
Petromania
Black gold, paper barrels and oil price bubbles
by Daniel O’Sullivan

HARRIMAN HOUSE LTD
3A Penns Road
Petersfield
Hampshire
GU32 2EW
GREAT BRITAIN
Tel: +44 (0)1730 233870
Fax: +44 (0)1730 233880
Email: enquiries@harriman-house.com
Website: www.harriman-house.com
First published in Great Britain in 2009
Copyright © Harriman House Ltd
The right of Daniel O'Sullivan to be identified as the author has been asserted
in accordance with the Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988.
ISBN: 978-1-906659-24-0
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from the British Library.
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior written permission of the
Publisher. This book may not be lent, resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by
way of trade in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
without the prior written consent of the Publisher.
Printed and bound in the UK by CPI, Antony Rowe, Chippenham
No responsibility for loss occasioned to any person or corporate body acting or
refraining to act as a result of reading material in this book can be accepted by
the Publisher, by the Author, or by the employer of the Author.

To Ele and Nessa, with love


Contents
Table of Figures
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
Preface
xi
Introduction
1
1.
The Ascent
13
2.
Paper Barrels
49
3.
The Financialisation of Oil
87
4.
The Peak Weeks
131
5.
A Bubble by Any Other Name
163
6.
Petromania Redux
213
Sources & Bibliography 
253
Index
277
v


Table of Figures
Figure 1:    21st century oil prices, the story so far
4
Figure 2:    Two bubbles
6
Figure 3:    The ascent to oil’s peak
41
Figure 4:    Sample oil futures curves
55
Figure 5:    Growth of Nymex open interest
70
Figure 6:    Nymex oil market growth by CFTC “commercial”/
“non-commercial” definitions
98-99
Figure 7:    Roll yields on futures curves in contango and backwardation 112
Figure 8:    Nymex oil market growth with more detailed 
trader definition
123-4
Figure 9:    Changing trader group domination across maturities
from 2000-2008
152-3
Figure 10:  Mad May
154
Figure 11:  Forces bearing on oil price formation in the Nymex
futures market
188
Figure 12:  Long-term price graph comparison for Nymex oil
and Nasdaq 100
209
Figure 13:  Two bubbles revisited – and what the Nasdaq did next
211
Figure 14:  Charting a fair price for oil
249
vii


ix
Acknowledgements
M
any oil industry experts are mentioned by name
somewhere in this book, and it will become apparent that
I agree with some and disagree with others. I would like to
stress, however, that where there is such disagreement on my part, it is
above all respectful disagreement. In this spirit I would like to thank all
of the following people in particular for their freely-given time in
discussing various issues with me, whether personally or in
correspondence, whether in specific regard to the research for this book
or in my day-to-day job as a journalist: Ed Morse, Daniel Ahn, Jeffrey
Currie, Francisco Blanch, Colin Smith, Stephen Schork, Robert
McCullough Jr., Christof Ruehl and Roger Bentley. 
Very special thanks are due to Leo Drollas of the Centre for Global
Energy Studies – unwittingly and unbeknownst to him (until now!) he
is in a certain sense the godfather to this book. It was after a couple of
hours spent in conversation with him in his London offices in January
2009 that I finally decided there was enough of a disjuncture between
what actually happened with the oil price in 2008, and what an
establishment consensus still persisted in saying had happened, to justify
treatment of these issues at greater length. Mr Drollas himself is
certainly not part of this establishment consensus, rather a proud
outlier; and although I have not quoted him extensively in this work,
this should in no way detract from the debt I owe him and the fact that
it was he who first pointed me toward an extremely wide range of
evidence backing up a stance I had already taken in early 2008 on a
then significantly narrower base of evidence, bolstered by inference.

x
Petromania
Speaking of my day-to-day job, I would also like to acknowledge
various editorial colleagues at the Investors Chronicle who have taken
charge of our news coverage from time to time over the past few years,
all of whom have proved happy in that role to support and run with my
own take on the oil markets. When we originally called the oil price as
a bubble in May 2008, this placed us well outside the then-fashionable
groupthink dominating the financial press. Thanks in this regard are
owed to Graeme Davies, Oliver Ralph, Simon Thompson, John
Hughman and Jonathan Eley. 
Paul J. Davies and Chris Dillow were both kind enough to read and
provide invaluable criticism, comment, and friendly encouragement on
vast tracts of the manuscript as it emerged, and Andrew Adamson and
Jack Cross also provided crucial help with the drafting. I am grateful to
the team at Harriman House, particularly Stephen Eckett, Chris Parker
and Suzanne Anderson, for taking this project on and seeing it through
to completion in a very tight timeframe, in a very professional manner,
yet in an ever-amiable and relaxed fashion throughout. It goes without
saying that any simplifications, exaggerations, omissions and other
errors still populating this text are my responsibility alone. 
Last but certainly not least, it would never have been possible for me
to steal the time in which to produce this book without a great deal of
love, support and forbearance shown me by the two beautiful girls in
my life, my wife Eleanor and daughter Nessa – to whom this book is
dedicated, and for whom I promise to try to be (slightly) less boring
and obsessional in future.
Daniel O’Sullivan
London, 2009

xi
Preface
P
etromania is an account of the spectacular boom and bust that
occurred in the crude oil market through 2008, which saw oil
breach $100 per barrel at the start of the year, clock an as-yet all-
time high of $147 per barrel in July, but then collapse to $34 per barrel
by Christmas – the wildest price movement ever seen in our most
important global commodity, and one which wreaked havoc in the
worldwide economy.
Contrary to arguments advanced by many commentators focusing on
fundamental factors, this book argues that new forms of financial
speculation which sprung up in commodity markets from the 1990s
onwards were instead the key driving force behind this chain of events,
now positively identified as a classic speculative bubble. No prior
knowledge of the oil markets and their functioning is presumed, so it is
hoped this text may also profitably serve as a basic primer on these
subjects as well.
I have for the most part eschewed footnotes, but all of the key sources
and texts can be found in the Sources & Bibliography section at the
back of the book.


Introduction


A Shadowy History
2
008 was the year the oil price made history not just once but
three times. The world gasped as it breached the $100 per barrel
threshold, for the first time ever, on the very first trading day of
that year. We swooned as crude oil reached an all-time high, as yet
unsurpassed, of $147 per barrel in early July. And when oil
subsequently collapsed from that peak in its most precipitate dollar
decline ever, to trade at $34 per barrel by Christmas ’08, people did not
know whether to laugh or cry. Had all that suffering been for naught?
Because make no mistake, no price matters more in this world than that
of a barrel of crude oil. Along its way, the rampaging oil price had
played havoc with livelihoods worldwide – affecting the poorest people
in particular – whilst crippling and bankrupting businesses across the
globe, destabilising developing world governments, and preventing
developed world governments from cutting interest rates as swiftly as
needed in meeting the most serious international economic crisis since
the Great Depression.
Figure 1 shows how extraordinary this price blow-out was in terms
of what has gone before since the turn of the 21st century (through the
1990s prices were even lower, around $20 per barrel). For a physical
commodity such as crude oil there are always physical market
fundamentals to consider in any account of price movements. And as
we shall see, there were many and indeed still remain many who feel
that supply and demand fundamentals justified the wild appreciation in
oil prices seen in recent years. Yet whenever such a spectacular boom
and bust in any asset price is observed over such a short timeframe, an
3

inescapable suspicion is that it was above all the product of a
“speculative bubble” inflated by investors – as defined by Yale
economist Robert Shiller, ‘a situation in which temporarily high prices
are sustained largely by investors’ enthusiasm rather than by consistent
estimation of real value.’1
This book is overwhelmingly concerned with establishing that the
actual physical fundamentals of oil supply and demand patently failed
to justify crude oil prices at the levels they achieved in summer 2008,
but that activity on the part of speculative financial investors was
instead the major driving force behind this phenomenon. The
arguments entertained both for and against this proposition will range
4
Petromania
Figure 1: 21st century oil prices, the story so far 
[Source: Thomson Datastream]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
3/1/00
3/1/01
3/1/02
3/1/03
3/1/04
3/1/05
3/1/06
3/1/07
3/1/08
3/1/09
See Fig 2
2007-2008
Date
$ oil price
Average
weekly oil
price
Matching shape of Nasdaq
bubble ’99-’00 (vertical axis
crossing horiz. axis at 700)
1 Irrational Exuberance, Robert Shiller, 2nd ed., 2005, p. xviii (Princeton University Press, 2005).
2007-2008

Introduction
5
across many aspects of the global oil industry and the globalised
financial markets, but we can make a modest start here and now. For
if a picture tells a thousand words, our chart here also furnishes
immediate and very eloquent support for the bubble theory. 
The shaded band below the actual peak of the oil price in Figure 1
sketches the matching shape of one of our more notorious speculative
bubbles of recent years: the Nasdaq tech stock/dotcom share boom in
the US which peaked in March 2000 before its own spectacular bust. 
Perhaps no two investment propositions could be more different than
crude oil and the boom-era Nasdaq. One is the physical product of a
classic, grimy, “old economy” business focused around costly and
dangerous real world engineering projects in often inhospitable
environments; the other was a basket of dotcom internet retailing,
biotech, new media and other similarly “weightless” members of a
supposed “new economy”. Yet as Figure 1 indicates, both the oil price
and the Nasdaq 100 shared a strikingly similar trajectory through the
crucial period spanning their most rapid appreciation and subsequent
abrupt collapse. 
This is more than just a matter of resemblance from a distance. Figure
2 details this uncanny coincidence in tighter focus (and without the
Nasdaq vertical axis offset used in Figure 1 for ease of presentation). It
clearly shows how closely the two markets shadow each other as they
move through their respective zeniths, years apart.
Lest those rightly wise to the tricks of statistical presentation begin to
question this startling parallel, it should be stressed – no axis-shifting
or otherwise underhanded data transformation is required to draw this
graph. It is simply a fact that, although separated across time, space
and underlying investment assets, both the Nasdaq 100 and the oil price
gained, gained again more rapidly, and then dropped precipitately

6
Petromania
through near-enough the same percentages in three distinct phases over
the same number of weeks in their respective boom to bust cycles. We
shall examine an extended version of this chart later, but what can
better explain this coincidence other than some unfolding logic of
speculative bubbles, an underlying algebra of investor herding common
to all such episodes? The spectacular rise and fall of the oil price
certainly looks like a speculative bubble, if recent history is any guide.
Does it matter if the oil blow-out was indeed a genuine speculative
bubble, a fragile ‘naturally-occurring Ponzi scheme’ to use Robert
Shiller’s terminology, demonstrating dynamics of the type described
variously both by Shiller and the late Hyman Minsky, another major
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
1
4
7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58 61 64 67 70
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
46-week period
Nasdaq gain 63.1%
Oil price gain 63.6%
16-week period
Nasdaq gain 49.9%
Oil price gain 44.3%
9-week period
Nasdaq loss 
33.5%
Oil price loss 
34.6% 
Nasdaq 100
from 14/01/99
to 25/05/00
Oil price from
07/05/07 to
15/09/08
Figure 2: Two bubbles [Source: Thomson Datastream]
$ oil price
Nasdaq 100
index level
Weeks

Introduction
7
theorist of speculative excess? That is, was it merely a self-referential
feedback loop of ever-higher valuations, only ever justified on the basis
of the next herd of investors buying into the latest “this time it’s
different” story? And if so, so what? Who cares that some made
fortunes while others lost their shirts in the sort of investment craze
which is, after all, now widely recognised as an all-too-periodic
visitation upon our market-based variant of economic development?
So what if the petromania of 2008 now takes its place in the historical
parade of previous investment manias, including such celebrated
episodes as the Dutch tulipomania of the 1600s, the “Mississippi
Scheme” of early 1700s France, and the roughly coincident episode in
England – which bequeathed us the usage by which we now tend to
identify similar market phenomena – the “South Sea Bubble”?
Black Gold, Devil’s Excrement
It matters greatly, as the list of charges already laid against the high oil
price underlines. No other commodity can affect the world economy
the way oil can – certainly not copper, gold or platinum, other
important commodities which also experienced astounding price blow-
outs through roughly the same period. Yet through 2008 they were not
the topics of conversation around the water cooler, or on radio talk
shows, or TV news reports, in legislative hearings held by elected
politicians, or at inter-governmental summits. Whereas oil most
definitely was centre stage across all. The reason is simple. At the dawn
of the 21st century, over a hundred years since combustion engines first
shattered the bucolic peace of our forefathers, the old-fashioned,
literally prehistoric, black, slick, smelly liquid hydrocarbon fossil fuel
known as crude oil remains our industrial lifeblood, and therefore the
single most-traded commodity worldwide both in terms of volume and
value.

Fuel products derived from crude oil drive our transport on land, sea
and in the air – while also firing a good portion worldwide of our
electrical power generation capacity. Meanwhile materials derived from
crude oil and its associated natural gas both underpin the ubiquitous use
of plastic throughout our industrialised society, and also provide us
with a plethora of synthetic fibres to clothe us in evermore imaginative
materials. Ever since the then-dominant British naval fleet made the
momentous decision to switch its boilers from coal-fired to oil-fired at
the beginning of the 20th century, access to and control of supplies of
crude oil has determined the weightiest of foreign policy decisions made
by states, and decided the outcome of wars fought between them. 
The incredible wealth oil can bring to those who control it has funded
the rise of fabulously rich dynasties around the world, from the original
US oil barons of the early 20th century to the Gulf sheikdoms of the
contemporary Middle East. However, these riches also mean
corruption, crime and violence are frequently inextricably intertwined
with the production and exploitation of oil. It is now common to refer
to the “resource curse” afflicting developing countries such as Nigeria,
endowed with significant oil resources but lacking the requisite
governance structures to check the potential for embezzlement, bribery,
thievery and outright armed conflict, both inter-state and civil, that the
promise of such resources can awaken in people. Oil is indeed
commonly known as “black gold”, but it has also famously been
described as ‘the devil’s excrement’ – by a one-time president of oil
producer cartel OPEC, no less (former Venezuelan oil minister Juan
Pablo Perez Alfonso, speaking in 1975).
A high oil price enriches some countries, but also spells relatively
higher costs across practically the whole gamut of business activity
worldwide. It brings an increased risk both of knock-on inflation in the
economy, yet also recession due to there being less cash to spare in oil-
Petromania
8

importing countries for other goods and services. Together these two
outcomes spell “stagflation”, the term coined in the 1970s following
the “oil shock”, an embargo by Arabian oil producers in protest at
Western support for Israel that signalled a new heavyweight status on
the global stage for OPEC. Much as it might pain us to admit it, nothing
matters as much to the smooth functioning of our society as our supply
of crude oil, and no price is therefore more important to us than the
price of crude oil. 
Follow the Money
Whoever can influence the oil price wields enormous power over the
direction of our globalised economy – which is exactly what this book is
about. Yet this is a tale played out a million miles from the swamps of the
Niger Delta, or the snows of the Russian Far North, or the deep water
offshore of Brazil, or the heat of the Arabian Desert. This is a tale played
out on computer screens across the world, shouted hoarse across City
trading pits, and buried in the annual statement of returns from your own
pension fund. For the truth is that, as with so many other spheres of
modern life, the globalised financial investment sector has effectively
colonised the oil market as a prime source of speculative return. 
As a result, many people are worried that the price of this most crucial
commodity of all now dances to the tune of investment manager
sentiment, herded in and out of short-lived trends, subjugated to trading
expectations regarding comparative yields across asset classes that also
include equities, bonds, currencies, precious metals and other
commodities. In the worst-case scenario, this “financialisation” of the
oil market causes the price to lose touch with the actual underlying
physical fundamentals of supply and demand. And certainly, this is
what the evidence collected here suggests happened over summer 2008.  
Introduction
9

10
Petromania
For many, it seems economically suboptimal – not to say morally
unfair – for the self-serving investment strategies of a well-paid
transnational financial elite to dictate wild gyrations in the oil price. It
rides roughshod over the common interest that the vast majority of
people worldwide share in enjoying relatively stable energy costs. Yet
this is the natural outcome of the particular way we have organised our
“market-capitalist” economy to date – and ultimately, changing this
state of affairs is a political question. It was one  which many politicians
themselves became very interested in as fuel prices rocketed skywards
through early 2008. In the US in particular, public opinion on the matter
forced a series of legislative hearings that sat across many months in
both Houses of the US Congress. The testimony offered and evidence
submitted to these hearings loom large in this tale, as do the responses
engendered from US market regulators.
Notwithstanding this flurry of legislative interest, however, one year
on there has yet to be any concrete action taken to control the financial
sector influence on the oil price which drove this chain of events. This
is also despite the previously avowed intent of new US president Barack
Obama to rein in such speculation in the oil market, a pledge he made
when campaigning for office. In mid-June 2009, the White House
unveiled a package of proposed regulatory reforms for the financial
sector, intended to ensure that the widespread institutional failings that
caused the global credit crunch, its attendant banking crisis and the
economic catastrophe we are now enduring can never happen again.
Re-regulating financial sector interest in the commodity markets,
however, is markedly absent from these proposals. Even though White
House spokesman Robert Gibbs told reporters, ‘I don’t think the
President’s concern has changed,’ he admitted he did not know if
speculation in oil markets would be dealt with in further proposals.

11
Introduction
It is easy to see why such steps have slid down the presidential “to do”
list. The priority for the world’s most powerful man right now is
stabilising the global financial markets at large. And while commodities
such as oil are an important part of this panorama, attention is fixed
instead on a whole other vista of market failure, the delinquent peddling
of sub-prime mortgages. The resulting toxic asset infection was spread
by the virus of securitisation and similar credit derivatives throughout
the length, depth and breadth of the banking sector worldwide, and
remains as yet largely unresolved. Significant as it is, the dramatic oil
price spike of summer 2008 risks becoming the other, forgotten
financial excess of the late noughties – overshadowed by the all-
encompassing fallout from that more obvious bubble of our times, the
worldwide real estate boom-and-bust. 
That would be unfortunate, as the lessons we can derive from
studying the petromania of 2008 are needed right here, right now.
Incredible as it may seem so soon after the oil price collapse in late
summer 2008, the financial forces which blew that bubble are at work
once again, stoking the next flare-up in oil, even as physical market
fundamentals look at least as unsupportive as they did last year, and
possibly more so. Oil doubled from its Christmas 2008 low, to around
$70 per barrel in mid-2009, and investment bank cheerleaders are once
again pencilling-in forward estimates of $95 per barrel for mid-2010.
Triple digit price forecasts will probably be in vogue once more by the
time this volume has gone to print. Back in the real world, however,
politicians and economists warn that this unchecked and patently
illogical price appreciation is undermining recovery prospects across
the wider economy. Following its initial appearance in summer 2008,
petromania may well come to be characterised by recurrent outbreaks
of the fever. Understanding how it progresses is at least half the battle
in tackling it.


1
The Ascent


‘At first, as in all these gambling mania, confidence was at its
height, and every body gained.’ 
Charles Mackay, “The Tulipomania” in Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the
Madness of Crowds (1841)
1.1 The Triple-Digit Threshold
Global markets opened 2008 in a jittery mood as January 2, the first
trading day of the New Year, saw leading share indices stumble in turn
across the time zones. While the main equity boards in Hong Kong,
Frankfurt, Paris and London would all close down more or less a
percentage point, the real upset was in New York where, following the
release of particularly weak US manufacturing data, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average was heading for a 1.7% drop – its worst first-day
percentage performance since 1983. Yet elsewhere in the city, another
market was about to breach a more momentous threshold. Shortly after
noon, a commodity broker working on the floor of the New York
Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) became the first person in history to
pay $100 for a barrel of crude oil. 
Stephen Schork, a former longtime Nymex trader who now edits the
daily energy market analytical newsletter The Schork Report,
remembers the exact moment: ‘I was on the telephone with a journalist
and I think the bid in the market was around $99.30 or $99.40, so he
was asking me “When do you think we will see $100?” And as soon as
he asked that, a $100 print went on the board and I said, “Yep, right
now I think we’ll see it…”’
15

The trade immediately made headlines worldwide. As the reporter’s
interest shows, crude oil’s rapid appreciation, from around $60 per
barrel a year earlier, was already big news, and that first hundred dollar
deal on Nymex – the exchange the wider world looks to for its
benchmark oil price – was immediately controversial. Not just because
the new era of triple-digit oil prices it heralded was feared both by
ordinary citizens struggling with sky-high fuel costs, as well as
economists and governments concerned at how appreciation in such a
ubiquitous industrial cost input was stoking global inflation. More
immediately, there were questions regarding the legitimacy of the
transaction and whether it should stand in the trading record. 
Those physically present in the Nymex exchange could see the agreed
$100 price printed up on the board over the open-outcry “bear pit”,
where the floor traders shout bids and offers at each other. However the
bulk of crude oil trade settled on Nymex is not transacted on the
exchange floor but through Globex, an electronic trading system that
links traders all over the world into the same market through their
computer screens. Nymex floor and electronic trading are ultimately
settled as a single market, and barrels bought or sold vocally on the
exchange floor are fungible with those bought or sold electronically off-
floor. But technically, on-floor and off-floor are two separate pools of
liquidity, so prices on Globex may not exactly match those posted in the
exchange. This is what happened with the first ever $100 barrel: most
market players, following trading at their screens elsewhere in the US
or abroad, simply never saw it. 
Yet the deal looked distinctly anomalous even on the floor of the
exchange, where transactions both immediately before and after it were
at significantly lower prices, around the $99.30-$99.60 per barrel
range. This was an “out-of-market” trade questionable enough for
Nymex to investigate – but it was confirmed in due course as valid.
Petromania
16

Nevertheless, the suspicion was that the deal had been done simply to
grab the “bragging rights” on the first ever $100 oil trade. Within
hours, unnamed sources were quoted in news reports to the effect that
the oil had been bought by a “local”, a floor trader who operates using
his own rather than client money, that he had bought the minimum
permitted lot of a single contract for 1000 barrels from another local,
and that he had turned around and sold out of the position immediately
afterwards. Mainstream media, including the Financial Times, were
happy to pick up Schork’s own comment that same day: ‘A local trader
just spent about $600 in a trading loss to buy the right to tell his
grandchildren he was the one who did it. Probably he is framing right
now the print reflecting the trade.’ 
The local supposedly responsible for this stunt was quickly named as
Richard Arens. Arens is indeed a Nymex floor trader, but has himself
never publicly confirmed nor denied his role in the episode. Yet that
reticence did not save him from a tsunami of public scorn for his
supposed “vanity trade”. ‘We’re sure the girls at the bar will be real
impressed,’ was the comment on the New York magazine website a day
later, under the headline ‘Richard Arens is Having His Moment’.
Indeed, Arens briefly became something of an online hate figure, with
US bloggers calling for his face to be put on dartboards or even for the
man himself to be burned at the stake – if not with anything as
expensive as gasoline. Outraged at the idea of one man pushing up
already crippling fuel prices for his own selfish ends, this blogger slant
played well with the theme of financial whiz-kids wreaking havoc in
the lives of ordinary people, so resonant since the onset of the banking
crisis the previous August and the first intimations of the current global
economic turmoil. 
Yet what if Arens was unfairly pilloried? Not so much in the sense of
mistaken facts – although we should note that an alternative tale
The Ascent
17

emerged in the New York Post days later, with Arens as the seller, and
the buyer instead a large commercial entity. Rather, in the sense that
even if Arens was indeed the $100 barrel buyer, could he not just have
been doing something quite normal for a trader – trying to get a feel for
what the market really wants? After all, the oil price had been extremely
volatile since punching through $90 per barrel the previous autumn.
While it had not yet traded at $100 per barrel, it had come very close
a couple of times already, trading as high as $99.29 in late November,
and bouncing around the $95-98 range in the last few trading days of
December. If Richard Arens was indeed the man who did the deal, we
may never know his motivation as, well over a year after the event, he
still refuses interview (I was informed of this through the intermediary
of a Nymex official). Yet we can entertain definite ideas about how the
trade might have occurred.
Firstly, as said, a market participant may have just offered the bid to
get a feel for the market – this is how a true open outcry auction market
works. Imagine that someone, wanting to know how the commodity in
question is trading, calls down onto the trading floor, ‘Where’s the
market?’ The answer comes back, ‘30 bid, at 34.’ In other words if you
want to sell, someone will buy from you at $99.30, and if you want to
buy, someone will sell to you at $99.34. This is an important point – a
deal can be done on the basis either of someone having made a bid to
buy, or someone having made an offer to sell the asset being traded.
But there is no requirement that any trader both bid and offer at the
same time, and it is possible to offer on the heels of someone else’s bid:
the hallowed, age-old conventions of open outcry trading stipulate only
that both the best bid and the best offer at any one time silence all
others. As Stephen Schork recalls, ‘Given the volatility, I don’t think
anyone was willing to sell at that point – so the market was only being
bid, at around $99.30. And then someone probably just said “At 100,”
Petromania
18

and this Arens guy probably just said, “Buy it!” He would not have bid
$100. I’m guessing someone just threw out a $100 offer, and this guy
took it. Maybe he was doing it because he felt there were a lot of stops
there, and this would create a rally.’
Stop orders are orders from clients that brokers must act on as soon
as the market price moves through a certain price level or “stop”. If
many clients have placed orders to buy or sell at a particular price
threshold, then once a transaction has been realised at that price in open
trade, all brokers with stop orders at that level are technically obliged
to complete the order as soon as they can, regardless of the fact that a
wave of large buy orders emerging once a particular stop is hit can lead
to the price quickly exceeding the stop level. This is a basic rule of
markets we shall have cause to return to in due course. Of course, by
definition, for every buyer there must be a willing seller; but if a
relatively large number of buy orders emerge at any one time, lots
already offered at a certain price are quickly snapped up, and the next
wave of sellers to emerge in response to the demand will of course pitch
their bids higher again, and so on until the buying runs out of
momentum. So it would have been solid trader logic to take up the
$100 offer when a subdued sell-side in the bear pit meant that, for
however brief an interval, this was indeed the best offer in the trading
ring. 
Traders know full well that “taking out” stops can lead to rallies, and
as far as Schork is concerned that was what the buyer who gave the
nod to ‘at 100’ was trying. ‘It’s analogous to a poker game – you call a
certain raise because you want to test the structure of the other guy’s
hand, the other players. You bid, you offer, and you bid; because you’re
pushing against the market, you want to see where the market’s weak
and then you’ll push. So there’s nothing wrong with what he was
doing.’ Oddly enough, despite the obvious psychological significance
The Ascent
19

of the triple-digit price level, on that particular day there was not a
wave of “stopped-out” buying when the $100 trade was hit inside the
exchange. And this, too, also explains why the trader in question would
indeed probably have sold out of the position as soon as possible
afterwards. As Schork says, ‘The market immediately traded lower, but
that’s what happens. You think, uh-oh, I made a mistake and you get
out – I’d rather lose $600 than $6000 or $60,000. So he tried it, he
took a $600 bet and it didn’t pay off.’ 
Despite the media mood within which his comments on the actual
day of the trade were quoted, Schork in fact empathises with whoever
ushered in the era of $100 oil. ‘I don’t think he ever envisioned the
snake pit that he opened up when he did this. He was doing something
very normal for what goes down on the floor – probing the market.’
And while the mystery trader – whether Arens or not – faced derision
for gratuitously trying to push oil prices higher, in reality he was only
guilty of bad timing. Oil actually closed at $99.62 on January 2 2008,
but the very next day it once again breached $100, trading at $100.09
intraday. Yet again, the notional wall of stops was not triggered and
the price once more slid back, closing at $99.18. After these damp
squibs, there was a pullback in prices to around the $90 mark for the
rest of January. But February 19 2008 saw Nymex oil finally log a
closing price above $100, at $100.01 – and from there, as Schork says,
‘We were off to the races.’ 
Thus far, oil had still not reached an all-time price high in inflation-
adjusted terms. The price spike in April 1980, as revolutionary turmoil
gripped key oil-producing state Iran, was deemed to have reached the
equivalent of around $103 in current money (although there are varying
figures given in this regard, depending on how inflation is factored in).
Whatever its exact inflation-adjusted level, that 1980 record soon
tumbled as oil breached $110 per barrel in early April 2008 and $120,
Petromania
20

a month later, in early May. By July 11 2008 the price had gone as high
as $147.27, and a break through the $150 mark was seen as inevitable.
It was hard to remember that oil had cost less than half that just a year
earlier – but by then, of course, there had been a lot of Nymex crude
oil trading tickets printed at $100-plus prices, and the novelty value
had worn off. 
1.2 Black Gold, Diabolical Prices
By the beginning of 2008, the oil price had been worrying a lot of
people for quite some time. Throughout the 1990s, the price of oil had
consistently traded around an average of $20 per barrel. But as the 21st
century began to unfold, crude started to probe higher. It was averaging
around $32 per barrel in 2003, then $42 in 2004, before jumping to an
average of $57 per barrel in 2005. In 2006 the price of crude had
averaged $66 per barrel; and in 2007 this average had climbed again to
$73 – an unthinkable level just a few years previously. And as we know,
it was set to break fresh records in 2008. What on earth was driving
such rapid price appreciation in the world’s most important
commodity? A complex of reasons, relating to the fundamentals of
physical supply and demand for oil, was widely seen as underlying this
phenomenon. 
Strong economic growth worldwide
The period from around 2002 onwards had seen strong economic
growth across the globe – crucially not just in advanced countries but
also in the developing world, as mass industrialisation and urbanisation
finally took off in both China and India. Oil itself is of course key to
economic development in terms of industrialisation and urbanisation,
and economic growth of this kind spells growth in oil consumption.
The Ascent
21

Using broad-brush, yearly average figures from BP’s Statistical Review
of World Energy, in 1997 total world oil demand was around 73.6
million barrels per day (mbpd). By 2002 this had grown to 77.8mbpd,
a 6% increase over five years. Through the next five years to 2007,
however, this total world demand had grown to 85.2mbpd, a 9.5%
increase.
China’s inexorable economic rise was particularly noteworthy in this
regard. From being the sixth-largest economy worldwide in 2004, just
two years later in 2006 its economy was deemed to have displaced both
France and the UK to become the fourth-largest, behind the US, Japan
and Germany. Historically self-sufficient in its oil supplies until 1993,
by the beginning of 2008 China was seen to have surpassed Japan to
become the second-largest oil importer in the world, after the US. The
same BP dataset as quoted above estimates Chinese crude oil demand
at around 4.2mbpd in 1997. Five years later, in 2002, it had grown to
5.3mbpd, a 26% increase. By 2007, it had reached 7.9mbpd, a 49%
increase in five years. Or, to look at the hungry dragon’s appetite from
another angle (and perhaps that most often quoted by newspapers),
from 2000 to 2007, the Chinese crude oil demand growth of 3.1mbpd
was equivalent to 39% of total world crude oil demand growth in the
same period. 
All else being equal, for oil prices to remain constant the rising
demand due to increased economic growth must be met with
sufficiently increased supply from production. The US government
Energy Information Administration (EIA) is another major and widely-
quoted source for energy market statistics which, in contrast to BP’s
annual review, presents its data on a quarterly basis. As might be
expected with such a real-world data gathering exercise, there are
discrepancies between the two sets of figures. Yet both agree that in
2006 and 2007, at least, world oil demand averaged more than world
Petromania
22

oil production. BP figures give 2006 and 2007 production of 81.7mbpd
and 81.5mbpd respectively, versus demand of 84.2mbpd and 85.2mbpd
respectively. The EIA figures are production of 84.5mbpd and
84.4mbpd respectively, versus demand of 85mbpd and 85.9mbpd
respectively. For what it is worth, a third set of figures from another
reputable data source, the OECD-sponsored International Energy
Agency (IEA), sees 2006 production of 85.5mbpd more than meeting
demand of 85.1mbpd, but 2007 production of 85.5mbpd again falling
short of demand at 86mbpd.
What do these figures tell us, apart from the important lesson that
there are multiple versions of even the most basic truths regarding oil
supply and demand? They support the view that from the mid-
noughties onwards, growth in oil production was apparently not able
to keep up with growth in oil demand, particularly in light of the trend
that Chinese demand appeared to be on. Whatever excess demand there
was over production through these years would of necessity have been
met by a net drawdown on inventories of oil in storage. Of course, as
their primary supply and demand figures differ from year to year, so
too do these implied stock drawdown figures from BP, the EIA and the
IEA. But regardless of the exact figures, year after year of net drawdown
on inventories is not a sustainable situation, as this stock cushion will
eventually be exhausted. Here, then, seem solid grounds for rising oil
prices, as increasing demand chases scarcer supply in a context of
diminishing inventories – but what were the reasons for the perceived
global production shortfall in the first place?
Tightening OPEC supply and capacity
The acronym OPEC – standing for the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries, the oil production cartel dominated by Arabian
petro-states since its founding in 1960 – is synonymous with control of
The Ascent
23

the world’s oil supply and the pricing thereof. The fact of the matter is
that OPEC countries (currently comprising Algeria, Angola, Ecuador,
Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates and Venezuela) ostensibly control as a unitary entity the total
amount of oil they produce as a group, in the interests of managing
supply in relation to demand so as to maintain prices at levels that offer
these countries a reasonable rate of return on their oil sector
investments. OPEC can do this because between them its member
countries produce somewhat over 40% of global oil supply; and
counted as a cartel, OPEC is the largest single contributor to that global
oil supply.
Despite the general upward trend in oil prices since 2000, late 2006
actually saw a significant pullback in oil prices, from around $74 per
barrel in late summer to just over $60 by the end of the year. OPEC
member countries had become accustomed to the $70 per barrel range,
and many were planning their budgets around this price level, so the
slide discomfited them enough for the cartel to announce production
cutbacks in November 2006 totalling 1.2mbpd. By February 2007 the
oil price had actually dipped below $60 again for a spell, so OPEC
announced further cutbacks totalling 0.5mbpd. Actual compliance by
OPEC member countries with cartel quota orders is variable at the best
of times, with overproduction beyond quota anecdotally endemic. Such
cuts also take some time to feed through into actual production, even
given willingness to comply. Nevertheless, for many industry observers
it was these OPEC cuts that played the biggest part in a perceived
tightening of the global oil supply and demand balance from late 2006
into 2007.  
In one sense, this should not have been too much cause for concern.
As throughout much of its history the task of maintaining oil prices at
what it saw as reasonable levels involved OPEC instructing its member
Petromania
24

countries to produce less – sometimes considerably less – than they were
actually capable of doing, the cartel is also traditionally seen as the
“swing” supplier in the global oil market, the player with the ability to
easily bring more barrels to the market should these suddenly be
required. Oil importing nations in the developed world have become
used to lobbying OPEC vociferously to increase its supply quotas
whenever oil prices seem to get too out of hand, and despite popular
Western resentment of the oil sheikhs supposedly driving around in
their gold-plated Rolls-Royces at our expense, OPEC has in general
proved itself a reliable partner in easing the market when asked to do
so by developed world economies. 
It could hardly be otherwise when the United States, the number one
oil consumer and importer in the world, is the military protector and
sponsor of the Al Saud dynasty that rules Saudi Arabia, the number
one oil producer in OPEC and the member country that dominates its
affairs by dint of this preponderance (according to the EIA, Saudi has
generally been producing around 8-9 million barrels of crude per day
in recent years, more than twice its nearest competitor in the group,
Iran, on some 3-4 million barrels per day). OPEC is also seen as being
sensitive to the threat of permanently high prices increasing both
marginal supply viability and fuel substitution. In other words, if the
cartel maintains prices at too high a level it runs the risk of these high
prices encouraging new oil exploration and production elsewhere in the
world, which could in due course take market share from its own
member countries. It might also risk encouraging consuming countries
to switch an increasing portion of their own energy supply to non-oil
sources, again harming its own long-term prospects for market share.
Such substitution can involve renewable and sustainable technologies,
including the crop-derived ethanol that has become such big business in
the US and Brazil in particular. 
The Ascent
25

Beyond this there is of course the fundamental issue that when oil
prices rise too high, they can choke off economic activity in absolute
terms, and potentially thereby help cause a recession – a situation which
is never good for OPEC revenues. In short, then, OPEC is well aware
of the imperative not to kill the goose that lays the golden egg. So on
the face of it, if OPEC production cuts were driving oil prices to
unbearably high levels for the global economy, all that had to be done
was convince OPEC to bring back on stream some of the spare
production capacity it had sitting idle as a result of prevailing
production restrictions. But what if OPEC itself did not really have so
much spare capacity available after all? If its own announced cuts
feeding through into the global oil supply and demand balance were
one reason given for oil prices trending higher, doubts that OPEC could
actually add that much to global supply, even if it reversed those cuts,
was another reason touted by many for this rapid oil price appreciation. 
As crude oil demand grew steadily year-on-year, and actual OPEC
production was forced to gradually grow in tandem, it turned out that
what had originally been a significant quantity of surplus production
capacity, above quota and spread across the cartel (of perhaps some
10mbpd through the 1990s), had shrunk considerably. So much so that
what spare capacity remained was largely concentrated in just Saudi
Arabia. According to the EIA, in 2002 the cartel was operating on
average with over 5mbpd of spare capacity, equating to some 6% of
the then-prevailing global demand of around 77mbpd. By 2006,
however, surplus supply capacity available to the global market from
OPEC had shrunk to below 2mbpd – and indeed at this point many
commentators felt OPEC had “lost control” of the oil price through
having allowed its swing production potential to drop to just over 2%
of then global demand, running at around 84mbpd. By the end of 2007
the EIA reckoned OPEC spare capacity had recovered slightly, to
Petromania
26

somewhere in a range between 2-3mbpd – with practically all of this
being in Saudi Arabia. Saudi capacity in late 2007 was stated to be
around 11.3mbpd and planned to grow to 12.5mbpd in 2009. At the
same time, the EIA estimated actual Saudi production running at
around 8.6mbpd. 
Disappointing non-OPEC production
Notable volumes of crude oil production outside the OPEC umbrella
come from other nations and regions. Indeed, according to IEA figures
which strip out natural gas liquids (NGL) production, despite the post-
Soviet decline of its hydrocarbon industry Russia is arguably the largest
actual producer of crude oil worldwide – as opposed to Saudi Arabia,
which has both the largest potential crude production capacity plus
significant actual volumes of NGL production, which some other
market-watchers (BP, for example) simply lump together with crude to
label the country the largest producer, full-stop. From 2005 onwards,
however, Russia has consistently produced close to or just over 10mbpd
of crude oil, depending on whose figures you take.
Likewise, the Caspian region of former Soviet satellites such as
Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, the North Sea, the Gulf of Guinea basin
and the wider West African coastal zone, as well as the Gulf of Mexico
offshore of the US, are all important sources. It is a standing structural
presumption of oil market analysis that, in contrast to OPEC members,
such non-OPEC producers are always working at full capacity – in
other words, they are always producing as much as they can at any
given moment. The logic behind this notion is that if the market-
dominating OPEC is in any case always going to adjust its own
production to maintain prices at its preferred level, then non-OPEC
countries have no reason not to pump at capacity and just take
whatever price is on offer at any given time. 
The Ascent
27

Despite this price-taker incentive for maximising non-OPEC
production, total non-OPEC production has disappointed expectations
through recent years. In several key producing regions, such as Mexico,
or the UK and Norwegian North Sea zones, output rates at ageing fields
are well into their natural decline as the resource in question nears
depletion. Indeed the steep drop-off in Mexican production has
surprised experts. Meanwhile, numerous new large projects in the
various non-OPEC production hotspots have been bedevilled with
various development problems and delayed start-ups (for example,
hurricanes damaging in-construction platforms in the Gulf of Mexico).
For 2008, non-OPEC production was still expected to rise incrementally
by many analysts – the EIA foresaw growth in non-OPEC supply of
around 0.9mbpd, this coming primarily from projects in Brazil, the US,
Russia and Canada. Yet after a string of surprises on the downside, the
feeling among many analysts was that not much faith should be put in
non-OPEC supply projections that presumed the smooth development
of ongoing projects in accordance with their stated timetable.
The shifting dynamics of non-OPEC production also gave grounds
for expectations of higher oil prices through arguments relating to the
“marginal cost of supply”. This is the idea that oil should naturally be
priced at the production cost of the “marginal” barrel, the production
cost of the last barrel required in building the supply stack sufficient to
meet global demand. Such supply stacks begin at the bottom with the
easiest, lowest-cost production, which yields a good return even at
relatively depressed oil prices – some production in the Middle East can
be costed in single-digit dollars per barrel. As demand moves beyond the
limits of such capacity, supply has to be sourced from evermore difficult
and costly production frontiers – from drilling at greater depths beneath
the terrestrial crust into technically more challenging high-pressure,
high-temperature fields; or drilling locations deeper or further offshore,
Petromania
28

or in more remote and inhospitable terrains such as the Arctic north. As
depletion of existing resources leads companies to source more and
more of their production from such terrains, the marginal cost
argument dictates that the price of oil will have to rise sufficiently to
reward the higher costs incurred in exploring and producing these new
resources. 
In general, oil in the core OPEC region of the Middle East is easy and
cheap to produce – one reason why the Mideast oilfields have been
developed so prolifically, and have been in production for such a long
time – while the more challenging production environments tend to fall
into the non-OPEC categorisation (although this is not an absolute
distinction). As noted above, at the start of 2008 the EIA was still
expecting non-OPEC production to achieve some minimum level of net
growth, and a good chunk of this was seen as set to come from Canada.
However, this Canadian supply is not from “conventional” oil drilling,
but comes instead from a non-traditional, “unconventional” (to use the
specific oil industry jargon) supply source. These are the so-called tar
sands or oil sands deposits, in which oil is locked in an extremely
viscous, bituminous form that demands a lot more engineering than
conventional oil in extraction, as well as higher operating and
processing costs. By the start of 2008, an oil price sufficient to reward
increasing production from Canadian oil sands was seen to be around
the $70 per barrel mark at least, and due to rampant construction cost
inflation in the Alberta region, where the industry is centred, some new
projects needed closer to $90 per barrel to ensure economic viability. 
Some analysts are scathing of such marginal cost arguments. ‘The
marginal barrel is always in the Middle East,’ is a typical rejoinder.
Meaning, in other words, that all such arguments are rendered moot by
the fact that all it takes is for OPEC to increase its production quota at
any given moment, and this fresh OPEC production will immediately
The Ascent
29

come into the supply stack at the lower end of the so-called “cost curve”
of producers; thereby removing the need for an equivalent amount of
production at the top of the curve, and by extension any need for prices
to match the costs of that displaced production. However, as we have
seen above, doubts have emerged over the ability of OPEC itself to
continue to push and pull production in and out of the supply stack at
will and, as we shall see below, some even go further, and say this ability
is already illusory. In a world where OPEC is already pumping at or
near full capacity, the marginal cost of supply argument does start to
make more sense with regard to oil price levels. 
Geopolitical conflict
By early 2008, war and the threat of violence had hung over the oil
markets for quite some time. Of course, the US-led invasion of Iraq in
2003 had itself reduced production in that OPEC member state, and to
even more negligible quantities than the Saddam Hussein regime had
managed under a decade of sanctions. Elsewhere, a serious insurgency
on the part of local people against international oil company interests
had flared up in the Delta region of Nigeria. A militant group called
MEND (the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta) had
gradually emerged at the forefront of a campaign of sabotage and
violent gun and bomb attacks. This campaign was now choking off
production from this key OPEC contributor – as facilities and pipelines
were damaged, and oil companies were forced to evacuate staff and
shut down production due to the security situation. By early 2008 it
was reckoned that the security situation in the Delta region had forced
the suspension of some 500,000 barrels per day from the typical
Nigerian capacity of around 2.5 million – in other words, a fifth of
potential production was interdicted by the violence.
Petromania
30

Then there was Iran. The Shia Islamic republic was by then well into
its still-ongoing face-off against the US and its regional ally Israel over
the alleged Iranian programme to develop a nuclear weapon. Sabre-
rattling by either side periodically ratcheted up the tension and led
analysts to wonder what a US or Israeli attack on Iran (as noted above,
the second-largest oil producer in OPEC) would mean for the global
supply and demand balance, and likewise how many oil tankers cruising
through the Persian Gulf the Iranians might be able to sink in
retaliation. From at least 2006, the ascent of the crude oil price had
played out against a chorus of US-Iran war predictions – such that, as
early as January 2007, one analyst was telling this writer personally
that it was only the perceived risk of war being launched against Iran
that was supporting oil prices (then around $60). One year on, oil was
a lot higher, Iran was still defying the US over its nuclear intentions,
and in response the world’s most powerful state was still ‘keeping all
options on the table’, as the phrase went.
Meanwhile, the “War on Terror” launched by the US against radical
Islamist armed groups, in the wake of the 9/11 attacks in 2001, had
entangled it in both Afghanistan and Iraq, and invited retaliation
against US and allied interests around the world. In this context, the
US dependence on imported oil was seen as a major vulnerability – and
explicitly highlighted as such by America’s enemies, with Al-Qaeda
leader Osama bin Laden, himself a Saudi, famously listing oil refineries
as among the ‘hinges’ of the world economy his disciples should target.
Accordingly, from 2003 onwards in Saudi Arabia there was indeed a
string of attacks by Islamist terrorists against oil industry facilities, with
the intent of destabilising the all-important Saudi supply. These had not
yet made a serious impact, but the potential threat was still perceived
as very serious. In Central Asia and the Caspian region too, the US was
on the alert against possible attacks against oil and gas industry
The Ascent
31

infrastructure, and took steps to mitigate threats – for example, by
funding the battalion of commandos specially set up by the government
of Georgia to guard the 1mbpd-capacity Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC)
pipeline, as it shipped oil across its territory toward Western markets. 
1.3 Grand Narratives
A background was therefore clearly in place by early 2008 against
which the strong appreciation of the crude oil price could be justified.
The key elements in this picture were strong global economic growth led
by emerging Asian countries and the perceived inability of global supply
to keep pace with resultant demand, the latter due to a combination of
tightening OPEC supply and capacity, disappointing non-OPEC supply
performance, and the heightened possibility of violent disruptions to
actual daily supply. Yet on the bedrock of these fundamental
observations were also constructed various analytical superstructures,
a number of sweeping grand narratives which informed various shades
of opinion as to how the oil markets were developing given this agreed
background, and therefore how the oil price would move in the coming
years. We can summarise these narratives as follows.
Emerging Asia and the “commodity super-cycle”
Inevitably, societies undergoing the twin transformation of
industrialisation and urbanisation experience an increased intensity of
commodity usage inherent in building all those factories, skyscrapers,
power plants, railways, roads and houses. This means persistent high
levels of raw material demand being maintained over a long period (the
postwar transformation of Japan is often cited as the classic case in
point). Such a period can be described as a “commodity super-cycle”,
an idea pushed by analysts who insisted the sky-high prices seen in
Petromania
32

The Ascent
33
recent years for such essential industrial inputs as oil and copper would
persist indefinitely, since industrialisation and urbanisation in emerging
Asian superpowers such as China and India marked an irreversible,
structural boost in demand. This demand boost or “super-cycle” would
supposedly persist for decades, regardless of the vagaries of the
developed world’s business cycle, and its influence on global commodity
supply and demand balances would maintain prices at a considerably
higher plateau – higher than those seen in recent years – for the
foreseeable future.
With regard to oil, the commodity super-cycle contains a particular
twist beyond just the simple first-order hunger for crude oil in general.
It is peculiar to emerging Asian growth, and China in particular, that
diesel is the refined fuel of choice. (This is similar to continental Europe
but in contrast to the preference for gasoline in the US.) This means
that in considering the effects of Chinese demand on crude oil supply,
special attention is paid to the section of that crude oil supply which is
most easily refined into diesel. In practice, this means a relative
preference for so-called “light, sweet” crude as opposed to “heavy,
sour” crude. Oil that is “heavy”, relatively dense or viscous, and/or
“sour”, relatively high in sulphur content, is more difficult and costly
to refine than “lighter” and/or “sweeter” crude. It is more difficult to
refine both diesel or gasoline alike from heavier, sourer crude oils, but
while there has historically nevertheless been significant investment in
refining capacity capable of “cracking” gasoline from heavier, sourer
crudes, there is a relative lack of capacity configured to refine diesel
from such oil. Chinese hunger for diesel was therefore seen as equating
to a squeeze on the light, sweet end of crude oil production in particular.

Peak oil
It goes without saying that as there is a finite amount of crude oil
trapped in geological formations around the world, it is theoretically
possible to use it all up one day – but that day remains a long-distant
reckoning, even now. The important question is actually not when will
the geological supply of oil run out in absolute last-drop terms, but
instead when and at which level will global oil production reach what
turns out to be its absolute historical peak in daily output. After all, it
is this peak level of daily global supply, and how long it persists for,
which will limit the amount of crude oil-dependent industrial activity
that our global society can support at its current technological level of
development. When this limit is reached, not only will additional
growth in oil-dependent activity become a zero-sum game, where one
consuming country’s gain will necessarily be another’s loss – but,
according to some, the statistical history of oil production patterns
indicates that actual decline in production levels follows on inevitably
from this peak with grim predictability. Peak oil theorists argue that we
are already close to or even past the point of maximum possible global
oil production, and therefore heading over the hump and into the
downward-facing slope of “Hubbert’s Peak”. 
Hubbert’s peak, also referred to as his “curve”, is a bell-shaped
statistical distribution seen to describe the characteristic profile of daily
production over time from an oilfield and, in aggregate, from many
oilfields, from a wider oil-producing region, a whole country, or even
the world. It is named for the US petroleum geologist M. King Hubbert,
who used this model to correctly predict more than a decade in advance
the point in the early 1970s at which oil production across the lower 48
US states actually reached its peak, before decline set in. Peak oil
advocates apply the same modelling techniques (using variations on the
several bell curve distribution shapes known to statisticians) to known
Petromania
34

global oil reserves and their dates of discovery. This produces their
startling conclusion that for world supply, considered as a whole, that
peak time is right around now. Crucial to their argument is the point
that no matter how many more billions of barrels of oil reserves may
yet be found in oil exploration worldwide, the length of time it takes to
develop such resources means it is practically impossible for this oil to
be brought on stream fast enough to offset the decline, now predicted
by the bell curve, from our current major producing fields. 
It should be noted that practically all oil companies and also many –
but not all – oil industry consultants disagree that the peak of daily
production will come anytime soon, although they are of course forced
to logically concede the concept itself as describing something that must
inevitably happen some day. The key grounds for the relative
equanimity with which most industry professionals react to the peak
oil theory – which none will gainsay in terms of the underlying
mathematics of production versus field depletion, or the accuracy of
Hubbert’s original prediction regarding the US – is that peak oil
calculations themselves tend to ignore new forms of “unconventional”
supply. (Such as the oil sands mentioned above, various gas-to-liquid
production processes, and the burgeoning bio-ethanol industry.) Some
of these processes produce actual crude, others produce a different type
of hydrocarbon which can nevertheless be used in much the same way
as crude – but as far as the oil industry is concerned, these
unconventionals are as valid sources for daily barrels of production as
conventional crude oil, and should be counted in production growth
estimates. 
Peak oil advocates are adamant that conventional crude oil
production per se will peak in the next couple of years, while an
influential book on the subject (Deffeyes’ Hubbert’s Peak) actually
specifies 2009 as the peak global production year. At the same time,
The Ascent
35

however, many oil industry economists and consultants tend to see oil
supply growing until at least the mid-2020s. Their view is a
combination of taking OPEC at its own word – the cartel itself insists
that with its current reserves it can continue to grow production for
this long – while presuming that non-OPEC supply will continue to
grow until perhaps just before 2020. (And, importantly, they also
include unconventional supply across both groups: for instance, oil
sands production in Canada, and gas-to-liquids production in Qatar).
It should, furthermore, be noted that peak oil theory additionally
involves making some heroic assumptions regarding the total amount
of recoverable, conventional crude oil that will eventually be extracted
from the planet through the whole history of the oil industry –
statistically-derived assumptions which by definition will never be
proven until after the fact.
In energy security terms, the spectre of peak oil mandates a massive
shift away from oil-dependent industrial society into alternative sources
of energy such as nuclear or renewables. Once the world realises it has
moved past peak oil there should theoretically be an unstoppable
explosion in oil prices, both to ration demand in relation to falling
supplies and to maximise the incentives for remaining production. In
geopolitical terms, however, the prospect of peak oil presages
unstoppable explosions of a more literal sort, a scramble between
countries to secure an ever-dwindling supply of this key commodity –
which could all too easily degenerate into new wars.
Resource nationalism
The idea of inter-state competition and struggle over supplies of
diminishing key resources, which seems the awful corollary of peak oil,
feeds into another theme of the past few years: “resource nationalism”.
Simply put, resource nationalism is what happens when states realise
Petromania
36

that it might not be in their best interests to continue to adhere to the
precepts of global free markets when considering the disposition of such
key natural resources as oil. It is seen as biting on both sides of the
supply and demand equation. 
On the supply side, governments (like those in Russia and Venezuela)
decide that control over the natural resources originating in their
countries is such a strategic advantage, in terms of both their own
independence and the supply-side sticks and carrots that can be
brandished against other less-endowed states, that they move to exclude
both foreign and/or private commercial interests from involvement in
the sector. Russia’s change in subsurface resource laws such that all
oilfields over a certain size are deemed “strategic” and therefore must
be majority-controlled by Russian interests; its destruction and
expropriation of the privately-owned Russian oil company Yukos; and
its stripping from UK/Dutch oil major Royal Dutch Shell of its majority
control over the flagship Sakhalin II oil and gas project in the Russian
Far East, are all good examples of supply-side resource nationalism at
work in recent years. To which, of course, we might also add, as another
obvious example, the expropriation by the Venezuelan government of
the Orinoco belt oilfields, previously controlled by major international
oil companies.
On the demand side, resource nationalism is manifested in the state-
controlled oil companies of emerging Asian powers such as China and
India becoming evermore avaricious in their pursuit of producing assets,
whether in terms of companies to be bought, or properties and
exploration permits to be snaffled up in licensing rounds. Thanks to
the invariably deep pockets that come with state sector ownership, they
are able to outbid and squeeze out the Western private sector interests
that have traditionally dominated global oil production. State-
controlled Chinese oil firms in particular have made prodigious efforts
The Ascent
37

to widen their global footprint. In 2005, CNPC purchased a majority
stake in previously Canadian-owned PetroKazakhstan; in 2006, fellow
state concern CITIC Group bought up another previously Canadian
enterprise operating in Kazakhstan called Nations Energy; and in the
same year Sinopec bought 49% of Russian oil company Udmurtneft,
while CNOOC bought 45% of a Nigerian offshore block from
TotalFinaElf and its state-owned Nigerian partner. 
Various arms of the Chinese state-controlled oil complex and Indian
state-owned ONGC have even joined forces to secure assets – in 2005
ONGC teamed up with CNPC to buy Petro-Canada’s Syrian assets,
while in 2006 ONGC and Sinopec joined forces to buy a half-share in
Colombian oil company Omimex. Some commentators have therefore
been worrying about the emergence of an “axis of mercantilism”
between China and India, “mercantilism” being the traditional term
used in political economy to describe such state direction of economic
activity. But if there was one deal that really highlighted the battle
between state-sponsored mercantilism and the free market, it was
CNOOC’s attempted purchase of privately-owned US oil firm Unocal
in 2005. A furore of objections expressed in US policy circles and by US
lawmakers caused CNOOC to withdraw its bid before the takeover
actually went to an official ruling. 
The attitude toward the deal expressed by many in the US was neatly
summarised by Richard D’Amato, the US senator heading the United
States-China Economic and Security Review Commission: ‘The Chinese
treat energy reserves as assets in the same way a 19th century
mercantilist nation-state would. Their goal is to acquire and keep energy
reserves around the world, and secure delivery to China, above and
beyond any market considerations. To do this, [they are] willing to pay
above-marketplace premium prices in order to gain exclusive control
over oil and gas. China believes it can only achieve energy security
Petromania
38

The Ascent
39
through direct control of reserves. This hoarding approach directly
conflicts with the efforts of the US and other countries in the
International Energy Agency to develop fungible, transparent and
efficient oil and gas markets.’ 
Whichever way it is manifested, rising resource nationalism spells a
diminution of opportunity in and control over the global oil markets for
the Western private sector interests that have historically dominated the
business – the integrated oil majors listed across Europe and America
like BP, (Royal Dutch) Shell, TotalFinaElf and ExxonMobil. It also,
incidentally, offers another twist on the peak oil theory. Some analysts
explain that, regardless of what might actually be the correct answer for
the year in which existing discovered production is going to peak, and
whether or not unconventional supply should be included or not in such
sums, in reality the tightening and often hostile grip of state interests on
key oil production regions such as Russia and Venezuela means that –
even if it might in theory be geologically possible to increase daily
production significantly from current levels – in reality this will not
actually happen because the necessary investment will simply not be
made in a timely fashion. In this view, calling the peak oil moment
around now is more a matter of realistic pragmatism than strict
geological inevitability. 
Twilight in the desert
If you put together all of the real world trends and the suppositions of
the related grand narratives recounted above, you might come up with
something close to an oil price apocalypse, a perfect storm of geological
and political risk factors spelling higher prices indefinitely. What could
possibly make things worse? Perhaps the idea that Saudi Arabia,
supposedly the last remaining source of discretionary swing supply
capable of easing the global oil market, might not even possess the spare

capacity it advertised to the world. This was the idea put forward by
energy sector investment banker Matthew R. Simmons in his celebrated
and controversial book of 2005, Twilight in the Desert. His key
assertion was that while hard data on the performance of the various
giant oilfields accounting for the bulk of Saudi supply was denied to
the wider world by Saudi national oil company Saudi Aramco (as a
matter of state secrecy), study of an extensive archive of Society of
Petroleum Engineers (SPE) reports – spanning decades and documenting
the technicalities of the development, commissioning and operation of
these same fields – indicated that in reality Saudi Arabia could not reach
the production capacity levels of which it continually told the world it
was capable. 
In fact, according to Simmons not only would it fail to reach its
targeted capacity of 12.5 million barrels per day by 2009, but there was
a real risk of a catastrophic collapse in Saudi production. As he wrote
in 2005:
With some agile planning and execution of many new projects, Saudi
Aramco may well be able to maintain its current production level for some
time. It is not impossible that the kingdom may even achieve a marginal
increase. But the odds are better that output might go into a gentle and
protracted decline. These would seem to be the best-case scenarios, however,
and they are vulnerable to a tipping by any number of relatively minor
events… A production decline of 30 to 50% in a period of five years or less
in any or all of Saudi Arabia’s key producing fields is not out of the
question.2
While the Saudi government refused to engage in debate over these
issues, or to allow Simmons or other outside experts to validate or
disprove his claims, believers in this Saudi supply “sunset” theory could
Petromania
40
2 Twilight in the Desert, Matthew R. Simmons, pp.358-9,  (Wiley, 2005).

only imagine what such an abrupt stripping-away of the already
threadbare OPEC supply buffer would do to oil prices.
1.4 Oil’s Unstoppable Explosion
The graph in Figure 3 sketches out the ascent of oil, in terms of daily
closing prices on Nymex, from the beginning of 2006 up to its peak in
July 2008. 
From the first trading day of 2008 through to July 11 (the day oil
reached its all-time intraday high of $147.27 per barrel) all of the
considerations sketched out above, both apparent fundamentals and
grand narratives built on those observations, continued to figure heavily
in the discussion of where the oil price was heading and what was
driving it there. In attempting to weigh up the perceived importance of
The Ascent
41
Figure 3: The ascent to oil’s peak [Source: Thomson Datastream]
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2/1/06
2/6/06
2/11/06
2/4/07
2/9/07
2/2/08
2/7/08
Date
$ oil price
Front-month Nymex oil price
Oil first breaches 
$100 per barrel 
$ oil price
Date
Front-month Nymex oil price
Oil first breaches
$100 per barrel

various popular memes such as these, it is a somewhat crude but
nevertheless well-accepted method to simply count the number of times
words or phrases appear conjoined in news reports through a given
period. Such an analysis does indeed show that as the oil price grew
rapidly from the start of 2008 into that summer, so too did media
linkage of this price movement to our collection of fundamental supply
and demand factors. 
Using the extensive Dow Jones Factiva database of published news
articles worldwide, we find that whereas for all of 2007 the use of ‘Iran’
in the same report as ‘oil price’ totalled 1,897 articles, for just January
1 to July 12 2008 (we use this date to reflect the fact that comment on
oil price movement is often in newspapers a day after the event), 1,557
articles used ‘Iran’ alongside ‘oil price’. For ‘Nigeria’ and ‘oil price’, the
full-year 2007 count for articles was 1,004, for just January 1 to July
12 2008 the count was 1,335. For ‘Venezuela’ and ‘oil price’ the split
is 803 articles in all 2007, versus 812 articles in our 2008 period to July
12. ‘Peak oil’ as a phrase garnered mentions in 179 articles in all of
2007, but 319 in the 2008 period to July 12, and even the
comparatively more recherché phrase ‘resource nationalism’ – a concept
which does not lend itself easily to quick-fire news reportage – managed
75 mentions in all of 2007, but 82 in the 2008 period to July 12.
We can also point to some specific sample manifestations of these
fears along our oil price appreciation timeline from New Year into
summer 2008. In both January and April 2008, US and Iranian naval
vessels had some sort of confrontation in international waters in the
Persian Gulf. While in both cases stopping short of outright hostilities,
each side accused the other of provocation and the incidents raised fears
over a conflagration engulfing the key crude oil shipping routes there.
In February 2008, the Turkish army entered the autonomous Kurdistan
region of northern Iraq in pursuit of Kurdish guerrillas, with the
Petromania
42

incursion being condemned by the central Iraqi government, and a
potential flare-up of violence in previously peaceable northern Iraq seen
as a possible threat to remaining Iraqi crude production, half of which
is exported via the Kirkuk pipeline running south of Kurdistan into
Turkey. 
In June 2008 the Niger Delta militants of MEND stepped up their
campaign with a gunfire assault by speedboat on the floating
production vessel at the Shell Bonga oilfield offshore of Nigeria. While
no lives were lost, the incident shut in another 225,000 barrels per day
of Nigerian production as Shell was forced to evacuate the vessel. The
attack also signalled a new level in disruption. Prior to this, the
insurgency had affected onshore and shallow-water facilities around
the Delta, but the offshore facilities producing significant quantities
from deepwater fields had been seen as immune to militant attentions.
Bonga was, however, 65 nautical miles offshore. By taking to the waves,
MEND had dramatically punctured this complacency, and dragged
whole new swathes of Nigerian production into its danger zone. 
Customers around the world were feeling the heat as the oil market
reacted to each fresh twist in various supply disruption scenarios, and
oil tracked steadily up from $100. By the end of April 2008, US gasoline
prices had reached $3 per gallon for the first time ever – then as soon
as early June, they had reached $4 per gallon nationwide. In another
couple of weeks, drivers in some US states were paying $4.50 per gallon.
Meanwhile in the US alone, high fuel costs forced eight small airlines to
completely shut down in the period from January to June 2008, with
another two such services operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection, while the major “network” carriers such as American
Airlines, Delta, Continental, US Airways and Northwest were
drastically chopping routes and retiring capacity.
The Ascent
43

Public outrage at high fuel prices was definitely a factor motivating an
ongoing series of hearings by both arms of the elected US Congress,
House and Senate, which will be examined in greater detail in due
course. However, angry as the mood was in America, the inconvenience
of US consumers pressured by high pump prices was not likely to
destabilise the government. The same could not be said of developing
nations around the world, particularly in Asia, whose governments are
in the habit of regulating fuel prices to the benefit of their citizens,
particularly their masses of poor people for whom fuel costs are already
a disproportionate share of outgoings.
Through caps on fuel prices, these governments effectively subsidise
the cost of oil to domestic consumers. As the crude price rose, so did the
cost of this subsidy – to breaking point in some cases. In late May 2008
the governments of both Indonesia and Malaysia, neighbouring
countries, announced roughly 30% hikes in fuel prices. Newspapers in
both countries quoted expert opinion fearing civil strife as a result, and
in Malaysia opposition parties called for rallies against the step. Around
the same time, India raised its regulated fuel prices by around 10%,
Taiwan by some 13% and Sri Lanka by 24%. The Economist magazine
commented at the time: ‘Across the emerging world, governments fear
that lifting fuel prices will hurt the poor and so trigger social unrest.’ But
given the ever increasing drain on their coffers which maintaining these
subsidies meant, many felt they had no choice.
Meanwhile a chorus of financial analysts kept hammering out the
message that these high oil prices were completely justified as reflecting
the constraints on supply versus galloping demand. Investment banks,
advising clients what to do with their money, were at the forefront – and
perhaps none more so than Wall Street titan Goldman Sachs. At
Goldman a team including their global head of commodity research
Jeffrey Currie, in London, and US-based oil equity analyst Arjun Murti,
Petromania
44

had already established a reputation for prescience in making very
bullish calls on the oil price. They had initially surprised many with
their predictions, but tended to be correct: it was in 2005, when oil was
actually trading around $50 per barrel, that Murti first predicted a
‘super-spike’ in the price to $100. 
From autumn 2007 Goldman had been saying oil was likely to streak
past $100, and now the bank was again forecasting higher prices. In
early May 2007, Murti commented in a research note that ‘the
possibility of $150-$200 per barrel seems increasingly likely over the
next 6-24 months’. Later the same month, Currie’s research team
revised upward their estimate for the price they expected oil to average
through the second half of 2008, moving from $107 to $141 per barrel.
It would however be very unfair to single out Goldman alone on this
issue – other investment bank analysts at houses such as Barclays
Capital and Merrill Lynch were equally confident that prevailing prices
were justified by fundamentals, and agreed with Goldman that it would
not be until persistently high prices caused genuine “demand
destruction”, in other words forcing the global appetite for oil back
into line with the actual supply-side realities, that prices would
moderate. 
By this point, however, even confirmed believers in $100-plus oil were
becoming discomfited with some of the wilder predictions being made.
Following wide publicity attending Murti’s $200-per-barrel statement,
Paul Horsnell and Kevin Norrish of Barclays Capital commented pithily
in one of their own research notes that there seemed little point in
adding further to ever-higher round numbers, with oil price forecasts
being thrown around like so much ‘analyst bling’ (to use their
memorable phrase).
The Ascent
45

1.5 The Dissidents
Not all commentators were convinced of the case for triple-digit oil.
Among investment bank analysts one or two, perhaps most notably Ed
Morse and his team at Lehman Brothers and Colin Smith of Dresdner
Kleinwort, had repeated through these months up to early July 2008
their opinion that oil prices above $100 were essentially a ‘bubble’
blown by speculators, in the same sense as described in our
introduction. We shall examine the whole concept of a “speculative
bubble” at length, but suffice to reiterate for now that labelling asset or
commodity price inflation a bubble is to recognise it as unsustainable
and liable to burst, or collapse. This is because the price inflation is
caused more by speculative pressure from investors hoping to profit by
simply riding upward price momentum than it is due to genuinely
fundamental commercial factors. 
Morse and Smith stood out among their peers, but they were certainly
not alone in fingering speculators as a major force driving the oil price
up. Lined up alongside them were a good number of oil industry
professionals themselves, including company executives and energy
sector consultants. Most publicly, OPEC itself was also loudly insisting
that speculators rather than fundamentals were to blame for oil nearing
$150. At the International Energy Forum in April 2008 (a meeting in
Rome between major oil consumers under the aegis of the IEA and
major oil producers, with OPEC well-represented), Saudi oil minister
Ali Al-Naimi had bluntly stated that, ‘Speculation in the futures market
is driving prices. Today, there is no link between oil fundamentals and
prices.’ 
Nevertheless, the cartel was under a lot of pressure, not least from
the US government, to do something to alleviate the situation. When
Petromania
46

then-US president George W. Bush visited key producer Saudi Arabia in
early May 2008, the Saudis themselves undertook to add a further
300,000 barrels per day to production. A month later they pledged
another unilateral increase of 200,000bpd – a total of half a million
barrels per day added into fundamental supply and demand calculations
in short order. Incredibly, this had seemingly no impact on oil’s
inexorable price rise – yet at the same time, the Saudis noted they were
already finding it hard to sell all their output! Later in June – with the
prospect of the promised Saudi increases having not reduced oil prices
at all – OPEC president Chakib Khelil made a similar point when
justifying no fresh production increases by the cartel beyond the latest
Saudi commitment. Khelil said that other OPEC countries such as his
own state Algeria were also finding it impossible to sell all their
production. Representatives from Qatar, Iraq and Libya likewise
affirmed around this time that they were producing more than
consumers required from them at that moment. 
The Saudi government and Khelil did indeed both acknowledge strong
demand for crude types preferred for diesel production – which in
various ways disadvantaged their own supply, with the Saudi oil being
too sour and the Algerian being so sweet it was preferred instead for
gasoline production (since it gave such a good yield of this fuel in
particular). Nevertheless, the OPEC front argued publicly that with the
market as a whole so obviously well supplied, it could only be
speculators responsible for oil price inflation. Evaluating arguments
over the effect of speculators and the objections raised in turn against
them, however, requires an understanding of how the global “oil price”
is actually determined. Welcome to the world of “paper barrels”.
The Ascent
47


2
Paper Barrels


‘What happens in the futures markets does not stay in the futures
markets...’
Testimony of Michael W. Masters, managing partner of Masters Capital
Management, United States House of Representatives June 23 2008
2.1 Whose Oil Price?
Asgard, Bonny Light, Forties Blend, Louisiana Light Sweet, Premium
Albian, Terra Nova, White Rose: as instantly evocative as cigarette
branding, these are in fact the names of some of the 160-odd commonly
recognised “benchmark” crude oils produced and traded around the
world. In a roster running from Abu Bukhoosh to Zueitina, each
benchmark is defined by a list of attributes that crude oil should meet
if it is to be sold under that name – primarily chemical qualities such as
specific gravity, sulphur content, pour point and mineral traces. As
crude oil itself is a naturally occurring resource with infinite small
chemical differences in product from field to field, invariably the
benchmark name is also a guide to a narrowly defined point of origin
for the oil in question. Abu Bukhoosh is locally-produced oil sold out
of the port of the same name in Abu Dhabi, Zueitina is likewise named
for its port-of-sale in Libya, while Asgard and Forties refer to complexes
of oilfields in the North Sea from which these blends are produced by,
respectively, Norwegian oil company Statoil, and British company BP. 
Benchmark crudes exist because oil refiners need to know what sort
of crude oil they are buying to refine into usable products in terms of
the heavy/light and sour/sweet distinctions. Ultimately, the attributes of
a particular crude may limit the products that can be derived from it
51

through the refining process, for which the full spectrum of output runs
from liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), through petrol/gasoline,
kerosene/jet fuel, diesel, heating and other fuel oils – to lubricating oils,
waxes and even asphalt, plus a slew of precursors and feedstocks for
petrochemical and subsequently plastics production, such as ethylene.
The crude benchmark system indicates differences between crude oils
traded between producers and refiners that in practice merit differential
pricing with regard to their refining potential. When production from
a particular new oilfield is brought onstream, it may be determined as
already comparable enough with an existing benchmark, or capable of
being made so through blending – and indeed, many benchmarks
themselves are already blends of crudes in any case. Alternatively, the
new production may perhaps be reckoned worthy of its own new
benchmark and marketed as such by its producer, as Statoil did with
Asgard from 2006 onwards.
These pricing differentials obviously require some price to be picked
as the basis for others, and the prices of three blends of crude in
particular emerged in the 1980s as the prime references or “markers”
for the global physical oil trade. These are West Texas Intermediate or
WTI, Brent and Dubai. WTI is a particularly light, sweet crude oil that
is very easy to refine and is produced in the very region of the United
States that the name itself indicates. Brent, produced from the UK North
Sea, is another light sweet crude blend and, although slightly inferior to
WTI, is the most widely-referenced price for the physical oil trade
worldwide. Dubai is produced in the United Arab Emirates and is also
light but significantly sourer than the other two benchmarks. Because
it is the blend most readily available in the Persian Gulf region – not
quite the same distinction as being the most prolifically produced! –
Dubai has become the reference for crude sales into the Far East market,
as opposed to the Atlantic Basin market dominated by WTI and Brent.
Petromania
52

WTI and Brent have wider recognition than Dubai, and traditionally the
quality differential sees Brent priced a couple of dollars cheaper per
barrel than WTI.
The wild appreciation in the per-barrel cost of oil from early 2007
into 2008 has already been described in terms of the crude oil price
quoted on the Nymex exchange in New York. This is appropriate, as it
is indeed the price per barrel quoted on Nymex that is the most
commonly followed benchmark price worldwide. The New York
exchange is seen as the largest and most liquid oil market in the world,
hence the best suited to price discovery in terms of matching large
numbers of buyers and sellers to reach an optimal price, a price based
on the widest possible spread of informed opinion. Yet as described
above, in the actual day-to-day trade of physical oil there are many
prices that could be quoted for a barrel depending on where it comes
from, and even in terms of the predominant reference prices for
determining a wide spread of subordinate prices we have perhaps three,
and certainly two, benchmarks to choose from. So which of these
physically traded benchmark crudes is the actual oil changing hands on
Nymex as the “oil price” on which so much attention around the globe
is daily focused? 
Strictly speaking, none of the above. On the one hand, it is certainly
the price for a WTI-standard barrel of “light, sweet crude” that is taken
as the global benchmark; however, the price the financial press
invariably quotes in that respect is not for a physical barrel of oil
available for delivery any time in the next few days, a so-called “spot”
or “prompt” delivery. This is verified by looking at any number of
online market data feeds, which will quote separate prices for both WTI
“spot” at Cushing, the major US oil terminal and trading hub situated
in Oklahoma, and the Nymex crude oil contract. It is the Nymex price,
usually some cents ahead of the Cushing spot price, which is repeated
Paper Barrels
53

54
Petromania
in daily news reports around the world. But Nymex is not a physical oil
market at all, rather a “futures” market, where financial contracts
rather than tangible goods are exchanged. The oil barrel priced on this
market is at root a virtual construct – a “paper barrel”.
2.2 Future Perfect
Futures markets took off in the United States from the middle of the
19th century, and originally grew out of trade in agricultural rather
than energy commodities – Nymex itself has been operating for 135
years. Simply put, a futures market is an exchange on which are traded
contracts guaranteeing a set price to be realised on delivery of a
particular commodity at a specified future date, which could be as close
in time as a few weeks away or as far out in time as many years hence.
Market participants are said to “buy” or “go long” on these contracts
if they wish to take delivery at the quoted price, or “sell” or “go short”
on these contracts if they wish to make delivery at the quoted price. As
with any market, quoted prices for the good on offer – in this case,
forward-dated commodity delivery obligations – change from moment
to moment with market perception of the risks and rewards attendant
on holding that good.  
The “light, sweet crude” oil futures market on Nymex is organised
into contracts, each contract or “lot” implying liability for a thousand
barrels of crude oil, with the delivery stipulated as being of WTI-
standard oil at the Cushing oil terminal. The contracts are dated in
terms of specific calendar months, e.g. December 2012 or July 2014,
with quoted maturities currently stretching out through some eight
years of potential future delivery dates. The contract maturities
available are determined by trader appetite, and have steadily
lengthened over time – in the early 1990s, the vast majority of oil

futures traded had a maturity measured in months alone, and growth
in contracts longer than three years did not begin until 2004. The set of
prices for ever more distant delivery dates which is generated in the
day-to-day trade of such contracts is called the futures “strip”. The
same strip represented as a price graph extending along an axis of
increasingly distant calendar dates describes what is known as the
futures “curve”, although it may sometimes be another shape entirely.
The Nymex contract everyone follows for the global benchmark oil
price is the so-called “front-month” contract, which is the calendar
contract right at the front end of the curve and hence closest to expiry
of trading at any given moment. The curve runs from this front-month
out to the furthest point of the “long-dated” maturities. Figure 4
sketches two sample oil futures curves from two separate dates in recent
years.
Figure 4: Sample oil futures curves [Source: Bloomberg]
57
59
61
63
65
67
69
71
73
75
$ oil price
Front month
Long-dated
Nymex oil
futures curve
17/02/06
Nymex oil
futures curve
31/08/07
55
Paper Barrels
$ oil price

As all futures contracts have a fixed delivery date, all eventually pass
through an expiry date beyond which they cannot be traded on the
exchange, at which point outstanding contracts held by market
participants move into the physical delivery phase. Trading expiry is
generally set a couple of weeks prior to stated delivery – this period
being seen as reasonable for real-world logistical arrangements to be
put in place for the delivery, which is ultimately presumed as a
possibility for all contracts. Officially, Nymex oil contracts cease trading
on the third business day prior to the 25th day of the month prior to
the actual delivery month. This means that already in early June, the
front-month Nymex price will be referred to as ‘oil for July delivery’ –
and once the date passes beyond the third business day prior to June 25,
this will shift to ‘oil for August delivery’, even though we might not yet
be in July! Likewise at this point, July becomes the “prompt” or
“delivery” month rather than the “front-month”, even though we might
not yet actually be in it. 
As noted, the front-month Nymex light sweet crude contract is
generally very close to the prevailing price for actual spot delivery of the
same standard of WTI crude at Cushing, and this is precisely because
of the trading and delivery timetable for front-month crude. By the time
trading expires for any given front-month contract, there is something
in the order of a week or two before delivery at Cushing falls due.
Meanwhile at the point the previous front-month becomes the current
delivery, or “prompt” month, there is never more than around four
weeks before the new front-month in turn becomes the next delivery
month. So logically, the difference between the cost of front-month
Nymex crude and spot delivery at Cushing is the fee you would pay for
keeping oil you could buy spot at Cushing, right now, in its storage at
the same terminal for the roughly two-to-four-week period until that
next front-month becomes the “prompt” or actual delivery month –
Petromania
56

and that is not very much per barrel after all, generally a matter of cents.
And yes, as logic would dictate, the difference between the two prices
is normally greater at the start of a new front-month and less as it nears
expiry.
The utility of such a futures market lies in it allowing both the
producers and the consumers of a particular commodity to fix in
advance the price they will either receive or pay for it, to “hedge” this
price risk as the technical term goes, thus allowing them a certain level
of certainty in organising their business. For example, a small oil
company might be trying to decide whether or not to take out a loan
to fast-track development of a marginal, low-yielding discovery
somewhere in the back-of-beyond in Texas. To make it worthwhile the
company needs to know that the price it is going to get for the oil
produced from this well in the future – in, say, nine months’ time – will
generate sufficient payback on the investment, including all sunk capital
plus the operating costs (including the interest on the loan) plus
whatever rate of return the developer judges it needs to get by. 
The oil company can try to hedge this price risk by going to the
futures market and checking if the prices currently quoted for deliveries
of oil, across the calendar window through which the well will be
producing, are high enough to justify this course of action. If the quotes
offered on the market are rich enough, the company will sell contracts
at that price through a futures broker – thereby locking in profitable
purchase for its production when it is pumped from the well nine
months hence. The oil company is of course free, through its futures
broker, to quote its own price for selling contracts at whatever level it
wishes, rather than simply taking a price from an established market
maker. However, if the price it requires is always higher than that
offered by others seeking to sell future deliveries, it will never get a deal
done. 
Paper Barrels
57

58
Petromania
There is another side to the equation. Looking at exactly the same
nine-month forward quote for oil in the futures market might be a small
oil refinery on the Gulf Coast of the US. Say they were seeking to ensure
adequate supply of crude input through what management fears might
be a disruptive storm season, in the same window the oil company is
selling into. The refiner would prefer to guarantee delivery of sufficient
crude at an agreeable price through this window rather than tie up
capital in buying the equivalent stock now and then also incurring
storage costs on it through the intervening months. The refiner can go
to the futures market, and it if likes the price on offer for crude in nine
months’ time, it will buy sufficient contracts to guarantee the deliveries
it wants. 
Fast forward nine months, and it is possible that the storm season has
indeed been a real humdinger – with multiple offshore platforms out of
action in the Gulf of Mexico, the price of oil for spot delivery has
rocketed. Tough luck for the oil company, which sees its rivals pocketing
much higher prices for their crude while it receives the lower price it
locked in by selling the futures contracts. But great for the refinery,
which has guaranteed deliveries of crude at the same lower price the
oil company has sold at, while rival refineries are paying through the
nose for whatever they can get their hands on. Nevertheless, the oil
company will console itself with the thought that the storm season
could have easily been a damp squib that saw oil prices dive below the
price it sold at – and it still receives the funds it calculated as sufficient
for its own profitability. 
This is a key point to grasp about the utility of hedging for companies
that are genuine physical producers or consumers of the commodity in
question. At the end of the day, any gains or losses incurred on their
futures transaction (with regard to what they could have bought or sold
at on the actual date) should be seen as secondary to the fact that they

are still buying or selling as they originally planned to, at the price
locked in through the hedging operation. The risk of hedging at what
turns out to be inappropriate levels is the flipside of locking in now the
price the commodity will be traded at in the future, and it is a risk many
physical producers and users of a commodity are happy to take for the
obvious benefits in terms of cash flow forecasting. Furthermore,
bankers and other financiers will often insist that a producer or user of
a particular commodity hedges this price risk at levels sufficient to
guarantee the repayment of interest and principal on any debt they may
provide to such a business. 
In a sense, genuinely physical hedgers theoretically cannot “lose” on
a futures trade, as by definition they will be getting precisely what they
wanted at a price they were happy enough to agree to previously.
Complaining that the other guy paid/received less/more for the same
commodity on the actual day of delivery because they had not hedged,
or had been able to hedge at a different price, is, in the purest version
of hedge theory, beside the point. 
2.3 Future Imperfect
So much for what we might call the Arcadian, pure theory of hedging,
in any case. The reality is more complicated – because 99% of futures
contracts on Nymex do not actually run to physical settlement of the
trade through actual delivery, even when the parties involved are
physical producers or consumers of the commodity. They are instead
settled through the practice of “offsetting” – or cash settlement of the
difference between the price for the calendar delivery previously agreed
by the market participant when buying or selling the original contract,
and the price for the same calendar delivery at the particular moment
the market participant is seeking to settle. 
Paper Barrels
59

By definition, this will not be the same as the actual price their
commodity may trade for on the actual specified delivery date, as the
offsetting has to take place prior to expiry of trading in the contract in
question. And this is because offsetting is achieved simply by transacting
on the futures exchange the equal and opposite trade to the original
trade being settled. If a trader went long of 50 December 2012
contracts, he will “offset” or settle his position by going short of 50
December 2012 contracts, or vice versa.  
Offsetting works because of one of the key features of a futures
exchange that makes it such an attractive proposition for managing
price risk in the first place. Exchanges such as Nymex radically reduce
the risk of doing business in contracts for future delivery by taking on
the settlement obligation themselves, with the entity of the exchange
itself becoming the counterparty for every transaction concluded by
contracts under its auspices. That is, if someone holds a contract from
the exchange, then the exchange itself both guarantees and takes charge
of fulfilling it on the due date, regardless of whatever happens to
whichever party was actually quoting the price at the time the contract
was taken up. 
Futures markets such as Nymex cover the risk this guarantee could
pose to their own financial stability primarily by collecting a good faith
deposit from each party trading on the exchange, to cover at least a
portion of the financial exposure inherent in their contract commitment
(such a deposit is called the margin); by collecting additional fees from
certain classes of exchange member; and by insurance contracts. And
indeed, because as noted above actual full payment under any contract
held by a market participant is only due upon physical delivery, it is
instead only this margin that any participant actually pays into the
exchange on the actual day a futures position is established, if they are
buying. Occasionally the margin required will be equal to the whole
Petromania
60

value of the futures transaction; in which case the contract is said to be
“fully collateralised”.
This blanket settlement guarantee, which the exchange extends over
all its contracts, means it is actually indifferent as to whether the market
participants originally taking each side of a contract struck at a
particular price and time actually both remain on the hook for that
particular obligation, right up to physical delivery. After all, the
exchange itself does not trade contracts on its own account. In both the
selling and the buying of the contracts, any offsetting party has had to
strike deals on the basis of quotes offered by other real market
participants. That is, if someone is buying a delivery obligation, they can
only actually do it if someone else is willing to sell it; and if by extension
that same buyer then wants to sell out of their existing obligation to
take delivery, they can only do it if someone else is bidding to buy into
that same dated delivery obligation. 
In the latter case, the net position of counterparty exposure the
exchange holds overall does not change, merely the identity of the
participants involved in constituting this exposure. Meanwhile the net
delivery obligations between the exchange itself and the original buyer
have accordingly been reduced to zero. First the buyer took a position
whereby they were obliged to take delivery of a set amount of the
commodity at a certain contract date from the exchange, but
subsequently they took out a position whereby the exchange was also
obliged to take delivery from them of the same amount of the
commodity on the same contract date. So now there is no need for any
physical commodity transfer whatsoever between this market
participant and the exchange. There is, however, a financial settlement
to be concluded, depending on the difference in contract price between
the two dates the original buyer put these two opposing positions in
place.
Paper Barrels
61

Returning to the example of the refinery. If it originally bought the oil
nine months out at $50 per barrel, then by the time actual physical
delivery date is looming, the oil price for delivery on that same date
might have jumped to $80. If the refiner moves to close out this position
through offsetting rather than taking actual physical delivery, it will
have bought a quantity of contract obligations at $50 per barrel and
then later sold the same contract obligations on for $30 more per barrel.
So as the universal settlement counterparty on all contracts, the
exchange now owes the refinery that $30 per each barrel. Upon
settlement by offsetting, it will duly credit the refiner’s account with
those profits. Where has that money come from? Ultimately from
whichever market participants have been holding the other end of those
contract obligations elsewhere on the exchange.
While it may indeed be the exchange itself that has paid out the
refinery its profits on offsetting, it is not a charity. It meanwhile has
rights over the margin accounts of the market participants holding the
other side of these positions – which may not actually be the original
seller of the contracts, if they too have already decided to close out their
position by offsetting. Returning to our small oil company, Texans are
canny people and it may not have been too long after selling their oil
nine months forward at $50 per barrel that these oilmen realised events
in the real world were moving against them. Perhaps weather scientists
are already predicting a bumper storm count in the Gulf of Mexico. By
the time there are only five months left until contract maturity, oil for
delivery on that date is already trading at $65. This is bad news for the
Texans. If this trend continues, by the time delivery falls due they could
end up selling their product for far less than they might otherwise be
able to. And while in our “pure” hedging theory above, hedging
companies are supposedly prioritising the security of a set amount of
guaranteed cash on a certain date – over the possibility of getting more
Petromania
62

cash on the actual date in question – in real life, no one likes to leave
money on the table. 
The Texans decide to exit the position by offsetting. They originally
sold contracts for future delivery at $50 per barrel; now they are buying
back the same amount of contracts for future delivery at $65. Their
delivery obligations cancel out, but by selling low and buying back
higher they have lost money in achieving this outcome – $15 per barrel.
This is the amount the exchange docks from their margin account upon
settlement by offsetting. It is only half the amount the refinery
eventually receives in the example above, but bear in mind the refinery
has not itself offset out of its position yet. If it were to offset at the same
moment as the Texans, five months before rather than just prior to
delivery, then the price would be $65 and the refinery itself would only
have made $15 per barrel – exactly the margin amount the Texans have
now forfeited with the exchange, which is precisely why the exchange
would be able to pay out the refiner in turn.
In our example the refiner is, however, actually still holding on to
their position at five months out, even as the Texans sell out. By
definition, as the Texans are buying themselves out of an existing
obligation, whoever is in turn selling them this contract on the exchange
has now taken on the other end of the refiner’s original transaction.
This new party – let us presume an actual physical oil trader which has
just bagged the rights to a consignment of oil, set to be loaded on a
tanker for the US in a couple of months –  has sold this oil for delivery
in five months at $65. By the time the refiner comes to offset its own
position when oil for the same now-imminent delivery date is $80, just
prior to delivery, this oil trader will now also notionally be down $15
versus the exchange itself. 
Paper Barrels
63

Yet the oil trader itself does not need to offset their own position for
the refiner to get paid the full $30 it is owed. The exchange can pay the
refinery the $15 already realised from the Texans, and the other $15 it
can pay from its own massive pool of funds precisely because it has
security over the oil trader’s margin account, even if this party has not
yet crystallised its own gain or loss versus the exchange. Throughout the
infinite permutation of offset possibilities – as market participants trade
in and out of positions – the exchange will always balance money paid
out to winners, on offsetting, with margins liquidated from losers when
they close out their position. Particularly as, in a real futures exchange,
traders nursing a notional loss at prevailing contract prices face “margin
calls” to keep their margin accounts topped up sufficiently to cover this
loss, regardless of when or whether they actually intend to crystallise it
through offsetting.
Why do the overwhelming majority of market participants prefer to
settle their futures exposure through offsetting without letting these
positions run to physical delivery? Simply because, for many, making or
taking physical delivery of the commodity in question on the due date
is impractical. The refiner might actually be able to buy oil far closer to
its operations than Cushing; the oil company may have a standing
marketing agreement with a preferred trading party through which it
sells all its oil. A physical commodity user may also not be able to let
their future contract run to delivery because the actual oil they are
seeking to sell or to buy is not actually the exact same standard as that
stipulated in the contract. An oil producer may be selling a slightly
different blend of oil from WTI, yet one which is still priced in relation
to WTI. 
Yet in either case – the market participant not wanting to meet
delivery conditions for its own convenience, or not actually being able
to by virtue of their seeking to trade a different grade of oil in the
Petromania
64

physical world – the hedging operation settled by offsetting has
nevertheless had its intended economic effect. Having exited its
obligation to take physical delivery of oil at Cushing for $50, the refiner
will instead buy it on the open market at a trading hub far closer to its
base of operations. As we know, the spot price there should actually be
near enough to the $80 per barrel the refiner sold out of its contracts
at, just prior to expiry of trading – but will inevitably not be exactly the
same. Perhaps the refiner ends up actually paying $82 per barrel – still,
having already realised $30 per barrel on the futures exchange, its
effective price for that same quantity of barrels has been reduced to
$52, near enough the $50 originally aimed for in any case. 
Likewise perhaps the oil our unlucky oil trader has in his tanker is
not WTI, but normally sells for a $4 discount to the benchmark. If by
the time he lands his cargo on the Gulf Coast the spot price (the price
his real-world trading counterparties in the physical market will be
referencing in calculating his payment) is $82 per barrel, he will receive
$78 per barrel. As he is already down $15 to the futures exchange after
offsetting out of his trade at $80 just prior to docking, his actual realised
price is $63. Again, near enough but not quite the $65 specified with the
hedge – but then whereas our trader always knew his actual sale price
was going to be discounted by some $4 to benchmark WTI, the small
increase in spot prices between him closing the futures position and
selling his oil has closed this gap by $2. This time around the
combination of pricing and temporal mismatches between closing the
futures trade and realising the physical trade has worked in his favour. 
In the real world, there are many niggling little factors – including the
exact hub physical oil is being traded through, the differential it may
price at compared to the hedge-able benchmark, and the risk of this
differential itself changing through time – which mean that the exact
outcome of a hedging operation may not be exactly what was intended.
Paper Barrels
65

Imperfection will out, at the end of the day; but the difference will
normally be small and is referred to as the “basis” risk, seen as the
residual and essentially irreducible risk of doing business in such
markets, even after putting suitable hedges in place.
Even allowing for basis risk, through offsetting in the futures
exchange oil market, participants can achieve their originally intended
economic effect without even having to physically deliver the
commodity to the exchange-specified location on the specified date.
That is the real beauty of futures markets – and, some would also say,
the curse. Because the flipside of all of the above is that if it is possible
to recognise a gain on a futures exchange through the practice of
offsetting, while never actually having to either make or take physical
delivery of the commodity in question, then by extension it is possible
for these gains to be realised by futures market participants who
actually have no real world business interest in the physical commodity
in question at all. This is where the speculators come in. 
2.4 Enter the Speculators
The word “speculator” itself can mean different things to different
people. However, as far as futures markets are concerned, a speculator
can be handily defined as a party ‘who does not produce or use a
commodity, but risks his or her own capital trading futures in that
commodity in hopes of making a profit on price changes’ (this definition
is in fact taken from the Nymex website). Speculators make money by
correctly guessing the direction the price of a commodity will actually
develop in over time, going long at the price currently available for a
contract if they expect it will rise, or going short at the price currently
available if they expect it will decline. 
Petromania
66

Offsetting the original exposure after the price has moved in their
favour then realises the difference manifest over the period. For physical
hedgers, this difference feeds into another, real world transaction, as a
balancing mechanism to ensure the price originally locked-in is actually
realised. The refinery needs to take the $30 per barrel from the futures
exchange it gained – from originally buying a contract at $50, and then
liquidating once the same contract price hit $80 – to offset against the
(roughly) $80 per barrel it actually ends up paying for its oil to achieve
the (roughly) $50 per barrel it originally aimed for. For speculators with
no interest in the actual physical oil market, however, the $30 gain
recognised on the exchange if they carried out the same transactions
would simply be pure profit.
In a key sense, futures markets actually need speculators. A market
consisting only of actual producers or consumers of a commodity might
not be liquid enough to enable all parties to hedge themselves at
acceptable prices, but with speculators coming into the mix there are
more parties to trade this price risk with, and more chances of finding
a counterparty for a transaction. One class of speculator in particular
is core to the functioning of traditional futures markets: the “floor
traders” or “floor brokers”, who commonly take the lead in actually
bidding and offering the price in open outcry. 
Among such market participants are found the “market makers” in
a particular contract, professional traders who spend every day on the
floor of the exchange as their job and are willing to buy and sell lots of
contracts with all other participants. Ideally, they hold any one exposure
on their books for as short a time as possible, and seek to make money
primarily out of the spread between bid and offer prices they quote,
because after all no one can expect a genuine market-maker in a
contract, capable of both buying and selling alike, to perform both
functions at the same price, or they would never make any money.
Paper Barrels
67

The supposed benefits of speculative interest in a futures contract do
not, however, stop with the role of market makers. In conventional
economic theory, the more information embodied in the market, the
more optimal the price discovery for all concerned. Speculators might
not have need of the actual commodity, but they may well have some
other form of specialist knowledge. They may, for example, be expert
in statistical probabilities regarding weather patterns. And this therefore
feeds into the pricing equilibrium, and should mean that such risk is
already “discounted” in the current price. 
Inasmuch as a speculator with such knowledge expects a bad storm
season, they will be willing to quote or seek a higher price than others
might do when seeking to buy a future delivery of oil. Conversely, if
they expect a damp squib they will be happier quoting or taking a lower
price than others when seeking to sell a future delivery. Their quotes
will take their place within the stack of quoted bid and offer prices from
which the market price emerges, helping to form this price regardless of
whether or not they actually ever hold physical possession of the
commodity. More participation in a market ideally means more
information implicit in its achieved pricing – and hence supposedly a
more “efficient” price discovery for the commodity in question.
Speculative participation is theoretically as welcome in this regard as
participation by physical commodity players. 
This weight-of-information argument is precisely why the Nymex
contract for front-month light sweet crude delivery is looked to as the
global benchmark for the oil price. It is the most widely-traded oil
futures contract in the world, hence supposedly the most effective for
price discovery. Generally, the volume of front-month contracts for WTI
outstanding on Nymex at any one time is more than twice the volume
of front-month contracts for Brent crude outstanding on the ICE
Market in London, the latter being the second most popular oil futures
Petromania
68

contract traded. So it is the Nymex front-month price which the world
prefers to take as its starting point, even though in the real world more
physical oil is actually priced with reference to Brent than WTI. 
As noted, the front-month Nymex light sweet crude contract is
generally very close to the prevailing price for actual spot delivery of the
same standard of crude at Cushing. Importantly, however, the price
transmission is seen to work from the futures price to the spot price
rather than vice versa. That is, the spot price is determined by looking
at the front-month contract price and then discounting appropriately.
This is what energy sector hedge fund manager Michael Masters meant
when, during his testimony before a June 23 2008 hearing in the US
Congress on the oil price, he made the comment quoted at the start of
this chapter. 
A fuller rendition of that statement by Masters is:
In the present system, price changes for key agricultural and energy
commodities originate in the futures markets and then are transmitted
directly to the spot markets. For these commodities, what happens in the
futures markets does not stay in the futures markets, but is felt almost
immediately in the spot markets. Physical commodity producers and
consumers trust and rely upon the price discovery function of the
commodities futures markets to accurately reflect the overall level of supply
and demand, pricing their spot market transactions directly off the
applicable futures price.
The spot price of oil, the actual price paid in the real world by physical
users of the commodity, is determined by the price of a notional barrel
traded in a futures contract obligation, which 99% of the time will be
liquidated prior to delivery. It is not necessarily attached to any
particular, physical barrel of oil – it is a “paper barrel”.
Paper Barrels
69

0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
3000000
3500000
26/12/00
26/12/01
26/12/02
26/12/03
26/12/04
26/12/05
26/12/06
26/12/07
26/12/08
Date
Open interest (contracts)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
$ front month contract oil price
Figure 5: Growth of Nymex open interest [Sources: CFTC, Thomson Datastream]
Open interest in
Nymex light, sweet
crude contract
(weekly recorded)
Oil price (weekly
average)
70
Petromania
2.5 Growth in Paper Barrels
Prior to the 1980s, there was not much need for active oil price hedging
in the US in particular, as the cost of domestically-produced oil was
actually regulated by the government. An increasing share of imports
from abroad in US oil consumption, and the volatility introduced into
international oil prices through events such as the OPEC-inspired oil
shock and the Iranian revolution, made this system of regulated prices
impossible to maintain. From 1981 the US oil price was free-floating.
It is from this date that trade in oil futures on Nymex started to
blossom, first sustained primarily by North American interest but, as
volumes grew and the pricing achieved credibility, then by market
participants from all over the world. 
Open interest (contracts)
$ front-month contract oil price
Date

71
Paper Barrels
Figure 5 shows the growth in oil futures trade on the Nymex market
just since 2000, expressed in terms of recorded weekly “open interest”
across the whole futures curve for light, sweet crude oil contracts traded
on the exchange. For comparison, it also shows the path of the oil price
itself (as determined by the front-month Nymex light, sweet crude
contract) through this same period of growth in open interest. Open
interest is the most commonly used metric to refer to the size of a futures
market, and references the number of contracts extant for delivery at
any one time, i.e. not including offset contracts within the reckoning. As
such, it is not quite the same as a simple trading volume measurement
– and here is our introduction to the sometimes counter-intuitive nature
of the additive rules of open interest. 
In the beginning was the contract; and the contract had two sides;
and the exchange saw that it was good. We can imagine some pristine
first dawn of futures trading on a particular exchange, the moment
when its first ever deal, for just one contract, is struck by two market
participants for a particular date. At that point, “open interest” on the
exchange is one contract, a contract by definition having two ends: one
end being the single buy obligation incurred in trade to date, and the
other end being the single sell obligation incurred in trade to date. Not
long afterwards, another deal is concluded between two other market
participants for exactly the same date, and open interest in that
particular contract maturity has now climbed to two contracts. 
Imagine, however, that when the next punter comes to the exchange
to buy a contract for delivery on that exact same date again, there is
actually no one else likewise newly-come to the exchange seeking to
sell that obligation. The punter is in luck, however. One of the buyers
in the previous deals is now already unhappy with the obligation they
have incurred, fearing they will no longer have use for the commodity
in question on the delivery date. They are willing to sell out of this

delivery obligation to the newcomer so that the latter will take it over
for them, and the latter is willing to do so. A third deal is agreed. So
open interest on the exchange is now three contracts? No, it remains at
two contracts – because, despite the participation in three deals to date
on the market by five parties, they have between them only dealt across
two whole contracts. Open interest would only have grown to three if
two newcomers had struck a brand new deal, a new contract sale and
purchase, between themselves, rather than a newcomer facilitating
someone selling out of a previously dealt contract. 
Contrariwise, open interest on our newborn exchange could actually
have shrunk back to just one contract on this third transaction if,
instead of having to wait for a newcomer to turn up willing to buy him
out of his obligation, the antsy buyer was seeking to offset just as the
seller on the other existing outstanding contract also decided it was in
their interests to abandon their own position. The antsy buyer is seeking
to sell the same contract that this latter participant is seeking to buy at
the same moment, both of them seeking to reverse their earlier trades.
They are able to agree a price on the exchange and a deal is done. As
in this case it is both an existing buyer and an existing seller offsetting
their way out of their obligation, one whole contract is liquidated and
open interest drops from two contracts to one. The remaining single
contract obligation on the exchange to deliver the set commodity at the
set date is now theoretically composed from both “other halves” left
behind by these two exiting parties – one of course still being a seller of
the commodity, the other still being a buyer. 
So, with the proviso that open interest does not necessarily reflect the
actual absolute volume of futures trades through a period (but rather
the net outcome from this trading in terms of still-extant contracts for
delivery at any one point), our graph nevertheless indicates a six-fold
increase in interest across Nymex oil futures since the start of this
Petromania
72

decade. This open interest is technically “futures-equivalent” open
interest, because it also includes the positions implied not just by
straight futures but also by another instrument widely traded on Nymex
alongside these contracts: options. Options come in two forms, “puts”
or “calls”. A put option gives the buyer the option, but not the
obligation, to sell the commodity in question at the price and on the
date specified in the option itself – which might be, for example,
December 2012 oil at $100 per barrel. A call option instead gives the
buyer the option, but not the obligation, to buy the commodity in
question at the price and on the date specified in the option itself. 
Options are more complicated than futures. For a start, they do not
necessarily require offsetting or physical delivery, but may instead expire
worthless. If, for example, a market participant had purchased a $100
per barrel December 2012 put option, but by this date oil is actually
trading at $120, they would be stupid to actually insist on exercising
their option. It is said to be “out of the money”, and will not be used
at all. This is indeed generally the intent of a person selling or “writing”
an option: to realise a fee on selling the option itself, but then hopefully
never have to make good on the implied obligation (the fee generally
being determined by incredibly complicated maths, and supposedly
yielding a price sufficient to compensate for the risk of the option being
exercised against them). On the other hand, if oil is only at $80 in
December 2012, the option will be “in the money”, and the option
buyer will certainly be seeking to exercise their pre-purchased right to
sell at $100. 
To whom will they be selling? As with futures, the proximate
counterparty for these exchange-traded derivatives is always the
exchange itself – but again, as with futures, the option buyer has only
been able to obtain this option in the first place because someone else
was willing to sell it on the exchange. This someone else remains on
Paper Barrels
73

the hook for this exposure with the exchange, and if the option they
sold is in the money on the December 2012 date, they will be obligated
to buy oil from the exchange at $100. In a very similar way to that seen
with futures, the trade in options gives rise to a paper quantity of
notional barrels at stake in the net exposure market participants build
up through their dealings – and these paper barrels can be counted
alongside those of straight futures in totalling open interest. 
2.6 The Phantom Menace
It is the paper barrel of the futures contract that sets the price for the
physical barrel in the real world. The paper barrel is more phantom
than physical, because the fact of the matter is that less than 1% of the
oil futures traded on Nymex actually run to physical delivery – the other
99% are instead settled financially, through the offsetting mechanism
described above. Of course, even legitimate physical producers or users
of a commodity nevertheless find it easier to settle futures through
offsetting. If it were indeed such commercial market players accounting
for the bulk of contracts, whether offset before expiry or not, we could
likewise be sure that it was their view of how markets were developing,
whether ultimately proved incorrect or not, that was guiding price
discovery. This is important because futures markets are in the end
intended to help actual physical producers and users of a commodity
manage their business, rather than provide an arena for speculative
profits. 
Yet a 99:1 ratio of offset to physically-settled oil futures contracts on
Nymex leaves an awful lot of room in which to postulate speculators –
in other words, those who by the Nymex definition above do not
produce or use oil – playing a major role in price discovery. It is also
remarkable how the absolute volume of barrels notionally at stake in
Petromania
74

these contracts, each for a thousand barrels, compares to actual physical
consumption of oil in the real world. When the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS) looked at the oil futures markets in a 2007 report, it
found that whereas in 2002 the largest contract (in volume terms)
traded on the Nymex and the largest such contract traded on ICE
together accounted for, on average, the barrel-equivalent of 3.2 times
global daily oil production, by 2005 this ratio had grown to 3.9 times.
Fast-forward to 2008, and do the same sum on the basis of data for
Nymex and ICE front-month contracts supplied by Platts Oilgram. On
May 22 that year, outstanding volumes totalled across the two leading
front-month contracts were equivalent to some 509 million notional
barrels of oil, or at least 5.9 times global daily production at that point. 
It might be reasonable to suggest that between 2005 and 2008,
proportionately that many more commercial producers or consumers of
physical oil had realised the value of hedging and had entered a futures
market they had previously played no part in. Or perhaps instead, to
suggest that through this period those already in the market had decided
to hedge a lot more of their production or consumption than they had
done previously. And indeed, rapidly-appreciating prices could explain
this latter behaviour for both producers and users, the former locking
in ever-greater shares of production at ever higher prices out of greed,
the latter locking in prevailing high prices out of fear that the trend
means they will go higher yet. Many would argue, however, that this
growth in paper barrel trade without the requirement of physical
settlement was instead symptomatic of a significant growth in the
speculative element in oil futures markets.
Some degree of speculation, particularly by market-makers, is
essential in the provision of liquidity to a futures market. But whenever
price discovery as a function becomes more determined by the judgment
of speculators than by physical producers or users of a commodity, then
Paper Barrels
75

by extension the prices that emerge in that market are not going to be
seen as reasonable by at least one side of the producer or user divide.
To that degree they are going to be both losing money on hedges
previously put in place at what they felt were reasonable prices, and
also more reluctant to use the futures market, so this market will
therefore be failing in its stated purpose. This point was made by
Masters when, in his testimony as above, he said, ‘the problem is that
because of the price volatility that has been created in these markets,
many people that used to hedge are now not hedging… people are
literally afraid to hedge, and we’ve talked to a lot of physical producers,
some of which did hedge at much lower prices and have had to cover
or rebuy what they sold at much higher prices, which in some cases has
forced them out of business’. 
The same point was also made during the course of the same hearing
by Douglas Steenland, chief executive of US airline Northwest, whose
written testimony stated:
In our view, the volume of speculative activity has translated directly into
speculative momentum that has placed upward pressure on oil prices
irrespective of market fundamentals. The original purpose of the futures
market – to allow end users and producers to hedge against future price
fluctuations – has been subverted. When futures prices are driven by
speculative activity, hedging becomes a high-risk activity for producers and
users. Because futures prices are a determinant of spot prices, end users of
petroleum products, such as airlines, are forced to pay prices which bear an
uncertain relation to the economics of oil production or consumption and
therefore cannot be planned for.
If it is speculators rather than physical producers or users of a
commodity driving price discovery – the menace of the phantom barrels
– the price emerging in these contracts will accordingly be divorced
Petromania
76

from the underlying fundamentals of the physical market as perceived
by those best-placed to judge them. And the first line of any such
argument alleging speculation as the main cause for the rocketing oil
price invariably drew attention to precisely this. The obvious signals
from physical oil markets that might support the appreciation of the
oil price to those levels on the basis of supply and demand fundamentals
were curiously lacking, despite the number of times people repeated the
arguments relating to potential supply disruption. This line of argument
is akin to the stance famously taken by Sherlock Holmes in the Arthur
Conan Doyle short story Silver Blaze, where the great detective advises
a police inspector to take note of ‘the curious incident of the dog in the
night-time’. As the inspector protests that the dog did nothing, Holmes
remarks, ‘That was the curious incident’. Which dogs were not barking
as the oil market was seeing its very own smash-and-grab played out?
2.7 Dogs That Did Not Bark
As we have seen above with the Saudis, OPEC president Khelil and
others, throughout the run-up in oil prices, OPEC countries had
maintained the line that actual physical supply shortages were not to
blame since the actual daily, physical oil market remained balanced –
nobody who wanted oil was having to go without. Of course, it could
be argued that this was exactly what OPEC would say to shift blame
from itself while still enjoying higher prices. But Western, commercial,
private sector oil companies were also saying this. UK oil giant BP hosts
a launch presentation for its annual Statistical Review of World Energy,
a document invariably picked up and quoted in the press when it
emerges every year. And speaking at the 2008 launch in June that year,
the company’s chief economist Christof Ruehl was quite adamant there
was no physical shortage of oil in the market – ‘The market,’ he said
confidently, ‘remains well supplied.’
Paper Barrels
77

Oil inventory levels
There is evidence to support this assertion in the most basic sense. We
noted earlier that there are various disparities between even reputable
sources of oil supply and demand monitoring. No one can ever verify
exactly how many barrels of oil are produced worldwide each day or
how many exactly are consumed, and neither should we expect them to.
But happily, these partially-veiled fundamentals manifest their relative
weight to one another in the far more immediately discernible shape of
oil inventories, the stocks of crude oil held in storage around the world.
It is these stocks that in the first instance meet excess demand over
supply at any given time. And indeed there are regular, cyclical peaks in
crude oil-derived product demand – such as the onset of the gasoline-
intensive summer “driving season” in the US, or a higher call on
diesel-fired power stations over cold winters – that cause refiners to
build crude oil stocks beforehand, as a precaution against unexpected
interruptions in their chain of supply locking them out of these lucrative
trading windows. 
These cyclical stock builds occur over longer-term patterns of stock-
holding reflecting the geopolitical currents we have already analysed. In
times of tension, people tend to hold higher levels of crude oil stock
than in more relaxed times. Of course, as with the primary production
and consumption data, there are disparities and some “guesstimation”
involved in global oil stock monitoring. At the end of the day, however,
barrels in storage are relatively easy to count and most countries see
provision of accurate data as a public good that benefits all of them by
allowing timely adjustments in production when required.  At any given
conjunction of cyclical and underlying factors, these reported oil
inventories can inform us of the basic state of the underlying physical
market. Rising stocks of oil in storage mean more oil is being produced
than is required for consumption at that point in time; falling stocks of
Petromania
78

oil in storage tell us that more is required for consumption than is being
produced at that point in time.
What were oil inventory levels through the first half of 2008 telling
us about the fundamental balance between supply and demand?
Certainly, successive quarters of apparent stock draws had occurred
through 2007 and fed into the feeling that demand was running ahead
of production. Things changed in early 2008, however. If we go right
back to that first day of trading in 2008 when oil actually initially
touched $100 per barrel, it did so as the US benchmark Dow Jones
equity index was dropping due to poor US manufacturing figures. The
recession – which many had feared was on the way – was on the cusp
of being confirmed; and all else being equal, a slackening of demand
growth should have eased the pressure on both inventories and oil
prices. Indeed, this prospect was widely seen as responsible for the
retreat in oil prices back towards $90 per barrel that occurred through
January and February 2008. No matter that crude prices had definitely
established themselves above $100 by early April, at this point the EIA
was publicly forecasting that US petroleum consumption in particular
would actually decline through 2008 as a result of the economic
slowdown (the agency did still expect global 2008 consumption to
increase overall on the basis of partial data showing continuing growth
in China, India, Russia and the Middle East – although we know now
with the benefit of hindsight that global consumption overall would
also drop in 2008).
As we have seen, supply disruption was not just feared but had also
come to pass in the first half of 2008 – particularly in Nigeria. Yet were
these disruptions enough to tighten the market further, despite an
emerging recession? This does not seem to have been the case.
According to EIA data, in both the first and second quarters of 2008,
crude oil inventories actually grew across the OECD region (essentially
Paper Barrels
79

the developed world) – from 4.08 billion barrels at the end of December
2007 to 4.09 billion barrels at the end of March 2008, and 4.13 billion
barrels by the end of June 2008. Another dataset from the IEA, the
OECD’s own energy agency, confirms that same picture with only slight
variation in the figures. Meanwhile, Saudi oil minister Ali Al-Naimi
had repeatedly commented through this period on how inventory levels
through the OECD region were within the five-year average band and
could therefore in no wise be seen as cause for concern in terms of
physical supply security. While some initially disputed this, the IEA itself
had announced in March 2008 that OECD stocks were ‘almost
uniformly above the seasonal norms’, and had even actually been above
the five-year average from the end of January onwards, a situation
which would not alter through the coming year. If we are looking for
fundamental support for high oil prices, among several indicators that
alert us to an underlying actual supply shortage, oil inventories are the
most obvious – yet this particular dog was definitely not barking. We
can clearly see in oil stock data the empirical evidence for Ruehl’s
comment on the market being ‘well supplied’ in June 2008.
The industry cost consensus
If high prices therefore were not reflecting any immediate physical
shortage of oil, what else in the spread of fundamental factors might
justify them? We have already noted the “marginal cost of supply”
argument, the idea that the price of oil has to be high enough to justify
the production cost of the least economic barrel required to meet
consumption. Human beings are rational creatures and we do not just
live in the here and now but are continually forecasting and planning
for the future. Thus high oil prices might not necessarily reflect a
fundamental physical shortage of crude in the present but might instead
simply be reflecting the highest-cost production seen as required in the
capacity mix to ensure that demand is comfortably met. The only
Petromania
80

problem with this argument is that oil companies themselves were
practically unanimous: even their highest-cost production currently
operating or due to come onstream in the near future did not cost $100
per barrel to produce. 
Let’s go back to Christof Ruehl’s own employer, UK oil giant BP.
While BP refuses to publicise any precise oil price forecasts it makes,
and indeed denies the utility of doing so, the figure it does choose to
publicise instead is its own so-called ‘long-term planning price’. This is
the price level at which BP tests the viability of planned investments
over many years of projected production prior to making the so-called
‘final investment decision’ (or FID), essentially the green light for project
construction. As such, it is not itself an average oil price forecast but
rather what the company sees as a viable floor for this average oil price,
a level beneath which prices are unlikely to drop. And what in turn
provides the confidence that a given price level should form the floor is
none other than BP’s own reckoning of how much it will cost to
produce oil through the period in question – the planning price is
derived from a marginal cost of supply-type analysis.
When BP reported its 2007 full-year results in February 2008, it used
the occasion to announce a change in its long-term planning price. Chief
executive Tony Hayward said that from now on, BP’s long-term
planning price would be $60 per barrel. Certainly this was a notable
increase on the previous planning price of $40 per barrel, and it was
seized upon as evidence that the oil industry believed that there had
indeed been a permanent shift upwards in the oil price. But $60 is a
long way from $100. What BP was saying with a long-term planning
price of $60 was that the most marginal supply it currently foresaw
developing in its own portfolio had a cost of production that allowed
a reasonable return on long-term project investments if prices averaged
$60.
Paper Barrels
81

Of course, it could just be that BP itself was a particularly conservative
company that used a deliberately low-balled price figure for project
planning, perhaps not reflecting what other large companies were
getting up to. There is some truth to this, as BP has largely steered clear
of the relatively high production cost “unconventional” supply sources
its UK-listed rival, Shell, has made large investments in (particularly
Canadian oil sands). Yet in the following months it became clear that
while other oil industry professionals might entertain slightly richer
ideas for where the oil price “needed” to be to reward sufficient
marginal production to meet demand, BP was merely toward the
bottom of a fairly limited band of estimates. The consensus among
professional oilmen who voiced opinion on this was very much that the
highest-cost production required to meet prevailing demand, invariably
cited as either Canadian tar sands production or very deepwater and
complex offshore development, was actually economically viable at oil
prices significantly below $100. 
We know this from on-the-record statements offered by prominent
oil industry executives called before the US legislature in the hearings
we have already referred to regarding high oil and related high fuel
prices. In one session before the Senate on May 22 2008 were gathered
together John Hofmeister of Shell’s US subsidiary, Robert Malone of
BP’s US subsidiary and John Lowe of US major ConocoPhillips.
Hofmeister said that if it reflected the industry cost base, the price of oil
should be ‘somewhere between $35 and $65 a barrel’. Malone actually
mirrored his company’s planning price in saying ‘in the range of $60’.
And Lowe went the highest, arguing that the price should be ‘about
$90 in this environment’. These opinions were being offered on a day
when oil actually passed $130 per barrel on Nymex for the first time
ever, to close at a then-record $133.82.
Petromania
82

Looking at this evidence, it remains very hard to justify oil prices over
$100. Neither current physical supply deficits rationalise it, nor the
production costs of marginal supplies expected as necessary to meet
demand any time in the foreseeable future. The obvious alternative for
many observers inside the oil industry was that it was indeed the activity
of speculators in the futures market, bidding up prices beyond levels
justified by these physical fundamentals. It was not only oil company
executives called to the long-running series of US legislative hearings
on the oil price – professional oil industry consultants and analysts (as
opposed to investment bank analysts) were also there in force too. One
of these characters, Fadel Gheit of Oppenheimer & Co, had already
made headlines in December 2007 when at that point, before oil had
crossed the $100 threshold, he testified before a Congressional
committee that speculators were responsible for oil costing twice as
much as it should, even when it was around the $90 per barrel range.
Six months later, on June 23 2008 – and with the oil price by then
tracking between $130 and $140 per barrel – Gheit was once again
testifying in front of a Congressional committee on the oil price. The
following is extracted from his written submission accompanying that
day’s testimony, and neatly summarises the points above, that when
physical market fundamentals fail to explain oil price movement, the
obvious cause is instead speculation: 
I do not believe the current record crude oil price is justified by market
fundamentals of supply and demand. I believe the surge in crude oil price,
which more than doubled in the last 12 months, was mainly due to excessive
speculation and not due to an unexpected shift in market fundamentals.
After all, demand growth in China, India and other developing countries
was not a surprise and was reflected in crude oil futures a year ago. In fact,
the slowdown in global economic growth, caused by the sub-prime debacle
Paper Barrels
83

84
Petromania
and fears of a run on banks, trimmed world oil demand forecasts, which
should have resulted in a lower, not higher, oil price. On the supply side, the
impact of the unrest in Nigeria on oil exports, the decline in Mexico’s crude
production, and other less than newsworthy factors, were hardly new news,
and were already discounted in crude oil futures. I firmly believe that the
current record oil price in excess of $135 per barrel is inflated. I believe,
based on supply and demand fundamentals, crude oil prices should not be
above $60 per barrel. My view is based on the following observations: there
were no unexpected changes in industry fundamentals in the last 12 months,
when crude oil prices were below $65 per barrel. I cannot think of any
reason that explains the run-up in crude oil price, besides excessive
speculation; world oil demand growth forecasts have been trimmed to
reflect the current economic slowdown, which should have resulted in lower,
not higher, oil prices; world oil production is economic at prices well below
$65 per barrel.
Testifying alongside Gheit that day were not just hedge fund manager
Michael Masters and fuel-consuming industry representatives such as
airline chief Douglas Steenland, as noted above, but also another two
professional oil industry consultants, Roger Diwan of PFC Energy and
Edward Krapels of Energy Security Analysis. Strikingly, all of these
witnesses would essentially agree with the angle offered by Gheit. At
one moment during the oral testimony from this panel of witnesses on
June 23 2008, one Congressman Barton on the committee asked them
collectively what they thought the price of oil should be at that moment.
Back came the answers: 
Gheit: ‘Between $46 and $60, no more than $60.’
Diwan: ‘Below $100.’
Masters: ‘Below $100.’
Krapels: ‘I’m in the $60 camp.’

85
Paper Barrels
To understand how these industry insiders all reached the same
conclusion that something other than fundamentals was driving
prevailing oil prices, we have to understand what was widely
acknowledged to have happened in the paper oil markets in recent
years. This is commonly referred to as the “financialisation” of oil, part
of a wider financialisation of commodity markets in general.


3
The Financialisation of Oil


‘Most frustrating for oil analysts is the lack of transparent data to
look at the exact size and flows of the different categories of
players on the oil markets. The data released by the CFTC does
not allow analysts like me to understand the broad movements by
the financial players in the market. The categories used by the
CFTC are too broad and are meaningless if you allow the index
funds to be categorized as commercials and if you don’t break
down these categories in smaller and better defined entities. I find
it ironical that we constantly require more data transparency
from the OPEC producers, be it on their production or reserve
data, but we cannot manage to do the same in our own backyard
on one of the most crucial if not the key determinant of oil price
formation.’
Roger Diwan, PFC Energy – testimony submitted to US Congress, House of
Representatives Subcommittee of Oversight and Investigation, Committee on Energy
and Commerce, June 23 2008
3.1 The Hearings
It should come as no surprise that in the US, at one and the same time
the pre-eminent global military and economic power yet also completely
dependent on imported oil and a society built around the car, the rapid
ascent of gasoline prices as a result of crude oil appreciation had been
met with public concern. And naturally, this concern quickly turned to
outrage at the suggestion that such prices might be artificially elevated
through the activity of speculative finance. This translated into
investigation by the US Congress itself. Hearings on the matter had
proceeded at various levels of Senate and House panels throughout this
89

period, from the autumn of 2007 into December, then March and April
of 2008, and again through May-July 2008. And by the time the latter
wave of hearings rolled around, oil prices had rocketed so high that
public attention was keenly focused on the testimony.
It is not my intention to bludgeon the reader with extensive
cataloguing of dates, the elected US senators and congressmen sitting on
whichever subcommittee and their opening statements, nor the detail in
the proffered complaints from associations representing airlines,
truckers and others drawn from the rich panoply of American life
suffering badly with sky-high oil prices. Suffice to say, these hearings
largely revolved around the same issue, now commonly referred to as
the “financialisation” of oil. This is the idea that the weight of non-
commercial, by definition “speculative”, interest in oil futures trading
on the part of financial institutions had altered the dynamics of price
discovery in that market so much that oil prices now reflected the
imperatives of finance more than the underlying fundamentals of
physical supply and demand. So some of the evidence presented by
some witnesses at these hearings provides a useful prism through which
to examine and weigh the arguments for and against the role of
speculators in driving high oil prices.
As we have seen, throughout these hearings the US legislature invited
various expert witnesses from the energy industry to offer their evidence
regarding this issue, including professional oilmen and also specialist
oil sector consultants. Many – but not all – of these emerged as what
we might call witnesses for the prosecution. In other words they agreed
with the notional charge that this financialisation of the oil futures
market was introducing undue speculation which was now indeed
driving oil prices higher than fundamentals warranted. And from the
welter of government agency initials thrown up in these hearings, as
the legislature called them to address these complaints and offer their
Petromania
90

own evidence on the matter, one set really stands out as continually
arguing the defence against this charge. The GAO (Government
Accountability Office) was called, the DoE (Department of Energy) was
called, as too was its subsidiary EIA (Energy Information
Administration, as above), along with the FERC (Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission). But it was the CFTC – or the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission – which persistently asserted that
speculative futures trading had no significant impact on the price of oil. 
Evidence from the CFTC was crucial to all these hearings because, as
the US government body responsible for regulating commodity futures
markets in the US, only it possessed the detailed statistical data that
could be reviewed to determine if movement in speculative capital was
linked to movement in oil prices. Other government agencies deferred
to its judgment – when EIA administrator Guy Caruso was quizzed by
the Senate in December 2007, he conceded that he personally thought
that speculative investment in oil futures had perhaps contributed
something to prices, but said such financial sector interest was not the
overwhelming driver behind price movement because the CFTC had
apparently established this was not the case. Yet CFTC evidence in this
regard would prove controversial – and not only because any assertion
that the oil price was being dictated by financial speculators was a
serious criticism of the CFTC itself.
After all, the CFTC’s main role is to ensure that the futures markets
are able to perform their primary function of hedging prices for
commercial producers and consumers of the commodity in question. It
should, then, notionally prevent precisely the sort of “artificial” skewing
of market prices by non-commercial interests that many of the expert
witnesses alleged was occurring. Accordingly, it had to suffer brickbats
from some irate US representatives convinced it had been asleep on the
job. Beyond the obvious self-interest at stake in the CFTC assertion that
The Financialisation of Oil
91

speculative finance was not calling the tune in oil prices, however, many
outside experts have a fundamental problem with the way the CFTC
presents its data on Nymex market participants, and said so in their
evidence. To understand what this problem is, we need to understand
who the players are in the financialisation of oil, how the CFTC
monitors their relative importance in the market, and how other
commentators think the CFTC has got it all wrong. 
3.2 The Meaning of “Financialisation”
“Financialisation” is a neologism now frequently used to describe what
has happened to the crude oil market over the past few years. In its
basic understanding, the word simply denotes increasing involvement in
that market by a whole fauna of financial investors – from lean, mean
speculating machines (such as hedge funds out to make a quick killing)
to large, lumbering beasts (such as traditionally staid and risk-averse
pension funds just looking for some diversity in their required diet of
stable, long-term returns). We can refer to this whole range of players
as “institutional investors”, as they all represent investing institutions
of one sort or another. What unites them apart from this definition is
that while they are keen to wring some form of financial return from
their foray into the sector, they have no interest as businesses in the
actual physical production, supply and end-usage of crude oil.
This is in stark contrast to the oil producing companies, oil traders,
refineries, fuel marketers, and intensive fuel-users such as airlines, who
were for years the main protagonists in the oil markets, and whose
views on the fundamental “real world” factors affecting the supply and
demand of actual physical oil were traditionally seen as determining
the oil price. Which brings us to other meanings suggested in
“financialisation” – referring not just to the simple fact of increasing
Petromania
92

institutional investor interest in the oil markets, but also to how the
weight and momentum of this financial interest has allegedly become
the dominant determinant of oil prices, obscuring “real world”
fundamentals. Thus the marketplace behaviour of oil gradually shifts
from that of an actual physical good – with, for example, price-setting
demand following predictable “seasons” in terms of annual patterns of
peak and trough physical oil usage – towards that of a particular class
of financial investment asset, with price-setting demand set by the
characteristics of the return or “yield” on offer in comparison to other
investment asset classes.
There is clearly a sliding scale of meaning in the usage of
“financialisation”, and some definitions comfortably nest within others.
For example, David Kirsch of oil consultancy PFC Energy was
apparently using the term in its simplest sense when interviewed by
Arab News at the very start of 2008. Following the first $100 per barrel
trade he explained the ‘financialisation of oil’ simply as the use of oil as
an investment product by hedge funds and pension funds. Yet some
months later his PFC Energy colleague Roger Diwan was using the same
term in a far more complicated sense, when testifying to the US
Congress in the June 23 2008 hearings. In fact, he came up with a
threefold evolution of financialisation in the oil markets over the
previous few years. This had started with a phase running from around
2003 to 2006, through which financial investors simply bought into oil
futures en masse, all hoping for positive price appreciation in their
investment based on the tightening fundamentals we have sketched in
our first chapter – and indeed, many were rewarded for buying into
this story. Nevertheless, according to Diwan, from 2006 onwards a
second stage of financialisation evidenced far more measured buying
and selling by financial institutions under more sophisticated strategies
– involving going short of the oil price at times, as well as long at others. 
The Financialisation of Oil
93

For Diwan, the third stage of financialisation was evident from the
onset of the credit crunch in August 2007, and saw a fresh
concentration of non-commercial, financial sector interests in the paper
oil futures market. This was made up both of money fleeing other types
of asset classes which had become distressed in the mass deleveraging
and sell-offs attending the credit crunch, and also new money born of
the deep interest rate cuts governments adopted to ease the crunch. This
latest stage of financialisation was causing oil futures to respond as
much to dollar weakness in the currency markets and perceived
inflation dangers (variables that affect financial sector demand for oil
as a perceived “safe haven” hedge against dollar debasement and
inflation) as to the variables reflecting physical supply and demand
fundamentals. 
Diwan was of course not the first to point out that an inverse
correlation had become apparent between the oil price and the strength
of the dollar or expectations for inflation – which are, of course, aspects
of the same phenomenon for holders of dollar-denominated funds. This
relationship was widely commented on throughout the media, and
indeed was also part of the standard OPEC line. As often as cartel
representatives mentioned speculators, they also mentioned that it was
gyrations in dollar strength motivating the speculators in their oil
investment strategies, as much as their long-standing appreciation of
the potential for supply disruptions. In early June ’08, for example,
OPEC president Khelil had commented: ‘In terms of market
fundamentals, there is no problem with supply and demand. Prices have
more to do with this speculative bubble, which is due to the
depreciation of the value of the dollar and geopolitical tensions.’ 
This linkage is in fact a key part of the investment case encouraging
financial institutions into commodities in the first place. Producers of
Petromania
94

dollar-denominated commodities such as oil are expected to raise the
dollar price of their product if the dollar weakens against their home
currency – so that the value of their sales are maintained once
repatriated – and likewise raise the dollar price of their product in line
with dollar economy inflation. Thus, investing in dollar-denominated
commodities provides a “natural hedge” for investors against the
twinned evils of dollar devaluation and inflation. Of course, for most
of our modern history, it has been dollar-denominated gold that has
reigned supreme as the commodity “safe haven”, but over recent years
oil and other metals (certainly platinum) have also been favoured. And
Diwan’s own statistical analysis presented as part of his testimony
demonstrated that since August 2007, while the so-called “R-squared”
measurement of statistical correlation between strength in the gold price
and weakness in the dollar was 78.8%, the R-squared between the oil
price and dollar was almost as high, 75.9% – which prompted Diwan
to label his graph showing this relationship as ‘Oil the New Gold’. 
3.3 The Growth in Speculative Interest
Taking the examples given above as a guide, we can distinguish between
a “soft” and a “hard” version of oil market financialisation. The former
simply refers to rising financial sector interest in investing in oil; the
latter instead positing some kind of distortion of the market, such that
this financial sector interest and its own concerns for maximising yield
on its managed money have become as key a determinant of oil prices
as the physical fundamentals of the market. Looking at what statistics
there are, it would be hard for anyone to disagree with the “soft”
meaning of financialisation at least. As Diwan noted, between 2003
and 2008 the number of financial sector companies directly trading on
The Financialisation of Oil
95

Nymex grew from 50 to more than 250, and this figure does not include
the financial sector players investing in the market through
intermediaries, such as the “swap dealers” we will examine below.
Figure 6 is drawn from CFTC data, and presents snapshots of open
interest across all Nymex light, sweet crude oil contracts on three
different dates, split into the two categories the CFTC uses in monitoring
all market participants, so-called “commercial” and “non-commercial”
traders. The commercial category includes all the real-world producers,
traders and users of physical crude oil (such as those listed above) who
directly maintain positions on the Nymex futures market to hedge their
existing real-world price risk. The non-commercial includes all the
“speculative” market participants whose interest in oil futures is purely
financial rather than anything to do with managing real-world business
risk. Historically, this split between commercial and non-commercial
trading activity using these definitions has been the CFTC’s preferred
format for reporting weekly market data to the public in its so-called
Commitment of Traders (CoT) report – so, as we shall see, historically
this has also been the best data available to external analysts (barring
some very recent exceptions, also detailed later). 
We have already identified one such “speculative” class of trader,
which in fact the futures market would be hard-pressed to do without
– the market makers. Alongside them the non-commercial category
includes “floor brokers” (those market participants trading futures on
the Nymex floor for either their own financial gain, or as a service to
external clients lacking their own market access), and also the hedge
funds that seek to invest directly in oil futures. All these “non-
commercial” parties are a priori assumed to be speculative traders with
no actual business interest in the physical supply and consumption of
crude oil. They invest in exactly the same contracts as physical market
players but with different aims, generally seeking to simply realise gains
Petromania
96

on offsetting, rather than pursuing any actual physical hedging
requirement (although hedge funds and other financial institutions do,
occasionally, extend their interest in oil into the physical market). 
One trade in particular is seen as characteristic of the “non-
commercial” market participants – the so-called “time spread” trade.
Time spread trades involve a speculator going long of the contract price
at one calendar point along the futures curve, and short of the contract
price at another point of the futures curve. Their motivation is that they
feel, for whatever reason, that prices at one part of the curve are out of
whack with prices at another, and they expect the differential between
them to either narrow or widen. They may not, however, be sure how
the prices will move to achieve this outcome. While one price will be too
high or too low with regard to the other, will it be this price that moves
to narrow or widen the gap, or the other price, or both prices moving
at once? Providing the time spread speculators go long of the price they
think is too low relative to the other, and short of the price they think
is too high relative to the other – as long as they are correct about
whether the gap in question will narrow or expand – they will make
money. 
Much as with a “pairs trade” in equity markets, even if both prices
move in the same direction but the trader is still right about the relative
performance of the two prices, then losses on the price that has moved
in the “wrong” direction relative to the trader position will be
outweighed by the gains in the other price moving in the same direction,
but to a greater extent. As with an equity market “pairs trade”, wrongly
predicting whether or not the gap will narrow or widen is the one way
such a trade can go wrong, but it may well then go disastrously wrong
– as the trade will possibly be taking losses on both positions. Time
spread trades going wrong can therefore occasionally be responsible
for notable breakouts of simultaneous buying and selling at different
The Financialisation of Oil
97

points along the curve, as speculators dash to reverse the positions. One
such example arguably occurred during a particularly fevered week in
May 2008, which we shall examine later.
Petromania
98
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2000
79%
21%
Commercial
Non-commercial
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2004
67%
33%
Commercial
Non-commercial
33%
67%
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2004
Commercial
Non-commercial
Commercial
Non-commercial
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2000
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2004

The Financialisation of Oil
99
Figure 6: Nymex oil market growth by CFTC “commercial”/“non-commercial”
split  [Source: CFTC (Büyüksahin, Haigh, Harris, Overdahl & Robe, 2008)]
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2008
50%
50%
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2008
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
3000000
2000 curve total
2004 curve total
2008 curve total
Market growth and commercial/non-commercial split
Commercial
Non-commercial
Commercial
Non-commercial
Open interest (conracts)
Commercial/non-commercial trader split 2008

As can be seen in Figure 6, while in 2000 the non-commercial side of
the market accounted for 21% of total open interest, by 2004 this had
grown to 33%, and by 2008 to 50%. Anyone tracking this data saw
undeniable growth in the non-commercial, speculative side of the
futures market. Yet the CFTC was adamant that the growth of non-
commercial trading was not itself a driver for high oil prices. How did
it establish this? Let’s go back to that CFTC finding relied upon by EIA
administrator Caruso. This was an important document as far as the
CFTC was concerned, and was also referred to by CFTC Commissioner
Walt Lukken himself when commenting on speculative pressure on oil
prices in December 2007 (before the Congressional Oversight and
Investigations Committee on Energy and Commerce).
It is worth quoting Lukken at length with regard to the questions that
study addressed and what the findings were:
Recently, the CFTC’s Office of Chief Economist examined the markets and
the role that speculators play in them. The staff studied the relationship
between futures prices and the positions of managed money traders
(MMTs), commonly known as hedge funds, for the natural gas and crude
oil futures markets. The staff also examined the relationship between the
positions of large speculators such as hedge funds and positions of other
categories of traders (e.g. floor traders, merchants, manufacturers,
commercial banks, dealers) for the same markets… The study found that
when new information comes to the market and creates some price
movement, it is the commercial traders (such as oil companies, utilities,
airlines) who react to it first… Hence, the report’s conclusions show that
speculative buying, as a whole, does not appear to drive prices up.
Despite the comment that the work was recent, this study in fact
originally appeared as a working paper in 2005, two versions of this still
Petromania
100

being easily available – and was then apparently updated in June 2006,
although I have not seen the later version.  
Hedge funds are of course the very definition of speculative capital,
and as such have become the bête noire in almost any modern tale of
financial excess, from the emerging markets collapse of 1997-8 onwards
through to the sub-prime mortgage credit disaster that triggered the
current global recession. It is easy to see why the CFTC would focus on
hedge fund trading in an analysis of speculative pressure on the price of
oil futures. After all, it would be unfair to treat all non-commercial
participants as sources of speculative pressure – as we have seen,
market-makers are technically counted as non-commercial, yet their
presence is essential in providing the liquidity needed for an efficient
market. And while some floor brokers, such as Richard Arens, were
indeed speculators out to play the market, others were simply service
providers for off-market clients of whom many would actually have a
genuine business interest in physical oil but lack the scale or desire to
trade on Nymex themselves. As hedge funds are presumed to be solely
interested in the financial gain to be won on correctly anticipating oil
futures price movements, they did indeed make a suitable subject for
examining if such speculation had an observable correlation with
movements in the oil price. 
This was moreover a study only the CFTC itself could have
undertaken. Only the CFTC had access to more detailed trading records
than the simple split between commercial and non-commercial traders
it presents to the world in the CoT reports. Indeed, in the original
working paper the authors make note of this consideration themselves
in vaunting the “unique” nature of the dataset to which they had access,
a dataset which split the two master categories down into more
particular subsets, including hedge funds. The conclusion drawn was
The Financialisation of Oil
101

that there was no significant correlation between the investment
patterns in Nymex oil futures by hedge funds and the movement of the
oil price itself. This study was the initial basis of the stand the CFTC
took right from the start of the hearings – that despite the obvious
growth in non-commercial interest on the Nymex crude oil market, the
speculative element of this interest was not responsible for driving oil
prices so high.
3.4 Enter the Swap Dealers
Outside commentators such as Gheit, Diwan, Masters, and Krapels,
disagreed with this conclusion. In voicing their objections they raised a
major issue with the way the CFTC presents its data, and how this
influences any attempt to gauge the true effect of speculation on oil
prices. The problem lay in the initial categorisation of market
participants into commercial and non-commercial. A particular type of
market participant included in the commercial categorisation, and
therefore of necessity excluded from the CFTC definition of
“speculative” adopted to date, should arguably have been more
accurately classified as non-commercial, and therefore part of the
speculative interest. These market participants are called “swap
dealers”, and the perceived “back door” through which this supposedly
commercial category of market participant was and is seen to exert
considerable speculative pressure is commonly referred to as the “swap
dealer loophole”. 
Sometimes a business or individual will have such exacting, particular
requirements in how they wish to fix their price exposure along some
portion of the oil futures curve, whether front-month or further
maturities, that simply buying and selling standardised futures contracts
on Nymex or similar markets does not do the job. They will have to
Petromania
102

turn instead to the so-called “over-the-counter” (OTC) world of
bespoke, tailored derivatives brokered privately rather than on
regulated markets. Such derivatives are in general proffered by financial
institutions who reckon themselves capable of accurately calculating
the risks they expose themselves to in guaranteeing to pay out – under
a ‘swap’ agreement – the difference between a price fixed now, and a
possible future price for a commodity (the conditions for payout of
course depending on whether the customer wants to go long or short of
the strike price specified and in which timeframe). 
Often the swap dealers are investment banks, able to deploy legions
of mathematical analysts and terabytes of computer processing power
to calculate the optimum prices they should charge for taking on this
risk while winning the largest possible number of customers. In this
business model, the ideal position for the swap dealer is to be
completely hedged itself, in other words neutral to the financial
outcomes of the derivatives it has written whatever happens to price
levels, while still raking in fees from supposedly taking on price risk.
And of course, the business of writing swaps itself provides a natural
hedge in this regard. Theoretically, in many markets there may be as
many people wanting to go long of a particular price at a certain level
as there will be wanting to go short at that same price. If the swap dealer
can write the derivatives for all these customers it will gain with as many
as it loses, and to the same extent on either side – no matter what
happens to the price in question. As the opposing counterparties are
therefore effectively funding each other’s potential gains, the swap
dealer is left in the middle – collecting fees while netting off these
opposite exposures against each other, putting together different ends
of the same trade from all suitably opposing positions on its book. 
More often than not, of course, in the real world there will be an
imbalance between the number of customers the particular swap dealer
The Financialisation of Oil
103

has wishing, in aggregate, to go long or short of a particular price along
the futures curve, and therefore it is left with a net exposure at that
point. This is where the swap dealer’s own trading on Nymex or
whichever other appropriate futures market comes in. Say a swap dealer
has written derivatives equivalent to a thousand contracts-worth of oil
volumes for customers going long of five-year oil at $150 per barrel, but
also written the equivalent of two thousand contracts for customers
going short of five-year oil at the same price. A thousand of each of
these opposing exposures cancel each other out; however, the swap
dealer still has a net exposure to a remaining one thousand customers
who have gone short of oil. Accordingly, the swap dealer’s own
exposure is financially equivalent to going long the equivalent amount
– by writing these derivatives he has become effectively a net buyer of
five-year oil at $150. 
This is easily seen to be the case: the swap dealer “wins” on this
exposure if the oil price rises, because then he will not be paying out on
the short derivative he sold but these customers will instead be paying
out to him. It is of course possible that the swap dealer might wish to
keep this exposure, particularly if its own opinion is that the five-year
oil price is indeed going to rise. However, good business practice is to
hedge out this remaining net exposure, and to do so the swap dealer
simply has to cover his net long exposure by selling the equivalent
amount of contracts for five-year oil at $150 on Nymex, which is of
course also the same as simply mirroring the net exposure his own
customers hold in the first place. Now the swap dealer is completely
risk-free. He will no longer benefit if the oil price rises, as the gains he
makes from his OTC swap counterparty he will have to pass on to clear
his own equivalent loss on the short exposure he has on the regulated
market. However, likewise he no longer loses if the oil price drops, as
the payout he will have to make to his OTC swap customers is funded
by the gains he makes on the short position on Nymex. 
Petromania
104

If the whole swap dealing business as described above sounds like
some kind of clever investment bank game where they win whatever
happens, bear in mind that this is exactly what the wider market expects
them to do in this position. Why should they lose out for providing a
very useful service often called upon by other segments of the market?
The whole business is entered into by all in the full acknowledgement
that the swap dealer itself will hedge its way out of most positions, and
indeed it is only because of its configuration and experience as an
investment bank – which already suits it to be a market aggregator,
capable of pulling a single measurable net exposure from countless
single exposures – that it is able to offer this valuable service in the first
place. 
This is the specialisation that justifies the fee payments worked into
every transaction it undertakes, these fees being the sole revenue from
the business if all exposure is systematically hedged away. Moreover, the
business is conducted in a way that allows swap dealers to function
without having to use whole slugs of their own capital as collateral
when hedging their own exposure. Just as a regulated futures exchange
demands margin accounts and constant collateralisation of potential
losses, so too do OTC derivative customers fund margin accounts with
their swap dealers and collateralise these as appropriate – allowing the
swap dealer to effectively use this posted collateral as its own collateral
when it needs to go to market itself.
Swap dealers have always been classified by the CFTC within its
commercial categorisation, because for years such structured OTC
derivatives were indeed used by commercial players in the energy
industry. Moreover, the investment bank swap dealers themselves, in
many cases, operate through subsidiary entities that were historically oil
trading companies involved in Nymex as commercial players already.
For instance, Goldman Sachs carries out all its business on the Nymex
The Financialisation of Oil
105

exchange through J. Aron & Co, an oil trader it bought up several years
ago, while Citi likewise operates through oil trading firm Phibro. Often,
these same entities are involved in genuinely commercial physical oil
trading alongside facilitating the hedging of their parents’ financial
sector swap dealing exposures, all of which can nevertheless require
trading in oil futures. So it can be hard to see where the actually non-
commercial market activity and the other, more genuinely commercial
activity undertaken by these supposedly commercial market participants
shade into one another.
The CFTC also extends special consideration to swap dealers in
exempting them from the position limits that apply to all other futures
market participants. Part of the CFTC armoury in supervising markets
under its jurisdiction is imposed limits on the size of the positions any
one market participant can take, including non-commercial players such
as hedge funds and floor brokers. This is designed to prevent
speculation taking over from the actual requirements of the physical
market as the main driver in pricing. Swap dealers are, however, exempt
from such limits. The CFTC recognises both their need to hedge away
exposure resulting from their derivative-writing activity as a genuinely
commercial requirement, and also that the volumes which might require
hedging could be far larger than the position limit that would apply to
the swap dealer if considered as a single participant under the normal
rules. 
As far as many were concerned, however, swap dealer involvement
in the futures trading market had long since ceased to be dominated by
commercial concerns, and was instead a prime conduit for speculative
financial interest in the futures market. To understand why this should
be the case, we need to realise that as far as speculative investment by
financial institutions in oil is concerned, what was formally ascribed to
such speculative interests operating on the Nymex oil futures market
Petromania
106

under the CFTC definition of “non-commercial” trading was just the
tip of a very large iceberg. We need to understand the wider world of
commodity-related investment, and the rise of the commodity index
funds.
3.5 Commodities as an Asset Class
The emergence of commodities as a widely-followed investible asset
class is well documented, and indeed whole volumes are written about
the subject (a good and fairly-up-to-date place to start is William
Hubard’s The Financialisation of Commodities, a Thomson Reuters
report released in April 2008). Suffice to say, many institutional
investors across a wide spectrum of pension funds, investment funds,
hedge funds and even university endowment and sovereign wealth funds
now believe it is appropriate to hold a portion of their asset portfolio
in commodities. The benefits are seen to include portfolio diversification
into an asset class that arguably displays low correlation with others
such as equities and, as we have touched upon, inflation-hedging, as
commodity prices commonly rise in tandem with inflation and are
indeed often an input into inflation. 
While commodity investing has been around since the 1970s, it has
only been since the start of this decade that it has really taken off with
institutional investors. The decision in 2000 by Dutch state sector
pension fund PGGM, the third-largest pension fund in Europe, to invest
a significant chunk in commodities is seen as a watershed. Hubard
reports this investment, predominantly in energy-related products, as
having grown to €4.8 billion or around 5.5% of its total assets by the
end of 2007. Likewise the 2006 decision by California public sector
pension fund CalPERS, the largest public pension fund in the US, to
invest $500 million across a spread of commodities was also widely-
reported and commented upon.
The Financialisation of Oil
107

How are such institutions structuring their investment in
commodities? A range of options are exploited:
•
Hedge funds: Money can simply be invested in a commodity-
focused hedge fund and the manager left to get on with things.
•
Commodity indices: Institutional investors can access products
tailored to mimic the notional return on a benchmark
commodity index, an artificial construction invented for the
purpose of tracking commodity price performance. 
•
Structured investment products: Institutional investors can buy
specially-tailored notes which promise to pay out a percentage
relating to the performance of particular commodities or
indeed commodity indices over a certain time-span, sometimes
while guaranteeing to protect capital as long as certain trigger
events do not occur (such as a breach of a specified price
range).
•
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs): Investors can now access notes
traded on regulated stock exchanges which track the price of
both individual commodities and baskets of commodities, with
refinements extending to short or leveraged exposure to this
commodity price movement.
The growth in these kinds of products, particularly commodity index-
tracking investment, has been incredibly strong, although it is very
difficult to get a handle on the exact sums involved. But the really
important point to realise is that, as we shall examine in greater detail,
the latter three options all necessarily involve some kind of trading in
off-exchange OTC commodity derivatives (while the first option may
also in fact turn out to do so as well). The Bank for International
Settlements (BIS), the nearest thing to a global banking authority,
Petromania
108

reckoned that the notional value of outstanding OTC commodity
derivative contracts had reached $6.4 trillion by mid-2006. 
3.6 Constructing a Commodity Return
To see how commodity index trackers, structured notes and ETFs
require underpinning by OTC commodity derivatives, and are therefore
key contributors to this amorphous total, we need to examine how their
return is generated. We will do so taking a commodity index tracker as
our model, as the principles hold true across the other asset classes as
well. And doing so will allow us to also examine the rise of the
commodity index fund. 
How can an institutional investor gain from what he expects to be
upward movement in the oil price in the coming years? It is not as easy
as it sounds. Ideally, the investor might buy some oil in the here-and-
now, and simply store it for as long as they wished. However, this raises
problems immediately – the oil trading and storage business has its own
hurdles and barriers to entry, and besides, as we have seen, investment
appetite for oil can potentially far exceed the amount of physical oil
available at any one point in time. So there simply would not be enough
oil to go around if everyone thought like this, or were indeed even
permitted to embark on such a course by the relevant regulators – an
unlikely outcome in a world of scarce oil. 
Of course, as we have also seen, it is possible to benefit from
movements in the oil price by investing in futures markets – but this is
not so straightforward either. As noted, the institutional investor does
not or indeed cannot hold a spot barrel in storage, yet any futures
contract they have bought will indeed eventually mature into a spot,
physical, barrel unless it is offset before maturity. Meanwhile the desired
horizon for investment might be much longer than even the longest
The Financialisation of Oil
109

maturity available in the futures market, and there is also the
consideration that dealing in such long-dated futures is also traditionally
less liquid, with the contracts therefore less desirable assets. 
It is possible, however, to structure a virtually permanent invested
position at any point along the oil futures curve, the strip of prices
running from nearby maturities out to the longest-dated contract
outstanding, by “rolling” in and out of different futures contracts as
time passes. For instance, if it is the front-month contract that is widely
followed as the global oil price which the investor wants to track, then
they might buy two-month contracts, hold them until they mature into
one-month contracts, sell out of these prior to the expiry of trading,
use these proceeds to buy another lot of two-month contracts and so on
– literally ad infinitum, as theoretically the investor could keep doing
this for as long as he has the money to do so. 
Thus the investor has constructed an artificially permanent invested
position at the front end of the futures curve by rolling in and out of
futures contracts as appropriate. It is immediately apparent, of course,
that this is not literally the same as exposure to the pure front-month
price, as at some points in time the investor will not always be 100%
invested in the front-month contract alone even given the “smoothing”
many such rolled positions achieve by splitting their investment between
the relevant months to begin with. But given the proximity of the
contracts involved, it will be the closest thing achievable as a genuinely
investible solution to the problem of maintaining a permanent front-
month position.
The practice of rolling futures contracts in this fashion introduces,
however, another element of risk or return into the equation, on top of
the front-month price movement the investor is hoping to capture. This
is the “roll yield” or “roll return”, and it emerges as a function of the
Petromania
110

shape of the futures curve at any particular point in time. What do we
mean by this? Futures curves have their own shape, determined by the
prevailing market view at any one point in time regarding the outlook
for prices. For example, an ongoing supply disruption may be causing
high prices at the front end of the curve, but the fact that this is expected
to be resolved within a matter of months means prices further out along
the curve, perhaps at one year or five years, are significantly lower. 
Alternatively, there may be ample supply and indeed growing
inventories in the here and now, but concerns over the longer-term
outlook for supply mean the three-year price may be higher than the
front-month. When a futures curve displays prices higher at the front
end of the curve than further out along the maturities, it is said to be in
“backwardation”, and when prices climb higher as you go further out
along the curve then it is said to be in “contango”. Often the two
conditions can exist alongside each other in the same curve – with a
prevailing contango from front-month out, to a certain maturity out
along the curve, and then backwardation thereafter, in which case the
curve displays a characteristic “hump”; or vice versa, with prices falling
away to a certain maturity and then climbing again thereafter. 
Whether a contango or backwardation is prevailing between the
particular points in the futures curve through which an investor is
rolling their position determines whether or not the roll yield they
receive is positive or negative (see Figure 7). If the curve is in
backwardation, then the yield on each roll will be positive – the investor
bought two-month contracts, has held them until they matured into
one-month contracts, and sold out of them at a price in excess of that
which he needs to buy the next same quantity of two-month contracts.
The difference is his roll yield, which can build up over time into a
significant amount on top of the implied gain or loss in the actual
movement in the underlying prices his originally invested capital is
The Financialisation of Oil
111

tracking. Likewise if the curve is in contango, each time the investor
rolls his position he is receiving less for the front-month contract than
he originally invested in the two-month contract – and, all else being
equal, this will not be enough to buy as many contracts as were bought
originally, so the investment has suffered a reduction. If the contango
persists for a long time, the negative roll yield can take quite a chunk
out of an investment regardless of what the underlying price is doing. 
Petromania
112
Figure 7: Roll yields on futures curves in backwardation and contango
Futures curve in backwardation – nearby contract prices more expensive than
long-dated means a positive “roll yield” is obtained by rolling contracts
TIME
Now
PRICE
Low
High
Future
Investor holds
contract while
it matures
from 2-month
into
1-month
Investor sells out of 1-month
contract prior to expiry and
buys next 2-month contract
Positive roll yield
Futures curve in contango – nearby contract prices cheaper than long-dated
means a negative “roll yield” is obtained by rolling contracts
TIME
Now
PRICE
Low
High
Future
Investor
holds
contract
while it
matures
f
Investor sells
out of 1-month
contract prior to
expiry and buys
next 2-month
contract
Negative roll yield
1-month
Futures curve in backwardation – nearby contract prices more expensive
than long-dated means a positive “roll yield” is obtained by rolling contracts
Futures curve in contango – nearby contract prices cheaper than long-dated
means a negative “roll yield” is obtained by rolling contracts

There is a third element of return to consider in analysing any such
permanently-maintained position along the futures curve. This is the
“collateral yield”, which simply reflects the fact that money held in
margin or collateral accounts to back investment in commodity futures
itself earns a standard rate of return in line with short-term deposits.
This is typically seen as around the same rate as the 90-day US Treasury
Bill, the “90-day T-bill rate”. While all deposits held on margin for
futures trades earn such rates regardless of whether they are part of a
rolled position, the collateral yield becomes an important if small
positive element of return when rolling a position means a significant
amount of capital remains tied-up in margin or collateral through the
life of the investment. 
The three elements above, the so-called “spot” return (or loss) on the
movement in the underlying price being tracked, the roll return
consequent on holding the position as time proceeds, and the collateral
return on the capital tied-up in these trades, characterise the return
profile for maintaining such an invested position at any particular point
on the futures curve, whether front-month or farther out.
3.7 The Rise of the Index
So far so good – but even while the method of maintaining a long-term
investment in oil futures is now clear, as with physical trading this
remains difficult to carry out in practice for most institutional investors.
They generally lack the scale and expertise to manage such complex
future positions themselves on an ongoing basis. This is where helpful
investment banks come in. Starting back as early as 1991 with the
launch of the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GCSI), banks and
other institutions have created indices that track the performance of
theoretically invested rolling positions in the futures markets of various
The Financialisation of Oil
113

commodities and at various maturities. Such an index is adjusted daily
not just in line with the spot movement in commodity prices but also
in line with the prevailing roll and collateral yields; in other words it is
a so-called “total return” index. 
With inception at a set value on a certain date, the growth or
shrinkage of a particular index since then reflects the cumulative
tripartite return that would have been realised to date on a set amount
of capital invested in a real futures position at that original point in
time. As to why index providers go to such trouble to maintain an index
mimicking the performance of a theoretical, permanently rolled-over
commodities futures position, the answer is simple. They wish to sell
institutional investors derivatives based on the performance of this
index, meeting the appetite of institutional investors who would like to
maintain such a position but are not practically able to do so. And, by
and large, they have been very successful. The GSCI is the granddaddy
of all such indices, and set a pattern now widely followed in that it is
actually a diversified commodity index – it aggregates a permanently-
invested futures return across a range of commodities at the front end
of the various curves, so investors have a one-stop solution for
diversifying their commodity exposure. 
Indices do exist for individual commodities, and indeed the GSCI and
its successors such as the Dow Jones-AIG (DJ-AIG) diversified
commodity index launched in 1998 are constructed on the basis of such
underlying single-commodity indices. The GSCI, for example, has a
roughly 36% weighting towards an index tracking front-month and
nearby WTI oil contracts, a 15% weighting towards an index tracking
Brent oil, a 6% weighting towards one tracking natural gas futures,
4% towards a copper index, and a 3% weighting towards each of
wheat and live cattle futures. As well as forming the basis for the larger
diversified index, these individual component indices will often
Petromania
114

themselves be used as the basis for products, both by the investment
banks themselves and third parties. Many single commodity ETFs are
created and managed, for instance, by companies such as ETF Securities
who are independent of the actual index providers but nevertheless have
an agreement to reference their products.
In terms of how the total return is calculated by the commodity index
provider, it is generally presumed that the investment is passive, and long-
only. In other words the notional position being referenced is not actively
managed with regard to its return but is presumed instead to remain
invested in that commodity for the duration regardless of performance,
and also that these futures contracts are all presumed to be for buying
rather than selling the commodity in question. So all else being equal, the
index will increase as commodity prices rise and drop as commodity prices
fall – as long as the roll return does not eat up this spot performance. It is
also presumed, for the purposes of calculating the collateral return portion
of the index performance, that the notional investment in futures is fully-
collateralised; in other words not just a margin deposit but the whole value
of the original investment has been put on deposit as collateral for the
position and is therefore earning the 90-day T-bill rate. 
Conditions like these, along with others vital to ensuring a consistent
and predictable method of index calculation, are enshrined in
agreements between index providers and customers accessing the index.
This means potential institutional investors are now free themselves to
decide if they want to bet on whether this replication of a passive, long-
only front-month futures position will rise or fall; in other words
whether they want to buy or sell the index in question. The easiest way
for them to do so is to simply agree an OTC derivative swap of some
sort, going either long or short of the index at whatever the prevailing
level is for a set amount of capital at risk, with a broker such as an
investment bank – in other words, a swap dealer. 
The Financialisation of Oil
115

Most institutional investors themselves, such as pension funds, have
to date tended to go long of the indices, anticipating the positive return
from tracking commodity price appreciation. The kind of commodity
index tracker fund that is constructed in such a deal, invested in by
financial institutions on the basis of a derivative tracking the
performance of a specified index or combination thereof, is now seen
as the largest single contributor towards commodity investment overall.
As Hubard reports, Standard & Poor’s (S&P) estimated 2007 total
outstanding commodity index investment of at least $130 billion was
up from $100 billion in 2006, and almost twice what it was in 2005,
while at the same time total commodity investment managed by hedge
funds was reckoned to be around $55 billion. S&P in fact bought the
rights to the GCSI index from Goldman Sachs in 2007 because the latter
investment bank and swap dealer felt that – given the amount of
derivatives business it was writing on the basis of the GCSI family of
indices – transparency required some distancing of itself from the
provider responsible for calculating the index levels themselves. 
3.8 Black Gold’s “Dark Matter”
Overall, total outstanding OTC commodity derivative investment was
reckoned at some $6.4 trillion by the Bank for International Settlements
in mid-2006. This figure is for the notional capital at stake in all OTC
derivatives, including those entered into by commercial commodity
users for genuine business risk hedging, alongside purely speculative
derivative exposure entered into by financial investors of the sort
described above. Against this total, perhaps some $100-150 billion
invested in commodity tracking funds does not seem like much at all.
But alongside such tracker fund interest, speculative commodity
exposure by financial institutions also involves instruments falling
Petromania
116

outside this description, such as single-commodity swaps (which might
end up repackaged as exchange-traded funds) or structured commodity
notes. All these products, too, are generally based on OTC swaps
referencing the commodity prices or commodity index levels, much the
same as the swaps underlying tracker funds.
A survey of financial sector investors in OTC commodity derivatives
released in May 2008 by investment consultancy Greenwich Associates
shows that these latter instruments are almost as significant in portfolios
as index exposure. While 43% of total institutions polled had exposure
to commodities via index swaps, 39% had exposure through single
commodity swaps, and 21% through structured notes (these are
overlapping, rather than mutually exclusive, exposures). It is clear that
index funds are only part of the commodity investment story for
institutional investors, and not even the most important part for certain
classes of respondent. While 59% of investment and pension funds
surveyed did indeed hold some index exposure, only 40% of banks
surveyed did, but 80% of the latter had single commodity swap
exposure. 
In truth, then, no one really knows exactly how much of that $6
trillion-odd figure for OTC commodity derivatives is down to
speculative financial investment, and the main reason for this is obvious.
By definition OTC derivatives are unregulated, in general traded away
from recognised exchanges (although some are in fact cleared through
exchanges), and most of the trade in them is therefore not subject to the
same sort of oversight as commodity dealing on recognised futures
exchanges. OTC commodity derivatives are an informational “black
hole”. Yet if little light escapes these off-exchange markets, it could
nevertheless be argued that the dealing that goes on in them is also the
“dark matter” of oil price formation.
The Financialisation of Oil
117

In the same sense that physicists postulate the existence of something
they term “dark matter”, a form of matter which they cannot actually
see but which they feel must exist because only with this additional
gravitational weight thrown into their sums do the orbits of galaxies
match the physicists’ preferred predictive models, it can be suggested
that an explosion of unregulated, largely invisible OTC derivative
trading must be what was moving the oil price when all of the visible
factors are not seen as sufficient to justify where prices were in the first
half of 2008. As Greenwich Associates themselves concluded in their
May 2008 study, with regard to financial investment in OTC
commodity derivatives specifically, ‘While the long-term fundamentals
of global energy and other commodities markets are being driven by
increasing demand, there is little doubt that, in the immediate-term,
speculative investors are driving up both trading volumes and prices.’
There is one objection raised time and again to this viewpoint. It is an
objection that is so easily dismissed after a short recap of how OTC
derivatives trading actually works as a business that it is surprising it is
raised at all. But it is raised nevertheless and by even quite heavyweight
commentators, so it is worth treating. It is, namely, that all these OTC
derivative exposures to oil are just so many “paper barrels”, even more
so than the barrels traded on regulated futures exchanges – precisely
because as these derivatives are purely financial swap agreements, they
have no reference whatsoever to taking or making delivery of physical
oil itself. 
As such, this “only paper barrels” viewpoint argues that the weight
and direction of this OTC derivative exposure on the part of financial
investors can make no difference to actual oil prices because it plays no
actual part in the futures market in which the actual oil price is
discovered (supposedly on the basis of the fundamentals of supply and
demand). At first glance, there seems some beguiling logic to this
Petromania
118

position, because regulated oil futures exchanges and unregulated off-
exchange derivatives trading are indeed separate spheres of trading
liquidity. So there is no obvious, formal connection between the two,
such that volumes of OTC exposure off-exchange should count in the
reckoning of prices quoted on-exchange, which reflect instead the
volume of demand evidenced on just that exchange. 
As we have seen, however, there is in fact a very real connection
between notional volumes of exposure traded in OTC derivatives, and
actual volumes of oil futures contracts traded on the regulated
exchanges (and therefore contributing to price formation there). This
linkage is of course the swap dealers themselves, who will as described
above invariably go to the regulated, exchange-based futures market to
hedge off the net exposure they end up holding as a result of
unregulated, OTC derivative contract writing. Moreover, not only is it
likely that the swap dealers will hedge this net exposure in the futures
market, they are in fact expected to do so by none other than the CFTC
itself. 
We have already mentioned the fact that swap dealers are exempt
from the position limits that restrain other market participants in
futures exchanges, but this is not the full extent of the “swap dealer
loophole” that is denounced by many experts as allowing financial
sector speculation to drive oil prices. The loophole in its current form
originates from 1991, when according to the CFTC’s own account, a
particular swap dealer enquired of it whether or not net swap exposures
incurred specifically as a result of writing derivatives based on
commodity indices could be cleared in the futures market in the same
way, without position limits, as the exposures incurred in structuring
derivatives for more obviously commercial customers. The CFTC ruled
that they could.
The Financialisation of Oil
119

3.9 Through a Glass, Darkly
Add up all the considerations above and it is clear that a mechanism
does indeed exist for the translation of volumes of interest going long
or short of oil prices at particular levels through off-exchange derivative
agreements into volumes of interest going long or short of oil prices at
comparable levels in the oil futures market. This is the needful and
customary practice of the derivative-writing swap dealer hedging off
the net exposure he holds (as a result of taking on the counterparty role
in all these swaps) by taking out on the regulated future exchange the
opposite trade to his own net exposure, and by implication mirroring
the net position his own customers have taken in striking the swap
agreements. 
In other words, if in aggregate their customers have gone long of WTI
oil, the swap dealer will have to go long of oil for the equivalent amount
on Nymex; or if they have gone short, then the swap dealer will have
to go short. And these volumes will in turn then be part of the whole
set of pricing pressures leading to the oil price quoted in the daily
papers. Moreover, there is of course good reason to suspect that in
aggregate the tilt this speculative financial interest will add toward any
swap dealer’s net exposure will be towards the long side, adding to
other upward pressure on prices from buying. This is because, as noted
above, much OTC derivative investment by institutional investors is
invariably going long of commodity prices, almost unquestioningly. 
It is theoretically possible that if a swap dealer could find another
dealer such as himself off-exchange, he could simply hedge away his
own net exposure here by structuring a swap on his own account with
the other dealer, without therefore having to go and deal in regulated
futures. So he could; but that possibility depends on the likelihood of
finding another swap dealer ready to take the opposite end of this trade,
Petromania
120

a swap dealer whose own net exposure is long commodities because
his own customer book is in contrast full of parties going short of
commodity prices. In reality this is unlikely to happen. 
The Greenwich Associates’ research quoted above cited two
investment banks in particular as between them transacting the bulk of
OTC commodity derivative writing, both for financial institutions and
for the commercial players. These were Goldman Sachs and Morgan
Stanley. When a market is dominated by just two players in such a
fashion, they are not likely to have books showing significantly differing
net customer exposures, with one being noticeably long of a particular
market versus the other being noticeably short. The law of averages
dictates that they will hold roughly the same exposures to roughly the
same clients. So, facing only each other, and holding the same
exposures, these big boys of OTC commodity derivative trading have
nowhere else to go in hedging their exposure than the actual real futures
exchange itself.
What difference does this new view of swap dealers make to the
balance of speculative versus genuinely commercial interest in the
Nymex crude market? It seems clear that, given the rise of institutional
investor interest in commodity derivatives, this speculative element will
have a significant role in reaching the net exposure a given swap dealer
has to bring to Nymex to hedge away. But with the way data on this
Nymex market segment has historically been collected and presented by
the CFTC, there is no authorised estimate available of how much swap
dealer activity on Nymex relates to hedging exposures due to financial
speculation, as opposed to supposedly more traditional exposure to
commercial hedge counterparties. We could, however, get some sense of
what the outer limits of such a scenario would look like, by simply
reversing the CFTC classification of swap dealers from commercial into
non-commercial. And we can do this because, while the CFTC normally
The Financialisation of Oil
121

limits its reporting split in the standard CoT report to the
aforementioned commercial/non-commercial, a couple of academic
studies released under its auspices have recorded a more detailed
breakdown of market participation. 
Figure 8 recasts the same data for total Nymex WTI open interest
data (shown previously) to demonstrate the split between commercial
and non-commercial interest at three different points in time – 2000,
2004 and 2008. That data comes from a CFTC study released at the
end of 2008 (by Büyüksahin, Haigh, Harris, Overdahl and Robe – see
Sources & Bibliography), which also revealed the subdivisions within
these two broad classifications at each of these three snapshots of
market activity. In our figure we pull out various sub-divisions as
identified in this data into their own category, so that we can both
appreciate their relative importance to the overall growth of open
interest on the futures exchange through this period 2000-2008, and
also construct our own new index of speculative potential on the
Nymex exchange. Under the new data split, we identify as specific
trading groups the “swap dealers” themselves, the “hedge funds” (or
MMTs), the other parties classed alongside MMTs in the CFTC non-
commercial category as “other non-commercial”, and lastly an
“unquestionably commercial” category, which is simply the
“commercial” category according to the CFTC distinction minus the
swap dealers. 
Petromania
122

The Financialisation of Oil
123
Total curve 2000
36%
6%
15%
43%
Total curve 2004
36%
12%
21%
31%
Total curve 2008
35%
23%
27%
15%
Unquestionably
commercial
Swap
Other “non-
commercial”
Hedge
Unquestionably
commercial
Swap
Other “non-
commercial”
Hedge
Unquestionably
commercial
Swap
Other “non-
commercial”
Hedge
Total curve 2000
Total curve 2004
Total curve 2008

The first three categories added together give us our new definition of
potential speculative activity on the market, as opposed to the
unquestionably commercial activity. As can be seen, having reclassified
the swap dealers into the potentially speculative category alongside the
CFTC “non-commercial” traders, we can see that in all three years this
new grouping dominates the market, but its dominance grows markedly
over time. From accounting for 57% of open interest in 2000, this
“potentially speculative” agglomeration accounts for 69% by 2004,
and an incredible 85% by 2008. And of course, this really is incredible.
With this example we are not seeking to say that by 2008 this actually
was the proportion of open interest originating from financial
speculation. We are, rather, saying that unfortunately this answer to
that question is as valid as the answer given by looking at the data
through the traditional lens of the CFTC CoT classifications. The truth
undoubtedly lies between these two extremes – the problem is, no one
knew where. 
Petromania
124
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
3000000
Total curve 2000
Total curve 2004
Total curve 2008
Figure 8: Nymex oil market growth with more detailed trader definition
[Source: CFTC (Büyüksahin, Haigh, Harris, Overdahl & Robe, 2008)]
Open interest (conracts)
Unquestionably
commercial
Swap
Other “non-
commercial”
Hedge

Nevertheless we can still draw other conclusions from this data. While
the whole focus of the preceding passage has been on swap dealers,
their actual share of the market is roughly constant at around 36%
through these three historical samples. Of course, in absolute terms the
volume this same percentage accounts for has grown massively, as we
can see from the presentation of the same data in Figure 8. From under
250,000 contracts in 2000 (the actual exact figure is 208,638), it
increased to around one million contracts in 2008 (the actual figure is
947,951). Nevertheless this realisation serves as an important
corrective. The whole point about the swap dealer loophole is that it
represents a significant additive to other speculative players already
clearly acknowledged as such in the market, rather than replacing these
players as the sole concern. Hedge funds – which in this data will mean
those hedge funds acting directly for themselves in Nymex, rather than
relying on floor brokers or swap dealers – display striking growth in
market participation, from 6% to 12% to 23% for 2000, 2004, and
2008 respectively. 
Meanwhile, floor brokers and traders – both the “market makers”
and the “locals”, for let us not forget that it was one of the latter who
were supposed to have first pushed oil to $100 – also saw a huge
increase in participation, from 15% to 21% to 27% through the three
years. So rather than focusing on any one of these, we should instead
observe that as these undoubtedly speculative players increased their
market share, with swap dealers relatively static across all three periods,
their growth came at the expense of our “unquestionably commercial”
category. This latter category, the only slug of Nymex open interest we
can (notionally) be sure is participating in the market on the basis of the
physical fundamentals of supply and demand, saw its share of open
The Financialisation of Oil
125

interest shrink from 43% to 31% to 15% across 2000, 2004, and 2008.
Whatever the exact proportion of all-important swap dealer
participation reflecting exposure to speculative financial sector clients,
the big fact to take away is that this period has certainly seen the
balance of trade in the market shift toward speculative interest.  
3.10 A Special Call
Among the expert witnesses at the various US hearings on the effect
financial speculation had in driving price movements in the oil price,
several lined up to concur with this sort of argument. It was argued
vociferously both that more attention should be paid to swap dealer
hedging in futures markets as a function of financial investor
speculation, and that the “swap dealer loophole” that theoretically
allowed this off-exchange financial investor interest to contribute to,
and therefore distort, futures price discovery on-exchange, should be
revoked and closed. Despite the paucity of data on the issue of swap
dealer exposures, one witness at least attempted to put some figures to
the legislature and the public at large. This was hedge fund manager
Michael Masters, who we have already mentioned. 
It would be fair to say that Masters became something of both folk
hero and folk devil as a result of his prominence through a series of
Congressional hearings. Eventually commissioned by US senators to
prepare a report on swap dealers and their influence on the market,
Masters released this report in autumn 2008 under the title The
Accidental Hunt Brothers, and set up a blog of the same name to further
promote his own take on the oil price blow-out. Yet this has not been
without challenge – a prominent oil sector analyst, Philip Verleger, has
dismissed Masters’ work as ‘junk analysis’ (of which more later). For
now, however, we are merely interested in one aspect of Masters’
Petromania
126

various Congressional presentations – his attempt to calculate how
much Nymex open interest volume the commodity index speculators
might account for when swap dealers come around to calculating their
net exposures for hedging on that market.
In testimony submitted on May 20 2008 to the US Senate Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, Masters reckoned that
index speculators alone would account for 31% of long-only interest in
outstanding WTI oil contracts on the Nymex market. That figure can
be compared with the total 36% of interest overall we ascribe to swap
dealers in 2008. Was most of this then obviously speculative financial
interest on the long side only? Not necessarily. Obviously, if the swap
dealer had managed to pair off such a large exposure to long-only
commodity index investors, with an equivalent weight of other OTC
derivative interest going short of the oil price, then its net exposure to
hedge would be zero. Or if it had twice as much short interest as long
then this would spell a net short exposure of equal magnitude. Yet the
absolute vacuum of data we have already commented on with regard
to total OTC market positions means there is nothing to gainsay the
implication that just index investment alone in OTC derivatives – i.e.
not including single-commodity swaps or exchange-traded funds or
structured notes – could be a serious weight in swap dealer exposure to
clients going long of the oil price, and therefore a serious weight in swap
dealer interest in buying oil futures.
How had Masters reached his figure for the proportion of long open
interest on Nymex that should be attributed to speculative index
investment? Ironically, while the crucial data regarding the size of
Nymex crude oil open interest attributable to index speculators was at
that time unavailable, the CFTC did actually maintain such data on the
volume of speculative index trade swap dealers brought to hedge on
Nymex when it came to agricultural commodities. Perhaps more
The Financialisation of Oil
127

sensitive to the charge of allowing undue speculative influence over the
historical core of the futures market, here the CFTC had compiled for
some time a record of the volume of open interest in these contracts
due to index speculation. 
Masters extrapolated from these CFTC disclosures the dollar value of
these contract positions, and then satisfied himself that these figures
tallied roughly with the stated weight of these commodities in key
commodity indices such as the SP-GSCI and the DJ-AIG versus the total
dollar value as stated for these indices by their own providers. The
method seemed to work, so Masters then worked backward from the
same total dollar value of these indices to find the contract-equivalent
open interest weight he should ascribe to index speculation in the
thirteen commodities still not covered by the data on agricultural
elements. Notably, while Standard & Poor’s estimated total commodity
index investment sat at $130 billion, Masters himself reckoned that
total commodity index investment in March 2008 had grown to $260
billion. 
The CFTC had its own response to Masters’ evidence and the picture
it painted. Nine days after his testimony above, on May 29 2008, the
US futures market regulator announced it was making a ‘special call’,
an enquiry into market participant behaviour with compliance backed
by legal sanctions. Swap dealers were to open up their black boxes of
net exposure calculation and reveal just how much speculative financial
investment was contributing to their overall net positions as hedgers on
Nymex. The scope of the information sought was as follows:
•
How much total commodity index trading is occurring in both
the OTC and on-exchange markets?
•
How much commodity index trading is occurring by specific
commodity in both the OTC and on-exchange markets?
Petromania
128

•
What are the major types of index investors?
•
What types of clients utilise swap dealers to trade OTC
commodity transactions?
•
To what extent would the swap clients have exceeded position
limits or accountability levels had their OTC swap positions
been taken on exchange?
In a letter dated June 11 2008 to Senator Jeff Bingaman, the chair of
the US Senate energy and natural resources committee, CFTC
Commissioner Walt Lukken explained the brand new thinking in the
agency regarding swap dealers:
The Commission is using its existing Special Call authorities to immediately
begin to require traders in the energy markets to provide the agency with
monthly reports of their index trading to help the CFTC further identify
the amount and impact of this type of trading in the markets. In addition,
the Commission will develop a proposal to routinely require more detailed
information from index traders and swaps dealers in the futures markets,
and review whether classification of these types of traders can be improved
for regulatory and reporting purposes. Lastly, the Commission will review
the trading practices for index traders in the futures markets to ensure that
this type of trading activity is not adversely impacting the price discovery
process, and to determine whether different practices should be employed.
In his letter Lukken also referred to the CFTC announcement one day
previously, on June 10, of the formation of a new US government ‘inter-
agency task force’ to examine the whole question of speculation in
commodity futures markets. This task force would include staff
representatives from the CFTC, Federal Reserve, Department of the
Treasury, Securities and Exchange Commission, Department of Energy,
and Department of Agriculture, and would examine investor practices,
The Financialisation of Oil
129

fundamental supply and demand factors, and the role of speculators
and index traders in the commodity markets. As Lukken wrote, ‘It is
intended to bring together the best and brightest minds in government
to aid public and regulatory understanding of the forces that are
affecting the functioning of these markets, and it will strive to complete
its work quickly and make public its results.’ The CFTC was finally
going to address the central questions raised in the hearings – light was
going to be shone on the dark matter of oil futures trading.
Petromania
130

4
The Peak Weeks


‘Commentators seeking an explanation for the unprecedented
surge in crude oil futures on Friday – up by nearly $11 a barrel –
have an embarrassment of riches. The spike (or is it a new
plateau?) can be blamed on everything from short-sellers covering
themselves, to hawkish comments from an Israeli minister, to a
slump in the dollar, or just the catch-all epithet “speculation”.
The only kind of speculator who would seriously push up the
price of oil today is the kind who holds physical stocks of oil
away from the market, hoping to sell later when prices are yet
higher. If such speculators exist, either they are Opec
governments, or they are doing a splendid job of hiding their
inventories, because the data suggest that end-users are burning
all the oil they buy. It is possible that speculators are indeed
driving up the price of futures contracts, but it is hard to find
much evidence that they are bidding up the price of the black,
sticky energy source that goes into oil refineries. Efforts to fight
speculation are at best a distraction from the real problem: oil
supplies are not growing much, while oil demand still is.’
Editorial leader, Financial Times, June 9 2008
‘Outside of the US, we have little doubt that there is an ongoing
build in inventories this quarter. But it appears to be taking place
far more in China and the Persian Gulf than in the OECD and,
as a result, is less visible and difficult to measure.’
Edward Morse et al, Lehman Brothers, “Oil dotcom”, May 29 2008
133

4.1 Entrenched Ideas
Despite the logic of the arguments regarding swap dealer hedging
requirements in the futures market, through May, June and into July
2008 it was clear that the idea that speculative factors could be
occluding real world indicators in driving breakneck oil price
appreciation was widely derided. Such derision came not just from the
bodies of regulatory officialdom such as the CFTC, but also from
numerous influential organs of opinion. As just some examples from
many that could be quoted, mere days before crude clocked its all-time
peak, Britain’s two most august and best-known business newspapers
ran back-to-back dismissals of arguments attributing sky-high oil prices
to speculative pressures. Following on from the editorial column quoted
above, July 4 saw the high-visibility “LEX” column in the Financial
Times declare of complaints against speculators, ‘This simplistic
argument blithely ignores fundamental supply and demand issues.’ And
in its July 5 issue The Economist noted, under the headline ‘The oil
price: Don’t blame the speculators’, that ‘This reasoning holds obvious
appeal for those looking for a scapegoat. But there is little evidence to
support it.’
In maintaining this stance the newspapers were lining up with
politicians on both sides of the Atlantic. Part of then-US Energy
Secretary Samuel Bodman’s case for haranguing the Saudis to increase
crude production in May and June was that, as he repeated to reporters
on the eve of an energy conference in the Saudi port city of Jeddah in
late June, ‘There is no evidence that we can find that speculators are
driving futures prices.’ Also in June, the UK Treasury published a report
which noted of financial speculation, ‘Although there is insufficient
evidence to conclusively rule out any impact, it is likely to be only small
and transitory relative to fundamental trends in demand and supply for
the physical commodities’.
Petromania
134

Hindsight is a wonderful thing, but why so many commentators were
to be proved wrong on the supposed durability of triple-digit oil prices
is itself a key part of this story that bears examination. After all, one
thing guaranteed to further inflate a speculative price bubble is potential
but as-yet uncommitted investors being told repeatedly and with the
reassuring gravitas of accepted authority that there is in fact no bubble
after all. What were the arguments deployed to bolster an
“establishment herd” of regulators, analysts, journalists, and politicians
in a shared view that speculation was not a key factor to consider in
analysing oil price movement? Some were without any merit
whatsoever; others were more cogent. We shall examine a few in turn,
from the fatuous to the more convincing.
“For every buyer there is a seller.”
It is surprising that we have to consider this as an argument at all, but
nevertheless it was repeated so many times throughout this period that
we must. We have already described the pricing pressure that the new
wave of speculation would bring to bear on futures, emerging through
the financialised oil market described above; and, further, how this
would, in light of the ruling grand narratives and the long-only bias
these investment stories encouraged in financial investors, invariably
fall on the long, buy-side. The “for every buyer there is a seller”
argument saw this as irrelevant because each speculative buyer is
matched by a seller, so there is as a result supposedly equal pricing
pressure in the opposite direction from those selling. The implication is
that speculators cannot move the market full stop. But this is obviously
balderdash. If it were not, how would market prices ever move in any
direction, whether up or down? 
The point isn’t whether or not a buyer finds a seller. For a transaction
to have occurred, and register as the last price for a particular contract
The Peak Weeks
135

136
Petromania
on Nymex, by definition they must have done. The important issue is
at which price the seller has had to go short against the buyer, which is
in turn linked to the volume of buying interest present in the market.
For argument’s sake let us presume that an investor comes to Nymex
seeking to buy 150 contracts for delivery of crude in June 2012. On the
offer side of the market, the current best quote is $133, but for 50
contracts. The next best quote is $133.30, for another 50. Next in the
stack of offers are a lot of 100 contracts, priced at $133.50. As the
single buyer snaps up all the contracts he requires for his order, he will
completely eat through the first two offers, and halfway into the third.
All else being equal, by the time he has finished, the best offer in the
market will now be 50 contracts, priced at $133.50. So on the offer
side of the equation, the price will have moved from $133 to $133.50,
and the volume of contracts available at this price will have dropped to
half what it was prior to this transaction. 
Seeing what has happened, other market participants will adjust their
quotes accordingly. While many would move theirs further upwards,
some may well come in with a new offer below $133.50. But as
vendors, they would have to have a good reason for offering at a price
lower than the previous transaction, and normally this would only
happen if there was no apparent buying interest, which in our example
is clearly not the case. Volumes of interest on either the buy or sell side
in a quoted market move both actual prices for the last transaction and
also the quoted prices around the bid and offer side simply by taking
out volumes previously available at certain prices on the bid or offer
side. This is not rocket science but a basic principle of how all paper
markets for quoted assets function. So it is amazing that people who
happily accept without question this logic in markets such as those for
listed company shares seem to have a blind spot for recognising it at
work in another paper market: oil futures.

137
The Peak Weeks
“Paper barrels cannot move the oil price.”
Not so obviously fatuous as the first argument above, but given the
preceding chapters the reader will hopefully now understand precisely
how paper barrels do indeed have the power to move the oil price, in
the sense of both the prices of oil futures themselves feeding into the
physical spot price, and the wider world of OTC derivatives feeding
into the prices of oil futures through swap dealer hedging requirements.
“Nymex is too liquid and efficient a market for speculators to
dominate.”
This is an argument heard many times from various analysts when
discussing the effect of speculation on the oil price. It is simply an
affirmation of the CFTC line that while there is obviously a speculative
element at work in the oil futures market, it is subordinate to and
indeed, as averred in the CFTC study on hedge funds, follows on the
coat-tails of a market moved by genuinely commercial parties on the
basis of the fundamentals of supply and demand. Such an opinion is
very much justified in relation to your own take on the volume of
speculative interest in the market, the effect this has on prices, and
whether or not the oil price as a result ever loses touch with the
fundamental realities of supply and demand. This book as a whole
addresses all these issues and the argument above will stand or fall with
your opinion after reading it.
We should note, however, that belief in the efficiency of markets such
as Nymex in achieving the optimal possible allocation of capital to
resources is, for many commentators, more than a contingent judgment
passed on this particular market or that. It is, rather, a cornerstone of
the dominant type of contemporary orthodox economic thinking, which
in its underlying attachment to the market mechanism as the ultimate

138
Petromania
arbiter of value goes so far as to deny the very possibility of such a thing
as a speculative bubble affecting the prices discovered through its
workings. We shall look again at this conditioning belief in a later
examination of the pathology of speculative bubbles; however, for now
let us say that for most modern financial analysts trained in this
thinking, saying that speculators cannot determine price movement in
a market is as much a religious assertion as a judgment based on
observation. 
Like much religious thought, such belief in perfection can lead to
amusing double-think. Anecdotally, I can recall having the discussion
above with an analyst in late May 2008, establishing that his opinion
was indeed that it was impossible for speculators to outweigh
fundamentals on the Nymex. Fair enough. I then enquired as to what
the analyst thought was behind a particularly striking shift in the futures
curve – from backwardation into a perfect contango – which had just
occurred. This, said the analyst, was due to a large volume of non-
commercial market players taking off a time-spread trade that had gone
wrong. The speculators had all gone long of the front-month and short
the back end of the curve. The trade had moved against them and many
had moved to unwind the position. 
As such they were selling the front-month and buying the back end;
the front-month contract dropped, and meanwhile the back end
contract in question was so comparatively illiquid that the large volume
of offsetting buys coming into the market caused its price to shoot up.
Hence the comparatively rare instance of the curve jumping into a full
contango, with prices rising steadily out to the farthest contract. I have
also heard two other versions of what happened that same week in May
2008, which we shall also examine in due course. For now, however,
readers may have noticed: on the one hand this analyst was saying
speculators could not move the market, and in the next breath he was

139
The Peak Weeks
describing in detail how a particular group of obviously speculative
market participants had not just moved a price but the shape of the
whole curve.
“Commodities not traded in futures markets have appreciated
just as much.”
This argument asserted that the rise in futures-traded commodities such
as oil was not due to speculative pressure, because its appreciation
matched that seen in other “bulk” commodities like iron ore, ferro
metals and coal. For whatever historical reasons, these commodities are
not continually traded on computer screens in futures markets to
determine daily prices, but are instead characterised by bilaterally-
contracted prices holding through set periods. As such they are seen as
largely impervious to speculative financial investment. But prices for
these commodities had indeed shot up in tandem with futures-traded
commodity market bellwethers such as oil or copper, and the reasoning
above held that because the increase in oil prices did not, by some
calculations, look out of line with these increases, the oil price
appreciation was as fundamentally-based as that seen in iron ore, which
indeed had a spectacular ascent of its own through recent years. 
This argument sounds reasonable enough, but fails ultimately for an
obvious reason. In truth, it merely shows that, if speculators have
moved oil prices, in the absence of finding support in physical
fundamentals they have simply looked to observable price appreciation
in other, bulk commodities, as a rough yardstick for a price level beyond
which their own buying spree might start to look “toppy”, as the lingo
goes. In reality, the physical supply and demand fundamentals across
the wide range of bulk and screen-traded commodities vary so much
that it is impossible to reckon some sort of universal level of price
appreciation that looks “appropriate” across all of them.

140
Petromania
4.2 The Serious Competition
Beyond the relatively lightweight arguments against speculation playing
a major part in price determination outlined above, the establishment
view also had in its favour three more heavyweight lines of reasoning
which all deserve serious attention. We can describe them as follows.
“Speculation in oil futures is always accompanied by
hoarding.”
Some clichés are so because they are true, and the sentiment above is
grounded in the reality of oil trading. When prices further out along
the futures strip offer a return in excess of the simple cost of storage
through the same period, it encourages people who have access to
physical oil to place it in storage while locking in the gain by selling the
same oil forward through contracts on the futures market. This is in
fact the practice that most people would most readily associate with
“speculation” on the oil market, and its obvious corollary is that oil in
storage tends to rise when participants are engaged in this play, or there
is “hoarding” as the common term goes. Therefore, goes the reasoning,
no visible hoarding means no speculation is at work. 
We have already noted how, in fact, through this period oil inventories
were actually building. At the time, however, this was not so obvious to
many market participants – oil stock data is invariably backward-
looking, and sometimes bears considerable revision following its initial
appearance. So let us allow that many certainly could not see any visible
hoarding through this period. Nevertheless, this argument still would
not hold any water against speculation in the sense we have specifically
described throughout preceding chapters. Note that this sort of
speculation accompanied by hoarding is only possible for those with

141
The Peak Weeks
access to physical oil – but that the very definition of speculator we use
for futures markets is, pace Nymex, someone without a commercial,
physical interest in the commodity at hand.  
Long, buy-side demand from speculators in oil futures would not
result in any hoarding on their part, at least. What about those selling
it to them on the exchange? Surely they need to hold stocks against the
risk of having to meet a physical oil delivery if they cannot offset their
way out of this commitment at a reasonable price? Would not hoarding
on the part of contract sellers to meet physical delivery on a futures
contract sold to a speculator still betray the latter at work? Not
necessarily. Firstly, it is presuming that the sell-side on a futures contract
will always be a physical market player, and while this is historically
often the case it is not a foregone conclusion. There is nothing to stop
a non-physical, non-commercial, financial speculator in the market
from selling as well as buying futures contracts, in which case there will
be no visible hoarding attached to their position in this transaction.
Moreover, even if the seller of the contracts the financial speculators
are buying is indeed a physical market player, they may yet forego the
security of having oil in storage to back their commitments if they feel
that the likelihood is that these commitments will not be called on any
time in the near future. This might be the case if they understood that
a large part of volume on the buy-side in the market is committed to
rolling out of taking actual delivery every month and instead being
permanently invested in the front-month – which means that those
selling into this demand will always find a liquid market in which they
will be able to buy back their own equivalent contract commitments
prior to monthly delivery as well. As we have seen, this is exactly the
situation that obtains with index investors. Further, as this index money
is long-only, it will remain automatically committed to rolling over

every month no matter how negative the resulting roll yield may be –
so even when the market is in contango and the index investor is
suffering, this trade remains on the table to be rolled over every month.
So much for the front end of the curve, but as we have seen financial
speculation in oil futures is not limited to index investors piling into
the front-month. There are institutions investing in long-term single
commodity swaps; institutions buying medium-to-long-term structured
commodity notes; institutions buying exchange-traded oil funds which
are not limited to front-month positions, but also allow investors to be
permanently long of the two- or three-year price; and institutions
buying dated options for various calendar points far out along the
curve. All these forms of investment would see swap dealers hedging out
client exposure by buying Nymex futures at the corresponding medium
and long-term dates along the curve. Even if the originating
counterparty to these trades is a physical player, they are unlikely to
right now put in storage barrels that will not be called on for five years
– when in the interim the physical player, particularly if they are a
producer, will have run through several more inventory cycles
themselves. 
They are much more likely to rely on their presence in the physical
trade to secure the requisite barrels far closer to the contract expiry date
than to tie up capital and pay inventory storage costs from now. The
idea that speculation is always accompanied by hoarding is fine if
describing a typical tactic of physical market players holding barrels to
realise locked-in profits within months, rather than years. (And we have
in fact seen episodes of such hoarding accompanying this kind of “old-
fashioned” speculation by physical traders a couple of times since the
oil price crash of late 2008.) It fails, however, as a cast-iron rule when
facing the realities of the new forms of speculation now at work in the
futures market. 
142
Petromania

The Peak Weeks
143
Diesel fundamentalism
Asian hunger for diesel had to be considered in any reckoning of
demand-side pressure in the oil markets. As previously explained, the
twist diesel brings to the story is that all oils are not created equal. Light,
sweet crude is favoured over heavy, sour crude. The implication is that
the market overall might have been balanced in appearance, but that in
reality the crucial light sweet crude was undersupplied versus demand.
As WTI oil itself is the premium light sweet blend, its price – both spot
at Cushing and by extension front-month at Nymex – was directly
subject to a demand squeeze not noted for other blends of crude,
particularly comparatively sour output from several large OPEC
producers. Thus while OPEC might be finding it hard to sell its crude
– and toward the peak of the oil price, a veritable flotilla of Iranian
tankers full of sour crude were indeed conspicuously floating out at sea,
with no demand for their cargo – the high “oil price” as quoted on
Nymex did indeed reflect high demand, but for exactly what it referred
to rather than all crude oil in general. And so it was genuine real world
fundamentals driving the oil price after all, rather than speculation. 
This line of reasoning has to be taken incredibly seriously, not least
because one of its proponents, oil sector analyst Philip K. Verleger, had
testified before Congress in December 2007 that oil would shoot up as
far as $120 per barrel in 2008 as a result of this light sweet squeeze.
Verleger’s argument was, however, that this squeeze was being made
worse than it had to be for quite artificial reasons – US government
insistence on filling its Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) with too much
light sweet crude oil. The US Department of Energy (DoE) had decided
to add to its strategic reserves and had commenced stock-building in
August 2007, continuing through the rest of the year and into 2008.
The SPR was being filled with a mix of sweet and sour crudes, but
Verleger reckoned that even though the quantity of light sweet crude the

government was taking out of the market amounted to less than 1% of
the total global light sweet crude supply (of perhaps 10 million barrels
per day), it was nevertheless sufficient to push prices upwards given the
tightness in the light sweet market. 
Verleger had reached this conclusion by rejecting as causes for oil
price appreciation all of the other “fundamental” reasons we have
enumerated previously, but also by rejecting, too, the idea that
speculation was the cause. Testifying in December 2007, he calculated
that commodity index investment in crude oil had actually declined in
the preceding couple of months, so it could not be behind the price rises
from around $70 in late summer 2007 to near $100 by the end of that
year. If it was not the “traditional” fundamental factors, nor the
speculators behind the price rise, it had to be the only other factor that
had changed in 2007 – the DoE policy of removing light sweet crude
stocks from the market through the latter half of the year. By January
2008, US politicians were echoing Verleger’s analysis and calling on the
DoE to suspend light sweet crude transfers into the SPR. The
government initially refused to budge and it was not until May, when
senators had finally passed a veto-proof law to end the transfers, that
the DoE capitulated and said its current programme of stock-building
would end with the transfers already scheduled for June 2008.
Verleger’s arguments invited some criticism because he asked a lot of
heavy lifting in terms of price appreciation from a very negligible
difference in market supply. Yet his conviction was that if there really
is no more light sweet crude available at the margin of supply, even a
small supply disruption can cause a significant price spike. He estimated
this effect at between an extra 25 to 40% price increase per 1% supply
shortfall in light sweet crude oil. Verleger did, however, also muddy the
waters somewhat himself. He felt that hedging by options derivative
writers on the Nymex market could also be putting upward pressure on
Petromania
144

prices – but he saw this hedging as originating against exposure to
commercial market players, specifically airlines hedging their oil price
exposure, rather than speculative investors. 
But it is worth noting that speculative investors would have exactly
the same effect if it was they who were buying long options on the oil
price from the derivatives writers instead of or even alongside
commercial players. The derivatives writers themselves would still have
to go long of oil by buying equivalent options on the Nymex. In media
comment through 2008, Verleger himself also made repeated references
to the weight of speculative investment in the oil market as contributing
to high prices. Yet after the oil price had collapsed by autumn 2008, he
was scathing, in particular, of Michael Masters’ arguments, and
dismissed the idea that speculation had played any part in the price
blow-out. He seemed to be back to a light sweet crude fundamentalist
view of the whole episode.
Whether or not DoE stock-building was artificially tightening the light
sweet crude segment of the oil market to a noticeable extent through the
first half of 2008, there was certainly evidence by early summer that
the market thought diesel itself was in short supply. The “crack spread”,
the margin refiners gain on splitting various products out of barrels of
crude oil, on diesel-type fuels – or “middle distillates”, as refiners know
them – had widened considerably. This was a signal that if prices for oil
in general had shot up, prices for diesel refined out of that oil had shot
up even more. Asian demand-driven super-cycle theories had a ready
answer – this was fundamentals par excellence at work. The question
was whether the bulls were right and this new pressure on light sweet
crude was now a permanent structural consideration in the oil price, or
was this diesel demand predicated on something more ephemeral that
might yet evaporate in short order? In due course we shall examine
arguments that the latter might indeed have been the case.
The Peak Weeks
145

“Future fundamentals require demand destruction.”
It is appropriate at this point to refer to the theory that lay behind the
high-profile calls of the Goldman Sachs analysts that became so
identified with the oil bull case through the first half of 2008. It will
already be apparent that in coming up with any case justifying the rapid
appreciation of oil prices in 2008, some recognition must be made of the
headline fact that many signals from the physical market simply did
not support the idea that demand was currently undersupplied. We have
seen it done above in the diesel fundamentalist argument (which argues
that these physical signals fail to reflect real tightness in a particular
segment of demand). Goldman Sachs indeed acknowledged this diesel
case, and made it part of its analysis. But it preferred to foreground
another element – the idea that high prices might not be responding to
an undersupplied market today, but instead reflect legitimate,
fundamental concerns about supply in the relatively near future. The
transmission mechanism for these concerns to the oil price quoted daily
in the newspapers was high prices at the back end of the futures curve
dragging up the front-month price after them.
Jeff Currie and his commodity analyst team at Goldman Sachs set out
its case in detail in its “Energy Watch” research note of May 16 2008,
subtitled “A lesson from long-dated oil”. The note is upfront in
admitting that it has to explain ‘a market that seemingly defies
fundamentals’, and then does so by refocusing attention from the front-
month contract that feeds directly into spot prices, to the five-year
forward price as traded in Nymex contracts. This in itself is relatively
uncontroversial. Many oil analysts would agree that the five-year end
of the futures curve, sufficiently removed from volatility at the front
end of the curve caused by relatively short-lived and therefore non-
fundamental supply shortages or gluts, may be the better guide to
reckoning what the market thinks the “fair” price actually is for oil. 
Petromania
146

In its analysis, Goldman takes the five-year WTI Nymex price as
revealing the true “structural” price for oil, and says that this has been
rising as a result of a “structural re-pricing” ongoing in the market.
According to Goldman, legitimate concerns about the adequacy of
potential supply development to meet the current trend of demand
growth were causing market participants to bid up five-year prices
towards the level where they would start to force a reduction in demand
growth, such that it moves back in line with supply growth capability.
Only when the market had reached this equilibrium would prices stop
appreciating. 
Goldman reckoned that to force the trend in oil demand growth of
3.8% annually – this figure being seen simply as equivalent to then-
forecast GDP growth – back in line with global oil supply growth
trending at just 1% annually, a 14% increase in the long-dated oil price
from its current levels was required. This meant that Goldman Sachs
forecast a $149 per barrel price for five-year Nymex WTI by the start
of 2009. As Goldman claimed had been the case with another
“structural re-pricing” seen in 2004-5 (at the end of which five-year oil
had settled at around $70 per barrel), they now argued that this rise at
the back end of the curve had fed through into price rises at the front
end of the curve. ‘After remaining stable for more than two years,’ the
analysts wrote, ‘the long-dated oil price (five-year forward) is once
again driving the oil market. And like 2004-5… the rise in long-dated
prices drags spot prices to ever-higher levels’. 
With this dynamic at play, Goldman also reckoned that despite
widespread dismay at the volatility in front-month prices from late 2007
onwards, these prices had in fact displayed normal cyclical, seasonal
patterns as long as it was understood that they had done so not in
relation to a flat yardstick but to a five-year price that had been
constantly appreciating while these cyclical peaks and troughs played
The Peak Weeks
147

out. As Goldman thought it had the handle on the “time-spread” logic
under which these cyclical front-end prices moved, versus the long
“structural” price, it also hazarded a forecast for the front-month WTI
price – through the second half of 2008 it would average $141 per
barrel. 
Goldman claimed that in 2004-5, the new equilibrium for long-dated
oil had settled at a level that incentivised new, costlier production from
unconventional resources such as oil sands to meet prevailing demand
growth. But the analysts foresaw no new technological breakthrough
this time, and the fundamentals of supply and demand meant supply
growth could not be accelerated. This was due to what Goldman called
‘the revenge of the old political economy’, which it labelled as ‘resource
protectionism’. In other words, precisely the sort of mercantilism and
resource nationalism we have already described as one of the grand
narratives dominating the physical oil market (academically,
mercantilism is recognised as the oldest distinct variant of “political
economy” considered as a system of statecraft).
In this respect, Goldman ended up pretty much in the “pragmatic
peak oil” camp – supply would not go much higher, not because of
geological but political restrictions on extraction of fresh resources. So
rather than incentivising new production that in reality could not be
accessed, this time around prices would have to rise to a level that
actually destroyed demand sufficiently for supply to balance it. 
4.3 The Reality and Implications of Curve
Integration
In its focus on the physical and political restrictions on supply growth
versus galloping demand as the dynamic forcing oil prices ever higher,
and in ascribing actual numbers to both of these and demonstrating the
Petromania
148

mathematical formulae for calculating the price rise required to crimp
demand growth sufficiently, the Goldman Sachs analysis was resolutely
based on supposed fundamentals. It also, however, touched on an
intriguing issue – was it true that long-dated futures prices could drag
front-month prices up and down? It is important to bear in mind how
the futures curve is constructed: with the last traded price for each
contract in question, even if this contract has not traded on the day in
question. There is no necessary linkage between front-month and other
prices. It is possible for the front-month to move a lot on a single day
while another contract will not have traded at all. 
In practice, however, what tends to happen is that trades on one part
of the curve do have an effect that ripples through other contracts. If
market participants decide there is sufficient read-across in terms of
supply or demand signals to the price of oil in contracts they are
invested in elsewhere along the curve, they may adjust positions there
up or down as well. This might seem obvious enough but, in fact, for
most of the period since oil futures started trading in earnest in the early
1980s, there was an observable disconnect between the front-month
and the rest of the Nymex curve. And for most of this period, the rest
of the curve rarely meant more than the one- and two-year-out prices,
it taking time for the market to develop to the level it is at today where
longer maturities are readily offered. 
A CFTC study released in February 2007 noted that in the early
1990s, the vast majority of oil futures traded had a maturity measured
in months, and growth in contracts longer than three years did not
begin until 2004. The same study also demonstrated that while until
2000 there was statistically no reliable relationship holding between
movement in the front-month and one- and two-year prices, in 2002
and 2003 some measure of correlation emerged, and in mid-2004, these
three maturities achieved meaningful ‘cointegration’. This means they
The Peak Weeks
149

started to move in a statistically-detectable “lockstep”, maintaining a
quasi-stationary position between themselves while moving up and
down together. The CFTC’s own research on the matter therefore
suggests that front-month and longer-dated contract prices do exhibit
meaningful linkage across their movements. 
Importantly, the statistical proof of such cointegration makes no
meaningful distinction as to which price might be the “first mover” and
which the “followers” – indeed, within the terms of reference of such a
study, this question does not make sense. We cannot say if long-dated prices
follow shorter-dated, or if shorter-dated follow longer-dated, or indeed if
they may switch around, one leading and now following. All we can say
is that, for significant stretches of time, they seem to move together. The
implications of this idea are considerable. On the one hand, if it is true that
long-dated prices can influence the front-month price, then a major
problem for those who saw high oil prices as driven by fundamentals was
solved. It did not matter if actual day-to-day market conditions were not
displaying any actual tightness that might justify soaring prices. As long as
there were strong fundamental grounds for bidding up oil prices some
distance out along the futures curve to a certain level, the movement across
the whole curve is being triggered by fundamentals.
On the other hand, if one presumes that long-dated price movement
can drag front-month prices around with it, it also makes the
speculative case for oil price appreciation considerably deeper. Many
of those who denied the speculative case did so because they did not, in
their opinion, see enough speculative weight in the market in the front-
month and nearby contracts alone to be materially capable of shifting
prices at this end of the curve. In reaching this conclusion they typically
focused on just the commodity index investors, the obvious class of
financial speculator investing in the front end of the curve. But if we
allow speculative pressures further out along the curve to also bear
Petromania
150

some weight in pulling front-month prices up or down, then the scope
of interest that has to be considered in calibrating potential effect is far
wider. It would take in all those institutions placing bets further out
along the curve through the plethora of swap-based instruments we
have already enumerated. 
Tellingly, while the February 2007 CFTC study could not determine
which price was leading which, it did attempt to determine which class
of trader it was whose trading across these different maturities was most
responsible for bringing their movement into cointegration. Its clear
answer was – the swap dealers. The very market agent most associated
with the transmission of speculative financial interest into the market
is also the market agent the CFTC’s own research suggests is responsible
for clear linkage emerging between price movement across different
maturities. So in this sense, Goldman Sachs might be right, but for the
wrong reasons. In other words, it may be correct in seeing the front end
of the curve as being dragged around by movement at the back end,
but incorrect in attributing this movement at the back end of the curve
to fundamentals. The whole phenomenon, encompassing both back-
end prices pushing ever higher and also the front-end responding to this
movement, might instead be down to speculative interest, transmitted
primarily through swap dealers. 
This is particularly the case as the farther reaches of the futures curve,
particularly beyond the three-year window that most commercial users and
consumers of oil limit their hedging strategies to, are particularly illiquid
compared to the front end of the curve. They are therefore prone to move
more with comparatively smaller volumes of trade, while also being
favoured more by speculators than physical market players. The same 2007
CFTC study also does indeed acknowledge that at that point in time,
significant commercial market players such as refineries had practically no
exposure beyond three years, while swap dealers were a driving force in
The Peak Weeks
151

such long maturities. And this picture tallies with subsequent data,
particularly the CFTC study released in late 2008 which we have already
used to generate our alternative view of the split between unquestionably
commercial and potentially speculative market participants. 
As Figure 9 shows, on the basis of this data, by 2008 swap dealers
held near enough 60% of contracts with maturities greater than three
years, with hedge funds the second-largest group of traders holding
such long-dated maturities, accounting for some 24%. Looking at the
three snapshots of trader segment interest across these dates, another
wider conclusion germane to our whole enquiry is unavoidable.
Petromania
152
Trader split across maturities 2000
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
<3m
3-12m
1-3y
>3y
Trade split across maturities 2004
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
<3m
3-12m
1-3y
>3y
Total curve 2000
Total curve 2004
Unquestionably
commercial
Swap
Other “non-
commercial”
Hedge
Unquestionably
commercial
Swap
Other “non-
commercial”
Hedge

Compared to 2000, when the “unquestionably commercial” element
of the market did hold at least half the contracts with maturities of
under three months, and a slightly lesser proportion of three-year-plus
maturities, by 2008 the unquestionably commercial market segment is
clearly holding just a small minority of interest across all contract
maturities, from front and nearby months right through to the longest-
dated. 
4.4 Mad May
It seems clear that the now-notorious Goldman note issued in mid-May
2008 would itself have actually contributed to swap dealer-transmitted
financial speculator interest at exactly the farther reaches of the curve
in particular. As a piece of research written by investment bank analysts
for institutional clients, by definition it obviously serves speculative
The Peak Weeks
153
Figure 9: Changing trader group domination across maturities from 2000-2008
[Source: CFTC (Büyüksahin, Haigh, Harris, Overdahl & Robe, 2008)]
Trader split across maturities 2008
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
<3m
3-12m
1-3y
>3y
Total curve 2008
Unquestionably
commercial
Swap
Other “non-
commercial”
Hedge

financial interest in the oil price. And the house recommendation the
analysts made to readers on the basis of their reading of the market was
indeed a long-dated single commodity swap on oil – namely buying the
four-year forward Nymex WTI oil price, calendar-dated 2012, which
was then sitting at $119.38 per barrel. This is the trade that institutional
clients heeding the advice would place with a swap dealer, who would
in turn then be seeking, all else being equal, to hedge this exposure by
going long of the 2012 oil price on the actual Nymex futures market. 
In fact, some commentators at the time would hold that Goldman
note responsible for kicking off a particularly manic couple of weeks in
the Nymex oil futures market – which can be summarised in terms of
sequential futures curves, as shown in Figure 10. For on May 16 2008,
the day the note was released, the whole curve shifted upwards
Petromania
154
Figure 10: Mad May [Source: Bloomberg]
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
CL1
CL13
CL25
CL37
CL49
CL61
CL68
CL70
Futures contracts (using generic codes)
$ oil pric
02/05/2008
15/05/2008
16/05/2008
19/05/2008
20/05/2008
21/05/2008
30/05/2008
Nearby contracts
Long-dated contracts
$ oil price
02/05/08
15/05/08
16/05/08
19/05/08
20/05/08
21/05/08
30/05/08

noticeably, but with the back-end gaining more than the front. While
front-month crude jumped some $2 per barrel, the four-year (2012)
price targeted specifically as a long trade by Goldman jumped almost
$5 and the farthest-traded date, June 2017, jumped more than $5. This
was to set in train a burst of price appreciation across the futures strip,
characterised by the back end appreciating more than the front. Just
two trading days after the Goldman research update, this trading
activity had already caused the very unusual shift in the shape of the
curve into a perfect, full contango, as referred to previously. 
Compared to prices on May 2 (the first trading day of that month) at
the most extreme point of this movement on May 21 the front-month
price had gained 14.5%, almost $17 per barrel, the four-year (2012)
price had gained 27%, almost $29 per barrel, and the nine-year (2017)
price had gained just over $33 per barrel, or 31%. Then, as abruptly as
it had appeared, this perfect contango collapsed back into the
backwardation that had characterised the curve at the start of the
month, but at a considerably higher price level. This can be seen in the
curve for the last trading day of that month, May 30, at which point the
front-month price closed up 9% compared to May 2, the four-year price
finished up 16%, and the nine-year price up 18%. So while the curve
had reverted into backwardation, still the long-dated break-out had left
its mark in terms of which maturities gained the most through this
month. 
This rapid flexing of the oil futures curve from one shape to another
and back again within days was unusual enough to draw analyst
comment at the time. As Dr Ed Morse of Lehman Brothers commented
in a research note released a fortnight after the Goldman note,
‘Fundamental changes cannot explain sudden, severe price or curve
movements.’ Morse had his own explanation for the near-
unprecedented price movements that week, which can be partially
The Peak Weeks
155

gleaned from the title attached to this research  – “Oil dotcom”. The
front-page of the note made the point with a graph illustrating that the
ascent of the Nymex oil price in terms of proportion over time mirrored
the previous expansion of one of our more recent speculative bubbles,
the ascent of the Nasdaq tech-stock market up to its peak in March
2000. The note argued, ‘As in the dotcom period, when “new
economy” stocks became popular, a growing number of Wall Street
analysts have been repeatedly raising their forecasts as oil prices have
risen. These revised forecasts have been partially responsible for new
investor flows, driving prompt and forward prices to perhaps
unsustainable levels.’
4.5 “Oil dotcom”
There were good reasons why the oil market should have paid attention
to Ed Morse – his career spans decades in the industry across a variety
of prominent roles. Apart from teaching international monetary policy
at Princeton University, Morse had been Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for International Energy Policy in the Carter administration, had
co-founded high profile energy consultants PFC Energy, and been
publisher of oil sector trade news mainstay Petroleum Intelligence
Weekly. After this he spent seven years as a strategic advisor at energy
trader Hess Energy Trading Co (HETCO), and was then appointed
head of commodity research at investment bank Lehman Brothers in
2006. Yet in May 2008 Morse found himself among a few lonely
contrarians, as he warned the rest of the market that prevailing oil
prices were a bubble waiting to burst. 
The May 29 2008 Lehman research note “Oil dotcom” followed
closely on the heels of another released on May 16, ironically the same
day as Goldman’s now-notorious $141 second half 2008 average oil
Petromania
156

price prediction. Entitled “Is it a bubble?”, this had introduced some
calculations Morse’s team had been making regarding the weight that
long interest index investment was bringing to bear on the Nymex oil
futures market and hence the oil price. Morse and his team reckoned
that commodity index investment alone accounted for as much as 25%
of total open interest in Nymex oil by early 2008, and had even
calculated that for every fresh $100 million inflow into commodity
indices as an asset class, the WTI oil price gained 1.6%. The analysts
also asserted that in the first quarter of 2008, this index investment had
indeed played a key role in leading oil prices higher.
“Oil dotcom” built on this work but also noted how index investors
alone were not the whole story, as the mix of speculative investment
pressures on the Nymex curve grew richer in the second quarter of
2008. The note laid out in considerable detail how, through the
remarkable weeks of May 2008 in which the curve flexed so
dramatically, the whole oil futures curve was under bombardment along
its length by a diverse artillery of speculative investment strategies.
Alongside supposedly long-term, long-only index investors at the front
end of the curve, Morse and his team identified short-term investors in
long-dated options as the key source of buying pressure pushing up the
long-dated end of the curve. It was this that was helping it flip into that
relatively rare “perfect contango” we have already discussed – Morse
and his team called this the ‘anomalous deferred [i.e. long-dated] oil
price move’. Because actual physical producers had notably failed to
appear as sellers into this long-dated long interest, the long-dated end
of the curve had shot up due to unbalanced pricing pressure. As the
note said: ‘In the past, producer selling would have slowed or impeded
the upward price drive. In its absence, retail investors, hearing a
growing number of reports about “peak oil”, continued to buy at higher
and higher strike prices, indicating that there is no necessary physical
The Peak Weeks
157

ceiling to the market.’ In other words, there was nothing stopping
option speculators from driving the long-dated price sky-high.
We should note at this point that this is only one of three different
versions of what happened along the futures curve in those frantic May
weeks in 2008. We have already heard the analyst anecdote concerning
time spread investors having to unwind a trade going against them; then
we have the account from Morse and his team highlighting short-term
options traders in particular as responsible for flipping the curve so
violently; and I have personally also been vouchsafed a version in which
this unusual movement in the futures curve was due to a large
commercial producer having to unwind some hedges that were going
badly. Which is true? Perhaps all of them, to a certain degree. If the
commercial producer unwinding its hedging position is doing so
precisely because speculative forces have driven the oil price far above
levels he previously thought suitable to lock in sales at, is his action a
commercial decision or one forced by speculation? The point is that in
any attempt to determine what was moving the oil futures market
through the mad weeks of May ’08, speculative investment patterns
have to figure high on the list of factors for anyone claiming to listen
to those who have tales to tell of those weeks.
The Lehman note did not dismiss potentially genuine fears about
underlying supply and demand, such as the apparent diesel squeeze
which exercised diesel fundamentalists like Philip Verleger and
Francisco Blanch of Merrill Lynch. There is, however, an alternative
account of this diesel squeeze which, while acknowledging real world
facts lying behind the wide diesel crack spread, nevertheless reframes
these facts as ephemeral and short-term considerations which should
have been recognised and discounted as such by the markets, and
therefore removed from consideration as fundamentals. The answer, as
with so much nowadays, lies in China.
Petromania
158

4.6 The Dragon’s Hoard
China came out with a double-whammy on diesel demand for summer
2008. Firstly, a devastating earthquake in the Sichuan province on May
12 meant a very large-scale rescue and relief operation that was hungry
for diesel. The quake also damaged power generation and coal
transport infrastructure in that region, throwing many companies onto
emergency power generators also fuelled by diesel. Secondly, the
country was hosting the Olympic Games in June, and as part of its
efforts to showcase China at this historic moment the government had
established a policy of building up diesel stocks. This was both to ensure
unforeseen supply disruptions did not affect the smooth running of the
sporting festival; as well as to provide a substitute fuel for the coal
normally burned in Beijing power stations through the weeks leading up
to the Olympiad, in the interests of cleaning-up the capital’s notoriously
polluted air for the benefit of tourists.
This Chinese hoarding arguably led to an apparent shortage of diesel
around the world, which in turn blew out middle distillate crack
spreads. And the word “apparent” is justified because, with this
information as part of the picture, it becomes clear that on an
underlying, fundamental basis there was in mid-2008 sufficient light
sweet crude being produced and likewise sufficient diesel being
produced in the normal run of things. It was instead a large quantity of
this existing and normally readily-available diesel being pulled off-
market by the Chinese that made matters seem otherwise. Importantly,
this Chinese diesel stock build would not have appeared on the oil
inventory datasets normally perused by oil analysts. This sort of report,
produced weekly and monthly by respectively the EIA and IEA, only
covers the OECD grouping of which China is not a member. So the
normal inventory figures that do the job well enough most of the time
were blind to this particular instance of hoarding. 
The Peak Weeks
159

Yet it should have been recognised for what it was by the wider oil
futures market – a temporary and unusual blip in diesel demand and
stock-building which would be unwound as soon as the Sichuan rescue
effort itself abated and the last bunting was taken down in post-
Olympics Beijing. As such, this was clearly not a persisting, fundamental
condition that spelled a permanent squeeze on light sweet crude and
diesel output alike, and so should not have been seen as justification
for the whole oil futures curve moving up to the heights it reached in
summer 2008. That the market might be misreading this situation was
highlighted by Dr Morse and his team in “Oil dotcom”, which warned
‘there is a tendency for the market to conflate legitimate reasons for
demand growth with what is likely a temporary spurt in recent demand
for inventory related to the Olympics. Once these are concluded and
economics trump air pollution concerns, many Chinese thermal [power]
plants are likely to switch back from diesel to coal.’
Morse and his team at Lehman Brothers meanwhile drew a stark
conclusion from their own up-close, detailed analysis of who was
buying what on the oil futures market: ‘Our conclusion from this study
is that we are seeing the classic ingredients of an asset bubble. Financial
investors tend to “herd” and chase past performance, comforted by the
growing analytical conclusion that markets are tightening, and new
inflows, in turn, drive prices higher. Larger allocations by institutional
investors, including new sovereign wealth funds desiring to increase
their commodity exposure, play a role. So does uncertainty about the
true state of market fundamentals, including the level of Saudi spare
capacity, the level of Chinese “real demand” versus stockpiling, and
other factors that bolster the current bullish consensus.’ 
The analytical standoff between an established body of opinion that
triple-digit oil prices were justified, and a much smaller group of hold-
outs convinced that prevailing crude prices were driven by speculators,
Petromania
160

continued as oil shot toward its peak. But the establishment could point
to the big guns arrayed on its side. In early July ’08, the IEA issued its
own supposedly authoritative view on medium-term oil market
fundamentals, in its annual Medium-Term Oil Market Report
(MTOMR). The 2008 issue mounted a defence of fundamentals as
responsible for prevailing oil prices, then fast approaching $150 per
barrel, and concluded: ‘While recognizing that speculation can have a
day-to-day impact on price moves, the fact that all producers are
working virtually flat out and that there is no sign of any abnormal
stock build gives a strong indication that current oil prices are justified
by fundamentals… Often it is a case of political expediency to find a
scapegoat for higher prices rather than undertake serious analysis or
perhaps confront difficult decisions.’ The last dismissive comment
summed up the consensus view that those obsessed with a speculative
bubble in the oil markets simply did not understand how these markets
work.
The initial results of the CFTC special call to swap dealers would not
be publicised until the autumn. The Interim Report of the US
government interagency task force was released a lot sooner, on July
22. In itself, this haste was a matter of some controversy – not least for
one of the CFTC’s own commissioners involved in preparing it, who as
we shall see issued a dissenting opinion on the findings and the way
they were prepared. Nevertheless, the official line taken in this report
was that, ‘to this point of the examination, the evidence supports the
position that changes in fundamental factors provide the best
explanation for the recent crude oil price increases. Observed increases
in the speculative activity and the number of traders in the crude oil
futures market do not appear to have systematically affected prices.’
But by the time it was publicised, however hurriedly, this finding looked
decidedly behind the curve. For the oil price was collapsing, in exactly
The Peak Weeks
161

the fashion which implied that $100-plus prices had indeed simply been
a speculative bubble all along. We can say this, because we can compare
the oil price blow-out to previous speculative bubbles.
Petromania
162

5
A Bubble by Any Other Name


‘When peak prices hit, we believe they are also likely to fall
precipitously. That’s the way cyclical turning points tend to occur
– in the midst of a market trend, turning points can be sudden,
unexpected, and severe.’
Edward Morse et al, Lehman Brothers, “Oil dotcom”, 29/05/08
5.1 The Bust
One year on from writing the words above, Ed Morse confesses that he
did enjoy some schadenfreude when what he had warned of for so long
came to pass. But who wouldn’t – because when the bust in the oil price
anticipated by Morse, Colin Smith of Dresdner Kleinwort, and a few
other market commentators (myself included), did come, it was truly
spectacular. From oil’s highest ever closing price of $145.18 on July 14
2008, a consecutive run of lower closing prices saw front-month Nymex
oil finish that Friday July 18 2008 on $128.88 per barrel. Despite a few
weak counter-trend rallies, it was really downhill all the way from there.
By August 5 2008 the oil price had dropped through $120 per barrel,
and on September 15 a 5% drop in one day saw it plunge through the
$100 per barrel mark and close at $95.71. 
This watershed must have shocked oil bulls into one final rage against
the dying of the light, as the crude price then staged its most notable
rally in this period, shooting back up to trade as high, intra-day, as $130
on September 22. But it was all for naught. Another drop followed, and
by October 1 of 2008 the oil price was trading firmly back below $100
per barrel, a level which it has still not to date ever regained. From
closing at $98.53 on October 1, by October 31 2008 the oil price closed
165

166
Petromania
at $67.81, losing 31% in a single month. By December 1, it had
dropped through $50 per barrel, but even this was not the end of the
retreat. Intraday trading on December 19 2008 saw the price drop as
low as $32.40 per barrel – well under a quarter of its peak less than six
months earlier. On the last trading day of 2008, the year which had
opened with oil first touching $100 per barrel, Nymex front-month
crude closed at $44.60 per barrel. Incredibly, oil had fallen so far it was
back to where it had been four years earlier. 
What had happened to $100 oil? The bullish case for triple-digit
prices that had been pushed by many investment banks and organs of
establishment opinion was simply shredded. In the face of such an
unprecedented collapse in the oil price, many scrambled for new
explanations that might explain the latest developments. For instance,
by the end of that first week of declines ending July 18 2008, some
market commentaries in the media were pointing to recent bearish
updates from OPEC regarding the likely level of oil demand in the
coming year as a cause for the nascent sell-off. This is, however,
disingenuous – as we have seen, throughout the whole first half of 2008
OPEC had been warning that oil supply was exceeding demand and
that inventories were building as a result. So the impression that the
cartel had suddenly changed its tune and introduced new information
into the market that traders were not previously aware of, and which
might therefore justify an abrupt reversal in pricing, is completely
misleading.
By the end of that first trading week after oil’s peak, running from July
14-18 2008, oil had traded down 12% but no one could really point to
any single, concrete fact to trigger such a pullback. As opposed to citing
the OPEC outlook update, the Financial Times concluded on July 18:
‘Oil had seemed immune to talk of weaker growth. But a downbeat
assessment by Ben Bernanke, the Federal Reserve chairman, on Tuesday,

167
A Bubble by Any Other Name
and hopes of easing tension between the US and Iran, a big oil producer,
appear to have at least temporarily taken the wind out of prices.’ A
completely different set of factors! And note how tentatively these
linkages are asserted; the use of the words ‘appear’ and ‘temporarily’.
These factors were certainly not taken as conclusive signals that the oil
price boom had ended, and the same report went on to note that ‘Other
traders were still cautious about calling the top of the oil market, having
made calls in the past three months after similar price plunges only to
see oil prices march higher later.’
Between July 14 2008, when oil finished the day’s trade at what still
remains its highest-ever closing price of $145.18, and September 16
2008 when oil closed at $91.15, oil shed 37% in two months. Just one
day prior to that latter date, US investment bank Lehman Brothers filed
for bankruptcy, setting in motion the train of events that saw the credit
crunch grow to its most monstrous proportions, as banks simply ceased
lending to anyone. Subsequently, many apologists for triple-digit oil
forecasts say it was clearly the Lehman bankruptcy that “changed
everything”, something they could never have foreseen. But it is obvious
that a massive first leg of the oil price collapse had already occurred
before this point, more than a third of the peak price having already
vanished. 
On September 15 2008, the day the US government introduced a
previously unthinkable scenario as it allowed Lehman to implode, oil
had indeed closed below $100 for the first time since March 5 of that
year, dropping 5% on the day. But two weeks earlier on September 1,
oil had dropped even more, 6% in a day, with no obvious single news
trigger. Energy risk management firm Cameron Hanover was quoted
on that September 1 price drop at the time: ‘The best reasons we can
give for [it] are the strength of the US dollar, the continuing decline in
consumer demand, and the market’s recent trend lower. The reaction is

168
Petromania
telling us that this market just does not have the stomach it once did for
higher prices.’ Lehman Brothers collapsed, immediately darkening the
economic outlook as it did so, well after the oil market had already
turned. And as with other, previous bubbles, the exact reason for the
sudden failure of momentum in the oil price right at the top of its peak,
and its abrupt reversal into a steep plunge, remains unclear. Certainly,
there was no sudden new nugget of information revealed to the market
that might justifiably trigger such panic. 
In fact, once the rout was underway the market actually ignored big
news stories that might plausibly support the oil price or at least cushion
its fall. The six-day war that erupted between Russia and Georgia less
than a month after oil’s peak was an obvious example, exposing
grievous miscalculations not only by the Georgian president but also
by the analysts who had claimed fundamentals were completely
supporting $140-plus oil. In late June, the temporary loss of some
250,000 barrels of daily oil production (bpd) due to the Bonga
shutdown in Nigeria was cited by many as sufficient reason for oil
smashing through $140, even as the unilateral Saudi production
increases totalling 500,000bpd failed to have any impact on price
expectations. In contrast early August saw Russian military action
plausibly threatening the Georgian section of the transnational Baku-
Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline, which can ship up to 1mbpd of Caspian
oil to Western markets, while separatist guerrillas in Turkey bombed
the Turkish section of the same pipeline, forcing temporary shutdown
in any case. Yet through these same days, oil dropped another 4% to
$113. Oil was dropping despite one of the most significant real threats
to global supply to have actually emerged through the whole year. The
implication that the price levels oil was relinquishing had in any case
borne scant relation to reality, 1mbpd supply threat or not, was stark.
Fundamentals do not evaporate in a month, but speculation does. 

169
A Bubble by Any Other Name
This radical disconnect from reality mirrored as much in the price
deflation as in its previous appreciation is in itself also a hint that we
are indeed dealing with a speculative bubble. When the market has
already lost touch with real-world fundamentals, sometimes plausible
grounds for the inevitable reversal seem as elusive as those claimed for
the preceding inflation. Robert Shiller has searched in vain for actual
real world news events that might have triggered two notable US stock
market collapses, the Great Crash of 1929 and the crash of 1987. Shiller
is instead forced to focus on the mechanics of what he terms a ‘negative
bubble’, the equally irrational inverse of the previous manic price
appreciation with exactly the same sort of feedback loop from price to
sentiment and back to price again, but this time driving stunning price
drops rather than gains. As he concludes, ‘There is no way that the
events of the stock market crash of 1929 can be considered a response
to any real news stories. We see instead a negative bubble, operating
through feedback effects of price changes, and an attention cascade,
with a series of heightened public fixations on the market. This
sequence of events appears to be fundamentally no different from those
of other market debacles – including the notorious crash of 1987’3. 
The oil price crash of late 2008 seems to have followed the same
pattern. Certainly through the initial phases, until the Lehman collapse
gave grateful financial hacks a catch-all reason for every market setback
across any asset class, the price drops in oil were themselves the main
story, and the explanations proffered for this ongoing pullback were a
hazy grab-bag of various observations. Interviewed in late May 2009,
Jeffrey Currie of Goldman Sachs remains convinced that it was the
Lehman bankruptcy which bankrupted in turn all his previous
assumptions regarding how oil prices would play out through 2008 and
3 Shiller (2005), pp. 97-98.

Petromania
170
into 2009 – in all their triple-digit glory. But of the oil price drops from
the peak until the Lehman collapse, he nevertheless concedes: ‘The drop
from $147 to $115 per barrel, that was idiosyncratic to the oil market
– prices had gotten too high too fast, and there was also some hoarding
going on.’ In other words, people had simply been paying too much for
oil compared to what was justified by fundamentals. 
It is certainly true, however, that following the Lehman implosion,
the oil price dropped at an even more rapid pace, until on December 19
2008 it traded as low as $32.40 and closed at $33.87 – the level which
turns out to have marked the lowest point in the oil price collapse,
prices having recovered since. From peak to trough the oil price saw
an incredible drop of 77% in just under six months. We have already
noted the lack of obvious news flow to trigger either the collapse from
peak pricing in the oil market or the historic stock market collapses
examined by Robert Shiller. In seeking support for the theory that the
oil price boom-and-bust was a classic speculative bubble, we can point
to far more coincidences than just that, however. The oil price boom-
and-bust of 2008 displays a wide range of markers for the particular
pathology that economists and historians have identified in previous
episodes of speculative excess.
5.2 Forever Blowing Bubbles
Instinctively, anyone who has studied or worked in investment markets
thinks they know what a market “bubble” is: a bout of stupendous
price inflation in a particular asset class that seems to feed on itself,
displaying a simple schematic of yesterday’s price rises justifying
purchases today which will again push prices up to justify yet more
purchases tomorrow. But the concept of the “speculative bubble” in
asset or market prices has only regained intellectual respectability in

recent years, and in particular in the aftermath of the credit crunch and
the associated collapse of the global financial system. Such a “bubble”
can be defined as inflation in the price of a given asset to levels
unsustainable in terms of an “underlying” or “real” valuation, and
therefore by implication stoked by “speculators”; defined in turn as
investors lured into an asset class for no more compelling reason than
the hope of making money simply by running with the prevailing tide
of investment fashion. But defined as such, the very existence of bubbles
has been downplayed or relegated to the sidelines in the last couple of
decades, a period notable rather for being characterised by the
resurgence of free market fundamentalism. 
The precepts of “efficient markets” and “rational economic agents”
prevailing in the halls of economic academia and the brain trusts of the
all-conquering global investment banks meant bubbles were a
theoretical impossibility. Under such models, the price reached in a free
market for an asset at any given point in time must perfectly reflect all
the known information relevant to that asset price and is therefore
identical with its “real” valuation, there being by definition no
“underlying” valuation to reference beyond this from which market
value can be stretched due to unwarranted speculative attention.
Meanwhile in the citadels of central banking, from where interest rate
pronouncements can actually have a definite impact in dampening
financial sector excesses, any policy geared towards identifying or
controlling asset price bubbles was effectively dismissed as a practical
impossibility. 
None other than long-time former US Federal Reserve chair Alan
Greenspan, for many years the world’s most powerful central banker by
dint of his control over US dollar interest rates, had publicly declared
in 1999 that ‘Bubbles generally are perceptible only after the fact. To
spot a bubble in advance requires a judgment that hundreds of
A Bubble by Any Other Name
171

thousands of informed investors have it all wrong. Betting against
markets is usually precarious at best.’ The message was, in other words,
that while investment bubbles may occasionally actually exist – and
note here the reluctance of an efficient market acolyte to gainsay the
judgment of the legions of ‘informed investors’ in making such a
determination – to all intents and purposes there is nothing to be done
about them, other than ruefully recognise them only in the aftermath of
their bursting. In regulatory as well as theoretical terms, then, bubbles
were until recently essentially invisible, the ghosts at the financial feast.
Of course, ex-Fed chair Greenspan has plenty of scope for rueful
recognition now he bears the dubious honour of asset price bubbles
actually being named after him by a slew of commentators. The
questions are no longer over the existence of these bubbles or whether
central bankers should act to identify and pre-empt them (in the new,
post-crunch financial orthodoxy – yes, they should), but over which
particular bubble inflated under his monetary policy oversight is being
referred to by use of his moniker. Is it the dotcom technology stock
bubble that burst just after the turn of the century, or the US housing
bubble that followed on the heels of the dotcom collapse, or indeed one
over-arching bubble combining these two asset blow-outs, in
recognition of the fact that Greenspan’s persistently low interest rate
medicine for nursing financial investors through the bloody aftermath
of the former was also the tonic on which they bulked up to ridiculous
extremes in the latter? 
The world banking system has endured disastrous capital impairment,
following the exposure of a gaping chasm between its own valuation of
US property assets and what emerged as realisable proceeds from these
assets. Since then, only a scattering of die-hard efficient market
fundamentalists (admittedly including much of economic academia)
would still contest the proposition that asset price bubbles are a real
Petromania
172

phenomenon, which in some essential sense involve the divergence of
market valuations from what turn out to be the sustainable, long-run
valuation of those assets. Unfortunately, it does indeed seem to have
taken the crippling of the global economy to finally ram home to society
at large the point that, where asset price bubbles are blown, they turn
out to embody the very opposite of the optimal capital allocation that
the efficient market Taliban claim for unfettered markets. But of course,
in the neo-classical economic theory which denies legitimate usage for
the term “bubble”, the capital write-downs resulting from such asset
price deflation are simply the “creative destruction” inherent in the
market finding a new price equilibrium level due to new information
becoming available, with this new price level neither no more nor no
less “correct” than that which preceded it. 
Back in the real world, however, when the gentle push from the
invisible hand of the market becomes a hard shove in the back of
bankers towards the edge of a valuation precipice, they are suddenly
reluctant to accept that what the market will pay for their assets at any
given time is necessarily the correct one. Sometimes the market
valuation is “distorted”, or “out of line with fundamentals”, argue the
bankers – as they ask taxpayers to take toxic assets off their hands at
higher prices than open sales would realise. Equally importantly,
politicians who formerly competed for the accolade of being the most
“pro business” in their embrace of free markets are no longer so keen
to agree that any pricing equilibrium reached by these free markets at
any given time must be the correct and only one possible, when the
pricing equilibrium now implied across almost every asset class by
markets left to run their course unimpeded spells significant job losses
and prolonged economic hardship for wide swathes of their electorate. 
Economic policy wonks have suddenly rediscovered the wisdom of
British economist John Maynard Keynes. His arguments included the
A Bubble by Any Other Name
173

proposition that there are in fact multiple equilibria possible for
markets, that some equilibria are qualitatively better than others when
judged in terms of efficient employment of all capital available
(including the supply of human capital), and that sometimes external
intervention is required to ensure that these are the points at which
markets settle. Such notions formed the basis for the long postwar
boom up to the 1970s, but were studiously disregarded by most pundits
courting economic credibility from the 1980s onwards. But look around
the world now at the panoply of soft loans, subsidies, capital injections,
and other forms of taxpayer-funded state aid being enacted to
“artificially” stimulate economic demand – and so resuscitate ailing
banks and industries (state bounties awarded to private citizens for new
automobile purchases being the latest wheeze). It is clear that we are all
Keynesians once more.
Rediscovered alongside Keynes is the American economist Hyman
Minsky, himself an intellectual disciple of Keynes at a distance, and
often painted as a fellow-traveller in Keynesian economic heresy against
efficient market theory. And so he is. Rather than agreeing that markets
tend toward settling around a stable equilibrium at the price that most
efficiently matches supply of a particular asset to demand at any
particular moment, his “financial instability theory” postulates instead
that markets are perennially unstable. Rather than each new price level
or supposed market equilibrium always being a logical reaction to a
change in external stimuli – in other words new information being made
available to the market – price levels also evolve in relation to what
might be termed “feedback effects” inherent in the workings of the
market itself. These feedback effects are the prime motive forces behind
market bubbles. 
Petromania
174

A Bubble by Any Other Name
175
5.3 Minsky’s Moment
Minsky’s feedback effects are essentially the same phenomena alluded
to by Robert Shiller in his work already quoted. In gaining a fuller
picture of how these effects arise and are transmitted through the
market, Shiller’s account of feedback in Irrational Exuberance can be
set profitably alongside previous work by Minsky himself (for example,
in Stabilizing an Unstable Economy), and the discussion by George
Cooper of Minsky and instability theory in his recent book The Origin
of Financial Crises. Synthesising these approaches into a single chain
of arguments, we can begin by saying that the aforementioned feedback
effects are manifested through diverse elements of market structure such
as the fractional reserve lending model of banking, or the discipline of
mark-to-market accounting used by lenders to control the leverage they
make available to investing institutions. These feedback loops have an
amplificatory effect such that an initial externally-triggered move in the
value of assets can cause waves of secondary adjustment throughout a
market and build up to events many orders of magnitude greater than
apparently foreshadowed by the initial stimulus. 
For example, losses announced by a bank on a particular loan, or
indeed even suspected by informed and risk-averse savers, can cause a
withdrawal of funds by some depositors because the liability
representing the cash claims of all depositors at that bank is now backed
by a relatively more impaired or overstretched income-generating asset
base. Yet in withdrawing their own cash from the bank’s capital base,
itself already just the small, liquid fraction of that asset base held close
to hand by the bank, they unavoidably put the equivalent right of
instant cash withdrawal for the remaining depositors at greater risk
than it was theoretically put at due to the original loss on the loan. Yet
more depositors realise this further heightening of risk and withdraw

their own cash, putting the claims of still-remaining depositors at even
more risk. And because everyone knows that under conventional
fractional reserve lending a bank only has cash equivalent to a tenth or
less of its actual deposited liabilities on hand, soon depositors are
flocking to withdraw their cash and there is a run on the bank.
Or in the case of mark-to-market accounting, a mark-to-market loss
recognised by an investing institution on an asset which was purchased
with debt leads to a “margin call” by its lender for cash to cover the
difference between the debt extended and the new and now-lower
realisable value of the asset. To raise the cash required to either cover
the margin call or pay back the debt in full, the institution has to
liquidate some of its other positions, in other words sell assets other
than the one on which the original loss has been recognised. But selling
these other assets increases the downward pressure exerted in reaching
the market equilibrium that determines their price at any given time,
and if this change in pressure is in turn enough to lower the publicly
recognised market value of these other assets then the institutions that
remain holding such positions have to realise a fresh round of marked-
to-market valuation adjustments. If they are also leveraged with regard
to these positions, they will in turn also face a fresh round of margin
calls – and so on, such that forced selling to meet margin calls on losses
on one asset class can inevitably spiral outwards into a systemic cascade
of market value write-downs across a wide range of assets.
As described above, the feedback effect that swamps the market is
initially triggered by a supposedly external stimulus. It is nevertheless
Minsky’s particular genius to demonstrate that with these feedback
effects structurally built into the market, there is a natural tendency
toward instability regardless of external stimuli. Or, as Minsky himself
says, thanks to ‘disequilibriating forces that are internal to the
Petromania
176

A Bubble by Any Other Name
177
economy… success in operating the economy can only be transitory;
instability is an inherent and inescapable flaw of capitalism’4 [his italics].
As he shows in Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, for example, it is
in fact long periods of apparent market stability that lay the
groundwork for a subsequent boom and collapse. As returns achieve an
ever-longer record of stability and therefore apparent robustness,
growing confidence in this robustness swells market appetite for risk
such that lower and lower cushions of safety are built into the financing
models used by investors in assessing investment in a particular asset
and the financial institutions that lend to them. Lending structures
evolve from what Minsky labels hedge finance, through speculative
finance, and into Ponzi finance (the latter, ultimate stage of development
bearing the same name derived from a world-famous “pyramid
scheme” peddler that Shiller later uses in his own explanation of
naturally-occurring bubbles).
In hedge finance, it is presumed that successful repayment of the debt
in question is possible simply on the basis of the future cashflows to be
obtained from the asset it is funding, and the quantity of debt offered
is based on prudent and conservative estimates of these likely future
cashflows. In speculative finance there is an acknowledgement that
cashflows attached to the asset may not be after all be sufficient to repay
existing debt as already agreed at some points in time, but also a
presumption that if such occasions do indeed arise, refinancing will be
available in the market because the eventual value of all receipts will
indeed support this level of debt, only now paid back over a longer
period. In Ponzi finance, any semblance of safety in the financing
structure is foregone, with the simple presumptions both that the debt
assumed will definitely need to be rolled over due to inadequacy of near-
4 Minsky, Hyman P., Stabilizing An Unstable Economy, (McGraw-Hil, 2008), p134.

Petromania
178
term receipts from the asset, and also that refinancing will nevertheless
be available at the requisite moment because the asset price in question
will meanwhile have appreciated in value. 
In the end it seems inevitable that the Ponzi financing will evolve to
a stage where even the slightest perturbation in underlying asset price
– even the most minimal shift generated by a random walk model of
market price movement – will be sufficient at some point to render the
terms of the next pending refinancing finally and fatally unattractive to
those as-yet uninvested in the asset. Ponzi financing cannot bear the
first hint of strain on its structural presumptions. As with a pyramid
scheme, the first gap in the virtuous circle of investment driving prices
higher and so itself encouraging profit expectations in the next wave of
investors quickly expands into a yawning chasm. Suddenly there are
no takers for the asset at ever-higher prices – that perennial supply of
“greater fools” has at last dried up. At this point all the feedback
mechanisms that have inflated the bubble kick into reverse, fuelling not
rapid price appreciation but precipitous price decline. Thus stability has
finally bred its own destruction, regardless of any required critical mass
of external stimuli. Depending on the particular stage in market
evolution from hedge, through speculative, to Ponzi financing, the same
asset price move that might spin the latter into crisis might not disturb
a hedge financing structure at all. But given the tendency of all markets
to gravitate toward Ponzi financing, instances of explosive asset price
appreciation and equally rapid price contraction are a question of when,
not if.
We have of course seen these sorts of negative feedback effects
throughout the unfolding of the credit crunch, with crises such as the
run by depositors on the Northern Rock mortgage lending bank in the
UK which led to its state takeover (the first such bank run in the country
for more than a century). Another example would be the mass

deleveraging by margin call-plagued hedge funds from late 2007
onwards, which saw the prices of supposedly “good” assets take a near-
indiscriminate hammering alongside obviously “toxic” assets. This in
particular revealed just how much of the preceding generalised asset
price boom was dependent on ever higher and higher levels of leverage,
ever increasing quantities of borrowed money, and ever tighter margins
of viability on that debt compared to the range of outcomes reality
might throw at the presumptions underpinning the financing. The last
days of the housing boom that afflicted so many developed world
economies (particularly the US, UK, Spain, and Ireland), and brought
us the sub-prime mortgage debacle, was a prime example of Ponzi
finance at work. 
The lesson from Minsky and contemporary proponents of his theories
such as George Cooper is that asset markets do not simply stabilise
themselves at an equilibrium appropriate to the external environment,
but rather have an inbuilt structural tendency to inflate beyond the
pricing levels fundamentally appropriate to that environment, even in
the absence of significant external stimuli. The result of the overshoot
can be an asset price bubble which, crucially, contains within itself the
seeds of its own reversal – and on the way back down, the structurally-
determined overshoot can tend towards recession or even the Keynesian
“liquidity trap” of outright depression. Crucially, overshoot in either
direction can continue for a very long time, but nevertheless, due to the
unstable foundation on which it is ultimately based, it is liable to reverse
at practically any point and will with time eventually inevitably collapse
into its opposite trend. 
These periodic reversals from market expansion to contraction or vice
versa are those “Minsky moments” you may well have been hearing so
much about in recent media discourse. For example, in the
expansionary bubble scenario that is our main concern, a continual
A Bubble by Any Other Name
179

180
Petromania
ratcheting-up of market values beyond the appropriate valuation trend
actually justified by each positive piece of news increases the chances
that the next time a piece of negative news comes along it may well
expose the magnitude of this widening mismatch. As seen, it is in fact
a symptom of bubbles that the next piece of bad news signalling this
mismatch may well be ignored, and so indeed may the one after that
and so on. But there always remains world enough and time for a
particular piece of bad news to eventually be noted and acted upon by
a particular market participant, and then the snowballing feedback
effect has an opportunity to take hold in the reverse direction. When it
does, that is the Minsky moment. 
5.4 The Pathology of Bubbles
While recognising the force of these theories allows us to say asset price
bubbles are real as opposed to simply a label for market developments
we happen to be caught on the wrong side of, nevertheless we are left
with the problem that bedevilled Alan Greenspan. As George Cooper
describes, bubbles are very hard to definitively label as such in explicitly
economic terms whilst they are being inflated. This is precisely because
the feedback effects which amplify market movement into unwarranted
price inflation or deflation are transmitted from one key indicator to
another to create a largely convincing picture of a market in optimal
equilibrium, rather than precarious instability constantly teetering on
the possibility of trend reversal. 
In the case of mark-to-market accounting, gains in the market
valuation of assets posted by investing institutions as collateral against
loans used to buy those same or other assets seemed to justify further
extensions of credit by lenders to these investment institutions. In turn,
these fresh infusions of borrowed money into the asset market raised the

181
A Bubble by Any Other Name
upward pressure on price-setting equilibria, leading to higher market
valuations and another increase in borrowing capacity. Each expansion
in leverage is theoretically caused only by an appropriate increase in
notional asset values, so if you were trying to spot a bubble prior to it
bursting by measuring growing investor overexposure in terms of debt
to asset value, you could well be wasting your time. After the bubble
bursting, of course, the newly-revealed value of the assets does indeed
look far too small to support the leverage extended on their basis – but,
by then, it is too late. 
Feedback transmission channels are not, however, limited to the sort
of debt leverage “force multipliers” of marked-to-market asset collateral
or margin calls. Robert Shiller also identifies prevailing media discourses
as a major reinforcer of irrationally bullish market sentiment. These
discourses relate to each price movement through an explanatory prism
of pre-conceived and largely untested notions regarding how the
particular market is going to develop in the future, which Shiller labels
as ‘New Era’ thinking. An example would be the dotcom era ideology
that real world profits no longer mattered as long as you could show
enough sales growth to justify an ever-higher stock market valuation,
which would in turn allow you to raise the next round of equity needed
to tide the company over until real profitability finally appeared – if it
ever did.
Psychologically, the constant repetition in the media of such
overarching narratives creates an environment in which lenders get
more and more comfortable with the idea that the apparent equilibrium
exhibited in the expansionary trend is indeed deeply entrenched, so they
worry less about potential risk and relax their standards. In short, they
get sloppy. Would that we had the correct instrumentation at our
disposal, the degree of this lender sloppiness is no doubt as revealing
with regard to the length of time for which a particular investment trend

has been flavour of the month as the half-life of carbon-14 is with
regard to the age of dead organic matter. 
Nevertheless, the tendency for bubbles to inflate through parallel and
mutually reinforcing market indicators means that, in spotting bubbles
in advance, we must rely on less purely theoretical but more behavioural
or pathological patterns. In this respect we can quote a useful summary
from veteran financial journalist Robert Teitelman:
Bubbles are assets that are inflated to such a degree that we heave the anchor
on intrinsic value and sail merrily into speculative fantasy. Asset bubbles
show a precipitous spike as the mania takes hold. Asset bubbles are driven
higher as speculative types pay attention only to each other, not to the world
outside. Asset prices spiral. Bubbles typically display a feverish, frantic,
divorced-from-reality mentality that increases as time moves on – until the
sudden break and collapse.
Teitelman goes on to distinguish the concept of a “bubble” from far
more generic miscalculations or misreadings of markets sometimes
labelled as such, mistakes of the sort that wreck countless real
businesses in the day-to-day vicissitudes of enterprise but which in
themselves don’t justify the label. ‘A bubble,’ he argues, ‘is a deeper,
narrower phenomenon that represents not the foul-ups of senior
managers but the descent of an entire market into a self-fulfilling and
self-reinforcing daydream. The dotcoms were part of a bubble; so were
sub-prime mortgages.’ Writing in May 2008, Teitelman was referring to
the two most recent obvious bubbles at that time, but, in fact, another
one was being inflated in the oil markets, even as he penned these
words. 
The oil price spike of 2008 displays all of the key markers of the
pathology of bubbles described above. Feedback loops are present in
force. Examples include the tendency of large chunks of long-only,
Petromania
182

passive index investment in the OTC derivative market to add upward
pressure to prices on the Nymex market itself; thereby seeming to justify
fresh waves of new investment into the index structures, which then
again need to be matched by long hedges on the Nymex, once more
raising prices. Or within the Nymex exchange itself, the fact that
investment at one portion of the futures curve can drag the price in
another portion of the curve up or down, which may trigger yet more
latent stop orders beyond the original point of price action, which lead
to their own rallies in turn. 
The feedback loops inherent in the dynamics of leverage and mark-
to-market accounting, explored so thoroughly by Minsky and Cooper,
are of course central to the very functioning of a futures market which
settles trades financially on margin accounts. Obvious examples of the
sort of ‘New Era’ thinking described by Shiller include the “commodity
super-cycle” presumptions and the peak oil narrative. We have already
seen how the media word count of several such memes increased
through the first half of 2008. Through this period the oil price bubble
clearly displayed many moments when price developments were
obviously at odds with a fundamental account of underlying supply
and demand – or as Teitelman’s pathological focus might put it,
investors in the oil price were not paying attention to the world outside
and were divorced from reality, venturing into a self-fulfilling, self-
reinforcing daydream. 
With regard to how the pricing trend reversed, there are indications
that it could simply have been due to the eventual exhaustion of
investment appetite for ever-higher oil prices. As suggested in the
newspaper report above – which referenced investor ‘stomach’ for ever-
higher oil prices – what might have happened, in other words, was
precisely the sort of exhaustion of “greater fools” that signals the
collapse of a Ponzi financing scheme, rather than any noteworthy real-
A Bubble by Any Other Name
183

184
Petromania
world development. Ironically, Ed Morse and his team at Lehman lost
their jobs right in the middle of the oil price crash that vindicated their
whole stance on the market, as their bank collapsed in its own sub-
prime mortgage Ponzi financing meltdown. Very soon afterwards, Dr
Morse and Lehman colleague Daniel Ahn were employed anew by
broker LCM Commodities, under which aegis they have since published
research indicating that from the end of May 2008 onwards there was
indeed a series of weeks seeing significant net withdrawals of index
investment from the futures market, which Ed Morse himself puts down
to ‘rebalancing’. For instance, see LCM Commodities research note
entitled “South by Southeast” dated March 19 2009 for a graph
showing estimated crude oil futures index investment-related flows,
clearly showing that the massive outflows which came to characterise
the second half of 2008 actually started in earnest from June 2008
onwards, in other words before the crude oil price had actually peaked.
Rebalancing is an idea we shall examine presently, but this evidence
essentially reinforces the picture that just after the madness of May,
there was indeed a cooling of investment ardour towards the oil price.
That notional next wave of new investors perhaps did not quite match
up to what had gone before in terms of appetite, and from that point
on the oil price was wobbling. It probably did not take much to bid it
up further to $147, yet by the same token it probably did not take much
either to tip it into the “negative bubble” that was always going to end
this expansion. This feeds into another marker of speculative bubble
pathology – the fact that, under the instability theories described above,
the market correction to the bubble in question is as likely to overshoot
to the downside as the bubble has overshot on the way up, particularly
given the leveraged, mark-to-market structures much financial
speculation is funnelled through. 

When the oil price collapsed, it did not collapse back to levels which
many $100-plus sceptics themselves would have thought reasonable –
perhaps the $60-80 per barrel range – but instead dropped past these
prices by a long way. That the price sunk to levels far below reasonable
can be seen in the fact that oil gained some $10 per barrel in exiting its
trough between Christmas 2008 and the start of 2009: roughly a 30%
gain in two weeks, from prices which have not since been revisited. The
$34 per barrel oil was fetching around Christmas was clearly as
unrealistic as the $147 it had fetched in early July. But speculative
bubbles may, after all, overshoot on the way down as well as on the
way up. And in regard to the severe rebalancing, manifested in this
sudden lack of appetite, there remains another loose end to tie-up. 
Readers may have wondered why more has not been made of the
graph presented earlier in the book, which plotted the growth of the
oil price alongside the explosion in Nymex open interest from 2000
through to the end of 2008 (Figure 5). Clearly the period that saw a
rapid oil price ramp-up also saw a rapid ramp-up in open interest in the
Nymex oil futures curve. Why do we not simply say that here is yet
more proof that the increase in paper barrels was driving the oil price?
In truth, some have. Roger Diwan of PFC Energy, for one, calculated
an R-squared of 81.5% for the statistical measure of correlation
between movement in the oil price and the growth of open interest on
Nymex in 2003-2006. In other words, 81.5% of the movement in the
oil price could be “explained”, in statistical terms, by movement in
Nymex open interest through this period. 
There are problems, however, with asserting this kind of simplistic
relationship between the oil price and reported Nymex open interest.
For a start, Diwan also found a much lower R-squared, of just 30.8%,
emerging for correlation between open interest and the oil price across
A Bubble by Any Other Name
185

2006-2008. While both indeed eventually did end up some 50% higher
at the end of this period than at its start, the noticeable drop in the oil
price toward the end of 2006, even as open interest rose, shreds the
correlation across this whole period. Beyond this observation, in
statistical jargon there is the general problem of calculating an R-
squared across two trending sets of data – i.e. two sets of data where
there may be an inbuilt bias toward expansion regardless of their
relationship to each other (for example, growth in trade on a market
from its inception, or growth in a commodity price that will necessarily
trend upward over time with inflation). My friend and econometrically-
learned colleague Chris Dillow, for example, notes how a high
R-squared can be calculated between growing US national debt in the
1980s and deaths from AIDS through the same period – but are we
really meant to believe this proves some sort of causal link between the
two?
We cannot simply say that rising open interest equals rising oil prices,
and vice versa. Sometimes a significant linkage may appear, other times
it will not. And this should be obvious, given something we have already
touched on earlier – the additive rules of open interest. The prices of
futures are determined by the movement of trading volumes at various
points along the curve – which, as we have seen, is not the same as the
open interest left extant after this trading. And this is in turn a key point
to bear in mind when considering an objection sometimes made against
assertions that speculative interest blew the oil price bubble. This line
of argument runs thus: if a massive weight of speculative interest piling
into oil futures supposedly caused prices to rocket, why then when the
oil price later collapsed did the exit of all these speculative players not
make more impact on open interest? As Figure 5 shows, this actually
stayed roughly level or even grew at times as prices tumbled. It is the
additive rules of open interest at work again. Even if there was a frantic
Petromania
186

sell-off on the part of speculative investors working to push prices down
through the negative bubble effect, open interest would only decline if
the same players who originally sold future oil at triple-digit-plus prices
to these speculators were liquidating their positions at the same time.
But why would they, when plunging prices meant these positions were
getting more valuable every moment? Open interest can remain the
same, even as previous long speculators herd out of the oil price en
masse, if the market participants buying them out of their positions are
not the original sellers also offsetting, but new players tempted into
these positions by the latest price drop. And indeed, newspaper market
reports from the period support this view with anecdotal evidence,
noting how, in the early weeks of crude’s plunge, sellers of oil at high
prices were content to sit on growing gains, forcing long liquidation to
pass through a narrower channel of available buying interest than
would otherwise be the case. All of which, of course, would work only
to increase the price drops with each round of liquidation.
5.5 Inside the Bubble
The oil price blow-out of summer 2008 undoubtedly looks like a
speculative bubble from many angles. We see the price behaviour
exhibited over time uncannily matching that witnessed in the notorious
dotcom blow-out. We see a patent lack of support from physical market
fundamentals, which should have been apparent from early in 2008.
We see a well-documented explosion of speculative financial investor
interest in commodities in general and the oil price in particular in
recent years. We see obvious mechanisms to transmit this generally
long-only interest directly to the futures market-determined global
benchmark oil price itself; and a wealth of “feedback loop”
amplification effects, both psychological and structural, obviously
A Bubble by Any Other Name
187

reinforcing this momentum. And lastly we see the resulting price
overshoot of the Nymex oil market itself, both on the way up and the
way down.
The arguments supporting the view that speculative activity was
instrumental in oil prices peaking at over $140 per barrel in July 2008
should now be clear. Which class of market participant drove the
speculative bubble in oil prices that peaked in summer 2008 – the hedge
funds simply looking to maximise short term returns, the “dumb
money” piling into long-only commodity index investing as a long-term
proposition, or more sophisticated investors likewise exerting influence
via the OTC hedge but nevertheless exploring deeper into the maturity
curve? The correct answer is, without doubt, all of the above.
Petromania
188
Front-
month
Nymex
WTI
contract -
the global
“oil
price”
Longest
-dated
contract
FUTURES CURVE
Co-integration of prices along length of curve
ON EXCHANGE
OFF EXCHANGE
Genuinely
commercial
oil market
players
SWAP
DEALERS
OTC DERIVATIVE MARKET
Hedge funds
Pension funds
Other institutional
investors
futures contracts
options
single commodity swaps, commodity index
trackers, structured commodity notes, etc
Hedge funds trading
on-exchange/“MMTs”
Floor brokers and traders,
market makers
Spot oil
prices, based
on differentials
to front-month
Nymex WTI
Figure 11: Forces bearing on oil price formation in the Nymex futures market

Figure 11 is a simple schematic visualising the wide spread of
speculative financing interest feeding into price determination alongside
genuine physical market considerations.
Yet any account focusing on speculative interest as the main driver
behind the oil price in summer 2008 must answer some questions of its
own, and address the issue of how to square this conclusion with
evidence offered to the contrary, from a variety of sources, which
supports rival accounts. The two major points that must be dealt with
and fitted into any account of the price blow-out which seeks to hold
water are:
•
Firstly, the diesel fundamentalist argument asserting that it was
a genuine and fundamentals-based squeeze on the light sweet
segment of the crude market which ramped prices up. This
view must be taken seriously because of the indubitable blow-
out in middle distillate crack spreads over summer 2008, which
accompanied the more obvious crude price spike; a pairing
which would indeed normally indicate fundamental shortage in
the market.
•
Secondly, the assertion that academic studies, particularly those
under the auspices of the CFTC with its enhanced access to
Nymex trading data, prove that speculative interest does not
materially affect price formation in the oil futures market. This
view must be taken seriously simply because it is still repeated
by many, even after the US regulator itself has had to do some
serious trimming and tacking with regard to its own previous
position on the extent of speculative trading in the oil futures
market. 
A key plank of the most convincing argument that oil prices at last
year’s peak were indeed justified on fundamental grounds is the
A Bubble by Any Other Name
189

evidence from the middle distillate crack spread that there was a
shortage of diesel fuel at the time. Advocates of this stance argue that
– as there was no discernible middle distillate stock build in the figures
analysts had access to at the time – this was a genuine shortage. As
such, the obvious cause is a genuine shortage of light sweet crude to
produce diesel from.
But we have already seen how Chinese hoarding due to earthquake
relief and Olympic preparations is a very plausible candidate for
artificially giving the appearance of an undersupplied diesel market in
May and June 2008. So yes, for some weeks through this period at least,
the market was receiving signals which seemed to indicate a fundamental
shortage of diesel and therefore of light sweet crude. But no, this apparent
shortage was not fundamental at all and had, as with any other apparent
shortage not based on fundamentals, its own accompanying stock build
somewhere around the world, only this one did not show up clearly on
the usual radar because of its Chinese provenance. 
This Chinese stock-build, however, became more noticeable to many
as it was unwound following the Olympics and pressure on the middle
distillate segment of the market was relieved, with a notable drop in
crack spreads from June 2008 into autumn. Interviewed in May 2009,
even Jeff Currie of Goldman Sachs acknowledged China as a factor in
‘some hoarding’ he now admits was indeed going on through the oil
price peak. Although he is reluctant to give it a starring role, Currie
says of Chinese diesel hoarding in particular: ‘That was going on, but
at the time we thought it was pretty small. Now we have data to look
back on, we can see that it wasn’t big, but it was bigger than we
thought.’ Other oil sector experts such as Ed Morse, Leo Drollas of the
Centre for Global Energy Studies (CGES), and Stephen Schork,
however, disagree. As far as they are concerned, the Chinese hoarding
did indeed make a significant difference to the wider market perception
Petromania
190

of middle distillate market balance, whereas it should have been
recognised as a temporary aberration. 
Moreover, the whole thesis of a diesel squeeze justifying a structural,
long-term shift in light sweet crude oil demand, and therefore the global
benchmark oil price, fails in the face of another key consideration.
Everyone knows there is a whole swathe of new refining capacity
coming onstream in the next year or two, concentrated particularly in
China and India, which is specifically configured to crack diesel out of
heavier, sourer crudes. It is this prospect, coupled with the reduction in
global demand we are now experiencing, but which was also clearly
emerging through 2008, that has now seen middle distillate crack
spreads recently mark fresh lows since their peak last summer. 
Overall, it has to be conceded that the particular conditions of diesel
demand on the ground for a couple of months in summer 2008 were real
enough, and that in this diesel squeeze we can also see evidential
justification for Dr Philip Verleger’s concern about the US government
hoarding of light sweet crude in its Strategic Petroleum Reserve.  But it
must also be recognised that this diesel squeeze was a brief and passing
phenomenon. While on fundamental terms it might justifiably have
added some dollars to the oil price through May or June 2008, it did not
justify the oil price getting to the levels it had already reached by that
point. The diesel squeeze was essentially a thin layer of fundamental icing
on a large speculative cake being baked in the Nymex oil market in early
summer 2008, and it by no means rebuts the case that speculative finance
was the major driving force in reaching triple-digit oil.
A priori, any statistical study attempting to measure speculative
influence on the oil price by using simply the traditional CFTC split
between its own definitions of “commercial” and “non-commercial”
market participants is invalid – simply and obviously because of the
A Bubble by Any Other Name
191

swap dealer loophole that allows speculative financial interest in the oil
price to be hedged on Nymex under the “commercial” cover. At a
stroke this rules out a whole slew of previous studies, including those
pre-2008 studies conducted under CFTC auspices which were
repeatedly referred to by regulatory officials like Walt Lukken in
rejecting the suggestion that financial speculation was driving high
prices. But don’t just take my word for it – no less august a body than
the United States’ own Government Accountability Office (GAO)
reached much the same conclusion in a briefing entitled Issues Involving
the Use of the Futures Markets to Invest in Commodity Indexes
prepared for the US Congress and released at the start of 2009. 
Commenting on a selection of studies it had reviewed, the briefing
notes: ‘Four of the studies used CFTC’s publicly available Commitments
of Traders (COT) data in their analysis, and their findings should not
be viewed as definitive because of limitations in that data… these data
generally aggregate positions held by different groups of traders and,
thus, do not allow the effect of individual trader group positions on
prices to be assessed.’ The same briefing also goes on to mention two
other reports prepared with non-public CFTC data. These are the same
two reports the CFTC released from summer into autumn 2008 – the
Interim Report on Crude Oil released in July ’08, conducted by the
Interagency Task Force on Commodity Markets set up and chaired by
the CFTC, and the Staff Report on Commodity Swap Dealers & Index
Traders, which the CFTC released in September. 
The GAO briefing itself notes that as these two studies found no
evidence of speculative trading materially affecting oil prices, this would
be its own provisional view as well. The findings of these two studies
themselves are, however, open to question on several grounds.
Petromania
192

5.6 What the Studies Do and Do Not Say
The Interim Report on Crude Oil
The Interim Report on Crude Oil released by the Interagency Task
Force on July 22 2008 actually marked the first emergence of detailed
data on the Nymex trading positions of specific types of market
participant that would subsequently appear in a CFTC report released
in December 2008. This latter CFTC report, entitled Fundamentals,
Trader Activity and Derivative Pricing and authored by Büyüksahin,
Haigh, Harris, Overdahl and Robe, is itself not directly concerned with
the effect of speculative investment on the oil price. It is instead an
updated version of the February 2007 CFTC study already mentioned
(and written by the latter four of the five authors above), which
established that there was increasing co-integration between the nearby
and farther-dated portions of the futures curve and fingered swap dealer
activity as the major cause of this phenomenon. 
Whereas the February 2007 co-integration study compared 2000 and
2006, the dataset as presented in the late 2008 update is split between
2000, 2004, and 2008, and is the basis of the figures presented earlier
in this book to show the true extent of potential speculative interest on
Nymex compared to what is implied by the traditional CFTC
distinction between commercial and non-commercial. The Interagency
Task Force indicates in a footnote that it has taken its data from the
then-pending 2008 update on the co-integration study. However, as it
presents figures for every year from 2003 to 2008, the underlying
dataset must be more than the 2000-2004-2008 snapshots presented
in the 2008 co-integration update as released. Regardless, the Task
Force took this data and then analysed it in a different way to reach its
A Bubble by Any Other Name
193

own verdict on the matter of whether or not speculative interest
materially shaped oil prices on Nymex.
In line with previous CFTC pronouncements, the Task Force found
that ‘the activity of market participants often described as “speculators”
has not resulted in systematic changes in price’ – so no surprise there.
Yet despite itself, this report still contained some eye-opening
information for those wondering at the scale of potential speculative
weight on the market. For whatever reason, the Interagency Task Force
did not actually present the data in terms of tabulated hard numbers (as
the update to the co-integration study would do in December 2008).
Instead it produced blocky, 3D-effect bar charts to show open interest
for each category of market participant, very hard to measure against
the sparsely scaled and strangely offset vertical axis it also used. As a
result, scrutinising the report graphics, it is impossible to say exactly
where in the space between 750,000 contracts and 1 million contracts
the average open interest on the market held by swap dealers in the first
half of 2008 falls. It looks, however, to be somewhere around 900,000
(as already seen, the table in the subsequent co-integration update, used
for the charts earlier in this book, puts the figure at 947,952).
Even the unhelpful presentation format used in the Task Force report
could not, however, hide the fact that swap dealers held three times the
volume of contracts held by the next-largest “commercial” market
participant, the physical oil traders, with actual oil producers and fuel
refiners negligible in comparison. And it was also clear that adding in
another 750,000 or so contracts from the hedge funds and floor traders
detailed in a separate graphic for “non-commercial” participants meant
the total potential speculative weight on the market in early 2008
appeared to be near enough seven times that of the unquestionably
commercial market participants. (In actuality, the same 85/15 split seen
in the chart earlier in this book.) And newspaper reports following on
Petromania
194

from the release of the report would indeed focus on how speculators
appeared to hold 80% of the market, far more than previously presumed.
As well as confirming the predominance of swap dealers, the Task
Force report also revealed that since 2004, the net exposure of all swap
dealers trading on Nymex had been on the long side, i.e. as a distinct
group of market participants they were net buyers of oil – although this
net weight on the long side had declined markedly since 2006. Despite
all this, however, the Task Force report said that it had performed
batteries of statistical tests to establish whether or not trading by these
different classes of market participant could be seen to cause movement
in oil prices. Its conclusion was that neither the officially non-
commercial players (including hedge funds), nor the swap dealers
considered as a group in themselves, could be seen as leading price
changes by their own positioning of volumes in the market, but that
these traders followed on the heels of movement by genuinely
commercial market players. 
But this was qualified: ‘While these statistical tests present the most
complete examination to date of the relation between position changes
and price changes, they – like all statistical tests – have some limitations.
First, the analysis was performed for trader groups rather than
individual traders. Consequently, these tests would not be able to detect
if the positions of some traders within a trading category have much
greater influence over prices than the positions of other traders in that
category. Second, the tests utilise end of day position data. Thus, the
tests may not capture any intraday position-price relationships. Finally,
the tests were performed on aggregated net position changes in the
nearby contracts alone (defining nearby as the futures contract with the
largest open interest). As a result, the tests do not reflect a systematic
effect of position changes at different maturities on either the prices of
the nearby futures contract or on the whole term structure of futures
prices.’
A Bubble by Any Other Name
195

We could therefore pick holes in the Task Force conclusions on all of
the grounds above; these indeed being real issues, any one of which
might upset the tentative conclusion. But perhaps the admitted focus
that these causality tests had on the front end of the curve is the most
striking, given the evidence already suggesting that nearby prices can
move in sympathy with longer-dated prices. It therefore could well be
actually along the further reaches of the curve that a particular instance
of pricing pressure in any direction from speculative market participants
originates, rather than right at the front end of the curve, where instead
the price might be moved by more commercial players responding to
what they see going on further out the curve. Even on its own terms,
then, the Interagency Task Force Interim Report on Crude Oil from
July 2008 leaves no little room for legitimate questioning of the
conclusion it drew.
The CFTC Staff Report
Compared to the two months the Interagency Task Force had from its
inception by the CFTC to its first and thus far only report being issued,
the in-house CFTC Staff Report on Commodity Swap Dealers & Index
Traders (the Staff Report) which was released in September 2008 had
a significantly longer gestation period. (Not least because it was to be
an opinion reached on data that had only been requested in May 2008.)
Strikingly, however, it is quite hard to actually determine any definite
conclusion made regarding the effects of speculation. It is presented as
a summation of data received from the “special call” for swap dealer
trading information, and then a list of recommendations regarding how
the CFTC should modify its regular data collection and presentations,
without much significant reference to whether or not the information
unearthed in the “special call” proved or disproved arguments
regarding speculative pressure in the market.
Petromania
196

Yet the Staff Report is nevertheless cited by some, including the GAO,
as helping establish that speculative pressure does not lead oil pricing
on Nymex. Why? The answer is in its presentation of one particular
segment of data, returned by the special call, regarding the volume of
long exposure to the oil price it calculates as being held by swap dealers
due to commodity index investment. The report finds that while the net
notional value of long-only commodity index investment in crude oil
futures rose from $39 billion at the start of 2008, to $51 billion by end-
June 2008, this was due simply to the value-at-stake in contracts rising
as the oil price itself rose. However, in terms of volume of contracts
bought in expectation of the oil price rising, the Staff Report finds that
long positions associated with commodity index investment actually
declined through the first half of 2008. 
In other words, some measure of commodity index investment was
actually being reversed out of Nymex even as the oil price was soaring
toward its peak. The implication is therefore that commodity index
investment cannot be responsible for the oil price breakout if it declines
through the same period. Herein is the basis on which this particular
report is seen to deny the speculative case. Dealing with this inference
requires a closer look at the data – which says that while the oil price
was $96 per barrel on December 31 2007, as index investment
accounting for the long side of 408,000 Nymex contracts, by March 31
2008 the oil price was $102 per barrel but long index interest would
have been some 398,000 contracts; and by June 30 2008 the oil price
was $140 per barrel while long index interest would have been 363,000
contracts.
It is true, then, that as the report states, ‘Measured in standardised
futures contract equivalents, the aggregate long positions of commodity
index participants in Nymex crude oil declined by approximately
45,000 contracts during this 6 month period – from approximately
A Bubble by Any Other Name
197

408,000 contracts on December 31 2007, to approximately 363,000
contracts on June 30 2008. This amounts to approximately an 11%
decline.’ Yet there is another way of putting this. That 11% decline was
not evenly spread over the six months in question, but concentrated
from March 31 2008 onwards. Up to that date, only 10,000 contracts
were liquidated, just over 2% of the supposed index interest from end-
December 2007. 
It is actually between end-March and end-June 2008 that the rest,
almost four-fifths, of the 11% decline comes, with 35,000 contracts
being liquidated. This timing is important, because when seen as a
phenomenon overwhelmingly concentrated in the second rather than
the first quarter of 2008, this reduction in long index investment is
exactly what you would expect to see on the part of speculative
investors profiting on a roaring oil price – it is evidence of
“rebalancing”. Rebalancing is a very simple concept and practically
universal across professional investors. It simply means that when an
investment is particularly successful, over time an investor will trim
their position in it both to realise profits and also control risks. 
For an extremely simplified example, imagine you had put $1000 into
oil at the end of December 2007. By the end of March 2008, with oil
having gained 6.25% from $96 to $102 per barrel, let’s unrealistically
imagine (i.e. without transaction costs or other forms of dissipative
“friction”!) that our own investment has gained the same, and is now
$1062.5. So far, so good – our investment has risen in value. Not so
spectacularly, however, that we feel obliged to do anything other than
let it run on. By the end of June 2008, however, oil is $140 per barrel,
now up 40% year-to-date. Likewise, our original $1000 is now $1400
– which is great, but presents its own, albeit agreeable, “problem”. This
problem relates to exposure to a single asset, in this case oil. After all,
Petromania
198

it is not just our profit that has grown 40%, but also our exposure to
oil itself. Considering we were originally happy with just $1000 of
exposure to oil, perhaps we are now concerned with leaving too much
capital, almost half our original stake again, at risk to future oil price
performance. 
Rebalancing is the answer. Selling out of some of the notably
successful investment realises profits now, and importantly for fund
managers and other institutional investors also locks in at least some
measure of positive performance on the investment to date, while also
reducing the exposure to the particular asset back towards where it
started out originally. Whether or not the rebalancing goes right back
to the original level of investment, and at what levels of gain and over
what timeframe it is carried out, are all real world considerations with
an infinity of permutations depending on who the investor is. But it is
easy enough to see that while there would be no great incentive for
investors in oil to rebalance a position held over end-December 2007 to
end-March 2008, by the time the end of the second quarter approached
in June ’08 there would be a lot of incentive for rebalancing.
Looking at the dates and figures quoted in the Staff Report, there is
no further information to be had between the end of March and the
end of June 2008. We simply don’t know at which point in this
timeframe the bulk of the index position liquidation in question
occurred. So it would be as valid a statement as that made in the report
(namely, that in the six months leading up to the peak of the oil price,
long index positions on the Nymex exchange declined 11%), to say
instead that the evidence equally plausibly supports another
interpretation. It might instead back up the view that index investors
could have held onto some 98% of their end-December 2007 positions
right up until the last weeks of June, only then liquidating another 9%
A Bubble by Any Other Name
199

of end-December holdings just in time to lock in profits for first half
reporting, and only after oil was close to $140.
In behavioural terms, this is exactly what might be expected of such
investors. And there is a big difference between this latter scenario and
the tenor of the Staff Report. In the first, these liquidating index
investors are still in the game until late June, when there is only a
fortnight and some $7 to go before oil reaches its peak; but the
implication in the Staff Report wording is that these index investors
were systematically disinvesting throughout the first half of 2008, and
were therefore unlikely drivers of oil towards its peak. As with so much
else in this story, the truth no doubt lies somewhere in between – but
again, as with so much else in this story, with the information available
at this point we simply do not know for sure. Dr Ed Morse, for one,
certainly feels that rebalancing by investors was evident after the
remarkable weeks of May 2008, a month in which oil not only clocked
up some of its strongest gains (in dollar terms) through 2008 but also
punched through both the $120 and $130 per barrel thresholds for the
first time.
5.7 The Dissenting Commissioner
Both the Interim Report on Crude Oil and the CFTC Staff Report on
Commodity Swap Dealers make statements dismissive of the idea that
speculative investment has a material role in determining oil prices
which, upon examination, are questionable themselves. There is,
however, another important consideration to bear in mind when
weighing their contribution to the debate. This is simply that one of the
CFTC’s own commissioners involved in the preparation of both reports
took the unprecedented step of issuing a public dissent from these
findings, on the basis that he did not feel the data justified such a
Petromania
200

determination, as well as to express his concern at how such categorical
statements were being made without what he regarded as sufficient
evidential support.
Included as Appendix G to the Staff Report is the “Commissioner
Bart Chilton Dissent”, in which the eponymous CFTC staffer writes:
I have significant concerns relating to the underlying analysis on which the
recommendations are based. Specifically, I express doubts regarding the
amount and type of data received in connection with the special call survey,
the nature of the analysis, and I have a fundamental disagreement with
certain conclusions underlying the Commission’s recommendations. I am
concerned that, while I believe the staff did a tremendous amount of work
in a short period of time, the agency may not have received the type of
comprehensive datasets needed to make reliable analyses and conclusions.
It is my understanding that staff have been in the process of receiving data
within just the last few weeks, making an extremely short turn-around time
for processing and analyzing this exceedingly complex issue. Most
importantly, I regret that certain conclusions may underlie these
recommendations regarding the causality link between index traders and
price movements, particularly in the crude oil market, and that these
conclusions that do not appear necessarily to be ineluctably linked to the
data received. Absent compelling evidence, I believe that the most
responsible course of action is to refrain from making conclusions or
declarative statements based upon such limited and unreliable data.
While Chilton’s dissent is included as part of the Staff Report, in the
same statement he also undermines the conclusions reached in the
earlier Interim Report on Crude Oil released by the CFTC-directed
Interagency Task Force, already discussed above:
A Bubble by Any Other Name
201

The Interagency Task Force released an Interim Report on July 22 [2008]
that contained statements about speculative activity in the oil markets.
Those statements were at best premature given that key information, such
as the type of data on which the CFTC bases its instant recommendations,
was not available for analysis by the Interagency Task Force. As noted, the
reliability of the data and the conclusions of the staff’s analysis cause
concern that, should the Interagency Task Force Final Report rely on that
analysis and review, its findings and conclusions will be similarly tainted. 
In summary, then, none of the reports depended on by those claiming
the CFTC proved that speculation does not play an important role in
determining the oil price, have actually proved any such thing. Studies
that rely simply on the traditional CFTC CoT distinction between
“commercial” and “non-commercial” traders are disqualified by virtue
of failing to pick up on the swap dealer loophole. Lest this ruling-out
of much previous work conducted around this issue, particularly by the
CFTC, be thought highly convenient for those pushing the argument
that speculation looms large in the events of last year, it also rules out
at least one other study which supports the idea that speculative
investors can move oil prices, conducted by an academic outside the
CFTC (see bibliography and source list for details). But sauce for the
goose is sauce for the gander. 
The two studies that move beyond the traditional CoT distinction to
examine the trading patterns of more specific groups of market
participants, including swap dealers, were both conducted under CFTC
direction and both not only fail to convince in ruling-out speculation as
a major influence on oil prices but are also undermined by one of the
regulator’s own officials taking the highly unusual step of drawing
public attention to their multiple deficiencies. Meanwhile, neither the
Interagency Task Force nor the CFTC itself have since released follow-
up studies to either report. This is particularly striking in the case of
Petromania
202

the Interagency Task Force, which was meant to issue a final report in
December 2008 but has thus far, by summer 2009, failed to come up
with the goods. Whether or not the task force is still active is itself a
moot point. No such follow-up report commitment was explicitly made
by the CFTC with regard to the staff report on swap dealers, but it did
say at the time that its new level of surveillance on swap dealers in
particular would be maintained and that new ways of transmitting this
information to the wider markets should be adopted – as yet, however,
the form of the weekly CoT report remains stubbornly locked in the
traditional outdated definitions of “commercial” and “non-
commercial” participants which fox any accurate knowledge of
speculative weight playing on the market.
The truth is that we have yet to have an authoritative, comprehensive
study analysing the oil futures market in terms of the more detailed
data categorisations the CFTC introduced in these two reports. Yet we
should note that as more and more data emerged over summer 2008,
the balance of probabilities seemed to be moving with those who saw
speculation as a major driver of the market. Everything tended to
support this: from the sheer scale of swap dealer predominance in the
Nymex oil futures trading in general, to the fact that when heavyweight
oil trader Vitol (see later) was reclassified from commercial to non-
commercial on the basis that it was speculating, it was nevertheless
found to be holding more than a tenth of open interest across the curve.
As Commissioner Bart Chilton wrote in his dissent:
In sum, smart people can disagree on this issue. Accordingly, until we have
a comprehensive, unbiased study of this issue, we should not be making
declarative judgments as to causation or effect. That being said, due to the
critical nature of this issue, I believe the American public can no longer wait
for studies or task forces. Given the data that we have received, I believe
A Bubble by Any Other Name
203

there are some appropriate conclusions that can be drawn, and certain
recommendations that should be made. I believe, first and foremost, there
is a great deal of information regarding the over-the counter market that the
agency does not routinely receive and that such information may be
imprecise. This data may have a significant impact on the exchange-traded
markets. Secondly, in my opinion it would also appear that such over-the
counter activity may, at times, have uneconomic effects on prices.
5.8 Darker Portents
The documents described above certainly do not exhaust the list of
academic, official, or quasi-official reports issued with regard to the oil
price spike of 2008. Some were more qualitative in approach, as
opposed to quantitative reports seeking measurable statistical evidence
to support their statements. Among the former, for example, were the
Accidental Hunt Brothers reports produced by Michael Masters (the
first of which, at least, was produced at Congressional behest), which
were in turn monstered so roundly by Dr Philip Verleger, again in more
qualitative than quantitative style. Among the more intriguing overall,
however, were the contributions from Robert McCullough Jr. of
Portland, Oregon-based McCullough Research. These combine both
quantitative and qualitative elements, and emerged from his testimony
regarding the July 2008 oil price spike before the US Senate Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources, on September 16 2008.
It is no surprise that McCullough was present before such a
committee. In a long career he has worked, variously, as a professional
economist, a university economics professor, and a long-time energy
industry executive in roles spanning regulation, operations, finance,
analysis, and strategic planning. As head of McCullough Research he
has appeared before US Congressional and legal court hearings as an
expert witness on energy markets – most notably, perhaps, in relation
Petromania
204

to detecting and describing the illegal market manipulation strategies
used by disgraced and defunct energy company Enron.
It is in this latter regard that his contribution to the oil price spike
debate stands out. As with many of the expert witnesses that testified
on the oil price before US legislators in summer 2008, McCullough feels
that fundamentals signally failed to justify the oil price. As he stated in
his Senate testimony, ‘A careful review of the fundamentals does not
explain why the price of oil increased by 50% in the first six months of
this year [2008] and then fell by 50% in the next three months. Supply
and demand stayed in rough balance over the first nine months of
2008.’  Yet his focus for an alternative explanation was a step beyond
the “financial sector speculative pressure” theories as laid out in detail
through this book. For McCullough found evidence that the same sort
of pricing and trading patterns betraying the power market
manipulation practised by Enron, at the start of this decade, could also
be perceived in the Nymex oil futures market at the height of the
summer 2008 price spike.  
This assertion casts the whole debate about speculation versus
fundamentals in a new light. Throughout this book, while the argument
made has been that speculative investment took over from physical
market fundamentals in determining the all-time high crude price of
July 2008, there has been no suggestion of criminal behaviour. None,
in fact, is necessarily needed. The attempt has been to prove that this is
an all-too-obvious outcome of structural features across both the oil
market itself and a financial institutional investment sector which comes
to this market, in one way or another, seeking high returns. In this sense,
despite the unfavourable outcomes attached to an oil price driven by
speculators – such as galloping inflation, the failure of markets for bona
fide physical hedging, and the immiseration of those suffering fuel
poverty worldwide – there is no group of people to “blame” as
A Bubble by Any Other Name
205

individuals. If McCullough is correct, however, there may well be, after
all, individuals directly culpable for illegally and covertly manipulating
the price of oil futures.
The particular form of market manipulation that McCullough can
arguably see evidence of in the oil futures markets over summer 2008
is referred to as the “spot forward gambit”. Simply put, it involves a
group of traders conspiring to profit from illegal collusion in trading by
orchestrating simultaneous placements of large-volume buy orders in
the spot market. This leads to a jump in price at the front end of the
curve which, thanks to the phenomenon of “curve shift”, the co-
integration between nearby and long-dated price movements, moves
prices up all along the curve. And by selling into this rally from
positions held further along the curve, the colluding traders make more
than they expend on bidding up the spot end of the curve in the first
place. McCullough claims that the pattern of selling exhibited overall
by “non-commercial” parties on the Nymex as the oil price moved
toward its absolute peak echoed patterns exhibited by Enron traders as
they moved to liquidate profits out of their own “spot forward
gambits” years earlier. 
Such tactics only work if the participants have sufficient market power
to be what McCullough labels a ‘pivotal trader’ – that is, a trader whose
market power is such that their own trading operations can swing the
market one way or another regardless of market fundamentals.
McCullough himself has no idea who might actually have been acting
in such a fashion. His conclusions are based on studying the traditional
CoT data recording all “non-commercial” market participants as a
single block. But he does note that the reclassification by the CFTC of
oil trader Vitol from its “commercial” into its “non-commercial”
category in mid-July 2008 revealed the scale of market power that some
individual traders do hold on Nymex. On July 15 2008, Vitol alone
Petromania
206

held more than 10% of positions (by volume) across the Nymex light
sweet crude curve. 
If McCullough is correct, then the oil price spike of 2008 may not
have been just a matter of blind herding by speculative investors in
expectation of ever-higher prices. To a certain extent it could also have
been deliberately engineered by traders large enough to knowingly and
deliberately move the market regardless of fundamentals. We should
be careful, however, about attributing this exact synthesis of arguments
to McCullough himself. As he wrote in email correspondence with this
author, ‘You will notice that I am on the milder range of the conspiracy
theorists in 2008.  We have a good set of data supporting oligopolistic
behavior.  We do not have the supporting data that would cross the line
into conspiracy or deception. The self-serving forecasts of investment
banks with large undisclosed positions are on the edge – a bit like crying
fire in a crowded theatre and then rifling the possessions that the fleeing
theatregoers left behind.’
McCullough notes that arguments attributing a key role to speculative
financial sector interest in ramping-up prices around the end of
June/early July ’08 in particular must somehow explain a curious fact.
The “risk premiums” embodied in long-dated prices along the forward
curve – compared to existing oil price forecasts such as the EIA outlook
– dropped through this period. In his view this is actually at odds with
a picture of investors clamouring to get in at the long end of the curve
(although, as noted above, there is also the possibility that financial
speculators were indeed deleveraging/rebalancing exposures toward the
height of the peak in any case). Nevertheless, he answers his own point
by also noting that this line of argument presumes that such a risk
premium behaves as if reflecting a fixed quantum of volume, to which
sellers of future contract commitments will limit themselves. In fact,
reality can be different: ‘The unsophisticated version of this theory
A Bubble by Any Other Name
207

assumes that forward contracts are like beach property. If everyone
wants beach front, the prices go up, since there is no more tomorrow
than there is today. Forward contracts aren’t limited, however. People
will continue to sell you forward contracts as long as you have money
– and then convene to pick over your bones after you run out of money.’
As for the general concept of a speculative bubble affecting oil prices
through the period leading up to the all-time high in July, McCullough
says in personal correspondence: ‘I am certainly not one to ridicule
bubbles and panics. We see them all the time. I am doubtful about the
sheer scale of the panic last spring [2008] and its sudden deflation. I
was curious enough last August [2008] that I ran the prices for any
number of “announcement effects” and came up with virtually nothing.
In Westerns, the cattle don’t stampede until the cowboys fire their
pistols. Last summer they apparently surged off on their own and then
skidded to an abrupt stop.’ And in the end, McCullough makes the
same point in his September 2008 testimony made by many other
expert witnesses through this tale: that the information at hand is
woefully inadequate to categorically confirm what happened.
As this testimony stated: ‘The events in the oil markets over the past
nine months make it clear that none of these agencies or the nation’s
policy-makers currently have enough information to make informed
decisions… The resemblance of the July 2008 oil price spike to earlier
spot forward gambits is troubling. Even more troubling is that data on
WTI crude spot and forward prices gathered by FERC, the FTC, the
CFTC, and at the EIA is too insufficient to determine whether the price
of oil was manipulated. Even more disturbing, last week’s CFTC report
[the Staff Report on swap dealers] that minimised the effects of
speculation on oil prices, chose to stop its analysis in June, prior to the
price spike.’ In the battle of expert opinion regarding speculative
pressure in the oil market, the CFTC has certainly not had the last
word. 
Petromania
208

5.9 Diagnosis: petromania
In the final analysis, when speaking of visible proof of the speculative
bubble, there is also the graphic trace the oil market left in its
spectacular rise and fall, the chart of price movement over time. While
Teitelman speaks of the ‘precipitous spike’ that marks a speculative
bubble ‘as the mania takes hold’, Shiller meanwhile notes in his
description of the S&P Composite index toward and then through the
US market bubble of 2000 how ‘the price index looks like a rocket
taking off through the top of the chart, only to sputter and crash’5.
Figure 12 shows the trajectory of the Nymex front-month oil price
through 2008 in the visual context of a long-term pricing graph,
running from April 1991 to the time of writing. 
A Bubble by Any Other Name
209
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
weeks
$ oil price
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
Nasdaq 100 ('Non-financials') index level
Average weekly oil price (22/04/91 - 08/06/09)
NASDAQ 100 ('Non-financials') average weekly level (04/01/83 - 20/02//2001)
Figure 12: Long-term price graph comparison for Nymex oil and Nasdaq 100
[Source: Thomson Datastream]
5 Shiller (2005), pp. 97-98.
$ oil price
Weeks
Nasdaq 100 (‘Non-financials’) index level
Average
weekly oil
price
(22/04/91 –
08/06/09)
Nasdaq 100 (‘Non-
financials’) average
weekly level
(04/01/83 –
22/02/01)

The movement around the peak certainly does look like a ‘precipitous
spike’ or an aborted rocket launch. Shown for comparison on the same
graph is the previous trajectory of another price graph; if anything more
closely tied to the turn-of-the-century “new economy”/dotcom/tech
stock blow-out in the US than the S&P graph Shiller uses. This is the
Nasdaq 100 (“non-financials”) index, which practically embodies the
dotcom boom-and-bust.
The Nasdaq 100 (“non-financials”) index is comprised of industrial,
technology, retail, telecommunication, biotechnology, health care,
transportation, media, and service companies trading on the Nasdaq
market in the US. It specifically excludes banking and other financial
institutions listed on the Nasdaq, which from our point of view might
add an unwelcome element of solidity to our sample of largely
“weightless” (which turned out to mean profitless) bubble stocks. From
trading at around 1,900 at the start of 1999, the index had reached its
peak around 4,700 in March 2000 (in tandem with the wider Nasdaq
composite index), at which point many of the firms included in the
Nasdaq 100 were seen as the vanguard of the “new economy” focused
around dotcom, new media and biotech narratives. The whole Nasdaq
market collapsed spectacularly after this, such that by the start of March
2001, just a year after its peak, the Nasdaq 100 was back to around
1,900. The Nasdaq boom-to-bust is commonly seen as one of the more
obvious examples of speculative excess blowing an unsustainable
market bubble in recent years. Although some economists have
nevertheless continued to hew to the precepts of efficient markets by
trying to prove that at each point in its expansion and subsequent
collapse the Nasdaq was indeed correctly priced in fundamental terms,
such efforts are generally treated with gentle mockery. 
Figure 12 shows how the pattern of both the Nasdaq 100 and the oil
price blow-out sketch the same general shape when viewed from a wide
Petromania
210

angle. But, as shown in this book’s introduction, the coincidence
between the two price inflation and deflation patterns is actually far
closer than just an apparent fit from a distance. In the introduction we
saw how in three phases in particular, two leading up to the peak and
then the third being the immediate post-peak collapse, the Nasdaq 100
and the 2008 oil price display practically follow the same pattern of
percentage increases and decreases over the same number of weeks. 
Figure 13 is an expanded version of the chart in the introduction,
which also shows how despite divergence in their patterns following
the three key phases above, nevertheless, after another 38 weeks
showing broadly similar net declines, what is striking is that both price
series end up being down near enough the same percentages from their
absolute highs – the Nasdaq being 51% of its peak, oil 47% of its peak.
Are we witnessing similar, post-bubble behavioural logic?
A Bubble by Any Other Name
211
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
1
11
21 31
41 51
61 71
81 91 101 111 121 131 141 151 161 171 181 191 201
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
46-week period
Nasdaq gain 63.1%
Oil price gain 63.6%
16-week period
Nasdaq gain 
49.9%
Oil price gain 
44.3%
9-week period
Nasdaq loss 33.5%
Oil price loss 34.6% 
38-week period
Nasdaq loss 23.5%
Oil price loss 27.7%
What the Nasdaq did for 
the following two years
End of oil price history to 
date at time of writing 
Figure 13: Two bubbles revisited – and what the Nasdaq did next [Source:
Thomson Datastream]
$ oil price
Week
Nasdaq 100 (‘Non-financials’) index level
Average weekly oil
price (07/05/07 –
08/06/09)
Average weekly level
for Nasdaq 100
(14/01/99 – 26/12/02)

For the oil price, this 38 week period in fact takes us right up to the time
of writing, in early June 2009. Currently, the oil price remains less than
half its all-time peak less than a year ago. Figure 12 also shows how the
Nasdaq 100 index developed for the two years following its own peak
period as already matched to the oil price – for no more reason than to
show “what happened next”. The next chapter will relate how even less
than a year on from their peak, oil prices are once more displaying all
the signs of another bubble being blown. So we cannot say if the most
recent oil price levels displayed in the chart above (from June 2009) of
around $70 per barrel, roughly matching the relative price level the
Nasdaq displayed the same distance from its own peak, will turn out to
be a near-term ceiling or not. Perhaps oil will bounce around from current
levels – as indeed the Nasdaq 100 seemed to do for a while from this
point on, in its own trajectory. Alternately, perhaps their superimposed
histories will once again diverge – perhaps a fresh oil market bubble will
indeed emerge regardless of how recently the previous one collapsed. That
certainly seems to be a possibility at the time of writing.
Petromania
212

6
Petromania Redux


215
‘Like the toxic debt of the banks, this is a very esoteric subject.
About a billion barrels per day are traded in crude futures on
Nymex and ICE for WTI and Brent. A billion barrels. Then we
have the options, and then we have the OTC market – which
could be another billion barrels, but quite a lot of that will be
covered by the swaps writers on the futures market. So avoiding
double counting, we could take maybe 1.2-1.3bn barrels as a
round number – a vast number. And this is the point I keep
making, I keep saying here is a market that is fifteen times the
actual crude market – and people just nod their heads and then
they carry on talking about fundamentals.’
Leo Drollas, chief economist of the Centre for Global Energy Studies (CGES), in
conversation, January 26 2009
6.1 Three Wise Men
As a working journalist I was fortunate enough to come down on the
right side of the triple-digit oil price debate in early 2008. For many
reasons, none particularly original to me and practically all of which are
repeated at some point elsewhere in this book, I reckoned that triple-
digit oil was a bubble being blown with a diverse spread of speculators
working at the bellows. The Goldman research note in mid-May,
followed by the remarkable fortnight of curve-shifting the oil futures
market underwent immediately afterwards, stung me into printed
comment in my day job for the Investors Chronicle. On May 29 2008
I argued that ‘Goldman is wrong, and oil price highs above $100 reflect
speculation more than reality’. By June 12 2008, personally shocked

216
Petromania
that prices were still breaking toward $140 per barrel, I advised readers
to go short of the crude oil price by using a short exchange-traded fund
(ETF) instrument listed on the London Stock Exchange (LSE), which
would gain in value as the oil price dropped. This proved to be among
our most profitable pieces of trading advice in 2008.
Contrary to the evidence you hold in your hands, I am, however, not
a monomaniac regarding the oil price. My day-to-day brief is to cover
the whole natural resources sector (mining as well as energy); there are
other stories to follow and life goes on. Even so, when I attended an oil
and gas investment conference in London in December 2008, with oil
then bouncing around the $40 per barrel level, I felt it was so obvious
that the whole $100-plus per barrel episode had been a speculative
bubble that I naively presumed this would be acknowledged as a simple
fact by practically any delegate speaking in the programme. I was
surprised then, that in a “Three Wise Men”-type panel debate involving
a trio of oil sector luminaries, the view that speculation had played any
significant role at all in the amazing oil price blow-out seen earlier that
year was very much a minority position – outnumbered two-to-one.
The three wise men were Christof Ruehl, the chief economist of UK-
listed international oil major BP, Francisco Blanch, head of commodity
research at investment banking giant Merrill Lynch, and Leo Drollas,
the deputy executive director and chief economist of the Centre for
Global Energy Studies (CGES), a London-based, Gulf-funded energy
consultancy. 
I have great respect for both Christof Ruehl and Francisco Blanch,
neither of whom I know in any meaningful sense but both of whom
have been extremely helpful in commenting on aspects of the oil market
whenever I have spoken to them in my work as a journalist. Both also
know far more about the oil market than I ever will – so with these
provisos firmly in the reader’s mind, I will nevertheless take the liberty

217
Petromania Redux
of characterising (but hopefully not caricaturing) the positions they
adopted in this debate. For Christof Ruehl of BP, OPEC is the beginning
and the end of the story. As far as he was concerned, the price ramp-up
had been due to the OPEC cuts in 2007 feeding through into the market
by early 2008, and then the unilateral Saudi production increases in
turn feeding in to loosen the market just as the massive fall in global
economic demand caused by the credit crunch hit in any case – an
unfortunate coincidence. Ruehl said speculators of course participated
in the oil futures market, but they waited to see where the price was
heading before clambering aboard to make money in the wake of trends
driven by physical market fundamentals, and OPEC is the single largest
physical market fundamental in the game. Francisco Blanch meanwhile
took the diesel fundamentalist line: the squeeze on the light sweet crude
segment of the market was real, it was due to galloping Asian demand
and if the credit crunch had not intervened, prices would have kept
rising anyway until they themselves choked off sufficient demand to
rebalance the market. 
As his two co-panellists spoke before him, Leo Drollas looked
increasingly perplexed. When he had the floor after them, he started by
saying how amazed he was that in all the discussion that had already
gone on, no one had mentioned what he labelled as ‘the elephant in the
room’. This proverbial pachyderm was the sheer size of the crude oil
futures market compared to the underlying crude oil physical market
and, as a result, the outsize influence that the futures market bore (and
continues to bear) in determining the oil price. Drollas is himself a
former head of energy studies and econometric analysis at BP, one of
Ruehl’s predecessors, so he has as good an understanding as any oil
company professional of the fundamental factors at play in oil price
determination. He was nevertheless adamant that until the effects of
speculation were understood, it was futile to talk of fundamentals. But

218
Petromania
Francisco Blanch himself responded that everyone could be sure that,
precisely because the Nymex was such a deep, liquid and efficient
market, speculation really was not an issue in pricing. In this dispute
between our three wise men we have, in microcosm, the broad shape of
the three key arguments running through this book, competing for our
attention. 
One is the background of physical fundamentals that oil company
professionals like Christof Ruehl see in action every day. This is a world
in which OPEC and its spare capacity, or lack of it, are considered the
ultimate origin of all pricing shifts. Secondly, there is the tighter focus
on Asian hunger for particular segments of the crude barrel refining
split, and the squeeze this seemed to bring to the light sweet crude end
of the oil market in mid-2008. This view is not overly adamant as to
whether or not this light, sweet squeeze was caused by genuine market
fundamentals or instead some kind of hoarding, deliberate or not,
perhaps even shading into market manipulation. Thirdly, we have the
focus on speculative pressure from financial investors as a key driver of
the oil price. This driver has been the major concern of this book.
Obviously, all three angles must be taken into consideration when
rendering an account of the wild volatility our most important global
commodity price demonstrated through the course of 2008. No
reasonable version can omit any of them. Yet this is what many
“establishment” accounts persist in doing even after the oil price
collapse – as exemplified in the lonely stand taken by Drollas on the
importance of speculation at this December 2008 conference. 
Hence the focus throughout this book has been on forcing recognition
of some simple truths regarding financial speculation, its impact on the
oil futures market, and its major influence, therefore, on the oil price in
the real world. All the requisite transmission mechanisms exist for a
huge variety of financial investment strategies and instruments to exert

pricing pressure on the all-important front-month price on the oil
futures curve. Yes, of course physical supply and demand fundamentals
had tightened through the course of the mid-noughties, creating the
conditions for the oil price to establish a new floor significantly above
$50 per barrel. And on top of this, geopolitical risk concerns from time
to time were seen to add an additional premium on the per-barrel price
of oil, a more or less reasonable outcome depending on your view of
how likely events such as a fresh war in the Middle East were. But in
my opinion it seems clear that speculative financial interest was the
main force driving, and wildly driving, the oil price from its break
through the watershed $100 per barrel mark at the start of 2008, to its
as-yet all-time high of around $147 per barrel in early July 2008.
Physical market fundamentals do not support the breakneck price
appreciation in front-month Nymex light sweet crude through this
period. Neither at the broadest macro-economic level in terms of
anticipated global growth, as the world was tipping into the serious
recession we still find ourselves in; nor at the level of worldwide balance
between oil production and consumption. Inventories were building,
OPEC member states were claiming difficulties in selling all their
production, and oil company economists and executives were
confirming that the market was well-supplied. The marginal cost of
production was below triple digits. Nor even after drilling down a
further level into the particular drivers of the light sweet crude segment
itself, do we find any significant enough support for these price rises.
Chinese diesel hoarding was already recognised by some commentators
as an ephemeral, short-term phenomenon that would evaporate in due
course; and certainly not a long-term factor outweighing the imminent
increase in sour-to-diesel refining capacity emerging in Asia. Inasmuch
as the pressure on the light sweet segment of the market was real even
if recognisably temporary, it should have been adding a premium to an
219
Petromania Redux

220
Petromania
oil price still comfortably trading in double-digit figures rather than to
an oil price trading well into triple-digit territory. 
Even physical market fundamentalists such as Christof Ruehl of BP
can clearly see a disconnect between how the oil price behaved in the
last months prior to it peaking near $150 per barrel in early July 2008,
and how it logically should have behaved through this period. Speaking
at a press conference in June 2009, presenting BP’s latest Statistical
Review of World Energy, Ruehl gave a potted review of the extreme
volatility energy markets experienced in 2008. And when he mentioned
the significant unilateral Saudi oil output increases of May and June
that year, he himself noted, unprompted, how even though these
developments should have driven the oil price lower, instead it jumped
higher regardless. As an in-house oil company economist, concerned
with taking the long view on whether oil prices averaged across several
decades in the future will justify large capital investments set to produce
crude through the same timescale, Ruehl may understandably not be
so interested in an oil price obviously diverging from physical market
fundamentals for, in his opinion, just a couple of months in 2008. This
may be all the more the case, since the unsupportive physical market
fundamentals all too obviously reasserted themselves very quickly after
July that year. Yet it is precisely this window of illogical oil price
behaviour which most clearly demonstrates how speculators took over
the oil market in the first half of 2008 to push prices ever higher –
regardless of the fundamentals Ruehl sees as dominating price
formation. And, as we have seen, the subsequent abrupt collapse in the
oil price is also in itself further evidence of a speculative bubble having
been blown, this time in the characteristics of its unwinding.
I hope I have demonstrated that there is ample evidence that the well-
documented explosion of institutional investor interest in a wide range
of speculative financial exposures to the oil price in particular, and

221
Petromania Redux
commodities in general, enjoys multiple channels of transmission onto
the Nymex oil futures market – the market that determines the
benchmark global crude price. Some participants such as hedge funds
and floor traders are visible in regulatory terms as obviously “non-
commercial”, by definition speculative players. Yet the swap dealers
are different. A class of market participant instrumental in transforming
off-exchange financial interest, going long of the oil price, into matching
on-exchange positions, these are the real “stealth bombers” of
speculation. They are rendered invisible to the conventional radar of
speculator detection by dint of their traditional regulatory classification
as “commercial” players, which immediately obscures any accurate
measurement of true speculative interest on the exchange. But they
nevertheless undoubtedly delivered and can still deliver the highest-
powered weight of speculative investment ordnance onto the target, the
oil futures curve. What facts are known about the over-the-counter
(OTC) commodity derivatives trading funnelled onto the regulated,
global price-setting market by swap dealers, indicate very significant
volumes of pricing pressure. 
In making this determination of speculative pressure dominating the
oil market in the first half of 2008, we are confronted with a series of
studies that purport to disprove this thesis. Yet none of these studies
manage to make an incontrovertible case that speculation did not play
a major role in moving the market through this period. Some studies fail
to do so simply because their analysis does not take account of the swap
dealer loophole; others because their assessment of trading patterns is
too limited in scope, does not take account of basic investment
fundamentals such as rebalancing and, not least, has been undermined
by dissenting opinion from a regulatory source. We have also seen how
many of the pathological distinctions identified by key exponents of
asset bubble theory, such as Minsky and Shiller, are clearly present in

222
Petromania
the oil futures market. (These identifying marks including various
endogenous market feedback loops, the logic of “naturally-occurring
Ponzi schemes”, and the groupthink of “New Era” paradigms.) We
have further seen how the oil price through this period was clearly
reacting as much to financial investor concerns over dollar weakness
and inflation as it was to potential supply disruptions; and how the
pattern of oil price movement up to its peak, and the subsequent sudden
collapse, matches up to another (almost) undisputed market bubble,
the dotcom craze exemplified in the Nasdaq market peak in 2000. Also
on the margins of possibility is market manipulation as a final
contributor to the heady oil price of summer 2008, as indicated by
Robert McCullough in particular. 
Perhaps none of this will seem so important when, in the future, oil
prices are averaged out over the “long run” of, say, the first half of the
21st century by a subsequent generation of analysts and economists. It
clearly does matter in the short run, however, to millions of ordinary
people worldwide, but particularly the poor in the developing world
struggling, even in more ordinary times, with fuel costs eating up a
disproportionately large share of their meagre income. It also matters
to policy-makers and central bankers struggling to determine the
appropriate interest rate-setting response to perceived inflationary
pressures across the global economy, where an over-zealous toughness
on the cost of borrowing can choke off activity and reduce living
standards for no good reason. I have already criticised the “speculation
is a red herring” stance taken by, among others, The Economist
magazine, when $100-plus oil prices were all the rage in summer 2008.
Yet I cannot help but agree with the same organ’s comment in its June
6 2009 issue: ‘In all the talk about the American housing market and
banking misjudgments, the role of oil at $140 a barrel in sparking this
recession has probably been underestimated. Last year, oil may have

been sending a false signal to central banks by pushing up headline
inflation when the economy was already weakening.’ In other words,
the fear of inflation being stoked by the prevailing high oil price
prevented central banks from cutting interest rates as soon as they
otherwise would have to combat the current downturn, a charge that
has been widely made elsewhere as well. The cost of this forced interest
rate paralysis in early 2008 to the global economy is literally
incalculable, not least as the contrary scenario, where interest rates were
cut earlier despite high oil prices, is an unobservable historical
counterfactual; but must be presumed to be material. There is a genuine
possibility that reckless speculation in oil futures severely worsened,
maybe even partly precipitated the traumatic economic crisis we are
still living through. Ultimately, the oil price spike of summer 2008 is
an illustration of how the financialisation of commodities is coming to
dominate price determination in the physical markets of those all-
important goods that modern industrial society simply cannot be
without. Economist L. Randall Wray noted this rising influence in his
2008 Levy Institute paper The Commodities Market Bubble, most of
which was written before the bubble burst, in other words before there
was conclusive proof that the price behaviour Wray considers was
indeed more financial speculative excess than anything else. ‘To be sure,’
he wrote, ‘it is very difficult to determine how much fault should be
placed in the laps of money managers, because there are a number of
forces coming together in a “perfect storm” to drive up commodity
prices. Still, there is adequate evidence that financialisation is a big part
of the problem, and there is sufficient cause for policymakers to
intervene with sensible constraints and oversight to reduce the influence
of managed money on those markets.’ Whether or not you agree with
Randall Wray’s call for policy action to restrict this influence, one thing
is very clear – we are all still living with the consequences of our 2008
summer of petromania.
223
Petromania Redux

6.2 The Aftermath
If the oil price wreaked havoc on its way up, it certainly made almost
as much mess on the way back down. While ordinary citizens
worldwide breathed easier with lower fuel prices, oil companies
themselves were knocked for six by the abrupt collapse in price
expectations. Banks that had been happy to lend money to small
operators on the basis of a triple-digit oil consensus suddenly slashed the
finance being made available to these same firms as they came back up
for refinancing. Several went straight to the wall, among the most
notable the dual Canadian/UK-listed North Sea explorer Oilexco.
Oilexco’s fate was poignant as it had just been responsible for probably
the best quality new UK North Sea oil discovery of the decade, in the
Huntingdon prospect. But Oilexco’s bankers refused to extend fresh
credit for the company to continue with its development plans, and as
current cash from production would not suffice to refinance existing
debt, Oilexco went bust. Huntingdon has now been snapped up in a fire
sale of Oilexco licences by UK midcap explorer Premier Oil. Good for
Premier, but tough on Oilexco and its shareholders – and arguably a
disincentive for future entrepreneurial interest in wringing more out of
the UK’s remaining, but dwindling, oil and gas endowment. 
Has such collateral damage wrought by the oil bubble in its implosion
compromised to any further degree existing UK energy independence or
energy security? Or may it likewise have compromised the same
considerations for other countries or the global economy as a whole?
Backing out to the wider picture, there seems little doubt that overall
investment in oil and gas development internationally has dropped as
a result of the low prices prevailing at the turn of 2009. International
oil majors such as Shell or BP have slowed down project development
and slashed capex plans for the next couple of years. Indeed, this is to
224
Petromania

225
Petromania Redux
such an  extent that many analysts feel that one effect of the price blow-
out has been to worsen the prospects for fresh supply emerging in the
near-term. Unconventional projects, so important to most forecasts
gainsaying peak oil fears with expectations of increasing supply into
the 2020s, have been particularly hard hit. Shell has put off investment
approval on a large expansion in its Canadian oil sands production.
Some would say this is a good thing given the environmental damage
oil sands production wreaks on its locale, but nevertheless slower oil
sands development on the part of one of its major proponents spells a
downgrading on fundamental supply expectations for the next few
years.
The crash has also strengthened the grasping hand of resource
nationalism. Share prices across the oil sector plunged worldwide as
the oil price did. Many companies lost access to equity markets at any
cost and so were stalled in development terms, marooned on promising
deposits they do not have the cash to develop. Post-price crash, there is
still merger and acquisition action ongoing in the sector – but it is
distinguished by being driven by state sector players able, in the current
environment, to pick and choose their targets, and avoid paying
excessive premiums. Private sector corporate players are, after all,
battening down the hatches and pulling in their horns while the ravaged
banking sector remains on life support. Why should the larger private
sector oil companies buy more opportunities when they are delaying
funding the ones they have already? Into this vacuum step cash-rich
state sector oil companies from emerging economies, who are picking
off listed, mid-sized producers with decent reserves left, right and centre. 
Notably, there is nary a squawk from shareholders that the offers
aren’t high enough. In this environment they know there is little chance
of a private sector white knight riding forth with a better offer. Thus it
was that while shareholders in AIM-traded SIBIR Energy, which shares

production from a Russian oilfield with oil major Shell, saw their stock
trade as high as 839p in mid-2008, a year later they were happy to
accept a 500p per share cash-out from state-owned Russian company
Gazprom Neft – frankly, an ignominious end to a previously very
promising independent Russian oil producer. But a welcome outcome,
one would think, for the state interests in Russia pushing for ever tighter
control of “strategic” sub-surface resources. Meanwhile Addax
Petroleum, another dual Canadian/UK-listed explorer, was bought in
June 2009 by Chinese state oil giant Sinopec. Geopolitical analysts are
still struggling to compute what the intervention of China itself in
endorsing  and bolstering regional Kurdish authority over the fields in
northern Iraq – seen as Addax’s jewel in the crown – means for the
balance of power in that country between the autonomous Kurdish
administration and the central government in Baghdad. This is because
the central Iraqi government disputes the Kurdish right to administer its
own oil licences, such as that awarded to Addax several years ago. But
China has certainly been quick to tie up resources going cheaper than
they otherwise would, as a result of the price crash.
When it comes to physical market fundamentals, the effect of the oil
price boom-and-bust has clearly been to aggravate many of the key
factors that were themselves feeding into L. Randall Wray’s ‘perfect
storm’ the first time around in any case. If the majority of people on this
planet desire and indeed need a measure of stability in their energy
costs, then the experience of 2008 was not a good indicator that the
financialised markets that determine the oil price are working to achieve
this effect. But it has not only been oil project developments, oil sector
share prices, forecasts regarding future oil supply additions, and
efficient market economic theories that have suffered a serious mauling
as a result of the oil price bubble’s explosive pop. Reputations have
been shredded as well.
Petromania
226

6.3 Goldman Sachs: Panto Villain?
If the petromania of 2008 was a stick of rock, the name running all the
way through it on the inside would be that of US investment bank
Goldman Sachs. As a Financial Times headline put it one day near the
height of the fever, ‘Goldman’s analysts speak, and the price of crude
rises’. Bullish Goldman Sachs analyst forecasts on crude prices are seen
by many to have been instrumental in pushing oil futures higher at
crucial points in the ramp-up to the July peak – particularly the crazy
weeks for the futures curve, as detailed above, which came on the heels
of their May 16 research note. But Goldman Sachs and its diverse
spread of interests appear at every stage of this story, far beyond simply
being the analyst cheerleaders for ever-higher oil prices. 
Through its control of commodities trader J. Aron & Co., the bank
is a trader and market-maker in physical crude oil – it can easily get its
hands on the black stuff itself, if need be. This same trading company
is a presence on Nymex, recognised as a commercial rather than a non-
commercial market participant. On Nymex, however, Goldman Sachs
is not just acting as a physical oil trader seeking to hedge commercial
risks but also a pre-eminent swap dealer hedging out exposures from
writing the sort of off-exchange, OTC derivatives that form the “dark
matter” of oil pricing. It is, as research by Greenwich Associates has
established, joint top bank for peddling off-exchange OTC commodity
derivatives both to commercial market players and financial investors
(alongside fellow Wall Street heavyweight Morgan Stanley). 
Meanwhile Goldman Sachs is a leading “prime broker” for the hedge
funds that are likewise so conspicuous in commodity price speculation,
in essence acting as an institutional “sugar daddy” who lends such
funds money in the first place, facilitates their trading and settlement,
handles all of the tedious back office administrative stuff, and possibly
Petromania Redux
227

even provides strategic research and investment advice. And, of course,
Goldman Sachs did not only invent in the first place the whole concept
of the commodity index when it launched the GSCI in 1991. It is also
widely known, although the CFTC itself has never publicly identified it,
as the bank that first importuned the regulator to grant an exemption
on position limits to swap dealers hedging-out exposure incurred from
enabling institutional investors to take bets on a commodity index. In
other words, the “swap dealer loophole” was originally instituted by the
CFTC for the benefit of Goldman Sachs.
It is therefore understandable that the heavyweight presence Goldman
Sachs spreads across several sectors of the oil market means people can’t
help but conclude this preponderance translates into some kind of
trading advantage. The Washington Post put it politely, in yet another
piece noting how oil prices jumped on the back of that Goldman note
in May 2008: ‘Some say Goldman – which acts as an oil broker, runs
the biggest commodity index fund, provides investment advice and
trades oil on its own account – has too many institutional conflicts of
interest.’ Oil sector consultant Fadel Gheit put it far less politely and
more directly in a June 23 2008 hearing, when US Congressman Bart
Stupak, referring specifically to Goldman as the ‘largest commodity
dealer on Wall Street’ and noting its $200 per barrel forecast, asked
Gheit whether there is an ‘actual or apparent conflict’ in an investment
bank talking up the price of commodities through its research arm,
whilst speculating on it at the same time. ‘Absolutely, unequivocally,’
answered Gheit, ‘It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy when the largest
trader predicts the price of a commodity. Guess what’s going to happen
to the price? It’s going to follow the leader.’
Of course, joining the dots in this fashion would be a no-brainer for
anyone observing Goldman’s role across the oil sector. Except for the
fact that any such systematic leveraging of information relating to client
Petromania
228

instructions received, or advice dispensed, across the whole group
would be highly illegal. Preventing the proprietary trading arms of
banks from “front-running” in markets on the basis of knowledge
regarding how clients intend to trade, or profitably pre-positioning
themselves in markets in expectation of house research producing a
predictable reaction on the part of clients, is the whole point of the so-
called “Chinese walls” that are maintained as a regulatory necessity
between different departments of the same financial institution.
Imputing that anything else happens is a very serious charge with regard
to any financial institution, and Goldman Sachs has had to develop a
thick skin in this regard. The allegations levelled at it run far beyond the
sort of “nudge-nudge, wink-wink” suggestions that it may occasionally
benefit from putting together information from disparate and ostensibly
ring-fenced operations.
In April 2009, US business magazine Forbes ran a story titled ‘Did
Goldman Goose Oil?’ The main thrust of this piece was to detail
suggestions that the investment bank’s traders had deliberately
manipulated markets to achieve the July spike in the oil price, simply in
order to bankrupt the US oil trader SemGroup. The reasoning runs,
firstly, that bankers from Goldman had gained knowledge of the
precarious position SemGroup had put itself in by going short of the oil
price in a series of derivative trades. This Goldman discovered when
they inspected its financial health prior to a planned private placement
of equity in the company, which the bank was deciding whether or not
to support (in the end this deal did not come about). Theoretically,
according to Forbes, an awareness of SemGroup’s vulnerability could
have motivated a plan for Goldman traders to ramp up the price of oil,
in expectation of therefore making the company go bust, although the
piece does not actually make clear why exactly Goldman might wish to
do this. It simply notes that the Goldman Sachs/J. Aron complex was
Petromania Redux
229

both a debtor and creditor of SemGroup in different respects due to
other market relationships, and implies that Goldman might expect to
come away with trophies from a bankrupt SemGroup.  
For its part, Goldman Sachs maintains that Chinese walls are
punctiliously respected between its many departments. They aver that,
in practice, this genuinely means traders elsewhere across the varied
business lines in the bank do not have access to notes penned by Murti,
Currie and their colleagues in equity and commodity research, before
they are released to external clients. Goldman emphasises that such
interdepartmental impermeability was naturally also the case between
any bankers who might have gained some knowledge of the SemGroup
futures exposures, in preparing the aborted deal, and its own oil futures
traders operating on Nymex. Of course, one would not reasonably
expect the bank to say anything else – but then this illustrates the
“damned if they do, damned if they don’t” situation Goldman Sachs
faces with regard to the charge that it profited improperly from what
went on with the oil price in summer 2008. Like the accused in a
mediaeval witch trial, there is nothing it can say that will demonstrably
prove its innocence as far as the inquisitors are concerned.
Nevertheless, Forbes seems to have got it wrong about Goldman and
SemGroup. The players quoted in the piece, suggesting such malpractice
might have happened, all seem themselves to be locked into an
adversarial legal face-off with Goldman over the collapsed SemGroup
assets. This arguably, perhaps obviously, colours their opinion of the
bank. Further, an independent court examiner report, cited in the Forbes
piece as a pending key contribution to the argument, was made public
after the story was published. Far from supporting any conspiracy
theory alleging Goldman manipulated the oil price to bankrupt
SemGroup, it found instead that SemGroup had recklessly exposed itself
by taking out short positions in oil far in excess of its own physical
Petromania
230

delivery capability, and was an accident waiting to happen if oil prices
rose persistently for any reason, fundamental or not. SemGroup has
only got itself to blame for going bust. Meanwhile, even analysts who
disagree with him praise Jeff Currie’s acuity and integrity, and
acknowledge his take on oil prices as a valid one even if it not shared
by themselves. Currie and Murti have been developing their view of the
oil market for years, and have been consistent in their views from long
before summer 2008 and the SemGroup collapse. Currie and Murti did
not suddenly start ramping-up oil forecasts out of the blue.
Still, it is easy to see how, much as a pantomime villain, Goldman is
painted as being “behind” everything to do with the black gold blow-
out. Its obvious influence across practically every crucial junction in the
financial flows determining the oil price globally – from actual trading,
through influential analysis, to facilitating investment for third parties
on the basis of such analysis – invites presumptions of “unfair” trading
advantage in these markets. And it is hard to imagine any kind of
evidence that would ever be seen as sufficient to “prove” its innocence
for some people. In truth, its preponderance is simply ample illustration
of how closely the modern financial sector grasps oil for its own
purposes. 
That is not to say, however, that Goldman has not benefited from the
whole oil price farrago more than other institutions might have. From
a clutch of global investment banks declaring surprisingly good first
quarter earnings in 2009, Goldman Sachs stood out as once more
deserving its crown as the top Wall Street player. True to its “black box”
reputation, it gave little detail on the specific elements contributing to
such a surprise on the upside. Institutional investment sources say,
however, that a large contributor to better-than-expected financial
results for some top banks – Goldman particularly – was a stampede of
financial investors rushing to unwind commodity positions they had
Petromania Redux
231

previously taken out using these same banks as brokers. The gains on
margins, plus break or restructuring fees realised in the course of
reversing these positions for their clients, were an unexpected bonus
for investment bankers deeply involved in peddling all such
commodities exposure. And none were or are more so involved than
Goldman. 
At the same time, it hasn’t all been good for Goldman. Its previously
enviable reputation in calling the oil price correctly took a hammering
as oil plunged. Punctuating the drop in the oil price through late 2008
were numerous media mentions of how Goldman had to completely
back out of the oil price investment recommendations it had previously
made to clients, leaving them high and dry in positions the bank no
longer forecast any profit from. Goldman was understandably reluctant
to do this. It hung on for a while, maintaining as late as October 2008
that clients should keep these trades on in the expectation that
continuing “high volatility” would provide less damaging exit levels
for these loss-making positions. But in late November ’08, the research
team led by Jeff Currie finally threw in the towel. As they wrote on
November 20: ‘The volatility in the past few weeks has mostly been to
the downside and the pressure on the oil complex has increased. In the
near term, we do not expect significant upside potential and as a
consequence we are closing all of our oil trading recommendations.’
The influential FT Alphaville blog run by the Financial Times
(http://ftalphaville.ft.com) immediately ran the headline ‘It’s official,
Goldman capitulates on oil’. Underneath, the journalist parsed the
meaning of the investment bank’s note: ‘Translation: We were wrong
and we’re sorry. Ouch’.
Interviewed by me in late May 2009, however, Jeff Currie maintains
that he and his team did not suffer undue blowback from irate investors.
He says, ‘In terms of the market collapsing, I think most people still
Petromania
232

believe in the story: if we had not been rocked by such a significant
event we would have got there. After Lehman collapsed, the world shut
down, there was a loss of trade credit due to the need for cash – it is
hard to replicate that kind of demand shock.’ And Currie also believes
that once we emerge from the current economic downturn, market
fundamentals will once again mandate rocketing oil prices: ‘The day of
reckoning is going to come – it will be a lot more painful than the
financial experience and take longer. We keep lurching from a financial
to an energy crisis, and because the cost of dealing with the financial
crisis is so great, as soon as we come out of it we will be right back into
the energy crisis.’ As noted in the previous chapter, however, Currie did
acknowledge that prices at their height in summer 2008 had got ‘too far,
too fast’ in relation to fundamentals. And other commentators have
been scathing of Goldman’s oil price predictions post-crash. When in
early June 2009 the bank upped its end-2009 price forecast from $65
per barrel to $85 and instituted an end-2010 target price of $95, a bald
comment from analyst Nauman Barakat of rival investment bank
Macquarie was also quoted by the press: ‘Goldman’s reports have lost
a lot of their credibility as a result of being so wrong.’ 
In the end, this is probably where the most damage has been done to
the bank synonymous with triple-digit oil prices. Meanwhile, the major
flaws in the way the oil markets work from which Goldman can be
signally seen to benefit – for example, the swap dealer loophole – are
more obviously deep-seated structural issues that cut across all
investment bank players, regardless of their relative infamy, rather than
openings for potential criminality by particular players. Indeed, perhaps
the more scandalous point is that Goldman does not need to engage in
illegal acts to make pots of money hand-over-fist from oil price
gyrations both on the way up and the way down, because it already
does so simply by virtue of how these markets currently function legally.
Unproveable allegations of particular misdeeds directed at Goldman
Petromania Redux
233

Sachs might sell well at newsstands but are a distraction from the
structural market reforms required if fresh outbreaks of petromania are
to be avoided. Given the position of the Nymex oil futures market at the
apex of oil price formation, this would be the CFTC’s job – and it now
seems to be taking this job more seriously than it did in early 2008.
6.4 The CFTC Finally Sees the Light
If Goldman’s reputation for forecasting has been tarnished by the whole
oil price bubble, the credibility of the US futures market regulator CFTC
practically evaporated in the latter half of 2008 as more and more
evidence emerged underlining how much influence speculative finance
actually played in determining the oil price. We have already mentioned
the implication from the data presented in the Interagency Task Force
Report issued in July 2008 (that some 80%-plus of interest across the
oil futures market could be classified as potentially speculative), and
how it was picked up with widespread incredulity by the media. And
also how, around the same time, the CFTC was forced to reclassify one
large market participant, Swiss-based oil trader Vitol, from the
commercial to the non-commercial segment of the market – after an
investigation found that the size and nature of the positions Vitol was
taking on Nymex were more properly seen as a pattern of speculative
trading, rather than the trader’s previously-presumed role of facilitating
transfers of physical oil in the real world. This well-publicised incident
seemed to make a mockery of all the CFTC’s previous protestations
that it was sure it was physical fundamentals directing the price-setting
process on Nymex.
Throughout the US Congressional hearings, the CFTC was excoriated
by elected lawmakers for its failure either to get to grips with the
influence many feel it is obvious speculation plays in Nymex oil futures
Petromania
234

trading, or to even ensure both itself and the public were equipped with
the necessary level of detail on the market to have an informed
argument about the issue. The “speculation is a sideshow” stance of
the CFTC was also undermined more recently by one of its regulatory
counterparts in the US government, the powerful Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC), which monitors gas and power
pricing by utility companies operating in the US. While the FERC does
not officially concern itself with oil prices as such, since US gas prices
are invariably linked to oil prices its views on whether or not gas prices
are being driven by fundamentals also imply a view on oil market
fundamentals. Gas prices in the US peaked on July 3 2008, just days
before oil itself. And, of course, natural gas was also targeted as an
investible commodity, alongside oil, in the commodity index trades that
speculators flocked into in recent years.
So eyebrows were certainly raised in April 2009 when the FERC
pointedly refused to agree with the CFTC that speculation in these
commodities was not a key influence in the pricing patterns seen in
2008. In its State of the Markets 2008 report released that month, its
latest annual update on how the markets under its oversight operated
through the previous year, the FERC said that: ‘we believe physical
fundamentals alone cannot explain natural gas prices experienced
during the first half of the year… we will describe how the financial
crisis that hit the country during the second half of the year altered the
role of financial products and players in energy markets and increased
the cost of capital while simultaneously reducing the access to capital.’
In other words, the FERC thinks speculative financial investment in
commodities pushed prices up, and this pressure only abated as the full
impact of the credit crunch decimated the investment capacity of the
financial sector itself. 
Petromania Redux
235

The FERC concludes in its April 2009 report:
In summary, while physical market fundamentals, particularly storage levels,
can explain why natural gas prices rose during the first six months of 2008,
none of the market fundamentals were extreme enough to explain why spot
Henry Hub prices reached $13.31/MMBtu by July 3. As we discussed at
the Winter Assessment last fall, the rise in natural gas prices coincided with
a global increase in many commodity prices. This increase in commodity
prices occurred as large pools of capital flowed into various financial
instruments that essentially turn commodities like natural gas into
investment vehicles. Ultimately, we believe that financial fundamentals along
with the modest tightening in the supply and demand balance for gas during
the first part of 2008, explains natural gas prices during the year.
The focus by the FERC on what it terms financial fundamentals in
explaining commodity price spikes in 2008 is completely at odds with
the oft-repeated CFTC view that physical market fundamentals alone
can explain energy futures movements through this period. Many
reckon this conclusion by the FERC, widely seen as the most powerful
government player charged with oversight of the US energy markets,
exposed the CFTC as being out on a limb in maintaining its previous
stance on speculation, even among its regulatory brethren.
One year on, and it seems change is finally afoot at the CFTC. Walt
Lukken, who was acting CFTC chairman through the 2008 price blow-
out (and can, as a result, be personally associated with the stubborn
refusal to consider speculation as a key cause of this), has moved on. He
first stepped down as acting chairman in January 2009 (at which point
Commissioner Michael Dunn took over as acting chairman until a new
presidential appointee could be confirmed), and resigned completely as
a commissioner at the agency in June 2009. This exit is in truth
understandable as part of the normal run of things, as appointments to
Petromania
236

CFTC commissioner positions are ultimately a party political issue
(although subject to cross-party Congressional confirmation hearings)
and the party in power in the US has switched over from the
Republicans of George W. Bush, who appointed Lukken, to the new
Democratic regime under President Barack Obama. The new CFTC
chairman is Gary Gensler, confirmed in this office at the end of May
2009. 
Speaking on June 2 before the United States Senate Subcommittee on
Financial Services, only six days after taking office, Gensler made a
decisive break with the previous stance taken by the agency under his
predecessor. ‘I believe,’ he stated, ‘that commodity index funds and
other financial investors participated in the commodity asset bubble.
Notably, though, no reliable data about the size or effect of these
influential investor groups has been readily accessible to market
participants. The CFTC could promote greater transparency and
market integrity by providing further breakdowns of non-commercial
open interests on weekly “Commitments of Traders” reports. The
American public deserves a better depiction of the marketplace. The
temporary relief from higher prices does not negate this need, especially
given that a rebounding of the overall economy could lead to higher
commodity prices.’ In other words, it is official – the CFTC now
recognises that the oil price movements of 2008 were indeed a bubble.
Better late than never. 
In various speeches since Gensler’s confirmation as CFTC chairman,
both he and fellow CFTC commissioners have announced a push for
greater transparency and regulation of the over-the-counter derivative
markets feeding into the Nymex futures curve, and also for more
detailed reporting formats for the trading data regularly presented to the
public. This would show more clearly the patterns of trading
determining oil price formation on the Nymex. At the time of writing
Petromania Redux
237

in mid-2009, a second report is apparently pending which will give a
further update on the data collected from the special call issued to swap
dealers in May 2008. Feedback has also been collected on a
consultation document regarding possible changes to the “swap dealer
loophole” provisions – the provisions which have allowed this class of
market participants to grow to such dominance over the rest of the oil
futures market.
Probably the most significant action to date, however, came just as
this volume was being prepared for press. On July 7 2009, Chairman
Gensler announced that the CFTC would hold its own series of public
hearings from late July 2009 into August. The evidence of these
hearings, and any regulatory outcome which results, will only be known
once this book is printed. This is, unfortunately, always going to be
rather the nature of things, with such a fast-moving story. The
indications are nevertheless that some serious changes in the commodity
futures trading regime are being considered. 
According to the latest (July 21 2009) CFTC release on these hearings,
their agenda will include garnering views from industry participants
and academics on the following issues:
•
Applying position limits consistently across all markets and
participants, including index traders, managers of exchange-
traded funds (ETFs), and issues of exchange-traded notes
(ETNs);  
•
The effect of position limits on market function, integrity and
efficiency;
•
The effect of position limits on facilitating the risk management
of clearinghouses;
Petromania
238

•
Whether the CFTC needs additional authority to implement
such limits;
•
What methodology the Commission should use to determine
position limit levels for each market?
•
What quantitative measures should be used in setting limits on
the size of an individual trader’s position?
•
Should limits be established by percentage or proportion of the
open interest of the market or by fixed number of allowed
contracts?
•
Should limits apply in all months combined, in individual
months, and in the delivery month?
•
How should timespread trades be incorporated in this
calculation?
•
Should the Commission limit the aggregate positions held by
one person across different markets?
•
Should exemptions from position limits be permitted for
anyone other than bona fide hedgers for the conduct and
management of a commercial enterprise?
•
The statute states exemptions on position limits should only
be granted to bona fide hedgers – what should the qualifying
factors be for an entity to meet the definition of a bona fide
hedger?
All of the above indicates that, at the very least, there will be some real
debate over the merits or not of allowing speculative financial sector
interest to be transmitted to the oil futures market through the existing
“swap dealer loophole” described in this book, rather than continuing
Petromania Redux
239

with the pretence that this whole issue does not affect oil prices. Time
will tell whether or not the CFTC has both the will and the authority
to face down what will undoubtedly be some vigorous lobbying from
Wall Street’s finest, to the effect that things should stay exactly as they
are with regard to swap dealer privileges. Perhaps the argument will
indeed be won by those who will undoubtedly say that, even granting
episodes such as the petromania of 2008, the benefits of allowing such
non-commercial investor interest to express a view on where oil prices
should be in terms of price discovery and liquidity outweigh the
disadvantages. Even when those disadvantages involve the most
lemming-like behaviour possible by such non-commercial investment
interests, and this behaviour actually takes over the market from
physical fundamentals.
Personally I find it hard to believe that a regulator in the US, the land
of free enterprise, will be able to take any steps that would effectively
shut down outright and overnight the multi-billion dollar industry that
commodity price speculation has become for the financial investment
sector. And this is plainly what would happen if the swap dealer
loophole was closed completely. Given that the US is also the land of
litigation at the drop of a hat, presumably any such move would in any
case lead to a flurry of lawsuits demanding compensation for some sort
of expropriation being alleged by investment banks and their clients.
What would happen, for instance, to those positions already being held
under the loophole, apart from being forcibly closed and probably with
many losses claimed as a result? A more likely outcome might well be
that the regulator claims a discretionary power to impose particular
limits on particular traders at particular times when they are seen to be
breaching some sort of threshold for “systemic” influence on oil price
formation, perhaps expressed as a percentage of open interest. This
sounds messy and hard to work in practice, but would be in line with
Petromania
240

the more discretionary powers many advocate for banking regulators
post-credit crunch; these are also predicated on ongoing monitoring of
the shifting levels of systemic risk that individual banks pose at any
given moment. 
What does definitely, at long last and certainly not before time, seem
to be happening in the interim is the replacement, in due course, of the
traditional publicly-available CoT data in its current form. This is
supposedly being superseded by more detailed weekly information, thus
helping to establish the real breakdown between what we might
describe as the “unquestionably commercial” and the “potentially
speculative” interest in oil futures. This is something which, as already
argued extensively, the current CoT format simply fails to capture.
CFTC chairman Gensler has already announced in early July 2009 that
in future CoT reports the current “commercial” categorisation will be
disaggregated and a specific swap dealer categorisation detailed; and
also that from the current “non-commercial” categorisation, “managed
money traders”, will also be disaggregated, showing hedge funds as a
specific category in themselves.
To be really effective, this new standard of information would
arguably have to not only monitor swap dealer activity per se on the
Nymex (and possibly other exchanges, the ICE being the obvious
candidate), but also monitor how much of the OTC business itself the
swap dealer was transacting was due to commercial parties and how
much due to financial investors. This does not seem to be happening
thus far with the rejig of the weekly CoT data, but then again it is
probably too much to hope for right now in terms of weekly
organisational surveillance capability. On the other hand, Chairman
Gensler also said in early July 2009 that he intends the sort of detailed
data on swap dealer client exposure yielded in the special call from mid-
2008 to continue to be regularly updated and aggregated by the CFTC,
Petromania Redux
241

with a view to publication of such data in a regular quarterly update.
As with the proposed changes to the CoT report, this will be a great step
forward in more accurately gauging the true influence of financial
investors’ speculation on oil price formation in the Nymex futures
market. 
Regardless of what actually happens in terms of position limit
exemptions, these new standards of data in themselves may help
dampen, to a certain extent, excessive oil price speculation in either
direction. We can imagine a “gold standard” of futures trading
transparency which, if practically impossible in the near term, is
certainly something that these new changes are a step towards. If
market participants had sufficiently detailed information when
evaluating price movements, they would be well-armed against
participating in obvious and ultimately fruitless speculative bubbles. If
they knew that, for example, a notional surge in the oil price could be
associated with a new weight of money landing across certain
maturities, due to a swap dealer hedging out exposure to financial
investors – as opposed to hedging out exposure to airlines managing
fuel price risk – they would be more wary of also piling in lest they turn
out to be the “greater fool” that speculative bubbles rely on for
momentum. 
For now, however, and pending the results of the CFTC hearings set for
late July and August 2009, the Nymex oil futures market lying under
that agency’s regulatory purview continues to operate in exactly the same
fashion as it has over the previous few years. One of the fruits of this is
that, incredibly, given that the last oil price bubble only burst a year ago,
it seems exactly the same forces are at work again blowing a fresh
bubble. But this time around, the speculatively-driven nature of this
process is obvious to all but the most blinkered commentators – because
through the first half of 2009 in which this has occurred, a lack of
support from physical market fundamentals has been plain for all to see.
Petromania
242

6.5 The Bubble is Burst, Long Live the Bubble
‘Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold’ – W. B. Yeats’ famous line in
his poem “The Second Coming” well describes what happened in the
oil market in the second half of 2008. Prices crashed fiercely from the
July 2008 all-time high of $147 per barrel. By Christmas, when a barrel
of the black stuff cost just $34, previous analyst predictions of
permanent triple-digit prices looked like a bad joke. The price collapse
was the most spectacular ever seen in a single year since oil futures
started trading on Nymex. Since then, however, the oil price has enjoyed
its own “Second Coming”, doubling since that trough to current levels
close to $70 in late July ’09, having reached this level in early June,
dropped back to $60 and then climbed again since then. Once again, the
oil bulls are lowing – the apparent early recovery of emerging Asian
markets, supposedly evidenced in particular by China’s commodity
import frenzy over recent months, is seen as vindicating their “super-
cycle” theories, and oil should benefit accordingly. Goldman Sachs, the
überbull of oil price forecasting throughout the 2008 bubble, has as
noted above once again been pushing higher and higher forecasts,
notwithstanding some degree of scorn towards its pronouncements this
time around.
In reality this oil price ramp-up has looked, if anything, even more
out-of-touch with physical market fundamentals than the 2008 price
spike. At least in the first half of 2008, no matter how much evidence
there was that the emerging recession was going to send global oil
demand into a tailspin, oil bulls could always tout what-if implications
of sudden supply disruption meeting an obviously minimal level of
headroom in the global oil supply system. Not least because, in early
2008, surplus production capacity across the OPEC oil producer cartel
was seen at a mere 1m barrels per day (mbpd), a 30-year low. A year
Petromania Redux
243

later, with global demand having tanked from perhaps 86mbpd to
around 83mbpd in the first quarter of 2009, OPEC spare capacity in
that same first quarter this year was around 4mbpd. That is a large
cushion of safety, giving the lie to any concern over near-term physical
shortages. And to experienced industry-watchers, this level of spare
capacity should itself in turn be a bearish portent for oil prices in the
near future.
As June 2009 rolled around, BP once again released its annual update
for its Statistical Review of World Energy. Speaking at this event, BP
chief economist Christof Ruehl said those betting on prices holding firm
at prevailing (roughly $70 per barrel) levels in the near-term may have
cause for concern. History shows that idle OPEC capacity does not in
general stay idle for very long. Some producers in the cartel inevitably
start to cheat on their quotas to gain extra revenue, with the incentive
all the greater the higher prices are. Add to this the fact that the world
has just seen the largest drop in oil consumption since the early 1980s;
that oil stocks in storage are high in historic terms; that even despite
shut-in OPEC production, current global oil supply is still exceeding
demand; and the probability that in global macroeconomic terms, as
Ruehl himself noted, ‘a return to high rates of economic growth may
prove elusive for some time’. Projections for demand growth are
anaemic – in July 2009, the IEA saw oil demand rebounding from a
2009 average of 83.8mbpd to 85.2mbpd in 2010. However, from the
same 2009 demand baseline, other influential forecasters are
considerably more circumspect – the US government’s own EIA sees
2010 demand at only 84.8mbpd, while OPEC itself is even more
downbeat, with 2010 demand seen at just 84.3mbpd. Echoing the first
half of 2008, it is, if anything, even harder to see how either current
conditions or near-term projections for physical market fundamentals
can justify the rate of appreciation the oil price has seen in the first half
Petromania
244

of 2009. Even if, as we shall examine below, the $60-70 per barrel price
range might seem fair through the cycle, as economists say, neither
current global economic conditions nor outlook have given any obvious
catalyst for prices to reach the top end of this range so quickly following
the trough experienced around the turn of 2008-9. Speculation, on the
other hand, explains a lot.
A growing weight of speculative financial interest in the oil price has
been obvious through this period, as it was leading up to oil’s all-time
peak last year. This time around, however, exchange-traded funds
(ETFs) have been notable as a vehicle of choice for oil price speculation,
as opposed to the more generalised commodity indices favoured last
summer. Broker LCM Commodities pointed out in late March 2009
that one US-listed oil ETF alone, the United States Oil Fund, at that
point accounted for some 15% of interest in front-month oil traded on
Nymex. And UK-based global ETF provider ETF Securities said in May
’09 that inflows of long interest into its suite of oil-tracking ETFs
totalled $954m in the first four months of 2009, more than twice all
inflows seen throughout 2008, and representing an annualised growth
rate of 544%. As we know, providers of all such derivatives end up
hedging their eventual net exposure onto the actual oil futures market,
and hence add to pressure on the front-month Nymex light sweet crude
oil price. Astonishing as it may seem that another bubble is being blown
in the oil price so soon after last year’s burst, the watchword has to be:
‘The speculative oil bubble is burst; long live the speculative oil bubble.’
One thing at least starkly different from the 2008 bubble is a wider
scepticism this time around on the part of investment bank analysts
toward higher prices, and particularly prices in triple digits. This time
last year, you could count on two fingers the number of top-tier
investment bank oil analyst teams warning that $100-plus crude prices
were cloud-cuckoo land – namely Ed Morse and his team at (now-
Petromania Redux
245

defunct) Lehman Brothers and Colin Smith and his team at Dresdner
Kleinwort. Other analysts might not have completely bought into the
oil bull story, but on the other hand they felt they did not want to
second-guess the market, so used the oil futures strip to value companies
regardless. They thereby locked in valuations on the basis of $100-plus
oil in any case. This time around, the long-time dissidents (Ed Morse
and fellow ex-Lehman colleague Daniel Ahn having now relocated to
LCM Commodities) are at least being joined by other big bank names
as-yet sticking to a $60-$70 range for their long-term oil price in
calculating company valuations. This is in defiance of whatever the
futures strip might currently say to the contrary (with five-year oil
having recently traded above $80 per barrel). Citigroup, for instance,
is using $65 per barrel for its long-term oil price assumption, while
Credit Suisse is sticking to $70. The latter bank also recently made a
comment that many of its analyst peers also seem to agree with, which
further crimps any justification for oil prices heading back towards the
$150 they were chasing last summer. Namely, that the economic
collapse experienced worldwide in 2008 has had such a serious effect
that it has permanently impaired the likely course of oil demand growth
from the levels the bank had previously seen as prevailing through the
coming years. 
Ironically, however, even as Credit Suisse adds its voice to those seeing
greater moderation in oil prices going forward, at the same time it is
feeding the very same trends that blew the bubble in the first place. The
bank has also just announced the creation of its own proprietary
commodity index series, to be administered in partnership with
privately-owned commodity trading giant Glencore. As with any other
such index, the purpose is, of course, to structure and sell investment
products based on its movements. Called the Credit Suisse Commodities
Benchmark (CSCB), this index too can be expected to add to the weight
Petromania
246

of non-commercial investment interest being brought to bear on the
Nymex oil futures curve. 
In sum, with there being as yet no firm regulatory changes enacted to
ensure there will not be a repeat of the speculative excess seen through
the oil price bubble of 2008, we cannot be sure that it will not happen
again, and perhaps sooner rather than later. The fact that physical
market fundamentals are even more clearly dissonant with the rapid
price appreciation witnessed through the first half of 2009 than they
were with the price action that saw crude trading above $100 per barrel
a year previously, only serves to underline how easy it remains for
speculative interest to get the upper hand in determining oil prices on
the Nymex.
6.6 Oil Futures – a Fair Price for Oil?
What should the price of a barrel of oil be? Conventional economic
theory tells us the answer is of course whatever the market wishes to
pay. Given the global asset market events of the last two years, however,
this kind of efficient market theory is looking dangerously threadbare.
Most sensible people would now agree – and it seems we can now
potentially include the new head of the CFTC in this camp – that
speculative market bubbles can obscure the underlying fair value of an
asset. Presuming we can make a distinction between the price the
market is paying for a barrel of crude oil at any given point in time,
and the price that could be seen as justified at that same time – in other
words, ignoring the protests of efficient market theorists – can we say
anything about where we might sensibly expect crude oil prices to trade
around in the next few years? 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward certainly thinks so. Speaking at the
2009 Statistical Review launch alongside his chief economist Ruehl, he
Petromania Redux
247

repeated an argument he has used several times before to support the
view that a “fair” price for oil lies somewhere in the $60-90 per barrel
range. The reasoning here is that only at a floor above $60 per barrel
can core producing countries in oil cartel OPEC afford to both maintain
their existing oil production infrastructure at a level that sustains
current output, and also meet their stated social spending commitments
to their generally young, and potentially restive, domestic populations.
If prices drop below this level, it is oil infrastructure spending rather
than social spending which will suffer first, so then the consequent
degradation of production capacity should see the oil price subsequently
rise in any case back towards a level that supports both spending
priorities. So much for the $60 floor, but Hayward also feels that the
marginal cost of supply for emerging sources of production – such as
deepwater offshore Angola and Canadian oil sands – means the upper
band of sustainable prices heads towards the $90 mark.
Dr Ed Morse and Daniel Ahn of LCM Commodities have a more
specific price band in mind. They have developed a model matching the
five-year forward oil price to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics’
producer price index (PPI) for oil and gas industry services, the five-
year price being conventionally accepted as the market’s best
expectation of a sustainable long-term oil price. 
Between January 1994 and October 2007, movement in the five-year
forward WTI oil price as traded on Nymex was very closely tied to
movement in the PPI index they have developed and back-tested
through the historical data (in statistical terms, yielding an “R-squared”
measure of correlation around 96% through this period, although
Morse and Ahn caution against reading too much into such a
pronouncement). Their chart as reproduced in Figure 14 details the
recent history of this relationship, from January 2004 onwards, and
shows the five-year forward oil price plotted against both the “plain
Petromania
248

vanilla” PPI index and also the PPI index adjusted for dollar
fluctuations, to strip out the effect of exchange rates feeding into oil
service supplier pricing. As can be seen, the fit between actual five-year
forward oil prices and what these twinned PPI indicators said they
should have been was incredibly close up until late 2007. Simply
observing the visual fit, however, it is clear that in contrast to the
preceding period, the actual real five-year price seriously diverged
upwards from the PPI indicators after October 2007, eventually
morphing into the oil price bubble which peaked in July 2008.
Petromania Redux
249
Long-dated WTI and upstream cost indicators
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Jan-
04
Jul-
04
Jan-
05
Jul-
05
Jan-
06
Jul-
06
Jan-
07
Jul-
07
Jan-
08
Jul-
08
Jan-
09
$/bbl
Dramatic price rise unexplainable by 
fundamental cost indicators, 
suggesting
an unsustainable bubble.
- R-sq from Jan-94 through Oct
07 is 96%
Convergence to 
fundamentally 
supported levels.
Jun-09 WTI
to date: 
$84.30
suggesting
potential
overshooting
again.
Figure 14: Charting a fair price for oil [Source: LCM Commodities]
5-year forward WTI
$75.68
Fitted WTI w PPI $-adjusted  $59.84
Fitted WTI w PPI
$61.03
May-09
$/bbl

While the five-year oil price and PPI data series briefly converged
again around January this year, oil has since run away upwards again
into what looks, from this chart, like the beginning of just another
bubble – which fits perfectly with what we are seeing in the markets as
above. Right now the PPI series predicts the “fair” five-year price in a
range of around $60 a barrel.
Both Hayward and the LCM team under Ed Morse offer different
reasons for pegging oil significantly below $100 per barrel for the
foreseeable future. Ultimately, though, each argument comes back to
concentrating on producer cost structures and the necessary returns that
must be distributed through the industry to motivate development and
maintenance of oil production. Such thinking is in stark contrast with
the price-spike-to-infinity models that characterised the oil price fever
of 2008. These models were predicated on fundamental supply deficits
not capable of remedy simply by gradual price increases to bring more
marginal sources into production. Instead, they were requiring prices to
leap high enough to permanently destroy demand in relation to a supply
which could not be significantly increased. As long as 4mbpd of spare
OPEC capacity remains idling, however, such jeremiads will appear
baseless – and current real world conditions do not indicate this buffer
will be evaporating quickly any time in the near future. 
I personally have my own, more cynical reasoning for thinking that
somewhere in the $60-70 per barrel range is a reasonable expectation
for the price of oil. As with Hayward’s theory, mine is linked to the self-
interest of the OPEC cartel which, in this new world of more straitened
economic conditions, and a hefty supply buffer unlikely to be eroded by
oil demand growth in the near-term, will once again have a lot of
discretion in matching supply to a particular targeted price band. Unlike
Hayward’s theory, it is not as complicated as calculating the price band
sufficient for OPEC members to realise both social and oil infrastructure
Petromania
250

spending. Instead, it simply notes the fact that around $60-$70 per
barrel looks to be the highest OPEC can get away with managing prices
to before they become high enough to incentivise fresh investments in
unconventional sources of supply such as oil sands and gas-to-liquids.
(These being the sources which threaten, in the longer term, to diminish
the power the cartel holds over the global oil market.) Potential
Canadian oil sands resources are often touted as equalling or exceeding
“another Saudi Arabia”. We can be sure the genuine article does not
wish these resources to become economically viable any time soon.
This, as much as social spending commitments, must surely lie behind
frequent indications from various OPEC mouthpieces that it sees
around $70 per barrel as the right price for oil. 
What will the oil futures markets, however, think is the right price for
a barrel of crude oil through the coming years? At the time of writing,
in July 2009, we are just past the first anniversary of oil’s as-yet all-
time high. It is impossible to say if, by the time this book is published,
real world fundamentals will have reasserted themselves to choke off the
fantastic and many would say unjustified rate of appreciation already
seen in the oil price year-to-date, or if indeed the price will have charged
even higher on the back of the same sort of speculative frenzy that
brought us that 2008 blow-out in the first place. But if the lesson of the
oil price bubble of 2008 is that speculative fantasy can all too often
displace the real world in determining the price of our most important
commodity, on the evidence of the first six months of 2009 it is clear the
oil market itself is yet to fully awake from the fevered dreams of
petromania. Perhaps in a world becoming ever more financialised, ever
more colonised by the imperatives of financial investment, with profit-
hungry investors and institutions riding roughshod over the actual
instrumental uses the real world has for the goods we trade between
ourselves, complete escape from this malaise is impossible. Like a
Petromania Redux
251

parasitic infestation lying latent in the lifeblood of the oil market,
recurrent bouts will return to disorientate us. Petromania is a condition
we might simply have to learn to live with.
Petromania
252

Sources
&
Bibliography


255
Core Sources, With Explanatory Notes
F
or a selection of core, what we might call evidential source
documentation, referred to repeatedly and in detail through the
text, I have adopted a non-standard format of bibliographic
listing as below. I trust this will make it easier for readers to both grasp
the respective significance of each, and locate copies of the material for
themselves if so desired. All other material is presented in the more
standard bibliography that follows this.
At the time of writing, some of the source documents have become
harder to locate than they were at earlier points in time. The CFTC
website (www.cftc.gov) in particular is notably poor at returning search
results linking to CFTC documents that the author himself previously
downloaded from official CFTC web pages now no longer maintained
in the same form. Nevertheless, where official channels fail, the internet
will often deliver the same documents through either generalist search
websites such as Google or, with more specific regard to academic
papers, through specialist sites such as the Social Science Research
Network (SSRN – www.ssrn.com). 
Additionally, in the interests of both space and sanity, I have eschewed
direct references here to the veritable legion of news reports from media
around the world regarding the oil price and associated issues from the
mid-noughties, up to the time of manuscript submission in mid-2009.
A very few important and/or exemplary stories from specific media have
already been dated or sourced in the text itself, and other references to
news stories may be easily verified de novo through the use either of a
generalist search website or a subscription-based news tool (such as
Dow Jones Factiva).

256
Petromania
CFTC-Originated Studies, Reports & Miscellanea
(See www.cftc.gov, with the proviso above.)
Fundamentals, Trader Activity and Derivative Pricing
(Bahattin Büyüksahin, Michael S. Haigh, Jeffrey H. Harris, James A.
Overdahl, Michel A. Robe, 2008)
The latest version of a CFTC study on co-integration between nearby
and long-dated oil futures prices as traded on Nymex, incidentally also
detailing the overwhelming dominance of swap dealers in the
contemporary market, and the source for the data detailing the split
between trader categories in 2000, 2004 and 2008 used in this book.
Data herein is far more detailed than that normally released to the
public in the weekly CFTC Commitment of Traders (CoT) report.
Market Growth, Trader Participation and Pricing in Energy Futures
Markets
(Michael S. Haigh, Jeffrey H. Harris, James A. Overdahl, Michel A. Robe,
2007)
Earlier version of the study on cointegration through the oil futures
curve (as above) – trader data snapshots herein cover just 2000 and
2006.
Price Volatility, Liquidity Provision and the Role of Managed Money
Traders in Energy Futures Markets
(Michael S. Haigh, Jana Hranaiova and Jim Overdahl, 2005) 
The “original” CFTC study (itself a November 2005 third draft of a
working paper first issued in April 2005) on whether managed money
traders (MMTs), more commonly known as hedge funds, could be seen

257
Sources & Bibliography
to lead price formation on the Nymex. Despite its very limited scope,
this work (or a later update of it) was repeatedly referred to by then-
CFTC chair Walt Lukken and other officials as “proof” that speculation
played no notable role in driving oil prices through early 2008.
Herding Amongst Hedge Funds in Futures Markets
(Michael S. Haigh, Naomi E. Boyd and Bahattin Büyüksahin, undated
itself but externally dated by SSRN to 2007)
Examining data running from 2002-2006, this paper is similar to that
above insofar as it examines the behaviour of MMTs/hedge funds in
commodity futures trading. This time it uses data from 32 separate
commodity futures markets, as opposed to oil futures in particular –
and concludes that while such investors do indeed exhibit “herding” in
their trades, this nevertheless does not translate into speculation
dominating price formation. Relevant as a later restatement of the same
conclusion made in the 2005 MMT study, and therefore also possibly
the research CFTC officials such as Walt Lukken were referring to when
they claimed that the CFTC had proved that speculation was not an
issue in oil price formation (see below). 
Written Testimony of Acting Chairman Walter Lukken Before the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations Committee on Energy
and Commerce, United States House of Representatives
December 12 2007 (CFTC, 2007)
In which Acting Chairman Lukken details to the subcommittee the
findings of research ‘recently’ (sic) undertaken by the CFTC, the
conclusions of which, as he states, ‘show that speculative buying, as a
whole, does not appear to drive prices up’. The research in question is
not specified beyond this: it could be either of the two studies listed

258
Petromania
directly above, whether originals as named or updates, a combination
of both, or another study entirely.
Letter from CFTC Acting Chairman Walt Lukken to The Honorable Jeff
Bingaman, Chairman, Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
United States Senate
June 11 2008 (CFTC, 2008)
In which CFTC Acting Chairman Walt Lukken details the purpose both
of the then-recently issued ‘Special Call’ to swap dealers trading oil
futures on Nymex and the creation of the Interagency Task Force, with
regard to examining the role of speculation and index trading in crude
oil price formation on Nymex.
Interim Report on Crude Oil
(Interagency Task Force on Commodity Markets, 2008)
The first and, despite being ‘interim’, thus far only report on crude oil
futures pricing issued by the special interagency task force put together
and chaired by the CFTC in response to widespread criticism of its
stance on speculation. Its findings that speculation played no significant
role in oil price formation are not only questionable in their own terms
but were also publicly disowned by CFTC commissioner Bart Chilton
(see below).
Staff Report on Commodity Swap Dealers & Index Traders with
Commission Recommendations
(CFTC, 2008)
The CFTC staff report on swap dealers, the first fruits (thus far) of the
‘Special Call’ the CFTC issued to swap dealers in mid-2008. As with the
Interim Report (above), its findings can be questioned in their own
terms. Also included as an appendix in this report is the ‘Commissioner

Bart Chilton Dissent’, in which the eponymous CFTC staffer disowns
not just the Staff Report findings but also those of the Interim Report
as well.
Testimony by Gary Gensler, Chairman, on behalf of the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission Before the United States Senate
Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government,
Committee on Appropriations
June 2 2009 (CFTC, 2009)
In which newly-appointed CFTC chairman Gensler reverses the official
position of the oil futures trading regulator by stating that there was
indeed a bubble in commodity prices and that commodity index funds
and financial investors were obvious players in this. 
Statement by Chairman Gary Gensler on Speculative Position Limits and
Enhanced Transparency Initiatives
July 7 2009 (CFTC, 2009)
In which CFTC chairman Gary Gensler announced a new wave of
(currently ongoing, at the time of writing) hearings on restricting
speculative pressure on commodity price formation in futures markets.
CFTC to Hold Three Open Hearings to Discuss Energy Position Limits and
Hedge Exemptions, First Hearing Scheduled for July 28 2009
(CFTC press release dated July 21 2009)
Official confirmation that the hearings announced by Chairman Gensler
are underway, detailing the scope of the enquiries.
The weekly Commitment of Traders (CoT) report and archives thereof
are available from:
www.cftc.gov/marketreports/commitmentsoftraders/index.htm
Sources & Bibliography
259

Other US Government Agency Reports
Issues Involving the Use of the Futures Markets to Invest in Commodity
Indexes [sic]
(US Government Accountability Office, January 2009)
A briefing prepared by the GAO for the House Committee on
Agriculture in December 2008 and publicly released in January 2009 as
a letter dated January 30 2009 from Orice M. Williams, Director,
Financial Markets and Community Investment, to The Honorable
Collin Peterson, Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, House of
Representatives, summarising the GAO conclusions alongside the
briefing slides. The letter itself details the GAO view on the limitations
of various studies regarding speculation in oil futures which rely only
on standard CFTC CoT data. The whole document is publicly available
at www.gao.gov.
State of the Markets Report 2008, Item No. A-3
April 16 2009 (Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 2009)
The FERC review of the wild energy price volatility seen in mid-2008
maintained that physical fundamentals alone could not explain this
phenomenon 
and 
focused 
instead 
on 
so-called 
“financial
fundamentals”, in a fashion completely at odds with the then-prevailing
CFTC view that financial speculation played no important role in these
events. Available from www.ferc.gov.
Petromania
260

Submissions to US Legislative Hearings and
Associated Documentation
Prepared Testimony of Philip K. Verleger, Jr.
(PKVerleger LLC 15 W. Francis Street, Aspen, Colorado 81611)
To the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigation of the US Senate Committee
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and the Subcommittee on
Energy of the US Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
December 11 2007
Philip Verleger’s late 2007 testimony recounted his evidence and
analysis that the US Department of Energy policy of filling the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve (SPR) with light sweet crude was squeezing WTI oil
futures prices as traded on Nymex and would lead to an oil price of
$120 per barrel in due course. This testimony plus much other relevant
material, including Verleger’s Comments on the Accidental Hunt
Brothers report in which he dismisses Michael Masters’ efforts as ‘junk
analysis’, can be found at the PK Verleger LLC website
(www.pkverlegerllc.com).
Testimony of Guy Caruso
Administrator, US Energy Information Administration
To the Subcommittee on Energy of the Committee on Energy and Natural
Resources, and the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, United States
Senate
December 11 2007 (US Department of Energy, Office of Congressional
& Intergovernmental Affairs, 2007)
Written testimony notable for the manner in which Caruso defers to
CFTC judgment on whether or not speculation is a major factor in oil
Sources & Bibliography
261

price formation (explicitly quoting the CFTC work on MMTs/hedge
funds), a stance which oral questioning from senators confirmed Caruso
maintained despite his own feeling that speculation was playing at least
some part in high oil prices (see below).
Senators Carl Levin and Byron L. Dorgan
Joint Hearing on Speculation in the Crude Oil Market
Committee Hearing
11 December 2007 (CQ Transcripts, 2007)
Transcript of same US Senate hearing referenced above. Contains in a
single record of one legislative hearing: comment from oil consultant
Fadel Gheit of Oppenheimer & Co, Inc, that then-current oil prices
were being inflated by speculators to levels twice what they otherwise
might be; comment as noted above from oil consultant Philip Verleger
of PKVerleger LLC that the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) policy
would drive crude prices to $120 per barrel; and a long grilling of EIA
administrator Guy Caruso by various senators in which they force him
to admit that while he himself thinks speculation is indeed a cause
contributing to high oil prices, he nevertheless defers to the CFTC
judgment that it should not be seen as a significant contributory factor. 
Testimony of Michael W. Masters
Managing Member/Portfolio Manager, Masters Capital Management, LLC
To the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, United
States Senate
May 20 2008
An appendix included in the submission from Masters to this hearing
was the first time he laid out before legislators his methodology and
resultant calculations regarding the volume of long, buy-side interest
Petromania
262

that commodity index investment was bringing to the oil futures
market. 
Testimony of Roger Diwan
(Partner at PFC Energy, 1300 Connecticut Av, NW Washington DC 20010)
Before the United States House of Representatives Subcommittee of Oversight
and Investigation, Committee on Energy and Commerce, regarding Energy
Speculation: Is Greater Regulation Necessary To Stop Price Manipulation?
Part II
June 23 2008 11:00 a.m
Roger Diwan’s written submission to the June 23 hearing includes his
account of what he described as the three stages of oil market
financialisation, his labelling of oil as the ‘new gold’ due to its emergent
price correlation with dollar weakness, and his call for greater
regulation and transparency in the futures market itself.
Testimony of Fadel Gheit
Managing Director & Senior Oil Analyst, Oppenheimer & Co. Inc.
To the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Energy
and Commerce
June 23 2008 
As quoted extensively in the text of this book, Gheit’s submission lays
out a clear case that when we have eliminated all fundamental reasons
for the explosive price appreciation seen in crude oil futures from late
2007, speculation is the obvious answer.
Sources & Bibliography
263

Financial Energy Markets and the Bubble in Energy Prices: Does
the Increase in Energy Trading by Index and Hedge Funds Affect
Energy Prices?
Executive Summary, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, US House of
Representatives
By Edward N. Krapels, Special Advisor, Financial Energy Markets, Energy
Security Analysis, Inc., Wakefield, Massachusetts
June 23 2008
Edward Krapels essentially agreed with his peers Diwan and Gheit that
it was speculation that was responsible for oil prices above $100 per
barrel.
Testimony of Michael W. Masters
Managing Member/Portfolio Manager, Masters Capital Management, LLC
To the Committee on Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, United States House of Representatives
June 23 2008
Excerpts from the submission by Michael Masters to the June 23
hearings have been quoted earlier in this book – this evidence also
reiterated his calculations, previously laid out in May 2008, of the
volume of commodity index-originated long interest in oil futures. 
Special Note
Testimony from the four witnesses listed immediately above – Diwan,
Gheit, Krapels and Masters – formed Panel 1 of the US Congressional
hearing before the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and
Commerce’s Subcommittee on Oversight & Investigations held on June
23 2008. Other testimony across three other panels that day included
submissions from US industry representatives, including airline
executive Doug Steenland as quoted earlier in this book, and testimony
Petromania
264

from market and regulatory officials. Copies of submissions from all
of these witnesses plus supplementary material are available from the
website archives of the US House of Representatives Committee on
Energy and Commerce, in the 110th Hearings section. The
supplementary material also includes an archived multimedia recording
of the June 23 2008 hearing, from which are taken the various verbatim
quotes from actual oral testimony related earlier in this book. The
hearing in question is entitled “Energy Speculation: Is Greater
Regulation Necessary to Stop Price Manipulation? – Part II” and the
title/summary page linking to all these assets is currently accessible at:
http://is.gd/2rBD9.
Depending on 19th Century Regulatory Institutions to Handle
21st Century Markets
United States Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee (McCullough
Research)
September 16, 2008
Testimony from Robert McCullough, Jr., of McCullough Research,
quoted earlier in this book and detailing his assessment of similarities
between the price patterns seen in the Nymex oil market in June/July
2008 and the price patterns seen in US West Coast power markets some
years earlier, the latter now known to be caused by illegal market
manipulation on the part of now-defunct energy company Enron. A
wealth of other useful material from McCullough, including the more
detailed report on the same subject entitled Seeking the Causes of the
July 3 2008 Spike in World Oil Prices, originally released in August
2008 under the aegis of US Senators Maria Cantwell and Ron Wyden,
is 
available 
from 
the 
McCullough 
Research 
website 
at
www.mresearch.com.
Sources & Bibliography
265

The Accidental Hunt Brothers / The Accidental Hunt Brothers
Act 2
Two reports on commodity index speculation and the resulting effect on
futures prices, written by Michael Masters of Masters Capital
Management – included in this sources section by dint of the fact that
the original report, at least, was released in September 2008 under the
aegis of US legislators who had been prominent in holding hearings on
the issues, specifically Senator Byron Dorgan, Senator Maria Cantwell
and Representative Bart Stupak. The title references the Hunt brothers
who notoriously (and deliberately, as opposed to accidentally) cornered
the silver market to cause a price spike in the early 1980s. Both reports
are just some of the material available at a website dedicated to the
issues surrounding commodity index speculation and maintained by
Masters and associates at accidentalhuntbrothers.com.
Selected Relevant Investment Bank Analyst Reports 
(Note: investment bank analyst reports are in general restricted to
clients, with some additional distribution to selected media.)
A lesson from long-dated oil: A steadily rising price forecast
Jeffrey Currie et al, Goldman Sachs Energy Watch
May 16 2008
The much-referenced Goldman note from mid-May 2008 which
introduced the second half 2008 average price forecast of $141 per
barrel and was itself seen as kicking off a couple of hectic weeks of
speculative activity in the oil futures markets.
Petromania
266

“Is it a bubble?”
Edward Morse et al
Lehman Brothers Energy Special Report
May 16 2008
Released the same day as the notorious Goldman note above, Dr Ed
Morse and team warn that the oil price does indeed look like a
speculative bubble and also introduce their calculations of the leverage
the oil price displays to commodity index inflows, as quoted earlier in
this book.
“Oil dot-com”
Edward Morse et al
Lehman Brothers Energy Special Report
May 29 2008
The Lehman Brothers note from Dr Ed Morse and his team which laid
out in detail the speculative forces causing the abnormal oil futures
curve flexing seen in the latter half of May 2008, warned that oil price
bulls were mistaking temporary Chinese hoarding of diesel for a long-
term structural demand deficit and predicted an abrupt end to the oil
price bubble.
Index Inflows and Commodity Price Behaviour
Daniel Ahn
Lehman Brothers Commodities Special Report
July 31 2008
Released as the oil price was already falling rapidly from its peak, this
note reiterated in detail much of the Lehman work relating to
commodity index inflows and futures pricing and is also a good, brief
primer on the whole issue of financialisation in commodity markets.
Sources & Bibliography
267

South by Southeast: Recent F&D cost deflation imply continued
deferred oil price weakness
Daniel P. Ahn, Edward L. Morse and Edward Kott
LCM Research Special Report
March 19 2009
This March 2009 note from ex-Lehmanites Ed Morse and Daniel Ahn
in their new berth at LCM Commodities lays out both the theory and
calculations of the producer price index/long-dated oil price correlation
referred to in this book. It also fingers oil index ETFs as driving oil price
appreciation through early 2009, and presents evidence of the
commodity index outflows from June 2008 onwards which support the
theory of investor “rebalancing” beginning before the oil price even
peaked.
As the financial crisis eases, an energy shortage lies ahead
Jeffrey Currie et al
Goldman Sachs Energy Watch
June 3 2009
A mid-2009 note from Jeff Currie and his team foreseeing the return of
a ‘structural bull market’ in oil pricing and instituting an end-2010 WTI
price forecast of $95 per barrel.
Petromania
268

Statistical Information on Energy Markets
BP Statistical Review of World Energy (BP)
This indispensable review is released annually by UK-listed
multinational oil company BP, the current edition (2009, 58th edition)
is available from www.bp.com.
IEA (International Energy Agency)
The energy agency of the OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development, essentially the club of developed world
market democracies) maintains a suite of various statistics as well as
publishing its monthly Oil Market Report (OMR) and, more recently,
its Medium Term Oil Market Report (MTOMR) - all of which are
available via www.iea.org.
EIA (Energy Information Administration)
The EIA is part of the US government Department of Energy (DoE),
and issues its own widely followed statistics on energy usage, see
www.eia.doe.gov.
OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries)
The oil producer cartel maintains its own statistics on oil markets and
usage, all of which are available from www.opec.org.
Sources & Bibliography
269

Bibliography
Arranged Thematically
Oil, History and Geopolitics
Clarke, D., Empires of Oil – Corporate Oil in Barbarian Worlds
(London: Profile Books, 2007)
Industry insider Duncan Clarke explains how the Western, private
sector oil companies that have historically dominated the industry since
its inception are facing an existential threat. The author shows how
power over resources is leaching from them to rising state sector
companies from outside the club of developed world market
democracies.
Duffield, J. S., Over a Barrel, The Costs of US Foreign Oil Dependence
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2008)
Eminent US political scientist John S. Duffield spells out the reality and
implications of US dependence on crude oil from overseas.
Engdahl, W., A Century of War: Anglo-American Oil Politics and the
New World Order (London/Ann Arbor: Pluto Press, 2004 [1992])
It is an article of faith among prominent leftist academics such as Peter
Gowan and David Harvey that the hike in oil prices caused by the Arab
“oil shock” of 1973 was at the least partially-inspired, at worst covertly
engineered, by the Nixon administration in the US. This was supposedly
both as a means of visiting recession upon oil import-dependent Europe
and Japan, then-rising economic competitors to the US, and also seeing
270

both the US dollar itself and the US bank-led dollar loan market
strengthened immeasurably by a massive jump in dollar-denominated
Arab oil revenues, or “petrodollars” (in reality, all these outcomes
occurred). While you will search in vain for any such tale in Daniel
Yergin (see below), this volume by William Engdahl is probably the
best-evidenced account of this alternative history, and is endorsed by the
high-profile Saudi oil minister of the 1970s, Ahmed Zaki Yamani.
Klare, M., Rising Powers, Shrinking Planet – How Scarce Energy is
Creating a New World Order (Oxford: Oneworld, 2004 [1992])
Klare, M., Blood and Oil (London: Hamish Hamilton, 2004)
Klare, M., Resource Wars, The New Landscape of Global Conflict (New
York: Metropolitan Books, 2001)
Michael Klare is arguably the preeminent academic analyst of resource
nationalism and the conflict it entails. All three of these books are both
extensively and comprehensively referenced enough for any professorial
discussion yet nevertheless highly readable for those not steeped in the
professional discourse of international relations.
Rowell, A., Marriott, M., & Stockman, L., The Next Gulf - London,
Washington and Oil Conflict in Nigeria (London: Constable, 2005)
An early account, yet still one of few detailed examinations, of the
background to the militant insurgency in the Niger Delta region of
Nigeria – although violent events on the ground have snowballed
considerably in the few years since it was published. 
Yergin, D., The Prize – The Epic Quest for Oil, Money & Power (New
York/London: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, 1992)
The classic doorstopper on the history of the oil industry from the mid-
1850s up to the late 20th century, replete with all the big personalities,
Sources & Bibliography
271

politics, brinkmanship and war along the way, by Daniel Yergin,
president of influential oil consultancy Cambridge Energy Research
Associates (CERA).
Peak Oil Theorists
Deffeyes, K. S., Hubbert’s Peak – The Impending World Oil Shortage
(Princeton/Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2001)
Kenneth Deffeyes is a prominent peak oil advocate who was also a
personal friend of the theory’s originator, Shell geologist M. King
Hubbert. This is a great introduction to the subject, in which Deffeyes
also predicts 2009 as the year world oil production will hit its
geologically-producible peak.
Bentley R. W., Mannan S. A., Wheeler, S. J., “Assessing the date of the
global oil peak: The need to use 2P reserves”, Energy Policy 35 (2007),
pp.6364-6382
Based at the University of Reading department of cybernetics, Dr Roger
Bentley is an agreeably unfanatic proponent of peak oil who will
happily concede that unconventional supply sources are a wild card in
any such calculations, but is nevertheless adamant that for conventional
oil supply, the peak production point is imminent. This paper argues
that a conventional, corporate “Big Oil”-type rebuttal of peak oil based
on historic growth in proven (so-called 1P) reserves over the past thirty
years is erroneous, as the focus instead should be on proven and
probable (2P) resources estimated at the time of discovery for a
particular oil deposit, which actually display far less growth through
this period. 
Petromania

Bentley, R., Boyle, G., “Global oil production: forecasts and
methodologies”, Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design
35(4) (2008), pp.609-626
Another paper co-authored by Roger Bentley, this one an admirably
comprehensive overview of the various schools and resulting estimates
surrounding this most tendentious subject – of great use to those who
both agree and disagree with peak oil theories.
Simmons, M. R., Twilight in the Desert – The Coming Saudi Oil Shock
and the World Economy (Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2005)
The controversial book by energy investment expert Matthew
Simmons, questioning the production capacity of OPEC mainstay Saudi
Arabia.
The Financialisation of Oil and Commodity
Markets
Campbell, Patrick; Orskaug, Bjorn-Erik; and Williams, Richard, “The
forward market for oil”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Spring
2006, pp.66-74
A useful survey by Bank of England staffers of both on-exchange and
off-exchange, over-the-counter (OTC) oil derivative trading activity,
which incidentally notes: ‘In common with other OTC commodity
markets there is only limited information available about the size of the
OTC market for oil. But the range of market participants we surveyed
were unanimous in reporting that the OTC oil derivatives market is
significantly larger than the exchange-traded oil futures market.’
Sources & Bibliography
273

Domanski, Dietrich, and Heath, Alexandra, “Financial investors and
commodity markets”, BIS Quarterly Review March 2007, pp.53-67
An article issued under the aegis of the Bank of International
Settlements (BIS), effectively the global banking regulator, which not
only includes the estimates of financial investment in oil futures versus
physical trade cited earlier in this book but is also itself a short
introduction to the financialisation of commodities.
Greenwich Associates, The Global Commodity Boom: Companies Turn
to Top Derivatives Dealers for Help in Hedging, and Financial Investors
Fueling Commodities Boom (2008)
A twinned pair of short reports released in May 2008 by investment
consultants Greenwich Associates detailing the results of surveys the
firm undertook. As referred to earlier in the text of this book, these
both established Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley as joint top dogs
for energy-related OTC derivatives trading and also detailed the varying
exposures of different classes of institutional investors to OTC
commodities derivatives.
Hubard, W., The Financialisation of Commodities (London: Thomson
Reuters) (2008)
This “IFR Market Intelligence” report, authored by investment
luminary and sometime TV market pundit William Hubard, covers in
detail the theory, practice and recent history of the commodities
investment boom.
Tham, Eric, Time Varying Factors Behind the Oil Price (2008)
An academic paper establishing an increasing sensitivity of the WTI oil
price to financial speculation since 2004 – the index of speculation in
question is the net long position of “non-commercial” market
participants as defined for the weekly CFTC CoT report.
Petromania
274

Wray, L. Randall, “The Commodities Market Bubble – Money Manager
Capitalism and the Financialization of Commodities”,The Levy
Economics Institute of Bard College Public Policy Brief, No. 96, 2008
(Annandale-on-Hudson: The Levy Economics Institute)
Written just prior to the great commodity price crash seen in the latter
half of 2008, this paper critiques the then-prevailing commodity price
boom as a speculative bubble, a natural outgrowth of the “money
manager” style of capitalism inherently prone to cyclical booms and
busts. Wray is a former associate of the late Hyman Minsky, working
at the Levy Institute which keeps the Minskyan flame burning, who
also helped prepare the latest edition of Minsky’s Stabilizing an
Unstable Economy (see below).
Speculative Bubbles and Market Irrationality 
Cooper, George, The Origins of Financial Crises (Petersfield: Harriman
House, 2008)
As referred to in Petromania, an excellent synthesis of various strands
of financial instability theory, including Minsky’s, with the author’s
own extensive understanding.
Mackay, Charles, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of
Crowds (Ware: Wordsworth Editions, 1995 [1841])
Originally published in the early 19th century, Mackay’s book includes
blow-by-blow accounts of some genuine investment market blow-outs
– the Dutch tulipomania, the Mississippi Scheme and the South Sea
Bubble – amongst a roster of more obscure episodes.
Sources & Bibliography
275

Minsky, Hyman P., Stabilizing An Unstable Economy (New York:
McGraw Hill, 2008 [1986])
As cited extensively in this book, a core work from the man who
literally wrote the book on the circular, self-reinforcing logic of
speculative finance and who is now being so publicly rediscovered in the
wake of the global credit crunch. 
Shiller, Robert J., Irrational Exuberance (2nd ed) (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2005)
Also extensively cited in this book, Robert Shiller’s seminal study of
market irrationality as evidenced through the 20th and early 21st
century. Whereas Minsky generally concentrates on the in-built
structural features of markets which push them into speculative excess,
Shiller generally focuses on the behaviour of market participants in both
booms and busts. Both aspects are required for a rounded picture of
how speculative bubbles are inflated and burst.
Teitelman, Robert, “The Journal goes bubble happy”, TheDeal.com
(published May 20 2008), available at:
www.thedeal.com/dealscape/2008/05/the_journal_goes_bubble_happy.php
Robert Teitelman’s pithy pathology of speculative bubbles, as quoted in
this book, was published on the website of well-known US financial
magazine/website TheDeal.
Petromania
276

Index


279
A
Accidental Hunt Brothers, The 126, 204 (see also: Masters,
Michael W.)
Addax  226
Ahn, Daniel  184, 246, 248 (see also: Morse, Dr Edward)
Alfonso, Juan Pablo Perez  (see: ‘crude, devil’s excrement, the’)
Al-Naimi, Ali  46, 80
Alphaville blog  (see: Financial Times, The, Alphaville blog)
Angolan deepwater offshore  248
Arens, Richard  17-20, 101
Asia  (see also: BTC; China; “commodity super-cycle”; diesel; India; 
resource nationalism)
“axis of mercantilism”  38
demand growth  21-3, 32-3, 143-5
Emerging Asia  32-3  
oil acquisition 37-8
B
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline  31-2, 168
Bank for International Settlements (BIS)  75, 108-9
Barclays Capital  45
Barton, Congressman Joe  83
Beijing Olympics  160
Bernanke, Ben  166-7
Bingaman, Jeff  129
Blanch, Francisco  158, 216-8
Bodman, Samuel (US Energy Secretary)  134
BP  23, 39, 81-2, 224 (see also: Hayward, Tony; Ruehl, Christof)
Statistical Review of World Energy  22, 77, 244, 248
Brent  (see: crude, prime markers)

Petromania
280
bubbles
definition  183
feedback loops (see: feedback loops)
identification  180-3
negative bubble, theory 169, 185-7
origins  175, 179
past bubbles  162
speculative bubbles  170-3 (see also: speculation...????)
Bush, George W.  47, 237
C 
Canadian oil sands  82, 225, 248
Caruso, Guy (see: EIA, Caruso, Guy)
Caspian oil  27
attacks  31-2
Central Asia (see: BTC)
CFTC (Commodity Futures Trading Commission)  89, 91-2
Commitment of Traders (CoT) report  96, 192, 237, 241 (see 
also: speculation, commercial/non-commercial split)
Commitment of Traders classifications  124
credibility  234-8
Fundamentals, Trader Activity and Derivative Pricing 193
future, the  238-9, 241-2
Interagency Task Force  161, 193-5, 202
Interim Report 161, 192-6, 200, 202
Lukken, Walt  (see: Lukken, Walt)
monitoring  96
Special Call  129-30
Staff Report 192, 196-201, 208
State of the Markets 2008 235
studies, assorted  100-2, 122, 125, 149
supervision  106-7, 119, 121
CGES (Centre for Global Energy Studies)  (see: Drollas, Leo)
Chilton, Bart dissent  201-3
China  21-3, 37-8, 143-4 (see also: Asia; Beijing Olympics; diesel)

Index
281
demand growth  159-60
hoarding  159-60, 189-90
Sichuan earthquake 159-60
Citi  106, 246
CITIC  38
CNOOC  38
CNPC  38
commodity index investment  108, 127-9, 157, 197-8 (see also:
speculation, commodities; CSCB)
investors  150-3
commodities  (see also: CFTC; derivatives)
investment  106-8, 120
indices  (see: commodity index investment)
super-cycle  32-3, 145, 183, 243  (see also: Emerging Asia)
swaps  117-119, 129
Congressional hearings  44, 76, 89-94, 143-5, 204-5, 208, 234-5
ConocoPhilips  82
consequences  224-6 (see also: credit crunch)
Cooper, George  179-80, 183
Origins of Financial Crises, The 175
credit crunch (see also: inflation; interest rates)  3, 17, 167-8, 223
Credit Suisse  246
Credit Suisse Commodities Benchmark  246-7
crude
benchmark varieties  52
black gold  7-8
‘devil’s excrement, the’  8
industrial lifeblood  7
fuel  8
light, sweet  (see: diesel)
marginal barrel  28-30, 80-1, 248
prime markers  52-3
supply  23-8
Currie, Jeffrey  44-5, 146, 169-70, 231-3

Petromania
282
D
D’Amato, Richard  38
Deffeyes, Kenneth  (see: Hubbert’s Peak)
Delta supply  (see: Nigeria, supply)
demand growth  (see: Asia, demand growth; crude, industrial 
lifeblood; supply and demand)
Department of Agriculture (US)  129
Department of Energy (US)  91, 129, 143-5
Department of Treasury (US)  129
derivatives  117-9, 121 (see also: commodities; commodity index
investment; futures; options; swaps)
investment  120
off-exchange derivative agreements  120, 126, 221 (see also: 
speculation)
OTC (over-the-counter)  103-5, 108-9, 115-21, 127-9, 137
188, 227   (see also: paper barrels)
developing world  3, 8, 21, 44, 83, 222, 234
diesel  144-5, 158-60, 189-91, 217
crack spread  158
demand  47
diesel fundamentalists  146, 158, 189
Diwan, Roger  83, 89, 93-5, 185-6
dotcom crash  5, 210-2 (see also: Nasdaq 100; “Oil dotcom”)
Dow Jones-AIG (DJ-AIG)  114
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan  77
Dresdner Kleinwort  (see: Smith, Colin)
Drollas, Leo  ix, 190-1, 215-8
Dubai  (see: crude, prime markers)
Dunn, Michael  236
E
economic crisis  3, 10, 17, 223, 233, 235
economic growth  21-2, 32, 244
Economist, The 44, 134, 222

Index
283
efficient market hypothesis  137-9, 171-4 (see also: speculation,
opposition)
EIA (Energy Information Administration)  22-3, 91
Caruso, Guy  91, 100
Emerging Asia  32-3, 37 (see also: Asia)
energy policy  (see: resource nationalism)
Energy Security Analysis  83
ETF Securities  245
ethanol  25, 35
exchange-traded funds (ETFs)  108, 115, 117, 245 (see also:
commodity index investment)
ExxonMobil  39
F
Federal Reserve (US)  129, 166, 171
feedback loops  7, 169, 174-83, 187, 222 (see also: “Minsky
moments”; bubbles, negative bubble theory)
FERC (Federal Energy Regulatory Commission)  91
financial instability theory  (see: Minsky, Hyman)
financialisation  9-10, 95-6, 251-2
of oil  92-4
Financial Times, The  17, 133, 166, 227
Alphaville blog  232
“LEX”  134
floor brokers  (see: speculation, floor brokers)
Forbes 229-30
foreign policy  30, 226 (see also: resource nationalism; Addax)
fuel  9 (see also: diesel)
government subsidy 44
futures  (see also: options)
additive rules of open interest  71, 186
delivery date  56
front-month 41, 55-7 (see also: futures curve; oil price,
Nymex price)
“fully collateralised”  60-5

Petromania
284
Nymex  54
offsetting  60, 63-6, 74
origins  54
oil  70-1
risk hedging  57-9, 63-6, 106, 119
speculation  66-7, 74-6, 135
spot delivery  55-6
futures curve  55, 102-4, 111-2, 149-51, 155, 188, 206, 221 (see 
also: speculation; swap dealers)
backwardation  111-2, 138, 155
contango  111-2, 138, 142, 155-7
“risk premiums”  207-8
G
GAO (Government Accountability Office) (US)  91, 192, 197
Issues Involving the Use of the Futures Market to Invest in 
Commodity Indexes 192
Gazprom Neft  226
Gensler, Gary  237, 241 (see also: CFTC)
Georgia  (see: Russo-Georgian conflict)
Gibbs, Robert  10
Global Energy Studies  (see: Drollas, Leo)
globalisation  22 (see also: Emerging Asia)
Goldman Sachs  44-5, 106, 121, 146-9, 227, 232-3, 243
2008 note  154-5
forecasts  243
Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI)  113-4
J. Aron & Co.  227
swap dealer  227-31
government fuel subsidy  (see: fuel, government subsidy)
Great Crash 1929  169
Greenspan, Alan  171-2, 180
Gulf of Guinea  27
Gulf of Mexico  27

Index
285
H
Hayward, Tony  247-8, 250 (see also: BP)
hedge funds  96, 108, 122
market share  125 (see also: commodities, investment)
Hofmeister, John  82  (see also: Royal Dutch Shell)
Horsnell, Paul  (see: Barclays Capital)
Hubard, William  107, 116
Hubbert, M. King  (see: Hubbert’s Peak)
Hubbert’s Peak  34-5
Hubbert’s Peak, Deffeyes, Kenneth  35
Huntingdon prospect  224
I
IEA (International Energy Agency)  23, 39, 80
Medium Term Oil Market Report 161
India  21, 44 (see also: Asia; Emerging Asia; resource nationalism)
industrialisation  21-2
Interagency Task Force  (see: CFTC, Interagency Task Force)
interest rates  3, 16, 171, 223 (see also: credit crunch)
Interim Report (see: CFTC, Inter-Agency Task Force, Interim
Report)
inventory levels  133 (see also: oil price, inventory levels)
hoarding  140-2, 159-60, 190-1
over-supplied  166
investor diversification  95
Iran
geopolitical tension  31, 167
nuclear program  31
Iraq
invasion  30
Kurdish oil licence  226
production  43
Turkish incursion  43
Irrational Exuberance (see: Shiller, Robert, Irrational Exuberance)

Petromania
286
“Is it a bubble?” 157
Islamists  31
J
J. Aron & Co  (see: Goldman Sachs, J. Aron & Co)
K
Keynes, John Maynard  173-4
Khelil, Chakib  47, 77, 94
Kirkuk pipeline  (see: Iraq, Turkish incursion)
Kirsch, David  93
Krapels, Edward  83
Kurdistan  (see: Iraq)
L
Laden, Osama bin  31 (see also: Islamists)
LCM Commodities  245 (see also: Morse, Dr Edward)
“South by Southeast”  184
Lehman Brothers  46, 155-7 (see also: Morse, Dr Edward)
bankruptcy  167, 169-70
“LEX”  (see: Financial Times, The, “LEX”)
light sweet crude  (see: diesel)
long-dated oil  (see: supply, fears)
Lowe, John  82
Lukken, Walt  100, 129-30, 192, 236 (see also: CFTC)
M
Mackay, Charles 15
Macquarie  (see: Barakat, Nauman)
Malaysia  44
Malone, Robert  82
marginal barrel  (see: crude, marginal barrel)
marginal cost of supply  (see: crude, marginal barrel)

Index
287
marginal production  (see: Angolan deepwater; Canadian oil sands)
market makers  (see: speculation, market makers)
market participants  193-5
commercial/non-commercial split (see: speculation)
criminality 205-6 (see also: speculation, speculators)
market share  125
pivotal trader  206
swap dealers 221 (see also: swap dealers)
mark-to-market  175-6, 180, 184
Masters, Michael W.  51, 69, 76, 83, 126-8, 145 (see also: Accidental
Hunt Brothers, The)
McCullough Jr., Robert  204-8, 222
Medium Term Oil Market Report (see: IEA, Medium Term Oil
Market Report)
MEND (Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta)  30, 43
Merrill Lynch  45, 216 (see also: Blanch, Francisco)
Mexico  (see: Gulf of Mexico)
Middle East  (see also: Iran; Iraq; OPEC)
Minsky, Hyman  6, 174-7, 179, 221
“Minsky moments”  179-80
Stabilizing an Unstable Economy 175, 177
Mississippi Scheme  7
MMTs (Managed Money Traders)  (see: hedge funds)
Morgan Stanley  121, 227
Morse, Dr Edward  46, 133, 155-8, 160, 165, 184, 190-1, 200,
245-6, 248, 250
Murti, Arjun  44-5, 231
N
Nasdaq 100  5, 210-12
Nations Energy  38
negative bubbles  (see: bubbles, negative bubbles)
‘New Era’ thinking  181, 183, 222 (see also: Shiller, Robert)
New York magazine  17
New York Post  18

Petromania
288
Nigeria  8 (see also: MEND; resource nationalism)
Bonga shutdown  168
production  43
supply  30
Norrish, Kevin  (see: Barclays Capital)
Northern Rock  178
North Sea oil  27
Northwest Airlines  76
Nymex open interest  (see: speculation, Nymex open interest)
O
Obama, Barack  10, 237
offsetting  (see: futures, offsetting)
“Oil dotcom”  133, 156-7, 160, 165 (see also: Morse, Dr Edward)
Oilexco  224
oil price (see also: speculation)
$100 oil  15-20  (see also: Arens, Richard)
1980 record  20
1990s/00s ascent  21
ascent  41-2
bust  165-70, 184  (see also: negative bubble)
dark matter  117-120
dotcom parallel  211-212  (see also: “Oil dotcom”)
fair price  245-51
forecast  45, 81-3, 246
front-month  68, 209
global benchmark  (see: oil price, Nymex price)
industry cost  80
inventory levels  78-80
Nymex price  53, 68-9, 72
speculators  188
spot price  53, 65, 69, 76, 137, 146-7
supply and demand  78
Olympics  (see: Beijing Olympics)
Omimex  38

Index
289
OPEC  9, 23-7
non-OPEC members  27
non-OPEC production  27, 29 (see also: marginal production; 
Russia)
non-OPEC supply  32, 36-7
production  29, 47, 244
self-interest  251 
spare capacity  26-7
speculation  94
supply  30, 32, 36-7, 40, 217
open interest  (see: Nymex open interest)
Oppenheimer & Co  83
options  73  (see also: derivatives; futures)
options derivative writers  144-5
speculators  158
Orinoco belt  (see: Venezuela, Orinoco belt)
OTC (over-the-counter) derivatives  (see: derivatives, OTC)
P
paper barrels  54, 70-2, 75, 137, 185-6
peak oil  34-5, 39-40, 147  (see also: supply, fears)
“perfect contango”  (see: futures curve, contango)
Petro-Canada  38
PetroKazakhstan  38
PFC Energy  83 (see also: Diwan, Roger)
Phibro  106
pipelines  (see: BTC; Kirkuk) 
pivotal trader  (see: market participants, pivotal trader)
Ponzi finance  6, 177-9, 222  (see also: Minsky, Hyman)
PPI index  248-50
Premier Oil  224
private sector  (see also: resource nationalism)
production  40, 43, 47, 168, 217, 220, 244

Petromania
290
R
real estate boom-and-bust  11
recession  8, 26, 179  (see also: credit crunch; economic crisis; interest 
rates)
regulation  10-11, 247 (see also: CFTC)
renewable energy  25, 36
resource curse  8 (see also: MEND)
resource nationalism  36-9, 42, 226
returns  (see: speculation, commodities, returns)
risk hedging  (see: futures, risk hedging)
“risk premiums”  (see: futures curve, “risk premiums”)
Royal Dutch Shell  39, 82, 224-6
Ruehl, Christof  77, 216-7, 220, 244, 247-8 (see also: BP)
Russia 37 (see also: resource nationalism)
production  27-8, 39
Russo-Georgian conflict  168
S
Saudi Arabia  (see also: OPEC)
Al Saud dynasty, American support of  25
crude capacity  27
“oil shock”  9
production  40, 47, 168, 217, 220
spare capacity  160
supply  39-40
surplus production capacity  26
terror attacks  31
Schork, Stephen  15, 17-20, 190-1
Schork Report, The 15
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)  129
SemGroup  229-230
Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
Committee (US)  127
Senate Subcommittee on Financial Services (US)  237
Shell  (see: Royal Dutch Shell)

Index
291
Shiller, Robert  6, 169-70, 175, 177, 181, 221
Irrational Exuberance 4, 175
Simmons, Matthew R.
Twilight in the Desert  40
Sichuan earthquake  (see: China, Sichuan earthquake)
Sinopec  38, 226
Smith, Colin  46, 165, 246
South Sea Bubble  7
Special Call  (see: CFTC, Special Call)
speculation  4-7, 55, 90, 94-5, 218
blind herding  206-7
bubble  7, 135-6
definition 171-3
oil price  187 (see also: oil price)
commercial/non-commercial split  98-100, 102, 104, 106-7, 
121-2, 125-6, 191-3, 206
commodities
indices  114-7, 127-8
returns  109-14
floor brokers  96
futures  66-8, 74-6, 135-6
future, the  251-2
growth in speculative interest  95-6
hedge funds  96
market makers  67-8, 96, 125
mechanism  218-9 (see also: swap dealer loophole)
Nymex open interest  70, 125, 127-8, 185-7
opposition  134-54, 161, 189, 216-7
(see also: efficient market hypothesis)
proponents  46-7
speculators  83, 158, 188 (see also: swap dealers)
spot forward gambit  206
time spread trades  97
speculative finance  177 (see also: Ponzi finance)
spot price  (see: oil price, spot price)

Sri Lanka  44
Stabilizing an Unstable Economy (see: Minsky, Hyman)
“stagflation”  9
Staff Report  (see: CFTC, Staff Report)
Statistical Review of World Energy (see: BP, Statistical Review of 
World Energy)
Steenland, Douglas  76
stop order  19-20
Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR)  143-5, 191
structured investment products  108  (see also: commodity index
investment)
Stupak, Bart  228
sub-prime  (see: real estate boom-and-bust; Ponzi finance)
supply  (see: OPEC; non-OPEC; marginal barrel)
fears  147-154, 157
shortage  190-1
supply and demand  9, 21-3, 77-8, 218  (see also: diesel
fundamentalists)
swap dealers  102-6, 122, 125-7, 152-5, 194  (see also: CFTC; 
speculation, commercial/non-commercial split;
Goldman, swap dealer)
swap dealer loophole  102-5, 119, 126, 221, 233, 238
swaps  (see: commodities, swaps; swap dealers)
T
Taiwan  44
Teitelman, Robert  182-3, 209
terrorism  31
TotalFinaElf  38-9
toxic assets  11
traders  125
tulipomania  7, 15
Turkey  (see: BTC; Iraq, Turkish incursion)
292
Petromania

U
Udmurtneft  38
United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission  38
United States Oil Fund  245
V
Venezuela
Orinoco belt  37
resource nationalism  39
Verleger, Philip K.  126, 143-5, 191, 204
Vitol  202-3, 206
W
War on Terror  31
Washington Post, The 228
West African oil  27
Wray, L. Randall 226
Commodities Market Bubble, The 223
WTI  (see: crude, prime markers)
Y
Yeats, W. B.  243
Yukos  37
293
Index



