
Philosophy of Perception
A Contemporary Introduction
William Fish

First published 2010
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Simultaneously published in the UK
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2010 Taylor & Francis 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechani-
cal, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, includ-
ing photocopying and recording, or in any information storage 
or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the 
publishers.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be 
trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Fish, William, 1972–
Philosophy of perception : a contemporary introduction /  
William Fish.
p. cm. — (Routledge contemporary introductions to philosophy
Includes bibliographical references.
[etc.]
1. Perception (Philosophy) I. Title.
B828.45.F57 2009
121’.34—dc22
2009036467
ISBN 10: 0-415-99911-1 (hbk)
ISBN 10: 0-415-99912-X (pbk)
ISBN 10: 0-203-88058-7 (ebk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-99911-3 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-99912-0 (pbk) 
ISBN 13: 978-0-203-88058-6 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2010.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-88058-7 Master e-book ISBN

For Freya, Anya, and Finlay


Contents
	
Acknowledgments
xi
1	
Introduction: Three key principles
1
Overview
1
Three key principles
3
Conclusion
9
Questions
9
Notes
9
2	
Sense datum theories
11
Overview
11
The Phenomenal Principle and misleading experiences
11
Sense data and the Common Factor Principle
13
The time lag argument
15
Sense datum theory formalized
16
Sense datum theory and the two hats
18
Sense datum theory and the Representational Principle
23
The sensory core theory
23
Percept theory 
24
Sensory core theory, percept theory, and the two hats
27
Metaphysical objections to mental objects
29
Questions
30
Notes
30
Further reading
31
3	
Adverbial theories
33
Overview
33
Adverbialism
36
Adverbialism and metaphysics
37
The many property problem 
39
The complement objection
43
Adverbialism and the two hats
44
Questions
47

viii  Contents
Notes
47
Further reading
48
4	
Belief acquisition theories 
51
Overview
51
Perception as the acquisition of beliefs
52
Belief acquisition theory and the two hats
54
Perception without belief acquisition
56
Perception, belief, and our conceptual capacities
59
Acquiring new concepts
61
Blindsight
63
Questions
63
Notes
63
Further reading
64
5	
Intentional theories
65
Overview
65
Varieties of intentionalism
66
Theories of perceptual content
71
How do experiences get their contents?
77
Representationalism and the two hats
78
Questions
82
Notes
82
Further reading
85
6	
Disjunctive theories
87
Overview
87
The causal objection
89
Epistemological disjunctivism
91
Disjunctivism about metaphysics
91
Disjunctivism about content
92
Disjunctivism about phenomenology
94
Naive realism
96
Disjunctive theories of hallucination
98
Disjunctivism and illusion
104
Disjunctivism and the two hats
106
Questions
108
Notes
109
Further reading
110
7	
Perception and causation
113
Overview
113
The causal theory of perception
118
Questions
121

Contents  ix
Notes
121
Further reading
123
8	
Perception and the sciences of the mind
125
Overview
125
Theoretical paradigms and their underlying assumptions
126
Important phenomena
128
Perception, cognition, and the phenomenal
134
Color vision and color realism
140
Questions
145
Notes
145
Further reading
146
9	
Perception and other sense modalities
149
Overview
149
Individuating the senses
149
Touch, hearing, taste, and smell
157
How distinct are the senses?
161
Questions
162
Note
163
Further reading
163
	
References
165
	
Index
175


Acknowledgments
Thanks to everybody I’ve talked philosophy of perception with over the 
years—there really are too many of you to mention individually, but I’m very 
grateful to you all. Particular thanks are due to my recent graduate philoso-
phy of perception class: Rhys Burkitt, Malcolm Loudon, Justin Ngai, Louise 
Nicholls, Hayden Shearman, Jeremy Smith, and Marcel Zentveld-Wale, who, 
over the course of a semester, worked through a draft of this book with me. I 
am also very grateful to Ned Block, Alex Byrne, Tim Crane, Dave Chalmers, 
Stephen Duffin, Kati Farkas, Heather Logue, Stephen Hill, Susanna 
Schellenberg, and two anonymous readers, who provided me with valuable 
advice and suggestions at various stages of the project. I am indebted to them 
all for their input. Thanks also to the Journal of Consciousness Studies, for 
permission to reproduce the synesthesia pop-out figures; Random House, 
for permission to reproduce the picture of the vase-face illusion; Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, as well as Alex Byrne and Dave Hilbert, for permission 
to reproduce the cone sensitivity and metamer graphs; and the Hackett 
Publishing Company for permission to reproduce the opponent-processing 
schematic and graph. Finally, thanks to Beth, for all of her support, and to 
my children—Freya, Anya, and Finlay—who make it all worthwhile. This 
book is dedicated to them.


1	
Introduction
Three key principles
Overview
In this chapter we begin by introducing the two hats: two “tests” for 
an adequate philosophical theory of perception. These are the episte-
mological hat, which focuses on perception’s role of providing us with 
information about the external world, and the phenomenological hat, 
which focuses on the conscious aspects of visual experiences.
The remainder of the chapter then considers three important 
principles by which philosophical theories of perception may be distin-
guished from one another. The Representational Principle states that 
all visual experiences are representational. The Phenomenal Principle 
states that if I am consciously aware of a property then a bearer of that 
property must exist for me to be consciously aware of. The Common 
Factor Principle states that indiscriminable veridical perceptions,  
hallucinations, and illusions have an underlying mental state in 
common.
Over the course of this book, we will be thinking philosophically about our 
capacity for sense perception—our capacity to perceive the world by means of 
our sense organs.1
If one is of a scientific bent, one might wonder just what the role of  
philosophical theorizing about perception is: isn’t empirical science in the 
process of discovering what the nature of a visual experience is and what 
is going on when we perceive? The relationship between the philosophy of 
perception and the associated sciences of the mind will be discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 8 but, for now, let us simply note that philosophical think-
ing about perception has a remit that is somewhat broader than that of the 
sciences. 
Whilst philosophers are indeed concerned with many of the questions that 
motivate empirical investigators—questions of how our capacity to perceive 
is related to our brains, bodies and environment, for instance—philosophical 
theories of perception are also explicitly fashioned to take more philosophical 

2  Philosophy of Perception
considerations into account. Two considerations that are of particular impor-
tance for the philosopher of perception are the following:
Phenomenology: Perceptual experiences are paradigmatically conscious 
experiences: they have a phenomenology or there is, in Thomas Nagel’s 
influential terminology (1979), something it is like to perceive. And given 
that there is something it is like to perceive, we can ask what it is like to 
perceive: what, specifically, it is like to see a pink elephant, to be tickled, 
or to smell coffee. Yet as philosophers such as Nagel and Frank Jackson 
(1982) have argued, there is an important sense in which scientific theo-
ries of perception do not really address the issues surrounding perceptual 
consciousness. One key role for the philosopher of perception, then, will 
be to theorize about perception in a way that gives due weight to its status 
as a conscious experience. This can also give us a consideration that we 
can use when it comes to assessing philosophical theories of perception: 
how accurately can it capture what it is like to have visual experiences?
Epistemology: Another key feature of perceptual experiences that is not a 
primary consideration for those studying perception scientifically is that 
perception is the primary source of our knowledge of the world in which 
we live. Again, then, another key consideration for the philosopher of 
perception will be to develop a theory that both informs, and is informed 
by, epistemological considerations. A further consideration for a theory 
of perception, then, will be how well it can make sense of perception’s 
role as a source of empirical knowledge.
To put it metaphorically, these considerations suggest that an adequate 
philosophical theory of perception has (at least) two different hats to wear—
an epistemological hat and a phenomenological hat. As we shall see as we 
work through different philosophical theories of perception, developing a 
theory that can adequately wear both of these hats has proved a difficult task. 
To oversimplify somewhat, what we find is that the better the phenomeno-
logical hat fits a theory, the more awkward the epistemological hat looks, and 
vice versa.
What is more, these are not the only important considerations to bear 
in mind when it comes to evaluating a theory of perception. For one thing, 
philosophical theorizing must also be informed by scientific findings—a 
philosophical theory that wears both of these hats adequately yet is incon-
sistent with scientific findings will not be of much value. We will come 
back to the interaction between philosophy and the empirical sciences in 
Chapter 8. In addition, there are also other philosophical considerations to 
take into account, such as the fact that any theory of perception will claim 
that certain things exist. Any theory can hence also be assessed in part by 
querying whether or not these ontological commitments are metaphysically 
acceptable (given the alternatives available). Moreover, as we shall see, certain 

Three key principles  3
philosophical theories of perception incorporate metaphysical commitments 
about the world itself; if there are reasons to think that these commitments 
are mistaken, this will constitute a problem with that theory of perception. 
As we proceed, we will evaluate each philosophical theory of perception 
in part by asking how well it wears the two hats, but we shall also bring these 
other considerations to bear where appropriate.
Three key principles
To enable us to provide some structure to the presentation of the philo-
sophical theories and, in particular, to see critical ways in which different 
philosophical theories of perception are similar to, and different from, one 
another, I shall classify theories according to which of three key principles 
they endorse and which they reject. An interesting feature of these prin-
ciples is that whilst they are all, broadly speaking, recommended by our own 
first-person understanding of what it is to be a perceiver, most theories of 
perception end up rejecting one or more of them. 
The Common Factor Principle
The first of our principles begins from the observation that different experi-
ences can be more or less correct or successful. Tradition distinguishes three 
cases:
Fully successful cases of perception—cases in which an object is seen and 
seen correctly or “as it is”—will be termed perception or, sometimes, veridi-
cal perception.2 When it comes to the associated verb, if we find a subject 
“seeing” or “perceiving”, it should be understood that we are dealing with a 
case of successful perception.
In contrast, illusion refers to cases in which an object is seen but seen 
incorrectly or “as it is not.” So, for example, illusions includes cases in which 
a round object is seen to be oval, a blue object is seen to be green, or a tall 
object is seen to be short. Unfortunately, as there is no aesthetically accept-
able verb form, when it is required, we will have to talk about subjects being 
under an illusion, or suffering from an illusion.
Finally, the term hallucination refers to cases in which it seems to the 
subject as though something is seen but where in fact nothing is seen. 
Classic examples include Macbeth’s hallucination of a dagger and (arguably) 
Hamlet’s hallucination of his father. Thankfully we have an acceptable verb 
form here: to hallucinate.
If we need a term that refers to an experience regardless of which of these 
three categories it fits into, we will use the term visual experience. Where you 
find this term it should be read as a generic term that includes perceptions, 
illusions, and hallucinations.
Now, the core of any philosophical theory of perception is an account of 
the nature of the mental state or event that occurs when we perceive. With 

4  Philosophy of Perception
this in mind, consider the following three (indistinguishable) situations: a 
subject is seeing an elephant that has been painted pink; a subject is under 
the illusion that the very same elephant, unpainted, is pink (perhaps because 
of new, experimental lighting at the zoo); a subject is hallucinating (or maybe 
dreaming) that they are at the zoo looking at a pink elephant. The Common 
Factor Principle says that in such indistinguishable or indiscriminable cases 
of perception, illusion, and hallucination the mental state or event that occurs 
is the same, regardless of which of these categories the visual experience falls 
into.
In order to be clear, let me say a little more about the idea that percep-
tions, illusions, and hallucinations have a “mental state or event” in common. 
The reason we need to say more is because, on one level at least, these three 
experiences are clearly different—they are a perception, illusion, and hal-
lucination in turn! Given this, what does it mean to say that the mental state 
or event in these three cases is the same?
Let me explain by way of an analogy. Consider: 
two different sorts of burn, exactly alike in the type of physical injury 
they involve (call it type B), but differing with respect to what causes the 
injury; there are sunburns, in which B is caused by exposure to the sun, 
and scorches, in which B is caused by proximity to a source of heat. 
(Child 1994: 145) 
In such a case, although there is a sense in which sunburns and scorches 
are different injuries, they nonetheless have an underlying “physical injury” 
in common—a burn of type B. Likewise, the Common Factor Principle 
states that although there is a sense in which indistinguishable perceptions, 
illusions, and hallucinations are different experiences, they nonetheless have 
a “mental state or event” in common: the latter claim about experiences being 
understood as analogous to the former claim about injuries. I will mark this 
by saying that, according to the Common Factor Principle, indistinguishable 
cases of perception, illusion, and hallucination have an “underlying” mental 
state or event in common.
With this clarification in mind, we can formulate the Common Factor 
Principle as follows:
(C)	Phenomenologically indiscriminable perceptions, hallucinations, 
and illusions have an underlying mental state in common.
Why might we think that this principle is intuitively plausible? One 
important consideration is the fact that, ex hypothesi, subjects are completely 
unable to distinguish between the experience they have when they perceive, 
when they hallucinate, and when they suffer from an illusion. If we think 
that our introspective capacities must be able to turn up a difference between 
two mental states or events if there is a difference there to be turned up, then 

Three key principles  5
the fact that we cannot discover a difference between perceptions, illusions, 
and hallucinations would show that there are no differences between them. 
Even if we do not hold such a strong view of introspection, the fact that the 
experiences in these different situations can be indiscriminable could at least 
be seen as evidence, albeit defeasible evidence, that the subject’s underlying 
mental state or event is the same across these situations.
A second reason, connected to and reinforcing this consideration, turns 
on evidence from psychology and neuroscience. We know from studying a 
range of phenomena that our ability to have veridical experiences depends 
upon the right kinds of activity taking place in our brains. Furthermore, we 
also know that if this brain activity is altered in certain predictable ways, 
subjects can be made to have illusory experiences. We are also confident that 
brain activity alone can be sufficient for a subject to have a hallucination. 
These considerations suggest that the nature of the experience is somehow 
determined by the underlying brain activity. Given this, it can then seem 
plausible to suppose that, if the same kind of brain activity occurs in a non-
standard situation, the subject will nonetheless undergo an experience of the 
same kind.
Finally, there is also an appeal to everyday talk about visual experiences. 
Consider a case in which we do not know whether or not we are seeing a 
pink elephant or hallucinating one. In such a case we might naturally say 
that we are having the experience of seeming to see a pink elephant, where 
this is understood as something that could occur in both a case of veridical 
perception and a case of hallucination.
The Phenomenal Principle
The second core principle that we shall use to focus our discussions is the 
Phenomenal Principle. This is explained and endorsed in a well-known pas-
sage by H.H. Price in which he contends that:
When I see a tomato there is much that I can doubt. I can doubt whether 
it is a tomato I am seeing or a cleverly painted piece of wax. I can doubt 
whether there is any material thing there at all. Perhaps what I took for a 
tomato was really a reflection; perhaps I am even the victim of a halluci-
nation. One thing however I cannot doubt: that there exists a red patch 
of a round and somewhat bulgy shape, standing out from a background 
of other color patches, and having a certain visual depth, and that this 
whole field of color is directly present to my consciousness. 
(Price 1932: 3)
The Phenomenal Principle is formulated more clearly by Robinson (who 
also gives the principle its name): 

6  Philosophy of Perception
(P)	If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something which pos-
sesses a particular sensible quality then there is something of which 
the subject is aware which does possess that quality. 
(Robinson 1994: 32)
To clarify the terminology here, “sensibly appears” is used to indicate that 
we are dealing with conscious awareness: so to say that there sensibly appears 
to me to be something pink is to say that pinkness is phenomenally present 
to me or characterizes what it is like for me. The Phenomenal Principle then 
states that, in such a case, there must actually be something pink of which I 
am aware. 
It is important to note that the Phenomenal Principle has the form of a 
conditional (an if–then statement) with a phenomenological antecedent and 
a metaphysical consequent. It tells us that, in order for things to be a certain 
way for us phenomenologically, then certain things must exist.
The main motivation for endorsing the Phenomenal Principle derives from 
our own introspective knowledge of what it is like for us to have conscious 
experiences. You can test the strength of this motivation for yourself by clos-
ing this book and looking at it. The force behind the Phenomenal Principle is 
simply this: in order for your experience to be the way it is, blackness, pink-
ness, and rectangularity have to actually be there for you to be aware of—there 
must be current instantiations of these properties to adequately explain what 
it is like for you to have this experience. If there were nothing bearing these 
properties for you to be aware of, the thought goes, then your experience 
could not be as it is. The Phenomenal Principle codifies this by saying that, 
whenever we have an instance of this kind of conscious awareness, then there 
must be something—some object—that the subject is aware of and that bears 
the properties that characterize what it is like for the subject.
Are there any other arguments in favor of the Phenomenal Principle? 
Possibly; as with the Common Factor Principle, it might also be argued to 
be an implicit commitment of our linguistic practices. Take, for example, the 
phenomenon of afterimages. If you stare at a bright light for a while, you will 
usually find that, when you close your eyes, you are aware of a bright spot in 
the center of your visual field that is roughly the same size and shape as the 
light you were staring at. When having such an experience, you might assent 
to the truth of the following statement: I am aware of a bright, circular patch. 
In assenting to the truth of such a statement, you appear to be committing 
yourself to the existence of a bright, circular patch that you are aware of. This 
patch would be the kind of object that the Phenomenal Principle insists must 
be involved in every visual experience. So the defender of the Phenomenal 
Principle might also argue that the language we use in talking about our 
experiences incorporates a tacit commitment to the Phenomenal Principle.

Three key principles  7
The Representational Principle
Our final principle, the Representational Principle, states that visual experi-
ences are intentional or representational.
When theorists claim that a visual experience is intentional, they are 
attempting to draw our attention to a particular feature of such an experi-
ence: that it is about something in the world—something other than itself or 
“beyond itself.” This raises the question of how visual experiences come to 
have this intriguing property. A common contemporary understanding of 
how visual experiences have the property of being “about” something is to 
see them as representing that the world is a certain way.3
To enable us to refer back to it, let us specify a formal statement of the 
Representational Principle as follows:
(R) All visual experiences are representational.
To explain the notion of representation in more familiar terms, consider a 
map of London and a postcard of St. Paul’s Cathedral. Both the map and the 
postcard tell us about St. Paul’s. In virtue of this, both of these objects can be 
said to represent St. Paul’s or, simply, to be representations.
Following up on this analogy will also enable us to highlight some key fea-
tures of what is involved in saying that a visual experience is representational.
First, note that, inasmuch as they are both representations of St. Paul’s, 
there are two key differences between the map and the postcard.
On the one hand, there is a difference in how they represent the cathedral. 
The map represents it symbolically and linguistically, with a cross symbol 
next to the words, “St. Paul’s.” The postcard represents it pictorially, with a 
photographic image of the building. Partly due to these differences in how 
postcards and maps represent, there is also a difference in what these two 
objects tell us about the cathedral. Whilst the map tells us where the cathe-
dral is, the postcard does not tell us this but rather tells us about other things, 
such as the shapes and colors of its signature dome and clock towers, as well 
as other things about its surroundings.
By focusing on what these different representations tell us about St. Paul’s, 
we can introduce an important piece of terminology: the content of the rep-
resentation. When we talk about a representation’s content, we are talking 
about what the representation tells us—about the information it conveys to 
us—and maybe also, on some accounts, how this information is presented.4
Here are some examples of philosophers making the claim that visual 
experiences have content:
A visual perceptual experience enjoyed by someone sitting at a desk may 
represent various writing implements and items of furniture as having 
particular spatial relations to one another and to the experiencer, and as 
themselves as having various qualities . . . The representational content 

8  Philosophy of Perception
of a perceptual experience has to be given by a proposition, or set of 
propositions, which specifies the way the experience represents the world 
to be. 
(Peacocke 1983: 5)
Perceptual experience represents a perceiver as in a particular environ-
ment, for example, as facing a tree with brown bark and green leaves 
fluttering in a slight breeze. 
(Harman 1990: 34)
[P]erceptual states represent to the subject how her environment and 
body are. The content of perceptual experiences is how the world is 
represented to be. 
(Martin 1994: 464)
A further important feature about the notion of representation is that, in 
virtue of having a content—in virtue of telling us something—a representa-
tion can misinform us: it can tell us that things are a certain way when they 
are not. As Crane puts it, “to say that a state has content is just to say that 
it represents the world as being a certain way. It thus has . . . a ‘correctness 
condition’—the condition under which it represents the world correctly” 
(1992: 139). For example, a misprinted map of London might tell us that St. 
Paul’s is on the South Bank of the river Thames; a joke postcard might depict 
Nelson’s Column rising out of the top of its dome. In these cases, the map 
and the postcard are still representations, and they still have content—they 
still tell us something—it is just in these cases, they are misrepresentations: 
what they tell us is not true but false. 
We must be aware that there is a fairly innocent spatial understanding of 
the term “content”. For instance, the “contents” of my pocket are, at pres-
ent, some coins, keys, a cellphone, and lint. But the fact that my pocket has 
contents, in this sense, doesn’t mean that it has correctness conditions or that 
it is potentially true or false. So we need to be aware that, sometimes, when 
people talk about the “content of perception” it is used as a way of referring 
to what is in our experience or what is perceived. It is not (necessarily) an 
endorsement of the Representational Principle.
I said at the outset of this chapter that all of these principles are motivated, 
in part, by our first-person understanding of what is involved in being a 
perceiver. What aspects of that understanding motivate the Representational 
Principle?
First, when we consider what it is like for us to enjoy visual experiences, 
it seems clear that perception is world-directed in some important way. In 
particular, perception plays a critical role in enabling us to find out about and 
navigate our environment. How could it do this if it were not the case that it 
carried information about that environment? Endorsing the Representational 
Principle can be seen as an attempt to capture this key feature of perception.

Three key principles  9
Second, there is our talk about experiences. We often speak of people see-
ing that the sky is blue, the sea is green, and so on. This might be taken to 
indicate that our everyday talk includes a tacit commitment to visual experi-
ences having world-involving contents as the Representational Principle 
suggests.
Third, there is the observation that much psychology also treats 
visual experiences as representational. To claim otherwise—to deny the 
Representational Principle—might be seen to be, in some sense, anti-science. 
(This will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.)
Conclusion
Despite the initial plausibility of these three principles, as we shall see, the 
majority of theories of perception end up rejecting one or more of them. In 
the next five chapters, we shall see how theories of perception can be char-
acterized by means of which of these principles are accepted and which are 
rejected. 
Questions
•	
How plausible do you find classifying visual experiences as 
either perceptual (veridical), hallucinatory, or illusory?
•	
Should we require a theory of perception to wear the episte-
mological hat, or should we work out a theory based on other 
criteria and only then start doing epistemology?
•	
At a first glance, which of the three key principles do you find 
plausible? Why? Which do you find implausible? Why?
Notes
	 1.	 As we all know, human beings have a number of different perceptual 
faculties, or senses. The familiar five are sight or vision, hearing or 
audition, taste or gustation, smell or olfaction, and touch or tactition. 
Although there is debate over precisely how many senses we have—cases 
can be made for other senses, such as nociception (perception of pain) 
and proprioception (perception of limb position)—these other possible 
senses will not figure in this book. What is more, the senses of hear-
ing, taste, smell, and touch will only be discussed toward the end of 
the book, in Chapter 9. Instead, the majority of this book will follow 
philosophical tradition and focus on philosophical theories of sight, or 
visual perception.

10  Philosophy of Perception
	 2.	 Sometimes, the term “veridical” can be used to mean that an experience 
somehow matches the world, even if it is not thereby a case of seeing. 
This is the source of claims that there could be, for example, a “veridical 
hallucination” (Lewis 1980). In the present context, “veridical” is not 
being used in this way—when we talk about “veridical perception,” we 
are discussing cases of successful seeing.
	 3.	 This is not to say that one couldn’t make a case for a different interpre-
tation of intentionality. The terminology itself derives from Brentano 
(1995), who characterizes intentionality in three ways: as involving “the 
intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object,” “reference to a con-
tent,” and “direction toward an object” (1995: 88). One could, therefore, 
contend that a theory of perception counts perceptual states as inten-
tional so long as it can count them as being somehow directed toward an 
object. However, the contemporary use of intentionality is most closely 
connected with the “reference to a content” characterization and, hence, 
to the notion that visual experiences contrive to be about things in virtue 
of being representational. We shall therefore restrict our understanding 
of intentionality in this way. 
	 4.	 The distinction between a representation and its content is often char-
acterized in terms of a distinction between representational vehicles and 
representational content. The vehicle of representation is the thing that is 
doing the telling—in the cases just discussed, the picture on the postcard 
and the icons on the map are the vehicles as they are doing the telling. 
The content of the representation is what the vehicle is saying—that St. 
Paul’s is on the north bank of the Thames and that it has a large domed 
vault.

2	
Sense datum theories
Overview
Theories that appeal to sense data typically accept both the Phenomenal 
Principle and the Common Factor Principle. These principles, together 
with some other unexceptional premises, can be used to argue that in 
all visual experience, whether perceptual or otherwise, we sense non-
physical objects, which nowadays are usually known as sense data.
Pure versions of sense datum theory also reject the Representational 
Principle. Some difficulties for this theory are discussed, including 
claims that it gets the phenomenology of visual experience wrong and 
that it cannot deliver a satisfactory epistemology.
In the light of this, we introduce and briefly discuss versions of the 
sense datum theory that accept the Representational Principle—sen-
sory core theory and percept theory. 
Some more metaphysical objections to mental objects (sense data) 
are then considered.
Common Factor Principle

Phenomenal Principle

Representational Principle
/
The Phenomenal Principle and misleading experiences
Sense datum theories of perception typically begin from an acceptance of the 
Phenomenal Principle: that if there sensibly appears to a subject to be some-
thing which possesses a particular sensible quality then there is something 
of which the subject is aware which does possess that quality. Now, in the 

12  Philosophy of Perception
misleading cases of illusion and hallucination, the Phenomenal Principle has 
an interesting consequence. 
Consider hallucination first as it is the simplest case. When a subject hallu-
cinates, there sensibly appears to that subject to be something that possesses 
at least one sensible quality. Take an hallucination of a pink elephant, for 
example. In such a case, there sensibly appears to the subject to be some-
thing that possesses the quality of pinkness. If we accept the Phenomenal 
Principle, this entails that there is something of which the subject is aware 
that possesses the quality of pinkness. Yet, as this is a case of hallucination, 
there is no suitable pink thing in the world—the pink thing of which the 
subject is aware cannot, therefore, be a worldly entity.
In the case of illusion, the considerations are similar. Once again, there 
sensibly appears to the subject of illusion to be something that possesses a 
sensible quality. For instance, if the gray elephant looks pink to the subject, 
then there sensibly appears to the subject to be something that possesses 
the quality of pinkness. The Phenomenal Principle therefore insists that 
there is something of which the subject is aware which possesses the qual-
ity of pinkness. Yet, whilst there is an experienced object in this case—the 
elephant—that object does not instantiate the property of pinkness so can-
not be the pink thing of which the subject is aware.
These arguments give us the first stages of what are known as the argu-
ment from hallucination and argument from illusion respectively. They move 
from an endorsement of the Phenomenal Principle, together with the plau-
sible claim that hallucinations and illusions are cases in which there sensibly 
appears to the subject to be something that possesses a sensible quality, to 
the conclusion that the subject is aware of something that cannot be identi-
fied with an everyday worldly object. More formally, the arguments work as 
follows:
Premise 1: (P) If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something 
which possesses a particular sensible quality then there is something of 
which the subject is aware which does possess that quality.
Premise 2(h): In hallucination, there sensibly appears to a subject to be 
something which possesses a particular sensible quality when there is no 
suitable worldly object at all.
Premise 2(i): In illusion, there sensibly appears to a subject to be some-
thing which possesses a particular sensible quality when there is no 
suitable worldly object that possesses that quality.
Conclusion (h): In hallucination, the something of which the subject is 
aware is not an everyday worldly object.

Sense datum theories  13
Conclusion (i): In illusion, the something of which the subject is aware is 
not an everyday worldly object.
If the subject is not aware of an everyday worldly object, what is the 
subject aware of? Well, whatever it is, it is pink. And as (we can safely stipu-
late) there is nothing pink in the subject’s brain, the object of awareness in 
these cases is typically taken to be nonphysical. Given that hallucinations 
seem to depend only on processes internal to the subject—processes in the 
brain, for example—the object of hallucinatory experience is also typically 
(although not exclusively) taken to be mind-dependent and “private” to its 
subject, in the sense that only the subject of the hallucination can be aware of 
that particular object. The typical contemporary answer to the question of 
what subjects are aware of in cases of illusion and hallucination is therefore 
that subjects are aware of mental objects known as sense data (singular: sense 
datum).
This gives us the positive conclusion of the first stage of the arguments 
from illusion and hallucination (which, for simplicity’s sake, I will combine):
Conclusion (+): In hallucination and illusion, subjects are aware of sense 
data.
Sense data and the Common Factor Principle
The next stage of the arguments from hallucination and illusion turn on an 
endorsement of the Common Factor Principle:
(C)	Phenomenologically indiscriminable perceptions, hallucinations, 
and illusions have an underlying mental state in common.
The “underlying mental state” in question is the state of being aware of 
sense data of certain kinds. Given the positive conclusion of the first stage of 
the arguments from hallucination and illusion: 
Conclusion (+): In hallucination and illusion, subjects are aware of sense 
data.
The Common Factor Principle licenses the inference to the further con-
clusion that we are aware of sense data in cases of veridical perception too.
Why might the sense datum theorist be tempted by the Common Factor 
Principle? Well, we have already mentioned the kinds of reasons why this prin-
ciple might seem appealing but in the present case the kinds of considerations 
that are appealed to by sense datum theorists include the indiscriminability 
of hallucination from veridical perception, the continuity between hallucina-
tion and veridical perception, and causal considerations.

14  Philosophy of Perception
Indiscriminability
As noted in the opening chapter, in the abnormal cases of illusion and hal-
lucination, the experiences we have can be indiscriminable from those we 
have in (the relevant) perceptual scenario. As Price contends:
Is it not incredible that two entities so similar in all these qualities should 
really be so utterly different: that the one should be a real constituent 
of a material object, wholly independent of the observer’s mind and 
organism, while the other is merely the fleeting product of his cerebral 
processes? 
(1932: 31–32)
Price argues that the indiscriminability of perception and cases of hal-
lucination and/or illusion give us reason to think that, if one is an awareness 
of sense data, then so must the other be. In response to this kind of consider-
ation, Austin wonders: “If I am told that a lemon is generically different from 
a piece of soap, do I expect that no piece of soap could look like a lemon? 
Why should I?” (1962: 50).
Perception to illusion continuity
The second consideration turns on the thought that our visual experiences 
will change from perceptual to illusory quite regularly. As examples of this, 
A.D. Smith mentions “the common phenomenon of looking at an article of 
clothing under the artificial lighting of a shop and discovering its ‘real’ color 
in daylight” and “the way in which our awareness of the colors of objects 
changes as dawn gives way to the full light of morning, or as dusk descends” 
(2002: 27). The contention here is that transitions from visual experiences 
that qualify as perceptual to visual experiences that qualify as illusory are 
pervasive. Given this, it would seem implausible to hold that they involve 
distinct kinds of awareness—an awareness of sense data in the illusory cases 
and some other kind of awareness in the perceptual cases.
Causal considerations
In addition to these considerations, we also have strong reasons to think 
that, in the case of hallucination, brain activity of the right kind is all that 
is needed (if the first stage of the argument from hallucination is correct) to 
create a sense datum of which the subject is aware. What is more, the subject’s 
being aware of this sense datum suffices for the subject to have an experience 
that is indiscriminable from a perception. Given this, if the same kind of 
brain activity were to occur during a perceptual episode, then it should also 
be sufficient to create a sense datum of which the subject is aware.1 And, as 
before, the existence and awareness of this sense datum would suffice for the 

Sense datum theories  15
subject to have an experience that seemed perceptual. So, regardless of the 
ways in which perceptions, hallucinations, and illusions may differ, there is 
good reason to think that they share a common element—a common aware-
ness of sense data.
The time lag argument
The standard arguments from illusion and hallucination both attempt to 
prove something of a deceptive case and then extend that conclusion to 
perceptual cases too. The time lag argument does not involve two stages. 
Instead, it simply operates with the Phenomenal Principle together with the 
following premise: 
2(t): In time lag cases, there sensibly appears to a subject to be some-
thing which possesses a particular sensible quality when the only suitable 
worldly object either no longer exists or has changed its qualities.
What makes this argument different from the others is that it attempts 
to include all cases—veridical and nonveridical—as time lag cases. An extra 
generalizing stage of the argument is not required.
The defense of this premise turns on two related considerations: first, that 
where distant objects are concerned, light from those objects takes a finite 
time to reach us; second, that the light from any object needs to affect us in 
order for us to perceive that object.
For instance, the distance to some stars is so large that, by the time the 
light from those stars reach Earth (and our eyes), the stars themselves have 
ceased to exist. Yet when the light reaches our eyes we have a visual experi-
ence of a star. This makes it a time lag case—a case in which there sensibly 
appears to a subject to be something that possesses a particular sensible 
quality when the only suitable worldly object no longer exists. Given the 
Phenomenal Principle, this entails that there must be something of which the 
subject is aware that possesses whatever qualities the “star” appears to have. 
As the star itself no longer exists, this provides another reason to think that 
the thing of which the subject is aware is a proxy star—a sense datum.
An alternative way of running the time lag argument is by considering the 
fact that light from the sun takes approximately eight minutes to reach us 
(Russell 1948: 204). When this light affects our sensory organs, say at time 
t, we do not have an experience of the sun as it is at t, but rather as it was at 
t - 8 minutes. This makes it a time lag case—a case in which there sensibly 
appears to a subject to be something that possesses a particular sensible qual-
ity when the only suitable worldly object has changed its qualities (cases of 
coincidental similarity aside). Given the Phenomenal Principle, this entails 
that there must be something of which the subject is aware that possesses 
whatever qualities the “sun” appears to have. As the sun itself has changed its 
qualities, this something must be a sun proxy—a sense datum.

16  Philosophy of Perception
Finally, the time lag argument can achieve full generality when we note 
that, in every case of visual experience, it will take a finite amount of time 
for light from the object to reach our eyes and be processed by our visual 
systems (Russell 1927: 155). Although in most cases the time lag here will be 
so miniscule the object will not have had time to cease to exist or to change 
its properties, we can contemplate the possibility that it might have done. 
And when we do, we see that we would have had the experience that we have 
regardless. The conclusion the argument aims to establish is, therefore, that 
all cases of visual experience are in fact time lag cases and hence that, in all 
cases of visual experience, we are aware of sense data.
Sense datum theory formalized
The sense datum theory proposes to analyze visual experiences (where, 
recall, this is neutral as to whether a case is perceptual, hallucinatory, or 
illusory) as follows.
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F if and only if 
S senses an F sense datum, D.
This analysis, as it stands, only suffices for a subject to have an experience 
as of a particular property. For this episode to constitute a successful perceiv-
ing of that property, or to constitute a perceiving of a particular object, O, 
then further other conditions must be met. These conditions will be dis-
cussed in Chapter 7. 
Given that the sense datum theory analyzes perception as involving a 
particular act (of sensing) directed at an existent object (a sense datum), it is 
often known as an act-object theory.
To clarify this theory, we need to say something about both what sense 
data are and what the relation of sensing is.
As to the nature of sense data, they are typically defined as nonphysical 
objects of awareness, which are logically private to a single subject. In addition 
to this, the classical picture of sense data also insists that they “actually pos-
sess standard sensible qualities, for example, shape, color, loudness, ‘feel’ of 
various sorts [but] possess no intrinsic intentionality” (Robinson 1994: 2, my 
emphasis). This latter claim insists that, whilst it might be the case that when 
we have a given visual experience we take the sense data to be “of the world” 
as a matter of habit or custom, they are not “of the world” in their intrinsic 
nature. In their intrinsic nature, sense data possess “only sensible qualities 
which do not refer beyond themselves” (Robinson 1994: 2). So, although 
the standard sense datum theory endorses both the Phenomenal Principle 
and the Common Factor Principle, it does not endorse the Representational 
Principle. We will consider why this is shortly. 
When it comes to the relationship of “sensing,” a natural way to under-
stand the notion is in a pseudo-perceptual way: as kind of like seeing sense 

Sense datum theories  17
data. If this is how we are to understand the notion then, as Gilbert Ryle 
points out (1990: 204–205), we would be left with a troublesome regress. 
If sensing D were a matter of perceiving D and D were perceived in virtue 
of sensing D*’ (as the sense datum theory of perception suggests), then we 
have simply ended up where we began. So the relationship of sensing needs 
to be understood in a nonperceptual way. Having said this, however, further 
analyses of this relationship have not been forthcoming. The relationship of 
sensing is typically left fundamental and unanalyzed. This is not necessar-
ily a problem, though—as Wittgenstein says, “explanations come to an end 
somewhere” (1953: §1).
This gives us the sense datum theorist’s take on the ontological structure 
of perception. What about the phenomenological side? In order to discuss 
this adequately, let me take a moment to introduce some important theoreti-
cal terminology.
Philosophical theories of the conscious aspects of mental states and events 
often utilize the notion of phenomenal character. To provide a theory of the 
conscious aspects of an experience is, then, to provide a theory of that experi-
ence’s phenomenal character. The problem is that people disagree as to what 
phenomenal character is. On one influential reading, the defining feature of 
phenomenal character is that it is a property of an experience. Thus, Byrne 
suggests, we should begin by stipulating that “the phenomenal character 
of an experience e is a property, specifically a property of e: that property 
that types e according to what it’s like to undergo e” (2002: 9). Yet there are 
theorists who agree that experiences have phenomenal characters but reject 
the claim that they are properties of those experiences. This is because those 
theorists take the defining feature of phenomenal character to be what it is 
that we are aware of when we perceive/introspect, and they argue that there is 
no reason to suppose that, in such cases, we become aware of properties of 
experiences (e.g. Tye 2000).
For this reason, I find it helps to keep things clear if we distinguish between 
phenomenal character and presentational character. The former, phenomenal 
character, is understood according to Byrne’s definition—as the property 
of an experience that types that experience by what it is like to undergo 
it. The latter, presentational character, is understood as whatever it is that 
we become aware of when we perceive or introspect. As we shall see as we 
proceed, this distinction enables us to accommodate anything that anybody 
might wish to claim by denying that phenomenal characters are properties 
of experiences by treating whatever they say about phenomenal character as 
a claim about presentational character and then identifying an appropriate 
phenomenal character to fit.
To see how this works, consider what the sense datum theorist would say 
we are directly aware of when we perceive. On this theory, we are directly 
aware of sense data and their sensible qualities. So, the presentational charac-
ter of an experience, according to the sense datum theory, will be constituted 
by the sensible properties of the sense data that the subject is aware of.

18  Philosophy of Perception
Although these sensible qualities are properties of sense data, and sense 
data are constituents of an experience, it would be a fallacy of composition to 
assume that these properties are thereby properties of the experience itself.2 
So these properties should not be identified with the phenomenal character 
of a sense datum experience. Yet there is an associated property that such 
an experience would have that would type it by what it is like to undergo 
it: it is the property the experience has of being a sensing of sense datum (or 
collection of sense data) D. The sense datum theorist can therefore identify 
this property with the phenomenal character of the experience. 
Sense datum theory and the two hats
The phenomenological hat
As we have seen, the sense datum theory is motivated primarily by phenom-
enological considerations. In particular, it is motivated by the thought that 
you cannot do justice to what it is like to have an experience unless that 
experience actually involves an awareness of objects that bear the properties 
that characterize what it is like for us. However, it has been argued that the 
austere nature of sense data—as objects that only possess sensible qualities—
makes it difficult for the theory to adequately capture the phenomenology of 
“real” experiences. This is Strawson:
Suppose a non-philosophical observer gazing idly through a window. 
To him we address the request, “Give us a description of your current 
visual experience” [ . . . ] Uncautioned as to exactly what we want, he 
might reply in such terms as these: “I see the red light of the setting sun 
filtering through the black and thickly clustered branches of the elms; I 
see the dappled deer grazing in groups on the vivid green grass . . .” and 
so on.
(1979: 43)
However, if the considerations presented in the arguments for sense data 
are accepted, it is possible that the subject might have an experience of this 
very kind even if there were no elms, no deer, no grass, etc. So we ask our 
observer to explain what his experience is like without committing himself to 
the existence of the (purportedly) perceived objects. If the sense datum theory 
is correct, then this ought to be possible by describing the sensible properties 
possessed by the immediate objects of his experience. As Strawson points 
out, however, a sensible subject “does not start talking about lights and  
colors, patches and patterns. For he sees that to do so would be to falsify the 
character of the experience he actually enjoyed” (1979: 43). Although the sub-
ject could attempt to exhaustively describe this in terms of patches of color, 
this would, according to Strawson, falsify the character of his experience—it 
would fail to adequately capture what it is like to have that experience. 

Sense datum theories  19
A more specific phenomenological problem area for sense datum theory 
has concerned the experience of depth. The premise for this objection is that 
depth is a phenomenological feature of our visual experiences—that depth 
is, strictly speaking, a sensible quality. If this premise is accepted, then it 
seems that the sense datum theorist has three choices: either to claim that 
depth is a further sui generis sensible property that sense data can possess (a 
response Robinson [1994: 206] describes as “ad hoc and bogus”); to accept 
that the sense datum theory fails; or to accept that sense data are in fact 
three-dimensional and are literally at a distance from the perceiver (Jackson 
1977: 102). Other sense datum theorists (such as Robinson 1994: 206–207) 
prefer to reject the premise, endorsing Berkeley’s famous claim that “distance 
of itself . . . cannot be seen. For distance being a line directed end-wise to the 
eye, it projects only one point in the fund of the eye. Which point remains 
invariably the same, whether the distance be longer or shorter” (1910: 13). 
This response treats our awareness of depth as not, strictly speaking, part of 
the phenomenal nature of the visual experience at all but rather as a result of 
the cognitive states that naturally accompany the experience.
The epistemological hat
As we might expect from the fact that the sense datum theory is motivated 
primarily by phenomenological considerations, it has been criticized for 
being unable to adequately wear the epistemological hat.
Typically, the sense datum theorist will claim that we perceive external 
objects “in virtue of” the sensing of sense data. A realist version of sense 
datum theory, which endorses the mind-independence of the material world, 
is therefore typically known as indirect realism. “Indirect” because the 
“direct” or immediate objects of experience are sense data; material objects 
are the objects of experience only “indirectly.”
This picture has led to the objection that, in claiming that we are only ever 
directly aware of sense data, and only through them aware of the external 
world, we “raise a veil” that separates us from the external world. Jonathan 
Bennett therefore calls this the “veil of perception doctrine” (1971: 69).
We need to be careful here. Some of the appeal of this objection is sensa-
tionalist, playing on the image of some kind of cognitive “ray” being aimed 
at the world by our minds but being thwarted by sense data that “get in the 
way.” But most realist sense datum theorists would not deny that external 
objects can be objects of perceptual awareness, they would just hold that this 
awareness is mediated by sense data. As Dancy puts it, sense datum theory 
“does not have the consequence that external objects are unobservable; it 
purports simply to tell us something about what it is to observe them” (1985: 
165).
To see how this might work, consider the relationship between seeing 
objects and seeing their surfaces. Jackson (1977) and Moore (1942) both 
argue that we do not directly “see” material objects but merely their facing 

20  Philosophy of Perception
surfaces. We then see the objects in virtue of seeing their surfaces. On the face 
of it, this is a reasonable claim. If we then view the relationship between sense 
data and objects on this model, it is no longer obvious that it involves a veil 
of perception. Nobody thinks that objects’ surfaces “hide” the objects them-
selves from us—rather they “facilitate” or “mediate” this awareness. This is 
exactly the way that sense datum theorists view the relationship between our 
awareness of sense data and our awareness of (the facing surfaces of) objects 
(see Jackson 1994).
Even if the sense datum theorist can adequately rebut the objection that 
the theory precludes the awareness of external objects, a key epistemological 
question remains: how does perception, so understood, enable us to acquire 
knowledge of the external world?
Traditionally, sense datum theories of perception have been associated 
with foundationalist theories of epistemology. Foundationalism begins from 
the observation that many of our empirical beliefs are justified by the relation-
ships they stand in to other beliefs. For instance, my belief that <London has 
a higher population than New Zealand> is justified by my beliefs that <the 
population of London is 7.5 million> and <the population of New Zealand is 
4 million>, together with some background mathematical beliefs. However, 
my belief that London is more populous is only conditionally justified; it is 
only justified if my beliefs about the relevant populations are justified. So 
what justifies me in these beliefs? Well, the thought goes, other beliefs, such 
as beliefs about the results of recent censuses, and so on.
However, this suggests the threat of a worrisome regress. If every belief 
is only justified if another belief is justified, and if that belief is only justified 
if a yet further belief is justified, then it looks as though we will never be in a 
position to say that any of our beliefs actually is (unconditionally) justified.
To avoid this, the foundationalist claims that all of our empirical beliefs 
ultimately depend for their justification on certain foundational beliefs—
beliefs that are justified in a special unconditional way.
What are these foundational beliefs? Well, as Lewis put it, “empiricists 
generally are agreed that nonperceptual synthetic knowledge rests finally on 
knowledge which is perceptual, and so find the root problem in the nature 
of perception” (1952: 170). The foundationalist’s foundations are our beliefs 
about our own sensory experiences. Why these beliefs? Because, “When I 
perceive a door, I may be deceived by a cleverly painted pattern on the wall, 
but the presentation which greets my eye is an indubitable fact of my experi-
ence . . . The given element is this incorrigible presentational element; the 
criticizable and dubitable element is the element of interpretation” (Lewis 
1952: 170).
The similarity between this claim and Price’s phenomenological defense 
of the Phenomenal Principle is striking. According to Lewis, what marks 
out beliefs about our own experiences is that, whilst there is much that can 
be doubted, there is a core belief which is indubitable or incorrigible.3 This 
explains why these beliefs are justified and hence apt to serve as our episte-
mological foundations.

Sense datum theories  21
According to traditional foundationalist versions of sense datum theory, 
then, our beliefs about the external world are inferred from and justified by 
beliefs about our own experiences.
Over the years, many philosophers have argued that such a claim renders 
sense datum theory fundamentally unable to deliver a satisfactory epistemol-
ogy. The worry is highlighted by the very arguments that aim to show that 
sense data are necessary. As the second stage of the arguments from illusion 
and hallucination makes clear, the sense data that we are aware of in a case of 
perception are exactly the same as those we would have been aware of in an 
indiscriminable case of illusion or hallucination. 	
Given this, we can see that the sense datum theory is committed to the 
idea that an experience of a particular kind could occur in a nonveridical 
context. This has the consequence that we cannot move deductively from a 
belief about an experience to a belief about the world. Given the possibility 
of hallucinations, our having an experience of a certain kind does not entail 
anything about the world whatsoever. Induction is likewise problematic. 
An inductive justification would claim that we are justified in assuming that 
experiences of certain kinds are reliable indicators of the world’s being a cer-
tain way because we have previously established the regularity of these two 
events coming together. Yet in the present case this is a nonstarter as we have 
no independent access to the world on which to establish that a certain kind 
of experience is correlated with the world’s being a certain way.
At this point, purist sense datum theorists may turn to abduction; to 
suggesting that our belief that sense data correlate with the external world 
is justified as it is the best available explanation of certain evidence. In this 
context, the “evidence” is that experience is highly organized and predict-
able, both across senses and across time. The “best available explanation” of 
this evidence is then held to be that the experiences are reliably correlated 
with a highly organized and predictable external reality.
To see how this might work, imagine a scientist observing (what we now 
know to be) alpha particle tracks in a cloud chamber. At first, let us suppose, 
the scientist just sees the tracks. After careful experimentation, she realizes 
that the presence of tracks are reliably correlated with the presence of certain 
materials in the chamber. She therefore hypothesizes that these materials all 
emit a certain particle, which she calls an alpha particle. After a period of 
using the hypothesis, she becomes so familiar with the hypothesis that she 
starts to think and talk directly about alpha particles, bypassing the tracks in 
both thought and language. Indeed, she may even get to a point where she no 
longer really “sees” the tracks, in that she no longer perceptually attends to 
the tracks at all. Instead, she attends directly to the alpha particles (we might 
say, “sees” the alpha particles) in virtue of her more basic kind of awareness 
of the tracks. This is, I take it, pretty much how the abductive approach sees 
the role of sense data in visual experience.
However, some theorists—including some sense datum theorists—have 
worried that treating our belief in the external world as a “theory” formulated 

22  Philosophy of Perception
to explain the “evidence” is implausible. For example, Price contends that 
“we do not invent [the theory that there is an external world]. We have 
already on other grounds formed a conception of the physical world” (1932: 
89). Likewise, Armstrong says that “surely we are not prepared to degrade 
bodies into hypotheses? We want to say that our assurance of the existence of 
the physical world is far stronger than any assurance we could obtain by indi-
rectly confirming a theory” (1961: 30). Moreover, Price goes on to suggest 
that it is not the “best explanation” anyway—he claims there are a “thousand 
and one” other hypotheses, most of which are “much simpler” (1932: 89).4
Ryle suggests the epistemological problems with sense datum theory run 
even deeper than that of justifying our empirical beliefs. He wonders how, 
given the commitments of the sense datum view, we could get to a point 
where we had concepts of mind-independent entities to feature in the con-
tents of these beliefs. He illustrates this concern with the following analogy.
There is immured in a windowless cell a prisoner, who has lived there in 
solitary confinement since birth. All that comes to him from the outside 
wall is flickers of light thrown upon his cell-walls and tappings heard 
through the stones; yet from these observed flashes and tappings he 
becomes, or seems to become, apprised of unobserved football-matches, 
flower-gardens, and eclipses of the sun. How then does he learn the 
ciphers in which his signals are arranged, or even find out that there are 
such things as ciphers? How can he interpret the messages which he 
somehow deciphers, given that the vocabularies of those messages are 
the vocabularies of football and astronomy and not those of flickers and 
tappings? 
(Ryle 1990: 212)
The worry, suggests Ryle, is not how we justify our belief that our experi-
ences refer to external reality but rather how we could ever have come by that 
belief in the first place.
Some theorists, who (a) take the arguments in favor of sense data to be 
strong, whilst (b) feel the force of the epistemological considerations just 
listed, yet (c) want to allow for us to have knowledge of the external world, 
have taken these considerations to show that we should endorse a metaphysi-
cal thesis known as Idealism. According to Idealism, the external world is 
not mind-independent after all, but mind-dependent. This enables “the 
physical world to come within the reach of direct perceptual awareness by 
taking it to be something which is logically created by facts about human 
sensory experience” (Foster 2000: 1). As Idealism is not a theory of percep-
tion, however, but rather a metaphysical theory about the nature of reality, I 
shall not discuss it further here.

Sense datum theories  23
Sense datum theory and the Representational 
Principle
As we have seen, the purest sense datum theorists do not also accept the prin-
ciple that visual experiences are representational. Their austere view is that, 
although we naturally take our experiences to be of a world, this is a purely 
cognitive, rather than perceptual, matter—a matter of the way we interpret 
those experiences rather than a feature of the experiences themselves. Some 
theorists, however, have suggested that the difficulties classical sense datum 
theory faces show this to be a mistake.
Take the question of how we can move from experiences to beliefs about 
the world. As, on the sense datum theory, experiences themselves are not 
representational, we saw that empirical knowledge would have to be the 
result of some kind of inference from experiences to world. And, as we saw, 
an adequate account of how these inferences get started is not easy to come 
by. Indeed, the best account of this seems to involve treating our convic-
tion that there is a stable, mind-independent external world as some kind of 
deeply held hypothesis—deeply held because it best explains why we have 
the sense experiences that we do.
Moreover, it is questionable whether treating the world-involving aspects 
of experience as purely cognitive effects of visual experiences, rather than per-
ceptual phenomena themselves, provides a phenomenologically apt picture of 
what actually happens when we have visual experiences. As Price says, “we 
simply jump straight from the awareness of A to the thought of B, without 
any preliminary wondering or considering of evidence, indeed without any 
rational process whatever” (1932: 140–141).
To avoid this, it may be appealing to endorse the Representational Principle 
in addition to the Phenomenal Principle and the Common Factor Principle. 
The thought would be that, if visual experiences also have a representational 
component, then they would tell us about the world as part of their very 
nature. In this case, we would not need to develop and endorse a theory about 
the world—a visual experience would, in a sense, wear the world on its sleeve. 
The sensory core theory
One way in which we might augment classical sense datum theory with the 
Representational Principle is if we take visual experiences to be comprised 
of both a phenomenal component, involving the direct awareness of sense 
data, and an additional representational component, which tells us about the 
world.
Such a modification of the classical sense datum theory would therefore 
hold that classical sense datum theorists, as understood above, were half 
right. They were right, the thought goes, in seeing that an awareness of men-
tal objects is required to accommodate the Phenomenal Principle. They were 
also right in treating the sense data themselves as not being representational. 

24  Philosophy of Perception
Where they went wrong, however, was in thinking that full-fledged visual 
experience was nothing more than an act of sensing sense data of various 
kinds. According to this line of thought, where the sense datum theorists 
took themselves to have given a full account of visual experience, they had in 
fact given only an account of the “sensory core” of visual experience. 
Price is a notable advocate of this kind of theory.5 In discussing the case 
of someone hallucinating a pink rat, he says that the correct analysis of the 
situation is that the man is both “acquainted with a pink sense datum” and 
“takes for granted the existence of a rat” (1932: 147). These two states of 
mind “arise together . . . all in one moment. The two modes of ‘presence to 
the mind’, utterly different though they are, can only be distinguished by 
subsequent analysis” (1932: 141).
On a two-component sense datum theory, normal visual experience 
involves a subject both (i) sensing or being acquainted with sense data and 
(ii) “taking for granted” that an appropriate material object exists. To give 
a full account of visual experience, then, the notion of something’s being 
“taken for granted” must be further explained. In discussing this, Price 
makes it clear that “what is taken for granted is . . . that so and so is the 
case—that a material thing exists here and now, that it has a surface of such 
and such a sort, that it is grass, etc.—in short, what is taken for granted is a 
set of propositions” (1932: 166).
The second component, then—the nonsensory component—is a repre-
sentational component. It involves the subject’s representing the world to be 
a certain way—the way specified by the relevant “set of propositions”—and 
taking it for granted that the world is as represented.
The sensory core theory therefore proposes to analyze the neutral cat-
egory of visual experience as follows:
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F if and only if:
•	 S senses an F sense datum, D, and
•	 represents that Fness is instantiated (and takes this for granted).
Like the sense datum theory proper, the sensory core theory will also 
hold that the presentational character of the experience will be given by the 
sensible properties of D and the phenomenal character of the experience will 
thereby be its property of being a sensing of D.
Percept theory 
Earlier, we noted that the classical sense datum theory has been criticized 
over whether its focus on “lights and colors, patches and patterns” can 
adequately capture the rich phenomenology of visual experiences. The 
sensory core approach has an answer to this objection: “to allow that purely 
cognitive features can alter experience” (Robinson 1994: 206). “If this line of 

Sense datum theories  25
thought is acceptable,” he says, “then we could describe depth [for example] 
as experiential, but not bed-rock phenomenal. It is experiential because it is 
not like the judgment of [a] radar operator, but enters more intimately into 
the experience itself. On the other hand, it is not truly phenomenal, because, 
for Berkeleian reasons, it is not given qualitatively in experience” (Robinson 
1994: 207).
However, this attempt to accommodate the fact that more properties seem 
to be experientially salient than the classical sense datum theory would pre-
dict has been criticized by Firth as being phenomenologically flawed.
The phenomenological fact is simply that in perception we are conscious, 
in one sense of the word, of physical objects, without at the same time 
being conscious, in another sense of the word, of the entities which 
have traditionally been called “sense data”. Perception, in short, is not a 
twofold state; and since we are conscious of physical objects we cannot 
possibly be conscious of sense data in the distinctive manner required by 
the Sense datum theory. 
(1965: 223)
Essentially, Firth’s contention is that properties such as hardness and 
coldness are properties that belong to perception—that can literally be 
sensed—whereas the sense datum theory claims that only properties of sense 
data can be sensed, all else being supplied by the associated cognitive features.
Moreover, Firth suggests, the willingness to countenance depth as an 
additionally phenomenologically present property “represents a first step 
toward the recognition that in perception we are conscious of many qualities 
and relations which do not differ in their phenomenological status from those 
few which have traditionally been attributed to sense data” (1965: 220–221). 
To account for this, he goes on to develop an alternative way of adding the 
Representational Principle to classical sense datum theory, which he calls the 
percept theory.
What distinguishes the percept theory from the sensory core theory is 
the denial of the idea that our perceptual awareness of “sensible qualities” 
such as color and shape proceeds by way of sensing sense data, and that our 
perceptual awareness of other qualities, such as depth (perhaps), clumsi-
ness, reptilianness, and felineness, proceeds by way of a distinct process of 
interpretation. According to Firth, we are conscious of all of these different 
qualities in the same way.
If Firth is right, then two possibilities present themselves: either we are 
aware of all of these qualities in the kind of way that the classical sense datum 
theorist takes us to be aware of shapes and colors, or we are aware of these 
qualities in some other way. 
The first option would require that we are aware of properties such as 
clumsiness, reptilianness, and felineness by being aware of objects that 
actually possess those properties. However, as Robinson points out, mental 

26  Philosophy of Perception
objects cannot literally be clumsy, reptilian or feline (1994: 29). This leaves us 
with the second option: if we can be aware of these properties by being aware 
of sense data, and if our awareness of all qualities proceeds in the same way, 
then this is not by way of being aware of something that actually possesses 
those qualities.
Instead, Firth’s view seems to be that we are aware of all qualities in a 
different way. He suggests instead that, while the mental object does not 
actually have these properties, it represents itself as having them. Sense data 
are not really clumsy or reptilian or feline, they just represent themselves as 
being clumsy, reptilian or feline. As mental objects also represent themselves 
as being mind-independent, Firth calls them “ostensible physical objects” 
(1965: 222).6
So the percept theory offers the following analysis of visual experience.
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F if and only if:
•	 S senses a sense datum, D, which
•	 represents that Fness is instantiated.
In sum, the percept theory claims that there are mental objects in visual 
experience, which, unlike sense data classically conceived, have both sensible 
and representational properties. In normal experience, however, we are not 
aware of their intrinsic sensible properties at all. All our attention is directed 
at the world, by way of being aware of what these mental objects represent.
Firth does allow that, when we engage in the process of perceptual reduc-
tion—when we focus on what we “really see” in perception—we can become 
aware of the properties actually possessed by sense data. However, he denies 
that this shows that we were aware of sense data all along: rather, in his view, 
perceptual reduction “has the effect of replacing a state of perceptual con-
sciousness [of an ostensible physical object] by a state in which we are aware 
of sense data” (Firth 1949/1965: 237).
To clarify the relationship between these three theories—classical sense 
datum theory, sensory core theory and percept theory—let us reflect on a 
familiar example. Consider a subject perceiving a circular coin that is tilted 
on its side. Although there is a sense in which the coin presents an elliptical 
face to the perceiver—its silhouette would be elliptical, for example—sub-
jects may not notice this, taking the coin to be circular. Our three theories 
will provide importantly different accounts of such an experience.
The classical sense datum theorist would hold that the subject of this 
experience would be consciously aware of ellipticality in virtue of sensing 
an elliptical sense datum. The fact that she does not notice this elliptical-
ity is due to her familiarity with such cases meaning that, on the basis of 

Sense datum theories  27
this experience, she interprets the coin to be circular. When focusing on the 
phenomenology, however, the subject is consciously aware of ellipticality.
According to the sensory core theorist, the subject is consciously aware of 
ellipticality in one sense (by sensing an elliptical sense datum) whilst being 
consciously aware of circularity in another (because the subject represents 
the coin as being circular and takes it for granted that this representation is 
correct).
Finally, on the percept theory, the subject is consciously aware of circular-
ity alone. This is because, despite actually being elliptical, the mental object 
represents itself as circular, and it is the way it represents itself as being, 
rather than the way it is, that determines the subject’s phenomenology. The 
subject can, however, become aware of the ellipiticality of the mental object 
by engaging in a process of perceptual reduction.
Sensory core theory, percept theory, and the  
two hats
The epistemological hat
Both sensory core theory and percept theory aim to avoid some of the 
epistemological problems of pure sense datum theory by introducing a rep-
resentational component. This component is supposed to be the foundation 
of our empirical beliefs.
However, as sensory core theorists allow that we are aware of both the 
properties that the sense datum possesses (in a sensory way) and the prop-
erties that are represented (in a more cognitive way), they face a dilemma. 
Either they allow that the representational component is somehow based (in 
an epistemically relevant way) upon the sensory component, or hold that it 
is distinct.
If they take the former option, and hold that the representational compo-
nent is based upon the sensory component, then this seems to fail to yield 
a significant epistemological advance over the pure version of sense datum 
theory. If they take the latter option, then they need to either allow that 
the interpretative component arises simultaneously but independently of 
the phenomenal component, or that this component is caused by or auto-
matically prompted by the phenomenal component in some nonepistemically 
relevant way. Whichever way they go, this not only leaves the sensory core 
view owing some kind of story of how and why the sensing and the taking 
for granted are always (or at least usually) “appropriate” to one another, it 
also seems to conflict with the intuition that, when we form a belief about 
the world on the basis of perception, we do so because of the way things seem 
(phenomenologically) to us.
The percept theory, of course, takes the latter option. Yet it doesn’t face the 
same set of objections as it holds, in essence, that in normal perception, the 

28  Philosophy of Perception
phenomenal component just is the representational component. According to 
the percept theory, when we form the belief that an object is blue on the basis 
of perception, we do so because our experience represents the object as blue.7
Whilst this gives the percept theory a putative epistemological advantage 
over the other theories that posit mental objects, it comes at the cost of a 
putative phenomenological disadvantage.
The phenomenological hat
As we have seen, the percept theorist holds that the properties we are aware of 
in everyday perception—the constituents of presentational character—are in 
fact properties that can (usually) only be had by mind-independent objects: 
properties such as clumsiness, reptilianness, and felineness. So the properties 
that we are aware of when we perceive, according to the percept theory, will 
not be the sensible properties of the sense datum D, but rather of the proper-
ties that D represents to be instantiated. Because of this, the phenomenal 
character of the experience will no longer be its property of being a sensing 
of something that is F, but rather its property of being a sensing of something 
that represents Fness.
With this made clear, we can actually see that percept theory embodies a 
rejection of the Phenomenal Principle. That principle, recall, says that:
(P)	If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something which pos-
sesses a particular sensible quality then there is something of which 
the subject is aware which does possess that quality.
As we have seen, the percept theorist claims that there are more sensible 
qualities—qualities that things can sensibly appear to possess—than the 
sense datum theorist can allow. The percept theorist will certainly accept that 
there are many cases in which the antecedent of the Phenomenal Principle is 
met without the consequent thereby being true. To see this, take a particular 
case in which there sensibly appears to a subject to be something which pos-
sesses the (now) sensible quality of clumsiness. The percept theorist does not 
agree that, in such a case, there is something of which the subject is aware 
which actually possesses that property. Rather the claim is that there is some-
thing of which the subject is aware which represents itself as possessing that 
property. So the percept theory does not endorse the Phenomenal Principle, 
even though it retains the commitment to mental objects.
Yet recall that a significant motivation for the Phenomenal Principle was 
that, in order for your experience to be the way it is, the properties that you 
are sensibly aware of have to actually be there. That the only way for your 
experience to be as it is is for there to be current instantiations of these 
properties that you are consciously connected to. The percept theory cannot 
agree with this.

Sense datum theories  29
One further phenomenological point that is worth mentioning is that a 
central argument for percept theory turns on the phenomenological claim 
that we cannot actually distinguish a sensory component and an interpreta-
tive component in experience. This claim seems to be contradicted by the fact 
that many philosophers have taken themselves to have distinguished such a 
thing. Indeed, Lewis describes the distinction between the purely sensory 
and the interpretative components as “one of the oldest and most universal 
of philosophic insights” (1929: 38).
Metaphysical objections to mental objects
To conclude this chapter, let us consider some objections to the feature that 
classical sense datum theories, sensory core theories and percept theories 
have in common: the postulation of private mental objects.
In the present philosophical environment, the very fact that sense data are 
held to be nonphysical would be reason enough for them to be viewed with 
deep suspicion. But not only are they nonphysical; they are also existent in a 
very strange kind of way. Barnes (1965: 143–152) asks a number of pertinent 
questions, including the following. Does a particular sense datum persist 
while I blink or is it replaced by a new one? Do sense data change in size as I 
move closer or further away, or are they constantly replaced by new smaller 
or larger sense data? If one sense datum moves across a visual field, does 
the whole package of sense data (the visual field) change, or do the different 
component sense data change their relative positions? If sense data really 
exist, the thought goes, these questions must have answers.
Whilst it is of course open for sense datum theorists simply to stipulate 
answers to these queries, Barnes worries about the fact that there seems to 
be no ground for choosing one answer over another. “It may be said that 
to answer these questions is not important,” he accepts. “I am inclined to 
agree that it is not; but the only reason I can see for this is that, [sense data] 
being wholly fictitious entities, we can attribute to them what qualities we 
please” (1965: 150). The thought here is that the fact that these metaphysi-
cal questions do not admit to any principled investigation suggests that the 
metaphysical realm in question does not really exist.
Another metaphysical worry is brought to light in an objection that, 
according to Chisholm (1942: 368), is originally due to Gilbert Ryle: the 
“Problem of the Speckled Hen”. When you perceive a speckled hen, you are 
likely to see that it has a large number of speckles without being able to see 
precisely how many speckles it has. Whilst the hen, as an existing object, has 
to have a determinate number of speckles (given the metaphysical principle 
that to be is to be determinate), our perception of the hen is indeterminate as 
to its speckledness.
The difficulty that this indeterminacy creates is that, as sense data are 
what we are immediately aware of in perception, and as our awareness is inde-
terminate, it seems to imply that the sense data will have to be indeterminate 

30  Philosophy of Perception
in nature. This can be argued to contravene the metaphysical principle cited 
above.
In response to this objection, sense datum theorists might stipulate that 
sensing something does not entail being aware of every feature of that thing 
(Robinson 1994: 193). Yet this doesn’t quite seem to solve the problem. It 
is one thing to allow that we might fail to notice some feature of a sense 
datum but quite another to claim that a sense datum could have features that 
we are unable to become aware of. It seems that the speckled hen could be 
just such a case. Even if I try to count the hen’s speckles, I may be unable 
to. If the sense datum is determinate as to its number of speckles, this must 
therefore be a feature of the sense datum that I am unable to become aware 
of. As Armstrong says, this “has the paradoxical consequence that objects 
specially postulated to do phenomenological justice to perception are now 
credited with characteristics that lie quite outside perceptual awareness” 
(1968: 220–221).
Questions
•	
How compelling are the arguments in favor of sense data? 
Where are their weaknesses?
•	
Which of these theories gives the better account of the phenom-
enology of visual experiences? Why?
•	
How compelling are the metaphysical objections to mental 
objects? Should they make us avoid such objects in our theories 
of perception?
Notes
	 1.	 Even if the brain activity is not exactly the same in the case of perception, 
we can be sure that there will be brain activity of some kind. And if brain 
activity of some kinds can suffice for the existence and awareness of a 
sense datum (as in the case of hallucination), there is at least a strong case 
that brain activity of other kinds (in perception) would likewise suffice.
	 2.	 Fallacies of composition occur when a property of a constituent of O is 
assumed to thereby be a property of O. For example, it is clearly a fallacy 
to assume that, as atoms have the property of being invisible to the naked 
eye, anything that is composed of atoms will also have the property of 
being invisible.
	 3.	 To say that something is indubitable is to say that it cannot be doubted. 
To say that something is incorrigible is to say that it cannot be corrected. 
However, I’m not sure that either of these two notions is quite what 
the foundationalist is looking for. To see why, note that there are two 

Sense datum theories  31
reasons why it may be impossible to doubt something, or impossible for 
something to be corrected. In the first case, either because it could be 
false, but we’re not cognitively equipped to doubt it, or because it sim-
ply couldn’t be false (it is infallible). In the second case, either because 
it could be false, but you are in a far better position than me to know 
whether it is true or false (so although you might get it wrong, you’re 
guaranteed to be in a better position than me), or because it simply 
couldn’t be false (it is infallible). For the purposes of epistemology, it 
looks to be the second sense of indubitability and/or incorrigibility that 
is relevant, which suggests that the really important notion is that infal-
libility—of being unable to be false.
	 4.	 As an example he mentions the hypothesis that God causes all of our 
experiences. As to whether this hypothesis, or any other, is simpler than 
the external world hypothesis, I leave the reader to decide.
	 5.	 It is also associated with Thomas Reid, who says that “sensation, taken 
by itself, implies neither the conception nor belief of any external object. 
It supposes a sentient being, and a certain manner in which that being is 
affected; but it supposes no more. Perception [here being used in a more 
specialist sense] implies an immediate conviction and belief of something 
external—something different both from the mind that perceives and 
from the act of perception. Things so different in their nature ought to 
be distinguished; but, by our constitution, they are always united. Every 
different perception is conjoined with a sensation that is proper to it” 
(2002: XVI).
	 6.	 There may be some dispute over whether a percept represents itself as 
being, say, reptilian, or whether it represents a physical object as being 
reptilian. Yet Firth is concerned to distinguish ostensible physical 
objects (sense data) from physical objects strictly speaking. Given this, 
it would be unclear to what extent an ostensible physical object would 
be ostensibly physical unless it presented itself as being something it is 
not—i.e. physical. For this reason I think the reflexive representational 
content makes best sense of Firth’s claims.
	 7.	 Of course, if the percept theorist holds that mental objects represent 
themselves as being clumsy, or reptilian, or feline (as Firth seems to sug-
gest), this does yield an epistemological objection. Why should the fact 
that a mental object tells us that it is, say, feline, justify us in believing 
that something in the world is feline?
Further reading
Three books, all entitled Perception, dominate the further reading for sense 
datum theory. Price’s Perception (1932) is an early defense of mental objects 
in the guise of the sensory core theory, Jackson’s Perception (1977) defends 
sense datum theory and addresses the epistemological objection to sense 
datum theories (Chapter 6), and Robinson’s Perception (1994) is, in my view, 

32  Philosophy of Perception
the classic contemporary defense of sense data. Although Robinson eventu-
ally (and tentatively) favours an antirealist version of the theory, the majority 
of the book is an argument for the claim that perception involves sense data 
and takes no stand on the metaphysical question.
In addition to these books, R.J. Swartz (ed.), Perceiving, Sensing and 
Knowing (1965) contains some useful papers, including Firth’s “Sense Data 
and the Percept Theory,” in which the percept theory is defended, and 
Barnes’s “The Myth of Sense Data,” which is the locus classicus of the meta-
physical objection to mental objects.

3	
Adverbial theories
Overview
Adverbial theories retain the Common Factor Principle but reject the 
Phenomenal Principle and the Representational Principle. Adverbialists 
reject the need to appeal to the objects of acts of sensing to explain what 
it is like for the subject, appealing instead to ways of sensing.
The formulation of adverbialism is discussed in detail, as is its con-
nection to qualia theory from the philosophy of mind, and objections 
to adverbialism are then discussed.
Common Factor Principle

Phenomenal Principle

Representational Principle

Imagine that we see a red triangle. According to the sense datum theory, to 
see a red triangle is, in part, to sense a red, triangular sense datum. As we 
have seen, the mental entity that this commits us to has been argued to be 
problematic, both epistemologically and metaphysically.
These concerns have led some to think that there must be something 
wrong with the Phenomenal Principle, given that it is this principle (albeit 
together with the Common Factor Principle) that is the origin of the com-
mitment to mental objects. This principle, recall, claims that:
(P)	If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something which pos-
sesses a particular sensible quality then there is something of which 
the subject is aware which does possess that quality.

34  Philosophy of Perception
Barnes argues that this principle is based on a fallacy. “That something 
appears pink to me is not a valid reason for concluding either that that 
thing is pink or that there is some other thing which is pink” (1965: 153). 
As Robinson also notes when discussing the arguments in favor of mental 
objects, our language is stocked with idioms, such as “seems,” “appears,” and 
“looks,” which we can confidently use to assert, for instance, that a nonpink 
elephant seems pink (1994: 40).
This kind of objection can be augmented by showing how statements that 
appear to commit us to the existence of certain objects can be reinterpreted 
so as to avoid such commitments. A highly influential approach to this proj-
ect, which in turn generated an alternative theory of perception, focuses on 
the possibility of providing adverbial translations of such sentences.
To explain: note that many familiar sentences of English relate a subject to 
an adjectivally modified object. Thus:
1  Lucy had a heavy bag.
2  John wore a broad hat.
For each of these sentences, the subject (John/Lucy) bears a certain rela-
tionship (having/wearing) to a certain object (a heavy bag/a broad hat). 
If sentences 1 and 2 are true then we appear to be committed to the 
existence of those objects—if it is true that Lucy has a heavy bag, then the 
heavy bag that Lucy has must exist. 
However, the following sentences have a similar surface structure.
3  Dave gave an energetic performance.
4  John wore a broad smile.
Sentences 3 and 4 also seem to relate subjects to objects in the very same 
way. Given this, we might think that, if sentences such as 3 and 4 are true, 
then we must also be committed to the existence of certain strange objects—
performances and smiles—which can both be adjectivally modified and to 
which we can bear relationships of giving and wearing.
However, we don’t have to see things in this way. Although 3 and 4 have 
the subject : verb : adjective : noun form, they can both be translated into a 
subject : verb : adverb form whilst retaining their sense. 
This translation has three stages. First, we map across the subject. Then  
we convert the noun from the original sentence into a verb (thus, in the 
case of 3 and 4, “performance” becomes “performed” and “smile” becomes 
“smiled”). Finally, we convert the adjective that modifies the noun into an 
adverb that modifies the verb, thus “energetic” translates as “energetically” 

Adverbial theories  35
and “broad” as “broadly”. For 3 and 4, this yields the following translated 
sentences:
3trans  Dave performed energetically.
4trans  John smiled broadly.
What is notable here is that 3trans and 4trans both make sense and intuitively 
mean the same as the pre-translated versions, 3 and 4.
Now let us try this with 1 and 2. Once the three-stage translation process 
is completed, we get the following sentences:
1trans  Lucy bagged heavily.
2trans  John hatted broadly.
Unlike the previous case, 1trans and 2trans are not sensible sentences of 
English and therefore could not mean the same as sentences 1 and 2.
The moral of the story is that, whilst some sentences that have the 
subject : verb : adjective : noun surface form can be translated into subject 
: verb : adverb form without losing their sense or changing their meaning, 
others, such as 1 and 2, cannot.
Where we cannot perform these translations, the thought goes, we really 
are ontologically committed to the existence of the objects referred to in true 
versions of those sentences.
However, where we can perform the translations, then even true sentences 
do not really commit us to the existence of their objects, they are just loose 
ways of talking. In the case of sentences such as 3 and 4, what we are really 
committed to are not objects such as performances and smiles which can be 
adjectivally modified but, rather, events of performing and smiling which can 
be modified adverbially. 
In this light, consider the kind of sentence that, it was suggested, carries 
an implicit commitment to the existence of mental objects.
5  Paul had a pink sense datum.
6  Julie had a triangular afterimage.
Then take these statements and push them through the translation to get:
5trans  Paul sensed pinkly
6trans  Julie afterimaged (=sensed) triangularly

36  Philosophy of Perception
Opponents of mental objects then contend that 5trans and 6trans mean the 
same as the original sentences. This is then argued to show that, contrary to 
first impressions, 5 and 6 do not commit us to the existence of problematic 
mental objects after all. Instead, like 3 and 4, they only commit us to subjects 
sensing in certain ways. 
Adverbialism
These considerations have been taken to show the way to an alternative 
theory of perception that does not posit mental objects. An adverbial theory 
of perception contends that visual experiences are not episodes of sensing 
sense data but are rather episodes of sensing in particular ways. 
Adverbialism, as a theory of perception, is easy to misunderstand. There is 
something in the translation argument above that can make the theory look 
like a verbal dodge, not a substantive theory of perception at all. As Cornman, 
himself a defender of adverbialism, says, “merely devising an artificial ter-
minology in which the problems [faced by sense data] do not arise neither 
solves nor dissolves the problems” (1971: 188). But, as we shall see, adverbial 
theories of perception offer much more than an artificial terminology. 
In getting away from the sense of artificiality, an important thing to note 
is that, although the adverbs that are appealed to in these particular transla-
tions are nonstandard, the underlying idea is actually quite familiar. Imagine 
that, instead of seeing a red triangle, you see a tree through heat haze. In such 
a case, we do not see a blurry tree—the tree doesn’t become blurry—rather 
we see the tree blurrily. The object we see doesn’t change; the way we see the 
object changes. 
In many ways, this observation is the core of an adverbial theory of per-
ception. For example, when I see a red object, according to the adverbialist, 
I don’t sense a red mental entity but rather sense the material entity in a 
particular way: redly. As Ducasse, one of the original adverbialists, put it: 
“To sense blue is then to sense bluely [ . . . ] Sensing blue, that is to say, is a 
species of sensing—a specific variety of the sort of activity generically called 
‘sensing’ ” (1942: 232–233).
Now adverbialists agree with sense datum theorists in endorsing the 
Common Factor Principle, which claims that:
(C)	Phenomenologically indiscriminable veridical perceptions, halluci-
nations and illusions have an underlying mental state in common.
If a subject sees a stick half-immersed in water, according to the adverbial-
ist, the subject doesn’t sense a bent stick but rather senses a straight stick 
bently. Or, to stay with the present example, if I see a white object under red 
light, and thereby suffer from the illusion that I see something red, I once 
again sense redly, but in this case, a white object is sensed redly. 

Adverbial theories  37
A hallucination of a red object will also involve my sensing redly, it is just 
that, in this case, nothing is thereby sensed. I still sense in a certain way—
redly—but no object is thereby sensed.
According to adverbialism, then, what it is like for me is a matter not of 
the object sensed (as there may not even be an object) but rather of the way 
I sense.
For this reason, adverbialism embodies a rejection of the Phenomenal 
Principle. That principle says that:
(P)	If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something that possesses 
a particular sensible quality then there is something of which the 
subject is aware which does possess that quality.
In both the illusory and hallucinatory cases just described, we have seen 
that there can sensibly appear to a subject to be something that possesses the 
sensible quality of redness without its being the case that there is something 
of which the subject is aware that possesses that quality. In the case of the 
bent stick illusion, the only object of which the subject is aware is straight, 
not bent, and in the case of a hallucination of something red, there is no 
object of which the subject is aware at all. 
Instead, in both of these cases, its sensibly appearing to the subject as 
though something is bent or red is accounted for, not by what the subject 
senses, but rather by the way the subject senses: in these cases, the subject 
senses bently or redly. In all of the different cases—veridical, hallucinatory, 
or illusory—the subject is simply in a distinctive kind of experiential state.
So the adverbialist proposes to analyze visual experiences as follows.
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F, if and only if S 
senses F-ly.
As with the sense datum theory, this is an analysis of the neutral category 
of visual experience. For such an episode of sensing to qualify as a perception 
of Fness, other criteria will need to be met. This is the subject of Chapter 7.
Adverbialism and metaphysics
Take an adverbial statement, such as “Jones senses redly.” At a first pass, 
there are two ways in which we might analyze this.
The first is to analyze such a statement as committing us to the existence 
of an event whose particular nature as an event is described by the adver-
bial modifiers. This analysis reads “Jones senses” as committing us to the 
existence of an event of sensing of which Jones is the subject, and “redly” as 
ascribing the property of being redly (whatever that may be) to the event.1
The second option is to treat “Jones senses redly” as a subject–predicate 
statement. According to this analysis, “Jones” refers to the subject and 

38  Philosophy of Perception
“senses redly” is a predicate, which functions to ascribe the property to the 
subject, Jones, of sensing redly. 
Of course, each analysis carries different metaphysical commitments, 
so an argument for one analysis over the other might contain metaphysical 
considerations.2 For present purposes, however, I don’t want to detour into 
these arguments; instead, let us focus on broader metaphysical issues. 
By some of its defenders at least, adverbialism was conceived of as a theory 
of perception that not only avoided the commitment to mental objects but 
that more generally avoided the commitment to any kind of dualistic meta-
physics. Instead, adverbialism was intended to be consistent with a monist 
materialistic metaphysics. However, more recently, adverbialism has been 
closely linked with qualia theory from the philosophy of mind (Crane 2000), 
a theory which has itself been argued to be committed to a form of dualism 
(e.g. Chalmers 1996). Let us therefore take a moment to explore this.
Consider, once again, the sense datum statement, “Jones senses a red sense 
datum.” As we have seen, this statement ascribes a sensible quality—phe-
nomenal or sensible redness—to a mental object, and states that Jones stands 
in the sensing relation to this object. In this way, the sense datum theory 
offers an explanation of why it is like this for Jones—Jones experiences red 
because he is aware of a sense datum that instantiates phenomenal redness.
Given this, a natural reading of the adverbial equivalent, “Jones senses 
redly” takes it to both identify a sensory event and ascribe a property to that 
event; a property which is marked by “redly.” If we follow this similarity 
through, the most natural interpretation would take this property to also be 
a phenomenal or qualititative property: a property that explains why it is like 
this for Jones. On this natural reading of adverbialism, then, the adverbialist, 
just like the qualia theorist, “holds the qualities sensed in experience to be 
modifications of experience itself” (Crane 2000: 177).
As you can see from Crane’s quote, qualia theorists hold that the quali-
ties sensed in experience—in our terms, the constituents of the experience’s 
presentational character—are properties of the experience: qualia.3 Moreover, 
it is these properties that type the experience by what it is like to undergo it. 
So, on a qualia theory, both the phenomenal character and the presentational 
character coincide. 
However, at least one advocate of the events analysis of adverbialism, 
James Cornman, denies that terms such as “redly” do “function to ascribe 
this kind of qualitative property to an event.” Instead, he suggests, they 
“function to specify more precisely a particular event” (1971: 271). As he 
is reported to have said elsewhere, “‘redly’ does not ascribe any non-sortal 
property to some event, nor does it ascribe any property which constitutes 
the manner in which the event occurred. . . . Instead, ‘redly’ serves only to 
internally classify John’s sensing” (Elugardo 1982: 36). 
To this extent, Cornman agrees with adverbialists, such as Tye, who 
prefer to analyze adverbial statements as subject–predicate statements. Tye 
contends that “the predicate ‘is a sensing-redly’ . . . really means ‘is a sensing 

Adverbial theories  39
with the red qualitative character’ where ‘red’ is a concealed description with 
a comparative normal cause connotation” (1984: 204–205). 
In essence, both Cornman and Tye argue that, rather than treat terms 
such as “redly” and “red qualitative character” as ascribing special irreducible 
phenomenal properties to either subjects or events, we should treat them as 
“topic neutral” (Smart 1959). That is to say, these terms should be under-
stood in such a way that “a Greek peasant’s reports about his sensations can 
be neutral between a dualistic metaphysics and [a] materialistic metaphys-
ics” (Smart 1959: 150). To this end, Smart suggests that when we say that a 
sensing has the “red qualitative character” or is a “sensing redly”, we merely 
mean something like the following: the sensing is a sensing of the kind that 
normally occurs when we are visually presented with objects (lights, etc.) 
that are red, where “red” has its normal meaning.
In this way, the adverbialist could allow that experiences have what we have 
been calling phenomenal characters—properties that type the experiences by 
what it is like to undergo them. For instance, the property of a perception of 
a red object that types it by what it is like to undergo it is, according to this 
type of adverbialism, its property of being a sensing redly, which, of course, 
unpacks as its property of being a sensing of the kind that normally occurs 
when we are visually presented with objects (lights, etc.) that are red.4
The motivation for this interpretation of adverbial statements is to avoid 
attributing any properties to the sensory event that preclude a materialistic 
identification of the sensory event with a brain event. A brain event, it is 
argued, can be a sensing of the kind that normally occurs when we are visu-
ally presented with a red object. In this way, some adverbialists hoped to 
offer an alternative to sense datum theory that was consistent with a monist 
materialistic metaphysics.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that, even if there are interpretations 
of adverbialism that are not committed to the existence of qualia, adverbial-
ism does serve to highlight the possibility of something that is central to 
qualia theory—the possibility of developing a theory of the visual experience 
that is not relational or does not have the act–object form.
The many property problem 
Let us now turn to some objections to adverbialism. Thus far, we have been 
discussing simple adverbial statements of the form “Jones senses redly.” Yet, 
as Jackson points out: 
Our statements about afterimages are not just to the effect that an image 
is red, or square, or whatever; they are also to the effect that an image is 
red and square and . . . [The problem for] the adverbial theory turns on 
this point that an afterimage has many properties, and will be referred to 
as the many property problem.
(Jackson 1975: 129)

40  Philosophy of Perception
Let us imagine, then, that we are looking to provide an adverbial analysis 
of the following statement: Jones is experiencing a red, square afterimage 
(Jones is sensing a sense datum which is both red and square). How should 
we analyze this?
Sensing F-ly and G-ly
The most obvious response would simply be to say that to sense a red, square 
sense datum is to sense redly and squarely. This would give us the following 
conjunctive principle of analysis:
“X senses an F, G, etc. sense datum” is to be analyzed as “X senses F-ly 
and G-ly and etc.” 
So, “Jones is experiencing a red, square afterimage” would be analyzed as 
“Jones is sensing redly and squarely.”
This analysis has the advantage of explaining the entailment from “I have 
a red, square afterimage” to “I have a red afterimage” and “I have a square 
afterimage.” It faces the following problem.
There is an important difference between the following two total afterim-
age experiences:
7	
Simultaneously having a red, square afterimage and a green, round 
afterimage.
8	
Simultaneously having a red, round afterimage and a green, square 
afterimage.
According to the conjunctive principle of analysis, the adverbial transla-
tion of these would be:
7trans  Sensing redly and squarely and greenly and roundly.
8trans  Sensing redly and roundly and greenly and squarely. 
But these are equivalent. Hence the conjunctive formulation doesn’t seem 
able to account for the differences between these total experiences.
If you’re not sure about this, consider the following sentences and their 
putative analyses:
9  Jones has a red, round afterimage and a green, square afterimage.
9trans  Jones senses redly and roundly and greenly and squarely.
10  Jones has a red, square afterimage.

Adverbial theories  41
10trans  Jones senses redly and squarely.
Whilst 9trans entails 10trans, 9 does not entail 10. The fact that the entail-
ments go awry suggests that the translations are not in fact equivalent.
Sensing F-ly G-ly
An alternative response to the many property problem is suggested by the 
ambiguity of the following:
11  Dave sang impressively loudly.
There is an interpretation of this which reads as conjunctive (Dave sang 
impressively and he did so loudly)—both adverbs modify the verb.
However, an alternative interpretation reads impressively as modifying 
not the verb but the adverb (it was the volume of Dave’s singing which was 
impressive rather than the singing itself).
The thought would be that our principle of analysis would not have to be 
conjunctive (where both adverbs modify the verb) but, instead, accumulative, 
where each additional adverb modifies the previous one. Thus:
“X senses an F, G, etc. sense datum” is to be analyzed as “X senses F-ly 
G-ly etc.”
So, when we say that Jones had a red, square afterimage, we should analyze 
this as follows:
Jones sensed redly squarely.
Rather than take both adverbs as modifying “sensed” (i.e. as being modes 
or ways of sensing), we take one adverb to modify the verb and the other to 
modify the first adverb.
This leads to the first problem—how are we going to nonarbitrarily decide 
which adverb modifies the verb and which modifies the first adverb? There 
seems to be no principled reason to answer this question in a particular way.
Even if we do, we run into another problem. Let us say that we decide that 
squarely modifies sensing and redly modifies squarely. Now “redly” means 
something different in “Jones sensed redly” and “Jones sensed redly squarely,” 
whilst “red” means the same in “Jones had a red afterimage” and “Jones had 
a red, square afterimage.” This suggests once more that the analyses are not 
equivalent.
Another way of seeing this is to look at the entailments. “Jones had a red, 
square afterimage” entails that Jones had a red afterimage. But “Jones sensed 
redly squarely,” does not entail that Jones sensed redly. To see this, note that 
(on the accumulative analysis) “Dave sang impressively loudly” does not 

42  Philosophy of Perception
entail that Dave sang impressively—his singing might have been impressively 
loud but otherwise unexceptional.
Sensing FG-ly
The final way Jackson suggests we might try and solve the many property 
problem is as follows:
“X senses an F, G, etc. sense datum” is to be analyzed as “X senses 
FG(etc.)ly.”
Where FG-ly names a simple (fundamental) mode of sensing, not a 
complex, derivative mode of sensing which is built up out of semantically 
significant components.
So, the claim that “Jones has a red, square afterimage” should instead be 
analyzed as “Jones sensed red-square-ly.” 
In response to this, Jackson objects that:
On this view, someone who remarks on the common feature in having a 
red, square afterimage and having a red, round afterimage [must be inter-
preted as] making a plain mistake—the first is sensing red-square-ly, the 
second sensing red-round-ly, which are different, and that’s that. But far 
from being a plain mistake, this remark looks like an evident truth.
(Jackson 1975: 133)
A further problem is that afterimages can also have other properties—
fuzziness and sharpness for example. But if I have a red, square, fuzzy 
afterimage, then this must be analyzed as sensing red-square-fuzzy-ly—so 
sensing red-square-ly isn’t, as it happens, basic.
Jackson suggests that if the basic level of adverbial analysis has n compo-
nents (i.e. is sensing F1-F2- . . . -Fn-ly), he will be able to point out another 
component at level n+1 so the adverbialist “cannot ever give even a single 
example of a basic mode of sensing, and thus cannot ever complete even one 
of his adverbial analyses” (Jackson 1975: 133).
Sensing of-an-F-G-ly 
However, Tye (1975) follows Sellars (1975) in complaining that Jackson has 
missed the point. According to Tye and Sellars, the correct interpretation of 
the view is arrived at by the following grammatical transformations.
12  John has a sensation of a red square, becomes
13  John has an of-a-red-square sensation.

Adverbial theories  43
Note that the phrase “of-a-red-square” in 13 is functioning as an adjective 
modifying the noun “sensation”. We then do our adverbial transformation 
to get:
14  John senses of-a-red-square-ly, or, as it is sometimes put,
15  John senses in an of-a-red-square manner.
Tye goes on to suggest that, on this approach, “manners of sensing are 
conceived of as resembling and differing from one another in ways systemati-
cally analogous to the ways in which their ‘corresponding’ physical objects, 
i.e. their normal causes, resemble and differ from one another” (1975: 139). 
Thus, “red” and “square” in “an of-a-red-square manner” have a sense which 
is “derivative from and analogous to” (Tye 1975: 140) their sense when applied 
to normal physical objects. Thus the relationships which seem to hold 
between sensings can be accounted for as parasitic on the relationships that 
hold between physical objects—it is the resemblances between red, round 
and red, square objects which explain the resemblances between red, round 
and red, square sensings. This analysis is therefore claimed to rebut Jackson’s 
concern that we will never have a basic mode of sensing by providing a sense 
in which sensing in “an of-a-red-square manner” does include “red” and 
“square” as components.5
The complement objection
A further objection concerns the fact that, where we have a particular object, 
both one property and its complement (i.e. its opposite) cannot simulta-
neously be instantiated by this object. For example, one particular object 
cannot simultaneously have the properties of both redness and not-redness 
(say, blueness)—or be hot and cold, or big and small, etc.
The same seems to apply for actions. “[I]t is not possible for a person at a 
given time to V both F-ly and non-F-ly. I can sing badly easily enough, but I 
cannot sing both well and badly at the same time; I can run quickly, but not 
both quickly and slowly; . . . and so on and so forth” (Jackson 1977: 69).
However, where sensing is concerned, it seems that we clearly can sense 
both F-ly and non-F-ly at the same time—“I may have a red and a green 
afterimage at the same time” (Jackson 1977: 69).
How can we explain this? Well, Jackson suggests that the only plausible 
reply is to say that, “though one cannot V both F-ly and non-F-ly at a given 
time, one can V F-ly with respect to A and non-F-ly with respect to B. For 
instance I can, during a concerto, listen happily to the strings and unhappily 
to the piano” (Jackson 1977: 69).
Of course, whilst we may be able to understand this in the case of percep-
tion (I am sensing whitely with respect to the cue ball and redly with respect 
to the object ball), how might we make sense of this where hallucinations are 

44  Philosophy of Perception
concerned when there are no appropriate physical things to be sensing F-ly 
with respect to? If such objects are required to solve this problem, it “is hard 
to see what [they] could be other than the mental objects of the act-object 
[i.e. sense datum] theory” (Jackson 1977: 69).
Tye suggests that this problem can be avoided by allowing that there are 
many different sensings going on at the same time. This response raises a 
worry over whether it is possible for the same person to be the subject of two 
simultaneous visual sensings, but Tye suggests that this is no more outlandish 
than a subject being on the end of two simultaneous punches or stabbings. 
“After all,” he says, “having a visual sensation . . . is something which happens 
to one, given the appropriate stimuli (rather than something one consciously 
does)” (1984: 207).6
Adverbialism and the two hats
The phenomenological hat
Inasmuch as adverbialism is initially presented as a response to the sense 
datum theory, we might think that it suffers from the same problems when it 
comes to getting the phenomenology right. For example, if sense datum talk 
of lights and colors, patterns and patches cannot capture what it is like for a 
subject, then it would appear that neither could talk about sensing light-ly, 
color-ly, pattern-ly, and patch-ly.
This objection would miss the point of the appeal to the adverbial 
transformations. The reason adverbialists highlight the availability of these 
transformations is as a means to show that whatever can be said in terms 
of sense data can also be said without committing ourselves to such things. 
Unlike the sense datum theorist, the adverbialist does not have to be commit-
ted to the claim that the phenomenology of any experience can be captured 
so simply.
To consider what the adverbialist might have to say about the phenom-
enology of a more complex experience, consider what Tye’s approach would 
have to say about Strawson’s example (from Chapter 2) of seeing the red light 
of the setting sun filtering through the black and thickly clustered branches 
of the elms, seeing the dappled deer grazing in groups on the vivid green 
grass, and so on.
Tye’s translations would take this report and transform it into the 
following:
14Strawson Subject S senses of-the-red-light-of-the-setting-sun-filtering-
through-the-black-and-thickly-clustered-branches-of-the-elms-and-
the-dappled-deer-grazing-in-groups-on-the-vivid-green-grass-ly, or, as 
it is sometimes put, 

Adverbial theories  45
15Strawson Subject S senses in an of-the-red-light-of-the-setting-sun-fil-
tering-through-the-black-and-thickly-clustered-branches-of-the-elms-
and-the-dappled-deer-grazing-in-groups-on-the-vivid-green-grass 
manner. 
This seems to be a pretty accurate report of what it is like for subject S to 
have this experience and, note, a report that can be true regardless of whether 
or not the subject is perceiving or hallucinating.
However, when considering the success of this kind of move, we must 
bear in mind that, unless a qualia interpretation is offered (see below), these 
statements are supposed to be understood in a topic-neutral way. In other 
words, they should be understood as claiming that the subject senses in the 
kind of way that is normally caused by the red light of the setting sun filtering 
through the black and thickly clustered branches of the elms and the dappled 
deer grazing in groups on the vivid green grass. Once this is clarified, we 
might wonder whether this approach actually offers an explanation of why 
this state has the phenomenology it does or whether it simply takes this for 
granted.
In particular, recall that the sense datum theorist would insist that, to do 
justice to the phenomenology of this experience—which, given the accep-
tance of the Common Factor Principle, could of course occur in the absence 
of red light, vivid green grass, and the like—we must explain how it is that 
we are consciously aware of redness and vivid greenness. In response to this, 
the sense datum theorist, by way of the Phenomenal Principle, contends that 
it is because we are aware of objects that instantiate these properties. What 
can the adverbialist offer in place of this explanation? Given that the kind of 
sensing that is normally caused by the red light of the setting sun (etc.) could 
occur in its absence, what explains the sensible appearance of redness and 
vivid greenness? It seems that the adverbialist (at least, the adverbialist who 
is not also a qualia theorist) has no explanation to offer. Instead, they seem 
to have to hold that it is just a brute fact about the kind of sensing that is 
caused by the red light of the setting sun (etc.) that it has the phenomenology 
it does.
If the adverbialist does offer a qualia interpretation of adverbialism, then 
it will of course face objections that qualia theories face. For instance, they 
face the objections that visual experiences are transparent or diaphanous. The 
qualia theorist claims that, when we introspect, we are aware of properties of 
our experiences, yet the claim that visual experiences are transparent suggests 
otherwise. To claim that an experience is transparent is to claim that, when 
one introspects that experience, one does not discover any properties of the 
experience itself, only properties of the objects of experience. As Harman 
puts it: 
When you see a tree, you do not experience any features as intrinsic fea-
tures of your experience. Look at a tree and try and turn your attention 

46  Philosophy of Perception
to intrinsic features of your experience. I predict that the only features 
there to turn your attention to will be features of the presented tree, 
including relational features of the tree “from here.”
(Harman 1990: 39)
 This is supposed to be a phenomenological observation. It tells us that, 
when we introspect our visual experiences, all we find are the features of the 
worldly objects. If this is correct, it stands as a phenomenological problem 
for theories that claim that we are aware of properties of experiences when we 
introspect.
In addition to these concerns, Butchvarov argues that either form of 
adverbialism “is incapable of doing justice to the most obvious and indeed 
essential phenomenological fact about perceptual consciousness . . . namely, 
its intentionality, its object-directedness” (1980: 272). To explain this, he 
draws attention to the fact that, according to adverbialism, even a successful 
case of perception “is a case of consciousness in virtue of the state of sensing 
it involves” (Butchvarov 1980: 273). Yet, he goes on to point out, that state 
of sensing itself is, on the adverbialist theory, not object-directed in and of 
itself. This means, he suggests, that “what makes [the sensory state] object-
directed is not what makes it a case of consciousness, [which] conflict[s] with 
the spirit, if not the letter, of the thesis of the intentionality of perception” 
(Butchvarov 1980: 273).
The epistemological hat
On the face of it, adverbialism looks to have one up on the sense datum 
theory, epistemically speaking. This is because it doesn’t have intermediate 
objects of awareness to “get in the way” of real, external objects. 
As we saw, the sense datum theory claims that, when we have veridical 
experiences of objects in the world, we are aware of these objects indirectly, 
in virtue of being aware of different objects: sense data.
The adverbialist, on the other hand, does not have to make such a claim. 
According to adverbialism, when we experience objects in the world, we are 
aware of those very objects, by sensing in a particular way. So adverbialism can 
allow that we are aware of material objects directly, and hence demand the 
title of direct realism.
This claim has been challenged. Following on from the phenomenological 
objection outlined above, Butchvarov argues that the mere fact that object 
“x is causally related to S’s sensing in a certain way can no more reasonably 
be described as S’s being conscious of x than the fact that the presence of 
carbon monoxide in the air is causally related to S’s having a headache can be 
described as S’s being conscious of carbon monoxide” (1980: 273). In other 
words, Butchvarov argues that S’s sensing in a particular way, even in the 
best possible cases in which this is appropriately caused by an object, cannot 

Adverbial theories  47
ever amount to being conscious of that object. This casts doubt on whether 
adverbialism can really be said to be a theory that enables “direct” awareness 
of the external world. 
In addition to this concern, adverbialism is not obviously in any better 
a position than sense datum theory when it comes to the epistemological 
question of how our empirical beliefs are justified.
A pure adverbialist theory, just like the pure sense datum theory, rejects 
the Representational Principle. That is, a pure adverbialist theory insists that 
there is nothing more to a particular visual experience than sensing in the 
right kind of way. As was the case with the classical sense datum theory, it 
is difficult to see how having such an experience—an experience that could 
occur without the world playing ball—could put us in a position to know 
anything about the world. If we stick with a foundationalist epistemology, 
then the question of how we move from a justified belief about our own sen-
sory states to a belief about the world crops up for the adverbialist, just as it 
did for the sense datum theorist.
As was the case with the sense datum theory, one could also develop vari-
ants of adverbialism by also endorsing the Representational Principle. I leave 
this as an exercise for the reader. 
Questions
•	
Can the adverbialist accommodate what it is like to have a rich 
visual experience of the kind we normally enjoy when looking 
at a complex scene?
•	
What kinds of “mixed” theories of perception could be cre-
ated by adding the Representational Principle to adverbialism? 
Think back to the sensory core theory and percept theory for 
suggestions.
•	
Is the adverbialist any better placed than the sense datum theo-
rist when it comes to wearing the epistemological hat? Would a 
mixed theory do a better job?
Notes
	 1.	 The familiar Davidsonian analysis of events (1980) would go further and 
hold that both “being a sensing” and “being had by Jones” are also predi-
cated of a bare event particular. Yet there are other metaphysical analyses 
of events, which our discussions need not go into, so for present purposes 
let us stick with the simplest way of understanding this analysis.
	 2.	 Tye (1984) contends that the subject–predicate analysis is to be pre-
ferred to the event analysis as, he argues, the event analysis faces similar 
metaphysical problems to those faced by the sense datum theorist. For 

48  Philosophy of Perception
instance, Tye wonders what the event analysis might say about a situa-
tion in which “I see a tiger in the distance and it appears to me to have 
numerous stripes (though no definite number). How many sensings do 
I undergo? One for each apparent stripe? But, as far as I am aware, there 
is no definite number of apparent stripes” (1984: 208–209). However, it 
seems that there is a reply available to the event adverbialist—to say that 
I am sensing in an indefinite-number-of-stripes manner.
	 3.	 “Qualia” is a plural and is pronounced kwar-lee-ah; the singular is 
“quale” (kwar-lay).
	 4.	 What is the presentational character of an experience according to this 
version of adverbialism? This is a tricky question. Earlier, we suggested 
that the adverbialist could claim that, in perception, we sense the (exter-
nal) property red redly, in illusion, we sense white redly, and in hallucina-
tion, nothing is sensed redly. Perhaps we could identify what is sensed 
with the presentational character? This would provide an adequate result 
in the perceptual case—the presentational character would include the 
external property of redness—but would have a very odd consequence in 
the case of illusion: it would entail that, when we misperceive something 
white as red, we are directly aware of whiteness. This just seems wrong. 
Perhaps, then, we ought to (given the endorsement of the Common Fac-
tor Principle) extrapolate from the minimal case of hallucination and 
hold that, strictly speaking, an adverbial experience of sensing redly 
lacks presentational character. This also seems strange.
	 5.	 What is the impact of these considerations when we turn our attention 
away from the translations themselves to the positive adverbial theories? 
As Tye’s remarks indicate, those who interpret the adverbial terms topic-
neutrally are likely to think these condsiderations miss the point—even 
complex terms such as of-a-red-square-beside-a-green-triangle merely 
point us toward the normal cause of such episodes of sensing. These 
considerations do, however, raise more issues for a qualia interpretation 
of adverbialism as they pose the question of how, once an experience has 
been broken down into its many constituent qualia, the red quale gets 
put back together with the square quale and the green quale with the 
triangular quale, rather than the other way round.
	 6.	 It is worth noting at this point that the claim that sensing is passive is 
highly controversial. For instance, Alva Noë’s Action in Perception is an 
extensive argument for the basic idea that “perceiving is a way of acting. 
Perception is not something that happens to us, or in us. It is something 
we do” (Noë 2005: 1).
Further reading
Most of the critical material in this chapter is presented in Frank Jackson’s 
1975 paper, “On the Adverbial Analysis of Visual Experience” published in 
the journal Metaphilosophy. This paper is followed by responses by Michael 

Adverbial theories  49
Tye (“The Adverbial Theory: A Defence of Sellars against Jackson”) and 
Wilfrid Sellars (“The Adverbial Theory of the Objects of Sensation”). 
Tye’s 1984 paper, “The Adverbial Approach to Visual Experience,” 
published in The Philosophical Review, contains useful discussions of the 
subject-predicate and event analyses of adverbial statements.
Panayot Butchvarov’s 1980 paper, “Adverbial Theories of Consciousness,” 
contains a number of phenomenological objections to adverbialism.
Tim Crane discusses the connections between adverbialism and qualia 
theory in his 2000 paper, “The Origins of Qualia.”
Wilfrid Sellars’s classic 1956 essay, “Empiricism and the Philosophy of 
Mind” is a complex, detailed attempt to build an adequate epistemology 
alongside a rejection of sense datum theories. (As we have seen, Sellars 
endorsed an adverbial theory of perception, although adverbialism itself is 
not discussed in this essay.) Paul Coates’s 2007 book, The Metaphysics of 
Perception, defends a Sellars-inspired adverbialist theory of perception.
Adverbialism is also defended in more recent papers by Uriah Kriegel 
(“Intentional Inexistence and Phenomenal Intentionality” and “The 
Dispensability of [Merely] Intentional Objects”) and Alan Thomas (“An 
Adverbial Theory of Consciousness”).


4	
Belief acquisition theories 
Overview
Belief acquisition theories (also known as doxastic theories) argue that 
visual experience is no more than the acquisition of belief. This claim is 
explained and discussed before some critical considerations are raised.
These include the objections that the perception can take place in 
the absence of beliefs being acquired, that the theory fails to allow that 
animals and children can be perceivers, that it cannot explain our abil-
ity to acquire new concepts, and that it is refuted by a phenomenon 
known as blindsight.
Common Factor Principle

Phenomenal Principle

Representational Principle

An alternative approach to both sense datum and adverbialist theories focuses 
on the fact that, when it comes to perceptual experience, what is important, 
from an evolutionary standpoint, is the nature of the information about the 
world it provides us with. As Armstrong puts it, “It is clear that the biological 
function of perception is to give the organism information about the current 
state of its own body and its physical environment, information that will 
assist the organism in the conduct of life” (1968: 209).
In other words, the very reason we have perceptual systems is to enable us 
to gain knowledge about the environment in which we have to live and pros-
per (ignoring, for the present, perception of the organism’s bodily states).1
According to a highly influential philosophical theory of knowledge, at 
least part of what it is to know that x is to believe that x and for x to be the 
case (i.e. to be true).2

52  Philosophy of Perception
This is a most important clue to the nature of perception. It leads us to 
the view that perception is nothing but the acquiring of true or false 
beliefs concerning the current state of the organism’s body and environ-
ment. . . . Veridical perception is the acquiring of true beliefs, sensory 
illusion the acquiring of false beliefs.
(Armstrong 1968: 209)
As is indicated by this quote, the belief acquisition theorist accepts the 
Common Factor Principle (in earlier work, Armstrong calls the parallel 
between veridical and nonveridical cases “the parallel on which the Argument 
from Illusion rightly insists” [1961: 83]). Given this, the belief acquisition 
theorist holds that phenomenologically indiscriminable visual experiences 
have an underlying mental state in common. 
An interesting question is whether or not the belief acquisition theorist 
accepts or rejects the Representational Principle. In one sense, the event of 
perceiving is the event of acquiring beliefs, and that event does not possess 
intentionality. However, the things that are acquired do possess intention-
ality. So there is a very clear sense in which perception can be said to be 
intentional on a belief acquisition theory. It is just that, as Armstrong puts it 
“the intentionality of perception reduces to the intentionality of the beliefs 
acquired” (1968: 211).
What about the Phenomenal Principle? That principle states that:
(P)	If there sensibly appears to a subject to be something which pos-
sesses a particular sensible quality then there is something of which 
the subject is aware which does possess that quality.
If we accept that the antecedent of the Phenomenal Principle can be met 
in both good and bad cases3—that is, accept that in cases of illusion and 
hallucination there sensibly appears to be something that possesses a par-
ticular sensible quality—then the claim that perception is nothing but the 
acquisition of beliefs seems to entail a rejection of the Phenomenal Principle. 
Hallucinations would be cases in which there sensibly appears to be some-
thing that possesses a particular sensible quality when in fact there is not. 
In such cases, the sense datum theorist’s putative “non-physical object of 
immediate apprehension is simply a ghost generated by my belief that I am 
seeing something” (Armstrong 1961: 84).
Perception as the acquisition of beliefs
Given Armstrong’s claim that perception and illusion (and, by extension, 
hallucination) involve the acquisition of beliefs, together with the claim 
that the same mental state occurs in indiscriminable cases of perception and 
hallucination, we can provide a first pass analysis of the belief acquisition 
theory’s claim about the neutral category of visual experience as follows:

Belief acquisition theories   53
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F if and only if S 
acquires the belief that something is F.4
As is indicated in the quote from Armstrong above, if this belief is true 
then the subject will thereby be said to see that something is F; if it is false, 
the subject will be under an illusion (or hallucinating).
In addressing this theory, it is important to be clear that the key theoreti-
cal claim is not that perception is believing but rather that it is the acquiring 
of belief. Normally, to say that a subject has a certain belief doesn’t entail that 
there is any occurrent mental event—anything going on in the subject’s mind 
at that time. We continue to believe certain things (e.g., that dogs are mam-
mals) even when we are not actually thinking that thought—for example, 
when thinking about something else, or when asleep. But perceiving some-
thing is an occurrent mental phenomenon. So it is important to be aware 
that this analysis does not hold that perception is believing (which may be 
a nonconscious, dispositional state), but that perception is the acquiring of 
beliefs. The acquiring of a particular belief is something that happens at a 
particular time and hence is plausibly an occurrent mental phenomenon.
However, even with this clarification made, the theory still faces an obvi-
ous problem (which is why I said that the above analysis is “first pass”). 
Suppose you have your eyes closed and I tell you that the cat is on the mat. 
You trust me and thus acquire the belief that the cat is on the mat, but you do 
not see the cat on the mat. This indicates that the simple claim that percep-
tion is the acquisition of belief needs augmenting.
Armstrong himself doesn’t say much at this point. He toys with the idea 
of adding “by means of the senses” to the analysis above, yet, of course, this 
will not solve the problem. When I tell you that the cat is on the mat, you 
acquire this by means of the senses—you hear me tell you—but again this 
doesn’t mean that you see a cat on a mat.
Pitcher (1971), however, discusses this problem more deeply. He initially 
attempts to distinguish the episodes of belief acquisition that constitute per-
ception from those that do not by saying that the relevant beliefs are those 
that are acquired through the use of the relevant sensory organ. He goes on to 
note, however, that one could form the belief that an object was cold, or hard, 
or sharp, by touching it with one’s eyes, so this belief would be acquired by 
using my eyes, yet I don’t see that the object is cold, hard, or sharp.
He therefore considers changing this, for the case of visual perception, to 
using our eyes in the standard visual way. This would rule out using my eyes 
to feel a property as a nonstandard use of eyes. Yet imagine a case in which I 
am trapped in a clear-walled but soundproof room and somebody holds up a 
sign to tell me that the cat is on the mat. This belief is acquired through using 
my eyes in the standard visual way, but my acquiring this belief doesn’t entail 
that I see whatever it is I learn.
In response to this, Pitcher (1971) further elaborates his analysis by 
placing conditions on the kinds of acquired beliefs which might constitute 

54  Philosophy of Perception
perception. He goes on to stipulate that the beliefs acquired must be per-
ceptual beliefs where, by a perceptual belief, Pitcher means a belief (or more 
strictly, a set of beliefs) whose overall richness corresponds exactly to the 
richness of all the propositions which specify how things look to the subject. 
Belief acquisition theory and the two hats
The epistemological hat
As we noted at the beginning of the chapter, belief acquisition theory is 
designed so as to be able to adequately wear the epistemological hat. There 
are two key features of the position that are intended to make it epistemically 
preferable.
The first advantage is that, as we have done away with mental objects 
as direct objects of perception, we could now be argued to have no veil of 
perception separating us from the world (as we saw, however, the same could 
also be said of adverbialism). As we saw in Chapter 2, however, the force of 
this “objection” to sense datum theory is somewhat sensational.
Another potential advantage this theory has, at least over foundational-
ist versions of sense datum theory and adverbialism, is that the beliefs we 
acquire in perception are already about the world. So there is no question of 
how we might justifiably move from our experiences, or beliefs about our 
experiences, to beliefs about the world. Yet, of course, if we assume that our 
empirical beliefs are justified and that these beliefs are either identical to, or 
justified by, some of the beliefs we acquire when we perceive, then there still 
remains the question of how the beliefs we acquire through perception are 
justified. 
Epistemology provides us with a number of theories of justification that 
could play this role. For instance, a belief acquisition theorist could endorse 
a coherentist theory of justification. Unlike the foundationalist we met in 
Chapter 2, the coherentist denies that our empirical beliefs depend for their 
justification on foundational beliefs that are justified in a special uncondi-
tional way. Instead, the coherentist holds that all beliefs are justified in the 
same way: by the relationship they stand in to other beliefs. In more detail, 
a coherentist belief acquisition theorist would hold that a belief we acquire 
when we perceive will be justified so long as (1) it coheres with or stands in 
suitable inferential relationships with the other members of the belief set of 
which it is now a part, and (2) the belief set itself is coherent.
Armstrong himself, however, appeals to an importantly different theory 
of justification, which he calls the “thermometer” view: 
Suppose that “p” is true and A believes that p, but his belief is not sup-
ported by any reasons. [ . . . What justifies such a belief?] My suggestion 
is that there must be a law-like connection between the state of affairs 

Belief acquisition theories   55
Bap [A believes that p] and the state of affairs that makes “p” true such 
that, given Bap, it must be the case that p. 
(Armstrong 1973: 166)
The thermometer analogy functions as follows. So long as a thermometer 
is working properly, there is a law-like connection between the temperature 
of the environment and the reading on the thermometer. Likewise, so long 
as our belief-forming mechanisms (our perceptual mechanisms) are work-
ing correctly, then there will be a law-like connection between aspects of 
the external environment and our beliefs about those aspects. “When a true 
belief unsupported by reasons stands to the situation truly believed as a 
thermometer stands to the actual temperature, then we have non-inferential 
knowledge” (Armstrong 1973: 166).
On Armstrong’s view, if there is a law-like connection between our beliefs 
and the environment, then our beliefs will be justified.
You might be wondering at this point how we could know whether or 
not our beliefs stand in this relation, but, according to Armstrong, we do 
not need to know this, it just needs to be the case (in other words, it is a 
metaphysical condition, not an epistemological one).
Indeed, it is this feature that makes the thermometer view so different 
from both foundationalist and coherentist theories of justification—it does 
not require that the subject be aware that their beliefs stand in a law-like rela-
tion to the facts. Instead, it allows that beliefs can be justified by factors that 
are not “cognitively accessible” to a subject. For this reason, such a theory 
is known as an externalist theory of justification (as opposed to internalist 
theories, such as foundationalism and coherentism). According to an exter-
nalist theory, the factor that justifies a subject in holding a belief need not 
function as the reason for which the subject holds the belief—the subject may 
hold the belief for other (internally accessible) reasons or they may simply be 
caused to have that belief as on a belief acquisition theory of perception—but 
they will nonetheless be justified in holding that belief.
Critics of the view may yet dispute the claim that endorsing the belief 
acquisition view constitutes a significant epistemological advance over the 
other theories we have considered. If the belief acquisition theorist endorses 
coherentism, for example, then all the epistemological work is being done 
by the relationship that the acquired beliefs stand in to our other beliefs. 
Alternatively, if the belief acquisition theorist endorses an externalist theory 
of justification, as Armstrong does, then again, all the epistemological work 
is being done by the claim that certain beliefs can be justified by things out-
side our ken.
There seems no reason that a sense datum theorist or adverbialist could 
not endorse either of these views. This would potentially give such theories 
all the purported epistemological advantages of belief acquisition theory. If 
these theorists don’t endorse such theories of justification, it is because they 
want to hold onto the idea that, somehow, our empirical beliefs are justified 

56  Philosophy of Perception
by the sensory aspects of our perceptual experiences. Yet, of course, this 
is just the feature of perceptual experiences that belief acquisition theorists 
seem to overlook, as we shall now discuss.
The phenomenological hat
The most intuitively difficult aspect of the belief acquisition theory is in its 
account of what it is like to have a visual experience. You may note that I 
haven’t yet said anything about what the phenomenal character or presenta-
tional character of an experience is according to the belief acquisition theory. 
This is, I confess, because I’m not sure that it applies. The belief acquisition 
theorist identifies visual experiences with episodes of acquiring beliefs, and I 
suspect that this theorist would deny that the episode of acquiring beliefs has 
a phenomenal character. I may be wrong about this, however.
Despite this, the question of why there should be something it is like to 
undergo an experience on the belief acquisition theory can still be posed. 
Yet there are features of the theory that can be called upon to explain this. 
First of all, at least on Pitcher’s version of the theory, when we perceive, we 
don’t strictly speaking acquire a belief but, rather, a body of rich and detailed 
beliefs. The richness and detail of our experience is reflected in the richness 
and detail of the beliefs we acquire.
In addition to this, we not only acquire beliefs about the world; we also 
acquire beliefs about our experiences. When I perceive a cat, I not only acquire 
the belief that <there is a cat on the mat>, I also acquire the belief that <I see 
that there is a cat on the mat>. Now imagine that you believe that you see a 
cat on a mat. What would you say if I asked you what it is like for you? Well, 
you would probably say that it is like seeing a cat on a mat. 
It is not clear that this quite scratches the itch. Perhaps you would say that 
“merely” believing that you see a cat on the mat would be like actually seeing 
a cat on the mat. But isn’t this because there is already something it is like to 
actually see a cat on the mat? It is not clear that the simple appeal to beliefs 
that one sees something can explain this all on its own.
Another way of pressing the point is by appeal to the idea of a philosophi-
cal zombie (Chalmers 1996). Zombies are beings exactly like us in all physical 
respects but which lack conscious experiences. In this context, the concern 
is this. If all there is to having visual experiences is acquiring beliefs, couldn’t 
a creature acquire beliefs in the way envisaged by the belief acquisition theo-
rist without being conscious? In other words, wouldn’t a zombie have visual 
experiences as understood by the belief acquisition theory?
Perception without belief acquisition
These phenomenological concerns express what seems to me to be the 
underlying intuitive objection to belief acquisition theories: that they leave 
something out.

Belief acquisition theories   57
One way in which the theory can seem to leave something out is that it 
seems there are occasions in which we experience something to be a certain 
way without believing it to be that way. If experiences are nothing more than 
the acquisition of beliefs, then there doesn’t appear to be room for this kind 
of disconnect.
Examples of this include such things as optical illusions. Take the famous 
Müller–Lyer illusion in Figure 3.1.
The left line looks longer than the right line, but because we know the illu-
sion, we don’t end up believing that the left line is longer than the right line. If 
anything, we may even end up believing that both lines are the same length. 
Despite this, we still have an experience as of one line’s being longer than 
the other. Doesn’t this show that we need to distinguish between the visual 
experience of the lines and the beliefs we form on the basis of this experience 
and hence cannot assimilate the former to the latter?
Both Armstrong and Pitcher consider this and respond in the same kind 
of way. Pitcher’s response is the most detailed, so I will outline this.
Pitcher distinguishes between three types of case (which are not supposed 
to exhaust the options but provide three points on a spectrum).
	 1	 First Cases: the normal or standard cases where the subject does believe 
things are as they look.
	 2	 Middle Cases: “although it looks to Q as though there is an x at u, never-
theless Q, for some reason or other, is not quite sure that there is, in fact, 
any such x at u” (Pitcher 1971: 91). As an example of this, imagine that, 
when the sun is out, you might be unsure whether or not you see water 
on the road in front of you. In such a situation you withhold judgment as 
to whether the world is as it appears to be.
	 3	 Last Cases: “although it looks to Q as though there is an x at u, Q nev-
ertheless does not [acquire] the perceptual belief that there is an x at 
u—on the contrary, he acquires the firm belief that there is not an x at u.” 
Figure 3.1

58  Philosophy of Perception
Examples of last cases include seeing a bent stick in water or an optical 
illusion such as the Müller–Lyer illusion. Even though the stick seems 
bent or the lines look different lengths, we do not believe that they are. 
The general way in which Pitcher and Armstrong deal with these prob-
lem cases is as follows. First cases are as normal. We just straightforwardly 
acquire the belief that there is an x at u. In middle cases, however, whilst the 
same processes are at work, we don’t immediately believe that there is an x at 
u (as we do in first cases) because things being this way conflicts with some 
of our other beliefs. Nevertheless, in these cases we still acquire a strong 
inclination to believe that there is an x at u.
Similarly, in last cases, the same processes are at work once more, but, as 
the subject is familiar with his senses deceiving him in such contexts, the 
inclination to believe that there is an x at u is completely suppressed. Even if 
the subject is so familiar with the illusion that she not only doesn’t believe 
that there is an x at u, but actually believes the opposite—that there is not an 
x at u—we can still say that there is a “suppressed inclination to believe” at 
work here because if the subject had not known about this kind of illusion, 
she would have believed that there was an x at u.
If, by “inclination to believe”, the belief acquisition theorist is really talk-
ing about an inclination, then having an inclination to believe is not believing, 
just as my having an inclination to go to the gym is not the same as my 
actually going to the gym (more’s the pity). Given this, it is difficult to see 
why being inclined to believe that I see a cat on the mat should suffice for me 
to have a visual experience as of a cat on the mat.
Armstrong, it is true, thinks that, underlying this abstract fact, there 
is something in the brain which provides the concrete vehicle of this 
potentiality—some neural process or structure which, given the whole 
functional organization of the brain, would suffice to put the subject 
into the relevant belief-state if the inhibiting beliefs (themselves neurally 
realized) were absent. But even if such a neural item exists, its presence 
does not help to meet the difficulty. For since its intrinsic properties 
are exclusively physical, and since its only psychological significance is 
in terms of its potential to yield or form a certain type of belief, this 
item would still not furnish the subject with an experience, or provide 
anything else that was accessible to introspection. 
(Foster 2000: 107)
At different points, however, Armstrong defines an inclination to believe 
in different ways. In Perception and the Physical World, for example, he 
defines it as “a thought held back from being a belief by other, contradictory, 
beliefs” (1961: 86). This definition raises the possibility that an “inclination 
to believe” in fact names a particular kind of mental state—like a thought or 

Belief acquisition theories   59
belief but, because of the presence of contradictory beliefs, with a restricted 
functional role—rather than a disposition to form a belief. 
It has also been argued that, by denying the existence of a visual experi-
ence that is distinct from our beliefs, the belief acquisition theory entails 
that we only see what we notice, where to notice something is to form a belief 
about it. This is then claimed to be refuted by the fact that we can actually see 
more than we notice. For instance, Fred Dretske (1969) argues that when we 
read a page of text, we don’t form beliefs about every single letter although 
(to explain our ability to read) we must nevertheless see every single letter. 
If this were correct, it would once more point to a level of seeing which pre-
ceded our conceptualizations of it in belief. However, we should be careful 
of reading too much into the term “belief”. If we are merely talking about a 
minimal level of discrimination and identification, then we do discriminate 
(most of) the letters. We can see this if we note that, were we to misidentify 
a letter we would probably misread the word and the sentence wouldn’t make 
fence (Goldman 1976: 151).
Perception, belief, and our conceptual capacities
The belief acquisition theory has also been argued to have the unwelcome 
consequence that conceptually unsophisticated creatures, such as infants 
and animals, cannot enjoy perceptual experiences. Consider the following 
argument:
1  (Premiss)	
Infants and animals have visual experiences.
2  (Statement of theory)	
Visual experiences are just the acquisition of 
beliefs.
3  (Premiss)	
Having beliefs involves having concepts.
4  (Premiss)	
Infants and animals don’t have concepts.
5  (from 2, 3 and 4)	
Infants and animals don’t have visual 
experiences.
Clearly 1 and 5 are contradictory, so something has to give somewhere. 
Some philosophers would reject premise 1. Pitcher himself seems to say 
some things which suggest he would take this line. For example, he says that 
a requirement: 
for a perceiver, Q, to be capable of [acquiring] the (perceptual) belief that 
there is an x at u, is that Q have the concept of an x. Thus I take it that a 
one year old child cannot [acquire] the (perceptual) belief that there is a 
digital computer before him, since he does not have that concept. If this 
is right . . . it follows that it cannot look to a one year old child as though 
there is a digital computer before him. And I think this consequence is 
in fact true. 
(Pitcher 1971: 94) 

60  Philosophy of Perception
But Pitcher could be saying that, as the child lacks this concept, he 
couldn’t have this very experience, but of course, this leaves it open that the 
child might have a different experience when looking at the computer. This 
interpretation doesn’t entail a rejection of 1.
If we would prefer to hold on to 1, that seems to leave us with having to 
reject either 3 or 4 to hold on to the belief acquisition theory of perception. 
Daniel Dennett has defended a theory of belief that could be argued to be 
consistent with a rejection of 3. Dennett contends that, to have beliefs, one 
must be “a system whose behavior is reliably and voluminously predictable 
via the intentional strategy” (1981: 59), where this strategy involves treating 
the system whose behavior is to be predicted as a rational agent, then figur-
ing out what beliefs and desires this agent ought to have, given its place in 
the world and its purpose, and then predicting that it will act to satisfy its 
desires in the light of its beliefs (1981: 61). If this strategy works, then, on 
Dennett’s view, the system is a true believer. This strategy would provide a 
way in which we could allow subjects to have beliefs without assuming that 
they have concepts (or, at the very least, a way in which we could make the 
question of whether a subject has beliefs prior to the question of whether a 
subject possesses concepts).
Armstrong himself takes the other option and rejects 4. To do this, he 
draws a distinction between mediate and immediate forms of perception in 
terms of inferential and noninferential beliefs. The noninferential beliefs 
are those we form about the “visual properties” (Armstrong 1968: 234) of 
objects. As Armstrong says, this is a fairly small group and includes those 
characteristically visual properties such as shape, color, size, etc.
[W]e see immediately that there is a thing having certain visual proper-
ties before us, and . . . this, by an automatic and instantaneous inference, 
produces the further belief that there is a cat’s head or a sheet of paper 
before us. It is only the visual properties of things that can be immedi-
ately perceived by the eyes. 
(Armstrong 1968: 235)
If concepts of the visual properties are the basic concepts which go to 
make up our immediate experiences, then so long as infants had those basic 
concepts, they could have an immediate experience which was identical 
to an adult’s. What would differ would be the inferred beliefs drawn auto-
matically on the basis of this experience (due to the differences in conceptual 
sophistication).
Does an infant have such basic concepts? When discussing what it takes to 
have a concept, Armstrong suggests that:
[If a] child reaches out for blue blocks, but never reaches out for green 
blocks . . . is not its behavior a manifestation of a true belief, acquired by 

Belief acquisition theories   61
means of its eyes, that there is a difference in color between the blue and 
the green blocks? And could it not be said to possess the concepts of blue 
and green . . . even if in a very primitive form? 
(Armstrong 1968: 246)
Beliefs involve concepts. Acquiring the belief that a particular object is 
red involves possession of the concept of red. Possession of the concept 
entails a general capacity of the perceiver, in at least some set of circum-
stances, to differentiate between things that are red and things that are 
not red. 
(Armstrong 1968: 339)
Although language is a way in which we can treat square things differently 
from nonsquare things, it is not the only way. General behavioral capacities 
provide another possibility: the ability to treat square things in a different 
way to nonsquare things could be said, at the very least, to constitute some 
kind of possession of the concept (even if it is not possessed in as rich a sense 
as it is by us language users).5
What is more, this level of concept possession would not only enable young 
children to have concepts (hence beliefs, hence visual experiences), it would 
also do the same for animals. For example, we could imagine Skinnerian 
operant conditioning which would train a pigeon to peck at squares and only 
squares (perhaps it received food when pecking a square and electric shocks 
when pecking any other shape). If such a behaviorally manifested discrimina-
tory capacity is held to suffice for possession of the relevant concept, then 
the pigeon could be said to acquire beliefs about the squareness of things in 
its surroundings and hence to have visual experiences.
Acquiring new concepts
A related objection is raised by Dretske: “if a man cannot see an x because he 
is ignorant of x-ish things, how could such unfortunate people relieve their 
ignorance?” (1969: 37). There are two potential objections here.
The first is clarified by Goldman, who argues that, “if persons are born 
without empirical concepts, building them gradually from early perceptual 
experience, then perception cannot consist in the acquisition of beliefs from 
the beginning” (1976: 152).
In other words, there is a potentially vicious circle raised: if perception 
involves the acquisition of belief, and beliefs are composed of concepts, but 
perception is itself the source of concepts, then how do we first acquire the 
concepts we need to possess in order to have perceptual experiences?
The second objection is a little less straightforward. Imagine that we 
are trying to train our pigeon from above to distinguish squares from 
nonsquares (i.e. are trying to get the pigeon to learn the concept square)—
doesn’t the pigeon have to be able to perceive a difference between squares 

62  Philosophy of Perception
and nonsquares in order for this to be possible? How can this be if the pigeon 
doesn’t already have the concepts?
More formally, the concern is this. Let us assume that perception is no more 
than the acquiring of sets of beliefs. How can we individuate visual experi-
ences (i.e. determine which visual experiences are the same as one another 
and which are different)? Well, as there is no more to a visual experience than 
the acquisition of beliefs, then the obvious principle of individuation would 
be as follows:
Two visual experiences are the same if the sets of acquired beliefs are the 
same.
But if the beliefs we can acquire are limited by the concepts we possess, 
then a problem concerning our ability to acquire new concepts arises. Suppose 
that we are trying to teach an infant who already possesses the general color 
concept red to distinguish between two specific shades of red: pillar-box red 
and cherry red. In other words, let us suppose that we are trying to teach the 
child the concepts of pillar-box red and cherry red. The obvious way to do 
this would be to show the child samples of pillar-box red and cherry red, and 
to tell them which one was which.
As we are supposing that the child doesn’t yet have these concepts, then 
as both shades are shades of red, when the child acquires beliefs about the 
shades which contain a place for a color (i.e. the child acquires the belief <the 
object is x>), this place would be filled with the same generic concept (which 
we accept the child does possess): red.
But then the sets of beliefs the infant would acquire on looking at these 
shades would be the same, and, according to the principle of individuation 
that naturally follows from this theory, the infant’s perceptual experiences 
would be the same. If the infant’s experiences of these two shades are the 
same, how would it be possible for the child to use these experiences as a basis 
from which to learn to distinguish between the shades?
The problem is, in order for concept learning to get off the ground, we 
need infants to be able to perceptually distinguish between two shades even if 
they don’t distinguish between the shades at the level of belief. As the theory 
of perception as belief acquisition says that the two levels are the same, the 
theory as it stands doesn’t seem able to account for this.
One way of avoiding the worry about breaking into this circle would be 
to say that, where the basic visual properties are concerned, we have a large 
number of these concepts (indeed, as many concepts as there are basic visual 
properties) innately—present from birth. After all, if it is true that the infant 
can distinguish between the different colors, even if it has not yet tied this 
discriminatory capacity to any particular kind of external behavior, then 
there might be a sense in which the infant could be said to already have these 
concepts.

Belief acquisition theories   63
Blindsight
In addition to these philosophical objections, there are also some objections 
to the belief acquisition theory based on findings from empirical science.
For instance, there is a pathological phenomenon, well known among 
visual psychologists, called blindsight, which has had a great deal of influ-
ence on recent philosophy of perception. Blindsight subjects typically have 
damage to brain area V1—the primary visual cortex—which effectively 
“maps” the retinal input. Because of this, damage to a localized area of V1 
will often result in a scotoma—a blind spot—in part of the visual field. As we 
would expect, if a stimulus is presented to a subject in their blind spot, the 
subject claims to be unable to see it. However, as Larry Weiskrantz and his 
colleagues discovered in the 1970s, if subjects are instructed to guess whether 
a stimulus is present in that area, or to guess its orientation or direction of 
motion, some subjects perform significantly better than chance. Indeed, 
some subjects can even perform better than chance when asked to guess, say, 
which of an X or an O is presented. This shows that, despite subjects lacking 
conscious experience of the area behind the blind spot, information from 
that area is nevertheless getting through to the subject in such a way that it 
can be retrieved in the right circumstances.
The problem this raises for the belief acquisition theory is that a blind-
sight subject can acquire beliefs, via his or her eyes, about the part of the 
environment that corresponds to the blind spot. This suggests, therefore, 
that acquiring beliefs, using the eyes, about the relevant part of the visual 
field does not, in fact, suffice for the subject to have a visual experience cor-
responding to that part of the visual field.
Questions
•	
Can we see more than we notice? Or, to actually see something 
do we need to be cognitively aware of it in some way?
•	
How plausible do you find the belief acquisition theorist’s 
attempts to deal with the problems of conceptually unsophisti-
cated perceivers?
•	
Is perception nothing more than the acquisition of beliefs?
Notes
	 1.	 As the prominence of epistemological considerations in these introduc-
tory sections might suggest, the belief acquisition theory of perception is 
far more focused on adequately wearing the epistemological hat than the 
phenomenological hat. As we shall see, however, this has left the theory 
open to serious objections.

64  Philosophy of Perception
	 2.	 “At least part of” because, even if true belief is necessary for knowledge, 
the highly influential theory does not think that it is sufficient as well, 
but rather that some kind of justification condition is also needed.
	 3.	 I express this as a conditional because Armstrong’s claim that the “non-
physical object of immediate apprehension is simply a ghost generated 
by my belief that I am seeing something” (1961: 84) could be read as 
denying that the antecedent of the Phenomenal Principle is met in bad 
cases. I do not discuss this here, however, as it is inconsistent with the 
assumed acceptance of the Common Factor Principle. This possibility 
will therefore be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
	 4.	 Pitcher (1971) raises a concern with the term “acquisition” inasmuch as 
it implies obtaining something which one did not previously have. As we 
can continue to perceive an unchanging scene (I see the cup on the table 
at t1, I still see it at t2, etc.) it would seem strange to say that we acquire 
the belief that the cup is on the table at t2 as we already believe that from 
perceiving it there at t1. To avoid this implication, Pitcher prefers to use 
the locution “causally receives” as we can keep causally receiving a belief 
even if we already have it. With this point made, however, I will stick 
with “acquire.”
	 5.	 The idea that possession of certain concepts is a matter of having cer-
tain skills and abilities has been defended more recently. For instance,  
Gregory McCulloch argues that “our having the experience-informing 
concepts we do have is constituted [. . .] by our abilities to move around 
and engage with the things in our surroundings” (1995: 140), and, like-
wise, Alva Noë has argued that part of what it is to have certain concepts 
is to have a range of tacit expectations as to how the appearances of  
certain objects will change under movement (2005: 77) and insists that 
this kind of skill is “obviously the sort of skill that non-linguistic animals 
and infants can possess” (2004: 183–184).
Further reading
The belief acquisition theory is developed by David Armstrong in his books 
Perception and the Physical World (1961) and A Materialist Theory of the Mind 
(1968). Pitcher’s closely related development of the theory can be found in his 
A Theory of Perception (1971) especially Chapter 2.
Alan Goldman’s 1976 paper, “Appearing as Irreducible in Perception” is 
an excellent and readable critical discussion of the belief acquisition theory, 
and Fred Dretske’s 1969 book, Seeing and Knowing (especially Chapter 1, 
Sections 1 and 2) contains detailed arguments for the claim that we need 
to make room for a more basic, nonepistemic level of perception in our 
theorizing.

5	 Intentional theories
Overview
Intentional theories of perception accept the Representational 
Principle, and treat visual experiences as a kind of propositional 
attitude in which subjects take the attitude of perceiving toward an 
intentional content.
In this chapter, we discuss a variety of different kinds of inten-
tionalist theory, including representationalism, which claims that the 
phenomenology of a visual experience is determined by its content. We 
then go on to discuss a number of important issues for intentionalists, 
focusing in particular on the nature of perceptual content.
Common Factor Principle

Phenomenal Principle

Representational Principle

We have already discussed the Representational Principle, which claims that:
(R) All visual experiences are representational.
As noted in the previous chapter, beliefs are also representational—they 
tell us things about the world. And a standard philosophical treatment of 
belief analyzes belief as a propositional attitude.
On this view, beliefs involve a subject taking the relationship (attitude) 
of belief toward a content (proposition): if I believe that Paris is in France, 
then I take the attitude of belief toward the propositional content <Paris is 
in France>.

66  Philosophy of Perception
In the previous chapter, we looked at the view that attempted to reduce 
visual experience to the acquisition of belief. Although this theory has failed 
to acquire many adherents over the years, it has suggested an alternative 
theory of perception that has since become quite popular; an intentional 
theory of perception:
I [take] as “intentionalist” . . . the theory which treats perception as a 
kind of propositional attitude, akin to belief.
(Crane 1998: 233)
An intentional theory of perception claims that visual experiences have 
an intentional content that represents the world as being some way. This 
is to see experiences as akin to propositional attitudes such as beliefs.
(Martin 1994: 745)
Like the theory of perception as belief acquisition, these approaches see 
important similarities between perceptions and beliefs, but, unlike that 
theory, they do not attempt to simply reduce the former to the acquisition of 
the latter. Instead, intentionalist theories retain the distinction between the 
perceptual and conceptual components—they allow that visual experiences 
are something over and above beliefs and the acquisition of beliefs.
Yet the intentionalist does insist that visual experiences are importantly 
analogous to beliefs: that, like beliefs, visual experiences have intentional or 
representational contents that represent the world as being a certain way. 
Moreover, on the intentionalist view, the subject takes an attitude toward 
that content that is importantly like the attitude of belief in that it doesn’t 
entail the truth of that content. As Byrne puts it, “perception constitutively 
involves a propositional attitude rather like the non-factive attitude of believ-
ing, exing (meant to suggest experiencing)” (2009: 437). So, rather than claim 
that, in perception, the subject believes that such-and-such is the case, the 
intentionalist view is that, in perception, subjects ex that such-and-such is 
the case.
Varieties of intentionalism
Intentionalists endorse the Representational Principle—they claim that all 
visual experiences are representational.
In addition to this, intentional theorists—at least those that we will be 
considering in this chapter—accept the Common Factor Principle. In the 
bad case of hallucination, the intentionalist will claim that the subject is 
having a visual experience with the same representational content as in the 
indiscriminable good case; it is just that in this case the content is false. And 
just as my believing that such-and-such is the case says something about 
how I take the world to be, whilst not entailing that the world is that way, 
my exing that such-and-such is the case also does not entail that the world 

Intentional theories  67
is that way—I could be in the same intentional state whether perceiving or 
hallucinating.
This is the basic intentionalist thesis. There are, however, a number of 
ways in which this basic idea has been developed.
One key choice point concerns the relationship between phenomenology 
and the intentional components of experience. There are three main positions 
that are taken here, which I will call strong phenomenology-first intentional-
ism, strong content-first intentionalism and weak intentionalism.
What makes all three of these approaches variants of intentionalism is that 
they all endorse the Representational Principle:
(R) All visual experiences are representational.
However, as their names suggest, the first two positions also endorse a 
somewhat stronger claim, which I will call the Mirroring Thesis:
(M) Change in phenomenology ↔ Change in representational content.
In English, the Mirroring Thesis states that there will be a change in phe-
nomenology, or what it is like to have an experience, if and only if there is a 
change in the experience’s representational content.
As (M) is a biconditional, it is important to remember that it should be 
read both ways. We can call these LR (for reading from left to right) and RL 
(from right to left) in turn:
(M)LR: That any change in phenomenology necessitates a change in 
representational content; and
(M)RL: That any change in representational content necessitates a 
change in phenomenology.
Strong phenomenology-first intentionalism
As the name suggests, this version of intentionalism treats phenomenology 
as the basic notion. Typically, phenomenology-first intentionalists hold that 
visual experiences have representational content in virtue of their phenom-
enology. The underlying idea is that, if there is something it is like to have an 
experience, then that alone suffices for the experience to be the kind of thing 
that could be true or false. Take the experience you are having now—it seems 
plausible to suppose that, given only what it is like for you, your experience 
is accurate if and only if there is a book (or suitably book-like object) in front 
of you (Siewert 1998). 
This is developed into an argument by Byrne (2001). He asks us to 
imagine an idealized subject enjoying two consecutive experiences—e and 
e*—that differ in their phenomenology. The fact that there is a difference 
in phenomenology means that, if experience e changes to experience e* at t, 

68  Philosophy of Perception
the subject (being ideal) will notice the change. As the subject notices that 
things have changed, it seems to follow that the way things seem to the subject 
has changed or, alternatively, that the way the world is represented to be has 
changed. We can express this by saying that experiences e and e* represent 
the world to be different or, alternatively, have different contents.
This argument allows us to conclude that, if the phenomenology of an 
experience changes, then so will its content—the world will have to be 
slightly different in order for the experience to be accurate. This gives us the 
left–right reading of (M)—that any change in phenomenology will yield a 
change in representational content. 
Of course, if experiences have content in virtue of their phenomenology, 
then it seems we can get the right–left reading too—if two experiences 
differ in what they represent, they must therefore present the world to be 
slightly different—in Byrne’s terms, the way things seem to the subject must 
be different. This is just to say that they differ in their phenomenology. So 
phenomenology-first approaches typically endorse (M) in both directions.
As there is scope for a strong phenomenology-first intentionalist to 
endorse different theories of an experience’s phenomenal character, it is dif-
ficult to offer a precise analysis of what is involved in a subject’s having a 
visual experience as of a property F. The basic idea, however, is that subjects 
will have an experience of property F when they have an experience with a 
phenomenal character that delivers a content in which Fness features.
Now, given that the phenomenology-first approach gives explanatory 
priority to an experience’s phenomenology, they allow us to explain what it 
is for an experience to have content by appealing to its phenomenology. But 
there is still a need to provide a theory of the phenomenal features of visual 
experiences. Phenomenology-first theorists typically endorse a qualia-based 
account of the kind touched on in Chapter 3, according to which experiences 
have certain intrinsic, nonrepresentational consciously accessible properties 
(qualia) that are responsible for the experience’s phenomenology.1 Although 
the qualia themselves are nonrepresentational, once we have an experience 
with certain qualia, the thought goes, we can “read off” a content from the 
phenomenology thus provided. This explains how the experience itself can 
be representational, even though the qualia themselves are not.
Strong content-first intentionalism
This version of intentionalism also endorses both (R) and (M) but, unlike 
phenomenology-first intentionalism, takes content as the most basic notion 
and attempts to explain what it is for a state to be conscious or to have phe-
nomenology in terms of its having the right kind of content. There are two 
standard approaches here.
According to higher order versions of intentionalism, we have lots of first-
order sensory representations (representations of the world produced by the 
senses), but these are not automatically conscious. They become conscious 

Intentional theories  69
when the subject has the right kind of higher order state about that first-order 
state. Exactly how this is spelled out differs according to different theorists.
Lycan (1996) argues that the higher order state is analogous to a first-order 
visual experience. A first-order sensory representation R will be conscious 
when, and only when, an internal “scanner” is producing higher order rep-
resentations about R. (This position is therefore known as a higher order 
perception [HOP] or higher order experience [HOE] theory.)
Rosenthal (1990), on the other hand, argues that the higher order state is a 
belief. On this view, a first-order sensory representation R will be conscious 
when, and only when, the subject has a higher order belief about R. (This 
position is therefore known as a higher order belief [HOB] or a higher order 
thought [HOT] theory.)
So, a higher order version of content-first intentionalism will propose the 
following analysis of visual experiences:
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F if and only if:
•	 S is in a first-order state, R, that represents that F is instantiated; and
•	 R is scanned/the subject of a higher order belief.
The currently more popular form of intentionalism is a first-order form, 
which—confusingly—is often called representationalism.
Typically, first-order strong content-first intentionalists (from here:  
representationalists) do not hold that entertaining a certain content suffices 
for the presence of phenomenology. The standard approach is to hold that a 
first-order sensory representation R is conscious when, and only when, it (i) 
has the right kind of content and (ii) plays the right kind of functional role. 
Thus, Tye, for example, holds that sensory representations are conscious 
when they have PANIC (Poised, Abstract, Nonconceptual Intentional 
Content) (1995: §5.2). On this view, the “right kind” of content is content 
that is both abstract (does not refer to particular objects) and nonconceptual 
(does not require the subject to possess the concepts used to specify the 
content); the “right kind” of functional role is that the mental state be poised: 
poised to impact upon the subject’s cognitive processes.
Representationalism therefore proposes the following analysis of visual 
experience:
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F if and only if:
•	 S is in a first-order state R that represents that F is instantiated, 
which meets other further conditions.
As both the higher order and first-order variants of intentionalism attempt 
to explain consciousness in terms of content, they face the inverse problem 
to that faced by the phenomenology-first theorists. Recall that phenome-
nology-first theorists needed a theory of what it is for an experience to have 

70  Philosophy of Perception
phenomenology with which they then explain what it is for an experience to 
have content. Content-first theorists, on the other hand, need a theory of 
what it is for a state to have a certain kind of content in order to explain what 
it is for an experience to have phenomenology. This will be discussed in more 
detail below.
Weak intentionalism
Weak intentionalists endorse the Representational Principle (R) but reject 
(M). That is, although weak intentionalists agree that all visual experiences 
have representational content, they do not agree that any changes in phenom-
enology will necessarily be matched by changes in representational content 
(or vice versa). Given this, weak intentionalism is compatible with different 
claims about the nature of the perceptual state.
(M)LR claims that any change in phenomenology necessitates a change in 
representational content. In response to this, weak intentionalists have pre-
sented examples in which it is claimed that phenomenology can differ while 
representational content remains the same. For example, suppose we see a 
tree from 100 metres away. This experience would represent the tree to have 
a certain height, h. Now suppose we walk toward that tree. Weak intentional-
ists have claimed that our experience of this tree from 50 metres would still 
represent the tree to have height h—so would have the same content—yet 
would be clearly phenomenally distinct (adapted from Peacocke 1983).
Alternatively, look at the room you are in. This experience represents the 
layout of the room. Now close one eye. Due to using only one eye instead of 
two, this experience will be subtly phenomenally different. Yet, claim weak 
intentionalists, it will still represent the layout of the room to be the same 
(Peacocke 1983). Or, imagine looking at two red points of light against a 
black background and shifting attention from one light to the other. There 
is arguably a phenomenal difference between the experience of attending to 
one and attending to the other, but it is not clear whether there is a represen-
tational difference between the two experiences (Chalmers 2004).
A final case in which weak intentionalists claim that phenomenology can 
differ whilst representational content remains the same is based on a thought 
experiment known as the inverted spectrum hypothesis. Suppose the phenom-
enological color you see when you look at blue things is the same as the color 
I see when I look at yellow things. Now consider you and I looking at the 
blue sky. Intuitively our experiences differ in phenomenology but (arguably) 
have the same representational content.
(M)RL claims that any change in representational content necessitates a 
change in phenomenology. As an objection to this claim, Ned Block develops 
a clever variant of the inverted spectrum hypothesis. Suppose that you are 
taken (in your sleep) to a new planet—Inverted Earth—in which objects 
have the inverse of their colors here on Earth. However, to ensure you don’t 

Intentional theories  71
notice the difference, you are fitted with a pair of color-inverting lenses. So, 
when you wake up and see the yellow sky, you have an experience of blue, 
just as you did on Earth; likewise, when you see the red grass, you have an 
experience of green. Weak intentionalists have contended that, over time, 
the representational contents of your experiences will change to fit your new 
surroundings. Now the (blue) experience you have when you look at the sky 
will have the content <the sky is yellow>, whereas on Earth it had the con-
tent <the sky is blue>. If so, then we have a case in which experiences with 
the same phenomenology (experiences of a clear sky on Earth and Inverted 
Earth) differ in representational content (Block 1990).
Figure 5.1 gives a visual structure of the different theories of perception 
that fall under the general heading of intentionalism.
Theories of perceptual content
When it comes to discussions of intentionalism, deciding on which inten-
tionalist theory of perception is only half the job: you also need to decide on 
a theory of perceptual content. A discussion of some of the key choice points 
for this follows.
The nature of contents
There are many different theories of propositions or contents. Here we 
will discuss three influential ones. On each of these theories, our linguistic 
specification of a content expresses a proposition that is identified with the 
content. The differences between the theories turn on their different con­
ceptions of what propositions are.
Figure 5.1

72  Philosophy of Perception
•	
Possible world contents: According to the possible world theory of 
content, our linguistic specification of a content—that “the cat is 
black” for example—serves to cleave possible worlds in two: those in 
which the proposition is true and those in which it is false. Possible 
worlds theories of content identify content with that set of possible 
worlds in which the proposition is true. 
•	
Singular (Russellian/Millian) contents: An alternative theory of con-
tent is the singular content theory. The linguistic specification of a 
content contains singular terms, predicates, connectives, and so on. 
On the singular content theory, the propositions actually have the 
referents of the singular terms and predicates as constituents. For 
instance, the proposition expressed by “the cat is black” is part-
constituted by the cat itself and the property of blackness. 
•	
Fregean contents: Rather than claiming that objects and properties are 
constituents of propositions, the Fregean holds that propositions are 
constituted by modes of presentation of objects and properties.
How should we choose between these alternatives? Well, one consideration 
turns on the fact that the representationalist theories that we are considering 
in this chapter endorse the Common Factor Principle. Suppose, then, that 
we were to claim that perceptual contents are singular. It would seem that 
two experiences of distinct yet qualitatively indiscriminable objects would 
therefore have different contents—as an experience of object a as black 
would have the content <a is black> whilst an experience of (qualitatively 
identical) object b as black would have the content <b is black>. As these 
contents are different, it would seem that the representationalist would have 
to accept that the phenomenal characters of these two experiences differ. 
With this in mind, Colin McGinn argues that: 
the content of experience is not to be specified by using any terms that 
refer to the object of experience, on pain of denying that distinct objects 
can seem precisely the same: so when we are describing the content of an 
experience, we should not make singular reference to the object of the 
experience.
(McGinn 1982: 39)2
Another consideration that is relevant to the particular case of perception 
is that theories of content should, in some sense, be true to the phenomenol-
ogy. This has also been the source of an argument in favor of Fregean theories 
over singular content theories. Consider color experience. Suppose we have 
a number of experiences of one and the same white surface. Naturally, on a 
singular content view, we would take all of these experiences to have contents 
that are part-constituted by the property of whiteness. Yet, the Fregean might 
argue, by suitable manipulation of hidden lights—a manipulation that takes 
place without the subject’s knowledge—this surface could be made to look 

Intentional theories  73
different colors at different times. A content that is constituted by the prop-
erty itself cannot account for this, so instead (the argument goes), we need 
to see that the contents of our experiences of this surface are constituted by 
different modes of presentation of that surface property.
A natural response for the singular content theorist to make is to say that, 
in those cases in which the surface does not look white, we are therefore under 
an illusion—we are misrepresenting the color of the surface. Suppose that the 
lighting is arranged in such a way that the white surface looks pink. In such 
a case, the singular content theorist would not hold that the content of this 
experience is constituted by the property of whiteness. Not only would this 
be false to the phenomenology, it would also have the consequence that the 
experience qualified as veridical—because the surface really is white. Instead, 
the singular content theorist would claim that the content is part-constituted 
by the property of pinkness. This is both true to the phenomenology and to 
our intuitions that the subject’s experience is misleading. 
Internalism/externalism3
A further important question about the nature of perceptual contents con-
cerns the question of whether the contents of a particular subject’s visual 
experiences are fixed solely by features of the subject’s brain, central nervous 
system and/or body, or whether the environment that the subject is in also 
plays a part.
Internalists about perceptual content hold that once you have fixed the 
physically internal states of the subject you thereby fix the contents of 
their visual experiences. This has the consequence that any two physi-
cally identical subjects will be in states with identical contents, regardless 
of any differences in the physical or social environments in which they 
live.
Externalists about perceptual content, on the other hand, hold that exter-
nal relations are also partly responsible for fixing contents. According 
to externalists, therefore, physically identical subjects may have experi-
ences with different contents.
Tyler Burge defends externalism in the case of perceptual content by con-
sidering a Twin Earth style argument (2007b).4 He asks us to imagine two 
distinct entities—as small shadow (an O) and a similarly sized and shaped 
crack (a C). Although these objects are both very small and their discrimina-
tion does not carry any evolutionary advantages or disadvantages, it turns 
out that Os are very common in the environment whereas Cs are very rare.
Burge then asks us to imagine a subject, P, who has grown up being con-
fronted with Os. He contends that “perceptual representations are formed 
and obtain their content through regular interactions with the environment. 
They represent what, in some complex sense of ‘normally’, they normally 

74  Philosophy of Perception
stem from and are applied to” (Burge 2007b: 203). Given this, the percep-
tual state that P enters when he encounters an O will be veridical—it will 
represent that an O is present. Now imagine that P, unbeknownst to him, 
encounters a C. According to Burge, our theory ought to treat this as a 
misrepresentation—P misrepresents a C as an O.
Now Burge asks us to imagine a counterfactual case. Suppose that the 
optical laws are different and that, in P’s environment, there are no longer 
any visible Os. Suppose, however, that P’s history is exactly as it was in the 
original environment, it is just that wherever P saw an O in the original case, 
in the counterfactual environment he saw a C. As the normal causes of P’s 
perceptual states have changed, Burge contends that they will now be repre-
senting Cs, not Os.
Finally, suppose that, where P saw a C in the original environment, he also 
sees a C in the counterfactual environment. Given their identical histories, 
we need not suppose that there are any physical differences between P in the 
original environment and P in the counterfactual environment. Nor need we 
suppose that there are any differences between the light that impacts upon P 
in the two scenarios. Despite this, Burge insists that where P misrepresented 
the C as an O in the original environment, in the counterfactual environment, 
P correctly represents the C as a C. Despite all the physical similarities, there 
is a difference in their perceptual contents—the contents are determined, in 
part, by the nature of the environment.
In order to see how internalists might attempt to counter this argument, 
recall the claim, from our discussions of phenomenology-first versions of 
intentionalism, that there are certain truth-conditions that an experience 
possesses merely in virtue of the phenomenology that it has. If this claim 
is found compelling, then we might think that Burge’s characterizations of 
the perceptual contents are too fine-grained—that P’s experiences do not 
distinguish between Os and Cs. This is the kind of response taken by Gabriel 
Segal, who argues that P’s experiences actually have a less precise content 
and merely represent the presence of a thin, dark mark that could be either a 
shadow or a crack (1989).
How we resolve this depends upon whether we place more importance on 
the causes or effects of our experiences in fixing on assignments of content. 
If we focus on the fact, as Burge does, that they are experiences of distinct 
entities, then this will seem to license the attribution of distinct contents. 
Alternatively, if we follow Segal and focus on the fact that things will seem 
the same to P and hence P will behave in the same way, regardless of whether 
or not the object is a crack or a shadow, then this can seem to license the 
attribution of a common content.
Conceptual/nonconceptual
When we discussed the theory of perception as belief acquisition, we saw 
that the theory faced objections concerning the apparent ability to perceive 

Intentional theories  75
possessed by conceptually unsophisticated creatures such as infants and 
animals. In addition to this, it has been argued that perception provides us 
with far more information, and at a far greater level of detail, than we could 
possibly bring under concepts (Dretske 1981). In response to these concerns, 
a number of intentionalists (including representationalists) reject the claim 
that perceptual content, like belief content, has to be conceptual in nature. 
If we no longer insist that all forms of representational content must be con-
ceptual, the door is then open to introduce a nonconceptual form of content. 
And this is just what many theorists do.
Essentially, the suggestion is that there are lots of mental states that repre-
sent the world around the subject to be a certain way. Sometimes, to be in one 
of these states requires that we have the concepts which are used to specify 
the content of the state. For instance, we can’t believe that cheese is made 
with milk unless we have the concepts of milk and cheese. If this is the case, 
then we say that such a state has conceptual content.
The claim is that there are other mental states that represent the world 
to be a certain way (e.g., perceptions), which we can entertain even though 
we don’t have the concepts which are used to specify the content of the state. 
Our experience of a Mark Rothko picture can still represent the presence of 
a very precise shade of yellow, even though we don’t have a concept of that 
particular shade. So, many intentional theorists about perception hold not 
only that perception is an intentional state, but that it is a state with a special 
kind of nonconceptual content.
Laid out more formally, an argument for nonconceptual content might 
look something like this:
	 1	 Visual experiences provide us with a lot of very rich detail. 
	 2	 This richness must be reflected in the experience’s representational 
content.
	 3	 To capture this richness, we need to specify this content using a fine-
grained taxonomy of properties.
	 4	 This taxonomy of properties outstrips our conceptual scheme.
	 5	 Therefore (from a standard definition of nonconceptual content), the 
content of visual experience must be (at least partly) nonconceptual.
The argument begins from the intuition that, if we stop and take stock of 
the scene before our eyes, we become aware of just how much fine-grained 
information our experiences provide us with.5 Given this, we need to capture 
this richness in an ascription of content. How should we go about this? The 
two most fully developed theories of nonconceptual content—Christopher 
Peacocke’s Scenario Content (1992: §3.1) and Michael Tye’s PANIC (1995: 
§5.2; 2000: §3.4)—begin the task of specifying a nonconceptual content in a 
similar fashion:

76  Philosophy of Perception
[I]magine a large, transparent matrix placed over the visual field. Each 
cell in the matrix covers a tiny portion of the field; within each cell, there 
is an ordered sequence of symbols for various features of any surface at 
that location in the field (for example, distance away, orientation, deter-
minate color, texture, etc.) 
(Tye 1995: 140).
For each point [ . . . ] identified by its distance and direction from the 
origin [something like a point of view in the case of vision], we need to 
specify whether there is a surface there and, if so, what texture, hue, 
saturation, and brightness it has at that point.
(Peacocke 1992: 63)
Both Tye and Peacocke begin the task of formulating an experience’s non-
conceptual content by mapping all the points in the perceiver’s field of view, 
and then, for each point, cataloging the surface properties that the experience 
represents as being instantiated at that point.
In order to do this adequately, we will need to employ a fine-grained tax-
onomy of properties in order to capture the richness that seems to be available 
to us in perception. How fine-grained? Well, the characteristic understanding 
of the perceptual richness motivation seems to be that an adequate account of 
perceptual content ought to capture the richness of visual experience to the 
limits of a subject’s discriminatory capacities. 
Given that we can discriminate so many colors, when we try to charac-
terize the detail available to us in experience, it seems that words, or, more 
accurately, the concepts we have available to describe the experience, must fail 
us. Even if we had command of every color name in the color dictionary—all 
4,000 of them (Tye 1995: 139)—our conceptual capacities would still be woe-
fully short when it comes to trying to capture the numerous shades of color 
we can discriminate in experience. So, any taxonomy of properties which is 
fine-grained enough to capture a subject’s discriminatory capacities will (or 
maybe even must) radically outrun the conceptual capacities a subject has 
available for thinking about experiences.6
We move from here to the conclusion with a definition of nonconceptual 
content: “For any state with content, S, S has a nonconceptual content, P, 
if a subject X’s being in S does not entail that X possesses the concepts that 
canonically characterise P” (Crane 1992: 143).
Given that nonconceptual content is defined as a content which does not 
require its bearer to possess the concepts required for its formulation, the 
conclusion that the type of content required to characterize the richness of 
visual experience is nonconceptual follows straightforwardly.
A further motivation behind the appeal to nonconceptual contents is that 
it also enables us to account for the perceptual similarities which appear to 
exist between animals and humans. As having an experience with a certain 
nonconceptual content does not require the subject to possess those concepts, 

Intentional theories  77
it leaves it open for animals to have experiences with nonconceptual contents 
just like ours (with due note taken of the different levels of discriminatory 
prowess of different animals).
Importantly, the claim is not that a given state might have conceptual 
content (if we happen to have the concepts) or nonconceptual content (if we 
don’t). Instead, what makes a state conceptual or nonconceptual is whether 
one’s having the concepts is a necessary condition of one’s being in that state. 
A given state might still be nonconceptual even if we have the concepts used 
to specify the content, so long as we could have been in that state had we not 
had the concepts.
How do experiences get their contents?
In this chapter, we have considered different intentionalist theories of percep-
tion as well as different theories of perceptual content. Before we move to 
seeing how well these theories wear our two hats, one further issue needs to 
be raised.
As we saw when we discussed the different intentionalist theories of 
perception, phenomenology-first versions of intentionalism hold that an 
experience’s phenomenology dictates what its content is—that its content 
can be read off its phenomenology.
Content-first versions of intentionalism, of course, can’t say this. These 
theories, recall, explain what it is for a state to have phenomenology by 
appealing to the content it has. So an account of what it is for a state to have 
a content of a certain kind is needed in order to thereby explain what it is for 
an experience to have phenomenology of a certain kind. This means that, to 
be complete, content-first theories must address the question of how experi-
ences get their contents: In virtue of what does a given experience have the 
particular content it does?
Representationalists have typically endorsed some kind of reductive, 
naturalistic theory of content. This is because this approach offers to provide 
a two-stage naturalistic explanation of consciousness. The first stage involves 
the explanation of consciousness in terms of content or representation—this 
is the representationalist theory discussed above. Then, if we can provide 
a naturalistically acceptable account of what is involved in a state’s having 
a particular content, we have thereby provided a naturalistically acceptable 
account of what is involved in a state’s being conscious. 
Although there are many naturalistic theories of content in the literature, 
including the “asymmetric dependence” theory of content (Fodor 1992), 
“success semantics” (Whyte 1990), “conceptual role semantics” (Harman 
1987), and various hybrid accounts, representationalists have tended to 
endorse variants of a teleosemantic theory of content (see, e.g., Dretske 1995: 
15; Tye 1995: 153; and Lycan 1996: 75).7 Although there are a number of dif-
ferent variants, the core of teleosemantic theories is their focus, in attributing 
contents to mental states, on what the biological function of these states are.

78  Philosophy of Perception
Despite this, there is no reason why (at least so far as I can see) representa-
tionalism could not be combined with any of these theories of content, and, 
indeed, it would be an interesting question which of these theories fits best 
with representationalism. Given this, what are the key considerations for a 
representationalist when it comes to deciding which theory to endorse?
Given the nature of the representationalist claim, probably the most 
important consideration is that, as the representationalist insists that what 
it is like to have an experience is explained by its representational content, 
an adequate theory of content must ascribe contents to experience that are 
as rich and detailed as that experience’s phenomenology. What is more, it 
must also be able to explain and predict the kinds of content–phenomenol-
ogy covariation that are stipulated by the Mirroring Thesis. The Mirroring 
Thesis, recall, states that any change in phenomenology necessitates a change 
in representational content. With this in mind, consider two experiences, e 
and e*, which differ in phenomenology. According to the Mirroring Thesis, 
these two experiences must, therefore, differ in content. But because the 
representationalist insists that content is the primary notion, the difference 
in content has to explain the difference in phenomenology, rather than the 
other way around. So an adequate theory of content must predict changes in 
representational content in all and only those situations in which what it is 
like to have the experience would change. How well the theories of content 
outlined above can explain these features is an important topic for further 
research.8
Representationalism and the two hats
As there are a number of different intentional theories of perception, I will 
focus the present discussions on the question of how well the most popular of 
these theories—representationalism—manages to wear our two hats.
The phenomenological hat
A leading motivation for representationalism has been that it can adequately 
capture the phenomenology of experience without requiring an appeal to 
either qualia or sense data in the bad cases.
In Chapter 3, the transparency objection to qualia theories was discussed. 
To claim that an experience is transparent, recall, is to claim that, when one 
introspects that experience, one does not discover any properties of the 
experience itself, only properties of the objects of experience.9 This phenom-
enological claim has been used to argue not only against qualia theory but 
also for representationalism. Effectively, the defense of representationalism 
on the basis of transparency is that it is the last man standing. This defense 
goes like this (Tye 2000):

Intentional theories  79
Transparency tells us that the properties we are aware of in experience 
appear to be properties of presented objects. There is, therefore, strong 
phenomenological evidence that the presentational character of a visual expe-
rience is constituted by properties of objects. To claim, therefore, that the 
properties we are aware of in perception are properties of experiences—as 
qualia theorists do—would be to convict visual experiences of massive error. 
This is claimed to be implausible.
If the presentational character of a particular experience is constituted by 
properties of objects, then perhaps it is constituted by the very properties of 
the mind-independent objects that we see. However, argues Tye, the possibil-
ity of indiscriminable hallucinations shows that this cannot be the case. In 
such cases, we can entertain a presentational character of this kind without 
there being any appropriate mind-independent objects. 
Well then, if presentational character is not constituted by the properties 
of mind-independent objects, then perhaps it is constituted by properties of 
mind-dependent objects—sense data. However, Tye suggests that this claim 
is unacceptable for “a whole host of familiar reasons” (2000: 46).
Representationalists, however, have an answer. The properties that con-
stitute presentational character are indeed properties of objects. But they are 
not necessarily properties that are currently instantiated by objects. Instead, 
they are properties that the experience represents as being instantiated. In this 
way, suggests the representationalist, the phenomenon of transparency can 
be accommodated without having to find objects to actually bear the relevant 
properties.
On this view, the presentational character of an experience is constituted 
by the everyday mind-independent properties. The phenomenal character of 
the experience—the property of the experience that types the experience by 
what it is like to undergo it—is the experience’s property of representing that 
these properties are instantiated or, alternatively, the experience’s property of 
having thus-and-such a representational content.10
The representationalist thus rejects the Phenomenal Principle. That prin-
ciple claims that if there sensibly appears to a subject to be something that 
possesses a particular sensible quality then there is something of which the 
subject is aware which does possess that quality. According to the representa-
tionalist, there sensibly appearing to a subject to be something that possesses 
a particular property is a matter of the experience’s representing that some-
thing possesses that property. For this to be the case, nothing actually need 
possess that property at all. 
The qualia theorist might respond to transparency by trying to show that 
we can, in fact, be aware of properties of experiences in introspection. Tim 
Crane, for example, contends that when you remove your spectacles you 
become aware of blurriness without taking the objects to be blurry. This, 
Crane suggests, shows that we are aware of blurriness as a property of our 
experience (2003). 

80  Philosophy of Perception
The representationalist, of course, must deny this. This means that we are 
owed an alternative explanation of what the experience of blurriness consists 
in. Tye’s response is to actually deny that we are aware of blurriness at all. 
Instead, our experiences simply fail to represent the sharp boundaries that 
the objects, in fact, have. So it is not that, in such experiences, we are aware 
of something that is not a property of an object—blurriness—but rather that 
we fail to be aware of one of the properties that the objects have: the property 
of having a sharp outline (Tye 2003).
Perhaps the most significant objection to the content-first account of 
phenomenology—in both its higher order and first order (representa-
tionalist) guises—turns on the role played in the account by functionalist 
considerations.
As we have seen, first-order content-first theorists (representationalists) 
account for the phenomenology of an experience of Fness by appeal to the sub-
ject’s being in a state that has a representational content in which Fness features.
Yet consider the following “a priori suspicion” (Kriegel 2002): If repre-
sentation of property F alone suffices for the subject of this representation 
to be consciously aware of Fness, then property F could not be represented 
unconsciously. This seems implausible. Instead, the thought goes, there must 
be something else that distinguishes conscious representations of Fness from 
nonconscious representations of Fness.
And, indeed, this is borne out when we consider specific content-first 
theories. We have already seen that the higher order theorists require that 
a first-order representation, to be conscious, must be either scanned or the 
subject of a higher order belief. We also noted when we were discussing first-
order theories that, to be conscious, a representational state also has to play 
the right kind of functional role. 
This means that, in all of these cases, the subject’s being in a state that 
represents Fness cannot, by itself, explain why Fness sensibly appears to the 
subject. This raises the question of why these additional considerations—
playing the right functional role; being scanned by an internal scanner; being 
the subject of a higher order belief—have the ability to change a nonconscious 
state into a conscious state.
As a way of making this concern vivid, we might wonder why, given that 
Fness can be represented nonconsciously, an (in itself) unconscious represen­
tation becomes conscious just in virtue of playing a particular functional 
role? But why couldn’t there be a case in which this representation plays this 
functional role without thereby making its subject conscious? If there could, 
then this suggests that the content-first theorist’s account of why there is 
something it is like to enjoy a visual experience may be lacking.
The epistemological hat
According to conceptualist versions of intentionalism—versions that hold 
that the contents of visual experiences are conceptual—empirical beliefs arise 

Intentional theories  81
simply from endorsing the contents of visual experiences. This allows for the 
possibility that, on such a view, empirical beliefs can be rationally, and not 
just causally, grounded by visual experiences.
Moreover, the regress problems do not arise for such a view—when we 
justify a belief by pointing to another belief, we can always ask what justifies 
that further belief. (It is in response to this challenge that Armstrong, as we 
saw, adopted an externalist conception of justification.) Here the situation is 
different. When we respond to the challenge, “Why do you believe that p?” 
with the answer, “Because I perceive that p,” we are not pointing to another 
belief as justifying the initial belief but an experience. And the question of 
what justifies an experience sounds odd—experiences are not the sorts of 
things that can be justified: we just have them, that is all. As long as having 
an experience that represents that p is adequate justification for believing 
that p, which on the face of it it seems to be, we look to have an adequate 
epistemology.
This account of the justification of empirical beliefs has been challenged—
it has been argued that, as we could have a visual experience in which we 
bear the exing attitude to the content that p when p was false (in the case 
of hallucination, say), having an experience in which we ex that p is not 
adequate justification for believing that p—but a more pressing concern is 
the fact that, as things stand, this approach is not available to the majority of 
intentionalists (at least, the majority of strong intentionalists) as they reject 
conceptualism in favor of nonconceptualism about perceptual contents.
Whilst this move does have the advantage of (purportedly) getting the 
phenomenology right, it comes at an epistemological cost: we can no longer 
simply talk about the experience’s content being endorsed in belief.
To have access to this account of empirical justification, then, the non-
conceptualist needs to say something about the relationship between the 
nonconceptual contents of visual experiences and the conceptual contents 
of beliefs, such that the former can be an epistemically suitable ground for 
the latter.
One response by nonconceptualists has been to say that belief contents 
and nonconceptual perceptual contents do stand in rational relations to one 
another. For example, if a nonconceptual content specifies a way of filling out 
space around the subject (as Peacocke’s scenario contents, discussed above, 
do), then some beliefs about the layout of space will be inconsistent with this 
content, or entailed by it, or made probable by it, and so on (Heck 2000).
Another response has been to hold that visual experiences and beliefs have 
the same whole contents: 
when a perception that p causes a belief that p, the whole contents of 
these two states are of the same type—p. [. . . B]elief conceptualises the 
content of perception. So treating the transition from perception to 
belief in terms of whole contents allows us to explain how perceptions 
have contents that can be the contents of beliefs. 
(Crane 1992: 155)

82  Philosophy of Perception
Questions
•	
How plausible is the claim that what it is like to have an experi-
ence is just a matter of the experience’s representational content?
•	
Can a nonconceptual content theorist provide an adequate 
account of the epistemological role of perception?
•	
Can any naturalistic theory of content successfully predict the 
kind of content variations required by the Mirroring Thesis?
Notes
	 1	 Let me note, at this point, that there are other conceptions of qualia in the 
literature. There are also different theories of these properties (including 
theories that claim that they are physical properties and theories that 
claim they are nonphysical properties). The 1997 book Explaining Con-
sciousness: The Hard Problem, edited by Jonathan Shear, gives a good 
overview of some of the proposed theories of qualia.
	 2.	 In light of this consideration, McGinn (1982) suggests we should limit 
the contents of experiences to merely existential contents. Others have 
argued that this isn’t quite right: experience doesn’t just tell us that there 
is a black and pink book there but that a particular book is black and 
pink. They have therefore tried to incorporate McGinn’s insight in a 
singular content view by holding a version of a view in which indiscrimi-
nable experiences share some kind of content schema, which delivers a 
singular content in a particular context and determines the experience’s 
phenomenal character. For instance, Burge (1991) develops a view on 
which visual experiences of a certain kind have a (non-truth-evaluable) 
demonstrative content of the form <That object is F>, which is shared by 
indiscriminable perceptions and hallucinations. Then, when the subject 
has an experience of this kind in a suitable environmental context—one 
which contains a suitable object (say, o)—the demonstrative picks out 
the relevant particular and, using this, creates a singular, truth-evaluable 
Conceptualists, however, are unlikely to be swayed. Even if perceptual 
contents can stand in rational relations to the contents of beliefs, they will 
contend that visual experiences with nonconceptual contents cannot be 
genuine reasons for a subject—reasons that figure as such from the subject’s 
point of view—unless they have conceptual content.
As Brewer argues, “even though being in [a state with nonconceptual 
content] may make it advisable, relative to a certain external end or need, for 
[a subject] to make the judgement or hold the belief in question, it cannot 
provide her own reason for doing so” (2005: 219).

Intentional theories  83
content, <o is F>. If the case is hallucinatory, however, this demonstra-
tive fails and no singular content is created (see also Soteriou 2000). Tye 
(2009) develops a version in which hallucinations do have contents, but 
that they are gappy. Schellenberg (forthcoming) develops a Fregean ver-
sion of the gappy content approach.
	 3.	 The terms “internalism” and “externalism” are used in many areas of 
philosophy, so we must be clear what we are being internalist/externalist 
about. In particular, in this context, internalism/externalism about per-
ceptual content should be distinguished from internalism/externalism 
about phenomenology and internalism/externalism about justification 
(as discussed in the previous chapter). Internalism about phenomenol-
ogy claims that internal physical duplicates will share phenomenology; 
externalism, that features external to the brain and body can determine 
phenomenology. Having said this, internalism about perceptual content 
is a natural partner of internalism about phenomenology—if we are 
internalist about phenomenology and if phenomenology fixes content, 
then content will also be fixed by the internal states of the subject. 
Likewise, externalism about phenomenology is often found with the 
content-first approach as a number of plausible naturalistic theories of 
content are externalist. This means that changes in environment can lead 
to changes in content. If it is also held that content fixes phenomenology, 
then changes in environment will also yield changes in phenomenology. 
	 4.	 Classic presentations of Twin Earth arguments include Hilary Putnam’s 
“The Meaning of ‘Meaning’” (1975), which argues that natural kind 
terms get their meaning from the physical environment, and Burge’s 
own (2007a) “Individualism and the Mental,” which argues that some 
terms get their meaning from features of our social environment.
	 5.	 At this point, let me flag that this intuition has been challenged by recent 
empirical work on change blindness and inattentional blindness. These 
findings will be discussed in Chapter 8.
	 6.	 This claim has recently been challenged. John McDowell argues that, “in 
the throes of an experience of the kind that putatively transcends one’s 
conceptual powers—an experience that ex hypothesi affords a suitable 
sample—one can give linguistic expression to a concept that is exactly 
as fine-grained as the experience, by uttering a phrase like ‘that shade’, 
in which the demonstrative exploits the presence of the sample” (1994: 
56–57). In other words, although we cannot capture the rich detail of 
experience using concepts such as “red,” “yellow,” “burnt sienna,” 
etc., we can conceptually capture this detail by using demonstrative 
concepts that pick out the very detail that is supposed to be problem-
atic—we can think about it as that shade. Concerns have been expressed 
with this response. The conceptualist seems to need to argue that the 
perceiver must have this demonstrative concept in order to be able to 
have the experience. But isn’t that upside down? Doesn’t the perceiver 
have an experience with a certain feature and thereby come to be able to 

84  Philosophy of Perception
demonstrate that feature? If this is so, then we need to be able to make 
sense of the idea that the experience can have this feature prior to the 
perceiver’s deploying a demonstrative concept.
	 7.	 To provide a little more detail for those who are interested, I will briefly 
outline the approach taken by the representationalist Michael Tye, who 
combines a teleosemantic approach with a dash of causal covariation. 
Tye contends that, “experiences represent various features by causally 
correlating with, or tracking, those features under optimal conditions” 
(2000: 64). So, in order for mental state M to represent F, M must covary 
with Fness under optimal conditions. When are conditions optimal? “In 
the case of evolved creatures, [optimal] conditions for vision involve the 
various components of the visual system operating as they were designed 
to do in the sort of external environment in which they were designed 
to operate” (Tye 2000: 138). Thus, suppose that an organism evolved in 
environment E and that, in E, M reliably covaries with F. Now suppose 
that the organism’s sensory mechanisms were selected for because they 
provided it with information about the environment in which it evolved 
(E). According to Tye’s theory, M will therefore represent F.
	 8.	 Another important consideration, at least for content-first theorists, is 
that the metaphysical theory of content must tie up in an appropriate way 
with the chosen psychosemantic theory. This means that content-first 
theorists are likely to also be singular content theorists as it is difficult 
to see how a naturalistic theory of content could ascribe contents con-
stituted by modes of presentation. Intentionalists who hold a Fregean 
theory are therefore far more likely to be phenomenology-first theorists. 
So, in many ways, the kind of argument considered above—which 
claimed that singular contents cannot be true to the phenomenology—is 
also an argument in favor of a phenomenology-first theory.
	 9.	 To the extent that the phenomenon of transparency constitutes an 
objection to qualia theories, it will of course constitute an objection 
to variants of intentionalism—perhaps weak intentionalism or strong 
phenomenology-first intentionalism—that posit qualia to account for 
the phenomenological features of visual experiences. Further concerns 
with appealing to qualia may include the fact that they have proved dif-
ficult to fit into the materialist/physicalist world of science (Levine 1983; 
Chalmers 1996).
	10.	 Tye actually claims that, when we introspect, we are aware of “aspects of 
the content of the experience” (1992). If an experience represents that the 
Pacific Ocean is blue, say, we can say that blueness is a component of the 
content of the experience and it is this that we are aware of. Because of 
this, Tye then officially goes on to identify the experience’s phenomenal 
character with its representational content (its PANIC). But we must 
remember that Tye is here using the term “phenomenal character” in 
the way we have been using the term “presentational character.” As we 
are using the term, phenomenal characters are properties of experiences 

Intentional theories  85
and, even though experiences have contents, the contents they have are 
not properties of those experiences. Everything that Tye wants to say by 
identifying phenomenal character with PANIC, however, is captured in 
the presentation here. 
Further reading
Mike Martin’s “Perceptual Content” (1994) is an excellent introduction to 
intentionalism in the philosophy of perception. A somewhat more techni-
cal overview of the different approaches an intentionalist might take can be 
found in David Chalmers’s 2004 paper “The Representational Character of 
Experience.”
For the transparency motivation, see Gilbert Harman’s “The Intrinsic 
Quality of Experience” (1990). For a defense of the Mirroring Thesis, see 
Alex Byrne’s “Intentionalism Defended” (2001).
For higher order versions of intentionalism, see Bill Lycan, Consciousness 
and Experience (1996) and David Rosenthal, “A Theory of Consciousness” 
(1990). First-order versions of intentionalism (representationalism) can be 
found in Dretske’s paper “Experience as Representation” (2003) and Michael 
Tye’s books, Ten Problems of Consciousness (1995) and Consciousness, Color 
and Content (2000).
Susanna Siegel’s entry in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, “The 
Contents of Perception” (http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/perception-
contents) is an excellent survey of the various issues hereabouts. Specific 
discussions of whether perceptual contents are internalist or externalist can 
be found in Gabriel Segal, “Defence of a Reasonable Individualism” (1991), 
Martin Davies, “Individualism and Perceptual Content” (1991), and Tyler 
Burge’s “Cartesian Error and the Objectivity of Perception” (2007b).
A good introduction to the issues surrounding nonconceptual contents 
is Tim Crane’s 1992 paper, “The Nonconceptual Content of Experience”. 
Richard Heck’s (2000) paper, “Nonconceptual Content and the ‘Space of 
Reasons’” pays specific attention to the epistemological role of experiences 
with nonconceptual contents.
A good place to start thinking about naturalistic theories of content is 
Barry Loewer’s essay “A Guide to Naturalizing Semantics” (1997).


6	
Disjunctive theories
Overview
Disjunctive theories of perception reject the Common Factor Principle. 
They argue instead that indiscriminable experiences can nonetheless 
be experiences of different kinds. Different versions of disjunctivism 
are discussed.
The focus of the remainder of the chapter is on disjunctivism about 
phenomenology and its employment in the defense of a philosophical 
theory of perception known as naive realism or relationalism. Issues 
discussed include what theories the disjunctivist can provide of bad 
case experiences of hallucination and where illusion fits into the 
picture. 
Common Factor Principle

Phenomenal Principle
?
Representational Principle
?
As the principles above indicate, the distinctive feature of disjunctive theo-
ries of perception lie in their rejection of the Common Factor Principle. 
Disjunctivists claim that the mental states involved in a good case experience 
of perception and a bad case experience of hallucination are different, even 
in those cases in which the two experiences are indiscriminable for their 
subject.
Why “disjunctivism”? We can see the answer to this question when we 
consider the disjunctivist’s analysis of the neutral category of visual experi-
ences. Putting illusions to one side for a moment (we will come back to them 
shortly), the disjunctivist proposes to analyze visual experiences as follows:

88  Philosophy of Perception
A subject S has a visual experience as of a property F if and only if:
•	 either S perceives an F,
•	 or S has a hallucination of an F.
To see how this is supposed to work, consider the following example (due 
to Child 1994: 145). Suppose that there are only two ways of producing a 
“likeness” of subject S—by either drawing S or photographing S. The resul-
tant objects—the photograph of S and the drawing of S—both qualify as 
likenesses of S. Whilst there is something common to both photographs of 
S and drawings of S inasmuch as they both qualify as likenesses of S, this is 
not because they have some common property in virtue of which they are 
both likenesses of S. Instead, the right way of understanding the category 
“likeness of S” is as disjunctive: something is a likeness of S if and only if it is 
either a drawing of S or a photograph of S. Indeed, we can present an analysis 
of the category of “likenesses” that parallels the analysis of the category of 
visual experience as follows:
An object O is a likeness of S if and only if:
•	 either O is a drawing of S,
•	 or O is a photograph of S.
For the disjunctivist, the category of visual experiences (of F) is like the 
category of likenesses (of S): it is fundamentally disjunctive.
There is obviously more for the disjunctivist to say about what is involved 
in both of the two core cases. What is it to have a perception of an F? What 
is it to have a hallucination of an F? In principle, these questions could be 
answered in any way: one could offer, say, an adverbialist account of what 
it is to have a perception alongside a sense datum account of the hallucina-
tory case. In practice, however, disjunctivism has typically been used in the 
service of a naive realist or relationalist theory of perception. Such a theory 
would therefore encompass an endorsement of the Phenomenal Principle, at 
least for cases of perception. This will be discussed below.
Interestingly, unlike every other theory we have considered, the disjunc-
tive nature of the disjunctivist’s claim means that there is no need to come 
up with extra conditions by which a visual experience can qualify as a case 
of perception. Instead, if a disjunctive analysis of visual experience is cor-
rect, then a visual experience is a case of perception if and only if it is not 
hallucinatory.
This way of understanding the neutral category of visual experience 
enables the disjunctivist to offer an interesting reinterpretation of seems 
statements. Recall that, in the opening chapter, we discussed a motivation for 
the Common Factor Principle that turned on the fact that, if we did not know 
whether we were seeing or hallucinating a pink elephant, we might naturally 

Disjunctive theories  89
say that we were having the experience of seeming to see a pink elephant. On 
the face of it, such a statement can appear to commit us to a good case/bad 
case common factor: something that could occur in both a case of perception 
and a case of hallucination.
However, the disjunctivist will follow J.M. Hinton (1967, 1973) and argue 
that a statement such as, “I seem to see a pink elephant” is just “a more com-
pact way of saying” something like this: “Either I see a pink elephant, or I am 
having a hallucination of a pink elephant.” Once this translation of the seems 
statement has been provided, there is no longer any pressure to think that the 
truth of “I seem to see a pink elephant” commits us to the presence of a good 
case/bad case common factor. 
Instead, where the statement, “Either I see a pink elephant, or I am having 
a hallucination of a pink elephant” is concerned, there are two different ways 
in which this disjunctive sentence can be made true—either by its being true 
that I actually do see a pink elephant, or by its being true that I don’t see a 
pink elephant, but that it is for me as if I did. As Don Locke puts the point: 
“‘This is a woman, or a man dressed as a woman’ does not assert the presence 
of a woman/transvestite-neutral entity . . . its truth depends simply on the 
presence of either a woman or a transvestite, as the case may be” (1975: 467).
The core disjunctive claim is therefore that:
We should understand statements about how things appear to a perceiver 
to be equivalent to a disjunction that either one is perceiving such and 
such or one is suffering a . . . hallucination; and that such statements are 
not to be viewed as introducing a report of a distinctive mental event or 
state common to these various disjoint situations. 
(Martin 2004: 37)
So, disjunctive theories hold that perceptions and hallucinations of a par-
ticular kind do not have an underlying mental state in common.
The causal objection
This claim—that perceptions and hallucinations are different mental states—
has been argued to conflict with the causal facts about perception. It seems 
clear that, in order for perception to take place, the perceived object must 
causally affect the subject’s sense organs and thereby affect the subject’s 
brain.
This can be developed into an argument against disjunctivism as follows:
	 1	 It is possible for intermediate stages of this causal chain to be activated 
in a nonstandard manner (say, by direct stimulation of the retina, optic 
nerve or visual cortex).
	 2	 If the intermediate stages of the causal chain were to be activated in a 
nonstandard manner, this would not alter the latter stages of the causal 

90  Philosophy of Perception
chain. So long as the earlier stages were accurately replicated, the latter 
stages would be the same.
	 3	 If the latter stages of the causal chain were the same, then the same kind 
of experience would result. But this is just to say that the same kind 
of experience can be caused in both good cases and bad cases, contra 
disjunctivism.
There are reasons to be dubious of the soundness of this argument. 
Consider the following example. There is a “causal chain” for the production 
of legitimate banknotes, which begins with (I guess) an order from a compe-
tent authority and concludes with notes being printed out on a certain kind of 
machine. Suppose, then, that forgers manage to reproduce the machine that 
prints legitimate banknotes. In this way, we can say that the forgers “activate 
the intermediate stages of the causal chain in a nonstandard manner.” Even 
though the latter stages of the causal chain are the same—those involving the 
functioning of the machine itself—the banknotes the forgers print on it will 
still be counterfeit. The “same kind of banknote” will not result, even though 
the immediate “cause” of the forgeries is the same as the immediate “cause” 
of genuine currency.
For a more philosophical reason to resist the causal argument, consider 
Hilary Putnam’s Twin Earth argument (1975). Putnam asks us to imagine 
Twin Earth, a planet identical to Earth in every way save for the fact that 
the stuff which fills the lakes and rivers and falls out of the sky is not H2O 
but an indiscriminable yet chemically distinct substance called XYZ (which 
the Twin Earth inhabitants nevertheless call “water”). On Earth, there is a 
subject called Oscar, and he also has a molecule for molecule replica on Twin 
Earth (who, despite being called “Oscar” by all who know him, we shall call 
Twin Oscar).1
Putnam’s contention is that when Oscar believes that <the glass is full of 
water>, his belief will be made true if the glass contains H2O; Twin Oscar’s 
equivalent belief, on the other hand, will be true if the glass contains XYZ. 
As these beliefs have different truth conditions, they are thereby different 
beliefs. So, despite Oscar and Twin Oscar’s physical and functional identity, 
Putnam suggests that they will have different beliefs. 
It seems, therefore, that we can make sense of the possibility of two 
different mental states having equivalent proximal causes. If so, then the 
disjunctivist can resist the causal objection and allow that perceptions and 
hallucinations are distinct mental states, even in situations where they have 
the same proximal causes.
What exactly does the claim that perceptions and hallucinations are 
distinct mental states amount to? The thing is, any theory of perception is 
going to allow that there is a sense in which perceptions and hallucinations 
are different mental states—one is perceptual and one is hallucinatory after 
all. The claim that perception and hallucination do not have a mental state 
in common must be saying something more than the truistic claim that 

Disjunctive theories  91
one is a perception and the other a hallucination. This raises the following 
question: Just how are perceptions and hallucinations different according to 
disjunctivism? There are a number of different possible answers to this, each 
of which yields a distinct form of disjunctivism. These are discussed below.
Epistemological disjunctivism
One possible answer to this question is to say that perceptions and hallu-
cinations differ in their status as perceptual evidence. In other words, the 
epistemological disjunctivist denies that a subject’s perceptual evidence is the 
same across indiscriminable cases of perception and hallucination.
Paul Snowdon draws attention to the possibility of epistemological dis-
junctivism when he suggests that we might “divide cases where it is true that 
it appears to the subject as if P into two sorts; one is where the subject is in 
a position to know that P . . . and others where the subject is in a position to 
know merely that it appears to be P” (2005: 140).
However, as Snowdon points out, it could be claimed that “a single basic 
sort of (inner) experience [has] quite different epistemological significance 
in different cases, depending, say, on the context and on facts about cau-
sation” (2005: 140). If so, then epistemological disjunctivism could allow  
that perceptions and hallucinations do have an underlying mental state in 
common. It would not, therefore, qualify as a type of disjunctivism as we are 
using the term.
If, however, the epistemological disjunctivist denies that perception and 
hallucination share a single basic inner experience, then the question remains: 
What is the nature of this difference?
Disjunctivism about metaphysics
Disjunctivism about metaphysics states that two mental states qualify as 
distinct so long as they have different constituents.2
This enables the disjunctivist to hold that perceived objects are actually 
constituents of the subject’s perceptual experience. “No experience like this, 
no experience of fundamentally the same kind, could have occurred had no 
appropriate candidate for awareness existed” (Martin 2004: 39).
One concern about metaphysical disjunctivism is that it can look like it is 
only terminologically different from theories that accept the Common Factor 
Principle (call them common factor theories). After all, any theory is going 
to accept that there is a difference between perceptions and hallucinations in 
that, in the former case, but not the latter, something is seen. 
Given this, it seems as though metaphysical disjunctivists and common 
factor theorists could agree on everything except what matters for sameness 
and difference of mental state. Whereas common factor theorists insist that 
the indiscriminability of perception and hallucination mean that they are 
experiences of the same underlying kind, metaphysical disjunctivists insist 

92  Philosophy of Perception
that the presence or absence of a seen object means that they are experiences 
of distinct kinds. If this were the case then, from the point of view of our 
interest in theories of perception, metaphysical disjunctivism doesn’t look to 
be of significant interest.3
This is not to say, however, that metaphysical disjunctivists have to agree 
with common-factor theorists about everything. The metaphysical disjunc-
tivist may insist that perceptions and hallucinations not only have different 
constituents but also differ in some other crucial way. For example, they 
may also contend that the two types of experience have different intentional 
contents or different phenomenal characters. These two possibilities are 
considered below.
Disjunctivism about content
Disjunctivism about content states that two mental states qualify as distinct 
so long as they have different contents.
If we want to endorse the Representational Principle, then we will accept 
that visual experiences have contents. Yet, suppose we preferred the singular 
conception of content. As the previous chapter focused on variants of inten-
tionalism that accepted the Common Factor Principle, we quickly concluded 
that such a position was untenable and hence that perceptual content could 
not be singular for objects. 
However, it is consistent for someone who endorses the Representational 
Principle to reject the Common Factor Principle. This leaves logical space for 
disjunctive variants of intentionalism, which claim that perception, halluci-
nation, and illusion differ in their assignments of content to indiscriminable 
experiences. This in turn leaves open the possibility of assigning singular 
contents in cases of successful perception.
The question we now need to ask is this: should we want to claim that 
perceptions have singular contents?
Motivations
One argument in favor of this claim is that it enables our theory of percep-
tion to adequately accommodate the phenomenon of particularity: that our 
experiences appear to be of unique, individual objects.
This is, at base, an appeal to intuition. Look at the book in front of you. 
The intuitive appeal to particularity is that your visual experience tells you 
that it is that very book that is in front of you, not merely that there is a book of 
a certain kind in front of you. An appeal to singular contents—contents that 
are part-constituted by that very object—would be well placed to capture 
this.
Soteriou (2000) augments this appeal with an argument. He asks us to 
consider a subject wearing displacing glasses that shift the apparent location 

Disjunctive theories  93
of objects rightwards, such that objects to the left of the subject look directly 
in front, objects directly in front of the subject look off to the right, and so 
on. Now imagine we have a red ball (A) placed to the subject’s left such that 
the action of the displacing glasses makes it look as though there is a red ball 
in front of the subject. As things stand, the content of this experience is false. 
Yet we can make it true by adding a further, indiscriminable red ball (B), 
directly in front of the subject. Now there is a red ball in front of the subject, 
just as the experience represents there to be.4
Given this, it looks as though the content comes out true. Intuitively, how-
ever, there is something wrong with this experience. One way of trying to 
accommodate this would be to include a self-referential component into the 
content of the experience, such that the experience not only represents that 
<there is a red ball in front of me>, but also that <the red ball that appears 
to be in front of me is actually causing this experience> (Searle 1983). Given 
that the second, self-referential component of the content is not true—it is 
B that is in front of me, but A that is causing the experience of a red ball’s 
appearing to be in front of me—this approach would count the experience 
as nonveridical. However, this approach has been criticized for getting the 
phenomenology wrong. The attribution of content to a visual experience is 
supposed to explain how things seem to us, and it is just not the case that it 
seems to us as though there is a causal relation between the object and our 
experience.
If this approach fails, then in order to account for the fact that the experi-
ence of the red ball fails to be a case of perception, Soteriou suggests that we 
should see the content of this experience as singular, not abstract. So, rather 
than the content of the experience being <there is a red ball in front of me>, 
which is true, it should be <A is a red ball and in front of me>, which is false 
as it is actually B in front of me. Thus, the thought goes, we should accept 
that perceptual contents are singular.
As noted in the previous chapter, a concern with this claim is that it entails 
that experiences of distinct but indiscriminable objects will differ in content. 
An experience of red ball A will have the content <A is a red ball and is in 
front of me> whilst an experience of indiscriminable red ball B will represent 
that <B is a red ball and is in front of me>. If the attribution of content to an 
experience is indeed intended to capture how things seem to the subject, then 
this would imply that how things seem to the subject of these two experi-
ences would be different, which conflicts with the assumption that they are 
indiscriminable.
Soteriou replies that this objection can be overcome so long as we 
remember that, in this context, “indiscriminable” means qualitatively 
indiscriminable—indiscriminable in terms of qualities or properties. As 
the experiences will represent both A and B to instantiate exactly the same 
properties (given their assumed indiscriminability), then we should expect 
the experiences to seem the same to their subject.

94  Philosophy of Perception
Content disjunctivism and phenomenology
One question that arises here is that, given that the contents of indiscrim-
inable perceptions and hallucinations can be different, how should we explain 
the fact of their indiscriminability? This is the most significant question fac-
ing disjunctive theories of all stripes.
One possibility for disjunctivists about content is to simply detach 
questions about perceptual contents from questions about perceptual phe-
nomenology. This would enable us to say that perceptions and hallucinations 
share phenomenology despite differing in content. Essentially, this response 
treats phenomenology as a factor common to perception and hallucination, 
even if it denies that they have a mental state in common.5 One might wonder, 
given this, whether disjunctivism ought, therefore, to be defined in such a 
way that such a position is ruled out as being disjunctivist. Alternatively, 
one might bite the bullet and insist that perception and hallucination could 
be indiscriminable despite not sharing phenomenal character. Such a posi-
tion would therefore be a version of disjunctivism about phenomenology, to 
which we shall now turn.
Disjunctivism about phenomenology
Disjunctivism about phenomenology states that two mental states qualify 
as distinct so long as they have different phenomenal character. According 
to this variant of disjunctivism, perceptions and hallucinations do not share 
phenomenal character.
The return of the causal argument
This claim, however, can seem to fall to a more plausible version of the causal 
argument. This argument contends not that the same proximal conditions 
will create the same kind of experience but rather that the same proximal 
conditions will create a mental state with the same phenomenology. This is 
Horgan and Tienson’s presentation of this argument:
Distal environmental causes generate experiential effects only by gener-
ating more immediate links in the causal chains between themselves and 
experience, viz., physical stimulations in the body’s sensory receptors  
. . . These states and processes causally generate experiential effects only 
by generating still more immediate links in the causal chains between 
themselves and experience—viz., afferent neural impulses, resulting 
from transduction at the sites of the sensory receptors on the body. 
Your mental intercourse with the world is mediated by sensory and 
motor transducers at the periphery of your central nervous system. 
Your conscious experience would be phenomenally just the same even 

Disjunctive theories  95
if the transducer-external causes and effects of your brain’s afferent and 
efferent neural activity were radically different from what they are.
(Horgan and Tienson 2002: 526–527)
The contention here is that even if there are reasons to think that changes 
in a subject’s environment might affect aspects of the nature of a mental state 
(perhaps because it could make a “seeing of water” experience into a “seeing 
of twin water” experience), the “conscious [aspects of the] experience would 
be phenomenally just the same.” 
If this argument succeeds, then disjunctivism about phenomenology 
would be false, even if the other versions of disjunctivism could be rescued. 
Yet the passage just cited doesn’t argue for the claim that “your conscious 
experience would be phenomenally just the same even if the . . . external 
causes and effects . . . were radically different.” Rather, it just assumes it. So 
it would be open for the disjunctivist about phenomenology to simply deny 
this claim. Having said this, Robinson does claim that “if it were not the 
case that perceptual processes, however stimulated, were sufficient to gener-
ate experience, it would be a mystery why [perception-like] hallucinations 
should occur” (1994: 152), but the legitimacy of this motivation has been 
challenged (Fish 2009).
Modesty
Even if the causal argument can be overcome, disjunctivism about phenom-
enology can still seem strange: perceptions and hallucinations are accepted 
to be indiscriminable. Doesn’t this just entail that they have the same phe-
nomenal character?
Clearly a disjunctivist about phenomenology cannot accept this claim: 
indiscriminability cannot entail sameness of phenomenal character. However, 
this does put the onus on this kind of disjunctivist to explain and defend 
the contention that experiences with different phenomenal character can be 
indiscriminable.
Mike Martin argues that to simply assume that the indiscriminability of 
two experiences has to be accounted for by their sharing phenomenal char-
acter is to attribute to subjects unreasonably immodest epistemic powers. 
Consider a perception of an F and a perfectly indiscriminable hallucination 
of such. In virtue of what do both count as visual experiences as of an F? A 
modest answer to this question is that this is enough: something is a visual 
experience of an F just in case it is indiscriminable from a perception of an 
F. If indiscriminability is assumed to be a matter of sameness of phenomenal 
character, however, then “when I come to recognize the possibility of perfect 
hallucination just like my current perception, what I do is both recognize the 
presence of [the phenomenal character] . . . in virtue of which this event is  
. . . an experience [of an F], and also recognize that an event’s possessing 

96  Philosophy of Perception
these characteristics is independent of whether the event is a perception or 
not” (Martin 2004: 47).
What about the possibility of “a situation in which [phenomenal character 
is different or] absent but in which a subject would be unable to discriminate 
through reflection this situation from one in which [an F] was really being 
seen” (Martin 2004: 49)? The modest conception of what is required for an 
event to qualify as visual experience would allow us to count such an event as 
an experience (as) of an F simply in virtue of this failure to discriminate. The 
alternative conception, however, could not count this as a visual experience 
as a/an F. In order to rule out the possibility of such scenarios, the defender 
of the idea that indiscriminability entails sameness of phenomenal character 
will have to assume that a careful subject simply cannot fail to recognize 
the presence and nature of phenomenal character when it is present, or the 
absence of phenomenal character when it is absent. This approach therefore 
has to “attribute to responsible subjects potential infallibility about the 
course of their experiences” (Martin 2004: 51). 
This opens up the logical space for two experiences that do not share 
phenomenal character to be indiscriminable. So, disjunctivism about phe-
nomenology is not ruled out a priori. But this doesn’t give us a positive reason 
to endorse the thesis. Why would anybody want to endorse disjunctivism 
about phenomenology?
Naive realism
Typically, the motivation for endorsing disjunctivism about phenomenology 
is to defend a philosophical theory of the good cases of perception known as 
naive realism or relationalism.
According to the naive realist, in the good cases of perception, external 
objects and their properties “shape the contours of the subject’s conscious 
experience” (Martin 2004: 64). Likewise, John Campbell outlines his rela-
tionalist view of perception by suggesting that, on this view, the “phenomenal 
character of your experience, as you look around the room, is constituted by 
the actual layout of the room itself: which particular objects are there, their 
intrinsic properties, such as color and shape, and how they are arranged in 
relation to one another and to you” (2002: 116).
A useful way of understanding this claim is to see the naive realist as 
endorsing the Phenomenal Principle, at least for the limited case of percep-
tion. Thus the naive realist holds that, whenever we have a case of conscious 
perception, there is something that the subject is aware of and that bears the 
properties that characterize what it is like for the subject. Unlike the sense 
datum theory, however, as naive realists endorse disjunctivism and thereby 
reject the Common Factor Principle, they are thereby enabled to say that 
these objects of awareness are actually the mind independent objects that 
inhabit the world.

Disjunctive theories  97
Typically, naive realists also reject the Representational Principle on the 
grounds that perceptions do not represent things, they simply present them 
as being as they are. There is therefore no question of experiences being 
incorrect, as the Representational Principle would require. As Austin puts it, 
“our senses are dumb—though Descartes and others speak of the ‘testimony 
of the senses’, our senses do not tell us anything, true or false” (1962: 11; see 
also Travis 2004). 
We can capture the naive realist’s claim that the external world shapes the 
contours of the subject’s conscious experiences by employing our terminol-
ogy of presentational character. At a first pass, the suggestion is that the 
presentational character of a perception is actually constituted by the piece 
of mind independent reality that is being looked at. Such a view of presen-
tational character enables the naive realist to claim that external reality is 
literally experientially present. To the extent that presentational character is 
constituted by external properties, the naive realist’s take on presentational 
character is actually quite similar to the intentionalist’s.
What about the phenomenal character of a perception? What does the 
naive realist have to say about the nature of the property of the experience 
that types it by what it is like to undergo it? Here naive realists depart from 
representationalists and instead go along with the sense datum theorists! 
Naive realists hold that the phenomenal character of a perception is its prop-
erty of being a sensing of the elements of the presentational character.6
This claim does raise the question of what is involved in a subject’s 
sensing or being acquainted with external reality. This is a critical part of 
a naive realist position, but without further explanation it can seem to be 
almost magical. Probably the most well developed answer to this question 
is presented by Alva Noë who develops an intriguing theory of perception, 
according to which “perceptual experience [is] an active form of engagement 
with the environment” (2001: 50). Noë rejects representationalism, arguing 
that we are not consciously aware of what the brain represents, and claims 
instead that we are rather consciously aware of what is made available by 
the various processes going on in the brain and body. How are parts of the 
world made available? By our having the ability to access the world using 
what he calls sensorimotor skills, where to possess a sensorimotor skill of a 
certain kind is to have a tacit understanding of how sensory stimuli change 
as a result of active movement. To use an example of Noë’s, we have access 
to—we see—the (whole) cat even though part of it is occluded behind a 
picket fence because we implicitly know that, were we to move our bodies in 
this particular way, some bits of the cat would come into view whilst others 
would become occluded by the fence, and so on. 7
In developing this suggestion, Noë claims that “you visually experience 
parts of the tomato that, strictly speaking, you do not see, because you 
understand, implicitly, that your sensory relation to those parts is mediated 
by familiar patterns of sensorimotor dependence” (2005: 77). Yet the appeal 
in this passage to the idea that some things can be seen “strictly speaking” is 

98  Philosophy of Perception
in fact a ladder that can be kicked away. To explain: Noë insists that we can 
still visually experience the back of a tomato even if we don’t see it “strictly 
speaking,” and our ability to experience the back of the tomato is claimed to 
rest upon our possession and exploitation of sensorimotor knowledge. Whilst 
this discussion makes its point by playing with the idea that we do see the 
front of the tomato “strictly speaking,” in fact this is not the case. This is the 
key point: nothing is ever given to consciousness in its totality, so nothing is 
ever seen “strictly speaking”; instead, everything that we see is seen in virtue 
of our possessing and employing sensorimotor skills. As Noë insists that it is 
worldly objects and properties (including aspects and appearances) that are 
seen, then if this reading is correct, he can usefully be seen as endorsing naive 
realism, broadly speaking, together with a detailed, action-based theory of 
what it is to stand in the acquaintance relation to external reality.8
Now we see the crux of naive realism about perception, we can see why 
naive realists have to endorse disjunctivism about phenomenology: on this 
view of phenomenal character, it is clear that a hallucination could not share 
phenomenal character with a perception, even in cases in which the two expe-
riences are indiscriminable for their subject. What can the naive realist who 
is disjunctivist about phenomenology say about the phenomenal character of 
indiscriminable hallucinations? 
Disjunctive theories of hallucination
Positive disjunctivism
The positive disjunctivist insists that there is a positive story to tell about 
the phenomenal character of the hallucinatory state. For example, one might 
claim that hallucination involves the awareness of nonphysical objects—
sense data—that are indiscriminable from physical objects. Such a claim is 
suggested by Austin’s observation, mentioned in Chapter 2, that “generically 
different” objects such as lemons and bars of soap can, nevertheless, look 
exactly the same (1962: 50). 9
A more sophisticated version of positive disjunctivism is presented by 
Mark Johnston (2004).10 Johnston contends that, when we have a successful 
case of perception, we are aware of an instantiated sensible profile: “a complex, 
partly qualitative and partly relational property, which exhausts the way the 
particular scene before your eyes is” (2004: 134). Importantly, the sensible 
profile that we are aware of, says Johnston, is a type not a token; had we stood 
before an array of different particulars instantiating the same sensible profile, 
what we are aware of—the sensible profile—would have been the same. Then, 
when you have a hallucination that is indiscriminable from this experience, 
“you are simply aware of the partly qualitative, partly relational profile. [. . .] 
When the visual system misfires, as in hallucination, it presents uninstanti-
ated complexes of sensible qualities and relations” (2004: 135).

Disjunctive theories  99
On Johnston’s view, there are, then, clear similarities between good cases 
and bad cases—in particular, in both cases the subject is aware of the same 
sensible profile. Yet there are important differences too. “When we see,” 
says Johnston, “we are aware of instantiations of sensible profiles” (2004: 
135; emphasis added). “When we hallucinate, on the other hand, we are only 
aware of the structured qualitative parts of such sensible profiles. Any case of 
hallucination is thus a case of ‘direct’ visual awareness of less than one would 
be ‘directly’ aware of in the case of seeing” (Johnston 2004: 137). The objects 
of hallucination are instead “proper parts” of the objects of seeing (Johnston 
2004: 140). 
The difficulty faced by positive views is that they flirt with what is known 
as the screening-off problem (Martin 2004). The screening off problem begins 
from the plausible claim that all that is needed for a hallucination to take 
place is the right kind of activity in the subject’s brain.
To see the worry, take a simple, Austin-inspired sense datum theory of 
hallucination first. It seems reasonable to suppose that a certain pattern of 
neural activity must suffice for a subject to be aware of sense data in the 
bad case of hallucination. If this is so, what about the neural activity that 
occurs in the good case of perception? If this also suffices for the subject to 
be aware of sense data, and if—as is suggested—this awareness explains why 
the subject takes him or herself to be perceiving a real-world object, then 
this awareness of sense data would seem to “screen off” the supposed object-
involving phenomenal character of the perception itself from explaining why 
the subject’s experience is as it is.
If, however, it is claimed that the neural activity does not suffice for aware-
ness of sense data in the good case of perception, then we might wonder why: 
if the mechanism or brain state is a sufficient causal condition for the 
production of an image, or otherwise characterised subjective sense-
content, when the [objects] are not there, why is it not so sufficient when 
they are present? Does the brain state mysteriously know how it is being 
produced . . . or does the [object], when present, inhibit the production 
of an image by some sort of action at a distance? 
(Robinson 1994: 153–154)
It is less clear how Johnston’s view fares here. At one point, he asks: 
Why isn’t awareness of a sensible profile a common act of awareness as 
between seeing and hallucination? It may be held to be . . . But it does 
seem that once we adopt the act/object treatment of visual experience it 
is more natural to individuate an act of awareness occurring at a time in 
terms of an object that includes all that one is aware of in the relevant 
time.
(Johnston 2004: 171)

100  Philosophy of Perception
As the perceiver is aware of more than the hallucinator (in that the per-
ceiver is aware of the particulars that instantiate the sensible profile whilst 
the hallucinator is aware of the sensible profile alone), Johnston’s sugges-
tion seems to be that when we account for the perceiver’s awareness of the 
particulars we thereby account for the perceiver’s awareness of the sensible 
profile. There is then no need to introduce an additional awareness of an 
(uninstantiated) sensible profile.
It is not clear that this suffices to ward off the screening off problem. 
After all, if neural activity does suffice for awareness of an uninstantiated 
sensible profile in the bad cases, it should suffice in the good cases too. And 
this is the case whether or not we need to appeal to this to explain the fact 
that the subject is aware of a sensible profile at all. So Johnston’s view may 
also be threatened by the screening off worry.
Negative disjunctivism
Given that a positive account of hallucination faces the screening off prob-
lem, some disjunctivists offer a negative account of hallucination instead. At 
the end of the previous section, we asked what account can the disjunctivist 
give of the phenomenal character of hallucination. The negative disjunctivist 
says that all we can say about indiscriminable hallucinations is that they are 
not veridical perceptions but are indiscriminable from them. In other words, 
the phenomenal character of a hallucination—the property of the hallucina-
tion that types it by what it is like to undergo it—is its property of being 
indiscriminable from a veridical perception of a certain kind.
If hallucinations are not indiscriminable from perceptions in virtue of 
having some property that renders them indiscriminable, how should we 
understand indiscriminability in this context?
This is a critical question for negative disjunctivists. Martin suggests that 
a hallucination of an F “is such that it is not possible to know through reflec-
tion that it is not one of the . . . perceptions [of an F]” (2006: 364). We can 
therefore define indiscriminability as follows: 
x is indiscriminable from a perception of an F if and only if x is such that 
it is not possible to know through reflection that it is not a perception 
of an F.
An important feature of this notion of indiscriminability is that it enables 
the negative disjunctivist to avoid the screening off problem. The key feature 
of the picture that enables this turns on the claim that indiscriminability 
properties have “inherited or dependent explanatory potential” and that such 
cases therefore “offer us exceptions to the general model of common proper-
ties screening off special ones” (Martin 2004: 70).
To explain the notion of a property having “inherited or dependent 
explanatory potential,” consider the property of being an unattended bag in 

Disjunctive theories  101
an airport, which causes a security alert. Sometimes objects with this prop-
erty are harmless, but sometimes they contain a bomb. Now ask: does the 
property common to harmless and nonharmless objects—that of being an 
unattended bag in an airport—explain why there is a security alert in such 
a way that the special property of being a bomb in an airport is screened off 
from being explanatory? Not at all. Instead, the only reason the common 
property of being an unattended bag in an airport has the explanatory role 
it does is because, sometimes, this property is correlated with the special 
property of being a bomb in an airport. In such a case, we can say that the 
explanatory potential of the common property of being an unattended bag in 
an airport is “inherited from” or “dependent upon” the explanatory potential 
of the special property of being a bomb in an airport. 
The negative disjunctivist exploits this by arguing that the key property 
of being indiscriminable from a perception of a certain kind—a property 
common to both perceptions and their indiscriminable hallucinations—has 
just this kind of inherited or dependent explanatory potential.
Why did James shriek like that? He was in a situation indiscriminable 
from the veridical perception of a spider. Given James’s fear of spiders, 
when confronted with one he is liable so to react; and with no detectable 
difference between this situation and such a perception, it must seem to 
him as if a spider is there, so he reacts in the same way. 
(Martin 2004: 68)
In order to explain why James shrieks when he hallucinates a spider, we not 
only have to say that his experience has the property of being indiscriminable 
from a perception of a spider but also that a perception of a spider constitutes, 
for James, a reason for shrieking. So the property of being a veridical percep-
tion of a spider is, like the property of being a bomb in an airport, a special 
property that is needed to explain why the common property has the explana-
tory potential it does. Whatever explanatory potential an indiscriminability 
property has in explaining why James behaves as he does is inherited from the 
explanatory potential of the associated case of real perception.
Martin therefore suggests that the screening off worry can be avoided 
by characterizing the hallucinatory state purely negatively. The disjunc-
tivist should say that “when it comes to a mental characterization of the 
hallucinatory experience, nothing more can be said than the relational and 
epistemological claim that it is indiscriminable from the perception” (Martin 
2004: 72). 
Difficulties for negative disjunctivism
Given the negative disjunctivist’s characterization of the hallucinatory 
state as a state that is simply indiscriminable from a perception of a certain 
kind, a lot hangs on the way in which the key notion of indiscriminability 

102  Philosophy of Perception
is understood. As we have seen, Martin claims that an experience will be 
indiscriminable from a perception of an F so long as it is “not possible to 
know through reflection” that it is not a perception of an F. Elements of 
this analysis of indiscriminability have been the source of objections. Both 
the restriction to the relevant knowledge being acquired “through reflection” 
and Martin’s interpretation of the modality present in “not possible to know” 
have been challenged. 
To take the “through reflection” clause first, one way of coming to know 
that your experience is not a perception of an F is by testimony. If I tell you 
that I slipped a drug in your coffee, you may on these grounds come to real-
ize that your experience of pink elephants is nonveridical. In this way, we can 
see that it is possible for you to know that your experience is not a perception 
of pink elephants.
Even though you can know that your experience is not a perception of 
pink elephants in this way, we do not want this to preclude your experience’s 
being indiscriminable from a perception of pink elephants. This is why 
Martin includes the “through reflection” clause in the definition of indis-
criminability: in order to rule out the possibility of knowledge gained from 
testimony being relevant to the question of whether or not two experiences 
are indiscriminable.
Sturgeon, however, argues that this proposal cannot be made to work 
(2006). On the one hand, the “through reflection” restriction must be strong 
enough to rule out any of the routes by which hallucinating subjects might 
“figure out” that they are hallucinating. He suggests that it must therefore 
be taken to stipulate that the “information involved in background beliefs 
cannot be generally available to reflection . . . Otherwise the possibility of 
everyday knowledge of [hallucination] will slip through the net [and] count 
as knowledge obtainable by reflection” (Sturgeon 2006: 209). 
On the other hand, when one hallucinates an F, one is thereby in a position 
to know a vast array of things. As a hallucination of an F is discriminable 
from perceptions of Gs, Hs, and Js, Martin’s definition will require that, for 
each case, a subject hallucinating an F can know, by reflection alone, that his 
experience is not one of these cases of perception. Sturgeon suggests that 
this “is a huge amount of knowledge to be got solely by reflection . . . and 
not by reflection on the visual character of [the hallucination], recall . . . The 
only way that could be true, I submit, is if background beliefs were generally 
available to reflection on context” (2006: 210).
Sturgeon therefore presents Martin with a dilemma. On the one hand, to 
rule out the possibility we might simply use our background beliefs to figure 
out that we are hallucinating, the “through reflection” clause must restrict 
us from making use of background beliefs. On the other, to make sense of 
all the reflective knowledge Martin’s theory allows that we are in a position 
to acquire when we hallucinate, the “through reflection” clause must allow 
us to make use of background beliefs. This, suggests Sturgeon, is just to say 
that Martin cannot give an adequate account of the “through reflection” 
restriction.

Disjunctive theories  103
Another source of objections has stemmed from Martin’s interpretation 
of the “not possibly knowable” condition. This condition is in the picture to 
enable the negative disjunctivist to acknowledge that creatures that lack the 
sophistication to know things might nonetheless have hallucinations. This is 
a prima facie problem because, if a creature cannot know things at all, then 
for any hallucination it might have, the creature will not know that it is not 
perceiving an F, or a G, or an H, and so on. As it stands, Martin’s definition 
of indiscriminability threatens to count any creature hallucination as indis-
criminable from each and every kind of creature perception. 
To avoid this, Martin states that whilst a creature “might fail to dis-
criminate one experience from another, making no judgment about them as 
identical or distinct at all, that is not to say that we cannot judge, in ascribing 
to them such experience, that there is an event which would or would not be 
judgeably different from another experience” (2004: 54; emphasis added).
In other words, Martin suggests that, when we talk about what it is or 
isn’t “possible to know,” we are not talking about what the subject—with the 
subject’s idiosyncratic capacities—is or is not in a position to know. Rather, 
we are talking in an impersonal way. When we say that a hallucination is not 
possibly known to be distinct from a perception of a certain kind, we do not 
mean not possibly known by the subject but rather, not possibly known in 
some impersonal sense.
Siegel argues that this approach renders us unable to pick out the hal-
lucinatory “experience”—the state or event that is reflected upon—in an 
appropriate yet nonquestion-begging manner (2008: 212). Given Martin’s 
view, the hallucinatory experience cannot be identified by its having a certain 
robust property. This would conflict with Martin’s insistence that nothing 
more can be said of the hallucination than that it is indiscriminable from 
the perception. Yet we cannot pick out the relevant state in virtue of its 
indiscriminability property either, because we are trying to explain what it 
is for a state of the creature’s to have the indiscriminability property in the 
first place. This means that we cannot identify the experience we are talking 
about by appeal to its being the one that has the indiscriminability property. 
I present an alternative version of negative disjunctivism in Fish (2009), 
where I depart from Martin on both of these issues. Where Martin endorses 
an impersonal sense of indiscriminability, I endorse a personal sense; where 
Martin rules out testimony, I rule it in. I argue that indiscriminability requires 
sameness of cognitive effects, where both behavior and (in conceptually 
sophisticated creatures) introspective beliefs qualify as species of cognitive 
effect. Where animals are concerned, a hallucination can therefore qualify 
as indiscriminable from a perception of a certain kind so long as it yields the 
kinds of behavior that a perception of that kind would have yielded. When it 
comes to known hallucinations, I ask what would be the effects of a percep-
tion in subjects who believed, through testimony, that they are hallucinating. 
I suggest that, in such a case, both the hallucination and the perception would 
yield the same kinds of belief. I therefore contend that in such a case the hal-
lucination would have the same cognitive effects as a perception would have 

104  Philosophy of Perception
had, and thereby qualifies as indiscriminable from that perception. Siegel 
(2008) also raises objections to these claims.
Disjunctivism and illusion
We have seen two disjunctive approaches to hallucination: positive disjunctiv-
ism, which claims that a positive account can be given of hallucination, and 
negative disjunctivism, which claims that all that can be said of hallucination 
is that it is indiscriminable from a perception of a certain kind.
A further question for the disjunctivist is this. If perceptions and halluci-
nations are experiences of different kinds, what should we say about cases of 
illusion? These are similar to perceptions inasmuch as something is seen but 
similar to hallucinations inasmuch as we get things wrong. The two obvious 
possibilities are to place illusion into one of the two disjuncts that we already 
have: to treat illusions as either like hallucinations or like perceptions. 
V vs. IH disjunctivism
The terminology of V vs. IH disjunctivism is taken from Byrne and Logue 
(2008). It indicates that illusion (I) is being treated along with hallucination 
(H) and against veridical perception (V).
McDowell seems to endorse this approach when he claims that “an 
appearance that such-and-such is the case can be either a mere appearance 
or the fact that such-and-such is the case making itself perceptually manifest 
to someone” (1998: 386–387). As McDowell’s veridical disjunct contains 
cases in which a “fact” is made manifest then, as there is no such thing as a 
nonobtaining fact, any scenario in which it appears to the subject that such-
and-such is the case when it is not could not be a case of a fact being made 
manifest. So illusions look to fall into the category of cases in which it merely 
appears as though a fact is made manifest along with hallucinations.
However, there are concerns with the attempt to treat illusions as hal-
lucinations. Robinson protests that, “if all non-veridical perceptions were 
treated in the same way as hallucinations, then every case of something 
not looking exactly as it is would be a case in which one was aware of some 
kind of subjective content. Only perfectly veridical perceptions would be 
free of such subjective contents” (1994: 159). This leads A.D. Smith to ridi-
cule the view: the “picture of our daily commerce with the world through 
perception that therefore emerges is one of a usually indirect awareness of 
physical objects occasionally interrupted by direct visions of them glimpsed 
in favoured positions” (2002: 28). 
VI vs. H disjunctivism
Perhaps we would do better to bring illusion under the veridical, rather than 
the hallucinatory, disjunct. This gives us VI vs. H disjunctivism.

Disjunctive theories  105
If illusion is treated as a special case of veridical perception, then the spe-
cific way in which illusion is treated will be dictated by the particular theory 
offered of the veridical cases. As one of the most significant motivations for 
disjunctivism is to make room for a naive realist account of the good cases, 
as we have seen, then this approach faces a problem. Illusions are cases in 
which objects look to be a way that they are not. As things stand, then, this 
approach to illusion would not be available to a disjunctivist who also wanted 
to be a naive realist about the good cases.
Having said this, one possibility is to insist that illusion is not, strictly 
speaking, a feature of experience but rather a feature of our cognitive response 
to our experiences (Brewer 2006; Fish 2009). On this view, as far as their 
experiential nature goes, illusions are perfectly veridical (hence VI vs. H 
disjunctivism). As Brewer puts it:
The intuitive idea is that, in perceptual experience, a person is simply 
presented with the actual constituents of the physical world themselves. 
Any errors in her world view which result are the product of the subject’s 
responses to this experience, however automatic, natural, or understand-
able in retrospect these responses may be. Error, strictly speaking, given 
how the world actually is, is never an essential feature of experience itself. 
(2006: 169)
Consider once again the Müller-Lyer illusion (see Figure 6.1). In this illu-
sion, two lines, which are actually the same length, are given arrowheads, 
which mislead the subject into thinking that they differ in length.
All of the other theories we have considered attempt to accommodate this 
error within the visual experience itself. Thus, sense datum theorists would 
claim that, when subject to the illusion, we are aware of different length sense 
data; adverbialists that we sense different-length-ly, and intentionalists that 
our experience represents the presence of two different length lines.11
Figure 6.1

106  Philosophy of Perception
Brewer’s alternative holds, in accord with naive realism, that the phenom-
enal character of our experience is in fact part-constituted by two same length 
lines but that, because of the arrowheads, we take ourselves to be confronted 
with two different length lines. Thus, the illusion is not a feature of experi-
ence, but a feature of the way we (cognitively) take that experience.
Two problems with this approach stand out. First, it is not obvious how 
to account for the fact that this illusion is persistent—that the lines continue 
to appear different lengths even though we know that the lines are the same 
length and hence do not take them to be different. Second, this approach 
seems unlikely to be applicable to all cases of illusion. Consider, in particular, 
familiar illusions of color, such as the observation that the colors of objects 
look different in different lighting conditions. A simple extension of this 
approach would be that the phenomenal character of our experience is part-
constituted by the same color in all of these cases, it is just that we take this 
color differently. This seems phenomenologically implausible.12
Disjunctivism and the two hats
In this section, I will focus on discussing the successes and failings of dis-
junctivism about phenomenology employed in the service of defending naive 
realism about perception.
The phenomenological hat
Probably the most significant motivation for endorsing naive realism about 
perception is the thought that it is the best way of doing justice to the 
phenomenology of those experiences.13 Yet naive realism does face some 
phenomenological objections.
For instance, consider the first pass claim that, on a naive realist view 
of perception, the presentational character of a perception is constituted by 
the scene that the subject is looking at. As it stands, this claim seems to be 
refuted by various considerations, including the everyday phenomenon of 
blurry vision. Two subjects standing in roughly the same place looking at the 
same scene could have experiences that are remarkably different in phenom-
enal character if one has normal vision whilst the other is short-sighted.
In addition to this concern is the thought that the same scene can be 
seen in different ways and that naive realism doesn’t have the resources to 
account for this. One way in which this concern plays out is the thought, 
mentioned above in connection with illusion, that the same surface color can 
look different—can be seen in different ways—in different circumstances. In 
addition to this is the finding that different perceivers, all of whom qualify 
as “normal,” will differ over precisely which surfaces are perceived as being 
a certain color. For example, perceiver A might claim that a surface that 
reflects light of 500 nanometers is unique green—green with no blue and 
no yellow component—whereas a surface that reflects light of 495 nanome-
ters is a slightly blueish green. On the other hand, perceiver B, in the same 

Disjunctive theories  107
observation conditions, might see the second (495 nanometers reflecting) 
surface as unique green and the first (500 nanometers reflecting) surface as 
a yellowish green! Again, this suggests that one and the same surface can be 
seen in different ways, a phenomenon that naive realists will need to account 
for.
A final point to make in connection with the naive realist’s account of 
phenomenology concerns the time lag objection, discussed in Chapter 2. In 
this context, the time lag argument picks up on the naive realist’s claim that 
the phenomenal character of one’s perception is a matter of one’s standing in 
a relation of acquaintance to external objects. As was highlighted by the time 
lag argument, however, we can have experiences of objects that no longer 
exist, as in the case of extinct stars, or experiences of the way objects were 
rather than the way objects are, as in the case of our experience of things 
happening on the surface of the sun. Both of these phenomena are explained 
by the finite speed of light and the vast distances separating us from the stars 
and sun. 
One way for the naive realist to reply to this objection would be to deny 
that such experiences can be cases of perception proper, but this would 
seem desperate. An alternative response has therefore been to challenge the 
assumption that the objects that we are aware of have to coexist with the act 
of awareness. As Pitcher argues, time lag considerations
[do] not entail that we do not directly see things and states of affairs in 
the “external world,” but only that we must see them as they were some 
time ago. We see real physical things, properties, and events, all right, but 
we see them late, that is all. According to a [naive] realist, it is a mere 
prejudice of common sense—and one on which the time lag argument 
trades—that the events, and the states of objects, that we see must be 
simultaneous with our (act of) seeing them. 
(1971: 48)
Whether this response is adequate or not is open to further discussion.
The epistemological hat
Supposed epistemological advantages have also been cited as a significant 
motivation for disjunctivism. Consider a skeptical argument that runs as fol-
lows. When we hallucinate, the kind of experience we have clearly fails to put 
us in a position to know anything about the external world. The experience 
we have in the case of a perception indiscriminable from this hallucination is 
an experience of the same kind. As the bad case experience fails to put us in 
a position to acquire knowledge, having the same kind of experience in the 
good case cannot place us in a better epistemological position. According 
to this argument, then, even when we perceive, we are not in a position to 
know anything about the external world. (This objection develops the con-
sideration touched on in the previous chapter, that if we could have a certain 

108  Philosophy of Perception
kind of visual experience when p was false, then having that visual experience 
could never justify us in believing that p.)
Disjunctivism offers to block this argument by denying the premise 
that the experience we have when we perceive is the same as the experience 
we have when we hallucinate. This would not, of course, prove that we do 
know anything about the external world, merely that such knowledge is not 
impossible. Yet it would block the skeptic from using the impossibility of 
knowledge as a premise in an argument for the conclusion that we do not 
know anything.
In response, the disjunctivist’s opponent may point out that, given the 
acknowledged indiscriminability of perception and hallucination, we cannot 
know, on any given occasion, whether we are hallucinating or perceiving. 
For example, Wright (2002) has argued that, even if it is true that seeing 
O entails that O exists, if we don’t have any reason to believe that we are 
seeing O rather than hallucinating O, we are not justified in believing that 
O exists. And as, of course, disjunctivists accept that hallucinations can be 
indiscriminable from perceptions, we could never have adequate reason to 
believe that we are seeing, rather than hallucinating, O. So we are never justi-
fied in believing that O exists. It is not after all clear that disjunctivism does 
provide any epistemological advantages.
The disjunctivist might reply that this misses the point. It is not that dis-
junctivism offers an argument to prove that we do have knowledge; rather, it 
offers a rebuttal to an argument that we cannot. To illustrate this, consider 
the familiar skeptical claim that all of our experiences might have been just 
as they are even if we were in the clutches of Descartes’ demon. If the dis-
junctivist is correct, this is not actually possible. If any of my experiences 
are in fact perceptions, then, to be as they are, they have to be veridical. It is 
therefore not possible that they could have been as they are and misleading. 
Suppose, then, that the skeptic were to reformulate the skeptical hypothesis 
as follows: all of your experiences might have been of the misleading kind. 
Now we can ask, so what? As long as they are not misleading, then many of 
our empirical beliefs will be justified. As McDowell puts it, this leaves the 
door open for us to hold that “our knowledge that [the skeptical] possibilities 
do not obtain is sustained by the fact that we know a great deal about our 
environment” (2008: 379).
Questions
•	
Can the disjunctivist make plausible the claim that experi-
ences can be indiscriminable despite not sharing phenomenal 
character?
•	
A premise of the restricted causal argument that the disjunctiv-
ist about phenomenology needs to reject is the claim that neural 

Disjunctive theories  109
replication would lead to replication of phenomenology. How 
might we go about determining whether or not this premise is 
true?
•	
How do cases of inherited or dependent explanatory potential 
aim to avoid the screening off problem?
Notes
	 1.	 Glossing over the fact, of course, that where Oscar’s body is largely 
composed of H2O, Twin Oscar’s is largely composed of XYZ.
	 2.	 An alternative presentation of metaphysical disjunctivism might focus 
not on the constituents of the experiences but rather on their superveni-
ence bases. So, whilst perceptions supervene on what is going on in the 
subject’s brain and body together with elements of the environment, 
hallucinations supervene on what is going on in the subject’s brain (and 
perhaps body) alone. This difference in supervenience bases yields a dif-
ference in kind of experience.
	 3.	 Of course, there could still be arguments between common factor 
theorists and metaphysical disjunctivists, thus understood. Perhaps, for 
example, there could be an argument over which principle of individua-
tion makes best sense of the epistemological role of perception.
	 4.	 Should the addition of ball B have the consequence that the subject’s 
experience now represents, falsely, that there is a ball off to the right, 
then a further ball (C) can be added to make this component of the 
content true as well. This can be iterated.
	 5.	 On the flip side, a defender of this approach wanting to eschew the 
disjunctivist label might argue that the mental states involved in percep-
tion and hallucination are the same in kind despite these differences in 
content (Burge 1991; Soteriou 2000). The defender of such an approach 
would therefore need to hold that such differences in content do not 
entail differences in experiential kind.
	 6.	 Naive realism is not always presented as involving the claim that subjects 
“sense” external objects. Other names for the key relationship are used, 
such as “acquaintance,” “taking in,” and “awareness or receptivity.” These 
differences in terminology do not affect the substance of the proposal.
	 7.	 In the context of this chapter, it is also worth making clear that, because 
of this, Noë, like McDowell, takes conscious visual experiences to 
require its subject to possess certain cognitive capacities.
	 8.	 Noë’s claim that certain parts of a tomato cannot be seen “strictly 
speaking” can make it look as though his theory has two stages: one 
that explains what seeing “strictly speaking” amounts to and a second 
that explains how seeing “in the full sense” is built on this basis. If this 

110  Philosophy of Perception
were the right reading of Noë’s project, then one might see the appeal to 
sensorimotor contingencies as relating to the second stage of the project, 
whilst the kind of traditional theories of perception we have been con-
sidering can be held up as responses to the first stage. On this way of 
looking at things, Noë’s theory would not actually be in competition 
with the more traditional theories; instead it would be a supplement 
to them—a supplement that explains how, from the platform of such a 
theory, we can rightly be said to be aware of whole objects. Yet, because 
of claims such as “perceptual content is virtual all the way in” (Noë 2005: 
193) I think that the reading given in the main text is the right reading.
	 9.	 Thau (2004: 195) suggests that this is the form of disjunctivism advocated 
by John McDowell. In presenting his disjunctive position, McDowell 
suggests that “an appearance that such-and-such is the case can be either 
a mere appearance or the fact that such-and-such is the case making itself 
perceptually manifest to someone” (1998: 472). Immediately following 
this presentation, McDowell goes on to say that “mere appearances” are 
the objects of deceptive experiences. So McDowell’s complete picture 
looks to be one on which we have one kind of experiential relation to 
two different kinds of objects: “facts made manifest” in the perceptual 
case, and “mere appearances” in the hallucinatory ones.
	10.	 Having said this, it is unclear whether or not Johnston’s view really 
qualifies as a variant of disjunctivism for reasons that we will discuss 
below.
	11.	 Brewer (2006) also contains a number of objections to the intentionalist 
account of this illusion.
	12.	 Responses to these objections can be found in Brewer (2008) and Fish 
(2009).
	13.	 Note that I am not claiming that this is a good motivation—see Haw-
thorne and Kovakovich (2006) for reasons to think it may not be—sim-
ply that it is a motivation.
Further reading
Many of the papers mentioned here can be found in:
•	
Haddock, A. and F. Macpherson (eds.) (2008) Disjunctivism: 
Perception, Action, Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) and in
•	
Byrne, A. and H. Logue (eds.) (2009) Disjunctivism: Contemporary 
Readings (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
Together these two texts contain almost all you could need to really get to 
understand disjunctivism and the various issues surrounding it.

Disjunctive theories  111
For a good critical introduction to disjunctivism, see A. Byrne and H. 
Logue (2008) “Either/Or” in Haddock and Macpherson (2008) and their 
introduction to Byrne and Logue (2009).
Although a number of the elements of disjunctivism can be found in J.L. 
Austin’s classic text, Sense and Sensibilia, the origin of disjunctivism in its 
contemporary form is the work of J.M. Hinton. See both his 1967 paper, 
“Visual Experiences” and his 1973 book, Experiences. The paper and extracts 
from the book can both be found in Byrne and Logue (2009).
On the pro-disjunctivism side, any student of disjunctivism should be 
familiar with Mike Martin’s corpus. See particularly his “The Reality of 
Appearances” (1997) and “The Limits of Self-Awareness” (2004), both of 
which are reprinted in Byrne and Logue (2009), and his “The Transparency 
of Experience” (2002) and “On Being Alienated” (2006).
In addition, Mark Johnston’s theory is presented in his “The Obscure 
Object of Hallucination,” which is also reprinted in Byrne and Logue (2009); 
Alva Noë’s theory is presented in his 2005 book Action in Perception; and 
William Fish’s theory is developed in his Perception, Hallucination, and 
Illusion (2009).
Good general anti-disjunctivist material can be found in H. Robinson 
(1994) Perception and A.D. Smith (2002) The Problem of Perception. 
For arguments for and against an epistemological advantage to disjunc-
tivism, see John McDowell, “The Disjunctive Conception of Experience 
as Material for a Transcendental Argument” in Haddock and Macpherson 
(2008) (for) and Crispin Wright, “(Anti-) Skeptics Simple and Subtle: G.E. 
Moore and John McDowell” (against).


7	
Perception and causation
Overview
This chapter focuses on the role of causal considerations in the phi-
losophy of perception. The first half of the chapter considers different 
attempts to use a broadly causal criterion to distinguish the cases of 
visual experience that qualify as cases of seeing from those that do 
not. The second half of the chapter then looks in detail at the different 
components of the causal theory of perception: the claim that percep-
tion involves causation, the claim that the Common Factor Principle is 
true, and the claim that these two claims are conceptual truths.
In our discussions of the different philosophical theories of perception, we 
have presented a number of different analyses of the neutral category of visual 
experience.
Disjunctivism aside, each theory provided an analysis of what is involved 
in a subject having a visual experience of an F, where having a visual experience 
was neutral as to whether the experience was veridical, illusory or hallucina-
tory. For the subject to actually see an F, we noted that other conditions need 
to be met. What are these other conditions?
To enable us to discuss this in a way that is neutral as to which of the 
various theories of perception are correct, we can present the issue in the fol-
lowing way. (This is an analysis of object perception; a comparable analysis 
of property perception is a little more complex.)
A subject S sees object O if and only if:
•	 S has a visual experience as of O; and 
•	 some other conditions are met.
The question then is, what is the nature of these “other conditions”? One 
suggestion is that S’s visual experience as of O needs to be satisfied.
To set the scene for this discussion, consider the discussion, within 
epistemology, about what distinguishes mere belief from knowledge proper. 

114  Philosophy of Perception
A component of an influential response to this question has been that at 
least part of what distinguishes knowledge from mere belief is that, to know 
something, your belief has to be true.1
The claim that a visual experience constitutes a case of seeing if that expe-
rience is satisfied should be understood analogously. The analogy is strongest 
in the case of intentionalism: as with belief, a perceptual state will be satisfied 
if its content is true. Other theories will understand “satisfaction” differently. 
For example, the sense datum theory will take a visual experience to be satis-
fied if the external object or scene “matches” the subject’s experience, where 
“matching” is a matter of resemblance between sense data and scene.
An initial worry with the appeal to satisfaction concerns precisely what 
is required for an experience to be satisfied. For instance, consider a visual 
experience as of a distant airplane. According to the intentionalist theory, 
this experience represents that there is a speck in the sky. But suppose there 
is an airplane off in the distance: is this content true? After all, an airplane 
is not a speck. The same problem arises for the sense datum theory. On this 
view, suppose my having that visual experience involves my sensing a speck-
like sense datum. Does this match or resemble the world? The same concerns 
arise. So there is work to do to give an account of what kinds of relationships 
between experience and object or scene qualify as “matching.”
Nevertheless, suppose this difficulty can be overcome. We can therefore 
supplement our analysis of seeing as follows.
Subject S sees O if and only if:
•	 S has a visual experience, E, as of O; and
•	 E is satisfied.
However, this analysis will not yet work. An appeal to satisfaction alone 
will not distinguish between those visual experiences that qualify as veridical 
and those that do not.
To see why, consider Grice’s example of the clock on the shelf. In this 
example, a subject has a visual experience as of a clock on a shelf, so the first 
condition of our analysis of seeing is met. What is more, there is a suitable 
clock on a suitable shelf in front of the subject, so the second condition is 
met. As both conditions are met, our current analysis would count this as a 
case in which S sees the clock on the shelf. However, Grice argues that:
it is logically conceivable that there should be some method by which 
an expert could make it look to X as if there were a clock on the shelf 
on occasions where the shelf was empty: there might be some apparatus 
by which X’s cortex could be suitably stimulated, or some technique 
analogous to post-hypnotic suggestion. If such treatment were applied 
to X on an occasion when there actually was a clock on the shelf, and if 
X’s impressions were found to continue unchanged when the clock was 

Perception and causation  115
removed or its position altered, then I think we should be inclined to say 
that X did not see the clock that was before his eyes. 
(Grice 1961: 142)
In this way, straightforward satisfaction theories run into the problem 
of what Kim calls “fortuitous satisfaction,” and he claims that “fortuitous 
satisfaction is the chief pitfall of all satisfaction theories” (1977: 611).2
Grice goes on to say that, “I think we should be inclined to say that X did 
not see the clock that was before his eyes just because we should regard the 
clock as playing no part in the origination of his impression” (Grice 1961: 142). 
In other words, Grice suggests that, for S to see the clock, the clock must be 
the cause of S’s experience, E. Yet causation alone will also not provide a suf-
ficient condition for seeing to take place. For one thing, there is the problem 
of picking out which component of the long causal chain is the component 
which is seen. An experience is causally dependent on numerous states of 
affairs—from states of our brains and eyes down to states of the electricity 
plant that generates the electricity that lights up the room—none of which 
are seen. For another, there is an issue with nonstandard experiences. For 
example, we might think that my hallucination was caused by my brain, but 
we do not want to say that, in having a hallucination, I see my brain.
Instead, a causal condition is usually added to the satisfaction condition, 
to get the following:
Subject S sees object O if and only if:
•	 S has a visual experience, E, as of O; and
•	 E is satisfied; and
•	 E was caused by O.
This analysis has also been criticized. Consider the following counter-
examples (Lewis 1980):
The Brain before the Eyes: I hallucinate at random (thus the experience is 
caused by my brain) and seem to see a brain before my eyes which per-
fectly matches (purely accidentally) my own brain. However, my brain 
is before my eyes—it has been removed from my skull and all nerves 
(etc.) have been stretched somehow. In this case, the first condition of 
the analysis is met: I have a visual experience as of a brain before my eyes. 
So is the second condition: this experience is satisfied as there is a brain 
before my eyes. And so is the final condition: my having this experience 
was caused by the brain before my eyes. As all three conditions are met, 
our analysis would count this as a case in which I see the brain before my 
eyes. That doesn’t seem right.

116  Philosophy of Perception
The Light Meter: I am blind, but electrodes have been implanted in my 
brain in such a way that when a light meter mounted on my head receives 
light over a certain threshold level, they will cause me to have an experi-
ence of a certain sort of landscape. By chance, just such a landscape is 
before my eyes, and its illumination is enough to turn on the electrodes. 
Once again, the first condition of the analysis is met: I have a visual 
experience as of a certain kind of landscape. So is the second condition: 
this experience is satisfied as there is just such a landscape in front of me. 
And so is the final condition: my having this experience was caused by 
the landscape. As all three conditions are met, our analysis would count 
this as a case in which I see the landscape. Again, that doesn’t seem quite 
right.
As our analysis wrongly counts these situations as cases in which some-
thing is seen, this suggests that we need to augment our conditions to rule 
out such cases as counting as cases of seeing.3
Grice suggests that maybe what we need to do is to restrict the modes of 
causal mediation to the standard ones. Even if we can’t spell out what they are 
(yet), we can nevertheless leave “a blank space to be filled in by the specialist” 
(1961).
With this modification made, our analysis of seeing would hold that sub-
ject S sees object O if and only if:
•	 S has a visual experience, E, as of O; and
•	 E is satisfied; and
•	 E was caused by O in the normal visual way.
The problem with this proposal, Lewis argues, is that it is too strong, and 
rules out cases of both nonstandard and prosthetic seeing. For instance, if 
some of us have visual systems that work on different principles to the rest 
of us, then their causal relation would be abnormal and hence they would not 
be said to see. As a more plausible version of this situation, it may be that 
scientists could develop a prosthetic eye which, when perfected, would pro-
duce effects just like a normal eye. Again, the causal relation in such subjects 
would be abnormal, and hence they would not see.
In both of these cases, Lewis suggests, we should not rule out the possibil-
ity that these subjects might really be said to see. The proposed modification 
should be rejected as it is too strong.
Lewis instead suggests that what is required is that the visual experience 
we have be counterfactually dependent upon the scene before the eyes. The 
underlying thought here is that if you really see an object or scene, then any 
changes in that object or scene would be reflected by changes in the visual 
experience.

Perception and causation  117
With this modification made, our analysis of seeing holds that subject S 
sees object O if and only if:
•	 S has a visual experience, E, as of O; and
•	 E is satisfied; and
•	 E was caused by O; and
•	 the phenomenal character of E is counterfactually dependent upon 
O.4
This would rule out the original counterexamples as follows:
The Brain before the Eyes: As I am hallucinating, I would have had an 
experience as of a brain before my eyes even if the brain had not been 
there. The counterfactual dependence of experience on scene does not 
hold.
The Light Meter: Again, it doesn’t matter what the scene in front of the 
subject is, so long as the illumination is adequate. You could change vari-
ous aspects of the scene (so long as the overall illumination remained the 
same) without thereby changing the nature of the visual experience. The 
counterfactual dependence of experience on scene does not hold.
The addition of the counterfactual dependence clause would allow for 
nonstandard or prosthetic seeing, because in each of these cases if these 
alternative systems really worked, then if you changed the scene, the experi-
ence would change, and hence we would have a counterfactual dependence of 
experience on scene.
However, there is a further counterexample from Michael Tye which 
involves two robots, Tom and Tim (1982).
Although I cannot see it, I am standing facing a mirror angled so I see 
an area to my right. Behind the mirror, and therefore hidden from my view, 
stands robot Tim. Away to my right, hidden behind a wall, stands Tim’s 
left–right inverted robot twin, Tom, who is facing the mirror. Robot Tom is 
therefore reflected in the mirror such that the image I see is of a robot which 
looks just like Tim would if the mirror were to be removed. Now, Tom is 
wired up so that all his movements are caused by Tim’s movements—the 
only reason he is standing where he is is because Tim is standing where he is. 
And any movements Tim makes are copied (but left–right inverted)—if Tim 
waves his right hand, then Tom waves his left hand, and the mirror image of 
Tom “waves its right hand.”
If I stand at the appropriate place in this set-up (Figure 7.1) and look 
(unknowingly) toward the mirror, I will have an experience as of a robot 
in front of me, so the first condition of Lewis’s revised analysis will be met. 
As is the second condition: my experience is satisfied as there is just such a 
robot in front of me—robot Tim. As is the third condition: my having this 

118  Philosophy of Perception
very experience is caused by the robot that is in front of me (Tim), as it is 
Tim being where he is that causes Tom to be where he is. And Lewis’s final 
condition is also met. The phenomenological features of my experience are 
counterfactually dependent upon Tim—if he moves, Tom will move and my 
experience will change accordingly. As all four conditions are met, Lewis’s 
revised analysis would count this as a case in which I see robot Tim. Yet 
although all the conditions of this analysis of seeing are met, our intuitions 
remain that it is Tom, not Tim, whom I see.
The causal theory of perception
The causal theory of perception is a generic name for the claim that causation 
is not only implicated in distinguishing between those visual experiences 
that are cases of successful perception and those that are not but that this is 
a conceptual truth about perception. To say that something is a conceptual 
truth is to say that it is something that would be “immediately acknowledge-
able by any person, whatever their education, who can count as having the 
concept in question” (Snowdon 1981: 176).
In more detail, the causal theory of perception typically contains three 
distinct claims. These are characterized by Snowdon (1981: 175–6) as follows:
(I) The causal thesis: It is necessarily true that if a subject (S) sees a public 
object (O) then O causally affects S.
(II) The effect thesis: O must produce in S a state reportable in a sentence 
beginning “It looks to S as if . . . ” [In our terminology, this means that 
Figure 7.1
MIRROR

Perception and causation  119
O must produce in S a visual experience, understood as a good case/bad 
case common factor].
(III) The conceptual thesis: This thesis amounts to a comment on the 
status of the other two. It says that theses (I) and (II) represent require-
ments of our ordinary concept, or notion, of vision. For this claim to be 
correct, it must be the case that anyone who can be said to possess the 
concept of seeing would endorse both (I) and (II).5
Strawson argues for (III)—the claim that the causal theory is a conceptual 
truth—as follows:
The idea of the presence of the thing as accounting for, or being respon-
sible for, our perceptual awareness of it is implicit in the pre-theoretical 
scheme from the very start. For we think of perception as a way, indeed 
the basic way, of informing ourselves about the world of independently 
existing things: we assume, that is to say, the general reliability of visual 
experiences; and that assumption is the same as the assumption of a gen-
eral causal dependence of our visual experiences on the independently 
existing things we take them to be of. 
(Strawson 1979: 51)
However, whilst this argument may provide reasons to think that (I) is a 
conceptual truth—that O must causally affect S in order for S to see O—it 
is entirely unclear how it bears on (II). There doesn’t seem to be anything in 
the argument that gives us any reason to think that it is part of the concept 
of perception that whatever causal transactions are involved must be such as 
to cause a good case/bad case common factor in S. 
In addition to this, Snowdon argues that the coherence of disjunctivism 
means that (II) cannot be a conceptual truth. He argues that, even if disjunc-
tivism turns out to be false, it will only be “scientifically established facts 
about perceptual and hallucinatory processes” that disprove it (1990: 130). 
But these are results that the man on the street could not be expected to 
know merely in virtue of having the concept of perception.
Even if it does turn out to be false, then, disjunctivism is not a conceptual 
falsehood and therefore claim (II) of the causal theory—that the intrinsic 
nature of the experience a subject has when perceiving an object is inde-
pendent of anything outside the subject—is not a conceptual truth as (III) 
claims.
Whilst there are reasons to doubt that claims (I) and (II) are conceptual 
truths, this doesn’t mean that they are not true. The claims in question are 
these:
(I) The causal thesis: It is necessarily true that if a subject (S) sees a public 
object (O) then O causally affects S.

120  Philosophy of Perception
(II) The effect thesis: O must produce in S a visual experience, under-
stood as a good case/bad case common factor.
And as it happens, there are strong reasons to think that (I) might indeed 
be true.
For one thing, as Lewis notes, the phenomenal character of perception 
does seem to be counterfactually dependent upon objects in the world.6 In 
addition to this, (I) offers a plausible explanation of why perception has the 
defeaters it does: why perception fails in the conditions in which it does fail. 
For instance, it explains why we don’t see O if our eyes are closed, or other 
opaque objects are interposed between us and O, and so on (Child 1994). 
What these have in common is that, in each case, the causal link between the 
object and the subject is broken.
If we accept (I), then this can be used to argue for the truth of (II) as 
follows: how could the presence of causation be a necessary condition for per-
ception to take place unless it was also the case that the seen object causes S to 
have an experience that is, in its intrinsic nature, independent of that object? 
An important question, then, is whether or not we can argue from the 
truth of (I) to the truth of (II). Is it the case that, if object O causally affects 
subject S, it does so by producing in S a visual experience, conceived of as 
a good case/bad case common factor? Or is there another way in which we 
could accommodate the thesis that it is necessarily true that O must causally 
affect S in order for perception to take place?
William Child offers a way of accommodating causation without commit-
ting to (II)’s ontology of experiences by making use of a distinction between 
personal and subpersonal levels of explanation. This distinction separates out 
the level of talking about human beings qua minded agents from the level of 
talking about human beings qua physical systems or, as Dennett puts it, “the 
explanatory level of people and their sensations and activities . . . and . . . the 
sub-personal level of brains and events in the nervous system” (1969: 93).
With this distinction in mind, consider Lewis’s account of the causal pro-
cesses involved in perception.
Ordinarily, when the scene before the eyes causes matching visual expe-
rience, it happens as follows. Parts of the scene reflect or emit light in 
a certain pattern; this light travels to the eye by a more or less straight 
path, and is focused by the lens to form an image on the retina; the reti-
nal cells are stimulated . . . and the stimulations comprise a signal which 
propagates up the optic nerve into the brain; and finally there is a pattern 
of stimulation in the brain cells which either is or else causes the subject’s 
visual experience. 
(Lewis 1980: 83–84)
Here we find that Lewis moves quite freely from talking about the causal 
processes at the subpersonal level to an effect—a visual experience—at the 

Perception and causation  121
personal level. According to Lewis, processes in the subject’s brain (subper-
sonal level) ultimately cause an experience (personal level).
Others, however, suggest that these levels of explanation ought to be kept 
separate:
The mental state of affairs, o’s looking F to S, is not a state or event at the 
end of a causal chain initiated by o; it is, rather, a (larger-sized) event or 
state of affairs which itself consists in the whole chain of physical events 
(not merely events within S) by which o causally affects S. The experi-
ence is the complete state of affairs, o causally affecting S. The ultimate 
effect in this causal state of affairs—the state or event which lies at the 
end of the causal chain which starts with o—is something physical in S; 
but that ultimate effect is neither identical with nor constitutive of the 
experience itself. 
(Child 1994: 161–162)
Essentially, Child attempts to secure a role for causation at the physical (or 
subpersonal) level, whilst denying the common factor conception of mental 
states at the mental (or personal) level. This would enable him to both endorse 
(I) and reject (II). However, the availability of this response does depend, in 
part, on whether or not we ought to keep a strong distinction between the 
personal and subpersonal levels. Not everyone will agree that we should.
Questions
•	
Can you think of any ways in which the causal theory’s analysis 
of seeing could be augmented to rule out Tim and Tom as a case 
of seeing?
•	
Can we both endorse a naive realist theory of veridical experi-
ence and secure a role for causation in perception?
•	
In thinking philosophically about perception, ought we distin-
guish between personal and subpersonal levels of explanation? 
What considerations ought we bring to bear in answering this 
question?
Notes
	 1.	 In these traditional theories, the mere truth of a belief is not taken to 
be sufficient for that belief to count as knowledge. We can imagine, the 
thought goes, that a belief might fortuitously happen to be true in situ-
ations where we would not want to say the subject has knowledge. Such 
analyses therefore hold that other conditions, such as the belief’s being 

122  Philosophy of Perception
justified, also need to be met. As we shall see, a similar process occurs in 
the perceptual case too.
	 2.	 Searle (1983) attempts to resurrect a satisfaction only account by actually 
including the causal component within the content. On his account, a 
visual experience of a yellow station wagon has the content, that there 
is a yellow station wagon there and the fact that there is a yellow sta-
tion wagon there is causing this visual experience. This means that the 
content could only be satisfied if a suitable causal component is present, 
and hence remains a satisfaction only theory. As noted in Chapter 5, this 
proposal faces objections inasmuch as it doesn’t seem like an accurate 
account of what visual experiences tell us. Moreover, it is also susceptible 
to the general concerns facing two component theories, discussed below.
	 3.	 It has been argued that the difficulties discussed in this section are not 
restricted to those who endorse the Common Factor Principle. Con-
sider, therefore, the kind of theory of veridical experience discussed in 
the previous chapter. According to such a view, when we see, the seen 
object is actually a constituent of the experience. Coates argues that an 
equally problematic situation arises here. He asks “what fact of the matter 
about my situation and the way I am placed in the world makes it the 
case that I am seeing, in a normal way, one particular object X, and not 
misperceiving some different object Y which happens also to be located 
somewhere in my surroundings?” (2007: 73). So if a constitutive theory 
of experience claims that S sees O if and only if O is a constituent of S’s 
experience, Coates’s challenge is this: What fact of the matter makes it 
the case that it is O, and not some other object, P, that is a constituent of 
this experience?
	 4.	 Strictly speaking, for Lewis, the last two clauses are this analysis are not 
distinct. This is because Lewis endorses a counterfactual theory of causa-
tion according to which, to say that A caused B is to say no more than 
that the existence of B is counterfactually dependent on the existence 
of A—that had A not existed, then B would not have existed (Lewis 
1986). 
	 5.	 It is important to note that both (I) and (II) can be accepted without also 
accepting (III). To do so would be to hold that (I) and (II) are perhaps 
empirical truths without being conceptual truths. Moreover, as we shall 
see, it has been argued that (I) can be accepted without accepting either 
of (II) or (III).
	 6.	 Having said this, we should note that the fact of counterfactual depend-
ence does not entail (I) as not all cases of counterfactual dependence are 
cases of causation. For example, my writing “Larry” is counterfactually 
dependent upon my writing “rr”—had I not done the latter I would not 
have done the former—but we do not want to say that my writing “rr” 
caused my writing “Larry”. In light of this consideration, Lewis suggests 
that counterfactual dependence only constitutes a case of causation when 

Perception and causation  123
the two items in question are distinct existences and do not stand in a 
part–whole relation (1986: 259). Given this, in order to know whether 
or not the fact that there is counterfactual dependence of experience on 
world supports (I), we must first answer the following question: Are 
elements of the external world and our experiences of those elements 
distinct existences, or do they rather stand in a part–whole relation? But 
this is just the question at issue between disjunctivists and common fac-
tor theorists! 
Further reading
Important early discussions of the causal theory of perception can be found 
in Grice, “The Causal Theory of Perception” (1961), Lewis, “Veridical 
Hallucination and Prosthetic Vision” (1980), and Strawson, “Perception and 
its Objects” (1979). All of these papers are reprinted in Dancy’s Perceptual 
Knowledge (1988). Also see Strawson’s 1974 paper, “Causation in Perception.”
Snowdon’s important discussions of the causal theory are his “Perception, 
Vision and Causation” (1981), which is also reprinted in Dancy’s Perceptual 
Knowledge, and his “The Objects of Visual Experience” (1990). Both of these 
papers are reprinted in Byrne and Logue (eds.) Disjunctivism: Contemporary 
Readings (2009).
Tye’s Tim and Tom example can be found in his “A Causal Analysis of 
Seeing” (1982) and Alva Noë’s 2003 paper, “Causation and Perception: The 
Puzzle Unravelled” offers a way in which the Tim and Tom problems might 
be overcome.
Child’s discussions on the compatibility of disjunctivism and the neces-
sity of causation for perception can be found in Chapter 5 of his 1994 book, 
Causality, Interpretation and the Mind. A more recent discussion of the 
causal theory can be found in Gerald Vision’s 1997 book, Problems of Vision: 
Rethinking the Causal Theory of Perception.


8	
Perception and the sciences of the mind
Overview
This chapter focuses on the interplay between the philosophy of per-
ception and the empirical sciences that investigate the mind. 
The first section looks at ways in which philosophy can impact upon 
science by examining and critiquing certain of its foundational assump-
tions; the second section reciprocates, looking at how scientific results 
and findings can constrain philosophical theorizing. The third section 
then looks at a particular issue that has exercised both philosophers 
and empirical scientists—the relationship between the sensory aspects 
of our experiences and our capacity to cognitively access or report on 
our experiences. The final section then looks at more indirect ways in 
which science can impact upon philosophy, by looking at the argument 
that color realism can be refuted by considering the physiology of our 
visual systems.
At the outset of the book, I asked the question of what the role of the phi-
losophy of perception was given that perception is also an object of study 
for the empirical sciences of the mind (a set of disciplines that I will bring 
together under the heading cognitive science).1 There we noted that a critical 
role for philosophy was to consider perception in a somewhat wider context, 
taking into account its status as a paradigmatically conscious experience and 
its core epistemological role.
In the present chapter, we will look more closely at the interplay between 
philosophy and cognitive science. In the first section, we will consider one 
role for philosophy, which is to critique some of the foundational assumptions 
of the science. We will then go on to see how, reciprocally, science can help to 
keep philosophy grounded, by discovering and investigating phenomena that 
constrain philosophical explanations of perception. Following on from this, 
we will look at the question of the interplay between the conscious sensory 
aspects of experiences and their cognitive aspects, as this is an issue where 
philosophy and empirical science come together. The chapter will conclude 

126  Philosophy of Perception
with a discussion of how scientific findings can impact upon the philosophy 
of perception in other ways.
For reasons of space, this chapter will not be comprehensive. There are 
many more ways in which empirical science and the philosophy of percep-
tion will come together than those listed here. To pick some examples out of 
the air, phenomena such as attention, introspection, and our experience of 
time are further areas where I would expect philosophy and empirical science 
to interact. In addition to this restriction in scope, the discussions in this 
chapter will be unable to trace all the ins and outs of the topics we will cover. 
Instead, the goal is much more modest: to give a flavor of the way empirical 
and theoretical approaches to perception fit together, which will provide the 
reader with a platform from which to engage in further research on areas of 
interest.
Theoretical paradigms and their underlying 
assumptions
This section will focus on an assumption that continues to exert a great deal 
of influence in contemporary cognitive science. This is “the idea—wide-
spread in both philosophy and science—that perception is a process in the 
brain whereby the perceptual system constructs an internal representation of 
the world” (Noë 2005: 2). 
In his 1991 book, Consciousness Explained, Daniel Dennett challenged the 
assumption that the brain functions by continually creating a rich internal 
representation of the scene corresponding to the visual field. To illustrate 
this, he outlines an experiment you can perform for yourself.
Take a deck of playing cards and remove a card face down, so that you 
do not yet know which it is. Hold it out at the left or right periphery of 
your visual field and turn its face to you, being careful to keep looking 
straight ahead (pick a target spot and keep looking right at it). You will 
find that you cannot tell even if it is red or black or a face card. Notice, 
though, that you are distinctly aware of any flicker or motion of the card. 
You are seeing motion without being able to see the shape or color of the 
thing that is moving. Now start moving the card toward the center of 
your visual field, again being careful not to shift your gaze. . . . You will 
probably be surprised at how close to center you can move the card and 
still be unable to identify it. 
(Dennett 1991: 53–54)
The moral Dennett draws from this experiment is that the perceptual 
system doesn’t provide real-time rich color and shape information about 
the peripheries of the visual field. Of course, this doesn’t refute the very 
idea—Dennett’s opponent might claim that the representation is built up 

Perception and the sciences of the mind  127
over time by piecing together the information from successive saccades (eye 
movements), for example—but it does raise a challenge.
In addition to this experiment, as part of this general program, Dennett 
also predicted that there would be cases in which subjects would fail to see 
some aspect of their immediate environment that, prior to the experiments, 
we would have felt confident that they would have seen (1991: 468).
For instance, consider the phenomenon known as change blindness (Simons 
and Levin 1997). In a well-known change blindness experiment, subjects view 
alternate presentations of a picture of a natural scene and a modified version 
of that picture. The kinds of modification include such things as significant 
objects appearing and disappearing, such as an airplane’s engine or a garage, 
or significant portions of an object changing color. While these images are 
cycling, the visual system is prevented from seeing the change happen by 
techniques such as adding a flicker—a brief period of no image—between the 
presentations, or by ensuring that the changes take place during subject sac-
cades. Even if viewing conditions are optimal, subjects are told that they are 
studying the images for a memory test (to ensure they are concentrating on 
features in the image) and are even told that the scenes depicted may change 
(so changes are expected), the changes can go undetected for a significant 
length of time.
Intriguingly, this phenomenon can also be found in real-world interac-
tions. To demonstrate this, Simons and Levin set up two experiments in 
which a pedestrian was approached by an experimenter asking for directions. 
After these two individuals had interacted for 10–15 seconds, two people 
carrying a door passed between them and, whilst the conversation was thus 
interrupted, the experimenter who had initially asked for directions switched 
places with one of the experimenters carrying the door. Even though the two 
experimenters differed in height, voice, clothing, and so on, in 66 percent of 
trials (eight of twelve), subjects continued the conversation and, when asked 
if they had noticed anything unusual, did not report noticing the change 
(Simons and Levin 1998). 
A closely related phenomenon is inattentional blindness (Mack and Rock 
1998). In experiments studying this phenomenon, subjects are given an 
attention-demanding task to perform. In one example, participants are shown 
a recording of two intermingled teams of basketball players—one wearing 
black, one white—each team passing a ball to one another. Participants are 
then asked to count the number of passes made by members of the white team 
to one another. Then, whilst the subject’s attention is occupied by this task, 
an unexpected event occurs; someone dressed in a (black) gorilla suit walks 
across the court, beating his chest midway. As with the change blindness 
experiments, if asked beforehand, we would probably expect such an event 
to be seen immediately. Because attention is otherwise engaged, almost half 
of the subjects of this experiment failed to see the gorilla cross the basketball 
court (Simons and Chabris 1999).

128  Philosophy of Perception
Noë argues that these results give us reason to think that perception is 
not “the process whereby a rich internal representation of experienced detail 
is built up” (2005: 50). Of course, as before, these findings do not refute the 
idea that perception involves the construction of internal representations. 
For one thing, Noë’s interpretations of these results can be challenged—per-
haps detailed representations are constructed but are not remembered (Pani 
2000; but see Rensink 2000). For another, even if we accept that the findings 
show that the brain does not create rich internal representations, this is not to 
show that the brain does not create representations at all. Yet these examples 
illustrate a useful way in which philosophers can impact upon the practice of 
science.
Important phenomena
In the previous section, we looked at one way in which philosophy and empiri-
cal science interact: by philosophers examining and critiquing the things that 
scientists take for granted. In doing this, we also saw how empirical science 
discovers phenomena that have important ramifications for philosophical 
theorizing. This is another important point of contact: the scientists need to 
keep the philosophers grounded. 
What I mean by this is that experimental researchers will often report 
important results—will provide accounts of what took place in various kinds 
of laboratory and/or real-life contexts—and/or discover important phenom-
ena. Regardless of the theorists’ particular theoretical backgrounds, unless 
there are reasons to think that these reports are suspect, then a philosophical 
theory of perception ought to be able to account for the existence of the 
phenomena and/or results discovered. So even if, as philosophers, we do not 
necessarily take on board the theoretical commitments of those working in 
cognitive science, we should nonetheless be aware of the phenomena that 
they discover, as our theorizing ought to be sensitive to this. In this section 
I will therefore briefly highlight a number of empirical findings that seem to 
be of importance to the philosopher of perception.
Pathologies of perception
A brief survey of the psychological and neuroscientific literature throws up 
numerous interesting pathologies of perception. Brief descriptions of some 
of these, together with indications of their philosophical relevance, follow.
Achromatopsia occurs when there has been damage to the area of a subject’s 
brain—area V4—that supports the ability of humans to see color. Sufferers 
from achromatopsia lose the ability to see color but retain the abilities to see 
other features, such as shape, form, and motion. The existence of this condi-
tion therefore suggests that our ability to see certain properties can, in some 
sense, “come apart” from our ability to see other properties. Philosophical 
theories of perception therefore need to accommodate the possibility of this 

Perception and the sciences of the mind  129
condition. In most cases, however, this looks to be straightforward: sense 
datum theorists could contend that the damage to V4 precludes the creation 
of colored sense data; adverbialists that it precludes the subject from sensing 
colorly; intentionalists that it precludes the representation of color; and naive 
realists, that it precludes the subject from being acquainted with worldly 
properties of color.
Akinetopsia, however, presents slightly more of a problem. This condi-
tion is due to damage to area MT—the area that supports our ability to see 
motion. Again, sufferers lose the ability to see movement whilst retaining 
their abilities to see other properties, such as color, form, and orientation. 
In this strange condition, sufferers report seeing people disappear from 
one place and reappear in another—they cannot see them moving from one 
place to another. When filling a teacup, sufferers see the liquid level jump 
from level to level rather than rise gently. Probably the closest experience for 
normal perceivers would be the experience of seeing moving objects under 
strobe lighting. However, such a parallel should not be taken too literally.
Once again, theories of perception should offer accounts of akinetopsia, 
but in all cases it is not clear how they should go about this. The problem is, 
most theories of perception have taken simple “still life” perception as their 
basic type of visual perception, with motion tacked on as somewhat of an 
afterthought. To put this point a different way, the difficulty is that motion 
is something that happens across time, whilst most theories of perception aim 
to give an account of what it is to have a certain kind of experience at a time. 
Theories of experience that focus on presenting an account of what it is to 
have an experience at a particular time have not given motion a central place.2 
Having said this, I don’t want to claim that extant theories of perception 
cannot provide some kind of explanation of akinetopsia. I do think, however, 
that it maybe indicates that, as philosophers of perception, our focus has 
been a little too tightly on experiences at a time, and that the temporally 
extended features of perception have been to some extent overlooked. So it is 
not so much that akinetopsia is a problem, more a gentle reminder that, when 
theorizing about perception, we also need to pay attention to the temporally 
extended aspects of visual experience.
A further interesting phenomenon is unilateral neglect, which usually 
results from damage to the right hemisphere of the brain. Although this 
damage doesn’t seem to cause partial blindness of the left visual field—sub-
jects can still have intact visual fields (Walker et al. 1991) and stimuli present 
to the left visual field can still produce priming effects (Berti and Rizzolatti 
1992)—subjects with unilateral neglect nevertheless overlook what is pre-
sented there. For example, cases have been reported in which subjects only 
brush their hair on the right side, only shave or make up the right side of 
their face, or only eat the food on the right side of their plate and claim to 
be finished, despite insisting that they remain hungry! If such subjects are 
asked to cross out all the lines on a piece of paper, they will cross out the 
lines on the right-hand side and claim to be finished, despite unmarked lines 

130  Philosophy of Perception
being present on the left side of the paper. Do these subjects nonetheless 
consciously experience the neglected areas? This is an intriguing question to 
which we shall return shortly.
Achromatopsia, akinetopsia, and unilateral neglect can all be seen as types 
of agnosia. Generally speaking, agnosias occur when the subject loses the 
ability to know or be aware of something. So, achromatopsia has also been 
known as color agnosia, akinetopsia as motion agnosia, and unilateral neglect 
as hemiagnosia. But there are many other kinds of agnosia, which may also be 
of interest to the philosopher of perception. These include:
Apperceptive agnosia: Sufferers of apperceptive agnosia seem to be able 
to see well enough—their visual acuity, ability to see color, and so on 
remain intact, and they can successfully avoid obstacles—but they are 
unable to see the forms of objects, to recognize objects, to discriminate 
between different stimuli, to accurately copy a simple drawing, and so 
on.
Associative agnosia: Unlike apperceptive agnosics, sufferers of associa-
tive agnosia seem to have intact form perception and can do such things 
as accurately copy a drawing and match it to its original. Despite retain-
ing these abilities, however, associative agnosics still fail to recognize 
what the drawing is a drawing of, even when it is their own copy. This 
nevertheless does seem to be some kind of visual defect inasmuch as, if 
the drawing is then verbally described to the subject, they will be able to 
identify it. 
Prosopagnosia: Prosopagnosics have a very specific failure of recognition: 
they cannot recognize familiar faces. Even though prosopagnosics know 
the people well, can recognize them by their voices, or perhaps even by 
specific facial features (such as a mole or a chipped tooth), they cannot 
recognize them by their faces per se.
Simultanagnosia: Subjects with simultanagnosia retain the ability to 
recognize objects in their visual field but only one at a time. If more than 
one object is presented, the subject claims to only be able to see one. 
Because of this, simultanagnosic subjects are unable to see whole scenes.
Anton’s syndrome (a form of anosognosia): Anosognosias are failures to 
recognize one’s own illness or deficit, but one that is of particular inter-
est to philosophers of perception is Anton’s syndrome, in which subjects 
who have lost their sight will nevertheless claim that they can see and, on 
particular occasions, will also make quite specific claims about what they 
see or why they fail to see on those particular occasions.

Perception and the sciences of the mind  131
The two visual systems hypothesis
The pathological conditions discussed in the previous section, together 
with findings from a variety of other sources, have led to the discovery of 
two different pathways in the brain that are both dedicated to the process-
ing of visual information. All visual information begins on the same path: 
it is passed from the retinas, down the optic nerve to the lateral geniculate 
nucleus (LGN) and from there to the primary visual cortex V1 at the back 
of the head. From there, however, this information travels down two distinct 
anatomical pathways, each of which is dedicated to performing different pro-
cessing tasks. On Ungerleider and Mishkin’s classic presentation (1982), one 
of these pathways—the what pathway—travels along the base of the brain 
(the ventral stream) and the other—the where pathway—travels up and over 
the top of the brain (the dorsal stream).
Although the precise functions of these two pathways have continued to 
be discussed, their existence is now widely accepted. According to a more 
recent and highly influential treatment by Milner and Goodale (1995), the 
purpose of the ventral stream is to underpin object identification/recogni-
tion whereas the purpose of the dorsal stream is to enable real-time visual 
guidance of action (they therefore suggest the pathways subserve what and 
how, rather than what and where). Milner and Goodale contend (although 
this can be disputed) that conscious visual awareness is connected with only 
one of the two streams—the ventral (object identification and recognition) 
stream. This therefore predicts that subjects would not necessarily lose the 
capacity to act in appropriate ways to visually presented stimuli even if, due 
to localized damage, they failed to consciously see those stimuli.
A famous example of this is Milner and Goodale’s patient D.F. This 
patient was presented with a vertically mounted disk with a slot cut into it, 
which was set at different angles for different trials, and D.F. was asked to 
report the orientation of the slot. However, Milner and Goodale found that 
her reports of the slot orientation were unaffected by its actual orientation—
they were effectively random guesses. On their hypothesis, this showed that 
information about the slot was just not making it through to the ventral 
stream responsible for object identification and recognition. However, when 
asked to post a card through the slot, D.F. had no difficulty—her actions were 
accurate, smooth, and appropriate. So information about the slot’s orienta-
tion clearly was making it through to the dorsal stream responsible for action.
Another interesting case, this time using normal subjects, is discussed 
by Haffenden and Goodale (1998). This experiment makes use of the 
Ebbinghaus illusion, in which a disk of a particular size surrounded by small 
circles is judged to be larger than a disk of the same size surrounded by big 
circles. Haffenden and Goodale discovered that, despite the presence of the 
illusion of size difference, if subjects were asked to pick up the central disks, 
they automatically moved their finger and thumb to the same distance apart 

132  Philosophy of Perception
in both cases. This suggests that, whilst the ventral pathway is subject to the 
illusion, the dorsal pathway is not.
Although these findings are fascinating in their own right, they are of 
particular significance for the philosophy of perception because they chal-
lenge something that can seem so obvious to us. For example, take your 
finger and place it slowly on this X. Naturally, it seems to us that any changes 
in the direction or angle or speed of our finger is made in response to our 
conscious awareness of the X, our finger, and the relationship between them. 
Yet, according to Milner and Goodale, conscious perceptual awareness does 
not play this role. Whilst it might play the role of singling out the X as some-
thing to put your finger on, once action begins it is guided by nonconscious 
processes.3
Synesthesia
A further interesting phenomenon for the philosopher of perception is syn-
esthesia. In the majority of such cases, an otherwise unexceptional sensory 
experience in one modality automatically causes its subject to have a fur-
ther experience in a distinct modality.4 If we call the initial unexceptional 
experience the triggering experience and the experience that this yields the 
synesthetic experience, the most widespread form of synesthesia occurs when 
the triggering experience is the experience of hearing certain words or sounds, 
and the synesthetic experience is a visual experience of color (Harrison and 
Baron-Cohen 1997). However, intramodal forms of synesthesia have also 
been discovered. Most prominent is what is known is grapheme–color synes-
thesia, in which a visually experienced black grapheme—a numeral or letter 
written in black ink—yields an additional color experience. In laboratory 
testing, it has been shown fairly convincingly that synesthesia is a robust 
condition inasmuch as particular trigger/synesthetic experience pairings 
have been found to be extremely robust.
Although synesthetic experiences have been reported for well over 100 
years, it is only relatively recently that scientists and philosophers have 
started taking the condition seriously. For many years, synesthetic reports 
were assumed to be either reports of memories that were associated with 
the things experienced, or perhaps even due to an overactive sense of meta-
phor—an extension of something we all do when we talk about, say, a wind 
as biting or a shirt as loud.
However, pop out experiments on grapheme–color synesthetes, conducted 
by Ramachandran and Hubbard (2001), seem to show that the phenomenon 
is not explained away so easily. The phenomenon of pop out is straightfor-
ward. If an image contains a triangle of red “2”s in an array of randomly 
placed green “5”s, the triangle formed by the red “2”s will “pop out”: it will be 
easy for you to see (as can be seen in the monochrome version of this figure 
on the right of Figure 8.1). However, if you are a normal subject, then if an 

Perception and the sciences of the mind  133
image contains a triangle formed by black “2”s in an array of randomly placed 
black “5”s, the triangle formed by the “2”s will not pop out (left).
Where subjects who synesthetically experience one color when they see 
a “5” and another color when they see a “2” are concerned, pop out actually 
occurs for the monochrome stimulus. This suggests that such synesthetes 
really do “see” the colors when they see the numbers rather than merely 
associate the colors with the numbers.
Here we have a case in which empirical research seems to have dem-
onstrated the existence of a phenomenon. As noted above, it is therefore 
something that philosophers ought to take into account. How does it impact 
upon the philosophy of perception? Well, for one thing, standard cross-
modal cases of synesthesia offer interesting challenges to theories of what 
makes an experience belong to a particular modality—makes it, say, a visual 
experience rather than an experience from a different modality, say an aural  
experience or a gustatory experience. We shall discuss this further in the next 
chapter.
As to the question of what relevance synesthesia has for theories of per-
ception, that will depend in part on whether synesthetic experiences are truly 
perceptual or whether they are imaginary. Now, as it happens, when ques-
tioned about the nature of their synesthetic experiences, subjects typically 
place themselves into one of two classes: either associators, who experience 
the synesthetic colors as being “in their mind’s eye,” or projectors, who 
experience the synesthetic colors as being out there in the world. We might, 
therefore, think that the synesthetic experiences of projectors are likely to be 
of the same kind as visual experiences, which are also usually of things “out 
there in the world.” 
This claim—that at least some synesthetic experiences are truly percep-
tual—has also been the subject of empirical study. For example, Blake et 
al. (2005) argue that synesthetic experiences are perceptual because, like 
perceptions, they can lead a subject to have afterimages. Further evidence 
for the perceptual nature of synesthetic experiences derives from studies that 
Figure 8.1

134  Philosophy of Perception
show that the areas of the brain that are usually active during veridical color 
experiences are, in fact, active during synesthetic experiences.
What are the options for the philosopher of perception here? Well, if a 
projective synesthetic experience of color is agreed to be a truly visual experi-
ence, then as it takes place in the absence of corresponding worldly colors, 
such an experience would look to be a special kind of hallucination—special 
inasmuch as it is caused by another sensory experience. An adequate theory 
of perception had better be able to accommodate such cases within its theory 
of hallucination. If it cannot, then unless reasons can be given to think that 
the experiences are not, in fact, perceptual, it will constitute a significant 
problem for that theory.
However, there is a further feature of synesthetic reports that might be 
argued to show that they cannot be perceptual after all. This is that, whilst 
projective grapheme–color synesthetes do report that the grapheme in ques-
tion looks to be colored, they also report that they can see the color of the 
ink. As one report states, “when probed about the locations of the two colors, 
[subject] A.D. reported that she didn’t know how to explain it, but that both 
appeared on the shape in the same location at the same time” (Macpherson 
2007: 76). Such an experience is difficult to imagine—seeing an object to be 
both red and black at the same time? This might be argued to be evidence 
that the experiences in question cannot be perceptual. On the other hand, if 
such an experience is nevertheless insisted to be perceptual, then once again 
an adequate theory of perception owes us an account of it.
Perception, cognition, and the phenomenal
Throughout the book thus far, I have taken the liberty of talking as though 
it is straightforward to distinguish between the sensory/phenomenal and 
conceptual/cognitive elements of visual experiences. In this section, I want 
to put some pressure on that distinction. In doing so, it will also provide an 
example of a way in which philosophy and empirical science can profitably 
interact with one another, whilst also highlighting some limitations to this 
interaction. 
To enable us to focus on the issues, consider an ambiguous figure, such as 
the vase–face figure in Figure 8.2.
This figure can be seen as either two black faces looking at one another, 
or as a white goblet-like vase. What should we say, then, of the experience of 
seeing this figure as two faces as compared with the experience of seeing the 
figure as a vase? There are three options that present themselves. 
[A] That the visual experiences are the same, it is just that the conceptual/
cognitive consequences of the two experiences differ. 
[B] That the visual experiences are different, but that they nonetheless 
share phenomenal character (the differences between the experiences 

Perception and the sciences of the mind  135
being a matter of nonphenomenal conceptual/cognitive elements of the 
experiences). 
[C]	That the visual experiences actually have different phenomenal character.
There are empirical studies that have been taken to bear on which of 
these hypotheses is correct. For example, an array of studies have shown 
that words are more easily recognized than nonwords (the word-superiority 
effect); common or frequent words are more easily recognized than uncom-
mon words (the word-frequency effect); repeated words are recognized more 
easily than novel words (repetition effects); and so on. Moreover, experiments 
with ambiguous figures have shown that, if subjects are presented with a 
disambiguated version of an ambiguous figure and then presented with the 
ambiguous one, subjects (unsurprisingly) interpret the figure in line with 
the previously seen disambiguation. In addition, Rock and Mitchener (1992) 
developed an experiment in which both informed and uninformed participants 
were shown ambiguous figures. They found that, whereas all of the informed 
subjects—who had been told that the figure they would see was ambigu-
ous—reported being able to see both of the interpretations of the figure, 
only one in three of the uninformed subjects reported the figure reversing. 
Altogether, these results look to show that knowledge and expectation—
both of which are plausibly cognitive phenomena—have a significant effect 
on what subjects can see. For instance, Doyle and Leach (1988) present 
evidence to show that the word-frequency effect is a perceptual effect—in 
other words, that the words are literally seen more easily. This can look to 
give us reason to prefer one of [B] or [C] over [A].5 If we accept this, then 
we accept that conceptual/cognitive differences can lead to differences in 
the experiences themselves. The question then becomes whether or not the 
Figure 8.2

136  Philosophy of Perception
cognitive/conceptual features have these effects by changing the phenomenal 
character of the two experiences of the vase–face figure, or whether they 
affect the experiences by simply being additional, nonphenomenal, elements 
of the experiences.
Which properties can be perceived?
For the purposes of this stage of the discussion, let us agree that phenomenal 
character involves what are often called “low-level” properties, such as color, 
shape, location, motion, and so on.6 The question is whether or not phenom-
enal character involves any “higher-level” properties. “Conservatives” say 
no, claiming that phenomenal character is completely exhausted by low-level 
properties; “Liberals”, on the other hand, insist that phenomenal character 
can involve one or more from the following list (this terminology is due to 
Bayne 2009).
Kind properties, such as the property of “being a house” or “being a 
tree” (Siegel 2006: 483; see also Bayne 2009). Causal properties, such as the 
property of a boulder’s flattening a hut (Strawson 1985) or, more generally, 
one thing’s causing another (see also Siegel 2009; Butterfill 2009). Generic 
properties, such as the property of being “five to ten rectangles arranged in 
a circle” (Block 2008: 307) or the property of being nonspecific text (Grush 
2007: 504; Fish 2009: 64).7
How might we go about answering the question of whether or not the 
phenomenal character of a visual experience can involve these sorts of 
properties?
As Siegel points out, introspecting our experiences can only take us so far. 
When we see a bowl of fruit, introspection can tell us that the phenomenal 
character of this experience does not involve the property of being a blowfly 
or the property of being a bass guitar. But does it involve the property of 
being a banana? Introspection is ambivalent. In light of this, Siegel defends 
the claim that phenomenal character can involve kind properties by using 
what she calls the “method of phenomenal contrast” (2007). This operates 
as follows:
Suppose you have never seen a pine tree before, and are hired to cut 
down all the pine trees in a grove containing trees of many different 
sorts. Someone points out to you which trees are pine trees. Some weeks 
pass, and your disposition to distinguish the pine trees from the others 
improves. Eventually, you can spot the pine trees immediately. They 
become visually salient to you. . . . Gaining this recognitional disposition 
is reflected in a phenomenological difference between the visual experi-
ences you had before and after the recognitional disposition was fully 
developed.
(Siegel 2006: 491)

Perception and the sciences of the mind  137
In essence, the method of phenomenal contrast proceeds by finding two 
experiences that involve the same “low-level” properties and then asking 
whether or not there is a phenomenal difference between the two experi-
ences. Here, the relevant experiences are (otherwise identical) experiences 
of a pine tree before and after gaining the capacity to pick them out by 
sight. Siegel’s argument is that these two experiences differ in phenomenal 
character despite the fact that their phenomenal characters involve the same 
low-level properties. The best explanation for this difference is therefore 
that phenomenal characters also involve high-level properties, such as the 
property of being a pine tree.
As Siegel recognizes, this is at heart an appeal to intuition: it just seems 
right to say that there is a phenomenal difference between the two experi-
ences before and after gaining the relevant capacity (she also gives an auditory 
example involving the experience of hearing words spoken in a language 
before and after learning that language). This has, however, been countered 
by another intuition. If I learn that the “lemon” I see is actually a bar of soap, 
I may insist that the phenomenal character of my experience hasn’t changed, 
regardless (Byrne 2009: 449). If this is so, then either the property of being 
a lemon must still be involved in the phenomenal character of my experience 
even though I know it is not a lemon, or that property was not involved in the 
phenomenal character of my experience at the start.
To try to provide an alternative way of resolving this dispute, Tim Bayne 
presents a phenomenal contrast based argument using the phenomenon, 
discussed above, of associative agnosia. Recall that associative agnosics seem 
to be able to see perfectly well, but cannot recognize objects, even when  
the objects are drawings they have themselves copied. Bayne suggests that 
the effects of the condition are enough to make it “extremely plausible” that 
the phenomenal characters of the experiences of a patient with associative 
agnosia are not the same as the phenomenal characters of “normal” experi-
ences. But, he argues, this is not because the patient’s phenomenal characters 
no longer involve low-level properties: “those abilities that require the pro-
cessing of only low-level [properties] remain intact. The patient’s deficit is 
not one of form perception but of category perception” (Bayne 2009: 391). 
The conclusion of the argument is that the reason these agnosics have dif-
ferent phenomenal characters is because the phenomenal characters of their 
experiences (but not ours) cannot involve high-level properties.
One response available to those who think that phenomenal characters 
involve only low-level properties is to accept [C]—that the visual experiences 
actually have different phenomenal character—but to draw a distinction 
between two variants of [C]. [C1] agrees with [B] in the conservative claim 
that phenomenal character involves only low-level properties but neverthe-
less holds that conceptual/cognitive features causally affect the phenomenal 
character in such a way that the (low-level) phenomenal character of each 
experience differs (see Tye 1995: 140 for an explanation of this kind). The 

138  Philosophy of Perception
second, liberal, option, [C2], holds instead that phenomenal character is 
part-constituted by conceptual/cognitive features.
To see the difference between [C1] and [C2], consider the difference 
between a car driver and a railway points operator deciding whether the 
relevant vehicle is to go left or right. If the car driver wants to turn left, he 
has to turn the steering wheel that way. The driver’s actions are naturally 
seen as part of the car’s turning left—this is a constitutive view akin to [C2]. 
If the points operator wants the train to turn left, however, he just need set 
the points. This can happen a long time before the train gets there. Then, 
when the train does arrive, it simply follows the predetermined direction. In 
this case, the points operator’s actions are not part of the train’s turning left; 
rather they are something that is, strictly speaking, external to that process, 
yet which has causally influenced it. This is analogous to [C1], the claim that 
high-level processing merely causally affects which low-level properties are 
involved in phenomenal character.
Given these two hypotheses, the question becomes: How could we 
discover whether or not conceptual/cognitive activity partly constitutes 
phenomenal character?
Consciousness and reportability
Recently, Ned Block (2007b, 2008) has investigated the closely related ques-
tion of whether activity in the mechanisms that underlie the reportability 
of and/or cognitive access to conscious experiences—both of which are, of 
course, conceptual/cognitive activities par excellence—are required for there 
to be phenomenally conscious experiences at all.
Again, this is a question to which intuition is ambivalent. On the one 
hand, a natural response to the change blindness and inattentional blindness 
experiments is to think that we must see the entire scene in some sense, even 
though we miss the changes or unattended objects. The claim that we liter-
ally do not see the thing that is changing, despite its taking up a large portion 
of our field of view, can be difficult to grasp. On the other hand, however, 
there is also a strong intuition that “the idea of phenomenal consciousness 
totally divorced from any access by the subject does not really seem like any 
kind of consciousness at all” (Levine 2007: 514).
Perhaps, then, this is a question for empirical science to answer. Yet as 
Block points out, the moment you think about how to investigate whether 
or not activity in the mechanisms that underlie cognitive access and report-
ability is required for consciousness, you run headlong into a methodological 
puzzle. As he says, a “natural methodology is to find the neural [activity that 
is taking place] in clear cases and apply it to the problem cases where for some 
reason there is no cognitive accessibility of the experience” (2008: 292). The 
difficulty arises when we ask how we know that a conscious experience is 
taking place. In the paradigmatic cases, it is because the subject tells us that 

Perception and the sciences of the mind  139
they are. So we would expect to find neural activity in the areas underlying 
cognitive access and reportability.
Block illustrates this problem with an example involving a further patho-
logical syndrome known as visuo-spatial extinction, which is brought on 
by brain injuries of certain kinds. If a subject suffering from visuo-spatial 
extinction sees an object on one or other side of his or her visual field, she 
can identify it and report its presence. Yet, if there are objects on both sides of 
the visual field, then the patient functions like a unilateral neglect patient: the 
patient can only identify and report one object, claiming to be unable to see 
the other. The first scenario clearly shows that such a patient has the capacity 
to be conscious of objects on both sides of the visual field. But, in the second 
case, is the subject conscious of the object on the unseen side yet unable to 
report it, or does the brain injury stop the subject from being conscious of 
it at all?8
Can science provide the answer to this question? Block reports studies 
by Nancy Kanwisher and colleagues that show that, in normal cases, there 
is activity in the area of the brain known as the “fusiform face area” when 
subjects report conscious experiences of faces. And experiments using mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques on the brain of a subject with 
visuo-spatial extinction have indeed shown that, even in situations in which 
the subject claims not to see a face on the left of the visual field, the area of 
the brain responsible for recognition of faces on the left (the right half of the 
fusiform face area) is active, just as it is when the subject successfully sees 
the face. 
As Block points out, this result could only show that the subject is con-
scious of the face but cannot report it if we have already assumed that activity 
in the fusiform face area alone supports the capacity to have conscious expe-
rience of faces and that activity in the areas underlying cognitive access and 
report are not required. This is the very question we are trying to answer. We 
want to know whether a subject can be conscious in the absence of any capac-
ity for cognitive access or report, yet we have no (non-question-begging) way 
of determining whether a state is or is not conscious other than through the 
reports of the subject. 
Some philosophers—Block (2007b: 486) cites Putnam (1981) and Dennett 
(1988, 1991)—have argued from this that the problem lies in the assumption 
that there must be a fact of the matter about whether subjects are conscious 
in these cases. In essence, they contend that the appearance of two distinct 
but unverifiable explanatory hypotheses shows that we are in fact operating 
with a problematic conception of consciousness.
Block, however, argues that we can resolve the problem by adopting the 
“method of inference to the best explanation, that is, the approach of looking 
for the framework that makes the most sense of all the data” (2008: 293). The 
bulk of his paper then contains arguments, based on this method, for the 
view that there can be consciousness without cognitive access/reportability. 

140  Philosophy of Perception
At this point, however, I will leave readers to investigate these arguments for 
themselves. 
What we must bear in mind, though, is that the method of inference to 
the best explanation functions as follows: a claim is supported if it is the 
best explanation of the evidence. Of course, this is entirely determined by 
what “evidence” we think needs explaining. As the sets of evidence that 
need explaining differ, so might our conclusion as to what constitutes the 
best explanation. In particular, if the relevant evidence set incorporates 
only the neuroscientific findings, the “best explanation” may indeed be, as 
Block suggests it is, that there can be conscious states that are unreportable/
inaccessible. If, however, the evidence set is expanded to include such consid-
erations as the epistemological role of perception, the best explanation of the 
conscious aspects of our experiences, and so on, then a different “best expla-
nation” might be warranted. Yet this seems unsatisfactory: surely, we might 
think, there really is a fact of the matter here (or perhaps maybe Putnam and 
Dennett were right after all). At this point, it seems that it is philosophy, not 
science, that is needed to resolve this particular issue.
Color vision and color realism
The final potential interaction between empirical science and the philoso-
phy of perception I shall consider concerns more “indirect” ways in which 
science can impact upon the philosophy of perception. For example, a number 
of the theories of perception we met in the first half of this book are com-
mitted to realism about color—committed to the view that colors are real, 
mind-independent properties.9 Certainly the belief acquisition theorist, the 
content-first representationalist, and the naive realist are all so committed. 
However, over the years, color realism has itself been challenged by various 
empirical findings. If color realism is shown to be false, then of course any 
theory of perception that is committed to its truth will thereby also be shown 
to be false. In this section, we will spend some time looking at the empirical 
evidence for this claim.
An important discovery for the empirical argument against color realism 
was the discovery of the existence of metameric pairs (or simply metamers). 
It is well known that, generally speaking, objects that reflect different pro-
files of visible light look to be different in color. This suggests that the color 
realist might identify a particular color with a particular surface reflectance 
property might say that to have a certain color just is to have the property 
of reflecting a certain profile of visible light (alternatively, the property of 
reflecting a particular color signal). However, it has also been discovered that, 
in some cases, two surfaces that look the same in color (in particular viewing 
conditions) can nevertheless have markedly different reflective profiles. Such 
pairs of surfaces are known as metameric pairs, or metamers (if they look the 
same in all viewing conditions they are known as isomeric pairs or isomers). 

Perception and the sciences of the mind  141
Figure 8.3 shows the different reflectance profiles of four different objects 
that are metamers.
The existence of metamers therefore has the consequence that the prop-
erty of being green, say, cannot be identified with the property of reflecting 
such-and-such a color signal (as there exist green surfaces that lack this 
property). One possible response for the color realist would of course be to 
insist that one or other of these apparently green surfaces is not really green; 
another to identify color with a disjunctive surface reflectance property (and 
thus claim that the property of being green is the property of having surface 
reflectance property A or surface reflectance property B, and so on).
The most problematic feature of metamers, though, occurs when we ask 
why surfaces that differ in reflectance profile look the same in color. When 
we look at the physiology of color vision, we discover that metameric pairs 
do have a property in common after all. The only thing is, it is the property 
of affecting us—human perceivers—in the same way.
Let me explain. The physiology of color perception begins with the retina. 
The human retina comprises around 120 million rods, which only support 
achromatic (black, white and gray) vision, and around 7 million cones, which 
are required to support chromatic, or color, vision. Both rods and cones 
are transducers—they convert energy from one form (light) into energy in 
another (electrical). When light falls upon a cone (we shall focus on cones as 
Figure 8.3

142  Philosophy of Perception
the basis of color vision) it responds by firing: by sending an electrical signal 
to the neurons it is connected to. However, the electrical signal it sends is 
completely independent of the wavelength of light that stimulates the cone. 
No matter what wavelength the incoming light, if it stimulates the cone to 
fire, the signal it sends doesn’t change. So, if all we have to go on are the 
signals being sent from the cone, we have no way of determining what the 
wavelength of light falling upon the retina is.
To overcome this, Mother Nature has given cones two critical features. 
First, she provides cones with a sensitivity curve. That is, cones are more 
likely to fire when stimulated by light of a particular wavelength (call that 
wavelength its peak sensitivity), and this likelihood of firing falls away as 
the wavelength of the incoming light departs from this peak sensitivity. The 
sensitivity of cones can therefore be represented with a bell curve (below). 
Second, in humans at least, Mother Nature equips us with three different 
kinds of cone, each of which has a different peak sensitivity. Roughly speak-
ing, one type of cone is most sensitive to light of short wavelength (within 
the spectrum of visible light), another to medium wavelength light and the 
other to long wavelength light. Typical sensitivity curves of human cones are 
shown in Figure 8.4.
When light of a particular wavelength falls upon the retina, each type of 
cone will respond in a different way, and, from the different firing patterns 
of the cones, a great deal of information about the wavelength of incoming 
light can be recovered.
As powerful as this system is, however, it is not foolproof. In particular, 
it leaves room for there to be surfaces that reflect color signals that, whilst 
different, nevertheless cause the same overall patterns of activation in the 
cones. As these surfaces affect the eye in the same way, they cannot be 
distinguished—these are our metamers. This suggests that the existence of 
Figure 8.4

Perception and the sciences of the mind  143
metamers is, in some sense, subject relative—the fact that there are metamers, 
and the particular metameric pairs that there are, seem to be a consequence 
not of the way the mind-independent world is but rather of the particular way 
our visual systems work. This has been argued to be evidence that colors are 
not mind-independent after all.
A further, related consideration is that certain features of our conscious 
experience of color seem to be likewise closely tied to the way our visual 
systems work. For instance, consider the distinction between unique and 
binary hues. 
The unique hues are red, yellow, blue, and green—hues that are not 
experienced as being “made up” of other hues. Binary hues are, by contrast, 
experienced as being composite. So, for example, orange is experienced as a 
composite of yellow and red; purple as a composite of blue and red; and so on. 
(It is important to be clear that, despite superficial similarities, the division 
of hues into unique and binary is not the same as the division of colors into 
primary, secondary, and tertiary.)
When we investigate the physiology of color vision further, we discover 
that it also offers an explanation of why hues break down into unique and 
binary. Somewhat over-simplified, what we find is that the next stage of the 
visual system performs a number of comparisons of the outputs (firing rates) 
of the cones. These are represented in Figure 8.5.
In this diagram, the boxes L, M, and S represent the long, medium, and 
short wavelength cones, respectively. For our purposes, the two important 
computations that the visual system performs are, first, that it finds the dif-
ference between the output of the medium wavelength cones and the long 
wavelength cones and, second, that it finds the difference between the output 
of the short wavelength cones and that of the long and medium wavelength 
cones combined.
Focusing on the first computation first, if the output from the long wave-
length cones is greater than that of the medium wavelength cones—if L > 
M—this signals green; if the output from the medium wavelength cones is 
Figure 8.5

144  Philosophy of Perception
greater than that of the long wavelength cones—if L < M—this signals red; 
if the output of both types of cone is the same—if L = M—it signals neither. 
As for the second computation, if the long and medium wavelength cone 
output combined is greater than that of the short wavelength cones—if L 
+ M > S—this signals yellow; if the other way round—if L + M < S—this 
signals blue. And again, if the output of the long and medium wavelength 
cones combined is roughly equal to the output from the short wavelength 
cones—if L + M = S—neither yellow nor blue is signaled. The way this 
opponent-processing system responds to incoming light of different wave-
lengths is represented in Figure 8.6.
With this graph in hand, we can see that if we were to show the subject 
a surface that reflects light of around 600 nanometers, the first (red–green) 
opponent processing system will signal red whilst the second (yellow–blue) 
system will signal yellow. And indeed, the subject will experience a combina-
tion of yellow and red—orange. The binary nature of orange is therefore 
accounted for, on this picture, by the fact that both elements of the opponent 
processing system signals a particular color: the orange color that the subject 
experiences is a composite of the colors—yellow and red—that are signaled. 
The same is true of the other binary hues.
Now, suppose we show the subject a surface that reflects a lot of short 
wavelength light—on our diagram, light of approximately 465 nanometers. 
In this case, as we can see from the graph, the first (red–green) opponent 
Figure 8.6

Perception and the sciences of the mind  145
Questions
•	
What kind of explanation could our different theories of per-
ception offer of:
•	
akinetopsia?
•	
inattentional blindness?
•	
the pop out experiments conducted on grapheme–color 
synesthetes?
•	
How should we go about addressing the question of whether 
there could be phenomenal experience in the absence of cogni-
tive access or reportability?
•	
Do the findings from color physiology refute color realism?
Notes
	 1.	 Strictly speaking, cognitive science is actually a name for a collection 
of disciplines that study the mind and cognition, which includes not 
only psychology, neuroscience, artificial intelligence, linguistics, and 
anthropology, but also philosophy. So, setting up the issue as one of the 
interplay between philosophy and cognitive science is, strictly speaking, 
not quite right.
	 2.	 Perhaps intentionalists could claim that, at a given time, it still makes 
sense for an object to be represented as being in motion and that repre-
sentation of this feature could explain the experience of motion. Possibly, 
but there is still a suspicion (in my mind at least) that this is still a failure 
to give motion its due as something that can be perceived.
	 3.	 Although Milner and Goodale (1995) do allow that the ventral system 
can control action in some circumstances, such as pointing at a previ-
ously seen target with closed eyes.
	 4.	 Sometimes, popular characterizations of synesthesia can be misleading. 
For instance, Richard Cytowic’s influential 1993 book on the phenom-
enon was called The Man Who Tasted Shapes. Such a description sug-
gests that, in synesthesia, objects or properties can be experienced via a 
processing system will be in balance and will not signal either red or green. 
The second (yellow–blue) system, however, will signal blue and hence the 
subject will experience (unique) blue. Here, the unique nature of the hue 
experienced is accounted for by the fact that only one of the two elements of 
the opponent processing system is signaling. Again, the way phenomenologi-
cal features of our color experiences turn out to correspond to features of the 
way we process color information has been taken as evidence for the claim 
that colors are a feature of the way we process visual information rather than 
a feature of the objective, mind-independent world.

146  Philosophy of Perception
nonstandard sensory modality (it suggests that, in this subject, shapes 
can be experienced by the modality of taste). Sadly, however, this is not 
an accurate description—it is not that shapes are tasted but rather that 
experiencing certain tastes causes additional experiences of shape.
	 5.	 Having said this, I’m sure it would be possible to provide an inter-
pretation of these results that was consistent with [A]. For example,  
Hochberg (1968) suggests that the word-frequency effect is judgmen-
tal—that unfamiliar words are equally easy to see, just more difficult to 
recognize.
	 6.	 “Involves” is to be read in a theory-neutral way. I use this term to accom-
modate the fact that different theories of perception will each frame this 
issue somewhat differently. For instance, a theorist who endorsed the 
existence of sense data might say that phenomenal character “involves” 
low-level properties in virtue of their being instantiated by sense data. 
A representationalist, on the other hand, would hold that phenomenal 
character “involves” such properties in virtue of their being represented, 
and a relationalist would hold that such properties are “involved” in phe-
nomenal character in virtue of the subject’s being acquainted with those 
properties.
	 7.	 Due to considerations of space, I won’t discuss the arguments sur-
rounding whether or not causal properties and generic properties can 
be involved in phenomenal characters. I will say, however, that thus far, 
these arguments have also had an important role for empirical results. 
For instance, the claim that causal properties can be involved in phe-
nomenal character often appeals to empirical work by Michotte (1963). 
See, for example, Siegel 2009 and Butterfill 2009. The claim that generic 
properties can be involved in phenomenal character is also argued to be 
required to account for some of the change blindness and inattentional 
blindness results we discussed above (Grush 2007; Fish 2009).
	 8.	 There are clear parallels between the resolution to this question and the 
resolution to the question of whether or not subjects “see” the changed 
or unattended object in the change blindness and inattentional blindness 
paradigms discussed above. See Block (2008: 295–297) for discussion.
	 9.	 Strictly speaking, colors, as we normally conceive of them, have three 
dimensions—hue, saturation, and brightness. The best way to see what 
we are talking about when we talk about hue is to see it as what is left when 
we subtract saturation—the depth, density or intensity of a color—and 
brightness from a color. Moreover, there are colors, such as brown, that 
do not correspond to hues. All of the hues are represented in the color 
spectrum (the rainbow). 
Further reading
Critiques of aspects of the representational paradigm can be found in 
Dennett’s 1991 book, Consciousness Explained, Alva Noë’s 2005 book, 

Perception and the sciences of the mind  147
Action in Perception, and William Ramsey’s 2007 book, Representation 
Reconsidered.
Examples of the change blindness and inattentional blindness experiments 
can be found on the University of Illinois’ Visual Cognition Lab website: 
http://viscog.beckman.illinois.edu/djs_lab/demos.html.
Semir Zeki has been at the forefront of research into perceptual patholo-
gies, and a lot of this research appears in his very readable 1993 book, A 
Vision of the Brain. A good philosophical introduction to the phenomenon of 
synesthesia can be found in Fiona Macpherson’s 2007 paper, “Synaesthesia.”
Susanna Siegel’s work has been prominent in discussions of the question 
of what properties can be perceived, see in particular her “How can we dis-
cover the contents of experience?” (2007) and her “Which Properties Are 
Represented in Perception?” (2006). A number of the other papers cited in 
this section can be found in a July 2009 special edition of the Philosophical 
Quarterly.
Ned Block’s work should be the starting point for further research into 
the issues relating to consciousness and reportability. See his collection 
Consciousness, Function and Representation (2007a). His recent papers, 
“Consciousness, Accessibility and the Mesh between Psychology and 
Neuroscience” (2007b) and “Consciousness and Cognitive Access” (2008) 
are not included in this collection, but are both detailed, empirically savvy 
attempts to show how the methodological problems discussed in this section 
can be solved empirically.
Although it is getting on a bit, C.L. Hardin’s 1988 book Color for 
Philosophers: Unweaving the Rainbow remains an excellent text on the 
scientific underpinnings of the philosophy of color and also contains key 
arguments against color realism.


9	
Perception and other sense modalities
Overview
In virtue of what do the senses differ from one another? And how do 
we distinguish between seeing something, hearing something, feeling 
something, smelling something, and tasting something?
These questions are considered, before we attempt to extend the 
theories of visual perception, met in the previous chapters, to the non-
visual modalities. We shall also discuss reasons to think that there can 
be experiences that are bimodal—experiences that we can only enjoy 
in virtue of the operation of two senses. 
Our discussions thus far have focused exclusively on vision, but human 
beings have a number of other senses, too. When we consider all of our senses 
together, there are lots of interesting philosophical questions that arise. For 
one, how many senses do we have? The traditional view (which dates back 
to Aristotle—De Anima, 424b: 22–23) is that we have five: vision, hear-
ing, touch, smell, and taste. Others have suggested that we have as many as 
seventeen different senses (Keeley 2002: 10). In this chapter we shall begin 
by asking what distinguishes the sense modalities from one another, before 
going on to ask what philosophers of perception have to say about the non-
visual senses. 
Individuating the senses
One interesting philosophical question turns on the question of by what 
criteria the different senses are distinguished from one another. In fact, this 
breaks down into two closely related questions:
•	
By what criteria are the senses distinguished from one another?
•	
How do we, as perceivers, distinguish between seeing something, as 
opposed to hearing it, feeling it, and so on?

150  Philosophy of Perception
The first of these questions is more metaphysical: it asks, what is it about 
the nature of the different senses that makes them distinct from one another? 
The second is more epistemological: it asks, when we have a sensory experi-
ence, how do we know which sense we are using? Suppose, for example, that 
as you are reading this, you smell coffee and hear the familiar whoosh of an 
espresso machine. How do you know that you smell the coffee and hear the 
coffeemaker rather than the other way round? In this section we shall con-
sider three possible answers to these questions and the difficulties they face.
The sense organ view
One possible response to these two questions is to individuate sense modali-
ties by appeal to their respective organs. This would be to answer the first 
question by claiming that seeing is what we do with the eyes, hearing with 
the ears, smelling with the nose, tasting with the tongue, and feeling with the 
skin. It answers the second question by claiming that we know which sense 
we are using because we know which sense organ we are using.
Of course, to try to individuate the senses by means of their respective 
organs means that we need to begin by individuating the organs themselves. 
This may seem obvious: the nose is the protuberance in the middle of the 
face; the eyes are the orbs located in the eye sockets; and so on.
However, things are not quite so straightforward. Consider, for example, 
that one can feel not only with the skin but also with the eyes, ears, nose, and 
tongue. If seeing is what is done with the eyes, then feeling something sharp 
poking one’s eye would thereby be counted as a case of seeing; if hearing 
is what is done with the ears, then feeling the cold of ice water by having 
it dropped in the ear canal would count as hearing the coldness; and so on. 
This suggests that the basic attempt to individuate the senses by way of their 
respective organs will not work.
Two ways in which the sense organ view might be modified seem open to 
a significant objection. The first alternative is to say that, when we talk about 
“the organs of sight” we are not meaning to refer solely to the eyes but also 
to their downstream physiological and neural systems. Feeling something 
as sharp by pressing it into your eyeball would therefore not qualify as a 
case of seeing as the overall process would employ downstream physiological 
systems that are not used in standard cases of seeing. Alternatively, we might 
say that, by “the eyes,” we mean the eyes qua organs that respond to light; by 
“the ears,” organs that respond to sound waves; and so on. Feeling something 
as cold by dripping it into your ear canal would therefore not count as hear-
ing coldness because, in such a case, the ears would not be functioning by 
responding to sound waves.
One difficulty with this proposal concerns the case of touch. Touch has 
both many downstream physiological systems—at least fifteen according to 
one estimate (Nudds 2003: 34)—and many different kinds of physical stimu-
lus it responds to. In addition to this, these modifications of the proposal 

Perception and other sense modalities  151
struggle to provide an adequate answer to the second, epistemological, 
question of how a normal perceiver might come to know that he is seeing or 
hearing. Suppose we have a perceiver who presses something sharp into his 
eye and denies that he sees the sharpness. The first response would seem to 
require this perceiver to know that nonstandard downstream physiological 
systems were being employed. Or suppose we have a perceiver who drips ice 
water into his ear and denies that he hears the coldness. The second response 
would seem to require the perceiver to know that in this case he was not 
responding to pressure waves in the atmosphere. Both of these responses 
therefore seem to require our perceiver to have specialized knowledge of a 
kind that, normally, we would not expect to be possessed by someone who 
could tell which sense they were using.
In addition to this concern, Roxbee-Cox (1970) asks why we group the 
two eyes together as organs of sight and the two ears together as organs of 
hearing? Why do we not, rather, group the left eye and the left ear together 
as organs of a certain kind? There must be, he suggests, something that is 
common to the eyes that explains and justifies our grouping them together; 
likewise for the ears.
What might this commonality be? Two possibilities, of course, would be 
that the two eyes respond to the same external energy source (light waves) or 
that they feed into the same physiological system. Again, though, this runs 
into problems when attempting to explain why normal perceivers class the 
eyes together as organs of sight as normal perceivers may well not possess 
this kind of specialized knowledge. Two other alternatives, that do not fall 
prey to this objection are: (1) that operation of the eyes yields a characteristic 
kind of experience; (2) that the eyes respond to a characteristic set of properties. 
If either of these two possibilities are what justifies us in grouping together 
the two eyes as organs of a particular sense (sight), then perhaps our answer 
to the questions above lies in one of them.
The characteristic experience view
The view that each sense corresponds with a particular kind of experience is 
tentatively supported by Grice, who outlines the suggestion as follows:
It might be suggested that two senses, for example, seeing and smell-
ing, are to be distinguished by the special introspectible character of the 
experiences of seeing and smelling; that is, disregarding the differences 
between the characteristics we learn about by sight and smell, we are 
entitled to say that seeing is itself different in character from smelling. 
(Grice 1962: 135)
What is important about this suggestion is that, to distinguish it from the 
alternative suggestion that sight and smell give us information about different 
properties (the characteristic properties view), Grice outlines it as claiming 

152  Philosophy of Perception
that seeing and smelling have a different character, even when we disregard the 
differences between the properties we learn about. In the terminology of earlier 
chapters, the suggestion is that the different senses have different associated 
qualia (for a similar suggestion, see Lowe 1992: 80).
When presented in these terms, we can see that the phenomenon of 
transparency, discussed in earlier chapters, may cause problems for the char-
acteristic experience view. To claim that an experience is transparent, recall, 
is to say that, when we introspect, we “see through” the experience to the 
objects themselves; that we only find features of the objects of experience, 
not features of the experience itself. If this is so, then there is no additional 
“smelling character” and “seeing character” to the experiences—at least not 
one that we can discover through introspection. As Grice acknowledges, “the 
attempt to describe the differences between seeing and feeling seems to dis-
solve into a description of what we see and what we feel” (1962: 144).
In addition to this, a view that makes an ineliminable appeal to special 
modality-specific qualia runs into difficulty when it comes to accounting for 
the possibility of distinct sensory modalities in other animals. For instance, 
Nagel famously wondered what it is like to be a bat, given that bats have 
a sonar sense that humans lack (1979). Other animals also appear to have 
senses that we don’t. For example, it is widely believed that sharks have the 
capacity to sense magnetic fields, that snakes have the capacity to sense infra-
red radiation, and that some fish can sense electric potential (Keeley 2002). 
If the characteristic experience view is correct, then this requires there to 
be distinct qualia associated with these distinct senses. Given the problems 
Nagel raises, claims that particular animals have senses that we lack would 
therefore have the status of “propositions to which one must subscribe with-
out really understanding them” (1979: 447).
If an appeal to a special “seeing character” is problematic, we may be able 
to avoid this by appeal to the notion, discussed in detail in Chapter 6, that 
experiences can be indiscriminable from one another. To see how this might 
work, consider the relations being exactly the same height as and looking as tall 
as. Focusing on the first relation first, note that we can legitimately infer that, 
if Alice is exactly the same height as Barbara, and Barbara is exactly the same 
height as Carol, then Alice is exactly the same height as Carol. This inference 
is legitimate because the relation being exactly the same height as is a transitive 
relation. The relation looking as tall as, however, is intransitive. As this rela-
tion is intransitive, the following inference will be illegitimate: if Alice looks 
as tall as Barbara, and Barbara looks as tall as Carol, then Alice looks as tall 
as Carol. The reason this inference is illegitimate is because it leaves open the 
possibility that Alice and Barbara might be unnoticeably different in height, 
as might Barbara and Carol, but that when you stand Alice and Carol next to 
one another, you can just make out that they are not as tall as one another.
This provides a way of developing a characteristic experience view that 
does not appeal to special modality-specific qualia. The suggestion is this: 

Perception and other sense modalities  153
“Any two experiences belong to the same modality if and only if those expe-
riences can stand at either end of a series of experiences that are connected at 
each stage by the indiscriminability relation” (Clark 1993: 141).
To see how this works, imagine three experiences: the first is an experi-
ence of an expanse of red; the second an experience of an expanse of green; 
the third an experience of C-sharp. In the case of the first two experiences, 
we could construct a series of experiences, such that the first experience is 
one of an expanse of red; the second is of a red with a hint of orange so slight 
as to be indiscriminable from the first; the third of a yet more orange-red 
indiscriminable from the second; and so on, through yellow to green. Our 
first two experiences could stand at either end of a series of experiences, 
where each pair of experiences in the series are indiscriminable from one 
another. They therefore qualify as experiences of the same modality. Yet we 
cannot construct such a sequence from either of the first two experiences to 
the experience of C-sharp. They therefore qualify as experiences from differ-
ent modalities. In this way, it might be possible to separate out all experiences 
into modality-specific classes.
There are more generic concerns with the characteristic experience view, 
however. Grice, for example, worries that it leaves it a contingent matter that 
seeing is the kind of experience we have in response to colors and shapes, 
that smell is the kind of experience we have in response to odors and scents, 
and so on. This concern can be highlighted by asking the following question: 
Would it be possible to have the sight-characteristic experience—where this 
is either an experience with the introspectible “seeing character” or an experi-
ence from a particular indiscriminability-based class—in response to scents 
and odors, whilst having the smell-characteristic experience in response to 
colors and shapes? Our natural inclination is to answer this question in the 
negative, but it is not clear how this response justifies us in doing so.
More worryingly, though, is that the characteristic experience view rules 
out the possibility of nonconscious sensory modalities. Not only does this 
seem to be a coherent possibility, there is evidence to think that we might 
actually have such a modality (although of course, being nonconscious, this 
may come as news to us!) Keeley (2002) suggests that there is evidence that 
humans possess a vomeronasal sense modality, physically located in pits 
on either side of the nasal septum, which enable us to sense pheromones—
chemical compounds that are involved in social sexual interactions. In other 
animals, damage to the vomeronasal system leads to reduced sexual behavior, 
whilst artificial stimulation of the system leads to increases in such behavior. 
According to Keeley, there is apparently a “growing list” of similar findings 
for humans, which is some evidence that humans have such a sense modal-
ity too (2002: 24). If there is indeed a vomeronasal sense modality, it is one 
which has no characteristic experiences associated with it. The characteristic 
experience view would be unable to distinguish this modality from others.

154  Philosophy of Perception
The characteristic property view
The characteristic property view aims to individuate the senses by means of 
the different external properties they give us access to. To adequately spell out 
this view, we need to begin with the sense-neutral claim that we perceive—
have sensory access to—an array of properties. This claim is “sense-neutral” 
because it doesn’t specify which sense we perceive these properties by, merely 
that they are perceived. Then, on this basis, we distinguish the senses from 
one another in terms of which of this array of properties each sense gives 
us access to. For example, seeing is the sense that gives us access to colors, 
shapes and sizes; hearing is the sense that gives us access to volume, pitch, 
and timbre; and so on.
An obvious initial difficulty with this approach turns on the fact that 
some properties can be perceived by more than one sense. For instance, we 
can both see and feel that things are warm, or smooth, or square. Likewise, 
we can both see and hear that someone is angry, or that the sea is rough. 
Or we can both smell and taste that something is sweet; or both see and smell 
the burnt toast; and so on.
In response to this, both Grice and Roxbee-Cox turn to the idea that 
some properties are perceived directly, whilst others are perceived indirectly 
or in virtue of the direct perception of distinct properties. The idea is that we 
can then deal with these problem cases by stipulating that the property in 
question is only perceived directly by (at most) one of the two senses. On this 
approach, we directly feel that something is warm but only see that it is warm 
by seeing other properties, such as its being red, perhaps. It is not clear that 
this response will work in all cases. Both smelling and tasting something as 
sweet, for example, or both seeing and feeling something to be square, seem 
to be cases in which both properties are perceived equally directly. 
An alternative response is to appeal to the fact that, when we see an object 
to be square, we perceive far more properties than squareness alone; we see 
the object’s squareness as a member of a set of properties that includes its 
size, color, direction of motion, and so on. When we feel squareness, however, 
we perceive squareness as a member of a different overall set of properties, 
including heft, texture, temperature, and so on. On this view, we distinguish 
between the senses by distinguishing between the range of properties that 
sense enables you to perceive.
As Grice points out, this proposal runs into a problem. “Suppose a man 
to be resting a half-crown on the palm of one hand and a penny on the palm 
of another: he might (perhaps truthfully) say, ‘The half-crown looks to me 
larger than the penny, though they feel the same size’” (1962: 137–138).
According to the characteristic property view, this subject perceives an 
array of properties—where “perceives,” recall, is sense-neutral—which 
includes properties from both the visual list (colors, shapes, etc.) and the tac-
tual list (texture, temperature, etc.). Our subject also perceives one coin to be 
larger than the other and the two coins to be the same size. The problem is, 

Perception and other sense modalities  155
nothing in the characteristic property view’s presentation of the facts enables 
us to conclude that the perception of the coins as differing in size is through 
the sense of sight and that the perception of them as having the same size is 
through the sense of touch.
In light of this problem, Roxbee-Cox (1970) presents a key feature version 
of the characteristic property view, which is similar in spirit to Aristotle’s 
claim that the senses can be individuated by their “special objects” (De 
Anima, 418a: 12). Where the straightforward characteristic property view 
collects together the array of properties that can be seen, and then claims 
that seeing just is the perception of those properties, the key feature view 
picks out specific properties from that collection and claims that seeing just is 
the perception of those key properties. 
Roxbee-Cox (1970) suggests that the key feature for sight is the property 
of having some color property; the key feature for hearing is having some loud-
ness and timbre; the key feature for taste is having some taste; the key feature 
for smell is having some odor; and the key feature for feeling is having some 
feel to the touch. The question of how a perceiver knows which sense he or she 
is using can then be answered by appeal to the perceiver’s knowing that he or 
she is hearing something—say, by knowing that the thing perceived has some 
loudness or timbre—or would know that he or she is smelling something by 
knowing that the thing perceived has some odor, and so on. 
In order to allow that other properties can be seen, heard, tasted, smelled, 
and felt, Roxbee-Cox presents the following suggestion. For non-key 
property, p, to be perceived by sense, S, the subject also needs to (directly) 
perceive that the object bearing p has S’s key feature. For instance, circularity 
is a non-key property. For it to be perceived by sight, this requires us to also 
directly perceive that the (circular) object has some color property. For it 
to be perceived by touch, this requires us to also directly perceive that the 
(circular) object has some feel to the touch.
Roxbee-Cox suggests that the key feature view can deal with Grice’s coin 
case as follows. Recall that the characteristic property view claimed that the 
subject both perceived the half-crown to be larger than the penny and per-
ceived the coins to be the same size but didn’t have the resources to account 
for the fact that the subject sees the coins to differ in size whilst feeling them 
to be the same size. The key feature view, however, can say the following:
the half-crown seems larger than the penny, and . . . the seeming-percep-
tion of this relationship involves the direct perception that the coins have 
some color property; while . . . the half-crown and the penny seem equal 
in size, and . . . the seeming-perception of this relationship involves the 
direct perception that the coins have some feel to the touch. 
(Roxbee-Cox 1970: 539)
There remain concerns with this approach, however. For one thing, the 
key feature for taste is the property of having some taste. Of course, for 

156  Philosophy of Perception
this to work, we have to know what tastes (qua properties of objects) are 
independently of them being defined as whatever properties can be sensed by 
the modality of taste. Given the statements of the key features listed above, it 
would seem that the same objection might also be made to smell and, given 
some of the concerns about color realism raised in the previous chapter, even 
to the case of vision.
In addition to this, we might also wonder whether the account of the 
perception of non-key properties is correct: is it really the case that percep-
tion of any non-key property at any time requires the subject to perceive 
the key property? For example, we saw in the previous chapter that subjects 
can suffer from achromatopsia—the inability to see colors—yet still have, 
and know that they have, visual experiences. Even where normal subjects are 
concerned, the change blindness experiments we discussed might be argued 
to show that, on some occasions, it is possible to see an object’s shape, say, 
without seeing that object to have some color property.
The final objection to consider turns to the case of touch. What is the key 
feature that is associated with the sense of touch? Think of all the different 
kinds of feeling there are. There is an active kind of contact feeling, in which 
we probe the object to feel its shape, or the texture of its surface; there is a 
kind of passive feeling, when we feel an object press or push against us; there 
is feeling an object to be warm or cold, feeling the air to be warm or cold, 
feeling water in which we are immersed to be warm or cold, the feeling of 
cold when alcohol evaporates on the skin; there is feeling one’s heart beating 
inside one’s chest or an oyster slipping down one’s throat; there is feeling 
the sun on your back and the wind on your face; there is feeling an itch or a 
tickle; there is feeling chemicals burning one’s skin, and so on. When all of 
the different kinds of feeling are listed in this way, we can see how difficult it 
will be to identify one unique key feature for touch, especially when we recall 
that, on the key feature view, the perception of non-key properties requires 
the perception of the key feature.
Perhaps, in light of all of this, we should deny that touch is a single sense 
after all, and instead see touch as a catch-all name for a number of different 
skin-based senses. However, this also faces problems. For one thing, the list 
above actually took a while to spell out. Yet, whenever a new possibility sug-
gested itself, it was clear to me whether or not it qualified as a case of feeling 
or not. This suggests that I have a good sense of when something qualifies 
as a case of feeling, which I use to determine whether or not a particular case 
qualifies. If the many-sense view of touch were correct, it would seem I ought 
to work in the other direction: that I determine whether or not a particular 
case qualifies as a case of (generic) feeling by considering my list of (specific) 
cases of feeling and seeing if that particular case appears. 

Perception and other sense modalities  157
Other approaches
Although each of these three approaches has appealing features, each picking 
out something that seems important for the question of what differentiates 
the senses, none of them has been generally accepted. What are the prospects 
for developing a more widely accepted method for individuating the senses? 
Well, there might be something to be gained by combining elements of the 
theories presented above, with the hope of thereby avoiding the problematic 
objections. Another possibility would be to reject the claim, implicit in the 
above, that our individuation process ought to answer both the metaphysical 
and epistemological questions together. Those questions, recall, asked what 
distinguished sensory modalities from one another and how we know that we 
are experiencing with one rather than another.
To see why this might be plausible, note that the very fact that there can 
be disagreement over whether or not humans have a vomeronasal sense relies 
on its being accepted that it is possible that there could be a sense organ 
that we are not conscious of using. If we have to know that we have a sense, 
then there can be no dispute. If we do accept that there could be sensory 
modalities we don’t know we have, this suggests that the questions of what 
makes something a sense modality of a particular kind is importantly dis-
tinct from the question of how we might know which sense modality we are 
using on any given occasion. This would allow us to develop an account of 
what individuates the senses from one another on purely scientific grounds, 
say, without worrying about how a subject might know which sense they are 
using (Keeley 2002).
Touch, hearing, taste, and smell
Given that the majority of this book has been given over to discussing and 
evaluating theories of visual perception, we might think that we would be 
well placed to simply extrapolate theories of the nonvisual senses from these 
extant theories. Before we see whether this is the case, we need to consider 
what the other senses serve to make us aware of.
The objects of touch, hearing, taste, and smell
The question to ask here has the general form: What do we sense, when 
we sense? Thus, what do we touch, when we touch? What do we hear, when 
we hear? What do we taste, when we taste? And what do we smell, when we 
smell?
Everyday language might make us think we can offer the same theory of 
all of these cases: we touch, hear, smell, and taste objects. Thus I touch the 
book, hear the car, smell the coffee, and taste the pineapple. Yet, as is the case 
with vision, when we see an object, we don’t just see that object—it is difficult 

158  Philosophy of Perception
to imagine what this would even be like—instead, seeing the object requires 
us to also see some of its properties.
If we follow this analogy through, then, we would say that, when I touch 
the book, I touch—sense—some of its properties, when I hear the car, I 
hear—sense—some of its properties, and so on. If this is the correct approach 
to take, then we can ask which properties the other senses make us aware of. 
When we discussed the characteristic property approach to individuating the 
senses, it was suggested that the characteristic properties of touch included 
properties such as shape, texture, and temperature. As these are indeed prop-
erties of objects, then the analogy works, thus far at least.
Things are not so simple when we consider the other senses. The character-
istic properties of hearing, for instance, included pitch, loudness, and timbre. 
Unless we are speaking metaphorically, these are not properties of objects but 
of sounds, where here I am using “sound” to mean something objective rather 
than experiential. The property of the object that we are aware of in hearing, 
then, would have to be its sound—the sound it makes—and then hearing 
makes us aware of the pitch, loudness, and timbre of this sound. Likewise 
for smell and taste. If these senses do indeed make us aware of properties of 
objects, the properties they make us aware of would have to be the object’s 
odor and flavor (we could call these the object’s smell and taste, but that 
would have the potential for confusion).
There are, however, reasons to be suspicious of the claim that sounds and 
odors, at least, are properties of objects. In the case of sound, O’Callaghan 
(2007) points out that sounds have duration and can persist through changes 
in their pitch, loudness, and timbre. These features, he argues, are difficult 
to square with a view of sounds as properties. For odors, the difficult to 
accommodate features would be the fact that odors seem to occupy volumes 
of space and that (what we normally call) an object’s odor can be detached 
from it and even survive the destruction of the object. For instance, cooking 
odors can pervade an entire room and persist long after the meal has been 
eaten and the pots and pans washed up. This is difficult to square with the 
claim that the odor is a property of the meal.
What are sounds and odors if they are not properties of objects? On the 
basis of his phenomenological observations, O’Callaghan goes on to suggest 
that the best theory of the nature of sounds is that they are event-like par-
ticulars that are spatially located at or near their sources (2007: 30). Likewise, 
to account for the fact that they can be disconnected from their sources, 
odors would also need to be treated as a kind of particular that has the capac-
ity to fill a volume of space. Even if such claims can be motivated by the 
phenomenology of auditory and olfactory experience, we do need to keep in 
mind that the phenomenological hat is not the only hat a theory of percep-
tion has to wear. There is also the epistemological hat. Treating sounds and 
odors as distinct particulars does raise the question of how the perception 
of, say, the rough, barking sound made by a car with a cracked muffler could, 
given that it is a distinct particular, justify us in having beliefs about the car.

Perception and other sense modalities  159
Theories of touch, hearing, taste, and smell
Once we have a fix on what the objects of our different senses are, we can 
then ask how these senses function. This is the call for a philosophical theory 
of those senses. Perhaps, one might think, we can develop a theory of each 
sense by simply extrapolating our preferred theory of vision. Of course, 
things are not that simple. 
Consider sense datum theories first. A sense datum theory of hearing 
would hold that, when we (as we would normally say) hear a sound, we 
directly sense a sense datum with properties of loudness, pitch, and timbre. 
Likewise for the other senses: when we feel the texture of a surface, we 
directly sense a sense datum with that texture; when we smell a spicy odor, 
we directly sense a spicy sense datum; when we taste a bitter taste, we directly 
sense a bitter sense datum.
Many of these claims seem strange. The Phenomenal Principle, which, 
recall, is a significant motivator for the sense datum theory of vision, doesn’t 
have quite the force in the nonvisual cases. When we taste something bitter, 
for example, why should we think that there has to be something bitter that 
we taste? Sometimes one can just have a bitter taste in one’s mouth without 
there being anything bitter that one tastes. A number of philosophers of per-
ception have also contended that the phenomenology of the sense of touch 
cannot be adequately explained by a sense datum theory, even by philoso-
phers who endorse that theory for vision. Brian O’Shaughnessy, for example, 
suggests that touch “involves the use of no mediating field of sensation. There 
is in touch no analogue of the visual field of visual sensations which mediates 
the perception of the environment” (1989: 38). Here, O’Shaughnessy makes 
clear his adherence to a sense datum theory for the case of vision in denying 
that the same theory is true of touch.
Other philosophers of perception have been led to the same conclusion. 
A.D. Smith, for example, focuses on the particular tactile case of the Anstoss: 
the experience of there being “a check or impediment to our active move-
ment: an experienced obstacle to our animal striving, as when we push or 
pull against things” (2002: 154). Smith argues that the “unique non-sensory 
nature of the Anstoss” alone serves to refute the claim that we are always 
directly aware of mediating sense data. “In the case of the Anstoss . . . it is 
just such focal sensations that are absent. There is simply no such sensuous 
item to interpose itself between us and the external physical force that we 
experience” (2002: 165).
How would an adverbialist deal with the nonvisual senses? Well, there 
are two ways an adverbialist might go. One way would be to have a mode 
of sensing that corresponds to each sense and then distinguish between 
experiences within that mode adverbially. This approach would hold that we 
taste sourly when we eat a grapefruit, taste sweetly when we eat a peach, and 
smell sweetly when we smell that same peach. The difference between the 
experience of tasting something sweet and smelling something sweet would 

160  Philosophy of Perception
thus be a matter of the different modes of sensing, rather than the different 
adverbially modified ways in which the sensing takes place.
Another way to develop an adverbial theory—the way that corresponds 
most closely to the qualia theory—would be to hold to only one mode of 
sensing and to distinguish between all experiences from all modalities by 
the adverbs alone. Thus we sense sweet-smell-ly when we smell the peach 
and sense sweet-taste-ly when we eat it. In this case, the difference between 
the experience of tasting something sweet and smelling something sweet is 
not a matter of different modes of sensing but rather of different ways in 
which that mode is modified—there is a sweet-smell-ly way of sensing and a 
sweet-taste-ly way.
In the terminology of the qualia theory, the claim would be that the gusta-
tory qualia possessed by the experience of eating a peach would differ from 
the olfactory qualia possessed by the experience of smelling a peach, and so 
on. The same would go for the other senses—the differences between what 
it is like to, say, feel a plush toy, feel a glass, and hear a car door slam would 
be differences between the tactual and auditory qualia possessed by each of 
those experiences. The concern with this approach is that to say that the 
difference between the experiences of smelling coffee and tasting pineapple 
is a difference in their qualia seems more like a restatement of the problem 
than a solution.
Intentionalists can also extrapolate reasonably straightforwardly. Exactly 
what is represented will depend, in part, upon what the objects of nonvisual 
sensory experiences are taken to be. To give a sense of the way intention-
alist theories of the nonvisual senses might look, we might say that touch 
experiences represent objects as having certain tactile properties, auditory 
experiences represent sounds as having loudness, timbre, pitch, and possibly 
location properties, and smell and taste represent odors and flavors as having 
certain gustatory and olfactory properties. 
Of course, phenomenology-first intentionalists would then couple this 
kind of claim with a qualia theory to account for the phenomenological 
aspects of experience. Inasmuch as that is the case, it faces the same question 
about its explanatory force. Representationalists, on the other hand, have 
an explanation of why an experience has the phenomenology it does—it is 
because of what it represents. Representationalism faces a problem in that it 
needs to claim that any property an experience can represent is a mind-inde-
pendent property. In some cases, this might seem implausible. For instance, 
the way sugar tastes to me is quite naturally seen to be a feature of the way I 
respond to sugar rather than a mind-independent property of the substance. 
An argument for this claim is that if I have a cold, sugar may taste bitter to 
me (Locke 1961: 124). If this is correct, then the (normal) taste of sugar is 
arguably not, as the realist about taste would have to claim, a property of 
sugar itself.
Naive realist theories of the nonvisual senses also run up against this dif-
ficulty. The naive realist would claim that tactual experiences are episodes 

Perception and other sense modalities  161
of being acquainted with surface textures, temperatures, shapes, and so on, 
that auditory experiences are episodes of being acquainted with sounds and 
their properties, that smell experiences are episodes of being acquainted with 
odors and their properties, and that taste experiences are episodes of being 
acquainted with the flavor properties of objects. It must also, therefore, allow 
that the taste of sugar is a real property of sugar. Not only can this be dif-
ficult to square with the intuition that tastes are a feature of how things affect 
us, it also runs into difficulties when it comes to explaining how one and the 
same thing can taste different in different circumstances. 
How distinct are the senses?
Our discussions thus far have treated the senses as relatively distinct from 
one another. There is an underlying assumption that, for example, visual 
experiences do not depend, in any important way, on our experiences in other 
modalities.1 To illustrate this, we haven’t been given any reason to doubt that, 
were we to suddenly become deaf, for example, our visual experiences would 
continue much as they are. Yet one might wonder whether this really is the 
case. Perhaps, instead, some of our experiences are actually multi-modal—
requiring the operation of more than one sense.
We are actually very familiar with one seemingly multi-modal experi-
ence—the everyday experience of taste. As it happens, the taste buds on the 
tongue only respond to fairly broad categories of taste—roughly: bitter, salty, 
sweet and sour—not nearly enough to account for the variety of different 
flavors we can taste. Our rich palette of tastes is in fact explained by the fact 
that, when food is placed in the mouth, some odor molecules travel through 
the passage at the back of the mouth to olfactory receptor cells at the top of 
the nasal cavity. It is this interaction of smell and taste that accounts for the 
rich variety of flavors we can perceive. This is why, when you have a cold, 
food tastes much more bland—not because anything different is happening 
with your taste receptors, but because your cold blocks the odor molecules 
from stimulating your sense of smell.
Although the senses of smell and taste are both involved in our perception 
of flavor, it would be phenomenologically inapt to treat the experience as 
merely additive—like tasting the sweet, salty, sour or bitter components of 
food plus smelling the food’s odor. Tasting food does not seem to us, phe-
nomenologically, to involve smelling at all—in particular, the act of inhaling 
through the nose, which seems so important to the experience of smelling, 
does not take place. Instead, these two senses intertwine to yield a homog-
enous experience that involves both the taste and smell modalities.
Matthew Nudds (2001) has argued that such bimodal experiences also 
occur in the case of vision and hearing. Consider the effect of listening to 
someone “throw their voice,” an effect known as the ventriloquism effect. 
This occurs when the ventriloquist—the voice thrower—speaks, whilst 
moving the mouth of a dummy and keeping his or her own mouth and lips 

162  Philosophy of Perception
still. This leads the audience to experience the voice as emanating from the 
dummy. Even though the voice does not actually come from the dummy’s 
direction, it is nonetheless experienced as so doing.
Nudds argues that: 
when one experiences the ventriloquism effect, the voice one hears 
appears to be produced by the dummy; it’s not just that one hears the 
voice as coming from the same place as one sees the dummy to be, one 
experiences the dummy and its mouth movements as responsible for 
what one hears.
(Nudds 2001: 218; my emphasis)
As evidence for this, he points to the experience of watching a film when the 
soundtrack is slightly out of sync. Even though the sounds and pictures are 
experienced as coming from the same place, what is missing, he claims, is the 
experience of hearing the sounds as being produced by what is seen. If this is 
right, then experiencing a sound being produced by something that you can 
see is an essentially multi-modal experience—it is an experience that requires 
the joint operation of two different senses.
Altogether, these considerations suggest that there is still much important 
work to be done in the philosophy of perception. Although the vast major-
ity of philosophical work has focused on vision, there remains no widely 
accepted theory of sight. What is more, we have also seen that there are rea-
sons to think that theories of the other senses may follow a different pattern. 
So, even if a theory of vision does gain wide acceptance, there is no guarantee 
that adequate theories of hearing, touch, smell, and taste will follow. Finally, 
we have seen reason to question the assumption that the right way to think 
about perception is by breaking it down into distinct senses and dealing with 
them separately. Perhaps, instead, a thorough philosophical understanding 
of our capacity to perceive the world will require a united theory of all our 
senses.	 How all of this plays out remains to be seen.
Questions
•	
What do you think is the key difference between the different 
senses?
•	
What are the advantages and disadvantages of attempting to 
develop a theory of perception that covers all five senses? 
•	
As philosophers of perception, how should we begin thinking 
about sense perception?

Perception and other sense modalities  163
Note
	 1.	 Often, philosophical discussions of the relationship between the senses 
have focused on Molyneux’s Question, which was first stated in a letter 
from William Molyneux to John Locke in 1688. It asks whether a blind 
man, who had learned to distinguish between a cube and a sphere by 
touch could, upon restoration of his sight, recognize which was the cube 
and which was the sphere without touching them. Molyneux’s question 
has a number of intriguing aspects. For instance, it might be taken to 
be a question about the phenomenological similarities and differences 
between visual and tactual experiences of shape. Or it might be taken 
to be asking whether we have distinct shape concepts for each sense or 
whether the same shape concepts are employed on the basis of both sight 
and touch. 
Further reading
Two important early discussions of the issue of how we individuate the 
senses are H.P. Grice’s paper, “Some Remarks on the Senses” (1962) and J.W. 
Roxbee-Cox’s, “Distinguishing the Senses” (1970).
Good discussions of the phenomenology of touch, and the differences 
between touch and vision, are Brian O’Shaughnessy’s “The Sense of Touch” 
(1989) and M.G.F. Martin’s 1992 paper, “Sight and Touch.” A.D. Smith’s The 
Problem of Perception (2002) also contains typically astute discussions of 
the nonvisual senses, and Casey O’Callaghan’s recent book Sounds (2007) 
is an excellent discussion of auditory perception (although it maybe focuses 
on phenomenological issues to the exclusion of the epistemological role of 
auditory experience). 
Matthew Nudds defends the existence of bimodal visual/auditory experi-
ences in his 2001 paper, “Experiencing the Production of Sounds.” 


References
Aristotle (1984) De Anima, in J. Barnes (ed.), The Complete Works of Aristotle, Vol. I, 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press), pp. 641–692.
Armstrong, D.M. (1961) Perception and the Physical World (London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul).
—— (1968) A Materialist Theory of the Mind (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).
—— (1973) Belief, Truth and Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Austin, J.L. (1962) Sense and Sensibilia (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Barnes, W. (1965) “The Myth of Sense-Data,” in R.J. Swartz (ed.), Perceiving, Sens-
ing and Knowing (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press), pp. 138–167.
Bayne, T. (2009) “Perception and the Reach of Phenomenal Content,” The Philo-
sophical Quarterly 59(236): 385–404.
Bennett, J. (1971) Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press).
Berkeley, G. (1910) A New Theory of Vision and Other Writings (London: J.M. Dent 
& Sons Ltd.).
Berti, A. and G. Rizzolatti (1992) “Visual Processing without Awareness: Evidence 
from Unilateral Neglect,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 4: 345–351.
Blake, R., T.J. Palmeri, R. Marois, and C.-Y. Kim (2005) “On the Perceptual Real-
ity of Synaesthetic Color,” in L.C. Robertson and N. Sagiv (eds.), Synaesthesia: 
Perspectives from Cognitive Neuroscience (New York: Oxford University Press).
Block, N. (1990) “Inverted Earth,” in J.E. Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical Perspectives 
Volume 4: Action Theory and Philosophy of Mind (Atascadero, Calif.: Ridgeview), 
pp. 53–79.
—— (2007a) Consciousness, Function and Representation (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press).
—— (2007b) “Consciousness, Accessibility and the Mesh between Psychology and 
Neuroscience,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30: 481–548.
—— (2008) “Consciousness and Cognitive Access,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society 108(3): 289–317.
Brentano, F. (1995) Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint (London: Routledge).
Brewer, B. (2005) “Perceptual Experience Has Conceptual Content,” in E. Sosa and 
M. Steup (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell), pp. 
217–230.
—— (2006) “Perception and Content,” European Journal of Philosophy 14(2): 
165–181.
—— (2008) “How to Account for Illusion,” in A. Haddock and F. Macpherson 
(eds.), Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press), pp. 168–180.

166  References
Burge, T. (1991) “Vision and Intentional Content,” in E. LePore and R. vanGulick 
(eds.), John Searle and His Critics (Oxford: Basil Blackwell), pp. 195–214.
—— (2007a) “Individualism and the Mental,” in T. Burge, Foundations of Mind 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 100–150. 
—— (2007b) “Cartesian Error and the Objectivity of Perception,” in T. Burge, Foun-
dations of Mind (Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 192–207. 
Butchvarov, P. (1980) “Adverbial Theories of Consciousness,” Midwest Studies in 
Philosophy 5(3): 261–280.
Butterfill, S. (2009) “Seeing Causes and Hearing Gestures,” The Philosophical Quar-
terly 59(236): 405–428.
Byrne, A. (1997) “Some Like It HOT: Consciousness and Higher-Order Thoughts,” 
Philosophical Studies 86(2): 103–129.
—— (2001) “Intentionalism Defended,” The Philosophical Review 110: 199–240.
—— (2002) “DON’T PANIC: Tye’s Intentionalist Theory of Consciousness,” A 
Field Guide to the Philosophy of Mind symposium on Tye’s Consciousness, Color, 
and Content. Available online at http://host.uniroma3.it/progetti/kant/field/tye-
symp_byrne.htm. (Accessed October 6, 2009.)
—— (2009) “Experience and Content,” The Philosophical Quarterly 59(236): 429–451.
Byrne, A. and H. Logue (2008) “Either/Or” in A. Haddock and F. Macpherson 
(eds.), Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press), pp. 57–94.
—— (2009) Disjunctivism: Contemporary Readings (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
Campbell, J. (2002) Reference and Consciousness (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Casullo, A. (1983) “Adverbial Theories of Sensing and the Many-Property Problem,” 
Philosophical Studies 44(2): 143–160.
Chalmers, D.J. (1994) “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness,” in J. Shear 
(ed.) (1997), Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem (Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press.
—— (1996) The Conscious Mind (New York: Oxford University Press).
—— (2004) “The Representational Character of Experience,” in B. Leiter (ed.), The 
Future of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 153–181.
—— (2006) “Perception and the Fall from Eden,” in T.S. Gendler and J. Hawthorne 
(eds.), Perceptual Experience (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 49–125.
Child, W. (1994) Causality, Interpretation and the Mind (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press).
Chisholm, R.M. (1942) “The Problem of the Speckled Hen,” Mind 51(204): 368–373.
Clark, Andy (2001) “Visual Experience and Motor Action: Are the Bonds Too 
Tight?” Philosophical Review 110(4): 495–519.
—— (2002) “Is Seeing All It Seems? Action, Reason and the Grand Illusion,” in A. 
Noë (ed.), Is the Visual World a Grand Illusion? (Thorverton: Imprint Academic), 
pp. 181–202.
Clark, Austen (1993) Sensory Qualities (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Coates, P. (2007) The Metaphysics of Perception: Wilfrid Sellars, Perceptual Con-
sciousness and Critical Realism (New York: Routledge).
Cornman, J.W. (1971) Materialism and Sensations (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univer-
sity Press).
Crane, T. (1992) “The Nonconceptual Content of Experience,” in T. Crane (ed.), The 
Contents of Experience: Essays on Perception (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press), pp. 136–157.

References  167
—— (1998) “Intentionality as the Mark of the Mental,” in A. O’Hear (ed.), Contem-
porary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 
pp. 229–251.
—— (2000) “The Origins of Qualia” in T. Crane and S. Patterson (eds.), The History 
of the Mind-Body Problem (London: Routledge), pp. 169–194.
—— (2003) “The Intentional Structure of Consciousness,” in Q. Smith and A. Jokic 
(eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives (Oxford: Clarendon Press), 
pp. 33–56.
Cytowic, R.E. (1993) The Man Who Tasted Shapes (London: Abacus).
Dancy, J. (1985) Introduction to Contemporary Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell).
—— (1988) Perceptual Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Davidson, D. (1980) “The Logical Form of Action Sentences,” in Essays on Actions 
and Events (Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 105–122.
Davies, M. (1991) “Individualism and Perceptual Content,” Mind 100: 461–484.
Dennett, D.C. (1969) Content and Consciousness (London: Routledge). 
—— (1981) “True Believers: The Intentional Strategy and Why it Works,” in A.F. 
Heath (ed.), Scientific Explanation (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 53–78.
—— (1988) “Quining Qualia,” in A. J. Marcel and E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in 
Contemporary Science (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 42–77.
—— (1991) Consciousness Explained (London: Penguin).
Doyle, J.R. and C. Leach (1988) “Word Superiority in Signal Detection: Barely a 
Glimpse, Yet Reading Nonetheless,” Cognitive Psychology 20(3): 283–318.
Dretske, F. (1969) Seeing and Knowing (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).
—— (1981) Knowledge and the Flow of Information (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
—— (1995) Naturalizing the Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
—— (2003) “Experience as Representation” in E. Villanueva (ed.), Philosophical 
Issues 13: Philosophy of Mind (Atascadero, Calif.: Ridgeview), pp. 67–82.
Ducasse, C.J. (1942) “Moore’s Refutation of Idealism,” in P.A. Schlipp (ed.), The 
Philosophy of G.E. Moore, Vol. I (La Salle, Ill.: Open Court), pp. 225–251.
Elugardo, R. (1982) “Cornman, Adverbial Materialism and Phenomenal Properties,” 
Philosophical Studies 41: 33–50.
Evans, G. (1982) The Varieties of Reference (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Firth, R. (1965) “Sense-Data and the Percept Theory,” in R.J. Swartz (ed.), Perceiv-
ing, Sensing and Knowing (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press), pp. 
204–270. 
Fish, W.J. (2009) Perception, Hallucination, and Illusion (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press).
Fodor, J. (1992) “A Theory of Content II: The Theory” in A Theory of Content and 
Other Essays (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 89–136.
Foster, J. (2000) The Nature of Perception (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Gibson, J.J. (1966) The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems (Boston, Mass.: 
Houghton Mifflin).
Goldman, A.H. (1976) “Appearing as Irreducible in Perception,” Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research 37(2): 147–164.
Grice, H.P. (1961) “The Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society 35: 121–152.
—— (1962) “Some Remarks about the Senses,” in R.J. Butler (ed.), Analytical Phi-
losophy (Oxford: Basil Blackwell), pp. 133–153.

168  References
Grush, R. (2007) “A Plug for Generic Phenomenology,” Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences 30(3): 504–505.
Haddock, A. and F. Macpherson (2008) Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, Knowl-
edge (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Haffenden, A.M. and M.A. Goodale (1998) “The Effect of Pictorial Illusion on Pre-
hension and Perception,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 10(1): 122–136.
Hardin, C.L. (1988) Color for Philosophers: Unweaving the Rainbow (Indianapolis, 
Ind.: Hackett Publishing Co.).
Harman, G. (1987) “(Non-Solipsistic) Conceptual Role Semantics,” in E. LePore 
(ed.), New Directions in Semantics (London: Academic Press), pp. 55–81.
—— (1990) “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience” in J.E. Tomberlin (ed.), Philo-
sophical Perspectives 4: Action Theory and the Philosophy of Mind (Atascadero, 
Calif.: Ridgeview), pp. 31–52.
Harrison, J.E. and S. Baron-Cohen (1997) “Synaesthesia: An Introduction,” in S. 
Baron-Cohen and J.E. Harrison (eds.), Synaesthesia: Classic and Contemporary 
Readings (Oxford: Blackwell), pp. 3–16.
Hawthorne, J. and K. Kovakovich (2006) “Disjunctivism,” Proceedings of the Aristo-
telian Society, Supplementary Volume 80(1): 145–183.
Heck, R.G. (2000) “Nonconceptual Content and the ‘Space of Reasons,’” The Philo-
sophical Review 109(4): 483–523.
Hinton, J.M. (1967) “Visual Experiences,” Mind 76(302): 217–227.
——(1973) Experiences: An Inquiry into Some Ambiguities (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press).
Hochberg, J.E. (1968) “In the Mind’s Eye” in R.N. Haber (ed.), Contemporary The-
ory and Research in Visual Perception (New York: Holt, Reinhart & Winston), 
pp. 99–124.
Horgan, T.E. and J.L. Tienson (2002) “The Intentionality of Phenomenology and 
the Phenomenology of Intentionality” in D.J. Chalmers (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: 
Classical and Contemporary Readings (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 
520–533.
Hurley, S. (1998) Consciousness in Action (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press).
Jackson, F. (1975) “On the Adverbial Analysis of Visual Experience,” Metaphilosophy 
6(2): 127–135.
—— (1977) Perception: A Representative Theory (Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge 
University Press).
—— (1982) “Epiphenomenal Qualia,” The Philosophical Quarterly 6(2): 127–135.
—— (1994) “Representative Realism” in J. Dancy and E. Sosa (ed.), A Companion to 
Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell), pp. 445–448.
Johnston, M. (2004) “The Obscure Object of Hallucination,” Philosophical Studies 
120(1–3): 113–183.
Keeley, B.L. (2002) “Making Sense of the Senses: Individuating Modalities in 
Humans and Other Animals,” Journal of Philosophy 99(1): 5–28.
Kim, J. (1977) “Perception and Reference without Causality,” The Journal of Philoso-
phy 74(10): 606–620.
Kriegel, U. (2002) “PANIC Theory and the Prospects for a Representational Theory 
of Phenomenal Consciousness,” Philosophical Psychology 15(1): 55–64.
—— (2007) “Intentional Inexistence and Phenomenal Intentionality,” Philosophical 
Perspectives 21(1): 307–340.

References  169
—— (2008) “The Dispensibility of (Merely) Intentional Objects,” Philosophical 
Studies 141(1): 79–95.
Levine, J. (1983) “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap,” Pacific Philosoph-
ical Quarterly 64: 354–361.
—— (2001) Purple Haze: The Puzzle of Consciousness (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press).
—— (2007) “Two Kinds of Access,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30(3): 514–515.
Lewis, C.I. (1929) Mind and the World Order: An Outline of a Theory of Knowledge 
(New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons).
—— (1952) “The Given Element in Empirical Knowledge,” Philosophical Review 
61(2): 168–175.
Lewis, D. (1980) “Veridical Hallucination and Prosthetic Vision,” Australasian Jour-
nal of Philosophy 58(3): 239–249.
—— (1986) “Causation,” in D. Lewis Philosophical Papers, Vol. II (New York: 
Oxford University Press).
Locke, D. (1975) “Review of Hinton’s Experiences,” Mind 84(1): 466–468.
Locke, J. (1961) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (London: J.M. Dent 
and Sons). 
Loewer, B. (1997) “A Guide to Naturalizing Semantics” in C. Wright and B. Hale 
(eds.), A Companion to the Philosophy of Language (Oxford: Blackwell), pp. 
108–126.
Lowe, E.J. (1992) “Experience and its Objects,” in T. Crane (ed.), The Contents of 
Experience: Essays on Perception (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 
79–104.
Lycan, W. (1996) Consciousness and Experience (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
Macdonald, G. (1979) Perception and Identity (London: Macmillan).
Mack, A. and I. Rock (1998) Inattentional Blindness (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
Macpherson, F. (2007) “Synaesthesia, Functionalism and Phenomenology,” in  
M. Marraffa, M. De Caro and F. Ferretti (eds.), Cartographies of the Mind: 
Philosophy and Psychology in Intersection (Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp. 65–80.
Martin, M.G.F. (1992) “Sight and Touch,” in T. Crane (ed.), The Contents of Experi-
ence: Essays on Perception (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 196–215.
—— (1994) “Perceptual Content,” in S. Guttenplan (ed.), A Companion to the Phi-
losophy of Mind (Oxford: Blackwell), pp. 463–471.
—— (1997) “The Reality of Appearances” in M. Sainsbury (ed.), Thought and Ontol-
ogy (Milan: FrancoAngeli), pp. 81–106.
—— (2002) “The Transparency of Experience,” Mind and Language 17(4): 376–425.
—— (2004) “The Limits of Self–Awareness,” Philosophical Studies 120(13): 37–89.
—— (2006) “On Being Alienated,” in T.S. Gendler and J. Hawthorne (eds.), Percep-
tual Experience (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 354–410.
McCulloch, G. (1995) The Mind and its World (London: Routledge).
McDowell, J. (1994) Mind and World (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
—— (1998) “Criteria Defeasibility and Knowledge,” in Meaning, Knowledge and 
Reality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press), pp. 369–394. First pub-
lished 1982.
—— (2008) “The Disjunctive Conception of Experience as Material for a Transcen-
dental Argument,” in A. Haddock and F. Macpherson (eds.), Disjunctivism: Per-
ception, Action, Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 376–389.

170  References
McGinn, C. (1982) The Character of Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Michotte, A. (1963) The Perception of Causality (London: Methuen).
Milner, A.D. and M.A. Goodale (1995) The Visual Brain in Action (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press).
Moore, G.E. (1942) “A Reply to My Critics,” in P.A. Schlipp (ed.), The Philosophy of 
G.E. Moore, Vol. II (La Salle, Ill.: Open Court), pp. 553–677 .
Nagel, T. (1979) “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” in Mortal Questions (Cambridge: 
Canto), pp. 165–180.
Neisser, U. (1967) Cognitive Psychology (New York: Appleton Century Crofts).
Noë, A. (2001) “Experience and the Active Mind,” Synthese 129(1): 41–60.
—— (2003) “Causation and Perception: the Puzzle Unravelled,” Analysis 63(2): 
93–100.
——(2005) Action in Perception (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
Nudds, M. (2001) “Experiencing the Production of Sounds,” European Journal of 
Philosophy 9(2): 210–229.
—— (2003) “The Significance of the Senses,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
104(1): 31–51.
O’Callaghan, C. (2007) Sounds (New York: Oxford University Press).
O’Regan, J.K. (1992) “Solving the ‘Real’ Mysteries of Visual Perception: The World 
as an Outside Memory,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 46(3): 461–488.
O’Regan, J.K. and A. Noë (2001) “A Sensorimotor Account of Vision and Visual 
Consciousness,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24(5): 939–73.
O’Shaughnessy, B. (1989) “The Sense of Touch,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
67(1): 37–58.
Pani, J.R. (2000) “Cognitive Description and Change Blindness,” Visual Cognition 
7(1–3): 107–126.
Peacocke, C. (1983) Sense and Content (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
—— (1992) A Study of Concepts (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Pitcher, G. (1971) A Theory of Perception (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press).
Price, H.H. (1932) Perception (London: Methuen).
Price, R. (2009) “Aspect Switching and Visual Phenomenal Character,” The Philo-
sophical Quarterly 59(236), 508–518.
Putnam, H. (1975) “The Meaning of ‘Meaning,’” in K. Gunderson (ed.), Language, 
Mind and Knowledge: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, VII (Min-
neapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press).
—— (1981) Reason, Truth and History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Ramachandran, V.S. and E.M. Hubbard (2001) “Synaesthesia: A Window into Per-
ception, Thought and Language,” Journal of Consciousness Studies 8(12): 3–34. 
Ramsey, W.M. (2007) Representation Reconsidered (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press).
Reid, T. (2002) Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, ed. by D. Brookes (Univer-
sity Park, Penn.: Pennsylvania State University Press). 
Rensink, R. (2000) “The Dynamic Representation of Scenes,” Visual Cognition 7: 
17–42.
Robinson, H. (1994) Perception (London: Routledge).
Rock, I. and K. Mitchener (1992) “Further Evidence of Failure of Reversal of Ambig-
uous Figures by Uninformed Subjects,” Perception 21: 39–45.

References  171
Rosenthal, D. (1990) “A Theory of Consciousness,” in N. Block, O. Flanagan, and 
G. Güzeldere (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), 
pp. 773–788.
Roxbee-Cox, J.W. (1970) “Distinguishing the Senses,” Mind 79: 530–550.
Russell, B. (1927) The Analysis of Matter (London: Kegan Paul).
—— (1948) Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits (London: George Allen & 
Unwin).
—— (1967) The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Ryle, G. (1990) The Concept of Mind (London: Penguin). 
Schellenberg, S. (forthcoming) “Ontological Minimalism about Phenomenology,” 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.
Searle, J. (1983) Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Cambridge University Press).
Segal, G. (1989) “Seeing What is Not There,” Philosophical Review 97(2): 189–214.
——(1991) “In Defence of a Reasonable Individualism,” Mind 100(1): 485–494.
Sellars, W. (1956) “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,” in H. Feigl (ed.), Min-
nesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. I (Minneapolis, Minn.: University 
of Minnesota Press), pp. 307–329.
——(1975) “The Adverbial Theory of the Objects of Sensation,” Metaphilosophy 
6(2): 144–160.
Shear, J. (1997) Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem (Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press).
Siegel, S. (2004) “Indiscriminability and the Phenomenal,” Philosophical Studies 
120(1–3): 90–112.
—— (2006) “Which Properties are Represented in Perception?” In T.S. Gendler and 
J. Hawthorne (eds.), Perceptual Experience (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 
pp. 481–503.
—— (2007) “How can we Discover the Contents of Experience?” Southern Journal 
of Philosophy 45: 127–142.
—— (2008) “The Epistemic Conception of Hallucination,” in A. Haddock and  
F. Macpherson (eds.), Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, Knowledge (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press), pp. 205–224.
—— (2009) “The Visual Experience of Causation,” The Philosophical Quarterly 
59(236): 519–540.
Siewert, C.P. (1998) The Significance of Consciousness (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press).
Simons, D.J. and C.F. Chabris (1999) “Gorillas in Our Midst: Sustained Inatten-
tional Blindness for Dynamic Events,” Perception 28: 1059–1074.
Simons, D.J. and D.T. Levin (1997) “Change Blindness,” Trends in Cognitive Science 
1(7): 261–267.
—— (1998) “Failure to Detect Changes to People during a Real-world Interaction,” 
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 5(4): 644–649.
Smart, J.J.C. (1959) “Sensations and Brain Processes,” The Philosophical Review 
68(2): 141–156.
Smith, A.D. (2002) The Problem of Perception (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press).
Snowdon, P. (1981) “Perception, Vision and Causation,” Proceedings of the Aristote-
lian Society 81: 175–192.

172  References
—— (1990) “The Objects of Perceptual Experience,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society Supp. Vol. 64: 121–150.
—— (2005) “The Formulation of Disjunctivism: A Response to Fish,” Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society 105(1): 129–141.
Soteriou, M. (2000) “The Particularity of Visual Perception,” European Journal of 
Philosophy 8(2): 173–189.
Strawson, P.F. (1974) “Causation in Perception,” in Freedom and Resentment and 
Other Essays (London: Methuen), pp. 73–93.
—— (1979) “Perception and its Objects,” in G.F. Macdonald (ed.), Perception and 
Identity: Essays Presented to A.J. Ayer (London: Macmillan), pp. 41–60.
—— (1985) “Causation and Explanation,” in B. Vermazen and J. Hintikka (eds.), 
Essays on Davidson (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 115–135.
Sturgeon, S. (2006) “Reflective Disjunctivism,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Soci-
ety, Supplementary Volume 80(1): 185–216.
Swartz, R.J. (1965) Perceiving, Sensing, and Knowing (Berkeley, Calif.: University of 
California Press).
Thagard, P. (2005) Mind: Introduction to Cognitive Science, 2nd edn (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press).
Thau, M. (2004) “What is Disjunctivism?” Philosophical Studies 120(1–3): 193–253.
Thomas, A. (2003) “An Adverbial Theory of Consciousness,” Phenomenology and 
the Cognitive Sciences 2(3): 161–185.
Travis, C. (2004) “The Silence of the Senses,” Mind 113(449): 57–94.
Tye, M. (1975) “The Adverbial Theory: A Defence of Sellars against Jackson,” 
Metaphilosophy 6(2): 136–143.
—— (1982) “A Causal Analysis of Seeing,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 42(3): 311–325.
—— (1984) “The Adverbial Approach to Visual Experience,” The Philosophical 
Review 93(2): 195–225.
—— (1992) “Visual Qualia and Visual Content,” in T. Crane (ed.), The Contents of 
Experience: Essays on Perception (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 
158–176.
—— (1995) Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the Phenom-
enal Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
—— (2000) Consciousness, Color and Content (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
—— (2003) “Blurry Images, Double Vision, and Other Oddities: New Problems for 
Representationalism?” in Q. Smith and A. Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philo-
sophical Perspectives (Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 7–32.
—— (2009) “The Admissible Contents of Visual Experience,” The Philosophical 
Quarterly 59(236): 541–562.
Ungerleider, L.G. and M. Mishkin (1982) “Two Cortical Visual Systems,” in D.J. 
Ingle, M.A. Goodale and R.J.W. Mansfield (eds.), Analysis of Visual Behavior 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 549–586.
Vision, G. (1997) Problems of Vision: Rethinking the Causal Theory of Perception 
(New York: Oxford University Press).
Walker, R., J.M. Findlay, A.W. Young, and J. Welch (1991) “Disentangling Neglect 
and Hemianopia,” Neuropsychologia 29: 1019–1027.
Warnock, G.J. (1987) The Philosophy of Perception (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press).

References  173
Weiskrantz, L. (1986) Blindsight: A Case Study and Implications (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press).
Weiskrantz, L., E.K. Warrington, M.D. Sanders, and J. Marshall (1974) “Visual 
Capacity in the Hemianopic Field Following a Restricted Occipital Ablation,” 
Brain 97(4): 709–728.
Whyte, J.T. (1990) “Success Semantics,” Analysis 50(3): 149–157.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations (Oxford: Blackwell).
Wright, C. (2002) “(Anti-)Sceptics Simple and Subtle: G.E. Moore and John McDow-
ell,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 65(2): 330–348.
—— (2008) “Comment on John McDowell’s ‘The Disjunctive Conception of 
Experience as Material for a Transcendental Argument’,” in A. Haddock and  
F. Macpherson (eds.), Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, Knowledge (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press).
Zeki, S. (1993) A Vision of the Brain (London: Blackwell Scientific Publications). 


achromatopsia 128–9, 156
act-object theory 16
admissible contents 136–8
adverbialism 33–7; analyses of 37–9
afterimages 6, 35, 39
agnosia, types of 130
akinetopsia 129
Anstoss, the 159
argument from hallucination, the 11–15
argument from illusion, the 11–15
Armstrong, D. 22, 30, 51–61, 81
Austin, J. 14, 97–9
Barnes, W. 29
Bayne, T. 136–7
belief acquisition theory 51–64
Berkeley 19
blindsight 63
Block, N. 70–1, 136, 138–40
Brewer, B. 82, 105
Burge, T. 73–4, 82
Butchvarov, P. 46
Byrne, A. 17, 66, 67–8, 104, 137
Campbell, J. 96
causal objection, the 89–91; the revised 
94–5
causal theory of perception, the 118–21
Chalmers, D. 38, 56, 70
change blindness 83, 127, 138, 146, 156
characteristic experience view, the 151–3
characteristic property view, the 154–6
Child, W. 4, 88, 120–1
Clark, A. 152–3
cognitive science 125, 145
coherentism 54–5
Common Factor Principle, the 3–5, 
13–15, 36–7, 52, 66–7, 72, 87–9
complement objection, the 43–4
concepts: acquiring new 61–2; basic 60–
1; belief and 59–61; demonstrative 83 
content 7–8, 65–6; conceptual/
nonconceptual 74–7; Fregean theory 
of 72, 83, 84; internalism/externalism 
about 73–4, 83; naturalistic theories 
of 77–8, 82–4; possible world theory 
of 72; singular theory of 72–3, 82–3, 
84, 92–3 
continuity, perception to illusion 14
Cornman, J. 36, 38–9
Crane, T. 8, 38, 66, 76, 79, 81
Dancy, J. 19
Davidson, D. 47
Dennett, D. 60, 120, 126–7, 139
disjunctivism 87–9; about content 
92–4; epistemological 91; about 
metaphysics 91–2; negative 100–3; 
about phenomenology 94–6, 98, 
106–8; positive 98–100
disjunctivism and illusion: V vs. IH 104; 
VI vs. H 104–6
doxastic theory see belief acquisition 
theory
Dretske, F. 59, 61–2, 75, 77
Ducasse, C. 36
epistemological hat, the 2; adverbialism 
and 46–7; belief acquisition theory 
and 54–6; disjunctivism and 107–8; 
intentionalism and 80–2; other senses 
and 158; sense datum theory and 
19–22; sensory core theory and 27–8 
exing 66, 81
externalism: about content 73–4, 83; 
about justification 54–5, 83; about 
phenomenology 83
Firth, R. 25–7
Fish, W. 95, 103, 105, 136, 146
Foster, J. 22, 58
foundationalism 20–2, 47, 54–5
Index

176  Index
Goldman, A. 59, 61
Grice, H. 114–6, 151–5
hallucination: definition of 3; disjunctive 
theories of 98–103
Harman, G. 8, 45–6, 77
Heck, R.G. 81
Hinton, J. 89
hues, unique and binary 143–5
Idealism 22
illusion: definition of 3; disjunctive 
theories of 104–6
inattentional blindness 83, 127–8, 138, 
146
inclination to believe 58–9
Indirect Realism 19, 46, 154
indiscriminability 3–5, 14, 66, 72, 79, 82, 
94–6, 100–4, 152–3
indistinguishability see indiscriminability
intentional strategy 60
intentionalism 65–6; first-order 69–70, 
80; higher-order 68–9, 80; strong 
content-first 68–70, 75, 77–80, 83, 84, 
140, 160; strong phenomenology-first 
67–8, 77, 84, 160; weak 70–1
internalism: about content 73–4, 83; 
about justification 55, 83; about 
phenomenology 83
Inverted Earth 70–1
Jackson, F. 2, 19–20, 39–44
Johnston, M. 98–100
Keeley, B. 149, 152, 153, 157
Kim, J. 115
Kriegel, U. 80
Levine, J. 138
Lewis, C.I. 20, 29
Lewis, D. 10, 115–18, 120–1, 122
Locke, D. 89
Locke, J. 160
Lycan, W. 69, 77
many property problem, the 39–43
Martin, M.G.F. 8, 66, 89, 91, 95–6, 99, 
100–3
McCulloch, G. 64
McDowell, J. 83, 104, 108
McGinn, C. 72, 82
metamers 140–3
method of phenomenal contrast, the 
136–7
Mirroring Thesis, the 67, 78
misrepresentation 8, 73, 74
modesty 95–6
Moore, G.E. 19–20
multimodal experiences 161–2
Nagel, T. 2, 152
naive realism 96–8, 105–7
Noë, A. 48, 64, 97–8, 109–10, 126, 128
Nudds, M. 150, 161–2
O’Callaghan, C. 158
O’Shaughnessy, B. 159
PANIC 69, 75, 84–5
particularity 92–3
Peacocke, C. 7–8, 70, 75–6, 81
percept theory 24–9
perception, definition of veridical 3
phenomenal character 17; according 
to adverbialism 38–9; according to 
belief acquisition theory 56; and the 
cognitive aspects of experience 134–
40; and disjunctivism 94–6; according 
to intentionalism 68; according to 
naive realism 96–8, 107; according 
to representationalism 79, 84–5; 
according to sense datum theory 
17–18 
Phenomenal Principle, the 5–6, 11–13, 
15, 28, 33–7, 52, 79, 96–7, 159
phenomenological hat, the 2; 
adverbialism and 44–6; belief 
acquisition theory and 56; naive 
realism and 106–7; other senses 
and 158; percept theory and 28–9; 
representationalism and 78–80; sense 
datum theory and 18–19 
Pitcher, G. 53–4, 57–8, 59–60, 64, 107
presentational character 17; according 
to adverbialism 38, 48; according 
to belief acquisition theory 56; 
according to naive realism 97, 106; 
according to representationalism79, 
84–5; according to sense datum 
theory 17–18, 28 
Price, H.H. 5, 14, 22, 23, 24
Putnam, H. 83, 90, 139
qualia 38, 39, 45–6, 48, 68, 78–9, 82, 84, 
151–2, 160

Index  177
relationalism see naive realism
Representational Principle, the 7–9, 
23–7, 47, 52, 65–6, 67, 92–3, 97
representationalism 69, 78–82, 97, 160
Robinson, H. 5–6, 16, 19, 24–6, 30, 34, 
95, 99, 104
Rosenthal, D. 69
Roxbee-Cox, J. 151, 154–5
Russell, B. 15–16, 72
Ryle, G. 17, 22, 29
satisfaction 113–4
scenario content 75–6, 81
Schellenberg, S. 83
screening off problem, the 99–101
Searle, J. 93, 122
Segal, G. 74
Sellars, W. 42
sense datum theory 16–18
sense organ view, the 150–1
senses: individuating the 149–57; number 
of 149; theories of nonvisual 157–61; 
sensing, the relation of 16–17, 97–8
sensory core theory 23–4
sensory/cognitive distinction, the 24–5, 
29, 105–6, 134–40
Siegel, S. 103, 136–7
Siewert, C. 67
skepticism 107–8
Smart, J.J.C. 39
Smith, A.D. 14, 104, 159
Snowdon, P. 91, 118–19
Soteriou, M. 92–3
Strawson, P.F. 18, 44, 119, 136
Sturgeon, S. 102
synesthesia 132–4
teleosemantics 77–8, 84
thermometer view, the 54–5
time lag argument, the 15–16, 107
Tom and Tim 117–18
transparency 45–6, 78–80, 84, 152
Twin Earth 73–4, 83, 90
two visual systems hypothesis, the 131–2
Tye, M. 17, 38–9, 42–3, 44–5, 69, 75–6, 
77, 78–80, 84, 117, 137
unilateral neglect 129–30
veil of perception doctrine, the 19–20, 
46–7, 54
ventriloquism effect, the 161–2
veridical perception, definition of 3
visuo–spatial extinction 139
Weiskrantz, L. 63
Whyte, J. 77
Wittgenstein, L. 17
zombies 56

