

Philosophy of Language
Philosophy of Language: a Contemporary Introduction introduces the student 
to the main issues and theories in twentieth and twenty-first-century phi-
losophy of language, focusing specifically on linguistic phenomena.
Topics are structured in four parts in the book. Part I, Reference and 
Referring, includes topics such as Russell’s Theory of Descriptions, 
Donnellan’s distinction, problems of anaphora, the description theory of 
proper names, Searle’s cluster theory, and the causal–historical theory. Part 
II, Theories of Meaning, surveys the competing theories of linguistic mean-
ing and compares their various advantages and liabilities. Part III, Pragmatics 
and Speech Acts, introduces the basic concepts of linguistic pragmatics, 
includes a detailed discussion of the problem of indirect force and surveys 
approaches to metaphor. Part IV, new to this edition, examines the four 
theories of metaphor.
Features of Philosophy of Language include:
new chapters on Frege and puzzles, inferentialism, illocutionary  
• 
theories of meaning, and relevance theory
chapter overviews and summaries
• 
clear supportive examples
• 
study questions
• 
annotated further reading
• 
glossary
• 
Praise for the First Edition:
“This exceptional text fulfils two essential criteria of a good introduc-
tory textbook in the philosophy of language: it covers a broad range of 
topics well, all of which are the basis of current active research, and does 
so in an accurate manner accessible to undergraduate students.”
Mike Harnish, University of Arizona
“. . . an excellent textbook for teaching. The examples throughout are 
delightful and students will love them.”
Edwin Mares, Victoria University of Wellington
William G. Lycan is William Rand Kenan Professor of Philosophy at the 
University of North Carolina. He is the author of over 150 articles as well as 
seven books.

Routledge Contemporary Introductions to Philosophy
Series Editor:
Paul K. Moser
Loyola University of Chicago
This innovative, well-structured series is for students who have already done an 
introductory course in philosophy. Each book introduces a core general subject 
in contemporary philosophy and offers students an accessible but substantial 
transition from introductory to higher-level college work in that subject. The 
series is accessible to non-specialists and each book clearly motivates and 
expounds the problems and positions introduced. An orientating chapter briefly 
introduces its topic and reminds readers of any crucial material they need to 
have retained from a typical introductory course. Considerable attention is 
given to explaining the central philosophical problems of a subject and the main 
competing solutions and arguments for those solutions. The primary aim is to 
educate students in the main problems, positions and arguments of contemporary 
philosophy rather than to convince students of a single position.
Classical Philosophy
Christopher Shields
Epistemology
Second Edition
Robert Audi
Ethics
Harry Gensler
Metaphysics
Second Edition
Michael J. Loux
Philosophy of Art
Noël Carroll
Philosophy of Language
Second Edition
William G. Lycan
Philosophy of Mathematics
Second Edition
James R. Brown
Philosophy of Mind
Second Edition
John Heil
Philosophy of Religion
Keith E. Yandell
Philosophy of Science
Alex Rosenberg
Social and Political 
Philosophy
John Christman
Philosophy of Psychology
José Bermudez
Classical Modern 
Philosophy
Jeffrey Tlumak
Philosophy of Biology
Alex Rosenberg and Daniel 
W. McShea

Philosophy of 
Language
a Contemporary Introduction
Second Edition
William G. Lycan

First published 2000
by Routledge
This edition first published 2008
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Simultaneously published in the UK
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
First edition © 2000 Taylor & Francis Group
Second edition © 2008 Taylor & Francis Group
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or repro-
duced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other 
means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trade-
marks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Lycan, William G.
Philosophy of language: a contemporary introduction/William G. Lycan. 
– 2nd ed.
p. cm. – (Routledge contemporary introductions to philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Language and languages – Philosophy. I. Title.
P106.L886 2008
401–dc22
2007038223
ISBN10: 0-415-95751-6 (hbk)
ISBN10: 0-415-95752-4 (pbk)
ISBN10: 0-203-93000-2 (ebk)
ISBN13: 978-0-415-95751-9 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978-0-415-95752-6 (pbk)
ISBN13: 978-0-203-93000-7 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2008.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-93000-2 Master e-book ISBN

Contents
Preface
ix
Acknowledgements
xi
Acknowledgements for the Second Edition
xii
	 1	
Introduction: meaning and reference
1
Overview
1
Meaning and understanding
1
The Referential Theory
3
Summary
6
Questions
6
Further reading
6
Part I: Reference and referring
	 2 
Definite descriptions
9
Overview
9
Singular terms
10
Russell’s Theory of Descriptions
12
Objections to Russell’s theory
19
Summary
29
Questions
30
Further reading
30
	 3	
Proper names: the Description Theory
31
Overview
31
Frege and the puzzles
31
Opening objections
36
Searle’s Cluster Theory
38
Kripke’s critique
39
Summary
43
Questions
43
Further reading
44

vi  Contents
	 4	
Proper names: Direct Reference and the  
Causal–Historical Theory
45
Overview
45
Possible worlds
46
Rigidity and proper names
47
Direct Reference
49
The Causal–Historical Theory
53
Problems for the Causal–Historical Theory
55
Natural-kind terms and “Twin Earth”
58
Summary
60
Questions
61
Further reading
61
Part II: Theories of meaning
63
	 5	
Traditional theories of meaning
65
Overview
65
The Proposition Theory
68
Summary
74
Questions
74
Further reading
74
	 6	
“Use” theories
76
Overview
76
“Use” in a roughly Wittgensteinian sense
77
Objections and some replies
79
Inferentialism
83
Summary
84
Questions
85
Further reading
85
	 7	
Psychological theories: Grice’s program
86
Overview
86
Grice’s basic idea
86
Speaker-meaning
88
Sentence meaning
92
Summary
96
Questions
96
Further reading
97
	 8 
Verificationism
98
Overview
98
The theory and its motivation
98
Some objections
100

Contents  vii
The big one
105
Summary
108
Questions
108
Further reading
108
	 9	
Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program 109
Overview
109
Truth conditions
109
Truth-defining natural languages
114
Objections to the Davidsonian version
117
Summary
123
Questions
124
Further reading
125
	10	
Truth-Condition Theories: possible worlds and 
intensional semantics
126
Overview
126
Truth conditions reconceived
126
Advantages over Davidson’s view
129
Remaining objections
131
Summary
133
Questions
133
Further reading
133
Part III: Pragmatics and speech acts
135
	11	
Semantic pragmatics
137
Overview
137
Semantic pragmatics vs. pragmatic pragmatics
138
The problem of deixis
139
The work of semantic pragmatics
141
Summary
143
Questions
143
Further reading
143
	12	
Speech acts and illocutionary force
144
Overview
144
Performatives
144
Infelicities and constitutive rules
149
Cohen’s problem
151
Illocutionary theories of meaning
153
Summary
154
Questions
154
Further reading
155

viii  Contents
	13	
Implicative relations
156
Overview
156
Conveyed meanings and invited inferences
157
Conversational implicature
158
Presupposition and conventional implicature
163
Relevance Theory
166
Indirect force
168
Summary
170
Questions
171
Further reading
171
Part IV: The dark side
173
	14	
Metaphor
175
Overview
175
A philosophical bias
175
The issues, and two simple theories
176
Davidson’s causal theory
177
The Naive Simile Theory
179
The Figurative Simile Theory
180
The Pragmatic Theory
183
Metaphor as analogical
187
Summary
189
Questions
190
Further reading
190
Notes
191
Glossary
201
Bibliography
205
Index
217

Preface
As its title slyly suggests, this book is an introduction to the main issues 
in contemporary philosophy of language. Philosophy of language has been 
much in vogue since early in the twentieth century, but only since the 1960s 
have the issues begun to appear in high resolution.
One crucial development in the past forty years is the attention of philoso-
phers of language to formal grammar or syntax as articulated by theoretical 
linguists. I personally believe that such attention is vital to success in phi-
losophizing about language, and in my own work I pay as much of it as I 
am able. With regret, however, I have not made that a theme of this book. 
Under severe space limitations, I could not expend as many pages as would 
be needed to explain the basics of formal syntax, without having to omit 
presentation of some philosophical issues I consider essential to competence 
in the field.
Since around 1980, some philosophers of language have taken a turn toward 
the philosophy of mind, and some have engaged in metaphysical exploration 
of the relation or lack thereof between language and reality. These adversions 
have captured many philosophers’ interest, and some fine textbooks have 
focused on one or both (for example, Blackburn 1984; Devitt and Sterelny 
1987). But I have chosen otherwise. Whatever the merits of those sorts of 
work, I have not found that either helps us sufficiently to understand spe-
cifically linguistic mechanisms or the core issues of philosophy of language 
itself. This book will concentrate on those mechanisms and issues. (Readers 
who wish to press on into metaphysics or philosophy of mind should consult, 
respectively, Michael J.  Loux’s Metaphysics and John Heil’s Philosophy of 
Mind, both in the Routledge Contemporary Introductions series.)
Many of my chapters and sections will take the form of presenting data 
pertinent to a linguistic phenomenon, expounding someone’s theory of that 
phenomenon, and then listing and assessing objections to that theory. I 
emphasize here, because I will not always have the space to do so in the text, 
that in each case what I will summarize for the reader will be only the opening 
moves made by the various theorists and their opponents and objectors. In 
particular, I doubt that any of the objections to any of the theories is fatal; 
champions of theories are remarkably good at avoiding or refuting objec-
tions. The real theorizing begins where this book leaves off.

x  Preface
I have used some notation of formal logic, specifically the predicate calcu-
lus, for those who are familiar with it and will find points made clearer by it. 
But in each case I have also explained the meaning in English.
Many of the writings to be discussed in this book can be found in the 
following anthologies: T.  Olshewsky (ed.), Problems in the Philosophy of 
Language (Austin, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969); J. F. Rosenberg 
and C.  Travis (eds.) Readings in the Philosophy of Language (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1971); D.  Davidson and G.  Harman (eds.), The 
Logic of Grammar (Encino, CA: Dickenson, 1975); R. M. Harnish (ed.) Basic 
Topics in the Philosophy of Language (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 
1994); A.  Martinich (ed.) The Philosophy of Language, 5th edn. (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2006), and earlier editions as well; P. Ludlow (ed.) 
Readings in the Philosophy of Language (Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/
MIT Press, 1997); A. Nye (ed.), Philosophy of Language: The Big Questions 
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1998); M. Baghramian (ed.), Modern Philosophy of 
Language (New York: Counterpoint Press, 1999).

Acknowledgements
I thank my editor, Moira Taylor, for her bracing encouragement and (espe-
cially) for her patience. The latter was severely tried.
Mike Harnish, Greg McCulloch, and Ed Mares each very kindly read an 
early draft and supplied me with many thoughtful comments and suggestions. 
I believe the book is much improved as a result, and I am most grateful.
Peter Alward and Laura Morgan produced much of the early draft by 
transcribing many hours of lectures from very bad audio recordings. I thank 
them warmly and I hope that each of them will soon make a full recovery.
Sean McKeever’s months of editorial help and advice have been invaluable. 
(He suffered through some transcribing as well.) Thanks especially to Sean 
for suggesting some needed cuts, and for organizing the bibliography.
The last few chapters of this book were completed during my tenure 
as a Fellow of the National Humanities Center, in 1998–99. I thank the 
Center and its wonderful staff for their generous support. For additional 
funding I am indebted to the National Endowment for the Humanities 
(#RA–20169– 95).

Acknowledgements for the Second Edition
Thanks to editor Kate Ahl for her patient help, and to Meg Wallace for a 
good deal of research as well as editing and indexing. Thanks also to many 
readers of the first edition, who have offered comments and suggestions from 
around the world. I am especially grateful to Mike Harnish (again!), Patrick 
Greenough, and Mark Phelan, who gave me very detailed comments that 
have led to many improvements, including the correction of some errors.
Many of the comments I have received urged me to add a chapter or section 
on this or that additional topic. Those were good ideas, but space limitations 
forbade my adopting more than a handful of them; my apologies.

1	
Introduction: meaning and 
reference
Overview
That certain kinds of marks and noises have meanings, and that we human 
beings grasp those meanings without even thinking about it, are very strik-
ing facts. A philosophical theory of meaning should explain what it is for a 
string of marks or noises to be meaningful and, more particularly, what it is 
in virtue of which the string has the distinctive meaning it does. The theory 
should also explain how it is possible for human beings to produce and to 
understand meaningful utterances and to do that so effortlessly.
A widespread idea about meaning is that words and more complex lin-
guistic expressions have their meanings by standing for things in the world. 
Though commonsensical and at first attractive, this Referential Theory of 
meaning is fairly easily shown to be inadequate. For one thing, comparatively 
few words do actually stand for things in the world. For another, if all words 
were like proper names, serving just to pick out individual things, we would 
not be able to form grammatical sentences in the first place.
Meaning and understanding
Not many people know that, in 1931, Adolf Hitler made a visit to the United 
States, in the course of which he did some sightseeing, had a brief affair with a 
lady named Maxine in Keokuk, Iowa, tried peyote (which caused him to hal-
lucinate hordes of frogs and toads wearing little boots and singing the Horst 
Wessel Lied), infiltrated a munitions plant near Detroit, met secretly with 
Vice-President Curtis regarding sealskin futures, and invented the electric 
can opener.
There is a good reason why not many people know all that: none of it 
is true. But the remarkable thing is that just now, as you read through my 
opening sentence—let us call it sentence (1)—you understood it perfectly, 
whether or not you were ready to accept it, and you did so without the slight-
est conscious effort.
Remarkable, I said. It probably does not strike you as remarkable or sur-
prising, even now that you have noticed it. You are entirely used to reading 
words and sentences and understanding them at sight, and you find it nearly 

2  Philosophy of Language
as natural as breathing or eating or walking. But how did you understand 
sentence (1)? Not by having seen it before; I am certain that never in the 
history of the universe has anyone ever written or uttered that particular 
sentence, until I did. Nor did you understand (1) by having seen a very 
similar sentence, since I doubt that anyone has ever produced a sentence even 
remotely similar to (1).
You may say that you understood (1) because you speak English and (1) 
is an English sentence. That is true so far as it goes, but it only pushes the 
mystery to arm’s length. How is it that you are able to “speak English,” given 
that speaking English involves being able to produce and understand, not 
only elementary expressions like “I’m thirsty,” “Shut up,” and “More gravy,” 
but novel sentences as complex as (1)? That ability is truly amazing, and much 
harder to explain than how you breathe or how you eat or how you walk, each 
of which abilities is already well understood by physiologists.
One clue is fairly obvious upon reflection: (1) is a string of words, English 
words, that you understand individually. So it seems that you understand 
(1) because you understand the words that occur in (1) and you understand 
something about how they are strung together. As we shall see, that is an 
important fact, but for now it is only suggestive.
So far we have been talking about a human ability, to produce and under-
stand speech. But consider linguistic expressions themselves, as objects of 
study in their own right.
(2)	 w gfjsdkhj jiobfglglf ud
(3)	 It’s dangerous to splash gasoline around your living room. 
(4)	 Good of off primly the a the the why. 
(1)–(4) are all strings of marks (or of noises, if uttered aloud). But they 
differ dramatically from each other: (1) and (3) are meaningful sentences, 
while (2) and (4) are gibberish. (4) differs from (2) in containing individually 
meaningful English words, but the words are not linked together in such a 
way as to make a sentence, and collectively they do not mean anything at 
all.
Certain sequences of noises or marks, then, have a feature that is both 
scarce in nature and urgently in need of explanation: that of meaning some-
thing. And each of those strings has the more specific property of meaning 
something in particular. For example, (3) means that it is dangerous to splash 
gasoline around your living room.
So our philosophical study of language begins with the following data.
Some strings of marks or noises are 
• 
meaningful sentences.
Each meaningful sentence has parts that are themselves meaningful.
• 
Each meaningful sentence means something in particular.
• 

Introduction: meaning and reference  3
Competent speakers of a language are able to understand many of that 
• 
language’s sentences, without effort and almost instantaneously; they 
also produce sentences, in the same way.
And these data all need explaining. In virtue of what is any sequence of marks 
or noises meaningful? In virtue of what does such a string mean what it dis-
tinctively does? And how, again, are human beings able to understand and 
produce appropriate meaningful speech?
The Referential Theory
There is an attractive and commonsensical explanation of all the foregoing 
facts—so attractive that most of us think of it by the time we are ten or eleven 
years old. The idea is that linguistic expressions have the meanings they do 
because they stand for things; what they mean is what they stand for. On this 
view, words are like labels; they are symbols that represent, designate, name, 
denote or refer to items in the world: the name “Adolf Hitler” denotes (the 
person) Hitler; the noun “dog” refers to dogs, as do the French “chien” and 
the German “Hund.” The sentence “The cat sat on the mat” represents some 
cat’s sitting on some mat, presumably in virtue of “The cat” designating that 
cat, “the mat” designating the mat in question, and “sat on” denoting (if you 
like) the relation of sitting on. Sentences thus mirror the states of affairs they 
describe, and that is how they get to mean those things. For the most part, of 
course, words are arbitrarily associated with the things they refer to; some-
one simply decided that Hitler was to be called “Adolf,” and the inscription 
or sound “dog” could have been used to mean anything.
This Referential Theory of Linguistic Meaning would explain the sig-
nificance of all expressions in terms of their having been conventionally 
associated with things or states of affairs in the world, and it would explain 
a human being’s understanding a sentence in terms of that person’s knowing 
what the sentence’s component words refer to. It is a natural and appealing 
view. Indeed it may seem obviously correct, at least so far as it goes. And one 
would have a hard time denying that reference or naming is our cleanest-cut 
and most familiar relation between a word and the world. Yet, when exam-
ined, the Referential Theory very soon runs into serious objections.
Objection 1
Not every word does name or denote any actual object.
First, there are the names of nonexistent items like Pegasus or the Easter 
Bunny. “Pegasus” does not denote anything, because there is in reality no 
winged horse for it to denote. (We shall discuss such names at some length in 
chapter 3.) Or consider pronouns of quantification, as in:
(5)	 I saw nobody.

4  Philosophy of Language
It would be a tired joke to take “nobody” as a name and respond, “You must 
have very good eyesight, then.” (Lewis Carroll: “Who did you pass on 
the road?” . . . “Nobody” . . . “ . . . So of course nobody walks slower than 
you.”1 And e. e. cummings’ poem “anyone lived in a pretty how town”2 makes 
little sense to the reader until s/he figures out that cummings is perversely 
using expressions like “anyone” and “noone” as names of individual 
persons.)
Second, consider a simple subject–predicate sentence:
(6)	 Ralph is fat.
Though “Ralph” may name a person, what does “fat” name or denote? Not 
an individual. Certainly it does not name Ralph, but describes or character-
izes him (fairly or no).
We might suggest that “fat” denotes something abstract; for example, it 
and other adjectives might be said to refer to qualities (or “properties,” “attri-
butes,” “features,” “characteristics,” and the like) of things. “Fat” might be 
said to name fatness in the abstract, or as Plato would have called it, The Fat 
Itself. Perhaps what (6) says is that Ralph has or exemplifies or is an instance 
of the quality fatness. On that interpretation, “is fat” would mean “has fat-
ness.” But then, if we try to think of subject–predicate meaning as a matter 
of concatenating the name of a property with the name of an individual using 
the copula “is,” we would need a second abstract entity for the “is” to stand 
for, say the relation of “having,” as in the individual’s having the property. 
But that would in turn make (6) mean something like, “Ralph bears the hav-
ing relation to fatness,” and so we would need a third abstract entity to relate 
the new “bears” relation to the original individual, relation and property, 
and so on—and on, and on, forever and ever. (The infinite regress here was 
pointed out by Bradley 1930: 17–18.)
Third, there are words that grammatically are nouns but do not, intui-
tively, name either individual things or kinds of things—not even nonexistent 
“things” or abstract items such as qualities. Quine (1960) gives the examples 
of “sake,” “behalf,” and “dint.” One sometimes does something for someone 
else’s sake or on that person’s behalf, but not as if a sake or a behalf were a 
kind of object the beneficiary led around on a leash. Or one achieves some-
thing by dint of hard work; but a dint is not a thing or kind of thing. (I have 
never been sure what a “whit” or a “cahoot” is.) Despite being nouns, words 
like these surely do not have their meanings by referring to particular kinds 
of objects. They seem to have meaning only by dint of occurring in longer 
constructions. By themselves they barely can be said to mean anything at all, 
though they are words, and meaningful words at that.
Fourth, many parts of speech other than nouns do not even seem to 
refer to things of any sort or in any way at all: “very,” “of,” “and,” “the,” “a,” 
“yes,” and, for that matter, “hey” and “alas.” Yet of course such words are 
meaningful and occur in sentences that any competent speaker of English 
understands.

Introduction: meaning and reference  5
(Not everyone is convinced that the Referential Theory is so decisively 
refuted, even in regard to that last group of the most clearly nonreferential 
words there are. In fact, Richard Montague (1960) set out to construct a 
very sophisticated, highly technical theory in which even words like those 
are assigned referents of a highly abstract sort, and do have a meaning, at least 
in part, by referring to what they supposedly refer to. We shall say more of 
Montague’s system in chapter 10.)
Objection 2
According to the Referential Theory, a sentence is a list of names. But a mere 
list of names does not say anything.
(7)	 Fred Martha Irving Phyllis
cannot be used to assert anything, even if Martha or Irving is an abstract 
entity rather than a physical object. One might suppose that if the name of 
an individual is concatenated with the name of a quality, as in
(8)	 Ralph fatness
the resulting string would have normal subject–predicate meaning, say that 
Ralph is fat. (Early in his career, Bertrand Russell suggested that, by writing 
down a list of names for the right sorts of things in the right order, one would 
form the collective name of a state of affairs.) But in fact (8) is ungrammatical. 
For it to take on normal subject–predicate meaning, a verb would have to be 
inserted:
(9)	 Ralph {has/exemplifies} fatness
which would launch Bradley’s regress again.
Objection 3
As we shall see and discuss in the next two chapters, there are specific lin-
guistic phenomena that seem to show that there is more to meaning than 
reference. In particular, coreferring terms are often not synonymous; that is, 
two terms can share their referent but differ in meaning—“Joseph Ratzinger” 
and “the Pope,” for example.
It looks as though we should conclude that there must be at least one 
way of being a meaningful expression other than by naming something, pos-
sibly even for some expressions that do name things. There are a number of 
theories of meaning that surpass the Referential Theory, even though each 
theory faces difficulties of its own. We shall look at some of the theories and 
their besetting difficulties in Part II. But first, in the next three chapters, we 
shall look further into the nature of naming, referring, and the like, in part 

6  Philosophy of Language
because, despite the failings of the Referential Theory of Meaning, refer-
ence remains important in its own right, and in part because a discussion 
of reference will help us introduce some concepts that will be needed in the 
assessment of theories of meaning.
Summary
Some strings of marks or noises are 
• 
meaningful sentences.
It is an amazing fact that any normal person can instantly grasp the 
• 
meaning of even a very long and novel sentence.
Each meaningful sentence has parts that are themselves meaningful.
• 
Though initially attractive, the Referential Theory of Meaning faces 
• 
several compelling objections.
Questions
1	
Can you think of any further objections to the Referential Theory as 
stated here?
2	
Are objections 1 and 2 entirely fair, or are there plausible replies that 
the referential theorist might make?
Further reading
Probably the most persistent critic of the Referential Theory is 
• 
Wittgenstein (1953: Part I). A more systematic Wittgensteinian attack 
is found in Waismann (1965a: ch. 8).
Arguments of the sort lying behind objection 3 are found in Frege 
• 
(1892/1952a) and (1892/1952b).
Bradley’s regress is further discussed by Wolterstorff (1970: ch. 4) and 
• 
by Loux (1998: ch. 1).

Part I
Reference and referring


2 
Definite descriptions
Overview
Even if the Referential Theory of Meaning does not hold for all words, one 
might think it would apply at least to singular terms (terms that purport 
to refer to single individuals, such as proper names, pronouns, and definite 
descriptions). But Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell argued powerfully 
that definite descriptions, at least, do not mean what they mean in virtue of 
denoting what they denote. Rather, he contended, a sentence containing a 
definite description, such as “The woman who lives there is a biochemist,” 
has subject–predicate form only superficially, and is really—logically—a trio 
of generalizations: it is equivalent to “At least one woman lives there, and at 
most one woman lives there, and whoever lives there is a biochemist.”
Russell argues for this analysis both directly and by showing that it affords 
solutions to each of four vexing logical puzzles: the Problem of Apparent 
Reference to Nonexistents, the Problem of Negative Existentials, Frege’s 
Puzzle about Identity, and the Problem of Substitutivity.
A variety of objections have been raised against Russell’s Theory of 
Descriptions. P. F. Strawson pointed out that it is at odds with our usual 
linguistic habits: though a sentence having “the present King of France” as 
its subject presupposes that there is at least one King of France, it is not false 
for lack of a King; rather, it cannot be used to make a proper statement at all, 
and so it has no truth-value. And Russell’s theory ignores the fact that most 
descriptions are context-bound, and denote uniquely only within a circum-
scribed local setting (“Bring me the book on the table”). Strawson argues 
more generally that Russell treats sentences and their logical properties in 
too abstract and disembodied a fashion, forgetting how they are actually used 
by flesh-and-blood people in concrete conversational practice.
Keith Donnellan notes that, even if Russell is right about some uses of 
descriptions, he has ignored a common sort of case in which a description is 
used “referentially,” merely to indicate a particular person or thing, regard-
less of that referent’s attributes.
Finally, there are further uses of descriptions, called “anaphoric” uses, 
which may defy Russellian treatment.

10  Reference and referring
Singular terms
In English or any other natural language, the paradigmatic referring devices 
are singular terms, expressions that purport to denote or designate particular 
individual people, places, or other objects (as opposed to general terms such 
as “dog” or “brown” that can apply to more than one thing). Singular terms 
include proper names (“Jane,” “Winston Churchill,” “Djakarta,” “7,” 3:17 
p.m.”), definite descriptions (“the Queen of England,” “the cat on the mat,” 
“the last department meeting but one”), singular personal pronouns (“you,” 
“she”), demonstrative pronouns (“this,” “that”), and a few others.
Even if the Referential Theory of Meaning is not true across the board, one 
might reasonably expect it to be true of singular terms. But Gottlob Frege 
(1892/1952a, 1892/1952b) and, following him, Bertrand Russell (1905/1956, 
1918/1956, 1919/1971) showed definitively that it is not true of definite 
descriptions, and raised serious doubts whether it is true of other ordinary 
singular terms either.
Frege and Russell set forth four puzzles about singular terms, the first 
three of which go back to objections raised in chapter 1 against the Referential 
Theory of meaning.
The Problem of Apparent Reference to Nonexistents
Consider:
(1)	 James Moriarty is bald.
(Professor Moriarty is Sherlock Holmes’ arch-enemy, described most fully 
in Conan Doyle’s story “The Final Problem.”1) The following set of state-
ments is inconsistent (that is, on pain of logical contradiction, the statements 
cannot all be true):
J1	
(1) is meaningful (significant, not meaningless).
J2	
(1) is a subject–predicate sentence.
J3	
A meaningful subject–predicate sentence is meaningful (only) in virtue 
of its picking out some individual thing and ascribing some property to 
that thing.
J4	
(1)’s subject term fails to pick out or denote anything that exists.
J5	
If (1) is meaningful only in virtue of picking out a thing and ascribing a 
property to that thing (J1, J2, J3), and if (1)’s subject term fails to pick 
out anything that exists (J4), then either (1) is not meaningful after all 
(contrary to J1) or (1) picks out a thing that does not exist. But:
J6	
There is no such thing as a “nonexistent thing.”
The rub is that every one of J1–J6 seems true.

Definite descriptions  11
The Problem of Negative Existentials
This is a special case of the foregoing puzzle but, as we shall see, an aggra-
vated one. Consider:
(2)	 Pegasus never existed.
(2) seems to be true and seems to be about Bellerophon’s steed, Pegasus. But 
if (2) is true, (2) cannot be about Pegasus, for there is no such entity for it to 
be about. Likewise, if (2) is about Pegasus, then (2) is false, for Pegasus must 
then in some sense exist.
It is worth noting a previous solution to the Problems of Apparent 
Reference to Nonexistents and Negative Existentials, rejected by Frege and 
later even more vehemently so by Russell. J1 is uncontroversial; J2 seems 
obvious; J4 is just a fact; and J5 is trivially true. Alexius Meinong (1904/1960) 
had boldly leapt to deny J6, insisting à la St. Anselm that any possible object 
of thought—even a self-contradictory one—has being of a sort even though 
only a few such things are so lucky as to exist in reality as well. Moriarty 
has being of that sort and can be referred to, even though—fortunately for 
England and the world—he lacks the property of existing.2
With that otherwise unexplained distinction in hand, Meinong could deal 
handily with negative existentials in particular. Such a sentence says, of an 
entity that (of course) has being, that that entity lacks existence. Secretariat, 
Seabiscuit and Smarty Jones were horses that existed but lacked wings; 
Pegasus had wings but failed to exist. It happens.
Less implausibly, Frege himself dealt with Apparent Reference to 
Nonexistents by rejecting J3: He posited abstract entities that he called 
“senses” and argued that a singular term is meaningful in virtue of having 
one of those over and above its referent—or in the case of a nonreferring 
singular term, instead of a referent. That is, since the singular term expresses 
a sense, it is meaningful whether or not it actually refers.
Frege’s solutions to Negative Existentials and the other two problems will 
be briefly surveyed in the next chapter.
Frege’s Puzzle about Identity
An identity statement such as
(3)	 Mark Twain is Samuel Langhorne Clemens
contains two singular terms, both of which (if the statement is true) pick 
out or denote the same person or thing. It seems, then, that what the state-
ment says is simply that that person is identical with that person, that that 
person is identical with herself. If so, then the statement is trivial; (3) says 
no more than “Mark Twain is Mark Twain.” Yet (3) seems nontrivial, in each 

12  Reference and referring
of two ways: first, (3) is informative, in that someone might learn something 
new upon reading (3) (either something about Twain’s actual identity or that 
Clemens was the famous author); second, (3) is contingent, as philosophers 
say—the fact (3) states is one that need not have held; reality could have been 
otherwise. So it seems that at least one of the singular terms figuring in (3) 
must have and contribute some kind of meaning over and above its referent.
The Problem of Substitutivity
The function of a singular term is to pick out an individual thing and intro-
duce that thing into discourse. Even if one stops short of the entire Referential 
Theory of Meaning, one might think it is in virtue of that denoting role that 
singular terms are meaningful at all. Therefore, we would expect that any 
two singular terms that denote one and the same thing would be semantically 
equivalent: we could take any sentence containing one of the terms and sub-
stitute the other of the two for the first term, without changing the meaning 
or at least without changing the truth-value of the sentence. But consider:
(4)	 Albert believes that Samuel Langhorne Clemens was less than 5 
feet tall.
and suppose (4) is true. Now, Albert is unaware that Clemens wrote nov-
els and stories under the pen name “Twain.” We cannot substitute the term 
“Mark Twain” for “Samuel Langhorne Clemens” in (4) without chang-
ing (4)’s truth-value; the result is a false sentence, since (we may suppose) 
Albert has seen a photo of Twain and believes that he was of normal height. 
In W.  V.  Quine’s (1960) terminology, the sentential position occupied by 
the name in (4) is referentially opaque—“opaque” for short—as opposed to 
referentially transparent (“opaque” means just that substituting a different 
singular term into that position may change the truth-value of the containing 
sentence). What causes the opacity is the “believes that” construction, since 
the sentence “Samuel Langhorne Clemens was less than 5 feet tall,” standing 
alone, is transparent: If Clemens was less than 5 feet tall, then so of course 
was Twain, “they” being the very same person.
Russell’s Theory of Descriptions
Russell initially posed the four puzzles in terms of definite descriptions rather 
than proper names, because he was interested in the logic of the word “the.” 
(“It may be thought excessive to devote two chapters [of his Introduction to 
Mathematical Philosophy] to one word, but to the philosophical mathemati-
cian it is a word of very great importance: like Browning’s grammarian with 
the enclitic δε, I would give the doctrine of this word if I were ‘dead from the 
waist down’ and not merely in a prison”3 (1919/1971: 167).)

Definite descriptions  13
Not too surprisingly, Russell argued on the basis of the puzzles that definite 
descriptions do have and contribute meanings that go beyond their referents 
alone. His Theory of Descriptions, as it has since been called and capitalized, 
takes the form of a contextual definition of the word “the” as it occurs in 
typical definite descriptions. That is, rather than defining the word explicitly 
(how would you go about completing the formula, “The = def . . . ”?), Russell 
offers a recipe for paraphrasing standard types of whole sentence containing 
“the,” in such a way as to exhibit the role of “the” indirectly, and to reveal 
what he called the sentences’ “logical forms.” (He does not here treat plural 
uses of “the,” or the generic use as in “The whale is a mammal.” Notice that 
definite descriptions can be formed without use of “the,” for example by way 
of possessives, as in “my brother” or “Doris’ egg salad sandwich,” though 
perhaps we might paraphrase those along the lines of “the brother of me.”)
Here is Russell’s contextual definition of “the.” Let us take a paradigmatic 
sentence, of the form “The F is G.”
(5)	 The author of Waverley was Scotch.4
(5) appears to be a simple subject–predicate sentence, referring to an 
individual (Sir Walter Scott) and predicating something (Scottishness) of 
him. But appearances are deceiving, Russell says. Notice that the ostensible 
singular term, “The author of Waverley,” consists of our troublesome word 
“the” pasted onto the front of a predicative expression, and notice too that 
the meaning of that expression figures crucially in our ability to recognize 
or pick out the expression’s referent; to find the referent we have to look for 
someone who did write Waverley. Russell suggests that “the” abbreviates a 
more complex construction involving what logicians and linguists call quanti-
fiers, words that quantify general terms (“all teenagers,” “some bananas,” “six 
geese a-laying,” “most police officers,” “no light bulbs,” and the like). Indeed, 
he thinks that (5) as a whole abbreviates a conjunction of three quantified 
general statements, none of which makes reference to Scott in particular:
(5a) At least one person authored Waverley.
(5b) At most one person authored Waverley.
(5c) Whoever authored Waverley was Scotch.
Each of (5a)–(5c) is intuitively necessary for the truth of (5). If the author 
of Waverley was Scotch, then there was such an author; if there were more 
than one author, “the” should not have been used; and if the author was 
Scotch it follows trivially that whoever did the authoring was. And (5a)–(5c) 
taken together certainly seem sufficient for the truth of (5). So we seem to 
have a set of individually necessary and jointly sufficient conditions for (5); 
that in itself is a powerful argument for Russell’s analysis.

14  Reference and referring
In standard logical notation: Let W represent the predicate “ . . . authored 
Waverley” and S represent “ . . . was Scotch.” Then Russell’s three conditions 
are:
(a) (∃x)Wx
(b)	 (x)(Wx  →(y) (Wy  → y = x))
(c)	 (x)(Wx  → Sx)
(a)–(c) are conjointly equivalent to
(d)	 (∃x)(Wx & ((y) (Wy  → y = x) & Sx))
Russell’s position is that (d) correctly expresses the logical form of (5), as 
distinct from (5)’s superficial grammatical form. We have already encountered 
an example of this distinction, in chapter 1, illustrated by the sentence “I saw 
nobody.” Superficially, that sentence has the same form as “I saw Martha”—
Subject+Transitive Verb+Object. Yet the two differ sharply in their logical 
properties. “I saw Martha” entails that I saw someone, while “I saw nobody” 
entails precisely the opposite; it is equivalent to “It’s not the case that I saw 
anyone” and to “There is no one that I saw.” Though someone just beginning 
to learn English might take it as one, “nobody” is not really a singular term, 
but a quantifier. In logical notation, letting A represent “saw” and i represent 
“I,” “I saw nobody” is expressed as ~(∃x)Aix or, equivalently, (x)~Aix and 
the explicit inference rules governing this formal notation explain the logical 
behavior of the English sentence thus translated into it.
So too, Russell maintained, the apparent singular term in (5), “The author 
of Waverley,” is not really (that is, at the level of logical form) a singular term 
at all, but a convenient (if misleading) abbreviation of the more complicated 
quantificational structure displayed in (a)–(c). As he puts it, the apparent 
singular term “disappears on analysis.” Our puzzles have arisen in fact from 
applying principles about singular reference to expressions that are not really 
singular terms at all but only masquerade as such.
Let us now go through the four puzzles and exhibit Russell’s solutions 
one by one.
Apparent Reference to Nonexistents
Russell put the Problem of Apparent Reference to Nonexistents in terms of 
(6):
(6)	 The present King of France is bald.

Definite descriptions  15
We turn, then, to the inconsistent set of statements corresponding to 
J1–J6 above, replacing “(1)” with “(6)” and relettering the statements with 
“K” instead of “J.” (Thus, statement K1 is “(6) is meaningful (significant, not 
meaningless),” K2 is “(6) is a subject–predicate sentence,” and so on.)
Now, let us paraphrase (6) according to the foregoing method:
At least one person is presently King of France [more perspicuously, 
presently kings France], 
and
at most one person is presently King of France, 
and
whoever is presently King of France is bald.
No problem. The first of the foregoing three conjuncts is simply false, 
since no one kings France at present; so (6) itself comes out false on Russell’s 
analysis. When we first stated the puzzle, it looked as though one had to reject 
either J3/K3 or (outrageously) J6/K6, since J2 seemed as obvious as the other 
undeniable J statements. But now Russell ingeniously denies statement K2, 
“(6) is a subject–predicate sentence,” since he denies that “The present King 
of France” is “really” a singular term. Of course (6) has subject–predicate 
form in the superficial grammatical way. But notice again that our three 
conjuncts are all general statements and that none mentions any specific 
individual corresponding to the alleged King; “the King” figures nowhere in 
logical form as a subject.
(Alternatively and less dramatically, we could keep K2, understanding it 
as alluding to superficial grammatical form, and reject K3 on the grounds 
that a superficially subject–predicate sentence can be meaningful without 
picking out any particular individual because it abbreviates a trio of purely 
general statements.)
Negative Existentials
Let us apply Russell’s analysis to (7):
(7)	 The present King of France does not exist.
Now, there is a Russellian paraphrase of (7) that leaves (7) just as anomalous 
as it seems to the naive hearer. That is the paraphrase that takes “exist” to 
be an ordinary predicate like “was Scotch” or “is bald,” and takes “not” to 
modify or apply to that predicate:
At least one person is presently King of France, 
and

16  Reference and referring
at most one person is presently King of France, 
and
whoever is presently King of France does not exist.
The anomaly is that the first conjunct asserts the existence of a present 
King, while the third conjunct denies it. No wonder (7) sounds peculiar to 
us. To make sense of (7), we must understand “not”, not as modifying the 
verb “exist”, but as applying to the rest of (7) as a whole, thus:
Not: (The present King of France exists). [That is, it is false that: the 
present King of France exists],
which is obviously what would be meant by someone who uttered (7) seriously. 
Then we apply Russell’s pattern of analysis inside the “not,” as follows.
Not: (At least one person is presently King of France, and at most one 
person is presently King of France, and whoever is presently King of 
France exists).
In symbols:
~(∃x) (Kx & ((y) (Ky → y = x) & Ex))
where “E” represents “exists.” (Actually, “exists” is itself treated as a quanti-
fier in logical theory, and so the conjunct Ex ought properly to be replaced 
by (∃z) (z = x), which is redundant.) The intuitive content of (7) is just, 
“No one is uniquely King of France,” or “No one uniquely kings France,” 
and Russell’s paraphrase has the virtue of being precisely equivalent to that. 
Nowhere in Russell’s analysis do we pick out an individual and say of that 
individual that he does not exist, so the Problem of Negative Existentials 
vanishes, at least for the case of definite descriptions.
In this preferred understanding of (7), the description occurs in what 
Russell called “secondary” position; that is, we have construed its underlying 
quantifiers “at least,” “at most,” and “whoever” as falling inside the “not.” 
The previous, dispreferred paraphrase gave the description “primary” posi-
tion, placing it first in the logical order with the “not” inside and governed 
by it. A meaning distinction of this kind is called a scope distinction: in more 
contemporary terminology, the secondary reading is that on which the quan-
tifiers take “narrow” scope, falling inside the scope of “not”; on the primary 
reading the quantifiers are outside the scope of “not,” and “not” is in their 
scope.

Definite descriptions  17
Frege’s Puzzle
An example featuring a definite description:
(8) 	The present Queen of England is [one and the same individual as] 
Elizabeth Windsor.
(8)’s left-hand term is a definite description, so let us paraphrase it away in 
Russell’s manner:
At least one person is presently Queen of England [presently queens 
England], 
and
at most one person is presently Queen of England,
and
whoever is presently Queen of England is [one and the same as] 
Elizabeth Windsor.
In symbols:
(∃x) (Qx & ((y) (Qy → y = x) & x = e)).
Now we see easily why our original identity statement is nontrivial. Of 
course we learn something when we hear Russell’s paraphrase, something 
substantive about Elizabeth and the present Queen both. And of course the 
identity statement is contingent, since someone else might have been Queen 
(there might even have been no Queen at all), Elizabeth might have run away 
from home and formed a rock band rather than be crowned, or whatever. The 
Theory of Descriptions seems to give a correct account of the identity state-
ment’s intuitive content. Note that on Russell’s view the statement is only 
superficially an identity statement; really it is a predication and attributes a 
complex relational property to Elizabeth. That leaves us with the problem of 
how a real identity statement could manage to be both true and informative, 
more of which in chapter 3.
Substitutivity
Let us return to Albert. He has been reading philosophy, and:
(9)	 Albert believes that the author of Nothing and Beingness is a  
profound thinker.

18  Reference and referring
Now, Albert is unaware that the author of Nothing and Beingness moonlights 
by writing cheap, disgusting pornography. We cannot substitute the term “the 
author of Sizzling Veterinarians” for “the author of Nothing and Beingness” 
in (9) without changing (9)’s truth-value; the result is a false sentence, since 
Albert believes that the author of Sizzling Veterinarians is a drooling moron. 
(I am afraid this reveals that Albert has read Sizzling Veterinarians.) The 
position occupied by the definite description in (9) is opaque.
In (9), the definite description occurs as part of what Albert believes, so 
we shall start our Russellian paraphrase with “Albert believes” and then apply 
Russell’s pattern of analysis, giving the description secondary occurrence or 
narrow scope:
Albert believes the following:
(At least one person authored Nothing and Beingness, 
and 
at most one person authored Nothing and Beingness, 
and
whoever authored Nothing and Beingness is a profound thinker).
This is a pretty good account of what Albert believes.5 And now it is obvi-
ous why we may not substitute “the author of Sizzling Veterinarians” into (9), 
for the corresponding analysis of the resulting sentence would come out:
Albert believes the following: 
(At least one person authored Sizzling Veterinarians, 
and
at most one person authored Sizzling Veterinarians, 
and
whoever authored Sizzling Veterinarians is a profound thinker).
Since this attributes an entirely different belief to Albert, it is no wonder 
that it is false even though (9) is true. (Of course, at the level of logical form 
we have not made a substitution at all, for the singular terms have “disap-
peared on analysis” and are no longer there to be substituted.)
The four puzzles made it clear that definite descriptions do not hook onto 
the world by directly naming and nothing else.6 But we needed a positive 
theory of how they do hook onto it. Russell has provided one very well moti-
vated theory. Notice that even though definite descriptions are not assigned 
referents in the way that names are, and even though they are not “really” 

Definite descriptions  19
singular terms at all, they still purport to have single individuals that answer 
to them; when a description does in fact have the corresponding individual 
that it purports to have—that is, when there does exist a unique so-and-so—
I shall speak of the description’s semantic denotatum or semantic referent. But 
the “hook” between a definite description and its semantic referent is (on 
Russell’s view) far less direct than is the hook between a simple name and its 
bearer.
Objections to Russell’s theory
Impressive as Russell’s achievement is, a number of objections have been 
brought against the Theory of Descriptions, chiefly by Strawson (1950). 
Before we take those up, I note an important criticism that might be made at 
just this point, though Russell quickly moved to forestall it.
When I set out the four puzzles with which we began, I called them puz-
zles “about singular terms.” I have since expounded each of them by using 
examples featuring definite descriptions, and wielded Russell’s Theory of 
Descriptions against them. But they are indeed puzzles about singular terms 
across the board, not just descriptions. We have already used proper names 
to make apparent reference to nonexistents, and we could even use pronouns 
(“you,” said by Scrooge to Marley’s ghost); Frege’s Puzzle and Substitutivity 
of course arise for proper names. These seem to be exactly the same problems 
as those that Russell has stated in terms of descriptions. It looks as though 
Russell has simply missed the boat, because he has given a theory that by its 
nature applies only to one very special subclass of singular terms, while any 
adequate solution to the puzzles ought to generalize.
Russell’s solution to this problem was if anything even more ingenious 
than the Theory of Descriptions itself. In brief, it was to invoke another 
distinction between surface appearance and underlying logical reality, and 
claim that what we ordinarily call proper names are not really proper names 
at all, but rather they are abbreviations for definite descriptions. But I shall 
postpone examination of that thesis until the next chapter.
Strawson’s critique was radical and searching. Indeed, Russell and 
Strawson were respectively figureheads for two very different approaches 
to the study of language (and to a lesser degree for two great rival systems 
of twentieth-century philosophy), though we shall not go into that until 
chapter 6. To set the stage for Strawson’s objections, I shall merely note that 
whereas Russell thought in terms of sentences taken in the abstract as objects 
in themselves, and their logical properties in particular, Strawson emphasized 
how the sentences are used and reacted to by human beings in concrete con-
versational situations. Russell’s most famous article (1905/1956) was called 
“On Denoting,” and in it denoting was taken to be a relation between an 
expression, considered in abstraction, and the thing that is the expression’s 
referent or denotatum. Strawson’s title was “On Referring,” which he meant 
ironically, because he thought of referring not as an abstract relation between 

20  Reference and referring
an expression and a thing but as an act done by a person at a time on an 
occasion. This way of looking at things gave Strawson quite a new slant on 
the four problems.
Strawson holds that expressions do not refer at all; people refer, using 
expressions for that purpose. This is reminiscent of the (U.S.) National Rifle 
Association’s slogan, “Guns don’t kill people, people kill people.” Certainly 
there is an obvious sense in which Strawson is right. To use an example of his, 
if I write down, “This is a fine red one,” “This” does not refer to anything—
and no determinate statement has been made—until I do something to make 
it refer. An expression will come to refer only if I use it in a suitably well-
engineered context, so that it does refer to a particular thing or person. But 
that is a matter of the expression being used, and when I do use it, it is I that 
am doing the work, not the expression.
Objection 1
According to Russell, sentence (6) (“The present King of France is bald”) is 
false owing to the lack of any such King. Strawson points out that that ver-
dict is implausible. Suppose someone comes out and asserts (6). Would that 
person’s hearers react by saying “That’s false” or “I disagree”? Surely not. 
Rather, Strawson maintains, the speaker has produced an only ostensibly 
referring expression that has misfired; the speaker has simply failed to refer 
to anything and so has failed to make a complete statement. The speaker’s 
utterance is certainly defective, but not in the same way that “The present 
Queen of England has no children” is defective. It is not incorrect but abor-
tive; it does not even get a chance to be false. Since no proper statement has 
been made in the first place, it follows that nothing either true or false has 
been said. A hearer would either just not comprehend or would say “Back up” 
and question the utterance’s presupposition (“I’m not following you; France 
doesn’t have a king”).7 Strawson therefore solves the Problem of Apparent 
Reference to Nonexistents by denying K3: (6) is meaningful, in that it has a 
legitimate use in the language and could be used to say true or false things if 
the world (or the French) were more cooperative, but not because it succeeds 
in picking out any individual thing.
Russell thought of a meaningful sentence as a sentence that has a meaning, 
or, as he put it, a sentence that expresses a proposition. A sentence’s logical 
form, on his view, is really that of the proposition the sentence expresses. But 
propositions by their nature are either true or false. Strawson eschews talk 
of “propositions,” and denies that sentences are the kind of things that can be 
true or false at all. What bears the properties truth and falsity are rather the 
statements made when speakers succeed in saying something, and not every 
act of uttering does succeed in that way, for not every meaningful sentence is 
always used to make a statement.

Definite descriptions  21
Russellians have a standard reply to objection 1, but it depends on some 
notions that I shall not develop until chapter 13, so I shall postpone it until 
then.
Objection 2
Strawson further criticizes the claim, which he attributes to Russell, that 
“part of what [a speaker] would be asserting [in uttering (6)] would be that 
there at present existed one and only one king of France” (1950: 330). That 
claim too is implausible, for although the speaker presupposes that there is 
one and only one king, that is certainly not part of what the speaker asserts.
But that is a misunderstanding: Russell had made no such claim. He 
said nothing at all about acts of asserting. Perhaps Strawson is assuming on 
Russell’s behalf that whatever is logically implied by a sentence is necessarily 
asserted by a speaker who utters that sentence. But the latter principle is false: 
if I say “Fat Tommy can’t run or climb a tree,” I do not assert that Tommy is 
fat, even though my sentence logically implies that he is; if I say “Tommy is 
five feet seven inches tall,” I do not assert that Tommy is either greater than 
two miles or less than eighteen miles tall.
Objection 3
Strawson points out that many descriptions are context-bound. He offers the 
example of:
(10)  The table is covered with books.
Presumably the subject term is a definite description, used in a standard 
way rather than in any different or unusual way. But if we apply Russell’s 
analysis we get “At least one thing is a table and at most one thing is a table 
and any thing that is a table is covered with books”—which by way of its 
second conjunct entails that there is at most one table, in the entire universe. 
That cannot be shrugged off. However unwillingly, Russell is going to have 
to take some notice of the context of utterance.
He has several options. After all, Strawson has no monopoly on the fact 
that when someone says “The table,” we hearers generally know which table 
is meant, because something in the context has made it salient. It may be 
the only table in sight, or the only one in the room, or the one we have just 
been talking about. Russell may say that there is ellipsis here; that in the 
context, “The table” is short for a more elaborate description that is uniquely 
satisfied. (As we shall see in the next chapter, Russell was no enemy of ellipsis 
hypotheses.)
The ellipsis view has some disturbing implications. Russell thinks of logi-
cal form as objectively real—that sentences really do have the logical forms 

22  Reference and referring
he posits. So if “The table” is elliptical, there has got to be a determinate 
answer to the question, “What material is ellipsized?” And the answer will 
matter because, depending upon which candidate you pick, (10) will turn 
out to say something completely different. If we say that “The table” means 
the table in this room, then we have introduced the concept “room,” and 
construed (10) as being literally about a room, indeed as having the predicate 
“room” hidden in its underlying logical structure.
Perhaps a better approach would be an appeal to restricted quantification 
(as in Lycan 1984 and Neale 1990). Often we say things like “Everyone likes 
her,” meaning, not every person in the universe, but everyone in a certain 
contextually indicated social circle. Or “Nobody goes to that restaurant any 
more,” which is unlikely to mean that no human being at all goes there; it 
would more commonly mean, no one of our sort (whatever sort that is).8 What 
logicians call the domains over which quantifiers range need not be universal, 
but are often particular classes roughly presupposed in the context. In fact 
(you can check this for yourself), practically all quantification that occurs in 
English is restricted quantification: “I’ll eat anything on pizza,” “There’s no 
beer,” and even “I wouldn’t trade this car for anything in the world.”
Of course the usual Russellian analysis starts with a quantifier: “At least 
one thing is a table . . . .” Let us simply regard that quantifier as restricted 
in the appropriate way. The same restriction will apply to the “at most one 
thing,” and so we lose the unwanted implication that there is at most one 
table in the universe; (10) will now imply only that there is at most one table 
of the contextually indicated sort, which is fine.
The appeal to restricted quantification differs from the ellipsis hypothesis, 
in that it does not require that explicit conceptual material be clandestinely 
mentioned in (10). The quantifier restriction is more like a silent demonstra-
tive pronoun: “At most one table of that sort,” where the context fixes the 
reference of “that.” So we seem to have solved the table problem on Russell’s 
behalf.
But there are more aggravated problem cases. Consider (11):
(11)	 If a bishop meets another bishop, the bishop blesses the other 
bishop. (Heim 1990)
For further examples, see Reimer (1992), Stanley and Szabó (2000), Ludlow 
and Segal (2004) and Lepore (2004).
Also, there is still a general problem of how quantifiers get restricted in 
context, what determines the exact restricted domains (which are almost 
always vague to boot), and how on earth hearers identify the right domains 
as quickly and as effortlessly as they do. But we have that general problem 
anyway; it poses no special objection to Russell’s Theory of Descriptions.
I pause to offer a partial rebuttal of Strawson’s notion that people rather 
than expressions refer. Recall the National Rifle Association’s slogan, “Guns 
don’t kill people, people kill people.” An appropriate response is, “Yes, but 

Definite descriptions  23
they kill them much more easily and efficiently using guns,” and there is a 
perfectly good sense in which the gun did kill the victim. So too there is at 
least a secondary sense in which expressions do refer. There is nothing at all 
wrong with saying that, in a particular context, the expression “The table” 
refers to the salient piece of furniture. Moreover, we have already introduced 
the notion of the “semantic referent” of a description: in context, remember, 
a description’s semantic referent is whatever object (if any) in fact uniquely 
satisfies the description.
Notice that Russell too has an objection to talking about the referent of 
a description. He wants to insist that descriptions are not really referring 
expressions at all; a sentence containing one abbreviates a mass of quantifi-
cational material that is entirely general and not about anyone in particular. 
But my notion of a semantic referent applies equally against Russell on this 
point. There is at least that secondary sense in which a description can have 
a referent. And it is perfectly harmless for a Russellian to grant that defi-
nite descriptions do refer, so long as s/he remembers that they do not do it 
directly, in the way we may have thought proper names do.
I turn to an objection made by Keith Donnellan (1966).
Objection 4
Donnellan noticed cases in which we do seem to use definite descriptions 
as if they are just tags or names, solely to refer to individuals. And in such 
cases the Russellian analysis does not capture what seems to be said when the 
relevant sentences are uttered.
Though Donnellan intended his article modestly as an adjudication of 
the Russell–Strawson dispute, his insight has wider application, and I shall 
expound it in its own terms.
Donnellan’s distinction
Donnellan called attention to what he called the referential use, as opposed 
to the attributive use, of a definite description. The most obvious type of ref-
erential use is when a description has grown capital letters and is really used 
as a title. A classic example is “The Holy Roman Empire,” whose referent, 
as Voltaire observed, was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire. Or “The 
Grateful Dead,” which is the name of a rock band; sentences containing that 
title do not mean that at least one thing is grateful and dead and . . . 
Russell might fairly retort that, as the capital letters show, those titles 
are not being used as descriptions at all, but (of course) as fused titles. “The 
Swan” is the name of a piece of instrumental music by Saint-Saëns, and 
sentences containing that title are about music, not about water fowl. But 
Donnellan shows that there are less formal cases in which we use descriptions 
solely to focus on a particular individual regardless of that person or thing’s 
attributes.

24  Reference and referring
For contrast, here is a standard Russellian example. We come across the 
hideously murdered body of Smith, and I assert
(12)  Smith’s murderer is insane
meaning that whoever committed this terrible crime is insane. Donnellan 
has no quarrel with Russell here; this is what he calls the attributive use of 
the description.
But suppose instead that we have not seen the body and have no other 
direct knowledge of the matter; Jones has been arrested and charged with 
the crime and we are attending his trial. The prosecution’s case is excellent, 
and we are privately presuming that Jones is guilty; also, he is rolling his eyes 
and drooling in a homicidal manner. Here too I say to you (12), “Smith’s 
murderer is insane.” In the context I am only using the description “Smith’s 
murderer” to refer to the person we are looking at, the defendant, regardless 
of what attributes he has. Moreover, what I said is true if and only if the 
defendant is insane, regardless of his having committed the murder. This is 
what Donnellan calls the referential use.
Donnellan’s objection to the Theory of Descriptions is just that the theory 
overlooks the referential use; Russell writes as if all descriptions were used 
attributively. But, against Strawson, Donnellan complains that equally he did 
not see the attributive use, that Strawson writes as if all descriptions were 
used referentially, in a context, to draw somebody’s attention to a particular 
person, place or thing. Thus both Strawson and Russell were mistaken in 
thinking that definite descriptions always work in one way, because there is 
an ambiguity acknowledged by neither. Donnellan does not take a position 
as to what kind of ambiguity it is; in particular he does not try to decide 
whether the sentence (12) itself has two different meanings explaining the 
description’s evidently distinct “uses.”
Donnellan gives several informal characterizations of the new referential 
use: “A speaker who uses a definite description referentially in an asser-
tion . . . uses the description to enable his audience to pick out whom or what 
he is talking about” (p. 285). The description does not “occur essentially,” 
but is “merely one tool for doing a certain job—calling attention to a person 
or thing—and in general any other device for doing the same job, another 
description or a name, would do as well” (ibid.). “[W]e expect and intend 
our audience to realize whom we have in mind  . . . and, most importantly, to 
know that it is this person about whom we are going to say something” (pp. 
285–6). This all sounds straightforwardly correct, for the “Smith’s murderer” 
case.9
However, Donnellan goes on to add a further characterization: in the 
attributive use of “The ø is Y,” “if nothing is the ø then nothing has been 
said to be Y,” whereas in the referential case “the fact that nothing is the ø 
does not have this consequence” (p. 287). He takes this point from Linsky 
(1963), who offers the example of someone (perhaps at a party) who observes 
a woman and her male companion and says, “Her husband is kind to her.” 

Definite descriptions  25
Donnellan and Linsky agree that, even if the woman is in fact unmarried, it 
is the companion that is referred to, and that what is said is that that person 
is kind to her regardless of his not actually being her husband. On this view, 
the real referent differs from what I have been calling the semantic referent, 
there being no semantic referent in Linsky’s example.
Or suppose that in the Smith case, against all the evidence, Jones is inno-
cent; Smith committed suicide and there is no murderer. (Or perhaps Smith 
is not even dead, but has been languishing in a state of deep suspended ani-
mation.) Intuitively, Donnellan maintains, that does not change what I said. 
And what I said is true if and only if Jones is insane, regardless of there being 
no murderer. Donnellan gives the further example of a party guest seeing 
an interesting-looking person sipping from a martini glass; the guest asks, 
“Who is the man drinking a martini?” In fact the glass holds only water, but, 
Donnellan maintains, the guest’s question is about the interesting-looking 
man, and not about (say) Dino, off in the billiard room, who is in fact the one 
and only man at the party drinking a martini.
Examples like these, sometimes called “near-miss” cases, are disputed. 
Following Grice (1957) and flouting Strawson, Kripke (1979a) distinguishes 
between what a linguistic expression itself means or refers to and what a 
speaker means or refers to in using the expression. For example, taken liter-
ally, the sentence “Albert’s an elegant fellow” means that Albert is an elegant 
fellow, but a speaker might use it sarcastically to point out that Albert is 
a revolting slob. (We shall say much more of disparities between speaker-
meaning and literal expression meaning in chapters 7 and 13.) So too, I may 
say “Smith’s murderer,” which phrase taken literally means whoever mur-
dered Smith, and (myself) honestly mean Jones on the stand and accurately be 
taken to mean Jones. Linsky’s speaker himself means the lady’s companion, 
but the expression “Her husband” according to the rules of English means 
whoever (if anyone) is married to her; Donnellan’s party guest obviously 
means the interesting-looking man, though the phrase “the man drinking a 
martini” literally means whatever man is in fact drinking a martini. Speakers 
in “near-miss” cases do mean what Donnellan says they mean, and mean true 
things, but (as with “Albert’s an elegant fellow”) they do those things by 
uttering sentences that are in fact false.
Let us define speaker-reference a little more formally, to contrast with 
semantic reference. The speaker- or utterer’s referent of a description on 
an occasion of its use is the object, if any, to which the speaker who used 
the description intended to call to the attention of her/his audience. (The 
speaker-referent is the object that the utterer means to be talking about.)
Fortunately, communication goes by speaker-meaning and speaker-refer-
ence: if I (speaker-)mean Jones when I say “Smith’s murderer” and you take 
me to mean Jones and understand me to have said that Jones is insane, then 
you have understood me correctly and communication has succeeded; it does 
not matter that the sentence I uttered was according to its literal meaning 
untrue, any more than it matters that “Albert’s an elegant fellow” is literally 
false.

26  Reference and referring
Thus, according to Kripke, Donnellan has failed to show that a sentence 
containing a definite description can be true even if nothing (or something 
extraneous) is the description’s semantic referent.
Even if Kripke is right about the near-miss examples, it is important to 
hold on to some version of Donnellan’s distinction. The distinction is amply 
illustrated by the original “Smith’s murderer” example and others, even if 
Donnellan is wrong about the meanings and truth-values of the near-miss 
sentences. Donnellan’s paper raises the question of specifying the circum-
stances under which one succeeds in referring, by using a description, to the 
person or thing one intends to refer to, and he has shown that this does not 
always go by semantic referent. Further, the distinction unmistakably mat-
ters to the truth-value of sentences that embed descriptions within clauses of 
certain kinds. Suppose I were to say:
(13)  I know that’s right because I heard it from the town doctor.
You might have to ask me, “You mean because she’s a doctor and this is a 
medical matter, or do you mean because you heard it from her and she’s also 
an authority on true crime?” (13)’s truth-value may depend on whether “the 
town doctor” is used attributively or referentially. Or consider:
(14)  I wish that her husband weren’t her husband.
The most natural reading of (14) is to take the first occurrence of the 
description referentially but the second attributively; what the speaker wishes 
is that the man in question were not married to the woman in question. But 
(14) has several other readings, depending on which way the descriptions are 
taken, even though they are fairly silly.
In light of Kripke’s distinction between speaker- or utterer’s referent and 
semantic referent, one might be tempted simply to write off Donnellan’s issue 
as verbal, and maintain that the Theory of Descriptions is still correct as an 
account of the truth-values of sentences taken literally, while Donnellan is 
often right about speaker-referent and speaker-meaning. But the ambiguity 
of sentences like (13) and (14) still seems to elude Russell’s analysis.10
Also, even if one is persuaded by Kripke and has discounted the near-miss 
examples, it remains controversial whether, for the referential case, the actual 
referent is always the speaker-referent. Notice that this question presupposes 
a third notion, that of “actual” referent, that is conceptually distinct from the 
other two. What is meant seems to be that the actual referent is the object 
about which the speaker actually succeeded in making a statement (asking 
a question, issuing a command, and so on), it being left open whether this 
tracks the literal semantic interpretation of the sentence uttered. (Of course, 
if the Theory of Descriptions is correct, either the actual referent is always 
the semantic referent or, since according to Russell definite descriptions do 
not really refer at all, there is no actual referent.)

Definite descriptions  27
MacKay (1968) argues that in some cases, even if one misspeaks, one’s 
actual referent may be the semantic referent rather than the speaker-referent. 
Suppose there are a rock and a book on the table, and, wanting you to bring 
me the book, I fumblemouth and say, “Bring me the rock on the table,” using 
“the rock” referentially and speaker-referring to the book, I have still asked 
you to bring me the rock, and you would not be complying if you brought 
me the book instead.
Or suppose I say to you, “I bet you $5 that the glorious winner [of a 
big auto race] is over forty years of age.” I am using “the glorious winner” 
referentially, thinking of Dale Earnhart, completely confident that he has 
the race won, and I have him very much in mind, clear mental image and all. 
But, although he crossed the finish line first, Earnhart does not in fact win; 
by a little-known technicality he comes in second to Fat Freddy Phreak, who 
has got loose again and entered the race at the last minute. Fat Freddy is only 
twenty-two. I owe you $5.
MacKay makes the general point that a speaker’s intentions may be arbi-
trarily crazy. Suppose I have formed the insane belief that Keith Donnellan is 
the illegitimate son of Santa Claus and Margaret Thatcher. Using the descrip-
tion referentially, I say “Mrs Thatcher’s Christmas bastard wrote a classic 
article on descriptions.” If you know enough about my weird beliefs, you will 
pick out the right individual and understand what I meant, but no one could 
correctly describe me as having said that Keith Donnellan wrote the classic 
paper.
It should be questioned whether there is any rightfully separate notion 
of an “actual referent.” The concept of a semantic referent is clear, and the 
theory of communication requires that of a speaker-referent, but perhaps the 
idea of an “actual referent” is just a confusion of the two based on our failure 
to see the difference between literal sentence semantics and the theory of 
communication. Then we would have to explain away the fact of our having 
intuitions about “actual referents” in cases like some of the foregoing. Kripke 
takes roughly that line, making use of an idea of Grice’s that we shall discuss 
in chapter 13.
Anaphora
One final objection to the Theory of Descriptions must be mentioned. As we 
have noted, Russell deals only with what he considers the central use of “the,” 
and exempts the theory from having to explain plural uses or the generic use. 
One may think that a theory of definite descriptions ought not to be pam-
pered thus forever. But in any case Russell does not mention anaphoric uses, 
and it has certainly been wondered why the theory should not be required to 
cover those, since unlike plural and generic uses, anaphoric descriptions are 
ostensibly singular referring expressions.
In general, an anaphoric expression inherits its meaning from another 
expression, its antecedent, usually though not always occurring earlier in the 
sentence or in a previous sentence. For example, in

28  Reference and referring
(15)	 The man who lived around the corner was eccentric. He used to 
snack on turtle heads
“he” refers back to the man who lived around the corner. Geach (1962) called 
such a term a “pronoun of laziness” and suggested that it merely abbreviates a 
boilerplate repetition of the antecedent phrase, so that (15)’s second clause is 
precisely equivalent to “The man who lived around the corner used to snack 
on turtle heads.” Geach’s suggestion is only one among several theories of 
anaphoric pronouns, but the general idea is that the pronoun has the referent 
that it does only in virtue of its relation to the antecedent phrase.
If Geach is right, then (15) poses no problem for the Theory of Descriptions; 
its second clause would be analyzed in the usual manner and that analysis 
seems at least as correct as other central Russellian paraphrases. But, as Evans 
(1977) points out, a parallel treatment fails when the antecedent is a quanti-
fier phrase or an indefinite description:
(16)	 Just one turtle came down the street. It was running as if it were 
being pursued by a maniac.
(17)	A rabbit appeared in our yard after dinner. It seemed  
unconcerned.
(16)’s second clause is not equivalent to “Just one turtle was running as if 
it were being pursued . . . ,” because the latter might be false even when (16) is 
true (our own pet turtle, in the dining room with us, may have been running 
as well). (17)’s second clause is not equivalent to “A rabbit seemed uncon-
cerned,” for that paraphrase misses the fact that the original “It” referred to 
the particular rabbit that appeared in the yard.
Russell may fairly rejoin that what he offered was a theory of definite 
descriptions, and neither (16) nor (17) contains a definite description. But 
if the “It”s in (16) and (17) are not pronouns of laziness, why should we 
think that “He” in (15) is one? Also, definite descriptions can themselves be 
anaphors:
(18)	 Just one turtle came down the street. The turtle was running  
as if it were being pursued by a maniac.
(19)	 A rabbit appeared in our yard after dinner. The rabbit seemed 
unconcerned.
It is plausible enough to take “The turtle” in (18) as abbreviating “The 
turtle that came down the street,” in which case (18) does not threaten 
Russell’s analysis. But the same will not do for (19): if we try to suppose that 
“The rabbit” abbreviates “The rabbit that appeared in our yard after dinner,” 
then by the usual uniqueness clause, (19) would entail that at most one rabbit 

Definite descriptions  29
appeared in the yard, and—notice—(19) itself does not entail that, but (since 
its opening phrase is only “A rabbit”) is logically consistent with more than 
one rabbit’s having appeared in the yard. True, a speaker who utters (19) does 
somehow suggest that there was just one. But notice that it would not be 
contradictory to utter (19) and then add, “In fact, there were several rabbits, 
and none of them looked very worried.”
Neale (1990) has tried to accommodate anaphora within a conservative 
Russellian theory; Heim (1990), Kamp and Reyle (1993) and others have 
argued that a broader semantic format is required. But I shall leave the topic 
at this point.
A few further issues have arisen in recent years. For example, it has been 
questioned whether the use of a definite description does really entail even 
contextual uniqueness (see Szabó 2000, 2003; Abbott 2003).
More generally, the relations between definite and indefinite descriptions 
have come under scrutiny (Szabó 2000 again; Ludlow and Segal 2004.)
Plural descriptions have been investigated by Sharvy (1980), Neale (1990) 
and Brogaard (2007) among others.
Summary
Singular terms refer to individual objects in the world. But to suppose 
• 
that that is all they do leads to logical puzzles.
Russell argued that sentences containing definite descriptions should 
• 
be analyzed as triples of general statements.
Russell defended this Theory of Descriptions both directly and by 
• 
appeal to its affording solutions to the four logical puzzles.
Strawson argues that Russell views sentences and their logical proper-
• 
ties too abstractly and ignores their standard conversational uses by 
real people in real life.
In particular, Russell misses the fact that sentences containing non-
• 
denoting descriptions are not regarded as false, but lack truth-value 
altogether on account of presupposition failure. Also, Russell ignores 
context-bound descriptions.
Donnellan calls attention to the referential use of descriptions, also 
• 
ignored by Russell, and tries, not altogether successfully, to distin-
guish it from the attributive use.
It is not obvious that Russell’s theory can accommodate all the ana-
• 
phoric uses of descriptions.
Questions
1	
Given (for the sake of argument) that the Theory of Descriptions is 
otherwise plausible, are you convinced by Russell’s solutions to the 
four puzzles?

30  Reference and referring
2	
Is Strawson’s critique more persuasive than I have granted? Develop it 
a bit further against Russell.
3	
To what extent does the theory correctly predict and explain the entire 
use of “the” in English?
4	
What do you make of Donnellan’s distinction? Can it be rendered 
more precise? Try to refine the intuitive contrast with which Donnellan 
begins.
5	
Dispute or defend any of Donnellan’s interesting intuitive judgements 
about “actual referents” in particular hypothetical speech situations. 
Then comment on the significance, for Donnellan’s program, of your 
own position on such a case.
6	
Donnellan regards his article as a contribution to the Russell–Strawson 
dispute. But he does not say much in the article about the four puzzles 
with which that whole issue began. Does his theory, as you construe it, 
solve any or all of the four puzzles?
7	
Can you help Russell extend his theory to cover our examples of ana-
phora? Are there other anaphoric examples that create further problems 
for him?
Further reading
Kaplan (1972) is an excellent detailed exposition of the Theory of 
• 
Descriptions. See also Cartwright (1987) and Neale (1990). The jour-
nal Mind published an entire special issue (Vol. 144, October 2005) in 
honor of “On Denoting” ’s one-hundredth birthday.
Russell (1957) replied to Strawson’s critique.
• 
Linsky (1967) surveys the Russell–Strawson dispute well.
• 
Despite Russell’s contempt for it, Meinong’s view has been stoutly 
• 
defended by Routley et al. (1980) and by Parsons (1980).
Donnellan (1968) replied to MacKay. Donnellan (1979) is a more 
• 
extended treatment and also takes up questions of anaphora.
Taylor (1998: ch. 2) offers a fuller but still accessible survey of ana-
• 
phoric phenomena.
Ostertag (1998) contains many important papers on definite descrip-
• 
tions, as does Bezuidenhout and Reimer (2004). See also Ludlow 
(2007), a fine survey article.

3	
Proper names: the Description 
Theory
Overview
Russell seems to have refuted the Referential Theory of Meaning for definite 
descriptions, by showing that descriptions are not genuinely singular terms. 
Perhaps that is not so surprising, since descriptions are complex expressions 
in that they have independently meaningful parts. But one might naturally 
continue to think that ordinary proper names are genuinely singular terms. 
Yet the four puzzles—about nonexistents, negative existentials, and the 
rest—arise just as insistently for proper names as they did for descriptions.
Frege offered solutions to the puzzles by proposing that a name has a sense 
in addition to its referent, the sense being a “way of presenting” the term’s 
referent. But he said far too little about what “senses” are and how they actu-
ally work.
Russell solved this problem by arguing, fairly persuasively, that ordinary 
proper names are really disguised definite descriptions. This hypothesis 
allowed him to solve the four puzzles for proper names by extending his 
Theory of Descriptions to them.
Yet Russell’s claim that proper names are semantically equivalent to 
descriptions faces serious objections: for example, that it is hard to find a 
specific description to which a given name is equivalent, and that people 
for whom the same name expresses different descriptions would be talking 
past each other when they tried to discuss the same person or thing. John 
Searle proposed a looser, “cluster” description theory of proper names that 
avoids the initial objections to Russell’s view. But Saul Kripke and others 
have amassed further objections that apply as much to Searle’s looser theory 
as to Russell’s.
Frege and the puzzles
We may have agreed with Russell that the Referential Theory of Meaning is 
false of descriptions because descriptions are not really (logically) singular 
terms, but we may continue to hold the Referential Theory for proper names 
themselves. Surely names are just names; they have their meanings simply 
by designating the particular things they designate, and introducing those 
designata into discourse. (Let us call such an expression a Millian name, since 

32  Reference and referring
John Stuart Mill (1843/1973) seemed to defend the view that proper names 
are merely labels for individual persons or objects and contribute no more 
than those individuals themselves to the meanings of sentences in which they 
occur.) But recall our initial objection to Russell’s Theory of Descriptions: 
that, although it was motivated entirely by the four puzzles, the puzzles are 
not at all specific to definite descriptions, because they arose just as insis-
tently—not to mention first—for proper names as well.
Frege preceded Russell in offering solutions to the puzzles. We have 
already seen what he said about Apparent Reference to Nonexistents:
(1)  James Moriarty is bald
is meaningful because the name “James Moriarty” has a “sense” over and 
above its putative referent, even if there is in fact no referent. In fact, nothing 
is referred to or denoted by the name, but the sense is “expressed” by it.
For Frege, the “sense” was, roughly, a particular “way of presenting” the 
term’s putative referent. Though itself an abstract entity rather than a men-
tal or psychological one, the sense reflects a person’s conception or way of 
thinking of the referent. Frege sometimes expressed senses in the form of 
definite descriptions; for example, the sense of the name “Aristotle” might 
be “Plato’s disciple and the teacher of Alexander the Great,” or “the Stagirite 
teacher of Alexander” (Frege 1892/1952b: 58n). A sense determines a unique 
referent, but multiple senses may determine the same referent.
Let us now see how Frege attacked the other three puzzles.
Negative Existentials
(2)  Pegasus never existed.
As before, (2) seems to be true and seems to be about Pegasus, but if 
(2) is true, (2) cannot be about Pegasus . . . . Notice that there is a worse 
complication here than is raised by the Problem of Apparent Reference to 
Nonexistents alone: whereas (1) is meaningful despite the nonexistence of 
James Moriarty, (2) is not only meaningful despite Pegasus’ nonexistence but 
actually and importantly true.
The idea of senses as particular modes of presentation affords Frege at least 
an impressionistic solution to the Problem of Negative Existentials (though 
whether this was actually his view and how it might be made precise are 
unclear): (2) can be taken to mean roughly that the sense of “Pegasus,” the 
conception of a winged horse ridden by Bellerophon, fails to find a referent—
not even a “nonexistent” one. Nothing in reality answers to that sense.1
The reason this idea is not straightforward is that for Frege a name only 
“expresses” and does not denote its own sense. So (2) is not literally about the 
sense of “Pegasus,” and does not out-and-out say of that sense that it lacks a 

Proper names: the Description Theory  33
referent, even though the latter is one thing we philosophers know when we 
know that (2) is true.
Frege’s Puzzle
(3)  Mark Twain is Samuel Langhorne Clemens
contains two proper names, both of which pick out or denote the same per-
son or thing, and so—if the names are Millian—should be trivially true. Yet 
as before, (3) seems both informative and contingent. (A fictional example is 
“Superman is Clark Kent”; according to Mr. Jerry Siegel’s comic-book saga, 
dilettante millionaires spent time and money trying to discover Superman’s 
secret identity.)
On Frege’s view, although the two names in (3) pick out a common refer-
ent, they “present” that individual in different ways; they have importantly 
different senses. And what he calls “cognitive significance” goes with sense, 
rather than with reference. This is what he writes:
When we found ‘a = a’ and ‘a = b’ to have different cognitive values, 
the explanation is that for the purpose of knowledge, the sense of the 
sentence, viz., the thought expressed by it, is no less relevant than its 
reference . . . If now a = b, then indeed the reference of ‘b’ is the same 
as that of ‘a,’ and hence the truth-value of ‘a = b’ is the same as that of 
‘a = a.’ In spite of this, the sense of ‘b’ may differ from that of ‘a’, and 
thereby the thought expressed in ‘a = b’ differs from that of ‘a = a.’ In 
that case the two sentences do not have the same cognitive value.
(1892/1952b: 78).
(But we are not told how it is that “a = b” can be contingent.)
Substitutivity
(4)	 Albert believes that Samuel Langhorne Clemens was less than 5 
feet tall.
But substituting “Mark Twain” for “Samuel Langhorne Clemens” in (4) 
produces a falsehood; as in the previous chapter, the singular-term position 
governed by “believes that” is referentially opaque. If the names were Millian, 
and contributed nothing to meaning besides the introduction of their refer-
ents into discourse, the substitution should make no difference at all and the 
position would be transparent.
Here Frege makes an ingenious move. The problem, we recall, was that 
the opacity was induced by the “believes that” construction, since what fol-
lows it is not itself opaque. Since belief is a cognitive matter, Frege supposed 

34  Reference and referring
that what determine a belief sentence’s truth-value are the senses rather than 
merely the referents of the expressions that follow the belief operator. He 
therefore suggests that what the operator does is to shift the reference of the 
name in particular: Inside “believes that,” the name refers not, as usually, to 
Clemens/Twain the person, but to its own sense. That is why the result of 
substituting “Mark Twain” into (4) has a different truth-value: In the belief 
context, “Mark Twain” refers to its sense, a different one from that of “Samuel 
Langhorne Clemens.”
Thus Frege’s distinction between reference and “sense” enables him to 
address each of the puzzles. And his solutions sound right, so far as they 
go: Names contribute meaning of some sort over and above their referents, 
and that is what makes the differences where we see differences, of course. 
But the solutions sound right, I suspect, because of their schematic nature. 
Frege calls the added meaning “sense,” but says little more about it (likewise 
about “expressing” as opposed to denoting, “cognitive significance,” and 
the like). In particular, he does not say what sort of meaning it is or what 
positive contribution it makes. This has an air of labeling rather than solving 
the problem. (But we shall consider a much more substantive and testable 
implementation of Frege’s view in chapter 10.)
Perhaps we could pick up on Frege’s further hint that names can have the 
senses of descriptions. That is just what Russell did, and it led him to a very 
rich approach to the puzzles.2
Russell’s Name Claim
Russell’s response is both brilliant and strongly defended. He turns around 
and offers a new thesis, which I will call the Name Claim. The claim is that 
everyday proper names are not really names, at least not genuine Millian 
names. They look like names and they sound like names when we say them 
out loud, but they are not names at the level of logical form, where expres-
sions’ logical properties are laid bare. In fact, Russell maintains, they are 
equivalent to definite descriptions. Indeed he says they “abbreviate” descrip-
tions, and he seems to mean that fairly literally.
Thus Russell introduces a second semantic appearance–reality distinction; 
just as definite descriptions are singular terms only in the sense of surface 
grammar, the same—more surprisingly—is true of ordinary proper names 
themselves. Here, of course, the difference is more dramatic. If you look at 
a definite description without referentialist bias, you can see that it has got 
some conceptual structure to it, in the form of independently meaningful 
words occurring in it that seem to contribute to its own overall meaning. So 
it is not too big a surprise to be told that underlying the misleadingly simple 
appearance of the word “the,” there is quantificational material. But now we 
are told the same about a kind of expression that looks conceptually simple.
If the Name Claim is true, then Russell’s solution to the four puzzles 
does generalize after all—because we just replace the names by the definite 

Proper names: the Description Theory  35
descriptions they express and then proceed as in chapter 2; the Russellian 
solutions apply just as before (whether or not we think they are good ones in 
the first place). Thus names do have what Frege thought of as “senses,” that 
can differ despite sameness of referent, but Russell gives an analysis of these 
rather than taking them as primitive items of some abstract sort.
It is important to see that the Name Claim is entirely independent of the 
Theory of Descriptions itself. (People often use the phrase “Russell’s theory 
of descriptions” as lumping together a number of different things Russell 
believed, including the Name Claim.) But one might accept either doctrine 
while rejecting the other: some theorists hold the Theory of Descriptions 
as a theory of definite descriptions themselves, while rejecting the Name 
Claim entirely; less commonly, one could embrace the Name Claim but hold 
a theory of descriptions different from Russell’s.
In support of the Theory of Descriptions, Russell gave a direct argument; 
then he touted the theory’s power in solving puzzles. He makes a similar 
explanatory case for the Name Claim, in that the claim lends his theory of 
proper names the same power to solve puzzles—puzzles that looked consider-
ably nastier for names than they did for descriptions. But he also gives at least 
one direct argument, and a second is easily extracted from his writings.
First, recall Russell’s direct defense of his theory of definite descriptions: 
He maintains that a sentence containing a definite description does intui-
tively entail each of the three clauses that make up his analysis of it, and the 
three clauses jointly entail the sentence. He now argues that the same is true 
of sentences containing proper names.
Take one of the toughest cases of all, a negative existential. (2) (“Pegasus 
never existed”) is actually true. What, then, could it mean? It does not pick 
out an existing thing and assert falsely that the thing is nonexistent; nor does 
it pick out a Meinongian entity and deny existence of it. It merely assures 
us that in fact there was no such winged horse. Similarly, “Sherlock Holmes 
never existed” means that there never actually was a legendary English detec-
tive who lived at 221B Baker Street and so on. This is very plausible.
The second direct argument (never given explicitly so far as I know) calls 
attention to a kind of clarificatory question. Suppose you hear someone using 
a name, say “Lili Boulanger,” and you do not know who the speaker is talking 
about. You ask who that is. The speaker replies, “Oh, the first woman ever to 
have won the Prix de Rome, in 1913, with her cantata Faust et Hélène”; and 
that is a proper answer. You asked because, so to speak, you did not under-
stand the name you heard. In order to come to understand it, you had to ask 
a “who” question, and the answer had to be a description. (Merely giving a 
second proper name of Boulanger would not have done the trick, unless you 
had previously associated that name with a description.)
Or we could use “who” questions as a kind of testing, which might be 
called the “spot-check test.” Suppose you used the name “Wilfrid Sellars,” 
and I whip around and say “Who’s that?” All you can reply, all that comes 
out, is “Um, the famous philosopher at Pittsburgh who wrote those really 

36  Reference and referring
dense books” or the like. In general, when asked “Who [or what] do you 
mean?” after one has just used a name, one immediately and instinctively 
comes up with a description, as an explanation of what one meant.
John Searle (1958) made a similar appeal to learning and teaching: how do 
you teach a new proper name to a child, and how do you learn the referent of 
a particular name from someone else? In the first case, you produce one or 
more descriptions; in the latter, you elicit them.
These are very robust phenomena; so the Name Claim is not just a des-
perate lunge made in order to solve the proper-name versions of the four 
puzzles.
Russell speaks aggressively of names’ “abbreviating” descriptions, as if 
they were merely short for the descriptions as “the U.S.A.” is short for “the 
United States of America.” That is too strong. All Russell actually needs for 
his analytical purposes is the weaker contention that names are somehow 
equivalent in meaning to descriptions (let us call that weaker thesis the 
Description Theory of proper names).
Yet even the less ambitious Description Theory has since come in for 
severe criticism.
Opening objections
Objection 1
Searle (1958) complained that, if proper names are equivalent to descrip-
tions, then for each name there must be some particular description that it is 
equivalent to. For example, if I unreflectively muse,
(5)	 Wilfrid Sellars was an honest man,
what am I saying, given that I know a fair number of individuating facts about 
Sellars? Searle tries out a couple of candidate description types, and finds 
them wanting. We might suppose that “Wilfrid Sellars” is for me equivalent 
to “The one and only thing x such that x is F and x is G and . . . ,” where F, G, 
and the rest are all the predicates that I would apply (or believe truly appli-
cable) to the man in question. But this would have the nasty consequence 
that (5) as I use it entails
(6)	 There is at least one philosopher with whom I had a fairly violent 
argument in George Pappas’ living room in 1979
—and (5) surely does not entail (6), for me or for anyone else.
Now, the spot-check test ought to supply a more local answer for each 
use of a name, and as we have seen, it is plausible to think that a speaker 
can normally cough up a fairly specific description when prodded. But it 
is unclear that this is always because the description was one the speaker 

Proper names: the Description Theory  37
already had determinately in mind. If you ask me, “Who is Sellars?,” I might 
make any of a number of answers that come to mind, depending on what 
sort of information I think you may want about him. It hardly follows that 
the answer I do produce is the precise description that my use of “Sellars” 
antecedently expressed.
Notice: The complaint is not merely that it would be hard to find out which 
description a speaker “had in mind” in uttering some name. The stronger 
thesis is that at least in many cases there is no single determinate descrip-
tion that the speaker “has in mind,” either consciously or subconsciously. 
I see little reason (independent of the semantical puzzles) for thinking 
that there is a fact of the matter as to whether “Wilfrid Sellars” is used as 
equivalent to “The author of ‘Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man’,” 
or “Pittsburgh’s most famous philosopher,” or “The inventor of the ‘Theory’ 
theory of mental terms,” or “The man on whose paper I had to comment 
at the Tenth Chapel Hill Colloquium in 1976,” not forgetting “The visiting 
philosopher with whom I had a fairly violent argument in George Pappas’ 
living room in 1979.” I need have had none of these in particular (even tacitly) 
in mind when I unreflectively uttered (5).
Objection 2
Undeniably, different people know different things about other people. In 
some cases X’s knowledge about Z and Y’s knowledge about Z may not even 
overlap. Assuming that the descriptions with which names are supposed to 
be synonymous are in speakers’ minds as revealed by the spot-check test, it 
follows from the Name Claim that the same name will have (many) different 
senses for different people; every name is multiply and unfathomably ambigu-
ous. For, if names are equivalent to definite descriptions, they are equivalent 
to different definite descriptions in different people’s mouths, and for that 
matter to different descriptions in the same person’s mouth at different times, 
both because one’s knowledge keeps fluctuating and because what is psycho-
logically prominent about one person for another keeps fluctuating too.
And things get worse. Suppose that I am thinking of Wilfrid Sellars as “the 
author of ‘Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man’,” and suppose you 
are thinking of Sellars as “Pittsburgh’s most famous philosopher.” Then we 
would be curiously unable to disagree about Sellars. If I were to say, “Sellars 
used to tie his shoes with one hand,” and you said “That’s ridiculous, Sellars 
did no such thing,” we would (on Russell’s view) not be contradicting one 
another. For the sentence I had uttered would be a generalization:
(7)	 One and only one person wrote “Philosophy and the Scientific 
Image of Man”, and whoever wrote “Philosophy and the Scientific 
Image of Man” used to tie his shoes with one hand
while yours would be just a different generalization:

38  Reference and referring
(8)	 One and only one person was a philosopher more famous than any 
other in Pittsburgh, and whoever was a philosopher more famous 
than any other in Pittsburgh did no such thing as tie his shoes with 
one hand.
And the two statements would be entirely compatible from a logical point 
of view. What looked like a spirited dispute, verging on fistfight, is no real 
dispute at all; we are merely talking past each another. But that seems quite 
wrong.3
Searle’s Cluster Theory
In light of these two objections (and several others) to Russell’s version of 
the Description Theory, John Searle offered a looser and more sophisticated 
variant. He suggested that a name is associated, not with any particular 
description, but with a vague cluster of descriptions. As he puts it, the force of 
“This is N,” where N is replaced by a proper name, is to assert that a sufficient 
but so far unspecified number of “standard identifying statements” associ-
ated with the name are true of the object demonstrated by “this”; that is, the 
name refers to whatever object satisfies a sufficient but vague and unspecified 
number (SBVAUN) of the descriptions generally associated with it. (Searle 
adds the metaphysical claim that to be the person N is to have a SBVAUN of 
the relevant properties.)
The vagueness is important; Searle says it is precisely what distinguishes 
names from descriptions, and in fact is why we have and use names as 
opposed to descriptions. Notice that, if the Name Claim were correct, then 
proper names’ only function would be to save breath or ink; they would be 
just shorthand. Searle insists that, rather than being equivalent to a single 
description, a name functions as a “peg . . . on which to hang descriptions” 
(1958: 172), and that is what enables us to get a linguistic handle on the world 
in the first place.
We would need to make some refinements. For example, if one is a 
Searlean it seems natural to require that a “sufficient number” be at least over 
half—otherwise two obviously distinct individuals could both be the name’s 
referent. Also, we would surely want to say that some of a person’s identifying 
properties are more important than others in determining his or her identity; 
some way of weighting the identifying descriptions is involved.
This Cluster Theory allows Searle to avoid the two objections we have 
raised for Russell’s view. Objection 1 is mooted because Searle has aban-
doned the commitment that for each name there must be some one particular 
description that it expresses. The name is tied semantically just to a loose 
cluster of descriptions. Objection 2 is blunted (Searle believes) by the fact 
that different people can have different subclusters of descriptive material in 
mind, yet each have a SBVAUN of identifying descriptions and thereby suc-
ceed in referring to the same individual.4

Proper names: the Description Theory  39
Thus Searle tried to mitigate the opening objections to Russell’s theory by 
offering his looser cluster version of the description approach. This version 
seems to qualify as a sensible middle way between Russell’s view and the 
Millian conception of names apparently discredited by the four puzzles. But, 
building on some important ideas of Ruth Barcan Marcus (1960, 1961), Saul 
Kripke (1972/1980) went on to subject Russell’s Name Claim and Searle’s 
Cluster Theory together to a more sustained critique. He argued that Searle 
had not backed far enough away from Russell, for Searle’s view inherits 
problems of much the same kinds; rather, the whole Descriptivist picture 
of proper names is misguided. The theory of reference has never been the 
same.
Kripke’s critique
Objection 3
Suppose that “Richard Nixon” is equivalent to “the winner of the 1968 
U.S. Presidential election.” And now consider a question about possibil-
ity. (Questions about possibility and necessity are called modal questions; 
more about these in the next chapter.) Could Richard Nixon have lost the 
1968 election? The answer seems unequivocally to be “Yes,” assuming that 
“could” here expresses merely theoretical, logical, or metaphysical possibility 
rather than something about the state of our knowledge. But according to the 
Description Theory, our question means the same as
(9)	 Is it possible that: one and only one person won the 1968 election  
and whoever won the 1968 election lost the 1968 election?
the answer to which is clearly “No.”
Searle’s Cluster Theory may seem to offer an improvement, because it is 
possible that a person who satisfies a SBVAUN of the description cluster 
associated with “Richard Nixon” nonetheless does not satisfy the particular 
description “winner of the 1968 election.” But, Kripke points out, human 
possibility extends further than that: Nixon the individual person might not 
have done any of the things generally associated with him. He might have 
apprenticed himself at age twelve to a sandalmaker and gone on to make 
sandals all his life, never going anywhere near politics or public life at all 
and never once getting his name in any newspaper. Yet, obviously, it is not 
possible that a person who satisfies a SBVAUN of the description cluster 
associated with “Richard Nixon” nonetheless does not satisfy any at all of 
the descriptions in that cluster. On Searle’s view, the character who went into 
sandalmaking would not have been the referent of “Richard Nixon” and for 
that matter would not have been Richard Nixon. And that seems wrong.
Michael Dummett (1973) has protested that objection 3 is simply invalid as 
it stands; at least, it rests on a hidden false assumption. We may infer that our 
modal question is synonymous with (9) only by assuming that, if “Richard 

40  Reference and referring
Nixon” is equivalent to a description at all, it is equivalent to one that has nar-
row scope; in the terminology of chapter 2, that is a “secondary” occurrence 
with respect to “It is possible that.” What if the relevant description has wide 
scope? Then our original question is synonymous, not with (9), but with
(10)  One and only one person won the 1968 election, and, concerning 
whoever won the 1968 election, is it possible that that person lost?
(10) is clumsy; also, there are other, irrelevant disambiguations of our 
question due to the fact that the interrogative operator itself has scope, so let 
me make the point more simply using just the indicative versions of the two 
readings. The sentence
(11)  It is possible for Richard Nixon to have lost the 1968 election,
presuming that “Richard Nixon” is equivalent to “the winner of the 1968 
election,” is ambiguous as between the narrow-scope reading
Possible: (∃x)(Wx & (y) (Wy  → y = x) & (z) (Wz  → ~Wz))
which corresponds to (11) and is false (I have represented “lost” as “did not 
win”), and the wide-scope reading
(∃x)(Wx & (y)(Wy  → y = x) & (z) (Wz  → Possible: ~Wz))
which presumably is true. Colloquially, (11) means that one and only one per-
son won the election and whoever won it is such that s/he could have lost.5
In a similar but more sophisticated move, some philosophers have finessed 
objection 3 by “rigidifying” the descriptions in terms of which they explicate 
names: Understand “Richard Nixon,” not as “the winner of the 1968 elec-
tion,” but as “the actual winner of the 1968 election.” See the next chapter.
Objection 4
Kripke (1972/1980: 83–7) offers an (utterly fictional!) example regard-
ing Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem, a famous metamathematical result. 
In Kripke’s fiction, the theorem was proved in the 1920s by a man named 
Schmidt, who died mysteriously without publishing it. Kurt Gödel came 
along, appropriated the manuscript, and scurrilously published it under his 
own name.6 Now, most people know Gödel, if at all, as the man who proved 
the Incompleteness Theorem. Yet it seems clear that, when even those who 
know nothing else about Gödel utter the name “Gödel,” they do refer to 
Gödel rather than to the entirely unknown Schmidt. For example, when they 
say “Gödel proved the Incompleteness Theorem,” they are speaking falsely, 
however well justified they may be in their belief.

Proper names: the Description Theory  41
This objection too goes against Searle’s Cluster Theory as well as against 
the classical Russellian view. Suppose no one in fact proved the Incompleteness 
Theorem; Schmidt’s alleged proof was irreparably flawed, or perhaps there 
was not even any Schmidt, but “the proof simply materialized by a random 
scattering of atoms on a piece of paper” (p. 86). Here it is even more obvi-
ously true that most people’s uses of “Gödel” refer to Gödel rather than to 
anyone else at all; yet those uses are not even backed by any Searlean cluster.
Objection 5
Consider the sentence
(12)  Some people are unaware that Cicero is Tully.
(12) is ostensibly true but, if the Name Claim is correct, (12) is hard to inter-
pret, for “there is no single proposition denoted by the ‘that’ clause, that 
the community of normal English speakers expresses by ‘Cicero is Tully’ ” 
(Kripke 1979b: 245). Since “Cicero” and “Tully” are equivalent to different 
descriptions for different people, there is no single fact of which (12) says 
some people are unaware. Now, if I assert (12), presumably its complement 
clause expresses what “Cicero is Tully” means in my speech. But since I know 
that Cicero is Tully, I associate the same set of descriptions (whatever they 
might be) with both names. Suppose that, like most philosophers, I associate 
both “Cicero” and “Tully” with “the famous Roman orator who denounced 
Catiline and who figures in some famous examples of Quine’s.” Then (12) is 
equivalent to:
(13)	 Some people are unaware that one and only one person was a 
famous Roman . . . [etc.] and one and only one person was a 
famous Roman . . . [etc.] and whoever was a famous Roman . . .  
[etc.] was a famous Roman . . . [etc.].
That massively redundant sentence is equivalent to:
(14)	 Some people are unaware that one and only one person was a 
famous Roman orator who denounced Catiline and who figures  
in some famous examples of Quine’s.
No doubt (14) is true, but surely it does not express what (12) means, even 
when (12) is uttered by me.
It is far from obvious how Searle might handle objection 5, either.

42  Reference and referring
Objection 6
If the Name Claim is true, then every name is “backed” by a description that 
applies uniquely to the name’s referent. But most people associate “Cicero” 
only with “a famous Roman orator” or some other indefinite description, 
and, say, “Richard Feynman” only with “a leading [then] contemporary theo-
retical physicist”; yet these people succeed not only in using those names 
correctly but also in referring to Cicero and to Feynman respectively when 
they do so. Moreover, two names of the same person, such as “Cicero” and 
“Tully,” may well have the same indefinite description as backing and, when 
they do, no Russellian theory can explain their continuing failure to substi-
tute in belief contexts (Kripke 1972/1980: 80ff., 1979b: 246–7).
More generally, it does not take much to succeed in referring to a person. 
Keith Donnellan (1970) offers an example in which a child who has gone to 
bed and to sleep is awakened briefly by his parents. They have with them Tom, 
an old friend of the family who is visiting and wanted just to see the child. 
The parents say, “This is our friend Tom.” Tom says, “Hello, youngster,” 
and the episode is over; the child has only barely woken. In the morning, the 
child wakes with a vague memory that Tom is a nice man. But the child has no 
descriptive material at all associated with the name “Tom”; he may not even 
remember that Tom was the person that he was semi-awake to meet during 
the night. Yet, Donnellan argues, that does not prevent him from succeeding 
in referring to Tom; there is a person who is being said to be a nice man, and 
it is Tom.
Objection 7
Russell emphatically wanted his theory to apply to fictional names such as 
“Hamlet” and “Sherlock Holmes” and “the free lunch.” If the Name Claim 
is correct, then, any sentence containing a fictional name in a “primary” or 
wide-scope position will come out false. For example,
(15)	Sherlock Holmes lived at 221B Baker Street
will come out false because it is supposed to be equivalent to
(16)	 One and only one person was [that is, there exists exactly one 
person who was] a famous detective who . . . [etc.] and whoever  
was a famous detective who . . . [etc.] lived at 221B Baker Street,
and (16) is false (there having existed, in fact, no such person). But some 
fictional sentences, such as (15) itself and “Hamlet was a Dane,” are true 
sentences, or at any rate not false ones.
Russell would not have been much swayed by this argument, since he had 
no inclination to call it true, as opposed to merely “make-believe-true” or 

Proper names: the Description Theory  43
“true-in-fiction,” that Holmes lives at Baker Street or whatever. (NB: if it 
were true that Holmes lived in Baker Street, then it would be true of Baker 
Street, a real place to this day, that it had had Holmes living in it. Also, if 
such sentences were true just in virtue of someone’s having written them in 
popular books or stories, then it would be equally true that Holmes existed, 
Hamlet existed, and so on, since people say those things in books and stories 
too; this point is strangely overlooked.) Yet some people want to insist that 
fictional sentences are literally truth-valueless rather than false; if you are 
sympathetic to this, you will want to hold a Kripkean theory of fictional 
names rather than Russell’s (Kripke 1972/1980:156–8). Donnellan (1974) 
defends such a theory in more detail.
Kripke has a further and in a way more fundamental objection to the 
Description Theory, but it requires a bit of technical apparatus. That appa-
ratus is one we will be needing again anyway. I shall develop it in the next 
chapter.
Summary
The four logical puzzles about reference arise just as insistently for 
• 
ordinary proper names as they did for definite descriptions.
Frege offered solutions in terms of what he called “senses,” but the 
• 
solutions do not really explain.
In response, Russell extended his Theory of Descriptions by defend-
• 
ing the Name Claim.
But the Name Claim faces at least two powerful objections.
• 
Searle offers a looser, “cluster” version of the Description Theory of 
• 
names, which avoids the initial objections.
But Kripke marshals a host of further objections that apply to Searle’s 
• 
view as trenchantly as they do to Russell’s stricter theory.
Questions
1	
Are Frege’s solutions to the puzzles really solutions, after all? What 
do they explain, absent the assumption that “senses” take the form of 
descriptions?
2	
Suppose you reject Russell’s Name Claim. How might you then solve 
the four puzzles, in regard to names?
3	
Respond on Russell’s behalf to one or more of the two opening objec-
tions; or come up with a further objection.
4	
Does Searle’s Cluster Theory really avoid objections 1 and 2, in ways 
that Russell’s stricter version of Descriptivism did not?
5	
Can you think of an objection to Searle’s theory that does not apply to 
Russell’s original theory?
6	
Can Russell rebut any of Kripke’s objections 3–7? Even if Russell can-
not, can Searle?

44  Reference and referring
Further reading
Russell’s Name Claim is defended most accessibly in “The Philosophy 
• 
of Logical Atomism” (1918/1956).
For some criticisms of the Name Claim similar to Kripke’s, see 
• 
Donnellan (1970).
Searle addresses the matter of fictional names in chapter 3 of Searle 
• 
(1979a). He replies to some of Kripke’s objections in chapter 9 of 
Searle (1983). More generally, there is a huge literature on fictional 
names; see, for example, Everett and Hofweber (2000), Braun (2005), 
and the references therein.
Burge (1973), Loar (1976), Bach (1987) and others have defended more 
• 
specific sorts of Description theory against Kripke, versions that avoid 
some of the objections.

4	
Proper names: Direct Reference 
and the Causal–Historical Theory
Overview
In a further argument against description theories of proper names, Kripke 
appealed to the notion of a “possible world” or universe alternative to our 
own. A definite description of Russell’s sort changes its referent from world 
to world; although “the world’s fastest woman in 1998” actually refers to 
Marion Jones, it designates different individuals in other worlds, since Jones 
might have been slower (or not even have existed) and other women might 
have been better runners. But typically, a proper name such as “Marion Jones” 
refers to the very same individual in every world in which that individual 
exists.
Some theorists claim that names are directly referential, in that a name 
contributes nothing but its bearer or referent to the meaning of a sentence in 
which it occurs. In light of Kripke’s arguments against description theories, 
this view is highly plausible. But the four puzzles return to haunt it. So we are 
left with something of a paradox.
A separate question is, in virtue of what does a proper name designate 
its bearer? Kripke offered a causal–historical picture of referring, according 
to which a given use of “Marion Jones” refers to Marion Jones in virtue of 
a causal chain that grounds that utterance event in the ceremony in which 
Jones was first given the name. But, in light of some examples that clearly do 
not fit that model, considerable refinement is needed to work up that picture 
into an adequate theory of referring.
Kripke, and Hilary Putnam, extended the causal–historical view to cover 
natural-kind terms, like “water,” “gold,” and “tiger,” as well as proper names. 
If we assume the basic correctness of that move, it has an unexpected con-
sequence: Putnam’s famous “Twin Earth” examples seem to show that the 
meaning of such a term is not determined solely by what is in the heads of 
speakers and hearers; the state of the external world makes a contribution as 
well. Thus, two speakers could be molecule-for-molecule duplicates and yet 
mean different things by their words.

46  Reference and referring
Possible worlds
I shall now set up the apparatus needed to state Kripke’s fundamental criti-
cism of description theories of proper names. I begin with the notion of a 
“possible world.” (It goes back at least to Leibniz, though it was incorpo-
rated into philosophical logic only in the twentieth century.) Consider the 
world we live in—not just the planet Earth, but the whole universe. Our 
talk about things in our universe is talk about what actually exists, what 
things there really are: Gordon Brown the British Prime Minister, my left 
elbow, Bolivia, the sandwich on your plate, the Andromeda Galaxy, and so 
on, but not Hamlet, the Easter Bunny, the Big Rock Candy Mountain, or 
the free lunch. And what is true in this universe is of course actually true. 
But there are things that are in fact false, yet might have been true. Things 
might have gone otherwise; the world could have been different from the way 
it is. Someone other than Brown might have succeeded Tony Blair as Prime 
Minister, I might have married a different person (which would have been a 
mistake), and I know I could have finished writing this book sooner if I had 
had a private secretary and a retinue of servants including a personal chef and 
a couple of hired killers.
Thus there are a number of ways the world might have been. To put it 
slightly more fancifully, there are alternative worlds. Different worlds, worlds 
that could have been ours, but that are only possible and not actual. Think 
of an array of possible universes, corresponding to the infinitely many ways 
in which things, very broadly speaking, might have gone. All these possible 
worlds represent nonactual global possibilities.
Now (obviously) a sentence’s truth—even when we hold the sentence’s 
meaning fixed—depends on which world we are considering. “Brown is 
Prime Minister” is true in the actual world but, since Brown need not have 
been Prime Minister, there are countless worlds in which “Brown is Prime 
Minister” is false: in those worlds, Brown did not succeed Tony Blair, or never 
went into politics, or never even existed. And in some other worlds, someone 
else is Prime Minister—David Cameron, P. F. Strawson, me, Madonna, or 
Daffy Duck. In still others, there is no such office as Prime Minister, or not 
even a Britain; and so on and so forth. So a given sentence or proposition 
varies its truth-value from world to world.
(For now, let us take all this talk of “alternate worlds” intuitively, as a met-
aphor or picture, a heuristic for seeing what Kripke is getting at. Considered 
as serious metaphysics, it raises many controversial issues,1 but we may hope 
that those issues will not much affect Kripke’s use of the possible-worlds 
picture for his purposes in the philosophy of language.)
Just as sentences change their truth-values from world to world, a given 
singular term may vary its referent from world to world: in our actual world in 
(late) 2007, “The present British Prime Minister” designates Gordon Brown. 
But, as before, Brown might not have succeeded, or even gone into politics 
in the first place, or even existed at all. So in some other worlds the same 

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  47
description, meaning what it does here in our world, designates someone else 
(Cameron, Strawson, . . . ), or no one at all—since in some other possible 
worlds the Conservatives won the election, and in some there was no elec-
tion, and so forth. This is why the description’s referent changes from world 
to world.
Let us call such a singular term, one that designates different things in dif-
ferent worlds, a flaccid designator. It contrasts specifically with what Kripke 
calls a rigid designator: a term that is not flaccid, that does not change its 
referent from world to world, but denotes the very same item in every world 
(at least in every world in which that item exists.2)
Rigidity and proper names
Now we are able to state Kripke’s further objection to description theories of 
proper names (1972/1980: 74ff.): a definite description of the sort Russell had 
in mind is flaccid, as has just been illustrated. Yet proper names, Kripke says, 
do not (usually) vary their reference across worlds or hypothetical situations 
in that way. If we imagine a world in which Aristotle does such-and-such, it is 
one in which Aristotle does that thing and has some different properties from 
those he has here in the real world. Our name “Aristotle” denotes him there, 
not someone else. Names are (normally) in that sense rigid designators, keep-
ing the same referent from world to world, whereas Russellian descriptions 
are flaccid. Thus, names are not equivalent to Russellian descriptions. (Of 
course, if a description is used referentially in Donnellan’s sense, it may go 
rigid.)
The foregoing parenthesized qualifications (“usually,” “normally”) are 
important. Kripke does not hold any strict universal thesis about proper 
names. He is generalizing about normal uses of ordinary proper names and 
saying only that, for the most part, such names are used rigidly. So he is 
not to be refuted by coming up with unusual flaccid names, which certainly 
exist: occasionally, a description is offered as conventionally fixing the mean-
ing and not just identifying the referent of an apparent proper name. “Jack 
the Ripper” is an example. And in popular writings about Scotland Yard or 
British detective culture of the 1950s, for example, the name “Chummy” was 
used as a mere synonym for “the culprit”; it meant, attributively or flaccidly, 
just “whoever committed the crime.” For that matter, probably any proper 
name has occasional flaccid uses. Frege (1892/1952a) offers a famous example: 
“Trieste is no Vienna,” where “Vienna” functions not as the name of a city, 
but as abbreviating a loose cluster of exciting cultural properties that Vienna 
has. In the same tone, on an occasion well remembered by American voters, 
1988 Vice-Presidential candidate Lloyd Bentsen told his rival Dan Quayle, 
“Senator, you’re no Jack Kennedy.” But those are hardly standard uses of the 
names “Vienna” and “Jack Kennedy.”3
Kripke offers a further little intuitive test for telling whether a term is 
rigid: try the term in the sentence frame, “N might not have been N.” If we 

48  Reference and referring
plug in, for N, a description like “the President of the United States in 1970,” 
we obtain “The President of the United States in 1970 might not have been 
the President of the United States in 1970”; and the latter sentence is clearly 
true, at least on its most natural reading: the person who was President in 
1970 might not have been President then (or at any other time). The truth of 
that sentence shows the description to refer to different people in different 
worlds, hence to be flaccid.
But if we put in the proper name “Nixon,” we get “Nixon might not have 
been Nixon,” at best a very strange sentence. It might mean that Nixon might 
not have existed at all, which is perhaps the most obvious way in which Nixon 
could have failed to be Nixon. But given that Nixon existed, how could he 
have failed to be Nixon? He could have failed to be named “Nixon,” but that 
is not to have failed to be Nixon himself (because, of course, Nixon need not 
have been named “Nixon”). He could have failed to have the properties ste-
reotypically associated with Nixon, hence failed to “be Nixon” in the sense 
that Trieste fails to “be Vienna,” but as we saw in the previous chapter such 
flaccid uses of names are unusual.
Kripke argues that when one uses the name “Nixon” to refer to a person 
in this world and then starts describing hypothetical scenarios or alternative 
possible worlds, continuing to use the name, one is talking about the same 
person. So if you ask, “Might Nixon have joined the Black Panthers rather 
than becoming President?,” the answer may be yes or may be no, but the sce-
nario you are considering is one in which Nixon, that very person, is a Black 
Panther—not one in which whoever or whatever was the U.S. President was a 
Panther. You are not imagining a world in which a Black Panther is President 
of the US.
But what of Russell’s spot-check argument? In response to “Whom do 
you mean by ‘Lili Boulanger’/‘Wilfrid Sellars’?” you promptly cough up a 
description or cluster of descriptions. Likewise Searle’s appeal to teaching 
and learning: They also proceed by equating the name in question with a 
description or cluster. These facts seem undeniable and insuperable.
In response, Kripke introduced an important distinction. Russell and 
Searle had both assumed that, if a name has a description or cluster associated 
with it in the ways they have respectively pointed out, then the name must 
share the meaning of that descriptive material (from now on I shall say just 
“description” for short). But this assumption is unwarranted, because there is 
a weaker relation that the description might bear to the name and still explain 
the spot check and pedagogical data: even though the description does not 
give the linguistic meaning of the name, it is what is used to determine the 
name’s reference on an occasion. Although the name “Lili Boulanger” is not 
synonymous with “the first woman ever to win the Prix de Rome,” the latter 
description can be used to indicate the person one is referring to when one 
uses “Lili Boulanger.” And it can be used as part of an explanation to a pupil, 
to identify the individual to which the name is attached.

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  49
Thus, even if a name in someone’s mouth at a time has a firm psychological 
association with a particular description in that person’s mind, it does not 
follow that the name is equivalent to the description in meaning. For all that 
has been shown, when the person obligingly coughs up the description in 
response to a spot check, the person is merely identifying the name’s refer-
ent. Similarly, if I tell a small child who “Gordon Brown” is, identifying that 
name’s referent by saying “Gordon Brown is the British Prime Minister,” it 
does not follow that the name “Gordon Brown” simply means “the British 
Prime Minister.” (Of course, this is not an argument against the Name Claim 
itself; it only undermines Russell’s use of the spot-check test as an argument 
for the Name Claim.)
Direct Reference
Russell used the four puzzles and (implicitly) his spot-check argument to 
attack the view that ordinary proper names are Millian names, in favor of 
the Description Theory. In turn, Kripke attacked the Description Theory in 
favor of the claim that ordinary proper names are rigid designators. But the 
latter claim does not quite amount to Millianism, for not all rigid designators 
are Millian names.
A Millian name, remember, is one that makes no propositional contribu-
tion but its bearer or referent. Its sole function is to introduce that individual 
into discourse; it lends nothing else to the meaning of a sentence in which it 
occurs. If we say “Jason is fat,” and “Jason” is a standard proper name, then 
the meaning of that sentence consists simply of the person Jason himself 
concatenated with the property of being fat.
Being Millian certainly implies being rigid. But the reverse does not hold. 
Although Kripke cites Mill and argues that names are rigid, rigidity does not 
imply being Millian. For definite descriptions can be rigid. Suppose we fall in 
with the prevalent view that arithmetical truths are all necessary truths. Then 
there are arithmetical descriptions, such as “the positive square root of nine,” 
that are rigid, because they designate the same number in every possible 
world, but are certainly not Millian because in order to secure their reference 
they exploit their conceptual content. Indeed, they seem to Russellize: “The 
positive square root of nine” seems to mean whatever positive number yields 
nine when multiplied by itself. So that description is not Millian even though 
it is rigid, because it does not simply introduce its bearer (the number three) 
into the discourse; it also characterizes three as being something that when 
multiplied by itself yields nine. Thus, in defending the rigidity of names, 
Kripke did not thereby establish the stronger claim. (Nor did he intend to; 
he does not believe that names are Millian.)4
However, other philosophers have championed the Millian conception, 
which has come to be called the Direct Reference theory of names. The first 
of these in our century was Ruth Marcus (1960, 1961), cited by Kripke as hav-
ing directly inspired his work. Subsequent Direct Reference (DR) theories of 

50  Reference and referring
names have been built on Marcus’ and Kripke’s work (for example, Kaplan 
1975; Salmon 1986).
The latter theorists have extended DR to cover some other singular terms, 
notably personal and demonstrative pronouns such as “I,” “you,” “she,” 
“this,” and “that,” as well as names. (An obvious problem about extending DR 
to pronouns is that any normal speaker of English knows what they mean, 
whether or not the speaker knows whom they are being used to designate 
on a given occasion; if you find “I am ill and will not hold class today” writ-
ten on the blackboard in an empty classroom, you understand the sentence 
even if you do not know who wrote it or on what day. This problem will be 
addressed in chapter 11.)
Of course, DR must confront the four puzzles. And, obviously, the DR 
theorist cannot subscribe to Russell’s solution or anything very like it, for, 
according to DR, names do nothing semantically but stand for their bearers.
Let us reconsider the Substitutivity puzzle first. Recall our sentence:
(1)	 Albert believes that Samuel Langhorne Clemens was less than 5 
feet tall.
(1) goes false when “Mark Twain” is substituted for “Samuel Langhorne 
Clemens.” How can DR explain or even tolerate that fact?
DR theorists employ a two-pronged strategy. There is a positive thesis and 
there is a negative thesis (though these are not often explicitly distinguished). 
The positive DR thesis is that the names in question really do substitute 
without altering the containing sentence’s truth-value. On this view,
(2)  Albert believes that Mark Twain was less than 5 feet tall.
is true, not false. At the very least, belief sentences have transparent readings 
or understandings, on which readings the names that fall within the scope of 
“believes” really do just refer to what they refer to.
We naturally think otherwise; (2) does not seem true to us. That is 
because when we see a belief sentence, we usually take its complement clause 
to reproduce the ways in which its subject would speak or think. If I assert 
(2), I thereby somehow imply that Albert would accept the sentence “Mark 
Twain was less than 5 feet tall” or something fairly close to it. If I say, “Albert 
doesn’t believe that Mark Twain was less than 5 feet tall,” I am suggesting 
that if faced with the sentence “Mark Twain was less than 5 feet tall,” Albert 
would say either “No” or “I wouldn’t know.”
But the DR theorists point out that such suggestions are not always true, 
perhaps not ever true. Consider:
(3)  Columbus believed that Castro’s island was China.
(Attributed to the late Roderick Chisholm.) We all know what one would 
mean in asserting (3); the speaker would mean that when Columbus sighted 

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  51
Cuba he thought that he was nearing the East Indies and was directly 
approaching China. Of course, being 450 years early, Columbus did not 
know anything about Fidel Castro; yet we can assert (3) with no presump-
tion that its complement clause represents things in the way that Columbus 
himself represented them. The speaker makes this reference to Cuba without 
at all assuming that Columbus would have referred to Cuba in that way or in 
any parallel or analogous way.
Or suppose you and I are among the few people who know that our 
acquaintance Jacques is in fact the notorious jewel thief who has been ter-
rorizing Paris’ wealthy set, called “Le Chat” in the popular press and by the 
gendarmes. We read in the newspaper after a particularly daring but flawed 
robbery that police believe “Le Chat dropped the fistful of anchovies as he 
or she ran.” We say to each other, “The police think Jacques dropped the 
anchovies as he ran.”
So it seems undeniable that there are transparent positions inside belief 
sentences, in which the referring expression does just refer to its bearer, 
without any further suggestion about the way in which the subject of the 
belief sentence would have represented the bearer. Singular terms can be and 
are often understood transparently. We might even say:
(4)  Some people doubt that Tully is Tully.
meaning that some people have doubted of the man Cicero that he was also 
Tully. That would perhaps be a minority interpretation of (4), but we can at 
least hear (4) as asserting that the people doubt of Cicero that he was Tully.5
Virtually all the DR literature has been devoted to establishing the posi-
tive thesis, that names do have Millian readings even in belief contexts. But 
the positive thesis is far from all that the DR theorist needs. For, although we 
may be persuaded that every belief sentence does have a transparent reading, 
most of us also remain convinced that every belief sentence also has an opaque 
reading, that on which some substitutions turn truths into falsehoods: in one 
sense Columbus believed that Castro’s island was China, but in another, he 
believed no such thing, for the obvious reason that he had never heard (and 
would never hear) of Castro. Similarly, in one sense the police believe that 
Jacques dropped the anchovies, but in another they do not, and likewise for 
people doubting “that Tully is Tully.” Yet it seems DR cannot allow so much 
as a sense in which belief contexts are opaque. That is DR’s negative thesis: 
that names do not have non-Millian readings, even in belief contexts.
The problem gets worse: it is hard to deny that the opaque readings are 
more readily heard than the transparent readings. Indeed, that is implicitly 
conceded by the DR theorists, in that they know they have had to work to 
make us hear the transparent readings. The DR theorists must try to explain 
the fact away as a particularly dramatic illusion. That is, they must hold that, 
in fact, sentences like (1)–(4) cannot literally mean what we can and usually 
would take them to mean; there is some extraneous reason why we are seduced 
into hearing such sentences opaquely. A few such putative explanations have 

52  Reference and referring
been sketched, using materials we shall encounter in chapter 13 (Salmon 
1986; Soames 1987, 2002; Wettstein 1991; and see Marcus 1981). But here, 
in my opinion, the DR theorists have come up short; at least, none of the 
sketches produced to date has struck me as very plausible, though perhaps 
Soames (2002) is the most promising.
As is implied by example (4), Frege’s Puzzle is even worse for the Millian. 
According to DR, a sentence like “Samuel Langhorne Clemens is Mark 
Twain” can mean only that the common referent, however designated, is 
himself. Yet such a sentence is virtually never understood as meaning that. 
And anyone might doubt that Clemens is Twain, seemingly without doubting 
anyone’s self-identity. Here again, the DR theorist bears a massive burden, of 
explaining away our intuitive judgements as illusory.
The Problems of Apparent Reference to Nonexistents and Negative 
Existentials are if anything worse yet. If a name’s meaning is simply to refer 
to its bearer, then what about all those perfectly meaningful names that have 
no bearers? (But for doughty recent DR attempts to meet those two prob-
lems, see Salmon 1998; Soames 2002; Braun 2005.)
We have come to a deep dilemma, nearly a paradox. On the one hand, in 
chapter 3 we saw compelling Kripkean reasons why names cannot be thought 
to abbreviate flaccid descriptions, or otherwise to have substantive senses 
or connotations. Intuitively, names are Millian. Yet, because the original 
puzzles are still bristling as insistently as ever, it also seems that DR is pretty 
well refuted. This is a dilemma, or rather trilemma, because it further appears 
that we are stuck with one of those three possibilities: either the names are 
Millian, or they abbreviate descriptions outright, or in some looser way such 
as Searle’s they have some substantive “sense” or content. But none of these 
views is acceptable.
A few theorists have claimed to find ways between the three horns. As 
noted in chapter 3, Plantinga (1978) and Ackerman (1979) have appealed to 
rigidified descriptions, such as “the actual winner of the 1968 election” as 
opposed to just “the winner of the 1968 election”; the former description is 
rigid, because “the actual winner” means the winner in this (our) world, and 
refers to that same person at any other world regardless of whether he won 
there. On this view, names are rigid though they are not Millian. (See also 
Jackson 1998.) Michael Devitt (1989, 1996) has offered a radical revision of 
Frege’s notion of sense. I myself (Lycan 1994) have offered a much subtler, 
more beautiful and more effective weakened version of DR, but it would be 
immodest of me to tout it here.6
We must now make a crucial distinction. So far in this chapter we have 
been talking about the semantics of proper names, that is, about theories of 
what names contribute to the meanings of sentences in which they occur. DR 
in particular takes for granted the idea of a name’s referent or bearer. But then 
a separate question is. In virtue of what is a thing the referent or bearer of a 
particular name? Semantics leaves that question to philosophical analysis. A 
philosophical theory of referring is a hypothesis as to what relation it is exactly 

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  53
that ties a name to its referent—more specifically, an answer to the question 
of what it takes for there to be a referential link between one’s utterance of a 
name and the individual that gets referred to by that utterance.
Semantical theories of names and philosophical accounts of referring vary 
independently of each other. The difference was blurred by Russell and by 
Searle,7 because each gave a very similar answer to both questions. Russell 
said that a name gets its meaning, and contributes to overall sentence mean-
ing, by abbreviating a description; also, what makes a thing the bearer of the 
name is that the thing uniquely satisfies the description. Likewise for Searle 
and his clusters. But now notice that, if one is a DR theorist, that alone tells 
us nothing about what attaches a name to its referent. The same goes for 
Kripke’s weaker rigidity thesis; up till now, he has been talking semantics 
only, and we have seen nothing of his theory of referring. To that we now 
turn.
The Causal–Historical Theory
As you can verify for yourself, most of Kripke’s objections to the Name Claim 
and to description semantics generally will also translate into objections to 
the Description Theory of referring; the Description Theory will predict the 
wrong referent (think of the Gödel/Schmidt example in objection 5, chapter 
3) or no referent at all (as when there is no particular description the speaker 
has in mind (objection 1) or in indefinite cases, as in objection 6).
Kripke sketches a better idea. He begins memorably (1972/1980: 91): 
“Someone, let’s say, a baby, is born . . . .” (I think we should grant Kripke’s 
assumption that the neonate is a baby. There is such a thing as being too 
picky.) He continues:
[The baby’s] parents call him by a certain name. They talk about him to 
their friends. Other people meet him. Through various sorts of talk the 
name is spread from link to link as if by a chain. A speaker who is on the 
far end of this chain, who has heard about, say Richard Feynman, in the 
market place or elsewhere, may be referring to Richard Feynman even 
though he can’t remember from whom he first heard of Feynman or from 
whom he ever heard of Feynman. He knows that Feynman was a famous 
physicist. A certain passage of communication reaching ultimately to the 
man himself does reach the speaker. He then is referring to Feynman 
even though he can’t identify him uniquely.
The idea, then, is that my utterance of “Feynman” is the most recent link 
in a causal–historical chain of reference borrowings, whose first link is the 
event of the infant Feynman’s being given that name. I got the name from 
somebody who got it from somebody else who got it from somebody else 
who got it from somebody else . . . , all the way back to the naming ceremony. 
I do not have to be in any particular cognitive state of Russell’s or Searle’s 

54  Reference and referring
sort. Nor need I have any interesting true belief about Feynman, or as to how 
I acquired the name. All that is required is that a chain of communication in 
fact has been established by virtue of my membership in a speech community 
that has passed the name on from person to person, which chain goes back 
to Feynman himself.
Of course, when a new user first learns a name from a predecessor in the 
historical chain, it can only be by the newbie’s and the predecessor’s sharing 
a psychologically salient backing of identifying descriptions. But, as before, 
there is no reason to assume that that particular backing of descriptions fixes 
the name’s sense. It is needed only to fix reference. So long as the newbie has 
a correct identificatory fix on the predecessor’s referent, the newbie can then 
freely use the name to refer to that person.
Taken at face value, this causal–historical view makes the right predictions 
about examples such as Donnellan’s Tom. In each example, referring succeeds 
because the speaker is causally connected to the referent in an appropriate 
historical way.
Kripke (1972/1980: 66–7) offers the further case of the biblical character 
Jonah. It is similar to the “Nixon” example (objection 3 in chapter 3). Kripke 
points out that we should distinguish between stories that are complete leg-
ends and stories that are, rather, substantially false accounts of real people. 
Suppose historical scholars discover that in fact no prophet was ever swal-
lowed by a big fish, or did anything else attributed by the Bible to Jonah. 
The question remains of whether the Jonah character was simply made up in 
the first place, or whether the story is grounded ultimately in a real person. 
Actually there are subcases: someone could have made up and spread a host 
of false stories about Jonah immediately after his death; or because Jonah 
was an exciting individual, all sorts of rumors and stories began to circulate 
about him, and the rumors got out of hand; or there might have been a very 
gradual loss of correct information and accretion of false attributions over 
the centuries. But, in any of these cases, it seems that today the Bible is saying 
false things about the real person, Jonah.8
It might be thought that ambiguous names—names borne by more than 
one person—pose a problem for the causal–historical view. (“John Brown” is 
ambiguous as between the former Scots ghillie who befriended Queen Victoria 
after Albert’s death, the monomaniacal failed farmer who invaded Harper’s 
Ferry in 1859, and doubtless thousands of other males of the English-speaking 
world. Until 1994, even the highly distinctive name “William Lycan” applied 
to more than one person. I suppose the vast majority of names are ambiguous; 
a name is unambiguous only by historical accident.) This is no problem at all 
for description theories because, according to description theories, ambigu-
ous names simply abbreviate different descriptions. (If anything, description 
theories make proper names too richly ambiguous.) But what if you endorse 
DR, and you deny that names have senses or descriptive connotations in any 
sense at all?

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  55
I asked that last question only to see if you had been paying attention 
earlier. It flagrantly ignores the important distinction between the semantics 
of names and the theory of referring. The Causal–Historical Theory of refer-
ring has a straightforward answer to the question of ambiguous names: if a 
name is ambiguous, that is because more than one person has been given it. 
What disambiguates a particular use of such a name on a given occasion is—
what else?—that use’s causal–historical grounding, specifically the particular 
bearer whose naming ceremony initiated its etiology.
Kripke emphasizes that he has only sketched a picture; he does not have 
a worked-out theory. The trick will be to see how one can take that picture 
and make it into a real theory that resists serious objections. The only way to 
make a picture into a theory is to take it overliterally, to treat it as if it were 
a theory and see how it needs to be refined. Kripke does just that, though he 
leaves the refinement to others.
Problems for the Causal–Historical Theory
The causal–historical view’s key notion is that of the passing on of reference 
from one person to another. But not just any such transfer will do. First, 
we must rule out the “naming after” phenomenon. My boyhood friend John 
Lewis acquired a sheepdog, and named it “Napoleon” after the emperor; 
he had the historical Napoleon explicitly in mind and wanted to name his 
dog after that famous person. “Naming after” is a link in a causal–historical 
chain: it is only because the emperor was named “Napoleon” that John Lewis 
named his dog that. But it is the wrong kind of link. To rule it out, Kripke 
requires that “[w]hen the name is ‘passed from link to link’, the receiver of 
the name must . . . intend when he learns it to use it with the same reference 
as the man from whom he heard it” (1972/1980: 96). This requirement was 
clearly not met by John Lewis, who was deliberately changing the referent 
from the emperor to the dog and meant his friends to be well aware of that.
Second, Kripke adduces the example of “Santa Claus.” There may be a 
causal chain tracing our use of that name back to a certain historical saint, 
probably a real person who lived in eastern Europe centuries ago, but no 
one would say that when children use it they unwittingly refer to that saint; 
clearly they refer to the fictional Christmas character. But then, how does 
“Santa Claus” differ from “Jonah”? Why should we not say that there was 
a real Santa Claus, but that all the mythology about him is garishly false? 
Instead, of course, we say that there is no Santa Claus (apologies to any-
one who did not know that). We use the name “Santa Claus” as though it 
abbreviates a description. A similar example would be that of “Dracula.” It 
is well known that the contemporary use of that name goes back to a real 
Transylvanian nobleman called “Vlad” (commonly, “Vlad the Impaler,” in 
virtue of his customary treatment of people who had annoyed him). But of 
course when we now say “Dracula” we mean the fictional vampire created by 
Bram Stoker and portrayed by Bela Lugosi in the famous movie.

56  Reference and referring
Having merely raised the problem, Kripke does not try to patch his 
account in response, but moves on. Probably the most obvious feature to 
note is that “Santa Claus” and “Dracula” as we use those names are associated 
with very powerful stereotypes, indeed cultural icons in the United States. 
Their social roles are so prominent that they really have ossified into fictional 
descriptions, in a way that “Jonah” has not even among religious people. In 
a way, Jonah’s iconic properties are side by side with his historical proper-
ties in the Old Testament, but as we might say, “Santa Claus” and “Dracula” 
are pure icons. And for the average American, the myth utterly dwarfs the 
historical source.
As Kripke says, much work is needed. Devitt (1981a) offers a fairly well 
developed view that does qualify as a theory rather than only a picture. 
However, here are a few objections that would apply to any version of the 
Causal–Historical Theory as described above.
Objection 1
We have been offered the notion of a causal–historical chain leading back 
in time from our present uses of the name to a ceremony in which an actual 
individual is named. But how, then, can the Causal–Historical Theorist 
accommodate empty names, names that have no actual bearers?
Perhaps the best bet here is to exploit the fact that even empty names are 
introduced to the linguistic community at particular points in time, either 
through deliberate fiction or through error of one kind or another. From such 
an introduction, as Devitt (1981a) and Donnellan (1974) point out, causal–
historical chains begin spreading into the future just as if the name had been 
bestowed on an actual individual. So reference or “reference” to nonexistents 
is by causal–historical chain, but the chain’s first link is the naming event 
itself rather than any putative doings of the nonexistent bearer.9
Objection 2
Evans (1973) points out that names can change their reference unbeknownst, 
through mishap or error, but the Causal–Historical Theory as presented 
so far cannot allow for that. According to Evans,10 the name “Madagascar” 
originally named, not the great African island, but a portion of the mainland; 
the change was ultimately due to a misunderstanding of Marco Polo’s. Or:
Two babies are born, and their mothers bestow names upon them. A 
nurse inadvertently switches them and the error is never discovered. It 
will henceforth undeniably be the case that the man universally known 
as “Jack” is so called because a woman dubbed some other baby with the 
name.
(Evans 1973: 196)

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  57
We do not want to be forced to say that our use of “Madagascar” still des-
ignates part of the mainland, or that “Jack” continues to refer to the other 
former baby rather than to the man everyone calls “Jack.”
In reply, Devitt (1981a: 150) suggests a move to multiple grounding. A 
naming ceremony, he says, is only one kind of occasion that can ground 
an appropriate historical chain; other perceptual encounters can serve also. 
Instead of there being just the single linear causal chain that goes back from 
one’s utterance to the original naming ceremony, the structure is mangrove-
like: the utterance proceeds also out of further historical chains that are 
grounded in later stages of the bearer itself. Once our use of “Madagascar” 
has a large preponderance of its groundings in the island rather than the 
mainland region, it thereby comes to designate the island; once our use of 
“Jack” is heavily grounded in many people’s perceptual encounters with the 
man called that, those groundings will overmaster the chain that began with 
the naming ceremony. This is vague, of course, perhaps objectionably so.
Objection 3
We can misidentify the object of a naming ceremony. Suppose I am seeking a 
new pet from the Animal Shelter. I have visited the Shelter several times and 
noticed an appealing grey tabby; I decide to adopt her. On my next visit I 
prepare to name her. The attendant brings out a tabby of similar appearance 
and I believe her to be the same one I intend to adopt. I say, “Here we are 
again, then, puddy-tat; your name is now ‘Liz’, after the composer Elizabeth 
Poston, and I’ll see you again after you’ve had all your shots” (tactfully I 
do not mention the mandatory neutering). The attendant takes the cat away 
again. But unbeknownst to me it was the wrong cat, not my intended pet. The 
attendant notices the mistake, without telling me, recovers the right cat, and 
gives her her shots (and the rest). I pick her up and take her home, naturally 
calling her “Liz” ever thereafter.
The problem is of course that my cat was not given that name in any 
ceremony. The imposter was given it, even if I had no right to name her. Yet 
surely my own cat is the bearer of “Liz,” not just after subsequent multiple 
groundings have been established, but even just after the naming ceremony 
I did perform. (It would be different if I had taken the imposter home and 
continued to call her “Liz.”) The multiple-grounding strategy does not seem 
to help here. Rather, what matters is which cat I had in mind and believed I 
was naming in the ceremony. (Devitt (1981a: section 5.1) speaks of “abilities 
to designate,” construing these as mental states of a certain sophisticated 
type.) If so, then repair of the Causal–Historical Theory on this point will 
require a significant foray into the philosophy of mind.

58  Reference and referring
Objection 4
People can be categorically mistaken in their beliefs about referents. Evans 
cites E. K. Chambers’ Arthur of Britain11 as asserting that King Arthur had 
a son Anir “whom legend has perhaps confused with his burial place.” A 
speaker in the grip of the latter confusion might say “Anir must be a green 
and lovely spot”; the Causal–Historical Theory would interpret that sentence 
as saying that a human being (Arthur’s son) was a green and lovely spot. Less 
dramatically, one might mistake a person for an institution or vice versa. (A 
former colleague of mine used to use the name of Emerson Hall—the build-
ing that houses the Harvard philosophy department—as a way of referring to 
the department, as in “Emerson Hall isn’t going to like this.” A casual hearer 
might easily have gotten the idea that “Emerson Hall” names a person.) Or 
one might mistake a shadow for a live human being and give it a name. In 
none of these cases is it plausible to say that subsequent uses of the name in 
question really refer to the categorially erroneous item.
Devitt and Sterelny (1987) call this the “qua-problem.” They concede that 
the celebrant at a naming ceremony, or other person responsible for any of 
a name’s groundings, must not be categorically mistaken and must indeed 
intend to refer to something of the appropriate category. This is a mild con-
cession to Descriptivism.
There are more objections (some of them further ones of Evans’). The 
majority position seems to be that Kripke initially overreacted to the 
Descriptivist picture. He was right to insist that causal–historical chains of 
some kind are required for referring and that descriptions do not do nearly as 
much work as Russell or even Searle thought they did; but (as critics, includ-
ing Kripke himself, maintain) there still are some descriptive conditions as 
well. The trick is to move back in the direction of Descriptivism without 
going so far as even Searle’s weak Descriptivist doctrine. But that does not 
leave much room in which to maneuver. One promising line has come to be 
called “causal descriptivism” (Kroon 1987): The idea is to accept the causal–
historical theorist’s causal–historical proposal as getting the cases right, but 
make it into a descriptive condition. Kroon defends this primarily by extend-
ing the “naming after” objection.
Natural-kind terms and “Twin Earth”
Kripke (1972/1980) and Hilary Putnam (1975a) went on to extend both the 
semantic theory of rigid designation and the Causal–Historical Theory of 
referring from singular terms to some predicates or general terms, chiefly 
naturalkind terms, common nouns of the sort that refer to natural substances 
or organisms, like “gold,” “water,” “molybdenum,” “tiger,” and “aardvark.” 
Such expressions are not singular terms, since they do not purport to apply 
to just one thing. But Kripke and Putnam argued that they are more like 
names than they are like adjectives. Semantically they are rigid; each refers 

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  59
to the same natural kind in every world in which that kind has membership. 
And some version of the Causal–Historical Theory characterizes their refer-
ring use.
This view sharply opposed a long-held Descriptivist theory of naturalkind 
terms, which associated each such term with a descriptive stereotype. For 
example, “water” would have been analyzed as meaning something like “a 
clear, odorless, tasteless potable liquid that falls from the sky as rain and fills 
lakes and streams,” and “tiger” as something like “a ferocious, carnivorous 
jungle feline, tawny with distinctive black stripes.” Kripke and Putnam urged 
modal arguments against such analyses, similar to objection 3 from the pre-
vious chapter and to the rigidity argument that began this one. For example, 
there could have been water even if there had never been rain, lakes or streams, 
and under different circumstances water might have had an odor or a taste. 
Tigers might have been born tame, and we might even find out that no tiger 
has ever in fact had stripes (a worldwide Wonderland-style conspiracy might 
have had all the stripes painted on).
What does make something a tiger, then, or a sample of water, if not the 
commonsense stereotype? Kripke and Putnam adverted to the scientific 
natures of natural kinds. What makes water water is its chemical composi-
tion, that it is H2O; what makes tigers tigers is their distinctive genetic code. 
In every possible world, water is H2O, but in some worlds H2O has an odor 
or a taste.
It may be objected that the chemical composition of water and the genetic 
characteristics of tigers were highly substantive empirical discoveries; so 
surely it was possible that water not be H2O, and so there are worlds in which 
water is not H2O. But Kripke and Putnam rejoined that the alleged “possibil-
ity” here is only a matter of scientific ignorance, not a genuine metaphysical 
possibility; once one does discover the scientific essence of a natural kind, 
one has discovered the true metaphysical nature of that kind, and the kind 
has that nature in every possible world in which it is manifested. What change 
from world to world are the elements of the commonsense stereotype.
If this view is correct,12 it has a somewhat startling implication about the 
relation between linguistic meaning and the mind: as Putnam puts it, that 
meaning “ain’t in the head.” Putnam imagines that somewhere in another 
galaxy there is a planet, called “Twin Earth,” which is a nearly exact duplicate 
of our Earth, running along exactly in parallel with our own history. It con-
tains a Twin Putnam, a Twin Brooklyn Bridge, a Twin Lycan and a Twin you, 
all molecular duplicates of their counterparts here. If one were able to watch 
both planets simultaneously, it would be like watching the same television 
program on two different screens. (But it is important to note that Twin 
Earth is not a different possible world; it is only another planet, within the 
same world as Earth. Though exactly like you to look at and embedded in an 
almost exactly similar planetary context, of course Twin you is not you, but 
a numerically different person.)

60  Reference and referring
I said that Twin Earth is a nearly exact duplicate of Earth. There is one dif-
ference: what looks and behaves like water on Twin Earth is not water—that 
is, H2O—but a different substance that Putnam calls XYZ. XYZ is odorless 
and tasteless and has the other superficial properties that water does, but 
it is only “fool’s water” (as in “fool’s gold”). Of course, the Twin-English-
speaking Twin Earthlings call the XYZ “water,” since they are otherwise 
just like us,13 but that is an equivocation; “water” in Twin English means 
XYZ, not water, just as (I am told) the kind term “chicory” in British English 
means a different plant from the one meant by the same word in American 
English.
Now, consider a pair of transworld twins, say Gordon Brown and Twin 
Gordon. After a natural disaster, Brown emphasizes the urgency of getting 
food and water to the victims. Naturally, at the same time, Twin Gordon 
emphasizes the urgency of getting food and “water” to the victims. But the 
word-for-word-identical sentences they utter mean different things. Brown’s 
sentence means that the victims must be provided with food and H2O, while 
Twin Gordon’s means that the victims must be provided with food and 
XYZ.
Yet Brown and Twin Gordon are physical duplicates. Given Putnam’s 
background assumptions, this shows that the meanings of Brown’s and Twin 
Gordon’s utterances are not determined by the total states of their brains, or 
even by the total states of their bodies. For their brain states and bodily states 
are identical, yet their utterance meanings differ.
That is perhaps no big surprise. After all, language is public property; any 
given language is used by a community, for communication between different 
people, not often for the mere articulation of someone’s private thoughts. 
But in fact (again given the background assumptions), Putnam’s example 
shows more: that the linguistic meanings of sentences are not determined 
even by the totality of speakers’ brain states and bodily states, indeed even 
by the entire community’s pattern of usage. For English speakers and Twin 
English speakers are all exactly alike in their physical composition and in the 
public deployment of words that sound just the same; yet the sentences of 
their otherwise identical languages mean different things.14 We shall return 
to this point in chapter 6.
Now it is time to branch out and take up the whole matter of meaning and 
theories of meaning.
Summary
Kripke argued that proper names normally function as rigid designa-
• 
tors, that a name denotes the same individual in every possible world 
in which that individual exists.
Taking a more ambitious line, the DR theorists defend the Millian 
• 
view that a name’s sole contribution to the meaning of a sentence in 
which it occurs is to introduce its bearer into the discourse.

Proper names: Direct Reference and the Causal–Historical Theory  61
But our four logical puzzles about reference still arise just as insis-
• 
tently as before, and seem to make DR untenable. We are left with 
something of a paradox.
Turning to the theory of referring, Kripke offered his causal–histori-
• 
cal picture as a replacement for Description Theories. Michael Devitt 
and others have refined and ramified the causal–historical view in 
response to initial objections.
Kripke and Putnam extended the Causal–Historical Theory to cover 
• 
natural-kind terms.
If the Causal–Historical Theory is correct, then Putnam’s “Twin 
• 
Earth” examples seem to show that the meanings of a speech commu-
nity’s words are not entirely determined by the contents of speakers’ 
and hearers’ heads; the external world makes a contribution also.
Questions
1	
Some philosophers are uneasy about Kripke’s notion of a “rigid desig-
nator” and his ancillary distinction between “fixing sense.” If you too 
are uneasy about “rigidity,” can you articulate the problem?
2	
Do fictional names pose a special problem for Kripke’s rigidity thesis? 
How might he treat fictional names?
3	
Now that Kripke has rejected the Name Claim, how might he address 
one or more of the four puzzles?
4	
Can you help DR address one or more of the four puzzles (a harder 
task)?
5	
Can you respond more fully on behalf of the Causal–Historical Theory 
to objections 1–4?
6	
Offer your own criticisms of the causal–historical picture.
7	
Assess the Kripke–Putnam view that natural-kind terms rigidly desig-
nate scientifically characterized kinds.
8	
Are you persuaded by Putnam’s “Twin Earth” examples that meanings 
“ain’t in the head”?
Further reading
Further representative papers on Direct Reference may be found in 
• 
Almog, Perry and Wettstein (1989); a survey and critique is offered in 
Devitt (1989). See also Recanati (1993).
Kvart (1993) also elaborates a version of the Causal–Historical Theory 
• 
of referring.
Evans (1973) offers further objections to Kripke’s picture, and an 
• 
interesting revision of it. Evans (1982) makes concessions to Kripke 
but insists that the idea of a “name-using (social) practice” must be 
introduced as a further element. McKinsey (1976, 1978) has moved 

62  Reference and referring
further back toward the ancien régime. Further objections are made 
by Erwin, Kleiman and Zemach (1976) and Linsky (1977).
Salmon (1981) surveys semantic views of kind terms. Schwartz (1977) 
• 
contains relevant papers. Criticisms of the Kripke–Putnam line are 
offered by Fine (1975), Dupré (1981), Unger (1983), and others. Boër 
(1985) responds to some of those criticisms.
The impact of “Twin Earth” examples on the theory of meaning gen-
• 
erally is explored in Harman (1982) and Lycan (1984: ch. 10).

Part II
Theories of meaning


5	
Traditional theories of meaning
Overview
If the Referential Theory of Meaning is false, what theory is true? Any 
theory of meaning must account for the relevant facts, which we may call 
“the meaning facts”: that some physical objects are meaningful (at all); that 
distinct expressions can have the same meaning; that a single expression can 
have more than one meaning; that the meaning of one expression can be 
contained in that of another; and more. We tend to talk of “meanings” as 
individual things.
Meanings have been thought to be particular ideas in people’s minds. But 
several objections show that this cannot mean actual thoughts in the minds 
of particular people at particular times. At best, meanings would have to be 
more abstract: types of idea that might (or might not) occur in the mind of 
some being somewhere.
Accordingly, meanings have also been taken to be abstract things in them-
selves, alternately called “propositions.” The sentence “Snow is white” means 
that snow is white; equally, we may say it “expresses the proposition that” 
snow is white. Other sentences, even in other languages such as “La neige est 
blanche” and “Der Schnee ist weiss” express that same proposition, and are 
therefore synonymous. This Proposition Theory fits the various “meaning 
facts” well, since “proposition” is essentially another word for “meaning.” 
But critics have questioned whether it explains the meaning facts satisfacto-
rily, or indeed at all.
When this book began, the topics of reference and meaning were not sepa-
rate, because the most common naive idea people have about meaning is that 
meaning is reference. In chapter 1 we disparaged the commonsensical but 
untenable Referential Theory of Meaning. So we must now confront mean-
ing directly, and look at some more sophisticated theories of meaning.
Like any theory, a theory of meaning has to have a proprietary set of data. 
What are the primary data for a theory of meaning? I will refer to them cor-
porately as “the meaning facts.”
First, as we emphasized in chapter 1, there is meaningfulness itself. Some 
strings of marks or noises in the air are just strings of marks or noises in the 
air, whereas others—particularly whole sentences—are meaningful. What is 
the difference? Perhaps that is the basic question for the theory of meaning.

66  Theories of meaning
Second, we sometimes say that two distinct expressions are synonymous. 
Third, we sometimes say of a single expression that it is ambiguous, that 
is, that it has more than one meaning. (So expressions and meanings are 
not correlated one to one.) Fourth, we sometimes say that one expression’s 
meaning is contained in that of another, as female and deer are contained in 
the meaning of “doe.” An important special case here is that of one sentence’s 
entailing another: “Harold is fat and Ben is stupid” entails “Ben is stupid.” 
(There is joint entailment too: “Grannie is either in the holding cell or in court 
already” and “Grannie is not in the holding cell” together entail “Grannie is 
in court already,” even though neither sentence alone entails that.)
There are more exotic meaning facts as well. For example, some disputes 
or alleged disputes are merely verbal or “only semantic,” unlike substantive 
disagreements over fact. X and Y do not disagree about what actually hap-
pened; they dispute only over whether what happened counts as a “so-and-so.” 
Onlookers say, “Oh, they’re just talking past each other.” (That happens a lot 
in philosophy.)
In stating the foregoing meaning facts, I have at least half-heartedly tried 
to avoid “reification” of things called meanings; that is, talking about “mean-
ings” as if they were individual things like shoes or socks. I have talked of 
sentences having such features as being meaningful, being synonymous, being 
ambiguous, though I did eventually slip into alluding to “meanings.” I could 
have reified throughout, and said “has a meaning” instead of “is meaningful,” 
“have the same meaning” instead of “are synonymous,” and so on, or perhaps 
even used explicit quantifier expressions, as in “There is a meaning that the 
sentence has” and “There exists a meaning that is common to each of these 
sentences.” Philosophers have made an issue of this.
Let us use the term “entity theory” to mean a theory that officially takes 
meanings to be individual things. And there is some considerable support for 
entity theories in the way we ordinarily talk. We not only seem to refer to 
things called meanings using the word as a common noun, but we seem to use 
quantifier expressions in that connection. We sometimes even seem to count 
them: “This word has four different meanings.” So it is not unnatural to turn 
first to entity theories.
There are at least two different kinds of entities that meanings might be 
taken to be. First, one could take the entities to be mental items. Theories of 
that kind are sometimes called ideational theories.
Ideational theories
The whipping boy here is usually John Locke (1690/1955), since Locke seems 
to have held that the meanings of linguistic expressions are ideas in the mind. 
On this sort of view, what it is for a string of marks or noises to be mean-
ingful is for the string to express, or somehow significantly correspond to, 
a content-bearing mental state that the speaker is in, an idea, an image, or 
perhaps a thought or a belief. What is characteristic of ideational theories as 

Traditional theories of meaning  67
I am using the term is that the mental states in question are actual states of 
particular people at particular times.
If a string is meaningful in that it expresses an idea, one may then say that 
for two expressions to be synonymous is for them to express the same idea. 
For an expression to be ambiguous is for there to be more than one idea that 
it could express, and so on. And regarding the phenomenon of merely verbal 
disagreement, the ideational theorist may say: It is not that one party has one 
thought and the other has a different, conflicting thought; they both have the 
same thought, but are confusingly putting it in different words that sound 
incompatible.
So an ideational theory seems to give us an intuitive way of expressing our 
meaning facts more precisely. Nonetheless ideational theories have not been 
popular in this or the past century (though we shall see in chapter 7 that Paul 
Grice defends a descendant of one). Here are several of the reasons for their 
disrepute.
Objection 1
If an ideational theory is to be precise enough to test, it must (eventually) 
specify what sort of mental entity an “idea” is. And then it will run into 
trouble. Mental images will not do at all, as a matter of fact, for images are 
more detailed than meanings. (An image of a dog is not just, generically, of 
a dog, but of a dog of some particular shape and size, possibly of a particular 
breed; an image of a triangle is of some particular type of triangle, equilateral 
or right or whatever.) A better candidate would be a more abstract mental 
“concept,” but that suggestion would be circular until someone managed to 
tell us what a “concept” is, independently of the notion of meaning. Also, a 
concept such as that of dog or triangle is not true or false on its own, and so 
cannot serve as the meaning of a complete sentence.
A whole thought might do, as the meaning of a complete sentence. But not 
every sentence expresses anyone’s actual thought. And if “thought” is meant 
in a more abstract sense, as it was by Frege, then we are talking about a very 
different sort of theory (see below).
Objection 2
As with the Referential Theory, there are just too many words that have no 
particular mental images or contents associated with them: “is,” “and,” “of.” 
Indeed, if images are what are on offer, there are certainly words that psycho-
logically could not have images associated with them, for example “chiliagon” 
or “nonentity,” and even when a word does have an associated image, as “red” 
does, we do not always call that image to mind in the everyday course of 
understanding the word as it goes by; indeed, we may virtually never call it 
to mind.

68  Theories of meaning
Objection 3
Meaning is a public, intersubjective, social phenomenon. An English word 
has the meaning it does for the entire community of English speakers, even if 
some members of that community happen not to understand that word. But 
ideas, images, and feelings in the mind are not intersubjective in that way; 
they are subjective, held only in the minds of individual persons, and they 
differ from person to person depending on one’s total mental state and back-
ground. Therefore, meanings are not ideas in the mind. (One might reply by 
appealing to what is common to all English speakers’ ideas of “dog,” say, but 
what is common to all “dog” ideas is not itself an idea but a type of idea, a 
universal or an abstract “quality” in the sense of chapter 1.)
Objection 4
There are meaningful sentences that do not express any actual idea or 
thought or mental state. For, as we saw in chapter 1, there are quite long and 
complicated sentences of English that have never been uttered, and some of 
those will never be uttered. (Of course, as soon as I gave you an example of 
one, it was no longer an example of one, because as soon as I had written it 
down, it became a sentence that had been uttered. But we can extrapolate; 
there are more where my fanciful Hitler sentence came from.) So there are 
sentences that are or would be perfectly meaningful but whose contents have 
never been thought by anyone or even occurred to anyone. Thus, there are 
meaningful sentences that do not correspond to any actual mental entities.
Much more commonly in this century, the entities invoked by entity 
theories of meaning have been abstract rather than mental. The meanings of 
sentences in particular have been called “propositions” (as by Russell, we saw 
in chapter 2).
The Proposition Theory
Like ideas, these abstract items are “language-independent” in that they are 
not tied to any particular natural language. But unlike ideas, they are also 
people-independent. Mental entities depend upon the minds in which they 
inhere; a mental state has to be somebody’s mental state, a state of some 
particular person’s mind at a particular time. Propositions are entirely gen-
eral and, if you like, eternal. (Russell himself had little further to say about 
their nature; his colleague G.  E.  Moore was clearer and more forthcom-
ing, or at least more forthright.1 Frege had previously constructed quite an 
elegant Proposition Theory, but seems to have held that there is nothing to 
understanding what a proposition is but understanding the role played by 
“propositions” in the theory.)
Consider a possible reply to objection 4 above: someone might try to save 
the ideational theory by suggesting that we need not restrict ourselves to 

Traditional theories of meaning  69
actual ideas; we can appeal to merely possible ideas—ideas that someone 
might have or might have had. But that would be to posit abstract contents 
that are possible contents of thought but are not related to anyone’s actual 
thoughts. Enter the proposition theorist: “Right, let’s call such thinkables 
‘propositions.’ ” And so (if the ideational theorist does make the move under 
discussion), the ideational view simply collapses into the Propositional 
Theory.
The Propositional Theory offers a graphic picture. Suppose we have one 
string of words, S, that is meaningful, alongside another string, g, that is only 
gibberish. What is the difference? According to Russell and Moore, it is that 
there is an abstract content or proposition, call it P, to which S stands in a 
certain special relation. S is a sentence of a particular language. Poor g does 
not bear that relation to any such item. The relation is often called expression; 
philosophers commonly talk of sentences expressing propositions. (Though 
here the term is more bloodless than in ideational theories. Ideational theorists 
think of sentences almost as being pushed out from inside us by the pressure 
of our thoughts, but propositions are abstract, changeless and powerless and 
do not push or pull.) So S is meaningful in virtue of expressing the particular 
proposition P; g’s failing is that it expresses no proposition at all.
The other meaning facts are neatly depicted from the present point of 
view. For sentences S1 and S2 to be synonymous is just for S1 and S2 to express 
the same proposition. They are distinct linguistic expressions—they could be 
different expressions in one and the same natural language or they could be 
corresponding expressions from different languages. What they have in com-
mon is solely that they bear the expressing relation to the same proposition.
So too for ambiguity. A sentence S is ambiguous if and only if there are at 
least two distinct propositions P1 and P2, and the single expression S bears 
the expressing relation to each of P1 and P2. In the case of merely verbal 
disputes, we can say that the parties do not disagree over any proposition; 
they are merely using different forms of words to express the same proposi-
tion, and the particular forms of words look as though they are in conflict 
even though they are not.
We know some positive things about what propositions are supposed to 
be, besides their being expressed by sentences. They are identifiable in terms 
of “that” clauses: we speak of the proposition that snow is white, and dedicate 
ourselves to the proposition that all men [sic] are created equal. “Snow is 
white,” “La neige est blanche” and “Der Schnee ist weiss” are synonymous 
because each of them expresses the proposition that snow is white. Although 
what follows the “that” clause is just another sentence of one particular 
natural language, the one we happen to be speaking, the function of the 
“that”—creating indirect discourse—is to free the reference to the proposi-
tion in question from its particular expression.
Propositions are also objects of mental states. People all over the world 
may believe that Asian markets are collapsing, doubt that Asian markets 
are collapsing, hope or fear that Asian markets are collapsing. Here too, the 

70  Theories of meaning
“that” serves to remove the implication that they all thought that thought in 
English. They could have thought it in any language; it would still be true 
that they believed, doubted or whatever that Asian markets are collapsing.
Further, propositions are the fundamental bearers of truth and falsity. 
When a sentence is true/false, it is so only because the proposition it expresses 
is true/false. One argument for this claim is that sentences change their 
truth-values from time to time and from context to context.
(1)  The present Queen of England is bald.
We believe (1) to be false, assuming that Elizabeth Windsor is not following 
Russell’s advice and wearing a wig. But what about the other queens, past or 
future, who may have been or may be bald? If (1) had been uttered during 
the reign of a previous queen who was bald, it would have been true, and if it 
should be uttered decades from now during the reign of a subsequent queen, 
it might be true or false. So whether (1) is false or true depends on when 
it is uttered. What makes a particular utterance of a sentence true or false 
is the proposition it expresses on that occasion. The reason (1) changes its 
truth-value is that it expresses different propositions on different utterance 
occasions. Sentences derive their truth-values from propositions; proposi-
tions’ truth-values are permanent.
Most Proposition Theorists hold that propositions have internal struc-
ture; they are composed of abstract conceptual parts. The word “snow” is 
a meaningful expression, but it is not meaningful in virtue of expressing a 
proposition; just by itself it does not express a full proposition. Only a sen-
tence expresses a proposition or, as they used to say in my grammar school 
days, a complete thought. “Snow” does not express a complete thought, but 
it expresses something that is part of many thoughts—a concept, or a type, 
or an “idea” in the abstract rather than the mental sense. “Concept” is the 
usual term used to mean an equally abstract constituent of a larger abstract 
proposition.2
There are “meaning facts” about the parts or constituents of sentences as 
well, and they can be treated analogously. Words that are synonymous with 
“snow” can be said to express the same concept; if “snow” is ambiguous, as 
it is, it is ambiguous in virtue of expressing different concepts: Sometimes 
it means the chilly white stuff that falls from the sky and at other times it 
means a certain controlled substance.
The Proposition Theory avoids all four of our objections to ideational 
theories, though one more narrowly than the others. We have already seen 
that it eludes objection 4. It avoids 1 because propositions and concepts are 
not mental entities, and it avoids 3 because, unlike mental entities, propo-
sitions and concepts are intersubjective, independent of particular people, 
languages, and even whole cultures.
It only barely evades objection 2. The Proposition theorist can insist that 
words like “is,” “and,” “of,” “chiliagon,” and “nonentity” express concepts 

Traditional theories of meaning  71
(“chiliagon” especially, which is a well-defined geometric term). But as I said 
in response to objection 1, if this is not to sound empty and perhaps even 
circular, the proposition theorist will have to give us some further character-
ization of the relevant concepts, one that does not quietly presuppose some 
notion of linguistic meaning. (We shall see in chapter 10 that a sophisticated 
version of the Proposition Theory can do this.)
The Proposition view is the leading entity theory of meaning. Like any 
theory of meaning it aims at explaining the meaning facts. It attempts to 
do that by positing a certain range of entities; that is how we often explain 
things, especially in science. We posit subatomic particles, unobservable 
entities of a certain range and kind, to explain the behavior of observable 
chemical substances and the ratios in which they combine.
A first problem for the theory as stated so far is created by a sort of mean-
ing fact that I have not mentioned up till now. Some philosophers consider 
this sort even more important than all the ones listed above: We understand 
a sentence S, in an immediate way, whereas we do not understand a gibberish 
string of words. Some strings of words are intelligible and other strings are 
not. This brings another term into the relation. Till now, the Proposition 
Theory has focused just on linguistic expressions and on propositions, with 
the expressing relation defined on them. Now it must let in human beings.
What is it for a person to understand a sentence S? The classic Moorean 
answer is: for that person to bear a certain relation to a proposition and to 
know that S expresses that proposition. This relation Moore called “grasping” 
(or sometimes “apprehending”). To understand S is to grasp some proposi-
tion P and to know that S expresses P.
The Proposition Theory too is congenial to common sense. It is easy to 
agree that certain sentences of various different languages all have something 
(their meanings) in common, a language-independent content, and it is easy 
and natural to call that content “the proposition expressed by” the various 
different sentences. Moreover, the Proposition Theory is a handy tool for 
describing and discussing the other sorts of “meaning phenomena” we have 
mentioned, to say nothing of entailment, meaning inclusion, antonymy, 
redundancy, and more. Finally, as we shall see in chapters 10 and 11, the 
Proposition Theory lends itself to elegant mathematical elaboration, in the 
hands of “possible worlds” semanticists and intensional logicians. But, as 
always, there are problems.
Objection 1
We have said that “propositions” are abstract entities, even though sentences 
are now being said to “express” them rather than to name them as in the 
Referential Theory. Considered as entities, these abstract items are somewhat 
weird. They are not located anywhere in space, and, since they could not be 
created or destroyed, they are also temporally eternal or at least everlasting. 
They existed long before any living being did, even though their contents 

72  Theories of meaning
have to do with highly specific states of human affairs, such as Fred’s having 
downed four quick Malaga Coolers at He’s Not Here during the early evening 
of Tuesday 19 September 1995. The propositions will exist long after the last 
sentient creature is dead. And (necessarily, since they are not in spacetime) 
they have no causal properties; they do not make anything happen.
A reply
It is right and proper to be wary of positing weird entities. But perhaps this 
direct appeal to “Occam’s Razor” is premature. The medieval philosopher 
William of Occam told us not to multiply posited entities beyond explana-
tory necessity. But we could know that propositions were unnecessary for 
explanation only if we had an alternative theory of meaning that explained 
the meaning phenomena just as well but without dragging in propositions. 
And (so far) we have no such competitor.
Objection 2
“Propositions” are in a sense unfamiliar and alien to our experience. I hear 
or see words and I understand them, but this is hardly, or seems hardly, a 
case of my doing something called “grasping” that puts me in touch with a 
supra-empirical nonspatial, indestructible, eternal object. (Bring up spooky 
mood music.)
Moore’s reply
It is quite plain, I think, that when we understand the meaning of a sen-
tence, something else does happen in our minds besides the mere hearing 
of the words of which the sentence is composed. You can easily satisfy 
yourselves of this by contrasting what happens when you hear a sentence, 
which you do understand, from what happens when you hear a sentence 
which you do not understand . . . . Certainly in the first case, there occurs, 
beside the mere hearing of the words, another act of consciousness—an 
apprehension of their meaning, which is absent in the second case. And 
it is no less plain that the apprehension of the meaning of one sentence 
with one meaning, differs in some respect from the apprehension of 
another sentence with a different meaning . . . . There certainly are such 
things as the two different meanings apprehended. And each of these 
two meanings is what I call a proposition.
(1953/1962: 73–4)
And, he might add, if you say you do not know what he is talking about, you 
are a liar. Grasping is something you have directly experienced.

Traditional theories of meaning  73
A different reply
Granting the premise instead of challenging it, one might point out that it 
is common not only in philosophy but in science to explain very familiar 
phenomena in terms of very unfamiliar, perhaps quite arcane phenomena. 
That is nothing new or unusual.
Objection 3
From Gilbert Harman (1967–8). The Proposition Theory does not in fact 
explain anything; it merely repeats the data in a fancier jargon. (“Why do 
‘Snow is white’ and ‘La neige est blanche’ have the same meaning?”—“Because 
they express the same proposition.”—“Oh, I see.”) It sounds as though the 
phrase “expresses a proposition” is just a fancier way of saying “is meaning-
ful.” At least until we are shown some independent way of understanding 
proposition talk, the suspicion will remain that it is only a pretentious way of 
re-expressing the meaning facts. Compare Molière’s physician on opium and 
“dormitive virtue.”3
Reply
We need not be too daunted by this objection either. For when a Proposition 
Theory is elaborated and refined, complete with a notion of a person’s “grasp-
ing” a proposition as well as that of a sentence’s expressing one, the apparatus 
has at least a bit of predictive power and so (to that extent) at least a bit 
of explanatory power. Whether the resulting story is plausible is a different 
question. But perhaps Harman was really getting at the next objection.
Objection 4
Whatever meaning is, it plays a dynamic role in human society. Some of your 
behavior is causally the result of my saying certain words that mean what 
they do, and some of my behavior results from your saying meaningful words 
likewise. Legal decisions in capital cases sometimes turn on the meanings of 
words, and so on. Thus meaning, whatever it is, must have some causal power 
(some push and pull, some punch, some biff). But propositions, as entirely 
abstract entities, precisely do not have causal powers. They sit quiescently and 
uselessly outside spacetime, and do nothing. So it is hard to see how proposi-
tions could figure in the explanation of human linguistic behavior or could in 
any other way help to account for the dynamic social role of meaning. And 
therefore they seem to be unnecessary posits after all.
Reply
Even if propositions do not help in the explanation of human behavior, 
human behavior is not the only thing that needs explaining. The “meaning 

74  Theories of meaning
facts” themselves are our primary data, and pace Harman, propositions still 
help to explain those.
The “ordinary language” philosophers of the 1950s drew a moral from 
early versions of objections 1 and 4: that what we need is a theory that 
explains meaning phenomena in terms that do connect up to human behavior. 
(Remember that human behavior involves actual physical motion; meaning 
must somehow contribute to literal push and pull.) More specifically, we need 
to understand meaning in terms of language use. Ever since, philosophers 
have spoken of “use” theories of meaning. But we are little the wiser, for there 
are many different kinds of modes of “use,” some of which are obviously 
irrelevant to meaning in the characteristically linguistic sense. Different 
specifically linguistic conceptions of “use” lead to different and competing 
theories of meaning.
Summary
A theory of meaning must explain the “meaning facts.”
• 
“Meanings” have often been taken to be entities or individual things.
• 
Ideational theorists contend that meanings are particular ideas in 
• 
people’s minds.
But several objections show that, at best, meanings would have to 
• 
be more abstract: types of idea, not actual thoughts in the minds of 
particular people.
Proposition theorists take meanings to be abstract things in 
• 
themselves.
But critics have questioned whether the Proposition Theory explains 
• 
the meaning facts satisfactorily (or at all).
Questions
1	
Is there more to be said in favor of the Ideational Theory? And/or can 
you defend it against one or more of our objections?
2	
Does the Proposition Theory really explain the meaning facts? Why or 
why not?
3	
Defend the Proposition Theory more thoroughly against our objec-
tions. Or raise a new objection of your own.
Further reading
Locke’s Ideational Theory is discussed in Bennett (1971).
• 
Frege (1918/1956) criticized ideational theories in favor of the 
• 
Proposition Theory. Wittgenstein (1953) criticized them from a very 
different perspective (see chapter 6), as did Waismann (1965a).
A classic Proposition Theory was offered by Russell (1919/1956).
• 

Traditional theories of meaning  75
For some discussion of propositions and their relations to sentences 
• 
and to utterances, see Cartwright (1962) and Lemmon (1966).
Quinean criticism of the Proposition Theory is best summed up by 
• 
Gilbert Harman (1967–8), particularly pp. 124–7 (pp. 141–7 are also 
relevant). Lycan (1974) is a rejoinder on the theory’s behalf. See also 
Loux (1998: ch. 4).

6	
“Use” theories
Overview
The Proposition Theory treats sentences and other linguistic items as inert 
abstract entities whose structure can be studied as if under a microscope. But 
Ludwig Wittgenstein argued that words and sentences are more like game 
pieces or tokens, used to make moves in rule-governed conventional social 
practices. A “meaning” is not an abstract object; meaning is a matter of the 
role an expression plays in human social behavior. To know the expression’s 
meaning is just to know how to deploy the expression appropriately in con-
versational settings.
Wilfrid Sellars’ version of this idea makes the act of inferring central; 
it is the complexity of patterns of inference that allows the “use” theorist 
to accommodate long, novel sentences. On this view, one sentence entails 
another, not because the two “express” “propositions” one of which is some-
how “contained in” the other, but because it is socially expected that one’s 
neighbor would perform the act of inferring the second sentence from the 
first.
“Use” theories of this kind face two main obstacles: explaining how lan-
guage use differs from ordinary conventional rule-governed activities, such 
as chess games, that generate no meaning; and explaining how, in particular, a 
sentence can mean that so-and-so (as the French “La neige est blanche” means 
that snow is white). Robert Brandom has recently offered a “Use Theory” 
that claims to perform these feats.
As we saw in chapter 2, Russell’s habit was to write a sentence on the 
blackboard and examine (as he contended) the proposition expressed by the 
sentence, treating it as an object of interest in itself and trying to discern 
its structure. Ludwig Wittgenstein and J. L. Austin argued that this picture 
of how language works and how it should be studied is completely wrong. 
Languages and linguistic entities are not bloodless abstract objects that can 
be studied like specimens under a microscope. Rather, language takes the 
form of behavior, activity—specifically social practice. Sentences do not 
have lives of their own. The things we write on blackboards, and the alleged 
“propositions” they express, are fairly violent abstractions from the utterings 
performed by human beings in real-world contexts on particular occasions.1 

“Use” theories  77
And for a person to utter something is first and foremost for that person to do 
something. It is a bit of behavior that by convention has gotten swept up into 
a rule-governed social practice. We have already encountered a version of this 
idea in chapter 2, for it is from the same perspective that Strawson wielded his 
several objections against Russell’s initially attractive Theory of Descriptions. 
And whether or not we are ultimately convinced by the objections, they were 
fresh and striking and, to many people, still intuitively compelling. That is a 
good letter of recommendation for the perspective itself.
“Use” in a roughly Wittgensteinian sense
Wittgenstein (1953) and Austin (1961, 1962) developed this social-behavioral 
idea in different ways. Here I shall concentrate on a Wittgensteinian view, 
deferring Austin’s until chapter 12. I say only “a Wittgensteinian view” 
because, for reasons that cannot detain us here, Wittgenstein himself opposed 
systematic theorizing in philosophy, and his followers objected to any phrase 
along the lines of “Wittgenstein’s theory of . . . ” or “Wittgenstein’s doctrine 
regarding . . . ”2 I shall merely try to sketch an account based on Wittgenstein’s 
contributions, without attributing that or any other theory to Wittgenstein 
himself.
If meaning itself is mysterious, one way to reduce the mystery is to enter 
its domain through something with which we are more directly familiar. In 
order to get a handle on meaning, let us think of it from the receiving end, the 
grasp of meaning or understanding of linguistic expressions. And in order to 
understand understanding, let us think of it as the product of our having been 
taught our language, and as what one learns when one learns a language.
But as soon as we try looking at it that way, something becomes immedi-
ately obvious: that what is learned and taught is a complicated form of social 
behavior. What you learn when you learn a language is to make moves, to 
engage in certain kinds of practice, conversational behavior in particular. 
And primarily, what is taught is the right way to behave when other people 
make certain kinds of noises, and what kinds of noises to make when cir-
cumstances are appropriate for doing so. Linguistic practice is governed by 
highly complex sets of rules, even though the rules are rarely articulated; 
small children just pick them up at a colossal rate, learning to obey them 
without realizing that that is what they are doing.
These home truths are obscured by entity theories, which treat meanings 
as static, inert things. Both Wittgenstein and Austin inveighed at length 
against entity theories, though here we shall be concerned with a positive 
account of “use.” Wittgenstein also scorned the view that meaning essentially 
involves referential relations between linguistic expressions and things in the 
world (though of course he did not deny that there are some such relations).
Wittgenstein offered the key analogy of linguistic activity to the playing 
of games. (According to the physicist Freeman Dyson, then a Cambridge 
undergraduate, one day Wittgenstein was walking past a field where a football 

78  Theories of meaning
match was in progress, and “the thought first struck him that in language we 
play games with words.”)3 Language is not a matter of marks on the blackboard 
bearing the “expressing” relation to abstract entities called “propositions”; 
language is something that people do, and do in a highly rule-governed and 
conventional way. Linguistic activity is governed by rules in much the way 
that the playing of a game is governed by rules.
Moreover, linguistic expressions themselves are like game pieces. Consider 
chessmen. A “pawn” or a “rook” is defined by the chess rules that govern its 
initial position and subsequent legal moves; what makes a knight a knight 
is the way in which it characteristically moves according to the game’s 
conventionally instituted rules. So too, a linguistic expression’s meaning is 
constituted by the tacit rules governing its correct conversational use.
Start with expressions like “Hello,” “Damn” (or “Good gracious”), “Oh, 
dear,” “Excuse me,” “Amen,” “Thanks,” “Stop it!,” “You’re on” (when a bet 
has been offered), and “Bless you.” These do not seem to mean what they do in 
virtue of standing for anything or in virtue of expressing propositions. They 
are just conventional devices, respectively, of greeting, evincing consterna-
tion, deploring, apologizing, endorsing, thanking, protesting, committing 
oneself to a bet, and blessing. They are noises we make that have socially 
defined functional roles; there are appropriate occasions for using them, inap-
propriate occasions for using them, and appropriate responses. When we talk 
of their meanings, we mean the functions they characteristically perform in 
the context of our current social practices. On the Wittgensteinian view, this 
is the locus and natural home of all meaning, though most expressions have 
vastly more complicated social roles.
To emphasize all this, Wittgenstein coined the term “language-game,” as 
in the meeting and greeting language-game, the wedding language-game, the 
arithmetic language-game, and so on.
Wittgenstein offers a further analogy (1953: 2): A builder and his assistant 
have just four kinds of building stones that they use. They speak a little 
primitive language that has just four corresponding words in it: “block,” “pil-
lar,” “slab,” and “beam.” They build things, engaging in their nonlinguistic 
activities aided by a certain primitive sort of linguistic activity: the builder 
says “slab,” and the assistant brings a stone of the appropriate shape. Now, 
someone might say, “Of course, that word ‘slab’ bears the referring relation 
to a block of this shape, and its meaning is the proposition that the assistant 
is to bring such a block to the builder.” But according to Wittgenstein this 
would be missing the point. In this little primitive language-game, the word 
“slab” does have a function that is obviously connected with blocks of that 
shape, but the point is the function and not the referring relation. The point 
of the builder’s making the noise “slab” is just to get the assistant to do 
something, to trigger conventionally (the assistant having learned his trade) 
a pattern of useful activity. The activity does involve things of this shape, but 
the primary point is to initiate action, not to refer, or to “express” an eternal 
proposition.

“Use” theories  79
Of course, it is hard to extrapolate this simple picture of meaning as brutely 
conventional social function to long and complex sentences like “The present 
Queen of England is bald” or “In 1931, Adolf Hitler made a visit to the United 
States, in the course of which he . . . ,” neither of which has any easily identifi-
able conventional social role (other than, unhelpfully, those of asserting that 
the present Queen of England is bald and that in 1931 . . . ). Some additional 
mechanism must be introduced to accomplish that extrapolation. The logical 
positivists appealed to the notion of verification, but I shall save discussion of 
that until chapter 8. Wilfrid Sellars (1963, 1974) invoked the idea of inferring 
as a social act. He spoke too of “language-entry rules,” and “language-exit 
rules,” these being respectively rules governing what one is supposed to say 
in response to certain sorts of nonlinguistic events (such as observations) 
and what one is supposed to do in response to certain linguistic utterances, 
but most importantly of “language–language rules,” which govern what one 
is supposed to say as the product of inference from something else that has 
previously been said. Let us call this the Inferential Theory of Meaning.
It is hard to see how a theory that took “Hello” or “Slab” as its para-
digms could succeed in explaining the more refined of the meaning facts. 
Meaningfulness, synonymy, and ambiguity are not a problem; but what of 
entailment between complex sentences? The Inferential Theory’s appeal 
to inferring helps, for what might seem to be the static abstract relation of 
“entailment” between two sentences can be reconstrued as a rule-governed 
practice of inferring the one from the other. “Harold is fat and Ben is stupid” 
entails “Ben is stupid” because, if someone asserts the former but denies the 
latter, we apply severe social sanctions; indeed, we at least raise eyebrows if 
someone asserts the former and then does not go on to behave as if the latter 
is true. According to Use theories, it is this practice itself that makes the 
inference valid, not (as logic books would have it) any independent guarantee 
that the inference preserves truth.
Objections and some replies
The beauty of the Inferential Theory is its effortless avoidance of every single 
objection we have made to each of the three traditional theories (Referential, 
Ideational, and Proposition). In addition, it is naturalistic, in that it focuses 
attention on the actual features of language as used in the real world. Still, 
there are some formidable problems.
Objection 1
All language-games are exactly the same as between Earth and Twin Earth, 
since those planets are running exactly in parallel; but words on Twin Earth 
and the rest diverge in meaning from their counterparts on Earth. Of an 
Earth utterance and its Twin, one may be true and the other false; what more 

80  Theories of meaning
could be required for difference of meaning? Thus, an expression’s meaning 
is not exhausted by the expression’s role in a language-game.
Reply
One can classify “language-games” more finely, and deny that we and our 
Twin-Earth doppelgangers are playing “the same” game, even though what 
we are doing would look exactly the same if seen on television. For example, 
we respond to and act upon water (H2O), while our Twins do not, but deal 
with XYZ; different rules altogether, you see. (This actually was Sellars’ 
original intention, though he had not yet heard of Putnam’s Twin Earth.)
Objection 2
Proper names pose a problem for the “use” theorist. Try stating a rule of 
use for the name “William G. Lycan,” or for the name of your best friend. 
Remember, it has to be a rule that every competent speaker of your local 
dialect actually obeys without exception. The only candidate rules that occur 
to me push the “use” theorist into a description theory of meaning for names. 
Wittgenstein himself found descriptivism congenial, but he had not read 
Kripke.
Objection 3
The Wittgensteinian theory seems helpless in the face of our original datum: 
speakers’ amazing ability to understand long, utterly novel sentences at 
first hearing without a moment’s thought. Chess pieces and the like are 
familiar, recurring types of object, and the rules for their use are directed 
one-to-one upon them. And similarly for “Slab,” “Hello,” “Ouch,” “I do,” 
and other Wittgensteinian examples of expressions whose uses are defined by 
local rituals or customs. But our ability to understand and act on long novel 
sentences cannot be the product of our knowing conventions directed upon 
those utterances, for no conventions have ever been directed upon those 
utterances.
The Wittgensteinian must grant that we understand novel sentences com-
positionally, in virtue of understanding the individual words that occur in 
them and working out the sentences’ overall meanings from the way in which 
the individual words are strung together. (We shall have a great deal more 
to say about this in chapter 9.) It follows that what is understood, that is, a 
sentence’s meaning, is not simply a matter of there being conventional norms 
directed upon that sentence’s deployment, for the sentence’s meaning is in 
large part a function of its internal structure as well.

“Use” theories  81
Objection 4
Could I not know the use of an expression, and fall in with it, mechanically, 
without understanding it? I have known undergraduates who are geniuses 
at picking up academic jargon of one sort or another and slinging it around 
with great facility, but without understanding. I knew one who took a phe-
nomenology course taught by a visiting Parisian, understood none of it, but 
learned the knack of stringing the jargon expressions together so well that 
his term paper earned (or “earned”) an A. Use perfect (or at least graded A); 
meaning nil.
Objection 5
Many rule-governed social activities—sports and games themselves in partic-
ular—do not centrally involve the kind of meaning that linguistic expressions 
have. Certainly chess moves and tennis shots do not have meaning of that 
sort. (Contrast the case where spies are using chess moves as an actual secret 
code; for example, N–Q3 may have conventionally been stipulated to mean 
“Take the zircon to Foppa and tell him we move tonight.”) What, then is 
supposed to distinguish language-games from ordinary games?
Suppose some community agrees to use certain words—or at any rate 
sounds and marks—in a peculiar way; say they decide to put only “words” 
with the same number of syllables next to each other in threes, or they utter 
“sentences” only in rhyming pairs, where each string begins with a one-letter 
word and adds one letter successively to each ensuing item. (This might be 
a sort of community-wide parlor game.) If a newcomer happened upon this 
whimsical society and knew nothing of the arrangement, s/he would not 
understand what was going on. The newcomer might, in time, work out all 
the rules according to which the various tokens were being used, and yet 
have no notion what, if anything, was being said. And in this simple case, at 
least, nothing is being said. Someone might suggest that such a game, like the 
builders’ language, is just too simple and/or primitive to qualify. But it is hard 
to see how the mere addition of further complexity would help.
Reply
Someone might argue that, if its rules are rich enough and advert often 
enough to ambient conditions, reference and predication will be recoverable 
from the game description. Suppose there is a rule that, whenever the waiter 
comes in, every third player shouts “Here, waiter,” and is given a martini; 
whenever any player says “Mix please,” s/he is passed the bowl of snacks by 
whoever is nearest it; and the like. One would then be tempted to conclude 
that “waiter” refers to the waiter and “mix” means snack food. So the game 
moves would have meaning after all.

82  Theories of meaning
Rejoinder
Perhaps, in that case, the utterances specified by the game rules would have 
meanings—but only because they do stand for or refer to things and not just 
because of their conventional deployment behavior.
Let us therefore stipulate that, no matter how complex the game becomes, 
the players’ utterances do not refer to things external to the game; they are 
only moves in the game. But then it seems even more obvious that the game 
is not even the beginning of an actual language, and that the moves do not 
have meaning in the same way that utterances of English sentences do. So the 
“use” theorist’s explicit conditions are not sufficient for something’s being a 
language.
Second reply
Waismann (1965a: 158) anticipates an objection of this kind. He hints at a 
competing reply: that genuine language-games are “integrat[ed] . . . into life.” 
By contrast, the parlor-game words, like chess moves and tennis shots, “bear 
a far less close relation to life than words used in earnest.” A language-game 
cannot be encapsulated, something that we keep at arm’s length and play just 
when we feel like it.
Rejoinder
But some language-games, such as the telling of shaggy-dog jokes, are 
encapsulated and played only occasionally and at will. Also, even if we agree 
that more serious, multipurpose language-games are thoroughly integrated 
into life, we usually think of that close, integrative relation as that of refer-
ring, as our words being about the things in the world that concern us. The 
Wittgensteinian does not agree that meaning essentially involves referring, 
and so Waismann needs to say what the “integration” is instead. The idea 
seems to be that language-games are integrated with other social practices. 
But it is hard to see how the Wittgensteinian can spell that out (a) in such a 
way as to explain how the linguistic moves take on propositional content, but 
(b) without secretly introducing referring.
My use just now of the phrase “propositional content” may suggest an 
unsuccessfully tacit allegiance to the Proposition Theory. But I am using 
it, and will continue to use it throughout this book, in a weaker sense, as 
whatever property of a sentence or other item is somehow expressed by a 
“that” clause, as in “means that broccoli will kill you.” We need not take that 
property to be a matter of bearing the “expression” relation to an abstract 
entity called “a proposition.”

“Use” theories  83
Objection 6
One clear sense in which a social practice qualifies as an actual language is 
that, according to it, one can make noises or inscribe marks and thereby say 
that P for some suitable sentence replacing P. And one of the things that 
is surely essential to language is that we can say things in it. But no such 
indirect discourse is licensed just in virtue of some people’s playing chess or 
the parlor game; none of the players has said or asked or requested or sug-
gested . . . that anything at all. There is something missing. We are playing a 
game, and using tokens according to a set of conventional rules, and engaging 
in a social practice that may not only be fun but have some larger point; it 
might even be in some way vital to our way of life. The things the players 
in these various games have done may have significance in some sense, but 
nobody has made any assertions or asked anything or advised anyone to do 
anything.
Inferentialism
At this point it is tempting to make some serious concession to the Referential 
Theory. But that would be to overlook the most recent incarnation of Sellars’ 
Inferential Theory: Brandom (1994), a 700-page monsterpiece, which at least 
has the potential for evading some of the foregoing objections. Brandom 
develops a particular conception of “use,” a normative conception accord-
ing to which a sentence’s use is the set of commitments and entitlements 
associated with public utterance of that sentence. His paradigm is that of 
asserting, considered as an actual social act: when one utters a sentence and 
thereby makes an assertion, one is committing oneself to defend that asser-
tion against whatever objection or challenge might be made by a hearer. The 
defense would take the form of giving reasons in support of the assertion, 
typically by inferring it from some other sentence whose uttering is not so 
readily open to challenge. And in making the assertion one also confers on 
oneself the entitlement to make further inferences from it. The social game 
of giving and asking for reasons is governed by rules, of course, and score 
is kept. (Notions of scorekeeping play a large role in Brandom’s system.) It 
is the reasons that would rightly be offered in support of a sentence S, and 
the norms according to which S could rightly be given in defense of further 
sentences, that constitute S’s meaning.
As would please Wittgenstein, reference plays no important role in this 
theory. For Brandom, reference is just a construct out of inferential practices 
defined on whole sentences, and not a fit subject for independent theorizing; 
the Causal–Historical Theory is entirely beside the point. (However, this 
exacerbates objection 2.)
Brandom’s system is very complex, and we cannot examine it here. But 
I note that it overcomes some of the objections raised so far against the 

84  Theories of meaning
Wittgensteinian view. Against objection 5, it does distinguish linguistic 
utterances from “Slab,” chess moves, and so on, since those are not the sorts 
of things in support of which one gives reasons, rebuts challenges, and so 
on. (One can of course offer practical reasons for having made a particular 
chess move or tennis shot, but Brandom means evidential reasons, utterances 
that give us reason to believe some statement of fact. Again, his paradigm is 
that of an inferential reason, and chess moves and the like are certainly not 
inferences.) Nor is objection 6 a problem, for Sellars himself gave an elegant 
inferentialist account of that clauses. Though Brandom holds that subsen-
tential expressions “have meanings” only derivatively from whole sentence 
meanings, he also recognizes a weak kind of compositionality, and so he may 
evade objection 3. And, admirably, he addresses some fairly detailed seman-
tic phenomena: proper names, descriptions, indexicals, quantification, and 
anaphora, in terms of their characteristic contributions to the commitment/
entitlement potentials of sentences in which they occur.4
In any case, the centrality of epistemological notions to inferentialist 
theories—defense, support, justification, acceptance—suggests that the 
theories are closer in spirit to verification accounts than to Wittgenstein’s 
original idea. See chapter 8.
A somewhat different sort of “use” theory (Alston 1963, 2000; Barker 
2004) is based on J. L. Austin’s notion of “illocutionary force.” But the latter 
concept will not be introduced until chapter 12.
Now let us move on and look at a considerably different theory of mean-
ing. Paul Grice’s theory begins with the outrageous notion that language is a 
means of communication.
Summary
“Use” theories have it that “meanings” are not abstract objects like 
• 
propositions; a linguistic expression’s meaning is determined by the 
expression’s characteristic function in human social behavior.
According to Wittgenstein, linguistic expressions are like game 
• 
tokens, used to make moves in rule-governed conventional social 
practices.
Sellars’ version of this idea makes the act of 
• 
inferring central, and it is 
the complexity of patterns of inference that allows the “use” theorist 
to accommodate long, novel sentences.
“Use” theories face two main obstacles: explaining how language 
• 
use differs from ordinary conventional rule-governed activities that 
generate no meaning; and explaining how a sentence can mean that 
so-and-so.
Brandom’s “use” theory overcomes some of these obstacles.
• 

“Use” theories  85
Questions
1	
Can the Wittgensteinian “Use Theory” as we have sketched it be 
defended against one or more of objections 1–4?
2	
Adjudicate objection 5. Can you make a better reply than Waismann’s?
3	
Come up with a Wittgensteinian reply to objection 6.
4	
Can a red/green color-blind person understand the word “red”? Think 
about this in regard to “use” theories.
5	
If you have read Brandom, discuss his views.
Further reading
The literature on Wittgenstein is so vast that I hesitate to mention 
• 
one or two or three exegetical works to the exclusion of others. But: 
Rhees (1959–60); Pitcher (1964: ch. 11); Hallett (1967); Kenny (1973: 
chs 7–9).
The 
• 
locus classicus of Sellars’ Functional Theory is Sellars (1963); see 
also Sellars (1974). An excellent exposition and defense of the central 
themes is given in Rosenberg (1974).
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
• 
 57 (1997) contains a 
symposium on Brandom (1994), with a précis, lead papers by John 
McDowell, Gideon Rosen, Richard Rorty, and J. F. Rosenberg, and a 
response by Brandom. Brandom (2000) is a more accessible retroduc-
tion to Brandom 1994).

7	
Psychological theories: Grice’s 
program
Overview
H. P. Grice maintained that a linguistic expression has meaning only because 
it is an expression—not because it “expresses” a proposition, but because it 
more genuinely and literally expresses some concrete idea or intention of the 
person who uses it. Grice introduced the idea of “speaker-meaning”: roughly 
what the speaker in uttering a given sentence on a particular occasion intends 
to convey to a hearer. Since speakers do not always mean what their sentences 
standardly mean in the language, Grice distinguished this speaker-meaning 
from the sentence’s own standard meaning. He offered an elaborate analysis 
of speaker-meaning in terms of speakers’ intentions, beliefs, and other psy-
chological states, and refined that analysis in the light of many objections. It 
is generally agreed that some version of the analysis must be right.
More importantly for our purposes, Grice also offered an analysis of a 
sentence’s (standard) meaning in terms of speaker-meaning. Here he faces 
severe difficulties, since there are several ways in which sentence meaning 
obstinately refuses to cooperate with speaker-meaning. Grice has a way of 
overcoming such obstacles, but it seems likely that that way concedes too 
much to competing theories of sentence meaning.
Grice’s basic idea
We are concerned to arrive at an account of meaning, meaning considered 
as a remarkable feature of linguistic expressions, of sentences in particular. 
But suppose we ask ourselves, what are sentences really? They are types of 
marks and noises, individual tokens of which are produced by people on 
particular occasions for a purpose. When you say something, it is usually 
for the purpose of communicating. You deliver yourself of an opinion, or 
express a desire or an intention. And you mean to produce an effect, to make 
something come of it.
So one might begin as the ideational theorists did and infer that the real 
natural ground of meaningful utterance is in what mental state is expressed 
by the utterance. Of course we have already introduced the word “express” as 
designating a relation between sentences and propositions, but here the term 

Psychological theories: Grice’s program  87
has a more concrete and literal use: sentence tokens are seen as expressively 
produced by speakers’ beliefs, desires, and other propositional attitudes.
Grice (1957, 1969) took these facts as the basis of his theory of meaning. 
He believed that sentence meaning is grounded in the mental, and proposed 
to explicate it ultimately in terms of the psychological states of individual 
human beings. We can think of this as no less than the reduction of linguistic 
meaning to psychology.
The linchpin of Grice’s project was a slightly different notion of meaning, 
which does not coincide with that of sentence meaning. (This is his crucial 
departure from the classic ideational theories.) Here are three examples to 
illustrate the difference. First, recall Strawson’s sentence from chapter 2, “This 
is a fine red one.” As we saw, the meaning of that sentence itself is not fully 
determinate; to understand it, we need to know what the speaker is pointing 
to. One speaker in one context may mean that the pear in her/his hand is a 
fine red pear, while a different speaker on a different occasion may mean that 
the third fire-engine on the left is a fine figure of a red fire-engine.
Second, suppose that like some unfortunates I incorrectly believe that the 
word “jejune” means something like callow or puerile,1 and I say “Mozart’s 
‘Piccolomini’ Mass is jejune, not good Mozart at all,” meaning that the 
‘Piccolomini’ Mass is callow and puerile. But “jejune” actually means meager 
and unsatisfying (it is from the Latin word for fasting); the sentence I uttered 
means that the Mass is meager and unsatisfying, which I would judge to be 
false even though I do find the Mass callow and puerile.
Third, consider sarcasm, as when one says “That was a brilliant idea”, 
meaning that someone’s idea was very stupid. Here too, we get a divergence 
between the meaning of the sentence uttered and what the speaker meant 
in uttering it (since the speaker means precisely the opposite). The moral is 
that what a speaker means in uttering a given sentence is a slightly different 
kind of meaning from the sentence’s own meaning. Grice called it “utterer’s 
meaning”; it is also widely called just “speaker-meaning.”2
Now, let us turn to Grice’s reductive project, the explication of sentence 
meaning in psychological terms. It proceeds in two importantly different 
stages. In the first stage,3 Grice attempts to reduce sentence meaning to 
speaker-meaning. In the second, he tries to reduce speaker-meaning to a 
complex of psychological states centering on a type of intention.
On the face of it, the first stage is a plausible idea. As Wittgenstein empha-
sized, it is very strange to think of sentences as having meanings on their 
own and in the abstract, as opposed to thinking of sentences as having mean-
ing because of what speakers use them to do. It does seem that linguistic 
expressions have the conventional meanings they do only in virtue of human 
communicative practices, and that communicative “practices” boil down 
to sets of individual speakers’ communicative acts. Grice amends that last 
phrase, focusing on what speakers use sentences to mean, in the sense of what 
the speakers mean in uttering the sentences when they do utter them. For 
Grice, a sentence’s meaning is a function of individual speaker-meanings.

88  Theories of meaning
But Grice concentrated his energies on the second stage of the reduc-
tion. That speaker-meaning should be explicated in terms of mental states 
is even more plausible than the first stage. If, when I say “That was a bril-
liant idea,” what I mean is that Smedley’s idea was very stupid, surely that 
speaker-meaning is something psychological, something about my mental 
state. Presumably it is a matter of my communicative intention, of what I am 
intending to convey to you. It does seem that, in general, individual commu-
nicative acts are a matter of speakers’ having complex intentions to produce 
various cognitive and other states in their hearers.
Speaker-meaning
Let us start with a plausible and perhaps needlessly specific version of Grice’s 
second-stage analysis, which skips over some of the early footwork contained 
in or occasioned by his original (1957) article. (I offer a paraphrase rather 
than a direct quotation, to avoid some of Grice’s own slightly technical jar-
gon and some complications.)4 We want to explicate statements of the form, 
“By uttering x, S meant that P,” as in “By uttering ‘The “Piccolomini” Mass is 
jejune’, Lycan meant that the ‘Piccolomini’ Mass is callow and puerile.” The 
analysis runs as follows:
(G1)	 S uttered x intending that A form the belief that P [where A is S’s 
hearer or audience]
and
(G2)	 S further intended that A recognize S’s original intention [as 
described in G1]
and
(G3)	 S still further intended that A form the belief that P at least 
partly on the basis of recognizing that original intention.
Thus, in our Mozart example, by uttering “The ‘Piccolomini’ Mass is jejune,” 
I meant that the Mass is callow and puerile, because I uttered it intending 
that you form the belief that the Mass is callow and puerile at least partly on 
the basis of your recognizing that I had that very intention.
As advertised, the core of speaker-meaning is an intention, but other men-
tal states figure in the analysis as well, namely the intended future belief of 
yours and the intended state of recognition.
It may be thought implausible that an ordinary speaker could have such 
complex intentions at all, much less have them every single time s/he makes 
an assertion. But Grice is not supposing that these communicative intentions 
are conscious, or before the mind. Indeed, in daily life most of our intentions 
are only tacit; we are only occasionally aware of them. So too, you usually 
say things without explicitly thinking about it, and often you speaker-mean 
things that you are unaware of.

Psychological theories: Grice’s program  89
The foregoing second-stage theory has been under nearly constant revision 
since 1969, in response to counterexamples of several kinds. I shall review a 
few of the objections and revisions, just enough to give you the flavor of this 
subproject.
Objection 1
Speaker-meaning does not in fact require an actual audience. Suppose I am 
given to soliloquizing. When I have a problem, practical or theoretical or 
personal, I work through it talking aloud to myself in the privacy of my base-
ment batcave. Not only do I intend no effect on any audience, I would be 
mortified if I were to find out that someone had been listening. Or consider 
Paul Ziff’s (1967: 3–4) protagonist George and the sentence, “Claudius mur-
dered my father”: in a single day, George might utter that sentence first “in 
the course of a morning soliloquy,” again “in the afternoon in the course 
of a conversation with Josef,” and then again “in the evening while deliri-
ous with fever” and unaware of his audience even though there was one. Yet 
George meant the same thing by “Claudius murdered my father” each time. 
But Grice’s analysis requires not only an audience but that the speaker have 
very specific intentions with respect to that audience, and this is implausible 
at least for the soliloquy and delirium cases.
Grice (1969: section V) addresses the audienceless cases. He urges a solu-
tion in terms of hypothetical or counterfactual audiences: in effect, a speaker 
should intend that, were anyone present and enjoying normal perceptual and 
other psychological conditions, that person would form the belief that P.
Need I, as a speaker, intend this? Perhaps so, since when I speak even to 
myself I must assume that what I say would make sense to someone. On the 
other hand, further potential counterexamples come to mind. Suppose I grew 
up on a desert island, and somehow put together a language all by myself; yet 
I never formed the concept of “another speaker” or of an “audience.” Then I 
could not intend anything about an audience even counterfactually. But this 
is a highly controversial case, since many philosophers have denied that it 
would be even faintly possible for me to make up my own language without 
having formed the concept of speakers and audiences.
Objection 2
Even when there is an actual audience, the speaker may mean something, yet 
not intend to produce belief by means of intention recognition; requirements 
(G3) and even (G2) may be too strong. Or the speaker may not even intend 
to produce the belief at all, since her/his audience already has the belief in 
question and is known by the speaker to have it.
Here is an example of the former type of case. Conclusion of argument: one 
offers an argument, perhaps produces a proof of a geometrical theorem. One 
certainly speaker-means the argument’s conclusion, but does not intend one’s 
audience to reach that conclusion even in part on the basis of recognizing 

90  Theories of meaning
one’s original intention. One may firmly intend them not to do so, but rather 
to form the belief on the basis of the argument’s merit alone.
Schiffer (1972: 79–80) approaches the (allegedly) audienceless cases, and 
Conclusion of argument as well, by stipulating that the speaker is her/his own 
audience. (I personally cannot dismiss this as fanciful, since it has been said 
of me that I often produce utterances for the simple gratification of hear-
ing myself talk.)5 This move might do, but for cases of the second type. An 
example of this is Examinee: A pupil who correctly answers an exam question 
means, for example, that the Battle of Waterloo was fought in 1815, but does 
not intend to induce that belief in the examiner(s).
Grice makes essentially two revisions in response to these and a swarm of 
other counterexamples. First, he suggests invoking the concept of “activated” 
belief: though some of the audience already believe what the speaker has in 
mind, their beliefs may not be fully conscious and psychologically active, or 
even conscious at all. If we beef up (G1), the requirement that the audience 
be intended to believe that P, to demand that S intends to produce activated 
belief in A, that may account (though not very naturally) for Examinee; it 
does better against some of the other cases.
Grice’s second revision is also to amend (G1), this time replacing it by 
the weaker provision that the audience be intended to believe only that the 
speaker believes that P. (Weakening (G1) in this way is compatible with hav-
ing strengthened (G1) to require activated belief.)
This second revision seems reasonable. As Grice says, it deals briskly with 
Examinee. And it is not implausible. To say something and mean it, we might 
hold, is merely to express a belief, usually but not always hoping or intending 
or expecting that one’s audience will come to share the belief. (When we 
inform people of things by telling them those things, we normally expect 
that informing to work by what informal logicians call “authority”: our hear-
ers take our word for what we are saying and believe it because we do.)
Yet as Grice grants and Schiffer emphasizes (p. 43), Conclusion of argument 
is not alleviated by either the first or the second revision. More generally, not 
all cases of communication succeed because the audience takes the speaker’s 
word. Recall the geometrical proof. For an example closer to home, Grice 
himself has communicated his theory of meaning to us, but not by virtue of 
having intended us to accept it on the strength of his say-so. It is true that 
we have come to believe that Grice believes his theory of meaning, so the 
newly weakened version of (G1) is satisfied; but that does not help here. (We 
cannot really even assume that Grice does believe the theory; I am afraid 
philosophers are always writing articles defending views that they do not 
themselves really believe.)
What about Schiffer’s response to Conclusion of argument, that the speaker 
is her/his own audience? I think there are still counterexamples of the same 
type. Suppose I produce a second proof of my theorem while the first is still 
sitting on the blackboard. I do not induce a belief in myself, or even activate 
one that I already held quiescently. Another: Suppose two philosophers are 

Psychological theories: Grice’s program  91
having a love-feast over the Direct Reference view of proper names. They are 
dancing around in a circle and shouting joyfully at each other, “Names only 
name!” over and over. Each is in a state of fully activated belief in the truth 
of this dubious assertion, and each knows that the other is; so neither can be 
said to have the intention of either producing or activating belief in the other. 
Yet surely they mean by their utterance that proper names only name; it is 
not a nonsense chant.
Further moves are available here,6 but I shall drop objection 2 at this 
point.
The first two objections were intended to show that Grice’s analysis is too 
demanding. The next two are to the effect that in other respects the analysis 
is not demanding enough.
Objection 3
On being inducted into the army, George is compelled to take a test 
designed to establish sanity. George is known to be an irritable academic. 
The test he is being given would be appropriate for morons. One of the 
questions asked is: “What would you say if you were asked to identify 
yourself?” George replies to the officer asking the question by uttering 
“Ugh blugh blugh ugh blugh”.
(Ziff 1967: 2)
George meant to show his contempt, and meant the officer to recognize his 
contempt on the basis of recognizing his intention to show it. But, although 
Grice’s conditions are met, George did not mean anything in any linguistic 
sense (though one might correctly point out that there is a wider sense of 
“communication” that Grice’s analysis still seems to capture).7
Objection 4
During World War II an American soldier is captured by Italian troops. 
He wants to get the Italians to release him, by convincing them that he is 
a German officer. But he does not know either German or Italian. Hoping 
that his captors do not know German either, he “as it were, attempts to put 
on a show of telling them that he is a German officer,” by officiously barking 
out the only German sentence he knows, a line of poetry he had learned in 
school: “Kennst du das Land wo die Zitronen blühen?” (“Do you know the 
land where the lemon trees bloom?”)8 (Searle 1965: 229–30).
Here the soldier uttered his sentence intending to get the Italians to believe 
that he is a German officer; he further intended them to recognize that origi-
nal intention; and he still further intended them to form the false belief in 
part on the basis of recognizing the intention. But it does not seem that in 
saying “Kennst du das Land . . . ,” he means that he is a German officer.

92  Theories of meaning
Grice responds by requiring that the audience be intended to believe 
there to be a “mode of correlation” between features of the utterance and the 
intended belief type. Schiffer (1972) makes a different move, in terms of his 
technical notion “mutual knowledge*.” It seems better not to forge on into 
these arcana for now.
Determined Griceans such as Schiffer (1972) and Avramides (1989) 
have shown extraordinary fortitude and skill in modifying Grice’s original 
account in such a way as to accommodate all the foregoing problem cases 
and more, with the result that, despite the profusion of objections, a com-
plicated(!) version of the theory remains tenable. And it is generally agreed 
that speaker-meaning must be in some way a matter of speakers’ intentions 
and other mental states. But now we must turn back to the first stage of the 
Gricean program, the reduction of sentence meaning to speaker-meaning.
Sentence meaning
As may surprise you after you have read the previous section, Grice’s (1968) 
construction of sentence meaning out of speaker-meaning is elaborate and 
full of tricky details. Rather than plunge into them, I shall reveal some 
obstacles in advance. Then I shall only outline the way(s) in which Grice 
tries to surmount them.
It would be natural to start by supposing that a given English sentence 
means that P only in the sense that when speakers of English utter that sen-
tence, they always or at least normally (speaker-)mean that P. But here come 
the problems.
Obstacle 1
Ziff (1967) offered the following two examples:
George has had his head tampered with: electrodes have been inserted, 
plates mounted, and so forth. The effect was curious: when asked how 
he felt, George replied by uttering . . . “Glyting elly beleg”. What he 
meant by [that], he later informed us, was that he felt fine. He said that, 
at the time, he had somehow believed that [“Glyting elly beleg”] was 
synonymous with “I feel fine” and that everyone knew this.
(pp. 4–5; by now you will have grasped that George leads a life 
more interesting than yours or mine)
A man suddenly cried out “Gleeg gleeg gleeg!”, intending thereby to 
produce a certain effect in an audience by means of the recognition of his 
intention. He wished to make his audience believe that it was snowing 
in Tibet. Of course he did not produce the effect he was after since no 
one recognized what his intention was. Nonetheless that he had such 
an intention became clear. Being deemed mad, he was turned over to 

Psychological theories: Grice’s program  93
a psychiatrist. He complained to the psychiatrist that when he cried 
“Gleeg gleeg gleeg!” he had such an intention but no one recognized his 
intention and were they not mad not to do so.
(p. 5)
In the text it is not clear whether Ziff took these cases to be counter-
examples to Grice’s analysis of speaker-meaning. But I do not understand 
him in that way and I do not take them as such. It seems to me that, in his 
altered state, George did mean that he felt fine; and the madman derangedly 
meant that it was snowing in Tibet. Rather, I take the point to be that, if 
Grice’s theory of speaker-meaning is correct, then speaker-meaning comes 
very cheap: given a suitably disordered mental state, any speaker might mean 
anything at all by any string of noises s/he happens to utter. If Grice’s analy-
sis of speaker-meaning is correct, then all the worse for the first stage of his 
project, for there will then be no formal constraint on what speakers might 
mean by any sentence they utter, but only statistics about how often speakers 
do mean this or that.
In real life, of course, speaker-meaning is not so easily had, for two reasons. 
(a) Most people are not deranged in the manner of Ziff’s patients. Far more 
importantly, (b) English sentences have the meanings they do have, and one 
cannot just mean anything by them one likes. Unless I am oddly mistaken 
about the meaning of the word itself, or some more elaborate stage-setting is 
in place, I cannot say “It’s cold here” and mean by it “It’s warm here.” (The 
example is Wittgenstein’s.) I could be being sarcastic, of course. But I could 
not very well mean “I have just rented the video of Agnes of God,” or “Pigs 
have wings.” The antecedent meaning of a sentence partly controls what a 
speaker can mean by it in a given context.
Reason (b) further embarrasses Grice’s first stage since, if sentence mean-
ing is to be analyzed entirely away into speaker-meaning, we should not have 
to look to sentence meaning as constraining possible speaker-meanings. 
(Perhaps “should not” is too strong. There is no flat-out circularity here; 
and it is certainly possible that one special construct out of speaker-meaning 
might constrain speaker-meaning in general. But the Gricean will still have 
to explain why this happens so robustly.)
Obstacle 2
Most meaningful sentences of a language are never uttered at all. Therefore 
no one has ever meant anything by them. Therefore their meanings can 
hardly be determined by what speakers (normally, typically, and so on) mean 
by them (Platts 1979: 89).
It is not much use, though tempting, to appeal to what speakers would 
have meant by the unuttered sentences had they uttered them. For one thing, 
the vast majority of those sentences are ones that the speakers would never 
have uttered. Even for a sentence that the speakers might have uttered even 

94  Theories of meaning
though they did not, the only handle we have on what the speakers would 
have meant in uttering it is what we already know that sentence to mean.
Obstacle 3
Novel sentences again. Even when a sentence is actually uttered, it may be 
wildly novel, yet instantly understood by its audience. But if it is novel, then 
there is (as before, independently of what we know the sentence itself to 
mean) no pre-established fact of what speakers normally mean or would 
normally mean by it. And notice that the first, novel use may be (a) also the 
last and (b) itself nonliteral. (I am pretty sure that the following sentence has 
never been uttered before, though it may be uttered again: “The President 
of the United States Philosophy Corporation, who has finally been released 
from prison and is hurrying here to the aviary on winged feet, will share 
the riches of her spirit with us at 3:00 p.m. tomorrow.” In such a case, even 
though the sentence had been uttered, no one would ever actually have meant 
by it what it literally means.)
Blackburn (1984: ch. 4) points out that, in the right circumstances, a 
given sentence may be uttered with practically any intention and certainly 
without the intention of displaying one’s actual belief. (Blackburn broaches 
the alternative idea that a sentence S means P when it is either a conven-
tional regularity or the consequence of a conventional regularity that one 
who utters S with assertive force “may be regarded as having displayed” that 
P, this regard-license being a social fact that obtains independently of any 
particular utterer’s intentions. This is an interesting idea, and calls for much 
unpacking of “may,” “be regarded,” and “display,” but it is not a Gricean idea, 
for it self-consciously severs sentence-meaning from speakers’ communica-
tive intentions.)
Obstacle 4
Sentences are often, and not just abnormally, used with other than their own 
literal meanings. Even neglecting sarcasm and other forms of indirect speech 
acts (we shall talk more about such things in chapter 13), figurative usage is 
very prevalent (we shall talk more about that in chapter 14). If Grice should 
want to say that a sentence’s own meaning is what speakers “normally” 
mean in uttering the sentence, he would have to say what “normally” means 
independently of the sentence’s standard meaning, as well as motivating the 
claim.
And things get even worse. There are private codes in which a given sen-
tence is never used with its literal meaning. The Japanese signal for the 1941 
air attack on Pearl Harbor was (the Japanese expression translated as) “East 
wind, rain,” which so far as I know has never been used to mean anything but 
“It’s time to go bomb Pearl Harbor.” And even apart from private codes, in 
everyday life there are many sentences that normally are uttered with other 

Psychological theories: Grice’s program  95
than their literal meanings, and perhaps are never uttered with those literal 
meanings. (“All right, buddy, where’s the fire?” “Can you tell me the time?” 
“George and Martha buried the hatchet.” “Business is business.”) And there 
is the whole question of metaphor, though, as we shall see in chapter 13, Grice 
himself thinks of metaphor as a species of what he called “conversational 
implicature.”
Now for a sketch of Grice’s reduction of sentence meaning to speaker-
meaning, and indications of how he would have approached objections 1–4 
had he been fully aware of them.9
He first concentrates on the narrow notion of sentence meaning for 
a particular individual, that is the meaning that the sentence has in that 
individual’s personal, distinctive speech or idiolect. (No two English speak-
ers’ idiolects are exactly alike.) And he restricts his initial target further, 
distinguishing structured utterances from unstructured ones. A structured 
utterance has meaningful parts, such as individual words, which contribute 
to the utterance’s overall meaning; any declarative English sentence is an 
example of this, since it contains words that are individually meaningful and 
it means what it does in virtue of those words meaning what they do. An 
unstructured utterance is a single expression or nonverbal gesture, such as 
“Ouch” or a beckoning motion that means “This way,” whose meaning is not 
compositional in that sense. (Note that Grice uses the term “utterance” very 
broadly, as including nonverbal communicative acts.)
After some backing and filling, Grice hypothesizes that x [an unstructured 
expression] means that P in S’s idiolect, if and only if (roughly) S has in her/
his repertoire the following procedure: to utter x if, for some audience A, S 
intends A to believe that S believes that P. (That last clause is a simplified 
version of “S speaker-means that P”; Grice argues that the simplification is 
harmless here.)
Now he expands this analysis to cover utterance meaning for a group of 
speakers: x [unstructured] means that P for group G if and only if (a) many 
members of G have in their repertoires the procedure of uttering x if, for 
some A, they want A to believe that they believe that P; and (b) the retention 
of that procedure is for them conditional on the assumption that at least some 
other members of G have that same procedure in their repertoires.
I think what is supposed to overcome obstacle 1 is the combination of 
(a) and (b); that the relevant procedure is widespread in the community and 
that individual members of the community rely on the other members to 
maintain that procedure as well. This seems exactly right.
But now the trick will be to go from the analysis of unstructured-utterance 
meaning to ordinary sentence meaning, since ordinary English sentences are 
all structured. Grice brings in the notion of a “resultant” procedure. At this 
point Grice’s article becomes dense and obscure, but I think the idea is this: 
Just as English sentences are made up of smaller meaningful parts—words 
and phrases—in virtue of which the whole sentences mean what they mean, 
an individual speaker will have in her/his repertoire a complex, abstract 

96  Theories of meaning
“resultant procedure” made up of the concrete procedures attaching to its 
respective composite parts. Thus, a sentence’s meaning will not be directly 
a function of speaker-meaning, but rather a function of the individual utter-
ance meanings of its ultimate parts. Only then will the core Gricean idea, 
and (crucially) his analysis of utterance meaning for a group, be invoked as 
explicating the utterance meanings of the parts.
I emphasize “abstract resultant procedure,” because very few of those 
“abstract” procedures will ever actually occur. And it is that feature that will 
help Grice with obstacles 2–3. For the theme of those obstacles is that unut-
tered and novel sentences do not correspond to any actual speaker-meanings. 
But at least arguably, they do correspond to the hypothetical speaker-mean-
ings that would be generated by Grice’s abstract resultant procedures. The 
appeal to abstract procedures may also help to overcome obstacle 4: Even 
though a certain sentence’s literal meaning is never matched by any actual 
speaker-meaning, it may still correspond to a hypothetical resultant speaker-
meaning.
Yet I believe that this absolutely necessary appeal betrays the spirit of the 
Gricean program. In effect, it gives the game away to a competing theory of 
meaning; I shall argue that in chapter 9.
Summary
According to Grice, linguistic expressions have meaning only because 
• 
they express ideas or intentions of the speakers who use them.
“Speaker-meaning” is, roughly, what the speaker in uttering a given 
• 
sentence on a particular occasion intends to convey to a hearer.
Grice offers an analysis of speaker-meaning in terms of speakers’ 
• 
intentions, beliefs, and other psychological states, and has tenably 
refined that analysis in the light of many objections.
Grice has also offered an analysis of a sentence’s own meaning in 
• 
terms of speaker-meaning.
That analysis overcomes some severe obstacles, but seemingly only by 
• 
conceding too much to competing theories of sentence meaning.
Questions
1	
Can you help Grice avoid one or more of objections 1–4?
2	
Can you think of further objections to Grice’s theory of speaker-
meaning?
3	
Discuss Grice’s “first stage”; will his elaborate method of reducing sen-
tence meaning to speaker-meaning work?

Psychological theories: Grice’s program  97
Further reading
Sch
• 
iffer (1972) is the classic working-out of Grice’s view. See also 
Gilbert Harman’s review (1974a), and Avramides (1989). Related 
works of Grice’s own are collected in Grice (1989).
Bennett (1976) is a valuable defense of the Gricean project by one who 
• 
was not an insider. MacKay (1972), Black (1973), Rosenberg (1974: ch. 
2), and Biro (1979) are critical of Grice.

8 
Verificationism
Overview
According to the Verification Theory, a sentence is meaningful if and only if 
its being true would make some difference to the course of our future experi-
ence; an experientially unverifiable sentence or “sentence” is meaningless. 
More specifically, a sentence’s particular meaning is its verification condition, 
the set of possible experiences on someone’s part that would tend to show 
that the sentence was true.
The theory faces a number of objections: it has ruled a number of clearly 
meaningful sentences meaningless, and vice versa; it has assigned the wrong 
meanings to sentences that it does count as meaningful; and it has some dubi-
ous presuppositions. But the worst objection is that, as Duhem and Quine 
have argued, individual sentences do not have distinctive verification condi-
tions of their own.
Quine went on to bite that bullet and infer that individual sentences do not 
have meanings; according to him there is no such thing as sentence meaning. 
Quine also attacked the formerly widespread view that some sentences are 
“analytic” in the sense of being true by definition or solely in virtue of the 
meanings of their component terms.
The theory and its motivation
The Verification Theory of meaning, which flourished in the 1930s and 1940s, 
was a highly political theory of meaning. It was motivated by, and reciprocally 
helped to motivate, a growing empiricism and scientism in philosophy and in 
other disciplines. In particular, it was the engine that drove the philosophi-
cal movement of logical positivism, which was correctly perceived by moral 
philosophers, poets, theologians, and many others as directly attacking the 
foundations of their respective enterprises. Unlike most philosophical theo-
ries, it also had numerous powerful effects on the actual practice of science, 
both very good effects and very bad. But here we shall examine verification-
ism simply as another theory of linguistic meaning.
As one popular positivist slogan had it, a difference must make a differ-
ence. That is to say, if some bit of language is supposed to be meaningful at 

Verificationism  99
all, then it has got to make some kind of difference to thought and to action. 
And the positivists had a very specific idea of what kind of difference it ought 
to make: the bit of language ought to matter, specifically, to the course of our 
future experience. If someone utters what sounds like a sentence, but you have 
no idea how the truth of that sentence would affect the future in a detect-
able way, then in what sense can you say that it is nevertheless a meaningful 
sentence for you?
The positivists threw out that rhetorical question as a challenge. Suppose 
I put a line of something that looks like gibberish on the blackboard and I 
assert that the scribble is a meaningful sentence in someone’s language. You 
ask me what will happen depending on whether the scribble is true or false. 
I say “Nothing; the world will go on just as it otherwise would, whether this 
sentence is true or false.” Then you should become deeply suspicious of my 
contention that this apparent gibberish actually means something. Less dras-
tically, if you hear someone utter something in an alien tongue, you presume 
that it does mean something, but you have no idea what it means; that is 
because you do not know what would show whether it is true or false.
The positivists were concerned about the basic property of meaningfulness 
because they suspected that many of what passed for meaningful utterances 
in the works of the Great Dead Philosophers were not in fact (even) mean-
ingful at all, much less true. So, their verification principle was most notably 
used as a criterion of meaningfulness as opposed to meaninglessness: a sen-
tence was counted as meaningful if and only if there was some set of possible 
experiences on someone’s part that would tend to show that the sentence was 
true; call this set the sentence’s verification condition. (A sentence also has 
a falsification condition, the set of possible experiences that would tend to 
show that it was false.) If, in examining a proposed sentence, one could not 
come up with such a set of experiences, the sentence would fail the test and 
would be revealed as being meaningless, however proper its surface grammar. 
(Classic examples of alleged failures include: “Everything [including all yard-
sticks and other measuring devices] has just doubled in size.” Eleventh-hour 
creation: “The entire physical universe came into existence just five minutes 
ago, complete with ostensible memories and records.” Demon skepticism: 
“We are constantly and systematically being deceived by a powerful evil 
demon who feeds us specious experiences.”)1
But the verificationists did not confine their concern to meaningfulness 
itself. The theory also took a more specific form, anticipated by C. S. Peirce 
(1878/1934). It addressed the individual meanings of particular sentences, 
and identified each sentence’s meaning with that sentence’s verification 
condition.
Thus, the theory had a practical use, as an actual test for what an individual 
sentence does mean; it predicts the sentence’s particular propositional con-
tent. This is an important virtue, not shared by all its competitors. (The naive 
Proposition Theory says nothing of how to associate a particular proposition 
with a given sentence.) The Verification Theory was meant to be used, and 

100  Theories of meaning
has been used—even by people who do not accept it in full—as a clarificatory 
tool. If you are confronted by a sentence that you presume to be meaningful 
but you do not entirely understand, ask yourself what would tend to show 
that the sentence was true or that it was false.
The Verification Theory is thus an epistemic account of meaning; that is, 
it locates meaning in our ways of coming to know or finding out things. To 
a verificationist, a sentence’s meaning is its epistemology, a matter of what 
its proper evidence base would be. (On one interpretation, the Sellarsian 
functional or Inferential Theory of Meaning mentioned in chapter 6 is verifi-
cationist, as Sellars’ inference rules are epistemic devices.)
The positivists allowed that there is a special class of sentences that do 
not have empirical content but are nonetheless meaningful in a way: these 
are sentences that are, so to speak, true by definition, true solely in virtue 
of the meanings of the terms that compose them. “No bachelor is married”; 
“If it’s snowing, then it’s snowing”; “Five pencils are more pencils than 
two pencils.” Such sentences make no empirical predictions, according to 
the positivists, because they are true no matter what happens in the world. 
But they have meaning of a sort because they are true; their truth, however 
trivial, is guaranteed by the collective meanings of the words that occur in 
them. Such sentences are called analytic.
Verificationism is an attractive view that has been held fervently by many. 
But like every other theory of meaning, it has its problems.
Some objections
The positivists never achieved a formulation of the Verification Principle 
that satisfied even themselves; they could never get it to fit just the strings 
of words they wanted it to fit. Every precise formulation proved to be too 
strong or too weak in one respect or another (see Hempel 1950). There is a 
methodological problem as well: to test proposed formulations, the positiv-
ists had to appeal to clear cases of both kinds; that is, of meaningful strings of 
words and meaningless strings. But this assumes already that there are strings 
of words that are literally meaningless even though they are grammatically 
well-formed and composed of perfectly meaningful words; and that is, when 
you think about it, a very bold claim.
These problems do not constitute principled objections to verificationism, 
but they suggest two more that do.
Objection 1
Wittgenstein would and did complain that the Verification Theory is yet 
another monolithic attempt to get at the “essence” of language, and all such 
attempts are doomed to failure. But in particular and less dogmatically, the 
theory applies only to what the positivists called descriptive, fact-stating lan-
guage. But descriptive or fact-stating language is only one kind of language; 

Verificationism  101
we also ask questions, give orders, write poems, tell jokes, perform ceremo-
nies of various kinds, and so on. Presumably an adequate theory of meaning 
should apply to all these uses of language, since they are all meaningful uses 
of language in any ordinary sense of the term; but it is hard to see how the 
Verification Theory could be extended to cover them.
Reply
The positivists acknowledged that they were addressing meaning only in 
a restricted sense; they called it “cognitive” meaning. To be “cognitively” 
meaningful is roughly to be a statement of fact. Questions, commands, and 
lines of poetry are not fact-stating or descriptive in that sense, even though 
they have important linguistic functions and are “meaningful” in the ordi-
nary sense as opposed to gibberish.
The restriction to “cognitive” meaning was fine for the positivists’ larger 
metaphysical and anti-metaphysical purposes, but from our point of view, 
the elucidation of linguistic meaning generally, it is damaging. A theory of 
meaning in our sense is charged with explaining all the meaning facts, not 
just those pertaining to fact-stating language. Further, the retreat to “cogni-
tive” meaning does not help with objection 2.
Objection 2
As we noted, the positivists were working with admittedly preconceived ideas 
of which strings of words are meaningful and which are not, trying to rule 
out the intuitively meaningless ones and to rule in the obviously meaning-
ful ones. But it is not only the positivists that had preconceived ideas about 
which strings of words are meaningful. Suppose we look at a given string of 
words, and ask whether or not it is verifiable, and if so what would verify it. 
In order to do that, we already have to know what the sentence says; how 
could we know whether it was verifiable unless we knew what it says?
To determine how to verify the presence of a virus, say, we must know 
what viruses are and where, in general, they are to be found; thus it seems we 
must understand talk of viruses in order to verify statements about viruses, 
rather than vice versa. But, if we already know what our sentence says, then 
there is something that it says. And to that extent, it already is meaningful. 
Thus, the question of verifiability and verification conditions is conceptually 
posterior to knowing what the sentence means; it seems we have to know 
what a sentence means in order to know how to verify it.2 But that is just the 
opposite of what the Verification Theory says.
A related point is that there is a glaring difference between the sentences 
that the positivists wanted to rule out as meaningless (“Everything has just 
doubled in size,” “The entire physical universe came into existence just five 
minutes ago”) and paradigm cases of meaningless strings, gibberish, or word 
salad of the sort illustrated in chapter 1 (“w gfjsdkhj jiobfglglf ud,” “Good of 

102  Theories of meaning
off primly the a the the why”). Surely the former strings are not meaningless 
in the same drastic and obvious way as the latter. Whatever may be wrong with 
them from an epistemological point of view, they are not mere gibberish.
Reply
The verificationist must come up with some difference between the two types 
of string, without admitting that strings of the first type are meaningful after 
all. Here is a possible move. Strings of the first type are made of regular 
English words and, because they are grammatical from a superficially syn-
tactic point of view, there is a kind of illusion of understanding. Since these 
are the kinds of strings of words that often do say and mean something, they 
produce in us a feeling of familiarity. We have the feeling that we know what 
they say. And in a weak sense we do: We can parse them grammatically, and 
we understand each of the words that occur in them. But it does not follow 
that these strings of words do, in fact, mean anything as wholes.
Objection 3
The Verification Theory leads to bad or at least highly controversial meta-
physics. Recall that a verification condition is a set of experiences. The 
positivists meant such verifying experiences to be described in a uniform 
kind of language called an “observation language.” Suppose our “observation 
language” restricts itself to the vocabulary of subjective sense impressions, 
as in “I now seem to see a pink rabbit-shaped thing in front of me.” Then 
it follows from verificationism that any meaningful statement I succeed in 
making can ultimately only be about my own sense impressions; if solipsism 
is false, I cannot meaningfully say that it is. And neither can anyone else.
Even if instead we loosen our notion of “observation” and include what 
Hempel (1950) called the “directly observable characteristics” of ordinary 
objects, it remains true that verificationism collapses a sentence’s meaning 
into the type of observational evidence we can have for that sentence, without 
remainder. For example, we are driven to a grotesquely revisionist view about 
scientific objects—the instrumentalist view that scientific statements about 
electrons, memory traces, other galaxies, and the like are merely abbrevia-
tions of complex sets of statements about our own laboratory data. What is 
the verification condition of a sentence about an electron? Of course it is 
something macroscopic, something about meter readings or vapor trails in 
a cloud chamber or scattering patterns on a cathode ray tube or something 
of the sort. It is observable with the naked eye in the here and now. Are 
we really to believe that when we talk about subatomic particles we are not 
really talking about little particles—particles so small that they cannot be 
observed—but instead about meter readings, vapor trails, and the like? (The 
positivists themselves did not consider this instrumentalism grotesque, but 
thought it importantly true; I think it is grotesque.)

Verificationism  103
And when we turn to questions about the human mind, we find that a very 
strong version of behaviorism falls right out: statements about people’s minds 
are merely abbreviations of statements about those people’s overt behavior. 
For the only sort of observational evidence I ever have regarding your inner-
most thoughts and feelings is the behavior I see and hear you engaging in. If 
one is a verificationist, philosophy of mind is over and done with.
Possibly one or more of the foregoing and to me unappetizing theories 
are true. Perhaps they are all true. My point here is just that our theory of 
linguistic meaning should not show in one step that they are. Metaphysics 
should not be settled by a theory of language, for language is just a late adap-
tation found in one primate species. (Perhaps it is not even an adaptation, but 
a pleiotropism; that is, a mere byproduct of other traits that are themselves 
adaptive.)
Objection 4
How does the Verification Principle apply to itself? Either it is empirically 
verifiable or it is not.
Suppose it is not verifiable. Then either it is just meaningless or it is an 
empty “analytic” or definitional truth. At least one positivist (I have forgot-
ten which) gallantly embraced the idea that the principle is just meaningless, 
a ladder to be kicked away once one has climbed it. Some positivists took the 
line that the principle was a useful stipulative definition of the word “mean-
ing,” for technical purposes. Hempel (1950) called the principle a “proposal,” 
hence neither true nor false, but subject to each of several rational demands 
and constraints, hence not simply arbitrary. Of course, any philosopher 
can stipulate anything at any time; but how does that help those of us who 
are looking around for a credible, indeed correct theory of meaning (as is)? 
Stipulations have their uses but, when we are trying to come to an adequate 
philosophical theory of a pre-existing phenomenon, a stipulation is not of 
much help.
I suppose some positivists thought of the principle as a faithful, correct 
definition that captures the antecedent meaning of “meaning.” The trouble 
with that idea is that we do not know what specifically semantic evidence 
would bear out the definition as correct. Certainly the positivists had not 
subjected the term “meaning” to the sort of analysis that Russell had lavished 
on the word “the”; and neither ordinary people nor nonpositivist philoso-
phers shared many intuitive judgments in line with the Verification Principle. 
It does not seem to be analytic, like “No bachelor is married”; I doubt that 
anyone who understands what the word “meaning” means and what “verify” 
means knows that to be meaningful is just to be verifiable and that a sen-
tence’s meaning is its verification condition.
Suppose the principle is taken to be empirically verifiable. That is, assume 
it is supposed to be confirmed by our experiences of sentences, their mean-
ings, and their verification conditions, and meaning has been found to track 

104  Theories of meaning
verification condition. But (as in objection 1) that presupposes that we can 
recognize sentence meanings independently of assigning them verification 
conditions. And it is not clear just what we should count as the “empiri-
cal” data on which the principle is based. Survey results from street corners? 
Dictionary definitions? (Never that.) One’s own linguistic “intuitions”? 
(Also, the Verification Principle’s own meaning would then, by the principle 
itself, coincide with its own verification condition, the set of experiences as 
of meanings coinciding with verification conditions; that is a nasty tangle, 
though I am unsure whether it is ultimately vicious.)
At any rate, the self-application problem is a real one, not just a superficial 
trick question.3
Objection 5
Erwin (1970) offers an argument to show that every statement is verifiable, 
trivially and in much the same way. Suppose we are presented with a funny-
looking machine that turns out to be a marvelous predictor. Namely, when 
one codes a declarative sentence onto a punch card and inserts it into a slot 
in the machine, the machine whirrs and clunks and lights up either “TRUE” 
or “FALSE”; moreover, so far as we are able to check, the machine is miracu-
lously always right.
Now consider an arbitrarily chosen string of words, S. The following set 
of experiences would suffice to raise S’s probability to a drastic degree:
1	
We code S onto a punch card.
2	
We feed the card into our machine.
3	
The machine lights up “TRUE.”
(And remember that the machine has never once been wrong.) Thus, there 
exists a possible set of experiences that would confirm S, even if S is intui-
tively gibberish. And S’s own particular verification condition would be that, 
when it is coded and put to the machine, the machine lights up “TRUE.” 
Thus the Verification Theory is trivialized, since every string of words is 
verifiable, and it assigns the wrong meanings to particular sentences (because 
very few sentences mean anything about punch cards being fed into infernal 
machines).
Something is wrong with that argument. But I have found it very hard to 
say exactly what.
Objection 6
Any version of the Verification Principle must presuppose an “observation 
language” in which experiences are described; hence it must countenance 
a firm distinction between “observational” and (correlatively) “theo-
retical” terms. As I have mentioned, some of the positivists restricted their 

Verificationism  105
observation language to statements about people’s private, subjective sense 
impressions. But that did not serve for purposes of intersubjectively check-
able science, so most positivists joined Hempel (1950) in appealing to the 
“directly observable characteristics” of ordinary objects. There are two prob-
lems here. First, the notion of “direct observation” is a vexed one, and seems 
totally technology-relative and interest- or project-relative as well. Is a visual 
observation “direct” when you are wearing eyeglasses? How about if you are 
using a magnifying glass? How about through a microscope, at this or that 
degree of magnification? How about through an electron microscope?
Second, “observations,” and statements couched in “observation language,” 
are theory-laden at least to a degree; what counts as an observation and what 
counts as observed and how a “datum” is described are all determined in part 
by the very theories that are in question.
Both these problems are knotty issues in the philosophy of science; I 
merely mention them here.4 But they help to set up a much deeper objection 
to verificationism.
The big one
Objection 7
Following Pierre Duhem (1906/1954), W. V. Quine (1953, 1960) argues that 
no individual sentence has a distinctive verification condition, except relative 
to a mass of background theory against which “observational” testing takes 
place. This will take some explaining.
There is a naive idea that many people have about science. It is that one 
puts forward a scientific hypothesis and then tests the hypothesis by doing an 
experiment, and the experiment shows, all by itself, whether the hypothesis is 
correct. Duhem pointed out that in the history of the universe there has never 
been an experiment that could singlehandedly verify or falsify a hypothesis. 
The reason is that there are always too many auxiliary assumptions that 
have to be made to bring the hypothesis into contact with the experimental 
apparatus. Hypotheses do sometimes get disconfirmed, outright refuted if 
you like, but only because the scientists involved are holding certain other 
assumptions fixed, assumptions that are disputable and may even be quite 
wrong. Suppose we are doing an astronomical study, and we are verifying and 
refuting things by making observations through complicated telescopes. In 
using such telescopes, the astronomers are assuming virtually all of optical 
theory, and countless other things besides.
Surprisingly, Duhem’s point holds in everyday life as well. Take any good 
ordinary sentence about a physical object, such as “There is a chair at the 
head of the table.” What is its verification condition? A first thing to notice 
is that “the” set of experiences that would confirm that sentence is in a way 
conditional, on one’s hypothetical vantage point. We might try something 
like this: If you walk into the room from the direction of this door here, you 

106  Theories of meaning
will have an experience as of a chair at the head of the table. But even that 
depends. It depends on whether you have your eyes open, and it depends on 
whether your sensory apparatus is functioning properly, and it depends on 
whether the lights are on, and . . . . These qualifications do not foreseeably 
come to an end. If we try to build in the appropriate hedges (“If you walk 
into the room, and you have your eyes open, and your sensory apparatus is 
functioning, . . . ”), more qualifications crop up: Are you walking forward 
rather than backing into the room? Has something been interposed between 
you and the chair? Has the chair been camouflaged? Has it been rendered 
invisible by Martians? Has your brain been altered by a freakish burst of 
Q-radiation from the sky? We can go on like this for days.
The moral is that what we take to be “the” verification condition for a 
given empirical statement presupposes a massive background of default 
auxiliary assumptions. Those assumptions are usually perfectly reasonable, 
and it is no accident that we make them. But a particular “verification condi-
tion” is associated with a given sentence only if we choose to rely on such 
assumptions, almost any of which may fail. Intrinsically, the sentence has no 
determinate verification condition.
That is (to say the least) an embarrassment for a theory that identifies 
a sentence’s meaning with that sentence’s verification condition. But as we 
shall now see, the matter does not quite end here.
Two Quinean issues
In the 1950s and 1960s, W. V. Quine posed two challenges to the positivists’ 
philosophy of language. First, he attacked the notion of analyticity (Quine 
1953, 1960); that is, he attacked the claim that some sentences are true entirely 
in virtue of what they mean and not because of any contribution from the 
extralinguistic world. Quine gives a number of different arguments against 
analyticity. Some of those are unconvincing. Others are better, and have kept 
“analytic” a fairly dirty word ever since, or at least till a recent resurgence. 
I will not itemize them, but only give a general idea of what I think is at the 
bottom of Quine’s repudiation of analyticity.
Quine shares and maintains the positivists’ epistemological bent, and 
believes that if linguistic meaning is anything it is a function of evidential 
support. But his own epistemology differs from the positivists’ in being 
holistic. There are individual sentences you hold true and sentences you 
reject as false, but in each case the support for your belief is a complex mat-
ter of the evidential relations your sentence bears to many other sentences. 
Whenever it seems that belief revision is required, you have a wide choice 
of which beliefs to give up in order to maintain a suitably coherent system 
(recall Duhem’s point). And there is no belief that is completely immune to 
revision, no sentence that might not be rejected under pressure from empiri-
cal evidence plus a concern for overall coherence. Even apparent truths of 
logic, such as truths of the form “Either P or not P,” might be abandoned in 

Verificationism  107
light of suitably weird phenomena in quantum mechanics. But an analytic 
sentence would by definition be entirely unresponsive to the world’s input, 
and so immune to revision. Therefore, there are no analytic sentences.
It may seem of little practical consequence whether there are any sentences 
that occupy the quaint philosophers’ category of “analytic.” But Quine’s 
rejection of analyticity does have one interesting little repercussion. Suppose 
two English sentences, S1 and S2, are precisely synonymous. Then the 
conditional sentence “If S1, then S2” should be analytic, having the content 
“If [this state of affairs], then [this very same state of affairs],” which could 
hardly be falsified by any empirical development. So, if there are no analytic 
sentences, no two English sentences are precisely synonymous, not even 
“Bambi’s mother was a doe” and “Bambi’s mother was a female deer.”5
It gets worse. Here is Quine’s second challenge to the positivists, and 
indeed to practically everyone. It is not just that there are no analytic sen-
tences, and not just that no two sentences are synonymous. It is that there is 
no such thing as meaning. Quine denies our “meaning facts” in the first place, 
and urges an eliminativism or nihilism about meaning, in the form of his 
doctrine of the “indeterminacy of translation.”
Here too Quine has given a number of arguments, some more convincing 
than others. One (from Quine 1969) can be stated very simply: Individual sen-
tences do not have verification conditions. But, if a sentence had any meaning 
at all, it would be a verification condition. Therefore, individual sentences do 
not have meanings at all. Thus does Quine save verificationism from objec-
tion 5. But it is a desperate lunge, since it saves the village by destroying it, 
simply eliminating meaning and the meaning-facts themselves. The problem 
with the argument, of course, is in justifying the second premise; if sentences 
do not have verification conditions, why continue to accept verificationism 
when there are so many other theories of meaning on offer?
A better-known argument starts with the hypothesis of a field linguist 
investigating an alien native language from scratch and trying to construct 
a “translation manual” or Native–English dictionary. Quine argues that the 
total evidence available to the linguist fails to determine any one translation 
manual; many mutually incompatible ones are entirely consistent with that 
evidence. Moreover the underdetermination here is not merely the standard 
underdetermination of scientific theories by the evidence on which they are 
based. It is radical: not even the world’s totality of physical fact suffices to vin-
dicate one of the rival translation manuals as against the others. Therefore, no 
translation is correct to the exclusion of its rival translations. But if sentences 
had meanings then there would be correct translations of them, namely the 
translations that did preserve their actual meanings. Therefore, sentences do 
not have meanings.
The problem here is to justify the premise that not even the world’s total-
ity of physical fact rules in one of the rival translation manuals as correct. 
The defense of that premise remains obscure.

108  Theories of meaning
Summary
According to the Verification Theory, a sentence is meaningful if and 
• 
only if its being true would make some difference to the course of our 
future experience; and a sentence’s particular meaning is its verifica-
tion condition, the set of possible experiences that would tend to show 
that the sentence was true.
The theory faces a number of medium-sized objections.
• 
But the worst objection is that, as Duhem and Quine have argued, 
• 
individual sentences do not have distinctive verification conditions of 
their own.
Quine attacked the view that there are “analytic” sentences, sentences 
• 
true solely in virtue of their meanings.
From Duhem’s point, Quine inferred the radical claim that individual 
• 
sentences do not have meanings; there is no such thing as sentence 
meaning.
Questions
1	
Respond on the verificationist’s behalf to one of objections 1–6.
2	
Try to tackle objection 7.
3	
Have you any further criticism to make of the Verification Theory?
4	
Discuss Quine’s attack on analyticity, or his defense of meaning 
indeterminacy. (Some outside reading would be required for either of 
these.)
Further reading
Ayer (1946) is a classic and/but very accessible exposition and defense 
• 
of verificationism.
Some influential anti-verificationist papers besides Quine’s were 
• 
Waismann (1965b) and various collected essays by Hilary Putnam 
(1975b), especially “Dreaming and ‘Depth Grammar’.”
Quine’s doctrine of the indeterminacy of translation spawned a vast 
• 
and toxic literature. For one view of the doctrine and the early litera-
ture, see Lycan (1984: ch. 9) (you were expecting me to recommend 
someone else’s view?); also, see Bar-On (1992).
The 1970s and 1980s saw an outbreak of neoverificationism, due largely 
• 
to writings of Michael Dummett collected in his (1978) book. For an 
oversimplifying but very clear attack on Dummett, see Devitt (1983).

9	
Truth-Condition Theories: 
Davidson’s program
Overview
According to Donald Davidson, we will obtain a better theory of meaning if 
we replace the notion of a sentence’s verification condition with that of the 
sentence’s truth condition: the condition under which the sentence actually 
is or would be true, rather than a state of affairs that would merely serve as 
evidence of truth. Davidson offers several arguments, chief among which is 
that compositionality is needed to account for our understanding of long, 
novel sentences and a sentence’s truth condition is its most obviously com-
positional feature. As a model of the way in which truth conditions can be 
assigned to sentences of natural languages such as English, Davidson takes 
the way in which truth is defined for an artificial system of formal logic. But, 
since English sentences’ surface grammar diverges from their logical forms, 
a theory of grammar and its relation to logic has to be brought to bear; such 
a theory exists and is supported independently.
Davidson’s theory faces many objections. One is that many perfectly 
meaningful sentences do not have truth-values. Some others are that his pro-
gram cannot handle expressions (such as pronouns) whose referents depend 
on context, predicates that are not synonymous but happen to apply to just 
the same things, and sentences whose truth-values are not determined by 
those of their component clauses.
Truth conditions
So far, only one of our theories has managed to shed much light on what 
actually determines the meanings of particular sentences. The Proposition 
Theory took sentence meanings and just reified them (made them into objects 
of a certain kind), without much further comment and without connecting 
the object thus reified with anyone’s linguistic practices or behavior. Grice 
attempted to fob off the question into the philosophy of mind by trying 
to connect sentences with the contents of people’s actual intentions and 
beliefs, which was not very successful and, more to the point, simply took 
the intentions’ and beliefs’ contents themselves for granted. As we have seen, 

110  Theories of meaning
the verificationists did better; they offered us a test for the propositional 
content of any given sentence, that content being (precisely) the sentence’s 
verification condition. The trouble is that, even if we ignore the Duhem–
Quine problem (objection 7 in the previous chapter), the verification test 
often seems to predict the wrong content (objection 3). Donald Davidson 
(1967a, 1970/1975) argued that we will get where we want to be if we replace 
the positivists’ notion of a sentence’s verification condition with that of the 
sentence’s truth condition. On this view, to know a sentence’s meaning is to 
know the conditions under which that sentence would be true, rather than to 
know how to tell whether the sentence is actually true. (Never mind episte-
mology.) For two sentences to be synonymous is for them to be true under 
just the same conditions; for a sentence to be ambiguous is for it to be both 
true and false in the same circumstance yet without self-contradiction; for 
one sentence to entail another is for it to be impossible that the first be true 
without the second being true also.
We are already familiar with the truth-conditional approach to meaning, 
though not by name, from our discussion of Russell’s Theory of Descriptions: 
Russell proceeds precisely by sketching the truth conditions of sentences 
containing descriptions and arguing on various grounds that they are the 
correct truth conditions. But more of Russell in the next section.
Davidson begins with two ideas that prove to be related. One is that a 
theory of meaning should afford guidance on what determines the mean-
ing of a particular sentence. The other is that of giving central importance 
to the wondrous phenomenon with which this book began: our ability to 
understand long novel sentences in a flash. Focusing on the first idea, he asks 
how one might give a “theory of meaning for” a particular language—not a 
general theory of meaning in our philosophical sense, but a theory of English 
or of Chinese or of Kwakiutl—that specified the particular meanings of that 
language’s sentences taken one by one.
What form might such a theory take? Davidson offers and motivates sev-
eral guidelines and constraints. The first is this:
Since there seems to be no clear limit to the number of meaningful 
expressions, a workable theory must account for the meaning of each 
expression on the basis of the patterned exhibition of a finite number 
of features. But even if there were a practical constraint on the length of 
the sentences a person can send and receive with understanding, a satis-
factory semantics would need to explain the contribution of repeatable 
features to the meanings of sentences in which they occur.
(Davidson 1970/1975: 18)
Here he is appealing to our ability to understand long novel sentences, and 
suggesting an explanation of that ability. How do we understand a potential 
infinity of English sentences on the basis of our finite vocabulary and limited 

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  111
experience of language? The answer must be that we have mastered “a finite 
number of features,” a relatively small and manageable set of meaningful 
expressions that serve as meaning “atoms,” and also some rules of composi-
tion, “patterned” ways of combining those atoms or semantic primitives that 
generate the meanings of more complex expressions.1
Very crudely, the meaning atoms are individual words, and the rules of 
composition are rules of grammar or syntax that specify how words can be 
combined in order to project their individual meanings into more complex 
meanings. Davidson contends that the meaning of a sentence is a function of 
the meanings of its constituent words.2 This is the thesis of compositionality, 
as we called it in chapter 6. Compositionality is the obvious hypothesis to 
explain our understanding of long novel sentences: we understand complex 
meanings by decomposing sentences syntactically into smaller meaningful 
elements, and computing the complex meanings as syntactic functions of the 
sentences’ smallest meaningful parts.
So an adequate theory of meaning in the general philosophical sense 
should guide us in constructing a systematic “theory of meaning for” any 
given language that would specify the meaning of each grammatical sentence 
of that language by chronicling the sentence’s composition out of its con-
stituent words. Thus, it should have the means to generate a list:
“Snow is white” means that snow is white. 
“Grass is green” means that grass is green. 
“Poltergeists make up the principal type of material manifestation” 
means that poltergeists make up the principal type of material 
manifestation.
“In 1931, Adolf Hitler made a visit to the United States, in the course of 
which . . . ” [You get the idea.]
And this list is infinite or potentially so. Of course, this example specifies the 
meanings of English sentences in English (and so it sounds a bit uninterest-
ing), but we must also be able to do the same for other languages:
“Der Schnee ist weiss” means [in German] that snow is white.
“Das Gras ist grün” means that grass is green.
“Die Poltergeisten representieren . . . ” [etc.]
How might a theory of English or a theory of German generate such a 
list? Notice first that, corresponding to our ability to understand long novel 
sentences, we have the ability to determine those sentences’ truth-values 
if we know enough facts. For example, if I happen to know that Katherine 
Dienes’ “Ave Maria” setting employs chant segments, drones, overlapping 
“ora pro nobis” figures, and other devices to suggest the sonority of medieval 
convent music, and I encounter the sentence

112  Theories of meaning
(1)	 Katherine Dienes’ “Ave Maria” setting employs chant segments, 
drones, overlapping “ora pro nobis” figures, and other devices to 
suggest the sonority of medieval convent music
(a sentence that I am quite sure is as new to you as it originally was to me); 
I also know that that sentence is in fact true. And if I had encountered a 
sentence just like it except that “medieval convent music” had been replaced 
by “Ice-T’s brand of rap music” and a clause had been added, “ . . . and Dienes 
has recently moved to Newark, New Jersey,” I would instantly have known 
it was false.
Thus, it seems we grasp the truth conditions of long novel sentences on 
sight, as well as understanding them, and the same question arises: How is 
that possible? Davidson thinks this coincidence is no coincidence. The ques-
tion has the same answer: compositionality. The truth conditions of long 
sentences are determined by the truth conditions of the shorter sentences 
of which they are composed, and the syntactic processes that generate the 
longer sentences carry truth-related semantic properties along with them, 
thus compounding simple truth properties into more complex ones.3
We have an elegant model for this compositionality of truth conditions, 
and it serves also as the only model we have for the compositionality of mean-
ing. It is the semantics of a formal language such as the predicate calculus, as 
formulated by logicians. If you have taken a course in symbolic logic, you will 
already have seen this coming and will be ahead of me. If you have not, I will 
try to explain the idea informally, without relying on technical notation.
I shall describe a very simple little language, nearly as simple as 
Wittgenstein’s builders’ language but with a crucial distinguishing feature. 
It has two terms or predicates, F and G, which correspond to the English 
words “fat” and “greedy”; F denotes or applies to all and only the fat things in 
the world and G applies to all and only the greedy things. The little language 
(which I shall call “Oafish”) also has two proper names: a, which denotes 
Albert, and b, which denotes Betty. And it has a semantic rule for forming 
subject–predicate sentences: a sentence made by prefixing a predicate P to 
a proper name n is true iff what n denotes is included among the things to 
which P applies. And finally, Oafish contains two further expressions called 
“sentence connectives”: “not,” which can be stuck onto any given sentence, 
and “and,” which can be inserted between two whole sentences to make a 
longer sentence. Each of the connectives is governed by its distinguishing 
semantic rule. The “not” rule is that a sentence made by sticking “not” onto 
another sentence A will be true if and only if A itself is not true. The “and” 
rule is that a sentence of the composite form “A and B” will be true if and 
only if A is true and B is true also. Thus:

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  113
Truth definition for Oafish
“F” applies to fat things. 
“G” applies to greedy things. 
“a” denotes Albert. 
“b” denotes Betty. 
A subject–predicate sentence “Pn” is true if and only if what “n” denotes 
is a member of the class of things that “P” applies to. 
A sentence of the form “Not A” is true if and only if the sentence “A” 
is not true. 
A sentence of the form “A and B” is true if and only if its component 
sentences “A” and “B” are both true.
This is the whole language—all of its vocabulary, all of its meaning rules 
of any kind. It is of limited interest, and encourages tedious repetitiveness. 
But its truth definition, even in its brute simplicity, has the twin features that 
we need: It allows for indefinitely long and indefinitely many grammatical 
sentences of Oafish, and (nonetheless) it manages to specify the truth condi-
tion of every one of them. For example, if an Oafish speaker utters “Fa,” 
we learn from our subject–predicate clause that that sentence is true if and 
only if the denotation of a, that is, Albert, is included in the class of things 
to which F applies, that is, the class of fat things, which is just to say that 
Albert is fat. (The class of things to which a term applies is called the term’s 
extension.) Or one can say that Albert is greedy. Or one can say that he is fat 
and he is greedy, because our truth rule for “and” tells us that “Fa and Ga” is 
going to be true only when Albert is fat and Albert is greedy. (Check that for 
yourself.) And the word “and” can be iterated, that is, applied over and over 
again, to make longer and longer sentences without letup: “Fa and not Fb”; 
“Fa and not Ga and Fb and not Gb”; “Fa and Ga and not Fb and Gb and Fa 
and not Fb”; and so on forever. (Of course the later sentences will be repeti-
tious, since Oafish has such a small lexicon, but even the most repetitious 
sentences are still grammatical and have perfectly clear truth conditions.)
So, just from this trifling little truth definition we have already got infi-
nitely many grammatical sentences, and we have projection rules that tell us, 
no matter how long a sentence is, the condition under which that sentence is 
true. Armed with this, we could encounter any novel sentence of Oafish, even 
if it were five miles long, and compute its truth condition. We have explained 
a potentially infinite capacity by finite, indeed minuscule, means.

114  Theories of meaning
Suppose we have derived a truth condition step by step from our truth 
definition and made it explicit:
“Fa and not Ga and Fb and not Gb” is true if and only if Albert is fat 
and Albert is not greedy and Betty is fat and Betty is not greedy.
We have taken a sentence of Oafish and specified its truth condition. But 
have we not also specified its meaning? Surely what the chosen sentence 
means is just that Albert is fat and Albert is not greedy and Betty is fat and 
Betty is not greedy. And it means that compositionally, in virtue of what a, 
b, F, and G denote plus the semantic rules for determining complex truth 
conditions from simpler ones.
Suppose we could do the same for English, that is, construct a truth defini-
tion that spits out something of the form, “ ‘——’ is true if and only if ——” 
for each English sentence. (Such products are called “Tarski biconditionals” or 
“T-sentences,” since they were inspired by the form of Tarski’s (1956) theory 
of truth.) And suppose each T-sentence is seen to get its target sentence’s 
truth condition right. Then, Davidson asks, what more could reasonably be 
asked of a theory of meaning for English?
Consider: A correct assignment of meaning to a sentence should determine 
that sentence’s truth condition; so we know that an adequate theory of mean-
ing for a language should yield at least a truth definition for that language. 
So if the truth definition also does everything we would expect a theory of 
meaning to do, it would be reasonable simply to identify a sentence’s mean-
ing with its truth condition.
What about the meaning facts, then? I have already mentioned the ways in 
which the Truth-Condition Theory accounts for synonymy and ambiguity. 
It accounts for meaning inclusion and especially for entailment as well. “Fa 
and not Fb” entails “Fa” because, according to our truth definition, “Fa and 
not Fb” could not be true unless “Fa” were. A truth definition for a language 
predicts the felt synonymies, entailments, and other semantic relations by 
reference to the semantic compounding rules it codifies.
And, in part, the contemporary truth-condition theorist studies linguistic 
constructions in just the same way that Russell worked on descriptions. S/he 
marshals a whole bunch of meaning facts about a particular kind or group 
of sentences in which s/he is interested—facts about synonymy relations, 
ambiguities, entailment relations, and so on—and tries to explain those 
facts in terms of truth conditions. Russell noted the semantic properties of 
sentences of this kind or that, especially interesting properties that create 
logical puzzles, and then asked, how can we put together a theory of such 
sentences that explains why the sentences exhibit those puzzling semantic 
features? His answer, as in the Theory of Descriptions, would be a putative 
truth condition.

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  115
The Truth-Condition Theory sees meaning as representation. In effect it 
reverts to the Referential Theory’s idea of meaning as mirroring or corre-
spondence between sentences and actual or possible states of affairs; Russell 
emphasized this idea (and indeed made it a cornerstone of his metaphysics). 
The truth definition is founded on the referential relations between terms 
and their worldly denotata or extensions. We saw in chapter 1 that the crude 
Referential Theory was far too simple an idea of the correspondence between 
words and the world; the truth-condition theorist does not posit so strong or 
simple-minded a correspondence, since s/he does not contend that all words 
are names. But the truth-condition theorist is back in the business of mir-
roring nature, of asking what actual or possible states of affairs does a given 
target sentence depict or represent.
Truth-defining natural languages
Oafish is explicitly truth-defined. Its sentences wear their truth conditions 
on their sleeves, in the sense that there is no disparity between a sentence’s 
surface grammatical form and what Russell called its logical form (chapter 
2). And one can just look at an Oafish sentence and, truth definition in hand, 
work one’s way back through the sentence’s compositional structure and 
calculate the sentence’s truth condition. That is Davidson’s paradigm.
There is a huge “but” (indeed a “But . . . !!”), which has probably already 
occurred to you. It is one thing to provide a truth definition for a made-up 
formal language, even for a much richer one than Oafish; it is quite another 
to reveal truth rules allegedly underpinning an already living natural lan-
guage like English. The natural language was here first. And, much more to 
the point, sentences of English do not wear their truth conditions on their 
sleeves. Notoriously, as we saw in chapter 2, their superficial grammatical 
forms differ unpredictably from their logical forms.
Well, says the truth-condition theorist, not quite unpredictably. That is 
where syntax enters the picture. (Indeed, the theorist may say, that is what 
syntax is for.)
I would like to give you an entire course in syntax; failing that, I would 
like to give you just the basics. But space allows neither. I shall merely gesture 
toward the fundamental idea and hope that you will pick up some of the 
rest elsewhere. For simplicity, I will use jargon that recalls the early days of 
theoretical syntax (roughly, the 1960s) once that discipline had been founded 
by Zellig Harris and Noam Chomsky.
A syntax or grammar for a language, natural or artificial, is a device for 
sorting well-formed or grammatical sentences from among all the strings 
made up of words from that language. And again (as with semantics), the 
model is that of formation rules for a logical system. Recall Oafish. Sentences 
of Oafish can be parsed, diagrammed by what are called “phrase markers,” 

116  Theories of meaning
in a way that directly depicts how they are compounded syntactically out of 
individual terms. Here is “Fa and not Fb.” 
Sentence
Predicate Name
Predicate
Name
Connective
Sentence
Sentence
Sentence
Connective
F
a
and
F
b
not
Sentence
Noun
Determiner
Noun
Verb
Noun phrase
Noun phrase
Verb phrase
Adjective
Determiner
ball
colorful
the
The
boy
hit
A sentence can be formed by placing a name after a predicate, so “Fa” and 
“Fb” are sentences. A sentence can be formed by prefixing a sentence with 
“not,” so “not Fb” is a sentence. Finally, a sentence can be formed by placing 
“and” between two sentences, so the whole thing is a sentence.
Simple English sentences can be diagrammed similarly. Here is a classic: 
“The boy hit the colorful ball.” 
The nodes in such a phrase marker are labeled according to grammatical cat-
egory, and the lowest ones begin to look like English “parts of speech”: noun, 
adjective, and so on. Higher nodes correspond to more complex grammatical 
structures such as noun phrases.

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  117
But few English sentences are so simple. Most have structures that cannot 
be entirely rendered by phrase markers of this straightforward type (called 
“context-free” markers), because there are grammatical relations that are 
robust and unmistakable that cannot be represented in this form. Chomsky 
(1957, 1965) argued that the phrase-marker grammar needs to be augmented 
by a device, specifically a set of rules, that can take one phrase marker and 
turn it into one of a different and dependent kind; he called such rules “trans-
formations.” For example, a passive transformation might take the foregoing 
phrase marker and rearrange its parts into a phrase marker for “The colorful 
ball was hit by the boy.” Transformations are conceived as dynamic, as agents 
that chop up phrase markers and rebuild their parts into more complicated 
tree diagrams.
With any luck, then, every grammatical string of English has either a 
context-free phrase marker or one that has been derived by a series of one 
or more transformations from a context-free marker. No other string is 
grammatical. (Grammars no longer have this simple architecture, nor do 
present-day linguists use my antiquated terminology. But to learn more you 
will have to read up on your own.)
As I said, linguists originally conceived a grammar simply as a machine 
that separated well-formed strings from gibberish. Some linguists leave it at 
that, and do not see that that enterprise has much to do with semantics or 
sentence meaning proper. But as Davidson says, something takes the mean-
ings of individual words and composes or projects them into whole sentence 
meanings. What is it that does that? Presumably, rules for sticking the words 
together in some rational order, an order that gives the whole composite a 
meaning. But notice that one and the same set of words can be arranged in 
different orders, and two of the resulting strings, even if each is well-formed, 
can have different meanings: Tragically, “John loves Marsha” does not mean 
the same thing as “Marsha loves John,” even though the same three words 
compose both sentences. So, in order to generate different meanings for 
those sentences, the projection rules must also do some finer tuning; they 
have got to look, not just at the words themselves, but at some finer distinc-
tions. But the very syntactic rules that compound grammatically acceptable 
strings out of individual words also seem ideally suited to serve as those 
meaning-projection rules also. In the late 1960s many linguists came to take 
that view, and held that transformations preserve meaning (though the latter 
thesis was qualified and partly abandoned by the Extended Standard Theory 
of the 1970s and by Government and Binding Theory of the 1980s).
Suppose we have a phrase-structure grammar for an explicitly truth-
defined formal language. And suppose we have grammatical transformations 
that are capable of converting formulas of that language into well-formed 
strings of English. Then we have a grammar whose phrase-structure com-
ponent spits out underlying structures (the logic-like formulas) and whose 
transformational component produces English variations on those under-
lying structures. Given that transformations preserve meaning or, more 

118  Theories of meaning
narrowly, that transformations preserve truth properties, we can then see 
how English sentences have their meanings. Namely, they have meanings in 
virtue of having truth conditions, and they have truth conditions in virtue of 
being transformationally derived from explicitly truth-defined formulas of 
a logic-like notational system. Synonymous sentences are transformational 
variations of each other; ambiguous sentences are the products of more than 
one possible transformational process, and so forth.
Ideally, the truth-condition theorist wants to be empirically more respon-
sible than Russell was. Russell approached truth conditions a priori; he would 
write an English sentence on the blackboard, write a logical formula next to 
it, eyeball the two, and judge that the latter seems to get the former’s truth 
condition right. Better, he did appeal to his hypotheses’ puzzle-solving abili-
ties as well. But a contemporary truth-condition theorist should want her/
his semantical hypotheses to be, in addition, at least somewhat responsible to 
plausible syntactic theories.
Objections to the Davidsonian version
Objection 1
Like the Verification Theory, the Truth-Condition Theory seems to apply 
only to descriptive, fact-stating language; questions and commands and so 
on are not true or false at all.
A weak reply
Although we do not ordinarily call questions or commands “true” and “false,” 
they do have bipolar, truth-like semantic values. A question is correctly 
answered “yes” or “no”; a command is obeyed or disobeyed. Intuitively, a 
nondeclarative sentence corresponds to a state of affairs that may or may 
not obtain, even though its function is not to describe or report that state 
of affairs. And for semantical purposes we may as well treat those semantic 
values as truth-values. For example, a command is “true” if it does in fact 
go on to be obeyed, “false” if it does not. Of course this is a nonstandard 
use of “true” and “false”; we are widening their application to all semantic 
bipolarity. (Perhaps we should make up a pair of more general semantical 
terms, such as “positive” and “negative.”)
A first rejoinder
Not all nondeclaratives are thus bipolar. Consider “wh-” questions, such as 
“Who robbed the diaper service?,” “What time is it?,” and “Why did you blow 
up my boat?” None of these has a “yes” or “no” answer; indeed, each admits 
a very large range of possible correct answers.

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  119
A second rejoinder
The difficulty about lack of truth-value is not confined to nondeclarative 
sentences. For one thing, it has been argued that certain grammatically 
declarative sentences lack truth conditions and have only epistemic “assert-
ibility” conditions. Most notably, Adams (1965) and others have defended 
the view that indicative conditionals lack truth conditions and truth-value.
Moreover, some philosophers hold (following the Positivists) that certain 
grammatically declarative sentences are not fact-stating even though they 
might be taken by the naive to be so. According to the emotivists in moral 
philosophy, moral judgments are only evincings or ventings, semantically just 
like groans, grunts of protest, cheers, and the like. If so, then such “factually 
defective” sentences do not have truth-values. So a T-sentence directed upon 
one (“ ‘Murder is wrong’ is true iff murder is wrong”) should come out false 
or anomalous.4
Reply to the second rejoinder
It is easy enough for the truth-condition theorist who is also an emotivist 
(or whatever) to restrict her/his truth theory against nonfactual sentences in 
the first place. But contrariwise, one may argue from the general plausibility 
of truth-conditional semantics (if one believes in it) to the implausibility of 
emotivism and other views that deny truth-value to perfectly grammatical 
declaratives.
Objection 2
Davidson talks as if the right-hand sides of his T-sentences will be written in 
English, or in the theorist’s own natural language whatever it may be, so that 
they can be readily seen to be correct or incorrect. Indeed, Davidson touts 
the T-sentences as empirically testable consequences of a proposed truth 
definition for a language. But no actual Davidsonian truth definition could 
deliver such T-sentences (Stich 1976; Blackburn 1984). For such a theory to 
yield T-sentences—or anything else—as theorems, it must be formulated in 
a fairly formal and regimented language, something logic-like. (Look again 
at the truth definition for Oafish.) Moreover, once the theorist gets around 
to natural-language constructions that do not occur in standard symbolic 
logics, such as adverbs, belief operators, and the like, the right-hand sides of 
T-sentences involving those may contain some radically unfamiliar notation. 
A recent version of Davidson’s own (1967b) theory of action sentences gener-
ates such T-sentences as:
“Jones buttered the toast at midnight” is true iff
(∃e)(BUTTERING(e) & PROTAG(Jones, e) & VICTIM(the toast, e) 
& OCCURRED-AT(e, midnight)).

120  Theories of meaning
The right-hand side here is to be read much as follows: “There occurred 
an event, which was a buttering of the toast, performed by Jones at mid-
night.” (By making the underlying subject the whole event rather than the 
agent Jones, Davidson is able to explain why the target sentence entails such 
simpler sentences as “Jones buttered the toast,” “Jones buttered something,” 
“Something happened to the toast,” and “Something happened at midnight,” 
which entailments are otherwise hard to capture.) But what, then, becomes 
of Davidson’s claim of testability? How are we supposed to know whether 
such arcane T-sentences are correct or incorrect?
Reply
Testability weakens, but not to the vanishing point. For we can still test con-
voluted T-sentences such as the foregoing against our logical intuitions, and 
we can still evaluate Davidson’s claims to have illuminated striking semanti-
cal features of the target sentence.
Objection 3
Ferocious technical problems arise once one starts examining sentences 
with deictic elements in them (anticipated by Davidson 1967a). (A “deictic” 
or “indexical” element is one whose semantic interpretation varies with 
context of utterance, like a tense marker or a demonstrative pronoun.) For 
example, how would one state a truth condition for the sentence “I am sick 
now”? “ ‘I am sick now’ is true if and only if I am sick now” would never do, 
since its truth-value depends on who utters it and when and is not in general 
determined by my (your humble narrator’s) state of health. Deictic sentences 
do not even have truth-values, except on actual or hypothetical occasions of 
their use (a point that would gratify Strawson).
Davidson’s own response is to relativize truth to a speaker and a time. 
The relevant T-sentence would be formulated as, “ ‘I am sick now’ is true as 
potentially spoken by p at t if and only if p is sick at t.” But this is unsatisfac-
tory in each of several ways,5 not least in that speaker and time of utterance 
are not the only contextual factors that affect truth-value. (Recall “This is a 
fine red one.”) We shall return to this issue in chapter 11.6
Objection 4
A Davidsonian truth definition has a hard time distinguishing expressions 
that happen to coextend (that is, to apply to exactly the same range of ref-
erents) but without being mutually synonymous (Reeves 1974; Blackburn 
1984). Consider two single vocabulary items that differ in meaning but that 
happen to have exactly the same extensions. The standard example of this is 
the words “renate” and “cordate,” meaning respectively “creature with kid-
neys” and “creature with a heart.”7 A Davidsonian truth theory will not be 

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  121
able to distinguish the meaning of a sentence containing “renate” from that 
of one containing “cordate,” for each term will have been assigned just the 
same class of objects as its extension.
First reply
In a truth theory of the sort described here, the words used in the right-hand 
sides of the T-sentences are supposed to correspond as closely as possible to 
the expressions composing the target sentence. (Look back at the truth defi-
nition for Oafish.) Thus, one will write the clause for “renate” as “ ‘Renate’ 
denotes renates” rather than as “ ‘Renate’ denotes cordates.” To derive the lat-
ter (albeit true) statement from our truth theory, one would need to add the 
contingent and nonlinguistic premise, “All and only renates are cordates.” 
And, according to Davidson, the meaning of a target sentence is given, not by 
just the T-sentence directed upon that target sentence, but by the T-sentence 
together with its derivation from the axioms of the truth theory. To avoid 
the suggestion that being cordate is part of the meaning of “renate,” we can 
require that the T-sentence’s derivation contain no nonlinguistic premises.
Second reply
“Renate” and “cordate” will be distinguished in sentences containing certain 
sorts of construction, notably in modal sentences and in belief sentences. 
Whatever semantics Davidson gives for sentences like “There could be a 
renate that was not cordate” and “Geoff believes that his pet turtle is a renate” 
would have to accommodate (indeed predict) the noninterchangeability of 
“cordate” for “renate” in those sentences.
Rejoinder to the second reply
Such sentences—in which coextensive terms cannot be substituted without 
possibly changing the truth-value of the sentences themselves—are puzzling 
in their own right. (They are called intensional sentences; this is a generaliza-
tion of the phenomenon that in chapter 2 was called “referential opacity.”) 
One would expect the substitution to make no difference; after all, even if 
we are using a different word, we are continuing to talk about exactly the 
same thing or class of things. We have already encountered a special case of 
this problem in chapters 2 and 3, the Problem of Substitutivity for definite 
descriptions and for proper names. Any theory of meaning must offer some 
explanation of substitutivity failures. So the phrase “Whatever semantics 
Davidson gives for sentences like . . . ” is not innocent. It will be hard work 
for Davidson to solve that problem given his format for a theory of mean-
ing. (Davidson does address the problem of intensionality here and there, 
principally in Davidson (1968). His solution is, roughly, to treat intensional 
sentences as making tacit reference to the very words that occur in them. We 
shall look at a quite different approach in the next chapter.)

122  Theories of meaning
Objection 5
It is all very simple to write a truth rule for a sentence-compounding word 
like “and”. After all, “and” is what logicians call a truth-functional connective: 
the truth-value of “A and B” is strictly determined by the truth-values of its 
component sentences A and B. But many sentence-compounding expressions 
do not simply pass truth on in that way. Take the word “because”: The truth 
of “A because B” is not determined by the truth-values of the component 
sentences A and B, for, even if both A and B are true, “A because B” may be 
false, depending on other features of the world. How, then, might one write a 
truth rule for “because,” parallel to Oafish’s rule for “and”? Or take adverbs. 
How might one write a truth rule for “slowly,” or for “very”?
Still worse, consider “believes that” again, as in “Joe believes that Mary 
believes that Irma believes that the house is burning down.” How would we 
write a truth rule for it? “n believes that A” is true if and only if . . . ” what?
One obvious strategy is to invoke a domain of helpful entities, such as 
propositions(!), and write truth rules for non-truth-functional expressions 
in terms of quantification over that domain. (As we have seen, to deal with 
some adverbs, Davidson introduced a domain of “events,” and made adverbs 
into adjectival predicates of events.) The main problem with that strategy 
is that it strains syntax, since the transformations have to work harder to 
transform the new, zany logical forms into familiar English; as Blackburn 
points out (1984: 289), a Davidsonian treatment of a non-truth-functional 
(and intensional) construction such as “because” or “believes that” requires 
at least a “heavy commitment to concealed logical forms.” (But, as before, 
belief sentences in particular are already an ugly problem for any theory of 
meaning.)
Objection 6
Truth-conditional semantics must fully disclose the general notion of truth it 
is presupposing. But the only plausible general analysis of truth is in terms of 
stating or asserting things: “One who makes a statement or assertion makes 
a true statement if and only if things are as, in making that statement, he 
states them to be” (Strawson 1970: 15). Which is to say that the analysis must 
be made in terms of communication, which must be cashed à la Grice. Thus, 
although the letter of truth-conditional semantics may be unobjectionable, 
its spirit is broken, for it collapses into Griceanism rather than standing as a 
superior alternative.
First reply
Whether or not we have an accepted general philosophical analysis of truth, 
we have the concept expressed by the ordinary English word “true,” and 
we also have the formal structure introduced by Tarski, which generates 
T-sentences. If the notion of meaning can be reduced to that of truth, that is 

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  123
a theoretical economy even if we provide no further philosophical explication 
of truth; it is not a case of “the concepts of meaning and truth each pointing 
blankly and unhelpfully at the other” (Strawson 1970: 16).
Rejoinder
All right, but what if the correct analysis of “true” is (indeed) in terms of 
communicating?
Second reply
If so, then there would (indeed) be Gricean collapse. But why should we 
accept the stating/asserting theory of truth in the first place? What about 
all the other general theories that philosophers have offered over the past 
two thousand years? Notably, there are the classical Correspondence, 
Coherence and Pragmatic theories. More recently, there is the Prosentential 
Theory devised by Grover, Camp and Belnap (1975). My best guess as to 
why Strawson simply ignores these is that he must be assuming that every 
such theory would somehow have to buy into the Gricean idea at some early 
stage: For example, since beliefs are primarily what cohere or fail to cohere, 
the Coherence Theory of Truth would have to treat sentences only in so far 
as they express beliefs, and so on. But I do not see why we should grant that 
assumption (if it is Strawson’s) just on his say-so. On this interpretation, 
Strawson is in the position of insisting, at bottom, “But surely some version 
of Griceanism is correct.”
On that note, let me pick up the suggestion Grice made about unuttered 
and novel sentences, his appeal to abstract “resultant procedures” (see the 
end of the penultimate section of chapter 7). It now seems that what he had 
in mind there was compositionality achieved by syntax. Suppose Grice could 
deliver a notion of public meaning analogous to sentence meaning but apply-
ing to subsentential expressions such as words; call it “expression meaning.” 
Then he could invoke syntax and abstractly construct sentence meanings 
out of expression meanings (though here again, he would have to work to 
distinguish the abstract “sentence meanings” from propositions).
How to go about explicating expression meaning? Recall that in chapter 
2 we defined a notion of “speaker-reference” for singular terms, intended in 
precisely Gricean contrast to the “semantic reference” of the term, under-
stood in terms of speakers’ intentions to call hearers’ attention to things. 
Perhaps we could define an analogous concept of “speaker-extension” for 
predicates in terms of speakers’ intentions standing somehow behind uses of 
those predicates, and so on. Then we could borrow Grice’s language about 
repertoires and procedures from his discussion of unstructured utterances, 
and use it to fashion corresponding types of expression meaning. The result-
ing two-tiered reduction of sentence meaning to speaker-meaning would still 
face problems, but no longer objections 2–4.

124  Theories of meaning
Also, the present idea suggests an interesting research program, for it 
tosses us back into the theory of reference from a new direction. For example, 
can the semantic denotation of a proper name really be analyzed in terms of 
speaker-reference? On the face of it, that idea competes with the Description 
Theory of names and with the Causal–Historical Theory.
But this composite view, the explication of sentence meaning in terms of 
primitive expression meaning plus a Gricean theory of the individual primi-
tive expression meanings, is to concede that the Truth-Condition Theory is 
correct, and to add only, though very significantly, a new type of theory of 
referring that would compete with those considered in chapters 2–4.
Summary
Davidson offers several arguments in defense of the Truth-Condition 
• 
Theory. The main argument is that compositionality is needed to 
account for our understanding of long, novel sentences, and a sen-
tence’s truth condition is its most obviously compositional feature.
Tarski’s style of defining truth for a system of formal logic is a model 
• 
for the way in which truth conditions can be assigned to sentences of 
natural languages.
But since English sentences’ surface grammar diverges from their 
• 
logical forms, a theory of grammar and syntactic transformation is 
needed.
Such a theory exists and has independent support.
• 
Davidson’s theory faces many objections. Perhaps the most damaging 
• 
is that many perfectly meaningful sentences do not have truth-values. 
Some others are that his Tarskian program cannot handle expressions 
(such as pronouns) whose referents depend on context, predicates 
that are not synonymous but happen to apply to just the same things, 
and sentences whose truth-values are not determined by those of their 
component clauses.
It may be possible to fuse Davidson with Grice by providing a Gricean 
• 
theory of term extensions.
Questions
1	
Evaluate Davidson’s main argument for his Truth-Condition Theory; 
that is, his appeal to compositionality, and Tarskian truth definitions.
2	
Discuss the further argument, given very briefly above, whose premises 
are that (a) a sentence’s meaning should determine that sentence’s truth 
condition, and (b) a truth definition for a language also does everything 
we would expect a theory of meaning to do.
3	
If you happen already to know something about theoretical syntax, 
assess the prospects of its being used as a vehicle for connecting English 
sentences to the right-hand sides of Davidsonian T-sentences.

Truth-Condition Theories: Davidson’s program  125
4	
Adjudicate one or more of the objections that we have raised against the 
Truth-Condition Theory.
5	
If you are familiar with the Liar Paradox, explore the problem it poses 
for the Truth-Condition Theory. (Davidson (1967a) addresses this 
briefly.)
6	
Raise a new, further objection to the Truth-Condition Theory.
7	
Develop the compositional, “two-tiered” Gricean theory suggested at 
the end of this chapter. Or, pursue the “first-stage” Gricean reduction 
of semantic denotation (for names or for predicates).
Further reading
Other than Lycan (1984), the best general introduction to the 
• 
Davidsonian program is Harman (1972). That paper and many other 
good ones in and about truth-theoretic semantics are reprinted in 
Davidson and Harman (1975); see also the anthologies Evans and 
McDowell (1976) and Platts (1980). Platts (1979) is a good critical 
discussion of the Davidsonian program.
Harman (1974b, 1982) broke with Davidson to found “Conceptual 
• 
Role” semantics. For a survey of the ensuing literature, see Lycan 
(1984: ch. 10).
Davidson (1986) is an important criticism of Davidson’s own posi-
• 
tion, based on the phenomenon of malapropism.
An important spinoff from and competitor of truth-theoretic seman-
• 
tics is “Game-Theoretic” semantics, developed by Jaakko Hintikka 
(1976, 1979). I am unsure how far Hintikka’s program competes with 
truth-theoretic semantics rather than being a variant of it. The basic 
papers on GTS are collected in Saarinen (1979).
Radford (1997), Culicover (1997), Sag and Wasow (1999), Carnie 
• 
(2001), and Lasnik and Uriagereka (2005) are excellent introductions 
to contemporary syntactic theory; see also Hornstein (1995). Larson 
and Segal (1995) expound the convergence of semantics with contem-
porary syntax from the viewpoint of theoretical linguistics.

10	 Truth-Condition Theories: possible 
worlds and intensional semantics
Overview
Kripkean possible worlds (as presented in chapter 4) afford an alternative 
notion of a truth condition: We saw that a contingent sentence is true in some 
worlds but not in others. So a sentence’s truth condition can be taken to be 
the set of possible worlds in which the sentence is true. Moreover, possible 
worlds can be used to construct “intensions” or meanings for subsentential 
phrases, and particularly for individual words or meaning atoms, that are 
like Frege’s “senses” in being independent of actual referents. For example, a 
predicate has different extensions in different worlds, and its intension can be 
taken to be the function that associates any given world with the predicate’s 
particular extension in that world. Then a grammar can show how those sub-
sentential intensions combine to make a truth condition, hence a meaning, 
for a complete sentence of which they are components.
The resulting view neatly avoids several of the objections that beset 
Davidson’s theory, most notably 4, the problem of coextending but 
nonsynonymous terms, and 5, the problem of non-truth-functional connec-
tives. It also lends a hand with the Problem of Substitutivity. But it inherits 
the rest of Davidson’s difficulties and incurs one or two more.
Truth conditions reconceived
As we saw in the previous chapter, the Truth-Condition Theory understands 
meaning as representation, as mirroring or correspondence between sen-
tences and actual or possible states of affairs. But we can take the notion of a 
hypothetical state of affairs more seriously than Davidson is willing to, and 
consider “possible states of affairs/circumstances/conditions” as Kripkean 
possible worlds (chapter 4). Recall that a possible world (other than the actual 
world, our own) is an alternative universe, in which things go otherwise than 
the way they go here. And, because worlds differ among themselves in respect 
of their component facts, of course the truth of a given sentence depends on 
which world we are considering.
This affords a new version of the idea of a sentence’s truth condition. The 
sentence is true in some possible circumstances and not in others. Which, in 

Truth-Condition Theories: possible worlds and intensional semantics  127
the vernacular of possible worlds, is to say that the sentence is true in some 
worlds and not in others. When two sentences have the same truth condition, 
they will be true in just the same circumstances, in just the same worlds. 
When they differ in truth condition, that means there will be some worlds 
in which one is true but the other is false, so they will not be true in just the 
same worlds. As a first approximation, then, let us take a sentence’s truth 
condition simply to be the set of worlds in which it is true.
For the truth-condition theorist, of course, that set of worlds will also be 
the sentence’s meaning. It would follow that synonymous sentences are true 
in just the same worlds, whereas for any two nonsynonymous sentences there 
will be at least one world in which one of the sentences is true but the other 
false. This idea generalizes to the meanings of subsentential expressions. But, 
to show how that works, I must backtrack for a paragraph or two.
We saw in chapter 2 that, unlike Russell, Frege (1892/1952b) had rejected 
thesis J3/K3 (“A meaningful subject–predicate sentence is meaningful (only) 
in virtue of its picking out some individual thing and ascribing some property 
to that thing”), by positing abstract entities that he called “senses” and arguing 
that a singular term has one of these over and above its putative referent. And 
Frege defended compositionality: According to him, the subject–predicate 
sentence has a composite sense made up of the individual senses of its parts, 
and is meaningful in virtue of having that composite sense, whether or not 
its subject even has a referent at all. (Thus did Frege attack the Problem of 
Apparent Reference to Nonexistents.)
As sketched so far, Frege’s view sounds like a version of the Proposition 
Theory. And so it is; it is prey to the various objections raised against that 
theory in chapter 5. But Rudolf Carnap (1947/1956), Richard Montague 
(1960, 1970), and Jaakko Hintikka (1961) developed intensional logic, giving 
a possible-worlds interpretation and explication of Fregean senses. Here, 
roughly, is the idea.
A singular term or a predicate is said to have both an extension (in the 
sense introduced in the previous chapter) and a Fregean sense or “intension.” 
The trick is to construe a term’s intension as a function from possible worlds 
to extensions. Thus, the intension of a predicate is a function from worlds to 
sets of things existing in those worlds that are in the predicate’s extensions in 
those worlds. For example, the intension of “fat” looks from world to world 
and in each world picks out the class of fat things there. “Fat” means not just 
the actual fat things, but whatever would be fat in other possible circum-
stances. (To put the idea in more human terms, if you know the meaning of 
“fat,” you know what various hypothetical things would count as fat as well 
as just the list of which things actually are fat.)
“Individual senses,” the intensions of singular terms, are functions from 
worlds to individual denizens of those worlds. That should sound a bit famil-
iar from chapter 4; a rigid designator expresses a constant function in that it 
picks out the same individual in every world. But a flaccid designator changes 
its referent from world to world: as we saw, “the British Prime Minister in 

128  Theories of meaning
(the second half of) 2007” designates Gordon Brown in the actual world, but 
various other people (or other creatures) in other worlds and no one at all in 
still others. The sense or intension of “the British Prime Minister” looks (or 
hops) from world to world and picks out whoever is currently Prime Minister 
there. As with predicates, if you know the meaning of the phrase “the British 
Prime Minister,” you know who would be the Prime Minister under vari-
ous hypothetical conditions, even if you do not know who is actually Prime 
Minister now.
Functions of this sort combine to make senses or intensions for whole 
sentences. Take:
(1)  The present British Prime Minister is fat.
In another possible world, (1)’s subject denotes whoever is Prime Minister 
there, and “fat” has an extension there that probably differs from the actual 
class of fat things. So, compositionally, we know how to tell whether (1) is 
true in that world: (1) will be true in that world if and only if the Prime 
Minister there belongs to that local extension. Therefore, if we know the 
intension of “the present British Prime Minister” and the intension of “fat,” 
we know whether a given world is one that makes (1) true, which is to say 
that we know how to tell in which worlds (1) is true; for we have in effect a 
composite function from worlds to truth-values. Therefore we know what 
set of worlds is (1)’s truth set. (Strictly speaking, the sentence’s intension 
is the function rather than the resulting truth set itself, but I shall ignore 
this technical distinction hereafter.) And that is to say that we know the 
proposition expressed by (1), which is to say that we know (1)’s meaning. 
(Do not be misled: all this talk of our “knowing” things does not mean we 
are slipping into verificationism. I am speaking metaphorically of how one 
computes a complex intension given some primitive, simple intensions and 
subject–predicate grammar.)
If a proposition is in this way construed as a set of possible worlds, then 
we do, after all, obtain nontrivial explanations of the meaning facts. Two 
sentences will be synonymous if and only if they are true in just the same 
worlds. A sentence will be ambiguous if there is a world in which it is both 
true and false but without contradiction. And the possible-worlds construal 
affords an elegant algebra of meaning by way of set theory: For example, 
entailment between sentences is just the subset relation. S1 entails S2 if and 
only if S2 is true in any world in which S1 is; that is, the set of worlds that is 
S2’s meaning is a subset of S1’s meaning.
Thus, the implementation of truth conditions in terms of possible worlds 
saves this sophisticated version of the Proposition Theory from Harman’s 
objection 3 (chapter 5), for it tells us what a “proposition” is, in terms that 
we can work with independently: A proposition is a set of worlds. (One may 
have metaphysical qualms about the idea of a “nonactual possible world,” but 
at least one already knows what a world is supposed to be.) The present view 

Truth-Condition Theories: possible worlds and intensional semantics  129
also avoids our second objection to Ideational Theories, which carried over 
to the Proposition Theory, for it tells us what an abstract “concept” is: a func-
tion from worlds to extensions. (Shortly I shall introduce a complication.)
Finally, there is a direct argument for the possible-worlds version of the 
Truth-Condition Theory, given very briefly in Lewis (1970):
In order to say what a meaning is, we may first ask what a meaning does, 
and then find something that does that.
A meaning for a sentence is something that determines the conditions 
under which the sentence is true or false. It determines the truth-value 
of the sentence in various possible states of affairs, at various times, at 
various places, for various speakers, and so on.
(p. 22)
I believe the idea is this: If you understand a certain sentence S, and you 
are shown a possible world at random—we fly you there and dump you down 
in that world, miraculously making you omniscient as regards its facts—then 
right away you know whether S is true or false. (If you know every single 
fact of that world and you still cannot tell whether S is true there, then you 
cannot understand S.) So one thing that a meaning does is to spit out a truth 
value for any world it is given. Which is to say that a meaning is at least a truth 
condition in the sense of a particular set of worlds. (This leaves it open that a 
meaning may include more than just a truth condition.)
Advantages over Davidson’s view
The possible-worlds view has some important advantages over Davidson’s 
version of the Truth-Condition Theory. Specifically, it avoids objections 4 
and 5 that we made against Davidson.
Objection 4 was the problem of coextensive but nonsynonymous 
terms. On the possible-worlds view, that is no problem at all. “Renate” and 
“cordate” differ in meaning because, although they apply to just the same 
things in the actual world, their extensions diverge in other possible worlds; 
countless worlds contain renates that are not cordates and vice versa. End of 
story (though shortly we shall resurrect Frege’s solution to the Problem of 
Substitutivity).
Objection 5 was the problem of non-truth-functional sentence connec-
tives. Here the possible-worlds view displays a unique strength. For it enables 
us to state truth conditions for certain connectives directly in terms of worlds. 
Take the simple modal operator “It is possible that,” as in “It is possible that 
the present U.S. President is fat.” The latter sentence will be counted as true 
if and only if there is a world in which the present U.S. President is fat. And if 
we wanted to say “Necessarily, if there is a U.S. President, the United States 
exists,” intensional semantics would count that as true if and only if in every 
world, if there is a U.S. President, the United States exists.

130  Theories of meaning
From this we can see that our original formula needs qualification: not 
every simple expression’s sense or intension can be cast as a function from 
worlds to an extension or referent. Some are functions from intensions to 
other intensions; “It is possible that” takes the intension of the sentence 
to which it is applied and turns it into a different intension. Another, sub-
sentential example would be adverbs, such as “slowly.” “Jane swims” is true 
in a world if and only if the referent of “Jane” in that world is among the 
things that swim there, because the extension of “swims” is just the class 
of that world’s denizens that swim. But what about “Jane swims slowly”? 
Grammatically, “slowly” modifies the predicate “swims,” making it into the 
complex predicate “swims slowly.” And the intensional semanticist maintains 
that the semantics follows in just the same way: The intension of “slowly” is a 
function from intensions to intensions; it picks up the intension of “swims” 
and turns it into a modified intension, namely the function that looks at a 
world and picks out the class of things that swim slowly in that world.1
The possible-worlds theory has a deft way with belief sentences also. Let us 
return for a moment to Frege. As a solution to the Problem of Substitutivity, 
Frege proposed that a belief sentence can change its truth-value as a result 
of substitution of coreferring terms because, even though the two terms 
have the same referent, they may have different senses, and so a different 
composite sense may result from the substitution. (And belief, a cognitive 
state, has a “thought” or composite sense as its object, not a referent.) As 
always with unexplicated versions of the Proposition Theory, that sounds 
right but does not really explain anything so long as “sense” is merely taken 
for granted. But the possible-worlds theorist can give the explanation more 
content: Although the two terms corefer in the actual world, they diverge in 
other worlds, so their intensions differ. Therefore the composite intensions 
of otherwise similar sentences in which they appear will differ also. If believ-
ing is a relation between the believer and a proposition—that is, a sentence 
intension—then of course the believer may believe the one intension without 
believing the other.
At this point an adjustment is needed. As I noted above, the present version 
of the possible-worlds theory counts two sentences as being synonymous 
when and only when the two are true in just the same worlds. But what of 
necessary truths that hold in every world? It would follow that every such 
truth is synonymous with every other; for example, “Either pigs have wings 
or they don’t” and “If there are edible mice, then some mice are edible” would 
mean exactly the same, which they obviously do not. Moreover, any sentence 
would be counted as being synonymous with any other sentence necessarily 
equivalent to it: “Snow is white” would be said to mean just the same as 
“Either snow is white or pigs have wings and pigs are mammals and no mam-
mals have wings”; and whoever believed the former would be automatically 
counted as believing the latter. Something has to give.
The source of the problem seems to be that complex intensions can be 
necessarily coextensive even when they are made up out of quite different 

Truth-Condition Theories: possible worlds and intensional semantics  131
concepts. The cure, then, as Carnap (1947/1956) saw, was to require that, for 
synonymy, sentences should not only have the same intension but have that 
intension composed in the same way (or much the same way) out of the same 
atomic intensions. This is what he called intensional isomorphism, and it rules 
out all the foregoing problem cases. For example, “Either pigs have wings 
or they don’t” and “If there are edible mice, then some mice are edible” are 
composed out of entirely different intensions (those of “pig” and “wing” in 
the first case and those of “mouse” and “edible” or “eat” in the second).
Remaining objections
The possible-worlds theory inherits several of the objections raised against 
Davidson’s version: 1 (nondeclaratives and non-fact-stating sentences), 2 
(testability), and 6 (taking truth for granted); an intensional theorist would 
make much the same range of replies as we did on Davidson’s behalf. Objection 
3 (deixis) arises in a different way, since the possible-worlds approach does 
not involve T-sentences, but it does arise, since no provision has as yet been 
made for deixis in the intensional apparatus. Objection 3 will be the main 
business of the next chapter.
The possible-worlds view also inherits the first two objections made 
against the Proposition Theory in chapter 5: weirdness and alienness. As I 
noted in chapter 4, it is one thing to take “possible worlds” as a metaphor 
or heuristic for explaining a way of looking at things, as I did in explaining 
Kripke’s view of proper names. It is another to appeal to them directly in 
serious theorizing, as the intensional semanticists do. In what sense are there 
really alternative worlds that do not really exist? But this is a large subject and 
I cannot go into it here.2
The possible-worlds view is also subject to objection 4 against the 
Proposition Theory (neglect of meaning’s “dynamic feature”). At the time, 
we replied simply that, even if propositions do not help in the explanation 
of human behavior, behavior is not the primary thing that needs explain-
ing; rather, the meaning facts are. But the objection has been pushed further 
against both versions of the Truth-Condition Theory.
Objection 7
There is still a problem of substitutivity. For there seem to be contexts in 
which synonymous (not just coextensive) terms cannot be intersubstituted 
without possible change of truth-value. “Ophthalmologist” and “eye doctor” 
are synonymous (or so we may suppose for convenience). But, if Sheila does 
not know that, “Sheila believes that every eye doctor doctors eyes” may be 
true while “Sheila believes that every ophthalmologist doctors eyes” is false; 
likewise “Irving went to an ophthalmologist because an ophthalmologist is 
an eye doctor” is true while “Irving went to an ophthalmologist because an 
eye doctor is an eye doctor” is false.

132  Theories of meaning
Objection 8
Some Davidsonians (for example, Lycan 1984) and some intension theorists 
think of the kind of semantically charged syntax I have been describing as a 
machine program for computing large meanings from smaller ones, a program 
that is in some sense being run in the brains of speakers and hearers. But that 
idea is problematic. Here is a more specific worry about the “dynamic fea-
ture,” pointed out by Michael Dummett (1975) and by Hilary Putnam (1978). 
Dummett’s and Putnam’s own writings are dense and somewhat obscure, but 
here is a simple way of putting one of their concerns: A sentence meaning is 
what one knows when one knows what a sentence means. But to know what 
a sentence means is just to understand that sentence. And understanding is 
a psychological state, one that inheres in a flesh-and-blood human organism 
and affects that organism’s behavior. Now, if what a sentence means is just 
its truth condition, how can knowledge of a truth condition per se affect 
anyone’s behavior, when (as is easily shown by Twin-Earth examples) truth 
conditions are often “wide” properties of sentences in the sense that they 
“ain’t in the head” and knowledge of truth conditions is a conspicuously 
wide property of people? The truth condition of “Dogs drink water,” here, 
differs from that of “Dogs drink water” on Twin Earth, but the difference is 
irrelevant to behavior and cannot affect it. But understanding (= knowing 
meaning) must and does affect behavior. Therefore understanding is not, 
or not merely, knowledge of truth condition, and so meaning is not, or not 
simply, truth condition.
First reply
Put in this way, the argument assumes that “understanding” must itself be 
a “narrow” or “in the head” concept. That is, to say the least, not obvious. 
(I leave to you the exercise of constructing a Twin-Earth counterexample.) 
Realizing that the argument needs a narrow concept of understanding also 
should make us reconsider the simple equating of “knowing meaning” with 
understanding and vice versa, truistic as that equating may have sounded at 
first.
Second reply
Further, the argument assumes that wide concepts cannot per se figure in the 
etiology of behavior. As is made clear by the “intentional causation” litera-
ture of some years ago,3 “figuring in” can be done in many ways. There is no 
doubt that behavior depends counterfactually on wide states of people: Had 
I wanted water (H2O), I would have gone into the kitchen to get some. And 
I think that is the strongest etiological notion guaranteed by common sense. 
If anyone thinks that understanding affects behavior in a stronger sense of 
“affect” than just that the behavior depends counterfactually on the under-
standing, we would have to hear some defense.

Truth-Condition Theories: possible worlds and intensional semantics  133
The “use” theorist is not quite finished with the truth-condition view. We 
shall begin chapter 12 by considering a further objection.
Summary
A sentence’s truth condition can be taken to be the set of possible 
• 
worlds in which the sentence is true.
More generally, possible worlds can be used to construct “intensions” 
• 
for subsentential expressions, which will combine compositionally to 
determine the containing sentence’s truth condition.
The resulting view avoids both the problem of coextending but 
• 
nonsynonymous terms and the problem of non-truth-functional 
connectives.
The possible-worlds theory also deepens Frege’s solution to the 
• 
Problem of Substitutivity.
But the theory inherits a number of Davidson’s original di
• 
fficulties 
and incurs one or two more.
Questions
1	
Evaluate Lewis’ direct argument for the possible-worlds version of the 
Truth-Condition Theory.
2	
Discuss the possible-worlds theory further, pro, con, or both. (If you 
do not already know some possible-worlds semantics, you will want to 
do at least a bit of outside reading; I recommend Lewis (1970).)
3	
Adjudicate objection 7 or objection 8.
Further reading
The simplest and most natural introduction I know to the Possible-
• 
Worlds version of truth-conditional semantics is Lewis (1970). Then 
work up to Cresswell (1973). (Tough stuff, requiring knowledge of 
formal logic and set theory; but it all came from something much 
tougher, collected posthumously in Montague (1974).)
Two good textbook introductions to Montague Grammar are 
• 
Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet (1990) and Weisler (1991).


Part III
Pragmatics and speech acts


11	 Semantic pragmatics
Overview
Linguistic pragmatics is characterized as studying linguistic expressions’ uses 
in social contexts. But there are two importantly different ways in which an 
expression’s use depends on context. First, owing to the presence of such 
deictic elements as personal pronouns and tense, a sentence’s propositional 
content varies from context to context (recall that “I am sick now” says dif-
ferent things depending on when it is uttered and by whom). Second, even 
once the sentence’s propositional content has been fixed, there are several 
other important aspects of its use that will still vary with context. Semantic 
pragmatics studies the former phenomenon, the determination of proposi-
tional content by context; pragmatic pragmatics studies the latter.
Davidson deals with the problem of deictic elements by complicating the 
standard form of his T-sentences. The possible-worlds theorists deal with it 
by relativizing truth to a set of content-affecting contextual factors such as 
speaker and time. But both approaches need to be liberated from having to 
list a fixed set of contextual features.
Semantic pragmatics has a complicated range of data to deal with. It must 
not only chart the complicated uses of pronouns, tense, and the like, but 
solve the general problem of disambiguation: Given that nearly every English 
sentence has more than one meaning, how does a hearer identify the correct 
one upon hearing the sentence uttered?
Charles Morris (1938) divided linguistic study into syntax, semantics, 
and pragmatics. Impressionistically put, the distinction was supposed to be 
this: Syntax is the study of grammar, the study of which strings of words are 
well-formed sentences of a given language and why. Semantics is the study 
of meaning, construed primarily (though as we know not uncontroversially) 
as a matter of the relations that linguistic expressions bear to the world in 
virtue of which they are meaningful. In contrast, pragmatics studies the 
uses of linguistic expressions in various social practices including, of course, 
everyday conversation and communication, but not only those. On this 
usage, Wittgenstein’s view (chapter 6 above) can be put by saying that either 
“semantics” is entirely misguided or it collapses into pragmatics.

138  Pragmatics and speech acts
Semantic pragmatics vs. pragmatic pragmatics
The single word we hear most often in the study and practice of pragmatics 
is “context,” meaning context of utterance. Pragmatics is specifically about 
the functioning of language in context. This marks a significant contrast, 
because syntax and semantics have generally aspired to be contextless. Syntax 
is about whether a sentence is grammatical or whether a string of words 
constitutes a grammatical sentence, period. Semantics has always focused on 
sentence meaning, the meaning of a sentence type in abstraction from any 
particular use to which the sentence might be put. But there are always pests 
like Wittgenstein, Strawson, and J. L. Austin reminding us that the very idea 
of a “sentence type” is a violent abstraction from linguistic reality. When a 
sentence is uttered, it is invariably uttered in a particular context by a par-
ticular speaker for a particular purpose. And this is something that cannot 
be ignored, for solid reasons that I shall try to make clear in the remaining 
chapters of this book.
I said that the distinction between semantics and pragmatics was supposed 
to be that the former deals with the acontextual meanings of sentence types, 
whereas the latter addresses the social uses of linguistic expressions in con-
text. But there are two reasons why that characterization is too simple. The 
first reason is that there is an important sense in which most sentence types 
simply do not have acontextual meanings. The second is that, as we shall see 
later on, social-use factors interpenetrate in certain special ways with what 
we would otherwise think of as propositional meaning.
Here is the sense in which most sentence types lack acontextual mean-
ings. Recall the phenomenon of deixis, brought up in objection 3 against the 
Truth-Condition Theory, and consider a heavily deictic sentence. Suppose 
you and I come into an empty classroom and find the following words writ-
ten on the blackboard:
(1)  I am ill and will not hold class today.
Unless we can find out who had written those words when and to whom, 
we do not know what exactly has been said (even though we know some-
thing about what has been said); we do not know what proposition has been 
expressed. In terms of the possible-worlds theory, we do not know the sen-
tence’s intension. In fact, if the sentence had been scribbled on the board 
merely as a linguistic example and no referents had even tacitly been assigned 
to its deictic elements, it would not express any proposition at all and would 
not even have an intension.
The common moral of the original objection 3 and of this last argument 
is that a sentence’s complete truth condition depends on contextual factors. 
And, even if one does not accept the Truth-Condition Theory of meaning, 
one can see that a sentence’s meaning, in the sense of its propositional con-
tent, depends on context in just the same way.

Semantic pragmatics  139
Cresswell (1973) distinguished between two kinds of pragmatics: semantic 
pragmatics and pragmatic pragmatics. 1 Semantic pragmatics deals with those 
elements of meaning in the sense of propositional content that simply do 
depend on context. It is the discipline that tells us how propositional content 
is determined by contextual features. But before we say more about it and 
explain the contrasting notion, let us deal with objection 3.
The problem of deixis
Returning to Davidson’s problem: He needs to find a way of formulating 
T-sentences that accommodates deictic or indexical elements without getting 
truth conditions wrong. I mentioned Davidson’s own proposal for doing this. 
Other notable attempts have been made by Weinstein (1974) and especially 
Burge (1974), but here I shall present a simple idea suggested by Harman 
(1972).2
We saw that one drawback of Davidson’s proposal was its limiting the 
potentially relevant contextual factors to speaker and time. There are many 
others. An obvious example is objects indicated by the speaker’s pointing 
gesture, as when the speaker says, “This one is more expensive than that one,” 
successively pointing to two different objects on display. To take a more exotic 
example, hemisphere.3 “It is autumn” is true as I write this in North Carolina, 
USA, but it would not be true were it uttered simultaneously in Sydney or 
in Buenos Aires. (Nor is the relevant hemisphere necessarily determined 
by the speaker’s location; it depends on the audience and on conversational 
purposes as well. If I am conversing with an Australian about Australian 
affairs—even if we are both currently in North Carolina in November—I 
may say, “Because it’s spring, the students will be just starting to think about 
their final exams.”) So we need an approach to deictic target sentences that 
does not presuppose a fixed number of contextual variables.
Let us get the whole job done in one stroke. We can relativize “true” to 
contexts—since we already know that the truth of a sentence type does vary 
with context—and introduce a function, α, that will look at a deictic ele-
ment occurring in a context and tell us what that element contributes in that 
context to propositional content.4 For example, if (as is generally thought) 
the first-person pronoun “I” always denotes the speaker, α will look at an 
occurrence of “I” in a particular utterance and map that expression onto the 
person who did the uttering. For short, α(“I”,C)—read as “what α assigns 
to ‘I’ in the context C”—is the speaker in C. Likewise, if “now” denotes 
roughly the time at which an utterance is itself uttered, then α(“now”,C) is 
that time. And α(“tomorrow”,C) would be the day immediately following 
the uttering in C.
Then we can write the right-hand sides of Davidson’s T-sentences in terms 
of what α assigns in the context C to each deictic element in the target sen-
tence. Thus:

140  Pragmatics and speech acts
“I am sick now” is true in C if and only if α(“I”,C) is sick at 
α(“now”,C).
“I am ill and will not hold class today” is true in C if and only if 
α(“I”,C) is ill during α(present tense,C)5 and α(“I”,C) does not hold 
class during α(future tense,C) on α(“today”,C)
“She has never been to a karaoke bar, but you and she will be visiting 
one tomorrow morning” is true in C if and only if α(“She”,C) does 
not go to a karaoke bar during α(perfect tense,C) but α(“you”,C) and 
α(“she,C) visit a karaoke bar during the morning of α(“tomorrow”,C).
Problem solved. Davidson’s technical problem of formulating T-sentences, 
that is; further philosophical questions can and will be raised about α.
The intensional logicians dealt with deixis by relativizing truth to an 
“index,” which was a fixed set of contextual variables. Montague (1968/1974) 
and Scott (1970) took an index to be a set of eight standard elements consist-
ing of a possible world w, a time t, a place l, a speaker p, an audience a, a 
sequence of indicated or demonstrated objects i, a “discourse-segment” d, 
and a “sequence of assignments to free variables” s (never mind what those 
last two mean). In this system, a truth condition assignment would look like 
this:
“I am sick now” is true at <w,t,l,p,a,i,d,s> if and only if in w, p is sick 
at t.
But this shares the drawback of Davidson’s method, though not as severely, 
in that it arbitrarily restricts the number of contextual features that can be 
cited.6 We have no way of foreseeing what further such features might become 
relevant to the truth of an utterance.
For example, we have already introduced one unexpected variable, 
hemisphere (as between southern and northern). There are plenty of others, 
seemingly without limit. The truth of “It is 5:00 p.m.” depends on time zone, 
an entirely conventional construct. (As Wittgenstein once noted, time zones 
are bound to our planet; “It is 5:00 p.m. on the sun” has no truth-value.) 
And some locutions presuppose a kind of vantage point, often distinct from 
the place of actual utterance, that can shift even within a single sentence 
(Fillmore 1975; Taylor 1988). Take
(2a)  Zonker went to Uncle Duke’s party.
(2b)  Zonker came to Uncle Duke’s party.
(2c)  I’m going out to clean the pasture spring; . . .—You come too.
(Robert Frost, The Pasture)

Semantic pragmatics  141
(2a) and (2b) can have the same truth condition, but (2b) can be said properly 
only by a speaker whose assumed vantage point is the party location itself. 
(Note too that what counts is the vantage point at the time of the party under 
discussion, not at the time of utterance; this is yet another context variable, 
usually called the reference time.) In (2c), the vantage point shifts fluidly from 
the place of utterance to the pasture spring, or at least to somewhere along 
the journey at which the speaker is pictured as ahead of the hearer.
Arriving at Princeton to give a talk, I am met by a former colleague 
whom I last saw teaching at Wellesley. I ask, “Are you here now?,” asking not 
whether she is physically located in Princeton (duhh) but whether she is now 
employed in the Princeton philosophy department (Nunberg 1993: 28); thus 
truth-value can vary with employing institution. Or take
(3)  Tomorrow is always the biggest party night of the year
uttered on the Friday before classes begin (Nunberg 1993: 29; Nunberg 
credits Dick Oehrle with the example). “Tomorrow” in (3) cannot refer, as 
it usually would, to the day or night following the date of utterance; it refers 
to a type of date on the students’ academic calendar, namely to the annual 
Saturday before classes begin.
I could go on and on. The moral is that we cannot ever be sure we have 
anticipated all the context variables that can affect truth-value. So I would 
advise the intension theorists to avail themselves, instead, of Harman’s 
mighty assignment function α.
The work of semantic pragmatics
The trick is to find out how α is computed; that is, what rules we use in 
particular contexts to fill in the missing chunks of propositional content 
corresponding to deictic elements. Presumably each such element in the lan-
guage is governed by an appropriate rule.
For example, we might look at the pronoun “I” and suggest that, in a given 
context, “I” always denotes the speaker. Turning to “now,” it seems reason-
able to say that “now” always refers in context to the time of the utterance. In 
fact, these first attempts are too simple. “I” can be used as a device of deferred 
reference to a position or role, as when the condemned prisoner says “I am 
traditionally allowed to order whatever I like for my last meal” (Nunberg 
1993: 20). Sometimes “I” is used in formulating a generalization, as in “If I’m 
a music department, I’m a snake pit.” The temporal reference of “now” can 
be deferred also, as when we are looking at a time-line representation of the 
evolution of life and, pointing, I say, “Now the dinosaurs appear,” or when 
you leave a message on your answering machine that says “I am not home 
now.” “Now” is sometimes spatial rather than in any way temporal—“Now 
Hillsborough Road crosses Airport Road and becomes Umstead Drive”—and 
sometimes not even spatiotemporal—“Now comes the first prime number 

142  Pragmatics and speech acts
whose square is greater than 1,000.” But one job of semantic pragmatics is to 
refine such rules until they are adequate to the data.
The intensional logician David Kaplan (1978) thinks of such rules as 
functions. As an intension is a function from worlds to extensions, a semantic–
pragmatic rule is a function from contexts to intensions. At the level of the 
sentence, the intension is a function from worlds to truth-values. Kaplan calls 
that the sentence’s “content” and, as before, it corresponds to the traditional 
notion of a proposition. The composite semantic–pragmatic rule is a function 
from contexts to contents; Kaplan calls that “character.” Content is what is 
left undetermined by the deictic sentences in our examples; character is what 
does determine content given all the relevant contextual features of a context 
of utterance. Thus, when we come upon the blackboard sentence, character 
tells us to look for the speaker (to find α(“I”,C)), and the hearer and the 
date of utterance; once we know those, we will know what has to obtain in a 
possible world in order for the sentence to be true in that world.
I said that, when we encounter the blackboard sentence unprepared, we 
do not know (in full) what it says. And I was right. But there is another 
perfectly good sense in which we understand the sentence itself, and virtually 
any English speaker understands “I am sick now” entirely out of context. 
Kaplan argues that the “m”-word should be reserved for character rather 
than for content, on the entirely reasonable ground that ordinary English 
speakers surely know the meanings of everyday deictic sentences even when 
they do not know the contextual parameters that would fix those sentences’ 
contents. Yet content in his sense is also still a perfectly good thing to mean 
by “meaning.” It is hardly a matter for heated dispute.
Computing α and/or characterizing character is not the only task of 
semantic pragmatics. Another and horribly vexed one is disambiguation. 
Many sentences, such as “Visiting philosophers can be boring,” “Ted is 
lying about meditating,” and (Paul Ziff’s example) “The mouse tore up the 
street,” are obviously ambiguous. And in fact, almost every sentence we ever 
encounter in life is technically ambiguous, in the sense that it has one or more 
possible if farfetched meanings in addition to the one that would normally 
be intended by an utterer. Yet we rarely pause to think, or even notice that 
we are choosing from among a range of possible meanings (not merely filling 
gaps in an otherwise unique propositional content). How we do this is a deep 
question, much deeper than that of how we compute α. Certainly too deep 
for this book, though some hints will be furnished in chapter 13.
That is semantic pragmatics. In contrast, pragmatic pragmatics takes 
propositional content for granted, and asks wider questions about the use 
of sentences in contexts. One and the same sentence with an already fixed 
propositional content can still be used to do interestingly different things in 
different contexts. As we shall see in our remaining chapters, there is con-
siderably more to producing and understanding language than just grasping 
propositional meaning, hard as the latter is to explain.

Semantic pragmatics  143
Summary
Linguistic pragmatics is characterized as studying linguistic expres-
• 
sions’ uses in social contexts.
Semantic pragmatics studies, in particular, the determination of 
• 
propositional content by context.
Davidson deals with the problem of deictic elements by complicating 
• 
the standard form of his T-sentences.
The possible-worlds theorists deal with it by relativizing truth to a set 
• 
of content-affecting contextual factors such as speaker and time.
But both approaches can be freed from having to list a fixed set of con-
• 
textual features, if we avail ourselves of the assignment function α.
In addition to tracking the complicated uses of particular deictic 
• 
expressions, semantic pragmatics is charged with solving the terrible 
problem of disambiguation.
Questions
1	
Is there a better way for Davidson or for the possible-worlds theorist 
to solve the problem of deixis than by importing Harman’s assignment 
function α? In particular, does α create new difficulties of its own?
2	
Take an expression such as “I” or “now” (or “tomorrow” or “recently” 
or “west” . . . ) and try to state the exact rule according to which it 
affects the propositional content of a sentence in which it occurs.
3	
Make at least a feeble start on the problem of disambiguation. (Do not 
expect impressive results.)
Further reading
For recent work on the semantics–pragmatics distinction, see Szabó 
• 
(2005).
For a somewhat less technical discussion of indexicals than Kaplan 
• 
(1978), see Kaplan (1989). Recanati (1993) takes up the DR approach 
to indexicals.
Yourgrau (1990) is a good collection on demonstratives.
• 
Taylor (1988) and Nunberg (1993) contain excellent examples of 
• 
unusual indexical constructions.

12	 Speech acts and illocutionary force
Overview
J. L. Austin called our attention to what he called a “performative” utterance 
of a declarative sentence, whereby one performs a conventional social act but 
does not state or describe anything—for example, “I apologize” or (in a game 
of bridge) “I double.” The kinds of acts that can be performed in this way are 
called speech acts. Each type of speech act is governed by rules of two sorts: 
constitutive rules, which must be obeyed if the act is to have been accom-
plished at all, and regulative rules, violation of which merely renders the act 
defective or, in Austin’s word, infelicitous. There are many and surprisingly 
various ways in which a given speech act can be infelicitous.
But Austin came to see that there is no principled distinction between 
performative utterances and those of ordinary declaratives. Rather, every 
utterance has a performative aspect or illocutionary force, which determines 
the type of speech act performed, and virtually every utterance has a descrip-
tive or propositional content as well. Further, many utterances have features 
that incorporate their distinctive effects on hearers’ mental states; these 
features are called perlocutionary.
Jonathan Cohen has raised a nasty problem about the truth conditions of 
sentences that contain explicit performative prefaces that specify the type of 
speech act to be performed, for example, “I admit that I had several private 
conversations with the defendant.” No satisfactory solution to that problem 
has been found.
William Alston and Stephen Barker have offered a distinctive type of “use” 
theory of meaning, based on the illocutionary notion of a speech act.
Performatives
Consider the following sentences.
(1)  I promise to pay you for the diapers.
(2)  I pronounce you husband and wife.
(3)  I christen this ship the Ludwig Wittgenstein.

Speech acts and illocutionary force  145
(4)  I apologize.
(5)  I double. [A bid in bridge.]
(6)  Raise you five. [A bet in poker.]
(7)  Nay. [A vote on a formal motion.]
Except possibly for the last two, these are declarative sentences, so (in 
particular) the verificationist must address them; what are their respective 
verification conditions? Perhaps that question is too hard, or unfair in view 
of Quine’s Duhemian objection. But what are their truth conditions?
We could direct T-sentences upon them. For example,
“I promise to pay you for the diapers” is true if and only if I promise to 
pay you for the diapers.
Really? (No, not really.)
“I double” is true if and only if I double.
Possibly; perhaps “I double,” as said by me on the appropriate occasion, is 
true if and only if I do double on that occasion. But it seems that we are leav-
ing something out, something that is more important than the utterance’s 
slightly degenerate truth condition. As J. L. Austin (1961, 1962) might have 
put it, when I say “I double,” I am not describing myself as doing some dou-
bling; I am actually doubling, and nothing more. (Doubling is a move in the 
game of bridge. It is part of a real language-game, in the literal sense.) And 
no one could acceptably rejoin, “That’s false, you don’t double.” If someone 
else then says of me, “He doubled,” that is a true report of what I did. But 
when I originally say it, simply as a move in the game, it does not seem like a 
candidate for truth or falsity.
“Nay” is true if and only if nay.
Forget it; that “T-sentence” is not even grammatical.
We have here the basis for a further objection to verificationism and to 
the Truth-Condition Theory, a compound of a Wittgensteinian objection 
and our first objection to the Truth-Condition Theory. A Wittgensteinian 
might look at (4), (5), and (7), especially, assimilating them to the builders’ 
primitive (“Slab!”) language, and remind us again of the many devices such as 
“Hello” and “Oh, dear” that have conventional social uses and are perfectly 
meaningful without having anything to do with verification or with truth 
itself. Even when we turn to the more highly structured (1)–(3) and (6), it 
seems that, although each is declarative in mood, none is in the business of 

146  Pragmatics and speech acts
stating a fact or disclosing a truth. They are in different lines of work; so they 
seem to count as “factually defective.”
In Austin’s original article (1961), he called sentences like (1)–(7) “perfor-
matives,” to distinguish them from “constatives” (constatives being just the 
usual sorts of descriptive, fact-stating, true-or-false sentences that philoso-
phers like). In uttering a performative one is not, or at least not ostensibly, 
describing anything or stating a fact, but performing a social act. When I 
utter (1), I am actually making the promise. When I utter (4) I am simply 
apologizing. When I utter (6) I add to my bet, making a financial commit-
ment. When I utter (3), in the proper context with a bottle of the appropriate 
kind of champagne, I actually perform the christening. Austin called such 
social actions “speech acts,” and so gave birth to the branch of linguistics and 
philosophy of language that ever since has been called “speech-act theory.”
Whatever the outcome for anyone’s theory of meaning, we must study 
the phenomenon of (in Austin’s title phrase) “doing things with words,” on 
pain of leaving out a very important range of linguistic phenomena. (There 
are two further reasons as well. One is that speech-act theory is the most 
effective cure for philosophers’ otherwise overmastering tendency, vividly 
exemplified in this very book so far, to think that declarative sentences are 
the only ones that matter. The other is that many mistakes have been made 
and fallacies committed in areas of philosophy other than philosophy of lan-
guage, through ignorance of speech-act theory; but space does not permit.)
Illocution, locution, and perlocution
Naturally, Austin began seeking a workable, fairly precise test for perfor-
mativity. He tried to characterize the notion syntactically, and ran into 
various kinds of trouble that need not detain us. But in his 1961 article he 
settled fairly comfortably on the so-called “hereby” criterion: An utterance 
is counted as performative if one could fairly interpolate the word “hereby” 
before the main verb. Thus, (1) is performative because the speaker could as 
well have said, “I hereby promise to pay you . . . ” The “hereby” emphasizes 
that the act in question, here the giving of a promise, is constituted by the 
speaker’s very utterance itself. The criterion works well for (2)–(6) also: “I 
hereby pronounce . . . ,” “I hereby christen . . . ,” and so on. “I hereby double” 
would be stilted, but its meaning would be perfectly in order.
Certainly the criterion marks off performatives from constatives. If I utter 
a paradigmatic constative, such as “The cat is on the mat,” I could not have 
inserted “hereby.” “The cat is hereby on the mat” is nonsensical or at least 
false, because the cat is (or is not) on the mat regardless of my saying that it 
is. My saying it does nothing to make it so.
Austin noticed a pesky class of clear nonconstatives, apparent performa-
tives, that are too simple to pass the “hereby” test. Actually (7) might be 
taken as an example, since “Hereby nay” is ungrammatical. But it is plausible 
to say that “Nay” is just a laconic form of “I vote nay,” which does meet the 
“hereby” condition.

Speech acts and illocutionary force  147
However, what about “Hooray!,” “Shame!,” and “Damn!”? None of these 
admits “hereby,” and they are harder than “Nay” was to hear as merely short 
for declaratives containing performative verbs. One might try arguing that 
“Hooray!” really means, “I hereby cheer”; Lewis (1970: 57– 8) proposed to 
understand “Hooray for Porky” as “I cheer Porky.” Perhaps “Shame!” means 
“I hereby castigate you” and “Damn!” means “I hereby curse.” But these 
hypotheses are not obviously correct.
Austin grew far more deeply dissatisfied with the performative/constative 
distinction when he noticed another type of sentence. Consider:
(8)	 I state that I have never traveled to a Communist country.
(8) passes the “hereby” test, and so should be counted as performative. When 
I say it, I thereby do perform a certain speech act: an act of stating. But it is 
also indelibly fact-stating, descriptive. Indeed—whether or not the speaker 
has in fact ever traveled to a Communist country—that is its whole point; 
the operative verb is “state.” The speaker’s statement is true or false. If (8) is 
uttered under oath and the speaker has traveled to a Communist country, the 
speaker can be indicted for perjury. So (8) seems to be either both performa-
tive and constative, or neither.
And there are more:
(9)	 I judge that we are overextended in the area of sealskin futures.
(10)	I report that the Committee has voted unanimously to expel 
Grannie.
(11)	 I advise you that it would be very stupid to buy more Amalgamated 
Amalgam stock.
(12)	I warn you that that Rottweiler has been starved for three days and 
is peevish.
Even (1) has a paraphrase with similarly constative features: “I promise that I 
will pay you for the diapers,” which at least asserts that I will pay you.
Such examples made Austin realize that a single utterance can have both a 
performative part or aspect and a constative part or aspect. In fact, virtually 
every utterance does, even if it lacks an explicit performative preface like 
those that begin (8)–(12). If instead of (8), I testify merely “I have never 
traveled to a Communist country,” I still perform an act of stating, in addi-
tion to merely expressing the propositional content that I have never traveled 
to a Communist country. Whenever I make an assertion—that is, whenever 
I make an utterance having the force of an assertion—I perform an act of 
asserting.
Declaratives can be uttered with other forces as well. If I were to delete the 
performative prefaces from (9)–(12) and say only “We are overextended . . . ,” 

148  Pragmatics and speech acts
“The Committee has voted . . . ,” and so on, in the same contexts, those utter-
ances would have the forces respectively of a judgment, a report, an advising, 
and a warning. Austin called this type of feature “illocutionary force,” and he 
contrasted it with “locutionary” or propositional content.1
In different contexts, the same declarative may have different illocution-
ary forces. “That Rottweiler has been starved for three days and is peevish” 
could have the force of a threat rather than a warning; or it could be merely 
an observation; or (notice) it could be a soothing reassurance. Even children 
recognize differences in potential force: A complaint such as “If you don’t 
quit it I’m going home” is met by the gibe, “Is that a threat or a promise?”
Turning to nondeclaratives, it is considerably more obvious that they have 
distinctive varieties of forces. In fact, the point of moods such as interroga-
tive and imperative seems to be to indicate ranges of illocutionary force.
(13)  Are you a member of the Salvation Army?
could be paraphrased as “I (hereby) ask you whether you are a member of the 
Salvation Army,” and likewise for “wh”-questions such as “Who let Fluffy 
out of her cage?”
(14)	 Go to the Music Library and find a copy of Lana Walter’s Petite 
Mass
could have the force of a command, an order, a mere request, or just a sug-
gestion, depending on the intentions and purposes of speaker and hearer and 
on whatever power relation or institutional authority may obtain between 
them.2
Thus did Austin’s original distinction between performative and constat-
ive utterances turn into a distinction between force and content as aspects 
of a single utterance. Austin (1962) elaborated a massive catalogue of dif-
ferent illocutionary forces and the factors that distinguish them. Here are 
a few further examples of distinct illocutionary acts: admitting (in either 
of two senses); announcing; assuring; authorizing; censuring; committing; 
complimenting; conceding; confessing; congratulating; defining; denying; 
granting; hypothesizing; inquiring; insisting; pardoning; pleading; pledging; 
predicting; proposing; reprehending; thanking; urging; vowing.
Austin introduced a third feature of utterances, in addition to illocution-
ary force and locutionary content: perlocutionary effect. Some verbs are like 
performative verbs in meaning a kind of social act performed by linguistic 
means, but fail the “hereby” test because they describe the act in terms of 
its actual effects on the hearer rather than in terms of the speaker’s inten-
tion. Take “frighten,” and “convince.” I cannot rightly say “I hereby frighten 
you” or “I hereby convince you that Grannie did it,” because whether you are 
respectively frightened or convinced depends in part on you and is in no way 
guaranteed (much less constituted) by my utterance itself. Acts of frightening 

Speech acts and illocutionary force  149
and convincing are what Austin calls perlocutionary acts; they are things we 
do with words, but not in the same intimate sense as are illocutionary acts. 
Here are a few more examples of perlocutionary acts: alarming; amazing; 
amusing; annoying; boring; embarrassing; encouraging; deceiving; distract-
ing; impressing; informing; inspiring; insulting; irritating; persuading.
The Verification and Truth-Condition Theories of meaning identify a 
sentence’s meaning with the sentence’s propositional or locutionary content 
alone. But is not illocutionary force a kind of meaning? Certainly, if you do 
not understand distinctions of force, then there is an important aspect of 
language that you have not yet mastered. So it seems that the verificationists 
and truth-condition theorists have left something out.
They may reply: “Important, of course; pragmatic properties are important 
in real life. But they’re not part of meaning.” I believe this is just a schoolyard 
scuffle over the “m”-word, which is often used more generally as an umbrella 
term for whatever aspects of linguistic activity are considered important. We 
already know that there are kinds of meaning besides locutionary sentence 
meaning—speaker-meaning, for example. Now we can add that here is now 
an illocutionary kind of meaning, force, which is not the same thing as locu-
tionary meaning either. Each of these kinds of meaning is perfectly real and 
indispensable to language use.3
Infelicities and constitutive rules
Speech acts are conventional acts; just as any “use” theorist would have it, 
they are embedded in and defined by social customs, practices, and institu-
tions. Their performings are governed by rules of many kinds. The rules are 
usually unwritten, merely implicit in normative social behavior.
Searle (1965, 1969) divides speech-act rules into constitutive rules and 
regulative rules. (Merely) regulative rules “regulate antecedently or inde-
pendently existing forms of behavior,” whereas constitutive rules “create or 
define new forms of behavior” (1969, p. 33). Thus, for example, rules of eti-
quette regulate activities or practices that exist quite independently of those 
rules: “Officers must wear ties at dinner”; “Never chew with your mouth 
open.” But the rules of chess or of American football actually define the game 
in question, and the game as such would not exist without them: “Bishops 
move only diagonally”; “A touchdown is scored when a player has possession 
of the ball in the opponents’ end zone while a play is in progress.”
We may introduce a more demanding and more interesting notion: A 
strongly constitutive rule is a rule whose violation aborts the purported speech 
act. Suppose I utter a sentence with the intention of performing a certain 
type of speech act, A. If I violate a strongly constitutive rule, it follows that 
I have simply failed to perform an act of type A. For example, if tomorrow I 
utter (3) and break a bottle over the prow of the USS North Carolina, I do not 
succeed in christening her, for I have not the standing or authority to do so. 
(The U.S. Navy has explicit rules for appointing the dignitaries who christen 

150  Pragmatics and speech acts
battleships. There is also the fact that the North Carolina has been christened 
already, on 12 June 1940.)4 If a clergyman utters (2) to a young couple stand-
ing before him in a Chicago chapel, but is not licensed to perform marriages 
in the state of Illinois, or if one of the couple is not of legally marriageable 
age, the wedding does not succeed (indeed is not a wedding at all, despite the 
organ music, rings, and rice). To raise someone five by uttering (6), I have 
to be playing poker at the time, and five has to be within the agreed-upon 
betting limit.
Violation of a merely regulative rule is less grave. If I utter a sentence 
intending to perform a speech act of type A, and violate no constitutive rules 
but do violate some regulative rule, the result is that I do perform an act 
of type A, but defectively or, in Austin’s official vocabulary, “infelicitously.” 
If the wedding did succeed, but the resulting marriage is only one of crass 
convenience and the couple were lying their heads off when they spoke their 
vows, the wedding was defective; it is a regulative rule of marriage that the 
couple love each other and sincerely intend to remain married. Promising 
is a closely related example: If I utter (1) insincerely, having no intention of 
paying you your money, it is an infelicitous promise. For that matter, if I 
shout (1) to you across a crowded room, and you cannot hear me, that is an 
infelicity of a different sort.
There are borderline cases as between strongly constitutive and regulative 
rules. What if I utter (4), but in a flauntedly unrepentant, jeering, sneering 
tone? Is that a grievously infelicitous apology, or no apology at all?
Austin (1962) was greatly concerned to emphasize the multifariousness 
of infelicity. An utterance can go wrong in any one of any number of quite 
different ways. It can be an ill-advised move in a game, as when one utters (6) 
because one has miscalculated the odds. Or it may be insincere. Or one may 
lack the standing or authority to perform an act of the kind intended. Or it 
may be very rude. Or it may be made too softly and go unheard. Or it may 
be made, tactlessly, in front of the wrong people. Or it may be verbose and 
pompous and blather on and on. Or it may presuppose something false, as 
if I were to apologize for doing something that my hearer had wanted done, 
or that was not in any way a bad thing to have done, or that I did not even 
do at all. This great variety of defects will become philosophically important 
later on.
In particular, now that we have recognized that some speech acts are acts 
of stating, asserting, and the like, we see that falsity is one common besetting 
defect of such acts; a regulative rule regarding acts of that class is that what 
is said should be true.
Austin complains at length that philosophers are obsessed with “the true–
false fetish,” the misguided idea that truth-value is all that matters in speech. 
In particular, we often mistake other kinds of infelicities for falsity; when we 
hear a sentence that is somehow defective, we tend to assume, fallaciously, 
that the sentence is not true. (In chapter 13 we shall scout two instances of 
this fallacy.) There are many ways in which utterances can go wrong—badly 

Speech acts and illocutionary force  151
wrong—without being false. Falsity is just one form of infelicity among 
many others.5
Cohen’s problem
Jonathan Cohen (1964) raised a nasty problem about sentences like (8)–(12). 
It is a problem about truth conditions. Take (8) (“I state that I have never 
traveled to a Communist country”). What is (8)’s truth condition?
Cohen says (p. 121) “It is tempting at first to suppose that in Austin’s 
view the meaning of our utterance is found totally in the clause that follows 
the performative preface.” Substituting “truth condition” for “meaning,” it is 
indeed tempting to read the truth condition out from under the performative 
preface. For what an utterer of (8) states is that s/he has never traveled to a 
Communist country, not that s/he is stating something. One could hardly 
evade a perjury charge by responding “The sentence I uttered was true, not 
false: I did indeed state that I had never traveled to a Communist country; 
the fact that I actually had traveled to a Communist country is irrelevant.” 
Likewise, surely (9)–(12) are not automatically true simply because I did 
respectively so judge, report, advise, and warn. (Though Lewis (1970) took 
exactly that bold position.) The locutionary content, or at least the truth 
condition, is just that I have never traveled to a Communist country, and the 
“I state that” is just the performative preface that makes the force explicit.
A further argument for this “tempting” view is that formal, explicit perfor-
matives such as (8)–(12) and (15) seem to be just verbose, inflated equivalents 
of the simpler statements, warnings, orders, and so on one could have issued 
without the performative prefaces. But Cohen raises a serious objection to 
the tempting view. Consider any of (8)–(12). Suppose Eleanor utters (12) to 
Franklin, and Lucy, overhearing, says “She’s warned him that that Rottweiler 
has been starved . . . ,” or “Eleanor has warned Franklin that that Rottweiler 
has been starved . . . .” In each case, Lucy refers to just the same individuals 
and predicates just the same relation between them, and only the tense has 
changed. Surely, in particular, “warn” in (12) means warn. The words that 
occur in (12)’s performative preface have their standard senses and referents. 
So, the preface is not just a tag or flag meant to signal force. (There are such 
tags and flags; grammatical mood is basically that, a simple range-of-force 
indicator. But “I warn you that” and the other prefaces in (8)–(11) are not 
just force labels; they have internal grammatical structure and their parts 
have their own meanings and referential properties.) So why, then, would 
we get to pretend that those parts of the sentences do not exist, and read the 
locutionary meaning out from under them?
It gets worse. As it turns out, the idea that performative prefaces are 
merely force labels is simply untenable. For such prefaces can have a lot of 
structure. For example, they can contain adverbial modifiers. Long adverbial 
modifiers.

152  Pragmatics and speech acts
(15a)	 I admit freely that I had several private conversations with the 
defendant.
(15b)	 I admit with reluctance that I had several . . . . [Notice that “with 
reluctance” modifies “admit,” not “had several . . . .”]
(15c)	 I admit gladly and with the greatest pleasure that I had . . . .
(15d)	 Because I am concerned to tell the whole truth, I admit that I . . . .
(15e)	 Mindful that there is a just and mighty God in Heaven who 
punishes those who withhold information in courts of law, and 
in mortal fear of the worm that dieth not and the fire that is not 
quenched, I admit . . . .
According to the tempting view, the only locutionary content in (15a–e) is 
that of their common complement clause (“I had several private conversations 
with the defendant”). But that claim grows less plausible as we work our way 
down the list. (15d)’s performative preface contains an entire clause that the 
speaker asserts, though in passing, as fact. (15e)’s contains several somewhat 
controversial assertions; if I were to utter (15e) seriously, you certainly could 
describe me afterwards as having expressed a highly contentful theological 
view. And not just expressed; the theology certainly seems to be part of what 
is said.
It seems the tempting view cannot be sustained. What becomes tempting 
at this point is instead to go back and admit that the sentences’ locutionary 
contents include their performative prefaces. (Call this the “liberal” view.) 
What is so bad about that?
Here is what is so bad, in case we have forgotten. If the liberal view is 
correct, then (8)–(12) are simply and automatically true whenever they are 
uttered and the relevant constitutive rules are not violated. No perjury charge 
could be made to stick, if the witness were careful to testify only in explicit 
performatives such as (8). Notice that semantically, (8)–(12) would not even 
entail their complement clauses (because one can state, report . . . things that 
are not so). My uttering of (10) would not commit me semantically to the 
claim that the Committee has voted unanimously to expel Grannie.
Now, Cresswell (1973) and Bach and Harnish (1979) have joined the lib-
eral view in questioning Austin’s vehement denial that the agents of speech 
acts are describing themselves as performing those acts; but these philoso-
phers have suggested that, in addition to the main acts, the utterers are also 
describing themselves as performing them. Thus, if I utter
I order you to attack and capture the University of Chicago
(16)

Speech acts and illocutionary force  153
my main speech act is that of giving an order, and as such does not involve 
truth-value, but in addition I do describe myself as giving the order, and so 
my sentence is true in that degenerate sense.
On this hypothesis, such sentences as (8)–(12), which differ from (16) 
in that their associated main speech acts are truth-liable, would have two 
locutionary contents and truth-values each: a primary content attaching to 
what was stated, ordered, or whatever (in (8), that I have never traveled to a 
Communist country), and a self-descriptive truth-value that would nearly 
always be automatically “true” (that I do so state). This two-truth-value 
hypothesis is attractive, for in light of examples like (15a–e), neither the 
tempting truth-value nor the liberal truth-value seems expendable. And we 
can make the two-truth-value hypothesis more palatable by arguing that the 
two truth-values attach to slightly different sorts of thing. Notice that in 
uttering (8) I make a statement. What statement? The statement that I have 
never traveled to a Communist country. So, although I made that statement 
by uttering a sentence that, taken liberally, does not entail its propositional 
content, I nonetheless made it. And if the fact is that I have traveled to a 
Communist country, my statement is false even though the sentence I 
uttered, taken liberally, is a true sentence. I could be convicted of perjury, not 
for having uttered a false sentence, but for having made a false statement.
(15d) and (15e) would require some elaboration. One feels that the utterer 
of (15e), in particular, has made two or three assertions in addition to that 
which is expressed by the complement clause. Yet the earlier examples in the 
list are borderline cases; would an utterer of (15a) assert that her/his admis-
sion was given freely? A full theory of speech acts would have to sort out 
such subtleties at length.
Illocutionary theories of meaning
William Alston (1963) tried seriously to work Austin’s speech-act pragmatics 
into a theory of locutionary meaning itself, identifying a sentence’s meaning 
with the sentence’s “illocutionary act-potential,” the range of illocutionary 
acts the sentence could be used to perform. If you are able to use a sentence in 
every illocutionary way that it affords, you know its meaning, and that is all 
there is to sentence meaning. (This would certainly qualify as a “use” theory 
of meaning, though superficially far from what Wittgenstein had in mind.)
But in fact Alston’s view did nothing to illuminate locutionary meaning, 
since potential-speech-act descriptions such as “assert that gorillas are veg-
etarians” already presuppose a notion of propositional content and exploit 
the meanings of their complement clauses. Also, as Maureen Coyle once 
observed to me, sentences that share their locutionary contents can differ 
violently in their illocutionary act-potentials: “Mother will eat the oyster”; 
“Will mother eat the oyster?”; “Mother, eat the oyster!”

154  Pragmatics and speech acts
Barker (2004) in effect heads off these objections. He avoids the first in 
Gricean fashion, by understanding illocutionary acts in terms of speakers’ 
intentions and beliefs; for example (oversimplifying viciously of course), to 
assert that P is to utter a sentence with the intention of getting one’s hearer 
to believe that P. The acts’ descriptions inherit the relevant propositional 
contents, not from the meanings of their complement clauses, but from the 
contents of the mental attitudes which partly constitute those acts. Barker 
avoids the second objection partly in the same way (tracing the common-
alities to sameness of some underlying propositional attitudes), and partly 
by arguing on sophisticated syntactic grounds that “locutionary content” 
cannot be separated from illocutionary force in the first place.
Notice that the latter point is also a further objection to the standard 
truth-conditional theory of meaning, because that theory assumes the locu-
tionary content is determined independently of force.
Summary
Austin called our attention to “performative” utterances and speech 
• 
acts more generally.
Each type of speech act is governed by rules of two sorts: constitutive 
• 
and regulative.
Violation of a regulative rule renders a speech act defective or infelici-
• 
tous. There are many and varied ways in which a given speech act can 
be infelicitous.
There is no principled distinction between performative utterances 
• 
and those of ordinary declaratives; rather, every utterance has an 
illocutionary force, and virtually every utterance has a propositional 
content as well.
In addition, many utterances have perlocutionary features.
• 
Cohen’s problem about the truth conditions of sentences that contain 
• 
explicit performative prefaces has not been solved.
The illocutionary notion of a speech act affords a new type of “use” 
• 
theory of meaning.
Questions
1	
Are all speech acts like “I double” in that they are constituted entirely 
by convention? (See Strawson (1964).)
2	
Can every speech act be assigned a locutionary content? Discuss our 
apparent counterexamples and argue pro or con.
3	
Choose a particular type of speech act and try to enumerate its consti-
tutive rules and its characteristic regulative conditions. (Searle (1969) 
does this for the act of promising.)

Speech acts and illocutionary force  155
4	
Spot some difficulties for Austin’s distinction between locutionary, 
illocutionary, and perlocutionary features. Find some troublesome 
borderline cases.
5	
Lewis (1970) defends the anti-Austinian idea that, when one tokens 
(even) a “pure” performative, one at the same time states that one is 
performing the act in question—or at least the sentence one utters is 
true if and only if one is performing that act. Examine this view.
6	
Go more deeply into Cohen’s problem.
7	
If you have read it, pursue Alston’s or Barker’s theory of meaning.
Further reading
The acknowledged classic on speech-act theory following Austin is 
• 
Searle (1969). But considerably better is Searle (1979a), a collection of 
essays. See also Travis (1975) and Holdcroft (1978).
Two excellent works (in addition to Sch
• 
iffer (1972)) that connect 
speech-act theory to other issues in pragmatics and to current 
research in linguistics and psychology are Bach and Harnish (1979) 
and Gazdar (1979). See also Cole and Morgan (1975), Levinson (1983), 
Green (1989), and Sadock (2004).
Ginet (1979) is an excellent paper, and illuminates Cohen’s problem. 
• 
Ways out of the problem (none of them entirely satisfactory) have 
been offered by Cresswell (1973), Bach and Harnish (1979), and Lycan 
(1984: ch. 6).
Alston (2000) further develops his illocutionary theory of meaning.
• 

13	 Implicative relations
Overview
Sentences entail other sentences, and in that strong sense imply them. But 
there are several ways in which sentences or utterances also linguistically 
imply things they do not strictly entail. First, very often a speaker uses a 
sentence to convey something other than what that sentence literally means, 
as for example in sarcasm or in broad hinting. According to Grice’s theory 
of “conversational implicature,” such implications are generated by a set of 
principles that govern cooperative conversation. Hearers pick up the implica-
tions either by assuming (contrary to appearances) that speakers are being 
cooperative and drawing inferences from that assumption, or by noting that 
speakers are being deliberately uncooperative and drawing inferences from 
that assumption. However, it is not clear how we are supposed to do this as 
rapidly and as accurately as we do.
Second, Strawson’s criticism of Russell’s Theory of Descriptions suggests 
a notion of “presupposition” distinct from entailment in that, when a sen-
tence’s presupposition fails, the sentence is not false but lacks truth-value 
entirely. But it is hard to find clear examples of this relation.
Third, some implications are carried by the choice of a special word, such 
as “but” as opposed to “and,” in that “but” means just the same as “and” 
except for carrying a contrastive connotation. Grice calls this phenomenon 
“conventional implicature.” Relevance theorists have challenged Grice’s 
model and offered competing explanations of some implicature phenomena.
Fourth, there are some sentences that would standardly be used to per-
form speech acts other than the acts indicated by their grammatical moods 
and semantic contents. To explain this anomaly of “indirect force,” Searle 
tries an extension of Grice’s theory of conversational implicature. But that 
strategy falls short of accounting for all the data, and there is no very satisfac-
tory alternative.
Davidson talks of a semantics’ capturing the “felt implications” of target 
sentences, by which he means the sentences’ entailment relations. But Grice 
(1975) has taught us that implication comes in different kinds. There are a 
number of phenomena that fall naturally under the label of “implication” but 
are not, or not obviously, cases of entailment. In this chapter I shall survey 
four of them.

Implicative relations  157
Conveyed meanings and invited inferences
First, there are what we might call “conveyed meanings” of utterances. It 
is natural (though not obligatory) to describe this phenomenon in terms 
of speaker-meaning: In many cases—this is quite prevalent in ordinary 
conversation—a speaker utters a sentence that means that P but it is obvious 
to all that the speaker’s main communicative intent is to convey something 
different, that Q. For example, I say to an obstreperous visitor, “There’s the 
door,” meaning that the visitor is to leave now. But the sentence “There’s 
the door” does not mean “You are to leave now,” nor could I be described as 
having come out and said that the visitor is to leave. I say one thing, I mean 
another; and this is perfectly clear to both parties without either of them 
having to think about it for a moment.
In chapter 7, of course, we have discussed mismatches between speaker-
meaning and sentence meaning. But there we tended to focus on pathological 
cases in which, for example, a speaker has a bizarre belief about the meaning 
of the word or about someone else’s understanding of the word (or a reason-
able belief about somebody else’s bizarre understanding of the word). But in 
the case of what I am calling conveyed meaning, there is no pathology; it is a 
perfectly normal conversational phenomenon. Suppose you ask me whether 
Smedley is a good philosopher, and I say:
(1a)	 Smedley summarizes texts pretty accurately and has very nice 
handwriting,
or, less subtly:
(1b)  Smedley is very good at ping pong.
Clearly, what I am conveying to you is not what my sentence literally means. 
What my sentence means may or may not be true, but that is immaterial. 
What I convey is something different, that Smedley is very bad or at least 
not very good at philosophy. My hearer should grasp that immediately; and 
indeed, competent hearers do grasp such conveyed meanings without ever 
realizing that that is what they are doing.
Here, then, we have come upon another linguistic phenomenon that (like 
illocutionary force) is part of what anyone would have to understand in order 
to be counted as a fully competent speaker of the language. If you were a 
foreigner well-versed in English or at least had learned the lexical meanings 
of the words and enough grammar to understand the literal meanings of sen-
tences, but you took utterances like the foregoing examples literally, there 
would still be something important that you were missing.
Another kind of “implication” that has exercised linguists is what Geis 
and Zwicky (1971) originally called “invited inference.” One example is the 
perfection of conditionals into biconditionals: Suppose I say,

158  Pragmatics and speech acts
(2)  If you mow my lawn, I’ll give you ten dollars.
Taken literally, (2) is only a one-way conditional; without logical impropriety 
I could have added, “Come to think of it, if you don’t mow my lawn I’ll give 
you ten dollars anyway.” But upon hearing (2) alone, you would immediately 
fill in that if you do not mow my lawn then I will not give you the ten dollars. 
You hear the mere “if” as an “if and only if.”
Another example would be the elevation of what are only conjunctions 
into causal claims. Thus:
(3)  Martha watched the Education School burning and smiled with 
pleasure.
Anyone would hear (3) as implying that Martha was caused pleasure by see-
ing the Education School burning; some people would hear (3) as actually 
saying that. But (3) does not say that. (3) says only that one thing happened 
and another did (compare “Martha watched the Education School burning 
and scratched her nose”). Likewise, “and” is often heard as carrying a tem-
poral implication. There is a difference that most people would hear in the 
meanings of
(4a)  John and Marsha fell in love and they got married
and
(4b)  John and Marsha got married and they fell in love.
Even though (4a) does not entail that John and Marsha fell in love and got 
married in that order, the temporal inference is invited.
Conversational implicature
Grice (1975) addressed himself to phenomena of the foregoing kinds. Seeing 
speaker-meaning as communication of the contents of one’s mental states, he 
began thinking about mechanisms of conversation and the social norms that 
govern cooperative conversation. He went on to develop the theory of what 
he called conversational implicature.
According to Grice, the conversational norm-in-chief is the Cooperative 
Principle:
(CP)	 Make your conversational contribution such as is required, at the 
stage at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of 
the talk-exchange in which you are engaged.

Implicative relations  159
(CP) may sound vacuous, but it summarizes a set of corollaries that are any-
thing but. Grice calls the corollaries “conversational maxims.” Here are a few 
(the numbering is mine).
(M1)	 Make your contribution to a conversation as informative as is 
required (for the current purposes of the exchange). [Call this  
the “Maxim of Strength.”]
(M2)	 Do not make your contribution more informative than is 
required.
(M3)	 Do not say what you believe to be false. [The Maxim of 
Truthfulness.]
(M4)	 Do not say that for which you lack adequate evidence. [The 
Maxim of Evidence.]
(M5)	 Be relevant. [The Maxim of Relevance.]
(M6)	 Avoid ambiguity.
(M7)	 Be brief (avoid unnecessary prolixity).
The maxims’ function is to expedite the giving and receiving of information, 
in fairly obvious ways.
The maxims afford explanations of how a speaker can say one thing and 
be correctly perceived as meaning another. Grice offers a template for such 
explanations, in the form of a standard pattern of reasoning meant to be 
engaged in by the hearer:
He [the speaker] has said that p; there is no reason to suppose that he is 
not observing the maxims, or at least . . . [CP]; he could not be doing 
this unless he thought that q; he knows (and knows that I know that 
he knows) that I can see that the supposition that he thinks that q is 
required; he has done nothing to stop me thinking that q; therefore he 
intends me to think, or is at least willing to allow me to think, that q; and 
so he has implicated that q.
(p. 50)
(“Implicate” is Grice’s technical term for this indirect means of 
communication.)
When I utter “There’s the door,” I intend my visitor to reason in Grice’s 
way. Roughly: “The door? The door has nothing to do with anything I cur-
rently have in mind. So, by the Maxim of Relevance (M5), the door must be 
relevant to something he has in mind. And he knows (and knows . . . ) that 

160  Pragmatics and speech acts
I must have worked that out. So he has deliberately shown me that he wants 
me to know where the door is. Why might that be? Egad, he must want me 
to go out the door.” Of course, all this reasoning takes place subconsciously 
and at very high speed. (Grice himself did not offer his system as a literal 
psychological model, but we need one and at this point we have no other.)
Contextual information may help with the reasoning too. In this case, 
the visitor may realize that he has been being fairly offensive, that I have 
not offered him a drink, that I am not smiling, and that it is 6:45 p.m. In any 
conversation, background information is mutually assumed, and vast funds 
of assumptions are assumed by both parties to be shared by both parties; 
Stalnaker (1978) calls such material “common ground.”
When I utter (1a) or (1b), I imply by way of the Maxim of Strength and the 
Maxim of Evidence that I am not in a position to say anything stronger about 
Smedley’s ability. But since (we may suppose) the reason I was asked is that I 
am the person who is in an ideal or at least good position to assess Smedley’s 
ability, this deliberately invites my hearer to conclude that there is nothing 
good to say about it.1
When I utter (2), I intend my hearer to reflect that, if I were going to give 
her ten dollars in any case, uttering (2) would violate both the Maxim of 
Relevance (why mention the lawn in particular?) and the rule against prolix-
ity. (There is also the background information that people do not often go 
around giving out money when no service has been rendered and no chari-
table purpose is evident.)
(3) and (4a) are a little harder to explain. What prompts us to infer from (3) 
that Martha smiled because she saw the Education School burning is probably 
some combination of the Maxim of Relevance with our knowledge of the 
effects of burning, of Martha’s likely attitude toward schools of education, 
and of the connection between desire-satisfaction and facial musculature. 
(4a) may have to do with some deep narratological assumption. Such mat-
ters, and the otherwise dangerously vague notion of “relevance” generally, 
have been investigated in some depth by Sperber and Wilson (1986), a work 
that departs from Grice in some ways and has spawned a new approach to 
implicative relations; see below.
Grice mentions that one can also generate an implicature by flouting a 
conversational maxim, that is, by violating it blatantly. My favorite Gricean 
example (paraphrased from pp. 55–6):
(5)	 Ms X produced a series of sounds that corresponded quite closely to 
the score of Handel’s “I Know That My Redeemer Liveth.” [Said by 
a concert reviewer.]
Why has the reviewer dribbled out all this prolix stuff, instead of saying 
simply that Ms X sang “I Know That My Redeemer Liveth”? “Presumably, 
to emphasize a striking difference between [Ms] X’s performance and those 
to which the word ‘singing’ is usually applied.” A more common type of 

Implicative relations  161
example is when the speaker’s sentence is too obviously false; Grice cites 
sarcasm there.
Grice suggests that his theory will account for metaphor, since metaphori-
cal utterances typically flout (M3):
Examples like “You are the cream in my coffee” characteristically involve 
categorical falsity, so the contradictory of what the speaker has made as 
if to say will, strictly speaking, be a truism; so it cannot be that that such 
a speaker is trying to get across. The most likely supposition is that the 
speaker is attributing to his audience some feature or features in respect 
of which the audience resembles (more or less fancifully) the mentioned 
substance.
(p. 53)
We shall assess this suggestion in chapter 14.
Two features are characteristic of conversational implicature. First, an 
implicature must be something one works out, or could work out, using 
reasoning of the kind illustrated above. If no such reasoning is available, then 
the implication must be of some other kind. Second, an implicature is cancel-
able, in the sense that a speaker who wanted to could forestall the inference 
that would otherwise be reasonable: “Smedley is very good at ping pong. But 
don’t get me wrong—he’s a terrific philosopher too. I mentioned the ping 
pong first because we’ve just been playing and I’m exhausted.”2,3
In the previous chapter I noted Austin’s complaint that, when a philoso-
pher perceives infelicity in an utterance, the philosopher tends too quickly to 
reject the sentence uttered as false. During the 1950s and 1960s, this was even 
a fashionable style of argument: from “This sentence would sound funny if 
uttered” to “This sentence is false/incoherent/meaningless.” Grice is in part 
concerned to eradicate that argument form. And we are now in a position to 
appreciate an example of it (a slightly convoluted example, because it is itself 
about falsity). Recall, from chapter 2, Strawson’s first objection to Russell’s 
Theory of Descriptions. He says that no one would ever respond to an utter-
ance of “The present King of France is bald” by saying, “That’s false.” And 
he is right about that. But from it he infers that the sentence uttered was 
not false; that is, that “That’s false” would itself be false. And that does not 
follow. The obvious reason we would not say “That’s false” is that to do so 
would be misleading by way of the Maxim of Strength: You are in a position 
to say something much stronger and more informative and a better contribu-
tion to the conversation, namely, “Hold on; there is no king of France.” So, 
even if Strawson’s own competing thesis (that statements with nonreferring 
singular terms in them should be taken as nonstatements rather than as false 
statements) is actually correct, his argument does not show that.
The basic idea of conversational implicature is almost universally accepted, 
as are most of its standard uses in philosophy. But Grice’s theory of it is now 
not so widely granted. There are two main direct complaints. First, some 

162  Pragmatics and speech acts
philosophers are suspicious of the amount of complex but nearly instanta-
neous and almost entirely unconscious reasoning posited by Grice’s theory. 
(Read through Grice’s template again, and see how long it takes you.)4 But 
then, in many walks of life we do a great deal of reasoning very quickly and 
subconsciously.
The second and more serious complaint is due to Harnish (1976), Sperber 
and Wilson (1986) and especially Davis (1998): Most cases of Gricean reason-
ing divide into two stages, an initial negative stage and a subsequent positive 
stage. In the negative stage, the hearer detects that the speaker’s meaning 
diverges from sentence meaning. In the positive stage, the hearer comes to 
a conclusion regarding what the speaker does mean instead. Appeals to the 
Maxim of Relevance certainly work that way. So does any Gricean reasoning 
that starts with “[The speaker] couldn’t mean that [because it is too obvi-
ously false and we all know that].” We know that something is up; but then 
there is the positive part of figuring out just what it is that is up. Davis objects 
that Grice gives us very little help with the positive part.
Take (3). I suggested some background knowledge of causal relations that 
would help a hearer calculate the implicature. But why is it obvious that the 
needed relevance is causal relevance in the first place? It does seem that causal 
relevance is the obvious candidate, but nothing in Grice’s theory predicts 
or even hints at that. Or consider Grice’s suggestion about metaphor. It is 
indeed obvious that the speaker means something other than what “You are 
the cream in my coffee” (literally) means, but what signals that “the speaker 
is attributing to his audience some feature or features in respect of which 
the audience resembles [cream in coffee]”? Why is that “the most likely 
supposition”?
Davis points out that philosophers of language have missed this important 
lacuna in Grice’s theory because, whenever we look at an example, we already 
know what would normally be implicated by an utterance of the sentence in 
question, and so we are not moved to ask ourselves how the positive calcula-
tion is worked out. The cure for this is to pretend that we do not already 
know, and just look at the utterance in context and try to hit upon clues that 
would show an entirely uninitiated hearer what the speaker meant to convey. 
It is not easy.
Practitioners of the “relevance” literature (see below) have discovered what 
they argue is a new kind of implication, called “explicature,” intermediate 
between conversational implicature and entailment, in that the explicatum 
is cancelable but, if left uncanceled, is counted as said rather than merely 
implied—see Carston (1988) and Recanati (1989). An alleged example would 
be:
(6)	 She put down the letter, shed a single tear, and walked slowly but 
steadily to the cliff’s edge; then she jumped.
That sentence does not strictly entail that its subject jumped off the cliff, 
because one could cancel the implication without contradiction, for example 

Implicative relations  163
adding “—not off the cliff, mind you, just up and down near the edge.” But, 
Carston and Recanati maintain, if the speaker does not cancel the fatal impli-
cation within a conversationally reasonable time, the speaker will be counted 
as having said, and not merely implicated, that the subject jumped off the 
cliff. But there are tenable arguments on both sides of this issue.
Presupposition and conventional implicature
A second species of implications that are not entailments was suggested 
by Strawson’s position on definite descriptions. Recall that, in response to 
Russell, Strawson (1950) said that “The present King of France is bald” does 
not entail the existence of a present king, but merely presupposes it. The 
mark of this, according to Strawson, was that, when there is no king, “The 
present King of France is bald” is not false, but lacks truth-value entirely. The 
same goes for “The present King of France is not bald.”
A few philosophers and many more linguists took up Strawson’s idea, and 
have made it a little more formal: When a sentence S1 entails a sentence S2, 
and S2 is false, then necessarily S1 is false and S1’s negation is true. But when 
S1 presupposes S2 and S2 is false, then S1 does not go false, but lacks truth-
value, and so does S1’s negation.5 Notice that presupposition in this sense 
(called semantic presupposition) is like entailment and unlike conversational 
implicature in being noncancelable. Both S1 and S1’s negation necessitate S2 in 
the absolute way characteristic of entailment.
There are actually no uncontroversial examples of semantic presupposi-
tion. But here are a few candidate sentence pairs.
(7a)  It was Grannie who robbed the diaper service.
(7b)  Someone robbed the diaper service.
(8a)  Have you stopped beating your spouse?
(8b)  You have beaten your spouse.
(9a)  Rocky realized that his fly was open.
(9b)  Rocky’s fly was open.
(10a)  Fred, who was fat, could not run.
(10b)  Fred was fat.
(11a)  She was poor but she was honest.
(11b)  Being poor inhibits [or somehow contrasts with] being honest.

164  Pragmatics and speech acts
In each case, it has been claimed, the a sentence necessitates the b sentence, 
and so does the a sentence’s negation; if the b sentence is false, the a sentence 
is not false but goes to zip. And indeed, in each case the a sentence’s negation 
does intuitively seem to carry the same implication as does the a sentence 
itself.
But in some cases, although the a sentence does necessitate the b sentence, 
the a sentence’s negation does not. This is true of (7). For
(7′)	It was not Grannie who robbed the diaper service; no one  
robbed it,
though perhaps peculiar, is not self-contradictory. If (7′) is not self-contra-
dictory, then the negation of (7a) does not necessitate (7b) in the strong sense 
required for semantic presupposition. (7a)’s negation does conversationally 
implicate (7b), by way of the Maxim of Strength; someone who utters “It 
was not Grannie who robbed the diaper service” is in a position to make a 
stronger and more usefully informative denial, namely that of (7b) itself. But 
conversational implicature is cancelable, as necessitation is not. No necessita-
tion, no semantic presupposition.
(8), though interrogative, meets a similar fate. If you are married and you 
are asked (8) (and you have never beaten your spouse), here is the correct 
answer: “No.”6 Because one can stop doing a thing only if one has at some 
time been doing it. (Of course the answer “No” is misleading because, via 
the Maxim of Strength, it implicates that one has beaten one’s spouse and 
continues to do so. The correct and nonmisleading answer would be, “No, 
because I never have beaten her/him in the first place.”)
(9) is possible to dismiss in this way, but harder.
(9′)	Rocky did not realize that his fly was open; he could hardly have 
realized that, because his fly wasn’t open
does not seem contradictory either; but there is not so obvious a Gricean 
explanation of (9a)’s negation implicating (9b).
(10) is perhaps the best alleged example of semantic presupposition on our 
list.
(10′)	 It’s false that Fred, who was fat, could not run, because Fred 
wasn’t fat
does sound contradictory or at least semantically anomalous. Yet to my ear, 
if Fred was not fat, (10) does not go truth-valueless. I hear (10) as strictly 
speaking false, because the speaker has (though unemphatically) called Fred 
fat. But that does not explain what is wrong with (10′). Our remaining case, 
(11), is more distinctive, and I shall postpone it briefly.

Implicative relations  165
If the Direct Reference Theory of proper names is correct, then perhaps 
Strawson is right and sentences containing nonreferring names lack truth-
value. Of course, that is what gave rise to the problems of Apparent Reference 
to Nonexistents and Negative Existentials. But, if so, then sentences contain-
ing proper names at all do semantically presuppose the existence of referents 
for those names.
Some linguists have distinguished a looser notion of “pragmatic presup-
position” from that of semantic presupposition. But that term has not been 
clearly defined, and no one type of pragmatic implication has been meant by 
this to the exclusion of other types.
To return to (11):
(11′)	 It’s false that she was poor but she was honest; being poor does 
not inhibit being honest
is not contradictory, but is awkward. And (11a)’s implication of (11b) is non-
cancelable. Suppose the person spoken of was both poor and honest. Then, 
intuitively, the speaker has said two true things about her. But if being poor 
does not at all inhibit (or somehow contrast with) being honest, something is 
still very wrong with (11a) (compare “Wilt is 7'2" but he’s tall”). The speaker 
has chosen the wrong word: “but” is like “and,” except that “but” carries a 
special connotation that “and” does not; very likely that is “but” ’s raison 
d’être.
Grice (1975) had a third classification for (11), neither conversational 
implicature nor semantic presupposition. He called it conventional implica-
ture. Conventional implicature is implicature, in that a speaker implicates 
something rather than actually saying it, but it differs from conversational 
implicature in two ways. First, conventional implicatures are not worked out; 
they are grasped immediately, not on the basis of reasoning. Second, they are 
not cancelable (I cannot say “George is a linguist but he’s smart—don’t get 
the wrong idea, though; I didn’t mean anything about linguists not being 
smart”). Conventional implicatures are normally carried by tendentious 
choices of particular words, as of “but” over “and.”
Grice’s original example was “He is an Englishman; he is therefore 
brave.”
While I have said that he is an Englishman, and said that he is brave, 
I do not want to say that I have said . . . that it follows from his being 
an Englishman that he is brave, though I have certainly indicated, and 
so implicated, that this is so. I do not want to say that my utterance of 
this sentence would be, strictly speaking, false should the consequence in 
question fail to hold.
(pp. 44–5)7

166  Pragmatics and speech acts
Further examples involve the words “too” and “either”: “Jonnie is a linguist 
and her husband is very smart too”; “Paul was a philosopher and his wife 
wasn’t very smart either.”
Here, as in many cases, a good way to investigate the nature of these dif-
ferent kinds of implications is to ask about the penalty or sanction that ensues 
when an implicatum is false. When S1 entails S2 and S2 is false, the penalty is 
that S1 is false. When S1 semantically presupposes S2 and S2 is false, then S1 is 
sent ignominiously to zip. When someone utters S1, thereby conversationally 
implicating S2, and the conveyed meaning or invited inference S2 is false, then 
the penalty is that, even if S1 is true, the speaker’s utterance is misleading. If 
S1 conventionally implicates S2 and S2 is false, then S1 is misworded, even if 
not false.
A further type of “pragmatic presupposition” not already mentioned here 
might be called “illocutionary implication”: The performing of a speech act 
in some sense implies the satisfaction of its distinctive felicity conditions. 
For example, my promising to return your champagne glasses implies that 
I intend to return them, and does so noncancelably (I cannot add, “ . . . but 
don’t get me wrong; I have no intention of returning them”). To our penalty 
catalogue, we might add that if someone utters S1, thereby performing a 
speech act having S2 as a distinctive felicity condition, and S2 is false, then the 
speech act is infelicitous in a distinctively illocutionary way.
Relevance Theory
Relevance theorists (originally Sperber and Wilson 1986; see especially also 
Carston 2002) began by developing Grice’s model, but their program is now 
a vigorous competitor. They reject the idea that there are particular conver-
sational maxims of Grice’s sort. Rather, they maintain, implicatures are the 
product of all-purpose cognitive processing that aims at efficiency of infor-
mation transfer more generally. “Utterances raise expectations of relevance 
not because speakers are expected to obey a Co-operative Principle and 
maxims or some other communicative convention, but because the search 
for relevance is a basic feature of human cognition, which communicators 
may exploit” (Wilson and Sperber 2004: 608). “Relevance” is understood as 
a favorable balance of “positive cognitive effects” over processing time and 
effort; a positive cognitive effect is (roughly) an improvement in the hearer’s 
representation of the world, such as acquisition of a true and useful belief. 
In general, we are always seeking to improve our cognitive condition in a 
cost- and time-efficient way.
In the matter of communication in particular, speakers and hearers at least 
tacitly know that we are all thus driven by relevance. So, when a speaker 
produces an utterance, s/he intends hearers to assume that it is cognitively 
beneficial enough to be worth processing. And therefore every utterance 
carries “a presumption of its own optimal relevance”—relevant enough to 
be worth the hearer’s effort, and “the most relevant one compatible with 

Implicative relations  167
communicator’s abilities and preferences” (p. 612). This is the relevance theo-
rists’ rival to Grice’s Cooperative Principle (CP). And they argue that the two 
theories make different predictions. For example, we constantly say things 
that are not strictly true and are known by both speaker and hearer to be not 
true, but without being perceived as flouting the Maxim of Truthfulness. We 
speak loosely; for example, using the noun “record” to include musical tapes 
and compact discs; and exaggeration is ubiquitous.8 But utterances of those 
kinds do not normally initiate Gricean reasoning, as in “Hmmm, she has 
flouted the Maxim of Truthfulness. Is it sarcasm? Or maybe she’s indicat-
ing that she’s not allowed to talk about this . . . .” We do not even tacitly 
notice such violations. Wilson and Sperber suggest that hearers’ expectations 
of truthfulness are only a rough-and-ready byproduct of their more basic 
expectations of relevance (p. 619).
Further: According to Grice’s picture, a hearer recovers the utterance’s 
full literal locutionary or propositional content (“He has said that p,”), and 
then proceeds to reason from that combined with the Cooperative Principle. 
But relevance theorists point out that, psychologically at least, that cannot 
be right. The sentence uttered never itself expresses or “encodes” a complete 
proposition. As we have seen, it must always be disambiguated. And its 
deictic elements must be assigned referents. These decisions, including the 
computation of Harman’s function α, are also guided by the general cogni-
tive drive for relevance. So there is simultaneous disambiguation, treatment 
of deictic elements, and working out of implicatures, with constant tradeoffs 
between them.
To the latter three processes, relevance theorists have added further ones 
that make for “explicatures” as described above. There is what Recanati 
(1993, 2001) calls “saturation,” the plugging in of an appropriate value to an 
underlying position in logical form: “This way is shorter” (than what way?); 
“I am too old” (for what?); “Are you strong enough in the legs?” (to do 
what?). There is also “free enrichment” (Recanati 1993; Carston 2002), when 
there seems to be an “unarticulated” (not just unvoiced or unpronounced) 
constituent of what is said even though there is no even covert hole in logical 
form or other specifically linguistic control: “I’ve eaten” (the most recent 
meal); “It’s raining” (in such-and-such location); “Our building is some 
distance away” (far enough that it would take contextually considerable time 
to get there). Sentence (6) above (“She put down the letter, shed a single tear, 
and walked slowly but steadily to the cliff’s edge; then she jumped”) might 
be thought to be a case of saturation, if it is argued that “jumped” logically 
expresses a relation between an agent and a location-plus-direction. More 
likely, it is a case of free enrichment.
Congenitally literal-minded philosophers will be skeptical of “free enrich-
ment,” and want to deny that speakers of the foregoing sentences actually 
said that they had eaten lunch in particular, or that it is raining here in Chapel 
Hill, or that it would take a good deal of time to get to the building. Such 
philosophers would hear those “enrichments” as ordinary implicatures.9 But 
linguists are more likely to be right on this sort of issue.

168  Pragmatics and speech acts
Indirect force
As I mentioned in the previous chapter, the three principal English moods 
correspond to three broad illocutionary genera of which individual types of 
speech act are species: The normal use of a declarative is to make a statement, 
that of an interrogative is to seek information, and that of an imperative is to 
issue a directive of some kind. But the correspondence is far from perfect:
(12)  I want you to go to the Broccoli Festival with me.
(13)  Can you pass the salt?
(14)	 Believe me when I say I’ll never again mix Glenfiddich and 
paregoric.
(15)	Tell me how you saved Kate Winslett from the giant tree frog that 
ate Pittsburgh.
(16)  I want you to tell me what has become of my children three.
(12) is grammatically declarative but would normally be used to issue a 
request or even an order. (13) is interrogative but would normally be heard, 
not literally as an information-seeking question about the hearer’s abilities, 
but as a request also. The imperatives (14) and (15) would normally be used 
respectively to make a statement and to ask a question. (16), though declara-
tive, would also be used to ask a question.
Grammatical mood in itself is hardly sacred. The real problem is deeper: 
Each of (12)–(16) also has a more literal reading that does correspond to its 
grammatical mood. For example, (12) could be uttered as a purely factual 
answer to “Please tell me what desire is uppermost in your mind right now, so 
that I can begin your psychoanalysis.” These more literal readings exist, but 
are uncommon and hard to hear. What needs explaining is why (and how) the 
nonliteral uses are the normal uses. This sort of illocutionary displacement 
is called “indirect force.”
Searle (1975) advocates what I shall call the conservative approach to 
indirect force. Namely, he maintains that an utterance’s indirect force can be 
predicted using just general principles of speech-act theory that we already 
know together with Gricean mechanisms that we already know. No new 
apparatus need be introduced.
Searle begins by putting forward some generalizations about ways of 
performing particular speech acts indirectly. For example: “S can make an 
indirect request (or other directive) by either asking whether or stating that a 
preparatory condition concerning H’s ability to do A obtains”; “S can make 
an indirect directive by stating that the sincerity condition obtains, but not by 
asking whether it obtains.” Searle illustrates and explains such generalizations 

Implicative relations  169
by deriving instances of them using only principles of speech-act theory and 
Gricean conversational reasoning.
Take (13), literally a question about the hearer’s ability but normally used 
to make a request. According to Searle, the hearer first infers in Gricean 
fashion that the speaker intends to convey something other than (13)’s literal 
meaning (the speaker obviously lacks theoretical interest in the hearer’s fine 
muscle coordination, for example). Then the hearer cleverly notes two things: 
that the speaker has alluded to the satisfaction of a preparatory condition for 
a request, and that the request in question is one whose obedience the speaker 
very probably wants the hearer to bring about. That is how the hearer identi-
fies the speaker’s utterance as a request to pass the salt.
The conservative view inherits the two main objections incurred by 
Grice’s theory of conversational implicature. There is skepticism regarding 
the posited instantaneous subconscious reasoning, and Davis’s (1998) com-
plaint arises with a vengeance: The negative stage, that of recognizing that 
there is some ulterior force, is easy, but the positive stage is much harder.
Davis’s problem is aggravated for the case of indirect force, because the 
hearer faces a greater challenge—not just to identify an implicated content, 
but in addition to pick out the unexpected force. (Here again, the difficulty 
is masked by the fact that, when we look at examples, we already know what 
indirect force they would have.) In the case of (13), what cues lead the hearer 
to identify it as a request?
Searle acknowledges the problem. The hearer has to notice that the speaker 
has alluded to a preparatory condition for requesting. But what cue would tip 
the hearer off to that? Moreover, the ability condition is also a felicity condi-
tion for speech acts of many different sorts; so how would the hearer single 
out requesting in particular? Perhaps s/he could narrow it down to directives. 
Within the class of directives we could perhaps exclude orders, commands, 
suggestions, and others on grounds of power relations and tone of voice. We 
also have corroborating information about the obedience conditions being 
ones in which the speaker may well have an interest. But at each substage of 
this reasoning, there is plenty of room for error.
At one point Searle suggests that there is a convention at work in addition 
to the purely Gricean reasoning. The words, “Can you . . . ?” do have a sort 
of conventional ring. But if so, it cannot be such a brute convention that it 
makes the locution in question amount to an idiom like “kick the bucket” 
or “bury the hatchet.” Requests beginning with “Can you . . . ” are, if you 
like, idiomatic, but they are not idioms, for they admit of literal answers. 
The hearer could say, “I can, yes, but are you sure you should be putting any 
more salt on your food?” This could be a smart-aleck answer (“Do you have 
the time?”—“Yes, I have it”), but it need not be; perhaps the hearer knows 
the speaker to have high blood pressure. One is at least able to reply to the 
sentence’s literal, compositional content, even if that is not entirely felicitous 
given that the speaker’s utterance was an indirect request. If “Can you . . . ” 
has conventional force of some kind, the kind badly needs explaining.

170  Pragmatics and speech acts
Morgan (1978) makes an important attempt at explaining the only quasi-
conventional mechanism involved here. Bach and Harnish (1979) argue for a 
less convention-like device of “standardization.” Both think of indirect force 
as “short-circuited” implicature; that is, as an implicature so common as to 
have become in some way automatic.
There is a further problem about indirect force, called to our attention by 
Gordon and Lakoff (1975): There are syntactic marks of indirect force. That 
is, there are surface-grammatical features that demand indirect interpreta-
tion of the sentences in which they occur.
(17)  Why paint your house purple?
(18)	 Why don’t you be nice to your brother for a change?/Be nice to 
your brother for a change, why don’t you?
(19)  Would you get me a glass of water?
(20)  I would like a dry martini, please.
(21)  Here, I need that wrench.
None of these sentences can have the force associated with its grammatical 
mood. Unlike “Why are you painting your house purple?,” (17) cannot be an 
innocent question, but must be a discouragement. (18) must be a reproach; 
(19) and (20) must be requests; unlike the simpler “I need that wrench,” (21) 
must be a request or something stronger.
Searle’s conservative approach is balked here. It has no way of predicting 
these data. Worse, it cannot even apply to them because, à la Grice, it posits 
calculation; indirect force is to be worked out. But with (17)–(21) there is 
nothing to work out. They wear their indirect forces on their sleeves.
Other theories of indirect force have tried to cope with this problem; none 
has been uncontroversially successful. The data themselves are not entirely 
uncontroversial: Bach and Harnish (1979: ch. 9) dispute some of them, most 
explicitly that (19) is grammatical.
Summary
Often a speaker uses a sentence to convey something other than what 
• 
that sentence literally means.
According to Grice’s theory of conversational implicature, such 
• 
implications are generated by a set of principles that govern coopera-
tive conversation. But Davis has offered a significant challenge to this 
view.
Relevance theorists reject the idea that implicatures are generated by a 
• 
set of conversational maxims. They hold instead that implicatures are 

Implicative relations  171
the product of all-purpose cognitive processing that aims at efficiency 
of information transfer more generally.
Strawson’s criticism of Russell’s Theory of Descriptions suggests a 
• 
notion of “presupposition” distinct from entailment. But it is hard to 
find clear examples of this relation.
A third type of implication, conventional implicature, is carried by 
• 
the choice of a special word.
There are sentences that are normally used with indirect force. To 
• 
explain this, Searle tries an extension of Grice’s theory of conversa-
tional implicature. But that strategy falls short of accounting for all 
the data, and there is no very satisfactory alternative.
Questions
1	
Think of some more examples of conveyed meanings and invited infer-
ences, and try to explain them using Grice’s principles.
2	
State some traditional philosophical issue and show how the notion of 
conversational implicature illuminates it.
3	
Adjudicate one of our two objections to Grice’s theory of conversa-
tional implicature, or come up with a further objection of your own.
4	
Is there anything to the notion of “presupposition” in a natural lan-
guage that cannot be accounted for in terms of implicature? Less 
tendentiously, is there more to the notion of “presupposition” in natural 
language than I have admitted in this chapter?
5	
Discuss the notion of conventional implicature, and try to think of 
more examples. Is Grice right in contending that it differs both from 
ordinary entailment and from conversational implicature?
6	
Adjudicate a dispute between a relevance theorist and Grice, or simply 
discuss some aspect of the Relevance Theory literature.
7	
Say something helpful about the puzzle of indirect force.
Further reading
Grice (1978) is a sequel dealing with stress and irony. Grice’s posthu-
• 
mous collection (1989) contains that and other important papers on 
related topics.
Davis (1998) is a comprehensive critique of Grice’s theory of conver-
• 
sational implicature. It also discusses indirect force.
Seeds of the “explicature” literature are in Cohen (1971). See also Bach 
• 
(1994b).
A good expository pro-presupposition paper is Karttunen (1973). 
• 
Two very good books on the “presupposition” literature are Kempson 
(1975) and Wilson (1975); for a scorched-earth critique, see Lycan 
(1984: ch. 4).

172  Pragmatics and speech acts
Sadock (1975) explores the distinction between conversational and 
• 
conventional implicature. The containing volume, Cole and Morgan 
(1975), is a splendid one, and contains several other nice works on 
implicature; see also Cole (1978). Karttunen and Peters (1979) is good 
on conventional implicature, as is Warner (1982). But the best general 
treatment of conventional implicature is Lycan (1984: ch. 5).
Bach (1999) iconoclastically but tenably disputes the very existence of 
• 
conventional implicature.
The Relevance Theory literature is now very large. See Blakemore 
• 
(1992) and Carston (2002).
The classic papers on indirect force are in Cole and Morgan (1975); 
• 
see particularly the papers by Gordon and Lakoff, Georgia Green, and 
Alice Davison.
Morgan (1978)’s theory of indirect force is developed further in Lycan 
• 
(1984: ch. 7).
Bach and Harnish (1979) offer an imposing master theory of com-
• 
munication, incorporating all the phenomena we have surveyed in this 
chapter and the last.
Levinson (1983) is a good general book on pragmatics. Davis (1991) is 
• 
an excellent anthology, and Horn and Ward (2004) is an outstanding 
reference work.

Part IV
The dark side


14	 Metaphor
Overview
The phenomenon of metaphor is far more prevalent than is generally admit-
ted by philosophers, and it raises two main questions: What is “metaphorical 
meaning”? And how do hearers grasp metaphorical meaning as readily as 
they do?
Most theorists have thought that metaphor is somehow a matter of bringing 
out similarities between things or states of affairs. Donald Davidson argues 
that this “bringing out” is purely causal, and in no way linguistic; hearing 
the metaphor just somehow has the effect of making us see a similarity. The 
Naive Simile Theory goes to the opposite extreme, having it that metaphors 
simply abbreviate explicit literal comparisons. Both views are easily seen to 
be inadequate. According to the Figurative Simile Theory, on the other hand, 
metaphors are short for similes themselves taken figuratively. This view 
avoids the three most obvious objections to the Naive Simile Theory, but not 
all the tough ones.
Searle treats metaphorical meaning as speaker-meaning that is also con-
veyed meaning, and invokes Gricean apparatus to explain it in much the 
way he explained indirect force. This has some plausibility and overcomes 
Davidson’s leading objections to metaphorical meaning, but incurs other 
objections.
A further theory of metaphor is based on the phenomenon, important in 
its own right, of single words’ analogical differentiation into hosts of distinct 
though related meanings.
A philosophical bias
Philosophers like language to be literal. The previous thirteen chapters have 
concentrated on theories of literal reference and literal meaning, and even 
our discussions of indirect force and conversational implicature have viewed 
those phenomena as merely speaker-meanings derived by some discrete 
mechanisms from literal sentence meaning. I have barely mentioned meta-
phor and other figurative uses of language.

176  The dark side
That bias reflects standard philosophical practice. Philosophers tend 
to think that literal speech is the default and metaphorical utterances are 
occasional aberrations, made mainly by poets and poets manqué. But the 
bias is only a bias; sentences are very often used in perfectly ordinary con-
texts with other than their literal meanings. Indeed, virtually every sentence 
produced by any human being contains importantly metaphorical or other 
figurative elements. My use just now of the word “element” was at least in 
part metaphorical. Or consider the number of times in a day that someone 
utters the word “level.” “Level” is almost invariably metaphor, unless the 
speaker is actually talking about a horizontal layering of some physical thing. 
Nonliteral usage is the rule, not the exception.
The letter of the claim that almost every sentence contains figurative ele-
ments is widely conceded, because everyone grants that among the literal 
expressions are many “dead” metaphors; that is, phrases that evolved from 
what were originally novel metaphors but have turned into idioms or clichés 
and now mean literally what they used to mean metaphorically. We speak 
of a river’s “mouth,” but no one in the present century thinks of this as a 
metaphorical allusion to human or animal mouths. Likewise “inclined to [do 
such-and-such],” “rich dessert,” “dead microphone,” and, for that matter, 
“dead metaphor.” Perhaps “level” as in “higher/lower level” is now literal too. 
“Level” in “carpenter’s level,” meaning the tool, is certainly dead; there is no 
other term for that tool, and in a dictionary it would be listed as a separate 
meaning of the word.
However, as has been emphasized by Lakoff and Johnson (1980), the 
distinction between novel or fresh metaphor and “dead” metaphor is one 
of smooth degree, not of kind. Fresh metaphors get picked up and become 
current, and then only very gradually—sometimes over centuries—sicken, 
harden, and die.
(Exactly how many expressions in the previous paragraph were used 
metaphorically rather than literally, assuming the distinction is not one of 
degree?)
So it seems intellectual honesty requires us to confront metaphor.
The issues, and two simple theories
There is some variation in taxonomy as to how metaphor is classified with 
respect to other figures of speech. Some theorists use the term “metaphor” 
very broadly, as almost synonymous with “figurative.” Others use it very 
narrowly, as naming one very specific figure alongside many other ones. I 
will not try to make fine distinctions here.
The main philosophical questions concerning metaphor are two: what 
is “metaphorical meaning,” broadly construed? And by what mechanism is 
it conveyed? That is, how do hearers grasp that meaning, given that what 
they hear is only a sentence whose literal meaning is something different? 
Metaphor raises many further important philosophical questions, about 

Metaphor  177
the rationale for expressing oneself metaphorically instead of directly, the 
distinctive effectiveness and power of metaphor as a figure of speech, and the 
centrality of metaphor in each of several walks of life, but in this chapter I 
shall confine my attention to the more specifically linguistic questions.
A few examples to work with:
(1)  Simon is a rock.1
(2)  Juliet is the sun.2
A more complex solar metaphor:
(3)	 Now is the winter of our discontent 
Made glorious summer by this sun of York.3
(4)	 When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul 
Lends the tongue vows.4
What seems to characterize (1)–(4) and other sentences called metaphori-
cal? Beardsley (1967) identifies two features working in tandem: Within such 
a sentence there is a conceptual “tension” (human beings differ categorially 
from rocks or suns, and souls and tongues are not the kinds of things that 
could interact commercially); yet the sentence is not only intelligible but 
perhaps even exceptionally informative or illuminating, and may express an 
important truth. Other theorists have expressed the first of these two fea-
tures more strongly, saying that a metaphorical sentence interpreted literally 
is incoherent, absurd, or at best transparently and wildly false—though we 
shall see below that that is not always so.
Davidson’s causal theory
Figurative language was thoroughly disdained during the logical positivist 
period, presumably on account of the positivists’ verificationism.5 Since such 
sentences as (1)–(4)—at least as they are intended—are not verifiable in the 
ordinary empirical way, they were judged not to be cognitively meaning-
ful. On this view, there is no such thing as “metaphorical meaning” if by 
“meaning” one means linguistic meaning; there is only emotive or affective 
significance. (Of course, many sentences used metaphorically have literal 
meanings as well: “Harold’s out to lunch”; “We’re up against it.”) Donald 
Davidson (1978) too rejects “metaphorical meaning” and denies the existence 
of linguistic mechanisms by which metaphorical significance is conveyed. 
Unlike the positivists, he thinks sentences like (1)–(4) do have meanings; 
but he contends that the meanings they have are just their literal meanings 
(however strange). “Metaphors mean what the words, in their most literal 
interpretation, mean, and nothing more” (p. 30). When Romeo uttered (2), 

178  The dark side
he was saying only that Juliet was, literally, the sun, though doubtless he was 
doing more than just expressing that ludicrous falsehood.
Davidson’s article is largely devoted to his negative case against “meta-
phorical meaning”; he gives several critical arguments, two of which we shall 
consider later on. But he does sketch a positive account of the significance of 
metaphor. It is brutely causal:
A metaphor makes us attend to some likeness, often a novel or surprising 
likeness, between two or more things.
(p. 31, italics added)
[A] simile tells us, in part, what a metaphor merely nudges us into 
noting.
(p. 36, italics added)
There is no logic to it, Davidson seems to be saying, much less any linguis-
tic mechanism that indicates the likeness to be “noted.” A pill or “a bump on 
the head” (p. 44) could do as well and as properly. Obviously the effect of 
metaphor is far from random, or poetry and other literature would not make 
the sense they do, much less succeed brilliantly; but the psychological means 
by which they do succeed are not in the linguist’s domain.
Davidson’s view implies that the only relevant difference between (1)–(4) 
and nonsense strings such as chapter 1’s “Good of off primly the a the the 
why” is that, for whatever reason, (1)–(4) have psychological effects that the 
word salad does not. But surely there is a huge cognitive difference between 
(1)–(4) and the word salad: We often not only understand them but can 
paraphrase them more literally; we draw inferences from them; we some-
times take ourselves to have learned new empirical facts from having heard 
metaphorical utterances. That cognitive value manifestly does not derive 
from their usually bizarre literal meanings. Moran (1997) adds the example 
of embedding in conditional antecedents (“If music be the food of love, play 
on,” or even “If music is the food of love, I’m going to buy some records”).
A cognate point is that, if Davidson is right, one can never misinterpret 
a metaphor.6 If in response to Romeo’s utterance of (2), some eavesdropper 
had chirped, “I get it!—Juliet depresses him because she’s so stupid and she 
smells horrible,” on the Causal Theory this would not have been an incor-
rect account of Romeo’s metaphorical utterance, but only evidence that the 
eavesdropper’s mental architecture was causally different from Romeo’s and 
from ours.
Moreover, as Goodman (1981) urges, Davidson cannot allow for meta-
phorical truth. If metaphorical utterances have only literal meaning, there 
being no other candidate for a bearer of truth-value, they will normally be 
false and only occasionally and accidentally true. But remember (however 
reluctantly) the prevalence of nonliteral usage. Even if we discount uncon-
troversially “dead” metaphor, few human utterances are entirely free of 

Metaphor  179
metaphorical elements. If metaphorical utterances are rarely true, then utter-
ances are rarely true.
Finally, Moran (1997: 263) notes that, when a metaphor dies, the relevant 
expression acquires a new literal meaning and accordingly gets an additional 
dictionary entry. This would be inexplicable, or at least arbitrary and odd, if 
the metaphor had previously had no sort of meaning at all.
And there are contemporary views that reject metaphorical sentence mean-
ing but give more plausible accounts of metaphorical communication. Given 
the availability of such accounts, there is no reason to accept Davidson’s 
purely causal theory.
The Naive Simile Theory
Philosophers beginning with Aristotle have noticed a striking similarity 
between metaphors and similes: It seems that both metaphors and similes 
express or invite comparisons of their topics to something a bit unexpected. 
Simon was like a rock, Juliet is like the sun in one or more respects, and 
Edward IV resembled the sun in perhaps a different way. This suggests an 
even closer kinship: the idea that a metaphor is just an abbreviated simile. 
According to the Naive Simile Theory in particular, a metaphor derives from 
the corresponding simile by ellipsis. Thus, (1) is short for “Simon is like a 
rock,” and (2) is short for “Juliet resembles the sun.”
(3) is considerably trickier since, although its grammatical subject can be 
translated as “Our discontent, which is like a winter,” the concluding referent 
(Edward IV) is not mentioned in any literal way; one would have to render 
that last part of (3) as something like “by x, a Yorkist who resembles the sun,” 
where the reference of “x” to Edward is somehow determined by context. 
“Made glorious summer” would have to be interpreted as something like 
“alleviated in a manner similar to a winter’s giving way to a glorious sum-
mer.” But probably all this could be worked out. ((4) is still tougher; I shall 
return to it.)
This simile view reconciles Beardsley’s two features: It accommodates the 
“conceptual tension” characterizing a metaphor, while explaining the meta-
phor’s intelligibility. The intelligibility is straightforward, since statements 
of likeness or resemblance are obviously intelligible. The tension arises from 
the move from likeness to actual ascription (“Juliet is the sun”).
The Naive Simile Theory has seemed plausible to, and even taken for 
granted by, many literary theorists and philosophers alike. But it faces objec-
tions, of which here are three.
First, Beardsley (1967) complains that, although the theory does explain 
the distinctive tension in the way I have noted, that explanation is very 
shallow. If a metaphor is only short for the corresponding simile, then it is 
simply synonymous with the simile and should not be heard as anomalous 
or puzzling in the first place. On this view, the tension is the merest surface 
appearance. But that seems wrong. There is no particular tension in “Juliet is 

180  The dark side
like the sun,” even if one wants to be told more about the respects in which 
Juliet resembles the sun. One feels that a metaphor works by containing 
an inherent tension that is more substantive. (Davidson (1978) and Searle 
(1979b) will go on to argue that, in particular, the metaphor works by having 
the anomalous literal meaning that it does.)
Second, Searle complains that a simile taken by itself is almost entirely 
uninformative. “Similarity is a vacuous predicate: any two things are similar 
in some respect or other” (1979b: 106; see also Goodman 1970). In what way 
is Juliet supposedly like the sun? Not by being a gigantic ball of gas, or by 
consisting in large part of nuclear fusion, or by being 93 million miles from 
the earth. As Searle points out, those properties are salient and well-known 
features of the sun; yet the Naive Simile Theory gives no hint as to why 
Romeo’s metaphor imputes different properties to Juliet rather than those. 
Thus, the theory fails to offer any mechanism by which metaphorical signifi-
cance might be conveyed.
Third, even when we have identified the relevant respects of similarity, 
they often prove to be themselves metaphorical. Searle gives the example, 
“Sally is a block of ice.” How, according to the naive simile theorist, is Sally 
like a block of ice? Perhaps she is hard and very cold. But not, of course, 
literally hard or cold; “hard” and “cold” are themselves used metaphorically 
here. So Sally is only like something that is hard and cold. In what ways? 
Perhaps she is unyielding, unemotional, and unresponsive. But, Searle points 
out (p. 107), there is no sense in which blocks of ice are unyielding, unemo-
tional, and unresponsive but many other inanimate things are not. Bonfires 
too are unyielding, unemotional, and unresponsive; but neither “Sally is 
like a bonfire” nor “Sally is a bonfire” is metaphorically compatible with the 
original sentence. The naive simile theorist would have to insist that there is 
a further underlying literal similarity between cold things and unemotional 
things. But we are given no evidence for that claim. Searle conjectures that, 
on the grounds of heaven knows what psychological factors, “people [just 
do] find the notion of coldness associated in their minds with lack of emo-
tion” (p. 108).
This last objection suggests a simple but radical modification of the Naive 
Theory, which preserves the central claim that metaphors are compressed 
similes but avoids most of our six objections. It is articulated and defended at 
length by Fogelin (1988): that metaphors abbreviate, not similes taken liter-
ally, but similes themselves taken figuratively.
The Figurative Simile Theory
Similes are often, perhaps usually, figures of speech. Sally is only figuratively 
like a block of ice, for she is only figuratively hard and cold. Simon is only 
figuratively like a rock, and Juliet is only figuratively like the sun. One way to 
see this (not Fogelin’s own way) is to note that literal similarity is symmetric: 
If A is literally similar to B, then necessarily B is literally similar to A. But 

Metaphor  181
a block of ice is not literally like Sally, nor a rock literally like Simon, nor 
the sun literally like Juliet. And no one would propose such comparisons as 
similes, as in “The sun?—Oh, the sun is like Juliet.” It is when similes are 
themselves nonliteral that they best paraphrase metaphors. This suggests the 
hypothesis that a metaphor is just an abbreviated figurative simile, deriving 
from the corresponding simile taken figuratively.
This Figurative Theory easily sidesteps our three objections to the Naive 
Theory. First objection: Since the figurative theorist does not reduce meta-
phors to literal and near-trivial assertions of similarity, it cannot be said that 
the Figurative Theory treats the metaphors’ conceptual tension as super-
ficial. There is already conceptual tension in the underlying simile. Second 
objection: Taken figuratively, the simile already carries one or more particular 
respects of similarity. So it does not fail to explain how the metaphor brings 
out those same respects. Third objection: Of course the figurative theorist is 
not committed to literal similarities between Juliet and the sun, Sally and a 
block of ice, or Simon and a rock.
These three advantages come at an obvious price. In each case, the 
Figurative Theory remedies a deficiency of the Naive Theory by lodging the 
needed material in the now figuratively interpreted corresponding similes 
and letting the respectively derived metaphors inherit it. But the danger here 
is that of only putting off the problem. For now the explanatory work is 
being done by the figurative nature of the underlying similes, and so their 
figurative interpretations need explaining in turn. Indeed, our original two 
main questions arise for figurative similes: What is it for such sentences to 
have figurative meanings, and how are those meanings conveyed to hearers?
Fogelin (1988) exploits the notion of a salient feature of a thing.7 (Those 
are the features that jump out at you, or loom large for you.) In that way he is 
able to mobilize a nonsymmetrical similarity relation (p. 78): “A is similar to 
B if and only if A has a sufficient number of B’s salient features.” A may share 
a sufficient number of B’s salient features without B’s sharing a sufficient 
number of A’s salient features, since the particular features of B that A shares 
need not be salient in A. For example, a chipmunk is very like a rat, except 
for being cute or perceived as such by humans; it has most of the rat’s salient 
features, being a small scavenging rodent of loose morals. But one would not 
say that a rat is like a chipmunk, because the cuteness of chipmunks is highly 
salient to humans and rats are not cute.
According to Fogelin, the difference between a figurative comparison 
and a literal one is in the standard of salience, which in a way reverses. It 
is, Fogelin says (p. 90), literally true that Winston Churchill looked like a 
bulldog, but literally false that Churchill was like a bulldog (he having been 
human rather than canine, two-legged, lacking in fur, given to talking rather 
than barking, and far too big to crawl into a doghouse). Yet it is figuratively 
true that he was like a bulldog. In calling him one, Fogelin says, “we compare 
him to a bulldog (as opposed, say, to a French poodle), while at the same 
time trimming the feature space in terms of the subject’s [Churchill’s] salient 

182  The dark side
features” (p. 91). Unfortunately Fogelin does not go into detail about “trim-
ming the feature space.” I believe the idea is that, having rejected the simile as 
literal, the hearer nonetheless charitably assumes that the alleged similarity 
does obtain, and now ignores the salient features of bulldogs that most obvi-
ously make the literal comparison false and looks for features that match the 
salient features of Churchill. (I am not sure what these would be; toughness, 
tenacity, earthiness, and looking like a bulldog?)
On this view, sentences have metaphorical meanings in context that differ 
from their literal meanings; yet it does not follow that any expression in the 
sentence has changed its meaning from literal to figurative use, or that the 
metaphorical meanings are spooky or magical. Rather, resemblance is always 
and everywhere relative to a standard of similarity, a “feature space” that 
determines which properties are to be matched with which. The standard of 
similarity is like an indexical in being determined by contextual factors, but 
also can take more than one value within a single context. That is why the 
sentence can be both true (metaphorically) and false (literally) on one and 
the same occasion of utterance: because two different standards of similarity 
are in play—much as “Muffie is small” can be both true and false if Muffie is 
an undersized moose. This is a nice advantage of Fogelin’s theory.
However, Fogelin faces at least three more difficulties. First, a statement 
may continue to be accepted as metaphorically true even when the cor-
responding simile has proved to be false. Searle (1979b: 102–3) offers the 
example, “Richard is a gorilla,” which the Naive Simile Theory would parse 
as “Richard is like a gorilla.” Let us suppose that what is meant is that Richard 
is like a gorilla in being fierce, nasty, prone to violence, and perhaps not 
very bright. But primatologists tell us that, in fact, gorillas are not nasty or 
prone to violence; they are shy, rather sensitive, and very intelligent animals. 
Likewise pigs, which figure in many metaphors imputing messiness, filth, 
greed, obesity, crassness, or some combination of those: I myself know of no 
evidence that pigs are particularly greedy, or that they are fatter relative to 
their skeletal size than other animals are.8
One might think that Fogelin has easily avoided this new objection, for 
when a simile is figurative it does not require the actual correctness of the 
relevant stereotype. “Sam acts like a gorilla” and “Merle eats like a pig” are 
correctly expressed and understood despite the fact that the two stereotypes 
are respectively simian and porcine slanders, because, in the similes, “gorilla” 
and “pig” are themselves being used figuratively rather than literally. But 
Fogelin’s picture of “trimming the feature space” presupposes or at least 
strongly suggests that the features relevantly shared by, say, Churchill and 
a bulldog are possessed literally by each of the two. And in that sense, on 
Fogelin’s theory a metaphor must still bottom out in a literal sharing of genu-
ine properties. In examples such as Searle’s (in which the stereotype is just 
wrong) it is far from obvious what the properties would be.9
Second, consider that many sentences individually admit of either literal or 
metaphorical interpretation. (“Adolf is a butcher”; “The worm has turned.”) 

Metaphor  183
Even when a sentence seems anomalous, often we can imagine circumstances 
in which it would be literally true; as Davidson notes (1978: 41), “You are 
pigs” would have been literally true if addressed by Odysseus to his men in 
Circe’s palace. Very likely there has never been a sentence that does not admit 
of some metaphorical understanding. For any sentence that does bear meta-
phorical interpretation, even one that would almost always be heard literally 
rather than metaphorically (say, “Ernest is lost”), any simile theorist will 
have to call it semantically ambiguous, as between its literal meaning and its 
simile-abbreviating meaning (that Ernest resembles a lost person). But such a 
proliferation of supposedly genuine semantic ambiguities is implausible.
The third new objection is that some metaphorical statements are too 
convoluted to be parsed as similes. (4) above is such an example. It is not 
literally about anyone’s blood, and blood cannot literally burn (while still 
within the body under even faintly normal conditions); “the soul” is prob-
ably itself being used metaphorically, and, even if not, souls cannot literally 
lend anything to tongues; but “tongues” is not being used to mean tongues, 
either, and vows are not the sorts of things that can be lent. So any simile 
theorist faces the daunting task of translating all of those things at once into 
resemblance talk. One would have to make free use of the sort of contextual 
placeholder that I used in explicating (3). A first pass might be: “When x, 
which is like a person’s blood, does something that resembles burning, how 
prodigally y, which is like a person’s soul, does something similar to lending 
some things that are vowlike to z, which resembles a person’s tongue.” We 
are not much the wiser. And refinement is needed, because for “the blood” 
metaphorically to burn is probably something distinctive to a bloodlike sub-
stance, not for it to do something that resembles the literal burning of, say, a 
piece of wood. It is no wonder that simile theorists have in the main stuck to 
simple subject–predicate examples like (1) and (2).
The Pragmatic Theory
Unlike the causal view, the Naive Simile Theory supplied a notion of “meta-
phorical meaning”; sentences had metaphorical meanings in addition to 
their literal ones, even though the former meanings proved to be shallow 
and unsatisfactory. And, as we have just seen, Fogelin’s version of the figu-
rative view endorses an even more robust notion of metaphorical meaning, 
in that his metaphorical meanings are (even if ineffable) more substantive 
and illuminating. As I mentioned earlier, Davidson argued globally against 
metaphorical meaning, indeed seems to enact a scorched-earth policy; so we 
should address his arguments. He gives five or six, but I have space to discuss 
only the two that I take to be most pertinent as directed against the other 
theories discussed here.
First: “There are no instructions for devising metaphors; there is no 
manual for determining what a metaphor ‘means’ or ‘says’; there is no test for 
metaphor that does not call for taste” (Davidson 1978: 29).

184  The dark side
Second: It is almost universally conceded that although some metaphors 
can be paraphrased in literal terms without great loss, many are open-ended 
in that the relevant set of similarities is vague and indefinite, and some (as in 
the poetry of e. e. cummings)10 cannot be paraphrased at all. These striking 
facts are neatly explained by the claim that there is no metaphorical mean-
ing, for on that view there is nothing to paraphrase or circumscribe (p. 30). 
Fogelin argues that the Figurative Simile Theory explains those facts as well. 
But Davidson adds that our uptake of a metaphor, “what we notice or see,” “is 
not, in general, propositional in character [at all] . . . Seeing as is not seeing 
that” (p. 45). Moreover, if a given sentence did have a metaphorical meaning, 
we would expect that that content could be fairly accurately expressed by 
some paraphrase, even if the paraphrase were cumbersome, prolix, flat, bor-
ing, or all of those.
Now, Davidson’s attack on metaphorical meaning can be exaggerated, as 
it is in spots by his own rhetoric. As I said, it is presented as a scorched-
earth or zero-tolerance policy. But in fact Davidson concentrates his critical 
arguments on the idea that linguistic expressions change their meanings in 
metaphorical usage; his bête noire is the positing of linguistic ambiguity. And 
at one important point he is careful “not to deny that there is such a thing as 
metaphorical truth, only to deny it of sentences” (p. 39). This leaves open the 
possibility that there is a middle way or compromise position.
Searle (1979b) proposes an account of metaphor that joins Davidson in 
deflating “metaphorical meaning” even further than did the Naive Theory, 
and in rejecting a linguistic ambiguity view. But as against Davidson it takes 
seriously the idea that metaphorical utterance is genuinely linguistic com-
munication rather than mere causation, and it posits a cognitive mechanism 
that computes something well worth calling metaphorical meaning.
I shall call Searle’s view the Pragmatic Theory, for he sees metaphor as 
simply a species of Gricean (or relevance-theoretic) communication in the 
sense of chapter 13.11 Recall from that chapter that Searle (1975) had offered a 
“conservative” account of how indirect speech acts are performed and under-
stood. The speaker utters a sentence grammatically marked for one range of 
illocutionary force but primarily means something by it that has a different 
force or at least a characteristically different locutionary content. The hearer 
first uses Gricean reasoning to determine that the speaker is trying to convey 
something other than what her/his sentence literally means; then the hearer 
uses further Gricean reasoning augmented by principles of speech-act theory 
and by mutually obvious contextual assumptions to work out the intended 
force and content of the utterance.
According to Searle:
The problem of explaining how metaphors work is a special case of the 
general problem of explaining how speaker meaning and sentence or 
word meaning come apart . . . . Our task in constructing a theory of 

Metaphor  185
metaphor is to try to state the principles which relate literal sentence 
meaning to metaphorical [speaker’s] utterance meaning.
(pp. 92–3)
Searle breaks down the interpretive process into three steps (parallel to the 
process he had posited for the interpretation of indirect speech acts). First 
the hearer must determine whether to look for a nonliteral interpretation 
in the first place. Second, if the hearer has decided to seek a metaphorical 
interpretation, s/he must then mobilize some set of principles or strategies 
for generating a range of possible speaker meanings. Third, s/he must employ 
a further set of principles or strategies for identifying which meaning or 
meanings from among that range are most likely to be in play on the pres-
ent occasion. (Note that, if this further set cannot pare the likely meanings 
down to one or two, that would explain the frequent open-endedness of 
metaphor.)
The obvious strategy underlying the first step is Gricean: When an 
utterance would be obviously defective if taken literally, look for a different 
speaker meaning. Our (1)–(4) all fit this model since, considered literally, 
each is false to the point of conceptual confusion. (As Searle says, however, 
not all metaphorical sentences are outrageous falsehoods or even false at all. 
The defect in literally uttering “Rocky is a real man,” “The quality of mercy 
is not strained,” or Máo Zédōng’s “A revolution is not a dinner party,” is their 
utter pointlessness due to their excessively plain truth.)
The Gricean strategy is not the only first-step option. Some metaphorical 
utterances are not in any way defective; there are other contextual cues, such 
as the kind of discourse that is taking place. Searle observes that, “when read-
ing Romantic poets, we are on the lookout for metaphors” (p. 114). Kittay 
(1987: 76) notes that metaphors are sometimes explicitly flagged as such: A 
victim is tied against a wall by thieves. “He realized that both literally and 
metaphorically . . . he was up against the wall, and . . . his hands were tied.”
The principal general strategy for the second step, Searle unsurprisingly 
says, is to look for similarities or comparisons. Searle offers eight principles 
according to which the uttered phrase can call to mind a different meaning 
“in ways that are peculiar to metaphor.” For example (principle 2), the differ-
ent meaning can be a “salient or well known property” of the thing or state 
of affairs mentioned. Or (principle 3), as in our “gorilla” and “pig” examples, 
the intended property can be one that is only often imputed to the thing.
Searle mentions just one strategy for the third step: to consider which 
of the meaning candidates are likely or even possible features of the subject 
under discussion. Juliet could not be a giant ball of gas, or consist largely 
of nuclear fusion, or be 93 million miles from the earth. Of course, hear-
ers also know things about what ideas particular speakers are likely to be 
expressing.
There remains the task of distinguishing metaphor as a species of indirect 
communication from others such as ordinary implicature, irony, and what 

186  The dark side
Searle calls “indirect speech acts” proper. Searle contrasts metaphor with 
indirect speech acts by contending (p. 121) that in the latter case the speaker 
means what s/he says in addition to meaning something more as well. (He 
does not address ordinary implicature, but he might well say the same in 
its regard.) The difference between metaphor and irony seems to be just 
that with metaphor the second and third stages of interpretation work by 
similarity or comparison, whereas with irony there is a simpler sort of reflex: 
The utterance taken literally is defective in that either the opposite is clearly 
true or the speaker may be expected to believe the opposite, so the “natural” 
choice of indirect meaning is just the opposite.
Davidson and Searle agree more than they disagree. Both deny that lin-
guistic expressions have special metaphorical meanings, and both hold that 
metaphor can be understood using apparatus already on hand in mainstream 
philosophy of language. (Fogelin aptly classifies the Causal and Pragmatic 
Theories together as “fecund falsehood” theories.) Moreover, I do not see 
why Davidson should, or how he could, dispute Searle’s view that there is 
metaphorical speaker-meaning. He does argue, contrary to Searle’s view, 
that what some metaphors convey is not propositional at all. But the biggest 
disagreement is over rules, principles and cognitive mechanisms, Davidson 
stoutly denying any and Searle eagerly proposing quite a few. So let us see 
how Searle might rebut Davidson’s two arguments against “metaphorical 
meaning.”
Davidson first argued that there are no instructions or rules for generating 
or for interpreting metaphors. As if directly inspired by that passage, Searle 
produced quite a number of such rules, and so far as they go they are plausible. 
Davidson added the qualification, “no test for metaphor that does not call for 
taste”; very likely Searle would concede that point, since he makes no claim to 
completeness and does not predict that even a final set of principles will give 
perfectly determinate results. But he wins this round on points.
Davidson’s second appeal was to open-endedness, unparaphrasability, and 
downright nonpropositionality. Searle’s account predicts open-endedness, 
since we may expect that his second and third stages will often fail to tamp 
down the possible speaker-meanings to just one or two. As for unparaphras-
ability, Searle grants that often we use metaphor precisely because there is 
no handy and accessible literal expression that means the same thing, but he 
argues that, if something is a linguistic meaning at all, in principle it could be 
formulated (however cumbersomely) in some language or other.
I think Searle wins that round also, but there is a deeper issue about 
nonpropositionality. Searle’s account is propositional to the core, since all 
speaker-meaning is meaning that so-and-so. If Davidson is right that what 
we notice or see in metaphor “is not, in general, propositional in character,” 
then by Searle’s own principle aforementioned it is not a linguistic meaning 
of any kind, not even a speaker-meaning.
Davidson’s “in general” makes his claim fairly ambitious, indeed false. 
Perhaps many poetic and other literary metaphors are so rich as to be 

Metaphor  187
nonpropositional in their purport, but everyday metaphors used casually by 
ordinary people are often perfectly paraphrasable in context. Quite often, 
just as Searle says, the speaker certainly does mean something, possibly 
something quite specific. Hans comes into his apartment and finds it a dis-
gusting mess12—dirty underwear on the floor, four days’ worth of dishes 
festering in the sink, other items not to be mentioned in a family publication 
such as this book—and Hans accosts his room-mate: “You pig!” He means 
fairly precisely that his room-mate is a filthy slob. (Had he instead found the 
apartment neat and clean but all the good food gone because his room-mate 
had scarfed it, he might have said “You pig!” meaning that his room-mate is 
a glutton.) So I think Davidson has overstated his case by overlooking facts 
of speaker-meaning.
On the other hand, just as Davidson says, writers who strew fresh literary 
metaphors, far from always having determinate speaker-meanings, may have 
no speaker-meanings or other propositional intent at all. That does not make 
the metaphors any less good or useful, because metaphor does sometimes 
have the quasi-perceptual character noted by Davidson; in some cases meta-
phor affects one’s literally perceptual set. (In other, intermediate cases, the 
metaphor just puts one in a different intellectual frame of mind for thinking 
about the topic at hand.) And that is a telling point against Searle.
Thus, each view has at least one advantage over the other. I believe that 
a rapprochement is possible, a hybrid view that combines the advantages of 
the Causal Theory and the Pragmatic Theory. But I leave that to you as an 
exercise, and merely note two further objections made against Searle.
First, Cooper (1986) and Moran (1997) point out that, if metaphorical 
meaning is simply speaker-meaning, then it is determined by and confined 
to the speaker’s intentions. Yet in cases of fresh metaphor, as Cooper says 
(p. 73), “even a quite definite speaker-intention does not finally determine the 
meaning of a metaphor.” Moran adds that “the interpretation of the light [the 
metaphor] sheds on its subject may outrun anything the speaker is thought 
explicitly to have had in mind” (p. 264).
Second, Ross (1981) and Kittay (1987) call our attention to a class of 
metaphor phenomena, sometimes called analogical, that indisputably involve 
meaning and meaning shift but are addressed neither by Davidson’s view nor 
by Searle’s. They are pervasive; they occur in nearly every sentence that comes 
out of our mouths. I will try to acquaint you with them; unfortunately, the 
theories of metaphor that exploit them are very dense and complicated, and I 
will not have the space to expound those.
Metaphor as analogical
As a way into the area in question, I introduce the infinite polysemy thesis 
defended by Weinreich (1966), Lyons (1977), Cohen (1985), and Davidson 
(1986), as well as by Ross and Kittay and by relevance theorists. That doctrine 
concerns lexical meaning, the meanings of words and short phrases rather 

188  The dark side
than those of whole sentences. It is that virtually any word, even a pronoun, 
may take on any number of novel and distinct lexical meanings without limit, 
given a suitable variety of environments within sentences in which they occur. 
Indeed, one and the same word, depending on the subsentential context and 
under strange enough external circumstances, can mean almost anything. 
Moreover—what is most surprising—words do this in such a way that the 
novel meanings can be grasped on the spot by normal hearers.
All this is because novel word meanings are generated in context from 
existing ones by intricate but fairly tractable mechanisms of analogy that 
are mobilized automatically by every normal speaker.13 For the same reason, 
very few such differences of word meaning are utter, brute ambiguities such 
as that of “bank” (financial vs. flying technique) or “die” (to perish vs. as 
used in craps and in board games); the polysemous meanings are systemati-
cally interrelated.
Consider the following sets of examples:
a	
“She dropped a stitch”; “She dropped her hem-line; “She dropped her 
book”; “She dropped a friend”; “She dropped her courses” (Ross 1981: 
33); “She dropped her eyes” (Kittay 1987: 154). Each occurrence of 
“dropped” in this list means something at least slightly different (and 
we may add the further noun forms “letter drop,” “parachute drop,” and 
“drop of blood”). Moreover, Ross says, “the meanings . . . are appropri-
ate, fitted to the completion words”.
b	
“He picked a date”; “He appointed a date”; “He fixed a date”; “He 
wanted a date”; “He borrowed a date” (Ross 1981: 80–1). Ross notes 
that each of these sentences is still ambiguous, and the ambiguity could 
be reduced only by the addition of wider contexts.
c	
“He charged the gun”; “He charged the jury”; “He charged her with 
murder”; “He charged him with responsibility”; “He charged more 
than the law allowed”; “He charged the boy too much”; “He charged 
the battery” (paraphrased from Ross 1981: 100). 
d	
My own example: “Dead man”; “dead duck”; “dead silence”; “dead 
ringer”; “dead march”; “dead eye”; “dead end”; “dead head”; “dead 
assets”; “dead heat”; “dead bolt”; “dead language”; “dead wrong”; 
“dead drunk”; “dead tired”; “dead boring”; “dead set (on)”; “the dead 
of winter.”
e	
Prepositions such as “in,” “on” and “of” notoriously have no constant 
meaning from context to context. (Lakoff and Johnson (1980) make 
this point trenchantly.)
f	
It occurs to me that even affixes and case markers are thus polysemous. 
The possessive in particular denotes seemingly countless different rela-
tionships, only some of them expressible as “ownership” in any sense  
at all.

Metaphor  189
It is true that we are making very fine distinctions here. Someone might 
well deny that all the foregoing word uses actually differ in meaning, and it 
may be suggested that some of the differences are only of tone or of connota-
tion. But when we ask, as a diagnostic, whether a sentence of the sort listed 
can simultaneously have more than one truth-value depending on disam-
biguation, the answer is obviously yes. Kittay reminds us of Peggy Parish’s 
children’s books, whose main character, the housemaid Amelia Bedelia, is 
deaf to such variations.
When asked to ‘dust the furniture’, she uses a powder-puff to spread 
face powder on the furniture; when required to ‘draw the curtains’, she 
produces a sketch of them; and when asked to ‘dress the chicken’, she 
puts a miniature pair of trousers and shirt on a bird intended for that 
night’s dinner.
(1987: 111)
“Dust,” “draw” and “dress” each have different senses, however closely 
those senses may be related to each other.
Unfortunately for our purposes, each of the two leading theories of ana-
logical meaning differentiation, Ross’s and Kittay’s—and even more their 
extension to a theory of metaphor in particular—are far too complicated 
even to be sketched here. I can only refer you to their works, and hope you 
have enjoyed this limited look at the dark side of philosophy of language.
Summary
The phenomenon of metaphor is far more prevalent than is generally 
• 
admitted by philosophers, and it raises two main questions: What is 
“metaphorical meaning”? And how do hearers grasp metaphorical 
meaning as readily as they do?
Most theorists have thought that metaphor is somehow a matter of 
• 
bringing out similarities between things or states of affairs.
Davidson argues that the stimulation of comparisons is purely causal, 
• 
not linguistic. At the opposite extreme, the Naive Simile Theory has 
it that metaphors simply abbreviate literal comparisons. Both views 
are easily refuted.
According to the Figurative Simile Theory, rather, metaphors are 
• 
short for similes themselves taken figuratively. This view avoids a few 
of the objections to the Naive Simile Theory, but not others.
Searle mobilizes Gricean apparatus to explain metaphorical mean-
• 
ing as speaker-meaning. This has some plausibility and overcomes 
Davidson’s leading objections to metaphorical meaning, but incurs 
other objections.

190  The dark side
A further theory of metaphor is based on the phenomenon, important 
• 
in its own right, of single words’ analogical differentiation into hosts 
of distinct though related meanings.
Questions
1	
Is there more to be said for Davidson’s causal theory, or for the Naive 
Simile Theory? 
2	
Pursue Fogelin’s Figurative Simile Theory, attacking or defending.
3	
Try to come up with a compromise view between Davidson and 
Searle.
4	
Defend Searle against one or more of our objections, or make a further 
objection.
5	
If you are willing to do some outside reading, discuss Ross’s and Kittay’s 
“analogy” phenomena. (Not for the faint of heart.)
Further reading
Black (1954/1962) was a seminal paper and attracted wide 
• 
commentary.
Reimer (2001) rehabilitates Davidson’s causal theory.
• 
Johnson (1981) is a useful anthology.
• 
Cohen (1975), Elgin and Scheffler (1987), Tirrell (1989) and Stern 
• 
(2000) offer further approaches to metaphor. White’s (1996) work is 
particularly subtle and detailed.

Notes
Chapter 1
	 1	 Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and Through The Looking Glass (London: 
Methuen, 1978), p. 180.
	 2	 Complete Poems, 1913–1962 (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1972).
Chapter 2
	 1	 The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, Vol. I, ed. E. W. Smith, New York: Heritage 
Press, 1950. A curious fact about Moriarty is that he has a brother, an army 
colonel, who is also named James. (If you are a Holmes buff and you did not 
already know that, you will enjoy verifying it yourself.)
	 2	 It was by arguing that existence is a perfection, in particular, that Anselm 
purported to prove the existence of God.
	 3	 No, sorry, you will have to get that story from Russell’s biographies.
	 4	 He meant “Scottish.” (In later twentieth-century usage and since, Scotch is a 
type of whisky, indeed the only type that is allowed to be spelled “whisky” as 
opposed to “whiskey.”) But since the example is a famous one of Russell’s I shall 
stick with it as it is.
	 5	 As you should expect, there is a second way of applying the analysis to (9), 
just as there were two ways of applying it to (7) on account of our having a 
choice as to where to put the “not.” The other way is to give the description 
primary occurrence, or wide scope with respect to “Albert believes that.” The 
Russellian paraphrase would then be: “At least one person authored Nothing 
and Beingness, and at most one person authored Nothing and Beingness, and 
whoever authored Nothing and Beingness is believed by Albert to be a profound 
thinker.” On this reading, (9) asserts a relation of belief holding between 
Albert and our moonlighting author—the person himself, regardless of how 
he is described—but this reading is exceptionally hard to hear, especially since 
coreferring descriptions do substitute into it without changing truth-value. The 
“secondary” understanding of (9) is much more common and natural.
	 6	 Russell added a fifth puzzle as well, which we may call the Problem of the 
Excluded Middle: Neither (1), “The present King of France is bald,” nor its 
apparent negation, “The present King of France is not bald,” is true. Yet a law of 
logic says that, of a sentence and its negation, one must be true. (Russell added 
that, since it seems the King is neither bald nor not bald, “Hegelians, who love a 
synthesis, will probably conclude that he wears a wig” (1905/1956: 48).) I leave it 
to you as an exercise to solve this fifth puzzle, in light of Russell’s treatments of 
the other four.

192  Notes
	 7	 Strawson notes that there are exceptions; occasionally a sentence containing 
a nonreferring description is out-and-out false. See Neale (1990), Lasersohn 
(1993), and Yablo (2006).
	 8	 G. K. Chesterton bases one of his Father Brown mystery stories, “The Invisible 
Man,” entirely on this phenomenon.
	 9	 Actually Donnellan’s characterizations do not perfectly line up with each other. 
For example, even in the referential case as he intends it we do not always “expect 
and intend our audience to realize whom we have in mind, and most importantly, 
to know that it is this person about whom we are going to say something,” for I 
may breathe “Smith’s murderer is insane” solely to myself, without expecting or 
intending anyone to realize anything. “Donnellan’s distinction” seems to be a 
family of related but distinct distinctions; commentators have gone on to try to 
sort this out (for example, Searle 1979b; Bertolet 1980; Devitt 1981b).
	10	 A determined Russellian might try to explicate the ambiguities along the lines 
of that of (7) and (9), as depending on whether we apply Russell’s analysis inside 
or outside “because” and “wish” respectively. Try it.
Chapter 3
	 1	 Meinong (as mentioned in Chapter 2) would have insisted that there is a winged 
horse, named “Pegasus,” and what sentence (2) does is predicate nonexistence 
of that particular horse. On this view, (2) is just like “Pegasus never ate alfalfa”; 
existing is something that you and I do because we got lucky, but that Pegasus 
did not manage to do, whether or not any of us has any choice in the matter.
Neither Frege nor Russell could accept that view (even though Russell had 
once taken it very seriously); it is much more plausible to think that (2) means, 
rather, just that the myth was only a myth, that there was no such winged horse 
that was ridden by Bellerophon.
	 2	 However, do not think that Russell’s theory is only a variant of Frege’s. There 
are several important differences between the two, and they make for different 
sets of strengths and weaknesses.
	 3	 In Chapter 2 we defined the notion of a description’s semantic denotatum/
referent, and someone might suggest that this provides the needed point of 
contact between our two disputants. But that would ignore the fact that there is 
no incompatibility whatever between Russell’s (7) and (8).
Improving on Russell, a later descriptivist might put the Name Claim in terms 
of descriptions used referentially, and appeal to the fact noted in our discussion 
of Donnellan that communication goes by speaker-referent rather than semantic 
referent. That would introduce a notion of “disagreement” between speakers 
that is weaker than clash of semantic content.
	 4	 This point needs further investigation, to say the least, since on Searle’s view, 
even though two such speakers may succeed in picking out the same individual, 
the sentences they use will still have different meanings and, for all that has been 
shown, we may still get the nondisagreement problem.
	 5	 This is an example of the Russellian’s departure from Frege. Frege did not allow 
that proper names have scope at all.
	 6	 In introducing this example in lecture form at Princeton University in 1970, 
Kripke interjected, “I hope Professor Gödel is not present” (p. 83).
Chapter 4
	 1	 See Lewis (1986) and Lycan (1994).

Notes  193
	 2	 This is an important qualification. If a term designated the same item in every 
possible world there is, that would mean that the item existed in every possible 
world, and that in turn would mean that the item could not but have existed. No 
ordinary thing or person has that kind of inevitability. Though you and I and 
the Brooklyn Bridge do really exist, we might not have, and so there are worlds 
in which we do not exist. What sort of item exists in every possible world? 
God, perhaps. Kripke is inclined to think that the numbers—at least the natural 
numbers starting 0, 1, 2, . . . —exist in every possible world. If so, then the 
numerals that refer to them presumably do designate the same things in every 
possible world, period. But that is hardly the normal case.
	 3	 For further examples of names used flaccidly, see Boër (1978).
	 4	 In Kripke (1979b) he comes back and he uses a variation on the Substitutivity 
puzzle about referring expressions to refute the Millian view. His argument there 
also seems to embarrass his own rigidity thesis, but he does not offer any alternate 
positive view. Kaplan (1975) fashions a made-up word “dthat” (pronounced 
“that”), which takes an ordinary description like “the man in the corner” and 
makes it denote its satisfier rigidly rather than flaccidly or attributively. Thus, 
“dthat man in the corner” refers to a given possible world, not to whatever man 
is in the corner in that world, but to the same man who is in the corner in this 
world. If I use “dthat man in the corner,” you should understand it as talking 
simply about that person, and my having put in the conceptual content, alluding 
to manhood and in-the-cornerness, is just a way of calling your attention to that 
man, as if I were fixing the reference of my own description without fixing its 
sense. So “dthat” functions as a rigidifier. Plantinga (1978) and Ackerman (1979) 
enlist a different version of the rigidifying idea in defending positive theories 
according to which proper names are rigid but not Millian; see below.
	 5	 Of course, if “Tully” is also a Millian name, that would amount to doubting that 
the person referred to is that very person. But this too is a possible understanding 
of (4).
Incidentally, the point about transparent readings can also be made regarding 
pronouns. Addressing Jacques himself, we could say “The police think you 
dropped the anchovies as you ran” (Sosa 1970; Schiffer 1979).
	 6	 Even the paperback edition of Lycan (1994) is expensive, I am afraid, but well 
worth every penny.
	 7	 And insufficiently emphasized by Kripke. It was first really prosecuted by Devitt 
(1989).
	 8	 Kripke cites H. L. Ginsberg, The Five Megilloth and Jonah (Jewish Publication 
Society of America, 1969), as seriously defending this view. Notice as well that 
Jonah’s name could not have been “Jonah”; there is no “j” sound in Hebrew. 
David Kaplan once maintained (in a 1971 lecture) that there is at least one 
real-world example of this type that favors the Causal–Historical Theory over 
Searle’s account of referring: the name “Robin Hood.” It seems historians had 
discovered that there really was a person who (causally) gave rise to the Robin 
Hood legend. It turns out, though, that that person was not poor, he lived 
nowhere near Sherwood Forest, he was not an outlaw (in fact, he and the Sheriff 
of Nottingham were fairly close), and his name was not even “Robin Hood.” On 
the causal–historical account, this makes perfect sense.
	 9	 This move would also help with two similar problems: the names of future 
individuals (“Let’s try to have a baby, and if we succeed its name will be ‘Kim’ ”); 
and the names of abstract objects, such as individual numbers, which have no 
causal powers.
You should wonder why, if the relevant causal–historical chain originated in 
a naming event, the naming event itself is not the actual referent of the name. 
(Thus, “Pegasus took only 30 seconds and was little strain for the author” might 

194  Notes
be a true sentence about an actual item, not a fictional sentence at all.) One might 
fairly stipulate that naming events are not referents unless they are themselves 
the objects of further naming events; or see the reply to objection 4 below.
	10	 He cites Isaac Taylor’s 1898 book, Names and Their History: A Handbook of 
Historical Geography and Topographical Nomenclature (Detroit, MI: Gale 
Research Co., 1969).
	11	 London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1927.
	12	 It is contested by Searle (1983), Rosenberg (1994), and Segal (2000).
	13	 The alert reader will have noticed an infelicity in Putnam’s example: since a very 
high proportion of the human body is constituted by water, the Twin-Earthlings 
can hardly be molecular duplicates of us. Ignore this, or if it really bothers you 
change the example to a natural kind that is unrepresented in the human body.
	14	 Burge (1979) argues on the basis of a Twin-Earth-style example that what a 
speaker means by a linguistic term depends in part on usage in the surrounding 
community, and so is not determined by the speaker’s head contents. This would 
be less surprising than Putnam’s point, though it does sustain his claim that 
meaning “ain’t in the head.” (Burge’s real concern in the article is for mind, not 
language: to show that even belief contents are not in the head.)
Chapter 5
	 1	 “The fact is that absolutely all the contents of the Universe, absolutely everything 
that is at all, may be divided into two classes—namely into propositions, on the 
one hand, and into things which are not propositions on the other hand” (Moore 
1953/1962: 71). Moore reported in an autobiographical note that he had once had 
a nightmare in which he dreamed that propositions were tables.
	 2	 Though, like “idea,” “concept” has also been used to mean a kind of particular 
mental entity. This equivocation has caused some confusion in contemporary 
cognitive psychology.
	 3	 “Why does opium put people to sleep?”—“Because it has a dormitive virtue.” 
That may sound profound until one realizes that the phrase is just transliterated 
Latin for “power of producing sleep.” The physician (Argan in Le Malade 
Imaginaire) might as well have spoken in Pig Latin: “It puts people to sleep 
because itay utspay eoplepay otay eepslay.” That is hardly an explanation.
Chapter 6
	 1	 Here are three infrequently noticed ways in which the notion of a “sentence” 
is quite a considerable abstraction away from real-world linguistic activity. 
First (you may be surprised to learn), human utterances do not come 
broken up into separate words. An acoustical analysis of oral speech 
production shows a continuous though of course variegated stream of sound. 
(When . . . we . . . talk . . . we . . . do . . . not . . . pause . . . even . . . briefly . . .  
between . . . words.) When we hear a stream of sound that constitutes somebody 
speaking, we put the word breaks in ourselves, automatically and without ever 
even thinking about it. That is already an abstraction, a theoretical or analytical 
move that we make.
Second, to think of something as a “sentence” presupposes the notion 
of grammatical well-formedness. Not just any string of words constitutes a 
sentence; only the grammatical strings do. And the idea of grammaticality is a 
sophisticated one, even though it is grasped however dimly by four-year-olds.
Third, consider the category of what linguists used to call semi-grammatical 
utterance. Some of the utterances that people produce are only semi-grammatical, 

Notes  195
in that if their words were written down on paper, the result would not count 
as an entirely grammatical sentence by some rule of grammar (it has some 
grammatical infelicity in it), but it is coherent enough to be understood. In fact, 
I suspect most people talk that way most of the time. At the very least, we all 
do things like making false starts, and we all engage vigorously in mid-course 
editing. Yet not only do we get understood by our hearers; nobody even notices. 
We correct for semi-grammaticality quite automatically. That correction is a 
theoretical move made by our brains, and yet another abstraction away from 
speech events in the real world.
	 2	 Paragraph 43 of Wittgenstein’s (1953) Philosophical Investigations is famously 
misquoted. It reads, “For a large class of cases—though not for all—in which we 
employ the word ‘meaning’ it can be defined thus: the meaning of a word is its 
use in the language.” Wittgenstein was very serious about “though not for all”; 
he did not hold that “meaning is use,” period. Indeed, he was allergic to universal 
generalizations. He thought it a deep defect of philosophy that philosophy 
seeks universal generalizations; the real world, he contended, is always more 
complicated than that.
As Georg Henrik von Wright put it, Wittgenstein “lived on the border of 
mental illness  .  .  .  throughout his life” (“Biographical Sketch,” in Norman 
Malcolm, Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1958). Wittgenstein also distinguished himself from most twentieth-century 
English-speaking philosophers by having had quite an interesting life; see Ray 
Monk’s wonderful biography, Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius (New 
York: Free Press, Maxwell Macmillan International, 1990).
	 3	 Reported by Norman Malcolm (1958: 65). “A central idea of his philosophy, the 
notion of a ‘language-game’, apparently had its genesis in this incident.”
	 4	 Horwich (1998) offers a similar if less well worked-out picture. Unlike Brandom, 
he emphasizes that individual expressions have meanings: a given expression’s 
“meaning property” is “its use being governed by such-and-such regularity—or, 
more specifically, the property that every use of the word is explained in terms 
of the fact that we accept certain specified sentences containing it” (p. 6, italics 
original). For each word, there is a “basic use regularity.” Examples: We tend 
to accept “That’s red” (if it is actually uttered) in the presence of a red thing; 
we accept “p and q” iff we accept p and we accept q. (“Accepting” a sentence is 
supposed to be a psychological notion (pp. 94–6), rather than a recognizable 
form of actual social behavior; this is another departure from Wittgenstein and 
from Brandom.) Compositionality is briefly addressed in chapter 7: A complex 
expression’s meaning property consists in a “construction property,” e.g.: x 
means DOGS BARK in that “x results from putting terms whose meanings are 
DOG and BARK, in that order, into a schema whose meaning is NS V” (p. 156). 
But, unless I have missed it, nothing is said as to how the “schema” is supposed 
to have a “use regularity” despite not being an expression of English.
Chapter 7
	 1	 Do not miss Kingsley Amis’ tale of this word in The King’s English (London: 
HarperCollins, 1998: 118–19). Amis swears he has seen the word misspelled 
as “jejeune” and even pronounced in pseudo-French as “zherzherne.” Come to 
think of it, do not miss the rest of Amis’ book either.
	 2	 There is a tendency in the Gricean literature to assume that speaker-meaning is 
unique, that a given utterance has but a single speaker-meaning. That assumption 
is false; we are complex communicators, and we sometimes mean more than one 
thing at a time by uttering the sentence that we do. Perhaps I mean what the 

196  Notes
sentence means and also some further conveyed meaning. Or if you are good 
at puns, your sentence may be itself ambiguous and you intend both meanings 
at once. Shakespeare could mean as many as five different things in a single 
utterance.
	 3	 It did not come chronologically first, but was presented in Grice (1968).
	 4	 In particular, let us confine the discussion to declarative sentences, though Grice 
was careful to address imperatives and others as well.
	 5	 Yes, it has. Can you believe that?
	 6	 One possible fix, suggested to me by the late Wendy Nankas, is to talk not just 
of activation but of reinforcement.
	 7	 Ziff’s case is strongly similar to an example of J.  O.  Urmson’s regarding 
thumbscrews, discussed by Grice (1969: 152–3). In response, Grice offered what 
he labels “Redefinition I”; but I have never seen exactly how that redefinition 
was supposed to rule out this kind of counterexample. There is a set of examples 
begun in conversation by Dennis Stampe, Stephen Schiffer, and P. F. Strawson, 
involving deceit and second-guessing of a certain kind. Stampe’s version was 
the first to be addressed by Grice (1969). The counterexamples and responses 
lead to an indefinite regress of particularly convoluted cases and revisions of the 
analysis. I doubt that you would thank me for dragging you through even the 
second example in the regress. (You might even try to return this book and get 
a fraction of your money back.) So I shall not even expound the first.
	 8	 This is the opening line of a song lyric that appears in Goethe’s novel Wilhelm 
Meisters Lehrjahre (1795–6), book 3, chapter 1.
	 9	 Schiffer (1972: chapters 5–6) pursued a different method, employing Lewis’ 
theory of conventions.
Chapter 8
	 1	 The foregoing examples are skeptical hypotheses of a kind that every 
philosophical tradition has taken seriously; the positivists had to work hard to 
argue that those “hypotheses” are meaningless even though the sentences look 
perfectly meaningful at first glance. The positivists had less patience and less 
trouble with the Hegelian idealism of the late nineteenth century, as in “The 
Absolute is perfect,” and with Heideggerian existentialism, as in “The Nothing 
noths” (“Das Nichts nichtet”). I once received a brochure, advertising a newly 
published philosophy book. The brochure contained a bulleted list of the book’s 
special features. And one of the bulleted items was: “Eleven new ways in which 
negation negates itself.” I swear I am not making this up.
	 2	 Of course, there are degrees of understanding. We may not understand a term 
completely. (Do you know exactly what a camshaft is? How about a linear 
accelerator?) But to understand a sentence even in part, we have to have some 
idea of what it says. But again, that implies that there already is something that 
it says prior to anything being determined about its verification conditions.
	 3	 Verificationism flirts with what the late David Stove (1991) called the “Ishmael 
Effect,” the phenomenon of a philosophical theory’s making a sole exception 
of itself. (The reference is to Moby Dick: “And I only am escaped alone to tell 
thee”; actually this is itself a quotation from Job 1:15.) For example: “All we 
can know is that we can know nothing.” “The only moral sin is intolerance.” 
“Absolutely everything is relative.”
	 4	 See Achinstein (1965) and Churchland (1988). But on the second point there has 
been some dissent, such as Fodor (1988).
	 5	 Actually a good thoroughgoing Quinean should not accept this argument. Why 
not? (Hint: see the previous paragraph.)

Notes  197
Chapter 9
	 1	 Here he follows Ziff (1960).
	 2	 “Words” is not quite right. Some meaning atoms are smaller than words: affixes 
such as “un-” (prefix) and “-able” (suffix). Some words are only pleonastic parts 
of meaning atoms, as in the French “ne . . . pas.” Linguists call true meaning 
atoms morphemes. But for convenience and familiarity I shall continue to speak 
of “words.”
	 3	 The compositionality thesis is simply assumed by most theorists, but it is hard to 
formulate precisely, and it has been seriously questioned, as by Pelletier (1994); 
see also Szabó (2007).
	 4	 More sophisticated present-day descendants of the emotivists include Blackburn 
(1984, 1993) and Gibbard (1990); but they try to find ways of granting that moral 
judgments can be called “true” or “false” and figure in T-sentences, without 
granting that moral judgments state facts about the world.
	 5	 See Lycan (1984: chapter 3). I should confess that that work is a global defense 
of the Truth-Condition Theory. I believe the theory is correct and worth paying 
high prices to hear live in concert.
	 6	 There is also a nasty problem about ambiguous sentences; see Parsons (1973) and 
Lycan (1984: chapter 3).
	 7	 I have been told by at least one biologist that the two do not apply to the same 
things; there are animals with hearts but no kidneys, or the other way around. 
But ignore this squalid fact and pretend that “renate” and “cordate” do apply to 
exactly the same animals.
Chapter 10
	 1	 Montague (1960) built up a structure of such higher- (and higher-) order 
intensions corresponding to more and more abstract parts of speech. In fact, out 
of a desire to one-up Quine, Montague explicitly assigned very rarefied individual 
intensions to “sake,” “behalf,” and “dint.” As I mentioned in chapter 1, in this 
way he meant also to strike a blow on behalf of the Referential Theory. (But it is 
at best a glancing blow: the words are not taken as denoting their intensions as if 
they were proper names.)
	 2	 See again Lewis (1986) and Lycan (1994).
	 3	 See, for example, Heil and Mele (1993).
Chapter 11
	 1	 The distinctions developed here are fairly traditional. But recently there has been 
some dispute over the best way(s) in which to draw the semantics–pragmatics 
distinction in particular. See, for example, Bach (2002) and Bezuidenhout 
(2002).
	 2	 It is further developed in chapter 3 of Lycan (1984).
	 3	 This was once pointed out to me by Peter van Inwagen.
	 4	 This treatment of tense is a fudge, for convenience; for a fuller treatment of 
tense, see Lycan (1984: 55–62).
	 5	 This presupposes that deictic elements are somehow marked as such in logical 
form.
	 6	 There is a more serious objection to it as well, pointed out by Burge (1974).

198  Notes
Chapter 12
	 1	 Austin took propositional content nearly for granted. He strongly opposed 
entity theories, so by “locutionary content” he did not mean anything about 
propositions as things. He merely gestured towards “sense and reference,” 
alluding to Frege but evidently not using “sense” to mean a kind of theoretical 
entity. Austin was offhand about propositional content because his focus was on 
the other thing, illocutionary force, which varies independently.
	 2	 In a recent Kudzu comic strip, the preacher Will B. Dunn resists the urging 
of a liberal parishioner that the Ten Commandments be renamed “The Ten 
Suggestions.”
Strawson (1964), Schiffer (1972), and Bach and Harnish (1979) argue 
convincingly that not all illocutionary force is as purely conventional as that 
of (1)–(7), the comparatively “pure” performatives with which we began. Some 
force, that of being an advising or being a question-asking, say, is more a matter 
of Gricean speaker-intentions.
	 3	 Moreover, there is evidence that some semantical phenomena cannot be explained 
except by reference to illocutionary factors (see Barker 1995, 2004).
	 4	 Just to save you looking: She was christened by Isabel Hoey, daughter of the 
then Governor of North Carolina. I am told that Hoey did use the traditional 
bottle of champagne, while a band played “Anchors Aweigh.”
	 5	 Linguists have often missed the fact that Austin used “infelicitous” as the 
broadest possible umbrella term. They sometimes use the word as applying 
to sentences, and neologistically mean something like “nonsyntactically and 
nonsemantically but pragmatically defective [in a way that is supposed to be 
fairly specific but is never specified].”
Chapter 13
	 1	 Notice, by the way, that if you ask me a question and I then produce an utterance, 
you automatically assume that my utterance is intended as an answer to your 
question. Suppose you ask, “Why are you late for class?,” and I say, “We had 
spaghetti at our house last night.” You would think: What? How does having 
spaghetti impede getting to class on the following day? Was it tainted? If you did 
start thinking along those lines, notice that you would simply have assumed that 
I was cooperating by producing an answer to the question you asked. One thing 
you will gradually learn, the more you think about conversational cooperation, 
is how pathetically easy it is for a trained linguist or philosopher of language to 
mislead, deceive, cheat, and hoodwink other people without ever saying anything 
false. Advertising copywriters and politicians are masters of conversational 
implicature, having worked it out instinctively, because it allows them to convey 
falsehoods without breaking the law by uttering false sentences.
	 2	 Grice adds a third feature, “detachability”. Since his form of conversational 
reasoning proceeds from the propositional content of the sentence uttered, any 
logical equivalent of the sentence should generate the same implicatures in the 
same context. But there are obvious objections to this, as when the rule against 
prolixity is exploited.
	 3	 Grice distinguishes (p. 73) between “particularized” implicature, ones such as 
(1a) or (1b), which must be worked out on the spot from the contextual facts, 
and “generalized” implicature, such as (2), (3) or (4a), which “is normally carried 
by saying that p.” No one disputes the existence of such a distinction, but its 
basis is highly controversial (Bach 1994a; Levinson 2000; Carston 2002; Horn 
2004; Recanati 2004).

Notes  199
	 4	 Philosophers impressed by the Connectionist approach in Artificial Intelligence 
will be especially suspicious, not to say derisive. But such philosophers are also 
skeptical of syntax, and of semantics conceived as explaining anything about 
human beings.
	 5	 Of course this formulation is unfaithful to Strawson’s original intent, because he 
did not want us to replace our two-valued logic for sentences with a three-valued 
logic for sentences; it was not that instead of having only these two possible 
truth values, “true” and “false,” a sentence now can have a third one, “zip” or 
“neuter.” Strawson’s point was that it is not sentences that have truth-values  
at all.
	 6	 There; was that worth the price of this book, or what?
	 7	 Ironically, I myself doubt that Grice’s own sentence is an example of conventional 
implicature, because I believe the implication is carried by the semantic meaning 
of the word “therefore.” “Therefore” means “for that reason.” And so Grice’s 
sentence is synonymous with “He is an Englishman, and for that reason, he is 
brave,” which in my speech entails that his being an Englishman is a reason or 
ground of his being brave. Fortunately, there are plenty of better examples.
	 8	 Everyone is always exaggerating!
	 9	 Stanley (2000) argues instead that many of them are cases of saturation.
Chapter 14
	 1	 “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church” (Matthew 16:18).
	 2	 Said by Romeo, after asking (tendentiously) what light through yonder window 
broke. Juliet also “hangs upon the cheek of night/Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop’s 
ear,” but that was back in Act I and I hope he thought better of it.
	 3	 Richard III, I. i. 1.
	 4	 Hamlet, I. iii. 116–17. But the most elaborately mixed of Shakespeare’s metaphors 
known to me is patriotic:
This royal throne of kings, this sceptred isle,
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi-paradise,
This fortress built by Nature for herself
Against infection and the hand of war,
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
Feared by their breed and famous by their birth . . .  
(Richard II, II. i. 40–52)
He got away with it.
	 5	 And by earlier empiricists as well. Blackburn (1984: 172) offers a pungent quote 
from Hobbes’ Leviathan.
	 6	 I owe this observation to Franklin Goldsmith.
	 7	 Here and elsewhere he draws on Tversky (1977).
	 8	 If you want greed, try cats. But no one ever calls someone a cat as a metaphorical 
way of saying that that person is greedy.

200  Notes
A further example is “bastard.” I know of no evidence that a male person 
whose parents were not married when he was born is any more likely to be 
callous or unscrupulous than is anyone else.
	 9	 Fogelin addresses this objection (pp. 44–5), but I think weakly. He complains 
that “gorilla” is not a metaphor but a dead metaphor; if so, that seems inessential 
to the example. Then he suggests that either the ellipsis is larger than usual, 
including “what most people think —s are like,” or the speaker “speaks from 
the perspective of common belief which he and his listener know contains false 
beliefs they do not share.” The first of the latter moves is semantically desperate; 
the second, in the absence of some independent motivation, is ad hoc.
	10	 According to cummings’ poem “anyone lived in a pretty how town” (cited in 
chapter 1), its protagonist [A]nyone “sang his didn’t he danced his did” (line 
4).
	11	 Searle himself reserves the term “indirect” for types of communication, such 
as indirect force and some conversational implicature, in which one conveys a 
second meaning in addition to meaning what one’s sentence says.
	12	 A real-life example, I am sorry to say, brought up by Hans during a seminar.
	13	 This idea is actually very old; Aristotle explored it, and it was vigorously 
elaborated by the medieval philosophers.

Glossary
Analytic
A sentence is analytic if its truth, 
however trivial, is guaranteed by the 
collective meanings of the words that 
occur in it.
Anaphoric expression
An anaphoric expression inherits its 
meaning from another expression, 
its antecedent, which usually occurs 
earlier in the sentence or in a previous 
sentence.
Antecedent (of an anaphoric 
expression)
The antecedent of an anaphoric 
expression is the expression from which 
the anaphoric expression inherits its 
meaning.
Compositionally, 
compositionality
A characteristic of how we understand 
novel sentences, namely that we 
understand such sentences in virtue 
of understanding the individual words 
and how they are strung together; 
presupposes that the meaning of a 
sentence is determined by the meanings 
of its component words together with 
their syntactic relations to each other.
Context of utterance
The setting in which a piece of language 
is used by a speaker.
Contextual definition
A type of definition, to be contrasted 
with explicit definition, whereby one 
exhibits the role played by the word 
to be defined by showing how one can 
paraphrase whole sentences in which the 
word occurs.

202  Glossary
Conventional implicature
Conventional implicature is implicature, 
in that a speaker implicates something 
rather than actually saying it, but it 
differs from conversational implicature 
in that conventional implicatures are 
grasped immediately, not on the basis of 
reasoning. Normally they are carried by 
tendentious choices of particular words.
Conversational implicature
Conversational implicature is 
implicature that one works out, or could 
work out, using reasoning based on 
something like Grice’s conversational 
maxims.
Deictic
A deictic element is one whose semantic 
interpretation varies with the context 
of utterance, such as a tense marker 
or a demonstrative pronoun. Deictic 
elements are also called indexicals.
Description theory of proper 
names
The thesis that names are equivalent in 
meaning to descriptions.
Domain
The class of things over which a 
quantifier ranges.
Extension
A term’s extension is the class of things 
to which the term applies; the extension 
of “red” is the class of red things.
Flaccid designator
A singular term that designates different 
things in different possible worlds.
Free enrichment
The contextual filling in of a constituent 
of what is said even though there is no 
even covert hole in logical form or other 
specifically linguistic control for that 
constituent.
General terms
Terms, such as “dog” and “brown”, that 
are meant to apply to more than one 
thing.
Ideational theories
Theories that hold that meanings are 
mental entities.
Identity statement
An identity statement contains two 
singular terms. If the statement is true, 
both its terms pick out or denote the 
same person or thing.
Idiolect
The personal and distinctive speech of a 
particular individual.

Glossary  203
Intensional isomorphism
There is an intensional isomorphism 
between two sentences when the 
sentences have the same intension and 
have it in virtue of being composed in 
the same way (or much the same way) 
out of the same atomic intensions.
Intensional logic
A formal system delineating the logic of 
Fregean senses.
Intensional sentences
Sentences in which coextensive terms 
cannot be substituted without possibly 
changing the truth-value of the 
sentences themselves.
Lexical meaning
The meaning of a word or short phrase, 
as contrasted with sentence meaning.
Modal
Concerning possibility and necessity.
Naturalkind terms
Common nouns, such as “gold” and 
“tiger,” that refer to natural substances 
or organisms.
Possible world
A world, or universe, which might have 
been the actual world.
Quantifiers
Words, such as “all” or “some,” that 
quantify general terms.
Referential Theory of Linguistic 
Meaning
This theory attempts to explain the 
significance or meaning of all linguistic 
expressions in terms of their having 
been conventionally associated with 
things in the world, and attempts to 
explain a human being’s understanding 
of a sentence in terms of that person’s 
knowing what the sentence’s component 
words refer to.
Restricted quantification
A feature of most quantified statements 
whereby the domain over which the 
quantifiers range is not the entire 
universe. The domain is restricted 
in some way typically indicated by 
context.
Rigid designator
A singular term that denotes the same 
thing in every possible world (more 
strictly, in every possible world in which 
that thing exists).

204  Glossary
Saturation
The contextual plugging in of an 
appropriate value to an underlying 
position in logical form.
Semantic presupposition
A sentence S1 semantically presupposes 
a sentence S2 only in the case that, if S2 
is false, then necessarily S1 lacks truth-
value.
“Sense” (Frege)
The sort of meaning a linguistic 
expression has over and above its 
(putative) referent.
Semantic referent
The individual, if one exists, that a 
description purports to pick out in 
virtue of the individual’s fitting the 
description; also called the semantic 
denotatum.
Speaker-meaning
What a speaker means in uttering a 
sentence; also called, by Grice, “utterer’s 
meaning.”
Speaker-reference
The object, if any, to which the speaker 
who uses a description intends to call to 
the attention of her/his audience.
Truth condition
The condition under which a sentence 
would be true.
Truth-functional
A connective is truth-functional if the 
truth value of compound sentences 
containing it is strictly determined 
by the truth values of the component 
sentences. For example, “and” is a truth-
functional connective because the truth 
value of sentences of the form “A and 
B” is strictly determined by the truth 
values of “A” and “B” respectively.

Bibliography
Note: Dates given in the form “1954/1962” refer first to the date of original publication 
followed by the more accessible reprinting actually cited.
Abbott, B. (2003) “A Reply to Szabó’s ‘Descriptions and Uniqueness’.” Philosophical 
Studies 103: 221–9.
Achinstein, P. (1965) “The Problem of Theoretical Terms.” American Philosophical 
Quarterly 2: 193–203.
Ackerman, D. (1979) “Proper Names, Prepositional Attitudes and Non-Descriptive 
Connotations.” Philosophical Studies 35: 55–69.
Adams, E. (1965) “The Logic of Conditionals.” Inquiry 8: 166–89.
Almog, J., Perry, J. and Wettstein, H. (eds.) (1989) Themes from Kaplan. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Alston, W. (1963) “Meaning and Use.” Philosophical Quarterly 51: 107–24.
—— (2000) Illocutionary Acts and Sentence Meaning. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press.
Austin, J. L. (1961) “Performative Utterances.” In J. L. Austin, Philosophical Papers. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. (1962) How To Do Things With Words. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Avramides, A. (1989) Meaning and Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ayer, A. J. (1946) Language, Truth and Logic, 2nd edn. London: Victor Gollancz.
Bach, K. (1987) Thought and Reference, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (1994a) “Semantic Slack: What is Said and More.” In S. L. Tsohatzidis (ed.), 
Foundations of Speech Act Theory: Philosophical and Linguistic Perspectives, 
London: Routledge.
—— (1994b) “Conversational Impliciture.” Mind and Language 9: 124–61.
—— (1999) “The Myth of Conventional Implicature.” Linguistics and Philosophy 22: 
327–66.
—— (2002) “Semantic, Pragmatic.” In J. K. Campbell, M. O’Rourke, and D. Shier 
(eds.), Meaning and Truth: Investigations in Philosophical Semantics, New York: 
Seven Bridges Press.
Bach, K. and Harnish, R.  M. (1979) Linguistic Communication and Speech Acts. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barker, S. (1995) “Towards a Pragmatic Theory of ‘If’.” Philosophical Studies 78: 
185–211.
—— (2004) Renewing Meaning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bar-On, D. (1992) “Semantic Verificationism, Linguistic Behaviorism, and 
Translation.” Philosophical Studies 66: 235–59.

206  Bibliography
Beardsley, M. (1962) “The Metaphorical Twist.” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 22: 293–307.
—— (1967) “Metaphor.” In P. Edwards (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vol. 5. 
New York: Macmillan.
Bennett, J. (1971) Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
—— (1976) Linguistic Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bertolet, R. (1980) “The Semantic Significance of Donnellan’s Distinction.” 
Philosophical Studies 37: 281–8.
Bezuidenhout, A. (2002) “Radical Pragmatics.” In J. K. Campbell, M. O’Rourke, and 
D. Shier (eds.), Meaning and Truth: Investigations in Philosophical Semantics. New 
York: Seven Bridges Press.
Bezuidenhout, A., and Reimer, M. (eds.) (2004) Descriptions and Beyond. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Biro, J. (1979) “Intentionalism in the Theory of Meaning.” Monist 62: 238–58.
Black, M. (1954/1962) “Metaphor.” In M. Black, Models and Metaphors. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press.
—— (1973) “Meaning and Intention: An Examination of Grice’s Views.” New 
Literary History 4: 257–79.
Black, M. and Geach, P. (eds.) (1952) Translations from the Philosophical Writings of 
Gottlob Frege. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Blackburn, S. (1984) Spreading the Word. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
—— (1993) Essays in Quasi-Realism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Blakemore, D. (1987) Semantic Constraints on Relevance. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
—— (1992) Understanding Utterances. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Boër, S. (1978) “Attributive Names.” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 19: 
177–85.
—— (1985) “Substance and Kind: Reflections on the New Theory of Reference.” 
In B.  K.  Matilal and J.  L.  Shaw (eds.), Analytical Philosophy in Comparative 
Perspective. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Bradley, F. H. (1930) Appearance and Reality. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Brandom, R. (1994) Making It Explicit. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (2000) Articulating Reasons. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Braun, D. (2005) “Empty Names, Fictional Names, Mythical Names.” Noûs 39: 
596–631.
Brogaard, B. (2007) “The but not All: A New Account of Plural Definite Descriptions.” 
Mind and Language 22: 402–26.
Burge, T. (1973) “Reference and Proper Names.” Journal of Philosophy 70: 425–39. 
Reprinted in D.  Davidson and G.  Harman (eds.) (1975) Semantics of Natural 
Language. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1974) “Demonstrative Constructions, Reference and Truth.” Journal of 
Philosophy 71: 205–23.
—— (1979) “Individualism and the Mental.” In P.  French, T.  E.  Uehling, and 
H.  Wettstein (eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy IV: Studies in Metaphysics. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Campbell, J.  K., O’Rourke, M., and Shier, D. (eds.) (2002) Meaning and Truth: 
Investigations in Philosophical Semantics. New York: Seven Bridges Press.
Carnap, R. (1947/1956) Meaning and Necessity, 2nd edn. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.

Bibliography  207
Carnie, A. (2001) Syntax. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Carston, R. (1988) “Implicature, Explicature, and Truth-Theoretic Semantics.” In 
R.  Kempson (ed.), Mental Representation. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. Reprinted in S. Davis (ed.) (1991) Pragmatics: A Reader. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
—— (2002) Thoughts and Utterances: The Pragmatics of Explicit Communication. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Cartwright, R. (1962) “Propositions.” In R. J. Butler (ed.), Analytic Philosophy, vol. 
1. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
—— (1987) “On the Origins of Russell’s Theory of Descriptions.” In R. Cartwright, 
Philosophical Essays. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chierchia, G. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1990) Meaning and Grammar: An 
Introduction to Semantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1957) Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton & Co.
—— (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P.  M. (1988) “Perceptual Plasticity and Theoretical Neutrality.” 
Philosophy of Science 55: 167–87.
Cohen, L. J. (1964) “Do Illocutionary Forces Exist?” Philosophical Quarterly 14: 
118–37.
—— (1971) “Some Remarks about Grice’s Views about the Logical Particles of 
Natural Language.” In Y.  Bar-Hillel (ed.), Pragmatics of Natural Languages. 
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1985) “A Problem about Ambiguity in Truth-Theoretic Semantics.” Analysis 
45: 129–34.
Cohen, T. (1975) “Figurative Speech and Figurative Acts.” Journal of Philosophy 71: 
669–84.
Cole, P. (ed.) (1978) Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 9: Pragmatics. New York: Academic 
Press.
Cole, P. and Morgan, J. L. (eds) (1975) Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts. New 
York: Academic Press.
Cooper, D. E. (1986) Metaphor. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Cresswell, M. J. (1973) Logics and Languages. London: Methuen.
Culicover, P. (1997) Principles and Parameters: An Introduction to Syntactic Theory. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, D. (1967a) “Truth and Meaning.” Synthese 17: 304–23. Reprinted in 
D. Davidson (1984) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
—— (1967b) “The Logical Form of Action Sentences.” In N. Rescher (ed.), The Logic 
of Decision and Action. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
—— (1968) “On Saying That.” Synthese 19: 130–46. Reprinted in D. Davidson and 
G. Harman (eds.) (1975) The Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: Dickenson. Also 
reprinted in D. Davidson (1984) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
—— (1970/1975) “Semantics for Natural Languages.” In D. Davidson and G. Harman 
(eds.) (1975) The Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: Dickenson. Reprinted in 
D. Davidson (1984) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
—— (1978) “What Metaphors Mean.” In S.  Sacks (ed) On Metaphor. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. Reprinted in D.  Davidson (1984) Inquiries into 
Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

208  Bibliography
—— (1984) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
—— (1986) “A Nice Derangement of Epitaphs.” In E. LePore, Truth and Interpretation: 
Perspectives of the Philosophy of Donald Davidson. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Davidson, D. and Harman, G. (eds.) (1972) Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht: 
D. Reidel.
—— (eds.) (1975) The Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: Dickenson.
Davis, S. (1991) Pragmatics: A Reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davis, W. (1998) Implicature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Devitt, M. (1981a) Designation. New York: Columbia University Press.
—— (1981b) “Donnellan’s Distinction.” In P. French, T. Uehling, and H. Wettstein 
(eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy VI: The Foundations of Analytic Philosophy. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
—— (1983) “Dummett’s Anti-Realism.” Journal of Philosophy 80: 73–99.
—— (1989) “Against Direct Reference.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 14: 206–40.
—— (1996) Coming to Our Senses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Devitt, M. and Sterelny, K. (1987) Language and Reality: An Introduction to the 
Philosophy of Language. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Donnellan, K. (1966) “Reference and Definite Descriptions.” Philosophical Review 
75: 281–304.
—— (1968) “Putting Humpty Dumpty Together Again.” Philosophical Review 77: 
203–15.
—— (1970) “Proper Names and Identifying Descriptions.” Synthese 21: 335–58. 
Reprinted in D.  Davidson and G.  Harman (eds.) (1972) Semantics of Natural 
Language. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1974) “Speaking of Nothing.” Philosophical Review 83: 3–31.
—— (1979) “Speaker Reference, Descriptions, and Anaphora.” In P.  French, 
T. Uehling and H. Wettstein (eds.), Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy 
of Language. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Duhem, P. (1906/1954) The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, trans. P. Wiener. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dummett, M. (1973) Frege: Philosophy of Language. New York: Harper & Row.
—— (1975) “What Is a Theory of Meaning?” In S.  Guttenplan (ed.), Mind and 
Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (1978) Truth and Other Enigmas, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dupré, J. (1981) “Natural Kinds and Biological Taxa.” Philosophical Review 90: 
66–90.
Elgin, C. and Scheffler, I. (1987) “Mainsprings of Metaphor.” Journal of Philosophy 
84: 331–5.
Erwin, E. (1970) The Concept of Meaninglessness. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Erwin, E., Kleiman, L., and Zemach, E. (1976) “The Historical Theory of Reference.” 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 54: 50–7.
Evans, G. (1973) “The Causal Theory of Names.” Aristotelian Society Supplementary 
Volume 47: 187–208.
—— (1977) “Pronouns, Quantifiers, and Relative Clauses (I).” Canadian Journal of 
Philosophy 7: 467–536.
—— (1982) The Varieties of Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Evans, G. and McDowell, J. (eds) (1976) Truth and Meaning. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

Bibliography  209
Everett, A., and Hofweber, T. (2000) Empty Names, Fiction, and the Puzzles of Non-
Existence. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Fillmore, C. (1975) The Santa Cruz Lectures on Deixis. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Linguistics Club Publications.
Fine, A. (1975) “How to Compare Theories: Reference and Change.” Noûs 9: 
17–32.
Fodor, J. A. (1988) “A Reply to Churchland’s ‘Perceptual Plasticity and Theoretical 
Neutrality’.” Philosophy of Science 55: 188–98.
Fogelin, R. (1988) Figuratively Speaking. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Frege, G. (1892/1952a) “On Concept and Object.” In M. Black and P. Geach (eds.) 
(1952) Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
—— (1892/1952b) “On Sense and Reference.” In M.  Black and P.  Geach (eds.) 
(1952) Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell. Reprinted in D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.) (1975) The Logic of 
Grammar. Encino, CA: Dickenson.
—— (1918/1956) “The Thought.” Mind 65: 289–311.
French, P., Uehling, T., and Wettstein, H. (eds.) (1979) Contemporary Perspectives in 
the Philosophy of Language. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Gazdar, G. (1979) Pragmatics: Implicature, Presupposition, and Logical Form. New 
York: Academic Press.
Geach, P. (1962) Reference and Generality. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Geis, M. and Zwicky, A. (1971) “On Invited Inferences.” Linguistic Inquiry 2: 
561–6.
Gibbard, A. (1990) Wise Choices, Apt Feelings. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Ginet, C. (1979) “Performativity.” Linguistics and Philosophy 3: 245–65.
Goodman, N. (1970) “Seven Strictures on Similarity.” In L. Foster and J. W. Swanson 
(eds.), Experience and Theory. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
—— (1981) “Twisted Tales: Or Story, Study, and Symphony.” Synthese 46: 331–50.
Gordon, D. and Lakoff, G. (1975) “Conversational Postulates.” In P.  Cole and 
J. L. Morgan (eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts. New York: Academic 
Press.
Green, G. M. (1989) Pragmatics and Natural Language Understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Grice, H.  P. (1957) “Meaning.” Philosophical Review 66: 377–88. Reprinted in 
H.  P.  Grice (1989) Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
—— (1968) “Utterer’s Meaning, Sentence-Meaning, and Word-Meaning.” 
Foundations of Language 4: 225–42. Reprinted in H. P. Grice (1989) Studies in the 
Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (1969) “Utterer’s Meaning and Intentions.” Philosophical Review 78: 147–77. 
Reprinted in H. P. Grice (1989) Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
—— (1975) “Logic and Conversation.” In D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.), The 
Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: Dickenson. Reprinted in P. Cole and J. L. Morgan 
(eds.) (1975) Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts. New York: Academic Press 
(page references are to the latter). Also reprinted in H. P. Grice (1989) Studies in 
the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

210  Bibliography
—— (1978) “Further Notes on Logic and Conversation.” In P.  Cole (ed.) (1978) 
Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 8: Pragmatics. New York: Academic Press. Reprinted 
in H.  P.  Grice (1989) Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
—— (1989) Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Grover, D., Camp, J., and Belnap, N. (1975) “A Prosentential Theory of Truth.” 
Philosophical Studies 27: 73–125.
Gunderson, K. (ed.) (1975) Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 8: 
Language, Mind, and Knowledge. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hallett, G. (1967) Wittgenstein’s Definition of Meaning as Use. New York: Fordham 
University Press.
Harman, G. (1967–8) “Quine on Meaning and Existence, I.” Review of Metaphysics 
31: 124–51.
—— (1972) “Logical Form.” Foundations of Language 9: 38–65. Reprinted in 
D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.) (1975) The Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: 
Dickenson.
—— (1974a) “Review of Stephen Schiffer’s Meaning.” Journal of Philosophy 71: 
224–9.
—— (1974b) “Meaning and Semantics.” In M. Munitz and P. Unger (eds.), Semantics 
and Philosophy. New York: New York University Press.
—— (1975) “Language, Thought, and Communication.” In K.  Gunderson (ed.), 
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 8: Language, Mind, and 
Knowledge. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
—— (1982) “Conceptual Role Semantics.” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 23: 
242–56.
Harnish, R. M. (1976) “Logical Form and Implicature.” In T. Bever, J. Katz, and 
T.  Langendoen (eds.), An Integrated Theory of Linguistic Ability. New York: 
Crowell. Reprinted in S.  Davis (1991) Pragmatics: A Reader. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Heil, J. (1998) The Philosophy of Mind: A Contemporary Introduction, London: 
Routledge.
Heil, J. and Mele, A. (eds.) (1993) Mental Causation. New York: Clarendon Press.
Heim, I. (1990) “E-Type Pronouns and Donkey Anaphora.” Linguistics and 
Philosophy 13: 137–77.
Hempel, C.  G. (1950) “Problems and Changes in the Empiricist Criterion of 
Meaning.” Revue Internationale de Philosophie 4: 41–63.
Hintikka, K. J. J. (1961) “Modality and Quantification.” Theoria 27: 119–28.
——  (1976) “Quantifiers in Logic and Quantifiers in Natural Languages.” In S. Körner 
(ed.), Philosophy of Logic. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Reprinted in E. Saarinen (ed.) 
(1979) Game-Theoretical Semantics. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1979) “Quantifiers in Natural Languages: Some Logical Problems.” In 
E. Saarinen (ed.) (1979) Game-Theoretical Semantics. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Holdcroft, D. (1978) Words and Deeds. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Horn, L. R. (2004) “Implicature.” In L. R. Horn and G. Ward (eds.), The Handbook 
of Pragmatics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Horn, L.  R., and Ward, G. (eds) (2004) The Handbook of Pragmatics. Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing.

Bibliography  211
Hornstein, N. (1995) Logical Form: From GB to Minimalism. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Horwich, P. (1998) Meaning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jackson, F. (1998) “Reference and Description Revisited.” In J.  Tomberlin (ed.), 
Philosophical Perspectives, Vol. 12: Language, Mind and Ontology. Atascadero, 
CA: Ridgeview Publishing.
Johnson, M. (ed.) (1981) Philosophical Perspectives on Metaphor. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Kamp, H. and Reyle, U. (1993) From Discourse to Logic. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishing.
Kaplan, D. (1972) “What is Russell’s Theory of Descriptions?” In D. F. Pears (ed.), 
Bertrand Russell. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books. Reprinted in D. Davidson and 
G. Harman (eds.) (1975) The Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: Dickenson.
—— (1975) “How to Russell a Frege-Church.” Journal of Philosophy 72: 716–29.
—— (1978) “Dthat.” In P. Cole (ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 9: Pragmatics. New 
York: Academic Press. Reprinted in P. French, T. Uehling, and H. Wettstein (eds.) 
(1979) Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
—— (1989) “Afterthoughts.” In J. Almog, J. Perry, and H. Wettstein (eds.), Themes 
from Kaplan. New York: Oxford University Press.
Karttunen, L. (1973) “Presuppositions of Compound Sentences.” Linguistic Inquiry 
4: 169–93.
Karttunen, L. and Peters, S. (1979) “Conventional Implicature.” In C.  Oh and 
D. A. Dineen (eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 11: Presupposition. New York: 
Academic Press.
Kempson, R. (1975) Presupposition and the Delimitation of Semantics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Kenny, A. (1973) Wittgenstein. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kittay, E. (1987) Metaphor. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kripke, S. (1972/1980) Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. An earlier version appeared in D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.) (1972) 
Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1979a) “Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference.” In P. French, T. Uehling, 
and H. Wettstein (eds.), Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
—— (1979b) “A Puzzle about Belief.” In A.  Margalit (ed.), Meaning and Use. 
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1982) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Kroon, F. (1987) “Causal Descriptivism.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 65 
1–17.
Kvart, I. (1993) “Mediated Reference and Proper Names.” Mind 102: 611–28.
Lakoff, G. (1975) “Pragmatics in Natural Language.” In E. L. Keenan (ed.), Formal 
Semantics of Natural Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980) Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Larson, R. and Segal, G. (1995) Knowledge of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Bradford 
Books/MIT Press.

212  Bibliography
Lasersohn, P. (1993) “Existence Presuppositions and Background Knowledge.” 
Journal of Semantics 10: 112–22.
Lasnik, H., and  Uriagereka, J. (with C.  Boeckx) (2005) A Course in Minimalist 
Syntax. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Lemmon, E. J. (1966) “Sentences, Statements, and Propositions.” In B. Williams and 
A. Montefiore (eds.), British Analytical Philosophy. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Lepore, E. (2004) “An Abuse of Context in Semantics: The Case of Incomplete 
Definite Descriptions.” In A. Bezuidenhout and M. Reimer (eds.), Descriptions 
and Beyond. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levinson, S. (1983) Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (2000) Presumptive Meanings: The Theory of Generalized Conversational 
Implicature. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lewis, D. (1969) Convention: A Philosophical Study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
—— (1970) “General Semantics.” Synthese 22: 18–67. Reprinted in D. Davidson and 
G. Harman (eds) (1972) Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1986) On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
Linsky, L. (1963) “Reference and Referents.” In C.  Caton (ed.), Philosophy and 
Ordinary Language. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
—— (1967) Referring. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— (1977) Names and Descriptions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Loar, B. (1976) “The Semantics of Singular Terms.” Philosophical Studies 30: 
353–77.
Locke, J. (1690/1955) Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Chicago: 
Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Loux, M. (1998) Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction. London: Routledge.
Ludlow, P. (2007) “Descriptions.” In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/descriptions/ (last 
accessed 15 November 2007).
Ludlow, P., and G. Segal (2004) “On a Unitary Semantical Analysis for Definite and 
Indefinite Descriptions.” In A. Bezuidenhout and M. Reimer (eds.), Descriptions 
and Beyond. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lycan, W. G. (1974) “Could Propositions Explain Anything?” Canadian Journal of 
Philosophy 3: 427–34.
—— (1984) Logical form in Natural Language. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/
MIT Press.
—— (1994) Modality and Meaning. Dordrecht and Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic 
Publishing.
Lyons, J. (1977) Semantics, vol. 1., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MacKay, A.  F. (1968) “Mr. Donnellan and Humpty Dumpty on Referring.” 
Philosophical Review 77: 197–202.
—— (1972) “Professor Grice’s Theory of Meaning.” Mind 81: 57–66.
McKinsey, M. (1976) “Divided Reference in Causal Theories of Names.” Philosophical 
Studies 30: 235–42.
—— (1978) “Names and Intentionality.” Philosophical Review 87: 171–200.
Malcolm, N. (1958) Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Marcus, R. B. (1960) “Extensionality.” Mind 69: 55–62.

Bibliography  213
—— (1961) “Modalities and Intensional Languages.” Synthese 13: 303–22.
—— (1981) “A Proposed Solution to a Puzzle about Belief.” Midwest Studies in 
Philosophy 6: 501–10.
Marsh, R. (ed.) (1956) Logic and Knowledge. London: Allen & Unwin.
Meinong, A. (1904/1960) “The Theory of Objects.” In R. M. Chisholm (ed.), Realism 
and the Background of Phenomenology. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Mill, J. S. (1843/1973) A System of Logic. London: Longmans.
Montague, R. (1960) “Logical Necessity, Physical Necessity, Ethics and Quanitifiers.” 
Inquiry 3: 259–69.
—— (1968/1974) “Pragmatics.” In R.  Montague (1974) Formal Philosophy. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
—— (1970) “English as a Formal Language.” In B. Visentini et al. (eds.), Linguaggi 
nella Società e nella Tecnica. Milan: Edizioni di Comunità.
—— (1974) Formal Philosophy, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Moore, G.  E. (1953/1962) Some Main Problems of Philosophy. New York: Collier 
Books.
Moran, R. (1997) “Metaphor.” In C. Wright and R. Hale (eds.), A Companion to the 
Philosophy of Language. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Morgan, J. L. (1978) “Two Types of Convention in Indirect Speech Acts.” In P. Cole 
(ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 9: Pragmatics. New York: Academic Press.
Morris, C. (1938) Foundations of the Theory of Signs. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Neale, S. (1990) Descriptions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nunberg, G. (1993) “Indexicality and Deixis.” Linguistics and Philosophy 16: 1–43.
Ostertag, G. (1998) Definite Descriptions: A Reader. Cambridge, MA: Bradford 
Books/MIT Press.
Parsons, K. (1973) “Ambiguity and the Truth-Definition.” Noûs 7: 379–93.
Parsons, T. (1980) Nonexistent Objects. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1878/1934) “How to Make Our Ideas Clear.” In C. Hartshorne and 
P. Weiss (eds.), Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 5. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Pelletier, F.  J. (1994) “The Principle of Semantic Compositionality.” Topoi 13: 
11–24.
Pitcher, G. (1964) The Philosophy of Wittgenstein. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Plantinga, A. (1978) “The Boethian Compromise.” American Philosophical Quarterly 
15: 129–38.
Platts, M. (1979) Ways of Meaning. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— (ed.) (1980) Reference, Truth and Reality. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Putnam, H. (1975a) “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’.” In K. Gunderson (ed.), Minnesota 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 8: Language, Mind, and Knowledge. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
—— (1975b) Mind, Language and Reality: Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
—— (1978) Meaning and the Moral Sciences, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Quine, W. V. (1951) “Two Dogmas of Empiricism.” Philosophical Review 60: 20–43.
—— (1953) From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
—— (1960) Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

214  Bibliography
—— (1969) Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Radford, A. (1997) Syntactic Theory and the Structure of English: A Minimalist 
Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Recanati, F. (1989) “The Pragmatics of What is Said.” Mind and Language 4: 
295–329.
—— (1993) Direct Reference. Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (2001) “What Is Said.” Synthese 125: 75–91.
—— (2004) Literal Meaning, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reeves, A. (1974) “On Truth and Meaning.” Noûs 8: 343–59.
Reimer, M. (1992) “Incomplete Descriptions.” Erkenntnis 37: 347–63.
—— (2001) “Davidson on Metaphor.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 25: 142–55.
Rhees, R. (1959–60) “Wittgenstein’s Builders.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
60: 171–86.
Rosenberg, J. F. (1974) Linguistic Representation. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1994) Beyond Formalism. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Ross, J. F. (1981) Portraying Analogy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Routley, R. (1980) Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond. Canberra: Departmental 
Monograph 3, Philosophy Department, Research School of Social Sciences, 
Australian National University.
Russell, B. (1905/1956) “On Denoting.” Mind 14: 479–93. Reprinted in R. Marsh 
(ed.) (1956) Logic and Knowledge. London: Allen & Unwin. Also reprinted in 
D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.) (1975) The Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: 
Dickenson.
—— (1918/1956) “The Philosophy of Logical Atomism.” In R. Marsh (ed.) (1956) 
Logic and Knowledge. London: Allen & Unwin.
—— (1919/1956) “On Propositions: What They Are and How They Mean.” In 
R. Marsh (ed.), Logic and Knowledge. London: Allen & Unwin.
—— (1919/1971) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. New York: Clarion 
Books/Simon & Schuster.
—— (1957) “Mr. Strawson on Referring.” Mind 66: 385–9.
Saarinen, E. (ed.) (1979) Game-Theoretical Semantics. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Sadock, J. (1975) “The Soft, Interpretive Underbelly of Generative Semantics.” In 
P. Cole and J. L. Morgan (eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts. New 
York: Academic Press.
—— (2004) “Speech Acts.” In L. R. Horn and G. Ward (eds.), The Handbook of 
Pragmatics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Sag, I. A. and Wasow, T. (1999) Syntactic Theory: A Formal Introduction. Stanford, 
CA: CSLI Publications.
Salmon, N. (1981) Reference and Essence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
—— (1986) Frege’s Puzzle. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
—— (1998) “Nonexistence.” Noûs 32: 277–319.
Schiffer, S. (1972) Meaning. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
—— (1979) “Naming and Knowing.” In P. French, T. Uehling, and H. Wettstein 
(eds.), Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Schwartz, S. (ed.) (1977) Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kinds. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.

Bibliography  215
Scott, D. (1970) “Advice on Modal Logic.” In K.  Lambert (ed.), Philosophical 
Problems in Logic. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Searle, J. R. (1958) “Proper Names.” Mind 67: 166–73.
—— (1965) “What Is a Speech Act?” In M. Black (ed.), Philosophy in America. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press.
—— (1969) Speech Acts. London: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1975) “Indirect Speech Acts.” In P. Cole and J. L. Morgan (eds.), Syntax and 
Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts. New York: Academic Press. Reprinted in J. R. Searle 
(1979a) Expression and Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1979a) Expression and Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1979b) “Metaphor.” In A. Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. Reprinted in J.  R.  Searle (1979a) Expression and 
Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1979c) “Referential and Attributive.” Monist 62: 190–208.
—— (1983) Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Segal, G. (2000) A Slim Book about Narrow Content. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sellars, W. (1963) “Some Reflections on Language Games.” In N. Sellars, Science, 
Perception, and Reality. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
—— (1974) “Meaning as Functional Classification (a Perspective on the Relation of 
Syntax to Semantics).” Synthese 27: 417–37.
Sharvy, R. (1980) “A More General Theory of Definite Descriptions.” Philosophical 
Review 89: 607–23.
Soames, S. (1987) “Direct Reference, Propositional Attitudes, and Semantic 
Content.” Philosophical Topics 15: 47–87.
—— (2002) Beyond Rigidity: The Unfinished Semantic Agenda of “Naming and 
Necessity”. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sosa, E. (1970) “Propositional Attitudes De Dicto and De Re.” Journal of Philosophy 
67: 883–96.
Sperber, D. and Wilson, D. (1986) Relevance: Communication and Cognition. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1970) “Pragmatics.” Synthese 22: 272–89. Reprinted in D. Davidson and 
G. Harman (eds) (1972) Semantics of Natural Language. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
—— (1978) “Assertion.” In P. Cole (ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 9: Pragmatics. 
New York: Academic Press.
Stanley, J. (2000) “Context and Logical Form.” Linguistics and Philosophy 23: 
391–434.
Stanley, J., and Szabó, Z. (2000) “On Quantifier Domain Restriction.” Mind and 
Language 15: 219–61.
Stern, J. (2000) Metaphor in Context. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Stich, S. (1976) “Davidson’s Semantic Program.” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 4: 
201–27.
Stove, D. (1991) The Plato Cult and Other Philosophical Follies. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Strawson, P. F. (1950) “On Referring.” Mind 59: 320–44.
—— (1964) “Intention and Convention in Speech Acts.” Philosophical Review 73: 
439–60.
—— (1970) Meaning and Truth. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Szabó, Z. (2000) “Descriptions and Uniqueness.” Philosophical Studies 101: 29–57.

216  Bibliography
—— (2003) “Definite Descriptions without Uniqueness: A Reply to Abbott.” 
Philosophical Studies 114: 279–91.
—— (ed.) (2005) Semantics versus Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (2007) “Compositionality.” In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/compositionality/ (last 
accessed 15 November 2007).
Tarski, A. (1956) “The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages.” In J. H. Woodger 
(ed. and trans.), Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Taylor, K. A. (1988) “We’ve Got You Coming and Going.” Linguistics and Philosophy 
11: 493–513.
—— (1998) Truth and Meaning. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Tirrell, L. (1989) “Extending: The Structure of Metaphor.” Noûs 23: 17–34.
Travis, C. (1975) Saying and Understanding. New York: New York University Press.
Tversky, A. (1977) “Features of Similarity.” Psychological Review 84: 327–52.
Unger, P. (1983) “The Causal Theory of Reference.” Philosophical Studies 43: 1–45.
Waismann, F. (1965a) The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy, ed.  R.  Harré. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press.
—— (1965b) “Verifiability.” Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 19: 119–50.
Warner, R. (1982) “Discourse Logic and Conventional Implicature.” Studia Anglica 
Posnaniensia 14: 91–102.
Weinreich, U. (1966) “Explorations in Semantic Theory.” In T.  A.  Sebeok (ed.), 
Theoretical Foundations. The Hague: Mouton.
Weinstein, S. (1974) “Truth and Demonstratives.” Noûs 8: 179–84. Reprinted in 
D. Davidson and G. Harman (eds.) (1975) The Logic of Grammar. Encino, CA: 
Dickenson.
Weisler, S. (1991) “An Overview of Montague Semantics.” In J.  Garfield and 
M. Kiteley (eds.), Meaning and Truth. New York: Paragon.
Wettstein, H. (1991) Has Semantics Rested on a Mistake? Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
White, R. M. (1996) The Structure of Metaphor. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wilson, D. (1975) Presuppositions and Non-Truth-Conditional Semantics. New York: 
Academic Press.
Wilson, D., and Sperber, D. (2004) “Relevance Theory.” In L. R. Horn and G. Ward 
(eds.), The Handbook of Pragmatics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations, trans.  G.  E.  M.  Anscombe. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wolterstorff, N. (1970) On Universals: An Essay in Ontology. Chicago: Chicago 
University Press.
Yablo, S. (2006) “Non-Catastrophic Presupposition Failure.” In J. J. Thomson and 
A.  Byrne (eds.), Content and Modality: Themes from the Philosophy of Robert 
Stalnaker. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yourgrau, P. (ed.) (1990) Demonstratives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ziff, P. (1960) Semantic Analysis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
—— (1967) “On H. P. Grice’s Account of Meaning.” Analysis 28: 1–8. 

Index
α (assignment function) 139–43, 167
Abbot, B. 29
abstract entities 11, 71, 73, 76, 78, 127
Ackerman, D. F. 52, 193
action sentences 119
actual referent 26–7, 30, 126, 193
Adams, E. 119
Almog, J. 61
Alston, W. 84, 153
ambiguity 24, 26, 69, 79, 114, 159, 184, 
188
ambiguous names 54–5
Amis, K. 195
analogical meaning shift 187–9
analytic sentences 98, 100, 103, 106–8
anaphora 9, 27–30, 84
antecedent (of anaphor) 27–8
arithmetical truths 49
asserting 21, 50–1, 58, 79, 83, 122–3, 
147, 150
assignment function see α
attributive use of definite descriptions 
23–4, 29; see also referential use of 
definite descriptions
Austin, J. L. 76–7, 84, 138, 144–55, 161, 
198
Avramides, A. 92, 97
Ayer, A. J. 108
Bach, K. 44, 152, 155, 156, 170–2, 197, 
198
Bar-On, D. 108
Barker, S. 84, 154
Beardsley, M. 177, 179
behaviorism 103
belief sentences 12, 17–19, 33–4, 50–1, 
121–2, 130–1, 191
Belnap, N. 123
Bennett, J. 87, 74
Bezuidenhout, A. 139
Biro, J. 97
Black, M. 97, 190
Blackburn, S. 94, 119–20, 122, 197, 199
Blakemore, D. 172
Boër, S. 62
Bradley, F. H. 4–6
Bradley’s regress 4–6
Brandom, R. 76, 83–5
Braun, D. 44, 52
Brogaard, B. 29
Burge, T. 44, 139
Camp, J. 123
cancelability of implicature 161–6
Carnap, R. 131
Carnie, A. 125
Carston, R. 161, 166, 167
Cartwright, R. 30, 75
causal theory of metaphor 177–9, 186–7, 
190
Causal–Historical Theory of referring 
53–61, 124
Chambers, E. K. 58
character of a deictic expression 142
Chesterton, G. K. 192
Chierchia, G. 133
Chomsky, N. 115–17
cluster theory of reference 38–43
coextending terms 120, 126–7, 129, 133; 
see also extension
“cognitive” meaning 101
Cohen, L. J. 151–3, 171, 187
Cohen, T. 190
Cohen’s problem 151–3
Cole, P. 155, 172
communication 25, 27, 53–4, 60, 84, 
90–1, 122, 137, 158–9, 166, 172, 179, 
184–5, 192, 200
communicative intention 88
compositionality 84, 109, 111–12, 
123–4, 127, 195, 197

218  Index
concepts 22, 34, 67, 70–1, 89–90, 122, 
129, 132, 194
constatives 146–8
constitutive rules 144, 149–50, 152, 154
context of utterance 21, 130, 138, 142,
contextual definition 13
contingent truth 12, 17, 33, 121, 126,
conventional implicature 156, 163, 
165–6, 171–2, 199
conversational implicature 95, 156, 158, 
161–5, 169–71, 175, 198, 200
conversational maxims 159–60, 166, 170
conveyed meanings 157, 166, 171, 175, 
196
Cooper, D. E. 187
Cooperative Principle (CP) 158–9, 167
Coyle, M. 153
CP see Cooperative Principle
Cresswell, M. J. 133, 139, 152, 155
Culicover, P. 125
cummings, e. e. 4, 184, 200
Davidson, D. 109–25, 129, 131, 133, 137, 
139–40, 143, 156, 175, 177–9, 180, 
183–4, 186–7, 189–90
Davis, W. 162, 169–71
Davison, A. 172
deictic expression see deixis
deixis 131, 138–40, 143
demonstrative pronouns 10, 22, 50, 120
descriptions 9–29, 31–43, 47–9, 52–8, 
77, 84, 110, 114, 121, 153, 156, 163, 
171, 191–2; indefinite 28–9, 42, 53; 
plural 13, 27, 29
Devitt, M. 52, 56–8, 61, 108, 192, 193
Direct Reference (DR) theory of 
singular terms 45, 49–61, 91, 165
disambiguation 40, 55, 137, 142–3, 167, 
189
domain of a quantifier 22, 122
Donnellan, K. 9, 23–7, 29, 30, 42–4, 47, 
54, 56, 192
“dormitive virtue” 73, 194
DR see Direct Reference (DR) theory of 
singular terms
“dthat” 193
Duhem, P. 98, 105–6, 108, 110, 145
Dummett, M. 39, 108, 132
Dupré, J. 62
“dynamic feature” of meaning 131–2
Elgin, C. 190
ellipsis 21–2, 179, 200
empty names 56
entailment 66, 71, 79, 114, 120, 128, 156, 
162–3, 171
entity theories of meaning 66, 71
Erwin, E. 62, 104
Evans, G. 28, 56, 58, 61, 125
Everett, A. 44
explicature 195
expression: of proposition 20, 70, 73, 78, 
86, 147; of thought 66–68
extension 113, 115, 120–1, 123–4, 
126–30, 142; see also coextending 
terms
fictional names 42–4, 61
Figurative Simile theory of metaphor 
175, 180–4, 189–90
figurative usage 94, 175–7, 182
Fillmore, C. 140
Fine, A. 62
flaccid designator 47–8, 52, 127, 193
Fodor, J. A. 196
Fogelin, R. 180–84, 186, 190, 200
formal logic 109, 124, 133
free enrichment 167
Frege, G. 6, 9–11, 17, 19, 31–5, 43, 47, 
52, 67–8, 74, 126–7, 129–30, 133, 192, 
198
Frege’s puzzle 9, 19, 52
Gazdar, G. 155
Geach, P. 28
Geis, M. 157
Ginet, C. 133, 155
Gödel, K. 40, 192
Goldsmith, F. 199
Goodman, N. 178, 180
Gordon, D. 170, 172
grammar 34, 99, 108, 109–11, 115, 
117, 124, 126, 128, 137, 195; see also 
syntax
Green, G. M. 155, 172
Grice, H. P. 25, 27, 67, 84, 86–97, 109, 
122–5, 154, 156, 158–71, 175, 184, 
185, 189, 195, 196, 198–9
Grover, D. 123
Hallett, G. 85
Harman, G. 62, 73–5, 97, 125, 128, 
139–41, 143, 167
Harnish, R. M. 152, 155, 162, 170, 172, 
198
Heim, I. 22, 29
Hempel, C. G. 100, 102–5, 
“hereby” criterion for performatives 
146–8

Index  219
Hintikka, J. 125, 127
Hofweber, T. 44
Holdcroft, D. 155
Horn, L. R. 172, 198
Hornstein, N. 125
Horwich, P. 195
ideational theories of meaning 66–70, 
74, 79, 86, 87, 129
identity statements 11, 17
idiolect 95
illocutionary force 84, 144, 148–9, 154, 
157, 184, 198
implication 22, 156–66, 170–1, 199
“in the head”, meaning is or is not 45, 
59, 61, 132, 194
indeterminacy of translation 107, 108
indexicals 84, 120, 139, 143, 182
indirect force 156, 168–72, 175, 200
infelicitous speech acts 144, 149–51, 
154, 161, 166, 198
Inferential Theory of Meaning 79, 83, 
100
inferring 76, 79, 83, 84
infinite polysemy 187
instrumentalism 102
intensions 126–33, 142, 197; intensional 
isomorphism 131; intensional logic 
127, 140; intensional semantics 126, 
129, 130; intensionality 121
intentional causation 132
invited inference 157, 166, 171
Inwagen, P. van 197
irony 171, 185–6
Jackson, F. 52
Johnson, M. 176, 188, 190
Kamp, J. 29
Kaplan, D. 30, 50, 142–3, 193
Karttunen, L. 171–2
Kempson, R. 171
Kenny, A. 85
Kittay, E. 185, 187–90
Kleiman, L. 62
Kripke, S. 25–7, 31, 39–44, 45–62, 80, 
126, 131, 192–3
Kroon, F. 58
Kvart, I. 61
Lakoff, G. 170, 172, 176, 188
language games 78–82, 145, 195
Larson, R. 125
Lasersohn, P. 192
Lasnik, H. 125
Lemmon, E. J. 75
Lepore, E. 22
Levinson, S. 155, 172, 198
lexical meaning 157, 187–8
Linsky, L. 24–5, 30, 62
literal meaning 25, 94–6, 157, 169, 
175–83
Loar, B. 44
Locke, J. 66, 74
locutionary content 148–54, 184, 198
logical form 13–21, 34, 109, 115, 118, 
122, 124, 167, 197
Logical Positivism 79, 98–110, 119, 177, 
196
Loux, M. 6, 75
Ludlow, P. 22, 29, 30
Lyons, J. 187
MacKay, A. F. 27, 30, 97
Marcus, R. B. 39, 49–50, 52
Maxim of Evidence 159–60
Maxim of Relevance 159–62
Maxim of Strength 159–64
McConnell-Ginet, S. 133
McDowell, J. 85, 125
McKinsey, M. 61
“meaning facts” 65–74, 79, 101, 107, 114, 
128, 131
Meinong, A. 11, 30, 35, 192
metaphorical meaning 175–8, 182–9
metaphysics 46, 102–3, 115
Mill, J. S 31, 49
Millian names 31–4, 39, 49–52, 60, 193
modality, modal properties 39, 47–8, 
121, 129
Montague, R. 5, 127, 133, 140, 197
mood 145, 148, 151, 156, 168–70
Moore, G. E. 68–9, 71–2, 194
Moran, R. 178–9, 187
Morgan, J. L. 155, 170, 172
Moriarty, J. 10–11, 32, 191
Morris, C. 137
Naive Simile Theory of metaphor 175, 
179–83, 189–90
Name Claim thesis 34–44, 49, 53, 61, 
192
Nankas, W. 196
narrow properties 132; see also “in the 
head”; wide properties
natural-kind terms 45, 58–9, 61, 194; see 
also Twin Earth
Neale, S. 22, 29, 30, 192

220  Index
“near-miss” cases 25–6
necessary truths 49, 130
negative existentials 9, 11, 15–6, 31–2, 
35, 52, 165
nonexistents 3–4, 9–11, 14, 19–20, 31–2, 
35, 52, 56, 127, 165, 192
novel sentences 2, 6, 76, 80, 84, 94–6, 
109–13, 123–4
Nunberg, G. 141, 143
Oafish 112–15, 119, 121–2
observation language 102, 104–5
Occam’s Razor 72
opacity 12, 18, 33, 51, 121
Ostertag, G. 30
Parsons, T. 30
Pelletier, F. J. 197
performatives 175–6
perlocutionary effect 144, 148–9, 154–5
personal pronouns 10, 137
Peters, S. 172
phrase markers 115–17
Pitcher, G. 85
Plantinga, A. 52, 193
Platts, M. 93, 125
possible worlds 45–9, 59–60, 71, 
126–33, 137–8, 140, 142–3, 193
pragmatic pragmatics 137–9, 142; see 
also semantic pragmatics
Pragmatic Theory of metaphor 183–4, 
187
predicative expressions 13
presupposition 20, 156, 163–6, 171; see 
also semantic presupposition
primary occurrence 16, 42, 191; see also 
scope; secondary occurrence 
proper names 1, 9–10, 12, 19, 23, 31–43, 
45–9, 52, 54, 60, 80, 84, 91, 121, 124, 
165, 192–3, 197
propositional content 82, 99, 110, 137–9, 
141–4, 147–8, 153–4, 167, 198
propositions 20, 65, 68–75, 76, 78, 84, 
86, 122–3, 131, 194, 198
Proposition Theory of meaning 65, 
68–75, 76, 82, 99, 109, 127–31
Putnam, H. 45, 58–62, 80, 108, 132, 194
“qua-problem” 58
qualities 4
quantifiers 13, 16, 22
Quine, W. V. 4, 12, 41, 75, 98, 105–8, 
110, 145, 197
Radford, A. 125
Recanati, F. 61, 143, 161, 162, 163, 167, 
198
Reeves, A. 120
Referential Theory of meaning 1, 3–6, 
9–12, 31, 65, 67, 71, 83, 115, 197
referential use of definite descriptions 
23–4, 29; see also attributive use of 
definite descriptions
referring 4–5, 10, 13, 19, 20, 23, 26–7, 
38, 42, 45, 48, 51–5, 58–9, 61, 78, 82, 
124, 193
regulative rules 144, 149–50, 154
Reimer, M. 22, 30, 190
Relevance Theory 166, 171
representation 115, 126, 141
restricted quantification 22
resultant procedures 95–6, 123
Reyle, U. 29
Rhees, R. 85
rigid designator 47–9, 52–3, 59–62, 127, 
193; see also Millian names
rigidified descriptions 52; see also 
“dthat”
Rosenberg, J. F. 85, 97, 194
Ross, J. F. 187–90
Routley, R. 30
Russell, B. 5, 9–30, 31–44, 45, 47–50, 53, 
58, 68–70, 74, 76–7, 103, 110, 114–15, 
118, 127, 156, 161, 163, 171, 191–2
Saarinen, E. 125
Sadock, J. 155, 172
Sag, I. 125
Salmon, N. 50, 52, 62
saturation 167, 199
SBVAUN 38–9; see also cluster theory
Scheffler, I. 190
Schiffer, S. 90, 92, 97, 155, 193, 196, 198
Schwartz, S. 62
scope 16, 18, 40, 42, 50, 191–2; see also 
primary occurrence; secondary 
occurrence
Scott, D. 140
Searle, J. 31, 36, 38–44, 48, 52–3, 58, 91, 
149, 154–6, 168–71, 175, 180, 182, 
184–90, 192–4, 200
secondary occurrence 16, 18, 40; see also 
primary occurrence; scope
Segal, G. 22, 29, 125, 194
Sellars, W. 35–7, 48, 76, 79–80, 83–5, 
100
semantic pragmatics 137–9, 141–3; see 
also pragmatic pragmatics

Index  221
semantic presupposition 163–5
semantic referent 19, 23, 25–7, 192
semi-grammatical utterances 194–5
“senses” 11, 31–5, 37, 43, 52, 54, 126–30, 
148, 151, 189
sentence meaning 53, 84, 86–7, 92–6, 
98, 104, 108–9, 117, 123–4, 132, 138, 
149, 153, 157, 162, 175, 179, 185
Sharvy, R. 29
similarity 175, 179–82, 186
simile 175, 178–84, 189
simile theories of metaphor 175–90
singular terms 9–14, 18–19, 29, 31, 34, 
50–1, 58, 123, 127, 161
Soames, S. 52
speaker-meaning 25–6, 86–9, 92–3, 96, 
123, 149, 157–8, 175, 184–7, 189, 195
speaker-reference 25, 123–4
speaker-referent 25–7, 192
Sperber, D. 160, 162, 166–7
“spot-check test” 35–7, 48–9
Stalnaker, R. 160
Stampe, D. 196
Stanley, J. 22, 199
Sterelny, K. 58
Stern, J. 190
Stich, S. 119
Strawson, P. F. 9, 19–25, 29, 30, 46, 77, 
87, 120, 122–3, 138, 154, 156, 161, 
163, 165, 171, 192, 196, 198–9
subject–predicate form 4–5, 9–10, 13, 
15, 112–13, 127–8, 183
substitutivity 9, 19, 50, 121, 126, 129–31, 
133, 193
synonymy 79, 114, 131
syntax 111, 115, 122–5, 132, 137–8, 199; 
see also grammar
Szabó, Z. 22, 29, 112, 197
Tarski, A. 114, 122, 124
Taylor, K. A. 30, 140, 143, 194
theory-ladenness 105; see also Duhem, 
P.
Tirrell, L. 190
transformations 117–18, 122, 124
transparent occurrence of a term 12, 33, 
50–1, 193
Travis, C. 155
truth, theories of 119–21
truth condition 109–15, 118–20, 122, 
124, 126–9, 131–3, 138–41, 144–5, 
149, 151, 154, 197
truth-functional connectives 122, 126, 
133
truth-value 9, 12, 18, 26, 29, 33–4, 43, 
46, 50, 70, 109, 111, 118–22, 124, 
128–31, 140–2, 150, 153, 156, 163, 
178, 189, 191, 199
T-sentences 114, 119–24, 131, 137, 
139–40, 143, 197
Twin Earth 45, 58–62, 79–80, 132, 194
understanding 1, 3, 15, 50, 68, 77, 80–1, 
102, 109, 111, 132, 142, 157, 196
Unger, P. 62
Uriagereka, J. 125
utterer’s meaning see speaker-meaning
verification condition 98–9, 101–8, 110, 
145, 196
verificationism 98, 100, 102, 105, 107, 
128, 145, 177, 196
Waismann, F. 6, 74, 82, 85, 108
Ward, G. 172
Warner, R. 172
Wasow, T. 125
Weinreich, U. 187
Weinstein, S. 139
Weisler, S. 133
Wettstein, H. 52, 61
“wh-” questions 118, 148
wide properties 132; see also “in the 
head”; narrow properties
Wilson, D. 160, 162, 166, 171
Wittgenstein, L. 6, 74, 76–8, 80, 82–5, 
87, 93, 100, 112, 137–8, 140, 145, 153, 
195
Wolterstorff, N. 6
Yablo, S. 20
Yourgrau, P. 143
Zemach, E. 62
Ziff, P. 89–93, 142, 196–7
Zwicky, A. 157

