philosophies
Article
The Unreasonable Destructiveness of Political
Correctness in Philosophy
Manuel Doria
Advanced Studies Research Group and Fuzzy Sets Laboratory PIT, Production Engineering Program, COPPE,
UFRJ P.O. Box 68507, 21945 972, Rio de Janeiro RJ, Brazil; manuel@manueldoria.com
Received: 14 March 2017; Accepted: 26 June 2017; Published: 3 August 2017
Abstract: I submit that epistemic progress in key areas of contemporary academic philosophy has
been compromised by politically correct (“PC”) ideology. First, guided by an evolutionary account of
ideology, results from social and cognitive psychology and formal philosophical methods, I expose
evidence for political bias in contemporary Western academia and sketch a formalization for the
contents of beliefs from the PC worldview taken to be of core importance, the theory of social
oppression and the thesis of anthropological mental egalitarianism. Then, aided by discussions from
contemporary epistemology on epistemic values, I model the problem of epistemic appraisal using the
frameworks of multi-objective optimization theory and multi-criteria decision analysis and apply it to
politically correct philosophy. I conclude that philosophy guided by politically correct values is bound
to produce constructs that are less truth-conducive and that spurious values which are ideologically
motivated should be abandoned. Objections to my framework stemming from contextual empiricism,
the feminine voice in ethics and political philosophy are considered. I conclude by prescribing the
epistemic value of empirical adequacy, the contextual value of political diversity and the moral virtue
of moral courage to reverse unwarranted trends in academic philosophy due to PC ideology.
Keywords: cognitive biases; multi-criteria decision analysis; epistemic appraisal; epistemic values;
ideology; metaphilosophy; multi-objective optimization; political correctness; social constructionism;
social oppression
1. Introduction
Western philosophy is under threat. The grand intellectual tradition that for over two thousand
years has fostered iconoclastic freethinkers of the highest caliber—from Socrates to Hypatia of
Alexandria and from William of Ockham to Giordano Bruno—has been infected by a spirit of uncritical
conformity that is incompatible with its original pursuits. This time, the foe is not a persecutory
institutional religion but a persecutory secular ideology. This ideology has become so ingrained in
humanities departments all over the (so-called) First World that it has become a received view, a default
position under which all other perspectives are evaluated. And dissenting points of view have been
stormed, not mainly by intellectual argument the way they should, but by political rhetoric and social
bullying.
The crux of the matter was pinpointed by social psychologist Jonathan Haidt [1]. Haidt, speaking
in the context of contemporary North American higher education, argued that universities as a whole
have been pursuing two mutually incompatible teloi—truth and social justice 1. As research aiming
1
Naturally, to talk about “truth” and “social justice” in theses cases is an abstraction; save for hardcore Fregeans, seekers
of truth do not aim for a particular object called The True but intend to reach at the end of rational investigations true
truth-bearers (beliefs, statements, theories, etc.). Analogously, what sincere partisans of social justice desire are actual concrete
changes in the socioeconomic sphere.
Philosophies 2017, 2, 17; doi:10.3390/philosophies2030017
www.mdpi.com/journal/philosophies

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
2 of 56
at truth is constrained by standards of objectivity, research aiming at social justice is constrained by
standards of political correctness—and the output of both may diverge dramatically.
The recognition that political ideology has been harmfully interfering in the thought processes of
professional philosophers of unquestionable intelligence and expertise is not often obvious. Robust
empirical results in behavioral economics and cognitive and social psychology over the last four
decades have consistently shown that human beings are less the creatures of deliberate rational inquiry
we’d wish them to be as they are of instinctive bias, confabulation, and groupthink [2–4].
Although this ideology, unlike other ancient institutional enemies of philosophy, is not overtly
homicidal 2, I claim that it is promoting the assassination of character, deterring the publication of
quality research papers, inhibiting the participation of researchers that defend politically unwelcome
theses in the academic arena and hindering epistemic progress on critical issues of our times such as
the metaphysics of race and sex and the intellectual legitimacy of divergent political beliefs and values.
The most conspicuous face of political correctness (hereafter shortened as ‘PC’) is amply familiar;
the enforcement of verbal norms intended to regulate speech which may elicit emotional responses
of negative valence to individuals of socioeconomically disadvantaged groups. The hallmark of this
process is the phenomenon of lexical substitution through euphemisms (such as the replacement
of ‘prostitute’ for ‘sex worker’); these are at the bottom strategic enactments of the moral virtue of
politeness in the context of interpersonal verbal interaction meant to decrease hostility and increase
cooperation among diverse parties [6].
Notwithstanding, I am primarily interested in the deeper, covert inﬂuences of PC in human
cognition. In particular, how PC may negatively disrupt rationality in contexts of epistemic appraisal
of theories by professional philosophers. As I will argue in detail, one of the reasons why I hold
PC carries this penetration over rational inquiry is due to focal, often implicit, claims in history,
economics, sociology, anthropology and psychology that ground the very motivation for why one
should be politically correct. For instance, peripherally this includes the claim that existing rampant
patterns of verbal behavior (and surrounding non-verbal behavior) perceived as discriminatory
signiﬁcantly cause the persisting sustenance of socioeconomic inequality among socially disadvantaged
groups (for an overview of this complex subject, see [7]). But more crucially, we ﬁnd the claim that
socioeconomic potential, as it is constrained by mental ability, is about the same for every human group.
My strategy is as follows:
1.
In Section 2, I sketch an empirical theory of ideology to guide discussions of detrimental
ideological bias over ﬁelds of inquiry;
2.
In Section 3, I review some of the evidence that points to the presence of widespread political bias
of a “left-wing” or “progressive” variety throughout Western institutions of higher education,
including academic philosophy;
3.
In Section 4, I brieﬂy expose a speculative etiology of PC and attempt to formalize the content of
several beliefs associated with PC to understand the underlying worldview;
4.
In Section 5, building upon some formal constructs I have introduced in the previous section
and additional ones from applied science, I defend the epistemic integrity of philosophy as
a truth-seeking enterprise and how PC concerns of social justice may undermine the epistemic
prowess of philosophy;
5.
In Section 6, I respond to three lines of argument cogent to the idea that philosophy requires
socially progressive political values in order to be truth-seeking;
6.
In Section 7, I ﬁnish this work with some tentative prescriptions of how to reverse existing
deleterious ideological effects due to political bias in academic philosophy.
2
It must be pointed out that postmodernism, stipulated as one of the central progenitors of this ideology I criticize, has generated
virulent thought patterns which overtly promote anti-scientific thinking that may end up with the loss of lives; for instance,
the accusation that evidence-based medicine is “fascist” [5] may influence the adoption of non-evidence-based medicine.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
3 of 56
2. A Sketch of an Empirical Account of Ideology
“Ideology”, as political scientist David McLellan puts it, “is the most elusive concept in the whole
of the social sciences” [8]. Given this confession and two centuries of convoluted discussion on the
topic, I shy away from supplying a fully-ﬂedged theoretical account of ideology 3 and will instead
deploy a preliminary informal characterization that will be sufﬁciently rich, inspired in a large number
of sources.
I isolate seven desiderata:
Postulate 1 (Cultural-Biological Parity). The cultural content of ideologies Ii are the products of processes
of cultural evolution whose mechanisms behave sufﬁciently similar to Neodarwinian biological evolution to
enable warranted analogies involving biological systems.
This postulate is a general theoretical endorsement of an evolutionary account of culture. More
speciﬁcally, I side with the ﬁeld of memetics, a broad research program in cultural evolution that is yet
to achieve satisfactory scientiﬁc credibility as a theory of both mental and cultural content and cultural
change and diffusion 4.
Employing a murky theoretical concept to explain another murky theoretical concept seems to be
asking for failure. In defense, such an evolutionary account of culture, by being consilient with several
results from the cognitive sciences, may do justice to features traditionally ascribed to ideology by
social theorists, such as relatively stable conceptual cohesiveness (Postulate 6) and the unconscious
control of behavior (Postulate 3).
Meme theorists posit “memes” as discrete replicating informational entities to perform
foundational roles in the social sciences analogous to the way genes do in the biological sciences.
In analogy to coadaptive gene complexes inside genomes, ideologies can be readily seen as a type of
co-adaptive meme complexes (or simply “memeplexes”). A memeplex is a coalition of memes which are
reproductively ﬁtter as a packaged whole.
Viewing ideologies as organisms of sorts promptly allow us to adopt the intentional stance [18]
towards them and commence the attribution of goal-directed behavior. Just like we do with biological
organisms, we can assign to memeplexes metaphorical purposes to spread their memes throughout
human societies.
Employing memetics to theorize about ideology is not novel; it has already been comprehensively
explored in James Balkin’s [19] theory of cultural software. Memetics has also been employed to
understand the cultural evolution of religion [20]. If religion is a species of the genus ideology,
comparisons with religions can be fruitful.
Postulate 2 (Content Pluralism). The cultural contents of an ideology I include socially transmitted cognitive
mechanisms, beliefs, and values.
Following James Balkin [19] (Chapter 5), I take the phenomenon of ideology to be irreducible
to a single type of component or bearer of content (such as explicit beliefs with propositional form).
A memetic approach to human culture is not restricted to study procedural knowledge in the form
3
In analytic philosophy, one of the most comprehensive expositions of ideology is Mario Bunge’s set-theoretical account
of a sociopolitical ideology, which is a kind of belief system, a subtype of epistemic ﬁeld (see [9] ( p. 91); [10] (pp. 228–237)
and [11] (Chapter 4)) for description and discussion). Such an approach would be especially congenial to my work
given my usage of his construct of a ﬁeld of inquiry, the other type of epistemic ﬁeld, which structurally is very similar to
sociopolitical ideologies.
4
The literature of cultural evolution is extensive and evolving very rapidly. Memetics differs from other theoretical
accounts of cultural evolution due to an assumption that the processes of cultural evolution are isomorphic to biological
evolution concerning details of the individuation of cultural information (discrete) and transmission (relatively high ﬁdelity).
For an evolutionary account of culture outside memetics, see [12]. Introductory defenses of memetics are found in [13,14].
A comprehensive critical assessment is found in [15]. For some incisive criticism of memetics, see [16,17].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
4 of 56
of beliefs or their linguistic representations; more importantly, it also encompasses skills that can be
culturally transmitted. Speciﬁcally for a memetic understanding of ideology, we are interested in
a wide variety of cognitive mechanisms (such as patterns of inference chains, heuristics, narrative scripts,
idealized cognitive models, etc.).
Postulate 3 (Unconscious Processing). The contents of an ideology I are by default processed without major
willful deliberation in the minds of the adherents A.
This postulate assumes a theoretical endorsement of so-called “dual-processes” theories of
reasoning or cognition (for contemporary reviews, see [21,22]). This perspective posits two “layers” of
cognitive processing; the faster one is phylogenetically ancient, bears processes which are effortless,
automatic and unconscious and content that is nonlinguistic. The slower one evolved recently in our
species, is cognitively demanding, is under our conscious control and supervision and is associated
with discursive or linguistic thought in the “stream of consciousness”.
This postulate was chieﬂy inspired by the notion of a vision described by political scientist Thomas
Sowell [23]. Sowell characterizes a vision as a “pre-analytic’ cognitive act” and “more like a hunch or
“gut feeling” than an exercise in logic or factual veriﬁcation” [23] (pp. 16–20). I submit that ideologies
interfere with thought processes chieﬂy through our more instinctive mind.
An important consequence of this is that ideological reasoning may not be readily presentable by
introspection as ideological, irrespective of the intellectual abilities of the agent. To identify ideological
inﬂuence may be extremely costly, requiring extensive cognitive effort.
Postulate 4 (The Worldview Constraint). An ideology I furnishes the minds of its adherents with both
pretheoretical contents (such as intuitions and platitudes) and with the conceptual resources which allow for
deliberate theoretical elaborations, under varying degrees of specificity, over a set of issues which are deemed to be
relevant for the adherent.
I second Marxist sociologist Göran Therborn [24] in his claim that “the operation of ideology
in human life basically involves the constitution and patterning of how human beings live their
lives as conscious, reﬂecting initiators of acts in a structured, meaningful world”. Ideologies are
comprehensive charts that readily ground, inform and guide human action under a myriad of reﬂective
decision-making contexts. They carry the resources needed to construe answers for a variety of possible
inquiries. In other words, ideologies are worldviews. The set of domains over which an ideology informs
can vary extensively, from the most general and abstract (such as viewpoints in ontology or legitimate
practices of knowledge-acquisition) to the more speciﬁc and concrete (such as particular notions of
social causation or even a partial description of a particular economic theory). The more an ideology
has nurtured a culture of internal criticism, the more one may expect it to have its tenets publicly
expressed in theoretical form.
Postulate 5 (Biocultural Symbiosis). For an ideology I, there exists at least one social group S, whose set
of collective goals G′ intersect with the set of goals G of the ideology I.
With this postulate, ideologies become worldviews which advance the interests of at least one social
group. This account of ideology is descriptive instead of pejorative; there can be “benign” ideologies
insofar as social groups can have “benign” goals.
Postulate 6 (Ideological Core). An ideology I is partially constituted by a web of beliefs p1, ..., pn partitioned
by a gradient assigning different degrees of importance, from the essential to the optional. The furthest a belief
p from the “core”, the less one adherent is obliged to endorse p. The content of p is propositional and can be
empirically extracted.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
5 of 56
This postulate is inspired by Imre Lakatos’ [25] account of research programs where a scientific theory
is said to have a robust “hard core”, extremely resilient to refutation, surrounded by a myriad of “auxiliary
hypothesis” sporting greater changeability. Using an analogy with evolutionary developmental biology
(Postulate 1), I take it that ideological cores roughly work like co-adaptive gene complexes involved with
essential biological functions [26]; changes in core beliefs are highly pleiotropic, that is, when changed,
they reverberate signiﬁcative changes over many other beliefs in the network. I also submit that
“mutations” over beliefs deeper in the core of an ideology are also more likely to be deleterious; that is,
they are more prone to produce nonviable cultural entities.
For instance, the religious ideology of Islam has as a core belief that Muhammad was the last
and greatest of all prophets sent by Allah. Can there be a species of Islam divorced from the belief in
a historical Muhammad 5? I take it that the overwhelming unpopularity of such a position is evidence
for the nonviability of Islam that suffers such a signiﬁcant “memetic” deletion.
Postulate 7 (Rational Dogmatism). The social costs of abandoning a belief p increase the nearer p stands at
the core of I and the more committed the adherent is to I. When the truth of p is disputed, we should expect that
adherents will predictably incur in behavior and cognition aiming at securing the alethic endorsement of p.
In ordinary parlance, “ideology” and “irrationality” are usually seen as inseparable friends and
“dogmatism” and “rationality” as polar opposites. I submit, given contemporary developments in
moral philosophy, behavioral economics, and social psychology, that this is mistaken.
While reluctant and consistent dogmatism over beliefs which have been overwhelmingly refuted
by empirical evidence is a gross intellectual failure from the point of view of the standards that ought
to regulate scientiﬁc practice, not so necessarily from the point of view of the norms that guide human
social reality. In contrast to the default conceptions of rationality, researcher Dan Kahan [28] situates
identity-protective cognition theory, which shall be deployed to explain ideological dogmatism, in the
tradition of expressive rationality defended by philosopher Elizabeth Anderson [29].
The theory of identity-protective cognition [30,31] advances the following picture; our nature
as rational social mammals drives us into acceptance inside social groups—social belonging is
a fundamental source of well-being.
And, if the thesis that ideology is inescapable rings true,
group-membership comes with a package of beliefs and values over which endorsement under varying
degrees (Postulate 7) is expected. This conceptual and affective bundle structures our experience into
worldviews (Postulate 4).
When the ideological core is challenged, a myriad of phenomena may take place. For instance,
opposing viewpoints can be unconsciously registered (Postulate 3) as threats to the individual and the
collective integrities, eliciting emotional responses of anger and priming insults and other aggressive
behaviors. The thresholds of conﬁrmation for antagonistic hypothesis may be subjected to unrelenting
“goalpost-turning”, accumulating ad hoc explanations just like a scientiﬁc research program facing
an experimental anomaly.
3. Ideological Bias in Contemporary Western Academia
The Western world, spearheaded by the United States of America and the nations of Western
Europe, stands as the keystone of human scholarship regarding the production of knowledge and its
global inﬂuence 6.
American universities are thus institutions centrally involved in this dynamics of power and
knowledge. They also house many stereotypes. Among these, the outspoken commitment to social
liberal values of diversity and inclusiveness throughout the campuses occupies a privileged position.
5
Such a theological hypothesis is explored in [27].
6
For a quantitative measure of this, the Scimago Journal & Country Rank maintained by the company Scimago Lab has
bibliometric data up to 2015 which can be accessed in http://www.scimagojr.com/countryrank.php. See also [32].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
6 of 56
But in deﬁance to these values, there exists one arena in which uniformity and exclusiveness appear to
be the norm, and that is the sphere of political afﬁliation. Survey data on the politics of the American
professorship, varyingly gauged as a function of self-reported ideological labels (for instance, ordinal
variables such as “extremely liberal” or “slightly liberal”) and party afﬁliation (predilection for voting
in Democratic candidates) display a noticeable tendency towards the political Left [33–36]. This pattern
is even more skewed when we consider the clusters of the humanities and social sciences in isolation,
thereby conﬁrming another stereotype about academia in general.
But why should that matter? Naïve reﬂection could suggest that there exists no logical connection
between the political afﬁliation of a researcher and the epistemic quality of his rational inquiry.
Under the account of ideology I have sketched, if pure mathematicians working with category theory
were overwhelmingly fascists, and astrophysicists specializing in extragalactic celestial mechanics were
overwhelmingly constitutional monarchists, it would be hard to say how the cognitive output in their
research ﬁelds could be compromised by their political beliefs because the associated sociopolitical
ideologies have nothing relevant to say and prescribe concerning the contents of metamathematics
and astronomy.
But in academic reality, practical connections between politics and academic compromise
abound anytime the referents of ideological cores are the very objects being studied. The empirical
evidence suggests that political homogeneity simpliciter is epistemically detrimental to ﬁelds of
inquiry that engage with politically controversial subjects. The pervasive phenomenon of motivated
conﬁrmation bias [37], the often automatic cognitive tendency to perceive novel evidence as being
supportive of previously accepted or believed hypotheses, gets hypertrophied in the presence of
rising ideological polarization inside a group [38], the phenomenon in which pre-existing dominant
ideological commitments are strengthened and exaggerated. This synergy may create an “echo
chamber”, a homogeneous batch of content that only gets rehearsed and circulated inside its boundaries
(see [39] for a discussion of a computational model of an “echo chamber”). This process, once kicked
off in academic settings, may viciously imperil the very (so-called) “self-correcting” institutional
mechanisms of science, such as the peer-review process (see [40] for a comprehensive analysis of this
dynamics in the context of contemporary social psychology).
The most troublesome and detailed empirical data comes from American researchers in social
and moral psychology studying political diversity and the effects of political bias in their own
overwhelmingly “liberal” or “left-wing” ﬁelds. Concerning the consequences of this ideological
hegemony in psychology, researchers have found evidence for discrimination in publishing, hiring,
symposium invitation and grant application by scientists of a conservative persuasion [41]. Research
has also challenged certain political stereotypes. For instance, there is evidence that intolerance
against ideological out-groups, ordinarily perceived to be a prototypical feature of conservative
“right-wingers”, is just as present in liberal “left-wingers” [42]. Speciﬁc ways in which established
empirical results in psychology could have been distorted by “left-wing” ideological bias were also
delineated. For instance, the institution of double standards under which the truth of an empirical
hypothesis supportive to a conservative worldview is required to satisfy impervious standards of
conﬁrmation as the truth of hypothesis of undetermined alethic status which is congenial to a liberal
worldview is presumed [43].
3.1. Political-Ideological Bias in Contemporary Western Philosophy
What is the status of ideological bias in anglophone philosophy? Similar in-depth empirical
investigations of particular effects of political-ideological bias in the ﬁeld of philosophy are necessary
but lacking. However, for the time being, I hold that the inductive inference that contemporary
philosophy is suffering from similar epistemically detrimental “left-wing” bias is projectable. More still;
I predict that the situation is even worse.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
7 of 56
This extrapolation from existing data is warranted for many reasons. First, existing survey
data mentioned in the previous section on the political afﬁliations of philosophers display
intense homogeneity.
Second, from a historical point of view, since the social sciences have been the last to emerge from
philosophy, I hold that they can be reasonably expected to have a signiﬁcant shared academic culture,
from the general values guiding scholarship to particular research methodologies. The mere fact that
the humanities and social sciences often share the same superordinate department in universities may
promote this condition. As an additional factor, the paradigm of critical theory which I’ll claim has
had a foundational role in the sociopolitical ideology behind PC, blurs the institutional distinctions
between philosophy and social science by design.
Third, some existing investigations exposing particular political biases in the scholarship of
neighboring academic disciplines in the humanities reproduce the pattern found in psychology. For
instance, in the context of American law, a statistical analysis made by political scientist Adam Chilton
and legal scholar Eric Posner exposed that researchers who vote Democrat write more ideologically
charged articles than researchers who vote Republican [44].
Fourth, the theoretical backbone of prevailing political ideologies has historically been articulated,
innovated and advanced to a large part by philosophers working in normative ethics and political
philosophy, from sketched generic frameworks to upfront detailed sociopolitical systems. In the
actual world, there is no classical liberalism without John Locke, communism without Karl Marx or
anarcho-primitivism without Henry David Thoreau. As philosophy became a professional career,
a thinker with ideological impact is likely to be afﬁliated with a particular university. Therefore,
we should expect academic philosophy, comprised of a network involving teachers, students,
classrooms, conference rooms, and journals, to be a proliﬁc spawning ground of political ideologies.
Fifth, there is some evidence that suggests that philosophers, particularly those dealing with
normative disciplines, are in general less well-equipped than scientists to identify bias. For instance,
philosopher Alan Hájek [45] has argued that in contrast to other professional academics, members
of his profession are in general less conscious of their tacitly employed heuristics. In conventional
philosophical methodology, the over-reliance on intuition as a source of content for philosophical
argument is particularly problematic. The analogical claim that when intuitions are at hand, the
philosophical expertise of professional philosophers grants a carry-over effect to philosophical
cognition that is similar to the one appreciated by professional scientists has been challenged in
light of recent results in the research program of experimental philosophy [46]. More dramatically in
the subﬁeld of moral philosophy, one of the very intellectual arenas that just scream for political
controversy, the expertise of professional philosophers as sources of better intuitions has been
questioned [47]. Under an experimental setting, while reasoning about moral dilemmas, professional
moral philosophers have displayed signiﬁcantly more susceptibility to framing effects (bias related to
irrelevant differences in the presentation of a problem) than professional non-philosophers [48].
Finally, throughout the very tradition of analytic philosophy, self-congratulatorily exposed as
a bastion of uncompromising rationality, semantic exactness and logical rigor, where we should prima
facie expect the least ideological bias (so much for faulty intuitions), there exists anecdotal evidence
of key philosophers reasoning on political causes in ways that would be deemed irrational under
standards of objectivity [49]. To sum it up, contemporary cognitive psychology is consistent with the
fact that one can sport a very cunning and logical mind when dealing with certain matters while being
the subject of incapacitating “blind spots" in other areas.
4. A View to the Politically Correct Worldview
So far, the primary ideological bias in vogue in the academia has only been generically
characterized as “liberal” or “left-wing”. The more precise issue of ideological inﬂuence that is
politically correct remains unaccounted. To truly probe the phenomenon, we must add speciﬁc content,
a task I shall begin to explore in this section.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
8 of 56
4.1. The Underlying Theme Behind Recent Incidents Involving PC Philosophy
Consider the following recent events in contemporary academic philosophy:
•
The journal Public Health Ethics rejected a paper on the moral consequences of scientiﬁc research
in genetic anthropology [50]. The author argues 7 that the reasons for the rejection are due to the
fact that the paper considered, ex hypothesi (and not as an actual factual statement) the thesis that
racial differences in behavior and cultural achievement are partially genetic in origin.
•
A lecturer discontinued the teaching of a popular practical ethics course at the University of Texas,
which had run for over three decades 8. His decision was motivated by persisting systematic
disruptions of his class in recent years by outsiders and undergraduates that resisted the exposition
and debate of viewpoints deemed to be morally unacceptable (un-PC) in topics such as abortion,
immigration, and afﬁrmative action.
•
The editors of the distinguished Stanford Encyclopedia Of Philosophy, motivated by the empirical
hypothesis that pervasive and systematic sexual discrimination towards women in philosophy is
the leading cause of their academic undercitation, have led the to ask the invited authors to inﬂate
the citations with publications from scholars of minority status. The truth of the discrimination
hypothesis of sexism in academic philosophy has been challenged with bibliometric data [51].
•
The American Philosophical Association has been asked by an expert in disability studies [52] to
remove the phrase “blind peer review” because it is allegedly discriminatory against blind and
visually impaired people.
•
The student union from the School of Oriental and Asian Studies of Buckingham University has
demanded that most White philosophers studied under the philosophy syllabus be dropped and
replaced by philosophers from the African and Asian continents 9.
Events such as these abound in the centers and peripheries of Western academia (for a critical
assessment of this trend, see [53]) and are part of a grander social dynamics. In this scenery, we can
add a profusion of neologistic phrases and expressions such as ‘trigger warning’, ‘safe space’ and
‘white privilege’ entering public discourse, the shift for traditional “left-wing” concerns with the
working class towards the identity politics of generally smaller social groups and the perceived sense
of detachment between older liberal professors and their Millennial far-left students.
What is going on? I state that these events all resonate a same underlying theme: a demand for
social justice. It is in this setting that contemporary critics of PC, not so much from the ivory towers
but those standing on the roads of asphalt and engaged with internet culture, berate their adversaries
as social justice warriors (“SJWs”) 10. In the age of polarizing ﬁgures from Caitlyn Jenner to Donald
Trump, “social justice” is simultaneously appraised by the millions as both sacred value and unholy
sin. But what exactly is this viliﬁed “social justice” that these “warriors” are “ﬁghting” for?
In its leanest sense, ‘social justice’ simply refers to distributive justice; families of theories in
normative economics, ethics and political philosophy centered at the fair allocation of material and
non-material goods in human societies (for a critical overview, see [54]).
At ﬁrst sight, it is true that the sense of social justice associated with “SJWs” is strongly
committed to soaring demands of distributive justice in social policy (such as afﬁrmative actions
for minority groups and international reparations for slavery and war) and the enforcement of norms
deemed to be equity-contributing in both the public and private sphere (such as sensitivity trainings
and zero-tolerance policies in businesses). But these, I claim, are but some of the salient practical
7
http://www.thecollegeﬁx.com/post/26076/
8
http://insider.foxnews.com/2016/12/05/ethics-professor-university-texas-bonevac-students-stiﬂe-politically-correct-
debates
9
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2017/01/08/university-students-demand-philosophers-including-plato-kant/
10
The phrase entered public consciousness to such a degree that it merited an entry in Oxford’s Dictionary: https://en.
oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/social_justice_warrior

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
9 of 56
manifestations of an underlying worldview that cannot be readily identiﬁed with any established
“left-wing” political ideology.
4.2. The Academic Originators of PC
Where did this ideology come from? My working hypothesis is that it is the product of cultural
hybridization of several strains of both Anglo-American and Continental European academic thought
throughout the last ﬁve decades. The spawning ground, originally in the departments of humanities
and social sciences of Western universities, has shifted to the wider world, including the Third World
(with some unfortunate results; see [55]). Of particular importance over the last decade, the cyberspace
was critical in the shaping of social identities, speech norms and political activism from emerging
subcultures of PC adherents. Disparate ideas with different genealogies have coalesced into a more or
less coherent system by the continuous exchange between students and teachers, academic theorists
and street activists, ﬁery partisans and resolute critics.
Although we could trace the memetic ancestors of this ideology as far away in the past and as
much detail as we’d want, I deliberately restrict my attention to four paradigms and some of their
various overlaps over the latter half of the 20th century; these are social constructionism, critical theory,
social liberalism, and postmodernism.
An exhaustive historical and sociological analysis of the evolution of the memeplex I posit to be
symbiotic with PC adherents is way beyond the reach of this work 11. And delineating the conceptual
cartography of different intellectual traditions and how they intersect may appear to be an unyielding
task. I summarize my attempt to isolate what I take it to be the nexus of these ideas in the Venn diagram
below (Figure 1):
Figure 1. The Intersectional Paradigms of the politically correct (PC) Worldview.
11
I refer the reader to some partly historical contemporary investigations and expositions of these trends which are consonant
with this project. For a detailed incursion into PC and postmodernism and hypotheses on its intellectual ancestors, see [56].
For the ideological takeover of social science by frameworks developed by critical theory and postmodernism, see [57–59].
An introductory exposition of the origin and content of social liberalism as the hybridization of classical liberalism with
socialist thought can be found in [60]. For the academic efforts to practice social science irrespective of relevant empirical
generalizations from the biological sciences, a classic exposition comes from cognitive psychologist Steven Pinker [61].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
10 of 56
4.3. Formalizing the Worldview of Contemporary Social Justice Adherents
It is time to make sense of some central ideas which I claim lie in the ideological core (Postulate 6)
of the PC worldview. As described under my hypothesis of the origin of this ideology, the ideas
I intend to formalize are conceptual hybrids, somewhere in between academic constructs with the
intuitive repertoire of a layman.
My approach here is that of a normative naïve anthropologist; I intend to secure what a truthful
and exact description of certain PC beliefs would look like assuming that their adherents are acting
rationally (Postulate 7). When one confronts the discourse of an alien worldview, one of the most
pervasive errors is to infer a lack of intelligence and rationality due to prejudicious background beliefs.
As a matter of fact, there exists empirical evidence suggesting that “left-wing" progressives are in
average more intelligent than “right-wing" traditionalists [62]. However, I shall also leave open the
hypothesis that PC discourse, particularly in its most postmodern verve, may be primarily rhetorical
and not designed to be truth-apt [56].
I suggest that this exercise is fruitful because it will allow us to provide with a certain precision
a necessary condition for the social justice of norms and policies and some sufﬁcient conditions for the
political correctness (and incorrectness) of speech acts and constructs.
Formalizations are processes of translation. When the axiomatic approach is applied to science
proper, a same informal theory can be formalized in many different ways. Therefore, I do not claim that
my formal correlates of these ideas are the only ones possible—far from it. My attempt at formalization
will also, unfortunately, be severely incomplete; it will depend on many informal postulates referring
to entities which will remain undeﬁned.
To be intimately acquainted with the PC worldview, a large number of concepts are candidates to
ﬁll the ideological core. I’ll focus my attention on two themes I take to be central; the ﬁrst one probably
needs no introduction, and that is the idea of social oppression, with several of its neighboring theses.
The other one, which I have named anthropological mental egalitarianism, is meant to captures some
strong intuitions a PC adherent may have on the equality of human potential.
Up to this point, there appears to be a bold inconsistency in the story I’m advancing; how could the
explicit theoretical knowledge outputted by academics evolve into pretheoretical tacit understanding
(Postulate 3) and become theoretical content back again?
We can resolve this apparent conﬂict in many distinct ways. First, under a dual-process theory
of reasoning, habituation and training allow the migration of a task formerly subjected to conscious,
willful supervision into an instinctive tacit skill [63]. From cognitive neuroscience, philosopher of
biology Alex Rosenberg has argued that the difference between deliberative procedural knowledge
and practical know-how is one of degree [64] (Chapter 8).
Second, it is a commonplace phenomenon that many academic products reach public discourse
in a “pasteurized” fashion that is incomplete or even distorting and uninformative. In the times
of modern faculty psychology, a common-sensical causal explanation by literate Westerners for the
capricious behavior of adolescents could employ “the passions” as the explanans. As brain physiology
advanced, the common-sensical explanans has been replaced with “the hormones”. It is unclear if any
nontrivial knowledge of biochemistry and endocrinology has successfully penetrated public thought
during this shift of words.
Third, terms may acquire entirely new meanings during this transition. ‘Deconstruct’ is a verb
repeatedly used by contemporary social justice partisans but it is unclear how much it really has to do
with the term of art ‘deconstruction’ originally described in Jacques Derrida’s On Grammatology.
Fourth, adherents may not be truly apprehending the relevant theoretical content at all but may be
merely uttering sentences as if by pure Pavlovian reﬂex. Consider the memes that are commonly used
as defeaters to slander the science of differential psychology such as “IQ does not measure intelligence”,
“IQ only measures one kind of intelligence” and “IQ tests are culturally biased”. It is doubtful that
most who deploy these propositions have acquired sufﬁcient theoretical knowledge on tests such as
Raven’s Progressive Matrices, the theoretical entity known as the g factor and the state of the art of

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
11 of 56
psychometrical research methodology. First-rate academic critics of intelligence testing do not merely
use crude memes; they employ technical arguments (for instance, see [65–67]).
Finally, I am not claiming that anything resembling my formalized constructs is necessarily
explicit in the minds of everyday PC adherents. I do claim, however, that they can be reasonably
reconstructed out of several implicit beliefs. What I shall supply are artiﬁcial constructs, products of
deliberate cognitive effort to make sense of the worldview of PC promoters under the assumption that
they are behaving rationally.
4.4. Modeling Social Kinds and Human Societies
In the social ontology and epistemology advanced by the “SJW” worldview, collectives reign
supreme. Human societies are partitioned into several overlapping factions, each with their distinctive
collective identities, allegiances, and interests. The default level of analysis of social phenomena is
centered in the dynamics among whole social groups and not the particular individual human beings
that constitute them. That is, the PC worldview denies the thesis of methodological individualism that
guides certain social science paradigms, surmised as the dual claim that properties of individual
human beings exhaust properties of human societies and that social explanations ought to refer to
these properties of individual human beings [68].
What do social groups mean for the average PC adherent? I employ the following formal semantic
analysis [69]; ﬁrst, the extension of a term or phrase designating a particular social group (such as
‘the bourgeoisie’ or ‘the White race’) is a social kind, which is a set. I contrast “social” with “natural”
kinds solely on etiology (if these categories emerge in ordinary social contexts) and practical relevance
for social cognition. On the issue of the ontological objectivity of social kinds, the degree by which
they are “socially constructed” via arbitrary human decision-making or if there are facts of the matter
independent of human intention, I will have something to say in the next subsection over at Postulate 12
(for lively contemporary discussions on this matter, see [70,71]).
Second, abstract entities employed for classiﬁcatory purposes do not exhaust the meaning of
these words. The referents of terms denoting particular social groups are taken to be real human
superorganisms of sorts, aggregates of individual human beings that function as willful agents of their
own and which are of fundamental explanatory relevance for social theory. The variables representing
these terms are logically the subjects of predication and ontologically, the “concrete” systems are the
bearers of properties.
Social groups are then characterized according to their constitution and taxonomy. Over at
the Appendix A.2, “An Ontology Of Collectives”, I supply a formal description to represent,
via an algebraic operation of aggregation, how small units (labeled ‘atomic individuals’) can compose
larger systems. An aggregation of individual human beings is called a human population. We will
consider a two-level nested hierarchy of social kinds that partition human populations: social genera
and social species. For example, according to the Commission of Human Rights of New York City 12,
the equivalence relation “is of the same gender as” partitions the population of New York City into
31 equivalence classes. These social species, in turn, may be assorted into one sole equivalence class
through an equivalence relation specifying a superordinate property, which allegedly forms the social
genus “gender”.
Human populations can be monospeciﬁc or polyspeciﬁc. A human population is monospeciﬁc
concerning a given social genus if and only its atomic individuals belong to the same social species,
and it is polyspeciﬁc when it involves a mixture of social species. For instance, concerning the social
genus “race”, the PC acronym “people of color” (“PoC”) refers to a human population whose members
belong to many different races, allegedly sharing nontrivial collective interests. Usually deﬁned by
the negative property of not being a Caucasian of European descent (“White”), the object picked
12
https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/cchr/downloads/pdf/publications/GenderID_Card2015.pdf

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
12 of 56
up by the reference class “PoC” can also be properly deﬁned as the aggregation of all “non-White”
populations. We could also deﬁne “polygeneric” populations. The LGBT community, for instance,
is polygeneric from the point of view of at least two equivalence classes designating social genera,
those of sexual orientation, and gender identity. These constructs are elaborated in greater detail over
the Appendix A.3, “A Social Taxonomy of Human Populations”.
I postulate the following placeholder to minimally characterize a human society:
Postulate 8 (Human Society). A human society S is the largest human population x living under a shared
set of recognized social institutions I which enforce a set of social norms N.
Human societies are aggregations of all members of social kinds responding to the same set of
social norms. This postulate is good enough for our purposes, congruent with legal, cultural, political
and geographical aspects of human societies.
4.5. Social Equality
Social equality is one of the moral centerpieces of the ideology underlying PC. For the most
salient aspect of the meaning of social equality in this ideology, I refer to the words of the social
worker and social justice advocate Neil Thompson; “equality can be understood to mean an absence
of discrimination” [72] (p. 13). This ideal of equality includes the conception of equality known as
equality of opportunity which I’ll take to include the thesis that different individuals with the same
potentials in ability ought to have equal prospects for development and success in life.
But in the SJW worldview, I claim that, although the absence of discrimination or oppression is
necessary for social equality, it is not sufﬁcient. We also need another ideal of social equality, that of
equality of outcome. More narrowly, this means that social groups in a particular society are equal if
and only if each gets the same share of monetarily valuable resources. Under this conception, social
equality just is a form of economic equality, deﬁned by a central theoretical term from economics,
wealth, taken to be the sum of monetarily valuable assets possessed by an economic agent in a ﬁxed
system of currency.
This conﬂation of social with economic inequality may be disputed on several grounds within
the very population of PC adherents. For instance, there is the claim that social equality chieﬂy
requires the fair allocation of intangible goods that resist monetary appraisals, such as respect or
dignity. In response, I argue that equality of outcome is rightfully in tune with PC intuition. First,
consider the following mental experiment; imagine an inegalitarian society that after hundreds or
thousands of years of systemic oppression, manages to institute equal opportunity for all overnight.
If equal opportunity is all there is for social justice, there is no more work to be done in this society.
However, prima facie, the social justice partisan would still ﬁnd not only desirable but necessary to
institute additional policies and norms designed to diminish alleged accrued “head starts” beneﬁting
the privileged groups 13. Such policies could include prototypical social justice policies such as
redistribution of wealth through social welfare. Second, I mention the defense by feminist political
philosopher Anne Phillips in which even when a society is primarily pursuing equality of opportunity,
equality of outcome serves as a good proxy for that goal [74]. Third, we have a pragmatic reason to
pursue this account of social equality as economic equality since it can be deﬁned with certain precision
while the same cannot be said for other alleged intangible values which stand in more uncertain terrain
to rigorously guide the ideals of social justice.
Economic inequality is most frequently measured as the inequality of income, which is much
more tractable empirically and can be used as a proxy variable for wealth. I assume that wealth
inequality, although very difﬁcult to calculate in practice, is the ideal “gold standard” of economic
13
Economist Christopher J. Ruhm has described a mathematical model of this exact situation [73].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
13 of 56
inequality (for a comprehensive technical exposition of the measurement of economic inequality in all
its complexity, see [75]). We then have the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 1 (Inequality of Outcome). Two human populations x and y with respectively n1 and n2 atomic
individuals and collective wealths w1 and w2 evaluated as m1 and m2 units of an arbitrary system of currency $
are said to be economically unequal if and only if
m1
n1
̸= m2
n2
Readers may refer to Appendix A.4, “A Toy Model of Wealth”, for a sketch of an idealized
measurement-theoretical account of material wealth and economic property.
What about the aspect of social equality characterized as the absence of discrimination?
To investigate it, we ﬁrst need to describe social oppression.
4.6. Social Oppression Theory
In the worldview of social justice, life in contemporary human societies is a hostile zero-sum
game. If a certain social group enjoys material prosperity, it is because systemic unfair treatment
is happening against at least another group. The key theoretical terms to consider are relations of
social oppression. These are the intellectual heirs of the dyadic asymmetric relation of exploitation of
labor described by Karl Marx between two populations of the social genus “social class”, which he
identiﬁed with two species, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat [76]. Throughout the second half of the
20th century up to this point in time, this relation has been steadily expanded by critical theorists and
other normative sociologists into a large family of dyadic relations of social oppression inside social
genera other than social class [77]. Here I attempt to describe what we may call Social Oppression
Theory (SOT), which will be used to characterize social justice and PC with greater precision.
I make seven axioms to characterize core tenets of the SOT. I supply a formal description of the
set-theoretical model and logical formulae for these axioms in Appendix A.5, “Social Oppression
Theory”. For a given society S, we then have:
Axiom 1. A relation of oppression xOy is asymmetric (anti-symmetric and irreﬂexive). That is, if xOy, it is
not the case that yOx.
Let us recall that x and y refer to whole human populations. We call x the oppressor, dominant or
privileged group and y the oppressed, subordinated or marginalized group.
The irreﬂexivity of relations of oppression could be disputed. For instance, consider the reported
phenomenon of “internalized homophobia” in homosexual men from the mental health literature [78].
Couldn’t this be a case of reﬂexivity, the oppressed being their own oppressors? I submit that this is
better explained in the PC worldview as being the workings of unjust social institutions enforced by
an ideology named ‘Heteronormativity’ (Table 1) under which the fundamental causative agents of
the oppression are homophobic heterosexuals and not homophobic homosexuals.
Table 1. Social Oppression in Western societies.
Genus
Oppressor
Oppressed
Immoral Act
Oppressive Ideology
Sex
Men
Women
Sexism
The Patriarchy [79]
Race
Whites
non-Whites
Racism
White Supremacy [80]
Sexual Orientation
Heterosexuals
Homosexuals
Homophobia
Heteronormativity [81]
Gender Identity
Cisgenders
Transgenders
Transphobia
Cisnormativity [82]
Body type
Thin people
Overweight people
Fat shaming
N/A
Nationality
Western citizens
non-Western foreigners
Xenophobia
Eurocentrism [83]
Ability
Able people
Disabled people
Ableism
Ablenormativity [84]
Age
Adults
Children and seniors
Ageism
Aetonormativity [85]

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
14 of 56
Axiom 2. There are as many relations of oppression O1, ..., Oi as there are social genera G1, ..., Gi partitioning H.
Axiom 3. If x oppresses y, then both x and y are of the same social genus G.
A same individual human being can be the surrogate of multiple relations of oppression insofar
as they are different types of oppression relations. This is the cornerstone of “intersectional theory” [86],
which encourages an analysis of social oppression at the level of the multiple social identities housed
by human beings, that can simultaneously enact the role of oppressor and oppressed in relation to the
different social genera he ﬁnds himself embedded in.
Axiom 4. Take the relation of oppression O associated with a social genus G.
•
If G has two species, both the oppressor x and the oppressed y are the largest aggregates of
members from their respective species, being monospeciﬁc populations.
•
If G has three or more species, the oppressor x is the largest aggregate of members of the social
species, being a monospeciﬁc population. The oppressed y is the aggregate formed by the largest
aggregates of each remaining social species, being a polyspeciﬁc population.
The relata of relations of oppression are entire collectives. For instance, when a person suffers
racism, this is to be interpreted as an attack on an entire marginalized racial community by the
dominant racial group. Under the oppressive ideology of Aetonormativity (see Table 1), which takes
adulthood to be normative, the aggregate formed by children and seniors suffers ageism from the
aggregate of adults.
Axiom 5. If x oppresses y, then there is inequality of outcome between x and y where y is the worse off population.
As privilege theorist Bob Pease puts it, “it is only when we understand that social inequalities
are human creations designed to beneﬁt a few that we can see the possibilities for challenging
inequality” [87] (p. 14). In the PC worldview, social inequality is a result of certain social groups not
acting fairly against other social groups. This notion can be interpreted as an expected consequence of
a strong form of social constructionism which takes the etiology of social inequality to be the product
of purely sociocultural factors.
This axiom merges both accounts of social equality from the social justice worldview (absence of
discrimination and equality of outcome) with social oppression. To see how, logically this axiom has
the form p →q. By the rule of contraposition, we have ¬q →¬p or to put it simply, if there is equality
of outcome between x and y, there is no oppression between x and y.
Axiom 6. If there is inequality of outcome between x and y, either x oppresses y or there exists at least one x′
that is oppressing another y′ whose set intersects with the set of y.
This reasoning is due to the intersectionality of social genera. For instance, consider the population
comprised by Kenyans living in English society. Were the oppressive relation of xenophobia between
the English and Kenyans eliminated, this would not imply that both groups are now economic equals
for Kenyans are disproportionally not of the same racial group of the English and thus can also be
subjected to the oppressive relation of racism by White Englishmen.
Axiom 7. Take the inverse relation of the relation of oppression xOy, the relation “y is oppressed by x”.
The inverse of this relation is the privilege relation xPy.
Here is my attempt to elucidate the formal structure and some of the semantic content of the
pervasive but obscure notion of “privilege”. Privilege is a posited theoretical term that refers to

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
15 of 56
a nonobservable property (in this case, a 2-place relation) of oppressive human populations of a certain
social kind.
This reading is motivated by a common trope employed by privilege theorists. For instance, Bob Pease
takes privilege to be the “flipside of discrimination”; whoever oppresses is privileged [87] (p. 4). Similar
metaphors involving the sides of coins are employed by other theorists over the literature [88,89].
Isn’t the inverse of the inverse of xOy simply xOy? For the sake of charitableness, we have the
following traditional resource from the analytic philosophy of language at hand; relations of oppression
xOy and privilege xPy are co-extensive (they have the same set as extension) and co-referential
(both refer to the same system of social institutions). However, oppression and privilege vary in their
intensions, that is, they are different “modes of presentation” for the same phenomenon.
For instance, imagine a primeval egalitarian society with two monospeciﬁc populations x and
y of the same genus, each collectively possessing a wealth evaluated at 1000 electrum. Then x
consolidates power and starts oppressing y by instituting unjust taxes and reaps some of the wealth of
y. After some time, x possesses a collective wealth of 1500 electrum and y, 500 electrum, becoming
social unequals. The system of tributes has two “faces”; x is advantaged by it and y is disadvantaged
by it. The enrichment of 500 electrum by x in tributes from y co-occurs with the impoverishment of y
of the very same 500 electrum.
Postulate 9 (Oppression-Action-Ideology Parity). Each relation of oppression O typiﬁes a class of immoral
acts Z and an oppressive ideology I which enforces unjust social institutions and norms realized through Z that
are responsible for social inequality.
Table 1 summarizes eight different types of social oppression posited by PC normative sociologists
as being prevalent in Western societies (this selection is not exhaustive; for other examples, see [87]
(p. 13)). To say that the literature dedicated to exposing of these forms of social oppression is enormous
would be an understatement. The general sentiment one may apprehend by the content exposed
by contemporary normative sociologists working under critical theory and its various offshoots is
that Western nations are terrible places for minorities to live, being social battlegrounds ﬁlled with
multiplicities of invisible violence.
For four of these relations of oppression, those of racism, xenophobia, ableism and ageism,
the oppressed populations are polyspeciﬁc. One of the oppressive groups appears to be polyspeciﬁc
too, violating Axiom 3, the group of “able people”. This uneasiness can be ﬁxed by replacing the
genus of “ability” with several smaller genera (such as “visual ability”, “auditory ability”, “motor
ability”, etc.).
Some forms of prototypical social oppression also appear to violate this schema. For instance,
consider anti-Semitism and Islamophobia as forms of oppression directed, respectively, against Jews
and Muslims. Both seem to conﬂate discrimination on race, ethnicity, nationality, and religion. They can
ﬁt the schema by being segregated into racism, xenophobia and religious bigotry 14.
It appears that the ideology promoting “fat shaming” has not been named; following the
etymological pattern, I suggest calling it ‘Leptonormativity.’
These axioms allow us to ground additional famous theses of the SJW worldview. For example,
take a staple of “SJW” discourse, the denial of the existence of acts of “reverse discrimination”, such as
so-called “reverse racism” 15, racism perpetrated against a racial group taken to be socially dominant:
14
The existence of an ideology of “Christian normativity” present in Western societies under which that which is non-Christian
is devalued by default has already been proposed [90].
15
See for example the following bold article, which neatly summarizes common arguments for the inexistence of reverse
racism http://www.dailydot.com/via/reverse-racism-doesnt-exist/.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
16 of 56
Theorem 1 (Impossibility of Reverse Racism). For a society S and two populations x and y inside S, if x
is racist towards y, y cannot be racist towards x.
A favorite argument by PC proponents for the non-existence of racism against White people
living in Western societies (but not, presumably, against White people living in Zimbabwe) involves
defending the claim that the very concept is incoherent. This can be done for instance by redeﬁning
the concept of racism, like critical race theorists have summarized with the famous pseudo equation
‘racism = prejudice + power’ [91]. But under the framework I’m describing, the logical impossibility
of “reverse racism” is a simple result. If being racist involves enacting the relation of oppression
associated with the genus of race and relations of oppression are asymmetric (Axiom 1), then only
dominant racial collectives can be racist. The same can be generalized for other social genera (such as
the non-existence of “heterophobia” in “heteronormative” societies).
We can now state what I hold to be a necessary condition for certain policy or action to merit the
stamp of social justice:
Postulate 10 (Necessary Condition for Social Justice). For two economically unequal human populations
x and y belonging to a same social genus G under a relation of oppression xOy, an action a at a time t0 is
socially just only if a would cause the decrease of the inequality of outcome between x and y at a future time t+.
We could also call such actions socially progressive. This condition is not sufﬁcient because arguably,
not every kind of redistribution of wealth would be legitimate (for instance, by an overt theft of assets).
4.7. Generalized Difference Principle
The articulation of what came to be known as the theory of justice as fairness by political
philosopher John Rawls [92,93] stands as one of the main intellectual milestones of the tradition
of social liberalism. What is famously known as the difference principle [94] ( pp. 5–6) can be interpreted
as a heuristic for resource allocation in a society which permits social inequalities insofar they absolutely
beneﬁt those that are worse-off economically.
I posit an expansion inspired by this principle 16 as an ethical heuristic to evaluate not simply
actions at the level of policy and legislation but everyday verbal social interaction which may neatly
capture an essential part of what is meant when it is claimed that a particular statement is not PC. I call
it the “Generalized Difference Principle” (GDP).
This proposal is motivated by the following; ﬁrst, in the PC worldview, verbal behavior is taken
to be supremely causally efﬁcient at perpetuating social inequality. Verbal discrimination, even when
extremely subtle (what came to be identiﬁed as “microaggressions” by critical race theorists) may
allegedly cause enormous economic damage (see, for instance, [96]). There also appears to be a strong
conﬂation of facts and values in the PC worldview, for factual statements are often perceived to be
immoral in various ways (such as “racist” or “homophobic”). Given this, I tentatively describe:
Postulate 11 (Generalized Difference Principle). Consider a human society S, two socially unequal human
populations x and y respectively from the species S1 and S2 belonging to the same genus G and a comparative
factual statement p involving a deprecation of y in comparison to x with respect to a certain attribute M. If p is
a statement on the propensity of M in the species S2, then:
•
If x is oppressed by y, then an assertion of p is morally acceptable
•
If y is oppressed by x, then an assertion of p exempliﬁes an action in the class of immoral acts Z
associated with G, being therefore socially oppressive
16
This was chieﬂy inspired by Neven Sesardi´c’s similar use of the difference principle [95]. ( p. 224)

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
17 of 56
•
If y is oppressed by x and p is not asserted but there exists signiﬁcant risk of p being interpreted as
an assertion, then p also exempliﬁes an action of the class of immoral acts Z associated with G,
being therefore socially oppressive
For instance, consider a neuropsychological investigation of the relationship between verbal
ﬂuency and sexual orientation [97] which documented that homosexual men display on average
better aptitude in different verbal ﬂuency-related tasks (such as the generation of as many words
as possible for a given category and the generation of as many synonyms as possible for a given
word) and that homosexual women fare on average worse than heterosexual women on the same
tasks.
Since homosexuals are posited to be oppressed by heterosexuals under the ideology of
Heteronormativity (Postulate 15, Table 1), it follows that this factual statement on the inequality
of verbal aptitude among these aggregates partitioned under the genus of sexual orientation is not
socially oppressive. For converse reasons, reporting the empirical result on homosexual women can be
classiﬁed as homophobic.
Finally, I posit that not all oppression is morally equivalent; in the PC worldview, there are forms
of oppression that are more immoral than others. I represent this with the following postulate:
Postulate 12 (Hierarchy of Oppression). For a given society S with n social genera where there exist
relations of oppression, there exists an asymmetric binary relation of moral severity ≫which takes relations of
oppression O as relata, forming a set {Oi∈I ≫... ≫Oj∈I}, I = (1, ..., n).
What deﬁnes the ordering? The degree of impoverishment/enrichment could be a possible
indicator. I leave it open for the SJW theorists to decide.
To see how this may be important, consider the following; Western feminist activists are avowed
at ﬁghting the sexist institutions which allegedly perpetuate a “rape culture” that is deeply ingrained
in the societies they live in and which allegedly have an origin in conservative mores [98]. Feminists,
however, have been criticized as a group by conservative social commentators for being senselessly
silent on the topic of sexual violence perpetrated by Muslims [99,100].
Let us assume that the accusation of disproportionate silence is true. Is it irrational? I submit
that far from being irrational, it is a sophisticated example of identity-protection cognition meant
to preserve the narrative script of SOT. The reasoning behind a feminist activist being vocal against
sexual crimes committed by White heterosexual men in Patriarchal White Supremacist societies is
straightforward; if the goal is to achieve an egalitarian society through social justice and if such
denunciations are effective means to cause a diffusion of power from the dominant social species to
the oppressed social species, resulting in the decrease of social inequality, then such denunciations are
prima facie instrumentally rational.
The same, however, does not necessarily apply to being vocal against sexual crimes committed by
Muslims both inside and outside Western societies. If the vocal imputation of moral responsibility for
sexual crimes on Muslims carries signiﬁcant risk at being seen as “racist” or “xenophobic” (Postulate 9)
and racism and xenophobia are ranked as having higher moral severity than sexism in the Hierarchy
Of Oppression, then to abstain from denouncing Muslim sexual violence is expressively rational, for
the sexism inﬂicted by Muslims becomes a lesser evil compared to the racism and xenophobia the
activist could inﬂict. A feminist that denounces Muslim sexual violence will also be at the risk of being
ostracized from her in-group of which she may have already invested signiﬁcant emotional and social
resources.
4.8. PC and Natural Human Equality
At ﬁrst glance, it is difﬁcult to see how the cosmopolitan developed world could harbor many
anthropological physical egalitarians, those who believe that humans do not vary in signiﬁcant ways
with regard to physical attributes due to differences in natural endowments. Every four years in the
Olympic Games, thousands of elite athletes show before our own very eyes the prima facie case of how

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
18 of 56
physical abilities, partially underpinned by group differences in the muscular, skeletal, endocrine 17
and respiratory systems, are not distributed equitably with respect to the partitions inside the social
genera of race, sex and age. This conclusion is suggested by empirical evidence (see [101] for an
overview mostly focused on racial differences in athleticism). More; even with access to the best
technology and infrastructure, not anyone can reach the elite level of an Olympic athlete in an arbitrary
sport. The potential for athletic achievement is similarly not equitably distributed; it is ultimately
constrained by genetic factors [102,103].
I’ll explore here a central belief of the PC worldview and supply a charitable formal representation
of its content.
I call this belief anthropological mental egalitarianism (AME). AME encircles more
speciﬁcally the denial of the existence of signiﬁcant mental differences in between socially oppressed
groups and their respective groups of oppressors of a same social genus, differences which are partially
underpinned by differences in their nervous systems mediated by genetic factors. For reasons of
charitableness, I restrict “signiﬁcant differences” to mean signiﬁcant differences in potential. What is at
stake are not the actual mental abilities and competencies of members of socially oppressed groups
(which may form considerable “gaps” in comparison to their respective oppressive groups) but what
they could be were the relevant socially oppressive ideologies removed through the implementation of
socially progressive policies and norms.
This contextualization with socially oppressed groups is important. According to the GDP as
stated (Postulate 10), that there exists room for a PC partisan to tolerate “natural” inequality among
groups when it is the case that it is currently beneﬁting the worse off socioeconomically. However,
even this is risky and may undermine the entire PC worldview by sheer force of external consistency.
I explain at greater length in Section 6.2 that from the point of view of the standards that guide
scientiﬁc research, it is irrational to consider that natural talents are consistently distributed only to the
populations of the socially oppressed. It is also inconsistent with the very tenet of the PC worldview
that takes economic inequality to be a social construction. For natural talents presumably naturally lead
to a differentiated acquisition of resources.
I argue that some version of AME stands one of the core beliefs of the PC worldview and that its
denial is arguably the supreme intellectual taboo in the “ﬁrst world”. For a famous example, in 2005,
Lawrence Summers, then the president of Harvard University, suffered considerable public backlash
for stating the empirically adequate hypothesis that women are more underrepresented than men at
top academic positions in science and technology partly because the normal distributions of mental
abilities (“aptitude”, in his words 18) in women, in comparison to men, had lower variability—meaning
that men are more typical in the extremes of the human cognitive spectrum. Since Summers uttered
these statements, the hypothesis for the greater phenotypical variability of men has accrued even more
evidence [104] and may constitute a difference between the sexes of fundamental importance. For this
remark, Summers was denounced as “sexist”, and it is speculated that this may have contributed to
both his resignation as president of Harvard University and even to have cost him a top position in the
Obama Administration 19.
What I informally refer to as the “mental” involves both general and speciﬁc features of human
beings posited by psychologists and encompassed in the categories of cognition, affect and behavior.
It includes a multitude of traits such as negative affectivity and general intelligence, social intelligence
and social anxiety, aggressiveness and creativity and delayed gratiﬁcation and openness to experience.
17
Given the intimate integration of the endocrine and nervous systems, studied in the epistemic ﬁeld of neuroendocrinology,
and given the role of hormones modulating behavioral responses of all kinds, one who acknowledges natural group
differences in endocrinology but denies natural differences in behavior may be at risk of being inconsistent.
18
A transcription of his speech can be found via the InternetWaybackMachine at http://web.archive.org/web/
20080130023006/http://www.president.harvard.edu/speeches/2005/nber.html
19
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/summers-sexism-costs-him-top-treasury-job-1033373.html

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
19 of 56
I assume, under a principle of ontological conservativeness, that all of them have at least an ordinal
structure, being representable through comparative structures (see the Appendix A.1 for the deﬁnition
of a comparative structure). From a measurement-theoretic point of view, what arguably is the
most studied psychological attribute—general intelligence—is commonly assumed to have a richer
structure, judging by the kinds of statistical procedures used to manipulate and interpret data on
intelligence testing (such as standard deviations and the averaging of data sets). This conclusion has
been disputed 20. The various ways the information about a given attribute represented on a scale
of real numbers (such as having one or two semantic poles or affective valences) are psychologically
interpreted will also not undermine the argument if we make some adjustments (see the discussion
below Postulate 15).
To give more clarity to what is meant by “potential” and the relationship between biology and
social genera, I shall elaborate two additional postulates centered on the issues of the social construction
of social kinds and the environmental etiology of the psychological phenotype.
4.9. Social Constructionism and Mental Environmentalism
A comprehensive analysis that would make justice of the concept of “social construction” is far
beyond the reach of this work. The theses associated with social constructionism can be phrased under
variable strengths. Leaning towards social constructionism is not considered much controversial for
genera such as religious afﬁliation and social class 21. The scientiﬁc and philosophical controversy
is initiated when there exists signiﬁcant academic dispute that the genera under question (such as
race and sex) are examples of what philosophers of science and metaphysicians call natural kinds.
Full-blown social construction of identity could involve, for instance, the claim that the categories of
sex and gender are picked up by properties which are free-ﬂoating from karyotype and anatomical
dimorphism and that racial categories are not correlated with genomic substructures. There would be
no objective fact of the matter at assigning an individual x into a species S of a genus G.
Empirically sounder forms of social constructionism are more moderate. For instance, philosophers
of cognitive science Edouard Machery and Luc Faucher [107] explain the prevalence of racial categories
in human cognition as a byproduct of both biological and cultural evolution involving the tracking
of real phenotypically salient traits of human populations whose clusters are otherwise taken to be
“biologically meaningless”.
I supply the following provisional necessary condition of social construction inspired by
a computational account of objectivity:
Postulate 13 (Necessary Condition for the Social Construction of Social Kinds). For a given social
genus G partitioned into species S1, ..., Sn, we say that G is socially constructed only if there exists no
nontrivial clustering algorithm T which takes as input a raw data set D exhibiting information about the set
of individual human beings H which outputs clusters S1′, ..., Sn′ that approximate the equivalence classes
S1, ..., S1.
The key term here is raw; the data set must be suitably unprocessed, devoid of idiosyncratic human
manipulation. For instance, some have argued that the the social genus “sex”—partitioned into
the equivalence classes “male” and “female”—is socially constructed predicated on the phenomena
of intersexuality, involving individuals with a myriad of chromosomal, developmental and
anatomical variations which statistically diverge from the typical phenotypes formed under the
20
See [105] for a formal philosophical criticism of the prospect of quantitative psychology. Measurement theorist Fred
Roberts [106] ( p. 64) follows a convention from the literature in which raw intelligence scores are ordinal-scalable but
standard intelligence scores are interval-scalable.
21
But even this may be disputed for the empirical generalization known as the “ﬁrst law of behavioral genetics” [108] state
that there exists no human behavioral trait with zero heritability.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
20 of 56
XY sex-determination system of the human species [109]. However, even under high estimates for
the prevalence of intersexuality (i.e., [110]), 98% of the members of an arbitrary human population
x1 will be clustered into the equivalence classes “male” and “female”. For a “social construction”,
the male-female binary appears to be doing a very lousy job at not carving nature at its joints.
One must be cautious in the inference from statistical atypicality to social construction not to incur
in a nonsequitur. For instance, in the case of intersexuality caused by major genomic structural variation,
a mechanical expert system informed of the number of autosomes and allosomes (the non-sexual and
sexual chromosomes, respectively) of individual humans would have no problem objectively sorting
the populations into the equivalence classes generated by the equivalence relation “is of the same
karyotype as”.
Another important thesis of the PC worldview associated with social constructionism captures
similar anxieties with the scientiﬁc understanding of the biological dimension of humanity and
expresses the attitude of divorcing biology from behavior and mind. I thus present:
Postulate 14 (Mental Environmentalism). For a given mental attribute M which is not invariant across
the population of all human beings H, the causal contribution that explains the variation of M throughout H
that is attributable to genetics is insigniﬁcant.
Why, of all biological factors, should genetics be privileged? This emphasis is a consequence of
the science of behavioral genetics which has developed the important (and controversial) measures of
heritability 22 to estimate the relative causal importance of genetics in the explanation the phenotypical
variation of a given phenotypical trait in a selected population. What makes genetics special is in
some sense contingent; perhaps in the near future, advanced gene therapy will be able to transform
the deepest part of our biology into environmental factors just like education and nutrition. But for
now, I hold, following the arguments by philosopher of biology Neven Sesardi´c [95] (Chapter 5),
that heritability entails non-modiﬁability or non-malleability. That is; the more the causal contribution of
the variation in a given trait is ascribed to genetic factors, the harder it is to reshape it for it implies
that there is less that is under existing practical human control.
The conjunction of the latter postulates can inspire a new axiom that is the converse of Axiom 5
from SOT, that is, the implication from inequality of outcome to social oppression. For if no social
kinds are objective natural kinds, then their very partitioning is under human control, being a cognitive
process that is a part of the social environment. And if there are no genetic contributions to the very
phenotypical traits required for economic prosperity, then their full range also stands in the realm of
social engineering. Natural environmental factors, such as droughts and disease, may be responsible
for inequality of outcome but those factors are in the realm of modiﬁability (for instance, through
irrigation and medicine). Therefore, from the lenses of the PC worldview, if we observe human
economic inequality, this gives credence to the hypothesis that oppressive institutions are at work.
A more formal description of AME can be found in Appendix A.6.
I will assume that
the measurement processes being represented here are temporally indexed to the present time.
As individual psychology changes over a lifetime, the ascribed numerical values of a given mental
22
The concept of heritability has been subjected to intense scrutiny by scientists and philosophers of science. For a recent
novel criticism, contemporary geneticists have been struggling with the so-called “missing heritability problem” (often
in the context of heritability in the narrow sense; see [95] (p. 21); for several given phenotypical traits measured as having
a high heritability, the associated genetic variants which have been traced via genetic sequencing appear to explain very
little of the total predicted heritability. Some scientists [111] have proposed transgenerational epigenetic inheritance to
account for the missing heritability; this account is more consonant with PC for the causes of epigenetic factors may exist
inside the range of environmental modiﬁability. However, alternative explanations which secure the notion of heritability in
genetic factors exist. For instance, a team of statistical geneticists [112] has argued that the “missing heritability” problem
emerges under the assumption that the contribution of a conjunction of expressed genetic variants can be modeled as a
linear (“additive”) combination. When the interactions among genetic variants are modeled as nonlinear, the problem may
signiﬁcantly dissolve.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
21 of 56
trait may ﬂuctuate. For instance, there is cross-cultural evidence which suggests that people tend to
become more introverted as they age [113].
Axiom 8. For a given mental attribute M, a ﬁxed representation standard for M and any individual human
being x, there exists a monotonic increasing function φ(x) that uniquely assigns a numerical value n to x.
This axiom just is a statement on the possibility of psychological measurement. Representational
standards are particular units used to codify the empirical information of measurable attributes
using numbers.
Axiom 9. There exists a numerical value ω representing the maximum potential of x at M. The value n is
either lesser or equal to ω.
Postulate 15. For any given time t, a given mental attribute M, a ﬁxed representation standard for M and any
individual human being x, ω is the global maximum point of the monotonic increasing function φ(x).
Through the conjunction of Axiom 10 and Postulate 14, we can state the modal claim that
the mental attributes of human beings, besides their actual realizations (captured by Axiom 9) also
have maximum manifestations. Discussions on lower and upper bounds of mental features are not
unknown. For instance, the case of sensations, encompassed by psychophysical variables such as
“brightness” and “loudness” is straightforward; the components of our sensory systems bear a lower
threshold that allows the minimum interaction with some type of energy and an upper threshold
which may represent either nondescript registration or nerve damage. What about traits such as
general intelligence? The philosophical literature on “superintelligence” appears to be committed to
a supremum for the intelligence, broadly considered, of humans [114].
Postulate 16. The value of ω is heavily dependent on genetic factors
Following the preceding developments, the etiology of this ceiling is stipulated to be
fundamentally genetic in origin.
Postulate 17. Only the maxima of mental attributes are relevant for social justice
Potentials are prima facie closed intervals with both maxima and minima. I assume that only the
former are relevant for our discussion. If this postulate holds true, certain adjustments are warranted.
For instance, take the “Big Five” model of personality which posits introversion-extraversion as
a continuum with two psychologically distinct poles. For traits with this kind of structure, it is better
in our framework to divide them in two given the possibility that both valences could be positively
correlated with economic afﬂuence 23.
Axiom 10. For any two individual human beings x and y with their upper bounds for M respectively evaluated
as ωx and ωy, there exists a function of comparative signiﬁcance ι that takes ωx and ωy as inputs and
outputs ‘1’ when the disparity is signiﬁcant and ’0’ when it is not
23
For this particular example, current empirical evidence suggests that this is not the case; extraversion has signiﬁcant positive
correlation with income, new promotions and negatively correlated with unemployment [115,116]. It appears to be unlikely
that the other tail of this continuum sports a signiﬁcant violation of this monotonicity.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
22 of 56
It is hard to deny the reality of individual differences in mental potential. I suspect that most of
those who are sympathetic to the PC worldview acknowledge it 24. For the sake of charitableness,
I advance that even if it is the case that statistical innate group differences exist, they may not matter.
And how could they matter? From the point of view of social justice, it is sound that differences in
psychology are signiﬁcant if they are causally connected with increases in wealth (Section 4.5). But by
how much? Consider the example of general intelligence. According to factor-analytical results of [117]
employing a North American data set, a one point increase in IQ is associated with an increase of up
to $616 of income a year 25. Is a change in one IQ point signiﬁcant enough? I’ll leave the speciﬁcation
of such discontinuous function for the partisans of social justice.
Axiom 11. For a given mental attribute M, a ﬁxed representation standard for M and any two individual
human beings x and y where x and y are members of two distinct species S1 and S2 from a same social genus G,
x and y have their upper bounds for M respectively evaluated as ωx and ωy, if we randomly “pick” x and y
from S1 and S2, then the probability that the function ι(ωx, ωy) will output ‘0’ (not a signiﬁcant difference in
potential) is greater than 50%.
This axiom is a weak denial of the existence of natural group differences. It states that typically,
the differences in the natural endowments of members from different groups are not socioeconomically
signiﬁcant. This increase in charitableness, however, comes at the expense of external consistency
with SOT, which demands stronger social constructionism. Axiom 6 states that there can only be
inequality of outcome between two groups x and y in the presence of social oppression. But under
Anthropological Mental Egalitarianism, there can be small group differences of wealth whose
etiology is traceable to group genetic differences in psychological aptitudes. One way to make
both theories consistent with each other could involve replacing standard equivalence relations “=”
for approximation relations “≈”.
4.10. PC redux
I ﬁnish this section with a tentative compilation of sufﬁcient conditions that make a certain
construct c un-PC:
Postulate 18 (Sufﬁcient Conditions for Political Incorrectness). For any construct c bearing a certain
content p, c is said to be politically incorrect anytime when:
•
p involves the denial of the ethical ideal of equality of outcome (Deﬁnition 1)
•
p is inconsistent with Axioms 1 to 7 of SOT
•
p is immoral according to the GDP (Postulate 11)
•
p holds that a social genus G is a natural kind (Postulate 13)
Denials of AME that are un-PC are already pre-speciﬁed by the GDP. The existence of a necessary
connection between PC and the social construction of genera may be disputed. In defense, I view these
propositions as forming a network (Postulate 6) with a certain stability. The placement of the fourth
condition was partly motivated by the hypothesis that the acceptance that there are social genera
24
For instance, feminist philosopher Anne Phillips writes: “Despite my scepticism about whether systematic differences of
ability or disposition can be mapped onto these particular categories (“gender, ethnicity and race”), I am not so naïve as to
doubt the existence of individual difference. Individuals vary in their abilities, characters, and dispositions, and though the
variance is often exaggerated by social and educational inequalities, people are indeed different in what they want and are
able to do” [74]. (p. 13)
25
The same study establishes a connection between higher IQs and ﬁnancial distress, pointing to possible nonlinear
relationships between wealth and general intelligence.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
23 of 56
which are natural kinds may initiate a runaway effect that may eventually prompt the denial of mental
environmentalism and then, full-blown thoughts and utterances that violate the GDP.
5. Philosophy and Political Correctness: An Irreconcilable Marriage
What is the telos of philosophy? And why exactly would PC hinder it? To investigate this question,
we must probe the physis of philosophy, so to speak. In particular, its knowledge-evaluating dynamics.
In this section, I shall present some arguments inspired by technical results from applied science
to defend the epistemic integrity of philosophy against contentions that philosophy is or should be
congenial to PC. In particular, I will brieﬂy expose some tools originated from the ﬁeld of engineering
which I hold will help us understand the relationship between PC and philosophy.
5.1. Philosophy as a Field of Inquiry
In the post-Wittgensteinian world we live in where a thriving cognitive science scrutinizes the
statistical character of the contents from our most beloved concepts, we have become reluctant to
accept ambitious deﬁnitions with crisp either-or membership criteria as an answer for questions with
the schematic structure ‘what is x?’. However, given the preliminary state of these investigations, I hold
we’re warranted to explore this nebulous terrain with the aid of conceptual analysis and other formal
methods conjoined with a dose of plausible empirical speculation; we must start from somewhere and
diligently revise our constructs as empirical data is revealed.
My starting point is the fruitful framework designed by philosopher-scientist Mario Bunge to
characterize epistemic ﬁelds in general and ﬁelds of inquiry [9] in particular 26. Bunge’s set-theoretical
exposition of epistemic ﬁelds portrays the complex systems under which knowledge, broadly
considered, is produced by human beings.
Genuine philosophy, alongside all of the legitimate sciences and some of the other humanities,
when properly conducted as investigative pursuits (such as archaeology and history) are all taken to
be examples of ﬁelds of inquiry.
The measurement-theoretical construct of a comparative structure, deﬁned in Appendix A.1, will
be deployed many times in this section.
Now, onto my adaptation of Bungean ﬁelds of inquiry:
Deﬁnition 2 (Field of Inquiry). A ﬁeld of inquiry F at a given time t is a 10-tuple F
=
⟨A, E, G, R, C, F, Ki, V, Si, ≽⟩where:
•
A is a set of professionals trained under a given research tradition
•
E is a set of research methods and processes enacted by members of A
•
G is a set of comparative structures, the goals of the ﬁeld of inquiry
•
R is a set of problematics; the open problems and issues entertained by members of A
•
C is a set of constructs, the formal and informal representata (statements, theories, propositions, etc.
27) produced by members of A to answer P
–
F a proper subset of C, the fund of knowledge of F
–
C is partitioned into proper subsets Ki, each pertaining to a class of comparable constructs
(rival constructs engaging with a same topic from P)
26
In Bunge’s original scheme, epistemic ﬁelds come in two types; ﬁelds of inquiry and belief systems, of which I take ideologies to
be one of its species.
27
Naturally, to treat logical formulae as individuals x, x ∈C is an abstraction. Treating them as logical formulae proper would
require the framework to employ second-order logic which would be extremely cumbersome.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
24 of 56
•
V is a set of comparative structures, the values used by members of A to assess members of C
under G
–
V is partitioned into proper subsets Si whose members stand under a partial order relation ≽,
the different families of evaluation standards
We could devise axioms for a “black box” model of the production of knowledge, where one or
more professionals a, a ∈A targeting a problem p, p ∈R engage in a research process f ∈B which
takes as input a proper subset the fund of knowledge F and outputs a construct x, x ∈C.
Under this framework, the metaphilosophical quest for a deﬁniendum of philosophy would
typically center in the analysis of the problematics R of the ﬁeld of inquiry of philosophy. I shall not
venture into this hard issue. Instead, I’ll focus on other aspects I take to be both more readily scrutable
and which will be sufﬁcient for my arguments; the set of goals G and the set of values V of philosophy.
Following developments from contemporary epistemology which will be discussed in greater
detail later in Section 5.3, goals come in two types: epistemic and non-epistemic. This distinction
will remain undeﬁned and purely in the domain of intuitive appreciation; epistemic goals include
standards such as wisdom, understanding, learning and, most important for our investigation, truth.
Non-epistemic goals are a heterogeneous lot which includes economic proﬁt, well-being, entertainment
and the other primary indictee of our investigation, social justice.
Legitimate ﬁelds of inquiry, in relative contrast to stagnant pseudoscience and pseudophilosophy,
other degenerate research programs and dogmatic ideologies, are cognitively progressive; this can be
informally characterized as the dual claim that their funds of knowledge tend, over time, to be
populated with more and more constructs which are better attuned to the goals of the ﬁeld 28.
If philosophy is a ﬁeld of inquiry, it is no exception—although the advancement appears to be
considerably slower than other ﬁelds of inquiry [118]. However, despite all the alleged actual and
potential insurmountable mysteries, antinomies, paradoxes and theoretical dead-ends as well as
unfortunate periods of wasteful degenerate philosophical research programs where the function of
our philosophical knowledge loses its monotonicity, I take it that that we stand today in a more fertile
ground than the one initiated by Nietzsche’s admired “Greek sages” 29. For a candid but blunt example,
the seeds of Thales have ultimately germinated in the minds of a succession of thinkers—from Aristotle,
Leibniz and Boole to Gödel, Church and Turing—responsible for the formal causes of the technological
marvel I am using to write this paper down 30.
5.2. Philosophy and Truth
What are the goals of philosophy? I accept that the gist of this issue has been successfully captured
by one of the oldest (if not the oldest) metaphilosophical accounts; out of the Pythagorean love of
wisdom, we extract that philosophy is, ﬁrst and foremost, a truth-seeking enterprise [121]. Even if there
exists contentious disagreement on both the domain of truths philosophy seeks (not to mention the
nature of truth itself!), truth of some persuasion remains the supreme epistemic goal of philosophy 31.
28
An easy and risky way to characterize this feature under this framework is this; let Ft0 be the fund of knowledge of
philosophy at a time t0 and Ft+ the fund of knowledge of philosophy at an arbitrary future time t+. Then the statement
|Ft+| >
Ft0
 is probably true.
29
The relevant quote comes from Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks: “The very ﬁrst experience that philosophy had on
Greek soil, the sanction of the Seven Sages, is an unmistakable and unforgettable feature of the Hellenic image. Other peoples
have saints; the Greeks have sages” [119].
30
There exists extensive metaphilosophical disagreement on the possibility of progress in philosophy. The sort of progress
envisioned by my example would not be considered properly philosophical [120]. But even the case that perennial problems
(such as the mind-body problem and free will) are unsolvable, if true, would itself be a positive epistemic result by
demarcating limits to human knowledge.
31
This strong thesis resonates with Berit Brogaard’s [122] account of epistemic value monism under which truth is a primary,
overriding and non-negotiable epistemic goal.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
25 of 56
This metaphilosophical position may no longer be as fashionable, but I contend that it is hard to
make sense of philosophy which does not take truth as an epistemic goal. If one holds that philosophy
has nothing to do with the pursuit of truth, I take it as a conversation stopper and a performative
contradiction. For if metaphilosophy is philosophy, the disagreement with the metaphilosophical
inquiry of what philosophy is for is a disagreement on the truth of what philosophy is for. If one wishes
to follow the road of doing philosophy that rejects these basic constraints of rationality, one is at the
risk of, to paraphrase philosopher Daniel Dennett, to engage in nothing more than “verbal ballet” [123]
or to play “intellectual tennis without a net” [124] 32. Philosophies so unrestrained are mere belief
systems, not ﬁelds of inquiry. The question of the possibility of philosophy being able to thrive as both
a truth-oriented activity and a vehicle for social justice—both understand the world and to save the
world—will be answered negatively in the next sections.
Up to this level of analysis, the postulated features of truth-seekingness and cognitive progress not
only underspecify philosophy but makes it indistinguishable from basic (as opposed to applied) science.
This is not an accident, but probably comes from shared inheritance for basic science is historically
an offshoot of philosophy. It is also not a demerit for the arguments I shall deploy in support of
a radical separation of philosophy from political correctness will be just as effective if applied to
basic science.
But what truth are we talking about? Modern mathematical logic has a built-in formal theory
of logical truth as model-satisﬁability which has been famously advanced as an interpretation of the
“classical” (correspondence) conception of truth. I shall not assume this particular schematic structure
of truth. Instead, in the spirit of maximizing generality and neutrality, I characterize a bland conception
of truth for ﬁelds of inquiry which should be compatible with many different theories of truth. Truth,
being a goal, will be represented as a bounded comparative structure ⟨T, ≽⟩with a pair of real numbers
setting a lower bound (absolute falsity) and an upper bound (absolute truth). For convenience reasons,
we can use the well-known interval [0, 1]. The relata of the ordering relation ≽are constructs x1 and
x2 being compared with respect to truth. If one holds that philosophical truth is strictly bivalent, one
may replace a continuous comparative structure for a discrete one so that the image of the function
of truth τ(x) only has two values, such as {0,1}. However, I believe the analysis is more fruitful if
we concede orders of truth for philosophical representata. For instance, assuming that the following
examples are rival positions and thus members of the same class K1, for a philosopher to hold that x1
(neutral monism) is truer than x2 (materialism) and to hold that materialism is truer than x3 (substance
dualism) is to assign as the image for the function of truth τ(x) of these constructs three real numbers
y1, y2, y3 so that 0 ≤y1 ≤y2 ≤y3 ≤1.
5.3. A Formal Account of the Relationship between Philosophical Knowledge and Values
How do the members of an epistemic ﬁeld legitimately evaluate a given construct as successfully
attaining a particular goal of the ﬁeld? And what if the ﬁeld has multiple goals or worse, multiple
conﬂicting goals?
This kind of problem has been entertained by both philosophers of science dealing with theory
choice and model selection and epistemologists dealing with belief justiﬁcation, which we may generalize
as the problem of epistemic appraisal (for a contemporary overview, see [125]).
What must the relationship between a bearer of content x and a particular goal ⟨Ω, ≽⟩∈G be
for it to be successful? A received philosophical view I’ll assume is that we are justiﬁed to hold x as
being on the road to achieve a certain Ω-goal if x “embodies” the appropriate Ω-values. In the words
of epistemologist and philosopher of science Stephen E. Grimm, “a belief earns positive marks (counts
as justiﬁed, rational, virtuous, etc.), from an epistemic point of view, just in case it does well with
respect to the things with intrinsic epistemic value (i.e., helps to promote them or bring them about).
32
Dennett attributes this adage to philosopher Ronald de Souza, referring to philosophical apologetics.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
26 of 56
Likewise, a belief earns negative marks just in case it does poorly with respect to the things with
intrinsic epistemic value” [126].
To formally characterize this relationship, we turn to a vibrant discussion in the contemporary
epistemology of science on epistemic or cognitive 33 values (such as empirical adequacy, predictive
accuracy, and external consistency; a ﬁner-grained typology in the context of the epistemic ﬁeld of
science is found at [128]). These epistemic values are contrasted with contextual, non-epistemic or
non-cognitive values (such as safety, social equality, and racial diversity). Fields of inquiry may employ
both, in variable conﬁgurations according to their set of goals.
Let us take epistemic goals to be accomplishable by constructs bearing the appropriate epistemic
values and the converse happening with non-epistemic goals. For instance, applied science, such as the
several branches of engineering, differs from basic science by having additional practical non-epistemic
goals which supply further normative requirements [129]. As an example, the ﬁeld of inquiry of
aerospace engineering has an overarching non-epistemic practical goal of aircraft and spacecraft design,
the construction of machines that transit the atmosphere and beyond. These crafts, in turn, must
efﬁciently carry on a variety of specialized supplementary practical duties depending on the role—from
belligerent air supremacy to peaceful civilian transportation. Thus, the epistemic appraisal of an x
(such as the computational model of an aircraft) must also be guided by the relevant non-epistemic or
contextual values such as safety, resilience, acquisition cost, payload capacity, and ﬁrepower. Aerospace
engineers naturally also want their ﬂuid dynamics to be approximately true 34 or else their aircraft
may not kick off the ground (much less reach escape velocity).
The sole epistemic goal we will be interested in is truth and the only epistemic values I’ll be
interested in I’ll call alethic epistemic values, those that are truth-enhancing. Other possible epistemic
goals (such as understanding or curiosity satisfaction) do not necessarily converge with truth.
For instance, educators teaching basic arithmetic with positive integers to small children, in an attempt
to make the subject more intelligible, (that is, to attain the epistemic goal of understanding) often utter
verbal heuristic devices such as “you can’t take a bigger number from a smaller number” which are
strict mathematical falsehoods, either decreasing or neutralize the goal of truth [130].
Taking for granted concepts from the science of statistics, alethic epistemic values are now
provisorily deﬁned:
Deﬁnition 3 (Alethic Epistemic Value). For a certain ﬁeld of inquiry F with the epistemic goal of truth,
⟨T, ≽⟩∈G, a value ⟨E, ≽⟩∈V is an alethic epistemic value if and only if the function of truth τ(x) is
positively correlated with the function of the value ϵ(x).
For instance, if we have good reasons to think that when a philosophical construct fares well in
semantic deﬁniteness and formal rigor, its truth is being enhanced, then these are candidates for being
alethic epistemic values. If scoring well in ad hocness and unwarranted aprioricity has the opposite
effect, we have the opposite conclusion.
I similarly deﬁne a politically correct value, a type of non-epistemic value:
Deﬁnition 4 (Politically Correct Value). For a certain ﬁeld of inquiry F with the non-epistemic goal of social
justice, ⟨J, ≽⟩∈G, a value ⟨P, ≽⟩∈V is a politically correct value if and only if the function of social justice
σ(x) is positively correlated with the function of the value ρ(x).
33
Larry Laudan [127] distinguishes cognitive from epistemic values. In his account, cognitive values encompass epistemic
values as a proper subset and the “epistemic” is strictly construed as the domain of necessary and sufﬁcient truth-conditions
for a construct. My sketched account of what I call alethic epistemic values is not as strong and may involve weaker
contingencies between a value and the goal of truth.
34
As a matter of fact, in the context of modeling a design problem (Section 5.4), engineers do not need to expend resources
computing the truth of natural science which has already stood to massive empirical scrutiny. It is already a given, a part of
the fund of knowledge F.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
27 of 56
And now, we deﬁne a dummy alethic epistemic value:
Deﬁnition 5 (Dummy Alethic Epistemic Value). An alethic epistemic value ⟨E, ≽⟩is a dummy alethic
epistemic value if and only if there exists another alethic epistemic value ⟨E′, ≽⟩and the values of the function
ϵ(x) are proxy variables of ϵ′(x), that is, ϵ′(x) is better correlated with τ(x) than ϵ(x).
This last deﬁnition is stimulated by intuitions on the existence of possible hierarchies of alethic
epistemic values in which some are more “basic” than others and the possibility of there being alethic
epistemic values that are redundant, performing idle work. For instance, elegance 35 may be tracking
simplicity, in which case it would be a dummy epistemic value. However, in scientiﬁc practice, proxy
variables are often indispensable, particularly when the relevant variable researchers aim to track is
non-observable.
I posit that sound philosophical and scientiﬁc inquiry is often constrained by a shared set of
regulatory ideals, i.e., for an arbitrary family of evaluation standards from a basic science K1 and
another from philosophy, K2, we should expect that K1 ∩K2 ̸= {∅}. For instance, one of these which
I hold follows naturally from the character of philosophy as a truth-seeking ﬁeld of inquiry is the
epistemic value of external consistency; philosophy ought to be consistent with the truths revealed by
other epistemic ﬁelds at least as epistemically secure as itself, the natural sciences being a prominent
example 36. If your descriptive metaphysics is inconsistent with the most established developments of
quantum mechanics and general relativity, then your system loses epistemic value. If your normative
ethics is inconsistent with the most solid results of behavioral genetics and moral psychology, then this
is also a serious defect of your theory. And so on.
5.4. Epistemic Appraisal as Engineering
Dealing with herculean projects which aim at the simultaneous satisfaction of multiple clashing
objectives, often in the light of information that is partial and even inconsistent, is what many engineers,
computer scientists, and economists working in the interdisciplinary ﬁeld of inquiry of operations
research (OR) do for a living. In the spirit of consilience among epistemic ﬁelds, I suggest that the
general problem of epistemic appraisal in philosophy and other ﬁelds of inquiry can be represented
using the formal skeletons of types of problems managed in OR and that we may tentatively draw
some lessons from the decades of human ingenuity accrued by research in this ﬁeld on the prognosis
of politically correct philosophy.
From OR, we have two types of problem of interest; roughly, when an agent knows in advance
a ﬁnite set of alternatives with variable performance in such and such criteria and needs to pick the
best, one has an evaluation problem, and one does multicriteria decision analysis (MCDA, also called
multiple criteria decision-making or aiding). The relevance of MCDA methods on the problem of theory
choice in the philosophy of science has been explored in recent years [132,133].
When one does not know in advance the alternatives of a problem involving multiple goals
but has a working mathematical model to represent it, one has a design problem and may attempt
to ﬁnd solutions through multiobjective optimization (MOO, also called multicriteria optimization and
multiobjective programming).
I shall make a very brief exposition of MCDA and MOO problems and draw some lessons for our
project. Some understanding of vector algebra will be assumed for this section. Vectors are referenced
35
Several examples of simplicity and elegance in the history of science are described by biologist Ian Glynn [131].
36
Critics of a postmodern or non-naturalistic verve may object and claim that such inferences are “scientistic” (or any other
number of smear words). I reject any such charges of “scientism” as deliberate buzzword-infused ploys meant to avoid the
satisfaction of external consistency and the loss of epistemic value such a constraint would cause for philosophical theories
that ignore empirical truth.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
28 of 56
in boldface, conforming to a standard notation. First, let us check the structure of an MDCA problem
(adapted from [134] (p. 10)):
Deﬁnition 6 (Multicriteria Decision Analysis Problem). A multicriteria decision analysis problem
(an evaluation problem) is a 6-tuple MC = ⟨A, X, X0, Φ, R, µ⟩where:
•
A is a nonempty ﬁnite set of actors enacting the decision-making
•
X is a nonempty set, the set of all possible decision variants, the decision space
•
X0, |X0| ≥2, is a nonempty ﬁnite proper subset of X, the set of decision variants
•
Φ is a ﬁnite set, the set of m ≥2 criteria functions φi, φ : X →R, i = (1, ..., m)
•
µ is the criteria mapping function µ : X →Rm, µ = (φ1, ..., φm)
•
The actors A intend to select a decision variant x, x ∈X0 for which µ(x) is the most preferred
multiple criteria valuation
Now, for a generic MOO problem (adapted from [135] p. X and [136]):
Deﬁnition 7 (Multiobjective Optimization Problem). A multiobjective optimization problem
(a design problem) is a 6-tuple MO = ⟨f, x, Rn, S, g, h⟩.
•
f is a ﬁnite column vector of size
m
≥
2,
the vector of
m objective functions
f = {φ1(x), ..., φm(x)}T, φi : Rn →R
•
x is a ﬁnite column vector of size n ≥2, the decision vector x = {x1, ..., xn}T
•
Rn is an n-dimensional Euclidean space, the decision space
–
S, S ⊂Rn, S ⊃x, is a nonempty set, the feasible region space
•
g is a vector of p inequality constraints, g = {g1(x), ..., gp(x)}
•
h is a vector of q equality constraints, h = {h1(x), ..., hq(x)}
•
For each function φi(d), φi(d) is to be either maximized or minimized
These frameworks are commensurable. For instance, the criteria functions from MCDA just are
the objective functions from MOO. Researchers often engage with the two types of problem at different
stages of a same project 37.
We may now draw several semantic equivalences that will allow us to frame the problem of
epistemic appraisal using the terms of ﬁelds of inquiry. Table 2 summarizes these correspondences:
Table 2. Semantic equivalences.
MCDA and MOO
Field of Inquiry
Set of actors A of an evaluation problem MC
Set of professionals A from a ﬁeld of inquiry F
Decision space X of an evaluation problem MC
Constructs in C from a same class Ki
Set of criteria functions Φ from an evaluation
The set of functions φ1, φ2... associated with
problem MC
the values of a family of evaluation standards Si
Vector of objective functions f from a design
As above
problem MO
Inequality and equality constraints g and h
A priori impositions by members of A given
from a design problem MO
the set of goals G
37
As framed in [135], the MCDA evaluation problem is actually a proper part of a major MOO problem “It should be
clear that multiobjective optimization consists of three phases: model building, optimization, and decision making
(preference articulation)”.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
29 of 56
5.5. Modelling Epistemic Appraisal
Further qualiﬁcations are warranted. In the name of formal rigor and structural conservativeness,
we strive to deal, if possible, solely with ordinal varieties of MOO and MCDA. In this move,
we potentially lose several technical options but still capture what is more essential. As a team
of control engineers puts it, “order [of objective functions] is much more robust against noise than
‘value”’ [137] (p. 13). Getting the order right is what’s most crucial.
Sometimes it is assumed that the values involved in epistemic appraisal can be readily given
a cardinal interpretation. For instance, in the context of the epistemic appraisal of scientiﬁc theories
and the demarcation problem, Martin Mahner proposes such an account of scientiﬁcity [138]. It is true
that several such characterizations have been proposed for particular alethic epistemic values. Most
notably, ways to quantify different senses of the simplicity of constructs [139,140]. Such polysemies
in alethic epistemic values are probably the norm, making the problem even harder. The concept
of simplicity in the context of epistemic appraisal, for instance, appears to be a mongrel concept
that designates different syntactical, semantical, epistemological, practical and aesthetic properties of
constructs [141,142]. Unfortunately, most philosophical theories (and other philosophical constructs)
are informal and are yet to be expressed in the regimented languages required for such computations.
This fact gives more credence to the proposal that presently, epistemic appraisal in philosophy (and
science) should be a strictly ordinal endeavor.
In MCDA and MOO, engineers regularly defy the measurement-theoretical doctrine of permissible
transformations by treating ordinal variables as if they were interval or ratio-scalable (for instance,
by extracting arithmetic means of arbitrary data and assuming that the different levels of Likert-type
scales 38 are equally spaced magnitudes). In the absence of evidence that the variable at hand satisﬁes
the axioms for linear structures or any kind of structure where an operation of concatenation isomorphic
to arithmetic addition can be deﬁned, one should be conservative and assume that it just meets the
simpler and less demanding family of comparative structures ⟨Ai, ≽⟩.
Now, for an exposition of some of the results from these ﬁelds of inquiry:
Postulate 19 (Non-Optimality). I suppose that, in general, for a given multi-objective optimization problem
MO, there exists no solution x ∈S that simultaneously attains the desired outcomes of objective functions f
(i.e., maximizations and minimizations) under constraints h and g.
The rule of thumb is that multiple objectives will conﬂict with each other. MOO is an art of
negotiation and compromise; the quest for a Platonic ideal aircraft, trafﬁc system, or automated factory
is irremediably tragic—the optimal solution in the sense of scalar or single-objective optimization is
generally impossible, and one must be content to one of their possible efﬁcient worldly realizations.
There are many types and hierarchies of efﬁcient solutions; below the crown of scalar
optimality [143] (Chapter 2), what rules more ﬁrmly is the notion of Pareto efﬁciency (also called
Pareto “optimality”). Consider the following deﬁnition of Pareto-efﬁciency (adapted from [135,143]):
Deﬁnition 8 (Pareto Efﬁciency). For a MOO problem MO where the vector of objective functions f =
{φ1(x), ..., φm(x)}T is to be maximized, x ∈S, a decision vector x’ is Pareto-efﬁcient if and only if there does
not exist another x so that φi(x) ≥φi(x’) for all i = 1, ..., n.
•
A Pareto-efﬁcient decision vector is strictly Pareto-efﬁcient if and only if φj(x) > φj(x’) for at least
one index j. Otherwise, it is weakly Pareto-efﬁcient
38
Likert scales are a staple of survey data designed to extract information regarding preferences. They usually involve a small
even number of sentences ranked from either the most positive or most negative valence (such as “strongly agree”, “agree”,
“indifference”, “disagree” and “strongly disagree”.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
30 of 56
We call a set of Pareto-efﬁcient solutions a Pareto frontier. Although these are often not computable,
we may strive for solutions which approximate the Pareto frontier. We say that all Pareto-efﬁcient
solutions dominate over the rest of the solutions in the feasible region space.
Since the frameworks of MOO and MCDA are commensurable, each decision vector x may
correspond to a decision variant x.
Let us contemplate some simple examples of evaluation problems in epistemic appraisal for
philosophy. Consider a hypothetical metaethicist comparing three constructs, the thesis of moral
cognitivism, the thesis of moral noncognitivism and a hybrid theory of both. He holds that four
alethic epistemic values are relevant for his evaluation and posits ordinal values under a bounded
interval [0, 10]. Table 3 summarizes this scenario:
Table 3. Theory choice in philosophy.
Theory
Internal Consistency
Empirical Adequacy
¬ad hocness
Simplicity
Moral cognitivism
10
5
4
5
Moral noncognitivism
10
7
6
7
Hybrid theory
7
5
2
2
Starting from very instinctive standards of rationality, it is a no-brainer that our model metaethicist
should choose moral non-cognitivism over the others for it is either better or equivalent to the
alternative positions in every respect. x2 is the only Pareto-efﬁcient solution of this set of decision
variants, and it thus dominates the others.
Now, consider a philosopher of mind evaluating theories of personal identity also under
four criteria. Table 4 depicts this scenario:
Table 4. Theory choice in philosophy.
Theory
Explanatory Power
Simplicity
Empirical Adequacy
Intuitiveness
Animalism
7
7
6
5
Lockeanism
8
5
5
6
Eliminativism
5
9
6
0
In this example, there is no decision variant dominating. All three options are Pareto-efﬁcient.
How does one choose? There exists no transcendental procedure, no single general algorithm that
takes a set of efﬁcient decision variants and outputs the most preferred one. Instead, there are several.
Engineers may often ﬁnd themselves in the paradoxical situation of having a second-order MCDA
problem when choosing which method to use to solve a particular MCDA problem [144].
In the ordinal MCDA case, although the vast majority of algorithms involve aggregation
procedures employing addition and multiplication at some point, there are fortunately some purely
“qualitative” strategies. For instance, the approach of generalized concordance rules [145], which does not
assume the additivity of typical “compare and aggregate” approaches in multicriteria decision-making.
How MCDA may model evaluation problems in ﬁelds of inquiry should be easy to see.
What about design problems? Here things get more complicated. I intend to use the framework
of MOO to represent an ideal hunt for constructs that efﬁciently carry out the goals of the ﬁeld through
the maximization of the associated values.
It is not clear if purely ordinal cases of MOO are feasible. Over the literature, in the context of
stochastic optimization, so-called “ordinal optimization” procedures exist as an antecedent backstage to
eschew computational burden for run-of-the-mill cardinal optimization [137]. Some decision theorists
(such as [134] (p. 58), in the context of scalarization techniques) have argued that even though
some mathematical manipulations in certain procedures have no empirical interpretation, (i.e., are not

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
31 of 56
meaningful 39 in a measurement-theoretic sense) they can be justiﬁed on heuristic or pragmatic grounds
and be positively informative.
I shall now add another informal companion for Postulate 19 meant to express something on the
standards of success of ﬁelds of inquiry:
Postulate 20 (Epistemic Effectiveness of a Field of Inquiry). The epistemic effectiveness of ﬁeld of inquiry
F is a function of its power to produce quality constructs in C.
A received hierarchy of quality of constructs in the context of evaluation and design problems
is thus:
•
Scalar Optimality, for problems with m = 1 functions
•
Strict Pareto Efﬁciency, for problems with m ≥2 conﬂicting functions
•
Weak Pareto Efﬁciency, for problems with m ≥2 conﬂicting functions
•
Approximations of Pareto Efﬁcient solutions, for problems with m ≥2 functions
Given this crude characterization, a ﬁeld of inquiry that consistently produces more efﬁcient
constructs relative to the problems it entertains is a more effective one.
This leads us to the
following consequence:
Postulate 21 (The Curse of Multiple Goals). In general, for a ﬁeld of inquiry F, the more goals in G it has,
the more ineffective it is at the development of constructs in C which are efﬁcient.
This conjecture emerges from considerations of Section 5.3 where each goal is associated which
a cluster of values which have, as elaborated in Table 2, a direct correspondence with objective functions
of a MOO problem.
This claim may look like a trivial truism; of course it is expected that the more targets a ﬁeld
aims to secure, the harder it is to secure them. But the point I’d like to emphasize is that the growth
of difﬁculty is generally not linear; it increases dramatically fast as m rises. This is partially due to
an assortment of formal phenomena dubbed “the curse of dimensionality” (ﬁrst exposed by [147],
in the context of dynamic programming) that take place with mathematical optimization as the number
of objective functions increases.
These complex problems are a breeding ground for the infamous “NP-hard” decision
problems where the computational resources required to reach a sufﬁciently strong solution may
grow exponentially. Many families of algorithms effective at attaining or bordering the Pareto
front in MOO with a small number of objectives do not scale well with a greater number of
objectives. For instance, many evolutionary algorithms struggle to ﬁnd Pareto-efﬁcient solutions
when m ≥3 [148]. Also, one of the most used procedures to test for the quality of two Pareto-efﬁcient
sets, the hypervolume indicator, has a #P-hard (“Sharp-P”) complexity class, being as hard to solve as its
associated NP decision problem [149].
Up until this point, many criticisms are possible. I’ll brieﬂy consider two of them. First, by
taking as relevant these results from theoretical computer science in the context of mathematical
optimization, we are implicitly representing the production of knowledge in an arbitrary ﬁeld of
inquiry F as a classical computational process, a program implementable in a Turing machine. Black
box model for black model, it could be argued that professional experts are best modeled as more
powerful computational systems (such as oracle machines) and thus, being able to circumvent the
imposed difﬁculties in the formal framework I’m grounding my analysis in, rendering them irrelevant.
39
An extensive discussion of several technical senses of “meaningfulness” in the context of the axiomatic representational
theory of measurement is found at [146].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
32 of 56
Second, it can also be questioned that since approximate solutions at a small distance from the
Pareto frontier scanned by much faster heuristic algorithms are often good enough and attainable with
fewer resources, by analogy the activities of professional philsophers may be modeled by much more
realistic heuristic algorithms.
The ﬁrst line of argument is congruent with standard practice in operations research. In design
problems, a priori expert knowledge compacting expectations of what a good solution looks like
can be incorporated in the model, relieving burdens (for example, in the context of an evolutionary
optimization [150]). In evaluation problems, this is even more obvious as experts are consulted to
place decision variants under preference relations, and this feedback is used to build decision-making
procedures. Under a formal decision setting, experts can indeed be modeled as oracles of a sort.
However, I claim that, particularly for the less methodologically robust fields of inquiry (such as
philosophy and the social sciences), we should be very skeptical of the powers of their professional experts
to find even “good enough” solutions in the feasibility space—much less efficient solutions (for instance,
political psychologist Philip E. Tetlock has documented the underwhelming predictive accuracy of
social scientists over even general economic and political trends [151]). Philosophy, in particular, may
be the field of inquiry most pessimistic of the status of its cognitive achievements [120,152]. Also,
as already acknowledged in Section 3.1, existing empirical evidence on expertise effects behind properly
philosophical inquiry (such as epistemology and ethics) is not consistent with philosophers having
particularly special epistemic powers.
Under this framework, I posit that the main reason why philosophy, in contrast to science, is more
ineffective is due to lack of robust standards under which contradictory efﬁcient decision variants are
to be evaluated. Science arguably has the “tribunal of experience” as the primary, if not overriding,
standard of excellence, up until the point it faces empirical underdetermination.
Is philosophy doomed? If each goal deploys a portfolio with a myriad of values whose structure
we know little about, we appear to be hostages of the curse of dimensionality. Postulate 21 may
seem to undermine optimality in truth-seeking pursuits. Or does it? There are two basic routes
when engaging with a MOO problem; either one treats it as a MOO problem in its own right
and incurs in any computational burdens involved or one attempts to transform it into a much
more tractable single-objective optimization problem (SOO) through a particular process of scalarization.
‘Scalarization’ names families of different algorithms that transforms a vector of multiple objectives
f = { f1(x), ..., fn(x)}T into a scalar { f (x)}.
In the name of optimism, I thus deploy the following bold conjecture:
Postulate 22 (Scalarization of Vectors With the Same Type of Goal). For a vector of functions
f = {φ1, ..., φn} associated with the portfolio of Ω-values from a goal ⟨Ω, ≽⟩, it is assumed that f can be
scalarized into f = {φ} without signiﬁcant loss of information.
This sums up the optimism that optimality may still be at hand for ﬁelds of inquiry that seek
truth, and truth only. Also, consider this; take our portfolio of alethic epistemic values {ϵ1, ..., ϵm}.
Given Deﬁnition 5, some of these may be just redundant dummy alethic epistemic values and thus may
be removed. This procedure would be an instance of the technique of dimensionality reduction [153] that
is employed in MOO.
5.6. Epistemic Appraisal of Politically Correct Fields of Inquiry
We can now characterize more precisely the following subvarieties of epistemic ﬁelds; truth-seeking
ﬁelds of inquiry (as I hold philosophy to be) and politically correct ﬁelds of inquiry (as I claim neither
basic science nor philosophy should be) and conclude our inquiry.
Deﬁnition 9 (Truth-Seeking Field of Inquiry). For a ﬁeld of inquiry F, F is truth-seeking if and only if:
•
F has truth, ⟨T ≽⟩, as a goal in G

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
33 of 56
•
All families of evaluation standards Si have at least one (and probably more than one) alethic
epistemic value ⟨E, ≽⟩
•
For all non-scalarized design problems, each function ϵi of the vector of objective functions f is to be
maximized
•
For all scalarized design problems, the scalar of truth τ(x) is to be maximized
•
In the context of any evaluation problem MD, where Si includes at least one non-alethic epistemic
value ⟨Λ, ≽⟩with an associated monotonic increasing function φΛ, no decision variant x1
where φΛ(x1) > φΛ(x2) may be preferred by a decision maker in A if for at least one ϵi(x1),
ϵi(x1) < ϵi(x2)
This characterization ensures that no construct even a bit defective on matters of truth will come
to dominate other solutions.
Examples of evaluation problems in the ﬁeld of inquiry of philosophy include not only deciding
which intuitions, premises and theories to choose but may also involve activities such as the ﬁlling
of a ﬁnite list of key speakers in conferences and deciding whether to accept or reject a paper given
contradictory appraisals of referees. If philosophy is truth-seeking, I argue that those academic
activities should also strive to satisfy the above requirements.
Deﬁnition 10 (Politically Correct Field of Inquiry). For a ﬁeld of inquiry F, F is politically correct if and
only if:
•
F has social justice, ⟨J, ≽⟩, as a goal in G
•
All families of evaluation standards Si have at least one politically correct value ⟨P, ≽⟩
•
For all non-scalarized design problems, each function ρi of the vector of objective functions f is to
be maximized
•
For all scalarized design problems, the scalar of social justice σ(x) is to be maximized
•
In the context of any evaluation problem MD, a decision variant x1 may dominate a decision variant
x2 when ϵi(x1) < ϵi(x2) and ρi(x1) > ρi(x2)
This deﬁnition is weaker than the preceding, in the name of charitableness; for a ﬁeld of inquiry to
be politically correct, it does not need to assign a priority to political correctness; it merely needs to be
taken into account, by being in the portfolio of values involved in the appraisal. One could strengthen
this characterization as much as one wants.
We now turn to the ﬁnal deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 11 (Epistemic Appraisal of Politically Correct Philosophy). For the ﬁeld of inquiry of
philosophy P, if P is politically correct, the epistemic appraisal in P can be thus modeled:
•
As a design problem, it is at best a 2-objective MOO problem representing the search for
Pareto-efﬁcient constructs x, x ∈C in a feasible space X with the vector of objective functions
f = {[τ(x), σ(x)]T} where τ(x) is the scalar of truth and σ(x) is the scalar of social justice and both
functions are to be maximized
•
As an evaluation problem between n ≥2 comparable constructs, {x1; ..., xn} ∈Ki and a set of
evaluation standards S, S ⊂V, it is an ordinal MCDA problem where:
–
The decision space set X is {x1; ..., xn}
–
The set of criteria functions Φ has as elements the functions associated with the values that are
truth and social justice-conducing, Φ = {ϵ1(x), ..., ϵr(x), ρ1(x), ..., ρs(x)}

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
34 of 56
5.7. Consequences of the Model for the Epistemic Appraisal of PC Philosophy
Tying all my considerations together, the practical answer for whether a synergistic marriage
between truth and social justice is plausible is a resounding “no”.
5.7.1. Consequence #1: PC Philosophy Can’t Reasonably Aspire to Be Truth-Seeking
To say that to carry out philosophy solely in the pursuit of truth is hard would be
an understatement. Now, optimization theory provides us with additional pragmatic reasons to
avoid compromise of any kind (and not just political) when doing basic research. If the search for truth
is not scalarizable, against the optimistic conjecture in Postulate 22, our effectiveness can be crippled
with our problem subjected to everything undesirable that may happen when m ≥2.
Truth-seeking enterprises, given Deﬁnition 9, have no place for spurious restraints of non-alethic
origin on the truth of statements (i.e., a value such as external consistency may inﬂuence the truth of
a construct in a truth-seeking ﬁeld of inquiry, but not a contextual value such as politeness or sensitivity
towards the feelings of others).
If truth is scalarizable without signiﬁcant loss of information, optimality becomes a possibility for
philosophical theories.
The best decision-makers of a ﬁeld are expected to marshal technical expertise under excellent
standards of rationality. However, as argued in Section 3, we have reasons to expect professional
philosophers, in general, to systematically run short of these aspirations when dealing with politically
controversial topics. Given the presented frameworks of MCDA and MOO, I will supply some possible
routes PC may compromise truth in philosophy. Here are some of the ways PC biases can be modeled:
•
In the context of both evaluation and design problems, the violation, willful or not, of the priority
of alethic epistemic values over everything else in the family of evaluation standards Si employed
•
In the context of evaluation problems, the underestimation of the actual values (in the sense of
assigned information) of alethic epistemic values associated with politically incorrect constructs.
•
In the context of design problems, the placement of unwarranted a priori inequality and equality
constraints over the objective functions associated with alethic epistemic values which are
prejudiciously deemed to be implausible because they are un-PC
For a contemporary example in the philosophy of science, take the thesis in philosophy of biology
that Homo sapiens not only is not a monotypic biological species—the social genus “race" being a natural
kind—but that one of the reasons for believing so is motivated by the alethic epistemic value of external
consistency with research on cognitive differences across racial groups in contemporary differential
psychology and behavioral genetics [154].
This particular thesis incurs in many sins; ﬁrst, according to the PC worldview, it denies the social
construction of the social kind “race” (Postulate 12). In its frank denial of Anthropological Mental
Egalitarianism (Axiom 11), it violates the Generalized Difference Principle (Postulate 10) with respect
to the social genus “race”, being typiﬁed as “racist” and therefore, being socially oppressive.
If one adheres to the PC worldview, one acquires reasons from the point of view of the expressive
rationality of identity-protection cognition (Postulate 7) to reprobate this thesis. In our model of
a design problem, this can be represented by the supply of low inequality constraints over the
empirical adequacy and external consistency of the construct. As an evaluation problem, conﬁrmation
bias suggests that a serious PC adherent would be bound to give low scores for the alethic epistemic
values of the thesis.
Again, the kind of rationality that is traditionally treasured as guiding philosophy and science is
not the expressive rationality of identity-protective cognition; it is a rationality of objectivity. It demands
us not to constrain the space of feasible hypothesis based on idiosyncratic preference, no matter
how personally important. If we allow values such as sexual equality, natural egalitarianism, and
extreme politeness to constrain science and philosophy, I predict we will produce worse science and

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
35 of 56
philosophy due to spurious directions prompted by these values. Politically correct philosophy can
only thrive contingently.
5.7.2. Consequence #2: Politically Correct Philosophy is Ineffective as Philosophy
It may be true that human males struggle more than human females with multitasking [155],
but I believe that we can be much more certain on the shortcomings of certain ﬁelds of inquiry at
multitasking. This may still strike as unreasonable; what about the ﬁelds of inquiry that are arguably
very accomplished at dealing with massive projects involving multiple conﬂicting goals, such as
the various branches of engineering, which consistently supply us with new designs of cars, planes,
and satellites?
What explains the success of the engagement with some MOO problems in some ﬁelds of
engineering is a conjunction of peculiarities; in the context of design problems, engineers are often
privileged with the possibility of developing a precise mathematical description of the problem at
hand. For that, they often have the most reliable and tested physical science at their service and may
ofﬂoad a lot of the hard cognitive effort into machines with dedicated computational resources of
unmatched power in the hunt for the solutions roaming the Pareto frontier.
Philosophers are not so lucky, the ﬁeld being largely informal and problems often lacking a precise
deﬁnition. Perhaps there is truth in the metaphilosophical statement that, for every ﬁeld of inquiry,
philosophy “is what you have to do until you ﬁgure out what questions you should have been
asking in the ﬁrst place” [156] (Chapter 2.1). Philosophy in its most pure of intellectual pursuits
is, arguably, underperforming (see [118]). If one sincerely wishes philosophy qua philosophy to be
cognitively progressive, represented as ﬁnding the set of highest quality solutions C for a class of
problems P (or their nearest neighbors), I submit that one is irrational to expect that philosophy can be
simultaneously socially progressive. The very same conclusion is generalizable to politically correct
science. Supplementing a set of obscure criteria with even more obscure criteria is to overload the
epistemic appraiser gratuitously.
5.7.3. Consequence #3: Politically Correct Philosophy is Ineffective as Social Justice
The converse is also true; if the goal of social justice is important for a professional philosopher,
it may be the case that the veneer of respectability accrued by this ﬁeld of inquiry may not even
be worth it from the point of view of the standards of political success. For, if philosophy is still
conceptualized as truth-seeking to a certain extent, this ideal will frequently be frustrating the design
goal of maximizing social justice.
Although the output of social justice can be given an economical characterization, causation in
social systems is messy and it may be very hard to evaluate the different impacts of social policies,
as economists continually struggle.
I second the prima facie case that the basic researcher committed to political activism is better
at doing pure political activism, without the restraints of a rationality of objectivity mandated by
philosophy and science. Unfortunately, it may be that roughly, this is what is already happening across
sectors of the humanities and social sciences; the repudiation of alethic epistemic values of formal rigor,
semantic deﬁniteness and empirical adequacy that ground bona ﬁde science, often under an exorcism
of “positivism”, appears to be most prevalent in degenerating research programs.
6. Defending the Epistemic Integrity of Truth-Seeking Philosophy
In this section, I will consider three broad objections against the theoretical and practical feasibility
of splitting up truth from social justice in philosophy. Although some of the arguments presented
here are primarily targeting empirical science, under my assumption that different avenues of basic
research have a shared structure in epistemic values and goals, I argue that these arguments can be
generalized to philosophy as well.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
36 of 56
6.1. The Objection from Contextual Empiricism
The case I’ve built on the relative orthogonality of truth and social justice, save for contingent
coincidence, has been ﬂatly rejected by several feminist philosophers over the last three decades.
Across the literature, we see the claim that values conducive for social justice may be necessary for
truth-conducive rational inquiry.
For instance, reiterating themes from critical theory and postmodernism, Sandra Harding [157]
advanced the need for scientiﬁc knowledge to be socially situated, in particular when it comes to the
lives of the socially oppressed. The conventional standards of empiricism are deemed inadequate for
the prospect of maximizing objectivity, retrogressing into an “objectivism”—and not true objectivity.
Paradoxically, in order for science to achieve “strong objectivity”, Harding defends that the social
identities of scientists themselves need to be critically considered as also constitutive of a given
scientiﬁc inquiry, and not merely its salient “objects of knowledge”. Even more; the necessity of
science to engage in “democracy-advancing projects” (i.e., social justice) can be justiﬁed on “scientiﬁc
and epistemological reasons” [157] (p. 69). This idea is the thesis that so-called “contextual” and
“non-epistemic” politically correct values may not be non-epistemic after all but rightfully stand as
legitimate alethic epistemic values 40.
What reasons do we have to accept this? A strong case comes from the research program of
contextual empiricism by philosopher of science Helen Longino 41. In her magnum opus Science As Social
Knowledge, Longino [160] has meticulously described what is perceived to be the intrusion of sexist
ideology into the background assumptions of several biological sciences, from paleoanthropology to
neuroendocrinology.
The general picture exposed by Longino’s contextual empiricism is this; empirical data is
underwhelming. Empirical adequacy simpliciter does not exist. The evidential relations that ground
empirical adequacy, having as relata part of the world (states of affairs, facts, events, etc.) on one side
and constructs (hypotheses, statements, sentences, etc.) on the other, are ﬁxed by a class of mental
events. It is the mind of the scientist, through his background beliefs, which prepares his attentive
resources to judge parts of the data (and not others) as salient and which projects hypothetical causal
structure among particular events as promising, thereby linking evidence from the world to construct.
The truth of the statement ‘f is evidence for h’ must be relativized to the set of background beliefs of
the reasoner in question, for it is the content of these mental states which enable evidential reasoning,
bridging an alleged “logical gap” between data and hypothesis. Longino’s thesis diverges from
famous theses associated with Kuhn, Duhem, and Feyerabend on the theory-ladenness of meaning
and observation. There exists greater elbow room for objectivity in Longino’s argument for “states
of affairs, hypothesis and background beliefs are independently speciﬁable” [160] (pp. 56–57). Also,
background beliefs strike as being primarily pretheoretical, non-articulated by default. Background
beliefs are posited to be a primary mechanism (though not the sole one) through which ideology may
inﬂuence scientiﬁc inquiry.
I isolate two major claims of the program of contextual empiricism, one theoretical and the
other, practical. Under the scheme I have presented, the theoretical claim is that it is impossible to
employ “pure” alethic epistemic values (“constitutive values” under Longino’s terminology) to settle
disputes on rival hypothesis, which carry within themselves different sets of background assumptions.
Under my framework, the practical claim can be read this way; to optimize truth, reliance on certain
40
Helen Longino used very similar words to summarize her most important work: “I argued in Science as Social Knowledge
that social or non-cognitive values could and did serve as cognitive values” [158] (p. 41).
41
Placing this distinguished philosopher in the same cluster as postmodern feminist critics of science whose output is of
limited quality is decidedly unfair. This general sentiment is also echoed, for instance, throughout essays in [159].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
37 of 56
contextual values is more efﬁcient than reliance on alethic epistemic values. These include feminist
contextual values 42.
For what probably is her most famous example, consider explanations for the co-evolution of
the hypertrophied neocortex and manual dexterity which are distinctive of our evolutionary lineage.
Many dominant models still place significant emphasis on the selective pressures for tool manufacturing
which would enable greater efficiency in the acquisition of animal protein by hunting bands of
male hominids [161]. Under androcentric background assumptions, the alleles of “Man, the Hunter”
become privileged theoretical entities as the female side of evolution, that of “Woman, the Gatherer”,
is overshadowed (for a historical overview, see [162]). Alternative empirically adequate models under
different background assumptions may have been neglected and undervalued due to implicit sexist
attitudes.
Consider now an analogous example in psychology. In what is now a contemporary classic,
psychologists Joseph Henrich, Steven J. Heine and Ara Norenzayan have argued that the status
of uncountable results from the behavioral sciences, taken to be descriptive of the human species,
may have been compromised [163]. This is because disproportionate amounts of cutting-edge research
in the behavioral sciences employ what may be the worst data sets possible to construe inductive
generalizations meant to be projectable to the whole of humanity. These data sets are populated
with information extracted from what the authors have dubbed “WEIRD” people—that is: Western,
Educated, Industrialized, Rich and Democratic. To put this in perspective, “a randomly selected American
undergraduate is more than 4000 times more likely to be a research participant than is a randomly
selected person from outside of the West” [163] (p. 63).
Given these two examples in mind (and assuming they are correct), we may present the
following case; wouldn’t the presence of undeniably politically correct values of equality, diversity,
representativeness, and inclusiveness (of women in the ﬁrst case, of non-WEIRD people in the latter)
make the research more truth-conducive? That certainly appears to be the case; in the context of the
research programs implicated in these examples, these politically correct values are also, under my
deﬁnition, alethic epistemic values.
However, I claim that they are all dummy alethic epistemic values (Deﬁnition 5).
That is,
theoretically, they could all be replaced, without loss of aptitude, with alethic epistemic values such as
statistical rigor and good old-fashioned empirical adequacy. Statistical rigor ensures that no sampling
errors are perpetrated and that sound methodology in data gathering is enforced (for instance, in the
design of stratiﬁed sampling). These alethic epistemic values are preferable since they do not prompt
spurious ideological content.
In order not to merely beg the question, I’ll brieﬂy advance some of the arguments brought forth
by philosopher of science Stéphanie Ruphy [164] in her defense of the ideal of what is commonly
called “value-free” or “value-neutral” scientiﬁc practice, taken to be the picture of scientiﬁc practice
exempt from contextual or non-epistemic values.
First, background beliefs, even if largely pretheoretical, may be reconstrued and expressed as
factual claims. For instance, the background beliefs that motivate androcentric paleoanthropology
involve factual claims on the preeminence of selection processes in the evolutionary history of one
of the sexes (and not the other). If evidential relations are contingent upon background beliefs and
background beliefs, being bearers of contextual values, can only be criticized in the light of other
contextual values, this appears to lead to a regress of background beliefs embodying contextual values
42
Some of the feminist values or “feminist theoretical virtues” Longino advances to guide scientiﬁc reasoning, such as
old-fashioned empirical adequacy and theoretical novelty, are difﬁcult to be framed as properly “feminist” or even as
related to social justice [158]. But criteria such as “applicability to human needs” as in preferring scientiﬁc knowledge that
“improves the material conditions of human life” instead of mere science “for knowledge’s sake” and “diffusion of power”,
under which explanatory models that incorporate “dominant-subordinate relationships” are to be deferred, decidedly strike
us as politically correct values.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
38 of 56
battling against each other, ad inﬁnitum. Also, the program of contextual empiricism is itself deploying
an empirical theory on the causal constituents of the cognitive processes involved in evidential
reasoning and ultimately theory choice and thus, may be confronted with alternative accounts of these
phenomena throughout the history of science. It also predicts rampant empirical underdetermination.
As Ruphy argues in her analysis of key historical cases discussed by Longino, the settlement
of seemingly empirically equivalent rival theories sporting different background assumptions and
targeting the same data appear to be best explained as being eventually achieved when this equivalence
becomes an inequality and that it is possible for evidential support, externally considered from the
diverging sets of background assumptions, to point a favorite. It does not have to be unequivocal;
if the settlement is secured by non-contextual criteria pointing to a direction, this shows that it is
not impossible.
For instance,
since Longino authored her opus nearly three decades ago,
genetic
paleoanthropology has advanced dramatically. Strains of DNA from humans and extinct hominins
with over a hundred thousand years of age have been extracted from bodily remains and researchers
have devised strict protocols to enable their genetic sequencing with the highest ﬁdelity [165]. Statistical
methods designed to detect the presence of natural selection in genomic data are being continuously
improved [166]. In the light of these technical accomplishments, the story of “Man, the Hunter” against
“Woman, the Gatherer” may no longer be a more hermeneutical exercise of “just-so stories” over the
deep history of piles of broken bones but a more precise direction course can be ascertained.
It can also be stated that contextual empiricism appears to render as vacuous distinctions between
science and seemingly obvious pseudoscience. For instance, flat-earthers reject the phenomena of ships
vanishing in the horizon (which may be as good as it gets as an example of an observation low in
theoreticity) as evidence for the hypothesis of a round earth. Some flat earthers (for instance, [167])
have claimed that naked eye observations of such phenomena are nonveridical experiences, perceptual
illusions which vanish by aiding the human eye with optical magnification (an ad hoc that can be readily
falsified by experiment). Under contextual empiricism, both conceptions may be just as empirically
adequate, relativized to their underlying assumptions. Following Ruphy, I take it to be implausible that
the standard normative stance endorsed by practicing scientists is creating a delusion by positing a vast
asymmetry on the empirical adequacy of these hypotheses.
Also, even in cases of full-blown empirical underdetermination, there also appears to be no
theoretical or practical impossibility for the employment of other “constitutive” alethic epistemic
values, such as ontological simplicity. Finally, the underlying claim that there cannot be a “value-free”
formalization of the relation of evidential relevance singling out the appropriate reference classes for
the explanandum of a theory can be disputed (for instance, [69] (p. 77)).
If the replacement of inadequate background assumptions for better ones is better explained by
old-fashioned, “contextual value-free” standards of empirical success, then the very case of feminist
criticism of androcentric ideology across the sciences becomes more robust. It would stand not as a ploy
involving arbitrary political victories of background assumptions from one ideology to another, but as
the replacement of constructs less conducive for truth for others more conducive for truth screened
out under standards of objectivity. The vibrant panorama issued by Helen Longino where scientiﬁc
knowledge achieves higher degrees of objectivity as an effect of the distributed social cognition enacted
in communities of scientists with a culture of internal criticism where background beliefs are put into
question may remain intact. As for the practical or pragmatic claim that locally, there may be contextual
values carrying the status of dummy alethic epistemic values which are indeed more efﬁcient than
pure alethic epistemic values at attaining the epistemic goal of truth, I will have something to say on
the matter in both the next subsection and in Section 7.3.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
39 of 56
6.2. The Objection from the “Feminine Voice” in Ethics
Starting in the 1980s, researchers in moral philosophy and moral psychology have advanced another
compelling case for the pervasive presence of epistemically detrimental ideological bias of a sexual nature
in both contemporary moral philosophy and empirical accounts of moral development [168,169].
Just as in paleoanthropology, the general sentiment entertained by this researchers is that
normative ethical theories have been misconstruing moral psychology by taking male human cognition
as prototypical. Those marshaling an ethics of care grounded in a distinguishable “feminine voice” in
morality have claimed that academic normative ethics has been disproportionally oriented towards
(so-called) masculine moral values and meta-values such as abstract rule-following, individualistic
autonomy and rational disinterestedness at the expense, ignorance, and deprecation of (so-called)
feminine values such as person-to-person interaction, social connectedness, and empathy.
The clashes between a communitarian virtue ethics exposing the “feminine voice”, where caring,
needs and responsibilities are central and a “masculine” liberal deontological or consequentialist ethics
grounded in justice, rights and duties range may appear hopeless at ﬁrst sight, but possible routes for
complementarity and synergy have been advanced [170].
From reasonable assumptions of the supervenience of moral action and judgment onto human
social behavior and cognition, the possibility that the distinct contributions to moral reasoning by
about half of the agents involved in these interactions have been neglected rises. And from this, a prima
facie case for the conclusion that traditional moral theories exposed by professional philosophers can be
signiﬁcantly defective emerges. More; it could allegedly show an actual nontrivial instance of truth and
social justice going hand in hand. I shall construct such as argument, whose general form is potentially
generalizable for other examples.
From The Ethics Of Care To social justice
P1 Normative ethics is a truth-seeking ﬁeld of inquiry
P2 The constructs devised by a truth-seeking ﬁeld of inquiry ought to be truthful
P3 For (the constructs of) normative ethics to be truthful, it ought to be sensitive to moral psychology
P4 Moral psychology comprises feminine values
C1 Therefore, to be truthful, normative ethics ought to be sensitive to feminine values
P5 For normative ethics to be sensitive to feminine values, it cannot over-privilege the role of
masculine values in moral psychology
P6 Normative ethics over-privileges the role of masculine values in moral psychology
C2 Therefore, normative ethics is not truthful
P7 For a given ﬁeld of inquiry, an alethic epistemic value is a value that increases the truthfulness of
their constructs
P8 Truth-seeking ﬁelds of inquiry must endorse their respective epistemic values
P9 Sexual inclusiveness of women in normative ethics is a value that increases the sensitivity towards
feminine values
C3 Therefore, for the ﬁeld of inquiry of normative ethics, the sexual inclusiveness of women is
an alethic epistemic value
C4 Therefore, the ﬁeld of inquiry of normative ethics must endorse the value of sexual inclusiveness
of women
P10 Sexual inclusiveness of women is also a politically correct value that enhances the goal of social
justice
C4 Therefore, normative ethics ought to adopt a value that enhances the goal social justice
P11 If a ﬁeld of inquiry ought to adopt a value that enhances the goal of social justice, then it is
compatible with social justice
C5 Therefore, normative ethics is a truth-seeking ﬁeld of inquiry that is compatible with social justice

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
40 of 56
As it is, for this argument to work, it appears to assume the truth-aptitude of the constructs
outputted by normative ethics (P1), which in turn may require metaethical commitments such as moral
cognitivism. Let us grant this.
First, I repeat the same strategy from the subsection above; I argue that in this case, the sexual
inclusiveness of women is a dummy epistemic value. It is indirectly tracking the empirical adequacy and
statistical rigor of the content of human moral psychology onto the content of normative ethics due to
a sampling error. If moral philosophers were to diligently examine their biases and conclude that they
are not feasible according to truths of human social cognition, there would be no need for the value of
sexual inclusiveness.
Second, the conclusion is too modest; compatibility of social justice with truth-seeking ﬁelds
of inquiry. This compatibility cannot easily be transformed in necessity. The adoption of a value
that enhances social justice as a byproduct does not imply that social justice must be a conscious
goal. The fact that philosophy may accidentally promote social justice is a trivial matter, already
acknowledged previously.
Alas, we can be charitable and circumvent this reply with some additionally reasonable premises:
P12 For a truth-seeking ﬁeld of inquiry, if the adoption of a dummy epistemic value tracking
an epistemic value is more efﬁcient for attaining truth than its avoidance, then the ﬁeld of
inquiry ought to adopt it
P13 The adoption of sexual inclusiveness of women in normative ethics is more efﬁcient for attaining
truth than its avoidance
C5 Therefore, normative ethics ought to adopt a value that enhances social justice
C6 Therefore, normative ethics is a truth-seeking ﬁeld of inquiry that requires the promotion of
social justice
Given the pessimistic picture I have issued with a model of epistemic appraisal, the pragmatic
power of dummy epistemic values cannot be understated and now appears to bridge a strong
connection between at least a major branch of philosophy with the ideal of social justice. However,
I hold that this particular case is not compatible at all with social justice. For that, I shall phrase
a counter-argument; for the sake of it, let us consider only endorsements of the value of sexual
inclusiveness of women which are motivated by considerations stemming from the ethics of care:
P11 If the adoption of a value by a ﬁeld of inquiry assumes the truth of a politically incorrect hypothesis,
then the ﬁeld of inquiry is incompatible with social justice
P12 The adoption of a value by a ﬁeld of inquiry ought to be rational
P13 The adoption of the value of sexual inclusiveness of women in normative ethics ought to comply
with certain standards of rationality
P14 The adoption of the sexual inclusiveness of women in normative ethics implies acknowledging
the truth of variation in the moral psychology of men and women
P15 The variation in the moral psychology of men and women demands an explanation
P16 To rationally endorse a proposition which includes an explanandum requires the endorsement of
the best explanans available
P17 The best explanation for the existing variation in the moral psychology of men and women implies
the existence of signiﬁcant genetic causes
C7 Therefore, to rationally adopt the value the sexual inclusiveness of women in normative ethics is
to acknowledge signiﬁcant genetic causes in the variation of moral psychology
P15 To rationally acknowledge the truth of an empirical hypothesis is to endorse the research methods
that have led to this truth and their other truthful results
P16 The research methods that have led to the truth of the variation in the moral psychology of men
and women have concluded that there are socially appraisable traits where men fare in average
better than women due to signiﬁcant biological causes

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
41 of 56
P17 To rationally adopt the value of sexual inclusiveness of women in normative ethics implies
acknowledging that there are socially appraisable traits where men fare in average better than
women due to signiﬁcant biological causes
P18 The hypothesis that there are socially valuable traits where men in average fare better than women
due to signiﬁcant genetic causes is politically incorrect
C8 Therefore, the adoption of sexual inclusiveness of women in normative ethics (due to
considerations stemming from the ethics of care) is incompatible with social justice
The empirical evidence for the case that existing patterns of cognitive, affective and behavioral
sexual dimorphism which are cross-culturally robust in humans are partly mediated by heredity is
compelling (see for example [171–173]; for some social constructionist and environmentalist responses,
see [174,175] (Chapter 9) and [176].
If the above argument is safe and sound, this means that the lessons from the ethics of care are not
really socially progressive in the sense I have exposed. The acknowledgment of truths about human
sexual diversity rationally entails truths perceived to be politically incorrect. Theorist Nel Noddings
places the epicenter of the ethics of care is instinctive maternal love which predates humanity, and that
is shared with all mammals, linking evolutionary biology with normative ethics.
This line of thought is not new. It, I argue, is what may be lying beneath criticisms of the ethics of
care on the ground they expose “essentialist stereotypes” of men and women, violating the general
thesis of the social construction of sex and gender.
One could also argue that this very ideal of a steadfast disinterested pursuit of truth just
is more androcentric and sexist ideological introgression, the product of unfairly eulogizing and
cultivating tendencies of the male psyche 43. If this is true, then science and philosophy guided
by standards of objectivity can be accused by PC adherents of unfairly manifesting a “masculine
voice”. For instance, it has been argued that women who enter the scientiﬁc community need to adopt
a “masculine rationality” at either “conscious or subconscious level” and that “the scientiﬁc method
incorporates masculine features such as the objectiﬁcation of nature” [177]. If this hypothesis in cognitive
anthropology is correct, it will make standards of objectivity illegitimate; that would be a genetic
fallacy. The fact that the etiology of alethic epistemic values could originally involve as precursors the
interests and tendencies manifested in the minds of denizens of so-called oppressive groups does not
imply that alternative modes of inquiry with equivalent epistemic prowess at extracting truths about
the world built upon other cognitive tendencies and values are possible (as argued by postcolonial
theorists and feminists who defend the possibility of “Afrocentric” and “feminist” sciences).
6.3. The Objection from Political Philosophy
An obvious observation appears to make the case of removing political values from philosophy
strike as ludicrous. For political philosophy has been developed in both the East and the West since at
least since the 6th century BCE by Confucius and Pythagoras and political philosophy is, presumably,
a legitimate ﬁeld of inquiry. Following this attitude, Mario Bunge goes as far as to claim that “the very
notion of an apolitical political philosophy is an oxymoron” [11] (p. VIII).
The problem with political philosophy is not political content per se but the a priori unwarranted
presumption of degrees of truth and falsity for constructs motivated by a pre-established ideological
core and the introduction of contextual values with spurious, non-truth-conducive, propensities.
As philosopher Bas van der Vossen argues, “the task of the political philosopher is to seek the truth
about politics”, and empirical evidence supports the thesis that political activism may signiﬁcantly
debilitate the tools of thinking of political philosophers through cognitive biases modulated by the
worldview of the philosopher [178].
43
And of the psyches of potentially other oppressive groups, such as White people

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
42 of 56
Critics may object that while that may be reasonable for descriptive political theory, not so for
normative political theory. And isn’t the very same thing true for other normative ﬁelds such as ethics
or epistemology? It appears to be the telos of any normative theory to carry built-in practical goals.
For instance, standards of persuadability—good normative theories must be cogent for a particular
range of agents to be implementable.
If this is true under the framework I have described, it means that we should expect normative
theories to suffer from additional burdens in comparison to basic research. It is a testimony to how
difﬁcult these disciplines are. The intrusion of practical goals would make normative theories both
less effective at attaining their goals and more susceptible to ideologies. This matter imposes upon us
additional reasons of why we ought to be extra careful at evaluating political philosophy. If ideology
is inescapable, then given the pervasiveness of cognitive bias, I contend that normative political
philosophies as ﬁelds of inquiry are at the imminent danger of becoming indistinguishable from political
philosophies as political ideologies. It is no accident that terms such as ‘libertarianism’ and ‘conservatism’
name both political ideologies and families of theories in political philosophy and political science.
7. Epilogue: Make Philosophy Truthful Again
We now enter a very perilous terrain: the domain of prescription under practical goals. For the
sake of consistency with my project, this entails caution.
It is an old sociological sleight of hand to claim that criticism of political ideology is itself politically
ideological. It may be so; however, this is no defeater for this project. If basic ﬁelds of inquiry cannot
exist without underlying ideology, and always carry within themselves a residue of militancy and
fanaticism, the best we can do is to make sure it this militancy and fanaticism are focused in the pursuit
of truth. Let us use, when possible, our top-down cognitive processes to intelligently design and
enforce self-corrective memetic mechanisms onto the philosophical Leitkultur.
With truth unrestrained from biases, basic ﬁelds of inquiry are bound to output many true
statements that are contingently politically correct. However, the contingency that there could exist
domains of rational inquiry in philosophy which are impervious to social justice is not worth the shot.
By the standards of critical theoretical and postmodern philosophers and sociologists of knowledge
who are trained to see the workings of oppressive ideology everywhere (and by everywhere, I mean even
in chemical thermodynamics, i.e., [179]) there may exist no such academic “safe space” in communities
nurturing the PC memeplex.
7.1. A Call for Radical Separation
For the truth-seeking partisan, the truth is too important to be compromised by petty ideology, be
it of “right”, “center”, “left” or any other dimensional axis.
I call for a radical separation of not only social justice from philosophy but of any content motivated
by social, political or religious ideology that consciously or unconsciously imposes constraints on the
truth of statements as safeguards for their ideological cores. Following the very same prescription by
Haidt [1], this can happen at the institutional level of universities, but one can imagine it happening at
various other settings. Such segregation has already been willfully performed by believers of certain
worldviews. For instance, those adhering to the worldview of Biblical literalism have devised their
very own peer-review journals which are explicit in their ideological commitments. All the editors
of the Journal of Creation 44 publicly adhere to a statement of faith which include the religious belief
that the ﬁrst chapters of the Book of Genesis are literally true. One can imagine similar journals being
formed under the allegiance of core tenets of PC (or even existing ideologically committed journals
becoming more transparent in their pre-existing and non-negotiable ideological commitments).
44
http://creation.com/journal-of-creation-writing-guidelines

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
43 of 56
The conﬂict I have depicted is not a clash between a “cold” disembodied reason against “warm”
bodily feeling; its values all the way down. It’s a war where I hope values which are conducive for
objectivity in the quest for truth will overthrow values which are not.
If it is true that PC has wrecked the epistemic integrity and quality of academic philosophy,
how may we reverse the damage that has already been done? I have thus chosen three values which
I stipulate could help attain this goal. The ﬁrst needs to be embodied in philosophical theory and
practice, the second at the institutional level and the third, onto the characters of philosophers.
7.2. The Alethic Epistemic Value of Empirical Adequacy
PC exists in between a mismatch at how the world is and how many would want the world to
be. The coalescence of social constructionism, critical theory and postmodernism may have given
to many the appearance that social phenomena are indeﬁnitely malleable by good will and social
engineering, erecting a misleading folk anthropology in the process, particularly when it comes to
the truths of human biological diversity. I thus claim that the key is securing the empirical adequacy of
our representations.
If metaphysical naturalism is true, the groundwork of reality does not care about our personal
feelings and sensibilities. Only local aspects of reality, like us, do. Reality is not—and never will
be—a “safe space.’. Reality, in all its exuberance and diversity, is big enough to supply us with endless
permutations of unwelcome facts. There are plenty of actual and potential empirical truths ready to
offend denizens of the entire political spectrum, not just “left-wingers”. There are conservatives who
are appalled at the thought of having nonhuman ancestors or of homosexuality having hereditary
components. Libertarians who reject by ﬁat empirical results on the constraints of human rationality
and aspects of human nature which point towards social dependency and collectivism also exist.
Even the few monarchists lurking around may be reticent to be informed on the historical record of
tyrannical royal dynasties or the phenomenon of regression to the mean which makes wise kings father
rather underwhelming princes.
How may one strive for greater empirical adequacy in factual domains reeking of ideology
and minimize the moralistic fallacy, the inference from moral reprobation to factual falsity? I second
a Bayesian methodological recommendation45 issued by a recent (and very politically incorrect) paper
by evolutionary psychologists Bo Winegard, Benjamin Winegard and Brian Boutwell [180]. Although
the stipulated approach is advised by the authors for behavioral scientists dealing with inquiries
on etiologies in the nature-nurture debate, the general strategy could be applied to any problem in
philosophy that potentially carries politically incorrect empirical content. Here is how it goes; if a given
topic or research ﬁeld has been ideologically compromised (such as the ontology of a given social
genus), it probably is the case that it has already accumulated too much conceptual rubble, such as
unwarranted inferences and biases of all kinds. The cognitive effort at separating the men from the
boys may not be worth it from a cost-effective analysis. Instead, let us start from a slate as clean as
possible by assuming a situation of complete ignorance and positing equal priors for the contending
constructs. Then, piecemeal-wise, proceed by deploying argument after argument and after each
evaluation of the evidence, adjust the priors accordingly. Record the accumulated inferential history so
that it can be replicated by other researchers.
Naturally, this is much better said than done. Such an approach is bound to have more success
given the appropriate social setting, which brings us to our next value.
7.3. The Dummy Alethic Epistemic Value of Political Diversity
The greatest threat of existing “echo chambers” across higher education may be the construction
and maintenance of institutionalized disconﬁrmation: nurturing academic settings where it is expected
45
Winegard et al. in turn are mentioning the approach originally described in [181].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
44 of 56
that your axiological and theoretical unequals will challenge your most treasured propositions [40].
Such scenario has the effect of suppressing conﬁrmation bias and potentially disrupting epistemically
illegitimate consensus. Concerning a PC “echo chamber”, a way this can be built is by enhancing
the political diversity of the community towards the “right-wing” end of the spectrum. Diversity, so
much hailed with PC adherents, does not apply to political belief for many political beliefs are seen,
according to my analysis, as the breeding grounds of social injustice.
Political diversity is hereby posited to be a dummy epistemic value.
It just is a proxy for
what ultimately matters, epistemically—statistical rigor, explanatory power, empirical adequacy,
and so on. It may be, however, of enormous pragmatic value and the most effective way to build
institutionalized disconﬁrmation.
How may professional philosophy come to honor this value? A strangely ironic political dilemma
emerges; translated into policy, does this mean afﬁrmative action quotas for non-PC philosophers?
Even if institutionalized disconﬁrmation could be achieved under a relatively low threshold of
non-left wing philosophers, this proposal is bound to elicit discomfort for conservative and libertarian
philosophers who are strongly opposed to afﬁrmative action as a matter of ethical principle.
This prescription is congruent with Helen Longino’s [158] picture of optimized scientiﬁc
engagement grounded on “critical interactions among scientists of different points of view”. If this is
the most effective way to attain objectivity, so be it.
But how well does this translate into philosophy?
There are differences between science
and philosophy which hint at institutionalized disconﬁrmation being potentially less effective
for philosophy. Institutionalized disconﬁrmation requires nontrivial publicly shared evaluation
standards which may not exist across different philosophical traditions. For instance, inside the
analytic tradition of philosophy, a Thomist metaphysician may staunchly disagree with a scientistic
metaphysician concerning the epistemic authority of pre-theoretical intuitions and the boundaries
of a priori knowledge, which in my model translates into different rankings by both parties on the
importance of alethic epistemic values such as intuitiveness and self-evidentiality. An optimistic
answer to this is that successive critical metaphilosophical engagement between different philosophical
traditions may result in greater epistemic commensurability over time. A pessimistic answer is that if
the epistemic ﬁeld of philosophy is bound to be an aggregation of robustly self-encapsulated subﬁelds,
the phenomenon of institutionalized disconﬁrmation will only be local.
7.4. The Virtue of Moral Courage
Contemporary ethicists make a distinction between physical courage and moral courage. Physical
courage, or valor, is the virtue to thwart fear from preventing one to do what is right, at the risk of
having his bodily integrity harmed - the cutting of ﬂesh, breaking of bones and spilling of blood up to
complete physical annihilation. Moral courage, in turn, is the virtue to thwart fear from preventing one
to do what is right, at the risk of having your social integrity harmed - the loss of friends, the ruin of
professional careers and the damaging of reputation up to complete social annihilation [182].
Up until recent history [183] (p. 90), there was no sharp bifurcation between valor and moral
courage. Ancient philosophers simply called it ‘courage.’ For to rise against established despotic
authority was the same thing as jeopardizing his bodily integrity, putting your own life at stake 46.
In today’s world, I speculate that the current political homogeneity in Western academia
has stimulated an increase of moral cowardice among philosophers that do not align politically
with the current left-wing trend. In particular, those who are at the beginning of their careers.
It is understandable; many young philosophers, often struggling economically, face a very hard
46
Not many centuries ago throughout Medieval and Modern Era Europe, this could have been a literal stake depending on
which heretical thoughts you uttered.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
45 of 56
multicriteria decision-making problem, one in which the virtue of prudence emerges as a heuristic to
stump any dangerous desires and prevent the prospects of academic suicide.
If this is true, one of the most tragic effects of this state of affairs could be the existence of
an invisible but prevailing self-censorship. How many truth-seeking thoughts of prime epistemic quality
in a myriad of important topics may not have been recorded and shared out of fear? This imposition
of conceptual barriers over what can and what cannot be pursued by human intelligence may be
crippling for philosophical creativity.
Rome wasn’t built in a day, nor was the enormous social infrastructure that supports PC. It took
decades of cultural evolution (Postulate 2.1). Reversing this trend will require hard work. I ﬁnish this
paper with a call for the masses of disenfranchised philosophers to embrace this heroically. To provide
a ﬁtting end to my case, I have taken the poetic liberty to borrow some of the words as well as some of
the spirit of a certain German philosopher who was particularly articulate 47.
Think dangerously! Build your conferences at the plain sight of social justice warriors!
Submit your truth-seeking politically incorrect papers into academic safe spaces! Live at an
intellectual war with your academic peers and yourselves! Be brave and uncompromising
free thinkers for as long as the PC thought police subsists, you seekers of true knowledge!
Acknowledgments: Foremost, I am extremely grateful for the two anonymous referees that have read my
manuscript and given me indispensable feedback and guidance that allowed me to substantially improve this
paper, alongside the editors who have been very kind and patient. I am also extremely thankful for my friend
Dante Cardoso Pinto de Almeida who has taken his time and talent to debug and correct some of the more
logic-heavy sections of this paper. Additional appreciation goes towards the encouragements, criticisms, and
corrections brought by Carlos Daniel Llosa, F. A. Doria, Giego Caleiro, Joao Fabiano and another friend who
wished to remain anonymous.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
Appendix A
Appendix A.1. Preliminaries from Measurement Theory
I’ll work under naïve set theory and ﬁrst-order logic with equality and shall liberally assume on
the ﬂy any mathematics I need (such as arithmetic with the operation of division). All sets presented
are by default taken to be ﬁnite and nonempty except for set of real numbers R. For the sake of brevity,
any mention that a set ‘is’ a particular entity will be an abbreviation for ‘represents’ a certain entity.
For the following measurement-theoretical constructs, I’ll assume the theory of functions.
Deﬁnition A1 (Generic Relational Structure). A generic relational structure S is an ordered n-tuple
⟨A, R1, ..., Rn⟩where A, the domain of S, a set whose elements represent objects of a certain class and each R is
a k-ary relation among these objects (not necessarily of the same arity).
Deﬁnition A2 (Comparative Structure). Let ⟨M, ≽⟩and ⟨R, ≥⟩be a pair of relational structures where M
is the domain of a generic relational structure and ≽is an ordering relation. Then R = ⟨M, ≽⟩is a comparative
structure if and only if (adapted from [184]):
•
An homomorphism φ : M →R exists
•
For all x, y ∈M, x ≽y →φ(x) ≥φ(y) (φ is isotone)
The function φ is also called a monotonically increasing function. These structures form so-called
ordinal scales.
47
The excerpt was adapted from Friedrich Nietzsche’s The Gay Science, § 283

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
46 of 56
Theorem A1. For a relational structure ⟨M, ≽⟩, if an ordering relation ≽is total and transitive, ⟨M, ≽⟩is
a comparative structure (for proof, see [185])
Deﬁnition A3 (Extensive Structure). Let ⟨M, ≽, ⊕⟩and ⟨R, ≥, +⟩be a pair of relational structures where
M is the domain of a generic relational structure, ≽is a binary ordering relation and ⊕is an empirical
binary operation of concatenation. Then R = ⟨M, ≽, ⊕⟩is an extensive structure if and only if (adapted
from [184,186]):
•
An homomorphism φ : M →R exists
•
For all x, y ∈M, x ≽y →φ(x) ≥φ(y) (φ is isotone)
•
For all x, y ∈M, φ(x ⊕y) = φ(x) + φ(y) (φ is additive)
•
For all x ∈M and z ∈R+, if φ′(x) is isotone and additive, then φ′(x) = z · φ(x) (φ is ratio-scalable
Given the prevalence of prototypical physical quantities such as duration and mass in the
experimental sciences, the classes of structures that uniquely specify ratio scales have been the
most studied in the axiomatic representational theory of measurement. Several different accounts
for the sufﬁcient conditions for such an homomorphism to exist have been provided (see for
instance [146] (p. 226), [184,186,187]), often motivated by constraints of empirical decidability. I employ
a structure of this kind to characterize material wealth, but I leave it open which axioms are required
to ﬂesh it out properly. For instance, it is unclear whether we need an axiom of density [146] (p. 226)
for there may be an inﬁmum of monetary value (a certain fraction of a cent in an arbitrary currency).
Appendix A.2. An Ontology of Collectives
I adapt the following results extensively from Mario Bunge [188] (pp. 27–33). This subsection will
liberally assume several constructs from abstract algebra.
Deﬁnition A4 (Mereological System). A mereological system is a semigroup ⟨S, ◦⟩where:
•
S is a ﬁnite set of individuals, called atomic individuals
•
◦is a ﬁnitary, associative, binary operation that is closed in S, the operation of aggregation
•
Members of S are indepotent, so that for x ∈S, x ◦x = x
The operation of aggregation is used to represent broad types of arrangements between
individuals, like those characterized by natural law (such as having cells with a certain karyotype) and
social convention (such as self-reporting a particular gender).
Deﬁnition A5 (Part-Whole Relation). For a mereological system ⟨S, ◦⟩, a part-whole relation ⊏is
a relation where:
•
⊏is transitive, reﬂexive and anti-symmetric
•
If x ◦y = y, then x is a part of the whole y, i.e., x ⊏y
Any whole whose atomic individuals are individual human beings will be called
a human population.
Theorem A2 (Suprema of Aggregates). For any two individuals x and y which are elements of S,
the association x ◦y is the supremum for x and y with respect to the part-whole ordering relation ⊏.
•
Proof: see [188] (p. 31)
Postulate 23 (Suprema of Mereological Systems). Every set S from a mereological system ⟨S, ◦⟩has
a supremum, denoted by [S].

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
47 of 56
Deﬁnition A6 (Aggregation of Individuals). For a mereological system ⟨S, ◦⟩, the aggregation
x1 ◦x2 ◦... ◦xn of all the members of S is its supremum [S].
This development was made explicit to allow the following; take the elements of S to designate
the 23 football players from Brazilian National Football Team. Then [S] is the aggregation x1 ◦... ◦x23.
Since the part-whole relation is reﬂexive, then [S], the Brazilian Football Team is itself a logical
individual z, z ∈S.
Appendix A.3. A Social Taxonomy of Human Populations
First, we describe a generic taxonomy, a nested hierarchy of species and genera (adapted from the
conjoint work of Mario Bunge and Martin Mahner, [189] (p. 255)). We view a certain equivalence class as
K = {x | Px}, where P is either a property or a conjunction of properties.
Deﬁnition A7 (Species of a Population). For an aggregate [S] and an equivalence relation ∼1 over S.
•
The set of species S = {S1,..., Sn} of S are the equivalence classes produced by the quotient
set S/ ∼1
Deﬁnition A8 (Genus of a Population). For a set of species S and an equivalence relation ∼2 over S .
•
The genus G of S is the equivalent class produced by the quotient set S / ∼2 where ∼2 picks
a nontrivial superordinate property or set of properties shared by all members of S
In Social Oppression Theory (Appendix A.3), each social genus has at least two species. We now
deploy other adapted Bungean constructs, those of monospeciﬁc and polyspeciﬁc populations [188]
(p. 154).
Deﬁnition A9 (Monospeciﬁc Population). An aggregate [S] is a monospeciﬁc population with regard to
a genus G with n species if and only if S ⊆Si∈I, I = {1,..., n}.
Deﬁnition A10 (Polyspeciﬁc Population). An aggregate [S] is a polyspeciﬁc population with regard
to a genus G with n species if and only if there exists at least two atomic individuals x and y inside S where
x ∈Si∈I and y ∈Sj∈I, I = {1,..., n}.
Appendix A.4. A Toy Model of Wealth
This subsection will assume the construct of an extensive structure from measurement theory
(Appendix A.1), which brings with itself the theory of functions. We’ll also deploy the constructs
from the Ontology Of Collectives (Appendix A.2) where we form populations by aggregating atomic
individuals.
Deﬁnition A11 (Material Wealth). A theory of material wealth is 4-tuple E = ⟨S, W, N,⋖⟩where:
•
S is a mereological system S = ⟨S, ◦⟩where:
–
S is a set of atomic individuals, the individual human beings S = ⟨α, β, γ...⟩
–
◦is an associative binary operation of aggregation among elements of S
–
x, y, z... are human populations inside S formed by the operation of aggregation
–
The largest population of S, [S], is the human society being analyzed
•
W is an extensive structure W = ⟨W,≽, ⊕⟩where:
–
W is a set of assets with monetary value u, v, w...

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
48 of 56
–
≽is the binary relation “more or equal in value than”
–
⊕is an empirical commutative and associative operation of concatenation
•
N is a numerical relational structure N = ⟨N, ≥, +⟩where:
–
R+ is the set of positive real numbers
–
≥is the formal relation “greater or equal than”
–
+ is the arithmetic operation of addition
•
⋖is a binary relation of ownership between elements of S and elements of W
Axiom 12. The binary relation ⋖is assymmetric (irreﬂexive, transitive, anti-symmetric).
Axiom 13. For all α ∈S and u, v ∈W, if α ⋖u and α ⋖v, then α ⋖u ⊕v.
Axiom 14. For all α, β ∈S and u ∈W, if α ⋖u then ¬(β ⋖u).
This axiom is prima facie false for it makes co-ownership of a same individual asset impossible.
It was stated for purposes of simpliﬁcation. A way to secure its plausibility is with the following ad hoc;
for an asset t allegedly co-owned by human beings α and β, t can be decomposed as the concatenation
of two distinct objects t = u ⊕v and we may have α ⋖u and β ⋖v.
Axiom 15. For all α, β ∈S and u, v ∈W, if α ⋖u and β ⋖v, then α ◦β ⋖u ⊕v.
Through aggregation, we may form human populations of certain social kinds. The collective
wealth of a social group thus simply is the concatenation of all the assets owned by its members.
Axiom 16. For a ﬁxed system of currency $ and a concatenation of material goods w ∈W, the monetary value
m of w is the image of a function f : W →R+.
This axiom is merely the lawful assignment of monetary values to a collection of material assets.
Assuming the ratio-scalability of monetary value, the function f is of the form y = ax, where a is a real
number greater than zero. Conversions other currencies are achieved by multiplication with the proper
positive real number.
This axiom is inconsistent with the possibility of negative wealth due to debt. I am deliberately
excluding this possibility also for the sake of simplicity. Under this framework, debt would be
interpreted as the possession of an asset with negative value of worth.
Appendix A.5. Social Oppression Theory
For this subsection, I’ll assume the preceding theory of equality of outcome alongside the described
social taxonomy for human populations (Appendix A.3)
Deﬁnition
A12
(Social
Oppression
Theory). A
theory
of
social
oppression
is
a
7-tuple
O = ⟨S, G , W, R,Oi, Pi, f⟩where
•
S is a mereological system S = ⟨S, ◦⟩where:
–
S is a set of atomic individuals, the individual human beings S = ⟨α, β, γ...⟩
–
◦is the associative binary operation of aggregation among elements of S
–
The largest population of S, [S], is the human society being analyzed
•
G is a subset of S, the superset of social genera ,G = ⟨G1, G2, G3...⟩

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
49 of 56
–
x, y, z... are human populations inside G
∗
nj designates the number of atomic individuals composing a population j ∈G
–
Each social genus Gi has as a subset a superset of social species S
•
R = ⟨M, N, φ⟩is the ﬁxed representational standard for monetary value
–
W is an extensive structure W = ⟨W,≽, ⊕⟩, the material wealth of the society
–
N is the numerical relational structure W = ⟨R+, ≥, +⟩
∗
mk ∈R+ is the monetary value of owned concatenations of assets by a population k ∈G
–
φ is an homomorphism φ : W →R+
•
Oi is a family of relations closed on S, the relations of social oppression
•
Pi is a family of relations closed on S, the relations of privilege
•
f is a function f : Oi →Gi
The following axioms are the regimented versions of Axioms 1-7 in the main text (Section 4.6):
Axiom 17. A relation of oppression xOiy is assymmetric (irreﬂexive, transitive, anti-symmetric).
Axiom 18. The function f that assigns relations of oppression to social genera is bijective.
This axiom was deﬁned this way to avoid cumbersome quantiﬁcation over predicates, which
would require a second-order logic.
Axiom 19. For all x, y ∈S, xOy →x, y ∈Gi.
Axiom 20. For all x, y ∈Gi:
•
(xOiy) ∧(|Si| = 2) →(x = [S1]) ∧(y = [S2])
•
(xOiy) ∧(|Si| > 2) →(x = [S1]) ∧(y = ([S2] ◦... ◦[Sn], n = |S i|))
Axiom 21. For all x, y ∈S, for all m ∈n ∈R+, xOiy →mx
nx
> my
ny
.
Axiom 22. For all x, y ∈Gi, for all m, n ∈R+, ∃z, w ∈Gj, m1
n1
> m2
n2
→(zOjw ∧(Si ∩Sj ̸= ∅)).
Axiom 23. For all x, y ∈S, xOiy = xPiy.
Appendix A.6. Anthropological Mental Egalitarianism
AME will deploy the preceding constructs plus the theory of probability and statistics.
Deﬁnition A13 (Anthropological Mental Egalitarianism). A theory of anthropological mental
egalitarianism is an 8-tuple A = ⟨H, G , M, I, N, R, Ω, Θ⟩.
•
H is a mereological system H = ⟨H, ◦⟩where:
–
H is a set of atomic individuals, the set of all individual human beings H = (x, y, z...)
–
◦is the associative binary operation of aggregation among elements of H
•
G is a subset of H, the superset of social genera, G = (G1, G2, ...)

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
50 of 56
–
Each social genus Gj has as a subset a superset of social species, S i = (Sj1, Sj2, ...)
•
M is a superset of k comparative structures M = ⟨H,≽i∈I⟩, the mental attributes, where:
–
≽i∈I is an empirical relation of comparison “greater or equal than”
•
I is an index set I = (1, ..., k), k ∈N designating speciﬁc mental attributes
•
N is a numerical relational structure N = ⟨R, ≥⟩where:
–
R is a set of real numbers R = (n, o, p...)
–
≥is the formal relation “greater or equal than”
•
R is a superset of k triples R = ⟨M,N, φi⟩, the representation standards for mental attributes
–
φi is a homomorphism φi∈I : M →R, the assignment of a numerical value to a human being
for a particular mental attribute
•
Ωis a subset of R, the set of upper bounds of mental attributes
•
Θ is a set of k functions Θ = (ι1, ι2, ...), the functions of socioeconomic signiﬁcance ιi∈I : A × A →[0, 1]
The following axioms are the regimented versions of Axioms 8-11 in the main text (Section 4.9):
Axiom 24. For all x ∈H, for all i ∈I, there is one an only one n ∈R so that φi(x) = n.
Axiom 25. For all x ∈H and for all i ∈I, there is one and only one n ∈R so that if φi(x) = n, then there is
one and only one ω ∈Ωand n ≤ω.
Axiom 26. For all x ∈H, for all y ∈H, for all i ∈I, there is one and only one ωx ∈Ω, there is one and only
one ωy ∈Ωrespectively for φi(x) = n and φi(y) = o. Then:
•
If the interval [ωx, ωy] is socioeconomically signiﬁcant, ιi(ωx, ωy) = 1
•
If the interval [ωx, ωy] is socioeconomically insigniﬁcant, ιi(ωx, ωy) = 0
Axiom 27. For all x ∈Sj1, for all y ∈Sj2, for all i ∈I, assuming that x and y are independent and identically
distributed random variables over Gj, then Pr(ιi(ωx, ωy) = 0) > 0.5.
References
1.
Haidt, J. Why Universities Must Choose One Telos:
Truth or Social Justice. Available online:
http://heterodoxacademy.org/2016/10/21/one-telos-truth-or-social-justice/ (accessed on 12 July 2017).
2.
Esser, J.K. Alive and well after 25 years: A review of groupthink research. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process.
1998, 73, 116–141.
3.
Gilovich, T.; Grifﬁn, D.; Kahneman, D. Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment; Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2002.
4.
Hirstein, W. Brain Fiction: Self-Deception and the Riddle of Confabulation; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA,
USA, 2004.
5.
Holmes, D.; Murray, S.J.; Perron, A.; Rail, G. Deconstructing the evidence-based discourse in health sciences:
Truth, power and fascism. Int. J. Evid.-Based Healthc. 2006, 4, 180–186.
6.
Fernández, E.C. Euphemistic strategies in politeness and face concerns. Pragmalingüística 2010, 10, 77–86.
7.
Lang, K. Poverty and Discrimination; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 2007.
8.
McLellan, D. Ideology; Open University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1995.
9.
Bunge, M. Epistemology and Methodology I: Exploring the World; Vol. 5 of Treatise on Basic Philosophy; Reidel:
Dordrecht, The Netherlands; Boston, MA, USA, 1983.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
51 of 56
10.
Bunge, M. Epistemology and Methodology II: Understanding the world; Vol. 6 of Treatise on Basic Philosophy;
Reidel: Dordrecht, The Netherlands; Boston, MA, USA, 1983.
11.
Bunge, M. Political Philosophy: Fact, Fiction, and Vision; Transaction Publishers: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2011.
12.
Mesoudi, A. Cultural Evolution: How Darwinian Theory Can Explain Human Culture and Synthesize the Social
Sciences; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 2011.
13.
Blackmore, S. The Meme Machine; Oxford Paperbacks: Wang Yuen St, Hongkong, 2000; Volume 25.
14.
Dennett, D.C. The new replicators. Encycl. Evol. 2002, 1, E83–E92.
15.
Distin, K. The Selﬁsh Meme: A Critical Reassessment; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2005.
16.
Sperber, D. An objection to the memetic approach to culture. In Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics
As a Science; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2000; pp. 163–173.
17.
Taylor, T. The Problem of ‘Darwinizing’ Culture (or Memes as the New Phlogiston). In Evolution 2.0; Springer:
Berlin, Germany, 2012; pp. 65–82.
18.
Dennett, D.C. The Intentional Stance; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1987.
19.
Balkin, J.M. Cultural Software: A Theory of Ideology; Yale University Press: Yale, CT, USA, 2002.
20.
Dennett, D.C. Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon; Penguin: London, UK, 2006; Volume 14.
21.
Evans, J.S. Dual-Processing Accounts of Reasoning, Judgment, and Social Cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol.
2008, 59, 255–278.
22.
Frankish, K. Dual-Process and Dual-System Theories of Reasoning. Philos. Compass 2010 5, 914–926.
23.
Sowell, T. A Conﬂict of Visions: Idealogical Origins of Political Struggles; Basic Books: New York, NY, USA, 2007.
24.
Therborn, G. The Ideology of Power and the Power of Ideology; NLB: New York City, NY, USA, 1980.
25.
Imre, L. Falsiﬁcation and the Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research Programmes. In Criticism and the Growth of
Knowledge; Lakatos, I., Musgrave, A., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1970; pp. 91–195.
26.
Garﬁeld, D.A.; Wray, G.A. The evolution of gene regulatory interactions. BioScience 2010, 60, 15–23.
27.
Kalisch, M. Islamische Theologie ohne historischen Muhammad—Anmerkungen zu den Herausforderungen
der historisch-kritischen Methode für das islamische Denken.
In
Islamic Theology without Historical
Muhammad—Notes about the Challenges of the Historical-Critical Method for Islamic Thinking; 2008; p. 2,
unpublished work.
28.
Kahan, D.
The expressive rationality of inaccurate perceptions of fact.
Behav. Brain Sci.
2015, 40,
doi:10.1017/S0140525X15002332.
29.
Anderson, E. Value in Ethics and Economics; Harvard University Press: Harvard, MA, USA, 1995.
30.
Sherman, D.K.; Cohen, G.L. The psychology of self-defense: Self-afﬁrmation theory. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol.
2006, 38, 183–242.
31.
Kahan, D.M.; Braman, D.; Gastil, J.; Slovic, P.; Mertz, C. Culture and identity-protective cognition: Explaining
the white-male effect in risk perception. J. Empir. Legal Stud. 2007, 4, 465–505.
32.
Czerniewicz, L.
Inequitable Power Dynamics of Global Knowledge Production and Exchange Must
Be Confronted Head on. Available online: http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2013/04/29/
redrawing-the-map-from-access-to-participation (accessed on 13 July 2017).
33.
Klein, D.B.; Stern, C. Political diversity in six disciplines. Acad. Quest. 2005, 18, 40–52.
34.
Stanley Rothman, S.R.L.; Nevitte, N. Politics and Professional Advancement among College Faculty. Forum
2005, doi:10.2202/1540-8884.1067.
35.
Gross, N.; Simmons, S. The Social and Political Views of American Professors; Presented at A Harvard University
Symposium on Professors and Their Politics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, 6 October 2007.
36.
Gross, N. Why are Professors Liberal and Why do Conservatives Care? Harvard University Press: Harvard, MA,
USA, 2013.
37.
Nickerson, R.S. Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 1998,
2, 175.
38.
Lamm, H.; Myers, D.G. Group-induced polarization of attitudes and behavior. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 1978,
11, 145–195.
39.
Del Vicario, M.; Bessi, A.; Zollo, F.; Petroni, F.; Scala, A.; Caldarelli, G.; Stanley, H.E.; Quattrociocchi, W.
The spreading of misinformation online. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 554–559.
40.
Duarte, J.L.; Crawford, J.T.; Stern, C.; Haidt, J.; Jussim, L.; Tetlock, P.E. Political diversity will improve social
psychological science. Behav. Brain Sci. 2015, 38, e130.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
52 of 56
41.
Inbar, Y.; Lammers, J. Political diversity in social and personality psychology. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 2012,
7, 496–503.
42.
Brandt, M.J.; Reyna, C.; Chambers, J.R.; Crawford, J.T.; Wetherell, G. The ideological-conﬂict hypothesis
intolerance among both liberals and conservatives. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2014, 23, 27–34.
43.
Jussim, L.; Crawford, J.T.; Anglin, S.M.; Stevens, S.T. Ideological bias in social psychological research.
In Social Psychology and Politics; Forgas, J.P., Fiedler, K., Crano, W.D., Eds.; Taylor and Francis: New York, NY,
USA, 2015; pp. 91–109
44.
Chilton, A.S.; Posner, E.A. An Empirical Study of Political Bias in Legal Scholarship; University of Chicago
Coase-Sandor Institute for Law & Economics Research: Chicago, IL, USA, 2015.
45.
Hájek, A. Philosophical Heuristics and Philosophical Methodology. In The Oxford Handbook of Philosophical
Methodology; Cappelen, H., Gendler, T.S., Hawthorne, J., Eds.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2016.
46.
Nado, J. Philosophical expertise and scientiﬁc expertise. Philos. Psychol. 2015, 28, 1026–1044.
47.
Weinberg, J.M.; Gonnerman, C.; Buckner, C.; Alexander, J. Are philosophers expert intuiters? Philos. Psychol.
2010, 23, 331–355.
48.
Schwitzgebel, E.; Cushman, F. Philosophers’ biased judgments persist despite training, expertise and
reﬂection. Cognition 2015, 141, 127–137.
49.
Sesardic, N. When Reason Goes on Holiday: Philosophers in Politics; Encounter Books: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
50.
Anomaly, J. Race Research and the Ethics of Belief. J. Bioeth. Inq. 2017, 14, 1–11.
51.
Sesardic, N.; De Clercq, R. Women in philosophy: Problems with the discrimination hypothesis. Acad. Quest.
2014, 27, 461–473.
52.
Tremain, S. Ableist Language and Philosophical Associations. Available online: http://www.newappsblog.
com/2011/07/ableist-language-and-philosophical-associations.html (accessed on 19 July 2017).
53.
Zunac, M. Radicalism’s Yield: Politics and the Illiberal Academy. Acad. Quest. 2016, 29, 428–433.
54.
Allingham, M. Distributive Justice; Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 2014.
55.
Dennett, D.C. With a Little Help from My Friends. In Dennett’s Philosophy: A Comprehensive Assessment;
Ross, D., Ed.; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2000; Chapter 15.
56.
Hicks, S.R.C.
Explaining Postmodernism: Skepticism and Socialism from Rousseau to Foucault; Scholargy
Publishing, Inc.: Tempe, AZ, USA, 2004.
57.
Bunge, M. A Critical Examination of the New Sociology of Science: “Part 1”. Philos. Soc. Sci. 1991, 21, 524.
58.
Bunge, M. A Critical Examination of the New Sociology of Science: “Part 2”. Philos. Soc. Sci. 1992, 22, 46.
59.
Bunge, M. Social Science under Debate: A Philosophical Perspective; University of Toronto Press: Toronto, ON,
Canada, 1999.
60.
Heywood, A. Political Ideologies: An Introduction; Palgrave Macmillan: Basingstoke, UK, 2012.
61.
Pinker, S. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature; Viking Press: New York, NY, USA, 2002.
62.
Kanazawa, S. Why liberals and atheists are more intelligent. Soc. Psychol. Q. 2010, 73, 33–57.
63.
Donald, M. A Mind So Rare: The Evolution of Human Consciousness; W. W. Norton & Company: New York, NY,
USA, 2002.
64.
Rosenberg, A. The Atheist’s Guide to Reality: Enjoying Life without Illusions; W. W. Norton & Company:
New York, NY, USA, 2011.
65.
Mackintosh, N. History of theories and measurement of intelligence. In The Cambridge Handbook of Intelligence;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011; pp. 3–19.
66.
Urbina, S. Tests of intelligence. In The Cambridge Handbook of Intelligence; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011; pp. 20–38.
67.
Willis, J.O.; Dumont, R.; Kaufman, A.S. Factor-analytic models of intelligence. In The Cambridge Handbook of
Intelligence; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011; pp. 39–57.
68.
Epstein, B. Ontological individualism reconsidered. Synthese 2009, 166, 187–213.
69.
Bunge, M. Treatise on Basic Philosophy: Semantics I: Sense and Reference; Springer Science & Business Media:
Berlin, Germany, 1977; Volume 1.
70.
Khalidi, M. Three kinds of social kinds. Philos. Phenomenol. Res. 2015, 90, 96–112.
71.
Mason, R. The metaphysics of social kinds. Philos. Compass 2016, 11, 841–850.
72.
Thompson, N.
Anti-Discriminatory Practice: Equality, Diversity and Social Justice; Palgrave Macmillan:
Basingstoke, UK, 2012.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
53 of 56
73.
Ruhm, C.J. When ’Equal Opportunity’ Is Not Enough: Training Costs and Intergenerational Inequality.
J. Hum. Resour. 1988, 23, 155–172.
74.
Phillips, A. Defending equality of outcome. J. Polit. Philos. 2004, 12, 1–19.
75.
Cowell, F. Measuring Inequality; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2011.
76.
Marx, K.; Engels, F. Communist Manifesto; Penguin: London, UK, 2002 [1848].
77.
Abberley, P. The concept of oppression and the development of a social theory of disability. Disabil. Handicap Soc.
1987, 2, 5–19.
78.
Shidlo, A. Internalized homophobia: Conceptual and empirical issues in measurement. In Psychological
Perspectives on Lesbian and Gay Issues; Volume 1: Lesbian and gay psychology: Theory, research, and clinical
applications; Greene, B., Herek, G.M., Eds.; SAGE Publications Ltd.: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 1994;
pp. 176–205
79.
Lerner, G. The Creation of Patriarchy; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1986; Volume 1.
80.
Bonilla-Silva, E. White Supremacy and Racism in the Post-Civil Rights Era; Lynne Rienner Publishers: Boulder,
CO, USA, 2001.
81.
Do’Mar Castro, M.; Dhawan, N.; Engel, A. Hegemony and Heteronormativity: Revisiting ‘the Political’ in
Queer Politics. In The Sage Handbook of Feminist Theory; Ashgate: London, UK, 2011; Volume 324, pp. 71–82.
82.
Baril, A.; Trevenen, K. Exploring ableism and cisnormativity in the conceptualization of identity and
sexuality ‘disorders’. Annu. Rev. Crit. Psychol. 2014, 11, 389–416.
83.
Shohat, E.; Stam, R. Unthinking Eurocentrism: Multiculturalism and the Media; Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 2014.
84.
Hehir, T. Eliminating ableism in education. Harvard Edu. Rev. 2002, 72, 1–33.
85.
Beauvais, C. The problem of ‘Power’: Metacritical implications of aetonormativity for children’s literature
research. Children’s Lit. Educ. 2013, 44, 74–86.
86.
Robinson, Z.F. Intersectionality. In Handbook of Contemporary Sociological Theory; Springer: Berlin, Germany,
2016; pp. 477–499.
87.
Pease, B. Undoing Privilege: Unearned Advantage in a Divided World; Zed Books, Ltd.: London, UK, 2010.
88.
Deo, M.E. Two Sides of a Coin: Safe Space & Segregation in Race/Ethnic-Speciﬁc Law Student Organizations.
Wash. UJL Pol’y 2013, 42, 83–129.
89.
Goodman, D.J. Oppression and Privilege: Two Sides of the Same Coin. J. Interc. Commun. 2015, 18, 1–14.
90.
Kamram, O. The American Muslim Dilemma: Christian Normativity, Racialization, And Anti-Muslim Backlash;
Texas A & M University: College Station, TX, USA, 2012.
91.
Operario, D.; Fiske, S.T. Racism equals power plus prejudice: A social psychological equation for racial
oppression. In Confronting Racism: The Problem and the Response; Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA,
USA, 1998; pp. 33–53.
92.
Rawls, J. A Theory of Justice; Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1971.
93.
Rawls, J. Justice as Fairness: Political Not Metaphysical. Philos. Public Aff. 1985, 14, 223–251.
94.
Rawls, J. Political Liberalism; Columbia University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1993.
95.
Sesardic, N. Making Sense of Heritability; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2005.
96.
Sue, D.W. Microaggressions in Everyday Life: Race, Gender, and Sexual Orientation; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken,
NY, USA, 2010.
97.
Rahman, Q.; Wilson, G.D. Large sexual-orientation-related differences in performance on mental rotation
and judgement of line orientation tasks. Neuropsychology 2003, 17, 25.
98.
Filipovic, J. Offensive feminism: The conservative gender norms that perpetuate rape culture, and how
feminists can ﬁght back. In Yes Means Yes; Seal Press: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2008; pp. 13–27.
99.
Hymowitz, K.S.The feminist silence about Islam. Policy J. Public Policy Ideas 2003, 19, 29.
100. Sommers, C.H. The subjection of Islamic women and the fecklessness of American feminism. Wkly. Stand.
2007. Available online: http://www.weeklystandard.com/the-subjection-of-islamic-women/article/14753
(accessed on 31 July 2017).
101. Entine, J. Taboo: Why Black Athletes Dominate Sports and Why We’re Afraid to Talk about It; PublicAffairs:
New York, NY, USA, 2008.
102. Maughan, R. The limits of human athletic performance. Ann. Trans. 2004, 10, 52–54.
103. Lippi, G.; Longo, U.G.; Maffulli, N. Genetics and sports. Br. Med. Bull. 2010, 93, 27–47.
104. Lehre, A.C.; Lehre, K.P.; Laake, P.; Danbolt, N.C. Greater intrasex phenotype variability in males than in
females is a fundamental aspect of the gender differences in humans. Dev. Psychobiol. 2009, 51, 198–206.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
54 of 56
105. Michell, J. Quantitative science and the deﬁnition of measurement in psychology. Br. J. Psychol. 1997,
88, 355–383.
106. Roberts, F.S.
Measurement Theory with Applications to Decisionmaking, Utility, and the Social Sciences;
Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications (Book 7); Reissue edition (12 March 2009); Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2009.
107. Edouard, M.; Luc, F. Social Construction and the Concept of Race. Philos. Sci. 2005, 72, 1208–1219.
108. Turkheimer, E. Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2000, 9, 160–164.
109. Hird, M.J. Gender’s nature Intersexuality, transsexualism and the ‘sex’/‘gender’ binary. Fem. Theory 2000,
1, 347–364.
110. Blackless, M.; Charuvastra, A.; Derryck, A.; Fausto-Sterling, A.; Lauzanne, K.; Lee, E. How sexually
dimorphic are we? Review and synthesis. Am. J. Hum. Biol. 2000, 12, 151–166.
111. Slatkin, M. Epigenetic inheritance and the missing heritability problem. Genetics 2009, 182, 845–850.
112. Zuk, O.; Hechter, E.; Sunyaev, S.R.; Lander, E.S. The mystery of missing heritability: Genetic interactions
create phantom heritability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 1193–1198.
113. McCrae, R.R.; Costa, P.T.; de Lima, M.P.; Simões, A.; Ostendorf, F.; Angleitner, A.; Maruši´c, I.; Bratko, D.;
Caprara, G.V.; Barbaranelli, C.; et al. Age differences in personality across the adult life span: Parallels in
ﬁve cultures. Dev. Psychol. 1999, 35, 466.
114. Chalmers, D.J. The Singularity: A Philosophical Analysis. J. Conscious. Stud. 2010, 17, 9–10.
115. Seibert, S.E.; Kraimer, M.L. The ﬁve-factor model of personality and career success. J. Vocat. Behav. 2001,
58, 1–21.
116. Viinikainen, J.; Kokko, K.; Pulkkinen, L.; Pehkonen, J. Personality and labour market income: Evidence from
longitudinal data. Labour 2010, 24, 201–220.
117. Zagorsky, J.L. Do you have to be smart to be rich? The impact of IQ on wealth, income and ﬁnancial distress.
Intelligence 2007, 35, 489–501.
118. Chalmers, D.J. Why Isn’t There More Progress in Philosophy? Philosophy 2015, 90, 3–31.
119. Nietzsche, F. Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks; Regnery Publishing Inc.: Washington, DC, USA, 1962.
120. Dietrich, E. There Is No Progress in Philosophy. Essays Philos. 2011, 12, 9.
121. Strickland, L. Philosophy and the Search for Truth. Philosophia 2013, 41, 1079–1094.
122. Brogaard, B. The Trivial Argument for Epistemic Value Pluralism. Or How I Learned to Stop Caring about
Truth. In Epistemic Value; Haddock, A., Millar, A., Pritchard, D., Eds.; Oxford University Press: Oxford,
UK, 2008.
123. Dennett, D. A Conversation with Daniel Dennett. Available online: http://www.theatlantic.com/past/
docs/unbound/digicult/dennett.htm (accessed on 14 July 2017).
124. Dennett, D.C. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanins of Life; Simon & Schuster: New York, NY,
USA, 1995.
125. Haddock, A.; Millar, A.; Pritchard, D. Epistemic Value; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2009.
126. Grimm, S.R. Epistemic Normativity. In Epistemic Value; Haddock, A., Millar, A., Pritchard, D., Eds.; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, UK, 2009; pp. 243–264.
127. Laudan, L. The epistemic, the cognitive, and the social. In Science, Values, and Objectivity; University of
Pittsburgh Press: Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2004; pp. 14–23.
128. Douglas, H. The Value of Cognitive Values. Philos. Sci. 2014, 80, 796–806.
129. Diekmann, S.; Peterson, M. The Role of Non-Epistemic Values in Engineering Models. Sci. Eng. Ethics 2013,
19, 207–218.
130. Graybeal, C.D. Mathematical Lies We Tell Students. Teach. Child. Math. 2014, 21, 197–199.
131. Glynn, I. Elegance in Science: The Beauty of Simplicity; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2010.
132. Okasha, S. Theory choice and social choice: Kuhn versus Arrow. Mind 2011, 120, 83–115.
133. Welch, J.R. New tools for theory choice and theory diagnosis. Stud. Hist. Philos. Sci. Part A 2013, 44, 318–329.
134. Kaliszewski, I.; Miroforidis, J.; Podkopaev, D. Multiple Criteria Decision Making by Multiobjective Optimization;
Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2016.
135. Deb, K.; Miettinen, K. Multiobjective Optimization: Interactive and Evolutionary Approaches; Springer Science &
Business Media: Berlin, Germany, 2008; Volume 5252.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
55 of 56
136. De Weck, O.L.
Multiobjective optimization:
History and promise.
In Proceedings of the Third
China-Japan-Korea Joint Symposium on Optimization of Structural and Mechanical Systems, Kanazawa,
Japan, 30 October–2 November 2004; Volume 2, p. 34.
137. Ho, Y.C.; Zhao, Q.C.; Jia, Q.S. Ordinal Optimization: Soft Optimization for Hard Problems; Springer Science &
Business Media: Berlin, Germany, 2008.
138. Mahner, M. Science and Pseudoscience How to Demarcate After the (Alleged) Demise. In Philosophy of
Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem; Pigliucci, M., Boudry, M., Eds.; University of Chicago
Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 2013; p. 29.
139. Bunge, M. The complexity of simplicity. J. Philos. 1962, 59, 113–135.
140. Chaitin, G. On the intelligibility of the universe and the notions of simplicity, complexity and irreducibility.
In Thinking about Gödel and Turing: Essays on Complexity, 1970-2007L; World Scientiﬁc Publishing: Singapore,
2007; pp. 201–226.
141. Bunge, M. The weight of simplicity in the construction and assaying of scientiﬁc theories. Philos. Sci. 1961,
28, 120–149.
142. McAllister, J.W. The simplicity of theories: Its degree and form. J. Gen. Philos. Sci. 1991, 22, 1–14.
143. Caramia, M.; Dell’Olmo, P. Multi-Objective Management in Freight Logistics: Increasing Capacity, Service Level
and Safety with Optimization Algorithms; Springer Science & Business Media: Berlin, Germany, 2008.
144. Triantaphyllou, E. Multi-criteria decision making methods. In Multi-Criteria Decision Making Methods:
A Comparative Study; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2000; pp. 5–21.
145. Dubois, D.; Fargier, H.; Perny, P.; Prade, H. Towards a qualitative multicriteria decision theory. In Proceedings
of the EUROFUSE Workshop on Preference Modelling and Applications, Granada, Spain, 25–27 April 2001;
pp. 121–129.
146. Narens, L. Theories of Meaningfulness; Scientiﬁc Psychology Series; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Hillsdale,
NJ, USA, 2002.
147. Bellman, R. Dynamic Programming, 1st ed.; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1957.
148. Deb, K.; Thiele, L.; Laumanns, M.; Zitzler, E. Scalable Test Problems for Evolutionary Multiobjective Optimization;
Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2005.
149. Bringmann, K.; Friedrich, T. Approximating the least hypervolume contributor: NP-hard in general, but fast
in practice. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization,
Nantes, France, 7–10 April 2009; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2009; pp. 6–20.
150. Akbarzadeh-T, M.; Jamshidi, M.
Incorporating a-priori expert knowledge in genetic algorithms.
In Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics
and Automation, CIRA’97, Monterey, CA, USA, 10–11 July 1997; pp. 300–305.
151. Tetlock, P. Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? Princeton University Press: Princeton,
NJ, USA, 2005.
152. Mironov, V.V. On Progress in Philosophy. Metaphilosophy 2013, 44, 10–14.
153. Brockhoff, D.; Zitzler, E.
Are all objectives necessary? On dimensionality reduction in evolutionary
multiobjective optimization. In Parallel Problem Solving from Nature-PPSN IX; Springer: Berlin, Germany,
2006; pp. 533–542.
154. Sesardic, N. Race: A social destruction of a biological concept. Biol. Philos. 2010, 25, 143–162.
155. Ren, D.; Zhou, H.; Fu, X. A deeper look at gender difference in multitasking: Gender-speciﬁc mechanism of
cognitive control. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Natural Computation, ICNC’09,
Tianjin, China, 14–16 August 2009; Volume 5, pp. 13–17.
156. Dennett, D.C. Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking; WW Norton & Company: New York, NY,
USA, 2013.
157. Harding, S. Rethinking Standpoint Epistemology: What is Strong Objectivity? In Feminist Epistemologies;
Alcoff, L., Potter, E., Eds.; Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 1993.
158. Longino, H.E. Cognitive and non-cognitive values in science: Rethinking the dichotomy. In Feminism, Science,
and the Philosophy of Science; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1996; pp. 39–58.
159. Koertge, N. A House Built on Sand: Exposing Postmodernist Myths about Science; Oxford University Press:
Oxford, UK, 1998.
160. Longino, H.E. Science as Social Knowledge: Values and Objectivity in Scientiﬁc Inquiry; Princeton University
Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1990.

Philosophies 2017, 2, 17
56 of 56
161. Stanford, C.B. The Hunting Apes: Meat Eating and the Origins of Human Behavior; Princeton University Press:
Princeton, NJ, USA, 1999.
162. Fedigan, L.M. The changing role of women in models of human evolution. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 1986,
15, 25–66.
163. Henrich, J.; Heine, S.J.; Norenzayan, A. The weirdest people in the world? Behav. Brain Sci. 2010, 33, 61–135.
164. Ruphy, S. “Empiricism all the way down”: A defense of the value-neutrality of science in response to Helen
Longino’s contextual empiricism. Perspect. Sci. 2006, 14, 189–214.
165. Kirsanow, K.; Burger, J. Ancient human DNA. Ann. Anat. 2012, 194, 121–132.
166. Vitti, J.J.; Grossman, S.R.; Sabeti, P.C. Detecting natural selection in genomic data. Annu. Rev. Gen. 2013,
47, 97–120.
167. Winship, T. Zetetic Cosmogony; Or, Conclusive Evidence That the World Is Not a Rotating-Revolving-Globe,
But a Stationary Plane Circle, 2nd ed.; Cullingworth, T.L.: Durban, Natal; Durban, South Africa, 1899.
168. Gilligan, C. In a Different Voice; Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1982.
169. Noddings, N. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education; University of California Press:
Berkeley, CA, USA, 1984.
170. Noddings, N. The Maternal Factor: Two Paths to Morality; Univ of California Press: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2010.
171. Schmitt, D.P.; Realo, A.; Voracek, M.; Allik, J. Why can’t a man be more like a woman? Sex differences in Big
Five personality traits across 55 cultures. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 2008, 94, 168.
172. Ngun, T.C.; Ghahramani, N.; Sánchez, F.J.; Bocklandt, S.; Vilain, E. The genetics of sex differences in brain
and behavior. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 2011, 32, 227–246.
173. Ruigrok, A.N.; Salimi-Khorshidi, G.; Lai, M.C.; Baron-Cohen, S.; Lombardo, M.V.; Tait, R.J.; Suckling, J.
A meta-analysis of sex differences in human brain structure. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2014, 39, 34–50.
174. Fine, C. Delusions of Gender: How Our Minds, Society, and Neurosexism Create Difference; WW Norton &
Company: New York, NY, USA, 2010.
175. Prinz, J. Beyond Human Nature: How Culture and Experience Shape the Human Mind; WW Norton & Company:
New York, NY, USA, 2014.
176. Eagly, A.H. Sex Differences in Social Behavior: A Social-Role Interpretation; Psychology Press: Hove, UK, 2013.
177. Bowling, J.; Martin, B. Science: A masculine disorder. Sci. Public Policy 1985, 12, 308–316.
178. Van der Vossen, B.
In Defense of the Ivory Tower: Why Philosophers Should Stay Out of Politics.
Philos. Psychol. 2015, 28, 1045–1063.
179. Kovács, Á. Gender in the substance of chemistry, Part 1: The ideal gas. HYLE Int. J. Philos. Chem. 2012,
18, 95–120.
180. Winegard, B.; Winegard, B.; Boutwell, B. Human Biological and Psychological Diversity. Evol. Psychol. Sci.
2017, 3, 159–180.
181. Rowe, D.C.; Rodgers, J.E. Under the skin: On the impartial treatment of genetic and environmental
hypotheses of racial differences. Am. Psychol. 2005, 60, 60.
182. Putman, D. Psychological courage. Philos. Psychiatry Psychol. 1997, 4, 1–11.
183. Olsthoorn, P. Military Ethics and Virtues: An Interdisciplinary Approach for the 21st Century; Routledge:
Abingdon, UK, 2010.
184. Frigerio, A.; Giordani, A.; Mari, L. Outline of a general model of measurement. Synthese 2009, 175, 123–149.
185. Luce, D.; Krantz, D.; Suppes, P.; Tversky, A. Foundations of Measurement; Vol. I: Additive and Polynomial
Representations; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1971.
186. Falmagne, J.C. A Set of Independent Axioms for Positive Holder Systems. Philos. Sci. 1975, 42, 137–151.
187. Narens, L. A general theory of ratio scalability with remarks about the measurement-theoretic concept of
meaningfulness. Theory Decis. 1981, 13, 1–70.
188. Bunge, M. Treatise on Basic Phylosphy; Volume 3: Ontology I–The Furniture of the World; Reidel Pub. Co.:
Boston, MA, USA, 1977.
189. Mahner, M.; Bunge, M.
Foundations of Biophilosophy; Springer Science & Business Media:
Berlin,
Germany, 1997.
c⃝2017 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

