
While the philosophical study of mind has always required philosophers to attend 
to the scientific developments of their day, from the twentieth century onwards it 
has been especially influenced and informed by psychology, neuroscience, and 
computer science.
Philosophy of Mind in the Twentieth and Twenty-First Centuries provides 
an outstanding survey of the most prominent themes in twentieth-century and 
contemporary philosophy of mind. It also looks to the future, offering cautious 
predictions about developments in the field in the years to come.
Following an introduction by Amy Kind, twelve specially commissioned 
chapters by an international team of contributors discuss key topics, thinkers, and 
debates, including:
•	
the phenomenological tradition,
•	
the mind–body problem,
•	
theories of consciousness,
•	
theories of perception,
•	
theories of personal identity,
•	
mental causation,
•	
intentionality,
•	
Wittgenstein and his legacy,
•	
cognitive science, and
•	
future directions for philosophy of mind.
Essential reading for students and researchers in philosophy of mind and philosophy 
of psychology, Philosophy of Mind in the Twentieth and Twenty-First Centuries is 
also a valuable resource for those in related disciplines such as psychology and 
cognitive science.
Amy Kind is Russell K. Pitzer Professor of Philosophy at Claremont McKenna 
College, USA. Her research interests lie broadly in the philosophy of mind, 
but most of her work centers on issues relating to imagination and phenomenal 
consciousness. In addition to authoring the introductory textbook Persons and 
Personal Identity (2015), she has edited The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of 
Imagination (2016) and co-edited Knowledge Through Imagination (2016).
PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN THE 
TWENTIETH AND TWENTY-FIRST 
CENTURIES

The History of the Philosophy of Mind
General Editors: Rebecca Copenhaver and Christopher Shields
The History of the Philosophy of Mind is a major six-volume reference collection, 
covering the key topics, thinkers, and debates within philosophy of mind, from 
Antiquity to the present day. Each volume is edited by a leading scholar in the 
field and comprises chapters written by an international team of specially com-
missioned contributors.
Including a general introduction by Rebecca Copenhaver and Christopher 
Shields, and fully cross-referenced within and across the six volumes, The His-
tory of the Philosophy of Mind is an essential resource for students and research-
ers in philosophy of mind, and will also be of interest to those in many related 
disciplines, including Classics, Religion, Literature, History of Psychology, and 
Cognitive Science.
VOL. 1 PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN ANTIQUITY
edited by John E. Sisko
VOL. 2 PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN THE EARLY AND  
HIGH MIDDLE AGES
edited by Margaret Cameron
VOL. 3 PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN THE LATE MIDDLE AGES AND 
RENAISSANCE
edited by Stephan Schmid
VOL. 4 PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN THE EARLY MODERN  
AND MODERN AGES
edited by Rebecca Copenhaver
VOL. 5 PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
edited by Sandra Lapointe
VOL. 6 PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN THE TWENTIETH AND  
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURIES
edited by Amy Kind

PHILOSOPHY OF MIND 
IN THE TWENTIETH AND 
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURIES
The History of the Philosophy of Mind,  
Volume 6
Edited by Amy Kind

First published 2019
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa 
business
© 2019 selection and editorial matter, Amy Kind; individual chapters, the 
contributors
The right of Amy Kind to be identified as the editor of the editorial 
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted 
in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Kind, Amy, editor.
Title: Philosophy of mind in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries / 
edited by Amy Kind.
Description: New York : Routledge, 2018. | Series: The history of the 
philosophy of mind ; Volume 6 | Includes bibliographical references and 
index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017060258 | ISBN 9781138243972 (hardback : alk. 
paper) | ISBN 9780429508127 (e-book)
Subjects: LCSH: Philosophy of mind—History—20th century. | 
Philosophy of mind—History—21st century.
Classification: LCC BD418.3 .P4846 2018 | DDC 128/.20904—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017060258
ISBN: 978-1-138-24397-2 (Vol VI, hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-50812-7 (Vol VI, ebk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-24392-7 (Vol I, hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-50821-9 (Vol I, ebk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-24393-4 (Vol II, hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-50819-6 (Vol II, ebk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-24394-1 (Vol III, hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-50817-2 (Vol III, ebk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-24395-8 (Vol IV, hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-50815-8 (Vol IV, ebk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-24396-5 (Vol V, hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-50813-4 (Vol V, ebk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-92535-9 (6-volume set, hbk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

v
List of contributors
vii
General introduction
x
REBECCA COPENHAVER AND CHRISTOPHER SHIELDS
	
Introduction to volume 6: twentieth-century philosophy  
of mind: themes, problems, and scientific context
1
AMY KIND
  1	 Philosophy of mind in the phenomenological tradition
21
PHILIP J. WALSH AND JEFF YOSHIMI
  2	 The mind-body problem in 20th-century philosophy
52
AMY KIND
  3	 A short history of philosophical theories of consciousness  
in the 20th century
78
TIM CRANE
  4	 20th-century theories of perception
104
NICO ORLANDI
  5	 20th-century theories of personal identity
126
JENS JOHANSSON
  6	 Introspecting in the 20th century
148
MAJA SPENER
  7	 The mental causation debates in the 20th century
175
JULIE YOO
CONTENTS

C o n t e n t s
vi
  8	 Intentionality: from Brentano to representationalism
200
MICHELLE MONTAGUE
  9	 Wittgenstein and his legacy
233
SEVERIN SCHROEDER
10	 The boundaries of the mind
256
KATALIN FARKAS
11	 The rise of cognitive science in the 20th century
280
CARRIE FIGDOR
12	 How philosophy of mind can shape the future
303
SUSAN SCHNEIDER AND PETE MANDIK
Index
320

vii
Tim Crane is professor of philosophy at the Central European University, Buda-
pest. He has written on a number of topics in the philosophy of mind, including 
intentionality, consciousness, perception, mental causation, and physicalism. 
His books include The Mechanical Mind (1995, 3rd edition 2015), Elements of 
Mind (2001), The Objects of Thought (2013), Aspects of Psychologism (2014), 
The Meaning of Belief (2017), and (as editor) The Contents of Experience 
(1992) and A Debate on Dispositions (1996). He is the Philosophy Consultant 
Editor of the TLS.
Katalin Farkas is professor of philosophy at the Central European University, 
Budapest. Her main interests are the philosophy of mind and epistemology. 
Her book The Subject’s Point of View (OUP 2008) defends an internalist con-
ception of the boundaries of the mind.
Carrie Figdor is associate professor at the University of Iowa, Department of 
Philosophy and Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Neuroscience. She pub-
lishes on topics at the intersection of philosophy of mind, science, and language, 
on epistemology and ethics of journalism, and on metaphysics. Her monograph 
Pieces of Mind: The Proper Domain of Psychological Predicates is forthcom-
ing with Oxford University Press, and her work has appeared in The Journal of 
Philosophy, Philosophy of Science, Topics in Cognitive Science, Mind & Lan-
guage, Frontiers in Communication, among others. She co-hosts “New Books 
in Philosophy” (http://newbooksnetwork.com/category/philosophy/) a podcast 
that features interviews with philosophers about their new books.
Jens Johansson is Professor of Practical Philosophy at Uppsala University. He 
has published a number of essays on the philosophy of death, personal identity, 
and related issues, and co-edited The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Death 
(2013, with Ben Bradley and Fred Feldman).
Amy Kind is Russell K. Pitzer Professor of Philosophy at Claremont McKenna 
College. Her research interests lie broadly in the philosophy of mind, but most 
of her work centers on issues relating to imagination and to phenomenal con-
sciousness. In addition to authoring the introductory textbook  Persons and 
CONTRIBUTORS

C o n t r i b u t o r s
viii
Personal Identity (Polity, 2015), she has edited The Routledge Handbook of 
Philosophy of Imagination (Routledge, 2016) and she has co-edited Knowl-
edge through Imagination (Oxford University Press, 2016).
Pete Mandik is professor of philosophy at William Paterson University of New 
Jersey. He is author of This Is Philosophy of Mind (2013) and Key Terms in 
Philosophy of Mind (2010).
Michelle Montague is Associate Professor of philosophy at the University of 
Texas, Austin. Her work focuses on the philosophy of mind, primarily on 
consciousness and intentionality. In addition to publishing numerous articles 
in these areas, she is the author of The Given: Experience and Its Content 
(Oxford University Press, 2016), the co-editor with Tim Bayne of Cogni-
tive Phenomenology (Oxford University Press, 2011), and the co-editor with 
Galen Strawson of Philosophical Writings by P. F. Strawson (Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2011).
Nico Orlandi is associate professor of philosophy at the University of California, 
Santa Cruz. Nico specializes in philosophy of mind and philosophy of psy-
chology and neuroscience, and has published several articles in addition to a 
book, The Innocent Eye: Why Vision Is Not a Cognitive Process.
Susan Schneider teaches at the University of Connecticut and is a member of the 
technology and ethics group at Yale and the Institute for Advanced Study in 
Princeton. Schneider writes about matters involving the metaphysics of mind, 
AI, and philosophy of cognitive science. She also writes opinion pieces for 
venues like The New York Times, Nautilus, and Scientific American. Her work 
wrestles with vexed questions about the metaphysical nature of the self and 
mind. Her books include the Blackwell Companion to Consciousness (with 
Max Velmans), Science Fiction and Philosophy and The Language of Thought: 
A New Philosophical Direction, as well as a forthcoming trade book, Future 
Minds. Her website SchneiderWebsite.com features many online lectures, 
interviews, and papers.
Severin Schroeder is Associate Professor in Philosophy at the University of Read-
ing. He has written three monographs on Wittgenstein: Wittgenstein: The Way 
Out of the Fly Bottle (Polity, 2006), Wittgenstein Lesen (Frommann-Holzboog, 
2009), and Das Privatsprachen-Argument (Schöningh/Mentis, 1998). He is the 
editor of Wittgenstein and Contemporary Philosophy of Mind (Palgrave 2001) 
and Philosophy of Literature (Wiley-Blackwell 2010). He is currently working 
on a book on Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics (Routledge).
Maja Spener is a lecturer in the Department of Philosophy at the University of 
Birmingham (UK). She is writing a book on introspective method in philoso-
phy and scientific psychology.

C o n t r i b u t o r s
ix
Philip J. Walsh is a post-doctoral teaching fellow at Fordham University. His 
research focuses on phenomenology and philosophy of mind. His published 
work includes articles on Husserl and Merleau-Ponty, as well as contemporary 
debates about perception, thought, expression, agency, and social cognition.
Julie Yoo is an Associate Professor of Philosophy at the California State Uni-
versity, Northridge. She has published articles in philosophy of mind and phi-
losophy of language. Her research areas also include metaphysics and feminist 
philosophy.
Jeff Yoshimi is an Associate Professor of philosophy and cognitive science in the 
Cognitive and Information Science department at UC Merced. He is a founding 
faculty member, having arrived in 2004, before the campus opened. He does 
work in phenomenology, philosophy of mind and cognitive science, neural 
networks, dynamical systems theory, and visualization of complex processes.

x
How far back does the history of philosophy of mind extend? In one sense, the 
entire history of the discipline extends no further than living memory. Construed 
as a recognized sub-discipline of philosophy, philosophy of mind seems to have 
entered the academy in a regular way only in the latter half of the twentieth cen-
tury. At any rate, as an institutional matter, courses listed under the name ‘Philoso-
phy of Mind’ or ‘The Mind-Body Problem’ were rare before then and seem not 
to have become fixtures of the curriculum in Anglo-American universities until 
the 1960s.1 More broadly, construed as the systematic self-conscious reflection on 
the question of how mental states and processes should be conceived in relation 
to physical states and processes, one might put the date to the late nineteenth or 
early twentieth century.
One might infer on this basis that a six-volume work on The History of Phi-
losophy of Mind extending back to antiquity is bound to be anachronistic: we 
cannot, after all, assume that our questions were the questions of, say, Democri-
tus, working in Thrace in the fifth century BC, or of Avicenna (Ibn-Sînâ), active 
in Persia in the twelfth century, or of John Blund, the Oxford- and Paris-trained 
Chancellor of the see of York from 1234–1248, or, for that matter, of the great 
German philosopher and mathematician Leibniz (1646–1716). One might on the 
contrary think it prima facie unlikely that thinkers as diverse as these in their 
disparate times and places would share very many preoccupations either with 
each other or with us.
Any such immediate inference would be unduly hasty and also potentially mis-
leading. It would be misleading not least because it relies on an unrealistically 
unified conception of what we find engaging in this area: philosophy of mind 
comprises today a wide range of interests, orientations, and methodologies, some 
almost purely a priori and others almost exclusively empirical. It is potentially 
misleading in another way as well, heading in the opposite direction. If we pre-
sume that the only thinkers who have something useful to say to us are those 
engaging the questions of mind we find salient, using idioms we find congenial, 
then we will likely overlook some surprising continuities as well as instructive 
discontinuities across these figures and periods.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Rebecca Copenhaver and Christopher Shields

G e n e r a l  i n t r o d u c t i o n
xi
Some issues pertinent to mental activity may prove perennial. Of equal impor-
tance, however, are the differences and discontinuities we find when we investi-
gate questions of mind assayed in earlier periods of thought. In some cases, it is 
true, we find it difficult to determine without careful investigation whether differ-
ence in idiom suffices for difference in interest or orientation. For instance, it was 
once commonplace to frame questions about mental activity as questions about 
the soul, where today questions posed about the nature of the soul and its relation 
to the body are apt to sound to many outmoded or at best quaintly archaic. Yet 
when we read what, for instance, medieval philosophers investigated under that 
rubric, we are as likely as not to find them reflecting on such core contemporary 
concerns as the nature of perception, the character of consciousness, the relation 
of mental faculties to the body, and the problem of intentionality – and to be doing 
so in a manner immediately continuous with some of our own preoccupations.
That said, even where upon examination we find little or no continuity between 
present-day and earlier concerns, this very difference can be illuminating. Why, 
for instance, is the will discussed so little in antiquity? Hannah Arendt suggests 
an answer: the will was not discussed in antiquity because it was not discovered 
before St. Augustine managed to do so in the third century.2 Is she right? Or is the 
will in fact discussed obliquely in antiquity, enmeshed in a vocabulary at least ini-
tially alien to our own? On the supposition that Arendt is right, and the will is not 
even a topic of inquiry before Augustine, why should this be so? Should this make 
us less confident that we have a faculty rightly called ‘the will’? Perhaps Augustine 
not so much discovered the will as invented it, to give it pride of place in his con-
ception of human nature. A millennium later Thomas Aquinas contended that the 
will is but one power or faculty of the soul, as an intellectual appetite for the good 
(ST I 82, resp.). Is he right? Is the will as examined by Augustine and Aquinas the 
same will of which we ask, when we do, whether our will is free or determined?
A study of the history of philosophy of mind turns up, in sum, some surprising 
continuities, some instructive partial overlaps, and some illuminating discontinui-
ties across the ages. When we reflect on the history of the discipline, we bring 
into sharper relief some of the questions we find most pressing, and we inevitably 
come to ask new and different questions, even as we retire questions which we 
earlier took to be of moment. Let us reflect first then on some surprising continui-
ties. Three illustrations will suffice, but they could easily be multiplied.
First, consider some questions about minds and machines: whether machines 
can be conscious or otherwise minded, whether human intelligence is felicitously 
explicated in terms of computer software, hardware, or functional processes more 
generally. Surely such questions belong to our era uniquely? Yet we find upon 
reading some early modern philosophy that this is not so. In Leibniz, for instance, 
we find this striking passage, known as ‘Leibniz’s mill’:
Imagine there were a machine whose structure produced thought, feeling, 
and perception; we can conceive of its being enlarged while maintaining 

R e b e c c a  C o p e n h av e r  a n d  C h r i s t o p h e r  S h i e l d s
xii
the same relative proportions, so that we could walk into it as we can 
walk into a mill. Suppose we do walk into it; all we would find there are 
cogs and levers and so on pushing one another, and never anything to 
account for a perception. So perception must be sought in simple sub-
stances, not in composite things like machines. And that is all that can be 
found in a simple substance – perceptions and changes in perceptions; 
and those changes are all that the internal actions of simple substances 
can consist in.
(Monadology §17)
Leibniz offers an argument against mechanistic conceptions of mental activity in 
this passage, one with a recognizably contemporary counterpart. His view may 
be defensible or it may be indefensible; but it is certainly relevant to questions 
currently being debated.
Similarly, nearly every course in philosophy of mind these days begins with 
some formulation of the ‘mind-body problem’, usually presented as a descendant 
of the sort of argument Descartes advanced most famously in his Meditations, and 
defended most famously in his correspondence with Elisabeth of Bohemia. Cen-
turies before Descartes, however, we encounter the Islamic polymath Avicenna 
(Ibn-Sînâ) wondering in detail about the question of whether the soul has or lacks 
quantitative extension, deploying a striking thought experiment in three separate 
passages, one of which runs:
One of us must suppose that he was just created at a stroke, fully devel-
oped and perfectly formed but with his vision shrouded from perceiving 
all external objects – created floating in the air or in space, not buffeted 
by any perceptible current of the air that supports him, his limbs sepa-
rated and kept out of contact with one another, so that they do not feel 
each other. Then let the subject consider whether he would affirm the 
existence of his self. There is no doubt that he would affirm his own 
existence, although not affirming the reality of any of his limbs or inner 
organs, his bowels, or heart or brain or any external thing. Indeed he 
would affirm the existence of this self of his while not affirming that it 
had any length, breadth or depth. And if it were possible for him in such 
a state to imagine a hand or any other organ, he would not imagine it to 
be a part of himself or a condition of his existence.
(Avicenna, ‘The Book of Healing’)
Avicenna’s ‘Floating Man’, or ‘Flying Man’, reflects his Neoplatonist orientation 
and prefigures in obvious ways Descartes’ more celebrated arguments of Medita-
tions II. Scholars dispute just how close this parallel is,3 but it seems plain that 
these arguments and parables bear a strong family resemblance to one another, 
and then each in turn to a yet earlier argument by Augustine,4 more prosaically 
put, but engaging many of the same themes.

G e n e r a l  i n t r o d u c t i o n
xiii
The point is not to determine who won the race to this particular argument, nor 
to insist that these authors arrive at precisely the same finish line. Rather, when 
we study each expression in its own context, we find illuminating samenesses 
and differences, which in turn assist us in framing our own questions about the 
character of the quantitative and qualitative features of mind, about the tenability 
of solipsism, and about the nature of the human self. One would like to know, 
for instance, whether such a narrow focus on the internal states of human con-
sciousness provides a productive method for the science of mind. Or have our 
philosophical forebears, as some today think, created impediments by conceiv-
ing of the very project in a way that neglects the embodied characteristics of 
cognition? From another angle, one may wonder whether these approaches, seen 
throughout the history of the discipline, lead inexorably to Sartre’s conclusion that 
‘consciousness is a wind blowing from nowhere towards objects’.5 One way to 
find out is to study each of these approaches in the context of its own deployment.
For a final example, we return to the birthplace of Western philosophy to reflect 
upon a striking argument of Democritus in the philosophy of perception. After 
joining Leucippus in arguing that the physical world comprises countless small 
atoms swirling in the void, Democritus observes that only atoms and the void are, 
so to speak, really real. All else exists by convention: ‘by convention sweet and by 
convention bitter, by convention hot, by convention cold, by convention colour; 
but in reality atoms and void’ (DK 68B9). This remark evidently denies the real-
ity of sensible qualities, such as sweetness and bitterness, and even colour. What 
might Democritus be thinking? By judging this remark alongside his remaining 
fragments, we see that he is appealing to the variability of perception to argue that 
if one perceiver tastes a glass of wine and finds it sweet, while another perceiver 
tastes the same glass and finds it bitter, then we must conclude – on the assump-
tion that perceptual qualities are real – that either one or the other perceiver is 
wrong. After all, they cannot both be right, and there seems little point in treating 
them as both wrong. The correct conclusion, Democritus urges, is that sensible 
qualities, in contrast to atoms and the void, are not real. The wine is neither sweet 
nor bitter; sweetness and bitterness are wholly subjective states of perceivers.
Readers of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century British philosophy will recog-
nize this argument in Locke and Berkeley. Locke presents the argument to support 
his distinction between primary and secondary qualities: primary qualities being 
those features of objects that are (putatively) in objects, independently of percep-
tion, such as number, shape, size, and motion; secondary qualities being those  
features of objects subject to the variability of perception recognized by Democri-
tus. Locke struggles with the reality of secondary qualities, sometimes treating 
them as ideas in our minds and other times as dispositions of the primary qualities 
of objects that exist independently of us. Democritus, by contrast, aligning the real 
with the objective, simply banishes them to the realm of convention. And Berkeley 
appeals to the same phenomenon on which Locke founds his famous distinction – 
the variability of perception – to argue that the distinction is unsustainable and 
thus embraces the anti-Democritean option: the real is the ideal.

R e b e c c a  C o p e n h av e r  a n d  C h r i s t o p h e r  S h i e l d s
xiv
We may ask which if any of these philosophers deserves to be followed. As an 
anecdotal matter, when beginning philosophy students grasp the point of argu-
ments from the variability of perception, they become flummoxed, because before 
having their attention focussed on the phenomenon of variability, most tend to 
think of sensible qualities as intrinsic monadic properties of the external objects 
of perception. This issue in the philosophy of perception, straddling as it does dif-
ferent periods and idioms, remains a live one, proving as vivid for us as it was for 
Democritus and Locke.
When we find similar philosophical arguments and tropes recurring in radi-
cally different periods and contexts throughout the history of philosophy, that 
is usually at least a strong prima facie indication that we are in an area demand-
ing careful scrutiny. Unsurprisingly, arguments concerning the nature of per-
ception and perceptible qualities offer one telling illustration. Still, we should 
resist the temptation to find continuities where none exists, especially where 
none exists beyond the verbal or superficial. We should moreover resist, perhaps 
more strongly still, the tendency to minimize or overlook differences where they 
appear. One of the intellectual joys of studying the history of philosophy resides 
precisely in uncovering and appreciating the deep discontinuities between dispa-
rate times and contexts.
On this score, examples abound, but one suffices to illustrate our point. The title 
of a widely read article written in the 1960s posed a provocative question: ‘Why 
Isn’t the Mind-Body Problem Ancient?’.6 This question, of course, has a presup-
position, namely that the mind-body problem is in fact not ancient. It also seems 
to betray a second presupposition, namely that there is a mind-body problem: a 
single problem that that engages philosophers of the modern era but that escaped 
the ancients. This presupposition raises the question: what is the single, unified, 
mind-body problem that the ancients failed to recognize? In fact, when we turn 
to the range of questions posed in this domain, we find a family of recognizably 
distinct concerns: the hard problem, the explanatory gap, mental causation, and so 
on. Not all these questions have a common orientation, even if they arise from a 
common anxiety that the mind and the body are at once so dissimilar that inquir-
ing into their relationship may already be an error, and yet so similar in their 
occupation and operation as to obliterate any meaningful difference.
We might call this anxiety categorial. That is, it has seemed to various philoso-
phers in various eras that there is some basic categorial distinction to be observed 
in the domain of the mental, to the effect that mental states belong to one category 
and physical states to another. That by itself might be true without, however, there 
being any attendant problem. After all, we might agree that there is a categorial 
distinction between, say, biological properties and mathematical properties, and 
even that these families of properties are never co-instantiable. After all, no num-
ber can undergo descent with modification, and no animal can be a cosine. That is 
hardly a problem: no one expects numbers to be biological subjects, and no one 
would ever mistake an organism for a mathematical function. The problem in the 
domain of the mental and physical seems to arise only when we assume that some 

G e n e r a l  i n t r o d u c t i o n
xv
objects – namely ourselves – exhibit both mentality and physicality, and do so in 
a way that is systematic and unified. Bringing these thoughts together we arrive at 
a mind-body problem: if mental and physical properties are categorially exclusive 
while we ourselves are mental and physical at once, we must be what we cannot 
be, namely subjects of properties that cannot coincide.
In this sense, Cartesian dualism might be regarded as a solution to the mind-
body problem, at least this mind-body problem, one which simply concedes its 
conclusion by affirming that minds and bodies are irredeemably different sorts 
of substances displaying different sorts of properties. Needless to say, this ‘solu-
tion’ invites a series of still more intractable problems concerning the interaction 
of these postulated disparate substances, about the location of the mental, and so 
forth. Even so, when the Cartesian expedient is rejected on these or other grounds, 
the old problem re-emerges, in one guise yielding an equally desperate seem-
ing sort of solution, namely the total elimination of the mental as ultimately not 
amenable to a purely physicalistic characterization.7 Eliminativism, no less than 
Cartesianism, solves the mind-body problem effectively by concession.
One should accordingly look afresh at the problem as formulated. In fact, when 
one asks what these purportedly mutually excluding properties may be, several can-
didates come to the fore. Some think properties such as being conscious are mental 
and cannot possibly be physical, perhaps because conscious states are ineliminably 
subjective, whereas all physical properties are objective, or because mental prop-
erties are essentially qualitative, whereas physical properties are only quantitative. 
Descartes’ own reasons, though disputed, seem to have been largely epistemic: pos-
sibly one can doubt the existence of one’s body, whereas it is impossible, because 
self-defeating, to doubt the existence of one’s own mind or mental states (Medita-
tion II). If these property-differences obtain in these domains and are in fact such as 
to be mutually exclusive, then we do now have the makings of a mind-body problem.
Returning, then, to the question pertinent to our study of the ancient period, we 
may ask: do the ancients draw these sorts of categorial distinctions? If so, why do 
they fail to appreciate the problems we find so familiar and obvious? Or do they in 
fact fail to draw these categorial distinctions in the first place? If they do not, then 
one would like to know why not. One can imagine a number of different options 
here: one could fault the ancients for failing to pick up on such starkly categorial 
differences; one could credit them for astutely avoiding the conceptual muddles of 
Cartesianism. Some argue, for instance, that Aristotelian hylomorphism embraces 
a framework of explanation within which Cartesian questions simply cannot arise, 
thereby obviating an array of otherwise intractable problems.8 Although we do not 
attempt to litigate these issues here, one can appreciate how an investigation into 
ancient approaches to philosophy of mind yields palpable benefits for some modern 
questions, even if and perhaps precisely because such questions were not ancient.
Needless to say, we never know in advance of our investigations whether the 
benefits of such study will be forthcoming. To make such discoveries as can be 
made in this area, then, we need ask a set of questions similar to those we asked 
regarding the mind-body problem, mutatis mutandis, for other philosophical 

R e b e c c a  C o p e n h av e r  a n d  C h r i s t o p h e r  S h i e l d s
xvi
problems in the mental domain, broadly construed, as they arise in other periods 
of philosophy beyond ancient philosophy as well.
If we proceed in this way, we find that the study of the history of philosophy of 
mind offers the contemporary philosopher perspectives on the discipline which, 
however far below the surface, may yet guide our own inquiries into the mental 
and physical, and into the character of mental and physical states and processes. 
This is, of course, but one reason to engage the studies these six volumes contain. 
Other researchers with a more purely historical orientation will find a wealth of 
material in these pages as well, ranging across all periods of western philosophy, 
from antiquity to that part of the discipline that resides in living memory. Our his-
torical and philosophical interests here may, of course, be fully complementary: 
the history of philosophy of mind takes one down some odd by-ways off some 
familiar boulevards, into some dead-ends and cul-de-sacs, but also along some 
well-travelled highways that are well worth traversing over and again.
Notes
1	 A perusal of the course offerings of leading universities in the US tends to confirm this. 
To take but one example, which may be multiplied, a search of the archives of the Uni-
versity of Notre Dame lists one course in ‘Philosophy of Mind’ offered as an advanced 
elective in 1918 and 1928, 1929, but then no further course until 1967, when ‘The Mind-
Body Problem,’ began to be offered yearly off and on for two decades. In the 1970s, 
various electives such as ‘Mind and Machines’ were offered intermittently, and a regular 
offering in ‘Philosophy of Mind’ began only in 1982. This offering continues down to 
the present. While we have not done a comprehensive study, these results cohere with 
archive searches of several other North American universities.
2	 Arendt sees prefigurations in St. Paul and others, but regards Augustine as ‘the first phi-
losopher of the will and the only philosopher the Romans ever had’ (1978, vol. ii, 84).
3	 For an overview of these issues, see Marmura (1986).
4	 On the relation between Descartes and Augustine, see the instructive treatment in Mat-
thews (1992).
5	 Sartre (1943: 32–33).
6	 Matson (1966). Citing Matson’s question, King (2007) went on to pose a continuing 
question of his own: ‘Why Isn’t the Mind-Body Problem Medieval?’. In so doing, King 
meant to oppose Matson, who had claimed that the one should not assume that medieval 
philosophers, although writing in a recognizably Aristotelian idiom, similarly failed to 
engage any mind-body problem. After all, he noted, in addition to their Aristotelianism, 
they accepted a full range of theistic commitments alien to Aristotle.
7	 Eliminativism about the mental has a long and chequered history, extending at least as 
far back as Broad (1925) (who rejects it), but has its most forceful and accessible formu-
lation in Churchland (1988).
8	 Charles (2008) has advanced this sort of argument on behalf of hylomorphism.
Bibliography
Arendt, Hannah. 1978. The Life of the Mind, vols. i and ii. New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich.
Broad, C. D. 1925. The Mind and Its Place in Nature. London: Routledge & Kegan.

G e n e r a l  i n t r o d u c t i o n
xvii
Charles, David. 2008. “Aristotle’s Psychological Theory”. Proceedings of the Boston Area 
Colloquium in Ancient Philosophy 24: 1–29.
Churchland, P. M. 1988. Matter and Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
King, Peter. 2007. “Why Isn’t the Mind-Body Problem Medieval?” In Forming the Mind: 
Essays on the Internal Senses and the Mind/Body Problem From Avicenna to the Medi-
cal Enlightenment, 187–205. Berlin: Springer.
Marmura, Michael. 1986. “Avicenna’s Flying Man in Context”. The Monist 69 (3): 383–395.
Matson, Wallace. 1966. “Why Isn’t the Mind-Body Problem Ancient?” In Mind, Matter, 
and Method: Essays in Philosophy and Science in Honor of Herbert Feigl, 92–102. St. 
Paul: University of Minnesota Press.
Matthews, Gareth. 1992. Thought’s Ego in Augustine and Descartes. Ithaca: Cornell Uni-
versity Press.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 1943. “Une Idée fondamentale de la phénomenologie de Husserl: 
L’intentionalité”. In Situations I. Paris: Gallimard.


1
The six volumes in this series aim to take a historical look at philosophy of mind 
from the very beginnings of philosophical discussion up to the present day. From 
the vantage point of these early years of the 21st century, however, it’s hard to 
be sure that we yet have enough distance and perspective to accurately and ade-
quately reflect on 20th-century philosophy of mind through a historical lens. For 
many of these debates, the dust has not yet settled. Moreover, the issues from the 
past century that now look to us to be of central importance may in the end not 
prove to be of lasting interest, while there may be other issues of significance 
that we now fail to identify as such. That said, the first eleven essays in this vol-
ume take up themes and debates that seem to have had particular prominence in 
20th century philosophy of mind. Then turning finally from the past to the future, 
the volume concludes with an essay that offers some cautious predictions about 
developments we are likely to see in philosophy of mind in years to come.
This introduction aims to provide some important background for the thematic 
discussions that follow by situating 20th-century of mind in a broader context 
and, in particular, in a scientific context. While the philosophical study of mind 
has always required philosophers to attend to the scientific developments of their 
day, philosophy of mind in the 20th century was especially influenced by such 
work – perhaps more so than at any other point in its history. The influence came 
largely from three different areas of research: psychology, neuroscience, and com-
puter science. As psychologists came to attend more closely to the connection 
between mind and behavior, as scientists came to better understand neural func-
tion, and as the mid-century work of Alan Turing ushered in the computer revolu-
tion, our understanding of a diverse range of issues in philosophy of mind – and 
indeed, even our very approach to those issues – was deeply affected.
In the first three sections of this introduction, I attempt to provide a brief over-
view of these three different areas of philosophically influential scientific research. 
Obviously, an introductory piece of this sort cannot provide anything even close 
to a comprehensive examination of such wide scientific terrain, but my selective 
INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME 6
Twentieth-century philosophy of mind:  
themes, problems, and scientific context
Amy Kind

A m y  K i n d
2
discussion should nonetheless help to provide some important context for the essays 
of this volume. Thus, in the final section of this introduction, I turn to those essays 
themselves. There my aim will be twofold: first, to sketch the themes discussed in 
these chapters, and second, to highlight some of the interconnections between them.
1.  Behaviorism
Philosophy of mind in the 20th century has been affected by its cognate discipline 
of psychology in many ways, but perhaps nothing in this domain has been more 
influential than the psychological behaviorism that ushered in the 20th century. 
While the psychologists of the late 19th century had relied heavily on introspec-
tionist methods in their investigations, the behaviorists denied that introspection 
had any role to play in the collection of scientific data. In their view, for psychol-
ogy to be a proper science – for it to be empirical in its orientation – it must con-
cern itself not with consciousness but with human behavior.
The term “behaviorism” was introduced in 1913 by the American psychologist 
John Watson in “Psychology as the Behaviorist Sees It,” an article often referred 
to as the behaviorist manifesto. As Watson there articulated it, behaviorism sees 
psychology as “a purely objective, experimental branch of natural science which 
needs introspection as little as do the sciences of chemistry and physics” (Watson 
1913, 176). For the behaviorist, the theoretical goal of psychology concerns the 
prediction and control of human behavior. At the center of the behaviorist program 
was the notion of stimulus-response, and correspondingly, the behaviorist divided 
psychological questions into two broad forms. Given a stimulus, the psychologist 
aims to determine what response will result; given a response, the psychologist 
aims to determine what stimulus brought it about. By proceeding in this way, the 
behaviorist works to identify the objective laws governing human behavior.
Watson’s behaviorism can be seen largely as a theory about psychological 
methodology. Though he urged that psychology “must discard all references to 
consciousness,” this was a claim about the proper focus of psychology and not a 
denial that consciousness exists. In later years, more radical behaviorists such as 
B. F. Skinner went further, dismissing feelings, ideas, and other features of mental 
life as “mental fictions” that play no helpful explanatory role (Skinner 1974, 18). 
By doing so, Skinner claimed, behaviorism “directs attention to the genetic and 
personal histories of the individual and to the current environment, where the real 
causes of behaviour are to be found” (Skinner 1987, 75).
Skinner’s most famous experimental work involved pigeons, and it was in con-
junction with his pigeon studies that he developed an approach known as operant 
conditioning. Prior to any conditioning, a pigeon will produce certain spontane-
ous pieces of behavior – what Skinner called operants – such as pecking at a key. 
By rewarding a certain type of operant with food or water, Skinner found that he 
could reinforce it, i.e., he could cause it to increase in frequency. Skinner then 
applied these lessons from the shaping of pigeon behavior to human behavior, 
behavior that he saw as shaped by the physical and social environment in which 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
3
we live: “Through operant conditioning, the environment builds the basic reper-
toire  with which we keep our balance, walk, play games, handle instruments and 
tools, talk, write, sail a boat, drive a car, or fly a plane” (Skinner 1953, 66).
Like Skinner, most of the behaviorists based their conclusions about human 
behavior on their work with animals. Watson’s own development of behaviorism 
was heavily influenced by Ivan Pavlov, a Russian physiologist who had shown that 
dogs could be conditioned to respond not only to food but also to a stimulus such 
as a bell that had been paired with it. (Pavlov’s studies produced laws now known 
as classical conditioning). In addition to Skinner’s work with pigeons, other lead-
ing behaviorists of the time such as Clark Hull and Edwin R. Guthrie worked with 
rats and cats. Much of this work suggested that the original stimulus-response 
paradigm was overly simplistic, and it consequently resulted in the addition of 
intervening variables. For example, Hull thought that factors such as drive and 
habit strength needed to be added to any predictive/explanatory laws of behavior.
Following Watson’s manifesto, behaviorism dominated psychology for several 
decades, and it wasn’t until the late 1950s that it fell out of favor. Ultimately, 
though behaviorists were successful in developing experimental techniques that 
would move psychology away from its reliance on introspection and towards 
objective methods of investigation, they were considerably less successful in pro-
viding any genuine explanation of human behavior. The theory proved especially 
problematic when it came to explaining thought and language. Skinner attempted 
to rectify this latter problem by applying the behaviorist framework to linguis-
tic behavior in his Verbal Behavior (1957), but this attempt was largely seen as 
unsuccessful. One especially notable criticism came in a scathing 1959 review 
by the linguist Noam Chomsky. In fact, this review is often cited as a key turning 
point in the fortunes of behaviorism. As Chomsky persuasively argued, an expla-
nation of linguistic acquisition and competence that ignores entirely the contribu-
tion of innate mechanisms is doomed to failure. The acquisition and production 
of language is far too sophisticated to be explained solely in terms of responses 
to stimuli.
Though behaviorism is now out of vogue, contemporary psychology owes 
much to its teachings. At the theoretical level, the behaviorists’ careful attention 
to experimental design and the measurement of variables has had a lasting impact 
on psychological research methods. At the clinical level, many contemporary 
therapies aimed at treating conditions such as addiction or PTSD can be traced to 
behaviorist models of the shaping of behavior. We can also see a deep behavior-
istic legacy in a vast array of social practices – from educational practices to job 
training. For our purposes, however, perhaps what’s most important is behavior-
ism’s philosophical legacy. In ways both direct and indirect, as well as both posi-
tive and negative, psychological behaviorism cast a long shadow over many of the 
debates that occupied philosophers of mind in the 20th century. From discussions 
of the relation between mind and body (Chapters 2 and 7), to discussions about 
consciousness (Chapter 3), perception (Chapter 4), and introspection (Chapter 5), 
to the development of Wittgenstein’s philosophical views on mind (Chapter 9), 

A m y  K i n d
4
we consistently see the influence of behaviorism, and even in these early years of 
the 21st century, we still find behavioristic traces in many areas of philosophical 
theorizing about the mind.
2.  Neural localization
The 20th century brought about extraordinary progress in our understanding of 
the brain. One particularly important area of progress concerns neural localiza-
tion (sometimes also called brain mapping): the attempt to identify which neural 
regions correlate with which cognitive functions. While there has been a very 
recent explosion of progress in this area with the advent of the sophisticated neu-
ral imaging techniques starting in the 1990s, there were significant developments 
throughout the century even before these advanced imaging techniques became 
available.
The story of neural localization might be said to begin in the early 19th cen-
tury with the work of Franz Joseph Gall, an Austrian physician and neuroanato-
mist. Today Gall is perhaps most famous for his advocacy of phrenology, a view 
according to which the shape of the skull determines various personality and 
character traits such as spirituality, secretiveness, and self-esteem. Indeed, Gall’s 
phrenological drawings mapped out as many as forty-two distinct areas of the 
skull and the underlying cerebral cortex that corresponded to different intellectual 
and emotional capacities. While Gall himself did not rely on any of the empirical 
brain research available at the time in developing these cranial maps, and while 
phrenology itself has long been rejected as mere pseudoscience, he can nonethe-
less be credited with setting forth two key principles that remain influential today: 
(1) that mental function arises from the brain, and (2) that the brain does not oper-
ate as a single organ but instead can be divided into numerous smaller organs, 
each of which bears responsibility for different cognitive functions.
Gall’s work came under attack in the 1820s by the French physiologist Pierre 
Flourens. Flourens rejected not only Gall’s phrenology but also the principles of 
localization underlying it. Denying that different parts of the brain had discrete 
functions, Flourens instead proposed what’s become known as a holistic approach 
to the brain. According to the holistic view, each part of a cerebral hemisphere is 
capable of performing all of the functions of that hemisphere. Holism remained 
popular until the middle of the 19th century when several different developments 
began to swing the pendulum back in the direction of localization. Work by the 
French neurologist Paul Broca and later by the German neurologist Carl Wernicke 
showed that language function could be traced to the left frontal cortex. Work-
ing with patients who suffered from various linguistic deficits, both Broca and 
Wernicke used postmortem analysis to identify the locations of neural damage. 
Also worth noting is the famous case of Phineas Gage, a construction worker 
who was seriously injured during an explosion in 1848 when his brain and skull 
were impaled by an iron rod over an inch thick. Though Gage recovered and had 
no subsequent difficulties with either motor function or speech, he experienced a 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
5
dramatic personality change. A responsible and polite man before the accident, 
thereafter he became profane, irreverent, and untrustworthy. Lack of autopsy 
results prevented the full significance of the Gage case from being revealed at the 
time, but an analysis by John Harlow in the 1860s correlated Gage’s cognitive and 
behavioral changes with a specific area of the prefrontal cortex.1
The start of the 20th century brought further evidence in support of the locali-
zation paradigm through the work of German anatomist Korbinian Brodmann. 
Brodmann attempted to differentiate the functional areas of the brain by analyzing 
cell shapes, their distribution, and their arrangement into patterns such as clus-
ters and columns. This new approach – known as the cytoarchitectonic method 
– enabled Brodmann to identify forty-three distinct functional areas of the cortex, 
and even now the cortical map he developed still proves influential. At the time, 
however, not everyone accepted Brodmann’s work, and the holistic view contin-
ued to enjoy pockets of support in the early years of the 20th century. Advocates 
included Pavlov, whom we encountered above in our discussion of behaviorism, 
and the American psychologist Karl Lashey, whose work running rats through 
mazes led him to the conclusion that what mattered was the size of a brain lesion 
rather than its location. But by mid-century, as the empirical case for localization 
continued to strengthen, support for holism declined and localization became the 
prevailing view. It has remained so to this day.
While the empirical evidence for localization in the 19th and early 20th cen-
turies came largely from postmortem studies of the brain, mid-century medical 
advances allowed for the collection of data from living patients. Largely because 
of the efforts of the pioneering Canadian neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield and his 
colleagues who were working to treat patients with epilepsy, techniques were 
developed that enabled the direct stimulation of cortical tissue of conscious 
patients during brain surgery. This enabled surgeons to better identify the areas 
responsible for the seizures and in turn allowed for the collection of data about 
brain function in real time.
Around the same time, an entirely different surgical procedure aimed at treating 
epilepsy led to further lessons about neural function. Starting in the late 1940s, a 
group of patients who suffered from a particularly severe and uncontrollable form 
of epilepsy underwent surgery to sever the corpus callosum, the bundle of nerve 
fibers connecting the brain’s two hemispheres. By breaking this connection, doc-
tors hoped to be able to prevent the epileptic seizures from spreading from one 
hemisphere of the brain to the other. Ultimately, approximately 100 such opera-
tions were performed. The patients who underwent these surgeries – often referred 
to post surgery as split-brain subjects – presented researchers with a unique oppor-
tunity to learn about brain function, and subsequent studies by the neuropsycholo-
gists Roger Sperry and Michael Gazzaniga revealed considerable new insights not 
only into hemispheric specialization but also into the ability of the hemispheres to 
coordinate their activities and to function independently of one another.
The state of scientific knowledge about the brain by mid-century was thus con-
siderable. A staggering amount of progress had been made in just a hundred years’ 

A m y  K i n d
6
time. But even greater advances were yet to come. Perhaps nothing has been as 
important to our understanding of neural function as the late 20th-century devel-
opment of noninvasive neural-imagining techniques. Starting with the develop-
ment of X-ray computed tomography (CT scans) in the early 1970s, scientists 
could for the first time work with three-dimensional images – a development that, 
as Marcus Raichle puts it, “quite literally changed the way in which we looked at 
the human brain” (Raichle 2008, 120).
Many of the modern imaging technologies work by measuring hemodynamic 
changes, i.e., they measure the changes in blood flow and the levels of oxy-
genation in the blood following neural activity. Though scientific research had 
revealed an important relationship between blood flow and brain function as early 
as the 1870s, it took almost 100 years for the significance of this fact to be fully 
appreciated and implemented for effective neural imaging by way of the develop-
ment of positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI). Finally, one more important step forward occurred in the late 1980s with 
the development of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) – a develop-
ment that opened up a new avenue of research that was almost wholly responsible 
for the birth of cognitive neuroscience. Unlike previous neural imagining tech-
niques, fMRI technology allows for relatively high-resolution images of the brain 
to be collected very quickly, with a whole brain scan being possible in less than 
three seconds.2
So how has philosophy of mind in the 20th century been influenced by all 
of this neuroscientific research? As we have learned more and more about the 
brain, how has that influenced our philosophical understanding of the mind? 
Interestingly, some philosophers have suggested that for most of the century it 
has had very little effect at all.3 In their article on “The Philosophy of Neurosci-
ence” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, John Bickle, Peter Mandik, 
and Anthony Landreth argue that “actual neuroscientific discoveries have exerted 
little influence on the details of materialist philosophies of mind.” While granting 
that the late 20th-century “neuroscientific milieu” has had some sway in discour-
aging dualism, they note that most 20th-century materialists – including even the 
empirically oriented identity theorists of the 1950s (see Chapter 2) – have relied 
very little on actual neuroscientific details. Moreover, as they go on to suggest, the 
rise of functionalism in the 1970s has been accompanied by a neglect of neurosci-
entific research not only in practice but also in principle. Functionalists suggested 
that mental states are to be understood in terms of their function. But since the 
function of a state does not depend on physical mechanisms in which it is realized, 
functionalists have tended to think that we cannot understand the nature of mind 
by way of neuroscience.
To my mind, however, this pessimistic assessment of the influence that neu-
roscience has had on philosophy is problematic. Granted, philosophers’ contin-
ued fixation on c-fibers in discussion of pain (see Chapter 2), even in the face of 
evidence that this association is overly simplistic, may seem to indicate a clear 
neuroscientific indifference – and this is how Bickle et al. take it.4 But there are 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
7
numerous other cases in which specific neuroscientific findings have played a 
key role in philosophical debates about the mind. Take the split-brain studies, for 
example. Introduced to philosophers largely by way of Thomas Nagel’s “Brain 
Bisection and the Unity of Consciousness” (1971), the empirical results gener-
ated by Sperry and Gazzaniga have played a direct role in a variety of differ-
ent philosophical debates from questions about consciousness (see Chapter 3) 
to questions about personal identity (see Chapter 5). Empirical findings about 
the relation between perceptual processing and electrical brain fields contributed 
to the demise of gestaltist views of perception (see Chapter 4), while empirical 
results concerning our sensorimotor capabilities have given rise to philosophical 
views of embodied cognition (see Chapter 10).
Perhaps more importantly, even when philosophers have not been focused on 
the specific details of neuroscientific research, they have still been tremendously 
influenced by the more general lessons that emerged during the course of the 
20th-century investigation of the brain. The “neuroscientific milieu” referenced 
by Bickle et al. has significantly shaped a variety of philosophical debates about 
the mind in the 20th century. Philosophical inquiries into the nature of the mind, 
of consciousness, of mental causation, of perception, etc. have all been conducted 
against the backdrop of the continuing success of the brain mapping project. Phi-
losophers working on mental causation, for example, may not be focused on par-
ticular findings about mental-physical correlations, but it’s become a starting point 
in much of that discussion that such correlations exist (see Chapter 7). Moreover, 
as we move forward in the 21st century, there is every indication that the influence 
of neuroscience on philosophy of mind will continue to grow even stronger.
3.  Alan Turing and the computer revolution
In this section, I turn from neuroscience to computer science, and in particular, 
to the seminal work of Alan Turing (1912–1954), a British mathematician who 
racked up many significant accomplishments during his short life. During World 
War II, he was part of the team of cryptographers who managed to decrypt the 
German code machine Enigma. He is widely credited with creating the field of 
artificial intelligence. And, though he was not trained as a philosopher, his paper 
“Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” published in Mind in 1950, has been 
hugely influential in 20th-century philosophy of mind.5
In fact, there are four distinct elements of Turing’s work that have proved espe-
cially important to philosophers of mind: (1) his development of what is typi-
cally referred to as a Turing machine, not an actual machine but rather an abstract 
model for a universal computing machine; (2) his subsequent contributions to 
the actual construction of some of the first digital computers; (3) his work on 
the mathematical notion of computability, and in particular, the result now often 
referred to as the Church-Turing thesis (see Chapter 11); and (4) his articulation 
of a framework – what he himself referred to as an imitation game but which is 
now widely referred to as the Turing test – for determining whether computers 

A m y  K i n d
8
can think. Here I will focus on this last element of Turing’s work,6 but all four of 
these elements are part and parcel of what has sometimes been called the com-
puter revolution – a revolution that parallels previous scientific revolutions asso-
ciated with figures such as Copernicus, Darwin, and Freud. As Luciano Floridi 
has argued, the computer revolution has forced us to reconceptualize the world in 
which we live:
Computer science and the issuing technological applications . . . have 
not only provided unprecedented epistemic and engineering powers over 
natural and artificial realities; by doing so they have also cast new light 
on who we are, how we are related to the world and hence how we under-
stand ourselves.
(Floridi 2012, 3540)
When approaching the question of whether machines can think, it is easy to 
get bogged down in definitional matters such as what we mean by “machine” 
and what we mean by “thinking” – so much so that the very question itself may 
seem a meaningless one. To bypass this difficulty, Turing proposed that we instead 
approach the question by judging the machine’s performance in an imitation game. 
Consider a set-up involving a neutral interviewer and two systems – one human 
and one machine. The interviewer asks questions of each system, not knowing 
which is which, via some kind of remote relay. (Turing described this in terms of 
a teleprinter connecting the rooms, but today it is easy to imagine the set-up in 
terms of texting or some other kind of instant messaging.) With no limit placed 
on the type of questions allowed, the interviewer is then given some set amount 
of time – five minutes, say – and is charged with determining which system is the 
human and which system is the machine. Having described this imitation game, 
Turing suggests we discard the meaningless question “Can machines think?” and 
instead ask: “Are there imaginable machines that can do well at the imitation 
game” (Turing 1950, 442)?
Turing himself gave an affirmative answer to this question, and he famously 
predicted that by the end of the 20th century, machines would be developed that 
would be able to reliably succeed at the imitation game. While this prediction 
has not yet come true, machines have exhibited considerable mastery across a 
diverse range of seemingly intelligent domains. Not only have machines been 
able to beat humans at games such as chess, Go, and Jeopardy!, but we now also 
have unmanned drones in our skies, driverless cars about to populate our high-
ways, and programs like Siri and Cortana that organize our lives.7 To many, it 
seems only a matter of time – perhaps only a very short matter of time – before 
the Turing test is passed. (See Chapter 12 for discussion of the likely future of 
artificial intelligence.)
However the future unfolds, it’s hard to overstate the importance played in the 
late 20th century by the framework for thinking about machine intelligence that 
Turing’s imitation game provided. In particular, this framework was almost solely 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
9
responsible for the initial wave of artificial intelligence in the 1950s and 1960s. 
As Blay Whitby has noted, in those years it served as “a source of inspiration to 
all concerned with AI” (Whitby 1996, 53).8 Indeed, writing in 1964, Alan Ross 
Anderson notes that more than 1,000 papers had been published since 1950 on the 
question of whether machines can think (Anderson 1964, 1).
Criticism of the Turing test has tended to come from two very different direc-
tions. On the one hand, some have charged that the test does not set a high enough 
bar for intelligence: Couldn’t a machine pass simply by “simulating” thinking 
rather than by actually thinking? (See, e.g., Searle 1980). Often these sorts of 
worries can be traced to the behaviorist presuppositions that seem to be underly-
ing the test: The Turing test seems to reduce thinking to behavior, a reduction that 
many have found problematic. On the other hand, some have charged that the test 
sets too high a bar for machine thought: Couldn’t there be intelligent machines 
that would be unable to pass the Turing test? In assessing this second criticism, 
it’s important to note that Turing seemed to intend that his test be a sufficient but 
not necessary condition for machine thought. While a machine’s ability to pass 
the test licenses the conclusion that it thinks, a machine’s inability to pass the test 
does not license the conclusion that it doesn’t think. Even so, some have suggested 
that the test sets such an unrealistically rigorous standard that it fails to be at all 
useful. Consider an example offered by Robert French (1990). If you are trying to 
determine what counts as flying, you might adopt the Seagull test: Anything that 
can fool a panel of investigators into thinking that it is a seagull counts as flying. 
Insisting that this is only a sufficient condition for flying does not make this test 
any more helpful when it gives false negatives on objects like 747s, mosquitoes, 
and hummingbirds – and likewise for the potentially false negatives issued by the 
Turing test. More generally, we might worry that the very set-up of the Turing  
test, a set-up that involves the imitation of humans, mistakenly constrains machine 
intelligence to a human mold.
Even this brief overview of the Turing test indicates that Turing’s work played 
a seminal role in the development of cognitive science, a topic taken up in Chap-
ter 11 of this volume. It’s perhaps also already clear how his work would influence 
20th-century philosophical thinking about the mind-body problem and the prob-
lem of consciousness: The emergence of functionalism – and, more generally, the 
computational model of mind – in the second half of the century owes directly 
to the computer revolution for which he was largely responsible (see Chapters 2 
and 3). Because the computational model of mind is at work in 20th-century 
discussions of perception (Chapter 4), intentionality (Chapter 8), and questions 
about the boundaries of the mind (Chapter 10), we see a similar influence on many 
of the other philosophical problems and themes traced in this volume. To give just 
one more example, we might note the impact that Turing had on Wittgenstein, 
whose lectures on the philosophy of mathematics he attended at the University 
of Cambridge in 1939. Indeed, there are various indications throughout Wittgen-
stein’s work that he was grappling with Turing’s ideas.9 (For a discussion of Witt-
genstein’s philosophy of mind, see Chapter 9.)

A m y  K i n d
10
4.  The essays
It was against this scientific backdrop – from psychology to neuroscience to com-
puter science – that the philosophical debates discussed in this volume played 
out. Not all of these debates were influenced by these empirical developments in 
the same way, and in some cases the influence is significantly more pronounced 
than in others. But as I turn now to the twelve chapters of this volume, it should 
become clear that many of the preoccupations of 20th-century philosophy of 
mind are deeply influenced by the science of the century.
The volume begins with Phillip Walsh and Jeff Yoshimi’s discussion of the 
phenomenological tradition initiated by Edmund Husserl and then developed by 
figures such as Martin Heidegger, Emmanuel Levinas, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, 
and Simone de Beauvoir. As the study of phenomena – things as they appear as 
opposed to things as they really are – phenomenology is essentially the study of 
consciousness. Though the work of the phenomenologists and the work of ana-
lytic philosophers of mind developed in isolation from one another for most of the 
20th century, there is considerable thematic overlap between them and, as Walsh 
and Yoshimi show, there was also an increasing convergence between these areas 
of study by century’s end.
After providing a comprehensive overview of the phenomenological tradition 
in 20th-century philosophy, Walsh and Yoshimi turn to philosophical issues in 
which the intersection between phenomenology and philosophy of mind is par-
ticularly salient. The first concerns perceptual content, where the work of Husserl 
and Merleau-Ponty has interesting points of contact with contemporary debates 
about non-conceptual content and the plausibility of representationalism. While 
these points of contact have been increasingly explored in recent years, the second 
issue discussed by Walsh and Yoshimi – that of the phenomenology of the mind-
body debate – still remains largely unexplored. As Walsh and Yoshimi convinc-
ingly show, Husserl’s own phenomenology of the mind-body problem can help 
to elucidate the space of possibilities available for philosophical consideration. In 
particular, by rejecting unlimited supervenience and endorsing only partial super-
venience – by claiming, that is, that only some of an agent’s mental processes 
supervene on that agent’s physical processes – Husserl opens the door to a wider 
range of possible positions than was usually accepted in 20th-century philosophy 
of mind. (Here Walsh and Yoshimi’s discussion connects nicely with the themes 
explored by Julie Yoo in Chapter 7.)
In Chapter 2, I trace the discussion of the mind-body problem in 20th-century 
philosophy. The dualist consensus that had dominated philosophical thinking 
about the relation between the mind and the brain since Descartes’ work in the 
17th century came under significant pressure throughout most of the 20th century. 
The story told here is perhaps well known – early in the century, philosophers were 
inclined towards various versions of behaviorism, which then was supplanted in 
mid-century by the development of the identity theory, which was in turn largely 
supplanted in the 60s and 70s by functionalism. In this chapter, however, I attempt 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
11
to flesh out this standard story by showing how the problems and objections that 
beset each theory directly gave rise to the next. I also aim to show how dissatisfac-
tion with these theories led to a renewed focus on the qualitative aspects of mind 
in the final decades of the century.
All three areas of scientific research outlined in the earlier sections of this 
introduction manifest their influence throughout the discussion in Chapter 2. The 
philosophical behaviorism of the early 20th century was very much influenced by 
what was happening in psychology at the time, and as psychological behaviorism 
fell into disfavor largely because of the work of Chomsky, so too did philosophi-
cal behaviorism. Increased understanding of the workings of the brain – and in 
particular, increasing optimism about neural localization – helped to give rise to 
the identity theorist’s conviction that mental states could be identified with par-
ticular brain states. Finally, the computer revolution ushered in by Turing’s semi-
nal work helped give rise to functionalism and, more generally, to computational 
models of mind.
Tim Crane takes up a topic closely related to the mind-body problem in Chap-
ter 3 when he traces the development of 20th-century thinking about conscious-
ness. As Crane notes, at the beginning of the century philosophers across the 
spectrum – from perceptual realists to pragmatists to phenomenologists – accepted 
two basic tenets about consciousness: that consciousness is the defining feature 
of the mind, and that consciousness and thought (intentionality) are inextricably 
connected and thus cannot be treated in isolation from one another (for similar 
discussion, see Chapter 8). By the end of the century, both of these tenets had been 
largely rejected. Moreover, while philosophers at the start of the century took the 
primary problem of consciousness to be one of explaining the nature of our access 
to the mind-independent world, philosophers at century’s end took the primary 
problem of consciousness to be one of explaining how any physical thing could 
be conscious.
Crane’s concern in this chapter is to diagnose how this change came about. 
Starting with the notion of “givenness” that characterized consciousness at the 
start of the century, Crane shows how philosophers began to conceive of con-
sciousness as primarily a sensory phenomenon – where the sensory element itself 
is seen as ineffable. This conception of consciousness, what Crane calls the phe-
nomenal residue conception, naturally leads to a bifurcated characterization of 
mental phenomena: On the one hand, there are essentially unconscious proposi-
tional attitudes, and, on the other hand, there are sensory qualia. Though this divi-
sion was treated as inevitable for much of the second half of the century, Crane 
argues that it should be rejected.
In Chapter Four, Nico Orlandi explores the history of philosophical reflection 
about perception in the last century. Her discussion treats perception in two guises. 
First, we can think of perception as a conscious relation. In this guise, percep-
tion is taken to be a means of acquainting perceivers with the mind-independent  
world. Twentieth-century work on perception involved a sustained defense of this 
assumption, which is often referred to as perceptual realism. Orlandi traces its 

A m y  K i n d
12
development from sense data theorists such as G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell 
at the start of the century, to intentionalists such as G.E.M. Anscombe in mid-
century, to disjuncitivists such as John McDowell in the latter half of the century.
Second, we can think of perception as a subconscious process, i.e., as whatever 
process enables us to perceive the world as we do. Here philosophers have been 
greatly influenced by research in psychology and, more broadly, in cognitive sci-
ence. At the beginning of the century, gestalt theorists such as the psychologists 
Max Wertheimer, Wolfang Köhler, and Kurt Koffka rejected the structuralism and 
atomism that dominated at the end of the nineteenth century and argued that per-
cepts cannot always be decomposed into more basic sensory parts. Rather, we 
must adopt a more holistic picture. Though gestaltism largely fell out of favor by 
mid-century, it nonetheless exerted an important influence on subsequent philo-
sophical work. The second half of the century was marked by the emergence of 
two different views. According to constructivism, perception essentially involves 
an internal inference, one that supplements the initial sensory stimulation. In 
vision, for example, the retinal image is processed by using hidden assumptions 
to reach perceptual conclusions about the environment. In contrast to constructiv-
ism, the ecological views that emerged in the second half of the century focused 
not on internal procedures but on environmental interactions. While the construc-
tivist tends to see perception as a static process, ecological theorists like J. J. 
Gibson see perception as dynamic. For Gibson, the perceptual act is an active 
engagement with the world.
In different ways, both of these views gain support from the developments in 
artificial intelligence discussed earlier in section 3 of this introduction. Construc-
tivism, for example, gains plausibility from the computational theory of mind. As 
Orlandi notes,
If we recognize symbols as information-carrying structures, and algo-
rithms as containing assumptions and rules to process the symbols, then 
viewing the perceptual process as computational pretty much amounts to 
viewing it the way the constructivist does – as an inference from some 
informational states to others.
(this volume, p. 116) 
In contrast, ecological views gain plausibility from more recent developments 
in connectionism. Connectionist networks, which attune to the world by spread-
ing levels of activation, seem to work in the dynamic way predicted by the eco-
logical view and without the internal inference process posited by constructivism.
While the first four chapters of the volume can be seen as tracing back to prob-
lems that were brought to the forefront of philosophical inquiry by Descartes, the 
topic of the fifth chapter traces back instead to a problem that was brought to the 
forefront by Locke. In this chapter, Jens Johansson takes up the topic of personal 
identity and, in particular, the question of what it takes for us to persist through 
time. Locke’s answer, proposed in the 17th century, was that someone existing 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
13
at one time is identical to someone existing at a later time if and only if the latter 
individual can remember something the former person experienced at the earlier 
time. Though Locke’s contemporaries pointed out several deep problems with this 
view, 20th-century interest in it was reignited when, in the early 1940s, H. P. Grice 
proposed a particularly sophisticated version of the Lockean view that avoided 
previous objections. After further modifications, Locke’s emphasis on memory has 
given way to interest in psychological connections more broadly considered, and 
the view has developed into what’s commonly known as the psychological con-
tinuity view. As Johansson notes, much of the discussion of personal identity in 
20th-century philosophy has centered on the plausibility of this view. One persis-
tent challenge comes from the fission problem, i.e., from the fact that it seems that 
one person can be psychologically continuous with two (or more) future individu-
als. More recently, other challenges have come from animalism, a view that sees us 
fundamentally as human animals. On this view, our persistence conditions are the 
persistence conditions of animals. Thus, our continued existence through time con-
sists not in psychological continuity but in the continuity of the human organism.
The debate about personal identity is one that bridges both philosophy of mind 
and metaphysics, and it has a very different character from the debates discussed 
in the previous chapters of this volume. But here too we can see influence from 
some of the empirical developments discussed earlier in this chapter. First, our 
increasing knowledge about the brain (and particularly, about neural localization 
of function) has helped to inform other thought experiments that have played 
an influential role in philosophical discussion of the problem of personal iden-
tity. Here recall the split-brain patients discussed in section 2. Lessons learned 
from such patients give rise to particular manifestations of the fission problem; 
we might imagine, for example, that someone’s brain is severed and each half is 
then implanted into a new android body. Secondly, and relatedly, the emergence 
of artificial intelligence and the corresponding computational theory of mind may 
well have given rise to intuitions that help to support the psychological continuity 
theory. Once we see the mind computationally, as a pattern of information, it then 
becomes easier to think of ourselves surviving when the information-pattern is 
uploaded into a different body or even to a machine.
In Chapter Six, Maja Spener explores the role that introspection played in 
20th-century theorizing about the mind. Focusing on the use of introspection in 
both philosophy and psychology, Spener attempts to analyze some of the persist-
ing influences these disciplines had on one another in this context. In doing so, 
however, she also highlights the peculiar lack of influence in some contexts. In 
particular, though the behaviorists largely succeeded in purging introspectionist 
methods from psychology in the first part of the century (see Section 1 above), 
philosophers – particularly philosophers of perception – continued to rely heavily 
and unashamedly on introspection in developing their philosophical theories. As 
Spener shows, this lack of influence also led to a surprising result: Despite sophis-
ticated debates about introspection at the beginning of the century, the end of the 
century saw philosophers working with a surprisingly rudimentary conception of 

A m y  K i n d
14
the proper role of introspection. Though there were indeed some lessons learned 
about introspection over the course of the 20th century, Spener also shows that 
there were many lessons lost.
Spener begins her discussion with the philosophical use of introspection by 
sense-data theorists such as G. E. Moore, C. I. Lewis, and H. H. Price. While such 
theorists often pointed out that introspection can lead us astray, and while they 
often accused their opponents of misusing introspection, they themselves were 
happy to invoke introspective data in defense of their own theory. Spener next 
turns to an extended discussion of the use of introspection in psychology – from 
introspectionists like Wundt, Titchener, and Kϋlpe to Gestalt theorists like Koffka 
and Köhler. (See also the discussion of Gestalt psychology in Chapter 4). As she 
carefully shows, psychologists of the early 20th century tended to accept that 
introspection can be usefully employed in a study of the conscious mind, but they 
also were careful to distinguish different kinds of introspection, not all of which 
they found equally suitable for experimental investigation. In the final section 
of her paper, Spener turns to late 20th-century philosophical theorizing and, in 
particular, to theorizing about the so-called transparency thesis. Roughly put, the 
thesis is that, when one reflects on the phenomenal character of one’s experience, 
one “looks through” the experience to what it is about, namely, to ordinary objects 
in the world. As Spener shows, discussions about transparency tend to take for 
granted that we have introspective access to our experiences and, moreover, that 
such access yields judgments appropriate for employment in theorizing. At the 
end of the century, unlike at its start, there was no longer any sense that we need 
to differentiate types of introspective access.
As we saw earlier, the discussion of Chapter Two attends to what’s often 
referred to as the mind-body problem. But talk of the mind-body problem is per-
haps misleading. Alongside the problem of how to account for the structural rela-
tion between mental states and their underlying neural states, there is also the 
problem of how to account for the causal relation between them. Julie Yoo takes up 
this problem – often referred to as the problem of mental causation – in Chapter 7.
The first part of Yoo’s discussion concerns three responses to mental interac-
tion that were prevalent in the early 20th century: epiphenomenalism, panpsy-
chism, and emergentism. While there are considerable differences between these 
three accounts, they share amongst them a broadly naturalistic focus. Thinkers 
surveyed in this part of the chapter include Thomas Huxley, William James, Ber-
trand Russell, and Samuel Alexander (among others). Yoo next turns to a form of 
skepticism about mental causation that arose in mid-century as an outgrowth of 
behaviorism, ordinary language philosophy, and the rise of Wittgensteinism (see 
Chapter Nine). According to thinkers such as Gilbert Ryle, it is a mistake to think 
of reasons as causes and hence also a mistake to think of the mind as something 
that can wield causal powers. Finally, the third and longest section of Yoo’s article 
focuses on what she calls the “golden age” of mental causation debates, an age 
that was largely ushered in by Donald Davidson’s argument for anomalous mon-
ism in 1970. This argument gave rise to what Yoo calls the Anomalism Problem: 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
15
If events can be causally related only if there are laws that cover them, then the 
absence of psychological or psychophysical laws raises doubts about mental 
events’ causal efficacy.
An explosion of interest in mental causation as the result of discussion of the 
Anomalism Problem in turn led to two other problems of mental causation. The 
Exclusion Problem, owing to the work of Jaegwon Kim, questions how mental 
events can be causally efficacious given the causal closure of the physical domain. 
Given causal closure, every event or action has a fully sufficient physical cause 
that “excludes” other causes, such as mental causes, in bringing about the action. 
The other problem arises from worries about externalism. According to content 
externalism (see the extensive discussion in Chapter 10), representational states 
are not solely “in the head.” Rather, their content depends on social and environ-
mental factors. But if this is true, then unless we are prepared to accept some kind 
of spooky action at a distance, mental contents do not look like they play a role in 
causing behavior. As Yoo discusses, the last decades of the 20th century witnessed 
careful attention to all three of these problems.
In Chapter Eight, Michelle Montague takes up the notion of intentionality, i.e., 
the respect in which our mental states are object-directed. Her discussion focuses 
on Franz Brentano, a philosopher whose work has been enormously influential 
in 20th- and 21st-century theorizing about the topic. Brentano’s work aimed to 
establish two central claims about intentionality. First, he claimed that intention-
ality is the “mark” of the mental, i.e., that all and only mental states are inten-
tional. Second, he claimed that consciousness and intentionality are constitutively 
related to one another. While much of 20th-century discussion of intentionality 
was preoccupied with what’s often referred to as the problem of intentionality – 
the problem of how we can think about nonexistent objects – Montague argues 
that a focus on this problem obscures our understanding of Brentano’s position 
and leads to misinterpretations of it.
Montague begins with a detailed explication of Brentano’s theories of con-
sciousness and intentionality in his Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint, 
published in 1874. She then discusses the shift in his views evident in the publi-
cation of the 1911 Appendix to this work. As Montague shows, Brentano moves 
from thinking about intentionality as involving reference to something as object to 
thinking of it explicitly as a relation. Her discussion then moves to other philoso-
phers who were influenced by Brentano, and she shows the impact that his work 
has had on subsequent philosophical discussions of intentionality. She starts with 
Kazimierz Twardowski and Alexius Meinong, two students of Brentano’s who 
attempted to develop and improve upon their teacher’s original theory. She then 
turns to Roderick Chisholm, the philosopher largely responsible for generating 
interest in Brentano’s work within contemporary analytic philosophy. Chisholm’s 
focus on our apparent ability to think about nonexistent objects set the terms for 
much of the subsequent discussion about intentionality in the second half of the 
20th century. Montague argues that much of that discussion – and in particular, the 
separatist assumptions that treated intentionality and consciousness in isolation 

A m y  K i n d
16
from one another for much of the second half of the century – proved to be a 
departure from Brentano’s own thinking about intentionality. In the final decades 
of the 20th century (and continuing now in these early years of the 21st century), 
an increasing skepticism about and then rejection of separatism brought philoso-
phers of mind back to something closer Brentano’s own treatment of intentional-
ity. In the final section of her chapter, Montague discusses contemporary theories 
of consciousness such as representationalism, higher-order theories, “conscious-
ness first” views, and the phenomenal intentionality program. (Here Montague’s 
discussion connects nicely with Crane’s discussion of these theories in Chapter 3.) 
In the course of this discussion, she shows how such theories do – and do not – 
succeed in recapturing Brentano’s original insights about intentionality.
Much as Chapter 8 serves as a chapter on the work and subsequent legacy 
of a towering figure in late 19th- and early 20th-century philosophy, Chapter 9 
serves as a chapter on the work and subsequent legacy of a towering figure in 
early and mid-20th-century philosophy. In this chapter, Severin Schroeder focuses 
on Ludwig Wittgenstein, particularly on his criticism of Cartesian dualism and 
the various misunderstandings that attend it. Because it is difficult to understand 
these criticisms unless one understands Wittgenstein’s distinctive approach to phi-
losophy, Schroeder begins his discussion with an introduction to Wittgenstein’s 
overall methodology. The chapter then ends with a discussion of Wittgenstein’s 
influence on subsequent philosophy of mind, an influence that has been particu-
larly prominent in the development of functionalist views. (For more on function-
alism, see Chapter 2.)
Wittgenstein’s anti-Cartesianism is particularly evident in his trenchant criti-
cisms of the inner-object model – a model according to which thoughts and feel-
ings are taken to be mental objects analogous to physical objects such as rocks and 
tables. In the course of this chapter, Schroeder aims to elucidate Wittgenstein’s 
attempts to show the problematic consequences of the inner-object model with 
respect to sensations and other minds, understanding, thinking, and voluntary 
action. Consider, for example, Wittgenstein’s famous private-language argument. 
Here Wittgenstein targets the assumption that sensations and other mental states 
are private, inner objects, inaccessible to others; his general strategy is to show 
that this assumption leads to absurd consequences – consequences such as the 
problem of other minds, i.e., our inability to have any way of knowing what others 
think and feel (and even if they think and feel), or the problem of communica-
tion, i.e., our inability to communicate anything about our thoughts and feelings 
to anyone else. Schroeder reconstructs in detail four of Wittgenstein’s principal 
objections to the inner-object view of sensations. Likewise, in his discussion of 
Wittgenstein’s attack on the inner-object view of voluntary action, a view presup-
posed not only by Descartes but also by British Empiricists such as John Locke, 
Schroeder differentiates three different objections posed by Wittgenstein. Though 
the details differ, all three of these objections aim to show that words like “will-
ing” do not pick out some distinctive mental occurrence that either precedes or 
accompanies a movement and thereby makes it a voluntary one.

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
17
Thus far we have seen various ways in which 20th-century philosophy devel-
oped in reaction to Cartesian dualism. In Chapter 10, Katalin Farkas takes up the 
20th-century reaction to a different aspect of the Cartesian conception of mind, 
namely, individualism. According to individualism, the content of mental states 
can be individuated wholly in terms of properties of the subject of those states. 
Consider the Evil Demon thought experiment of the First Meditation, where 
Descartes worries that a powerful and malicious force might be deceiving him into 
thinking there is an external world. As Descartes argues, even if he were the victim 
of radical deception, he would still be a thinking thing and, moreover, he would 
still have exactly the same mental features as those he has when he is not deceived. 
This claim – that we could have the very same thoughts and experiences absent 
an external world, that our thoughts would have the very same content absent an 
external world – came under intense scrutiny in the second half of the 20th century.
After an introductory sketch of the Cartesian conception of mind, Farkas turns 
to the externalism (or anti-individualism) that has its origins in Frege’s distinc-
tion between sense and reference and grew more directly out of the work of 
Hilary Putnam and Tyler Burge in the 1970s. Putnam and Burge proposed thought 
experiments that suggested that two qualitatively identical individuals placed in 
different environments might mean different things by a natural kind term like 
“water” and likewise have different concepts and different thoughts. To use Put-
nam’s famous phrase, both meanings and the content of thoughts “ain’t in the 
head.” In addition to her discussion of Putnam and Burge, Farkas also considers 
the two-dimensionalism associated with David Kaplan and later developed by 
David Chalmers and also the alternate externalist framework of Gareth Evans and 
John McDowell. Then, turning to naturalist conceptions of mind, Farkas discusses 
two other themes that arise in thinking about the boundaries of the mind: (1) the 
“active externalism” of the extended mind thesis, and (2) embodied cognition 
views. According to the extended mind thesis, external devices such as notebooks 
or smart phones may play the same role in our cognitive processes as non-occurrent  
beliefs, and hence may be literally said to be part of the mind. According to views 
of embodied cognition – views that draw heavily on the sorts of empirical research 
we considered earlier – our cognitive processes fundamentally depend upon our 
bodies and, in particular, on our bodies’ sensorimotor capacities. Discussion of 
these views leads Farkas to a more general discussion of the different ways that 
20th-century philosophers have conceived of the boundaries of the mind.
Perhaps nowhere in the volume is the connection to Turing’s legacy more appar-
ent than in Chapter 11. Here Carrie Figdor provides a conceptual history of the 
rise of cognitive science in the 20th century. Cognitive science is the multidiscipli-
nary study of individual agents, both what they are and how they function. Figdor 
organizes her discussion around five central innovations of the 20th century that 
constitute what she calls the “basic explanatory package” of cognitive science.
The first four pieces of the package came together in relatively short succes-
sion in the 1930s and 1940s. First, Turing’s development of the universal Turing 
Machine showed how a sequence of simple internal state transitions could 

A m y  K i n d
18
produce rational behavior. Second, the proposal by McCulloch and Pitts that we 
should think of neurons as biological logic gates enabled cognitive scientists to 
understand how those simple internal state transitions might be thought to occur 
in the brain. (A logic gate is a unit whose operations can be explained in terms of 
the truth tables for conjunction and disjunction.) This work also led to the devel-
opment of connectionist networks, often referred to as neural nets. Third, Wie-
ner’s work showed how systems could learn. While Turing’s original model did 
not address the question of how system rules could be modified, Wiener showed 
how we could incorporate feedback control into the model. This helps to account 
for learning. On Wiener’s model, learning occurs when an agent appropriately 
modifies its behavior in response to experience that is itself a consequence of 
prior behavior. Fourth, Shannon’s work helped us to understand what was meant 
by “information” in discussions of information processing. In particular, Shannon 
showed that the statistical or probabilistic structure inherent in communication 
elucidates and indeed quantifies the notion of information.
The final element of the conceptual package did not emerge until David Marr’s 
work in the 1980s. Marr was a vision scientist, but his approach to explanation 
helped to unify cognitive science research across its many disciplines. In particu-
lar, Marr identified three different kinds of questions we need to answer in order 
to explain the workings of an information-processing system. The first question 
concerns computation: What is the problem that the system needs to solve? The 
second question concerns algorithm: What sorts of representations and rules are 
utilized in solving the problem? And the third question concerns implementa-
tion: In what physical mechanisms are these representations (and the processes in 
which they are involved) realized?
Figdor’s chapter concludes by noting that “the basic conceptual package for 
explaining agency will soon be fully elaborated in outline if not in its empirical 
details,” and she predicts that, with respect to cognitive science, the 21st century 
will likely be the century of the social, i.e., it will involve intense study of social 
cognition. In the final chapter of the book, Susan Schneider and Pete Mandik 
directly take up the question of what lies ahead in the 21st century. Their discus-
sion begins with findings from the artificial intelligence community that strongly 
suggests that sophisticated artificial intelligence will be here by 2070, if not ear-
lier. This looming development suggests that philosophy of mind will have a very 
important role to play in the decades ahead. Though discussing this role requires 
Schneider and Mandik to make some predictions, their chapter is better viewed 
as prescriptive than as predictive, as their primary concern is to suggest ways that 
philosophy of mind can positively impact the future that lies before us.
Consider, for example, the fact that a dizzying array of neural enhancements will 
likely soon be widely available. Philosophical work on the extended mind – and 
here recall Farkas’ discussion in Chapter 10 – can help us to better understand and 
navigate these emerging technologies. Or consider the fact that one may soon be 
able to upload one’s consciousness and thereby in some way “migrate” to a cloud-
based existence. In this context, Johansson’s discussion of the problem of personal 

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  V O L U M E  6
19
identity in Chapter 6 becomes particularly relevant: Would such a migration con-
stitute survival? Here again, Schneider and Mandik suggest ways that philosophy 
of mind can help people of the late 21st century make sense of the decisions with 
which they will be confronted. Finally, consider also the challenges that lie ahead as 
we confront the possibility of AI consciousness. Analogous to what’s often referred 
to as the hard problem of consciousness (see Crane’s discussion in Chapter 3) is 
the hard problem of AI consciousness, a problem that concerns how we determine 
whether there is something that it is like to be an AI system. Do such systems really 
feel pain when they are damaged? Can they experience suffering? The need to make 
progress on such questions seems particularly pressing when we recognize the ethi-
cal obligations we have to creatures that have the capacity to suffer.
In a sense, Schneider and Mandik’s chapter – a chapter that concludes not only 
this volume but also all six volumes of this series on philosophy of mind – serves 
as a vindication of the discipline itself. As they convincingly argue, the problems 
that lie ahead are problems that philosophy of mind is distinctively qualified to 
address. While scientists and artificial intelligence researchers will develop the 
coming technologies, philosophers of mind will be needed to help understand and 
assess the implications such technologies present. In doing so, future philosophers 
will have a very long and fruitful history upon which to draw.
Notes
1	 	These findings would later be corroborated in the 20th century; see Damasio et al. (1994).
2	 	For a useful survey of the advances made in neural imaging techniques in the second half 
of the 20th century, see Savoy (2001). In particular, this article provides a helpful and 
relatively accessible overview of techniques such as PET, MRI, and fMRI.
3	 They take the publication of Patricia Churchland’s Neurophilosophy (1986) to be the 
turning point.
4	 Alternatively, one might see philosophers’ use of “c-fiber” as explicitly serving a place-
holder function. See the discussion in Chapter 2.
5	 As of this writing in 2016, Google scholar lists this paper as having been cited more 
than 8400 times. (For comparison, J.J.C. Smart’s influential paper “Sensations and Brain 
Processes,” published in Philosophical Review in 1959, is listed as having been cited just 
over 1300 times.)
6	 All four of these elements of Turing’s work are discussed in the papers collected in Mil-
lican and Clark (1996).
7	 Indeed, programs like Siri are referred to as “intelligent personal assistants.”
8	 It’s worth noting that, having made this assessment, Whitby goes on to argue that focus on 
the Turing test eventually became a distraction from other promising avenues of AI research.
9	 Wittgenstein (1967; 1980) explicitly addressed the notion of Turing machines.
Bibliography
Anderson, Alan (ed.). (1964). Minds and Machines. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bickle, John, Mandik, Peter and Landreth, Anthony. (2012). “The Philosophy of Neurosci-
ence,” in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 
2012 Edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2012/entries/neuroscience/.

A m y  K i n d
20
Churchland, Patricia (1986). Neurophilosophy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Damasio, Hanna, et al. (1994) “The Return of Phineas Gage: Clues About the Brain from 
the Skull of a Famous Patient,” Science, 264: 1102–1105.
Floridi, Luciano (2012) “Turing’s Three Philosophical Lessons and the Philosophy of Infor-
mation,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Aristotelian Society, 370: 3536–3542.
French, Robert (1990). “Subcognition and the Limits of the Turing Test,” Mind, 99: 53–65.
Millican, P.J.R., and Clark, A. (eds.). (1996). Machines and Thought: The Legacy of Alan 
Turing, vol. I. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Nagel, Thomas (1971) “Brain Bisection and the Unity of Consciousness,” Synthese, 22: 
396–413.
Raichle, Marcus (2008). “A Brief History of Human Brain Mapping,” Trends in Neuro-
sciences, 32(2): 118–126.
Savoy, Robert L. (2001). “History and Future Directions of Human Brain Mapping and 
Functional Neuroimaging,” Acta Psychologica, 107: 9–42.
Searle, John (1980). “Minds, Brains, and Programs,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3: 
417–424.
Skinner, B.F. (1953). Science and Human Behavior. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
Skinner, B.F. (1974). About Behaviorism. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Skinner, B.F. (1987). “Behaviorism, Skinner On,” in Gregory, Richard L. (ed.), Oxford 
Companion to the Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Turing, A.M. (1950). “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind, 59: 433–460.
Watson, John B. (1913). “Psychology as the Behaviorist Views It,” Psychological Review, 
20: 158–177.
Whitby, Blay (1996). “The Turing Test: AI’s Biggest Blind Alley,” in Millican and Clark 
(eds.): 53–62.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1967). Zettel. Edited by G.E.M. Anscombe and G. H. von Wright. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1980) Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology, 2 vols. Edited by 
G.E.M Anscombe, G. H. von Wright, and H. Nyman. Oxford: Blackwell.

21
1.  Introduction
Contemporary phenomenology and philosophy of mind are vast areas of research. 
In the PhilPapers database, phenomenology has over 34,000 entries, and phi-
losophy of mind contains over 92,000 entries, distributed across consciousness, 
intentionality, perception, and metaphysics of mind, among others.1 The two areas 
come together at many points – think of two galaxies colliding. But the meta-
phor is not quite apt. They are not independent bodies of research that happen 
to overlap but are rather two phases of a continuous tradition that diverged for a 
time and are now, at least partially, reintegrating (the image of a diverging and re-
converging flock of starlings – a murmuration – comes to mind).
Philosophy of mind in the 20th century is typically understood in terms of a cer-
tain historical progression (cf. Chapter 2): after rejecting introspection as unreli-
able, the behaviorists of the 1930s–1950s sought to understand the mind strictly in 
terms of publicly available data. But behaviorism cannot account for certain inner 
feelings and states, so the identity theory emerged in the late 1950s as a viable 
physicalist alternative (Place 1956; Feigl 1958; Smart 1959). The identity theory 
posits a strict, reductive identity between brain states and mental states. However, 
the one-to-one link between psychological terms and corresponding physical 
terms was problematic, since terms like “pain” seem to have a one-many rela-
tion to physical kinds (many types of system can feel pain). To address this issue, 
functionalists described mental states as states of a kind of finite state machine 
or probabilistic automaton, defined by a pattern of relationships between inputs, 
outputs, and other internal states (Fodor 1974; Putnam 1967). These systems have 
the attractive feature that they can be multiply realized in different physical sys-
tems. Thus, octopi and humans can be in pain. It is “non-reductive” physicalism 
because it does not posit a 1–1 identity relation between mental states and brain 
state types, but rather a many-one implementation relation (Stoljar 2015). Func-
tionalism continues to be a dominant theory of mind.
1
PHILOSOPHY OF MIND IN 
THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL 
TRADITION
Philip J. Walsh and Jeff Yoshimi

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
22
However, problems with functionalism – which were essentially phenomenologi-
cal problems – emerged beginning in the 1970s. Nagel (1974), and later Block (1980), 
Searle (1980), and Jackson (1982), pointed out that purely formal relations between 
states leave out the first-person, subjective character of consciousness. By the 1990s, 
consciousness had become a central topic in philosophy of mind (Searle 1992; Flana-
gan 1992; Chalmers 1996; also see Chapter 3 on 20th-century theories of conscious-
ness), and since then, more and more aspects of the mental are being addressed from 
a standpoint that does not try to reduce or analyze away consciousness.2
So contemporary philosophy of mind has rediscovered phenomenology, albeit in 
an (until recently) fairly impoverished form. Contemporary philosophers of mind 
often address “the phenomenology” of a particular form of experience by inquiring 
whether “there is something that it is like” to undergo it. The phrase is suggestive, 
but it has led to an austere phenomenology, an account of the “small mental resi-
due” that materialist theories leave unexplained (Kim 2010, 333). This narrow con-
ception of phenomenology has, however, been expanding. “Liberal” accounts of 
phenomenal character include emotional-affective, agentive, and cognitive experi-
ence (Bayne and Montague 2011). Intentionality has been pursued in an increas-
ingly phenomenological way (Horgan and Tienson 2002; Kriegel 2013). These and 
related projects come closer to phenomenology as historically conceived, which 
was extremely rich in terms of its method, scope, and conceptual apparatus.
In what follows, we use the term “phenomenology” in two senses. In one 
sense, “phenomenology” is a method – the study of consciousness using first-
person reflection. It studies the phenomenal character of mental states, or “what 
it is like” to experience them from the first-person perspective. In another sense, 
“phenomenology” is an explicit research program initiated by Edmund Husserl 
(1859–1938) and developed in different and sometimes inconsistent ways by 
Martin Heidegger (1889–1976), Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961), Simone 
de Beauvoir (1908–1986), and others.
In the next section, we give an overview of the phenomenological tradition. In 
section 3, we survey some of the many ways phenomenology overlaps philosophy of 
mind: they have shared historical origins in Brentano, Frege, and Husserl; there are 
numerous areas of thematic overlap; and there are also active collaborations, espe-
cially in the recent literature. In sections 4 and 5, we develop two case studies that 
show in more detail how phenomenology and philosophy mind can interact. In sec-
tion 4, we describe a detailed phenomenological approach to perceptual content, and 
in section 5 we outline Husserl’s phenomenological analysis of mind-body relations.
2.  Overview of phenomenology
Phenomenology is often defined as the study of consciousness, or sometimes, the 
study of phenomena, i.e. things as they appear as opposed to things as they really 
are. Although there are problems with this definition (Husserl and Heidegger 
would have quibbles with it), it is helpful as a first pass way of understanding 
what phenomenology is.

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
23
The first of the classical phenomenologists, Husserl, developed the following 
first-person reflective method. He begins with the phenomenological reduction 
(Husserl 2014, §32ff.). The idea is to focus on lived experience in the “natural 
attitude” of daily life, and to describe it as accurately as possible. To do this, take 
some episode of everyday life, put it in “brackets” (i.e. do not make any extrane-
ous assumptions about it, but simply treat it as a phenomenon to be studied) and 
describe it. Perhaps you are aware of a book page or a computer screen as you 
read these words, as well as pictures or people in the background. Perhaps you are 
aware of music playing, an itch in your body, or a lingering emotional state. You 
arguably have some sense of yourself and your body as separate from the things 
around you. You probably assume the things around you exist. Most of us are thus 
naïve realists in the natural attitude (in this way the method is supposed to differ 
from Descartes’; there is no active doubting, there is simply a description of what-
ever our epistemic attitude happens to be at a time).
Husserl dissected these conscious states into their various kinds of parts, using 
mereology, the study of parts and wholes, which he helped to develop (Varzi 
2015). For example, within the total field of consciousness he distinguishes inten-
tional experiences or “acts” of consciousness as entities that can be further ana-
lyzed (which, following his teacher Brentano, were an emphasis throughout his 
career; cf. Chapter 8 on Intentionality). Within intentional experiences of physical 
objects, Husserl distinguishes their sensory character from their more cognitive 
components (the way the cup looks vs. my knowledge that it is a cup, that it was 
given to me at Christmas last year, etc.). He also distinguishes one’s sense of an 
object as an external object, from one’s sense of herself as perceiving the object. 
Several of the distinctions that Husserl made in his careful mereological analyses 
of perceptual experience foreshadow contemporary debates about the metaphys-
ics and epistemology of perceptual experience. For example, Husserl claims that 
perceptual experience consists of non-intentional sensory stuff (which he referred 
to as hyle) in need of conceptual “interpretation” or “apprehension”, a topic that 
tracks several current debates (see section 4 below).
One of Husserl’s main innovations is his account of how the objects given in 
intentional experience are “constituted” in “webs of partial intentions”, charac-
terized by “motivation” relations and “horizon” structures (Husserl 2001a, §10; 
1989, §56).3 The idea is that my seeing a thing as being a certain way is founded 
on a pattern of counterfactual sensori-motor relationships between my current 
sensory experience and my immanent anticipations. As I turn the cup in my hands 
or move around it, my current sense of the front of the cup “motivates” a range 
of further perspectives (Walsh 2013). The totality of my motivated expectations 
forms a kind of “horizon” of understanding, which captures my overall sense of 
how I think the thing will look from different perspectives. When I move the cup, 
these motivated expectations will either be fulfilled or frustrated by what I actu-
ally do see. When expectations are frustrated, I update my horizon understanding 
of the cup. When I learn something about the cup this information is “sedimented” 
in to my understanding of it. These changes in how I see things are studied by 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
24
“genetic phenomenology.” In these and other ways, reality is “constituted” for a 
person in flowing streams of experience. The study of how different features of 
experienced reality are related to conscious processes is what Husserl calls “consti-
tutive phenomenology.” Much of Husserl’s vast output – 40,000 pages of research 
manuscripts – takes up questions relating to particular domains of constitutive 
phenomenology: the constitution of space, time, living beings, animals, other peo-
ple, social, worlds, cultural institutions, fictional worlds, abstract domains like 
mathematics, etc. In section 5, we consider one of these areas – Husserl’s account 
of the constitution of mind-body relations relative to our experiences of minds, 
bodies, and mind-body interactions – in relation to the contemporary metaphysics 
of mind.
Husserl makes a distinction between two general types of phenomenologi-
cal process (Yoshimi 2009). On the one hand, there is a level of passive or pre-
predicative constitution, which does not involve attention (hence “passive”) or 
language (hence “pre-predicative”). Simply by interacting with things, we get a 
sense of how they work. As we walk around a neighborhood, interact with a cat, 
or practice skiing, we become familiar with how the neighborhood is laid out, or 
how the cat or skis tend to behave. As surprises occur, we update our knowledge 
of these things: we change what we expect at a turn in the neighborhood, or how 
we expect the cat to respond to a new person. Husserl refers to this as a process of 
“passive genesis”, by which our intuitive, pre-attentive understanding of things is 
updated (Husserl 1969; 1973; 2001c). Whenever we see a thing, we tacitly bring 
all this implicitly acquired understanding to it, via what Husserl calls “passive 
synthesis”. When, by contrast, we start to talk about things, using the explicit con-
ceptual resources of a language, a second set of dynamics – which is active and 
predicative – becomes involved. Husserl describes in great detail how, in acts of 
comparing, contrasting, explicating, counting, relating, and so forth, we develop a 
more explicit, linguistically mediated sense of things. This cat is named Lily. She 
is a Balinese, and Balinese cats are known to be playful. These conceptual struc-
tures have their own horizon-structures, a kind of linguistic web of associations 
and patterns that further inform how we experience things. These two processes 
have been used to understand Husserl’s relation to social and embodied cognition 
(Walsh 2014), cognitive science (Yoshimi 2009), and perceptual content (Hopp 
2008, see section 4 below).
Husserl also describes essences or eide, which are invariant features of a class 
of objects constituted in experience. He does so using a variational method, which 
may have derived from the mathematical theory of calculus of variations (Vari-
ationsrechnung) he wrote his Ph.D. dissertation on (Yoshimi 2007). The idea is to 
take some object given in the field of experience, e.g. a perceived cup or passage 
of music, and then imagine arbitrary variations to it, while remaining in some 
larger region of being (e.g. physical things in general, sounds in general). The cup 
could be larger, a different color, etc., but still remain a physical thing. Features of 
the thing that remain constant through the variation are essences. Husserl says, for 
example, that it is an essence of perceived physical things that we never perceive 

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
25
them all at once: no matter how we alter the cup, we are always perceiving only 
one part of it. This is the essential “one-sidedness” of perception (Husserl 2014, 
12; see also Husserl 2014, §42). Essences impose necessary constraints on how 
the members of a given class of objects or processes must appear in conscious-
ness. Eidetic phenomenology studies these essences. Essences are known a priori 
and are necessarily true, according to Husserl. There are interesting questions 
about the viability of eidetic phenomenology (Kasmier 2010) and its relation to 
rationalism, conceptual analysis, and contemporary epistemology.4 In section 5, 
we consider Husserl’s eidetic analysis of the phenomenology of the mind-body 
problem, a kind of conceptual analysis of what is necessary, and what is left open, 
when one experiences minds in relation to bodies.
Husserl thought of phenomenology as an active, collaborative research program 
and not as a static doctrine. In Logical Investigations, he refers to the “zig-zag” 
(Zickzack) manner of phenomenological inquiry: “since the close interdepend-
ence of our various epistemological concepts leads us back again and again to our 
original analyses, where the new confirms the old, and the old the new” (Husserl 
2001b, 175). A testament to this ethos can be found in the way his students have 
carried on this discussion, developing Husserl’s ideas across a wide range of top-
ics. In the remainder of this section, we overview some of the major phenomeno-
logical figures after Husserl.
Heidegger began as Husserl’s assistant and envisioned protégé. He dedicated 
Being and Time to Husserl “with friendship and gratitude” (Husserl later added in 
marginal comments near this dedication: Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas; 
“Plato is a friend, but truth is a greater friend” Husserl 1997). Heidegger had a 
distinctive vision of phenomenology and was increasingly critical of Husserl as 
their professional relationship unfolded. He eventually broke with Husserl com-
pletely, joining the Nazi party and, as rector of Freiburg, ostracizing Husserl, and 
removing the dedication to Husserl from Being and Time.
Heidegger’s background and bearing are much different than Husserl’s. Where 
Husserl was a mathematician by training, Heidegger was trained in theology 
and history of philosophy. Where Husserl was sanguine about the prospects of 
a rational foundation for all knowledge by way of eidetic analysis of pure con-
sciousness, Heidegger came to distrust the very concept of consciousness, and 
the terms and categories of Western philosophy more generally. He advocated 
“destroying the history of ontology” (Heidegger 1962, 41), and developed a new 
vocabulary for describing human existence. Rather than referring to human beings 
or conscious agents, for example, he refers to “Dasein”, literally “there-being”, 
which he defines as that being whose “being is an issue for it”. Where Husserl 
emphasizes experiences of physical things like trees and ink blotters, Heidegger 
emphasizes what is meaningful in a person’s life, that “for the sake of which” a 
person lives. The cup is rarely perceived as such, but is rather a tool, ready-to-
hand, there “in-order-to” provide refreshment and energy while writing or reading 
papers, which is something one does “for the sake of” being an academic. These 
more existential dimensions of everyday experience are Heidegger’s emphasis in 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
26
phenomenology. Heidegger takes up all the classical phenomenological themes – 
space, time, things, language, other persons, etc. – but always with new language 
and emphases, and with fascinating results. Heidegger’s approach to phenom-
enology has been influential in philosophy of mind and cognitive science, espe-
cially via the work of Hubert Dreyfus and his students (Dreyfus and Hall 1982; 
Dreyfus 1992; Wrathall and Malpas 2000).
Some notable students of Husserl include Edith Stein and Aron Gurwitsch. 
Stein’s dissertation, On the Problem of Empathy (1916/1989), conducted under 
Husserl’s supervision, provides a concise analysis of a variety of phenomena 
related to contemporary discussions of social cognition and the problem of other 
minds (see, e.g., Stueber 2006; Goldman 2006). Further links between Husserl’s 
theory of meaning and the social world were taken up by Alfred Schutz, who 
integrated phenomenology with Max Weber’s sociology. Husserl praised Schutz’s 
The Phenomenology of the Social World (Schutz 1932/1967), which remains rel-
evant in contemporary discussions of collective intentionality and intersubjectiv-
ity (Gilbert 1989; Mathiesen 2005; Chelstrom 2013).
Aron Gurwitsch was a philosopher and psychologist who did early work con-
necting phenomenology with Gestalt psychology and clinical psycho-pathology. 
After World War I, he worked with brain-injured veterans at a special institute set 
up by the Prussian government (Embree 1972). He began meeting with Husserl 
in the late 1920s and early 1930s, and later became close friends with Schutz, 
with whom he carried on an extensive and illuminating correspondence (Grathoff 
1989). In the 1930s, he fled the Nazis to France, where he gave a series of lectures 
attended by Maurice Merleau-Ponty that may have influenced Merleau-Ponty’s 
way of interpreting psychological data (in particular, psycho-pathological cases) 
using phenomenology.5 He fled again to America in the 1940s, where he (along 
with others, like Schutz and Farber) helped establish phenomenology as a field 
of philosophical research (Kaelin and Schrag 1989). He is perhaps best known 
for his “field theory of consciousness”, which studies the overall organization of 
consciousness into different parts – including inner thoughts, bodily experiences, 
and a sense of some part of the physical world – and the way these parts change 
their organization in time. This theory has been applied to the study of bodily 
awareness (de Vignemont 2011), attention (Arvidson 2006), and cognitive science 
(Embree 2004).
One of the first figures to bring phenomenology to France was Emmanuel Levi-
nas. Levinas attended Husserl’s lectures in Freiburg in 1928–1929, around the 
same time Gurwitsch and Schutz began studying Husserl’s work. Levinas’ dis-
sertation (Levinas 1930/1995) was devoted to Husserl’s theory of intuition, and 
he subsequently translated Husserl’s lectures at the Sorbonne, Cartesian Medita-
tions, from German into French (Husserl 1931/1960). Levinas’ mature work on 
the ethical dimensions of experience stems from his critical engagement with Hus-
serl’s phenomenological analyses of empathy and intersubjectivity, and develops 
an account that emphasizes the experience of looking at another conscious being 
(human or animal) in the face. Although Levinas is not typically understood as 

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
27
doing philosophy of mind, his work can be understood as making phenomenolog-
ical contributions to topics in social cognition and moral psychology (Overgaard 
2007; Levin 1998; Atterton 2011).
It is said that Sartre was converted to phenomenology when Raymond Aron 
pointed at a cocktail and said, “You see, my dear fellow, if you were a phenom-
enologist, you could talk about this cocktail and make a philosophy out of it”, 
after which Sartre immediately went looking for a copy of Levinas’ book on Hus-
serl’s theory of intuition (Flynn 2014). Sartre went on to study Husserlian phe-
nomenology in Berlin in 1933–1934. His early works are primarily interpretations 
of Husserl, but he went on to develop a distinctive approach to phenomenology. 
His point of departure is the phenomenological analysis of self-awareness and the 
structure of subjectivity. In The Transcendence of the Ego (Sartre 1937/1991), 
Being and Nothingness (Sartre 1943/2003), and elsewhere, Sartre develops an 
account of subjectivity, or the “ego”, whereby the world-directed intentionality 
of experience necessarily includes a pre-reflexive form of self-awareness (D. W. 
Smith 1986). On Sartre’s account, the self is not defined by any fixed essence, but 
is rather a kind of “nihilating” force, which surges forward, transcending its own 
concrete circumstances and historical situations (its “facitity”) and creating values 
by its radically free acts. Sartre also develops an original account of human emo-
tions like shame, which on his account is a form of self-relation through which 
the self becomes aware of itself as an object, i.e. as something fixed and visible to 
others. Shame “is not a feeling of being this or that guilty object but in general of 
being an object” (Sartre 2003, 312; qtd. in Zahavi 2014).
Simone de Beauvoir studied philosophy alongside Sartre and Merleau-Ponty at 
the Sorbonne, and engaged in a life-long personal and philosophical parternship 
with Sartre. She contributed to a wide range of philosophical topics from a phe-
nomenological perspective. The Second Sex (Beauvoir 1949/2011) is perhaps the 
most richly interdisciplinary work of classical phenomenology. Rather than rely-
ing solely on phenomenological reflection, Beauvoir draws on literary, historical, 
biological, and psychological sources to elaborate what the actual lived experi-
ences of women have been at different times and places, and in different concrete 
circumstances. Going beyond Merleau-Ponty’s brief analysis of sexuality in Phe-
nomenology of Perception, Beauvoir connects phenomena such as menstruation 
and pregnancy to the intersubjective manner in which one’s subjectivity is shaped 
by the norms and expectations of others (Murphy 2009). It has been argued that 
her main interest in the book is phenomenological: “Instead of putting forward a 
sociohistorical theory or a liberalist thesis, Beauvoir presents a phenomenological 
description. The phenomenon that she describes is the reality named woman, and 
her aim is to analyze the meanings involved in this reality” (Heinämaa 1999, 115).
Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception (1945/2013) has been increas-
ingly influential in recent philosophy of mind.6 Developing a complex dialectic 
between rationalism and empiricism, judgment and sensation, Merleau-Ponty 
weaves together concepts from Husserl, Heidegger, and empirical psychology 
(among other sources) to develop an account of the essentially bodily nature of 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
28
perception and of intentionality in general. For Merleau-Ponty, what is fundamen-
tal in experience is not the patterns of sensation emphasized by empiricists, or the 
abstract rules emphasized by rationalists, or the behavioral tendencies empha-
sized by psychologists, but rather the concrete situation a person or organism finds 
itself in, which is structured around its bodily existence and what is significant 
in a situation. Merleau-Ponty is notable for his detailed examination of clinical 
cases, for example Schneider, a patient with visual agnosia (a case which Gur-
witsch first described to Merleau-Ponty on the basis of his work at the Prussian 
institute). Schneider could do concrete things like swatting away a mosquito or 
grabbing his nose, but could not identify abstract locations on his body. He was 
no longer sexually stimulated by direct bodily contact, but was aroused by sugges-
tions of an intimate situation. These cases highlight the fundamental importance 
of our embodied existence in a meaningful world, where whole situations matter 
far more than discrete locations or explicit rules.
Husserl’s influence on 20th-century philosophy extends even further than this. 
Theodor Adorno (1956/1982), Jacques Derrida (1967/2011), and Paul Ricouer 
(Ricoeur 1967/2007) – central figures in contemporary continental philosophy – 
devoted their earliest monographs to extending and critiquing Husserl’s ideas. 
Husserl’s understanding of mind and consciousness, whether sympathetically 
elaborated upon or critically deconstructed, has thereby formed the basis of a 
great deal of 20th-century philosophy.
3.  Phenomenology in relation to philosophy of mind
The phenomenological tradition is related to the philosophy of mind in several 
broad ways, which we survey here.7 First, we describe their shared historical origins 
in late 19th-century thought, and some of the surprising ways this shared history 
continued in to the 20th-century. Second, we describe a few philosophical areas 
(e.g. mereology, the study of parts and wholes) that have phenomenological origins 
and that are today used by philosophers of mind. Third, we survey the many areas of 
thematic overlap between phenomenology and contemporary philosophy of mind.
Phenomenology and philosophy of mind have a shared history. Philosophy of 
mind is generally considered to be part of analytic philosophy, and analytic philoso-
phy originated in the same milieu as phenomenology, an “Anglo-Austrian tradition” 
(Dummett 1993, 2) encompassing Bolzano, Brentano, Frege, Husserl, and others. 
Husserl’s early work is distinctively analytic in its tone and content. Husserl makes 
fine-grained distinctions, resolves equivocations, and engages in the same issues of 
logic, language, and meaning as other early analytic philosophers. He was in close 
dialogue with Frege and his ideas were familiar to Russell and Wittgenstein.8
Phenomenology continued to be interwoven with analytic philosophy during 
the period of logical positivism and the Vienna school (D. W. Smith 2013; Roll-
inger 1999; Livingston 2002). Carnap took seminars with Husserl at Freiburg, 
and his foundational program was rooted in phenomenological considerations, 
an effort to derive all knowledge claims from an analysis of “the given” (the 

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
29
Aufbau refers several times to Husserl in this connection). Husserl has been called 
“Carnap’s unknown master” (Haddock 2008). The verificationist idea that state-
ments are meaningful only if they can be verified in immediate experience also 
has obvious affinities to phenomenology, since verification chains are themselves 
phenomenological constructs (D. W. Smith and McIntyre 1982; Lübcke 1999).9
There were also premonitions of the analytic/continental split in this period. 
Carnap (1931) famously critiqued Heidegger’s account of the “nothing” as a para-
digm example of nonsense (interestingly, Carnap probably inherited his concept 
of nonsense from Husserl; Bar-Hillel 1957; Vrahimis 2013). Schlick vigorously 
disputed Husserl’s idea that non-sensory intuition of essences is possible (Living-
ston 2002). Later, as behaviorism – the view that internal mental states don’t exist 
or aren’t amenable to observation – took hold first among psychologists and then 
analytic philosophers like Wittgenstein and Ryle, all mention of private conscious 
states became suspect; “the air was laced with a certain suspicion of ‘inner’ men-
tal states behind behavior and speech” (D. W. Smith and Thomasson 2005, 2). 
Overt references to consciousness – or worse, transcendental subjectivity – were 
clearly out of the question by the middle of the 20th century – as was the dense, 
opaque style of prose associated with Heidegger and his followers.
Nonetheless, leading figures in early philosophy of mind, even in this period, 
maintained an interest in phenomenology.10 Ryle went to Freiburg to meet Husserl 
and study with Heidegger (Thomasson 2002, 116), and then began his career at 
Oxford teaching phenomenology and related ideas. His first two publications were 
reviews of phenomenological texts. Over the course of his career Ryle wrote six 
papers “focused entirely on the phenomenological tradition” (Thomasson 2002, 
116). Ryle’s conception of the scope and method of philosophy is, Thomasson 
argues, due in large part to Brentano’s and Husserl’s influence. All three sharply 
distinguished the methods of empirical science (and psychology in particular) 
from the methods of philosophy. All three thought of philosophy as a distinc-
tive form of inquiry, that should proceed independently of experimental results 
or inductive generalizations. Ryle’s specific approach to conceptual analysis was 
influenced by Husserl. In the Logical Investigations Husserl described a method 
for identifying categories of meaning by asking which terms could be substituted 
in to a sentence without producing some form of nonsense. Ryle’s concept of a 
category mistake seems to have been a direct application and broadening of this 
type of “nonsense detection” (more on this connection shortly), as do his efforts in 
The Concept of Mind to examine the logical relationships between different types 
of mental concepts (he himself described the book as “a sustained essay in phe-
nomenology”; Thomasson, 122). Ryle was also influenced by Heidegger. Ryle’s 
critique of Cartesianism and associated talk of “inner” mental states is clearly 
resonant with Heidegger, as is Ryle’s method of ordinary language philosophy, 
which emphasizes everyday practice over theoretical reflection. Based on these 
and other observations, Thomasson concludes that “the very idea of analytic phi-
losophy and its proper role” (123) and “some of its characteristic methods” (134) 
owe more to phenomenology than is generally acknowledged.

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
30
Sellars was also trained in phenomenology. While pursuing his MA at SUNY 
Buffalo, Sellars met Marvin Farber, a student of Husserl’s who was one of the pri-
mary people to bring phenomenology to America (Kaelin and Schrag 1989). Sell-
ars would later say, “For longer than I care to remember I have seen philosophical 
analysis (and synthesis) as akin to phenomenology (Thomasson 2002, 123). Sell-
ars defended a kind of “outer observation” account of appearance-talk, which 
may have been influenced by Husserl’s method of phenomenological reduction. 
On this account, appearance-talk is parasitic on world-talk: “the concept of look-
ing green, the ability to recognize that something looks green, presupposes the 
concept of being green” (Sellars, quoted in Thomasson 2005, 120). Compare Hus-
serl’s method of phenomenological reduction, which, as we saw, begins with the 
naïve realism of everyday life. In everyday life, we simply assume that things are 
certain ways. Husserl and Sellars both note that it is only by a complex and deriva-
tive procedure (e.g., coming to doubt our ability to judge colors in different light-
ing conditions) that we come to think of things in terms of their “appearances” 
(we return to these issues in section 4).
One general source of Husserl’s influence on 20th-century philosophy of 
mind – already noted in the discussion of Ryle – is his work on “pure grammar” 
in the fourth logical investigation. Husserl distinguishes word sequences that are 
formally ungrammatical (e.g. “a man and is”) with word sequences that are gram-
matical but describe impossible situations (e.g. “round square” or “wooden iron”). 
The former are nonsense or Unsinn; the latter are countersense or Widersinn. 
Husserl’s grammatical analyses influenced Ryle, Carnap, and, perhaps indirectly, 
Chomsky. As we saw, there is evidence that Carnap’s concept of nonsense derived 
from Husserl (Vrahimis 2013), and it has also been suggested that Logical Syn-
tax of Language was written under Husserl’s influence (Bar-Hillel 1957). Ryle’s 
account of category mistakes – cases where one category is mixed with another 
incompatible one – can plausibly be viewed as a refinement of Husserl’s account 
of countersense (Thomasson 2002). Husserl’s account of pure grammar is in sev-
eral ways similar to Chomsky’s linguistic theory (Edie 1977).11
Beyond these historical interconnections, phenomenology is related to phi-
losophy of mind via concepts and tools that now have independent philosophical 
interest. Examples include formal ontology (the study of the basic categories of 
being – object, property, fact, etc. – and their inter-relations; B. Smith 1998), 
mereology (the study of parts and wholes; Varzi 2015; Simons 1987), facts 
(Mulligan and Correia 2013), and ontological dependence (Correia 2008). All 
of these originate in part in Husserl (each has other sources as well), and have 
become a standard part of the philosopher’s metaphysical toolkit. These tools 
have been applied in various ways to philosophy of mind. Mereology is rel-
evant to the question of how unified mental states can be parsed in to distinct 
“experiential parts” (Brook and Raymont 2014). Ontological dependence and 
formal ontology have been deployed in the literature on mental-physical rela-
tions like supervenience, dependence, and grounding (Yoshimi 2010; Correia 
and Schnieder 2012).

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
31
Finally, and for our purposes most importantly, there are many areas of direct 
thematic overlap between phenomenology and philosophy of mind. In these 
cases, we find both the explicit application of insights from the phenomenological 
tradition to philosophy of mind, as well as more implicit traces of phenomenol-
ogy (both as tradition and method) in pursuit of contemporary topics. Examples 
include the structure of intentionality (D. W. Smith and McIntyre 1982; McIntyre 
1986; Dreyfus and Hall 1982; Kriegel 2011; Strawson 1994; Crane 1998); the 
twin-earth thought experiment and semantic externalism (Beyer 2013; Føllesdal 
2018); Davidson’s anomalous monism (D. W. Smith 1995; Zhok 2011); the over-
lap between Husserl and John Searle’s philosophy of language, mind, and the 
social world (what some have called the “Searle in Husserl”);12 functionalism and 
artificial intelligence;13 first-person knowledge (Thomasson 2005), supervenience 
and metaphysics of mind (Yoshimi 2010); one-order and higher-order theories 
of consciousness (Kriegel 2009; Kriegel and Williford 2006); representational 
theories of mind (McIntyre 1986; Shim 2011); and non-conceptual content (Hopp 
2010; Barber 2008; Dahlstrom 2007).
In some areas, phenomenology and philosophy of mind are actively collab-
orating, as in discussions of self and structure of self-awareness (D. W. Smith 
1986; Kriegel 2009; Strawson 2009; Zahavi 2005; Siewert 2013), the study of 
social cognition, the problem of other minds, empathy, and collective intention-
ality (Schutz and Natanson 1970; Overgaard 2007; Gallagher and Zahavi 2007; 
Carr 1986; Mathiesen 2005; Schmid 2003; Zahavi 2014), embodied, enactive, and 
situated approaches to cognition (Gallagher 2005; Noë 2004; Thompson 2007; 
Hurley 1998; Rowlands 2010; ch. 10 on Boundaries of the mind in this volume), 
time-consciousness (Dainton 2000), bodily awareness (de Vignemont 2011), 
whether non-sensory purely “cognitive phenomenology” exists (Siewert 1998; 
Strawson 1994; Pitt 2004; Bayne and Montague 2011; Smithies 2013; Chudnoff 
2015; Breyer and Gutland 2016), and in debates in the philosophy of perception 
about disjunctivism, representationalism, and direct realism (A. D. Smith 2008; 
Hopp 2011; Overgaard 2013).
We now consider two specific cases to further illustrate how phenomenology 
and philosophy of mind interact.
4.  Perceptual content
Suppose you enter a room with a round black dining table in the center. As you 
approach the table, you are looking down at it from an oblique angle. Sunlight 
streams through an open window, creating variegated shades and tones across the 
surface of the table. What do you see? Or, to put the question differently, what is 
the content or your perceptual experience? On one hand, answering this question 
is straightforward: you see a table. On the other hand, it provokes further ques-
tions regarding how, precisely, one is aware of the table. For example, does the 
table look round? Or, given the angle of your perspective, does it appear ellipti-
cal? Do you see it as being a uniform shade of black? Or are you unaware of the 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
32
blackness, since the sunlight presents the table as a variegated set of shades and 
tones? What is the relationship between what is phenomenally manifest in the 
experience and what the experience represents as being the case? These questions 
about content, representation, and phenomenal character are at the center of sev-
eral live debates in contemporary philosophy of mind (cf. Orlandi, Chapter 4 of 
this volume). Relative to these debates, we believe that Husserl developed a fairly 
rich view, whereby perceptual experience is built up from multiple non-conceptual  
and conceptual layers or strata. In what follows we distinguish four layers of 
perceptual experience: (1) what is intuitively given or “sensorily manifest” in 
the experience; (2) an “immanent horizon” of felt associations; (3) a “counter-
factual horizon” of ways we expect an object to be relative to different move-
ments with respect to it; and (4) a linguistically/conceptually mediated stratum of 
“active” and “predicative” understandings of things. As we will see, these strata 
play different representational roles and are more or less phenomenally prominent 
in experience. We will also see that (1)–(4) involve different types of conceptual 
and non-conceptual content: (1) and (2) are “linguistically non-conceptual” and 
also “discriminatively non-conceptual”. (3) is linguistically non-conceptual but 
discriminatively conceptual. And (4) is both linguistically and discriminatively 
conceptual.
On Husserl’s account, objects dominate experience. We live through percep-
tions, but experience things (recall his emphasis on constitutive phenomenology, 
on how the objects that appear to us are constituted in experiential processes). 
This emphasis on objects is sometimes referred to as the “transparency” of con-
sciousness (Kind 2010). As Lycan puts it, “We normally ‘see right through’ per-
ceptual states to external objects and do not even notice that we are in perceptual 
states” (Lycan 2014, sec. 3.3; see also Harman 1990; Tye 1995; 2000).
For Husserl, as for many contemporary authors, this object-centered feature of 
experience can be described in terms of perceptual content. Husserl describes the 
content of an act as that part of it which “prescribes – represents or presents – the 
object of my perception” (D. W. Smith 2007, 208); it “specifies the object of per-
ception” (D. W. Smith 2007, 209). This object-prescribing content is distinct from 
the full experiential act that contains it, whose overall phenomenology seems to 
outstrip the object-prescribing content, as we will see. The content is also distinct 
from the actual object it refers to.14 As Husserl said as early as the Investigations:
We must distinguish . . . between the object as it is intended [the inten-
tional object] . . . and the object which is intended [the actual object]. In 
each act an object is presented as determined in this or that manner.
(Husserl 2001a, 113)
Although objects dominate experience, for Husserl, perceptual phenomenology 
includes an implicit sense of our embodied relation to the world (this is related to 
Husserl’s phenomenology of the mind-body problem; more in section 5). We see 
the pattern of shading on the table, and know that it is the result of light playing 

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
33
off the table. Even with no scientific knowledge, we have an implicit understand-
ing of how light works and how it interacts with things. The variegated shades 
(what Husserl calls “intuitive content”) are sensorily manifest. In a similar way, 
we understand that as the car moves in the distance it gets smaller in our visual 
field, because of how objects interact with our eyes. These features of perception 
are not what we initially focus on, but on reflection we can in some sense identify 
that the table was “viewed as” elliptical, and as being colored in different shades 
due to lighting conditions.15
Within this sensorily manifest intuitive content, Husserl distinguishes non-
intentional sensations or what he later calls “hyle”, from an interpretive element 
that “animates” them.16 He makes this distinction using a variational method.17 
The contribution made by the interpretive part of perception can be varied inde-
pendently of what is sensorily manifest, and vice versa. Thus, on the one hand, 
different patterns of sensation can yield the same perceptual sense you have of the 
table. As the lighting changes slightly, the same table appears. On the other hand, 
the sensory contents can remain the same as perceptual contents vary. For this 
case, Husserl describes the interpretive shift that occurs when perceiving a figure 
in a wax museum initially as another person, and then as a wax figure or man-
nequin (Husserl 2001a, Inv. 5, Sec. 27). The part that is different between these 
experiences – the part that exceeds their sensory character – is the “interpreta-
tion”, “act character”, or “apprehensional character” of the perceptual act.
Husserl associates this apprehensional character with several additional layers 
of structure in the perceptual act, which are in various ways conceptual and non-
conceptual. To make these connections between Husserl’s account of perceptual 
content and conceptual structures, we distinguish two senses of “conceptual”. In 
one sense, concepts are the constituents of propositional contents – the stuff of 
language and thought. If one thinks that the table is black, one does so in virtue 
of the concepts “table” and “black”. We will call these “linguistically structured 
concepts”. In another sense, a concept is a kind of discriminative ability avail-
able to non-linguistic animals. Insofar as an animal can differentially respond to 
humans vs. non-human objects, or to perishable vs. unperishable food sources, 
animals have concepts in this sense (Margolis and Laurence 2011). We will call 
these “discriminative concepts”. Notice that both types of concept allow for a 
kind of detachment from the intuitively given object. One can think about the 
black table using the words “black” and “table” and thus be intentionally related 
to a black table, without seeing any tables. Arguably an animal could imagine one 
of those things (i.e. a table, a human, or a piece of food), absent any actual table, 
human or food, and thereby be non-intuitively related to something.
Husserl describes several structures that are non-conceptual relative to both 
of these senses of “conceptual”. First, the sensorily manifest intuitive content of 
the act – i.e. how the object appears to sensory experience – is non-conceptual 
in a classical sense. The table is presented as having a very specific shape and 
color (not the pattern of light on it, but what we take to be the actual color and 
shape of the given table, e.g., the precise pattern of knots and grains visible in the 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
34
wood beneath the paint). This detail far exceeds what the linguistically structured 
concept “black table” prescribes. When we think “black table” we are thinking 
at a level of generality that, on Husserl’s account, is consistent with many differ-
ent intuitive contents, many different ways an actual table could be given (Hopp 
2010). The sensorily manifest also seems to be discriminatively non-conceptual, 
insofar as a perceiver would not be able to reliably discriminate between each 
subtle variation in the pattern of shading of the table.
Second, there is a kind of penumbra of felt associations between the current 
object and other profiles of the object, and other features of the object – an “imma-
nent horizon”. This is the level of passively synthesized motivations, which 
develop via passive genesis (cf. section 2). This penumbra of motivations is phe-
nomenally manifest – according to Husserl – and contributes to how we take the 
object to be, but also exceeds what can be given in any kind of conceptualized 
experience. The motivation relations that comprise this stratum of experience are 
developed in Husserl’s early analyses in the Logical Investigations, and later in 
his lectures on Active and Passive Synthesis (Husserl 2001c). He describes them 
as a kind of experienced indication relation, a species of association (Walsh 2013). 
He is explicit, however, that this is not to be understood in terms of Hume’s dis-
cussion of discrete impressions causally “triggering” subsequent impressions. 
Rather,
If A summons B into consciousness, we are not merely simultaneously 
or successively conscious of both A and B, but we usually feel their con-
nection forcing itself upon us, a connection in which the one points to the 
other and seems to belong to it.
(Husserl 2001b, 187)
The phenomenal character of “felt-belonging” connects the phenomenal features 
of a momentary perceptual profile of a table to those subsequent profiles that are 
most imminent in the temporal flow of experience, i.e. what he calls “adumbra-
tions” or “protentions”.18 As with intuitive content, the penumbra does not rely 
on linguistically-structured concepts. A dog need not have any concept of a table 
in order to experience this kind of felt penumbra of associations. So the imma-
nent horizon is linguistically non-conceptual (whether it is discriminatively non- 
conceptual is less clear; we will not take up the issue further here).
A next level of structure is the level of counterfactual horizon structure 
(cf. section 2), which further unpacks what apprehensional character is, e.g. what 
changes when we go from seeing an object as a mannequin to seeing it as a 
human. The horizon of an experience of a thing is the set of further possible 
experiences of that thing, which extends “in infinitely many directions in a sys-
tematically and firmly rule-governed manner, and . . . in each direction without 
end” (Husserl 2014, 78). That is, our overall understanding of a thing can be 
understood in terms of rule-governed patterns connecting how we interact with a 
thing with how we expect it to respond. When you see the figure first as a human, 

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
35
then as a mannequin, this shift in representational content can be explicated by 
analyzing the way the horizon of the experience changes. If I see a mannequin, 
I expect it not to move, to have a specific feel when I touch it. If I see a human, 
I expect the skin to give, and be warmer. I expect a living person to move and 
notice me. These expectations extend “in infinitely many directions” and “with-
out end” and can thus be thought of as systems of counterfactuals describing 
chains of possible interactions and expected experiences (D. W. Smith and McI-
ntyre 1982; Yoshimi 2009).
Counterfactual horizon structures are linguistically non-conceptual, but dis-
criminatively conceptual. Horizon structure does not require that we have linguis-
tic concepts: pre-linguistic animals and children have a sense of how things will 
behave relative to our movements and interactions. So horizons are in that sense 
non-conceptual (cf. Hopp 2010). However, horizons are conceptual insofar as 
concepts are discriminative structures. A dog can approach what it takes to be a 
real person in the store, and have a specific set of expectations as a result. When it 
begins to suspect it is not a real person, and just an inanimate object, it will acti-
vate a different set of expectations and thereby behave differently. These features 
of experience are clearly part of the content of an act – the full accuracy condi-
tions for an act must specify how we expect it to be – but are not phenomenally 
present in the same way intuitive contents and the penumbra of motivations are. 
So we have a subtle layer of meaning: a further layer of content that is in one sense 
conceptual, in another sense non-conceptual. This layer is important for analyzing 
the representational content of experience in that it is essential for understanding 
the relation between what is phenomenally manifest in the experience and one’s 
dispositions. It is not, however, part of the occurrent phenomenal character of the 
experience in the same manner as the intuitively given content and the immanent 
horizon of motivations. This horizon of expectations is far too detailed (it says 
what will be surprising or not relative to all possible movements with respect to an 
object) to plausibly be included in the phenomenology of an experience.
Finally, Husserl describes a layer of structure which is explicitly conceptual in 
the linguistic sense. This is the layer of predicative structures where we talk and 
think about things; we compare them, explicate their properties, relate them to 
other things, read about them, and so forth (cf. section 2). We learn about the his-
tory of mannequins; we compare mannequins in terms of their weight, age, and 
cost; we talk to someone who worked with mannequins in a warehouse. In these 
ways, we create layers or “sediments” of linguistic conceptual structure on top 
of the pre-given object, which is already endowed with the more passive motiva-
tional and horizon structures described above. Whereas many animals may possess 
the nonlinguistic discriminative concepts described above, it is plausible that only 
human perceptual experience includes this kind of explicitly conceptual stratum. It 
is in virtue of the former that both the dog and I share a basic horizon of expecta-
tion regarding how the mannequin might look or move, and in virtue of the latter 
that I, and not the dog, experience the mannequin as a cultural object of a specific 
kind. These sedimented predicative structures have their own kind of horizons and 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
36
motivation relations, e.g. the “arithmetical horizon” (Husserl 2014, sec. 28), the 
space of possible thoughts about numbers and transitions between these thoughts. 
Thus Husserl acknowledges – and in our view, expands on – the considerations 
that drive conceptualism (McDowell 1994; Brewer 1999), i.e. that what is given in 
perception must be able to connect in an appropriate way with the space of reasons, 
the logical space of language and thought.
Husserl’s account of perceptual content overlaps with contemporary discus-
sions in philosophy of mind in several ways beyond those already mentioned. His 
idea that perceptual content prescribes an object resonates with contemporary dis-
cussions of representational content in terms of “accuracy conditions.” For Hus-
serl, perceptual content “prescribes” an object in that it conveys how the object is 
– i.e. what properties the object instantiates, and how it will behave relative to our 
interactions with it – rather than simply presenting us with how the object appears 
(from here, in this light, etc.). This view of content is akin to Siegel’s (2010) “con-
tent view”, whereby perceptual content is not like the contents of a bucket, but 
rather like the contents of a newspaper – the information conveyed by the experi-
ence (Siegel 2015). As we have seen with his analysis of the hyletic component 
of perceptual act, however, Husserl does not think that the phenomenal character 
of experience is fully determined by its representational content. As Shim (2011) 
argues, this puts Husserl at odds with “representationalist” or “intentionalist” 
views (Harman 1990; Dretske 1995; Tye 1995; 2000; Byrne 2001).
Husserl’s analysis of (in contemporary terms) perceptual content was also taken 
up and extended in interesting ways by Merleau-Ponty. Merleau-Ponty under-
stood his project in Phenomenology of Perception as a continuation of Husserl’s 
work. He was among the first to visit the Husserl archives in Leuven the year they 
opened (Vongehr 2007). At the archives, he may have been the first person (out-
side of Husserl’s personal circle) to see Ideas II, where Husserl’s sensori-motor 
account is worked out in detail.19 Merleau-Ponty explains pre-predicative (i.e. 
linguistically non-conceptual) sense by appealing to the way perceptual experi-
ence is intertwined with our bodily form. He thereby expands on Husserl’s hori-
zon level of analysis, describing systematic correlations between what is visually 
given and our ongoing proprioceptive and kinesthetic sense of our bodies. Unlike 
Husserl (on some readings), Merleau-Ponty locates content in a kind of perceptual 
norm or optimum (cf. Dreyfus 2002; Crowell 2013, ch. 6; Kelly 2005). When you 
see the table from an oblique angle and it appears elliptical to you, the content 
of your perception represents it as being round since it would appear round from 
an optimal view (directly overhead). The normativity of this perceptual optimum 
is established by facts about how our bodies are structured and how our percep-
tual systems operate in relation to the world, and not necessarily by anything 
consciously accessible to us in the phenomenological reduction. This emphasis 
on sensori-motor contingencies is central to the enactivist account of perception 
(Noë 2004; O’Regan 2001; Hurley 1998), a thriving area of contemporary phi-
losophy of mind and cognitive science (cf. the references in section 3).

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
37
5.  The phenomenology of the mind-body problem
Whereas the issue of perceptual content in relation to phenomenology has been 
explored in some depth already, there is a largely unexplored area of overlap between 
phenomenology and the mind-body problem, which we briefly describe here.
In texts written around 1910, Husserl develops what can be called a “phenom-
enology of the mind-body problem” or more generally, a “phenomenology of the 
metaphysics of mind”. Rather than directly asking what mental states and physical 
states are, and how they are related, he asks how people experience mental states, 
physical states, and their relationship (Yoshimi 2010).20 That is, he considers how 
mental states, physical states, and mental-physical relationships are themselves 
constituted in the flux of experience. Husserl’s phenomenology of the mind-body 
problem does not decide the philosophical issues, but rather sheds light on the 
space of possibilities available for philosophical consideration. Thus, Husserl’s 
phenomenology can be viewed as a kind of transcendental or eidetic analysis of 
the mind-body problem, a framework within which any analysis of mind-body 
relations must unfold (recall that essences or eide are necessary constraints on the 
appearance of a given class of objects or processes). On Husserl’s eidetic analysis, 
one can’t have a position on the mind-body problem except relative to some prior 
experience of mind-body relations. Experiences of mind, body, and their relation 
are constrained by certain essential structures. Eidetic phenomenology lays out 
what these constraints are. Empirical considerations can further restrict the space 
of possible theories of mind and brain.21 Again, this does not decide the philo-
sophical issues, but rather helps delineate what the space of possible philosophical 
positions on the mind-body problem is for creatures like us.
We will begin by describing Husserl’s analysis of how sensory states are expe-
rienced as supervening on brain states. His analysis is quite similar to standard 
physicalist accounts of mental states. However, unlike physicalists, Husserl does 
not believe that all mental phenomena are experienced as supervening on physical 
states. His view can be thought of as involving a kind of “partial-supervenience”. 
We end by considering the range of positions on the mind body problem left open 
by Husserl’s eidetic analysis.
According to Husserl, we experience sensations as arising from physical pro-
cesses.22 He calls this an “experience of psycho-physical conditionality” (Husserl 
1989, 78) or “physiological dependences” (physiologische Abhängigkeiten; 143). 
For example, we know that running an object over the surface of the skin pro-
duces a determinate succession of sensings, which can be repeated: “If an object 
moves mechanically over the surface of my skin, touching it, then I obviously 
have a succession of sensings ordered in a determinate way” (161–162). He calls 
this a “phenomenal if-then”. If the body is put in a certain state, then certain phe-
nomenal states will arise. Husserl also notes that we do not always understand 
how these experienced mental-physical connections or “conditionalities” work; 
we just have an understanding that somehow there is such a relationship (272).

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
38
Husserl describes a phenomenological form of supervenience between sen-
sory states and physical states.23 He says that we experience the physical states 
of organisms as determining their sensory states. If two experienced agents or 
“animate organisms” are experienced as physically indiscernible, they will also 
be experienced as mentally indiscernible:24
the sensibility presents itself [to consciousness] in such a way that we 
can say that if the animate organism is the same . . . with regard to its 
materiality and its material states, then . . . the stratum of sensation would 
also have to be the same.
(Husserl 1980, 120)
So, sensations are experienced as supervening on physical processes. If two agents 
are experienced as having the same physical properties, they will also be experi-
enced as having the same “stratum of sensation” (i.e. sensory properties). Other 
phenomenological features are experienced as supervening on physical states of 
the brain, including “phantasy” (which includes imagination and memory), feel-
ings, instincts, and “the proper character, the rhythm, of higher consciousness” 
(Husserl 1989, 308–309).
Thus far we have a picture of mind-body relations that is similar to a standard 
contemporary physicalist conception. According to this picture, mental properties 
are related to physical properties via synchronic “vertical” supervenience rela-
tions (think of how a pattern of atoms at a time determines a unique molecular pat-
tern at that same time). See Figure 1.1. Physical processes are related by dynamic 
or diachronic “horizontal” causal processes, where one state of (say) the brain 
gives rise to successive states, relative to an environment and a set of physical 
laws. The lower-level dynamics then induce higher level dynamics via the super-
venience relations (Yoshimi 2012). For example, when a brain changes from state 
P to P* at the neural level, this gives rise to parallel changes from M to M* at the 
psychological level, in virtue of the supervenience relation.
On the basis of this overall picture of mental-physical relations, many contem-
porary philosophers deny that true mental causation is possible (cf. Chapter 7 
M
P
P*
M*
supervenes
supervenes
causes
Figure 1.1  A standard account of mental-physical relations. Physical processes like P to P* 
unfold dynamically and are shown as proceeding horizontally. Physical to mental 
supervenience relations occur synchronically and are shown as vertical lines.25
Adapted from Kim (2003).

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
39
on mental causation). All apparent causal processes are ultimately driven by  
bottom-level physical processes; the appearance of mental causation is an epiphe-
nomenon. This has come to be known as the “causal exclusion argument”; think 
of low-level process “excluding” high level process from doing anything (Kim 
2007). This argument has been addressed by physicalists in a variety of ingenious 
ways, which seek to preserve mental causation in a physicalist framework (Ben-
nett 2008; Wilson 2009).
However, although we experience many mental properties as being fixed by 
physical properties, it is not clear that we experience all mental properties as 
being fixed by physical properties (Husserl 1980, 16). For some mental phenom-
ena, Husserl thinks it is unclear whether there is an assumed physical basis, and 
concludes that it is an empirical question which mental phenomena are experi-
enced as having a physical basis and which aren’t: “obviously, how far all this 
extends can only be decided empirically and if possible by means of experimental 
psychology” (Husserl 1989, 308). He goes on to a give an argument that some 
properties relating to time-consciousness must not supervene on physical pro-
cesses.26 Husserl thus defends a form of partial supervenience: the idea that some, 
but not all mental properties are fixed by an agent’s physical properties. This vari-
ant on the supervenience relation is novel to Husserl’s account, and is of some 
independent philosophical interest (Yoshimi 2010).
Given that Husserl endorses only partial supervenience, he is open to a wider 
range of possibilities than most contemporary philosophers are. In particular, he 
is open to such possibilities as downward causation and temporal slippage, and is 
unconcerned about causal exclusion and related physicalist worries.
Downward causation occurs when mental phenomena directly cause changes 
in physical phenomena (Kim 1992). We could imagine, for example, a diagonal 
arrow from M to P* in Fig. 1. Physicalists typically deny that this type of causa-
tion is possible. However Husserl claims that it is phenomenologically coherent; 
we can imagine experiencing a scenario of “reverse dependency” where sensa-
tions are produced at the mental level, and the physical level changes accordingly. 
In such a scenario the mind has “its own causality”, and physical changes in the 
body (indexed by a variable B) are dependent on it:
[in such a case] we assume that the mind has its own causality, an inner 
empirical lawfulness, in the production of sensations; i.e., a causality 
that can first of all unfold in itself and lead to a sensation, to which the 
state of B would then be linked as dependent on it.
(Husserl 1989, 309)
As an example, Husserl refers to “the voluntary production of hallucinations” 
(309) where, presumably, we first imagine something, and the brain then enters an 
appropriate state to support that imagination.
Husserl also considers the possibility of temporal drift between brain states 
and the mental states they give rise to, describing it as unclear “whether or not 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
40
the Objective temporal point of the cerebral stimulation, corresponding to the 
movement of the hand, must be taken as the same identical temporal point of the 
sensation” (310). He goes on to locate the source of this unclarity in the more 
fundamental problem of determining what the time of conscious states is: “Eve-
rything depends here on the way of defining the temporal point of a determinate 
state of consciousness” (309–310). Husserl’s instincts were right: the timing of 
conscious events has emerged as a difficult but important topic, in the wake of 
Libet’s pioneering work on the neuroscience of free will, and in particular his 
controversial method for measuring the time of conscious intentions (Joordens 
et al. 2002; Libet 2009).
Although downward causation and temporal drift are unpopular today, they 
have been endorsed by proponents of strong emergence. Emergence in the phi-
losophy of mind is a family of relations (O’Connor and Wong 2012).27 The strong-
est forms of emergence treat the mind as having some genuine autonomy from 
the physical level, and allow for temporal drift, downward causation, and robust 
mental causation (O’Connor and Wong 2005).
Figure 1.2 depicts a simplified version of strong emergence, based primarily on 
(O’Connor and Wong 2005). Physical processes unfold just as they do in physical-
ism. In addition to causing each other, physical states also cause other emergent 
mental states to occur. Since the upwards mental-to-physical relation is “dynamic 
and causal” (664), some temporal drift can occur. Mental states can have causal 
effects of their own, both in terms of downward causation, and in terms of causa-
tion of other mental states. Their “effects . . . include directly determining aspects 
of the microphysical structure of the object as well as generating other emergent 
states” (665). There is no problem of causal exclusion in this framework: mental 
causation is alive and well, alongside physical-to-physical and physical-to-mental 
E
P
E*
P*
causes
causes
causes
causes
causes
Figure 1.2  A version of strong emergence, between physical states P and emergent states 
E. Here the emergent states are mental states. Genuine mental causation is 
allowed via agent causation (upper horizontal arrow). Regular physical causa-
tion remains (lower horizontal arrow). Supervenience is replaced by upward 
causation from physical to mental. Downward causation from mental to physi-
cal is allowed.

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
41
causation. The view naturally couples with property dualism and agent causal 
views of the will. An agent’s free choices have a direct causal impact on other 
mental states and on physical states.
So, within the space of possibilities left open by Husserl’s analysis of the 
essences of experienced physical bodies, mental states, and mental-physical inter-
relationships, existing theories have occupied many of the available spots. Experi-
mental philosophy could supplement Husserl’s eidetic analyses with controlled 
studies of intuitions in these domains. Empirical work measuring mind-brain cor-
relations could further constrain the space of open possibilities. Perhaps these zig-
zagging analyses will lead us to new, unexplored regions of the space of possible 
solutions to the mind-body problem.
Conclusion
We have seen that phenomenology and philosophy of mind – understood both 
as philosophical disciplines and as historical traditions  – are interrelated in a 
complex, dynamic way. As historical traditions, they were at one time joined, 
later diverged, and are coming back together in a larger swarm-like pattern, char-
acterized by local swirlings of overlap and mutual reinforcement, intermittent 
skirmishes, and shared new directions. Although it is impossible to detail all the 
integrative possibilities in a single chapter, we have tried to mark out some prom-
ising areas, and to illustrate how further collaborations might unfold.
Notes
	 1	 As of November 2017.
	 2	 Interest in consciousness and other internal processes never completely disappeared, 
either in philosophy or psychology, even during the behaviorist era. See Baars (1986) 
and Strawson (2015).
	 3	 Husserl uses terms like “horizon” and “motivation” in multiple ways, and much of the 
scholarly work in Husserlian phenomenology involves distinguishing and clarifying con-
cepts like these (Walsh 2017). We have marked some but not all of the relevant distinctions 
here (e.g. we distinguish between an “immanent horizon” and “counterfactual horizon”).
	 4	 On Husserl’s epistemology see (Willard 1984; D. Kasmier 2003; Sanchez 2010; Hopp 
2011). On Husserl’s eidetic method see (Sowa 2007; David Kasmier 2010).
	 5	 On the nature and scope of Gurwitsch’s influence on Merleau-Ponty, see (Toadvine 
2001).
	 6	 The new Landes (2013) translation is both timely for and evidence of this increasing 
appreciation.
	 7	 In this section, we give a detailed overview of the main areas of overlap between phe-
nomenology and philosophy of mind. It is worth noting that phenomenology overlaps 
other areas of philosophy in similar ways, including philosophy of math (Tieszen 2011; 
Hill and Da Silva 1997; Hartimo 2010), philosophy of cognitive science (Petitot et al. 
1999; Gallagher and Schmicking 2010), epistemology (Willard 1984; Hopp 2011), 
feminist philosophy, in particular, feminist phenomenology (Fisher and Embree 2000; 
Heinämaa 1999), queer phenomenology (Ahmed 2006), and phenomenology of race 
(Alcoff 1999), among others. In the case of philosophy of math especially the historical 

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
42
origins overlap. Husserl was close friends with Hilbert and Cantor, had Weyl as his 
student, and was later read by Gödel (Hill and Da Silva 1997). These overlaps between 
phenomenology and other areas of philosophy are themselves relevant to philosophy 
of mind, and merit further study.
	 8	 There is now a fairly extensive literature on these connections; see (Føllesdal 1994; 
Durfee 1976; Willard 1984; Cobb-Stevens 1990; B. Smith 1994; Mohanty 1982; 
Simons 1992; D. W. Smith and McIntyre 1982; D. W. Smith 2013).
	 9	 See also Horgan and Tienson (2002), who independently develop a similar idea about 
phenomenal intentionality and verificationism.
	10	 In addition to Ryle and Sellars, there have been studies of early phenomenology in 
relation to Wittgenstein, Austen, and Hare, among others (Durfee 1976).
	11	 Though Katz has said “it is completely wrong . . . to speak of unity of purpose between 
Husserl and Chomsky” (qtd. in Kusch 1989, 63), in light of, among other things, 
Chomsky’s emphasis on the biological basis of the rules he describes, which sharply 
contrasts with Husserl’s a priori enterprise.
	12	 Or “Hussearle”, as Beyer (1997) puts it. More specific areas of overlap include the 
structure of intentionality, the relation of mind to language, Searle’s concept of the 
background, and his more recent work on social ontology (Beyer 1997; McIntyre 
1984). Searle has responded to the claim that his work is similar to Husserl’s, acknowl-
edging that he read some Husserl and assimilated phenomenological ideas via Dreyfus, 
but denying substantive influence (Searle 2005).
	13	 The relationship between phenomenology, functionalism, and artificial intelligence or 
AI (which is closely related to functionalism) is multi-faceted. There may have been 
some historical influence via the connections outlined above, and in content there are 
notable similarities (H. L. Dreyfus and Hall 1982; McIntyre 1986; Mensch 1991; Liv-
ingston 2005), e.g. insofar as both emphasize abstract rules and structures (in Hus-
serl’s case eidetic structures and horizon structures; in the case of functionalism and AI 
abstract relations between inputs, outputs, and inner states). In light of these similari-
ties between Husserl and AI, Dreyfus regards Heidegger’s critique of Husserl as an 
implicit critique of AI (H. L. Dreyfus and Hall 1982; Hubert L. Dreyfus 1992). For a 
critical discussion of the assimilation of Husserl to classical AI see (Yoshimi 2009).
	14	 At least according to realist interpretations of Husserl (as contrasted with idealist read-
ings). Cf. B. Smith (1995).
	15	 These ideas can also be understood in terms of Merleau-Ponty’s work. On one reading, 
Merleau-Ponty locates content in a kind of perceptual norm or optimum (cf. Dreyfus 
2002; Crowell 2013, ch. 6; Kelly 2005). When you see the table from an oblique angle 
and it appears elliptical to you, the content of your perception represents it as being 
round since it would appear round from an optimal view (directly overhead). The nor-
mativity of this perceptual optimum is established by facts about how our bodies are 
structured and how our perceptual systems operate in relation to the world.
	16	 The concept of uninterpreted sensory or hyletic data has been controversial since Hus-
serl’s own lifetime. Gurwitsch (1964), drawing on Gestalt psychology, argued that 
there were no such things as hyletic data, only interpreted Gestalt forms. Hopp (2010) 
develops his account of non-conceptual content in a Husserlian framework that rejects 
hyletic data. On the relation between hyletic data and contemporary debates about 
phenomenal consciousness also see (Shim 2011; Williford 2013).
	17	 Cf. Siegel’s method of “phenomenal contrast” (Siegel 2007; 2010). This method of 
phenomenal contrast has played a prominent role in recent arguments about the nature 
and existence of cognitive phenomenology (Siewert 1998; Pitt 2004; Smithies 2013).
	18	 Motivations in this sense are similar to what Gurwitsch calls the “thematic field” of an 
act (Gurwitsch 1964), and what William James called fringes (Mangan 2007). They 

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
43
are also a kind of horizon structure, an “immanent” horizon, which is distinct from the 
counterfactual horizons described in the main text.
	19	 Rojcewicz and Schuwer (1989) recall Merleau-Ponty describing the experience of 
reading Ideas II as “une expérience presque voluptueuse” (xvi).
	20	 In asking how people experience these phenomena, Husserl pursues a form of inves-
tigation similar to studies of folk intuition in experimental philosophy. Experimental 
philosophers have in fact addressed the question of how mind and body are intuitively 
understood (Knobe 2011). It would be interesting to extend these studies to the ques-
tion of folk intuitions about mind-body relations, and thereby empirically investigate 
Husserl’s claims.
	21	 As Husserl puts it in the case of psycho-physical dependencies: “How far [mental-
physical relations] actually reach is a matter for psycho-physiological empirical inves-
tigation to decide. How far [psycho-physical dependencies] can reach, on the other 
hand, that is to say, how far questions about “physiological correlates” and correspond-
ing hypothetical constructions can be senseful and guiding for the process of actual 
research, is a matter for psycho-physical inquiries into essences” (Husserl 1980, 16; 
for further discussion, see Yoshimi (2010).
	22	 Assuming we are in the “naturalistic attitude” (naturalistichen Einstellung), “the attitude 
of the subject who intuits and thinks in the natural-scientific way” (Husserl 1989, 3).
	23	 On the standard definition: A properties supervene on B properties iff objects with 
the same B properties will also have the same A properties. As it is also put: being 
B-indiscernible entails being A-indiscernible; B-twins must be A-twins, or B proper-
ties determine A properties. Also note that states are taken to be a kind of maximal 
property: the A-state of a thing is the set of A-properties that apply to it at a time; for 
example the mental state of an organism is (roughly) the distribution of mental proper-
ties that apply to it at that time (Yoshimi 2012).
	24	 In other works he also gives a phenomenological analysis of indiscernibility, or in his 
terms “qualitative identity”, in terms of series of pairwise comparisons. See D. Kas-
mier (2003).
	25	 There are some simplifications involved in this diagram. For example, supervenience 
is typically construed as a relation between sets of properties, whereas it is shown here 
as a relation between individual states or property instances.
	26	 Since on his view these processes have a necessary form that cannot be captured by 
any contingent physical process (Yoshimi 2010 critiques this argument).
	27	 Weak or epistemic emergence (what most scientists mean by “emergence”) is the view 
that, though everything is physical, it is necessary for practical reasons to study some 
complex phenomena using higher-level predicates and laws. It would be too unwieldy 
to, for example, develop a science of biology that only referred to atoms and atomic 
bonds. Concepts like “species” and laws applying to species are thus epistemically 
ineliminable features of our scientific practice, even if species ultimately supervene on 
micro-features of physical systems. There are other forms of ontological emergence 
as well, e.g. “fusion” based accounts (which draw on quantum physics), whereby the 
states of an emergent, compound system can determine the states of their constituents, 
but not conversely (Humphreys, 1997).
Bibliography
Adorno, T. W. (1982). Against Epistemology: A Metacritique: Studies in Husserl and the 
Phenomenological Antinomies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ahmed, S. (2006). Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
44
Alcoff, L. M. (1999). “Towards a Phenomenology of Racial Embodiment,” Radical Phi-
losophy, 95: 15–26.
Arvidson, S. (2006). The Sphere of Attention: Context and Margin. Dordrecht: Springer.
Atterton, P. (2011). “Levinas and Our Moral Responsibility Toward Other Animals,” 
Inquiry, 54: 633–649.
Baars, B.J. (1986). The Cognitive Revolution in Consciousness. New York, NY: Guilford 
Press.
Barber, M.D. (2008). “Holism and Horizon: Husserl and McDowell on Non-Conceptual 
Content,” Husserl Studies, 24: 79–97.
Bar-Hillel, Y. (1957). “Husserl’s Conception of a Purely Logical Grammar,” Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research, 17: 362–369.
Bayne, T., and Montague, M. (eds.). (2011). Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Beauvoir, S. (2011). The Second Sex. Trans. C. Borde, and S. Malovany-Chevallier. New 
York, NY: Vintage Books.
Bennett, K. (2008). “Exclusion Again,” in Hohwy, J. and Kallestrup, J. (eds.), Being 
Reduced: New Essays on Reduction, Explanation, and Causation. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Beyer, C. (1997). “Hussearle’s Representationalism and the ‘Hypothesis of the Back-
ground,’ ” Synthese, 112: 323–352.
Beyer, C. (2013). “Edmund Husserl,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2013/entries/husserl/.
Block, N. (1980). “Troubles with Functionalism,” Readings in Philosophy of Psychology, 
1: 268–305.
Brewer, B. (1999). Perception and Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Breyer, T., and Gutland, C. (2016). Phenomenology of Thinking. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Brook, A., and Raymont, P. (2014). “The Unity of Consciousness,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/
entries/consciousness-unity/.
Byrne, A. (2001). “Intentionalism Defended,” Philosophical Review, 110: 199–240.
Carnap, R. (1931). “Überwindung Der Metaphysik Durch Logische Analyse Der Sprache,” 
Erkenntnis, 2: 219–241.
Carr, D. (1986). “Cogitamus Ergo Sumus,” The Monist, 69: 521–533.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Chelstrom, E. (2013). Social Phenomenology: Husserl, Intersubjectivity, and Collective 
Intentionality. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Chudnoff, E. (2015). Cognitive Phenomenology. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Cobb-Stevens, R. (1990). Husserl and Analytic Philosophy. Dordrecht: Springer.
Correia, F. (2008). “Ontological Dependence,” Philosophy Compass, 3: 1013–1032.
Correia, F., and Schnieder, B. (2012). Metaphysical Grounding: Understanding the Struc-
ture of Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crane, T. (1998). “Intentionality as the Mark of the Mental,” in Crane, T. (ed.), Contem-
porary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 
229–251.
Crowell, S. (2013). Normativity and Phenomenology in Husserl and Heidegger. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
45
Dahlstrom, D. (2007). “The Intentionality of Passive Experience: Husserl and A Contem-
porary Debate,” New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy, 
7: 25–42.
Dainton, B. (2000). Stream of Consciousness: Unity and Continuity in Conscious Experi-
ence. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Derrida, J. (2011). Voice and Phenomenon: Introduction to the Problem of the Sign in Hus-
serl’s Phenomenology. Northwestern University Press.
De Vignemont, F. (2011). “Bodily Awareness,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2011/entries/bodily-awareness/.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1992). What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2002). “Intelligence without Representation – Merleau-Ponty’s Critique 
of Mental Representation the Relevance of Phenomenology to Scientific Explanation,” 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1: 367–383.
Dreyfus, H. L., and Hall, H. (1982). Husserl, Intentionality and Cognitive Science. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dummett, M. (1993). Origins of Analytical Philosophy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Durfee, H. (1976). Analytic Philosophy and Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Springer.
Edie, J. M. (1977). “Husserl’s Conception of ‘The Grammatical’ and Contemporary Lin-
guistics,” in Mohanty, J.N. (ed.), Readings on Edmund Husserl’s Logical Investigations. 
Dordrecht: Springer: 137–161.
Embree, L. (1972). “Biographical Sketch of Aron Gurwitsch,” in Gurwitsch, A. and 
Embree, L. (eds.), Life-World and Consciousness. Northwestern University Press.
Embree, L. (ed.). (2004). Gurwitsch’s Relevancy for Cognitive Science. Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Feigl, H. (1958). “The ‘Mental’ and The ‘Physical’,” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy 
of Science, 2: 370–497.
Fisher, L., and Embree, L. (2000). Feminist Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Flanagan, O. (1992). Consciousness Reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flynn, T. (2014). Sartre: A Philosophical Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Fodor, J. (1974). “Special Sciences (or: The Disunity of Science as a Working Hypoth-
esis),” Synthese, 28: 97–115.
Føllesdal, D. (1994). Husserl and Frege: A Contribution to Elucidating the Origins of 
Phenomenological Philosophy. Dordrecht: Springer.
Føllesdal, D. (2018). “Husserl and Putnam on Twin Earth,” in Frauchiger, M. (ed.), Themes 
from Putnam. Frankfurt: Ontos.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S., and Schmicking, D. (2010). Handbook of Phenomenology and Cognitive 
Science. Dordrecht: Springer.
Gallagher, S., and Zahavi, D. (2007). The Phenomenological Mind: An Introduction to 
Philosophy of Mind and Cognitive Science. New York, NY: Routledge.
Gilbert, M. (1989). On Social Facts. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
46
Goldman, A. (2006). Simulating Minds: The Philosophy, Psychology, and Neuroscience of 
Mindreading. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grathoff, R. (ed.). (1989). Philosophers in Exile: The Correspondence of Alfred Schutz and 
Aron Gurwitsch, 1939–1959. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Gurwitsch, A. (1964). The Field of Consciousness. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press.
Haddock, G. (2008). The Young Carnap’s Unknown Master. Farnham, UK: Ashgate Pub-
lishing, Ltd.
Harman, G. (1990). “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience,” Philosophical Perspectives, 4: 
31–52.
Hartimo, M. (2010). Phenomenology and Mathematics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. Trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson. New York: 
Harper & Row.
Heinämaa, S. (1999). “Simone de Beauvoir’s Phenomenology of Sexual Difference,” 
Hypatia, 14: 114–132.
Hill, C., and Da Silva, J. (eds.). (1997). The Road Not Taken. On Husserl’s Philosophy of 
Logic and Mathematics. London: College Publications.
Hopp, W. (2008). “Husserl on Sensation, Perception, and Interpretation,” Canadian Jour-
nal of Philosophy, 38: 219–245.
Hopp, W. (2010). “How to Think about Nonconceptual Content,” New Yearbook for Phe-
nomenology & Phenomenological Philosophy, 10: 1–24.
Hopp, W. (2011). Perception and Knowledge: A Phenomenological Account. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Horgan, T., and Tienson, J. (2002). “The Intentionality of Phenomenology and the Phe-
nomenology of Intentionality,” in Chalmers, D. (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Classical and 
Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 520–533.
Humphreys, P. (1997). “How Properties Emerge,” Philosophy of Science, 64: 1–17.
Hurley, S. (1998). Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Husserl, E. (1960). Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. Trans. D. 
Cairns. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1969). Formal and Transcendental Logic. Trans. D. Cairns. The Hague: Mar-
tinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1973). Experience and Judgment. Trans. J. Churchill, and K. Ameriks. North-
western University Press.
Husserl, E. (1980). Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy: Third Book: Phenomenology and the Foundation of the Sciences. Trans. T. 
Klein and W. E. Pohl. Dordrecht: Springer.
Husserl, E. (1989). Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy: Studies in Phenomenology of the Constitution. Trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. 
Schuwer. Dordrecht: Springer.
Husserl, E. (1997). Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the Confronta-
tion with Heidegger (1927–1931): The Encyclopaedia Britannica Article, the Amster-
dam Lectures,Phenomenology and Anthropology’, and Husserl’s Marginal Notes in 
Being and Time and Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics. Trans. T. Sheehan and R. 
Palmer. Dordrecht: Springer.
Husserl, E. (2001a). Logical Investigations, Vol. 2. Trans. J. Findlay. Abingdon, UK: 
Routledge.
Husserl, E. (2001b). Logical Investigations, Vol. 1. Trans. J. Findlay. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
47
Husserl, E. (2001c). Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis: Lectures on Tran-
scendental Logic. Trans. A. Steinbock. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Husserl, E. (2014). Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy: 
First Book: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology. Trans. D. Dahlstrom. Hackett 
Publishing Company, Inc.
Jackson, F. (1982). “Epiphenomenal Qualia,” The Philosophical Quarterly, 32: 127–136.
Joordens, S., van Duijn, M., and Spalek, T. M. (2002). “When Timing the Mind One Should 
Also Mind the Timing: Biases in the Measurement of Voluntary Actions,” Conscious-
ness and Cognition, 11: 231–240.
Kaelin, E. F., and Schrag, C. O. (1989). American Phenomenology: Origins and Develop-
ments. Dordrecht: Springer.
Kasmier, D. (2003). Husserl’s Theory of a Priori Knowledge: A Response to the Failure 
of Contemporary Rationalism. Dissertation. Los Angeles, CA: University of Southern 
California Press.
Kasmier, D. (2010). “A Defense of Husserl’s Method of Free Variation,” in Vandevelde, P. 
and Luft, S. (eds.), Epistemology, Archaeology, Ethics: Current Investigations of Hus-
serl’s Corpus. Continuum.
Kelly, S. (2005). “Seeing Things in Merleau-Ponty,” in Carman, T. and Hansen, M. (eds.), 
The Cambridge Companion to Merleau-Ponty. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, J. (1992). “ ‘Downward Causation’ in Emergentism and Nonreductive Physicalism,” 
in Beckerman (ed.), Emergence or Reduction. de Gruyter & Co: 119–138.
Kim, J. (2003). “Blocking Causal Drainage and Other Maintenance Chores with Mental 
Causation,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 67: 151–176.
Kim, J. (2007). Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Kim, J. (2010). Philosophy of Mind. Third Edition. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Kind, A. (2010). “Transparency and Representationalist theories of Consciousness,” Phi-
losophy Compass, 5: 902–913.
Knobe, J. (2011). “Finding the Mind in the Body,” in Brockman, M. (ed.), Future Science: 
Essays from the Cutting Edge. Random House: 184–196.
Kriegel, U. (2009). Subjective Consciousness: A Self-Representational Theory. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, U. (2011). The Sources of Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, U. (ed.). (2013). Phenomenal Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, U., and Williford, K. (eds.). (2006). Self-Representational Approaches to Con-
sciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kusch, M. (1989). Language as Calculus vs. Language as Universal Medium: A Study in 
Husserl, Heidegger and Gadamer. Dordrecht: Springer.
Levin, D. (1998). “Tracework: Myself and Others in the Moral Phenomenology of  
Merleau-Ponty and Levinas,” International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 6: 
345–392.
Lévinas, E. (1995). The Theory of Intuition in Husserl’s Phenomenology. Trans. Orianne. 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Libet, B. (2009). Mind Time: The Temporal Factor in Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Livingston, P. (2002). “Husserl and Schlick on the Logical Form of Experience,” Synthese, 
132: 239–272.

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
48
Livingston, P. (2005). “Functionalism and Logical Analysis,” in Smith, D.W. and Thomas-
son, A. (eds.), Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press: 19–40.
Lübcke, P. (1999). “A Semantic Interpretation of Husserl’s Epoché,” Synthese, 118: 1–12.
Lycan, William (2014). “Representational Theories of Consciousness,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/
entries/consciousness-representational/.
McDowell, J. (1994). Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McIntyre, R. (1984). “Searle on Intentionality,” Inquiry, 27: 468–483.
McIntyre, R. (1986). “Husserl and the Representational Theory of Mind,” Topoi, 5: 101–113.
Mangan, B. (2007). “Cognition, Fringe Consciousness, and the Legacy of William James,” 
in Schneider and Velmans (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: 
Blackwell: 671–685.
Margolis, E., and Laurence, S. (2011). “Concepts,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/concepts/.
Mathiesen, K. (2005). “Collective Consciousness,” in Smith, D.W. and Thomasson, A. 
(eds.), Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. Clarendon Press: 235–252.
Mensch, J. (1991). “Phenomenology and Artificial Intelligence: Husserl Learns Chinese,” 
Husserl Studies, 8: 107–127.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2013). Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. D. Landes. Abingdon, 
UK: Routledge.
Mohanty, J. N. (1982). Husserl and Frege. Indiana University Press.
Mulligan, K., and Correia, F. (2013). “Facts,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2013/entries/facts/.
Murphy, A. (2009). “Sexuality,” in Dreyfus and Wrathall (eds.), A Companion to Phenom-
enology and Existentialism. Blackwell: 489–501.
Nagel, T. (1974). “What Is It like to Be a Bat?” The Philosophical Review, 83: 435–450.
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
O’Connor, T., and Wong, H. (2005). “The Metaphysics of Emergence,” Noûs, 39: 658–678.
O’Connor, T., and Wong, H. (2012). “Emergent Properties,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2012/entries/
properties-emergent/.
O’Regan, K. (2001). “What It Is Like to See: A Sensorimotor Theory of Perceptual Experi-
ence,” Synthese, 129: 79–103.
Overgaard, S. (2007). Wittgenstein and Other Minds: Rethinking Subjectivity and Intersub-
jectivity with Wittgenstein, Levinas, and Husserl. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Overgaard, S. (2013). “Motivating Disjunctivism,” Husserl Studies, 29: 51–63.
Petitot, J., Varela, F., Pachoud, B., and Roy, J.M. (eds.). (1999). Naturalizing Phenomenol-
ogy: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science. Palo Alto, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
Pitt, D. (2004). “The Phenomenology of Cognition, Or, What Is It Like to Think That P?” 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 69: 1–36.
Place, U.T. (1956). “Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” British Journal of Psychology, 
47: 44–50.
Putnam, H. (1967). “The Nature of Mental States,” Readings in the Philosophy of Psychol-
ogy, 1: 222–231.
Ricøeur, P. (1967). Husserl: An Analysis of His Phenomenology. Trans. Ballard and 
Embree. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
49
Rojcewicz, R., and Schuwer, A. (1989). “Translators’ Introduction,” in Husserl, E. (ed.), 
Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy: 
Second Book. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers: xi–xvi.
Rollinger, R. D. (1999). Husserl’s Position in the School of Brentano. Dordrecht: Springer.
Rowlands, M. (2010). The New Science of the Mind: From Extended Mind to Embodied 
Phenomenology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sanchez, C. (2010). “Epistemic Justification and Husserl’s Phenomenology of Reason in 
Ideas I,” in Vandevelde, P. and Luft, S. (eds.), Epistemology, Archaeology, Ethics: Cur-
rent Investigations of Husserl’s Corpus. New York, NY: Continuum.
Sartre, J. P. (1991). The Transcendence of the Ego: An Existentialist Theory of Conscious-
ness. New York, NY: Hill and Wang.
Sartre, J. P. (2003). Being and Nothingness. Trans. H. E. Barnes. New York, NY: Washing-
ton Square Press.
Schmid, H. B. (2014). “Plural self-awareness,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sci-
ences, 13: 7–24.
Schutz, A. (1967). The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press.
Schutz, A., and Natanson, M. (eds.) (1970). Phenomenology and Social Reality. The 
Hague: M. Nijhoff.
Searle, J. (1980). “Minds, Brains, and Programs,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3: 
417–424.
Searle, J. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Searle, J. (2005). “The Phenomenological Illusion,” in Reicher and Marek (eds.), Experi-
ence and Analysis: Papers of the 27th International Wittgenstein Symposium: 317–336.
Shim, M. (2011). “Representationalism and Husserlian Phenomenology,” Husserl Studies, 
27: 197–215.
Siegel, S. (2007). “How Can We Discover the Contents of Experience?” The Southern 
Journal of Philosophy, 45: 127–142.
Siegel, S. (2010). The Contents of Visual Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Siegel, S. (2015). “The Contents of Perception,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/perception-contents/.
Siewert, C. (1998). The Significance of Consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Siewert, C. (2013). “Phenomenality and Self-Consciousness,” in Kriegel, U. (ed.), Phe-
nomenal Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 235–257.
Simons, P. (1987). Parts: A Study in Ontology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simons, P. (1992). “The Anglo-Austrian Analytic Axis,” in Simons, P. (ed.), Philosophy 
and Logic in Central Europe from Bolzano to Tarski. Dordrecht: Springer: 143–158.
Smart, J.J.C. (1959). “Sensations and Brain Processes,” The Philosophical Review, 68: 
141–156.
Smith, A.D. (2008). “Husserl and Externalism,” Synthese, 160: 313–333.
Smith, B. (1994). Austrian Philosophy. The Legacy of Franz Brentano. Open Court.
Smith, B. (1998). “Basic Concepts of Formal Ontology,” in Guarino, N. (ed.), Formal 
Ontology in Information Systems. IOS Press: 19–28.
Smith, B., and Smith, D. W. (eds.). (1995). The Cambridge Companion to Husserl. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, D. W. (1986). “The Structure of (Self-) Consciousness,” Topoi, 5: 149–156.

P h i l i p  J .  Wa l s h  a n d  J e f f  Y o s h i m i
50
Smith, D. W. (2007). Husserl. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Smith, D. W. (2013). “The Role of Phenomenology in Analytic Philosophy,” in Beaney, 
M. (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of the History of Analytic Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press: 1495–1527.
Smith, D. W., and McIntyre, R. (1982). Husserl and Intentionality: A Study of Mind, Mean-
ing, and Language. Dordrecht: Springer.
Smith, D. W., and Thomasson, A. (eds.). (2005). Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smithies, D. (2013). “The Nature of Cognitive Phenomenology,” Philosophy Compass, 8: 
744–754.
Sowa, R. (2007). “Essences and Eidetic Laws in Edmund Husserl’s Descriptive Eidetics,” 
New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy, 7: 77–108.
Stein, E. (1989). On the Problem of Empathy. Washington D.C.: ICS Publications.
Stoljar, D. (2015). “Physicalism,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
phy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/physicalism/.
Strawson, G. (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, G. (2009). Selves: An Essay in Revisionary Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Strawson, G. (2015). “Consciousness Myth,” Times Literary Supplement. Feb 25, 2015.
Stueber, D. (2006). Rediscovering Empathy: Agency, Folk Psycholgy, and the Human Sci-
ences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thomasson, A. (2002). “Phenomenology and the Development of Analytic Philosophy,” 
The Southern Journal of Philosophy, 40: 115–142.
Thomasson, A. (2005). “First-Person Knowledge in Phenomenology,” in Smith, D.W. and 
Thomasson, A. (eds.), Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press: 115–139.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tieszen, R. (2011). After Godel: Platonism and Rationalism in Mathematics and Logic. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Toadvine, T. (2001). “Phenomenological Method in Merleau-Ponty’s Critique of Gur-
witsch,” Husserl Studies, 17: 195–205.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the Phe-
nomenal Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, Color, and Content. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Varzi, A. (2015). “Mereology,” in Zalta, E. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/mereology/.
Vongehr, T. (2007). “A Short History of the Husserl-Archives Leuven and the Husserli-
ana,” in History of the Husserl-Archives Leuven. Dordrecht: Springer: 99–126.
Vrahimis, A. (2013). Encounters Between Analytic and Continental Philosophy. Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Walsh, P. J. (2013). “Husserl’s Concept of Motivation: The Logical Investigations and 
Beyond,” Logical Analysis & History of Philosophy, 16: 70–83.
Walsh, P. J. (2014). “Empathy, Embodiment, and the Unity of Expression,” Topoi, 33: 
215–226.
Walsh, P. J. (2017). “Motivation and Horizon: Phenomenal Intentionality in Husserl,” 
Grazer Philosophische Studien, 94: 410–435.

T h e  p h e n o m e n o l o g i c a l  t r a d i t i o n
51
Willard, D. (1984). Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge: A Study in Husserl’s Early 
Philosophy. Ohio University Press.
Williford, K. (2013). “Husserl’s Hyletic Data and Phenomenal Consciousness,” Phenom-
enology and the Cognitive Sciences, 12: 501–519.
Wilson, J. (2009). “Determination, Realization and Mental Causation,” Philosophical 
Studies, 145: 149–169.
Wrathall, M., and Malpas, J. (eds.). (2000). Heidegger, Coping, and Cognitive Science: 
Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus, Vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Yoshimi, J. (2007). “Mathematizing Phenomenology,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences, 6: 271–291.
Yoshimi, J. (2009). “Husserl’s Theory of Belief and the Heideggerean Critique,” Husserl 
Studies, 25: 121–140.
Yoshimi, J. (2010). “Husserl on Psycho-Physical Laws,” New Yearbook for Phenomenol-
ogy and Phenomenological Philosophy, 10: 25–42.
Yoshimi, J. (2012). “Supervenience, Dynamical Systems Theory, and Non-Reductive 
Physicalism,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 63: 373–398.
Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zahavi, D. (2014). Self and Other: Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Zhok, A. (2011). “A Phenomenological Reading of Anomalous Monism,” Husserl Studies, 
27: 227–256.

52
What is the nature of the mind? What is its relation to the body? These ques-
tions – which jointly constitute the mind-body problem – lie at the heart of phi-
losophy of mind. Traditionally, there have been two sorts of approaches to this 
problem. According to the position known as dualism, the mind is an imma-
terial thing not existing in physical space. Dualists believe that there are two 
fundamental kinds of things in the world: material things, like trees and tables 
and chairs, and like our physical bodies, and immaterial things, like minds. The 
mind, according to the dualist, has a different kind of nature from the body 
(which includes the brain). In contrast, the position known as monism holds that 
there is only one type of fundamental entity in the world. The most influential 
form of monism, traditionally known as materialism but now more commonly 
referred to as physicalism, claims that all entities – including the mind – are 
physical in nature.
In the wake of René Descartes’ influential 17th-century arguments in favor 
of dualism, it was long assumed that physicalism was not a tenable position. 
Such was the general philosophical consensus about the mind-body problem 
at the close of the 19th century.1 But this was to change in the 20th century, 
a period of time in which considerable attention was addressed to the mind-
body problem, and also in which considerable progress was made. This essay, 
which aims to take a historical look at this progress, traces the progression of 
philosophical thought about the mind-body problem over the course of the 20th 
century.
Because it would be impossible in an article of this sort to survey all of the 
important developments on the mind-body problem that occurred in the 20th 
century, I here focus my attention on several of the key movements and themes 
that occupied philosophical attention over the course of the last 100 years. The 
first three sections trace the development of physicalism about the mind from 
behaviorism to the identity theory to functionalism. In the fourth section, I turn 
to the qualia-based threat to such theories that arose in the last quarter of the 
century.
2
THE MIND-BODY PROBLEM IN 
20TH-CENTURY PHILOSOPHY
Amy Kind

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
53
1.  Behaviorism
The story of the mind-body problem in 20th-century philosophy begins with 
behaviorism, a movement that dominated philosophical thinking about the mind 
for at least the first half of the century. Insofar as behaviorism offered a genuine 
alternative to both traditional dualism and traditional materialism, each of which 
had been found wanting, its popularity is perhaps unsurprising. Though behav-
iorist theories come in several different varieties, they all in some way attempt 
to understand the mind in terms of bodily behavior. While philosophers prior to 
the onset of behaviorism had long recognized a tight connection between mind 
and behavior, this connection had generally been understood to be evidential in 
nature. My reaching for a drink counts as evidence that I’m thirsty; my moaning 
and groaning counts as evidence that I’m in pain. In contrast, behaviorists argued 
that we should view the connection between mental states and bodily behavior not 
as evidential but as constitutive. For the behaviorist, we should not think of bod-
ily behavior as a mere manifestation of some inner mental state; rather, exhibiting 
such behavior is simply what it is to be in the relevant mental state.
The behavioristic turn in philosophy at the start of the 20th century mirrored a 
similar turn in psychology. Dissatisfied with the introspectionist methods that had 
previously been dominant, psychological behaviorists aimed to reorient psycho-
logical study towards more objective methods that would put the discipline on a 
similar footing with other sciences. According to psychological behaviorists, psy-
chology is best understood not as a science of mind but as a science of behavior. 
Though our primary interest here concerns behaviorism in philosophy of mind, it 
will be useful to begin with a brief discussion of psychological behaviorism. Doing 
so will help us to better understand the philosophical varieties of behaviorism.
1.1  Psychological behaviorism
The term “behaviorism” was coined by John Watson (1913) in “Psychology as the 
Behaviorist Sees It,” an article often referred to as the behaviorist “manifesto.” 
Though there had been some isolated expressions of a behavioristic bent among 
nineteenth century psychologists, psychology in the late 19th century and the 
early 20th century was largely a study of inner mental life.2 Following the work 
of Wilhelm Wundt, often regarded as the father of modern psychology, this study 
was conducted by way of rigorous introspective investigation. As William James 
wrote in his Principles of Psychology, “Introspective observation is what we have 
to rely on first and foremost and always” (James 1890/1981, 185).
In urging that psychology should study behavior rather than the inner causes of 
behavior, psychological behaviorists were largely concerned with issues of scien-
tific methodology. But many of them were also often tempted by a stronger stance, 
one that denies the existence of such inner causes altogether. This eliminativist 
tendency was particularly marked in the late-20th-century work of B. F. Skin-
ner, who referred to his view as radical behaviorism and contrasted it with the 

A m y  K i n d
54
methodological behaviorism of psychologists like Watson. In About Behaviorism, 
where he dismissed alleged inner causes of behavior as “mental fictions,” Skin-
ner explicitly identified human thought with human behavior: “Thinking has the 
dimensions of behavior, not of a fancied inner process which finds expression in 
behavior” (Skinner 1974, 18, 117–118). Ultimately, however, Skinner’s support 
for eliminativism was not entirely unequivocal. For example, though he claimed 
in Science and Behavior that statements like “he eats” and “he is hungry” both 
refer to the same behavioral fact, he also noted that the “objection to inner states 
is not that they do not exist, but that they are not relevant in a functional analysis” 
(42). As we turn to philosophical behaviorism, we will see a similar flirtation with 
eliminative behaviorism – and one that is similarly ambiguous.
1.2  Philosophical behaviorism
While behaviorism was widespread among philosophers in the first half of the 20th 
century, there were really two distinct versions of the view on offer, each spring-
ing from a different motivation. The behaviorism associated with philosophers 
such as Rudolf Carnap and Carl Hempel was an outgrowth of logical positivism 
and the verificationist theory of meaning. Based on the supposition that there are 
close logical connections between statements involving mental vocabulary and 
statements involving behavioristic vocabulary, this view is typically referred to 
as logical behaviorism. The behaviorism associated with philosophers such as 
Gilbert Ryle and Ludwig Wittgenstein was an outgrowth of ordinary language 
philosophy. While this view does not have a standard name in the philosophical 
literature, I will call it ordinary language behaviorism.3
Logical behaviorism is a theory about the meaning of statements involving 
mental expressions – statements like “Diego has a toothache” or “Sofia believes 
that it will rain.” While the meaning of these psychological statements may seem 
to depend on their reference to inner mental states – to Diego’s toothache and to 
Sofia’s belief – the logical behaviorists disagree. Instead, they take the meaning of 
such statements to consist in behavioral facts about Diego and Sofia, i.e., facts about 
the behavior that these individuals manifest or that they are disposed to manifest.
Underlying this view is a commitment to the verificationist theory of meaning, 
a theory that takes the meaning of a statement to be established by the conditions 
of its verification (see Hempel 1980, 17). Consider a claim about temperature, 
e.g., the claim that the current temperature in my office is 72 degrees Fahrenheit. 
For such a statement to be true, it would have to be the case that the mercury level 
of a properly calibrated glass thermometer currently placed in my office would 
correspond to the number 72 on a Fahrenheit scale. We could also make analogous 
claims about an alcohol thermometer or an infrared thermometer, or about various 
other devices; as Hempel notes, there is a long list of other possibilities that make 
the statement true. Each of these possibilities can be expressed by what he calls 
a physical test sentence. We need not establish the truth of all of the physical test 
sentences in evaluating the truth of the original sentence. But the key point is that 
the original sentence about temperature communicates to us nothing more than 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
55
the fact that these physical test sentences obtain; the original sentence is simply an 
“abbreviated formulation” of such sentences (Hempel, 1980, 17).
In identifying the meaning of a statement with the conditions of its verification, 
the verificationist is in turn committed to the claim that statements lacking veri-
fication conditions lack meaning. Though such a statement might be grammati-
cally well-constructed, it lacks any content and is thus only a pseudo-statement 
(see, e.g., Hempel, 1980, 17; Carnap, 1932, 44). What then of psychological state-
ments? Since there is no way in principle to test for inner states like pains and 
beliefs, must such statements be dismissed as meaningless? To avoid this result, 
the logical behaviorist suggests that psychological statements have verification 
conditions that are directly analogous to those we saw in the temperature example. 
Psychological statements are verified by facts about behavior. For example, the 
verification conditions for the claim that Diego has a toothache include physical 
test sentences like the following:
•	
Diego grimaces and rubs his mouth
•	
When asked, “What’s wrong,” Diego utters the words, “I have a toothache.”
•	
Diego has swollen gums and a tooth with an exposed pulp
and so on. For the logical behaviorist, then, mentalistic vocabulary should not be 
taken to refer to inner mental states. Rather, the meaning of claims involving such 
vocabulary consists in facts about behavior.
In contrast to logical behaviorism, ordinary language behaviorism was not 
motivated by verificationism. Rather, the behaviorism of philosophers like Ryle 
and Wittgenstein was primarily grounded in worries about the problem of other 
minds, a problem that is particularly acute if there are inner mental states that are 
private to each individual. As Wittgenstein suggested in his posthumously pub-
lished Philosophical Investigations:
The essential thing about private experience is really not that each per-
son possesses his own exemplar, but that nobody knows whether other 
people also have this or something else. The assumption would thus be 
possible – though unverifiable – that one section of mankind had one 
sensation of red and another section another.
(Wittgenstein 1953, §272)
As he went on to suggest in the famous “beetle-in-a-box” passage, problems arise 
from the assumption that people understand a mental state like pain only from 
their own case:
Suppose everyone had a box with something in it: we call it a “beetle.” 
No one can look into anyone else’s box, and everyone says he knows 
what a beetle is only by looking at his beetle. – Here it would be quite 
possible for everyone to have something different in his box.”
(Wittgenstein 1953, §293)

A m y  K i n d
56
While there is considerable dispute about how best to interpret this passage (as 
well as the larger argument of which it is a part), we can nonetheless here see 
Wittgenstein’s worries about how we would know anything about other minds if 
mentalistic vocabulary were to refer to private mental states.
Ryle expressed related worries in The Concept of Mind, a book that offered an 
extended attack on the view that the mind is an immaterial substance distinct from 
the body. On this Cartesian picture, one that Ryle often referred to derisively as 
“the Cartesian myth” or as “the dogma of the ghost in the machine,” solipsistic 
worries naturally arise: “I can witness what your body does, but I cannot witness 
what your mind does, and my pretensions to infer from what your body does to 
what your mind does all collapse, since the premisses for such inferences are 
either inadequate or unknowable” (Ryle 1949, 60). To overcome such worries, 
Ryle urged that we see mental vocabulary as functioning to refer to behavioral dis-
positions: “To find that most people have minds . . . is simply to find that they are 
able and prone to do certain sorts of things” (Ryle 1949, 61). Likewise, Wittgen-
stein too argued that once we pay careful attention to the way language is used, we 
see that it is a mistake to see the grammatical function of mental vocabulary as one 
of reference to mental states; verbal expressions involving the word “pain,” for 
example, are simply instances of pain-behavior, no different from other instances 
of pain-behavior like crying. (See Wittgenstein1953, §244.)
In developing their views, both Wittgenstein and Ryle at times seemed to 
embrace eliminativism. In the beetle-in-the-box passage, for example, Wittgen-
stein went on to note that “the thing in the box has no place in the language-game 
at all; not even as a something, for the box might even be empty” (Wittgenstein 
1953, §293). Likewise, in dismissing Cartesianism as a myth – in claiming that 
the postulation of mind as an entity distinct from the body is a “category mistake” 
– Ryle also seems to be expressing sympathy for an eliminativist view. Ultimately, 
however, neither of these philosophers came down squarely on the eliminativist 
side. Wittgenstein explicitly pulled back from eliminativism when he noted that 
the respect in which mental states are fictions is that they are grammatical fic-
tions; a sensation “is not a something, but not a nothing either!” (Wittgenstein 
1953, §304) Similarly, though Ryle’s scorn for talk of mentality and minds is 
apparent, his discussion tended to fall short of showing how, exactly, we can suc-
cessfully analyze such talk away.4
1.3  Criticisms of behaviorism
Despite the dominance of behaviorism in the first half of the century, in the 1950s 
and 1960s it came under attack from several different directions. A sharply nega-
tive review of Skinner’s 1957 book Verbal Behavior by Noam Chomsky (1959) 
called psychological behaviorism into question. According to Chomsky, language 
acquisition and verbal competence cannot be explained simply in terms of stimu-
lus and reinforcement; rather, we must postulate innate mechanisms to achieve an 
adequate explanation. Around the same time, important criticisms directed at both 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
57
logical behaviorism and ordinary language behaviorism began to surface in the 
philosophical literature.
One influential criticism derives from the work of Roderick Chisholm (1957). 
For the behaviorist, belief consists in behavioral dispositions; for example, we 
might analyze a gardener’s belief that it will rain in terms of his disposition to 
carry an umbrella with him while he works and to put away his watering can. 
(See Ryle 1949, 174.) But such behavioral dispositions implicitly presuppose the 
presence of relevant desires: A gardener who believes that it will rain will carry an 
umbrella only if he wants to stay dry. Thus, any attempt to provide a behavioral 
definition of belief would have to make reference to desire and, likewise, any 
attempt to provide a behavioral definition of desire would have to make refer-
ence to belief. That such mental notions are inherently connected – that they form 
an “intentional circle” – dooms any attempt to define them solely in terms of 
behavior.5
A second influential criticism derives from the work of Hilary Putnam and, in 
particular, from the article “Brains and Behavior.” (Putnam 1963) This criticism 
is aimed specifically at the logical behaviorists. To make the case that the kinds of 
analyses they offered were in principle unworkable, Putnam asks us to imagine a 
community of stoic individuals in which all of the adult members have trained them-
selves to entirely suppress their involuntary pain behavior. These super-spartans  
might occasionally verbally admit they are in pain – in a normal, pleasant tone 
of voice – but they will show no other sign. When they stub their toes or burn 
their fingers, they don’t wince or moan, or flush or break out in a sweat, or grab 
the affected body part. Yet they still feel pain as we do, and they dislike it. Tak-
ing this one step further, Putnam next asks us to imagine a community of super-
super-spartans. Having been super-spartans for so long, they no longer even make 
verbal reports of pain, and they will not admit to being in pain if they are asked. 
Because we can conceive of this sort of case – a case of pain without any pain-
behavior whatsoever and, in fact, without even any disposition to pain-behavior – 
logical behaviorism must be mistaken.
The criticisms of behaviorism struck many as decisive, and by the late 1960s, 
behaviorism had largely disappeared from view. Though there are behavioristic 
elements present in the work of some late 20th-century philosophers – perhaps 
most notably in the work of Daniel Dennett – the vast majority of contemporary 
philosophers reject the reduction of mind to behavior.6 As we will see, however, 
behaviorism left an important legacy, for the rise of both the identity theory and 
functionalism in the second half of the 20th century can be traced in large part to 
the lessons learned in discussions of behaviorism.
2.  The identity theory
Even while behaviorism was dominating philosophy of mind in the early part of 
the 20th century, both the philosophical and the psychological literature contained 
isolated expressions of a different sort of physicalist view, one that identifies 

A m y  K i n d
58
mental states not with behavioral dispositions but instead with physical states of 
the brain. The philosopher Moritz Schlick, for example, claimed that we should 
not understand the relationship between our experience and brain processes as 
one of causality but rather one of simple identity (Schlick 1925/1974). Likewise, 
the psychologist Edwin G. Boring claimed that “consciousness is a physiologi-
cal event” (Boring 1933, 14). But it was not until the late 1950s that the identity 
theory achieved philosophical prominence. The rise of the theory owes almost 
entirely to the publication of three ground-breaking articles: “Is Consciousness 
a Brain Process,” by U. T. Place (1956), “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’,” by 
Herbert Feigl (1958), and “Sensations and Brain Processes,” by J.J.C. Smart 
(1959). As summarized by Feigl, the identity theory consists in the claim that 
“the states of direct experience which conscious human beings ‘live through,’ and 
those which we confidently ascribe to some of the higher animals, are identical 
with certain (presumably configurational) aspects of the neural processes in those 
organisms” (Feigl 1958, 446).
Feigl’s development of the theory  – which occurred while he was working 
at the University of Minnesota – proceeded separately from Place and Smart’s 
development of the theory – which occurred while there were both at the Uni-
versity of Adelaide. There are thus various minor differences between what’s 
sometimes called the American identity theory and what’s sometimes called the 
Australian identity theory. But these differences won’t matter for our purposes 
here.7 As Place himself notes, “Although there are certain differences of detail in 
the positions adopted in these three papers, the area of agreement was sufficiently 
great for all three of the original protagonists to be able to agree that they were all 
defending the same basic position” (Place, n.d.).
2.1  The case for the identity theory
Prior to the 20th century, materialists had often identified mental states with vari-
ous physical states. In antiquity, Democritus understood the soul as a sort of fire, 
made out of spherical atoms, and he took thought to consist in the physical move-
ment of atoms. In the 17th century, Hobbes claimed that sensations are simply 
internal motions of the sense organs. But the identity theory of the 20th century 
departs from these previous theories in at least two key ways. First, in focusing 
on brain processes, the identity theorists aligned themselves with neuroscience. 
Given the tremendous advances in neuroscientific research in the 20th century, 
this alignment gave credibility to their theory. Second, and perhaps more impor-
tantly, the identity theorists took the psychophysical identities they posited to be 
directly analogous to other scientific discoveries. Just as scientists discovered 
that lightning is identical to a certain kind of electrical discharge or that heat is 
identical to molecular motion, so too the identification of specific mental states 
with specific brain states emerges as a scientific discovery. We might discover, for 
example, that pain is identical to the stimulation of c-fibers.

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
59
It is worth pausing a moment over this particular example. Though it is now 
in widespread use in philosophical discussion, the three papers by Place, Feigl, 
and Smart that ushered in discussion of the identity theory did not invoke this 
particular identity claim, nor did they use other specific examples of this sort. 
Rather, they tended to talk more generally of a sensation being identical to some 
brain process or other. Reference to the pain/c-fiber identification did not become 
common in philosophical discussions of the identity theory until the 1960s (see, 
e.g. Putnam 1960 and Rorty 1965). Importantly, however, the use of “the stimula-
tion of c-fibers” or “c-fiber firing” in such discussions seems best understood as 
a placeholder term, i.e., as a stand-in for whatever brain process is discovered to 
be identical with pain (assuming that any is). It should thus not be seen as a threat 
to the identity theory if it turns out that pain is not c-fiber firing but is some other 
kind of brain process (see, e.g., Puccetti 1977). The precise identity will be deter-
mined by scientific discovery.
In drawing an analogy to scientifically discovered identities, the identity theo-
rists emphasized several related features of such identities, some epistemic and 
some semantic. For example, the identity theorists stressed that the plausibility of 
their theory hinges on the recognition that not all identities have the same epis-
temic status. Many identities – like the claims that “red is a color” and “a square 
is an equilateral rectangle” – can be known a priori. In contrast, an identity like 
“lightning is electrical discharge” can be known only a posteriori; it is an empiri-
cal claim that results from scientific inquiry. Psychophysical identities, said the 
identity theorists, are to be understood analogously to claims like “lightning is 
electrical discharge” rather than to claims like “a square is an equilateral rectan-
gle.” Claims like “pain is c-fiber firing” are also the result of scientific inquiry and 
thus cannot be known a priori.8
In making their semantic points, the identity theorists called upon early 20th-
century research in philosophy of language. Frege’s seminal work on the dis-
tinction between sense and reference showed that two expressions that refer to 
the same object may nonetheless differ in meaning by having different senses. 
Consider the expressions “the Morning Star” and “the Evening Star.” Though 
they both refer to the same object – the planet Venus – the sense of the former 
expression is something like “the first heavenly body visible in the morning sky,” 
while the sense of the latter expression is something like “the last heavenly body 
visible in the evening sky.” According to the identity theorists, the distinction 
between sense and reference comes into play in the case of empirically discovered 
identities. Though the word “lightning” refers to the same phenomenon as the 
words “electrical discharge,” these two expressions do not have the same sense. 
Likewise, though the word “pain” refers to the same phenomenon as the words 
“c-fiber stimulation,” these two expressions do not have the same sense. Thus, it’s 
no objection to the identity theory that someone might be perfectly able to discuss 
his own pains and sensations without knowing anything at all about neuroscience 
or even about the brain – as Smart noted, “a person may well know that something 
is an A without knowing that it is a B” even though A is identical to B. Thus: “An 

A m y  K i n d
60
illiterate peasant might well be able to talk about his sensations without knowing 
about his brain processes, just as he can talk about lightning though he knows 
nothing of electricity” (Smart 1959, 147).9
More generally, the identity theorists persuasively showed that many potential 
objections to the identity theory stem from similar confusions about the nature 
of psychophysical identities. Here it will be worthwhile for us to explore one 
other specific implementation of this general strategy, since this will also help to 
illuminate why the identity theory is often referred to as the topic-neutral theory. 
Consider after-images and, more specifically, the fact that we typically refer to 
them as being colored. For example, after staring at a bright green colored patch, 
a viewer who turns her attention to a white surface might plausibly describe her 
experience by saying something like, “I have a magenta afterimage.” Call this 
claim M. Claims like M seem to pose a problem for the identity theory: Though 
the after-image is magenta, the correlated brain process is not, so how can the 
after-image be identical to the brain-process? In response to this worry, the iden-
tity theorist argues that, once claims like M are properly understood, they can be 
seen to be consistent with physicalism. Though the general line of argumentation 
owes to Place, the point was more forcefully developed by Smart. As he argued, 
rather than taking M to commit us to the existence of something magenta-colored, 
we should best understand it as having the (rough) meaning: There is something 
going on that is like what goes on when (for example) I see a corncockle flower. 
Understood this way, M contains only “quasi-logical” or “topic-neutral” words 
and does not presuppose that the after-image is immaterial (Smart 1959, 150). In 
this way, the identity theorists argued that much of our purportedly mentalistic 
vocabulary – and indeed, our very experience of our own mentality – is actually 
non-committal between dualism and physicalism.10 This insight proves critical to 
establishing the viability of the identity theory, and more generally, the viability 
of physicalism.
As our discussion thus far suggests, the initial case put forth for the identity 
theory was in many ways a defensive one. Feigl, Place, and Smart were typi-
cally more concerned to answer or forestall objections than to mount positive 
arguments for their view. Smart, for example, noted that the object of his paper 
was “to show that there are no philosophical arguments which compel us to be 
dualists” (Smart 1959, 143). Insofar as these early identity theorists put forth a 
positive case for the theory, it rested largely on considerations of Ockham’s razor: 
Given theories of equal explanatory power, we have reason to adopt the one that 
is ontologically more parsimonious. As Smart put the point:
If it be agreed that there are no cogent philosophical arguments which 
force us into accepting dualism, and if the brain process theory and dual-
ism are equally consistent with the facts, then the principles of parsi-
mony and simplicity seem to me to decide overwhelmingly in favor of 
the brain process theory.11

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
61
Seeds of a further positive argument lie in a worry originally expressed by 
Feigl. Immaterial mental states, were they to exist, would have to be “nomological 
danglers” (Feigl 1958, 428), i.e., they would remain entirely outside the system 
of physical laws. Later identity theorists further developed this argument, relying 
heavily on the thesis that physics is thought to be causally closed, or complete, 
i.e., the causal history of any physical event can be wholly given in physical terms 
(see, e.g., Papineau 2002). This thesis, which seems immensely plausible in light 
of the scientific advances of the 19th and 20th centuries, deprives opponents of 
the identity theory of a plausible account of mental causation.12 Intuitively speak-
ing, mental causes play a crucial role in the causal histories of human actions: 
my desire for a drink causes me to get up from where I’m sitting and walk to 
the kitchen, my fear causes me to back up when I encounter a rattlesnake on the 
hiking trail, my toothache causes me to make an appointment with the dentist. If 
we accept the completeness of physics, however, then someone who denies the 
identity theory can account for mental causation only by accepting one of the fol-
lowing two unpalatable alternatives:
(1)	 Human actions are always overdetermined, wholly and completely caused 
by mental events and also wholly and completely caused by physical events. 
Thus, even if I didn’t have a desire for a drink, I would still have taken the 
same action.
(2)	 The appearance of mental causation is an illusion. In reality, mental events 
are epiphenomenal, i.e., they have no causal power.
In contrast, the identity theorist’s account of mental causation is perfectly in line 
with the completeness of physics. Since the identity theorists claim that mental 
events are identical to physical events, they can explain human action in terms of 
mental causes without denying that a physical event’s causal history can be given 
wholly in physical terms.
Generally speaking, then, the positive case for the identity theory can be seen 
as one of inference to the best explanation. According to the identity theorists, the 
best way to account for mental causation is to see mental causes as themselves 
physical. More generally, the best way to account for all of the undeniable psy-
chophysical correlations that we observe is in terms of identity. There are not two 
distinct things whose correlation needs explanation; rather there is only one thing. 
As we saw earlier, a similar strategy of inference to the best explanation was 
employed by the behaviorists. But the identity theorists have a plausible reason to 
claim that the explanation they offer is better than the one offered by the behavior-
ists. In reducing mental states to behavior, the behaviorists had to deny that mental- 
state talk serves a reporting function. For the behaviorist, my claim that I am 
in pain does not serve to report my pain but rather is part of what constitutes it; 
consider Wittgenstein’s remark that “The verbal expression of pain replaces cry-
ing and does not describe it” (Wittgenstein 1953, §244). As the identity theorists 

A m y  K i n d
62
pointed out, this seems implausible. But unlike the dualist, who views such a 
claim as a report of an “irreducibly psychical something” (Smart 1959, 142), the 
identity theory can view the claim as a report that refers to a brain process (albeit 
perhaps unknowingly to the one who makes the report).
Though the identity theory in this way makes a considerable advance over 
behaviorism, the early identity theorists did not fully abandon the behaviorist 
leanings of the early 20th century. As originally developed, the identity theory 
was meant to apply only to experiential mental states, states like mental images 
and pains. With respect to other mental states like beliefs and desires, the early 
identity theorists thought that behaviorist analyses were largely correct. Place, for 
example, noted explicitly that for cognitive and volitional concepts “there can be 
little doubt . . . that an analysis in terms of dispositions to behave is fundamentally 
sound” (Place 1956, 44). Later identity theorists like David Armstrong and David 
Lewis explicitly rejected the restriction of the theory to experiential states. Putting 
emphasis on the virtue of theoretical economy, these later theorists thought that it 
would be preferable to give a unified account of all mental phenomena (see, e.g., 
Armstrong 1968, 80). In further developing the identity theory, Armstrong and 
Lewis also emphasized the causal nature of mental states, thereby paving the way 
for the functionalist theories of mind that became prominent in the late 1960s and 
that continue to be prominent today.
2.2  Multiple realizability
To understand the rise of functionalism, however, we must first understand an 
influential criticism directed against the identity theory in the late 1960s, namely, 
what we might call the multiple realizability argument. Forcefully developed by 
Hilary Putnam and Jerry Fodor among others, the argument rests on the claim 
that creatures with very different neural mechanisms might all feel pain, i.e., that 
pain might be multiply realizable in many different kinds of physical structures. 
As Putnam puts the point, the truth of the identity theory requires the existence of 
some type of state such that any creature whatsoever who is in pain is in that phys-
ical state. But creatures as diverse as mammals, reptiles, and molluscs all seem 
unquestionably to experience pain, despite having very different neural structures. 
And can’t we conceive of extraterrestrial life forms who also experience pain? 
(Putnam 1967, 436) Here we might consider Lewis’s example of a hydraulically 
powered Martian. Martian pain feels just like human pain, though the Martian has 
a physical constitution quite different from that of humans:
His hydraulic mind contains nothing like our neurons. Rather, there are 
varying amounts of fluid in many inflatable cavities, and the inflation 
of any one of these cavities opens some valves and closes others. His 
mental plumbing pervades most of his body – in fact, all but the heat 
exchanger inside his head. When you pinch his skin you cause no firing 
of C-fibers – he has none – but, rather, you cause the inflation of smallish 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
63
cavities in his feet. When these cavities are inflated, he is in pain. And the 
effects of his pain are fitting: his thought and activity are disrupted, he 
groans and writhes, he is strongly motivated to stop you from pinching 
him and to see to it that you never do again.
(Lewis 1980, 216)
In brief, the identity theory postulates an identity between types of states, with 
each type of mental state identified with a type of brain state. (For this reason, the 
theory is often referred to as type physicalism). My pain and your pain are both 
tokens of the type pain, but so too are the pain of an octopus and the pain of a 
Martian. For the identity theory to be true, all tokens of the type pain must also be 
tokens of the same type of physical state (be it the state of c-fiber firing or some 
other state). But just as two token mousetraps (or two token clocks, or two token 
engines) might be made of – or realized by – very different physical materials, so 
too it seems that two tokens of the type pain might be realized by very different 
physical states.
The multiple realizability argument came to be seen as a significant threat to the 
identity theory. Importantly, however, that is not to say that the identity theory has 
been discarded. Unlike behaviorism, the identity theory continued to attract support 
through the final decades of the 20th century, and versions of the theory continue 
to be defended in these early days of the 21st century. Among the various strategies 
available for responding to the multiple realizability argument, one promising line 
retreats to species-specific reduction and concedes that human pain is a distinct type 
of mental state from, e.g., octopus pain. (For discussion, see Kim 1992.)
At this point, it’s also worth noting that the threat posed to the identity theory 
by the multiple realizability argument is not a threat to physicalism in general. 
Nothing in the argument shows that pain is non-physical, i.e., it is compatible 
with the argument that all token pains are realized by some physical state or other, 
even if those physical states are not all of the same type. Thus, for all we’ve said 
so far, token physicalism remains a viable theory.13 Other objections that have 
been raised to the identity theory, particularly those concerning qualia, the phe-
nomenal aspects of our mental states, do count against physicalism more broadly. 
But since such objections are best understood against the backdrop of both the 
identity theory and functionalism, we will postpone discussion of them until the 
final section of this paper.
3.  Functionalism
Behaviorism was threatened by the possibility that an organism might be in a 
mental state without exhibiting any of the characteristic behavior associated with 
that mental state, i.e., an organism might be in pain without exhibiting any pain 
behavior. The identity theory was threatened by the possibility that an organism 
might be in a mental state without being in the characteristic brain state associ-
ated with that mental state, i.e., an organism might be in the state of pain without 

A m y  K i n d
64
being in the state of c-fiber firing. Functionalism manages to block both of these 
threats by treating mental states as functional states. For the functionalist, a men-
tal state like pain is identified by the functional role that it plays in the life of the 
organism. While historical antecedents to functionalism can be found in the work 
of Aristotle and Hobbes, the view received its first detailed development in the 
second half of the 20th century.14 Its rise coincides with important developments 
in computer science and particularly in artificial intelligence, and functionalists 
have often drawn on computational analogies in spelling out their position. On 
the functionalist view, mentality is better thought of at the level of software than 
at the level of hardware.
3.1  Mental states as functional states
Above we noted that a device like a mousetrap can be realized in multiple differ-
ent physical structures. For something to be a mousetrap, what matters is not what 
it is made of but what it does, i.e., the function it performs. The notion mousetrap 
must thus be specified not physically but functionally. In this way mousetraps are 
different from, say, nuggets of gold. For something to be a gold nugget, it must 
have a specific physical constitution, i.e., it must be composed of atoms with 
atomic number 79 – hence the truth of the expression, “All that glitters is not 
gold.” Compare pyrite, or fool’s gold, which has a similarly brilliant yellow luster 
but is a compound of iron sulfide.
Mousetraps are not the only things that are specified functionally. A similar point 
applies to many other artifact concepts – engines, clocks, pencil sharpeners – and 
even biological concepts. As Jaegwon Kim notes,
What makes an organ a heart is the fact that it pumps blood. The human 
heart may be physically very unlike hearts in, say, reptiles or birds, but 
they all count as hearts because of the job they do in the organisms in 
which they are found, not on account of their similarity in shape, size, or 
material constitution.
(Kim 2011, 131)
The functionalist claims that mental states are better understood on the model of 
the mousetrap than on the model of gold nuggets. Consider again the mental state 
pain. This state plays a certain role in the life of an organism. It typically comes 
about because of bodily damage, and it typically results in wincing, moaning, 
avoidance behavior, fear, a desire for relief, and so on. Or consider the mental state 
thirst. It typically comes about because of lack of adequate hydration, and it typi-
cally results in dry mouth, liquid-seeking behavior, a desire for liquids, and so on.
As this suggests, the functionalist’s characterization of mental states is strikingly 
reminiscent of the behaviorist characterizations of mental states. In particular, 
both the functionalist and the behaviorist define mental states in terms of a rela-
tion between inputs and outputs. But despite this similarity, there are nonetheless 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
65
Dime input
Nickel Input
S1
Dispenses a gumball and remains 
in S1
Proceeds to S2
S2
Dispenses a gumball and a nickel 
and proceeds to S1
Dispenses a gumball and 
proceeds to S1
several important differences between the two kinds of characterizations. Unlike 
the behaviorist, the functionalist does not deny that mental states are internal states 
of the organism. For the functionalist, a statement like “I am in pain” does not 
count as just pain behavior along the lines of wincing and moaning but serves 
as a genuine report. This leads to a related difference between functionalism and 
behaviorism. By accepting that mental states are internal states of organisms, the 
functionalist can make reference to such states in the specification of inputs and 
outputs. Pain produces not only certain characteristic behaviors but also certain 
mental states; as indicated above, it typically leads to a desire for relief.
Our discussion thus far highlights two important tenets of the functionalist 
view. First, mental states are interdefined. Second, mental states are multiply real-
izable. The first point protects functionalism from many of the objections that 
threatened behaviorism; the second point protects functionalism from many of 
the objections that threatened the identity theory. While these two tenets underlie 
functionalism in general, the view comes in several varieties that differ from one 
another in various important respects.
As originally articulated by Putnam, functionalism was formulated in terms of 
a Turing machine, a hypothetical device proposed in 1936 by mathematician Alan 
Turing. (For this reason, Putnam’s version of functionalism is often referred to as 
machine functionalism.) In brief, the operations of a Turing machine can be wholly 
characterized by a set of instructions given in what’s often called a machine table. 
For each internal state of the computer, the instructions specify the output that will 
result from a given input. An example drawn from Fodor (1981) helps to elucidate 
the concept.15 Consider a simple gumball machine that sells gumballs for a dime, 
takes both nickels and dimes, and is capable of dispensing change. The operations 
of the machine can be wholly described by the following table:
As this table indicates, the machine has two possible states. Metaphorically 
speaking, we can think of S1 as the state waiting for a dime and S2 as the state 
waiting for a nickel.16 The machine is waiting for a dime when it has received no 
money since last dispensing a gumball; the machine is waiting for a nickel when 
it has received a nickel since last dispensing a gumball. If the machine is waiting 
for a dime and it gets a dime, then it dispenses a gumball and continues to wait for 
a dime. If the machine is waiting for a dime and it gets a nickel, then it switches 
to waiting for a nickel. If the machine is waiting for a nickel and it gets a dime, 
then it dispenses a gumball and a nickel and switches to waiting for a dime. If the 

A m y  K i n d
66
machine is waiting for a nickel and it gets a nickel, then it dispenses a gumball and 
switches to waiting for a dime.
For the machine functionalist, the mind can be thought of as a Turing machine, 
i.e., the operations of the mind can be completely described by way of a machine 
table. Each mental state corresponds to one line – perhaps a very long line – in 
the machine table. Though coming up with the appropriate machine table will 
undoubtedly be quite difficult, Putnam notes that the project of doing so – that is, 
the project of coming up with “‘mechanical’ models of organisms” – is an “inevi-
table part of the program of psychology” (Putnam 1967, 435).
Returning to the machine table above, note that while it gives a complete speci-
fication of the operation of the gumball machine it says nothing about its physical 
constitution. The gumball machine might be made of plastic, of metal, of wood, 
and so on. In fact, it might even be made of non-physical stuff. Consider Fodor’s 
claim that: “As far as functionalism is concerned a [gumball] machine with states 
S1 and S2 could be made of ectoplasm, if there is such stuff and if its states have 
the right causal properties” (Fodor 1981, 129). Machine functionalists like Put-
nam tended to think the same could be true of the mind and hence took their view 
to be compatible with dualism (Putnam 1967, 436).
As functionalism has developed, however, it has tended to be classified as a 
physicalist view, and reasonably so: Most functionalists see themselves as com-
mitted to physicalism. The commitment underlying the physicalist version of 
functionalism might be captured as follows: While mental states may be realized 
in many different physical substances, they must all be realized in some physical 
substance or other. As this suggests, however, the physicalist version of function-
alism – and hereafter it should be assumed that I am talking about this version of 
the view unless I explicitly note otherwise – is not a version of type physicalism. 
Rather, it is a version of token physicalism. For the functionalist, every token 
pain is realized in some physical state, but those physical states might be tokens 
of different physical types – perhaps c-fiber firing in humans while something 
altogether different in a hydraulic Martian.
In the wake of Putnam’s work, various versions of functionalism have been 
developed in the philosophical literature. These subsequent versions retain the core 
commitment of functionalism – that mental states should be understood as func-
tional states – while dropping the commitment to understanding functional states in 
terms of machine states. Some functionalists endorse psychofunctionalism, the view 
that mental states are defined by the functional roles they play in an empirical theory, 
specifically, that of cognitive psychology (see, e.g., Fodor 1968). Other functional-
ists endorse analytic or conceptual functionalism, the view that mental states are 
defined by the functional roles they play in our ordinary or “folk” theory (see, e.g., 
Lewis 1966; Armstrong 1968). This version of functionalism emerges from logical 
behaviorism and shares its underlying motivation of providing analyses of our ordi-
nary mental state concepts. Yet other functionalists endorse teleological functional-
ism. What’s distinctive to teleological functionalism is the claim that that the notion 
of ‘function’ must be understood teleologically, i.e., in terms of biological purpose.17

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
67
3.2  Criticisms of functionalism
By the 1970s, functionalism had become the dominant view in philosophy of 
mind, and, in fact, even now at the beginning of the 21st century, it continues to 
enjoy widespread acceptance. But despite its popularity, the view has nonetheless 
faced significant criticisms. One key strand of attack, emerging from the work of 
John Searle, claims that functionalism is unable adequately to capture the inten-
tional nature of our mental states. In this context, intentionality doesn’t have to do 
with intention but with aboutness or directedness. Consider my belief that Albert 
Pujols is a baseball player. This belief, which is about Albert Pujols, has inten-
tional content. When I hope that Pujols will hit a lot of home runs next season, 
or when I desire his autograph, these mental states too have intentional content – 
they too are directed at Albert Pujols. Importantly, mental states can have inten-
tional content even if they are directed at things that do not exist. Someone who 
has mistaken Conan Doyle’s stories for nonfiction might admire Sherlock Holmes 
and desire his autograph. Though Sherlock Holmes does not exist, these mental 
states are intentional nonetheless.18
Searle’s famous Chinese Room thought experiment aims to show that com-
puters cannot achieve understanding and, correspondingly, that functionalism 
cannot provide an adequate account of mentality. Consider a computer that is 
programmed to speak Chinese. If the program were good enough – if, say, the 
program were to put the computer in the same functional states as a native speaker 
of Chinese – then the computer would produce outputs that were indistinguishable 
from such a speaker. The computer would appear to understand Chinese. But, says 
Searle, this appearance would be mistaken, for the mere instantiation of a program 
cannot endow a computer with understanding. To defend this point, Searle imagi-
nes that he is inside a room with a very sophisticated rulebook equivalent to the 
computer’s program. When Searle enters the room, he does not understand Chi-
nese, and has no idea what the different Chinese characters mean – they look to 
him like mere squiggles. The instructions in the rule book tell him what squiggles 
to output upon receiving certain other squiggles as input. But now suppose he gets 
very good at following the rulebook, so good that from outside the room it appears 
that there is a native Chinese speaker on the inside. This, Searle suggests, gives 
us a system that is analogous to a computer instantiating a program, a system that 
passes through the same functional states as a native Chinese speaker does when 
understanding Chinese. But, says Searle, no matter how good he gets at manipu-
lating the squiggles, he does not understand Chinese. His outputs don’t mean any-
thing to him; they lack intentionality. Thus, functionalism fails to account for the 
intentionality of mental states and hence fails to be an adequate theory of mind.
Functionalists have various responses to this argument. One prominent response 
charges that Searle is looking for understanding in the wrong place. He is just a 
cog in the machine while it’s the overall system of which he is a part that achieves 
understanding (see, e.g., Boden 1988). But even if functionalism is able to account 
for intentional states like beliefs and desires – and many philosophers think that, 

A m y  K i n d
68
despite Searle’s objections, the theory is especially well suited in this regard – it 
has faced intense criticism regarding its ability to handle qualitative states.
Consider the experience of seeing a ripe banana, or smelling a skunk’s spray, or 
feeling a dull ache in your lower back. Each of these experiences has phenomenal 
or qualitative character – to use a phrase associated with the work of Thomas 
Nagel, there is something it is like to have such experiences. The experience of 
seeing a ripe banana has a different qualitative character from seeing an unripe 
banana, and the experience of feeling a dull ache in your lower back has a dif-
ferent qualitative character from the experience of feeling a sharp twinge in your 
lower back.
Two different arguments have been offered to show that functionalism cannot 
adequately account for the qualitative character of our mental states. The first such 
argument – typically referred to as the absent qualia argument – owes primarily to 
the work of Ned Block (1978). Block proposed a thought experiment involving a 
homunculi-headed robot, i.e., a robot whose body is powered by a system consist-
ing of a billion homunculi.19 Supposing we’re able to map out the functions of the 
human brain in a machine table, we could assign each homunculus a simple task 
corresponding to one square of that table, e.g., pushing a certain output button 
upon receiving a certain input. In this way, the billion homunculi together would 
constitute a system that is functionally equivalent to the human brain. According 
to Block, however, it seems implausible that such a system would really feel pain 
or have the qualitative experience associated with seeing a ripe banana. To dem-
onstrate this implausibility, Block proposes that we recruit one billion humans 
and have each of them substitute for one of the homunculi. When thinking about 
a robot powered in this way, most people have the strong intuition that it would 
lack qualia. But since having qualitative character is essential to the mental state 
of pain, and to the mental state of seeing a ripe banana, functionalism does not 
provide an adequate account of these states.
The second qualia-based argument directed at functionalism is what’s typically 
referred to as the inverted qualia argument. Underlying the argument is the intui-
tion, first articulated in the 17th century by John Locke, that inversion of the vis-
ible spectrum might be behaviorally undetectable, i.e., that two people might have 
quite different – even inverted – qualitative experiences without this difference 
showing up in their behavior. Starting in the 1970s, several philosophers began 
employing the possibility of spectrum inversion in arguments against function-
alism (see, e.g., Block and Fodor 1972; Shoemaker 1975). The argument goes 
roughly as follows. Consider two individuals, Ruby and Kelly, who are function-
ally identical to one another with respect to their color experiences. Both will refer 
to red tomatoes as ripe and to green tomatoes as unripe; both stop at red lights and 
go at green lights; both note that a stop sign has the same color as a Coke can, and 
that grass has the same color as Kermit the frog. But it seems possible that their 
qualitative experiences are very different from one another. The experience that 
Ruby has when looking at a ripe tomato might be different from the experience 
that Kelly has when looking at a ripe tomato. In particular, Kelly’s experience 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
69
when looking at the ripe tomato might be the experience that Ruby has when look-
ing at Kermit the frog, while the experience that Kelly has when looking at Kermit 
the frog might be the experience that Ruby has when looking at a ripe tomato. In 
this case, though Ruby and Kelly have experiences that are inverted from one 
another, there will be no functional difference. But since the qualitative aspect of 
a mental state seems central to its being the mental state that it is, functionalism 
seems inadequate.
Granted, many philosophers have questioned the coherence of spectrum inver-
sion (see, e.g., Dennett 1988). But accounting for qualia has continued to prove 
problematic for functionalism and, in fact, for physicalism more generally. In the 
last quarter of the 20th century, debates about qualia emerged to play a key role in 
the mind-body problem. We turn to these debates in the next section.
4.  The age of qualia
With respect to the mind-body problem, the end of the 20th century can in many 
ways be thought of as the age of qualia. Although the majority of philosophers in 
the 21st century still consider themselves to be physicalists of one sort or another 
(see Bourget and Chalmers 2014), since the 1970s there has been significant phil-
osophical attention devoted to qualia and, in particular, to the apparent difficulty 
in accounting for qualia within a physicalist treatment of mind.20 If 20th-century 
discussion of the mind-problem began with the Age of Behaviorism, and subse-
quently passed through Age of the Identity Theory and the Age of Functionalism, 
it would not be much of an overstatement to characterize the end of the century 
(and indeed, the beginning of the 21st century) as the Age of Qualia.
In addition to the qualia-based arguments against functionalism that we con-
sidered in the previous section, two related arguments that emerged in the 1970s 
and 80s brought qualia to the forefront of discussion. The first of these argu-
ments has become known as the bat argument; the second has become known as 
the knowledge argument. In the 1990s, a third qualia-based argument – the zom-
bie argument – entered the fray.21 All three of these arguments aim to show that 
physicalism cannot adequately account for qualia and thus cannot be an adequate 
theory of mind. At the same time, they have also had the effect of rejuvenating the 
dualist position that had been dormant for most of the century. In what follows we 
consider each of these arguments in turn.
4.1  The bat argument
Thomas Nagel introduced the bat argument in his seminal article “What Is It Like 
to Be a Bat?” (1974). Given that bats are mammals, they are surely conscious – 
there is surely something that there’s like to be a bat. But bats navigate the world 
very differently from the way that we humans do. While we use our senses of 
sight, sound, and touch to make our way about the world, bats do so by way of 
echolocation. Thus, their conscious experience is very different from ours – so 

A m y  K i n d
70
different, in fact, that it’s claimed that we cannot even imagine what it’s like for 
a bat when it is using its sonar. What it’s like to be a bat is thus fundamentally a 
subjective phenomenon, understood only from a single point a view (namely, the 
bat’s). Since physicalism takes the objective point of view, it cannot capture what 
it is like to be a bat. Moreover, this failure of physicalism is not a minor one, since 
the fact that experience is subjective is an essential fact about experience, i.e., the 
subjectivity of what it is like to be a bat is an essential fact about it. So, concluded 
Nagel, physicalism cannot capture all the essential facts about experiences.
Even though our own conscious experience is very different from that of the 
bat, one might question whether Nagel was right to conclude that we can’t even 
imagine it. In an attempt to forestall this kind of objection, Nagel noted that it 
wouldn’t be enough for us to imagine that we have webbing on our arms, that we 
spend the day in caves hanging upside down by our feet, that we eat insects, and 
so on. It won’t even help to imagine that one has extremely poor vision and that 
one uses high-frequency signals to perceive the world. As Nagel argued:
In so far as I can imagine this (which is not very far), it tells me only 
what it would be like for me to behave as a bat behaves. But that is not 
the question. I want to know what it is like for a bat to be a bat. Yet if 
I try to imagine this, I am restricted to the resources of my own mind, and 
these resources are inadequate to the task. I cannot perform it either by 
imagining additions to my present experience, or by imagining segments 
gradually subtracted from it, or by imagining some combination of addi-
tions, subtractions, and modifications.
(Nagel 1974, 439)
Since the time Nagel wrote his article, developments in virtual reality have made 
possible human experience of something like echolocation. But presumably 
Nagel would extend the reasoning from the above quotation to deny that even this 
experience would be enough to enable us to imagine what it is like to be a bat: All 
that we could learn from such an experience would be what it is like for a human 
to have some bat-like qualities.
4.2  The knowledge argument
The knowledge argument was introduced by Frank Jackson in the 1980s in a 
pair of articles: “Epiphenomenal Qualia” (1982) and “What Mary Didn’t Know” 
(1986). The argument centers around a thought experiment involving Mary, a 
brilliant color scientist.22 We are asked to imagine that Mary has lived her entire 
life enclosed in a black and white room and that she has never been exposed to 
color. She wears black and white gloves, she never presses on her eyeball to have 
a phosphene experience, and so on. While in the room, however, she has been 
given black and white textbooks, a black and white television, a computer with 
a black and white monitor, and other black and white research tools. Moreover, 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
71
Mary lives at a future time at which researchers have developed a completed 
color science. While in her black and white room, Mary masters this color sci-
ence. Through careful study, that is, she learns the entire physical story of color. 
She knows exactly how the human eye and the human brain process color, she 
knows exactly how humans categorize objects by color, and she knows about the 
similarity relations among colors. Now suppose that one day Mary is released 
from her black and white environment. Immediately upon her release, Mary sees 
a ripe tomato. According to Jackson, it seems overwhelmingly plausible that this 
experience provides Mary with an “aha” moment: Once she sees color for the first 
time, she learns something new. In particular, she learns what seeing red is like. 
But since she already knew all of the physical facts about color, since she already 
knows the entire physical story, that story must not be the whole story. For this 
reason, physicalism cannot provide an adequate account of our mental states.
Physicalist responses to the argument tend to divide into two broad catego-
ries. First, some physicalists have denied Jackson’s intuition about Mary, what we 
might call the “aha” intuition. According to Daniel Dennett, who has persistently 
pushed this line in response to Jackson, the reason that we mistakenly have the 
“aha” intuition is that we’ve merely managed to imagine that Mary has lots and 
lots of physical information, not that she has all the physical information. If we 
were to imagine the situation correctly – if we were really to imagine that Mary 
has all the physical information – we would see that there is nothing left for Mary 
to learn (Dennett 1991, 398).
This strategy has not been widely pursued, presumably because even most 
physicalists find the “aha” intuition very hard to deny. Most physicalists instead 
pursue a second strategy, one that concedes that Mary learns something new upon 
leaving the room. Such philosophers deny that this concession threatens physical-
ism, because they deny that what Mary learns consists of a new fact. This second 
kind of response to the Mary case itself divides into two broad classes. The first 
group of philosophers deny that Mary’s newfound knowledge is factual. Rather, 
it is a different kind of knowledge – perhaps know-how (Lewis 1990; Nemirow 
1990), or perhaps acquaintance knowledge (Conee 1985). A second group of phi-
losophers accept that Mary’s knowledge is indeed factual, but they deny that it’s 
knowledge of a new fact. Rather she comes to recognize an old fact in a new 
way, under a new guise or via new concepts (Loar 1990). Despite such responses, 
however, the knowledge argument has continued to have considerable traction in 
philosophy of mind.23
4.3  The zombie argument
The zombie argument came to prominence in the mid-1990s through the work 
of David Chalmers.24 The philosopher’s zombie is importantly different from the 
brain-eating creatures that populate Hollywood horror movies. As described by 
Chalmers in The Conscious Mind (1996), zombies are understood to be crea-
tures who are physically identical to human beings but who completely lack 

A m y  K i n d
72
phenomenal consciousness, i.e., they are completely lacking in qualia. Your zom-
bie twin, for example, is molecule-for-molecule identical to you and likewise 
identical to you functionally: She processes information just as you do, reports on 
her mental states just as you do, focuses her attention on the world just as you do, 
and so on. But, as Chalmers said, “none of this functioning will be accompanied 
by any real conscious experience. There will be no phenomenal feel. There is 
nothing it is like to be a zombie” (Chalmers 1996, 95).
Chalmers then argued from the conceivability of zombies to the falsity of 
physicalism. If we can conceive of a zombie world – a world that is physically 
identical to ours yet in which there is a complete absence of phenomenal con-
sciousness – then such a world is metaphysically possible. But if a zombie world 
is metaphysically possible, then facts about consciousness are facts over and 
above the physical facts. Since the truth of physicalism requires that there be no 
facts about consciousness that are over and above the physical facts, physicalism 
must be false.
The zombie argument is often referred to as a conceivability argument. It 
moves from facts about what’s conceivable to facts about what’s possible. In this 
regard it resembles Descartes’ famous argument for substance dualism, presented 
in his Meditations on First Philosophy (1642). Descartes rested his argument on 
the claim that he could conceive of the mind existing without the body; from this 
he concluded that it is possible for the mind to exist without the body and hence 
that the mind and the body are two separate substances. Chalmers’s conceivabil-
ity argument does not aim to establish substance dualism but rather the falsity of 
physicalism. His own positive view, developed subsequently in The Conscious 
Mind, is a naturalistic version of property dualism.
Conceivability arguments typically face two different kinds of objections. First, 
it might be questioned whether the proposed scenario is really conceivable. Sec-
ond, it might be questioned whether conceivability is really a good guide to meta-
physical possibility, i.e., it might be questioned whether the conceivability of a 
given scenario really shows that such a scenario is logically possible. (See Gendler 
and Hawthorne 2002.) In addition to criticisms of these sorts, the zombie argu-
ment also faces a third kind of criticism. Many physicalists question whether the 
metaphysical possibility of zombies counts against physicalism, and this in turn 
leads to questions about how exactly physicalism should be construed. Twenty 
years after its articulation, the zombie argument continues to be heavily debated.
Conclusion
From the vantage point of these early years of the 21st century, it is still too soon 
to assess whether we’ve reached the end of the age of qualia, and, if so, what new 
age will be ushered in to replace it. It seems clear, however, that phenomenal con-
sciousness continues to pose a threat to physicalist theories of mind. This threat 
has led some to argue that the mind-body problem is in principle insoluble (see, 
e.g., McGinn 1989). It also seems to account for the recent resurgence of interest 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
73
in theories of mentality that in various ways aspire to transcend the traditional 
dualism-physicalism divide. In particular, many philosophers of mind have begun 
to explore the coherence of positions like panpsychism and Russellian monism, 
both of which try to find a place for consciousness at the fundamental level of 
reality.25
But despite the threat of phenomenal consciousness, traditional versions of 
physicalism continue to enjoy considerable support. In the view of many physi-
calists, the tremendous neuroscientific progress of the 20th century suggests that 
it is just a matter of time before we are able to understand mentality entirely in 
terms of neural mechanisms. Perhaps this will require us to abandon some of our 
common mental state vocabulary; it might be that our folk psychological concepts 
like “belief” and “desire” do not map very well unto neuroscientific states. Such is 
the prediction made by eliminative materialists such as Paul Churchland (see, e.g., 
his 1981). It might be that we will be able to understand the truth of physicalism 
only by way of a conceptual revolution of sorts.26 Alternatively, perhaps, future 
developments in neuroscience, in conjunction with philosophical theorizing, 
might enable us better to grasp how a physical reduction of mentality is possible.27
Ultimately, however, it remains the case at the start of the 21st century that the 
nature of mentality is still very much in dispute. Granted, there are some points 
of widespread agreement. Substance dualism, which had dominated philosophy 
prior to the 20th century since the time of Descartes, is no longer considered via-
ble. Likewise, behaviorism has been dismissed as a failed experiment. But despite 
these important points of agreement and the corresponding philosophical progress 
involved, it is clear that the 20th century did not provide a widely accepted solu-
tion to the mind-body problem. It remains to be seen whether such a solution will 
be found in the century ahead.28
Notes
	 1	 See, e.g., the assessment by U. T. Place: “[E]ver since the debate between Hobbes and 
Descartes ended in apparent victory for the latter, it was taken more or less for granted 
that whatever answer to the mind-body problem is true, materialism must be false” 
(Place 2002, 36).
	 2	 See Titchener 1914 for a discussion of 19th century antecedents to behaviorism in 
psychology.
	 3	 In discussions of behaviorism, philosophers often adopt different classificatory 
schemes. See, e.g., Byrne (1994) and Graham (2010).
	 4	 In the second half of the 20th century philosophy, non-behaviorist versions of elimi-
nativism were developed by various philosophers. This kind of view, which seems to 
have its roots in the work of Wilfred Sellars, is notably found in W.V.O. Quine (1960), 
Paul Feyerabend (1963), Richard Rorty (1965), and Paul Churchland (1981).
	 5	 Chisholm (1957, 173–185). See also Geach (1957, esp. 7–9).
	 6	 See Dennett 1987 for essays in which his behavioristic tendencies are in evidence.
	 7	 See, e.g., Crawford 2013 for discussion of the differences.
	 8	 The early identity theorists also claimed that such scientific discoveries were contin-
gent. In the wake of Saul Kripke’s Naming and Necessity (1980), this claim is now 
largely thought to be mistaken.

A m y  K i n d
74
	 9	 Place (2002, 37) takes this feature of the identity theory to be central in distinguishing 
it from earlier versions of materialism.
	10	 For a useful discussion of topic-neutrality, see Armstrong (1999, 75–79).
	11	 Smart does not work out this argument in any detail, but see Christopher Hill (1991, ch. 
2) for a more comprehensive attempt to show that considerations of simplicity favor 
the identity theory over its dualistic rivals.
	12	 See Chapter 7 for a detailed discussion of the problem of mental causation.
	13	 Donald Davidson’s anomalous monism is one particularly prominent version of token 
physicalism. See, e.g., Davidson (1970).
	14	 See Levin 2013 for a discussion of historical antecedents to functionalism.
	15	 I have amended this example slightly.
	16	 In describing the gumball machine’s states this way, I do not mean to suggest that the 
gumball machine should be thought of as having mental states. To reemphasize, the 
description is meant to be metaphorical.
	17	 Ruth Millikan’s work has been especially important in the development of the tele-
ological notion of function (see, e.g., Millikan 1993).
	18	 For further discussion of intentionality, see Chapter 8.
	19	 Block supposed that a billion homunculi would be sufficient to realize the functional 
organization of the human brain since, at the time that he was writing, that corre-
sponded to the best estimate for the number of neurons in the brain. It is now believed 
that there are upwards of 85 billion neurons in the brain. Block can of course accom-
modate this development by increasing the number of homunculi needed to power the 
robot system.
	20	 This debate has been accompanied by a corresponding surge of interest in the notion of 
consciousness more generally. For further discussion of consciousness, see Chapter 3.
	21	 An additional influential critique of physicalism related to qualia-based considerations 
was developed in Kripke (1980).
	22	 Jackson 1982 also included a second thought experiment involving a man named Fred 
who’s able to discriminate more colors than normal human beings. Subsequent discus-
sion, however, has tended to focus almost exclusively on the Mary case.
	23	 Jackson himself, however, eventually recanted; he no longer believes that the knowl-
edge argument disproves physicalism. See Jackson (2003).
	24	 A similar argument was previously introduced in Kirk (1974).
	25	 See, e.g., the collection of papers in Alter and Nagasawa (2015).
	26	 This point has recently been argued by Nagel: “Our inability to come up with an intel-
ligible conception of the relation between mind and body is a sign of the inadequacy of 
our present concepts” (1998).
	27	 For a more detailed discussion of what lies ahead for philosophical theorizing about 
mentality, see Chapter 12.
	28	 Thanks to Frank Menetrez and Julie Yoo for comments on a previous draft.
Bibliography
Alter, Torin and Nagasawa, Yujin (2015). Consciousness in the Physical World: Perspec-
tives on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Armstrong, David M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of Mind. New York: Humanities Press.
Armstrong, David M. (1999). The Mind-Body Problem: An Opinionated Introduction. 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Block, Ned and Fodor, Jerry A. (1972). “What Psychological States Are Not.” Philosophi-
cal Review, 81 (April): 159–181.

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
75
Boden, Margaret (1988). Computer Models of the Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Boring, Edwin G. (1933). The Physical Dimensions of Consciousness. New York: The 
Century Co.
Bourget, David and Chalmers, David J. (2014). “What Do Philosophers Believe?” Philo-
sophical Studies, 170: 465–500.
Byrne, Alex (1994). “Behaviorism,” in Guttenplan, Samuel (ed.), A Companion to the Phi-
losophy of Mind. Oxford: Blackwell.
Carnap, Rudolf (1932). “Psychology in Physical Language,” Erkenntnis, 3: 107–142.
Chalmers, David J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chisholm, Roderick (1957). Perceiving: A Philosophical Study. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press.
Churchland, Paul (1981). “Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes,” Jour-
nal of Philosophy, 78: 67–90.
Conee, Earl (1985). “Physicalism and Phenomenal Properties,” Philosophical Quarterly, 
35: 296–302.
Crawford, Sean (2013). “The Myth of Logical Behaviourism and the Origins of the Iden-
tity Theory,” in Beaney, Michael (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of the History of Analytic 
Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, Donald (1970). “Mental Events,” in Foster, Lawrence and Swanson, J. W. 
(eds.), Experience and Theory. London: Duckworth.
Dennett, Daniel (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, Daniel (1988). “Quining Qualia,” in Marcel, A. and Bisiach, E. (eds.), Conscious-
ness in Modern Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dennett, Daniel (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
Feigl, Herbert (1958). “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’,” Minnesota Studies in the Philoso-
phy of Science, 2: 370–497.
Feyerabend, Paul (1963). “Mental Events and the Brain,” Journal of Philosophy, 40: 
295–296.
Geach, P. T. (1957). Mental Acts. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Gendler, Tamar and Hawthorne, John (2002). “Introduction: Conceivability and Possibil-
ity,” in Gendler, Tamar and Hawthorne, John (eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Graham, George (2010). “Behaviorism,” in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy (Spring 2015 edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/
entries/behaviorism/.
Fodor, Jerry (1968). Psychological Explanation. New York: Random House.
Fodor, Jerry (1981). “The Mind-Body Problem,” Scientific American, 244: 114–125.
Hempel, Carl G. (1980). “The Logical Analysis of Psychology,” in Block, Ned (ed.), Read-
ings in the Philosophy of Psychology, Volume 1. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press: 1–14.
Hill, Christopher S. (1991). Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Jackson, Frank (1982). “Epiphenomenal Qualia,” Philosophical Quarterly, 32: 127–136.
Jackson, Frank (1986). “What Mary Didn’t Know,” Journal of Philosophy, 83: 291–295.

A m y  K i n d
76
Jackson, Frank (2003). “Mind and Illusion,” in O’Hear, Anthony (ed.), Minds and Persons. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 421–442.
James, William (1890/1981). The Principles of Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Kim, Jaegwon (1992). “Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction,” Philoso-
phy and Phenomenological Research, 52: 1–26.
Kim, Jaegwon (2011). Philosophy of Mind (third edition). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Kirk, Robert (1974). “Zombies Vs Materialists,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
48: 135–152.
Kripke, Saul A. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Levin, Janet (2013). “Functionalism,” in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/
entries/functionalism/.
Lewis, David (1966). “An Argument for the Identity Theory,” Journal of Philosophy, 63: 
17–25.
Lewis, David (1980). “Mad Pain and Martian Pain,” in Block, Ned (ed.), Readings in 
the Philosophy of Psychology, Volume 1. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press: 
216–222.
Lewis, David (1990). “What Experience Teaches,” in Lycan, William G. (ed.), Mind and 
Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell: 29–57.
Loar, Brian (1990). “Phenomenal states,” Philosophical Perspectives, 4: 81–108.
McGinn, Colin (1989). “Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?” Mind, 98: 349–366.
Millikan, Ruth (1993). White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Nagel, Thomas (1974). “What Is It Like To Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review, 83: 435–450.
Nagel, Thomas (1998). “Conceiving the Impossible and the Mind-Body Problem,” Phi-
losophy, 73: 337–352.
Nemirow, Laurence (1990). “Physicalism and the Cognitive Role of Acquaintance,” in 
Lycan, William G. (ed.), Mind and Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Papineau, David (2002). Thinking About Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Place, Ullin T. (n.d.). “Identity Theories,” A Field Guide to the Philosophy of Mind. http://
host.uniroma3.it/progetti/kant/field/mbit.htm.
Place, Ullin T. (1956). “Is Consciousness a Brain Process,” British Journal of Psychology, 
47: 44–50.
Place, Ullin T. (2002). “A Pilgrim’s Progress? From Mystical Experience to Biological 
Consciousness,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9: 34–52.
Puccetti, Roland (1977). “The Great C-Fiber Myth: A Critical Note,” Philosophy of Sci-
ence, 44: 303–305.
Putnam, Hilary (1960). “Minds and machines.” In Hook, S. (ed.) Dimensions of Mind. New 
York: New York University Press. Reprinted in Putnam 1975: 362–385. Page references 
are to the reprinted edition.
Putnam, Hilary (1963). “Brains and Behavior,” in Butler, R. (ed.), Analytical Philosophy 
Second Series. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Reprinted in Putnam 1975: 325–341. Page ref-
erences to reprinted edition.
Putnam, Hilary (1967). “The Nature of Mental States,” Originally published as “Psycho-
logical Predicates,” in Capitain and Merrill (eds.), Art, Mind, and Religion. Pittsburgh: 

T h e  m i n d - b o d y  p r o b l e m  i n  2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  p h i l o s o p h y
77
University of Pittsburgh Press. Reprinted in Putnam 1975: 429–440. Page references to 
reprinted edition.
Putnam, Hilary (1975). Mind, Language and Reality: Philosophical Papers, Volume 2. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quine, Willard van Orman (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gilbert Ryle (1949). The Concept of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rorty, Richard (1965). “Mind-Body Identity, Privacy, and Categories,” Review of Meta-
physics, 19: 24–54.
Schlick, Moritz (1925/1974). General Theory of Knowledge. Trans. Alfred E. Blumberg. 
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Shoemaker, Sydney (1975). “Functionalism and Qualia.” Philosophical Studies 27 (May): 
291–315.
Skinner, B. F. (1974). About Behaviorism. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Smart, J.J.C. (1959). “Sensations and Brain Processes,” Philosophical Review, 68: 
141–156.
Titchener, E. B. (1914). “On ‘Psychology as the Behaviorist Views It,’ ” Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical Society, 53: 1–17.
Watson, John B. (1913). “Psychology as the Behaviorist Views It,” Psychological Review, 
20: 158–177.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1953). Philosophical Investigations, translated by G.E.M. Ans-
combe, New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.

78
3
A SHORT HISTORY OF 
PHILOSOPHICAL THEORIES OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS IN THE 20TH 
CENTURY
Tim Crane
1.  Introduction
Philosophy in the 20th century began and ended with an obsession with the prob-
lems of consciousness. But the specific problems discussed at each end of the 
century were very different, and reflection on how these differences developed 
will illuminate not just our understanding of the history of philosophy of con-
sciousness, but also our understanding of consciousness itself.
An interest in the problems of consciousness can be found in at least three move-
ments in early 20th-century philosophy: in the discussions of perception and realism 
by G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell; in the related discussions of realism and prag-
matism in America, in the period between William James and C. I. Lewis; and in the 
phenomenological movement started by Edmund Husserl. Two common themes in 
all these movements are: (i) that consciousness is a central or defining feature of the 
mind, and (ii) consciousness and thought (or intentionality) are interrelated phenom-
ena not to be discussed in isolation from one another. The problem of consciousness 
in those days was the problem of the nature of our access to the mind-independent 
world.
By the end of the century, the central concern of theories of consciousness in 
analytic philosophy was the question of physicalism, and the problem of con-
sciousness had become the problem of explaining how any physical thing could 
be conscious. Moreover, consciousness was not considered to be the essential 
feature of the mental, and thought (or intentionality) and consciousness were typi-
cally treated as distinct, separable phenomena. Both this conception of conscious-
ness and its perceived relation to the rest of the mind are very different from the 
conception to be found at the beginning of the century. The aim of this chapter is 
to explain how this change came about.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
79
2.  Thought, perception and the “given”
It is a truism of the history of 20th century philosophy that what came to be called 
analytic philosophy began in Cambridge with the “revolt against idealism” by Ber-
trand Russell and G. E. Moore. At the heart of this revolt was the insistence on the 
mind-independence of the objects of thought. But this insistence was also intertwined 
with assumptions about consciousness. In one of the seminal texts of early analytic 
philosophy, “The Refutation of Idealism”, Moore argued that thought and sensation 
“are both forms of consciousness, or to use a term that seems to be more in fashion 
just now, they are both ways of experiencing” (1903, 437). He then went on to derive 
anti-idealist conclusions from what he took to be manifest facts about experience.
Moore considers an experience of green and an experience of blue, and asks 
how they differ and how they resemble each other. He calls the respect in which 
they differ, the “object” of the experience and the respect in which they are the 
same, “consciousness” (“without yet attempting to say what the thing I so call 
is” 1903, 444). He acknowledges that consciousness itself is hard to identify by 
introspection. In a famous passage, he writes:
that which makes the sensation of blue a mental fact seems to escape us; 
it seems, if I may use a metaphor, to be transparent – we look through it 
and see nothing but the blue; we may be convinced that there is some-
thing, but what it is no philosopher, I think, has yet clearly recognised.
(1903, 446)
But the fact that we find consciousness itself so hard to identify should not make 
us dismiss it. Philosophers miss this relation because:
the moment we try to fix our attention upon consciousness and to see 
what distinctly, it is, it seems to vanish: it seems as we had before us a 
mere emptiness. When we try to introspect the sensation of blue, all we 
can see is the blue: the other element is as if it were diaphanous. Yet it 
can be distinguished if we look attentively enough, and if we know that 
there is something to look for.
(1903, 450)
The view Moore is opposed to is what he calls “the content theory”, which con-
ceives of the experience of blue on the model of substance and quality (alterna-
tively: object and property). On this theory, perceived blue is conceived of as a 
“quality of a thing” (1903, 448). For contemporary readers, it is important to bear 
in mind that this use of the word “content” is entirely different from today’s use: 
from at least the 1980s onwards, the word “content” has been standardly used to 
refer to representational features of experience. Moore’s use of the word makes 
“content” mean something closer to what we now know today as “qualia”: the 

T i m  C r a n e
80
intrinsic conscious properties of the experience. The content theory, in Moore’s 
sense, implies that if an episode of awareness is an awareness of blue, there has 
to be a “blue awareness” (1903, 450). Moore thinks this is absurd, and one of the 
sources of the errors of idealism. Moore seems to think that once we reject the 
absurd “content theory” and recognise the distinctness of the experience and its 
object, then we see what is wrong with idealism: “there is, therefore, no question 
of how we are to ‘get outside the circle of our own ideas and sensations’. Merely 
to have a sensation is already to be outside that circle. It is to know something 
which is as truly and really not a part of my experience” (1903, 451).
As Thomas Baldwin points out, Moore soon realised that “more needs to be said 
to handle cases in which something which is not in fact blue looks blue” (Baldwin 2010). 
This led to Moore’s lengthy investigation of whether the objects of experience – 
which he called “sense data” – are mind-independent or mind-dependent. This 
question became a preoccupation of the philosophy of perception for some dec-
ades, until the whole “sense data” way of thinking was widely abandoned in the 
1950s. What lay behind this whole sense-data tradition was not, as some have sup-
posed, a foundationalist epistemology or a concern with refuting scepticism, but 
a particular conception of consciousness: the “act-object” conception. According 
to this conception, conscious states and episodes are essentially relations: an “act” 
relating the subject of the state to its “object” (see Martin 2000). What is “given” 
in experience (the datum, plural: data) is the object or objects.
For present purposes, two points about Moore’s discussion are especially impor-
tant. First, for Moore, sensing is a form of consciousness, but thought is a form of 
consciousness too: his “true analysis of a sensation” applies to thought as well as 
to sense experience. Moore therefore believed in something like what is now called 
“cognitive phenomenology”: apprehending a proposition is an “act of conscious-
ness which may be called the understanding of meaning” (Moore 1953, 57–59; 
cf. Tennant 2006). Second, Moore held that “a sensation is, in reality, a case of 
‘knowing’ ”. The relation we call “being aware of” or “experiencing something” is 
“just that which we mean in every case by ‘knowing’ ” (1903, 449). As we will see, 
both these claims about consciousness came to be rejected later in the 20th century.
Moore’s emphasis on both the centrality of consciousness was shared both by 
the emerging science of psychology and by the early phenomenologists. Wilhelm 
Wundt, whose Principles of Physiological Psychology (1904) was one of the 
founding texts of the discipline, assumed that consciousness was the principal sub-
ject-matter of psychology. George Trumbull Ladd, who founded the Psychological 
Laboratory at Yale in 1892, defined psychology as the “description and explanation 
of states of consciousness as such”. William James is reported to have agreed with 
this definition (Güzeldere 1997). The British psychologist and philosopher G. F. 
Stout defined psychology as “the science of the processes whereby an individual 
becomes aware of a world of objects and adjusts his actions accordingly” (1899, 
4). Awareness is consciousness, and psychological processes are those that make 
awareness possible. Stout therefore distinguishes between the psychological – eve-
rything that is relevant to the processes whereby an individual becomes aware of 
the world – and the psychical, or the facts of consciousness themselves (1899, 7). 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
81
The psychological is whatever contributes to the creation of mental life; so much 
of the psychological is unconscious. The psychical in “the proper sense” is that 
which in some way enters into consciousness (1898, 9). In this, Stout registers his 
agreement with the American psychologist and editor of the famous Dictionary of 
Philosophy and Psychology, J. M. Baldwin, that consciousness is “the common 
and necessary form of all mental states . . . it is the point of division between mind 
and not-mind” (Stout 1899, 8). However, like Moore, Stout argued that no defini-
tion of consciousness is possible. “What is consciousness?” he asks, and in a strik-
ing non-sequitur, answers: “Properly speaking, definition is impossible. Everybody 
knows what consciousness is because everybody is conscious” (Stout 1899, 7).
Edmund Husserl shared the view that consciousness was a fundamental fea-
ture of all mental phenomena (Husserl 1900–1901; 1913). The phenomenological 
movement he initiated often claimed its inspiration in Franz Brentano’s classifi-
cation of all mental phenomena as intentional (Brentano 1874). Brentano, like 
Wundt and other psychologists of the day, had assumed that all mental phenomena 
are conscious – in his terminology, they all involve “presentation” (Vorstellung). 
For Husserl, the “the comprehensive task of constitutive phenomenology” is the 
task of “elucidating in their entirety the interwoven achievements of conscious-
ness which lead to the constitution of a possible world” (Experience and Judge-
ment 1948, 50). Husserl’s concern was with the (“transcendental”) conditions that 
make it possible for there to be a world for the subject; and for him, there being 
a world for the subject is the same as things being present to consciousness (see 
Poellner 2007, §2). The fundamentality of consciousness was a persistent com-
mitment of the phenomenological tradition (see, for example, Jean-Paul Sartre’s 
(1943) critique of the idea of unconscious intentionality).
As well as the claim that consciousness is definitive of all mental phenomena, 
these early 20th-century thinkers held that consciousness involves objects (how-
ever they are to be ultimately understood) appearing or being present or “given” to 
consciousness. Moore claimed that every experience “from the merest sensation 
to the most developed perception of reflexion” involves “that peculiar relation 
which I have called ‘awareness of anything’ . . . this is in fact the only essential 
element in an experience” (1903, 453). H. H. Price, who had studied with Moore, 
also called the relation of “being given” a “peculiar and ultimate manner of being 
present to consciousness” (Price 1932, 3). As the term “sense-data” suggests, 
then, consciousness is givenness (Crane 2000).
This is not to say, of course, that all philosophers of the era thought of given-
ness in the same way. The Harvard philosopher C. I. Lewis, in his influential work 
Mind and the World Order (1929) argued for a distinction between the given and 
its properties or qualities (which he called “qualia”) on the one hand, and the 
way the given is interpreted or conceptualised by the mind on the other. We are 
conscious of the qualia that are given to us, but we have no knowledge of them, 
according to Lewis, because “knowledge always transcends the immediately 
given” (Lewis 1929, 132). Whenever we attempt to describe a quale we must 
necessarily conceptualise it, and this inevitably changes what we are aware of. 
Qualia can be identified only indirectly by describing their place in a relational 

T i m  C r a n e
82
structure, which allows the possibility of inverted qualia: intrinsically differ-
ent qualia could play the same role in the network of relations (1929, 124). The 
given is, in this sense, ineffable. As M.G.F. Martin (2003) has pointed out, this is 
significantly different from the sense-datum theory, which emphasised the non-
conceptual, non-intellectual confrontation with an object in sense experience, 
the sense-datum. According to the sense-datum theory, perceptual consciousness 
consists in the relation to this object and is itself a form of knowledge. But in 
denying that awareness of the given (and its qualia) is a form of knowledge, 
Lewis “rejects a key element of the sense-datum tradition: sensing as an exam-
ple of a simple, primitive, or unanalysable state of knowing which relates the 
knower to something independent of the mind, where the subject’s grasp of what 
is known is pre-conceptual” (Martin 2003, 529). Martin also notes that this aspect 
of the sense-datum view is also rejected by Husserl’s Phenomenology. Husserl 
thought there was a kind of sensory “matter” (hyle) in sense-experience, but he 
did not think that this matter was something that is perceived: “although Husserl 
allows a role for the matter of episodes of perceiving, such aspects are not given 
to a subject as objects of awareness – they are not candidates for knowledge in 
the way that sense-data are supposed to be” (Martin 2003, 529). Both Husserl 
and Lewis, then, rejected the idea that the sensory matter of consciousness was 
an object of awareness.
Whereas Moore and Husserl saw consciousness and thought (intentionality) as 
intertwined, it is tempting to see Lewis’s creation of his conception of qualia as 
a first step in the separation of consciousness from intentionality which became 
orthodox in late 20th-century analytic philosophy. The idea that consciousness is 
something inexpressible, indefinable, inefficacious, additional and separable from 
the rest of mental life – from judgements, concepts, beliefs, thoughts and so on – 
came to be the central theme of later discussions of consciousness. I will call this 
the “phenomenal residue” conception of consciousness. As I will now argue, the 
conception was not eliminated by the behaviourist revolution in psychology and 
philosophy; on the contrary, the main legacy of the behaviourist movement was 
to reinforce this conception.
3.  The disappearance of consciousness:  
behaviourism and “raw feels”
In its early days, as we saw, scientific psychology was unequivocally the science 
of conscious phenomena. Early 20th-century psychologists traced their origins 
back to the associationism of James Mill and Alexander Bain, and “associa-
tion” was supposed to relate ideas, conceived of as conscious occurrences. The 
introspectionist school of Edward B. Titchener (who had studied with Wundt in 
Leipzig) attempted to use the detailed description of experience to describe its 
structure. There was a broad consensus that introspection was the correct method 
for psychology, and as William James commented, “everyone agrees that we there 
[i.e. in introspection] discover states of consciousness” (James 1890, 185).

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
83
James himself went on to reject the importance of consciousness in a famous 
paper published in 1904 called “Does ‘Consciousness’ Exist?”: “I believe that 
‘consciousness’, when once it has evaporated to this estate of pure diaphaneity, is 
on the point of disappearing altogether. It is the name of a nonentity, and has no 
right to a place among first principles” (James 1904, 477). His actual point is less 
radical than it initially seems: he rejects consciousness as an “entity” but argues 
instead that it is a “function”, the function of knowing (1904, 478). But nonethe-
less, James’s rejection of any non-epistemic sense of “consciousness” is striking; 
in some ways it prefigures the rise of behaviourism (see Güzeldere 1997, 13).
Even during the heyday of consciousness in early 20th-century psychology, 
there was a feeling that consciousness was mysterious, elusive and hard to under-
stand or define. Titchener quoted Bain and the Cambridge psychologist and phi-
losopher James Ward: “ ‘Consciousness’ says Professor Ward, ‘is the vaguest, 
most protean, and most treacherous of psychological terms’; and Bain, writing 
in 1880, distinguished no less than thirteen meanings of the word; he could find 
more today” (1915, 323–324). Introspectionism did not live long past Titchener’s 
death in 1927, collapsing partly under the weight of the unwieldy complexity of 
Titchener’s results – in his Outline of Psychology (1896), he had claimed that 
there were 44,000 elements in conscious experience – and partly because of the 
unclarity of the introspective method itself.
Psychology at this time (and indeed throughout the whole century) was very 
much preoccupied with its scientific status, and behaviourism seemed to grant it 
the scientific respectability it sought. The behaviourist phase in psychology lasted 
for at least three decades from the 1920s until the 1950s, and in the hands of 
Edward Thorndike, John B. Watson, Ivan Pavlov, B. F. Skinner, Clark Hull, E. C. 
Tolman (and others), it emphasised strict, “objective” measurement of behaviour 
as the only properly scientific method. Indeed, behaviour itself ultimately became 
the only serious subject-matter of scientific psychology. Watson was adamant that 
behaviourism would have nothing to do with consciousness: “Behaviorism claims 
that ‘consciousness’ is neither a definable nor a usable concept; that it is merely 
another word for the ‘soul’ of more ancient times” (Watson 1930, 3).
In standard introductions to the philosophy of mind, a distinction is typically 
made between “methodological” behaviourism and “analytical” behaviourism 
(see e.g. Maslin 2001, ch. 4). Methodological behaviourism is the psychological 
view that the scientific study of the mind can proceed only through the study of 
behaviour and its stimulus conditions; this view is of course compatible with there 
being aspects of the mind that science cannot study. Analytical behaviourism is 
the view that mental states are constituted by behaviour alone, or by dispositions 
to behave; this is a constitutive or metaphysical claim about the nature of mental 
states themselves, or perhaps a conceptual claim about mental concepts.
There are at least two difficulties with this way of classifying positions: first, 
the analytical behaviourist position, as described, is incredibly implausible. C. D. 
Broad classified such a behaviourism as a “silly” theory (1925, 6): “one which 
may be held at the time when one is talking or writing professionally, but which 

T i m  C r a n e
84
only an inmate of a lunatic asylum would think of carrying into daily life” (1925, 
5). Second, and relatedly, it’s really not obvious that there have been any philo-
sophical behaviourists in this sense. Watson’s remarks about consciousness might 
suggest that this was his view, but these remarks are better understood as a rhe-
torical flourish targeted against the dead-end of introspectionism, rather than as 
a substantive doctrine. (For a different perspective on behaviourism, see Amy 
Kind’s essay in the present volume.)
Sometimes Gilbert Ryle (1949) and Ludwig Wittgenstein (1953) are classified 
as analytical behaviourists. Certainly Ryle and Wittgenstein had in common their 
opposition to a picture of the mind which treats mental occurrences as private and 
“hidden” behind behaviour. Ryle himself explicitly opposed what he called the 
“official doctrine” that
when someone is described as knowing, believing or guessing some-
thing, as hoping, dreading, intending or shirking something, as design-
ing this or being amused at that, these verbs are supposed to denote 
the occurrence of specific modifications in his (to us) occult stream of 
consciousness.
(Ryle 1949, 17)
It is worth noting here that Ryle himself uses the word “consciousness” mostly 
for reflection on or knowledge about experience, rather than for experience itself; 
his references to the “stream of consciousness” are largely disparaging (see Ryle 
1949, 155ff.).
Ryle’s alternative to the “official doctrine” was to focus philosophical attention 
on the ways in which we actually apply mental terms, and the standards employed 
or presupposed in these applications. These standards, he claimed, often require 
public and observable evidence for a mental ascription. But as Julia Tanney points 
out, “in focussing on what is observable, he does not commit himself to reducing 
what is observable itself to sequences of ‘muscular behaviour’ ” (Tanney 2014). 
Moreover, Ryle explicitly denied that he was a behaviourist, and a careful reading 
of his texts does not support the “philosophical behaviourist” reading. As his later 
work On Thinking made explicit, his declared aim was to steer a course between 
the “Category-howler of Behaviourism or the Category-howler of Cartesianism” 
(1979, 17).
Wittgenstein too was concerned to return to the “rough ground” (1953, §107) 
of real psychological ascriptions, and argued that claims made about so-called 
“inner” processes “stand in need of outward criteria” (1953, §580). Like Ryle, 
he tried to undermine what he saw as a mistaken picture of the mind which treats 
mental occurrences as essentially private and only contingently connected with 
their behavioural manifestations. Wittgenstein’s concept of a “criterion” was sup-
posed to describe the conceptual (or “grammatical”) connection between mind 
and behaviour that was more intimate than mere evidence or causal connection. 
Mental states may be expressed in behaviour, just as (e.g.) an interpretation of a 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
85
piece of music finds its expression in the musical performance itself. But this is 
not the same thing as these states being identified with behaviour. Wittgenstein’s 
view is no more “analytical behaviourism” than Ryle’s is; and, like Ryle, Wittgen-
stein himself explicitly denied that he was a behaviourist.
The real influence of behaviourism on later philosophy of mind was felt at first 
in the work of the logical positivists (or logical empiricists), the philosophers 
of the Vienna Circle who attempted to develop a “scientific philosophy”. The 
most influential of the logical positivists was Rudolf Carnap, whose influence was 
particularly strong on W. V. Quine, himself arguably one of the most influential 
analytic philosophers of the 20th century. Quine explicitly advocated some form 
of behaviourism in various writings. One way in which this expressed itself was in 
his explicit rejection of ideas like “sense-data”, the “given” and “things before the 
mind” – ideas which, as we saw above, had dominated discussions of conscious-
ness in the first few decades of the century in epistemology and the philosophy of 
mind (cf. also Sellars 1956). However, Quine’s behaviourism was not an attempt 
to reduce mental states to behaviour – he was happy to acknowledge the reality of 
what he called the “heady luxuriance of experience” (Quine 1981, 185). Rather, 
he rejected mental states as unscientific posits of a pre-scientific age. So Quine 
should not be classified as an “analytical” behaviourist in the usual sense.
Although the distinction between “methodological” and “analytical” behaviour-
ism is difficult to sustain, it is related to a tension in actual behaviourist writings, 
between those that are prepared to acknowledge something like consciousness, but 
deny that it can be scientifically studied, and those that declare there to be no such 
thing. This distinction does not line up exactly with the distinction between meth-
odological and analytic behaviourism, since those who declare there is no such 
thing as consciousness do not make any specific proposal about how conscious 
mentality is related to behaviour (as analytical behaviourists were supposed to 
have done). All they do is dismiss talk of consciousness as meaningless, unverifi-
able and unscientific. This does not amount to any genuine philosophical doctrine.
However, scientific resistance to the study of consciousness outlived the offi-
cial decline and collapse of behaviourism. As Daniel Dennett pointed out as late 
as 1978,
one of philosophy’s favorite faces of mentality has received scant atten-
tion from cognitive psychologists, and that is consciousness itself: full-
blown, introspective, inner-world, phenomenological consciousness . . . 
one finds not so much a lack of interest as a deliberate and adroit avoid-
ance of the issue.
(1978, 149)
This was not obviously because all psychologists were still behaviourists, or 
that the behaviourists actually denied the existence of consciousness: “off the 
printed page” Julian Jaynes commented, “behaviourism was only a refusal to talk 
about consciousness” (Jaynes 1976, 15). Rather, the dominant view seems to be 

T i m  C r a n e
86
that one could concede that there is something to all this talk about consciousness, 
but it is not a subject-matter for grown-up scientific psychologists.
This is the view we find in the work of E. C. Tolman, who famously argued that 
“everything important in psychology . . . can be investigated in essence through 
the continued experimental and theoretical analysis of the determiners of rat 
behavior at a choice point in a maze” (Tolman 1938, 34). In his 1932 book Purpo-
sive Behaviour in Animals and Men, Tolman introduced the term “raw feels” as a 
name for what therefore lies outside the scope of scientific psychology:
sensations, says the orthodox mentalist, are more than discriminanda- 
expectations, whether indicated by verbal introspection or by discrimination- 
box experiments, They are in addition immediate mental givens, “raw 
feels”. They are unique subjective suffusions in the mind.
(Tolman 1932, 250–251; see also Farrell 1950, 174)
Given Tolman’s rejection of mentalism, this sounds as if he is rejecting raw feels; 
but in fact his view was that science cannot settle the question of whether they exist:
we never learn whether it feels like our red or our green or our gray, or 
whether indeed, its “feel” is perhaps sui generis and unlike any of our 
own. . . . Whether your raw feels are or are not like mine, you and I shall 
never discover. . . . If there be raw feels correlated with such discrimi-
nanda expectations, these raw feels are by very definition “private” and 
not capable of scientific treatment. And we may leave the question as to 
whether they exist, and what to do about them, if they do exist, to other 
disciplines than psychology – for example, to logic, epistemology and 
metaphysics. And whatever the answers of these other disciplines, we, as 
mere psychologists, need not be concerned.
(Tolman 1932, 252–253)
The idea that consciousness might consist in ineffable qualities which are inac-
cessible to science and whose nature is undetectable by others is an idea which we 
first found in the work of C. I. Lewis (cf. his “qualia”) and one which permeates 
philosophical discussions of consciousness later in the century, as we shall see.
The significance of behaviourism for the philosophy of consciousness in the 
20th century does not lie in any plausibility that the doctrine might have had as a 
substantial thesis about the nature of mind and consciousness. Rather, its signifi-
cance lies in the fact that it generated and helped to sustain a conception of most of 
mental life as not essentially involving consciousness at all. And this conception 
came to be accepted even by behaviourism’s most severe critics. Here is Jerry 
Fodor, for example, writing in 1991:
It used to be universally taken for granted that the problem about con-
sciousness and the problem about intentionality are intrinsically linked: 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
87
that thought is ipso facto conscious, and that consciousness is ipso facto 
consciousness of some or other intentional object . . . Freud changed all 
that. He made it seem plausible that explaining behaviour might require 
the postulation of intentional but unconscious states. Over the last century, 
and most especially in Chomskian linguistics and in cognitive psychol-
ogy, Freud’s idea appears to have been amply vindicated. . . . Dividing 
and conquering – concentrating on intentionality and ignoring conscious-
ness – has proved a remarkably successful research strategy so far.
(1991, 12)
The reference to Freud is largely rhetorical, and may simply be due to the journal-
istic context in which these remarks appeared. Although it is often claimed that 
Freud changed our conception of the mental with his discovery of unconscious 
mentality, Freud’s specific impact on analytic philosophy has been minimal. (In 
fact, the attribution to Freud of the discovery of the unconscious is itself very 
misleading: see e.g. Whyte 1960; Manson 2000.) A more plausible hypothesis, 
to my mind, is that what Fodor calls the divide and conquer strategy is a result of 
the conception of consciousness which was introduced by behaviourism. If this is 
right, then there is an irony in the fact that the officially anti-behaviourist move-
ments in cognitive psychology and Chomskian linguistics should have embraced 
a conception of consciousness which “while granting the reality of consciousness, 
maintains it to be quite inessential to mind, psychology or cognition – and at 
most, of some peripheral or derivative status or interest” as Charles Siewert puts 
it (Siewert 1998, 3; see also Siewert 2011). As we will see, this tendency is also 
central to the physicalist or materialist rejection of behaviourism.
4.  Physicalism and the explanatory gap
The main preoccupation of the philosophy of mind in the second half of the 20th 
century was the question of materialism or physicalism. Materialism was not a 
20th century invention, of course: in the early modern era, its origins are recog-
nisable in Hobbes and Cartesians like La Mettrie, and materialist doctrines were 
popular in 19th century Germany (see Gregory 1977). The logical positivists had 
formulated a doctrine that they called ‘physicalism’ (see Carnap 1932, 1955) as a 
doctrine about the language of science: it says that all truths can be expressed in 
physical language (that is, in the language of physics). But in keeping with Car-
nap’s general attitude to ontology, this was supposed to be a doctrine purely about 
a choice of linguistic framework, and not about the world.
W. V. Quine’s (1951) rejection of the analytic/synthetic distinction, which he 
took to lie behind Carnap’s philosophy, led to a more direct approach to ontologi-
cal questions (see Hookway 1988). Quine’s view was that ontological questions 
could be considered on all fours with scientific questions about what there is. 
Another influential doctrine of Quine’s was his naturalism: his belief that philoso-
phy was not just “continuous” with science, but that all ontological questions are 

T i m  C r a n e
88
really questions for science. Although Quine himself remained a methodological 
behaviourist in linguistics and in psychology (1990, 37), it is worth pointing out 
that the combination of naturalism and the straightforward attitude to ontology 
does not entail behaviourism. Indeed, this combination of views led to a hugely 
popular non-behaviourist (or “mentalist”) version of physicalism in the later dec-
ades of the 20th century.
A crucial movement here was the version of materialism which emerged in 
Australia in the 1950s (often known as “the identity theory”). In a pair of very 
influential papers, J.J.C. Smart (1959) and U. T. Place (1956) proposed that men-
tal states and processes should be identified with states and processes in the brain. 
This form of materialism was put forward as an empirical hypothesis, akin to the 
hypothesis that lightning is an electrical discharge, or that heat is the motion of 
molecules.
Smart’s paper is standardly cited as a revolutionary moment in this history of 
the mind-body problem, freeing those with scientific or materialist tendencies 
from the twin strangleholds of behaviourism and Wittgensteinian obscurantism. 
Of course, originality in philosophy rarely takes this form. The idea that mental 
states and neural states (or processes or events) are literally identical was not 
invented by Smart, but had been in the air for a while. Smart himself always gave 
credit to Place (1956) and Feigl (1958) for explicit formulations, and he identified 
related views in Carnap and Reichenbach. Some have taken the Australian-British 
metaphysician Samuel Alexander to have defended the identity theory in the early 
part of the century, though it is hard to see how this is compatible with his defence 
of the “emergence” of the mental (see Thomas 2013). And as Place pointed out, 
the psychologist E. G. Boring, a follower of Titchener, had claimed explicitly in 
1946 that “neural process and sensation are identical” (see Place 1990).
Smart was concerned in the 1959 paper with sensations, and said little or noth-
ing about thoughts or other conscious episodes. He considered various objections 
to the identity theory, the most powerful of which he credited to Max Black. This 
is the objection that even if the identity theory does identify sensations with brain 
processes, how can it deal with the “phenomenal qualities” of those processes? 
For example, even if having an orange after-image is a brain process, where does 
this leave the qualitative “feel” of this after-image – its “orangey-ness”, as it were? 
Smart responded with what he called his “topic-neutral” analysis of attributions 
of phenomenal properties. It is “topic-neutral” because the truth of the analysing 
claim is neutral on whether the property itself is physical or irreducibly “psychi-
cal”. This is Smart’s proposed analysis:
When a person says, “I see a yellowish-orange after-image” he is saying 
something like this: “There is something going on which is like what is 
going on when I have my eyes open, am awake, and there is an orange 
illuminated in good light in front of me, that is, when I really see an 
orange.”
(Smart 1959,149)

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
89
From the point of view of the present investigation, the interesting thing about 
Smart’s analysis is that he thinks this account explains
the singular elusiveness of “raw feels” – why no one seems to be able to 
pin any properties on them. Raw feels, in my view, are colorless for the 
very same reason that something is colorless. This does not mean that 
sensations do not have properties, for if they are brain-processes they 
certainly have properties. It only means that in speaking of them as being 
like or unlike one another we need not know or mention these properties.
(Smart 1959, 150)
These “phenomenal properties” of experience are elusive and ineffable, like Lew-
is’s qualia and Tolman’s raw feels. Smart’s conception of consciousness, therefore, 
has a close connection with the behaviourist’s “phenomenal residue” conception, 
despite the fact that he thinks (unlike the behaviourists) that a scientific account 
of consciousness can be given, by using the topic-neutral analysis. (Feigl (1958, 
section V) has a similar view of raw feels, which he equates with “qualia”.)
Smart’s topic-neutral analysis of mental concepts can be seen as an early attempt 
to develop the functionalist theory of mind, which treats mental states as charac-
terised in terms of their typical causes and effects (cf. Armstrong 1968; Lewis 
1966; 1972). Sometimes known as the “causal theory of mind”, functionalism 
became the dominant approach in the philosophy of mind in the 1970s and 1980s.
The most persistent objection to functionalism, posed famously by Ned Block 
and Jerry Fodor (1972) and then developed by Block (1980), is that it cannot 
handle the essence of consciousness, the familiar “qualitative feel”. Block and 
Fodor argued, with the use of a number of thought experiments, that a function-
alist account of conscious states could be true of different creatures even if they 
had very different conscious experiences (“inverted qualia”) or no consciousness 
at all (“absent qualia”). Here the essence of consciousness is thought of as some-
thing that in its very nature eludes functionalist analysis: this is the phenomenal 
residue conception of consciousness, which we saw was epitomised in the notion 
of a raw feel. Indeed, Sydney Shoemaker, in a famous defence of functionalism 
against Block and Fodor’s attack, explicitly links Block’s objection to the view 
that functionalism “cannot account for the ‘raw feel’ component of mental states, 
or for their ‘internal’ or ‘phenomenological’ character” (Shoemaker 1975, 185).
Taking a broader view, Block’s criticism can be seen to belong to a kind whose 
most general form is found in Thomas Nagel’s classic paper “What Is It Like to 
Be a Bat?” (1974). Nagel begins with the statement that “consciousness is what 
makes the mind-body problem really intractable” (1974, 435). He then offers a 
famous definition of consciousness: “fundamentally an organism has conscious 
mental states if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism – 
something it is like for the organism” and adds, “we may call this the subjective 
character of experience” (1974, 436). All reductive accounts of consciousness 
fail, Nagel argues, because “all of them are logically compatible with its absence” 

T i m  C r a n e
90
(1974, 436). Nagel illustrates his conclusion with the thought experiment that no 
matter what one knew about the mental life of a bat from an objective, scientific 
point of view, one would not thereby know what it was like to be a bat: facts about 
the bat’s consciousness.
Nagel’s description of consciousness in terms of the idea of “what it’s like” is 
vivid and compelling. (The idea had originally been proposed by B. A. Farrell 
(1950, 177) and T.L.S. Sprigge (1971, 167–168), as Nagel willingly acknowl-
edged.) But it is important to emphasise that this idea does not by itself imply 
the phenomenal residue conception of consciousness. And nor does it imply 
what Lewis, Feigl and others meant by “qualia” (indeed, the words “quale” and 
“qualia” do not occur in Nagel’s article). This is worth stressing, because many 
standard introductions to the problem of consciousness equate “phenomenal con-
sciousness” with “subjective experience” with “what it’s like” and with “qualia”. 
But there is nothing in the idea of subjective experience as such that requires that 
we think of it in terms of a phenomenal residue, as I characterised that idea in 
section 1 above.
Nagel did not argue against the truth of physicalism in his 1974 paper. Rather, 
he argued that although we have good reasons to think it is true, we cannot under-
stand how it can be true. Frank Jackson, by contrast, used similar considerations 
to Nagel’s to argue that physicalism is false. Jackson’s famous “knowledge argu-
ment” used the now famous example of an omniscient scientist, Mary, who knows 
all the physical information about seeing red – information expressible by physi-
cal science – but has never seen red (Jackson 1982). When she sees red for the first 
time, she comes to learn something new; therefore not all information is physical 
information. (Essentially the same argument was published in the same year by 
Howard Robinson (1982), and precursors of the argument can be found in Broad 
1925, Russell 1927 and Feigl 1958.)
By the last decades of the century, physicalist theories of consciousness could 
be divided into the optimistic and the pessimistic. Among the pessimists were 
Nagel, who defended materialism at least until Mind and Cosmos (2012), although 
he insisted that the doctrine is unintelligible. Colin McGinn (1989) took inspira-
tion from Nagel and from Noam Chomsky in defending his “mysterian” view that 
we are constitutionally incapable of solving the mind-body problem. From Nagel 
he took the idea that solving the problem requires explaining the “subjective” 
in “objective” terms. From Chomsky he took the idea that there might be con-
tingent limits on our cognitive capacities, such that we are “cognitively closed” 
to some problems or what Chomsky calls “mysteries”: just as a dog is constitu-
tionally incapable of understanding quantum mechanics, so we may be incapa-
ble of understanding the mind-brain relation (which on independent grounds, we 
know to obtain). Another pessimist is Joseph Levine, who coined the phrase “the 
explanatory gap” to describe the problem consciousness poses for materialism 
(Levine 1983; 2001). Levine argues that although we have good reason to think 
that some kind of materialism thesis is true, we do not have an explanation of 
the necessary connection that holds between the facts about consciousness and 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
91
their underlying material bases. Levine’s conception of explanation is Hempel’s 
deductive-nomological conception: to explain a phenomenon X is to derive prop-
ositions about X from other propositions about the explaining facts and about the 
laws of nature. Levine argues that Nagel’s considerations show that there can be 
no such deduction. He attempts to close the explanatory gap in Levine (2001).
Among the optimists, Frank Jackson, whose conversion to materialism hap-
pened at some time before the mid-1990s, addressed head-on the problem set in 
Levine’s terms. Jackson (1998) follows Lewis in taking the essence of physical-
ism to be a global supervenience thesis: any possible world which is a minimal 
physical duplicate of the actual world is a duplicate simpliciter (cf. Lewis 1983). 
He also agrees with Levine that the materialist must explain why this necessary 
supervenience relation holds: it cannot be a brute fact, since there are no unex-
plained necessities in nature, on Jackson’s view. He proposes explaining super-
venience in terms of a functionalist conceptual analysis of mental concepts, in 
the style of Lewis (1972). By contrast, Robert Kirk (1994) skips the conceptual 
analysis step, arguing that strict implication alone between the physical and the 
phenomenal truths is sufficient to close the explanatory gap. Others like David 
Papineau (2002) argue that physicalism does not need to close the explanatory 
gap, it only needs to explain why the gap seems to imply a metaphysical gap, 
when in reality there is no such metaphysical gap.
John Searle is a different kind of optimist. He thinks of the mind-body problem 
as a scientific problem, like the “stomach-digestion” problem (Searle 1992). There 
is no deep and mysterious metaphysical puzzle about how the stomach manages 
to digest food; and we should think in the same way about the brain and its mental 
activity. The analogy suggests that mind is the activity of the brain; but Searle 
does not pursue the analogy in that direction. Rather, his claim is that mental 
states are “caused and constituted” by what goes on in the brain. Consciousness is 
a basic biological fact about us and other conscious organisms; it should be part 
of the scientific worldview that there is “subjective ontology” (i.e. the ontology 
of consciousness) as well as “objective ontology”. Searle denies that he is a mate-
rialist, because he wants to reject the mental/physical contrast, on the grounds 
that “mental” connotes “mental-as-opposed-to-physical”, which he thinks loads 
the dice somewhat against a properly scientific understanding of consciousness. 
However, since no plausible version of materialism will accept that “mental” has 
this connotation, we can safely ignore Searle’s claim that he is not a materialist.
For both optimists and pessimists, the central question for physicalism is how 
to account for consciousness. This question and a wide range of answers to it 
were summarised and systematised in The Conscious Mind by David Chalmers 
(1996). An expansive and synoptic work, this book set the agenda for discus-
sions of consciousness up to the end of the century and in the first decade of the 
21st century. Three things about Chalmers’s book are worth noting here: first, his 
conception of the problem of consciousness; second, his endorsement of the anti-
physicalist arguments pioneered by Jackson; and third, his positive speculative 
theory of consciousness.

T i m  C r a n e
92
On the first point: Chalmers divides the study of consciousness into “easy” 
problems and the “hard” problem. Easy problems are, for example, those of 
explaining “the ability to discriminate, categorize, and react to environmental 
stimuli; the integration of information by a cognitive system; the ability of a sys-
tem to access its own internal states; the focus of attention; the deliberate control 
of behavior” and others (Chalmers 1995, 200). We should not dwell on whether 
“easy” is the right word for these problems, many of which are very difficult 
indeed; the point is rather the contrast between these scientific questions and what 
Chalmers calls the “hard” problem of consciousness: the problem of explaining, 
for any conscious state, why it is conscious at all.
Second, Chalmers thinks that there is no physicalist solution to the hard prob-
lem. As Nagel had emphasised, the conditions specified by all current materialist 
theories of consciousness are logically consistent with the absence of conscious-
ness. If this is right, there can be no deduction from the facts about the physical 
basis of consciousness to the facts about consciousness. Following Kirk (1974), 
Chalmers dramatises this with the image of a “zombie”: a creature who is a physi-
cal replica of a conscious creature, but who lacks consciousness. The easy prob-
lems could be solved for the zombie; but having solved these we would still be in 
the dark about what makes us differ from zombies.
Third, there is Chalmers’s positive conception of consciousness. Chalm-
ers thinks of consciousness as metaphysically or logically independent of its 
functional or physical basis, in a certain sense. He thinks that the facts about 
consciousness supervene on the physical facts as a matter of lawlike necessity, 
rather than metaphysical necessity. But later in the book he flirts with a version 
of panpsychism that he calls “panprotopsychism” – the idea that all matter is 
endowed with some kind of simple consciousness, whose coming together in 
organisms produces the conscious phenomena we experience. This seems to have 
the consequence that consciousness does supervene on the physical after all, since 
any physical duplicate of our world would be a mental duplicate too; and zombies 
would be impossible. Paradoxically, then, this kind of panpsychism turns out to be 
a form of physicalism. (This may not be a problem on the version of panpsychism 
defended by Galen Strawson (2006); and for a contrasting view of panpsychism 
see Goff (2017).)
My interest here is not in the truth of physicalism, nor in the arguments for 
and against it, but the various ways in which consciousness has been conceived. 
The different conceptions cluster around the different understandings of the 
invented term “qualia”. Literally the plural of the Latin word for quality (singular: 
“quale”), the word “qualia” came to dominate discussions of consciounsess in 
the second half of the century. Jackson described himself in his 1982 paper as a 
“qualia freak”, and intended by this to express his anti-physicalist sentiments. He 
clearly did not mean by “qualia” exactly what C. I. Lewis meant (the ineffable 
properties of the immediately given), so what did he mean?
Broadly speaking, the term “qualia” came to mean two things in the philosophy 
of mind of the late 20th century. In one use of the term, to believe in qualia is just 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
93
to believe in consciousness itself; the use of the term does not imply any particular 
theory of consciousness. To deny qualia, in this sense then, is to deny conscious-
ness; and what sense can be made of this? But in another use, qualia are proper-
ties that are, in Michael Tye’s words, “intrinsic, consciously accessible features 
that are non-representational and that are solely responsible for [the] phenomenal 
character” of sensory experiences. In itself, this does not imply that qualia are non-
physical, as Tye himself acknowledges (Tye 2013). What matters is that qualia 
are intrinsic properties of sensory experiences, they are non-representational  
(they do not represent anything outside themselves) and available to conscious-
ness. Ned Block adds to this definition the claim that qualia “go beyond” the 
functional properties of mental states; so the existence of qualia is incompatible 
with functionalism. Indeed, Block claims that the existence of qualia is of great 
significance:
The greatest chasm in the philosophy of mind  – maybe even all of  
philosophy – divides two perspectives on consciousness. The two per-
spectives differ on whether there is anything in the phenomenal character 
of conscious experience that goes beyond the intentional, the cognitive 
and the functional. A convenient terminological handle on the dispute is 
whether there are “qualia”, or qualitative properties of conscious expe-
rience. Those who think that the phenomenal character of conscious 
experience goes beyond the intentional, the cognitive and the functional 
believe in qualia.
(Block 2003)
It should be clear, I hope, that this conception of qualia is the heir of the phenom-
enal residue conception of consciousness whose presence I have traced from C. 
I. Lewis, via the behaviourists, to Smart and Feigl. Consciousness conceived in 
terms of qualia is non-functional, non-intentional and intrinsic. Often qualia are 
purely sensory too, though Block does not say this explicitly here. The qualitative 
nature of experience, on this view, is explained by the instantiation of properties 
which Block vividly describes as “mental paint” properties. In this he employs an 
image first mooted and then rejected by William James in 1904: “experience . . . 
would be much like a paint of which the world pictures were made”.
However, the essence of the late 20th-century debates about materialism and 
consciousness do not presuppose this substantial notion of qualia. Nagel’s 1974 
argument does not presuppose any specific conception of consciousness, and a 
fortiori it does not presuppose qualia in Block’s sense. The same is true of the 
Jackson-Robinson knowledge arguments. All that these arguments presuppose is 
that there is such a thing as conscious experience (the experience of an alien crea-
ture like a bat, for example, or the experience of seeing red for the first time). They 
do not presuppose that conscious experience involves qualia in the substantial 
sense. So if consciousness poses a problem for materialism, this problem cannot 
be avoided by rejecting this controversial assumption about qualia.

T i m  C r a n e
94
Where the substantial notion of qualia gets a grip is in its application in the 
objections to functionalism. If qualia are essentially non-functional, as Block 
says, then obviously sameness of functional role will not suffice for sameness of 
qualia; and this is exactly what the inverted qualia thought-experiments are sup-
posed to show. Sydney Shoemaker once observed that “belief in qualia often goes 
with belief in the possibility of ‘inverted qualia’ ” (Shoemaker 2007). It is clear 
that what he must mean by “qualia” is Block’s substantial notion, not the innocu-
ous one. But does this substantial notion of qualia, and the phenomenal residue 
conception of consciousness which it implies, have any independent plausibility? 
In other words, what reasons are there, independently of suspicion of functional-
ism, for thinking that consciousness should be conceived in this way? In the last 
section of this paper, I will address this question.
5.  Consciousness, cognition and intentionality
Any theory of the ontological basis of consciousness – whether dualist, material-
ist or some other kind – must begin with some idea of what the phenomenon of 
consciousness is, and how it should be initially characterised. As we saw above, 
many early 20th-century philosophers thought of consciousness in terms of the 
idea of “givenness”: the presentation to the subject of a special kind of object – 
e.g. sense-data or qualia. And over the course of the century, consciousness in the 
analytic tradition became conceived of as a primarily sensory phenomenon, with 
the sensory element itself conceived of as something inexpressible, indefinable, 
inefficacious and separable from the rest of mental life. This is what I am calling 
the “phenomenal residue” conception of consciousness. By the end of the century, 
it became common to think of states of mind as divided into two categories: the 
essentially unconscious “propositional attitudes” and the phenomenal residue of 
sensory qualia (see Crane 2003 for discussion).
One upshot of this picture is that conscious thought becomes very hard to make 
sense of. If consciousness is essentially a sensory phenomenon, to be thought of 
in terms of the instantiation of simple sensory properties, then conscious think-
ing, reasoning, imagining, day-dreaming and other intentional phenomena must 
be understood in terms of these properties. This is standardly done by conceiving 
of conscious intentionality in a composite way, as some kind of hybrid of uncon-
scious intentional states and conscious qualia. (As we have seen, the phenomeno-
logical tradition, by contrast, connected consciousness and thought at the outset.) 
But is this the right account of conscious thinking, or of conscious intentionality 
in general?
In considering the relationship between consciousness and intentionality, there 
are two questions we need to address: first, can consciousness in general be under-
stood in terms of intentionality at all? And second, how should we understand 
conscious intentionality itself (e.g. conscious thinking)?
Taking the first question first, there have been two broad approaches which 
have attempted to understand consciousness in terms of intentionality. One treats 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
95
consciousness in terms of the representation of mental states: to be a conscious 
state is to be the object of another (intentional) mental state. This is the higher-
order representation or higher-order thought (“HOT”) approach (see Mellor 
1977–1978; Carruthers 2000, 2011; Rosenthal 1988; 2005; for reasons of space 
I ignore here the “same-order” or “self-representation” views, e.g. Hossack 2002; 
Kriegel 2009).
The other treats consciousness itself as a form of intentionality. Conscious 
states belong to a sub-category of intentional states; they are conscious in them-
selves, and not because they are the objects of higher-order states. This is inten-
tionalism or representationalism (Tye 1995; Dretske 1995; Byrne 2001; Chalmers 
2006; Crane 2009). I will consider these views in turn.
The HOT approach has been most fully developed by David Rosenthal (1988; 
2005) but it has obvious affinities with earlier views: for example, Ryle’s concep-
tion of consciousness as introspection, and Armstrong’s idea of consciousness as a 
monitoring mechanism (“consciousness . . . is simple awareness of our own state 
of mind” Armstrong 1968: 95). There are different versions of HOT theory. Some 
versions say that a first-order state is conscious only when one is actually think-
ing about it (Rosenthal 2005). Others say that one only has to have the disposition 
to think about the first order state (Carruthers 2003). Still others think of what is 
higher-order as a “perception” rather than a thought (Armstrong 1968; Lycan 1996).
Sometimes it is said that the appeal of the HOT theory derives from the idea 
that being conscious is always being conscious of something (see Lycan 2001). 
This is debatable. For it is natural to say that being aware of an object in one’s per-
ceived environment (say) is an instance of “being conscious of something”. But 
according to the HOT theory, this is not so. For the only application of the notion 
of being “consciousness of” something which it allows is when one is conscious 
of one’s own mental state. As Rosenthal says, “the first-order state can contribute 
nothing to phenomenology apart from the way we’re conscious of it” (Rosenthal 
2005; 32). So it is best not to let too much turn on the interpretation of the intuitive 
idea of “being conscious of” something.
Criticism of the HOT theory is not normally based on the rejection of the very 
idea of higher-order thought, or even of the idea that having a higher-order thought 
about a mental state could be a way of making that state conscious. Rather, the 
criticism normally comes from the idea that higher-order representation is not 
necessary for consciousness. (Peacocke 1993 argues that it is not sufficient either; 
but here I will focus on the objection to the necessity claim.) Many philosophers 
have argued strongly that some mental states (sensations, for example) are con-
scious in themselves and not simply because they are the objects of higher-order 
thought. For example, when one is paying close attention to some intellectual task, 
one may not be paying attention to, or thinking about, the lingering pain in one’s 
lower back. But that pain is in your consciousness nonetheless. Although HOT 
theorists have responded to these kinds of complaint, they do linger persistently.
Ned Block has argued influentially that there is a fundamental distinction 
between two concepts of consciousness: access and phenomenal consciousness 

T i m  C r a n e
96
(Block 1995; 2007). A representation is “access conscious” when one can access 
it in thought, or it is available for being “broadcast” among other representations; 
and a state of mind is “phenomenally conscious” when there is something it is like 
to be in this state. One of the ways in which the HOT theory fails, on Block’s view, 
is that it fails to take account of phenomenal consciousness in his sense. Since on 
Block’s view, phenomenal consciousness can occur without access conscious-
ness, and HOT theories in effect say that all consciousness is access conscious-
ness, he claims to have some clear counter-examples to the HOT theory.
Block’s distinction is certainly real, in the sense that every theory (with the 
exception of the HOT theory) attempts to account for the difference between a 
simple conscious state and thinking about one’s conscious states. This is not the 
same as the distinction between consciousness and attention, since attention is 
normally conceived in terms of focussing on the objects of conscious experience, 
and not only on one’s mental states. The distinction between consciousness and 
attention has been explored by philosophers as a way of making sense of the dif-
ferent ways in which one may be said to be conscious of something (see Mole 
et al. 2011; O’Shaughnessy 2000; Wu 2014; for the view that consciousness is 
attention, see Prinz 2013).
The mere idea that there are different kinds of consciousness, and that think-
ing about (or accessing) a state of mind is a different thing from that state’s being 
conscious, is not (pace Carruthers 2011) a discovery of the late 20th century, 
but something which has been around for a while. We find it in G. F. Stout for 
example:
consciousness has manifold modes and degrees  .  .  . consciousness 
includes not only awareness of our own states, but these states them-
selves, whether we have cognisance of them or not. If a man is angry, 
that is a state of consciousness, even though he does not know that he is 
angry. If he does know that he is angry, that is another modification of 
consciousness, and not the same.
(Stout 1899, 7–8)
Notice too that to make a distinction between access and phenomenal conscious-
ness is not, in itself, to commit to Block’s conception of phenomenal conscious-
ness in terms of qualia, understood as “mental paint” properties. So Block’s 
phenomenal/access distinction in itself does not imply the phenomenal residue 
conception of phenomenal consciousness, even though he has that conception too.
The second way in which consciousness is understood in terms of intentional-
ity is provided by the intentionalist or representationalist theory of conscious-
ness. Intentionalist theories of perception, in particular, had been proposed by 
Anscombe (1965) and Armstrong (1968). In the following decade, Daniel Den-
nett (1978) proposed a “cognitive theory” of consciousness, and developed it in 
his major work, Consciousness Explained (Dennett 1991). Other intentionalist 
theories of consciousness began to develop over the turn of the century, in the 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
97
work of Harman (1990), Tye (1995), Crane (1998), Byrne (2001) and Chalmers 
(2004; 2006).
Unlike the HOT theory, the intentionalist theory of consciousness does not 
explain consciousness in terms of the representation of one’s own mental states, 
but rather explains it in terms of the nature of the state itself. For the HOT theory, 
states are conscious only when they fall under the “searchlight” of another mental 
state; for intentionalism, some states are conscious in and of themselves, in vir-
tue of their intentionality. One kind of intentionalism (called “pure” by Chalmers 
2004) says that the phenomenal character of a state of mind is identical with or 
supervenes upon its intentional content (Tye 1995). Another (called “impure” by 
Chalmers 2004) says that the phenomenal character of a mental state is deter-
mined by its whole intentional character: i.e. attitude or mode as well as content 
(Crane 2001; 2003; 2009).
Sometimes intentionalism is presented as being motivated by physicalism: the 
thought is that if we can reduce consciousness to intentionality, and intentionality 
to functional role, then this will facilitate a physicalist solution to the mind-body 
problem. But even if this is the actual motivation of some intentionalists, it is 
not essential to the intentionalist programme (see Chalmers 2006). Intentionalism 
can be motivated by purely phenomenological considerations (Byrne 2001). For 
example, intentionalism can be motivated by arguing that it is the best way to 
understand the mind as involving a ‘perspective’ or a ‘point of view’ (Crane 2001; 
2009), or the best way to elaborate the idea that all mental facts are representa-
tional facts (Dretske 1995).
By contrast, Block (1990) has argued that phenomenological considerations, 
plus some assumptions about intentionality, can be used to refute intentionalism. 
If Block’s arguments are going to be dialectically effective, the phenomenal resi-
due conception of consciousness cannot be an assumption of the argument, as an 
obvious phenomenological fact; rather, it must be the argument’s conclusion. For 
if the phenomenal residue conception were the starting point, then intentionalism 
would be doomed from the outset, and no further argument would be needed. The 
fact that Block and others think that argument is needed suggests that they do not 
really think that the phenomenal residue conception can be assumed.
So far in this section, we have been discussing the attempts to understand con-
sciousness in terms of intentionality. The other large question about the relation-
ship between consciousness and intentionality relates to conscious intentionality 
itself, and how it should be understood. More specifically, the question is about 
the existence and nature of conscious thinking, or the “phenomenology of think-
ing”. Regardless of what a theory of consciousness says about the intentionality 
of perception or sensation, thinking is a paradigm of intentionality, and thinking 
can arguably be unconscious as well as conscious. So what should a theory of 
consciousness say about this?
Two broad approaches to this question had arisen by the early years of the 
21st century. The first is to say that the phenomenology of thinking should be 
explained in terms of other, independently understood, phenomenological features 

T i m  C r a n e
98
(e.g. sensation, imagery etc.). We can call this the “reductionist” approach to the 
phenomenology of thinking. The second is to say that conscious thinking has its 
own distinctive (or “proprietary”) phenomenology, which is not reducible to the 
phenomenology of other mental episodes. This second view is sometimes called 
the doctrine of “cognitive phenomenology” (Bayne and Montague 2011), though 
this term is a little misleading: strictly speaking, it ought to be a name for the phe-
nomenon to be explained itself as opposed to a specific explanation of it.
Those who defend proprietary cognitive phenomenology appeal to phenomena 
like the distinctive experience of coming to understand a sentence one did not 
previously understand (Strawson 1994) or the role of phenomenology in coming 
to know what you believe (Pitt 2004). Those who take the reductionist approach 
argue that all these phenomena can be accommodated by appealing to phenom-
enology of other mental episodes (see Lormand 1996; Tye and Wright 2011). 
A distinct idea, but related to the doctrine of cognitive phenomenology, is the 
doctrine of phenomenal intentionality (Farkas 2008; Kriegel 2013). This holds 
that some kinds of intentional phenomena have their intentionality in virtue of 
their phenomenal properties, as opposed to in virtue of their causal relations to the 
world or teleological properties. This doctrine requires an independent conception 
of phenomenal properties which can then be used to explain conscious thought 
or perception (for example). Strictly speaking, phenomenal intentionality does 
not entail cognitive phenomenology, since it is possible to hold that the former 
doctrine applies only to perception (say); and nor does cognitive phenomenol-
ogy entail phenomenal intentionality, because it is possible to say that there is 
proprietary phenomenology of cognition without thinking that its intentionality 
is explained by some previously understood phenomenal properties. But many of 
the leading thinkers in this area hold both versions (e.g. Pitt 2004).
These debates about cognitive phenomenology and phenomenal intentionality, 
which arose at the end of the 20th century, illustrate the importance of starting dis-
cussions of consciousness with an adequate account of the phenomena. And once 
again, we find that an obstacle to progress in the debate on cognitive phenomenol-
ogy is the lingering influence of the “phenomenal residue” conception of conscious-
ness, and the associated distinction between two kinds of mental states (crudely, 
sensations and propositional attitudes). If we begin with such a conception of con-
sciousness, then it is very hard to make sense of the doctrines of phenomenal inten-
tionality and cognitive phenomenology. But the aim of these doctrines is to explain 
conscious thought, and what merit can there be in a conception of consciousness 
which makes the obvious fact of conscious thought impossible to understand?
Conclusion
I have argued that the late 20th-century conception of consciousness in analytic 
philosophy emerged ultimately from the idea of consciousness as givenness, via the 
behaviourist idea of “raw feels”. In the post-behaviourist period in philosophy, this 
resulted in the division of states of mind into essentially unconscious propositional 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
99
attitudes (“beliefs and desires”) plus the phenomenal residue of qualia: intrinsic, 
ineffable and inefficacious sensory states. It is striking how little in the important 
questions about consciousness depends on this conception, or on this particular 
division of mental states. So accepting this division and its associated conceptions 
of intentionality and consciousness is not an obligatory starting point for the phi-
losophy of mind. A historical investigation of how these ideas came to be seen as 
inevitable can also help us see how we might reasonably reject them.1
Note
1	 I have been helped in writing this chapter by: very helpful comments on earlier drafts 
from Amy Kind, Hanoch Ben-Yami, Nico Orlandi and Galen Strawson; conversations 
with Katalin Farkas, David Pitt and Howard Robinson; and the writings of Charles 
Siewert.
Bibliography
Anscombe, G.E.M. (1965). “The Intentionality of Sensation: A Grammatical Feature” in 
Butler, R.J. (ed.), Analytical Philosophy: Second Series. Oxford: Blackwell: 156–180.
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul.
Baldwin, Tom (2010). “George Edward Moore,” in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy Summer 2010 Edition. http //plato stanford edu/archives/
sum2010/entries/moore/.
Bayne, Tim and Montague, Michelle (eds.). (2013). Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Block, Ned (1980). “Troubles with Functionalism,” in Block, Ned (ed.), Readings in the 
Philosophy of Psychology, Vol. I. London: Methuen: 268–301.
Block, Ned (1990). “Inverted Earth,” in Tomberlin, James (ed.), Philosophical Per-
spectives, 4 Action Theory and Philosophy of Mind. Atascadero: Ridgeview: 53–79. 
Reprinted in Block, N., Flanagan, O. and Güzeldere, G. (eds.), The Nature of Conscious-
ness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 1997: 677–694.
Block, Ned (1995). “On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness,” Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 18: 227–247. Reprinted in Block, N., Flanagan, O., and Güzeldere, G. 
(eds.). (1997). The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 375–416.
Block, Ned (2003). “Mental Paint,” in Hahn, M. and Ramberg, B. (eds.). Reflections and 
Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 165–200.
Block, Ned (2007). “Consciousness, Accessibility and the Mesh between Psychology and 
Neuroscience,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30: 481–548.
Block, Ned and Fodor, Jerry A. (1972). “What Psychological States are Not,” Philosophi-
cal Review, 81: 159–181.
Boring, E. G. (1946). “Mind and Mechanism,” The American Journal of Psychology, April.
Brentano, Franz (1874). Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Edited by L.L. McAl-
ister. Trans. A. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, and L. L. McAlister. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul (1973) reprinted with an introduction by Peter Simons. London: Routledge 
1995. Originally published as Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt, Leipzig: 
Duncker and Humblot (1874).

T i m  C r a n e
100
Broad, C.D. (1925). The Mind and Its Place in Nature. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Byrne, Alex (2001). “Intentionalism Defended,” Philosophical Review, 110: 199–240.
Carnap, Rudolf (1932). “Psychology in Physical Language,” Erkenntnis, 3: 107–142 
(1932/3).
Carnap, Rudolf (1955). Logical Syntax of Language. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Carruthers, Peter (2003). Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, Peter (2011). “Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness,” The Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy Fall 2011 Edition in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). https://plato.stan-
ford.edu/entries/consciousness-higher/.
Chalmers, David (1995). “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 2: 200–219.
Chalmers, David (1996). The Conscious Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, David (2004). “The Representational Character of Experience,” in Leiter, B. 
(ed.), The Future for Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 153–181.
Chalmers, David (2006). “Perception and the Fall from Eden,” in Gendler, Tamar Szabó 
and Hawthorne, John (eds.), Perceptual Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crane, Tim (1998). “Intentionality as the Mark of the Mental,” in O’Hear, A. (ed.), Con-
temporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 
229–251.
Crane, Tim (2000). “The Origins of Qualia,” in Crane, Tim and Patterson, Sarah (eds.), 
History of the Mind-Body Problem. London: Routledge: 169–194.
Crane, Tim (2001). Elements of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crane, Tim (2003). “The Intentional Structure of Consciousness,” in Jokic, A. and Smith, 
Q. (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press: 33–56.
Crane, Tim (2009). “Intentionalism,” in Beckermann, Ansgar, McLaughlin, Brian and Wal-
ter, Sven (eds.), Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press: 474–493.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1978). “Toward a Cognitive Theory of Consciousness,” Minnesota 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 9(1978).
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991). Consciousness Explained. London: Allen Lane.
Dretske, Fred I. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Farkas, Katalin (2008). “Phenomenal Intentionality without Compromise,” The Monist, 
91: 273–293.
Farrell, B. A. (1950). “Experiences,” Mind 59: 170–198.
Feigl, Herbert (1958). “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical,’ ” in Feigl, H., Scriven, M. and 
Maxwell, G. (eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press: 370–497.
Fodor, Jerry A. (1991). “Too Hard for Our Kind of Mind,” London Review of Books, 13 
June: 27.
Goff, Philip (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Gregory, Frederick (1977). Scientific Materialism in Nineteenth Century Germany Studies 
in the History of Modern Science vol I. Dordrecht: D Reidel.
Güzeldere, Güven (1997). “The Many Faces of Consciousness: A Field Guide,” in Block, 
N., Flanagan, O. and Güzeldere, G. (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press: 1–68.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
101
Harman, Gilbert (1990). “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience,” in Tomberlin, J. (ed.), Phil-
osophical Perspectives 4 (Atascadero: Ridgeview); reprinted in Block, N., Flanagan, O. 
and Guzeldere, G. (eds.). (1997). The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press: 663–676.
Hookway, Christopher (1988). Quine: Language Experience and Reality. Cambridge: Pol-
ity Press.
Horgan, Terence and Tienson, John (2002). “The Intentionality of Phenomenology and the 
Phenomenology of Intentionality,” in Chalmers, David (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Clas-
sical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 520–533.
Hossack, Keith (2002). “Self-knowledge and Consciousness,” Proceedings of the Aristo-
telian Society. 102: 163–181.
Husserl, Edmund (1900–1901). Logische Untersuchungen. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer, 
1980. English edition Logical Investigations. Trans. J N Findlay 2 vols. London Rout-
ledge, 2001.
Husserl, Edmund (1913). Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologis-
chen Philosophie Erstes Buch. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer, 1980. English edition Ideas 
Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and a Phenomenological Philosophy First Book. 
Trans. F Kersten Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1982.
Husserl, Edmund (1948). Erfahrung und Urteil, ed L Landgrebe. Hamburg: Felix Meiner 
1985. English edition Experience and Judgement. Trans. J. S. Churchill and K. Ameriks. 
Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973.
Jackson, Frank (1982). “Epiphenomenal Qualia,” Philosophical Quarterly, 32: 127–136.
Jackson, Frank (1998). From Metaphysics to Ethics Oxford: Oxford University Press.
James, William (1890). Principles of Psychology. New York: Holt.
James, William (1904). “Does Consciousness Exist?” Journal of Philosophy, Psychology 
and Scientific Method, 1: 477–491.
Jaynes, Julian (1976). Origins of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kirk, Robert (1974). “Zombies v. Materialists,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
Supplementary Volume, 48: 135–152.
Kirk, Robert (1994). Raw Feeling: A Philosophical Account of the Essence of Conscious-
ness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah (2007). “Intentional Inexistence and Phenomenal Intentionality,” Philo-
sophical Perspectives, 21: 307–340.
Kriegel, Uriah (2009). Subjective Consciousness: A Self-Representational Theory. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah (ed.). (2013). Phenomenal Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levine, Joseph (1983) “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap,” Pacific Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 64: 354–361.
Levine, Joseph (2001) Purple Haze. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, C.I. (1929). Mind and the World Order. London: Constable.
Lewis, David (1966). “An Argument for the Identity Theory,” Journal of Philosophy, 63: 17–25.
Lewis, David (1972). “Psychophysical and Theoretical Identifications.” Australasian Jour-
nal of Philosophy, 50: 249–258.
Lewis, David (1983). “New Work for a Theory of Universals.” Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy 61: 343–377.
Lormand, Eric (1996). “Nonphenomenal Consciousness,” Noûs, 30: 242–261.
Lycan, W.G. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

T i m  C r a n e
102
Lycan, W.G. (2001). “A Simple Argument for a Higher-Order Representation Theory of 
Consciousness,” Analysis, 61: 3–4.
McGinn, Colin (1989). “Can we solve the mind-body problem?” Mind 98: 349–66.
Manson, Neil (2000) “ ‘A Tumbling-ground for Whimsies’? The History and Contempo-
rary Role of the Conscious/Unconscious Contrast,” in Crane, Tim and Patterson, Sarah 
A. (eds.), History of the Mind-Body Problem. London: Routledge.
Martin, M.G.F. (2000). “Beyond Dispute: Sense-Data, Intentionality and the Mind-Body 
Problem,” in Crane, Tim and Patterson, Sarah (eds.), History of the Mind-Body Problem. 
London: Routledge: 195–231.
Martin, M.G.F. (2003). “Sensible Appearances,” in Baldwin, Thomas (ed.), The Cam-
bridge History of Philosophy 1870–1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maslin, Keith (2001). An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Mellor, D. H. (1977–1978). “Conscious Belief,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
78: 87–101.
Mole, Christopher, Smithies, Declan and Wu, Wayne (eds.). (2011). Attention: Philosophi-
cal and Psychological Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moore, G. E. (1903). “The Refutation of Idealism,” Mind, 12: 433–453.
Moore, G. E. (1953). “Propositions,” in Some Main Problems of Philosophy. London: 
George Allen and Unwin: 57–59.
Nagel, Thomas (1974). “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review, 83: 435–450.
O’Shaughnessy, Brian (2000). Consciousness and the World. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Papineau, David (2002). Thinking About Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peacocke, Christopher (1993). A Study of Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pitt, David (2004). “The Phenomenology of Cognition or What Is It Like to Think That P?” 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 69: 1–36.
Place U.T. (1990). “E G Boring and the Mind-Brain Identity Theory,” British Psychologi-
cal Society History and Philosophy of Science Newsletter, 11: 20–31.
Poellner, Peter (2007). “Consciousness in the World Husserlian Phenomenology and 
Externalism,” in Leiter, Brian and Rosen, Michael (ed.), Oxford Handbook to Continen-
tal Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University.
Price, H. H. (1932). Perception. London: Methuen.
Prinz, Jesse (2013). The Conscious Brain. New York: Oxford Unversity Press.
Quine, W.v.O. (1951). “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” The Philosophical Review, 60: 
20–43.
Quine, W.v.O. (1981). Theories and Things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Robinson, Howard (1982). Matter and Sense. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenthal, David (1986). “Two Concepts of Consciousness,” Philosophical Studies, 49: 
329–359.
Rosenthal, David (2005). Consciousness and Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Russell, Bertrand (1927). The Analysis of Matter. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Ryle, Gilbert (1949). The Concept of Mind. London: Hutchinson.
Ryle, Gilbert (1979). On Thinking. Oxford: Blackwell.
Sartre, Jean-Paul (1958). Being and Nothingness. London: Methuen; originally published 
1943.
Searle, John (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sellars, Wilfrid (1956). Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press 1997.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  c o n s c i o u s n e s s
103
Shoemaker, Sydney (1975). “Functionalism and Qualia,” Philosophical Studies, 27: 
291–315.
Shoemaker, Sydney (2007). “A Case for Qualia,” in McLaughlin, Brian P. and Cohen, 
Jonathan D. (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Blackwell.
Siewert, Charles (1998). The Significance of Consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Siewert, C. (2011). “Phenomenal Thought,” in Bayne, T. and Montague, M. (eds.), Cogni-
tive Phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 236–267.
Smart J. J. C. (1959). “Sensations and Brain Processes,” The Philosophical Review, 68: 
141–156.
Sprigge, T.L.S. (1971). “Final Causes,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Supplemen-
tary Volume, 45: 149–192.
Stout, G.F. (1899). A Manual of Psychology. London: University Correspondence College 
Press.
Strawson, Galen (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, Galen (2006). “Realistic Monism – Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism,” 
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13: 3–31.
Tanney, Julia (2014). “Gilbert Ryle,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Winter 
2014 Edition in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). http //plato stanford edu/archives/win2014/
entries/ryle/.
Tennant, Neil (2006). “Cognitive Phenomenology Semantic Qualia and Luminous Knowl-
edge,” in Greenough, P. and Pritchard, D. (eds.), Williamson on Knowledge. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Thomas, Emily (2013). “Space, Time and Samuel Alexander,” British Journal for the His-
tory of Philosophy, 21: 549–569.
Tolman, E. C. (1932). Purposive Behaviour in Animals and Men. New York: Century.
Tolman, E. C. (1938). “The Determiners of Behavior at a Choice Point,” Psychological 
Review, 45: 1–14.
Tye, Michael (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tye, Michael (2013). “Qualia,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Fall 2013 Edi-
tion in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). http //plato stanford edu/archives/fall2013/entries/qualia/.
Tye, Michael and Wright, Briggs (2013). “Is there a Phenomenolgoy of Thought?” in Bayne 
and Montague (eds.), Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Watson, J. B. (1930). Behaviorism (Revised edition). New York: W W Norton & Co.
Whyte, L. L. (1960). The Unconscious Before Freud. New York: Basic Books.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Edited by G.E.M. Anscombe 
and Rush Rhees and Trans. G.E.M. Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wu, Wayne (2014). Attention. London: Routledge.
Wundt, Wilhelm (1874). Grundzüge der physiologischen Psychologie (Principles of Physi-
ological Psychology) Leipzig: W. Engelmann.

104
To give a glimpse of theories of perception in the 20th century, I propose to con-
sider perception under two guises. First, we can think of perception as a conscious 
relation. Perceiving is intuitively a basic way of getting acquainted with a mind-
independent and material world. We may call this intuitive position ‘realism’. 
We can call the further idea that everything (including perception and its objects) 
is physical, ‘physicalism’. The 20th century in philosophy can be seen as a pro-
longed attempt to defend realism, and, to a lesser extent, to defend physicalism.2
Second, perception can be seen as a process that happens subconsciously. It is what-
ever process gets us to perceive the world as we do. The last century produced a number 
of models of this process, stemming from the emerging collaboration between phi-
losophy and psychology. Constructivism and ecological approaches are the two main 
present contenders, while Gestalt theory was popular in the first half of the century.
Before we proceed, I should point out that there is no presumption here that 
the two topics under consideration, although presented separately, are unrelated. 
Work in one field influenced work in the other and vice-versa. When possible, the 
relevant influences will be noted.
1.  The perceptual relation and the objects of perception
Sense perception seems to be a form of awareness of a mind-independent reality. 
When we see a table, hear a doorbell, touch a shirt, taste a pineapple, or smell a 
flower we seem capable of entering into direct contact with ordinary objects and 
events. Such objects and events exist independently of perceiving agents.
Defending this realist approach was one of the preoccupations of philosophers 
based in Cambridge in the first half of the 20th century. ‘Sense-data’ theory – the 
dominant strand of philosophical theorizing about perception in this period  – 
originated in the attempt to rescue a realist viewpoint from the British idealism 
of the late 19th century. Notable British idealists – known as ‘neo-Hegelians’ –  
include J.M.E. McTaggart, F. H. Bradley, Edward Caird, Bernard Bosanquet,  
T. H. Green and Harold Joachim.
4
20TH-CENTURY THEORIES OF 
PERCEPTION1
Nico Orlandi

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
105
Idealism is a complex metaphysical and epistemological position. British ideal-
ists held some variation of Berkeley’s idea that esse est percipi, or that reality is 
spiritual or mental. Berkeley reached this conclusion by supposing that the only 
things that are perceived are ideas. Since ideas are mental, he concluded that the 
world is also mental (Bradley 1899).3 Early sense-data theorists were reacting to 
this approach or, more specifically, to the notion that the objects of perception are 
not ordinary objects, but mind-dependent entities.
1.1  Sense-data theory
Although initially attracted to idealism, G. E. Moore later attempted to refute 
it (Moore 1903). In presenting his account of perception, Moore introduced the 
concept of sense-data to British audiences. This concept referred generally to the 
immediate objects of perception (Moore 1910/2014), and Bertrand Russell later 
popularized it in the Problems of Philosophy in 1912.4 Important in the sense-data 
tradition are C. D. Broad – one of Russell’s students – and H. H. Price – one of 
Moore’s students – who later went on to teach Wilfrid Sellars (Broad 1914; Price 
1932). A. J. Ayer is also usually counted among sense-data theorists, but some 
interpreters argue that his position is harder to classify (Ayer 1956; Martin 2003).
Initially, ‘sense-data’ was just a term of art to refer to what is immediately 
and directly given in perception (Huemer 2011). ‘Immediate’ and ‘direct’, in this 
context, mean that the perceptual awareness of sense-data does not depend on the 
awareness of anything else. Sense-data are simply given in sense perception, and 
sense perception is an unmediated relation to its objects. Importantly, the term 
‘sense-data’ was supposed to be neutral as to the nature of the sense-data them-
selves. It was an open question whether the objects of perception were physical or 
mental, mind-dependent or mind-independent, and parts of the surfaces of mate-
rial objects or not (Russell 1912, 12; Moore 1953, 30).
Moore had hoped to contrast idealism by arguing that sense-data are identi-
cal with ordinary entities, but his position encountered difficulties that are now 
known as ‘the problem of perception’ (Smith 2002). The problem can be illus-
trated by reference to perceptual illusion, hallucination, perspectival variation, 
and the time lag between events in the world and our perceptions of it.5
For brevity’s sake we can focus on perceptual illusion. In illusions, an item is 
experienced, but it appears other than it really is. A straight stick may appear bent 
when placed in water. A soft fabric may feel rough when touched after touching 
something softer. In these instances, we are perceptually aware of something that 
has certain properties – something bent or rough – when no corresponding thing has 
those properties. Because no corresponding entity has the properties perceived, the 
temptation is to suppose that what we perceive is not the stick itself. We perceive the 
appearance of the stick. In the visual case, sense-data theorists often talked of the 
immediate objects of perception as patches of color. We may be aware of ordinary 
objects in perception, but only indirectly – that is, only in virtue of perceiving the 
objects’ appearances.

N i c o  O r l a n d i
106
Further, the argument goes, because there is no relevant phenomenological dif-
ference between cases of illusion of this kind and cases of ordinary perception, the 
reasoning can be extended to apply to every instance of perceiving. In everyday per-
ception, like in illusion, we are directly aware of appearances. Appearances change 
with perspective. Sense-data theorists took this to suggest that appearances are mind-
dependent. Our access to the world is mediated by awareness of these appearances.
Although formulations of the argument from illusion tend to use the visual case, 
the argument is supposed to work for other modalities as well. It is just not always 
clear how this works. One may take the objects of audition to be sounds, not ordi-
nary objects (O’Callaghan 2007). We perceive objects by perceiving the sounds they 
produce. So the argument from illusion does not seem to straightforwardly apply to 
audition. The argument would seem to require, first, that we think of sounds as, in 
some sense, ordinary and mind-independent; and, second, that we think of sounds 
as having properties – for example, loudness – that we can misperceive.
But regardless of these difficulties, considerations of illusion lead sense-data 
theorists to enrich the neutral conception of sense-data. Sense-data are not just the 
immediate objects of perception. They are also (a) dependent on the mind, and (b) 
having the properties that they perceptually appear to us to have.
Thesis (a) is peculiar given the original anti-idealism of proponents of sense-
data theory, but the theory is supposed to be compatible with realism about the 
world (Moore 1925). Sense-data theorists, like Moore, tend to also be realists, 
but without endorsing the original Moorian idea that sense-data are identical with 
ordinary objects. Sense-data theorists tend to be indirect realists, believing that 
perception puts us in contact with a physical reality, even if only indirectly. Per-
ception is not, as pre-theoretically supposed, an unmediated form of acquaintance 
with the world. It is mediated by our contact with entities variably described as 
‘sense-data’, ‘mental images’, ‘impressions’ and ‘appearances’.
The notable exception to the realist bent of sense-data theory is Bertrand Rus-
sell who flirted with both phenomenalism – the thesis that the physical world is a 
construction out of sensory elements – and with neutral monism – the thesis that 
the mind and the world are constructions out of a common basis of sensory acts 
(Russell 1914).
Because sense-data theory conceives of the immediate objects of perception as 
appearances rather than ordinary objects, it differs from naïve or direct realism of 
the kind defended by Thomas Reid and by J. L. Austin (Austin 1946; 1962; Reid 
1764). Austin argued forcibly that the arguments used against a direct realist posi-
tion are unconvincing. One of Austin’s strategies is to claim that such arguments 
trade on a misunderstanding of the common-sense expressions ‘look’, ‘appear’ 
and ‘seem’. To say that a straight stick appears bent in water, for example, is not 
to say that we are acquainted only with its looks.
Austin’s work belongs to a tradition of Oxford direct realism whose prede-
cessor is most notably Prichard, and whose successors are some contemporary 
proponents of ‘disjunctivism’, a position that we will briefly survey in section 1.4 
(Hinton 1973; Martin 2003; Prichard 1906; Snowdon 1979; Travis 2004).

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
107
Reflection on whether mind-independent objects are the objects of perception is 
also present in the phenomenological tradition. According to both Edmund Hus-
serl and Maurice Merleau-Ponty, what we perceive appears to exist independently 
of our own existence. In a line of reasoning that resembles considerations of per-
spectival variation, but that reaches different conclusions, Husserl and Merleau-
Ponty argue that the mind-independence of the objects of perception is given by 
the fact that we can take multiple perspectives on the objects. It is evident in the 
fact that taking different perspectives changes the way the objects look (Husserl 
1900/1; Merleau-Ponty 1945).
A similar conclusion concerning mind-independence is reached by more recent 
work on the phenomenology of other modalities. Tactile experience, for example, 
delivers an appearance of something ‘external’ and mind-independent insofar as 
in touching something we experience the limit of our own body (Condillac 1947; 
Smith 2002; Strawson 1958).
Thesis (b) of sense-data theory, according to which sense-data have the proper-
ties that they appear to us to have, is, like thesis (a), a problematic thesis, and it 
is sometimes credited with the introduction in philosophy of qualia – or qualita-
tive properties present in experience. This is not quite right, however. American 
philosophers had already introduced the term ‘qualia’ somewhat independently of 
sense-data theory. Charles Peirce used the term in relation to sense perception in 
1866, and C. I. Lewis later used it in discussing the conceptual status of percep-
tion (Crane 2000; Lewis 1929; Peirce 1866/1931).
Thesis (b) is a tacit presupposition of the argument from illusion. According 
to the argument, when one perceptually experiences something, there must be 
something that one stands in the relation of perceiving to, and this something 
must have the properties which it seems to the perceiver to have. For example, if 
it now looks to me as though there is a white expanse before me as I look at a wall, 
then an actual white expanse must exist, be sensed by me and have the properties 
I perceive it to have. This is true even if I am misperceiving or hallucinating a 
wall. And the property of being white, the reasoning goes, must be a non-physical 
property in this case. This is because nothing in the environment, or in my head, 
is white when I am hallucinating a white wall.
Experienced properties like ‘being white’ are examples of qualia. Although 
there are different senses of the term ‘qualia’ in contemporary philosophy, we can 
work with the idea that a quale is a qualitative property present in perceptual expe-
rience (Crane 2000 and this volume, Tye 2013). Some take qualia to be properties 
of the objects of experience. Some take them to be properties of the experiences 
themselves.
Typical examples of qualia are the color of something seen, the pitch of a heard 
sound and the smell of an odor. Because qualia can be present in experiences 
when no property corresponds to them in the environment (or in one’s head), they 
are thought to pose a threat to physicalist accounts of the mind.
Due to its metaphysics of mysterious objects and properties, sense-data theory 
was mostly abandoned in the second half of the 20th century, when physicalism 

N i c o  O r l a n d i
108
dominated the philosophy of mind. Indeed, with some notable exceptions (Ber-
mudez 2000; Jackson 1977; O’Shaughnessy 2003), most contemporary philoso-
phers of perception reject sense-data theory.
Two alternative theories of perception emerged: adverbialism and represen-
tationalism or intentionalism. The latter continues to be influential today (Arm-
strong 1961; Burge 2005; 2009; Dretske 1969; Harman 1990; Lycan 1996; 
Peacocke 1983; Searle 1983; Tye 1992). The former enjoyed popularity in the 
mid-20th century (Chisholm 1957; Ducasse 1942; Sellars 1975). We should look 
at each in turn.
1.2  Representationalism or intentionalism
Representationalists point out that the ontological commitments of sense-data 
theory are peculiar when we recognize that perceiving is a psychological state 
and, like other psychological states, it can have objects that do not exist. When 
I think of a unicorn, I am in a psychological state that is about an entity that does 
not exist. It is hard to see why the mere fact that I can think of a unicorn would 
imply both that the unicorn exists, and that its perceived properties are present in 
the world. Similarly, it is not clear why we would want to suppose that perceiving 
something means that the object perceived exists, and that we should discover 
properties corresponding to the perceived properties in the natural environment.
The fact that psychological states are about objects (that may not exist) is 
labeled their ‘intentionality’. The fact that such states tell us something about 
the objects they are about is called their intentional ‘content’. Sense-data theory 
has been charged with ignoring the intentionality of perception, for instance by 
G.E.M. Anscombe (Anscombe 1965; Searle 1983). Anscombe argues against both 
sense-data theory and direct realist positions by pointing out that what she calls 
‘sensation’ – and what I have been calling ‘perception’ – is similar to other mental 
attitudes in relating us to intentional objects.6
Prior to Anscombe, the emphasis on intentionality is present in authors such 
as Chisholm, Husserl, Merleau-Ponty and Brentano, who reintroduced the very 
concept of intentionality from Scholastic philosophy (Brentano 1874; Chisholm 
1957; Husserl 1900/01; 1913; Merleau-Ponty 1945; Montague this volume). 
Husserl distinguishes the psychological act of perceiving – the noesis – from its  
content – the noema, which directs itself to an object. A perceptual act with a 
given content can occur in the absence of its object while still aiming at it.
Representationalists about perception tend to also be representationalists about 
qualia (Anscombe 1965; Byrne 2001; Dretske 1995; Harman 1990; Lycan 1987; 
Shoemaker 1994; Tye 1994). There are different versions of representationalism 
about qualia, but the general idea is that qualia are represented properties of repre-
sented objects. Some express this view by saying that qualia are ‘representational 
properties’. They are properties of what is represented in perceptual experience. 
When I am hallucinating a white wall, for example, I am representing a wall as 
having the property of being white. The wall does not need to be present in my 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
109
immediate environment, and its whiteness is not an immaterial property of my 
experience. It is a represented property of a represented (or intentional) object.
This type of position is often coupled with the claim that perception is phenom-
enologically ‘transparent’. When we perceive, we see ‘right through’ perceptual 
states to the world (Crane 2003; Harman 1990; Moore 1903). The properties that 
we are aware of in perception are properties that we attribute to external objects, 
not to our experiences of them.7
J.J.C. Smart’s ‘topic neutral translation’ from the mid twentieth century is an 
example of representationalism of this kind (Smart 1959). According to Smart, 
“I see a yellowish-orange after-image” means, roughly, that “there is something 
going on in me which is like what is going on when I have my eyes open, am 
awake, and there is an orange illuminated in good light conditions in front of me.” 
This type of translation aims to replace talk of qualia and of other purely mental 
entities with talk of entities that are presumably more acceptable – that is, with 
talk of intentional objects and their properties – although it is still a burden of 
intentionalism to explain what intentional objects ultimately are.
In addition to avoiding a dubious ontology, representationalism is thought to be an 
improvement over sense-data theory because it better accounts for the epistemic role 
of perception. Perception is not only what puts us in contact with the world. It is also 
seemingly capable of grounding our beliefs and judgments concerning the world. 
Sense-data theorists typically held the position that the perception of sense-data is 
indubitable, and not influenced by one’s concepts or categories – where concepts are 
roughly ideas that come with certain abilities (Machery 2009; Martin 2003; Price 
1932). Although, according to some proponents of sense-data theory, one could be 
wrong about how things are – and judgments concerning how things are depend on 
the concepts one has – one could not be wrong about how things appear. One could 
be wrong that a stick in water is bent – or that it is even a stick. But one couldn’t be 
wrong about its looks – that is, about the existence of something that appears bent.
This immunity to error in sense-data theory raises questions concerning the 
ability of perception, so conceived, to inform about the world in a way that can 
justify belief. How does an infallible appearance of a color patch justify a belief 
in worldly objects and events that are presumably different from color patches?8
Both Anscombe and members of the phenomenological tradition, such as Hus-
serl, emphasized that perception and belief are similar in the fact that they relate 
us to intentional objects and in the fact that they have content. Because they have 
content. Because they have content, perceptual states, just like beliefs, are about 
items in the environment – they can have a common subject matter – and they can 
stand in justificatory relations to one another.
One strand of philosophical literature has, then, been interested in spelling out 
what features perceptual content must have in order to play its epistemic role. 
A particularly active debate centers on the notion of non-conceptual content. C. 
I. Lewis discusses themes related to this issue early in the 20th century (Lewis 
1929). But it is not until Gareth Evans that the notion of non-conceptual content 
is introduced in philosophy (Evans 1982).

N i c o  O r l a n d i
110
Proponents of non-conceptual content hold that some mental states have con-
tent – representing the world to be a certain way – even when the bearer of those 
states lacks the concepts that specify the content (Bermudez and Cahen 2012). 
One can see a white wall – and usefully describe it as such – even if one lacks the 
concept of a wall and the concept of white.9 Deniers of non-conceptual content 
hold that perception needs to have a similar content to beliefs in order to properly 
relate to them. Since belief is taken to have conceptual content, perception is 
taken to have this type of content too (Brewer 1999; Byrne 2005; Speaks 2005). 
The challenge for proponents of non-conceptual content – similar to the challenge 
that sense-data theory faced – is to account for the rational role of perception.
The popularity of intentionalism in the second half of the 20th century also 
prompted a reformulation of the debate on the objects of perception in terms of 
whether perception has rich or poor content.10 This debate ceased to focus exclu-
sively on ordinary objects. Contemporary philosophers are interested in what kind 
of properties perceptual content includes. In some conservative views, much like 
in sense-data theory, perception puts us in contact with the surface properties of 
objects – so-called ‘low-level properties’ (Clark 2000). Less conservative posi-
tions hold that perception has richer content, including, for example, causation 
and kind properties (Siegel 2006; 2010). One type of argument in favor of this less 
conservative view appeals to the effects that expertise has on perceptual experi-
ence – a topic on which we will return in section 2.2.
Representationalism aimed to avoid the problematic ontology of sense-data 
theory. The same is true of adverbialism.
1.3  Adverbialism
Adverbialism holds that when we perceive, we are in a certain kind of mental state 
of which we can be aware but this mental state does not possess the properties that 
it appears to us to have.
Consider, again, the example of my experience of a white wall. According to 
the adverbial theory, my experience involves no thing, either actual or non-actual, 
that is white. Rather, when I experience a white wall, I sense or perceive ‘whitely’. 
Whitely sensing is just a type of visual sensing. To ask for the location of the white 
thing I am sensing betrays a false presupposition. Analogously, instead of talking 
about smiles, we can talk of manners of smiling (Jackson 1975, 128).
Adverbialism is an attempt to get rid of mysterious mental objects and proper-
ties by appeal to manners of perceiving. In so doing, adverbialism seems to deny 
altogether that perception is a relation. Perception emerges in this theory as a 
subjective act that can be done in different manners, rather than as a relation to an 
outside world. Thus, adverbialism seems to react to sense-data theory by denying 
something that most other theories accept: the relational status of perception. This 
feature of adverbialism can be seen as what is most problematic about it.
One of the main problems with adverbialism has come to be known as the 
‘many properties problem’, which, as the name suggests, arises from the fact 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
111
that experiences seem to be relations to objects that can have multiple properties 
(Jackson 1975). How do we understand, for example, having a red and round 
after-image in the adverbial theory? One may be inclined to suppose that we can 
understand it in terms of seeing redly and roundly. But things get complicated 
when we think of experiences that involve more than one object with different 
properties. How do we distinguish experiencing a red, round after-image and 
a green, square after-image from experiencing a red, square after-image and a 
green, round after-image? These experiences seem different, but they involve see-
ing redly, roundly, greenly and squarely in a way that makes them indistinguish-
able in the adverbial theory. Perhaps, there is a way to respond to these worries 
by appeal to different acts of seeing that are differently located in space (Sellars 
1975). In general, however, the adverbial theory has been unable to survive this 
type of criticism.
Both representationalists and adverbialists wanted to distance themselves from 
sense-data theory. It is a further question whether representationalists are akin 
to sense-data theorists in the form of realism that they accept. As we saw ear-
lier, sense-data theorists tend to be indirect realists. If, by contrast, contemporary 
intentionalists aspire to hold direct realism, they need to explain how perception 
can be a relation to intentional objects (and contents) while also putting us in 
unmediated contact with the world.
A concern with rescuing direct or naive realism is part of the motivation for 
an alternative view about perception called disjunctivism – a position that gained 
popularity in the second half of the 20th century.
1.4  Disjunctivism
Despite the contrast between sense-data theory and intentionalism, the two theo-
ries share an assumption that disjunctivism denies. This is the ‘common factor’ 
or ‘common kind’ principle. According to this principle, veridical perceptions, 
illusions and hallucinations are all states that belong to the same psychological 
kind. They are all forms of perceptual experience that differ only in accuracy. Dis-
junctivism denies this principle (Hinton 1973, 71; Martin 2003; McDowell 1987; 
Snowdon 1979).
According to disjunctivism, the objects of perception are mind-independent, 
ordinary entities. Illusions and hallucinations are possible, but they are not mental 
states of the same psychological kind as regular perceptions. One cannot move, 
as it is done in the argument from illusion, from a conclusion about illusory cases, 
to a conclusion about perception at large. In veridical perception we are directly 
acquainted with real entities.
Interestingly, disjunctivists do not deny that perception and hallucination have 
something in common. Each of these states is an experience that is subjectively 
indistinguishable from the other. What they have in common, however, is the 
mere fact that they are subjectively indistinguishable. An experience is either a 
genuine perception or a hallucination – hence the theory’s name.

N i c o  O r l a n d i
112
While hallucinations are experiences of some kind, perceptions are relational 
states that are partly constituted by their objects. When the objects are not present, 
perception does not occur. Thus, while the representationalist thinks of perception 
as essentially a relation to representations, the disjunctivist thinks of perception as 
being fundamentally a relation to objects (Campbell 2002).11
For this and other reasons, John McDowell has argued that disjunctivism is 
the only theory that explains how perceiving agents are in genuine contact with 
the world. Other theories, according to McDowell, are all too friendly to skepti-
cism. M.G.F. Martin has similarly argued that disjunctivism is the only theory that 
accords with our common sense view of perception. Disjunctivism respects the 
common sense idea that perception is a type of ‘openness to the world’.
In sum, if we conceive of perception as a relation, we can see the 20th century 
in philosophy as a struggle to defend realism and physicalism. Overall, indirect 
realism is more common in the first half of the century, while direct realism is 
preferred in the second half, with theories battling over which does a better job at 
rescuing direct realism. Physicalism is also a constant concern, especially in the 
second part of the century. In the next section, we consider perception as a type 
of unconscious process.
2.  The perceptual process
The philosophy of perception in the last century has been shaped by cooperation 
with the developing field of psychology. Psychological theories have in turn been 
influenced by work in philosophy. The interplay between these and other disci-
plines eventually developed into what is now known as ‘cognitive science’. Cog-
nitive science is a collaboration of academic disciplines geared at understanding 
mental states and processes. It is controversial whether this is a unified field, but it 
includes psychology, philosophy, computer science, linguistics and neuroscience.
Cognitive scientists tend to be interested in perception as a process, and to 
focus on the problem of understanding how it is that we come to perceive the 
world as we do (Palmer 1999). Perception starts with the stimulation of sensory 
receptors by environmental elements – for example, by light hitting the retina or 
by sound waves affecting the ears’ membranes. The question is how, from this 
sensory basis, we come to perceive distal objects and events.
The major psychological theories of perception in the 20th century that address 
this question are either reactions to, or continuations of what happened in the cen-
tury before. The second half of the 1800 saw two important developments in the 
new field of perceptual psychology. First, Wilhelm Wundt proposed structuralism, 
a position inspired by the British Empiricists. Structuralism was later popularized 
in the United States by one of Wundt’s students, Edward Titchener and, as we 
will see, it is the psychological counterpart of sense-data theory (Titchener 1902; 
Wundt 1874).
Second, Hermann von Helmholtz – a German physicist, mathematician and 
physiologist, who also supervised Wundt in Heidelberg in 1858 – proposed what 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
113
was later called ‘constructivism’, a view that became prominent in the second half 
of the twentieth century and that remains popular today (Helmholtz 1867).
Gestalt psychology – which was particularly influential in the first half of the 
1900s – and ecological optics – which gained momentum at mid-century – are 
reactions to structuralism and to constructivism respectively. The sections that 
follow outline these theories with an eye to how they influenced – and how they 
were influenced by – the philosophical theories discussed so far.
2.1  Structuralism and Gestalt psychology
A central thesis of structuralism is ‘atomism’, the idea that perception arises 
from a process in which simple, indivisible, and modality specific sensory atoms, 
not unlike sense-data, are combined. The process of combining was thought to 
be associative. The sensory atoms, or basic sensations, are associated or linked 
together as a result of prior exposure. In the case of vision, visual sensations of 
color in each region are concatenated to produce a perception of the color of a 
whole visual scene based on past encounters.
Because structuralism thought of the atoms of sensation as modality-specific, 
it had the problem of explaining how sensations from different modalities are 
integrated into a single percept. This problem will be later called ‘the binding 
problem’ and a section of contemporary cognitive science is dedicated to studying 
it (O’Callaghan 2014; Treisman 1996).
Structuralists thought that visual sensations trigger memories from other 
senses – for example, how a wall looks triggers memories of how it feels – allowing 
atoms specific to other senses to be added to the percept. Perception, in structural-
ism, occurs by a process of unconscious association that makes use of memory. 
Objects and scenes appear as they do because the perceptual system adds atomic 
appearances as in a mosaic.
Structuralists held this view together with a preference for the method of intro-
spection. They claimed that, through trained introspection, one could discover 
the elementary units of perception. This aspect of structuralism was retained in 
Gestalt Psychology, which thought of consciousness as central to the study of the 
mind, but it was questioned by both behaviorism and by competing perceptual 
theories (James 1904; Skinner 1938; Gibson 1979). Later in the century, psy-
chologists decidedly moved away from introspective methods and from the study 
of consciousness more generally. It was believed that perception could be under-
stood in isolation from consciousness.
Although popular in the second half of the 1800s, the 20th century opened 
with a publication that put structuralism into question. In 1912, Max Wertheimer 
published an experiment on phi motion, or apparent motion that is considered 
the beginning of Gestalt Psychology. Wertheimer’s study is taken to show that 
percepts cannot always be decomposed into basic sensory parts (Wagemans 
et  al. 2012; Wertheimer 1912). Perceived movement, for example, does not 
depend on seeing an object in two positions – the starting and the end positions. 

N i c o  O r l a n d i
114
Motion is a structured whole or ‘Gestalten’ with its own ontological status and 
phenomenology.
Wertheimer extended this theory to the perception of shape and rhythm. His model 
was then developed by his colleagues in Berlin, Wolfang Köhler and Kurt Koffka 
(Koffka 1935; Köhler 1920). According to Gestalt theory, a perceptual scene has 
properties that the parts – even when considered together – do not have. Gestaltists 
were interested not in how the parts compose a whole, but rather in how the structure 
of a whole affects its subparts. They contrasted structural atomism, with holism.
This holistic thesis had an effect in philosophy, prompting some theorists to 
question whether appearances are simple and unadulterated in the way in which 
sense-data theory and structuralism thought they were (Hanson 1958). Accord-
ing to holism, no appearance is what it is independently of how it is situated in a 
whole. The way an item looks is affected by the way other items in the perceptual 
field look. Thus Gestalt psychology influenced views that questioned the neutral-
ity of perception, a topic on which we will return in the next section (2.2).
Gestalt theorists took themselves to be discovering principles of perceptual 
organization that are not acquired through experience, or association, and that 
organize whole appearances. 
Although Gestaltists were primarily concerned with rejecting the atomistic con-
victions of structuralism, they also held views about the physiology of perceiving. 
Köhler proposed two related ideas. One was that the brain was a dynamic, physi-
cal system that converged towards an equilibrium of minimum energy. This idea 
predates contemporary accounts of the brain based on dynamics and predictive 
coding (Clark 2013). A second proposal was that the causal mechanism underly-
ing perception was given by a ‘physical Gestalt’ or an electromagnetic field gener-
ated by events in neurons.12
Some of these ideas were later shown to be problematic. The notion of a physi-
cal Gestalt, for example, was in trouble when it was found that disrupting electri-
cal brain fields did not seriously affect perceptual abilities (Lashley et al. 1951).
These physiological findings may have contributed to Gestalt psychology los-
ing its appeal in the second half of the 20th century. The development of com-
puter science, of cognitive science and of neuroscience may also have offered 
better theoretical frameworks. Work on perceptual principles of organization and 
on the emergent structure of perceptual experience, however, continues to this day 
(Wagemans et al. 2012).
2.2  Constructivism
Another powerful idea that shaped work on perception in the 20th century is the 
constructivist view that perception involves a type of unconscious inference. Con-
structivists stress that sensory stimulation is inadequate in perception. In the case 
of vision, what is projected on the retina consists of light intensities that can be 
caused by a number of environmental elements. How do we get to see an object 
when all that is projected on the retina is light?

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
115
A similar problem is supposed to arise in the other modalities, but although 
this is true of audition, it is not clear that the same applies to the rest of the senses 
(Burge 2010). 
In the case of seeing, the question of how we derive a rich view of objects from 
what is projected on the retina is answered in different ways. Structuralism points 
to associations based on past experience. Gestalt psychologists hypothesize a 
number of principles of organization, focusing mostly on how the principles regu-
late conscious appearances. Constructivism, not unlike Gestalt psychology, cent-
ers on some principles of organization and views them as part of an unconscious 
process that not only organizes, but also adds information to what is contained in 
sensory stimulation (Helmholtz 1867).13
According to constructivism, the perceptual process supplements the initial 
stimulation by performing a type of inference. In vision, the retinal ‘image’ is 
processed by using hidden ‘assumptions’ to reach perceptual ‘conclusions’ about 
the environment. A given discontinuity in light intensity, for example, may be 
taken to be an edge based on the assumption that discontinuities of a certain kind 
are typically edges in our world. The perceptual conclusions are ‘guesses’ as to 
what is the most likely cause of the stimulation. In this view, the world appears as 
it does because we construct it to appear as it does.
In constructivism, the internal states of perceptual processing that encode infor-
mation about the world are typically called ‘representations’. Representations are 
not themselves objects to the experiencing subject. Generally, in cognitive science, 
representations are subconscious states that carry information about the world, 
where carrying information is spelled out in different ways (Dretske 1981). The 
conscious subject is not aware of representations, and she has little or no control 
over them. A representation, in this context, is a theoretical notion introduced to do 
explanatory work. It is not clear how representations, understood in this way, relate 
to the intentional entities postulated by representationalism (see section 1.3.).
Because the inferential view conceives of perception as mediated by repre-
sentational states, it also conceives of perception as indirect, a term reminiscent 
of indirect realism. The sense in which perception is indirect in the inferential 
framework, however, is different from the sense employed in sense-data theory 
(see section 1.1). According to the latter, sense-data are the immediate objects of 
awareness, and everything else is perceived by or in virtue of perceiving sense-
data. This is not the case in inferential accounts of perception. Percepts are built 
out of sensory states that carry information, but the sensory states are not perceived 
or given to the individual. In this respect, constructivism also differs from struc-
turalism, according to which the atoms of sensation are introspectively available.
Another important difference with both the sense-data tradition and the basic ele-
ments of structuralism is that sensory states in constructivism need not be modal-
ity specific. Although inferential views typically take vision to be their paradigm 
example, and some proponents think of the senses as distinct (Fodor 1983), some 
constructivists have been open to the idea that much of sensation and of perception 
are multimodal. This is true of recent Bayesian accounts to which I return later.14

N i c o  O r l a n d i
116
Interestingly, and despite the dissimilarities between indirect realism and con-
structivism, some of the considerations that are sometimes brought up in support 
of the inferential idea are parallel to some of the considerations introduced to 
suppose that our perceptual access to ordinary objects is mediated. The ability to 
explain illusion and misperception, for example, is mentioned as one advantage of 
constructivism in a way that is reminiscent of the argument from illusion (Fodor 
and Pylyshyn 1981; McClamrock 1995).
Because of its use of the notion of representation, constructivism has a Kan-
tian flavor and, although introduced by Helmholtz in the 19th century, it gained 
popularity only in the second half of the 20th century (Gregory 1970; Hochberg 
1964; Rock 1983). This was partly due to two important, and related, develop-
ments. One was the introduction of computers as models and simulators of mental 
processes (Newell and Simon 1963; Turing 1950). The other was the idea that the 
brain is an information processing system (Broadbent 1958; Neisser 1967; von 
Neumann 1951). Both developments shaped the progress of perceptual science 
and have been influential in philosophy of mind.
Constructivism weds well with a computational and information-processing 
model of mental activity because computations are traditionally understood as 
operations on symbols in virtue of rules or algorithms (Fodor 1975; Ullman 1980). 
If we recognize symbols as information-carrying structures, and algorithms as 
containing assumptions and rules to process the symbols, then viewing the per-
ceptual process as computational pretty much amounts to viewing it the way the 
constructivist does – as an inference from some informational states to others.
Partly because of its fit with computer science, constructivism has been widely 
accepted in philosophy since the 1950s (Marr 1982; Rock 1983; 1997; Ullman 
1980; Palmer 1999; Pylyshyn 1984; Fodor 1984; Churchland 1988). Philosophers 
who do not agree on much else – for example, Jerry Fodor and Paul Church-
land – tend to accept it. Derivatively, the notions of representation, computation 
and information have received extensive scrutiny in philosophy.15
The most current version of constructivism is the Bayesian model of perception 
(Brainard 2009; Clark 2013; Maloney and Mamassian 2009; Mamassian et al. 
2002; Rescorla forthcoming). According to such model, the visual system per-
forms inductive inferences on some hypotheses about the environment. These 
hypotheses are initially selected based on prior experience. The hypotheses are 
tested in real time given sensory stimulation and either confirmed or changed.
Like Gestalt psychology, constructivism prompted reflection on the neutral-
ity of perceptual appearances. According to constructivism, what we perceive 
depends on unconscious inferences that employ assumptions about the world. If 
the assumptions change – through, for example, the acquisition of new knowl-
edge – then it seems that what we perceive should correspondingly change.
Following these developments in psychology, a number of philosophers of sci-
ence from the middle of the 20th century started questioning the status of observa-
tion in scientific theories (Hanson 1958; Kuhn 1962). The idea was that, contrary 
to common belief, observation is theory-laden and scientists working in different 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
117
paradigms literally perceive different worlds. The opposing view is that observa-
tion is theory-neutral and it can serve as an impartial tribunal to adjudicate clashes 
of opinion.
In philosophy of mind, this disagreement later generated two versions of con-
structivism. Reacting to the idea that observation is theory-laden, Jerry Fodor 
published an influential work that denied that perceptual inferences are affected 
by other mental states (Fodor 1983; 1984). Fodor proposed modularity. The mod-
ular thesis includes a number of claims, but one of the central claims is that per-
ceiving is importantly isolated from thinking and believing. Perceptual processes 
are largely immune to influence from outside of perception, such that what we 
perceive is pretty constant through time and across world-views.
Deniers of modularity claim that perception is ‘cognitively penetrable’ 
(Churchland 1988). Perception is influenced by background knowledge and 
expertise such that the same subject may perceive the world differently at dif-
ferent times as a function of a change in beliefs. Along similar lines, different 
subjects may perceive the world differently as a function of their differing theo-
retical convictions.
Work on cognitive penetrability and on the modularity of perception is ongo-
ing with philosophers interested in understanding the epistemic consequences of 
thinking of perception as cognitively penetrable (Raftopoulos 2009; Siegel 2012).
Despite the popularity of constructivism in the second half of the 20th century 
and the beginning of the 21st century, an alternative position – reminiscent of 
work in the continental tradition in philosophy – emerged and is now popular 
in embedded and embodied approaches to mental activity. This is the ecological 
view of perception that I briefly discuss in the next subsection.
2.3  Ecological perception
The major alternative position to constructivism rejects the computation- and  
representation-heavy approach to perception in favor of a more ‘ecological’ way 
of understanding the perceptual process. In explaining why we see the world as 
we do, the ecological view says that we should focus on the way the world is.
The main precursor of this type of position in psychology is J. J. Gibson (Gib-
son 1950; 1966; 1979). Initially influenced by Gestalt Psychology, Gibson’s work 
is primarily a reaction to Helmholtz’s ideas. Gibson stressed two elements of the 
perceptual act. First, that perception happens over time, and in a moving and 
exploring, body. Second, that the information available in the natural environment 
and in sensation is rich and not inadequate as supposed by constructivism.
In vision, the information is present in what Gibson calls the ‘ambient optic 
array’ which is available to, and picked up by, our eyes. The ambient optic array 
contains a number of invariants that allow the perceptual system to figure out the 
distal layout. Slanted surfaces of various kinds, for example, project images on the 
retina that have characteristic texture gradients (Gibson 1950). Perceivers can use 
such gradients to see the slant and depth of surfaces in the world.

N i c o  O r l a n d i
118
The richness of environmental stimuli and the embodiment and time extension 
of perception help Gibson understand how perceiving subjects deal with sensory 
data without invoking internal inferential and representational structures. Such 
structures are needed, according to Gibson, only if we conceive of perception 
as a static process, where the visual system needs to continuously store and add 
information to an impoverished stimulus. By contrast, Gibson thinks that the per-
ceptual act is an active engagement with the world.
Proponents of this kind of position tend to liken perceiving to the type of 
engagement present in the tactual modality (Noë 2004). Learning the shape of 
something by touch requires continuously exploring the object as opposed to try-
ing to form a model of the shape based on a single encounter. Accordingly, per-
ceiving requires the direct ‘pick-up’ of information in a rich biological context in 
which perceivers can move and explore.
Gibson admitted that the brain needs to somehow attune, and respond to the 
environment it encounters. But he tried to explain this attunement by using a reso-
nance metaphor. The information in the stimulus simply causes the appropriate 
neural structures in the brain to fire and resonate (Gibson 1966; 1979).
The metaphor of resonance – which was perhaps influenced by the work of 
Köhler – remained underdescribed in Gibson, and it was later at the center of 
criticism. David Marr, for example, while accepting many Gibsonian insights, 
remarked that ignoring the details of how the brain attunes to the world amounts 
to oversimplifying the perceptual task (Marr 1982). Marr and other constructiv-
ists can be read as trying to supplement what Gibson left unexplained: the internal 
computational basis of perception.
More recent developments in computer science, such as connectionism, may 
supplement what Gibson and Köhler had in mind without committing to con-
structivism (Churchland 1990; Feldman 1981; Grossberg 1982; McClelland and 
Rumelhart 1986; Rosenblatt 1962). Connectionist networks are nets of connected 
units that spread information, and attune to the world, by spreading levels of 
activation – simulating a biological brain. It is open to debate whether such net-
works make use of representations and perform inferential operations (Ramsey  
et al. 1991).
Gibson’s work inspired a number of philosophers and psychologists in the sec-
ond half of the 20th century and his influence continues today. His ideas have been 
borrowed in various ways in the literature on so-called ‘embodied and embedded 
cognition’ in philosophy and in psychology. This literature puts into question the 
need to appeal to representations in the study of mental processes (Clark 1997; 
Geisler 2008; Hurley 2002; O’Regan and Noë 2001; Orlandi 2014; Wilson 2004).
Although contemporary philosophers of perception often refer back to 
Gibson, it should be noted that the stress on understanding perceptual pro-
cesses as embodied and ecologically situated is present in the continental tra-
dition in the first half of the twentieth century  – in particular, in Maurice  
Merleau-Ponty (Merleau-Ponty 1945). According to Merleau-Ponty, there is a 
type of ‘readiness’ on the part of the subject in perception that makes an object 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
119
available for discovery. Rather than postulating internal states that represent infor-
mation, Merleau-Ponty thought that such representations are implicit in the sub-
ject’s own dispositions to move.
In sum, when considering perception as a process, the 20th century saw the 
emergence of three theories of perception. Gestalt psychology was prominent in 
the first half of the century, while constructivism dominated the second half, with 
ecological approaches serving as a plausible competitor. The century also saw the 
emergence of intense cooperation between philosophy and disciplines such as 
psychology, computer science and linguistics.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I traced the history of theories of perception in the 20th century by 
considering perception under two guises. If we focus on perception as a relation, 
then I suggested that the 20th century has been preoccupied with defending real-
ism and physicalism.
If we regard perception as a process, then the century was dominated by inter-
action between philosophy and the emerging cognitive sciences. The first half 
of the century saw the rise of Gestalt Psychology, while the second half saw the 
emergence of two views, one centering on internal procedures, and one focusing 
on environmental interactions.
Notes
	 1	 For help and advice with this chapter, I thank Tim Crane, JJ Dinishak, Jon Ellis, Dan 
Guevara, Rasmus Grønfeldt Winther, Amy Kind and Samantha Matherne, whose 
knowledge of history helped a great deal.
	 2	 Although widely used, the term ‘physical’ is hardly ever spelled out in philosophy 
of mind. Some contrast ‘physical’ with ‘mental’ (which seems unfortunate since the 
mental would then be non-physical by definition). Often ‘physical’ is synonymous 
with ‘mind-independent’, ‘material’, ‘non-spiritual’ and occasionally with ‘causally 
efficacious’. Physicalism was initially a doctrine about the language of science (see 
Crane, this volume).
	 3	 Thanks to Samantha Matherne for this reference.
	 4	 Martin (2003) notes that the concept of sense-data had already been used in the late 
19th century, in the United States by Royce and James.
	 5	 For the argument from illusion, see Ayer (1963: pp. 3–11), and Hume (1748). For 
perspectival variation and time lag of the kind that occurs when we perceive no longer 
existing stars, see Russell (1912).
	 6	 Martin (2003) points out that whether this charge against sense-data theory is on point 
can be questioned. Martin argues that both Broad and Price were aware of the inten-
tionality of perception.
	 7	 G. E. Moore (1903) is an early precursor of transparency. Thanks to Amy Kind for this 
pointer. For deniers of transparency in some of its formulations, see Block (2000) and 
Kind (2003).
	 8	 I think that this type of problematic for sense-data theory is raised in Sellars 1956 and 
it is also a point pressed by Wittgenstein 1953.

N i c o  O r l a n d i
120
	 9	 Paul Crowther (2006) rightly points out that this is only one conception of non-conceptual  
content in the literature. Indeed, Crowther and Richard Heck disagree on whether this 
dispute is consistently about a single notion (Heck 2007). For more on this dispute 
see Evans (1982), Peacocke (1983), Heck (2000), Roskies (2008), McDowell (1994).
	10	 See Burge 1979 for the idea of mental states having content. See Siegal (2010) for the 
idea that perception has content.
	11	 To be fair, representationalists also think of perception as directed at objects. Repre-
sentations are, by definition, states that stand for something else. But, as I mentioned, 
representationalists face the challenge of explaining how perception can be a relation 
to intentional contents while also being a direct acquaintance with objects.
	12	 A central Gestaltist thesis was also ‘psychophysical isomorphism’ according to which 
perceptual experiences are structurally isomorphic to physiological, brain events 
(Wertheimer 1912; Köhler 1920/1950 and 1947).
	13	 For a comparison between some of the principles of organization of Gestalt psychol-
ogy and those of constructivism, see Pomerantz and Kubovy (1986).
	14	 This is also true of the major competitor of constructivism, the ecological approach 
that I discuss in section 2.3.
	15	 The list of references includes Dretske 1981; Fodor 1975; 1983; Haugeland 1991; Mil-
likan 1984; Piccinini 2008.
Bibliography
Anscombe, G.E.M. (1965). “The Intentionality of Sensation: A  Grammatical Feature,” 
in Butler, R. J. (ed.) Analytical Philosophy: First Series. Oxford: Blackwell: 143–158. 
[Reprinted in her Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Mind: Collected Papers, Vol. II. 
Oxford: Blackwell; also in Noë and Thompson (eds.) 2002.]
Armstrong, D. (1961). Perception and the Physical World. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Austin, J. L. (1946). “Other Minds,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplemen-
tary Volume 20: 148–187.
Austin, J.L. (1962). Sense and Sensibilia, reconstructed from the manuscript notes by War-
nock, G. J., Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ayer, A. J. (1956). The Problem of Knowledge. London: Macmillan.
Ayer, A. J. (1963). The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge. London, MacMillan. SML 
edition: 183–199.
Bermúdez, José Luis (2000). “Naturalized Sense Data,” Philosophy and Phenomenologi-
cal Research, 61: 353–374.
Bermudez, J., and Cahen, A. (2012). “Nonconceptual Mental Content,” The Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy, (Spring 2012 edition), Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). http://plato.stan 
ford.edu/archives/spr2012/entries/content-nonconceptual/.
Block, N. (2000). “Mental Paint,” in Hahn, M. and Ramberg, B. (eds.), Essays in Honor of 
Tyler Burge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bradley, F. H. (1899). Appearance and Reality: A Metaphysical Essay. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Brainard, D. H. (2009). “Bayesian Approaches to Color Vision,” The Visual Neurosciences, 
4. http://color.psych.upenn.edu/brainard/papers/BayesColorReview.pdf.
Brentano, F. (1874). Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 
Taylor and Francis, 2009.
Brewer, B. (1999). Perception and Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
121
Broad, C. D. (1914). Perception, Physics, and Reality: An Enquiry into the Information 
That Physical Science Can Supply about the Real. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and Communication. New York: Pergamon Press.
Burge, T. (1979). “Individualism and the Mental,” in Rosenthal, David M. (ed.), The 
Nature of Mind. New York: Oxford University Press: 536–567.
Burge, T. (2005). “Disjunctivism and Perceptual Psychology,” Philosophical Topics, 33(1): 
1–78.
Burge, T. (2009). “Perceptual Objectivity,” Philosophical Review, 118(3): 285–324.
Burge, T. (2010). Origins of Objectivity, Vol. 10. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Byrne, A. (2001). “Intentionalism Defended,” Philosophical Review, 110: 199–239.
Byrne, A. (2005). “Perception and Conceptual Content,” in Sosa, E. and Steup, M. (eds.), 
Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, Oxford: Blackwell.
Campbell, J. (2002). Reference and Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chisholm, Roderick (1957). Perceiving. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Churchland, P. (1988). “Perceptual Plasticity and Theoretical Neutrality: A Reply to Jerry 
Fodor,” Philosophy of Science, 55: 167–187.
Churchland, P. (1990). “Cognitive Activity in Artificial Neural Networks,” in Osherson, 
D. and Smith, E. (eds.), Thinking: An Invitation to Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press: 372–381.
Clark, Andy (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, Andy (2013). “Whatever Next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and the Future 
of Cognitive Science,” Behavioral and Brain Science: 1–86.
Clark, Austin (2000). A Theory of Sentience, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Condillac, E. (1947). Traite des sensations, Oeuvres Philosophiques de Condillac, Volume 
1. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France: 219–314.
Crane, T. (2000). The Origins of Qualia. http://sas-space.sas.ac.uk/220/1/The%20ori 
gins%20of%20qualia.pdf.
Crane, T. (2003). “The Intentional Structure of Consciousness,” in Smith and Jokic (eds.), 
Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford and New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Crowther, T. M. (2006). “Two Conceptions of Conceptualism and Nonconceptualism,” 
Erkenntnis, 65(2): 245–276.
Dretske, F. (1969). Seeing and Knowing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Ducasse, C.J. (1942). “Moore’s Refutation of Idealism,” in Schilpp, Paul Arthur (ed.), The 
Philosophy of G. E. Moore. La Salle, IL: Open Court, 232–233.
Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Feldman, J.A. (1981). “A Connectionist Model of Visual Memory,” in Hinton, G. E. and Ander-
son, J. A. (eds.), Parallel Models of Associative Memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum: 49–81.
Fodor, J.A. (1975). The Language of Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fodor, Jerry A. (1983). The Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psychology. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1984/1990). “Observation Reconsidered,” Philosophy of Science, 51: 23–43. 
Reprinted in Fodor (1990): 231–251.

N i c o  O r l a n d i
122
Fodor, J. A., and Pylyshyn, Zenon W. (1981). “How Direct Is Visual Perception?: Some 
Reflections on Gibson’s ‘Ecological Approach’,” Cognition, 9(2): 139–196.
Geisler, W. S. (2008). “Visual Perception and the Statistical Properties of Natural Scenes.” 
Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 167–192.
Gibson, J. J. (1950). The Perception of the Visual World. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gregory, R. L. (1970). The Intelligent Eye. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Grossberg, S. (1982). “Studies of Mind and Brain.” Reidel, Boston: 5–213.
Hanson, N. R. (1958). Patterns of Discovery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harman, G. (1990). “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience,” in Tomberlin, J. (ed.), Phil-
osophical Perspectives. Atascadero: Ridgeview: 31–52, 4, reprinted in Block, Ned, 
Flanagan, Owen and Guzeldere, Guven (eds.). (1997). The Nature of Consciousness. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 663–676.
Haugeland, J. (1991). “Representational Genera,” Philosophy and Connectionist Theory: 61.
Heck, R. G. (2000). “Nonconceptual Content and the Space of Reasons,” Philosophical 
Review, 109: 483–523.
Heck, R. G. (2007). “Are there Different Kinds of Content?” In Cohen, J. and McLaughlin, 
B. (eds.), Contemporary Debates in the Philosophy of Mind, Oxford: Blackwell.
Helmholtz von, H, (1867/1925). Treatise on Psychological Optics (from 3rd German edi-
tion, Trans.) New York: Dover Publications.
Hinton, J. M. (1973). Experiences. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hochberg, J. (1964). Perception. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Huemer, Michael (2011). “Sense-data,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 
2011 Edition), in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/
entries/sense-data/.
Hume, David (1748). “Enquiry Concerning HUMAN Understanding,” in Selby-Bigge, L. 
A. (ed.), Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of 
Morals, 3rd edition revised by P. H. Nidditch, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975.
Hurley, S. L. (2002). Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Husserl, E. (1900/1) [2nd, revised edition 1913], Logical Investigations. Trans. J. N. Find-
lay. London: Routledge, 1973.
Husserl, E. (1913). Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenologi-
cal Philosophy – First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology, Trans. F. 
Kersten. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982.
Jackson, F. (1975). “On the Adverbial Analysis of Visual Experience,” Metaphilosophy, 
6: 127–135.
Jackson, F. (1977). Perception: A Representative Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
James, William (1904). “Does Consciousness Exist?” Journal of Philosophy, Psychology 
and Scientific Method, 1: 477–491.
Kind, A. (2003). “What’s so Transparent about Transparency?” Philosophical Studies, 
115(3): 225–244.
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of Gestalt Psychology. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Köhler, W. (1920/1950). “Physical Gestalten,” in Ellis, W. D. (ed.), A Sourcebook of 
Gestalt Psychology. New York: the Humanities Press: 17–54.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
123
Köhler, W. (1947). Gestalt Psychology: An Introduction to New Concepts in Modern Psy-
chology. New York: Liveright.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press (1970), 2nd edition, with postscript.
Lashley, K. S., Chow, K. L., and Semmes, J. (1951). “An Examination of the Electrical 
Field Theory of Cerebral Integration,” Psychological Review, 58(2): 123.
Lewis, C. I. (1929). Mind and the World Order: Outline of a Theory of Knowledge. Dover 
reprint, 1956.
Lycan, W. G. (1987). Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Lycan, W. G. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McClamrock, R. (1995). Existential Cognition: Computational Minds in the World. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E., and PDP Research Group (1986). “Parallel Distrib-
uted Processing,” Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, 2: 216–271.
McDowell, J. (1987). “Singular Thought and the Extent of Inner Space.” In John McDow-
ell & Philip Pettit (eds.), Subject, Thought, and Context. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
McDowell, J. (1994). Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Machery, E. (2009). Doing Without Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maloney, L. T., and Mamassian, P. (2009). “Bayesian Decision Theory as a Model of Human 
Visual Perception: Testing Bayesian Transfer,” Visual Neuroscience, 26(1): 147–155.
Mamassian, P., Landy, M. S., Maloney, L. T., Rao, R., Olshausen, B., and Lewicki, M. 
(2002). “Bayesian Modelling of Visual Perception.” Probabilistic Models of the Brain: 
Perception and Neural Function. Boston: MIT Press, 13–36.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation 
and Processing of Visual Information. New York, NY: Henry Holt and Co. Inc.
Martin, M. (2003). “Sensible Appearances,” in Cambridge History of 20th Century Phi-
losophy, edited by Thomas Baldwin.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945). The Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. Colin Smith, Lon-
don: Rooutledge 2002.
Millikan, R. G. (1984). Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories: New Foun-
dations for Realism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moore, G. E. (1903). “The Refutation of Idealism.” Mind: 433–453.
Moore, G. E. (1910/2014). Some Main Problems in Philosophy. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Moore, G. E. (1925). “A Defence of Common Sense,” in Muirhead, J. H. (ed.), Contem-
porary British Philosophy (2nd series), London: Allen and Unwin: 193–223. Reprinted 
inPhilosophical Papers and in G. E. Moore: Selected Writings: 106–133.
Moore, G. E. (1953). Some Main Problems of Philosophy. London: George, Allen and 
Unwin.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Newell, A., and Simon, Herbert A. (1963). “GPS, a Program that Simulates Human 
Thought,” in Feigenbaum, E. A. and Feldman, J. (eds.), Computers and Thought. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Noë, Alva (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
O’Callaghan, C. (2007). Sounds: A Philosophical Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Callaghan, C. (2014). “Intermodal Binding Awareness,”  in Bennett, David and Hill, 
Christopher (eds.), Sensory Integration and the Unity of Consciousness. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.

N i c o  O r l a n d i
124
O’Regan, J. K. and Noë, Alva (2001). “A Sensorimotor Account of Vision and Visual Con-
sciousness,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24(05): 939–973.
Orlandi, N. (2014). The Innocent Eye: Why Vision is Not a Cognitive Process. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
O’Shaughnessy, B. (2003). “Sense Data,” in Smith, Barry (ed.), John Searle. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press: 169–188.
Palmer, S. E. (1999). Vision Science: Photons to Phenomenology, Volume 1. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Peacocke, C. (1983). Sense and Content. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce: Vols. 1–6 (C. Hart-
shorne & P. Weiss, eds.).
Piccinini, G. (2008). “Computation Without Representation,”  Philosophical Studies, 
137(2): 205–241.
Pomerantz, J. R., and Kubovy, Michael (1986). “Theoretical Approaches to Perceptual 
Organization: Simplicity and Likelihood Principles,” Organization, 36: 3.
Price, H. H. (1932). Perception. London: Methuen & Co.
Prichard, H. A. (1906). “Appearances and Reality I,” Mind, 15(58): 223–229, April.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1984). Computation and Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Raftopoulos, A. (2009). Cognition and Perception: How Do Psychology and Neural Sci-
ence Inform Philosophy? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ramsey, W., Stich, S., and Garon, J. (1991). “Connectionism, Eliminativism, and the 
Future of Folk Psychology,” in Philosophy and Connectionist Theory. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum: 199–228.
Rescorla, M. (forthcoming). “Bayesian Perceptual Psychology,” The Oxford Handbook of 
the Philosophy of Perception. Oxford University Press.
Reid, T. (1764). An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense, 
Brookes, Derek R. (ed.), University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997.
Rock, I. (1983). The Logic of Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rock, I. (1997). Indirect Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rosenblatt, F. (1962). Principles of Neurodynamics: Perceptrons and the Theory of Brain 
Mechanisms. Washington, DC: Spartan Books.
Roskies, A. L. (2008). “A New Argument for Nonconceptual Content,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research, 76: 633–659.
Russell, B. (1912). The Problems of Philosophy. London: Home University Library.
Russell, B (1914). Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method 
in philosophy. Chicago and London: Open Court Publishing.
Searle, J. (1983). Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Sellars, W. (1956). “Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind,” Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, 1(19): 253–329.
Sellars, W. (1975). “The Adverbial Theory of the Objects of Sensation,” Metaphilosophy, 
6(2): 144–160.
Shoemaker, S. (1994). “Phenomenal Character,” Noûs, 28: 21–38.
Siegel, S. (2006). “Which Properties are Represented in Perception?” in Szabo, T. Gendler 
and Hawthorne, J. (eds.), In Perceptual Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 
481–503.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r c e p t i o n
125
Siegel, S. (2010). The Contents of Visual Experience. New York: Oxford University Press.
Siegel, S. (2012). “Cognitive Penetrability and Perceptual Justification,” Nous, 46(2): 
201–222.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis. Century 
Psychology Series, edited by Richard M. Elliott. New York: Appleton-Century- Crofts.
Smart, J.J.C. (1959). “Sensations and Brain Processes,”  Philosophical Review, 68: 
141–156.
Smith, A. D. (2002). The Problem of Perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Snowdon, P. F. (1979). “Perception, Vision and Causation,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society 81: 175–192.
Speaks, J. (2005). “Is There a Problem about Nonconceptual Content?” The Philosophical 
Review: 359–398.
Strawson, P. F. (1958). Individuals. London: Methuen.
Titchener, E. B. (1902). Experimental Psychology: A Manual of Laboratory Practice. (Vol. 
1) New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan.
Travis, C. (2004). “The Silence of the Senses,” Mind, 113(449): 57–94.
Treisman, A. (1996). “The Binding Problem,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 
6(2):171–178.
Turing, Alan M. (1950). “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind: 433–460.
Tye, M. (1992). “Visual Qualia and Visual Content,” in Crane (ed.): 158–716.
Tye, M. (1994). “Qualia, Content, and the Inverted Spectrum,” Noûs, 28: 159–183.
Tye, M. (2013). “Qualia”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 Edition), 
Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/qualia/.
Ullman, S. (1980). Against Direct Perception. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Von Neumann, J. (1951). “The General and Logical Theory of Automata,” Cerebral Mech-
anisms in Behavior: 1–41.
Wagemans, J., Elder, J. H., Kubovy, M., Palmer, S. E., Peterson, M. A., Singh, M., & von 
der Heydt, R. (2012). “A Century of Gestalt Psychology in Visual Perception: I. Per-
ceptual Grouping and Figure – Ground Organization,” Psychological Bulletin, 138(6): 
1172.
Wertheimer, M. (1912). “Über das Sehen von Scheinbewegungen und Scheinkor-
poren,” Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 61: 463–465.
Wilson, R. A. (2004). Boundaries of the Mind: The Individual in the Fragile Sciences. 
Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G.E.M. Anscombe, Oxford: 
Blackwell, 3rd edition, 1967.
Wundt, W. (1874). Grundzüge der physiologischen Psychologie (Principles of Physiologi-
cal Psychology), Leipzig: Engelmann.

126
1.  Introduction
Three questions have dominated 20th- and early 21st-century thinking about per-
sonal identity:
(a)	 What does it take for us to persist? More precisely, by virtue of what is someone 
existing at a certain time numerically identical to a certain individual existing at 
an earlier or later time? Tomorrow I am going to be in the dentist’s chair; what 
makes it the case that that patient is me rather than someone else? Is it because 
he stands in some mental relation to me, or because he has my soul, or because 
he has my body, or because some other relation holds between him and me?
(b)	 What matters in survival? Each person seems to have a reason to care about 
his own future in a special way. For instance, I am bound to feel intense pain 
during tomorrow’s visit to the dentist. Like everyone else, perhaps, I have a 
reason to dislike these future experiences; but unlike everyone else, I also 
seem to have a reason to have prudential concern about it – to anticipate the 
experiences “from the inside” with unease and fear. Is this because these 
experiences are experiences of mine – that is, is it because I am numerically 
identical with the future experiencer – or is it because of something else? Or 
do I not have such a reason after all?
(c)	 What are we? This question concerns what kind of thing a human person is. 
The dentist is going to find a human organism in her chair tomorrow. Am 
I identical to this organism? If not, how am I related to it: am I a part of it 
(e.g. a brain), or is it a part of me, or am I a soul associated with it, or am I 
“constituted” by it (so that we are composed of the same particles without 
being identical), or are we related in some other way?
Our primary focus in this chapter will be on one particular answer to question 
(a): personal identity over time holds by virtue of psychological continuity (e.g. 
Lewis 1976; Noonan 2003; Nozick 1981; Parfit 1971, 1984; Perry 1972; Shoe-
maker 1970; 1984; Unger 1990). This focus is motivated in part by the fact that 
5
20TH-CENTURY THEORIES OF 
PERSONAL IDENTITY
Jens Johansson

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
127
the psychological-continuity view is the single most discussed theory of personal 
identity during the past century, and in part by the fact that exploration of the 
historical development of this view will naturally lead us to some of the most 
significant aspects of the debates on questions (b) and (c) as well.1
2.  The psychological-continuity view
20th- and 21st-century versions of the psychological-continuity view can be 
regarded as refinements of a theory sometimes ascribed to John Locke: personal 
identity over time obtains by virtue of direct memory links (Locke [1690] 1975). 
More precisely, someone existing at time t is identical to someone existing at a 
later time t* if and only if the latter individual can at t* remember something the 
former person experienced at t.
While this account has the virtue of simplicity, it also has the vice of incoher-
ence (Reid [1785] 2003, 52). Suppose that, thirty years from now, A remembers 
some of my present experiences, and I now remember some of the experiences 
B had thirty years ago, but A cannot, thirty years from now, remember any of the 
experiences B had thirty years before now. The present view then entails that, 
although I am A and I am B, A is not B. But this is out of the question, for two 
numerically distinct things cannot be identical to one and the same thing.
Philosophers were largely silent on personal identity during the first decades of 
the 20th century, but in 1941 H. P. Grice proposed a modified and highly sophis-
ticated version of the Lockean view, a version that avoids the above objection 
(Grice 1941). Grice’s complete account is too complex to summarize here, but 
one of its most crucial components is its appeal to indirect memory links. Personal 
identity is preserved just in case there is continuity of memory: a chain of direct 
memory connections. Because, in our example, A remembers experiences that 
I have at a time at which I remember B’s experiences, Grice’s view yields that A 
is identical with B (and I am A and I am B).
Bishop Butler ([1736] 1975, 100) had accused Locke’s theory of being viciously 
circular: personal identity over time cannot be understood in terms of memory, 
for memory conceptually presupposes personal identity over time; we simply do 
not count someone as remembering an earlier experience unless he himself did 
have the experience. Appealing to indirect memory connections is of no help in 
answering this objection. However, something that does seem to help is the notion 
of quasi-memory (Shoemaker 1970). Quasi-memory is just like memory except 
that it does not conceptually presuppose (although it allows) identity between 
the quasi-rememberer of an experience and the individual who had the experi-
ence. Just as my remembering a certain experience conceptually entails that the 
experience actually occurred, and caused my memory, so my quasi-remembering 
a certain experience conceptually entails that the experience actually occurred, 
and caused my quasi-memory; by contrast, whereas my remembering a certain 
experience conceptually entails that I had the experience, my quasi-remembering  
a certain experience does not conceptually entail that I had it. There is thus no 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
128
circularity in saying that personal identity over time should be understood in 
terms of (continuity of) quasi-memory.
As suggested by the above, for a long time memory-involving relations outshined 
other psychological relations on the personal identity scene. This focus can perhaps 
be partly explained by the fact that the debate long involved a somewhat confus-
ing mixture of metaphysical and epistemological considerations: participants often 
did not distinguish clearly between the question of what personal identity over 
time holds in virtue of and the question of what constitutes evidence for personal 
identity over time. (This conflation is facilitated by the frequent use of the term 
“criterion of personal identity,” which has both a metaphysical and epistemologi-
cal reading.) Memory, or quasi-memory, seems particularly relevant to the latter, 
epistemological question: having what appears to be a quasi-memory of an earlier 
experience normally provides me with an excellent reason to believe that I myself 
did have that experience. For quasi-memory gives us a special kind of access to – a 
sort of “inside information” of – our own past experiences that we lack to the past 
experiences of others (that is, we do so in fact, though not as a matter of conceptual 
necessity). Another partial explanation of the focus on memory relations might be 
that an object’s persistence through time is, plausibly, to a large extent a matter of 
its states at any one time being caused by its states at earlier times. The appeal to 
memory is obviously congenial to this idea, for as just noted, nothing is a memory 
(or even a quasi-memory) of an experience unless it is caused by that experience. 
Many other ordinary mental relations, such as “x believes the same things as y” and 
“x has the same character traits as y,” lack such a causal requirement.
Of course, however, we can still appeal to nearby notions that do involve such 
a requirement: for instance, “x’s beliefs are direct effects of y’s beliefs” and “x’s 
character traits are direct effects of y’s character traits.” And that is precisely what 
participants in the debate have gradually come to do: they have gradually come to 
regard personal identity over time as depending on chains of these and countless 
other mental connections, with quasi-memory as just one relevant psychological 
connection among others.2 In other words, what is necessary and sufficient for 
personal identity over time is the holding of the more general relation of psycho-
logical continuity.
In addition to these fairly conservative modifications of the simple Lockean 
view  – replacing direct memory links with indirect memory links, replacing 
memory with quasi-memory, and supplementing quasi-memory with other mental  
relations – a more drastic revision is apparently called for, in light of the so-called 
“fission” problem (sections 4–7). But first it will be useful to consider why we 
should be drawn to the psychological-continuity view in the first place.
3.  Reasons to accept the psychological-continuity view
Historically, one important motivation behind the psychological-continuity view 
has been its strong empiricist credentials. What makes it the case that a certain pre-
sent experience belongs to the same person as a certain other present experience? 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
129
One possible answer is that these experiences are somehow held together by the 
same substance: perhaps an immaterial substance, a soul. David Hume ([1739] 
1978, 252) famously stated, however, that no such entity can be observed: what 
one finds by looking into one’s own mind (arguably the natural place to look) are 
just numerous perceptions; one does not find, in addition to these perceptions, 
a bearer of them, let alone an immaterial bearer. For an empiricist, it would be 
ideal to instead be able to answer the question by appeal to some mental relation. 
And Grice (1941) offers just such an answer: these two experiences, he suggests, 
are had by the same person because they can be known by introspection to be 
simultaneous. If you are now in pain, your pain is of course simultaneous with my 
present experiences, but this is not something that can be known by introspection; 
by contrast, the simultaneity of your pain and your other present experiences can 
be so known. On Grice’s view, this is not because they are all yours; rather, they 
are all yours because they can be so known. The psychological-continuity view is 
a natural development of this suggestion. What makes it the case that a certain pre-
sent experience belongs to the same person as a certain past or future experience? 
Not, friends of the view insist, their being tied to the same substance (let alone the 
same immaterial substance), but simply their being elements of the same chain of 
mental events. They do not belong to this chain because one and the same person 
has them; rather, they are had by the same person because they belong to this chain.
Another consideration often thought, at least at first sight, to support the  
psychological-continuity view, is that it is, after all, an account of personal iden-
tity; and the concept of a person is evidently a psychological one. According to 
Locke’s influential account, for instance, a person is “a thinking intelligent being, 
that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself, the same thinking 
thing, in different times and places” ([1690] 1975, 335). As a result, it may be 
charged that non-psychological approaches to personal identity over time – such 
as the “bodily” view that sameness of body is necessary and sufficient for per-
sonal identity over time – must be based on some kind of conceptual confusion. 
In fact, however, the confusion lies in this very charge (Olson 1997, 29–30). For 
even if the concept of a person is a psychological one, this does not mean that 
psychological features are relevant to a person’s persistence. The fact that an indi-
vidual satisfies a certain concept does not entail that the concept is involved in his 
identity conditions; after all, a pianist can stop being a pianist without ceasing to 
exist, and a child can continue to live to old age. Of course, advocates of the psy-
chological-continuity view will hold that the concept of a person is special: it is a 
“substance concept” – a concept that provides the identity conditions for all things 
falling under it. But appealing to this claim would be question-begging against 
opponents of the view; it ought not to persuade anyone not already inclined to 
believe that psychology is relevant to personal identity over time.
The primary reason to accept the psychological-continuity view is that it gives 
the intuitively correct verdicts in cases in which a person’s psychology is trans-
ferred to another body, whereas competing views – most obviously the bodily 
approach – have the opposite implications. Anthony Quinton’s influential 1962 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
130
article “The Soul” contains the following case, whose details will likely secure it 
from oblivion:
I know two men B and C. B is a dark, tall, thin, puritanical Scotsman of 
sardonic temperament with whom I have gone on bird-watching expedi-
tions. C is a fair, short, plump, apolaustic Pole of indestructible enterprise 
and optimism with whom I have made a number of more urban outings. 
One day I come into a room where both appear to be, and the dark, thin 
man suggests that he and I pursue tonight some acquaintances I made 
with C, though he says it was with him, a couple of nights ago. The short, 
fair, plump, cheerful-looking man reminds me in a Polish accent of a 
promise I had made to B, though he says it was to him, and which I had 
forgotten about, to go in search of owls this very night. At first I suspect a 
conspiracy, but the thing continues far beyond any sort of joke, for good 
perhaps, and is accompanied by suitable amazement on their part at each 
other’s appearance, their own reflections in the mirror, and so forth.
(Quinton 1962, 401)
If the bodily view is right, B has gotten C’s former mental features, and vice versa. 
If the psychological-continuity view is right, B has gotten C’s former body, and 
vice versa. As Quinton emphasizes, it is the latter judgment that is intuitively 
correct.3
More exactly, the latter judgment is the intuitively correct one, and what the 
psychological-continuity view yields, provided that the resulting persons’ mental 
states have been suitably caused by B and C’s respective former mental states – 
that the case really involves psychological continuity and not mere psychological 
similarity.4 One year after the publication of Quinton’s essay, Shoemaker pre-
sented a similar case where this requirement is satisfied:
Two men, a Mr. Brown and a Mr. Robinson, had been operated on for 
brain tumors, and brain extractions had been performed on both of them. 
At the end of the operations, however, the assistant inadvertently put 
Brown’s brain in Robinson’s head, and Robinson’s brain in Brown’s 
head. One of these men immediately dies, but the other, the one with 
Robinson’s head and Brown’s brain, eventually regains consciousness. 
Let us call the latter ‘Brownson’ . . . When asked his name he automati-
cally replies ‘Brown.’ He recognizes Brown’s wife and family . . . and 
is able to describe in detail events in Brown’s life . . . of Robinson’s past 
life he evidences no knowledge at all.
(Shoemaker 1963, 23–24)
Again, the intuitively attractive thing to say of this “surgical blunder (of rather 
staggering proportions!),” as Shoemaker would later describe it (1984, 78), is that 
it results in Brown regaining consciousness: Brownson is identical to Brown.5 This 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
131
judgment is incompatible with the bodily view but entailed by the psychological- 
continuity view (as Brownson has Robinson’s body but is psychologically con-
tinuous with Brown).
According to a popular line of thought, this verdict can be further boosted by 
considerations of what prudentially matters (see question (b) in section 1). Sup-
pose that Brown learns, before the operation, that the surgical blunder will occur 
and that Brownson will enjoy a delicious brownie afterwards. Intuitively, whereas 
everyone might have a reason to welcome this future experience, Brown has a rea-
son to have prudential concern about it – to delightfully anticipate the experience 
“from the inside.” On a common view, this shows that Brownson is Brown, since 
a person has reason for this kind of prudential concern about a future experience 
only if he himself is going to have the experience. Arguments such as these need 
to be treated with some caution, however. It is not clear to what extent the perti-
nent judgment – that Brown has reason for prudential concern about Brownson’s 
future experience – provides independent support for the thesis that Brownson is 
Brown. It may be that we make it only because we are already disposed to judge 
that Brownson is Brown (and already believe that personal identity over time is 
what prudentially matters).
4.  The fission problem
The most discussed problem for the psychological-continuity view during the 
20th century – especially during the 1970s and 1980s – is the “fission” problem. 
It is based on the observation that one person can be psychologically continuous 
with two (or more) future individuals. Although the problem appears to have been 
originally formulated by Samuel Clarke ([1738] 1978, 844–845), and the mod-
ern discussion of it was primarily set in motion by a fantastic case presented by 
Bernard Williams (1957), most writers have focused on a variant of Shoemaker’s 
Brownson case, due to David Wiggins (1967, 53) and formulated by Derek Parfit 
as follows:
My Division. My body is fatally injured, as are the brains of my two 
brothers. My brain is divided, and each half is successfully transplanted 
into the body of one of my brothers. Each of the resulting people believes 
that he is me, seems to remember living my life, has my character, and 
is in every other way psychologically continuous with me. And he has a 
body that is very like mine.
(Parfit 1984, 254–255)
Call the original person (the “me” in Parfit’s story) “Henry,” the post-fission per-
son with Henry’s left hemisphere, “Lefty,” and the post-fission person with Hen-
ry’s right hemisphere, “Righty.” As both Lefty and Righty are psychologically 
continuous with Henry, the psychological-continuity view, as construed thus far, 
entails that Henry is identical to each of them. This in turn entails that Lefty and 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
132
Righty are identical to each other. But they aren’t: they are two, not one.6 Conse-
quently, psychological continuity cannot be sufficient – and hence not necessary 
and sufficient – for personal identity over time.
5.  The non-branching approach
On the most popular revision of the psychological-continuity view in light of 
this problem, what is necessary and sufficient for personal identity over time is 
psychological continuity that has not taken a branching form (Shoemaker 1984, 
85; cf. Parfit 1984, 263). Thus a person existing at t is identical to an individual 
existing at a future time t* only if the latter individual is the only one who is at t* 
psychologically continuous with the former as he is at t.7 This clause is not satis-
fied in the fission case: upon fission, no one is uniquely psychologically continu-
ous with Henry as he is before fission. So, on this non-branching version of the 
psychological-continuity view, Henry is identical with neither Lefty nor Righty 
(nor with anyone else existing after fission).
One objection to the non-branching approach is that, precisely because it 
implies that fission is the end of Henry, it makes fission as bad as ordinary death. 
This, many think, is not a sensible result: ordinary death seems far worse than fis-
sion. Whereas it seems prudentially reasonable for Henry to make great sacrifices 
in order to prevent his own death, many believe that it would be prudentially 
irrational for him to do so in order to prevent fission – for instance, by seeing to it 
that one of his hemispheres is destroyed.
Another objection is that the non-branching approach violates an attractive 
“intrinsicality” requirement. My identity with an individual seems to be wholly 
a matter between him and me; after all, numerical identity is arguably the most 
intimate relation of all. Thus while, for instance, my being the only one who is 
equally tall as a certain individual does not solely depend on the intrinsic features 
of the relation between us, my being identical with a future individual seems to do 
so (Noonan 1985). On the non-branching approach, however, it depends in part on 
extrinsic features, namely, on whether there are future individuals other than him 
who are psychologically continuous with me.
In Parfit’s view, however, such objections draw the wrong lessons from the 
fission case (1984, 261–270). They derive their force from the assumption that 
identity is what prudentially matters in survival, but what the fission case reveals 
is precisely that this assumption is mistaken. After all, Parfit suggests, we should 
all agree that if Henry’s left hemisphere had been placed in a new body and the 
right one had been destroyed, then he would survive as the person ending up with 
his left hemisphere – call him “Only” – and his relation to Only would contain 
what matters.8 Because Henry’s relation to Lefty is intrinsically just like his rela-
tion to Only, it too must contain what matters. The fact that, in the fission case, 
Henry also bears this kind of relation to yet another future person – Righty – does 
not mean that anything that matters is missing from his relation to Lefty. Indeed, 
since the parallel claims can be made about Henry’s relation to Righty, fission is 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
133
a “double success”; far from depriving Henry of what matters, it gives him what 
matters twice over. Furthermore, while the non-branching approach does violate 
the above intrinsicality requirement, this is a serious drawback only if it implies 
violation of an analogous and more important requirement: namely, that whether 
what prudentially matters obtains between a future individual and me, is some-
thing that solely depends on the intrinsic features of the relation between him and 
me. However, once we separate personal identity from what matters, violation of 
the former requirement does not imply violation of the latter requirement.
Parfit’s treatment of fission has been so influential that fission is often seen pri-
marily as a challenge for the thesis that identity is what matters, rather than a chal-
lenge for the psychological-continuity view itself. As Eric Olson (1997, 52–57) 
has pointed out, however, the Parfitian strategy seems to undercut one of the 
main reasons to accept the psychological-continuity view. Recall the case where 
Brownson ends up with Brown’s psychology (sect. 4): the claim that Brownson 
is Brown since Brown has reason for prudential concern about Brownson’s future 
experiences, presupposes precisely that one has such a reason only if one is identi-
cal to the future experiencer.9
6.  The plurality of worms
Because the thesis that personal identity is what prudentially matters has consider-
able intuitive appeal, after all, many proponents of the psychological-continuity 
view have tried to deal with the fission case in a way that does not require its aban-
donment. The most popular such strategy is the “cohabitation” approach (Lewis 
1976; Noonan 2003; Perry 1972; Robinson 1985). The basic idea is that Lefty and 
Righty existed even before fission, sharing the same body and psychological fea-
tures. Up to fission, the only differences between Lefty and Righty concern what 
is going to happen to them later; in all other respects they are exactly alike. Thus, 
the idea is not that, even before fission, Lefty has only Henry’s left hemisphere, 
and Righty only his right hemisphere: before fission each of them has the entire 
brain. Hence whatever one of them thinks and feels and does, the other one also 
thinks and feels and does: they speak with one voice.
On the non-branching approach, the fission story involves three persons: Lefty, 
Righty, and Henry. On the simplest and most well-known versions of the cohabita-
tion approach (such as David Lewis’s), it involves two: Lefty and Righty. Where does 
that leave Henry, then: does he not exist at all on this approach? That is a misunder-
standing; instead, before fission “Henry” refers ambiguously to Lefty and Righty. So 
long as what is said is true on both disambiguations, it is true; and before fission, this 
condition is clearly satisfied by “Henry exists” (for Lefty exists and Righty exists).
It may seem obviously false that there is more than one person associated with 
Henry’s body before fission. As we shall see later (sects. 9 and 10), however, it is 
arguable that friends of the psychological-continuity view are committed to some-
thing very similar to this even in perfectly ordinary, non-fission cases – and so 
they, at least, are hardly in a position to lightly dismiss the cohabitation approach.

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
134
How does the cohabitation approach reconcile the psychological-continuity 
view with the thesis that identity is what matters in survival? The idea is easiest 
to explain from the perspective of “four-dimensionalism”: the general account of 
persistence espoused by virtually all cohabitation theorists. According to four-
dimensionalism, things persist by having temporal parts, or “stages,” located at 
different times; the persisting object itself is a space-time “worm,” composed of 
its various stages.10 Conjoined with the psychological-continuity view, this theory 
yields that two stages belong to the same person in virtue of being related by 
psychological continuity. In ordinary cases, of course, no stage belongs to more 
than one person. In the fission case, however, Lefty and Righty share the same 
pre-fission stages (though no post-fission stages). Now consider such a shared 
pre-fission stage S1, a post-fission stage S2 of Lefty, and a post-fission stage S3 
of Righty. The relation between S1 and S2 seems to contain what matters, and so 
does the relation between S1 and S3. Crucially, in each of these cases, there is also 
a single person of which the relevant stages are parts: both S1 and S2 are parts of 
Lefty, and both S1 and S3 are parts of Righty. It is not the case, then, that we have 
what matters between two stages in the absence of personal identity over time.
It has been protested, however, that while this approach accommodates some 
ideas in the vicinity of the intuition that personal identity is what matters, it does 
not accommodate that intuition itself (Parfit 1976; Sider 1996; 2001, 202–203). 
For instance, perhaps it accommodates the thesis that, for stages, belonging to the 
same person is what matters. Moreover, perhaps it accommodates the thesis that, 
if what matters obtains between a person, as he is at time t, and a person, as he is at 
time t*, then the former person exists at t*. However, according to the critics, what 
the relevant intuition requires is that, if what matters obtains between a person, 
as he is at t, and a person, as he is at t*, then the former person is identical to the 
latter person. And the fact remains that the relation between Lefty, as he is prior 
to fission, and Righty, as he is after fission, seems to contain what matters; and the 
fact remains that Lefty is not identical to Righty.
7.  The stage view
A more recent proposal also deserves a mention here. According to another ver-
sion of four-dimensionalism, the “stage view” (Hawley 2001; Sider 1996; 2001), 
although there are all those temporally extended objects that the “worm” theorist 
identifies us with, these objects are not what we refer to with ordinary names and 
predicates (such as “Henry” and “person”). Instead, every ordinary object is an 
instantaneous stage: thus, you and I and other persons – as well as chairs, dog-
houses, etc. – exist strictly speaking only for a moment.
The stage theorist does not thereby hold that I have never been asleep, or will 
never eat lunch. Instead, she handles temporal predication analogously with how 
Lewis analyses modal predication (Lewis 1986). According to Lewis, claims 
about how I could have been should be understood in terms of properties of modal 
counterparts of me: individuals located in other possible worlds who are suitably 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
135
similar to me. I could have been F just in case there is a modal counterpart of me 
who is F. Note that the counterpart is not the one who could have been F; I have 
that modal property. Similarly, on the stage view, claims about what I have been 
and will be like (as well as “tenseless” claims about what I am like at various 
times) should be understood in terms of properties of temporal counterparts of 
me: stages located at other times who are related to me in a suitable way. I was or 
will be F just in case there is a temporal counterpart of me who is F. Thus I really 
am going to eat lunch, so long as there is a future temporal counterpart of me 
who eats lunch. Note that the lunch-eating stage is not the one who is going to eat 
lunch; I have that temporal property.
Different theorists can of course disagree on which is the “suitable way” 
required for a stage to be a temporal counterpart of me. But one obvious candi-
date is psychological continuity. Given this proposal, the stage theorist has a neat 
solution to the fission problem (Sider 1996; 2001, 201–202).
Like the cohabitation theorist, and unlike the non-branching theorist, the stage 
theorist can say that there is a pre-fission person who is going to have Henry’s left 
hemisphere after fission and a pre-fission person who is going to have Henry’s 
right hemisphere after fission. Unlike the cohabitation theorist, the stage theorist 
can say that the former person is identical to the latter person. For it is open to her 
to hold that something (in this case, Henry) can have two temporal counterparts 
located at the same time (in this case, a post-fission time). Moreover, she does not 
thereby commit herself to the absurdity that, after fission, Henry will (for instance) 
both have and lack his left hemisphere. For none of Henry’s post-fission counter-
parts (and, of course, no other object) both has and lacks his left hemisphere.
It is arguable that this approach preserves the intuition that personal identity is 
what matters. Again, what matters seems to obtain between Henry and Lefty, and 
between Henry and Righty: if we were to torture Lefty and give Righty a present, 
Henry would have prudential reason for fearful anticipation of the torture and 
for delightful anticipation of the gift. On the stage view, Henry himself would be 
going to experience the torture, and Henry himself would be going to receive the 
present. It is not obvious that the intuition that personal identity is what matters 
requires more than this.
In any event, if it does, then this is presumably because persistence over time, 
or having properties at different times, requires more than the stage view offers. 
In other words, the stage theorist’s solution to the fission problem probably stands 
and falls with the stage view itself. By contrast, as we saw, the cohabitation theo-
rist’s solution to the fission problem is problematic even on the assumption that 
the cohabitation approach is true.
8.  Reductionism
Before we turn to further problems for the psychological-continuity view, we 
shall briefly consider a related, but more obscure issue of which there was quite 
a lot of discussion in the years that followed the publication of Parfit’s Reasons 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
136
and Persons in 1984. One of Parfit’s main theses in this book is what he calls 
“reductionism” about personal identity. According to reductionism, “the fact of a 
person’s identity over time just consists in the holding of certain more particular 
facts” (1984, 210) – such as the fact that a future individual is (uniquely) psycho-
logically continuous with me as I am now, or that a future individual has the same 
body as the one I have now. Non-reductionism, by contrast, asserts that personal 
identity over time is a “further fact”; it is something “over and above” the obtain-
ing of such psychological or bodily continuities.11 Although Parfit seems to rec-
ognize the conceptual possibility of a non-reductionist view that merely says, for 
instance, that whereas personal identity holds if and only if there is (non-branching)  
psychological continuity, it does not consist in such continuity, he takes the main 
non-reductionist view to hold that personal identity over time involves the sharing 
of an immaterial, Cartesian soul.12
According to Parfit, though we may be largely unaware of this, large portions of 
our thinking about ourselves rely on non-reductionism. For example, he contends, 
we tend to believe – or believe things that presuppose – that it can never be inde-
terminate whether I am identical to certain past or future individual, an assump-
tion that, he says, is reasonable only on non-reductionism. More dramatically, lots 
of our most fundamental beliefs about morality and prudence presuppose non-
reductionism. For instance, while a common complaint against utilitarianism is 
that it fails to “take seriously the distinction between persons” (Rawls 1971, 27), 
Parfit holds that reductionism reveals that that distinction does not deserve to be 
taken seriously. Moreover, he expresses sympathy for the claim that reductionism, 
unlike non-reductionism, leaves prudential concern for one’s own future unjusti-
fied. Since the fact that a future pain, for instance, is mine just consists in mundane 
facts about certain continuities, and lacks the splendor and star quality of facts 
about an immaterial soul, it is unreasonable for me to get worked up about it.13
It is important to distinguish the thesis that prudential concern for one’s own 
future is unjustified from the thesis that identity is not what justifies prudential 
concern (sect. 5). For one thing, Parfit’s main support for the latter thesis – the 
fission argument – would be undermined if it were to be shown that Henry would 
not be justified in having prudential concern for Lefty’s (or Righty’s) experiences. 
This would do nothing to undermine the former thesis. For another, even if identity 
is not what prudentially matters, something else may justify prudential concern – 
psychological continuity, for instance. After all, in every ordinary case, if a person 
is going to have a certain future experience, then she is psychologically continuous 
with the future experiencer. (Indeed, on the psychological-continuity view, this 
will hold in any possible case, ordinary or not – even the non-branching version 
takes psychological continuity to be necessary for personal identity over time.)
In section 5 we noted Olson’s remark that if identity is not what prudentially 
matters, then the claim that Brown has reason for prudential concern about 
Brownson’s experiences fails to support the psychological-continuity view. 
A similar point can be made here. If reductionism shows that we do not have 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
137
reason for prudential concern about our future experiences, then we cannot say 
that Brownson must be Brown because Brown has reason for prudential concern 
about Brownson’s future experiences.
During the past two decades, the interest in reductionism and its practical sig-
nificance has waned considerably. It is easy to suspect that this has largely to do 
with the elusiveness of the issue. One unclarity concerns the content of reduction-
ism and non-reductionism. One might have thought that, when Parfit says that on 
reductionism, facts about a person’s identity over time “consist” in facts about 
certain continuities, whereas on non-reductionism, facts about a person’s iden-
tity over time are “further facts,” he simply means that reductionism identifies 
these facts, whereas non-reductionism regards them as numerically distinct (so 
that “further facts” simply means “other facts”). But this is evidently not what 
he means, for he emphasizes that, on his preferred version of reductionism, facts 
about personal identity stand to facts about the relevant continuities in the way 
that a bronze statue stands to the numerically distinct lump of bronze with which 
it coincides. He says:
If we melt down a bronze statue, we destroy this statue, but we do not 
destroy this lump of bronze. So, though the statue just consists in the 
lump of bronze, these cannot be one and the same thing.
(1995, 295)
This analogy is not very helpful, however. The lump may be able to exist with-
out the statue, but if the “reduction base” for personal identity obtains, then so 
does personal identity over time. After all, the “reduction base” must be a (neces-
sary and) sufficient condition for personal identity over time – for example, non-
branching psychological continuity.
Moreover, if we do not identify facts about personal identity with facts about 
certain continuities, it is hard to see why the former should be taken to inherit the 
supposed unimportance of the latter (Merricks 1999; see also Johnston 1997). 
Surely something can depend in very intimate ways on something else while still 
meriting very different attitudes than it (think of non-natural moral facts versus 
the natural facts on which they depend, for instance). Yet another obscurity con-
cerns Parfit’s idea that non-reductionism does not leave prudential concern unjus-
tified. It is difficult to see exactly what it is about my sharing an immaterial soul 
with a future individual that is supposed to make it reasonable for me to care about 
his experiences (Johansson 2007; Whiting 1986, 547; Wolf 1986, 707).
9.  The animalist challenge
While many think that the aforementioned problems for the psychological- 
continuity view (sects. 2, 4) reveal a need for some substantial adjustments to it – 
such as the inclusion of a non-branching clause – few have seen them as a reason 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
138
to abandon it altogether. During the past two decades, however, many so-called 
“animalists” have claimed to offer just such a reason.
According to animalism, human persons are human animals, members of the 
species Homo sapiens (Ayers 1991; Carter 1988; Mackie 1999a; Olson 1997; 
2003; Snowdon 1990; 2014; van Inwagen 1990). This view may seem too obvi-
ous to be worth stating: who believes that we are plants or dogs or robots? But 
animalism is not trivial, for it is incompatible with the psychological-continuity 
view (as well as with various other popular theories). It is not that the two views 
explicitly give conflicting answers to any of the three questions in section  1: 
while the psychological-continuity view is an answer to question (a), the ques-
tion about our persistence conditions, animalism is an answer to question (c), the 
question of what kind of thing we are. However, psychological continuity – with 
or without the “non-branching” qualification – is not necessary and sufficient for a 
human animal’s identity over time, and so if we are human animals, as animalism 
says, it is not necessary and sufficient for our identity over time, contrary to the  
psychological-continuity view (Olson 1994; 1997; 2003).
To see that psychological continuity is not necessary for the identity over time 
of a human animal, note that every human animal was once an embryo, which did 
not have any psychological features whatsoever, and hence was not psychologi-
cally continuous with anything at all. Moreover, if the animal is unlucky, it might 
enter a permanent vegetative state, in which it is still alive but has no psychological 
features.14 To see that psychological continuity is not sufficient for the identity over 
time of a human animal, return once again to the Brownson case. After the transfer, 
the “recipient” animal (the one with what was Brown’s brain before the transfer) is 
psychologically continuous with the “donor” animal (the one that started out with 
Brown’s brain) as it was before the transfer. But surely these are two different ani-
mals; the surgeons have moved an organ, not an entire human organism.15
So if the psychological-continuity view is true, then we are not human ani-
mals. This is troublesome for the psychological-continuity view, for there is an 
influential argument in favor or animalism: the “thinking animal problem,” most 
forcefully put forward by Eric Olson (1997, 80–91, 97–109; 2003; 2007, 29–39). 
It begins with the simple observation that, whether or not I am a human animal, 
there is a human animal where I am. It is the organism that I see when I look in 
the mirror, and is currently sitting comfortably in my chair. This animal is suspi-
ciously like me: if it is not me, then it is hiding it very well. This comes out most 
clearly when we consider the animal’s mental properties. Because the animal and 
I have the same brain (or at least exactly similar brains, located in the same place 
and composed of the same particles), and the same surroundings, it seems that it 
must be psychologically indiscernible from me. Olson argues that if I am nonethe-
less not it, then three problems arise. First, there is a problem of too many think-
ers. If I am not the animal, then
[t]here are two thinking beings beings wherever we thought there was 
just one. There are two philosophers, you and an animal, sitting there 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
139
and reading this. You are never truly alone: wherever you go, a watchful 
animal goes with you.
(Olson 2003, 329).
Perhaps we can accept the cohabitation theorist’s claim that two individuals share 
their thoughts in an extraordinary scenario like the fission case (sect. 6). It is much 
more unattractive to say that this holds even in all normal cases.
Secondly, there is a problem of too many persons: since the animal has the 
same mental features as I do, it too seems to qualify as a person. For instance, it 
seems to satisfy Locke’s account of personhood (sect. 3): that is, it seems to be “a 
thinking intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself 
as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times and places.” Whether or not 
we accept the details of Locke’s account, there can hardly be non-persons psycho-
logically indiscernible from persons, just as there cannot be non-roses botanically 
indiscernible from roses. While the “too many persons” problem (like the other 
two problems) afflicts animalism’s rivals in general, it is (unlike the other two 
problems) particularly embarrassing for advocates of the psychological-continuity  
view. For not only is it unappealing to say that there are two persons in my chair 
right now; in addition, if the animal is a person, then the psychological-continuity 
view is simply wrong to say – as it does in most versions – that all persons persist 
by virtue of psychological continuity. As we have just seen, the animal in my 
chair does not. And if billions of persons persist by virtue of something other than 
psychological continuity, why not all persons?
Thirdly, even if it can be shown that the animal is not a person after all, an 
epistemic problem remains. For whenever I think, “I am a person, not an animal,” 
the animal thinks, “I am a person, not an animal” – and apparently its epistemic 
position does not differ in any way from mine:
It will have the same grounds for thinking that it is a person and not an 
animal as you have for believing that you are. Yet it is mistaken. If you 
were the animal and not the person, you would still think you were the 
person. So for all you know, you are the one making the mistake. Even if 
you are a person and not an animal, it is hard to see how you could ever 
have any reason to believe that you are.
(Olson 2007, 36)
It is not entirely clear exactly what the main point is supposed to be here. On one 
interpretation, it is that I have a reason to believe that I am a person, but could 
not have such a reason if I were not identical to the animal; hence, I am identi-
cal to the animal. On another interpretation, the point is that I cannot have any 
reason to believe that I am not the animal. This is of course unwelcome news for 
an opponent of animalism: she could not have any reason for her belief that she is 
not an animal. However, this purely epistemic claim does not, all by itself, imply 
that she is an animal: it does not follow that animalism is true. On yet another 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
140
interpretation, though, the truth of animalism follows in a more indirect way – 
namely, via the additional and not implausible premise that if a view of someone’s 
nature is true, then she can have reason to believe in it.16
In any case, critics of animalism, and particularly friends of the psychological-
continuity view, have suggested various solutions to these problems. For instance, 
Shoemaker (1999) has appealed to his functionalist theory of mental properties 
in order to show that human animals do not have mental features. Hence there is 
only one thinker and only one person in my chair: me. According to another line 
of response (Noonan 2003, 211), the animal in my chair does think – and so there 
really are more than one thinker where I am – but because it does not have psycho-
logical persistence conditions, it is not a person and does not refer to itself with 
the first-person singular pronoun. When I think, “I am a person, not an animal,” 
the animal does not think, incorrectly, that it is a person, not an animal; instead, it 
thinks, correctly, that I am a person, not an animal. So the animal is not mistaken 
after all.
These proposed solutions are ingenious – perhaps even more so than they are 
plausible (Olson 2007, 29–39). Yet another line of response does not amount to a 
solution, but points out that animalism faces an analogous challenge (Zimmerman 
2008; see also Olson 2007, 215–216). Consider my brain, for instance. First, if 
the animal in my chair thinks, why does not my brain do so as well? The fact that 
the animal has parts that the brain lacks – legs, arms, etc. – and whose job is not 
to give rise to thought, can hardly indicate that the brain does not think. Secondly, 
since the brain is psychologically indistinguishable from a person, it seems to be a 
person as well. Thirdly, how could I ever have any reason to believe that I am the 
animal and not the brain? Moreover, the argument continues, any reason to deny 
that the brain thinks as I do would presumably also be a reason to deny that the 
animal thinks as I do (for example, the view that no material thing can think would 
rule out both thinking brains and thinking animals), leaving the animalist with no 
advantage over its rivals with respect to this sort of challenge.
While we cannot go into detail here, the standard reply from animalists appeals 
to a certain view of composition, according to which there are no composite 
objects except those that are alive: for any non-overlapping objects, there is some-
thing they compose just in case their activities constitute a biological life (van 
Inwagen 1990; cf. Olson 2007, 226–228). There are chairmen, but no chairs – 
only particles “arranged chair-wise”; there are dogs, but no doghouses – only par-
ticles “arranged doghouse-wise.” Although this is of course a highly controversial 
doctrine, it does have considerable independent support; for instance, it is one of 
few principled ways of avoiding the perhaps overly extreme views “mereological 
nihilism” (no objects compose anything) and “mereological universalism” (for 
any non-overlapping objects, there is something they compose; see sect. 10). In 
any event, this more moderate view of composition would straightforwardly solve 
the thinking brain problem. Because the activities of particles “arranged brain-
wise” do not constitute a biological life – although they are of course among the 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
141
particles that make up the organism and whose activities do constitute a biological 
life – there are on this view no brains, and hence no thinking brains.
10.  The ontological problem
Again, friends of the psychological-continuity view must deny that we are ani-
mals. But even more fundamentally, several writers have argued that it is difficult 
to find any sensible view of what we are – any sensible answer to question (c) 
in section 1 – that sits well with the psychological-continuity view (Olson 1994; 
2007; van Inwagen 1997; 2002; see also Merricks 1999).
Suppose first that “three-dimensionalism” is true: things exist at different times 
by being wholly present at each of those times, not by having temporal parts; as it 
is often put, things endure through time. What kind of enduring thing am I, if the 
psychological-continuity view is true?
The brain may seem to be a natural candidate (despite the abovementioned 
attempts to deny its existence), as it is responsible for a person’s mental features; 
again, in the Brownson case, Brown’s psychology goes where his brain goes. In 
fact, however, psychological continuity – even non-branching psychological con-
tinuity – is not necessary and sufficient for a brain’s identity over time. It is not 
necessary, for my brain existed before it had any capacity to sustain mental fea-
tures; and it may lose that capacity without ceasing to exist. Furthermore, consider 
a so-called “brain-state transfer” case (Shoemaker & Swinburne 1984, 108–111): 
a machine records information about the total physical state of Brain A, located in 
Room A, then erases it; it also erases the total physical state of Brain B, located 
in Room B; then it produces Brain A’s state in the brain located in Room B. After 
this procedure, the brain in Room B is psychologically continuous with Brain A as 
Brain A was before the transfer (insofar as brains have mental features at all; but 
that is assumed by the proposal at issue, since we have mental features), not with 
Brain B as it was before the transfer. Crucially, the brain located in Room B after 
the transfer is manifestly Brain B: its mental features have gone, but it has not 
gone anywhere. Hence, Brain B has persisted through psychological discontinu-
ity. This also shows that psychological continuity is not sufficient for a brain’s 
identity over time. For, obviously, the brain-state transfer does not result in Brain 
A becoming identical with Brain B. No process can have such a result, for nothing 
can become identical with anything other than itself. It would not be reasonable to 
reply that what really happens in this case is that Brain A is in fact transferred to 
Room B and becomes composed of the particles that a moment earlier composed 
Brain B (which ceased to exist when its state was erased). Surely no brain can 
instantaneously change its location without any of its proper parts having moved 
from the one location to the other.17
A popular view is that persons are (enduring entities and) “constituted” by ani-
mals (Baker 2000; Shoemaker 1984): I am composed of the same particles as the 
animal in my chair and occupy the same place as it, but we have different modal 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
142
properties (for instance, whereas I  could become inorganic, the animal could 
not). Whatever the merits of this doctrine, it too is difficult to reconcile with the 
psychological-continuity view (van Inwagen 1997; 2002). For example, the con-
junction of the two views implies that, in a brain-state transfer case, an enduring 
human-organism-sized object – the person – either becomes identical to another 
object or instantaneously changes its location although none of its proper parts has 
moved from the one location to the other. This seems no more plausible than the 
corresponding claim about brains.
Nor can we expect any happy marriage between the psychological-continuity 
view and the view that persons are enduring immaterial souls (van Inwagen 2002, 
178–179). For example, it seems possible for a soul – no less than for an organism 
or brain – to have its current mental features obliterated and replaced by new ones. 
Then it persists without being psychologically continuous with itself as it was 
earlier. (Perhaps a soul cannot exist at a time without having mental features then. 
But this does not imply that it cannot persist through psychological discontinuity.) 
Furthermore, psychological continuity does not seem sufficient for a soul’s iden-
tity over time: it seems possible for a soul to become psychologically continuous 
with another soul.
Similar remarks apply to other enduring entitites. But a more promising com-
panion to the psychological-continuity view is four-dimensionalism (let us here 
focus on its standard version, the worm view; see sect. 6). A four-dimensionalist 
can describe a brain-state transfer case as follows: the person whose brain-state is 
transferred to a new head is composed of most pre-transfer parts of one animal (the 
“donor” animal) and most post-transfer parts of another animal (the “recipient” 
animal). No object becomes identical to something it has until then been numeri-
cally distinct from; instead, two different animals share parts – different ones – 
with the person. Of course, the view still implies that one human-organism-sized  
object (the person) can instantaneously change its location even if none of the par-
ticles that compose it before the transfer – or more precisely, no particle that is a 
spatial part of it before the transfer – moves from the one place to the other. How-
ever, this may be easier to swallow if the object is temporally extended, a “worm,” 
rather than being wholly present at each time of its existence. In any case, this is 
just an instance of something that friends of four-dimensionalism happily accept 
regardless of considerations of personal identity. For just about all four-dimen-
sionalists endorse mereological universalism (sect. 9): for any non-overlapping 
objects, there is something they compose. So there is an object composed of, 
say, your-chair-a-moment-ago and my-chair-right-now, although no particle has 
moved from your room to mine.
Naturally, four-dimensionalism is highly contested; on the other hand, so are 
the general metaphysical views that enemies of the psychological-continuity view 
are committed to (such as the doctrine of composition appealed to by many ani-
malists; see sect. 9). However, two special problems to do with the combination 
of the psychological-continuity view and four-dimensionalism (particularly when 
accompanied by mereological universalism) should be noted. First, it gives rise to 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
143
a radical variant of the “thinking animal” problem (sect. 9; see Olson 1994, 2007, 
122–125; Zimmerman 2003). My present stage thinks as I do, and so do all objects 
of which it is a stage, nearly all of which are not composed by stages related by 
psychological continuity. Thus my current thought, “I am a person,” is shared 
by all these objects; how do I know that I am the person with the correct belief 
rather a non-person with a delusion of grandeur? The odds are strongly against 
me. Secondly, while the view that all person-like individuals persist by virtue of 
psychological continuity has considerable intuitive appeal, one may wonder how 
much is preserved of that appeal in the view that, although the vast majority of 
person-like individuals do not persist by virtue of psychological continuity, some 
of them (the persons) do so.
Conclusion
Since the 1990s, the personal identity debate has been much more concerned than 
it used to be with the ontological question of what kind of thing we are (question 
(c) in section 1), as well as with more general and deep metaphysical issues about, 
for instance, composition and persistence. Although some might look back with 
nostalgia on the preceding era – with its obsession with fanciful science fiction 
examples, compared with which the fission case looks boringly realistic – this 
shift in focus is to be welcomed. For as animalists in particular have emphasized 
(Olson 1994; 2007; van Inwagen 1997; 2002), it is relatively hopeless to try to 
answer question (a) – the question about personal identity over time – indepen-
dently of question (c), and equally hopeless to try to answer question (c) indepen-
dently of more general metaphysical issues.
As a result of this shift in focus, the psychological-continuity view is no longer 
the main view in the debate: it is not an answer to question (c), and it is difficult to 
reconcile with most sensible answers to question (c). However, the view of course 
still has a great many excellent champions; moreover, every rival view faces con-
siderable problems, too. Given the complexity of the issues, it is probably fair to 
say that no one yet knows the correct answers to the main questions of personal 
identity. We need one more century to think things over.18
Notes
	 1	 Again, the debate has been dominated by questions (a) – (c), but it involves other 
issues as well. One of these concerns the kind of identity at play when we speak of an 
“identity crisis”; for an influential account, see Schechtman (1996). In section 8, I will 
briefly consider yet another question, which concerns the reducibility of personal iden-
tity over time to physical or psychological continuity.
	 2	 Some of these other relations will need to be construed as analogous with quasi-memory:  
“x carries out the quasi-intention of y,” for instance.
	 3	 Locke similarly suggested, in support of his version of the psychological-continuity  
view, that “should the soul of a prince, carrying with it the consciousness of the prince’s 
past life, enter and inform the body of a cobbler, as soon as deserted by his own soul, 

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
144
every one sees he would be the same person with the prince” ([1690] 1975, 340). 
Locke’s reference to the soul is confusing, however, since souls do not seem to persist 
by virtue of psychological continuity (see sect. 10). (The title of Quinton’s essay is 
similarly confusing.)
	 4	 Some philosophers would say that, in addition to the causal conditions necessary for 
psychological continuity, some further ones are necessary for personal identity (e.g. 
that the psychological continuity has not come about in an abnormal way). I shall 
ignore this complication in this chapter.
	 5	 In the book from which the case is taken, Shoemaker himself does not assert that 
Brownson is Brown; however, he does so in his (1970).
	 6	 This is so whether or not there is a single thing – a larger, scattered object with twenty 
toes – that Lefty and Righty together compose after fission. They would still be two 
parts of that object, not one.
	 7	 “Only if,” but not “if and only if,” for one fission product may exist at a future time at 
which the other one no longer does so; the former is not thereby identical to the origi-
nal person.
	 8	 However, adherents of the “bodily” view do not agree that Henry is Only; nor do “ani-
malists” (sect. 9).
	 9	 This does not mean that considerations about prudence provide no reason to prefer the 
non-branching view to non-psychological theories. The separation between personal 
identity and what prudentially matters is probably much more radical given a “bodily” 
or “animalist” view (Unger 2000).
	10	 More exactly, this is the “worm” view  – by far the most popular version of four- 
dimensionalism (e.g., Heller 1990; Lewis 1976; 1986). For another version, see section 7.
	
	   Some writers use “four-dimensionalism” to denote a view of the metaphysics of 
time: the view that past, present, and future objects all exist (“eternalism” is a more 
common name). Like many others, I use “four-dimensionalism” only to denote a the-
ory of persistence – the one that appeals to temporal parts.
	11	 Although reductionism and non-reductionism concern personal identity over time, 
they are not answers to question (a) in section 1 (or to question (b) or (c)). Instead, they 
are, of course, answers to the question, “Does the fact of a person’s identity over time 
just consist in the holding of certain more particular facts, such as facts about psycho-
logical or physical continuity?”
	12	 Merricks (1998) defends a non-reductionist view that does not involve immaterial 
souls.
	13	 Historically, considerations of this sort have sometimes been regarded as evidence 
against reductionism and related views. For example, Butler urged that Locke’s theory 
implausibly makes “the inquiry concerning a future life of no consequence at all to us, 
the persons who are making it” ([1736] 1975, 99). Parfit turns this kind of argument on 
its head.
	14	 Similarly, according to some writers (Feldman 2000; Mackie 1999b), a human animal 
will eventually become a corpse (unless its death is unusually violent); and outside of 
horror stories, corpses have no psychological features. This argument is more contro-
versial, however (Olson 2004).
	15	 Similar considerations show that the psychological-continuity view is incompatible 
with the doctrine that we are our bodies. However, this doctrine does not seem to be the 
same as animalism. For one thing, some hold that human animals are “constituted” by 
but numerically distinct from human bodies. For another, some animalists claim that it 
makes no sense to say that a person is identical to his body (van Inwagen 1980, 283).
	16	 Brueckner and Buford (2009) interpret the argument in this third way (and argue 
against it).

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
145
	17	 Similar remarks apply to the view that a human person is a proper part of a brain – for 
instance, the part that is chiefly responsible for the capacity of consciousness (McMa-
han 2002).
	18	 My sincere thanks to Amy Kind and an anonymous referee for their very helpful 
comments.
Bibliography
Ayers, M. (1991). Locke: Vol. 2: Ontology. London: Routledge.
Baker, L. R. (2000). Persons and Bodies: A Constitution View. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Brueckner, A. L., and Buford, C. (2009). “Thinking Animals and Epistemology,” Pacific 
Philosophical Quarterly, 90: 310–314.
Butler, J. ([1736] 1975). “Of Personal Identity,” in Perry, J. (ed.), Personal Identity. Berke-
ley: University of California Press: 99–105.
Carter, W. R. (1988). “Our Bodies, Our Selves,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 66: 
308–319.
Clarke, S. ([1738] 1978). The Works of Samuel Clarke, vol. 3. New York: Garland 
Publishing.
Feldman, F. (2000). “The Termination Thesis,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 24: 98–115.
Grice, H. P. (1941). “Personal Identity,” Mind, 50: 330–350.
Hawley, K. (2001). How Things Persist. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Heller, M. 1990. The Ontology of Physical Objects: Four-Dimensional Hunks of Matter. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hume, D. ([1739] 1978). A Treatise of Human Nature, Selby-Bigge, L. A. and Nidditch, P. 
H. (eds.), 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johansson, J. (2007). “Non-Reductionism and Special Concern,” Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy, 85: 641–657.
Johnston, M. (1997). “Human Concerns Without Superlative Selves,” in Dancy, J. (ed.), 
Reading Parfit. Oxford: Blackwell: 149–179.
Lewis, D. (1976). “Survival and Identity,” in Rorty, A. (ed.), The Identities of Persons. 
Berkeley: University of California Press: 17–40.
Lewis, D. (1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
Locke, J. ([1690] 1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Nidditch, P. H. (ed.) 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Mackie, D. (1999a). “Animalism versus Lockeanism: No Contest,” Philosophical Quar-
terly, 49: 369–376.
Mackie, D. (1999b). “Personal Identity and Dead People,” Philosophical Studies, 95: 
219–242.
McMahan, J. (2002). The Ethics of Killing: Problems at the Margins of Life. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Merricks, T. (1998). “There Are No Criteria of Personal Identity Over Time,” Noûs, 32: 
106–124.
Merricks, T. (1999). “Endurance, Psychological Continuity, and the Importance of Per-
sonal Identity,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 59: 983–996.
Noonan, H. (1985). “The Only x and y Principle,” Analysis, 45: 79–83.
Noonan, H. (2003). Personal Identity, 2nd edn. London: Routledge.

J e n s  J o h a n s s o n
146
Nozick, R. (1981). Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Olson, E. T. (1994). “Is Psychology Relevant to Personal Identity?” Australasian Journal 
of Philosophy, 72: 173–186.
Olson, E. T. (1997). The Human Animal: Personal Identity without Psychology. New York 
and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Olson, E. T. (2003). “An Argument for Animalism,” in Martin, M. and Barresi, J. (eds.), 
Personal Identity. Malden, MA: Blackwell: 318–334.
Olson, E. T. (2004). “Animalism and the Corpse Problem,” Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy, 82: 265–274.
Olson, E. T. (2007). What are We? A Study in Personal Ontology. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Parfit, D. (1971). “Personal Identity,” Philosophical Review, 80: 3–27.
Parfit, D. (1976). “Lewis, Perry, and What Matters,” in Rorty, A. (ed.), The Identities of 
Persons. Berkeley: University of California Press: 91–107.
Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parfit, D. (1995). “The Unimportance of Identity,” in Harris, H. (ed.), Identity: Essays 
Based on Herbert Spencer Lectures Given in the University of Oxford. Oxford: Claren-
don Press: 13–45.
Perry, J. (1972). “Can the Self Divide?” Journal of Philosophy, 69: 463–488.
Quinton, A. (1962). “The Soul,” Journal of Philosophy, 59: 393–409.
Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Reid, T. ([1785] 2003). “Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man,” relevant passage repr. 
in Martin, M. and Barresi, J. (eds.), Personal Identity. Malden, MA: Blackwell: 48–54.
Robinson, D. (1985). “Can Amoebae Divide without Multiplying?” Australasian Journal 
of Philosophy, 63: 299–319.
Schechtman, M. (1996). The Constitution of Selves. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1963). Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1970). “Persons and Their Pasts,” American Philosophical Quarterly, 7: 
269–285.
Shoemaker, S., and Swinburne, R. (1984). Personal Identity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Shoemaker, S. (1999). “Self, Body, and Coincidence,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, 73: 287–306.
Sider, T. (1996). “All the World’s a Stage,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 74: 
433–453.
Sider, T. (2001). Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Snowdon, P. (1990). “Persons, Animals, and Ourselves,” in Gill, C. (ed.), The Person and 
the Human Mind: Issues in Ancient and Modern Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press: 
83–107.
Snowdon, P. (2014). Persons, Animals, Ourselves. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Unger, P. (1990). Identity, Consciousness and Value. New York: Oxford University Press.
Unger, P. (2000). “The Survival of the Sentient,” Philosophical Perspectives, 11: 325–348.
van Inwagen, P. (1980). “Philosophers and the Words ‘Human Body’,” in van Inwagen, 
P. (ed.), Time and Cause: Essays Presented to Richard Taylor. Dordrecht: Reidel. I: 
283–300.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  t h e o r i e s  o f  p e r s o n a l  i d e n t i t y
147
van Inwagen, P. (1990). Material Beings. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
van Inwagen, P. (1997). “Materialism and the Psychological-Continuity Account of Per-
sonal Identity,” Philosophical Perspectives, 11: 305–319.
van Inwagen, P. (2002). “What Do We Refer to When We Say ‘I’?” in Gale, R. (ed.), Black-
well Guide to Metaphysics. Oxford: Blackwell: 175–189.
Whiting, J. (1986). “Friends and Future Selves,” Philosophical Review, 95: 547–580.
Wiggins, D. (1967). Identity and Spatio-Temporal Continuity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Williams, B. (1957). “Personal Identity and Individuation,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, 57: 229–252.
Wolf, S. (1986). “Self-Interest and Interest in Selves,” Ethics, 96: 704–720.
Zimmerman, D. (2003). “Material People,” in Loux, M. and Zimmerman, D. (eds.), The 
Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 491–526.
Zimmerman, D. (2008). “Problems for Animalism,” Abstracta, Special Issue I: 23–31.

148
Introspection in the 20th century is a vast topic. Discussions involving introspec-
tion figured in the relatively new discipline of experimental psychology, as well 
as in various debates in philosophy of mind and epistemology. Introspection has 
been a focus of interest as a method of investigation and as a psychological and 
epistemic capacity itself. Over the course of the century, these theoretical interests 
did not always connect well, although they have intersected and influenced each 
other at different points. But there is no helpful sense in which one might talk of 
‘the history’ of introspection in the 20th century if by that one means a straight 
line of development across ten or so decades of psychological and philosophical 
theorizing with, and about, introspection. Instead, there is a criss-crossing pattern 
of various storylines and what I shall do here is track a couple of different strands 
in the overall pattern to the exclusion of many others.1 In particular, I shall con-
centrate on philosophers’ and psychologists’ use of introspection, and the discus-
sions surrounding such use.
A story we are often told is that during the late 19th century and the beginning 
of the 20th century, experimental psychology was synonymous with introspec-
tionism, exemplified by the work of Wilhelm Wundt and E. B. Titchener. Accord-
ing to the story, these early psychologists took the subject-matter of psychology 
to be conscious states only and their main method of investigation was introspec-
tion. The new experimental science aimed to provide data about consciousness 
via introspection under scientifically controlled conditions. We are told that this 
approach, while groundbreaking in its aim to make psychology thus conceived 
scientific, failed because it imploded from within while at the same time being 
superseded by a different approach to psychology: behaviourism. Behaviourism 
rejected not only the idea that introspection could be conducted in scientifically 
respectable ways, but also the central assumption that the subject-matter of psy-
chology concerned conscious states. According to the story, introspectionism, and 
with it the use of introspection in theorizing about the mind, was pretty much 
annihilated after the behaviourists were finished with it (see, e.g., Braisby and 
Gellatlly, 2012). Behaviourists themselves might not have in the end successfully 
6
INTROSPECTING IN THE 20TH 
CENTURY
Maja Spener

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
149
established their own methodological preferences and choice of the bona fide 
subject-matter of psychology, but they are generally credited with putting an end 
to introspectionism by the late 1920 or early 1930s.
What is curious, if this story were even half-way true, is that throughout much 
of the 20th century, within certain philosophical debates (e.g., in philosophy of 
perception and epistemology) philosophers have been happy to appeal to first-
person reflections on sensory experiences in their theorizing. This raises questions 
about the relationship between the apparently scorching critique of the use of 
introspection within psychology during the first part of the century, and the con-
tinued and relatively easygoing use of introspection in philosophical theorizing. 
One suggestion might be that psychologists and philosophers were engaged in 
something like parallel play, working in relative ignorance of each other’s fields. 
While there is a kernel of truth to this, there is also plenty of evidence of common 
interests and interaction between philosophers and psychologists. So the question 
is not really whether philosophers and psychologists talked to each other and read 
each other’s work – they clearly did. The question is how much they talked and 
in what way this is reflected in theorizing in their own domains. The answer is, 
predictably, complex. In this paper, I make a start on it by showing some of the 
persisting influences psychology and philosophy had on each other when it comes 
to using introspection in theorizing. Equally, I highlight the lack – or loss – of 
influence in certain cases, resulting in a more rudimentary conception of the use 
of introspection towards the end of the century than the often quite sophisticated 
earlier debates about it would warrant. I begin with discussions involving intro-
spection in the philosophy of perception in the first half of the century that reflect 
certain pressures felt at the time concerning the use of introspection in theoriz-
ing about experience. I then turn to relevant developments within psychology 
during this period and earlier, which show a more sustained engagement with 
various worries about introspection giving rise to these pressures. I finish by look-
ing briefly at philosophical discussions about perceptual experience late in the 
century displaying a mix of lessons absorbed and lessons forgotten with respect 
to their use of introspection.
1.  Introspection in the sense-datum theory debate
In this section, I will look at how early 20th-century philosophers of perception 
used introspection in their theorizing. I will focus specifically on proponents and 
critics of the sense-datum theory of perception. Moore’s paper ‘The Refutation of 
Idealism’ seems a good starting point because it was published right at the begin-
ning of the century in 1903, and also because it bridges different philosophical 
epochs. On the one hand, it is engaged in a (from our vantage point) backwards-
looking debate with the then still more widely defended idealism; on the other 
hand it constitutes an early contribution to the ensuing lively focus on sense-
datum theories of perception.

M a j a  S p e n e r
150
In his paper, Moore argues for a distinction between sensory experience and its 
(mind-independent) object, which he thinks is missing from extant accounts of 
sensory experience. He is also concerned to explain why his opponents failed to 
posit such a distinction:
[T]here is a very good reason why they should have supposed so, in the 
fact that when we refer to introspection and try to discover what the sen-
sation of blue is, it is very easy to suppose that we have before us only a 
single term. The term “blue” is easy enough to distinguish, but the other 
element which I have called “consciousness” – that which sensation of 
blue has in common with sensation of green – is extremely difficult to 
fix. That many people fail to distinguish it at all is sufficiently shown by 
the fact that there are materialists. And, in general, that which makes the 
sensation of blue a mental fact seems to escape us: it seems, if I may use 
a metaphor, to be transparent – we look through it and see nothing but 
the blue; we may be convinced that there is something but what it is no 
philosopher, I think, has yet clearly recognised.
(Moore 1903, 446)
Moore suggests here that introspective reflection on experience easily leads phi-
losophers astray on this matter. He points out that introspection does not clearly 
reveal any conscious element in addition to whatever non-conscious objects expe-
rience presents. It is then understandable, according to Moore, that philosophers 
think that experience is monolithic (‘a single term’) with no distinctive conscious 
aspect separable from the objects presented by experience.
Further on, though, he tempers both his claim about what introspection reveals, 
and about how misleading introspection is concerning the nature of sensory expe-
rience. While still insisting that introspective reflection is likely to mislead, he 
explains that this occurs because it is not done carefully enough:
[T]he moment we try to fix our attention upon consciousness and to see 
what, distinctly, it is, it seems to vanish: it seems as if we had before us a 
mere emptiness. When we try to introspect the sensation of blue, all we 
can see is the blue: the other element is as if it were diaphanous. Yet it can 
be distinguished if we look enough, and if we know that there is some-
thing to look for. My main object in this paragraph has been to try to make 
the reader see it; but I fear I shall have succeeded very ill. . . . Whether or 
not, when I have the sensation of blue, my consciousness or awareness is 
thus blue, my introspection does not enable me to decide with certainty: 
I only see no reason for thinking that it is. But whether it is or not, the point 
is unimportant, for introspection does enable me to decide that something 
else is also true: namely that I am aware of blue, and by this I mean, that 
my awareness has to blue a quite different and distinct relation.
(Moore 1903, 450–451)

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
151
Thus, introspection is not a poor guide when done right. Moore is happy to use 
introspective data in theorizing about the nature of conscious experience; indeed, 
it forms a central plank in defence of his own view. But he makes clear that since 
introspection is apt to mislead, using it in theorizing is not easy business. He works 
hard to get the reader to introspectively attend to experience properly. Moore accepts 
both that introspection is a major source of bona fide, theory-relevant information 
about the mind, but that significant care must be taken in availing oneself of it.
Versions of Moore’s attitude to introspection can be traced through the philoso-
phy of perception in the 20th century. It is common among both sense-datum theo-
rists and their critics dominating discussion in the first half of that century. First 
and foremost, these philosophers took for granted that in providing an account of 
conscious perceptual experience one must start with an accurate description of its 
phenomenal character. Further, they assumed that this description is acquired via 
first-person access to one’s experience. Philosophers talked of, e.g., ‘introspecting’, 
‘attending to one’s own experience’ or ‘direct inspection of experience’ (see, e.g. 
Lewis 1929, 57; Firth 1949, 523). This basic assumption of first-person access to 
important data about perceptual consciousness is reflected in the way philosophers 
typically employ it without much ado, other than occasional emphatic assertions 
that we have it. It suggests a relatively uncomplicated and natural-seeming first-
person way of becoming aware (or being aware) of one’s own conscious experience.
C. I. Lewis, for instance, talks about the character of pure sensory experience, 
i.e. experience which has not had interpretative involvement from thought (Lewis 
1929, 36–66).2 According to him, ‘the sensuously given’ is that which is unalter-
able by different interests or levels of knowledge and it has a distinctive ‘sensuous 
feel or quality’. As such, Lewis says, it must always be ineffable, because when 
one tries to articulate it one applies interpretation of one type or another. Nonethe-
less, he expects us to have a good grasp of the given:
It is that which remains untouched and unaltered, however it is construed 
by thought. Yet no one but a philosopher could for a moment deny this 
immediate presence in consciousness of that which no activity of thought 
can create or alter.
(Lewis 1929, 53)
Lewis does not explicitly say how we are aware of the given, but he clearly thinks 
that it is in some very basic and ordinary way obvious from the first person. It is 
‘the brute-fact element in perception, illusion and dream’ (57), the ‘immediate and 
indubitable’ (65).
A similar stress on what seems beyond doubt and obvious from the first-person 
is evident in others during this era, such as C. D. Broad and H. H. Price. Broad, 
e.g., observes that
The fundamental fact is that we constantly make such judgements as: 
‘This seems to me elliptical, or red, or hot’ as the case may be, and that 

M a j a  S p e n e r
152
about the truth of these judgements we do not feel the least doubt. (. . .) 
I may be perfectly certain at one and the same time that I have the pecu-
liar experience expressed by the judgement: ‘This looks elliptical to me’ 
and that in fact the object is not elliptical but round. (. . .) I do not sup-
pose that anyone, on reflection, will quarrel with this statement of fact.
(Broad 1923, 236)
And Price, too, relies easily on introspection. In his book Perception he investi-
gates the nature of perceptual experience and how they can justify our perceptual 
beliefs. He insists that his enquiry is squarely philosophical: ‘[w]e must simply 
examine seeing and touching for ourselves and do the best we can’ (Price 1932, 
2). Providing an example, Price describes what he can and cannot doubt when 
reflecting on how things appear to him as he is undergoing a visual experience as 
of a tomato:
[T]hat something is red and round then and there I cannot doubt. Whether 
the something persists even for a moment before and after it is present to 
my consciousness, whether other minds can be conscious of it as well as 
I, may be doubted. But that it now exists, and that I am conscious of it – 
by me at least who am conscious of it this cannot possibility be doubted.
(3)
‘The something’ Price isolates via first-person reflection is a sense-datum. Sense-
data differ from other kinds of data present to consciousness on two counts. 
Firstly, they give rise to belief in external-world objects. Secondly,
it seems plain that there is also another characteristic common and pecu-
liar to them, which may be called ‘sensuousness’. This is obvious on 
inspection, but it cannot be described.
(4)
Again, the quote displays the confidence with which Price and others put for-
ward first-person judgements about experience. In sum, early philosophers of 
perception took the results of first-person inspection to be palpable, unassailable 
and generalizable. Further, they considered gathering first-person phenomenal 
descriptions of experience with which to constrain one’s account an appropriate 
method for theorizing about experience.3
Yet there exists also a different current in these discussions about conscious 
experience. Philosophers agreed that harnessing first-person access to experience 
for use in theorizing requires some care. Moore, we saw, introduced this compli-
cation because introspection is the source of a mistaken view about experience as 
well as the source of crucial information supporting the right view. As the debate 
about perceptual experience and the sense-datum theory gathered speed, similar 
issues arose. For example, there were disputes about what sort of qualities are part 

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
153
of what is presented in phenomenal consciousness and what kinds of objects we 
are immediately phenomenally conscious of, which are the bearers of such quali-
ties. In particular, opponents of sense-datum theorists maintained that experiential 
character is as of ordinary objects and properties, rather than as of special sensory 
objects and their relatively sparse properties (e.g. (Barnes 1944–1945; Reichen-
bach 1938, 163–169).
These disputes put participating philosophers under pressure concerning their 
shared assumption about the appropriateness of the introspective method. Many 
felt the need to balance the claim that the kind of supporting evidence delivered 
by introspection is tremendously forceful with acknowledgement that there is a 
genuine debate about the phenomenal character of experience. What had to be 
reconciled was that certain aspects of experience are ‘quite plain’, ‘indubitable’, 
‘obvious’ on the basis of introspection and yet that opponents could be so thor-
oughly introspectively misled.
The pressure typically was relieved in one of two ways. Just as Moore did, some 
philosophers attempted to diagnose a problem on the part of the opponent which 
would explain their failure to introspect adequately, consistent with maintaining 
that conscious experience was properly introspectively available all along. This 
style of explanation was preferred by opponents of sense-datum theory who held 
that the phenomenal character of perceptual experience is as of ordinary objects 
and properties (as opposed to being as of sense-data with a sparser collection 
of sensory qualities). When Roderick Firth in 1949 reviews the debate between 
sense-datum theory and what he calls ‘percept theory’, he notes that sense-datum 
theorists seem entirely unresponsive to compelling phenomenological criticism 
from their opponents. But, he adds,
[i]f this indifference [to such criticism] is not to be attributed to igno-
rance or perversity, it is likely to suggest that there are certain fallacies 
or prejudices which prevent many people . . . from examining perceptual 
consciousness with complete objectivity.
(Firth 1949, 452)
For instance, philosophers might be prevented from introspecting properly if they 
are in the grip of a particular conception of perceptual experience which weakens 
their introspective capacity to judge the character of experience.4
The second style of explanation involved allowing that there are different ways 
to access experience via the first person. This tack, which tended to be used by 
defenders of sense-datum theory, consisted in shifting the goal-posts from think-
ing of the debate as manifesting straightforwardly conflicting deliverances of 
introspection to manifesting different ways to introspect. Lewis, Broad and Price, 
for instance, each concede that there is a sense in which the character of percep-
tual experience can be described in terms of presenting ordinary objects and prop-
erties. Indeed, they all agree that it is how the character of experience would strike 
the naïve observer: on casual inspection, we encounter ‘the thick experience of 

M a j a  S p e n e r
154
the world of things’ (Lewis 1929, 54), which presents all the rich qualities had by 
ordinary objects. But these philosophers also insist that in casual inspection we 
fail to notice something that on careful inspection we can become aware of.
One then must make sense of this in terms of an introspective method: what do 
these different ways of inspecting experience amount to and which one ought we 
to use in theorizing? To illustrate the general strategy, I focus here on Price’s view.5 
Ordinary perceptual consciousness, Price agrees, is consciousness as of mate-
rial objects (objects are leibhaftig gegeben in such consciousness, Price remarks, 
using Husserl’s phrase). However, perceptual consciousness in fact involves two 
different mental events: acquaintance with a sense-datum and an act of perceptual 
acceptance, i.e. a kind of taking for granted that there is a material object that 
‘belongs’ to the sense-datum with which one is acquainted.
The two states of mind, the acquaintance with the sense-datum and the 
perceptual consciousness of [say] the tree, just arise together. The sense-
datum is presented to us, and the tree dawns on us, all in one moment. 
The two modes of ‘presence to the mind’ utterly different though they 
are, can only be distinguished by subsequent analysis.
(Price 1932, 141)
Price holds that while awareness of a sense-datum and awareness of a material 
object in the same experience arise in unison, they constitute different kinds of 
cognitive acts. The former is factive, i.e. an acquaintance with something actually 
existing, which Price calls an ‘intuitive’ cognitive act. The latter is not factive, 
as experiential awareness as of material objects is consistent with there being no 
such object present. Perceptual acceptance is not intuitive, then. However, Price 
says it is ‘pseudo-intuitive’ because just like acquaintance of sense-data it con-
trasts with deliberative or discursive cognitive acts, such as inferring and surmis-
ing: it is not an activity but ‘effortless . . . undoubting and unquestioning’ (153). 
Price bases these claims on introspection:
That [perceptual acceptance] has this character is just an introspectible 
fact, however difficult to describe.
(Price 1932, 156)
As Price explains, the source of this character is different for intuitive and pseudo-
intuitive acts, constituting their fundamental difference. However, in ordinary 
perceptual consciousness, we do not seriously reflect on experience and so we 
miss the difference.
What happens is not that we identify [the sense-datum and the material 
object in an experience], but that we fail to distinguish between them. 
Our state is, as it were, a dreamy or half-awake state, in which we are 
unaware of a difference, which if we reflected would be obvious. Now 

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
155
the sense-datum really is intuitive. And since we fail to distinguish it 
from the remainder of the thing, the whole thing is as if it were intuitive, 
though only the sense datum actually is so.
(Price 1932, 168)
Thus, Price can agree that the character of ordinary perceptual experience 
involves the presentation of material objects and their properties – this is so when 
we introspect in a casual manner. For Price, this does not conflict with the view 
that introspection reveals distinct sense-data. It would conflict if he were to claim 
that the very same thing presented in experience which opponents hold to be a 
material object is really a sense-datum. But this is not so on Price’s picture. In the 
casual case – in everyday introspection – we are not theorizing about experience 
and do not attend carefully to it. We do not discriminate between the two kinds of 
presented objects in such a superficial characterization. When we do introspect 
perceptual experience with the aim of providing an account of its nature – in 
careful introspection – we make more fine-grained discriminations. We notice 
that there are distinct kinds of object which are present to the mind very differ-
ently, i.e. there are sense-data, which are intuited, and material objects which are 
pseudo-intuited.
This sort of explanatory approach was challenged in various ways by critics of 
sense-datum theory. They typically favoured the first type of explanation, insisting 
that the first-person inspection genuinely relevant to the introspective method is 
a kind of everyday introspection. Such introspection is immediate, commonplace 
and non-theoretical and it produces our naive take on experience. Careful inspec-
tion, on the other hand, is a more removed, optional take on experience which has 
no particular claim to priority in an analysis of perceptual consciousness (Firth 
1949, 462–463; Wild 1940, 82). In choosing careful introspection, sense-datum 
theorists were said to elevate an ‘attitude of “doubt” or “questioning” ’, as Firth 
puts it, to be the central method in analysing experience without any justification. 
By contrast, everyday introspection – and with it the introspective datum that 
experience is as of ordinary objects and properties – is not arbitrary as it is ubiq-
uitous and already in use independently of one’s theoretical aims.
A further objection to the method of careful introspection is more fundamental. 
As we saw, careful introspection aims to expose basic elements of phenomenal 
character to which we are allegedly insensitive in everyday introspection. Oppo-
nents argued that rather than helping to uncover the basic sensory structure of 
experience, careful introspection leads to a misrepresentation of the character of 
experience. Once the stance of everyday introspection is abandoned and careful 
introspection, driven by, say, epistemological concerns, is employed, we are in 
fact destroying, or at least heavily obscuring, the original target of observation.6
Both of these objections – and the wider discussion of which kind of first-person 
access is appropriate in philosophical theorizing about perceptual experience – 
echo some of the dominant concerns shaping the discussion in experimen-
tal psychology around that time. Firth, for instance, frequently mentions that 

M a j a  S p e n e r
156
psychologists agree with him about what direct inspection of experience reveals. 
He particularly cites Gestalt psychologist Wolfgang Köhler’s criticism of intro-
spectionist psychology practiced by Wundt and Titchener as one way to under-
stand what has gone wrong with the sense-datum view (Firth 1949, 461).
Overall, it is evident that philosophers of perception during this period 
assumed that first-person access to experience makes available an apt description 
of phenomenal experience. Possession of such access was not a matter of grave 
concern for any of them, some difficulties and disagreements about the relevant 
type of access notwithstanding. However, when we look more closely at parallel 
discussions in psychology around the turn of the century and carrying on into 
the 1940s, the contrast is stark. For the basic worries at the centre of analogous 
debates in psychology threatened the very use of introspection in psychological 
theorizing.
2.  The scientific role of introspection
In 1865, John Stuart Mill, responded to Auguste Comte’s criticism of scientific 
psychology and of its core method, self-observation, as follows:
There is little need for an elaborate refutation of a fallacy respecting 
which the only wonder is that it should impose upon anyone.
(Mill 1907/1865, 63)
Comte had previously argued that scientific psychology is doomed for practical 
and conceptual reasons.7 Self-observation, he said, in the sense of first-person 
attention to one’s own conscious mental states, results in the destruction of the 
state one seeks to observe. As soon as one attentively reflects on one’s conscious 
visual experience of a horse, say, one ceases to visually attend (at least in the 
manner one did before) to the horse and this changes one’s visual experience. 
Moreover, the idea of a single self attending to her own attending seems to require 
that the self splits attention. But such splitting, according to Comte, is conceptu-
ally suspect.
Mill offers two quick responses. Concerning the conceptual worry, he points out 
that splitting attention has been demonstrated to be possible. He refers to William 
Hamilton’s experiments showing that subjects can attend to several things at once 
(‘as many as six’): while attention is weakened by such splitting, it is not impos-
sible. Furthermore, Mill suggests that the conceptual point can be side-stepped in 
any case because scientific psychology can use a form of self-observation which 
does not involve attending to a concurrent act of attention. Rather, good scien-
tific practice would use immediate retrospection, a technique of reflecting on a 
conscious experience just after having it ‘when its impression in memory is still 
fresh’ (64). But mainly, concerning both the practical and the conceptual point, 
Mill simply insists that the assumption that we have introspective knowledge of 

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
157
our own thoughts and experiences is not up for debate. Whatever we say about 
introspection, on Mill’s view, we had better be able to explain how
we could . . . have acquired the knowledge, which nobody denies us to 
have, of what passes in our minds. M. Comte would scarcely have affirmed 
that we are not aware of our own intellectual operations. We know of our 
observings and our reasonings, either at the very time, or by memory the 
moment after; in either case, by direct knowledge, and not . . . merely by 
their results. This simple fact destroys the whole of M. Comte’s argument. 
Whatever we are directly aware of, we can directly observe.
(ibid. 64)
Thirty-five years on, William James agrees with Mill’s assessment on certain 
points. He attributes to common sense the unshakable belief that we have intro-
spective awareness of our own conscious states and he asserts that this belief is 
central to psychology (‘the most fundamental of all the postulates of Psychology’):
Introspective Observation is what we have to rely on first and foremost 
and always. The word introspection need hardly be defined – it means, 
of course, the looking into our own minds and reporting what we there 
discover.
(185)
However, James acknowledges concerns about the accuracy of introspective 
observation. He notes that there are extreme positions on this issue, ranging from 
Brentano’s claim that introspective apprehension of conscious states is infallible, 
to Comte’s rejection of direct introspective knowledge as ‘a pure illusion’. James 
suggests that Mill’s view about introspective knowledge by immediate retrospec-
tion expresses a ‘practical truth about the matter’. He points out that even those 
who hold that introspective observation is infallible would concede that in addi-
tion we have access to our conscious states by immediate retrospective reflection, 
which is fallible due to the involvement of memory.8 The question is which of 
these types of first-person access to the mind can serve as the basis for psychologi-
cal method. James’ answer is that it must be retrospective reflection.
But the psychologist must not only have his mental states in their abso-
lute veritableness, he must report them and write about them, name 
them, classify and compare them and trace their relations to other things. 
Whilst alive they are their own property; it is only post-mortem that they 
become his prey.
(James 1890/1981, 189)
Indeed – here James agreed with Comte – judging, labelling or classifying our 
own conscious states cannot be done concurrently. And, just like in any other area, 

M a j a  S p e n e r
158
we are fallible in making classifications and generalizations. This is not merely 
true of introspective classification and judgement within psychology; it is true in 
ordinary situations, concerning everyday judgements such as that I feel tired. It 
may seem as if at that moment one is merely expressing the very feeling one is 
experiencing ‘and so to be experiencing and observing the same inner fact at a sin-
gle stroke’. But in fact, says James, the experience one is having at that moment 
is that of saying-I-feel-tired. Insofar as the latter involves the feeling of tiredness 
it is very different from the feeling of tiredness felt just a moment before. ‘The act 
of naming [it] has momentarily detracted from their force.’
Thus, both ordinary introspective judgement and introspective observation in 
psychology involve immediate retrospection. Retrospection is required when we 
are going beyond merely feeling, to classifying and labelling. The question about 
accuracy thus is an empirical question and, says James, we do ‘find ourselves in 
continual error and uncertainty’ when engaging in introspection of this type.9 But 
equally, for James, that introspection is difficult and fallible is nothing out of the 
ordinary. All kinds of observation – especially scientific observation – have this 
feature. We simply have to do the best we can. And, just like in most other areas 
of investigation by observation, agreement among participating investigators is 
the ultimate arbiter of adequate theorizing.
The only safeguard is in the final consensus of our farther knowledge 
about the thing in question, later views correcting earlier ones, until at last 
the harmony of a consistent system is reached. Such a system, gradually 
worked out, is the best guarantee the psychologist can give for the sound-
ness of any particular psychologic observation which he may report.
(191)
In sum, for James, the adequate psychological method is just ordinary introspec-
tive reflection, which involves labelling and classifying conscious experiences 
based on immediate retrospection. Both the involvement of memory and the 
activity of classification mean that this kind of introspection is fallible.
James contrasted this method with that employed by his contemporaries in 
psycho-physics and experimental psychology. He was not a fan of the latter, to 
put it mildly.10 His main complaint was that experimental introspection is too 
restricted in scope, concerning both the conditions under which introspective data 
can be collected and the kinds of phenomena introspective data can be collected 
about. For James, this literally takes the life out of the subject-matter, trivializ-
ing psychological work. To preserve the lived character of perceptual conscious-
ness – for him so essential to the phenomenon – means using more free-flowing 
first-person retrospective reflection on ordinary experience, constrained mainly 
by seeking agreement about its best description with other psychologists and sub-
jects engaged in describing it.

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
159
2.1  Wundt and restricted introspection
I now turn to the views of these experimentalists, with a less hostile eye than that 
of James.11 I shall concentrate on the key figure of Wilhelm Wundt and then con-
trast his views briefly with those of his students, Edward Bradford Titchener and 
Oswald Külpe. Collectively, these psychologists are most often associated with 
so-called ‘classical introspectionist psychology’.
A founding figure in experimentalist psychology as it developed from early 
psycho-physics in the mid- to late-1900s, Wundt is perhaps the most well-known 
representative of the German tradition of early experimentalist psychology which 
gave a key role to introspection. Early on, Wundt distinguished between differ-
ent kinds of first-person access to conscious experience. He, too, was sensitive 
to Comte’s criticism of introspection as having destructive or distorting effects 
(see, e.g. (Wundt 1896, 25).12 In response, Wundt accepted Brentano’s distinction 
between two kinds of first-person access to one’s own conscious states, namely 
self-observation (Selbstbeobachtung) and inner perception (innere Wahrnehmung) 
(Brentano 1874, 35–42).13 According to it, self-observation is an active form of 
direct deliberative attention to one’s conscious experiences; inner perception is the 
fairly automatic and passive awareness one has of one’s own conscious experience, 
as one goes along in the world in an ordinary manner. Wundt thought that both are 
real psychological phenomena, but that only inner perception constitutes genuine 
introspective awareness in the sense of being epistemically successful. For pretty 
much Comte’s reasons, he argued that any attempt at deliberately attending to 
one’s conscious states with the aim of observing them would distort or destroy the 
latter. So, while this does not mean that self-observing in this manner is impossible 
qua mental activity, it does mean that it cannot yield a scientifically valid form of 
observation, since the cognitive upshot cannot provide accurate data about the 
conscious phenomenon putatively attended to (Wundt 1888, 296). Wundt is highly 
critical of psychologists who use self-observation in their work, likening these 
efforts to Baron Munchhausen’s pulling himself out of the bog by his own hair.
Inner perception, on the other hand, was taken to be the source of our firm 
common sense belief – one that Wundt endorsed – that we can know about our 
own conscious experiences. In contrast to self-observation, inner perception can 
supply the essential data for scientific psychology. But it cannot do so on its own, 
since it is a passive form of introspection not involving a deliberate attempt to 
attend to one’s conscious experiences. Rather, inner perception involves noticing 
them indirectly, ‘out of the corner of one’s “mental eye” (Lyons 1986, 4) as one 
goes along having them. Inner perception is therefore unsystematic and unpre-
meditated. The trouble is that if one now tries to directly use inner perception to 
provide introspective data about conscious experience, one thereby turns passive 
inner perception into destructive active self-observation.
Our capacity for inner perception therefore has to be carefully exploited so 
as to yield scientifically respectable data. Wundt’s experimental method aims to 

M a j a  S p e n e r
160
achieve this by inducing inner perception under tightly controlled circumstances 
(Danziger 1980, 245). In light of this, he placed severe constraints on using intro-
spection in psychology. They are needed to enable scientific investigation because 
of the fleetingness of the subject-matter of psychology (i.e. conscious experiential 
events being very unstable), one the one hand, and the difficulties with our first-
person access to this subject-matter, on the other. Given that direct observation 
is not possible, we have to use objective measures and experiments to observe 
somewhat indirectly as best as we can. For one thing, we have to ensure that we 
can get the conscious phenomenon reliably to present in subjects, without the lat-
ter attempting to self-observe. Wundt’s various experimental set-ups are crucial 
aids to this (Hülfsmittel).14 For another, Wundt maintained that not all conscious 
phenomena can be investigated in this manner. Thoughts and emotions, for exam-
ple, are not reliably correlated with external stimuli to the same extent that basic 
sensations seem to be. Moreover, concerning sensory experiences themselves, we 
can acquire data only about elementary features, elicited by simple judgements or 
behavioural responses. Wundt’s experiments shun qualitative reports because for 
him they are products of active self-observation. He therefore restricted experi-
mental introspective investigation to certain basic aspects of sensory experiences. 
Other types of conscious and non-conscious mental phenomena, e.g. thought and 
emotions, were to be investigated by different, non-introspective methods (see 
(Wundt 1896, 24–28) and (Wundt 1888)). Having developed different methods of 
investigation for different psychological phenomena under the heading of ‘social 
psychology’ (Völkerpsychologie), he published extensively in this area. Contrary 
to currently widespread belief, Wundt’s conception of psychology thus encom-
passes vastly more than investigation by introspection (see (Danziger 1980)).15
2.2  Titchener, Külpe and systematic introspection
Wundt was gradually superseded by a new generation of introspectionist psy-
chologists within the first decade of the century. Some were students of his, who, 
although receiving their training in his laboratory, came to reject many of his 
restrictions on introspection. Two main brands of introspectionist psychology 
emerged directly out of Wundt’s laboratory: Titchener’s structuralism and Külpe’s 
Würzburg school. These differed significantly, and they were at times bitter critics 
of one another. However, they both endorsed the scientific legitimacy of qualita-
tive data collected from subjective introspective reports under experimental con-
ditions. This alone constituted a clear break with Wundt.16
Attitudes to introspection had very much changed among these psychologists. 
Titchener, for instance, confidently claimed that introspection itself can be a per-
fectly good source of scientific observation:
But if self-observation means, simply, psychological observation; and if 
observation in psychology has as its end a knowledge of mind, . . . then, 

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
161
just as certainly, introspection may be as impersonal, as objective, as 
matter-of-fact, as is the observation of the natural sciences.
(Titchener 1912b, 434)
In response to the kind of worries that had led Wundt to regard inner percep-
tion as the only source of legitimate data (which still needed to be manipulated 
appropriately with the help of various experimental set-ups), Titchener took a 
more sanguine approach. He argued that these worries concern a former use 
of introspection in psychology, which is ‘precritical, pre-comparative and pre-
experimental’ (435). It involved introspective judgements that were infected by 
theoretical bias and the aim for metaphysical systematization. However, Titchener 
maintained, the mature psychology of his day used introspection differently. For 
example, in the case of introspective disagreement, a regimented and repeated 
application of the experimental introspective method could be relied upon to erad-
icate biased and confused reports.
Psychology is not the only science in which the strict application of the 
best available methods leads to opposite conclusions. But is there the 
same hope, in psychology, that differences will presently be resolved? 
I see no reason for any but an affirmative answer. (. . .) A more methodical 
series of observations, with variation of conditions, would either bring two 
observers into agreement or would give us the key to their disagreement.
(437)
This echoes James’s insistence that introspective observation is just like any other 
form of scientific observation – fallible and subject to disagreement. Titchener 
also emphasizes the role of agreement about introspective data in ensuring that 
the introspective data passes scientific muster. More generally, the various ways 
in which the new generation of introspectionist psychologists conceived of their 
work constituted a rapprochement of sorts with the non-experimentalist British 
empiricist tradition and their use of introspection.
One loosening of Wundtian restraint concerned the proper scope of introspective 
method. Külpe’s Würzburg laboratory, for example, specifically aimed to investi-
gate conscious thought, judgement, emotions and thought’s relation to action (see 
the work of e.g. Karl Marbe, Karl Bühler, Otto Selz, and Narziss Kaspar Ach). 
Titchener, too, endorsed a much larger domain of investigation, including memory 
and mental processes more generally (Titchener 1912b, 427–428). More impor-
tantly, and correlatively, the other substantial loosening of constraint concerned 
the kind of introspective access harnessed in psychology, i.e. the proper method 
of investigation. The new generation accepted retrospection as a central introspec-
tive method, along the lines of James and Mill (see, e.g., (Bühler 1908, 100–101; 
Külpe 1920; Müller 1911; Titchener 1912c)). Typically, they accepted both, use of 
a more direct introspective awareness along the lines of inner perception, as well 

M a j a  S p e n e r
162
as immediate retrospective awareness. With that inclusion, the whole nature of 
the experimental method changed as well. The method of systematic introspection 
(Ausfrageexperimente) became dominant. Experiments designed to elicit imme-
diate retrospective judgements about one’s conscious experiences moved away 
from use of objective, performance-related measures to a focus on subjective 
report and on qualitative description of experience. In particular, we see a striking 
change in how the experimenter is involved in the experiment: eliciting qualita-
tive data requires the experimenter to ask questions to which the subject responds.
One consequence was that certain theoretical differences were prone to show 
up in the introspective data itself, rather than in what was taken to be the scien-
tific interpretation of the introspective data (Danziger 1980, 253). The infamous 
‘imageless thought controversy’ between Titchener and the Würzburg school is 
a case in point. Würzburgers like Külpe claimed that they could introspect non-
imagistic and non-sensational awarenesses (unanschauliche Bewusstheiten) 
reflecting higher cognitive activity. Titchener, on the other hand, argued that intro-
spection did not reveal anything non-imagistic or non-sensational and hence that 
his opponents were simply confused in various ways, either mistaking sensational 
composites for putatively non-sensational elements of experience or letting their 
theoretical preferences infect their introspective data.
This episode thus also reflects another aspect of the state of play among experi-
mental introspectionists in the early decades of the 1900s. The debate had become 
one about competing pictures of the metaphysics of conscious experience, with 
Titchener defending a structuralist, bottom-up picture, and the Würzburg school 
defending a richer conception of conscious experience including complex and 
higher-level cognitive elements. Titchener adhered to the doctrine of sensational-
ism, the view that conscious experience is composed of sensory elements that com-
bine to produce the overall experience. Sensationalism, endorsed already by Mill 
and earlier British empiricists (Mill 1843, ch 4), gives introspection a key role in 
analysing experience into its basic components and in discovering the rules of com-
bination in terms of which complex conscious contents of ordinary experience can 
be explained. In this capacity, the role of introspection was to overcome the naïve 
but misleading take on experience, and to discern the real conscious character with 
its basic sensational structure. In Titchener’s hands, then, introspective investiga-
tion of conscious experience is a form of analysis, or, as it was sometimes called 
‘reduction’, of experience into its basic sensory components (Titchener 1912c). 
Külpe and the Würzburgers endorsed a rather different picture of conscious experi-
ence. Specifically, they held that, in addition to sensory aspects, conscious experi-
ences included other fundamental aspects, in the form of mental activity. The latter 
could not be analysed into combinations of the former. This basic outlook drew on 
Brentano’s act psychology and Husserl’s phenomenological approach to investi-
gating experience. The Würzburg emphasis on investigating conscious thinking 
and activity in experience derived from these very different interests.
Both sides of the debate practiced systematic introspection, however. Yet sys-
tematic introspection presented several methodological problems (some old, 

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
163
some new) none of which were particularly hidden from practitioners. Central use 
of immediate retrospection meant that the concern about memory as a potential 
source of distortions and gaps resurfaced. The reliance on verbal articulation and 
report of qualitative data about subjects’ conscious experience introduced worries 
about scientific validity of the data, given the inability to independently check 
for the presence of the experiences in question. In addition, the experiments of 
systematic introspection, with their active involvement of the experimenter, have 
a strong demand character, which presents its own danger for infecting the data 
collected (Müller 1911). Part of the explanation for why systematic introspection 
was attractive to its proponents despite all these known problems is the pervasive 
influence of phenomenalism in science and philosophy at that time.17 Phenom-
enalism is the view that theories and explanatory terms must be epistemically 
grounded in what is directly given in experience. It takes for granted that we have 
access to what we are experientially given. Access to experience is, of course, 
the bone of contention in the discussions concerning introspective methodol-
ogy. However, specific worries concerning introspective method might not have 
appeared fundamentally threatening but just something to be worked around, in 
light of the truly dominant position of phenomenalism at the time.
The background influence of phenomenalism also sheds light on the two basic 
pictures of the nature of experience separating the two camps (see (Danziger 
1980), (Boring 1953) and (Hatfield 2005) for more details). Titchener was heav-
ily influenced by the positivism of Ernst Mach, which reinforced the atomistic- 
sensational conception of conscious experience found in the sensationalism inher-
ited from the British empiricists. As mentioned above, Külpe and the Würzburg 
school, by contrast, were guided by Brentano’s act psychology and Husserl’s phe-
nomenological approach and they held a far less constructivist view of conscious 
experience.
By the 1920s, the method of systematic introspection had more or less run its 
course. In Germany, Gestalt psychology had taken hold, which, although con-
tinuing with some of the basic ideas of the Würzburg school, constituted another 
important shift in methodological outlook. In the US, among other things, the 
gradual rise of behaviourist psychology, encompassing an outright rejection of the 
conception of psychology concerned with inner conscious states, led to a fizzling 
out of Titchener’s programme by the time of his death in 1927.18
2.3  Gestalt psychology and phenomenological method
Gestalt psychology is said to have been founded by Max Wertheimer, who argued 
that movement – independently of an object which moves – could be shown to be 
literally seen. Perceived movement was to be neither reduced to more constituent 
sensational elements, nor explained in terms of further judgement (Wertheimer 
1912). The recognition of perceived moment as an unreducible feature of con-
scious experience was followed by recognition of other features, providing a 
very different conceptual framework of the basic organization of experience. 

M a j a  S p e n e r
164
Describing experience in terms of fundamental organizational features, such as 
object constancy, was a far cry from the sparse features figuring in Wundt’s con-
strained introspective investigation or Titchener’s unconstrained systematic intro-
spective analysis.
Two specific changes are relevant from our point of view. The first is a deliberate 
return to a less liberal introspective experimental method. Gestalt psychologists 
attempted to avoid or minimize problems associated with the demand character 
of systematic introspection and the involvement of memory by including checks 
of overt behaviour in their experimental techniques (Danziger 1980). The sec-
ond is a full-throated endorsement of the need for a phenomenological descrip-
tion of experience which is naïve or pre-theoretical. In doing this they rejected 
both, Titchener’s introspective analysis and Wundt’s restriction on the scope of 
introspective investigation. Gestalt psychologists thereby manifested their affinity 
with the Würzburg school and Husserl’s work on phenomenology (Koffka 1924, 
150). As Kurt Koffka emphasizes, at the centre of their approach to psychology is 
the ‘phenomenological method’:
In reality experimenting and observing must go hand in hand. A good 
description of a phenomenon may by itself rule out a number of theo-
ries and indicate definite features which a true theory must possess. We 
call this kind of observation ‘phenomenology,’ a word which has several 
other meanings which must not be confused with ours. For us phenom-
enology means as naïve and full a description of direct experience as 
possible. In America ‘introspection’ is the only one used for what we 
mean, but this word has also a very different meaning in that it refers to 
a special kind of such description, namely the one which analyses direct 
experience into sensations of attributes, or some other systematic but not 
experiential ultimates.
(Koffka 1935, 73)
Indeed, Gestalt psychologists saw themselves in a kind of Goldilocks position 
between (systematic and analytical) introspectionism and behaviourism. Koffka 
and Köhler took great pains to explain how their approach differed from, over-
lapped with  – and, of course, improved upon  – introspectionism, as well as 
behaviourism (Koffka 1924; Köhler 1930, 1–77). Both types of experimental 
psychology were accused of ‘remoteness from life’. Behaviourism is criticized 
for leaving our experience altogether:
In their justified criticism they threw out the baby with the bath, substi-
tuting pure achievement experiments and tending to leave out phenom-
enology altogether. . . . Without describing the [conscious character of 
experience] we should not know what we had to explain.
(73)

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
165
Introspectionism was criticized for using a procedure to isolate certain features 
of experience (local size, form and brightness) from their ordinary experiential 
contexts. The result is that
of all objective experience, as both layman and psychologist enjoy it in 
the visual field of everyday life, very little is left as pure and genuine sen-
sory fact (. . .) As long as the introspectionists’ attitude prevails, however, 
psychology will never seriously study those experiences which form the 
matrix of our whole life. Instead it will observe and discuss the proper-
ties of rare and unusual experience which, though they are supposed to 
be continually present beneath our naïve experiences, seem to be so well 
hidden most of the time that their existence has nothing to do with life as 
we actually experience it.
(Köhler 1930, 64–65)
Gestalt psychologists accepted that the introspectionists’ data about experiences 
is genuine in that there really are such pure sensory experiences, discoverable by 
the introspective methods in question. But they also held that these experiences 
do not represent mainstream types of perceptual experience that form the starting 
point of any psychological inquiry. Gestalt psychologists argued that the central 
focus of psychology is the description and explanation of direct (naïve, immedi-
ate, uncritical) experience, i.e. of everyone’s normal experiential awareness when 
they, say, open their eyes and look around. Ordinary experience is typically of the 
world, of objects such as chairs, tables and trees and their ordinary properties. The 
character is objective in that it is as of external-world, mind-independent stuff 
(Köhler 1930, 1–25).
According to Gestalt psychologists, the most apt characterization of experience 
is obtained by just describing one’s surroundings in as naïve a manner as possible: 
‘[a]ny description I can give of my surroundings, of this room, the people in it, 
and so on, are facts for psychology to start from’ (Koffka 1924, 153). Koffka’s 
phenomenological method has its origin in Husserl’s work and I provide no more 
than the briefest gloss on it here.19 The key thought is that we can gain knowledge 
of experience by directing our attention outwards into the world first and then 
shifting our attitude from experiencing the world to considering the character of 
such experiencing. The shift in attitude is something intellectual we do – Husserl 
calls it ‘bracketing’ – where we withhold certain kinds of commitment that come 
with normal experiencing the world. Such bracketing, according to Husserl, does 
not distort the experience itself but merely disconnects it from performing its nor-
mal function, thereby transforming our experiential knowledge of the world into 
knowledge of the experiential character of the former. Much more would need to 
be said to adequately present and elucidate Husserl’s view and its influence on 
Gestalt psychologists, among others. But it should be clear already that the phe-
nomenological method differs not only from systematic introspection, but from 

M a j a  S p e n e r
166
all the other introspective methods discussed so far. The latter all involve kinds 
of first-person access to experience via fairly basic psychological kinds (obser-
vation, memory, attention, feeling). The former does not; the sense in which it 
constitutes first-person access to experience is quite different, since the route to 
first-person awareness of experience is via outward experiential attention together 
with further deliberate and complex intellectual efforts.
Koffka further explains that one can also take an investigative, first-person 
(‘analytic’) attitude to experience, i.e. one can introspect one’s experience in the 
more traditional sense. However, taking that attitude to one’s experience changes 
one’s mental situation, namely the ‘subjective conditions’ under which the organ-
ism is reacting to the environment. Consequently, it is no surprise that there are 
different experiences (‘reactions’) in these cases. ‘You were looking at this room 
and were interested in it at the beginning, you were introspecting and interested 
in psychology afterward’ (154). Thus, introspecting involves changing the expe-
rience one is having in a way the phenomenological method does not. In light 
of this, Koffka argues that, while psychology can and does usefully engage in 
introspective investigation of conscious experience, it has to do so very carefully. 
Sometimes the changes brought about in the target experience are not destruc-
tive, but are in keeping with the dynamic organization of the target experience’s 
content. In that case, the introspectively changed experience amounts to ‘a devel-
opment’ of the former. But sometimes the changes result in an entirely different 
experience altogether.
This is why it is wrong to attempt to maintain an analytical attitude at all 
costs as the method of psychology. In most cases such an attitude does 
not develop the [original experience], but destroys many of its original 
tendencies. The attitude which is legitimate has to be determined by the 
nature of each separate whole dealt with, and in this appears the art of 
introspection. Introspection, like every other kind of observation, is an 
art, and it is not an easy one.
(158)
The criticism here is not that analytic introspectionism uses introspection to 
investigate conscious experience – Gestalt psychology does so, too. Rather, intro-
spectionism uses it irresponsibly and exclusively. Because of this, the fact that 
introspection inevitably changes the target experience becomes too destructive. 
The root problem is that introspectionists use introspective data so acquired as the 
starting point for theorizing, assuming that it offers the most basic and accurate 
description of conscious sensory experience. But, as we saw, Gestalt psycholo-
gists hold that the latter and hence the starting point for psychology is based on the 
naïve and uncritical take on it derived from simply describing the scene around 
one, i.e. describing ‘the world, as we have it’.

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
167
2.4  Varieties of first-person access
In sum, psychologists of this era tended to accept that introspection delivers use-
ful and important data about the conscious mind, but also that there are different 
kinds of introspection, i.e. different kinds of first-person access and that not all 
are equally suitable to the task. Moreover, even if suitable such access must be 
employed carefully because getting scientifically respectable introspective data 
is difficult under the best circumstances. They agreed that the central difficulty 
comes from the potentially distorting and destructive effects of deliberate intro-
spective reflection but they disagreed about what to do about this. Their disagree-
ment has many sources, and I have been able to convey only a small part of the 
overall story. Among the experimental psychologists, the Gestalt psychologists 
emphasized further that the first point of departure for the scientist must be a 
description of ‘direct experience’, by which they meant ordinary, lived experi-
ence from the point of view of the naïve experiencer. As we saw, this description 
is obtained by describing, as uncritically as possible, the world around one as one 
is experiencing it. Insofar as this method owes to Husserl’s phenomenological 
method, and by the Gestalt psychologists’ own insistence, this way of acquiring 
first-person data about experience is significantly different from any of the other 
kinds of first-person access classified as introspection.
In section 1, I said that Firth refers to the Gestalt psychologists’ naïve take 
on experience to explain what he means by direct inspection of experience. 
Moreover, his critique of sense-datum theory mentions the Gestalt psychologists’ 
rejection of Titchener’s systematic introspective method. This clearly shows the 
influence psychological discussion of introspection had on philosophy of percep-
tion at that time. This impact was long-lasting. Thirty years later, P. F. Strawson, 
in critiquing A. J. Ayer’s sense-datum view, insisted that when we ask ‘a non-
philosophical observer gazing idly through a window’ to describe his experience 
to us ‘[h]e does not start talking about lights and colours, patches and patterns 
(Strawson 1979, 43)’. Instead, Strawson claims, the world is objectively ‘given 
with the given’ (47).
However, just like in the case of the Gestalt psychologists’ view about the naïve 
description of experience, it is not entirely clear what the nature of the first-person 
access involved is. According to Strawson,
[the observer will] use the perceptual claim – the claim it was natural 
to make in the circumstance – in order to characterise [his] experience, 
without actually making the claim. [He] renders the perceptual judge-
ment internal to the characterization of the experience without actually 
asserting the content of the judgement. And this is really the best pos-
sible way of characterising the experience.
(Strawson 1979, 44)

M a j a  S p e n e r
168
The Husserlian heritage seems plain in this passage. Against the background of 
the developments in psychology just discussed, this raises interesting questions 
about whether – and, if so, in what sense – the method employed counts as a first-
person access we recognize as a kind of introspection at all.
3.  Transparency and introspecting at the end  
of the 20th century
While earlier philosophical discussions surrounding perception were typically 
motivated by epistemological concerns, late 20th-century focus shifted to philos-
ophy of mind topics such as physicalism and the mind-body problem. There was 
an active debate about perceptual experience between representationalism, qualia 
theories and disjunctivism. Sense-datum theory had largely dropped out of the 
picture by then. Some of the main reasons for this connect smoothly with the cri-
tique Firth made against Price: the view that sense-datum theory severely distorts 
the character of experience and that a correct description of the latter involves 
reference to ordinary objects and properties. It is fair to say that the claim that 
the phenomenal character of experience is as of the objective world was broadly 
taken as common ground in the 1980s and 1990s and many disputes about the 
correct description of phenomenal character concerned certain further details.20 
The details of these views are not important here; rather, it’s the way in which 
such descriptions were typically put forward in those discussions. Specifically, the 
claim that phenomenal character is as of the objective world was often affirmed 
in the context of the thesis that experience is transparent to first-person reflection. 
The transparency thesis has played a powerful role in the philosophy of percep-
tion at the end of the century, providing a major source of support for arguments 
in favour of representationalist and disjunctivist views of perceptual experience. 
Roughly, it says that when one reflects on what (e.g.) visual experience is like for 
one – when one reflects on the phenomenal character of one’s visual experience – 
one looks through the experience to what it is about, namely to the ordinary 
objects and their sensible properties presented in experience. As Tye puts it:
Why is it that perceptual experiences are transparent? When you turn your 
gaze inward and try to focus your attention on intrinsic features of these 
experiences, why do you always seem to end up attending what the expe-
riences are of? (. . .) In turning one’s mind inward to attend to the experi-
ence, one seems to end up scrutinizing external features or properties.
(Tye 1995, 135–136)
Proponents of the transparency thesis thus maintain that first-person reflection on 
phenomenal character does not lead to awareness of any special experiential object or 
properties, distinct from those we would refer to in describing the world as we experi-
ence it (see also, e.g. (Shoemaker 1996, 100–101; Dretske 1995, 62)). The most apt 
description of phenomenal character is in terms of ordinary objects and properties.

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
169
Interesting for our purposes is what kind of reflection is supposed to be involved 
in the transparency thesis. The blunt assumption by philosophers in these debates 
was that it is introspection (see, e,g (Loar 1997, 597; Lycan 1995, 82; Tye 2000, 51).  
They tended to identify what they (and others) are doing when they reflect on 
phenomenal character as introspecting and often called the data about experience 
thus collected ‘introspective evidence’ (e.g. (Martin 2000, 219; Crane 2000a, 50). 
Other phrases are also used, such as ‘turning one’s attention inwards’, or ‘attend-
ing to one’s experience’, or ‘reflecting on what experience is like’ and so forth. 
The impression one forms on the basis of this literature is that there is a fairly 
straightforward first-person access to one’s own conscious states. It was taken 
for granted that we have introspective access to our experiences and that such 
access yields appropriate descriptions of phenomenal character for use in theoriz-
ing. However, not much is said about what kind of access it is.
Thus, philosophers of perception towards the end of the 20th century took seri-
ously phenomenal adequacy constraints on their theories, and they did not con-
sider them difficult to come by via introspection. This contrasts with both debates 
discussed previously. The early sense-datum discussion held that introspecting 
phenomenal character is possible as well as knowledge-conducing, but they also 
recognized that it must be done with great care. Moreover, we saw that the fact that 
opponents accepted different introspective verdicts raised a serious question for 
them about the kind of first-person access at work in their respective theorizing. 
Firth argued that direct inspection of experience reveals that phenomenal character 
is best described objectively, but he also acknowledged different kinds of first-
person attitudes one might take to one’s conscious experiences and that they might 
be responsible for the different verdicts. In the case of experimental psychology, 
we saw that psychologists were much preoccupied with the question of which kind 
of first-person or introspective access was suitable for gathering accurate descrip-
tions of the target experiences. Much of their discussion was driven by worries 
over the potential of various kinds of introspection to distort or destruct the target 
experience and this worry was crucial to their choice of introspective method.
In the last two decades of the 20th century, philosophers of perception in the 
debates mentioned above were not concerned about these issues. They put forward 
claims about phenomenal character, where these claims were meant to be obvi-
ous upon introspection. Insofar as there was sensitivity to the issue of diverging 
introspective claims about phenomenal character, this is not taken to impugn the 
first-person access to conscious experience as such in a serious way. For instance, 
Michael Martin explains the differences between the descriptions of phenomenal 
character by sense-datum theorists and representationalists as resulting from pri-
oritizing different elements of the naïve introspective description of phenomenal 
character which forms common ground between them.
From this perspective, what is notable about each of the main tradi-
tions is not what they seek to defend by reference to introspection, but 
what they are prepared to reject in the face of introspective support. The 

M a j a  S p e n e r
170
sense-datum tradition denies the manifest fact that it seems to us as if we 
are presented in experience with mind-independent objects and states of 
affairs in the world around us. The intentional tradition denies the intro-
spective evidence that things apparently sensed must actually be before 
the mind for one to experience so.
(Martin 2000, 219)
Most surprisingly, though, is the seeming lack of awareness of any connection 
between the transparency thesis and Husserlian phenomenological method among 
many mainstream proponents of the transparency thesis. In their hands, the latter 
tends to be taken to articulate that which is introspectible, namely the thoroughly 
objective character of experience. But when one looks at accounts of the process 
involved, they bear significant resemblance to those put forward by psycholo-
gists and philosophers more directly inspired by Husserl.21 The reason why this is 
important here is that, as we saw above, whether the phenomenological method 
counts as a kind of introspection at all is a genuine question.
Late 20th-century discussions involving transparency thus display a kind of 
selective forgetfulness with respect to introspection. On the one hand, there is a 
clear line running from early critics of sense-datum theory and the experimental 
psychologists who influenced them, to later proponents of representationalism and 
disjunctivism endorsing the thought that naïve reflection on experience reveals its 
character to be objective. On the other hand, though, the earlier long-standing and 
sophisticated discussions in which this thought was typically embedded – in par-
ticular the distinction between types of first-person access at work in theorizing 
about conscious experience – has almost entirely washed out.
Notes
	 1	 For instance, I will not provide an overview of all the different accounts of the nature 
of introspection and self-knowledge put forward. For excellent, up-to-date and com-
prehensive survey articles covering this material, see Gertler 2008; Kind, April 2015; 
Schwitzgebel, Summer 2014.
	 2	 I am presenting Lewis as a sense-datum theorist here, but see (Crane 2000b, 180–181) 
for discussion.
	 3	 ‘[T]he only way to decide a question of this sort is by direct inspection of perceptual 
consciousness itself’ (Firth 1949, 453).
	 4	 According to Firth, sense-datum theorists might hold an over-intellectualised concep-
tion of perceptual experience which ‘could blind [them] to the very phenomenological 
facts which would correct it’ (455).
	 5	 See (Broad 1923, 247–8; Lewis 1929, 38–66) different versions of this explanatory 
strategy. See also Firth 1949.
	 6	 See Firth 1949, 460–461. In the preface to the 1954 reprint of Perception, Price says 
that while he still thinks that sense-datum terminology is useful for describing how 
things strictly look, say, from a painter’s perspective, it is not useful in accounting for 
ordinary perceptual experience. He explains that sensing (acquaintance with sense-
data) is not as previously argued a core constituent of ordinary experience, but is rather 
itself a kind of phenomenal inspection (Price 1932, ix).

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
171
	 7	 See the lengthy passage from Cours de philosophie positive, cited in (James 1890/1981, 
187–188).
	 8	 James notes Brentano’s distinction between ‘the immediate feltness of a feeling’ and 
our awareness of it via retrospective reflection.
	 9	 Especially when introspecting experiences which are complex or not very strong, 
according to James. See (James 1890/1981, 190–191) for more discussion.
	10	 ‘This method taxes patience to the utmost, and could hardly have arisen in a country 
whose natives could be bored. Such Germans as Weber, Fechner, Vierordt and Wundt 
obviously cannot. . . . (. . .) There is little of the grand style about these new prism pen-
dulum, and chronograph-philosophers. They mean business, not chivalry. What gener-
ous divination, and that superiority in virtue which was thought by Cicero to give a man 
the best insights into nature, have failed to do, their spying and scraping, their deadly 
tenacity and almost diabolic cunning, will doubtless some day bring about’ (192).
	11	 That hostility is a manifestation of different viewpoints not just about introspection but 
also about the overarching theoretical conception of psychology, between the British 
tradition James is ensconced in, and the German experimentalist tradition of Wundt. 
For the historical origin and background debates surrounding introspectionist psychol-
ogy, see (Danziger 1980), also (Boring 1953) and (Lyons 1986, p. ch 1).
	12	 Wundt was also reacting to similar criticism of introspective methods in psychology by 
his teacher, Friedrich Lange (Lange 1887, 679–690).
	13	 ‘Innere Wahrnehmung’ is often translated as ‘inner perception’ and to avoid confusion 
I will stick with this terminology. But the choice of words is unfortunate in suggesting 
the perceptual model of introspection, which seems not strictly part of the notion as it 
was used by Brentano and Wundt.
	14	 Wundt disagreed with James’s choice of retrospection as the key introspective method. 
For Wundt, retrospection isn’t scientific observation at all because the latter requires by 
definition that the target of observation be present while being observed (Wundt 1888, 
294). Retrospection involves merely remembering the relevant conscious experience. 
However, Wundt did think that it can be used to good effect. Some of his experi-
ments employed retrospection, mainly to retrospectively access the upshot of inner 
perception.
	15	 For a representative caricature view of Wundt’s psychology as confined to investigat-
ing conscious experience via introspection, see Braisby and Gellatly 2012, 9. Also 
Davies 2005, which presents nuanced picture of the complex development of experi-
mental psychology overall, though.
	16	 See, e.g., Wundt’s detailed criticism of the Würzburg experimental approach (Wundt 
1907).
	17	 For detailed accounts of these background influences see Boring 1953, Danziger 1980, 
Hatfield 2005.
	18	 For space reasons, I will concentrate on Gestalt psychology in this paper. But the rela-
tionship between behaviourist psychology and introspection is fascinating in its own 
right (Boring 1953; Lyons 1986, 23–44). For classic papers by early behaviourists cri-
tiquing introspectionist psychology, see e.g. Watson 1913; Dunlap 1912. For attempts 
to account for introspective belief in behaviourist terms see, e.g. (Lashley 1923).
	19	 My (rudimentary) understanding of Husserl’s approach is due to (Thomasson 2005). 
See Walsh and Yoshimi’s chapter on the phenomenological tradition in this volume.
	20	 One key issue concerned whether one needs to appeal to additional non-objective, 
qualitative properties to adequately describe phenomenal character (e.g. Harman 1990; 
Tye 1992; Tye 1995; Tye 2000; Searle 1983; Peacocke,1983; Levin 1995; Block 1980, 
278). Another issue, e.g., concerned the precise manner of objective givenness, that 
is, whether it involves particular objects or merely generalized existential reference to 
them (e.g. Soteriou 2000; Martin 1997; Davies 1992).

M a j a  S p e n e r
172
	21	 The issue plays out in different ways in some later discussions concerning the nature 
of introspection, see, e.g. Sellars 1956/1997; Drestke 1999; Byrne 2005; Tye 2000. 
The Husserlian origin is hardly ever acknowledged, much less discussed in any detail. 
See, though, (Thomasson 2005) for an excellent discussion of Husserl’s view of self-
knowledge and his influence on Sellars’s view in particular.
Bibliography
Barnes, W. (1944–1945). “The Myth of Sense-data,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society.
Block, N. (1980). “Troubles with Functionalism,” in Block, N. (ed.), Readings in the Phi-
losophy of Psychology. London: Methuen.
Boring, E. (1953). “A History of Introspection,” Psychological Bulletin: 169–189.
Braisby, N., and Gellatly, A. (2012). “Foundations of Cognitive Psychology,” in Braisby, N. and 
Gellatly, A. (eds.), Cognitive Psychology. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 1–28.
Brentano, F. (1874). Psychologie vom empirischen Standtpunkt Vol 1. Leipzig: Duncker & 
Humblot.
Broad, C. (1923). Scientific Thought. London: Kegan Paul.
Bühler, K. (1908). “Antwort of die von W. Wundt erhobenen Einwaende gegen die Meth-
ode der Selbstbeobachtung an experimentell erzeugten Erlbebnissen,” Archiv fuer die 
gesamte Psychologie.
Byrne, A. (2005). “Introspection,” Philosophical Topics, 33: 79–104.
Crane, T. (2000a). “Introspection, Intentionality and the Transparency of Experience,”. 
Philosophical Topics, 28: 49–67.
Crane, T. (2000b). “The Origins of Qualia,” in Crane, T. and Patterson, S. (eds.), History of 
the mind-body problem. London: Routledge: 169–194.
Danziger, K. (1980). “The History of Introspection Reconsidered,” Journal of the History 
of Behavioural Sciences: 241–262.
Davies, M. (1992). “Perceptual Content and Local Supervenience,” Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society: 21–45.
Davies, M. (2005). “An Approach to Cognitive Psychology,” in Jackson, F. and Smith, M. 
(eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drestke, F. (1999). “The Mind’s Awareness of Itself,” Philosophical Studies, 95: 103–124.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dunlap, K. (1912). “The Case Against Introspection,” Psychological Review (19): 404–413.
Firth, R. (1949). “Sense-data and the Percept Theory,” Mind: 434–465.
    Gertler, B. (2008). “Self-knowledge,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. (Fall 
2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta  (ed.), <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/
entries/self-knowledge/>.
Harman, G. (1990). “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience,” Philosophical Perspectives, 4: 31–52.
Hatfield, G. (2005). “Introspective Evidence in Psychology,” in Achinstein, P. (ed.), Scien-
tific Evidence. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press: 259–286.
James, W. (1890/1981). The Principles of Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Kind, A. (2015, April). “Introspection,” Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ISSN 2161-
0002, http://www.iep.utm.edu/.
Koffka, K. (1924). “Introspection and the Method of Psychology,” British Journal of Psy-
chology, 15: 149–161.

I n t r o s p e c t i n g  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
173
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of Gestalt Psychology. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd.
Köhler, W. (1930). Gestalt Psychology. London: G. Bell and Sons Ltd.
Külpe, O. (1920). Vorlesungen ueber Psychologie. Leipzig: Hirzel.
Lange, F. A. (1887). Geschichte des Materialismus und Kritik seiner Bedeutung in der 
Gegenwart. Iserlohn: J. Baedeker.
Lashley, K. S. (1923). “The Behaviorist Interpretation of Consciousness,” Psychological 
Bulletin (30): 237–272; 329–353.
Levin, J. (1995). “Qualia: Intrinsic, Relational or What?” in Metzinger, T. (ed.), Conscious 
Experience. Parderborn: Schoeningh: 277–292.
Lewis, C. I. (1929). Mind and the World Order. London: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Loar, B. (1997). “Phenomenal States,” in Block, N., Flanagan, O. and Guezeldere, G. 
(eds.), The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 97–615.
Lycan, W. (1995). “Layered Perceptual Representation,” Philosophical Issues, 7, 81–100.
Lyons, W. (1986). The Disappearance of Introspection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Martin, M. (1997). “The Reality of Appearances,” in Sainsbury, M. (ed.), Thought and 
Ontology. Milano, Italy: Franco Angeli: 81–106.
Martin, M. (2000). “Beyond Dispute: Sense-data, Intentionality and the Mind-body Prob-
lem,” in Crane, T. and Patterson, S. (eds.), History of the Mind-Body Problem. London: 
Routledge: 195–231.
Mill, J. S. (1843). A System of Logic. s.l.:s.n.
Mill, J. S. (1907/1865). Auguste Comte and Positivism. London: Kegan.
Moore, G. E. (1903). “The Refutation of Idealism,” Mind, 433–453.
Müller, G. E. (1911). “Zur Analyse der Gedaechtnistaetigkeit und des Vorstellungsver-
laufes,” Zeitschrift fuer Psychologie, I(5).
Peacocke, C. (1983). Sense and Content. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Price, H. H. (1932). Perception. London: Methuen.
Reichenbach, H. (1938). Experience and Prediction. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
    Schwitzgebel, E. (2014, Summer). “Introspection,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy. (Winter 2016 Edition), Edward N. Zalta  (ed.), <https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2016/entries/introspection/>.
Searle, J. (1983). Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Sellars, W. (1956/1997). Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1996). “Qualities and Qualia: What’s in the Mind?” in The First-Person 
Perspective and other Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 97–120.
Soteriou, M. (2000). “The Particularity of Experience,” European Journal of Philosophy, 
173–189.
Strawson, P. (1979). “Perception and its Objects,” in: MacDonald, G. (ed.), Perception and 
Identity: Essays Presented to A. J. Ayer. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press: 41–60.
Thomasson, A. (2005). “First-Person Knowledge in Phenomenology,” in Smith, D. W. and 
Thomasson, A. (eds.), Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Titchener, E. B. (1912a). “Description vs Statement of Meaning,” American Journal of 
Psychology, (23): 165–182.
Titchener, E. B. (1912b). “Prolegomena to a Study of Introspection,” American Journal of 
Psychology, (23): 427–448.

M a j a  S p e n e r
174
Titchener, E. B. (1912c). “The Schema of Introspection,” American Journal of Psychology, 
(23): 485–508.
Tye, M. (1992). “Visual Qualia and Visual Content,” in Crane, T. (ed.), The Contents of 
Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 158–176.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, Color and Content. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Watson, John B. (1913). “Psychology as the Behaviorist Views It,” Psychological Review 
(20): 158–177.
Wertheimer, M. (1912). “Experimentelle Studien ueber das Sehen von Bewegung,” 
Zeitschrift fuer Psychology and Physiologie der Sinnesorgane: 61.
Wild, J. (1940). “The Concept of the Given in Contemporary Philosophy – Its Origin and 
Limitations,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research: 70–82.
Wundt, W. (1888). “Selbstbeobachtung und innere Wahrnehmung,” Philosophische Stu-
dien: 292–309.
Wundt, W. (1896). Grundriss der Psychologie. Leipzig: Engelmann.
Wundt, W. (1907). “Ueber Ausfrageexperimente und ueber die Methoden zu Psychologie 
des Denkens,” Psychologische Studien, (3): 301–360.

175
1.  Introduction
The ‘mind-body problem’ covers two distinct but related metaphysical problems. 
One is synchronic: how to account for the structural relation between mental 
states and their underlying neural states. The other is diachronic: how to explain 
the apparent causal relations between a person’s environment, her mental states, 
and her body. The problem of mental causation pertains to the latter.1
We can see the problem of mental causation in an illustration. As evening 
approaches, you notice that it is getting darker. This observation, along with your 
desire to see better, triggers the urge to seek a light switch. Luckily, you spot one. 
Your hand moves toward it and flicks it on, illuminating the room and letting 
you see again. Every part of this story involves the apparent causal interactions 
among the environment, one’s mind, and one’s body. One’s surroundings seem to 
cause the mental state of perceiving the dimming ambient light, and this mental 
state seems to lead to the desire to see better, which then produces a sequence of 
movements in one’s arm. It certainly seems that one’s mental states play a critical 
role – if you wanted to remain in the dark or had some other mental state, the story 
would have turned out differently.
Explaining how one’s mental states figure in as causes and as effects alongside 
the causal activity going on in the body has been notoriously difficult. Ever since 
Descartes (1596–1650) deemed the mind wholly non-physical and substantially 
different from the body, mind-body interaction has been deeply baffling.2 After 
all, if the mind is wholly non-physical, how can it ‘push’ against the brain to 
make it move the arm? Twentieth-century work on mental causation has under-
gone radical shifts in the very approach to the problem – from returning to the 
17th-century debates about the tenability of dualism, to rejecting the problem all 
together as a pseudo-problem, to finally returning to it again with unparalleled 
interest. Indeed, the history of the mental causation debates in this century has 
unfolded with ever greater drama, as the end of the century has brought into focus 
not just one, but many, distinct problems of mental causation, each posing unique 
threats to its very possibility.
7
THE MENTAL CAUSATION 
DEBATES IN THE 20TH CENTURY
Julie Yoo

J u l i e  Y o o
176
This essay is divided into three sections. The first covers the early 20th-century 
writings on mental causation. The second presents the mid-century denial of men-
tal causation as a legitimate problem. And the third and longest section lays out 
the late 20th-century discoveries of new difficulties for mental causation, along 
with the most significant strategies proposed in their wake.
2.  Early 20th century: “naturalist” approaches  
to mind-body interaction
Despite three centuries separating the early 20th-century philosophers from 
Descartes, there is a seamless continuity between them (see Maja Spener’s entry 
in this volume on Descartes and 20th-century approaches to introspection). The 
virtues and drawbacks of the positions mapped out by the post-Cartesian phi-
losophers of the 17th century, namely, interactionism, parallelism, and epiphe-
nomenalism (see the Appendix for a summary of these positions), were still very 
much alive in the debates in the early 20th century, fueled, no doubt, by the rapid 
growth of new scientific approaches to the mind and the materialist metaphysics 
they naturally insinuated.3
In light of these trends, it is understandable why philosophers would have been 
pressed to re-examine the plausibility of explaining mind-body interaction in 
broadly naturalistic terms. Roy Wood Sellars summed up the zeitgeist this way:
Until recently, dualistic theories have been in the ascendant. Whatever 
form this dualism took, whether parallelistic or interactionistic, it rested 
upon certain traditional assumptions and inhibitions which have only 
lately been undermined by the growth of science and the corresponding 
increase of what may be called a realistic naturalism.
(1918, 155)
Of the naturalist positions, reductive materialism offers the most straightforward 
account of mental causation, since it is nothing other than plain physical causation 
that goes by a mental description. Indeed, there simply is no problem of mental 
causation for reductive materialism since the mind is not placed in a separate 
ontological category from the body. Despite this Occamite advantage, conceptual 
difficulties for reductive materialism have made (and continue to make) the option 
controversial. More attractive were epiphenomenalism, panpsychism, and emer-
gentism, the main positions on mental causation in the early 20th century.
Epiphenomenalism was defended by T. H. Huxley (1874) and George Santay-
ana (1942). On this view, mental states are causal “byproducts” of neural (physi-
cal) states but do not themselves cause physical or other mental states. Although 
epiphenomenalism has the virtue of avoiding some of the problems that beset 
Cartesian interactionism (see the Appendix), it is admittedly at odds with com-
mon sense. We can grant that the sensation of pain is a causal consequence of 
neural activity, but we also believe that the sensation of pain qua sensation can 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
177
make a person go through great lengths to put a stop to it. Mental states certainly 
appear to have highly focused efficacy. Moreover, this efficacy seems to have a 
plausible Darwinian explanation. As argued by William James, were it not for the 
evolutionary adaptiveness of pains that warn against harm, humans would not 
be where they are today (1890). James’s Darwinian strategy was not sufficiently 
developed to accommodate the efficacy of representational contents of intentional  
states, a desideratum for a complete account of mental causation, but it was a solid 
a posteriori strategy to support the efficacy of phenomenal states.
Another view popular at the time was panpsychism, promoted by James (1907 
and 1909), Russell (1927), and Whitehead (1929). The idea was developed in 
different ways. On James’s version, the nature of the physical is such that it is 
“dusted” with mentality, where mentality is an ineliminable aspect of the basic 
physical structure of the world. On Russell’s version, space, time, and matter are 
“grounded by” a form of mentality. Because the mental was supposed to be a 
fundamental feature of the world, panpsychists perhaps assumed that the mecha-
nisms of mental causation were obvious. For Whitehead, the world evolves as it 
does by virtue of participating in the mind’s intrinsic “spontaneity and creativity.” 
But this inchoate idea is not obvious. Indeed, for all its popularity, panpsychism 
faced some large open questions. Was the universe supposed to be “dusted with” 
or “grounded by” fully conscious minds or only protoconscious minds? And how 
did the dusting or grounding take place?4 These gaping holes might explain why 
there was no official panpsychist account of mental causation.
The most developed view of mental causation to come out of the early 20th 
century was the emergentist notion of downward causation. Emergentism was 
embraced on both sides of the Atlantic: by Samuel Alexander (1920), Lloyd Mor-
gan (1923), and C. D. Broad (1925) in the UK and by William James (1890), Roy 
Wood Sellars (1920 and 1922), and Arthur Lovejoy (1926) in the US. The view 
was (and still is) appealing because it promises to strike a delicate balance between 
the austerity of mechanistic views, where the mind is nothing but the aggregate of 
purely physical parts, and the extravagance of panpsychism and dualism. Unlike 
the panpsychists who postulated mentality at the most basic level, the emergen-
tists accounted for the ontological status of mentality in terms of the arrange-
ment of “more basic” physical (neural) constituents. Once those constituents were 
combined in the right way, mental properties were said to emerge, not as causal 
consequence of the lower-level constituents, as a dualist interactionist would con-
strue things in the “bottom-up” direction, and not as a logical consequence of the 
properties of the lower level, the way the mass and shape of a wall is a logical 
consequence of the mass and arrangement of the constituent bricks. Instead, emer-
gent properties were said to emerge as brute, novel, products that synchronously 
non-causally and nonlogically arise out of their underlying constituents.
On the emergentist view, higher-level phenomena such as minds have a dis-
tinctive causal capacity over and above the causal powers of the constituents 
whose arrangements make their emergence possible. These distinctive causal 
powers enable changes at the higher level (intra-level causation), the lower-level 

J u l i e  Y o o
178
phenomena being insufficient on their own to bring about these changes. The 
exercise of these distinctive causal powers at this higher level also involves what 
philosophers call downward causation (inter-level causation).
There are two different ways downward causation can be construed. The first 
is in terms of the “top-down” part of dualist interactionist causation. On this con-
strual, higher-level phenomena bring about changes at the lower level that would 
not have come about were it not for the presence of the emergent forces doing 
their thing; the emergent properties bring about changes at the lower level.5 On 
the other construal, and one more difficult to pin down, downward causation does 
not bring about changes in the lower level as such. This construal is implicit in 
Alexander’s objection to epiphenomenalism:
The mental state is [alleged by some dualists as] the epiphenomenon of 
the neural process. But what neural process? Of its own neural process. 
But that process possesses the mental character, and there is no evidence 
to show that it would possess its specific neural character if it were not 
also mental.
(1920, Vol I, 8)
According to Alexander, a neural process has the properties it has in virtue of 
being the process for a certain mental state. Had the process been a neural process 
for a different mental state, the neural processes would have had different physical 
properties. That is, there is no way to prise the mental apart from its neural cor-
relate. This blocks the mind-body separation necessary to get epiphenomenalism 
off the ground. On one way of interpreting Alexander’s view, higher-level phe-
nomena determine how the lower-level constituents get to behave, not by directly 
exerting causal powers on the lower level, but by constraining which causal pow-
ers the underlying processes may exercise. This would mean that the laws of the 
special sciences, and thus laws of higher-level kinds, including mental kinds, are 
irreducible to the laws of fundamental physics. However, the properties that figure 
in these irreducible laws do not exert causal powers over and above the causal 
powers of their lower-level physical constituents. Instead, the higher-level laws 
non-causally constrain the expression of the causal powers of physical properties. 
This is not interactionist downward causation. It is, one might say, downward 
determination.
The mental causation debate, while lively in the early 20th century, came to a 
halt in the mid-20th century, when a core assumption shared by rival materialist 
accounts of mental causation came under close scrutiny. This assumption was 
realism about the mind.
3.  Mid-20th century: questioning reasons as causes
With the rise of behaviorism, ordinary language philosophy, and the influence of 
the late Wittgenstein, the 1930s to the 1960s witnessed a thorough rejection of the 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
179
Cartesian framework, and with it, the very conception of mind as something that 
can wield causal powers.6
The most forceful and notable of these critiques came from Gilbert Ryle (1949). 
According to Ryle, the Cartesian metaphysics of mind came down to the puerile 
idea of a ghost in the machine. Thinking of the mind as an entity like a body, 
except that it is non-physical, involved a “category mistake,” Ryle’s term for a 
fundamental error in one’s very conceptual grasp of the phenomenon at hand. 
This error was committed not only by dualists, according to Ryle, but also by 
materialists according to whom the mind was, again, an object, though thoroughly 
mechanical in nature (Ch. III, “The Will”). Questions about what caused your 
hand to turn on the light switch – whether it was the mind or instead the body – 
were just the wrong questions to ask. Using ordinary language as a guide:
[W]e say simply ‘He did it [the action]’ and not ‘He did or underwent 
something else which caused it’.
(1949, 82)
The general lesson people took from Ryle was that reasons are not causes. In 
short, there is no mental causation in the traditional sense.
Three arguments were given for this negative claim. One, which we can call the 
improper category objection, is that reasons do not belong to the right ontological 
category to count as causes. This is because they are not events: “Motives are not 
happenings and are not therefore of the right type to be causes” (Ryle 1949, 113). 
Actions are also not appropriately classifiable as events, according to Elizabeth 
Anscombe (1957). Neither reasons nor actions are to be modeled on physical 
change, for physical changes are backed by evidence and support predictions. 
Nothing like this applies to reasons or actions.7
A second argument for the negative claim, which we can call the necessitation 
objection, is that there is a logical or conceptual (a priori) tie connecting reports of 
reasons and reports of actions, violating one of the Humean principles governing 
causal claims, namely, that the descriptions of causes and their effects must be logi-
cally contingent and a posteriori. As A. I. Melden 1961 explains in his Free Action:
If the relation were causal, the wanting to do would be, indeed must be, 
describable independently of any reference to the doing. But it is logi-
cally essential to the wanting that it is the wanting to do something of 
the required sort with the thing one has. Hence the relation between the 
wanting to do and the doing cannot be a causal one.
(1961, 128)
Reports of practical reasoning, however, seem to display a conceptual tie. When 
we say things like “She turned on the light switch because she wanted to brighten 
the room and believed that by turning on the switch, the room would get brighter,” 
there is an air of logical necessity or triviality to the claim; had she believed or 

J u l i e  Y o o
180
desired differently, it seems to follow that she would have done something else a 
matter of analytic inference. Such is the mark of explanations in terms of reasons, 
according to Melden. To dispel the air of logical necessity, one could say, “She 
turned on the light switch because the fast-spiking interneurons were activated by 
an increase in dopamine in her prefrontal cortex.” But then this would not be an 
explanation of the action in terms of the person’s reasons.
The third argument, which we can call the general law objection, comes from 
another Humean constraint on causation. If causation is a matter of constant con-
junction, then a causal relation obtains in virtue of there being a general law to the 
effect that causes of a certain kind always lead to effects of this other kind. But, 
M. F. Cohen tells us:
[I]n neither first nor third person statements does a motive [reason] expla-
nation of an action rest upon an empirical generalization about what the 
agent (or others) would do in like circumstances when possessed of such 
a motive.
(1964, 331)
Indeed, the generalizations of folk psychology are riddled with qualifications and 
escape clauses: all things being equal, if you fear something, you will avoid it; all 
things being equal, if you want something, you will seek it; and so on. Without a 
non-ex post facto way way of accounting for when all things are equal, generali-
zations appealing to an agent’s reasons appear unfit to work as empirical law-like 
generalizations.
These anti-causal arguments about reasons and actions held considerable sway 
in the mid-20th century until they were overturned dramatically by Carl Hempel 
(1962), Kim & Brandt (1963), and most notably, Donald Davidson (1963 and 
1970), who placed the problem of mental causation once again in the the forefront 
of philosophy of mind.
4.  Late 20th century: the many problems for mental 
causation
We now enter the golden age of the mental causation debates. Not only do we see 
an array of novel approaches to the traditional Cartesian problem, but we also dis-
cover unforeseen problems whose solutions have inspired some impressive feats 
of creativity and ingenuity. These include:
The Anomalism Problem: If events can be causally related only if there 
are laws that cover them, the absence of psychological or psychophysical 
laws jeopardizes mental events as candidates for efficacy.
The Exclusion Problem: If the physical domain is causally closed, 
then your turning on the switch has a fully sufficient physical cause 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
181
that “excludes” other possibly mental causes in bringing about the 
action.
The Externalism Problem: If representational states are individuated broadly 
as suggested according to content externalism, then short of invoking spooky 
action at a distance, mental contents do not look like they play a role in causing 
behavior.
These are independent problems. That is, the solution to one does not yield a 
solution to the others. This section takes each of these problems in turn.
4.1  The anomalism problem
4.1.1  Davidson’s argument for reasons as causes
Davidson (1967 and 1970) takes on all three mid-century objections to treating 
reasons as causes: the improper category, necessitation, and general law objec-
tions. Against the improper category objection, Davidson claims not only that 
causes are correctly classifiable as reasons, but that, without a causal reading of 
reasons, there is no way to draw the critical distinction between a mere reason 
and a motivating reason for acting. Say that you thought that turning on the light 
switch would make a delightful clicking noise but that the click was not why 
you turned it on. If your primary concern was to illuminate the room, hearing the 
click was not the trigger for your action, even though it might have been a reason 
for it. The trigger for the action is what engages our interests when we explain a 
person’s action, especially when issues of agency, free will, and moral respon-
sibility are at stake. A story in terms of mere reasons tells us only how an action 
was reasonable in light of the beliefs and desires an agent may have held at the 
time. What is essential is the reference to the actual causal forces that produced 
the action.
Against the necessitation objection, Davidson (1967) explains how causal rela-
tions obtain no matter how we describe them. Suppose an event c causes an effect 
e and we decide to label c as “the cause of e.” Surely the causal relation does 
not disappear just because we now utter “the cause of e caused e.” The descrip-
tions we choose to pick out the events do nothing to affect their causal workings. 
A crucial corollary to this reply is the idea that a single event can be picked out 
by nonequivalent descriptions. This plays a pivotal role in Davidson’s handling 
of the general law objection. Davidson agrees with Melden, Anscombe, and other 
anti-causalists that there are no general laws relating reasons and actions. But if 
one endorses the Humean condition where singular causal relations are made pos-
sible only by falling under general laws, which Davidson does, a causal relation 
between reasons and actions means they do fall under general laws, just not laws 
with mental descriptions.
These replies to the anti-causalist objections make up Davidson’s famous 
argument for anomalous monism (1970), the argument that placed the issue of 

J u l i e  Y o o
182
mental causation front and center up to this very day. The argument draws on 
three principles:
Mental Causation: At least some mental events interact causally with physical 
events.
Anomalism of the Mental: There are no strict deterministic laws on the basis of 
which mental events can be predicted and explained.
Nomological Character of Causality: Events enter into causal relations insofar 
as they fall under strict laws.
Given the principle of the anomalism of the mental, no mental event m can cause 
a physical event p (or any other event, for that matter) on account of its govern-
ance under a psychological law or psychophysical law, since no such laws exist.8 
But the principle of the nomological character of causality requires that all causal 
relations be covered by a strict law.9 So if m is to cause p, there has to be a strict 
law that makes their causal connection possible. As the only candidates for strict 
laws are physical laws, this means that m can cause p only if it is covered by a 
strict physical law. An event’s being covered by a physical law entails that it is a 
physical event, so it follows that m is a physical event. That is, every efficacious 
mental event is token identical with a physical event, and the token identity thesis 
is established. This establishes monism in the form of token physicalism. Demon-
strating the causal efficacy of mental events is now easy: because physical events 
unproblematically enter into causal relations and mental events simply are physi-
cal events, mental events are causally efficacious.
4.1.2  Criticisms of Davidson’s argument
Token physicalism is the linchpin of Davidson’s theory of anomalous monism, 
and virtually every philosopher concedes that the theory allows for a mental event 
to cause other events.10 But a number of critics have objected that anomalous 
monism blocks an event’s mental properties from playing a causal role and thus 
fails to furnish a solution to the problem of mental causation (Loewer and LePore 
1987; Fodor 1989; McLaughlin 1989).
Take any causal relation holding between a reason c and an action e. According 
to the critics, c causes e in virtue of subsumption under a strict causal law. Laws 
of this kind relate only physical properties because it is only in physics that we 
get strict laws. So what secures the causal relation between c and e is c’s instantia-
tion of a physical property, not its instantiation of a mental property. Therefore, 
the critics conclude, c qua mental makes no causal difference since it is c qua 
physical that accounts for c’s efficacy, permitting mental events to enter into the 
same causal relations even if the content were changed or eliminated as long their 
physical properties remained intact. Surely, an account of mental causation that is 
indifferent to thought content is not an account of mental causation.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
183
This objection has come to highlight one of the most important 20th-century 
insights into the problem of mental causation. While establishing the efficacy of 
a mental event may be a step in the right direction, what we really want is an 
account that demonstrates how the mental properties of an event can be causally 
relevant.11 This worry, which goes by type epiphenomenalism (since the concern 
is over the relevance of mental properties or types, not token events), drives all 
contemporary problems of mental causation.12
Davidson (1993) has countered that there is a mistake in the very idea that 
events are causes in virtue of certain of their properties or that c causes e qua 
some property or other. Reports of causation, according to Davidson (1967), are 
extensional and should not be conflated with explanations, which are intensional. 
The mark of an extensional context is its immunity to shifts in truth value under 
substitution of co-referring expressions. Insisting that “c qua physical causes e” 
is true but “c qua mental causes e” is false, under anomalous monism, conflates 
causal reports with explanations. As McLaughlin (1993) has shown, however, the 
critics are not guilty of conflating causation with explanation. Emphasis on the 
properties certainly alters the truth-value of the causal report, but not because it 
violates extensionality. To violate extensionality, the “in virtue of” qualification in 
“c causes e in virtue of the fact that c has F” would have to make the cause of an 
event essentially description-dependent, but this qualifier does not do this: citing 
what makes it the case that a pair of particulars is related in a certain way doesn’t 
involve the need to cite what descriptions are true of the particulars. The reason 
why “c qua physical causes e” is true, but “c mental causes e,” is false, is that the 
modifiers specify different properties of the cause c in which one of its properties, 
but not the other, secures the conditions under which the causal relations hold. 
Since the principle of the nomological character requires strict laws for securing a 
causal connection among events and since only physical laws are arguably strict, 
this explains why truth values differ between causal reports that reference a physi-
cal property and those that reference a mental property.
4.1.3  Other solutions to the problem of anomalism
Those working on the problem of anomalism have proposed other solutions that 
purport to credit causal relevance to mental properties. Two accounts stand out.
One is Fodor’s proposal, where M and P can appear in the familiar generaliza-
tions of folk psychology, but modified by ceteris paribus clauses (1991). This 
approach endorses Davidson’s principle of the nomological character of causality, 
but denies that only strict laws can do the job. The most pressing question for this 
approach is how the ceteris paribus conditions are cashed out (Schiffer 1991). If 
all things are to be equal in the vocabulary of psychology, then the generaliza-
tions will look trivial or ex post facto: if the things being equal for someone to 
do A if she wants to do A comes down to there being no overriding desires or 
not changing her mind at the last minute, then the generalization looks like an 

J u l i e  Y o o
184
analytic truth, not an empirical one (a problem the mid-century philosophers like 
Ryle, Anscombe, and Melden had long pointed out). If, on the other hand, they are 
cashed out in different vocabulary, say, in lower-level vocabulary (this is Fodor’s 
view), then they lose their identity as full-fledged generalizations of folk psychol-
ogy since they would ultimately have to be framed in physical vocabulary, making 
Fodor’s strategy just collapse into Davidson’s original proposal.
The second is LePore and Loewer’s proposal (1987), where the relation between 
M and P is a relation of counterfactual dependence. A mental property M of event 
c is causally relevant to property P of event e if c causes e, c has M and e has P, 
M and P are metaphysically independent (satisfying Hume’s condition), and e’s 
having P counterfactually depends upon c’s having M, that is, if c did not have M, 
then e would not have had P. The main problem with this approach is that coun-
terfactual dependencies may not be enough (Braun 1995; Kim 1998; McLaughlin 
1989). Fires give off both heat and smoke. Only the heat is relevant to warming 
a room. However, there is a counterfactual dependency of the heating upon the 
smoke because smoke and heat reliably co-occur when a fire is lit. Thus, there are 
misleading counterfactual dependencies, and for all we know, the counterfactual 
dependency of bodily motion upon mental properties is misleading.
One has to wonder whether the approaches by Fodor and LePore and Loewer 
miss the point of the principle of the anomalism of the mental. Davidson’s insist-
ence on there being no laws couched in the vocabulary of folk psychology is not 
a mere empirical observation that no laws have yet been formalized. It goes back 
to insights made by Ryle, Wittgenstein, and Anscombe. We make sense of peo-
ple’s minds and actions, not by invoking a universal law and initial conditions, 
but by appreciating why an action was performed given the agent’s distinctive 
constellation of beliefs and desires set within a unique, non-repeatable, set of 
circumstances (McDowell 1984; Child 1993). In brief, we gain a better under-
standing of an agent’s reasons in terms of a narrative setting, not a scientific one 
where individual peculiarities are whitewashed in the interest of capturing (pos-
sibly nonexistent) generalities (von Wright 1971).
4.2  The exclusion problem
4.2.1  A formulation of the exclusion problem
Kim is to be credited with introducing the the exclusion problem as it is known 
today (1984, 1989, 1998, 2005). Kim’s formulation is a reworking of a problem 
raised in by Norman Malcolm (1968), who asked whether it is possible for a 
segment of behavior to have both a ‘mechanistic,’ or physicalistic explanation 
as well as a mentalistic or a ‘purposive’ one. This raises the question of whether 
it is possible to give multiple complete explanations for a single explanandum. 
The answer given by Malcolm was ‘no’; a complete explanation makes any other 
superfluous. Thus, once an explanation for an action has been furnished by an 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
185
appeal to its physiological antecedents, the full explanatory picture has been com-
pleted, leaving no room for a further explanation couched in terms of reasons.13
With Kim’s principle of explanatory realism, Malcolm’s problem of explanatory 
exclusion becomes the problem of causal exclusion. According to this principle, 
certain structural features of the world (‘truthmakers’) underwrite the correctness 
and truth of an explanation. Thus, the question of whether we can have distinct 
explanations for a single explanans becomes the question of whether we can have 
distinct causes of a single effect. This is the principle of causal exclusion:
Exclusion: If a property F is causally sufficient for a property G, then no prop-
erty F* distinct from F is causally relevant to G.
Epiphenomenalism results from applying this principle to the currently popular 
metaphysics of non-reductive physicalism, which consists of these two theses:
Causal Completeness of the Physical: For every physical property P, there is a 
physical property P* that is causally sufficient for P.14
Irreducibility of the Mental: For every mental property M and physical prop-
erty P, M is distinct from P.15
According to the irreducibility thesis, your desire to turn on the switch is not 
reducible to any physical property. The subsequent motion of your arm moving 
towards the switch has a fully sufficient physical cause, according to the causal 
completeness thesis. Since no effect requires more than its sufficient cause, your 
desire is ‘excluded’ from contributing to your behavior, according to the exclusion 
principle, rendering your desire epiphenomenal.
The exclusion principle does not rule out the possibility of overdetermination. It 
is only supposed to cast suspicion on systematic overdetermination. For instance, 
a single case where a person dies because she is both shot in the heart and suffers 
a brain aneurysm, both of which would have been independently sufficient for 
her death at exactly the same time is permitted under the principle. What is not 
permitted is when every assassination is also overdetermined by a fatal aneurysm. 
Without something tying the two types of events together, there is no basis for 
postulating such a cosmically improbable pairing of outcomes. Likewise, while 
it would not strain credulity to think that on a certain occasion, one’s turning on 
the light switch is caused by the right neurophysiological processes, and indepen-
dently of those processes, by one’s having the desire to turn on the switch, one 
certainly would not want to postulate a framework that magically coordinates par-
allel causation for every instance of mental causation. The point of the principle of 
exclusion is to rule out extensive parallel causation.
The exclusion problem casts a wide net. Its epiphenomenalist conclusion 
applies not just to mental properties, but to all properties not strictly reducible to 

J u l i e  Y o o
186
a physical property. This includes the phenomena of the special sciences. Further-
more, the exclusion problem does not require any particular theories of causation; 
whether we go with the nomic subsumption model, the counterfactual model, 
process theories, or some other theory, the problem still arises. What follows is a 
survey of some general strategies for solving the exclusion problem.
4.2.2  Dual explanandum solutions
On this approach, psychological explanations accomplish one thing, while physi-
cal or neurobiological explanations accomplish another (see Dretske 1988; Jackson 
and Pettit 1990; Lowe 2006). The causal relations they track are different and thus 
do not compete against each another. For this reason, there is no basis for exclu-
sion. Such a view was popular among the mid-century philosophers influenced by 
Ryle, Anscombe, and the late Wittgenstein. Kim (1989), however, poses a dilemma 
for this approach. If we insist that a bit of behavior has some causal origin that is 
irreducibly mental, and therefore non-physical, then this effectively violates the 
causal completeness of the physical domain. If not, then we are back to the very 
problem of exclusion that the dual explanandum strategy was designed to avoid.
4.2.3  Partial reduction solutions
The demise of the central state identity theory of U. T. Place (1956) and J.J.C. 
Smart (1959) has rendered non-reductive physicalism the most plausible metaphys-
ics to hold for those who also reject dualism.16 There are two notable approaches 
to mental causation within the framework of non-reductive physicalism. One aims  
to reduce a mental property M to a single physical kind P relative to some species 
S (Lewis 1966; 1972; 1983). Known as species-specific or local reductions, we can 
identify a mental property like pain with a physical property in an organism, for a 
given species, so that we have human pain, Martian pain, octopus pain, and so on:
S → (M ↔ P).
The problem with this approach is that it faces the one over the many problem 
familiar to students of Plato: some F must be common to all instances of F in virtue 
of which they count as having F. Otherwise, human pain, octopus pain, and Martian 
pain are pains in name only (Shoemaker 1981; Pereboom and Kornblith 1991).
On the other partial reductionist approach, it is not mental properties that are 
reduced per se, but rather their instances. These instances are to be construed as 
tropes (see Macdonald and Macdonald 1986; Robb 1997).17 The idea here is that we 
can reduce a mental trope to a physical trope in the spirit of Davidson’s token identity 
strategy so that the mental trope will get credited with causal relevance as long as the 
physical trope with which it is identical is efficacious. The trope identity approach, 
however, may not give us any substantive advantage over Davidson’s event identity 
(Nordhoff 1998). The trope approach must, at a minimum, demonstrate that a mental 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
187
trope is indeed identical with a physical trope. But on the face of it, they look like 
different tropes. Tropes are as finely grained as they come; short of analytic equiva-
lence between the terms picking out a trope, there is little support for this strategy 
since mental and physical terms are notoriously non-equivalent in meaning.18
4.2.4  Property dependence approaches:  
supervenience and realization
Some defenders of mental causation working within non-reductive physicalism 
aim to preserve the full irreducibility of the mental rather than construing it in 
partially reductive terms. On this view, the mental is irreducible, but also depend-
ent on the physical in a substantive way so as to be consistent with the doctrine 
of physicalism. The most developed approach within this view is Yablo’s con-
strual of the psychophysical supervenience relation in terms of determinables and 
determinates (1992). It is a view that is designed to be consistent with the multi-
ple realizability of a mental property by diverse physical properties. The idea is 
that just as the more general determinable red can be realized by the more spe-
cific scarlet and crimson determinates, the various physical realizations – neural, 
silicon-based, etc. – are to be construed as the determinates of the more general 
mental determinable. The motivation behind this approach is the modality of the 
relation between determinates and determinables; determinates supervene upon 
their determinables with logical or metaphysical necessity.19,20 The virtue of a rela-
tion holding with this modality is that the mental and the physical can ‘mutually 
participate’ as the cause, a feat they can pull off “since a determinate cannot pre-
empt its own determinable.” (Yablo 1992; 250) Consider what goes on when we 
press our brakes at a red light. The fact that the red is crimson does not exclude 
or pre-empt the redness. Likewise, when you turn on the light switch, the neuro-
physiological goings on do not pre-empt your desire to illuminate the room. Both 
the mental and the physical have a role to play in bringing about behavior.
While this approach has great appeal, it faces possible counterexamples. Con-
sider the even more general determinable of being colored. Among its determi-
nates are red, yellow, and green. The determinable is certainly present when any 
one of these determinates is present, but in the case of traffic lights, each of the 
determinates has a different effect: the red causes cars to stop, while the green 
causes cars to go. With such varying outcomes, the presence of the more general 
determinable, being colored, is irrelevant. This means that an account of mental 
properties modeled after determinables will not, without further qualification, be 
saved from causal exclusion.21
Another property dependence approach to the problem of exclusion exploits 
the nature of realization. Shoemaker (2001) construes the functionalist notion of 
realization in a way that is meant to get around the counterexample affecting 
Yablo’s determinable/determinate approach. On Shoemaker’s view, both real-
ized and realizing properties have “causal powers,” sets of actual and possible 
causes and effects that a property’s instantiation can have. The causal powers of 

J u l i e  Y o o
188
the realized (mental) property are said to form a subset of the causal powers of 
the realizing (physical) property. The benefit of this view is that a subset of causal 
powers cannot be trumped or overridden by its superset, as the subset is just a 
part of the superset. (An earlier, but less developed, strategy along these lines was 
suggested by Kim 1993.) Thus, if a 10-pound brick crushes a statue, then the part 
of the brick that weighs 8 pounds will certainly be involved in the effect, and not 
excluded by the 10-pound brick it partly constitutes. Likewise, the causal powers 
of your desire to see better, which form a subset of the the causal powers of the 
concurrent neurophysiological goings on, are a part of getting your body to turn 
on the light switch. If the causal powers of your desire form a subset of the causal 
powers of your body, surely your body will not exclude the causal role of your 
mental states since the causal powers of the mental state partly constitute the total 
causal powers of the body. Shoemaker’s strategy has enormous intuitive appeal, 
but, as with Yablo’s approach, it also faces potential counterexamples. Gillett and 
Rives (2005) argue that the subset/superset distinction regarding causal powers 
does nothing to help the realized mental property play a genuine causal role.
4.3  The externalism problem
4.3.1  A formulation of the externalism problem
We now come to the last of the many contemporary problems of mental causa-
tion.22 The problem applies to mental states having representational or proposi-
tional contents – intentional states. According to externalism, we must take into 
consideration facts physically external to a person’s body when individuating con-
tentful mental states. These may include facts about one’s physical environment, 
as well as facts about the linguistic norms of one’s speech community (Putnam 
1975; Burge 1979; Kripke 1980). Suppose someone used the term ‘motorcycle’ to 
refer to cars. Pointing to her four-door sedan, she says “I need to get gas for my 
motorcycle.” Given how ‘motorcycle’ and ‘car’ are used in our speech community, 
we would say that our driver is mistaken in her application of ‘motorcycle’. Now 
suppose that there is a different community, one that uses ‘motorcycle’ to refer to 
cars and motorcycles. Had our driver grown up in that community, she would be 
perfectly correct in her use of ‘motorcycle’ when referring to her four-door sedan.
Our assessment of which predicate application is correct or incorrect can be 
carried over to beliefs (Fodor 1987; McGinn 1989). If we place the driver in our 
speech community, she would be accused of holding false beliefs about cars, but 
that very same driver placed in the alternative community would be credited with 
holding true beliefs about cars. Beliefs with different truth conditions cannot be 
the same belief. This means that our driver has different beliefs depending on 
which speech community we place her in, even though we keep all her intrinsic 
physical properties properties the same. That is, externally individuated properties 
fail to supervene upon an individual’s intrinsic (the brain). But then it looks like 
contents make no causal difference to what the person does.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
189
The problem for mental causation generated by externalism is that causation, 
intuitively understood, involves only the intrinsic properties of objects and events. 
Externalist ways of individuating mental properties, however, render them extrin-
sic to a person’s body. Consequently, they appear causally irrelevant to proxi-
mal effects. To appreciate this, consider the causal irrelevance of the property of 
being a genuine dollar bill. If you put a convincing counterfeit dollar into a soda 
machine, the power of that bill to get the machine to dispense a soda comes only 
from its intrinsic properties – its size, shape, and design. The fact that the bill is 
counterfeit (or genuine), an historical and hence extrinsic property of the bill, 
makes no difference to the causal workings of the machine. Under externalism, 
our bodies are like the soda machine and our thoughts are like the real or counter-
feit dollar. Our bodies respond only to what is proximally going in or around it, 
not to the contents of our beliefs.
4.3.2  Solutions to the externalism problem
Solutions to the argument from externalism pursue one of two strategies. One 
is to deny the thesis of externalism for mental content (see Fodor 1980). The 
other is to deny that only intrinsic features can be causally relevant to proximal 
causal mechanisms (see Burge 1993). Let us begin with the denial of externalism. 
The strategy here is to appeal to narrow content. Narrow content is the content 
that intrinsic twins have in common; narrow content, by stipulation, supervenes 
upon the intrinsic properties of an individual (Fodor 1991). Think about the purely 
intrinsic features of the dollar bill – features that would be equally shared by a 
genuine bill and a counterfeit. The intrinsic features are their narrow properties. 
They supervene upon the internal properties of individuals and are thus shared by 
their physical duplicates. Narrow content is the content one entertains under the 
Cartesian account of mental representation: as you entertain a thought of water, 
the content of that thought never ‘reaches out’ beyond your head. Intentional 
properties, then, individuated narrowly, will be just as suited to causing behavior 
as any other internal properties of a person.
The appeal to narrow content certainly gets around the problem of causal irrel-
evance that faces externally individuated content, but the notion of narrow content 
is highly contentious. Some have even argued that the notion is incoherent (see 
Adams et al. 2007). Consider again the counterfeit dollar. Surely we do not value 
it just because it shares the same intrinsic features as the genuine article. Whether 
a piece of currency or a work of art is genuine or a fake matters to us. The signifi-
cance of Putnam’s and Burge’s insights into the individuation of general terms lies 
in their observation about our ordinary attributive practices; they conform to the 
externalist model, not the internalist one.
The alternative solution is that there can be ‘broad causation’ (see Burge 1993; 
Yablo 1997). This view requires a little stage setting. On this approach, there is the 
causation of bodily motion by neural properties, on the one hand, and then there is 
the causation of intentionally characterized action by broadly individuated mental 

J u l i e  Y o o
190
content. Take, for instance, one’s waving to a friend: by doing this, one performs 
the action of greeting a friend, but one also engages in a purely bodily process that 
engages one’s bones and muscles. On this solution to the problem of externalism, 
we have two causal processes – one that pertains to the proximal visual stimuli 
that result in the bodily movement – this would be ‘narrow causation’ – and a dif-
ferent one that pertains to the appearance of the friend, resulting in the action of 
greeting – this would be ‘broad causation.’ The friend one has in mind, of course, 
is the individual with whom one has had actual causal contact, not some physi-
cally similar but distinct individual. To the extent that one has in mind the friend 
and not the look-alike, one’s thought has broad content, which, on this approach, 
causally results in the action.
The very concept of wide causation, however, goes against our ordinary intui-
tions about what causation involves. According to our ordinary intuitions, we 
assume that causes and their effects must be in spatial contact with each other 
or mediated by things that spatially link them together – that there is no action 
at a distance. But wide causation asks us to believe exactly this – that things are 
caused by situations that have no physical contact with them. It would make no 
difference, it seems, that it was the friend and not the doppelganger that motivated 
one to wave. For this reason, wide causation is not an easy solution to accept (but 
see Yablo 1997 for a defense).
Conclusion
As we can see, most of the action on the mental causation debates in the 20th cen-
tury takes place post 1970, starting with the numerous criticisms of Davidson’s 
influential account of mental causation in his groundbreaking “Mental Events” 
(1970). Thanks to the momentum generated by that paper, late 20th-century work 
on the metaphysics of mental causation has made great progress towards clari-
fying the desiderata for an adequate solution. The first desideratum is crediting 
a clear causal role to the mental qua types, not just to particulars falling under 
mental types. The second is identifying the scope of one’s solution since there are 
several non-overlapping problems of mental causation. And the third is specify-
ing whether one’s solution pertains to phenomenal properties or representational 
properties, since they face different causal problems.
These achievements, of course, would not have been possible were it not for the 
work done in the early and mid 20th century. Indeed, current innovative approaches 
to the mind owe their inspiration to positions proposed during these periods. This 
is certainly the case for epiphenomenalism, (Walter et al. 2006), emergentism 
(Bedau and Humphries 2008; Macdonald and Macdonald 2010; Gillett 2016), and 
panpsychism, (Nagisawa and Alter 2015). Anti-causalism about reasons as well 
has found new proponents (Hutto 1999; Tanney 2008). The sophistication and 
richness of the 21st-century debates on mental causation have their roots firmly 
planted in the impressive work accomplished in the 20th century.

191
The three main dualist accounts of mental causation are interactionism, paral-
lelism, and epiphenomenalism. The thick horizontal line represents the division 
between the mental (above the line) and the physical (below the line); the arrows 
represent a cause leading to an effect.
Interactionism
Mental events directly cause physical events, and vice versa. Specifically, certain 
physical events would not occur without the intervention of mental events.
APPENDIX: DUALIST ACCOUNTS 
OF MENTAL CAUSATION
DESIRE TO SEE BETTER 
PERCEIVE BRIGHT LIGHT
NEURAL CORRELATE OF
HAND TURNS ON LIGHT SWITCH 
DESIRE TO SEE BETTER
Figure 7.1  Interactionist Causation
This is Descartes’ account of how the mind and the body causally interact with 
each other: there is direct causation from the mental to the physical and from the 
physical to the mental. The most common objections to interactionism are the prob-
lem of spatiality, the problem of energy conservation, and the ‘pairing problem.’
According to the problem of spatiality (Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia 1618–
1680), all effects need to be in spatial contact with the things that cause the move-
ments. If the mind has no spatial location, it is hard to understand how it can make 
our bodies move. (Descartes’ reply that the interaction takes place in the pineal 
gland does not address the concern. Surely locating where the mystery takes place 
does not solve the mystery.) According to the problem of conservation, the total 
energy of the physical system must be uniform at all times. A mental cause, under a 

J u l i e  Y o o
192
dualist account, would be an outside causal influence upon the brain when the brain 
is instructed to do the mind’s bidding. Any outside causal influence would create 
an energy surplus in the physical system, violating conservation. There is, finally, 
the ‘pairing problem’ (Kim 2005), nicely presented by Durant Drake when he asks:
How does the soul know just where to strike in the brain to produce the 
brain-events which are the necessary antecedents to the activity of the 
organism? We should not know where to stimulate the brain, or what sort 
of motions must be produced there. – It is difficult enough to imagine 
how an immaterial desire or volition could start or steer a brain-process, 
but the difficulty of imagining how the spaceless desire or volitions 
knows just which atoms or electrons to move . . . is greater still.
(1923, 225, Drake’s emphasis)
To locate, hit, and maneuver a physical target, there must be a physical means of 
managing this feat. A non-physical entity cannot pull off this feat without presup-
posing a physical means of solving the problem.
Parallelism
There is complete causal segregation when it comes to causation in and by the mind 
and causation in and by the body. Mental events cause and are caused by only other 
mental events; physical events cause and are caused by only other physical events.
DESIRE TO SEE BETTER 
PERCEIVE BRIGHT LIGHT
NEURAL CORRELATE OF
HAND TURNS ON LIGHT SWITCH 
DESIRE TO SEE BETTER
Figure 7.2  Parallelist Causation
Parallelism circumvents some of the problems that trouble interactionism. It cer-
tainly would not face the problem of conservation, since the mental and physical 
realms are never allowed to interact. It also does not face the problem of spatial 
interaction, since, again, the two realms are causally segregated. However, it does 
face a version of the pairing problem with a vengeance, which is a part of the 
larger problem of mind-body coordination: what allows a mental event to line 
up with its appropriate physical correlate? In other words, if you want to greet a 
friend, how do you end up with a waving arm rather than a hop, skip, and a jump? 
Why do you perceive an increase in ambient light when the light goes on and not, 
say, taste pineapple? For two systems that are supposed to have no causal contact 
with each other, our minds and bodies are remarkably well coordinated.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
193
There are two different accounts of how the coordination is achieved: Gottfried 
Leibniz’s (1646–1716) pre-established harmony and Nicolas Malebranche’s 
(1638–1715) occasionalism. Both accounts appeal to a deus ex machina to 
explain the coordination. According to Leibniz’s pre-established harmony, when 
God chose to create our world as the best of all possible worlds, that world was 
one where every mental event was (non-causally) paired with its appropriate bod-
ily event. The pairing is so precise that the mind and the body are like two separate 
clocks wound up in advance to chime at precisely the same time. On this view, 
God is fairly ‘hands-off’ when it comes to coordinating an individual’s mind with 
her body, having done all the work ahead of them when choosing our world’s 
blueprint. Not so on Malebranche’s account. According to Malebranche, coordi-
nation is achieved by God on an event by event basis; whenever someone wants 
to greet a friend, God is right there to make her arm wave. God, in his omnisci-
ence and omnipresence, is always ready to bring about an appropriate behavior 
for a given thought. To modern ears, these solutions to the coordination problem 
probably sound ad hoc. Of course, Leibniz and Malenbranche do not appeal to 
God out of desperation or lazy convenience; previous commitments to constraints 
on causation and a metaphysics that includes God’s existence motivate their solu-
tions. But in the absence of these commitments, the coordination problem goes 
unsolved, making parallelism implausible.
Epiphenomenalism
This is a view developed by Thomas Huxley (1825–1895) and Santayana (1863–
1952). On this view, mental events are caused by physical events but mental 
events themselves never cause anything (not even other mental events). Durant 
Drake (1923) illustrates epiphenomenalism with the idea of a cinematic projec-
tion of two people fighting. As far as what is happening on the screen, no one 
is actually hitting anyone. At most, the light emanating from the screen has the 
power to produce flickering images. The figures on the screen have no causal 
powers to strike a blow. Analogously, whatever mental states appear to be caused 
by these images – fear, excitement, expectation – are byproducts of the neural 
states of the viewer. These mental byproducts, just like the image of the fighter’s 
formidable right hook, have no effects.
DESIRE TO SEE BETTER 
PERCEIVE BRIGHT LIGHT
NEURAL CORRELATE OF
HAND TURNS ON LIGHT SWITCH 
DESIRE TO SEE BETTER
Figure 7.3  Epiphenomenal Causation

J u l i e  Y o o
194
Epiphenomenalism does not face the problem of causal coordination, the main 
sticking point for parallelism. It also does not face the interactionist problems of 
spatial location, the pairing problem, or the problem of conservation, since no new 
energy is ever introduced, thanks to a causally impotent mind. However, epiphe-
nomenalism flies in the face of intuition – that what we think makes a causal dif-
ference to how we act. Everything being equal, when you feel hungry, you go to 
the refrigerator, not the garage; when you want to stay dry in the rain, you use an 
umbrella, not a strainer. Without further qualification to the nature of the relation 
between the mental and the physical, epiphenomenalism is consistent with the 
view where the body is doing exactly what it would be doing with the appropriate 
mental states, except that the mental states are completely absent, or worse, totally 
antithetical to the mental states that make sense of the body’s behavior. If an 
important constraint on philosophical theories is that they stay close to ordinary 
appearances, epiphenomenalism strays from it quite a bit.
Notes
	 1	 See the entry by Amy Kind in this volume on the mind-body problem for a discussion 
of the synchronic problem. As will become apparent, one’s position on reduction, the 
synchronic problem, significantly constrains one’s account of mental causation, the 
diachronic problem.
	 2	 Actually, the problem is ancient. See Caston (1997) for discussion.
	 3	 This was a period when the foundations for modern psychology were being estab-
lished. Physiologists such as Paul Broca, David Ferrier, and Charles Sherrington were 
mapping the neural correlates of mental functions. Wilhelm Wundt was creating the 
very discipline of experimental cognitive psychology in his Principles of Physiologi-
cal Psychology (1904). William James was proposing methods of gathering introspec-
tive data in his two-volume Principles of Psychology (1890). And John Watson was 
founding the principles of behaviorism in his Behavior: An Introduction to Compara-
tive Psychology (1914). All of this was going on during an immensely fertile time for 
biology, chemistry, physics, medicine, engineering, and industry.
	 4	 See Nagasawa & Alter (2015) for contemporary approaches to panpsychism.
	 5	 Epiphenomenalism can be construed in partially emergentist terms. The epiphenome-
nal would certainly have no downward causal powers; but nor would they be (“bottom-
up”) caused to come into being by the lower-level phenomena. Rather, they would be 
emergent. This reading is closer to the kind of epiphenomenalism George Santayana 
proposed (1949). His epiphenomenalism does not involve one-way causation.
	 6	 U. T. Place (1956) and J.J.C. Smart (1959) are notable exceptions, who proposed the 
full reduction of mental properties and processes to the physical. One should note that 
the concerns of Place and Smart lay primarily with phenomenal properties, not with 
intentional ones, which make up the focus of the anti-causalists.
	 7	 Many others agreed with Ryle and Anscombe about this: Flew (1949), Hamlyn (1953), 
Foot (1957), Winch (1958), and Hart & Honoré (1959).
	 8	 ‘Psychophysical law’ covers both causal laws relating mental events with behavior (e.g. 
“pains cause clutching the wounded area”) as well as non-causal intertheoretic laws that 
tie types of mental state with their underlying neurophysiological correlates (e.g. “pain 
is c-fiber stimulation”). Davidson denies the existence of both kinds of connections.
	 9	 There are two things to keep track of here. One is the nomological requisite for cau-
sation. The other is the strictness requirement for these laws. Both are controversial. 

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
195
There are singularist accounts of causation that reject nomological requisite for causa-
tion, defended by Anscombe (1959), Hart and Honoré (1959), and more recently, de 
Pinedo (2006), who all deny that laws are necessary for events to enter into causal 
relations. And there are those like Fodor (1980; 1991) and Schiffer (1991) who endorse 
the nomological requisite for causation, but deny the strictness requirement. Davidson 
concedes that among the basic laws of physics may be probabilistic laws. But whether 
a law is determinist or probabilistic is orthogonal to the issue of strictness, which is 
about the universality of the conditions under which the laws hold. Probabilistic laws 
would be strict in this sense.
	10	 Hornsby (1981) and Child (1993) have questioned the soundness of Davidson’s argu-
ment for token identity.
	11	 This has nothing to do with realism regarding properties or universals. The point is that 
causal relevance must be accorded to the mental qua types, not just mental particulars 
qua particulars. Realists and nominalists alike share the same burden regarding this 
desideratum for an account of mental causation.
	12	 The problem of type epiphenomenalism is not surprising for a coarse-grained account 
like Davidson’s. On his view, events are individuated in terms of their causes and 
effects. Entities individuated in this way can cover large spatio-temporal chunks hav-
ing many properties, only some of which may be causally relevant. But the problem 
of epiphenomenalism does not get fixed with a more fine-grained theory of events. On 
Kim’s fine-grained account (1973 and 1976), an event is an ordered triple, <object, 
property, time>, where an event is the exemplification of a constitutive property by a 
constitute object at a time. On this approach, an event e1 is the same event as e2 just in 
case they consist of the same constitutive object, property, and time. Since a physical 
property and a mental property are arguably distinct properties and thus distinct consti-
tutive properties, mental events would not be token identifiable with physical events. 
In that case, Kim’s theory of events would face the problem of token epiphenomenal-
ism for the class of mental events.
	13	 Malcolm used this reasoning as a reductio against mechanism, arguing that its very 
utterance was itself an intentional act, and thus a testament to its falsity in spite of our 
rhetorical assertion of its truth.
	14	 The causal completeness principle is one of two central theses of the doctrine of physi-
calism. The other thesis is that to create the world and the conscious individuals who 
live therein, all you need are only micro-physical physical ingredients – physical parti-
cles, properties, and laws. The doctrine of physicalism is thus best understood as a two-
part thesis, a diachronic thesis about the causal completeness of the physical domain, 
and a synchronic thesis regarding the fundamentality of physical properties in fixing 
all the other properties. There are, undoubtedly, thorny issues about how ‘physical’ 
should be defined. Known as ‘Hempel’s dilemma,’ after Carl Hempel (1969), ‘physi-
cal’ can’t be defined in reference to current physics since it is probably wrong or at best 
incomplete, but it also can’t be defined in reference to some open-ended future physics 
since that would make the thesis vacuous. What we mean by ‘physical’ in physical-
ism is probably best captured by Barbara Montero (2009), who says that the usage of 
self-declared physicalists reflects a commitment to a fundamental ontology includ-
ing anything non-mental. So were it discovered by future physicists that, say, there is 
mind-dust at the fundamental level, these self-declared physicalists would proclaim 
that they wrong all along about the natural world.
	15	 We need not be talking about irreducibility in a robust sense, as in property dualism, 
where mental properties are only nomologically and thus metaphysically contingently 
associated with physical properties. The multiple realizability of mental properties 
supports irreducibility in only the minimal sense denying the identification of mental 
types with physical types.

J u l i e  Y o o
196
	16	 Please see the Amy Kind’s entry on the mind-body problem in this volume for a discus-
sion of the considerations that led away from the identity theory.
	17	 Tropes and properties differ in that while a property is repeatable, a trope is not. A real-
ist about properties would say the distance in a marathon is a single property, being 
26.2 miles, that is “fully present” in every marathon. A trope theorist, on the other 
hand, would say that a distinct 26.2-mile trope is instantiated for every marathon that 
takes place.
	18	 See also Schneider (2012) who argues that a psychophysical trope identity theorist 
cannot also maintain her commitment to non-reductive physicalism. This is because 
the non-reductive aspect of the thesis requires the non-identity of the mental and the 
physical qua types. But when one helps oneself to psychophysical trope identities, then 
the class of mental tropes that make up the mental type will just consist of physical 
tropes only and this is reductionism, plain and simple. Mental properties do no work 
qua types under psychophysical trope identity. If this is right, then the appeal to mental 
tropes to save mental causation is a non-starter.
	19	 Borrowing from Kripke’s defense of necessary a posteriori identities (1980), Yablo 
suggests that we treat determinates and their determinables as necessary a posteriori 
one-way conditionals.
	20	 The difference between supervening with logical or metaphysical necessity, on the one 
hand, and supervening with physical or nomological necessity, on the other, comes 
down to whether subvenient duplicates are always or only sometimes accompanied by 
the supervening properties. Under logical or metaphysical necessity, base duplicates 
exactly match their supervening properties as a matter of logical necessity; we can 
no more have base duplicates with differing supervening properties than we can have 
non-H2O water. Under physical or nomological necessity, base duplicates match their 
supervening properties only as a matter of contingent laws of nature. In short, proper-
ties tied together by physical supervenience can be fully prised apart; properties tied 
together by logical supervenience cannot.
	21	 Yablo is fully aware of this problem in his (1992) and offers an account in terms of 
“causal proportionality” to solve it. For criticisms, see Crane (2008), Dowe (2010).
	22	 Well, maybe not the last problem. Under a functionalist approach, mental properties 
are defined in terms of other mental properties and behaviors. This approach, in effect, 
forges logical connections between mental states and behaviors, violating Hume’s con-
dition that causes and effects must be logically contingent. Rupert (2006) has offered 
some suggestions for responding to this problem.
Bibliography
Adams, F., Drebushenko, D., Fuller, G., and Stecker, R. (2007). “Narrow Content: Fodor’s 
Folly,” Mind and Language, 5(3): 213–219.
Alexander, S. (1920). Space, Time, and Deity, Volumes 1 and II. London: Macmillan.
Anscombe, E. (1957). Intention. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Antony, L. (1995). “I’m a Mother, I Worry,” Philosophical Issues, 6: 160–166.
Bedau, M., and Humphries, P. (2008). Emergence: Contemporary Readings in Philosophy 
and Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Braun, D. (1995). “Causally Relevant Properties”, Philosophical Perspectives, 9: 447–475.
Broad, C. (1925). The Mind and Its Place in Nature. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Burge, T. (1979). “Individualism and the Mental,” in French, Uehling and Wettstein (eds.), 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, IV, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press: 73–121.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
197
Burge, T. (1993). “Mind-Body Causation and Explanatory Practice,” in Heil and Mele 
(eds.), Mental Causation, Oxford: Clarendon Press: 97–120.
Caston, V. (1997). “Epiphenomenalisms, Ancient and Modern,” in The Philosophical 
Review, 106(3): 309–363.
Child, W. (1993). “Anomalism, Uncodifiability, and Psychophysical Relations,” Philo-
sophical Review, 215–245.
Cohen, M. F. (1964). “Motives, Causal Necessity, and Moral Accountability,” Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy, 42.
Crane, T. (2008). “Causation and Determinable Properties: On the Efficacy of Color, 
Shape, and Size,” in Hohwy, J. and Kallestrup J. (eds.), Being Reduced: New Essays on 
Reduction, Explanation, and Causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, D. (1963). “Actions, Reasons and Causes,” Journal of Philosophy, 60: 685–700.
Davidson, D. (1967). “Causal Relations,” Journal of Philosophy, 64: 691–703.
Davidson, D. (1970). ‘Mental Events,” in Foster, L. and Swanson, J. (eds.), Experience and 
Theory. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Davidson, D. (1993). “Thinking Causes,” in Heil, J. and Mele, A. (eds.), Mental Causation. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
de Pinedo, M. (2006). “Anomalous Monism: Oscillating Between Dogmas,” Synthese, 
148: 79–97.
Dowe, P. (2010). “Proportionality and Omissions,” Analysis, 3: 446–451.
Drake, D. (1923). “The Mind-Body Impasse,” The Philosophical Review, 32(2): 225.
Dretske, F. (1988). Explaining Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flew, A. (1949). “Psycho-Analytic Explanations,” Analysis, 10:11.
Fodor, J. (1980). “Special Science,” in Representations: Philosophical Essays on the Foun-
dations of Cognitive Science, by Fodor, J. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1989). “Making Mind Matter More,” Philosophical Topics, 17: 59–79.
Fodor, J. (1991). “You Can Fool Some of the People All the Rime, Everything Else Being 
Equal: Hedged Laws and Psychological Explanations,” Mind, 100: 19–33.
Foot, P. (1957). “Free Will as Involving Determinism,” Philosophical Review, 66.
Gillett, C. (2016). Reduction and Emergence in Science and Philosophy. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Gillett, C., and Rives, B. (2005). “The Non-existence of Determinables: Or, A World of 
Absolute Determinates as Default Hypothesis,” Nous, 39: 483–504.
Hamlyn, D. (1953). “Behavior,” Philosophy, 28.
Hart, H.L.A., and Honoré, A. M. (1959). Causation in the Law. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Hempel, C. (1962). “Rational Action,” Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philo-
sophical Association, 35.
Hempel, C. (1969). “Reduction: Ontological and Linguistic Facets,” in Morgenbesser, S. 
et al. (eds.), Essays in Honor of Ernest Nagel. New York: St Martin’s Press.
Hornsby, J. (1981). “Which Physical Events Are Mental Events?” Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society, 81.
Hutto, D. (1999). “Cause for Concern: Reasons, Causes and Explanations,” Philosophy 
and Phenomenal Review, 59(2): 381–401.
Huxley, T. (1874). “On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata and its History,” The 
Fortnightly Review, 16(New Series): 555–580.

J u l i e  Y o o
198
Jackson, F., and Pettit, P. (1990). “Program Explanation: A General Perspective,” Analysis, 
50 (2): 107–117.
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology, Volumes 1 and II. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
James, W. (1907). Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
James, W. (1909). A Pluralistic Universe. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kim, J. (1973). “Causation, Nomic Subsumption, and the Concept of an Event,” Journal 
of Philosophy, 70: 217–236.
Kim, J. (1976). “Events as Property Exemplifications,” in Brandt, M. and Walton, D. (eds.), 
Action Theory, Dortrecht: D. Reidel.
Kim, J. (1984). “Epiphenomenal and Supervenient Causation,” Midwest Studies in Phi-
losophy, 4: 31–49.
Kim, J. (1989). “Mechanism, Purpose, and Explanatory Exclusion,” Philosophical Per-
spectives, 3: 77–108.
Kim, J. (1993). “The Non-Reductivist’s Troubles with Mental Causation”, in Heil, J. and 
Mele, A. (eds.), Mental Causation. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a Physical World. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kim, J. (2005). Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Kim, J., and Brandt, R. (1963). “Wants as Explanations of Actions,” Journal of Philosophy, 60.
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lewis, D. (1966). “An Argument for the Identity Theory,” Journal of Philosophy, 63: 17–25.
Lewis, D. (1972). “Psychophysical and Theoretical Identifications,” Australasian Journal 
of Philosophy, 50: 249–258.
Lewis, D. (1983). “ ‘Mad Pain and Martian Pain’ and ‘Postscript,’ ” in Lewis, D. (ed.), 
Philosophical Papers, Volume 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Loewer, B., and LePore, E. (1987). “Mind Matters,” Journal of Philosophy, 84: 630–642.
Lovejoy, A. (1926). “The Meanings of ‘Emergence’ and Its Modes,” Proceedings of the 
Sixth International Congress of Philosophy. London: Longmans, Green, & Co: 20–33.
Lowe, E. (2006). “Non-Cartesian Substance Dualism and the Problem of Mental Causa-
tion,” Erkenntnis, 65(5): 5–23.
Macdonald, C., and Macdonald, G. (1986). “Mental Cause and Explanation of Action,” 
Philosophical Quarterly, 36: 145–158.
Macdonald, C., and Macdonald, G. (2010). Emergence in Mind. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
McDowell, J. (1984). “Functionalism and Anomalous Monism,” in LePore, E. and 
McLaughlin, B. (eds.), Actions and Events: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald 
Davidson. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
McGinn, C. (1989). Mental Content, Oxford: Blackwell.
McLaughlin, B. (1989). “Type Epiphenomenalism, Type Dualism, and the Causal Priority 
of the Physical,” Philosophical Perspectives, 3: 109–135.
McLaughlin, B. (1993). “On Davidson’s Repose to the Charge of Epiphenomenalism,” in 
Heil, J. and Mele, A. (eds.), Mental Causation. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Malcolm, N. (1968). “The Conceivability of Mechanism,” Philosophical Review, 77: 45–72.
Melden, A. (1961). Free Action. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Montero, B. “What Is the Physical,” in McLaughlin, B., Beckermann, A. and Walter, Sven 
(eds.), Oxford Handbook in the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

2 0 t h - c e n t u r y  m e n ta l  c a u s at i o n  d e b at e s
199
Morgan, C. (1923). Emergent Evolution. London: Williams and Norgate.
Nagasawa, Y., and Alter, T. (2015). Consciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives on 
Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nordhoff, P (1998). “Do Tropes Resolve the Problem of Mental Causation?” Pacific Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 48: 221–226.
Pereboom, D., and Kornblith, H. (1991). “The Metaphysics of Irreducibility,” Philosophi-
cal Studies, 64(2): 125–145.
Place, U. (1956). “Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” British Journal of Psychology, 47: 
44–50.
Putnam, H. (1975). “The Meaning of ‘Meaning,’ ” Philosophical Papers, Vol. II: Mind, 
Language, and Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Robb, D. (1997). “The Properties of Mental Causation,” Philosophical Quarterly, 47: 
178–194.
Rupert, R. (2006). “Functionaism, Mental Causaiton, and the Problem of Necessary 
Effects,” Nous (40)2: 256–283.
Russell, B. (1927). An Outline of Philosophy. London: Allen and Unwin.
Ryle, G. (1949). The Concept of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Santayana, G. (1942). New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Schiffer, S. (1991). “Ceteris Paribus Laws,” Mind, 100: 1–17.
Schneider, S. (2012). “Non-Reductive Physicalism Cannot Appeal to Token Identity,” 
Philosophical and Phenomenological Research, 85(3): 719–728.
Sellars, R. (1918). “An Approach to the Mind-Body Problem,” The Philosophical Review, 
27(2): 150–163.
Sellars, R. (1920). “Evolutionary Naturalism and the Mind-Body Problem,” The Monist, 
30(4): 568–598.
Sellars, R. (1922). “Is Consciousness Physical?” Journal of Philosophy, 19(25): 690–694.
Shoemaker, S. (1981). “Some varieties of functionalism Philosophical Topics, 12(1): 
93–119.
Shoemaker, S. (2001). “Realization and Mental Causation,” in Gillett, C. and Loewer, B. 
(eds.), Physicalism and Its Discontents. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smart, J. (1959). “Sensations and Brain Processes,” Philosophical Review, 68: 141–156.
Tanney, J. (2008). “Reasons as Non-Causal, Context-Placing Explanations” in Sandis, 
Constantine (ed.), New Essays on the Explanation of Action. Palgrave Macmillan.
Walter, S., Pauen, M., and Staudacher, A. (2006). “Epiphenomenalism: Dead End or Way 
Out?” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13(1–2): 7–19.
Watson, J. (1914). Behavior: An Introduction to Comparative Psychology. Henry Holt & 
Co.
Winch, P. (1958). The Idea of a Social Science. London: Routledge &Kegan Paul.
Wundt, W. (1904). Principles of Physiological Psychology. Trans. E. B. Titchener. New 
York: Macmillan.
von Wright, G. (1971). Explanation and Understanding. London: Routledge  & Kegan 
Paul.
Whitehead, A. (1929). Process and Reality. New York: Macmillan.
Yablo, S. (1992). “Mental Causation,” The Philosophical Review, 101: 245–280.
Yablo, S. (1997). “Wide Causation,” Philosophical Perspectives, 11: 251–281.

200
1.  Introduction
In this chapter, I want to say something about the role played by Franz Brentano 
(1838–1917) in bringing the topic of intentionality to the forefront of philosophi-
cal attention in the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. The time period this 
chapter covers is substantial, and I will only be able to discuss a limited number 
of issues and philosophers. I will only gesture at Brentano’s influence on the con-
tinental tradition, although one of the most remarkable features of his philosophy 
is precisely the extent of its influence on both the continental and analytic philo-
sophical traditions.1 I will focus on three works: the first edition of Psychology 
From an Empirical Standpoint, published in 1874 (‘Psychology’); the Appendix 
of supplementary remarks that accompanied the republication of Book Two of 
Psychology in 1911 (‘the Appendix’); and certain essays from his Nachlass pub-
lished in 1924. These works are collected in an English translation published in 
1973 and 1995 with the title Psychology From an Empirical Standpoint.2
Brentano’s theory of mind is wide reaching and complex. It covers such topics 
as the unity of consciousness, the fundamental classification of mental phenom-
ena, and the role of emotions in our knowledge of value – in addition to offering 
theories of intentionality and consciousness. Here I will focus on only two of 
Brentano’s central claims, and I will state them using the term ‘intentionality’, 
although Brentano never used this noun himself.
[1]	 Intentionality is the mark of the mental; all and only mental phenomena are 
intentional.3
[2]	 Consciousness and intentionality are constitutively related, and cannot be 
treated in isolation from one another.
[1] is undoubtedly what Brentano is best known for in present-day analytic philos-
ophy. In his Psychology he characterized mental phenomena in terms of ‘object-
directedness’, and it is this that we have come to call ‘intentionality’. But we need 
8
INTENTIONALITY
From Brentano to representationalism
Michelle Montague

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
201
to consider what motivated this particular characterization in some detail if we are 
to achieve an adequate understanding of what Brentano meant by [1].
Many analytic philosophers who accept the characterization of intentionality in 
terms of ‘object-directedness’ immediately go on to raise as a problem – ‘the prob-
lem of intentionality’ – the fact that we are apparently able to think about non-exist-
ent objects. The problem, briefly, is that if we take intentionality to be a relational 
phenomenon, and accept that relations can only hold between existent things, then 
we cannot give any account of how we can be intentionally related to non-existent 
things when we think – as we apparently do – about non-existent things.
I think that Brentano was not particularly concerned with this issue in the 1874 
Psychology. It is only in the 1911 Appendix that he addresses it directly, and his 
awareness of it seems to be partly the result of the work of two of his students, 
Kasimir Twardowski (1866–1938) and Alexius Meinong (1853–1920). Twar-
dowski showed that Brentano’s theory could escape certain seemingly implau-
sible consequences by means of the introduction of a distinction between the 
content and the object of mental phenomena. Meinong accepted some of Bren-
tano’s central psychological insights and extended them in one seemingly natural 
ontological direction. Brentano then attempted to acknowledge and address these 
developments in his Appendix by offering a characterization of intentionality that 
was different from the one he gave in 1874.
The focus on our apparent ability to think about non-existent objects was inten-
sified in the analytic tradition by the work of Roderick Chisholm (1916–1999). 
He characterized much of Brentano’s work on intentionality in terms of it. But 
although the idea that we can think about non-existent objects raises interesting 
questions, and may raise problems for a theory of intentionality, I think it is a 
mistake to approach Brentano’s original theory of mental phenomena from this 
direction. It misrepresents his position, and leads to further misapplications and 
distortions of his work.
I will focus on two such misrepresentations. The first is the idea that Brentano’s 
theory of intentionality has dualist metaphysical implications. The second is the idea 
that Brentano was wrong to think that all and only mental phenomena are inten-
tional, because intentionality can be found everywhere in the physical (non-mental) 
world. These may be interesting ideas in themselves, but to see them as directly tied 
to Brentano’s theory of intentionality is – I claim – to miss the central questions and 
methodology that drove some of Brentano’s most brilliant work in the Psychology.
[1] has been much discussed in analytic philosophy. Less attention has been 
paid to [2]. In fact, for most of the twentieth century (I will speak simply of 
‘the twentieth century’ although the particular position I have in mind is more 
accurately described as ‘the dominant position in analytic philosophy of mind in 
the later twentieth century’), it was orthodoxy in analytic philosophy of mind to 
suppose that consciousness or phenomenology and intentionality can exist in the 
complete absence of the other.4 The reasons for this are complex, and I will men-
tion only a few. First, twentieth-century theories of intentionality tended to focus 
on propositional attitudes, which are implicitly or sometimes explicitly assumed 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
202
to involve no phenomenology. Second, and connectedly, many theorists accepted 
the claim that there are unconscious mental states with unconscious mental  
content  – from which it immediately follows that there are intentional states 
that lack any phenomenology.5 I will argue that both of these motivations for 
separating consciousness and intentionality in this way are related to Chisholm’s 
characterization of intentionality. Brentano, by contrast, took consciousness or 
phenomenology to be a thoroughly intentional phenomenon, and argued directly 
against the reality of unconscious mental states. Indeed, Brentano’s theory of con-
sciousness was partly motivated by this rejection. There is, then, an important 
respect in which the twentieth-century view of consciousness and intentionality 
drifted far from Brentano’s original view.
In the last two decades of the twentieth century a theory, which its proponents 
chose to call ‘representationalism’, became prominent in analytic philosophy of 
mind. It appeared to accept versions of both [1] and [2].6 But the appearance of 
affinity is superficial. Brentano’s motivations for asserting [1] and [2] were very 
different from those of the representationalists. One of the central motivations for 
representationalism, which I will call the ‘transparency thesis’, is in direct conflict 
with Brentano’s theory of consciousness. And although both theories appeal to 
intentionality to account for consciousness, the role intentionality plays in each 
theory results in very different theories of consciousness.
The plan of the chapter is as follows. In section 2, I try to put Brentano’s theo-
ries of consciousness and intentionality in the context of his overall aims in 1874. 
I then briefly describe the shift in his views in the 1911 Appendix. In section 3, 
I introduce Twardowski and Meinong’s developments of Brentano’s theory. In 
section 4, I summarize Chisholm’s influential linguistic interpretation of Brenta-
no’s ‘marks of the mental’. In section 5, I discuss the relation between Brentano’s 
views and the representationalist position. I conclude with a few remarks about 
some recent theories of consciousness and intentionality that do much better than 
representationalism in capturing some of the spirit of Brentano’s philosophy.
2.  Brentano from 1874 to 1911
One of Brentano’s main goals in his 1874 masterpiece was to demarcate the field 
of psychology in a way that showed it to be a distinctive and unified discipline. 
He had two central motivations. First, he believed that psychology contained 
the roots of aesthetics, logic, ethics and politics. Logic, he thought, was rooted 
in ‘immediately evident’ judgments, ethics was rooted in ‘immediately evident’ 
emotions, and these immediately evident judgments and emotions provided us 
with knowledge of the necessary truths that constitute the foundations of logic and 
ethics.7 Second, he believed that a unified discipline could be established only by 
dispelling the lack of clarity and disagreement among his contemporaries about 
psychology’s subject matter and method. Most of the Psychology is dedicated to 
this second undertaking.8

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
203
Defining the field of psychology, therefore, involved two essential tasks: articu-
lating its method and marking out its proprietary subject matter. What I hope to 
make clear in what follows is the central way in which the notions of intentional-
ity and consciousness featured in Brentano’s attempt to accomplish both tasks.
Brentano conceived of psychology as a ‘Cartesian science’ in the sense that it 
had an epistemologically certain foundation.9 With Descartes, Brentano argued 
that we can know truths about our mentality with certainty.10 His conception of 
psychology was at the same time fully empirical, not because it was based on 
experimentation that could be repeated and observed from the third-person stand-
point, but because its truths were based on experience itself. Psychology, in short, 
was a first-person empirical science that provided necessary truths about our men-
tal lives.
Mental phenomena were the proper subject matter of psychology, according 
to Brentano. The correct definition of the discipline is accordingly ‘the science 
of mental phenomena’. Brentano first argued that this definition was a suitable 
replacement for the ‘Aristotelian’ definition of psychology as ‘the science of the 
soul’. The new definition could avoid the controversial metaphysical assumption 
of the Aristotelian definition, i.e. that there are souls, while retaining the ability to 
address one of the main concerns of the Aristotelian definition, namely the ques-
tion of immortality.11 Secondly, and more arduously, Brentano aimed to give a 
detailed characterization of what he took mental phenomena to be. Reference to 
intentionality would be essential to this task.
All the sciences study phenomena, according to Brentano, where ‘phenomena’ 
is taken in its original meaning of ‘appearances’. Physics, chemistry, biology and 
psychology all study appearances, appearances understood as the ‘data of con-
sciousness’: what is given to consciousness, what shows up in consciousness. 
“All the data of our consciousness are divided into two great classes,” he says, 
“the class of physical and the class of mental phenomena” (59/77), and it is in 
terms of these two great classes that the subject matter of the natural sciences is 
distinguishable from the subject matter of psychology: the natural sciences study 
physical phenomena; psychology studies mental phenomena.
What are physical phenomena? What are mental phenomena? And given that 
both types of phenomena are appearances, what distinguishes them from each 
other? The first thing to do, perhaps, is to note the fundamental respect in which 
both physical phenomena and mental phenomena in Brentano’s sense are mental 
phenomena in our sense (i.e. our standard present-day sense), simply because 
they are appearances.
Brentano’s examples of physical phenomena are color, light, sound, spa-
tial location, and heat, and at first glance this list seems like a familiar starting 
point for characterizing physical objects and their properties. It seems to connect 
directly with our ordinary view of things, according to which there is a world of 
mind-independent physical objects that have various mind-independent physical 
qualities that are the proper object of study of the natural sciences.

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
204
In asserting that physical phenomena are mere appearances, however, Bren-
tano’s starting point is very different. On his terms, ‘physical phenomena’ are not 
part of any experience-transcending mind-independent reality, but only signs of 
something that is transcendent in this way. A physical phenomenon is an appear-
ance created by our causal relation to something independent of us. As such, phys-
ical phenomena cannot give us knowledge of how things ‘really and truly are’. He 
puts this point variously by saying that
The phenomena of light, sound, heat, spatial location and locomotion . . . 
are not things which really and truly exist. They are signs of something 
real, which, through its causal activity, produces presentations of them. 
They are not, however, an adequate representation of this reality, and 
they give us knowledge of it only in a very incomplete sense. We can say 
that there exists something which, under certain conditions, causes this 
or that sensation. We can probably also prove that there must be relations 
among these realities similar to those manifested by spatial phenomena, 
shapes and sizes. But this is as far as we can go. We have no experience 
of that which truly exists, in and of itself, and that which we do experi-
ence is not true. The truth of physical phenomena is, as they say, only a 
relative truth.
(14/19)
we have no right . . . to believe that the objects of so-called external per-
ception really exist as they appear to us. Indeed, they demonstrably do 
not exist outside of us. In contrast to that which really and truly exists, 
they are mere phenomena.
(7/10)
We have nevertheless seen how the expression “physical phenomena” is 
sometimes erroneously applied to . . . forces themselves.
(76/100)
So the subject matter of the natural sciences, according to Brentano, is physi-
cal phenomena, e.g. color, sound, warmth and odor, all of which are appearances. 
Natural sciences do not directly study ‘things in themselves’, even though some 
people mistakenly think they do.
So much for physical phenomena. What about mental phenomena?12 Brentano’s 
examples include hearing a sound, seeing a colored object, thinking a general con-
cept, loving a dog, and judging that grass is green. Since mental phenomena and 
physical phenomena are both phenomena, things ‘of the mind’ so to speak, to fully 
understand how psychology is distinguished from the natural sciences, Brentano 
now faces the third question listed above: what distinguishes mental phenomena 
from physical phenomena? To give a clear definition of the field of psychology 
is to answer this last question. Examples of physical and mental phenomena may 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
205
provide a sense of their difference, but Brentano wishes to find a more principled 
way of distinguishing them.
He considers four main possibilities. I’ll briefly introduce the alternatives he 
found inadequate before turning to his favored and most famous criterion.
1.	
Mental phenomena are either presentations or are “based upon” (61/82) pres-
entations; all other phenomena are physical phenomena.
By presentation, Brentano does not mean what is presented, but the act of presen-
tation. An act of presentation is required for anything to appear in consciousness. 
To be presented with something is precisely to have something appear to one in 
consciousness. “As we use the verb “to present”, “to be presented” means the 
same as “to appear”.” (62/81) “We speak of a presentation whenever something 
appears to us” (153/198).
One of Brentano’s main aims in the Psychology was to provide a fundamental 
classification of mental phenomena. To this end, he divided mental phenomena 
into three fundamental categories: presentation, judgment, and love/hate.13 But 
the three categories are not situated on the same level, for in order for anything to 
be judged or perceived (Brentano counts perceptions as judgments) or loved or 
hated, it must first appear in consciousness, and this requires an act of presenta-
tion. For example, a physical phenomenon, e.g. a color or a sound, is an appear-
ance in the sense that it is what can appear to consciousness, but a presentation is 
required in order for any physical phenomena to appear at all. Acts of presenta-
tion, therefore, form the foundation of every judgment and emotion.
This act of presentation forms the foundation not merely of the act of judging, 
but also of desiring and of every other mental act. Nothing can be judged, desired, 
hoped or feared, unless one has a presentation of that thing (61, 80).14
Brentano, then, endorses this way of distinguishing mental from physical phenomena.
But even after one has divided mental phenomena into two groups in this way, 
those which are presentations and those which are based on presentations, and has 
in this way distinguished them from all physical phenomena, which are neither 
presentations nor based on presentations, there is still a question about what fun-
damental feature it is that all appearances that are mental phenomena have in com-
mon, what fundamental feature it is that makes them mental and so distinguishes 
them from all appearances that are physical phenomena. A single diagnostic suf-
ficient and necessary condition of mental phenomena would be preferable.
2.	
Physical phenomena always appear with spatial location and extension, 
whereas mental phenomena always appear without extension and spatial 
location.15
Brentano puts this criterion aside for two reasons. First he notes that it is con-
tested from both directions. Some argue that sound and olfactory phenomena are 
examples of physical phenomena that appear to be non-spatial.16 Berkeley argues 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
206
that color is essentially non-spatial, and some of Brentano’s contemporaries, e.g. 
Herbart, Spencer and Lotze, argue that all physical phenomena are essentially 
non-spatial. In contrast, Aristotle argues that mental phenomena such as sense 
perceptions are spatially located in our sensory organs, while others claim that 
sensory appetites are localized. Although Brentano remarks that all of these criti-
cisms may be unjustified, his second reason for rejecting this criterion is that it 
only provides a negative characterization of mental phenomena. What is wanted 
is a unified and a positive characterization of mental phenomena.
3.	 Only mental phenomena are perceived in inner consciousness or inner per-
ception and thus are “those phenomena which alone can be perceived in the 
strict sense of the word” (70/92).
Brentano distinguishes inner perception from external perception. External per-
ception is always of physical phenomena in Brentano’s sense, such as color, sound 
and spatial location. Inner perception is always of mental phenomena. The Ger-
man word for perception, “Wahrnehmung”, literally means taking something to 
be true, and since the phenomena of external perception cannot be proved real or 
true, they cannot reveal the true nature of the external world, there is a sense in 
which external perception is not perception at all. So, for Brentano, the phrase 
“external perception” is arguably a misnomer. We do, however, perceive our own 
mental phenomena in this strict and literal sense. According to Brentano, inner 
perception is immediate and infallibly self-evident (70/91). We can know that 
mental phenomena are real and we can know their real nature through inner per-
ception: “The phenomena of inner perception . . . are true in themselves. As they 
appear to be, so they are in reality, a fact with is attested to by the evidence with 
which they are perceived” (15/19–20).
It is important to note that by “inner consciousness” and “inner perception”, 
Brentano does not mean what contemporary theorists typically call “introspec-
tion”, or what Brentano and his contemporaries also call “inner observation” 
(Beobachtung). Introspection or inner observation is one mental act taking a dis-
tinct mental act as an object or as the focus of attention. For Brentano, inner 
consciousness is a self-intimating phenomenon where a mental act takes itself as 
object, not as the focus of attention, but only ‘in passing’ or ‘by the way’ (neben-
bei), as Aristotle observed. One shouldn’t suppose that to say that a mental act 
takes itself as object only ‘in passing’ is to suggest that this taking itself as object 
is unimportant or inessential. For, in fact, its taking itself as object in this way is 
constitutive of its existence as a conscious mental phenomenon – essential to its 
existing at all as a conscious mental phenomenon.
The importance of inner perception cannot be underestimated in elucidating Bren-
tano’s conception of psychology. Not only is inner perception what makes a con-
scious mental state conscious at all, it is also our main source of evidence for making 
psychological distinctions. I’ll postpone a more thorough discussion of inner percep-
tion to section 5, where I consider Brentano’s theory of consciousness in more detail.

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
207
Although Brentano accepts this third criterion and doesn’t express any explicit 
dissatisfaction with it, he thinks there is a better way of capturing what is distinctive 
of mental phenomena, which brings us to what Brentano is most well known for.
4.	
All and only mental phenomena have intentionality. This is of course based 
on Brentano’s famous passage:
Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics of the 
Middle Ages called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object, 
and what we might call, though not wholly unambiguously, reference to 
a content, direction toward an object (which is not to be understood here 
as meaning a thing), or immanent objectivity. Every mental phenomenon 
includes something as object within itself, although they do not all do so in 
the same way. In presentation, something is presented, in judgment some-
thing is affirmed or denied, in love loved, in hate hated, in desire desired 
and so on. . . . This intentional in-existence is characteristic exclusively 
of mental phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it. 
We can, therefore, define mental phenomena by saying that they are those 
phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves.
(68/88–89)
Although this was Brentano’s favored way of distinguishing mental phenomena 
from physical phenomena – “Nothing distinguishes mental phenomena from 
physical phenomena more than the fact that something is immanent as an object 
in them” (152/197) – what it amounts to is ‘not wholly unambiguous’. For in this 
short passage, Brentano provides four ways of characterizing mental phenomena. 
Mental phenomena essentially involve:
•	
intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object;
•	
reference to a content;
•	
direction to an object (although ‘object’ is not to be understood here as mean-
ing a thing);17
	
and
•	
immanent objectivity.
Later in the same chapter, Brentano adds a fifth by characterizing mental phenom-
ena in terms of “the reference to something as an object” (74/97).
In the end, it is arguable that Brentano means the same thing by all of these 
expressions. In contemporary philosophy they are all replaced by the term ‘inten-
tionality’, and intentionality is then typically characterized in terms of ‘about-
ness’, ‘of-ness’ or ‘object directedness’.
The key to seeing the interchangeability of these expressions, perhaps, is to see 
the relationship between the phrases ‘direction to an object’ and the ‘intentional 
inexistence of an object’.18 There has been a great deal of debate about Brentano’s 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
208
use of the term ‘intentional inexistence’, but I think his meaning can be made 
sufficiently clear by considering his overall project. Many have argued that what 
Brentano meant by the intentional inexistence of an object was that all the objects 
of mental phenomena literally “exist in” or “dwell in” mental phenomena.19 Since 
all phenomena are by definition appearances, that is, ‘things of the mind’, and 
phenomena, whether physical or mental, are the objects of mental phenomena, 
all objects of mental phenomena are literally ‘in the mind’. Although I think this 
interpretation is correct, we can go further in understanding the term ‘intentional 
inexistence’ if we consider how Brentano contrasts it with ‘real existence’ as these 
phrases apply to mental and physical phenomena.
For Brentano, ‘intentional inexistence’ signals something about the nature of the 
objects towards which our mental phenomena are directed. Both mental phenom-
ena and physical phenomena can be the objects of mental phenomena. Physical 
phenomena, for example, are the objects of presentations of sounds, colors, spatial 
location, etc. Mental phenomena are the objects of inner perception, but also can 
be the objects of introspection. Insofar as anything is the object of a mental phe-
nomenon, it has intentional inexistence. So, ‘intentional inexistence’ is a perfectly 
general phrase, which applies to any possible object of a mental phenomenon. But 
only some objects of mental phenomena have ‘real existence’, and those are men-
tal phenomena only when they are objects of inner perception. That is, only some 
objects have real existence in addition to intentional inexistence. An object has 
‘real existence’ when it is presented to us as it is in itself. By this criterion, physical 
phenomena, e.g. sounds, colors, etc. do not have ‘real existence’, because they do 
not present us with a transcendent reality as it is in itself. Sound, for example, as an 
object of a mental act, does not reveal to us the true nature of a mind-independent 
quality in nature. Mental phenomena, when they are the objects of introspection, 
i.e. when one mental act is directed at a distinct mental act in a focused fashion, do 
not have ‘real existence’, for introspection does not reveal the true nature of mental 
phenomena. Only when mental phenomena are objects of inner perception is their 
true nature revealed to us, and so it is only in the case of inner perception that men-
tal phenomena have ‘real existence’, as well as intentional inexistence.
We said that mental phenomena are those phenomena which alone can 
be perceived in the strict sense of the word. We could just as well say 
that they are those phenomena which alone possess real existence as well 
as intentional existence. Knowledge, joy and desire really exist. Color, 
sound and warmth have only a phenomenal and intentional existence.
(70/92)
The phenomena of inner perception are a different matter. They are true 
in themselves. As they appear to be, so they are in reality, a fact which is 
attested to by the evidence with which they are perceived.
(15/19)

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
209
So, we can now see why intentionality, for Brentano, must be characterized in 
terms of ‘intentional inexistence’, because it is the term that applies to all possible 
objects of mental phenomena: The ‘intentional inexistence’ of an object is what is 
distinctive of all mental phenomena; only some of the objects of mental acts have 
‘real existence’.
This interpretation of Brentano’s characterization of intentionality is very for-
eign to our contemporary understanding of intentionality. We tend to begin with 
the idea that our intentional mental states are typically directed at, or relate us to, a 
mind-independent reality.20 In fact, we take the paradigm cases of such intentional 
mental states to be relations to physical objects. And if this is our starting point, 
the idea that we can think about objects that do not exist becomes a pressing prob-
lem. If intentional mental states are relations, and relations can only have relata 
that exist, how can we think about non-existent objects? Similarly, if we can only 
stand in genuine relations to things that exist in space and time and have causal 
influence, and abstract objects don’t exist in space and time and don’t have causal 
influence, how can we think about, and hence become intentionally related to, 
abstract objects?
Although Brentano later started thinking about intentionality in these terms in 
the 1911 Appendix, it didn’t seem to concern him at all in 1874. The shift is evi-
dent in the following remarks. In the very first sentence of the Appendix he writes, 
“What is characteristic of every mental activity is, as I believe I have shown, the 
reference to something as an object. In this respect, every mental activity seems 
to be something relational” (211/ 271). In the Foreword to the 1911 edition, he 
characterizes his shift in thinking about intentionality as follows: “One of the 
most important innovations is that I am no longer of the opinion that the mental 
relation can have something other than a thing [Reales] as its object” (xxvi/xxiii). 
And in the Nachlass (XIV On Objects of Thought) he writes:
Anyone who thinks thinks of something. And because this is part of the 
concept of thinking, this concept cannot be a unitary one unless the little 
word “something,” too, has a single meaning. . . . [I]f the “something” 
is a univocal concept, it can only be a generic concept under which eve-
rything which is supposed to be an object of thought must fall. And con-
sequently it must be maintained that anyone who is thinking must have 
a thing (Reales) as his object and have this as his object in one and the 
same sense of the word. This is in opposition to Aristotle, . . . and to 
many moderns who say that we do not always have a thing, but often 
have a non-thing (Nicht-Reales), as our object.
In these passages, we see Brentano move from thinking about intentionality as 
involving reference to something as object to thinking of it explicitly as a relation, 
and as a relation only to Reales. It is important to bear in mind Brentano’s original 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
210
distinction between an object and a thing (Reales). He immediately sees the dif-
ficulty in thinking of intentionality as a relation to Reales:
If I take something relative (ein Relativ) from among the broad class of 
comparative relations, something larger or smaller for example, then, if 
the larger thing exists, the smaller one must exist too. . . . It is entirely 
different with mental reference. If someone thinks of something, the one 
who is thinking must certainly exist, but the object of his thinking need 
not exist at all. In fact, if he is denying something, the existence of the 
object is precisely what is excluded whenever his denial is correct. So the 
only thing which is required by mental reference is the person thinking. 
The terminus of the so-called relation does not need to exist in reality 
at all. For this reason, one could doubt whether we really are dealing 
with something relational here, and not, rather, with something some-
what similar to something relational in a certain respect, which might, 
therefore, better be called “quasi-relational”.
(“Relativliches”) (Appendix 211–12/271–272)
As Crane (2006) points out, calling intentionality ‘quasi-relational’ doesn’t do 
much more than name the problem of thinking of intentionality in relational terms. 
So although Brentano started thinking about intentionality in different terms, he 
didn’t produce a sophisticated theory in these new terms.
So what happened between 1874 and 1911, and how do Brentano’s ‘innovations’ 
relate to current issues in the theory of intentionality? We can begin to answer 
both of these questions by first considering Twardowski and Meinong’s develop-
ments of Brentano’s views and Brentano’s awareness of these developments.
3.  Twardowski and Meinong
Both Twardowski and Meinong attempted to improve on aspects of Brentano’s 
1874 theory of intentionality. In his book On the Content and Object of Presenta-
tions (1894/1977), Twardowski introduced a distinction between content and object, 
which provided a possible clarification of Brentano’s notion of ‘immanent object’ 
and addressed a puzzling issue with Brentano’s theory of judgment. In his famous 
article ‘The Theory of Objects’ (1904), Meinong developed a theory of objects with 
Brentano’s insight about intentionality as one of its central building blocks.
I’ll begin with the puzzle for Brentano’s theory of judgment and Twardows-
ki’s solution. The puzzle results from two features of Brentano’s theory, namely 
that judgments are ‘objectual’, and that the object of a particular mental act is an 
‘immanent object’, which has ‘intentional inexistence’ in the act.
Brentano’s objectual theory of judgment stands in contrast to a ‘propositional’ 
theory of judgment.21 Very briefly, according to a propositional theory, judgments 
are intentional attitudes, which are related to propositions or something proposition- 
like. A typical example is Jenny judges that grass is green, where ‘that grass is 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
211
green’ designates a proposition or something proposition-like. According to Bren-
tano’s objectual theory, judgment is a sui generis mental phenomenon in which 
we either affirm or deny the existence of an object, but this is not to be understood 
as predicating existence of an object. Although ‘There is an x, such that x is F’ 
does involve predicating F of x, according to Brentano’s theory, ‘There is an F’ 
involves no predication. For Brentano, all simple judgments have one of two con-
tents: ‘There is an F’ or ‘There is not an F.’ Every simple judgment is directed at an 
individual object – an F – and either affirms or denies the existence of that object. 
The following are reductions offered by Brentano’s theory:
<Every dog is cute> is reducible to <There is no non-cute dog>;
<No dog is cute> is reducible to <There is no cute dog>;
<Some dog is cute> is reducible to <There is a cute dog>;
<Some dog is not cute> is reducible to <There is a non-cute dog>.22
Now consider my judgment that the aether does not exist. According to Brentano, the 
object of this mental act, the aether, is an immanent object, so it does ‘exist’ inside 
my consciousness – it appears to my consciousness. So, it seems there is a sense in 
which I would be wrong in denying its existence. The obvious issue here is that what 
I wish to deny the existence of is not an immanent object, which intentionally exists 
in my mental act, but rather something that if it did exist would exist independently 
of my consciousness. Judging that the aether does not exist means rejecting a physi-
cal space-filling substance outside of my consciousness. In other words, the object of 
this judgment does not seem to be an object that has only ‘intentional inexistence’.
Twardowski offers a solution to this problem by attempting to clarify the notion 
of an ‘immanent object’. According to Twardowksi, every mental phenomenon 
has a content (Inhalt) and an object (Gegenstand): “One has to distinguish . . . 
between the object at which our idea “aims, as it were,” and the immanent object 
or the content of the presentation.”23 The content of a mental act is wholly “inside” 
the mind and depends for its existence on the occurrence of a mental act. The 
object of a mental act is that at which the act aims, and typically does not depend 
on the occurrence of a mental act:
We shall say of the content that it is thought, presented, in the presenta-
tion; we shall say of the object that it is presented through the content 
of the presentation (or through the presentation). What is presented in a 
presentation is its content; what is presented through a presentation is its 
object. . . . When one says something is presented, one merely has to add 
whether it is presented in the presentation or through the presentation. In 
the first case, ‘the presented’ means the content of the presentation; in the 
second, the object of the presentation.24
The notion of an ‘immanent object’ is identified with the content of the presentation, 
while the object of a presentation provides us with a more intuitive notion of what it 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
212
is to be an object of a mental act, namely something that typically exists beyond the 
mental act itself. Twardowski is abandoning Brentano’s restriction to theorizing only 
about phenomena. With this development, Twardowski can easily solve the puzzle 
for Brentano’s theory of judgment. There is a mental content (immanent object), 
through which the aether is presented and judged as non-existing. That content, pre-
sent in me, exists. The object of my judgment, the aether itself, does not exist.
The example of the aether has further significance, because although Twar-
dowski’s distinction between content and object clarifies certain aspects of Bren-
tano’s overall theory of intentionality, and even foreshadows our contemporary 
way of thinking about intentionality, it leaves a very difficult issue unresolved. 
Twardowski and Meinong never forsook the idea that every mental phenomenon 
has an object, in addition to having a content. If every mental phenomenon is 
object directed, in the sense of object introduced by Twardowski, then what do 
we say about our thoughts about objects that don’t exist, such as thinking of the 
aether or the golden mountain? It is this consideration, together with the question 
of how to analyze negative existentials and the ontological status of mathematical 
entities, that motivated Meinong’s theory of objects.
Meinong summarized his own approach to the theory of objects as follows:
It may sound strange to hear that metaphysics is not universal enough 
for a science of Objects, and hence cannot take on the task just formu-
lated. . . . Without doubt, metaphysics has to do with everything that 
exists. However, the totality of what exists, including what has existed 
and will exist, is infinitely small in comparison with the totality of the 
Objects of knowledge.25
According to Meinong, concrete objects, if they exist, exist in space and time. 
Abstract objects, such as propositions or mathematical entities ‘subsist’ outside 
of space and time, and objects such as the golden mountain or Pegasus neither 
exist nor ‘subsist’; they are ‘beyond being or non-being’. This last category of 
objects, non-existent objects, has been the most controversial, despite its account-
ing for our seeming ability to think about non-existent objects and our ability to 
meaningful deny their existence. What is critical for understanding this aspect of 
Meinong’s theory is the independence of an object’s Sosein (what an object is, 
what properties it has) from its Sein (existence).
The Sosein of an Object is not affected by its Nichtsein . . . neither being 
nor non-being can belong essentially to the Object in itself . . . the Object 
as such stands ‘beyond being and non-being’ . . . The Object is by nature 
indifferent to being, although at least one of its two Objectives of being, 
the Object’s being or non-being, subsists.26
There has been a lot of discussion and criticism of Meinong’s theory of objects.27 
My goal here is not to discuss Meinong’s approach in detail, but to show how his 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
213
sophisticated theory of objects was in part motivated by a Brentanian claim about 
intentionality, namely, that all mental phenomena are object-directed. Once this 
claim is divorced from Brentano’s assertion that the objects of mental phenomena 
are ‘immanent objects’, and intentionality is seen as a relational phenomenon, if 
we accept at face value that we think about non-existent objects, it seems it is no 
leap at all to postulate non-existent objects!
Although it is not clear what Brentano thought of Twardowski’s content/
object distinction, he completely rejected a Meinongian development of his main 
insights. Although he doesn’t explicitly mention Meinong, he does say the follow-
ing in the 1911 Appendix (213–14/274):
I do not wish to bring this discussion of mental reference to a close with-
out having given a word of consideration to the view that there is a dis-
tinction between “being” and “existing.” According to this view both are 
to be taken in a very peculiar sense. Namely, a person might be led to 
say that if someone is mentally referring to an object, the object really 
always has being just as much as he does, even if it does not always exist 
as he does . . . I confess that I am unable to make any sense of this dis-
tinction between being and existence.
Twardowski’s content/object distinction is very much in line with current concep-
tions of intentionality, for discussions about intentionality typically focus on the 
notions of ‘intentional content’ or ‘representational content’, and the objects of 
our intentional states are typically taken to be mind-independent entities.28 Bren-
tano’s resistance to a Meinongian theory of objects is also clearly in sync with pre-
sent day attitudes towards Meinong and Meinongian-inspired views. But although 
Brentano may have rejected Meinong’s postulation of non-existent objects, theo-
rists have continued to focus on the possibility of thinking about the non-existent 
in twentieth-century analytic philosophy.
4.  From Chisholm’s Brentano to contemporary  
theories of intentionality
More than any other analytic philosopher, Roderick Chisholm (1916–1999) 
brought Brentano’s philosophy to the attention of the analytic tradition.29 First, 
he introduced Brentano’s theory of intentionality as centrally concerned with our 
apparent ability to think about non-existent objects. Second, and now putting 
aside Brentanian exegesis, Chisholm’s focus on thinking about the non-existent 
set the stage for much of the discussion about intentionality in the second half of 
the twentieth century. I’ll consider both of these issues in turn.
After citing Brentano’s famous passage, Chisholm summarizes it as follows:
When Brentano said that these attitudes “intentionally contain an object 
in themselves,” he was referring to the fact that they can truly be said to 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
214
have objects even though the objects which they can be said to have do 
not in fact exist. Diogenes could have looked for an honest man even if 
there hadn’t been any honest man.30
Chisholm elucidates this understanding of Brentano in what I will presently intro-
duce as Chisholm’s ‘three marks of intentionality’, although he does so in terms of 
intentional sentences, thus conducting his discussion of intentionality in linguistic 
terms. His central idea is that intentional sentences create intensional contexts. An 
intensional context is a feature of sentences in which existential generalization 
and the principle of substituting co-referring terms fail. Failures of existential 
generalization for simple declarative sentences and for sentences with proposi-
tional clauses constitute Chisholm’s first and second marks of intentionality, and 
the failure of the principle of substitution of co-referring terms constitutes his 
third mark of intentionality.
Existential generalization is a rule of inference in first order logic, for example, 
according to which atomic sentences such as ‘Fa’ (where ‘a’ stands for a singular 
term and ‘F’ stands for a predicate) entail that there exists an x such that x is F 
(‘∃xFx’). For example, “Bill is an honest man” entails that there exists an hon-
est man. Existential generalization fails in intensional contexts. For example, a 
sentence such as “Diogenes looked for an honest man” is intensional, because 
neither it nor its contradictory “Diogenes didn’t look for an honest man” implies 
that there are or there are not honest men. Chisholm extends this point to cover 
sentences with propositional clauses such as “James believes there are tigers in 
India”. Neither this sentence reporting James’s belief nor a sentence reporting its 
contradictory implies that there are or there are not tigers in India.
According to the principle of substitution of co-referring terms, co-referring 
names and definite descriptions can be substituted in a sentence while preserving 
its truth-value. For example, if ‘Muhammad Ali’ is substituted for ‘Cassius Clay’ 
in the sentence “Cassius Clay was a great boxer”, then the truth-value of the origi-
nal sentence is preserved. As already noted, this principle fails for certain inten-
tional sentences. We can’t validly infer that “Lois Lane believes that Clark Kent 
can fly” from the sentence “Lois Lane believes that Superman can fly” despite the 
fact that ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark Kent’ are co-referring terms.
After providing these three marks of intentionality, Chisholm claims that
we may now re-express Brentano’s thesis – or something resembling that 
of Brentano – by reference to intentional sentences. Let us say (1) that 
we do not need to use intentional sentences when we describe nonpsy-
chological phenomena; we can express all of our beliefs about what is 
merely “physical” in sentences which are not intentional. But (2) when 
we wish to describe perceiving, assuming, believing, knowing, wanting, 
hoping and other such attitudes, then either (a) we must use sentences 
which are intentional or (b) we must use terms we do not need to use 
when we describe nonpsychological phenomena.31

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
215
Although this ‘re-expression’ of Brentano’s view might be correct in letter, 
Chisholm’s ‘three marks of intentionality’ in terms of which he motived this 
re-expression are not in the spirit of what motivated Brentano’s views in 1874. 
I argued in section 2 that a concern about our ability to think about non-existent  
objects wasn’t even on the conceptual map for Brentano in 1874.32 At best, 
Chisholm’s considerations capture some of what started to concern Brentano in 
the 1911 republication of Book Two of the Psychology. Nonetheless, this inter-
pretation of Brentano as focused on thoughts about non-existent objects is the one 
many contemporary analytic philosophers have accepted, and it has led to further 
claims and challenges to the idea that intentionality is the mark of the mental.33 
I will consider two.
First, it has led some philosophers to draw metaphysical conclusions about the 
mind-body problem, namely that certain forms of reductive physicalism are false.34 
Here is a standard summary of this view expressed in the entry on Chisholm in the 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Feldman and Feldman: section 8):
Brentano’s Thesis [is] not entirely clear, but its importance should be 
obvious. Suppose that every psychological fact somehow involves 
something with “intentional inexistence” (however precisely this is to 
be construed). Suppose that no physical fact involves a thing with inten-
tional inexistence. Then it would follow that no psychological fact can 
be identified with a physical fact; one version of the psycho-physical 
identity theory would be false; physicalism of some popular varieties 
would be untenable.
Very roughly, according to reductive physicalism, the physical is something 
entirely non-mental that can be fully characterized in the term of physics. For 
Brentano in 1874, both mental and physical phenomena are appearances, “things 
of the mind”, so the possibility of ontologically reducing the mental to the physi-
cal, as it is understood by reductive physicalism, does not even arise. Further-
more, Brentano’s views in 1911 are too underdeveloped to conjecture about his 
possible views on reductive physicalism.
Second, the failure to take into account how Brentano understood the notion 
of physical phenomena has led to a challenge to the idea that intentionality is the 
mark of the mental in the sense that it is a property that can be possessed only 
by mental phenomena. This challenge is most vividly expressed by ‘naturalistic’ 
theories of intentionality that dominated discussion of intentionality in the second 
half of the twentieth century.
The initial consensus was that the way to naturalize intentionality was to iden-
tify a wholly naturalistically (scientifically) characterizable relation that holds 
between states of the brain and states of the environment in such a way that the 
states of the brain can be said to reliably track the states of the environment. Given 
this tracking, the states of the brain could be said to ‘carry information’ about the 
environment, and so be genuinely intentionally about the environment.

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
216
Many ‘tracking theorists’ agreed that a reductive naturalistic explanation of 
intentionality must begin by accepting the idea that lawful causal correlation 
between states of the brain and states of the environment is the foundation for the 
former representing (or carrying information about) the latter. But if intentionality 
is fundamentally a matter of causal co-variation of this kind, then intentionality 
can be found amongst non-mental phenomenon such as smoke and fire, tree rings 
and the age of trees, shadows and objects and indeed anywhere causal co-variation  
is found.35 And so intentionality ceases to be the mark – the distinguishing mark – 
of the mental.
On this view, object-directedness cannot be limited to mental phenomena. After 
noting the ubiquitiousness of intentionality, Dretske goes on to characterize the 
mental in terms of our apparent ability to think about the non-existent:
what we are trying to build is a system that exhibits that peculiar array 
of intentional properties that characterizes thought. We are, in particular, 
trying to build systems that exhibit what Chisholm describes as the first 
mark of intentionality, the power to say that so-and-so is the case when 
so-and-so is not the case, the power to misrepresent how things stand in 
the world.36
Chisholm’s interpretation of Brentano, with its focus on misrepresentation, came to 
dominate much of the contemporary discussion about intentionality. Philosophers 
offered various explanations of the possibility of misrepresentation. Dretske, Mil-
likan and Papineau – to name a few – offered teleological accounts, while Fodor 
appealed to the phenomenon of asymmetric dependence.37 I don’t have the space 
to give the details of these accounts, but they all endorse the claim that object- 
directedness as such is not enough to adequately characterize mental phenomena. 
On this view, it is only by considering the idea that we can think about the non-
existent do we get to the heart of what is distinctive of mental intentionality – an 
idea that will obviously be rejected by those to whom it seems obvious that we can 
never properly be said to think about things that don’t exist. My main point here 
is that this move beyond object-directedness to adequately characterize the mental 
only arises if we ignore what Brentano meant by ‘physical phenomena’. For Bren-
tano, physical phenomena are appearances, and it is not clear that it makes sense to 
ask if one appearance ‘carries information’ about another appearance. Moreover, 
since physical phenomena are ‘things of the mind’, the kind of reduction natural-
istic theories of intentionality are after cannot be achieved on a Brentanian theory.
5.  Consciousness and intentionality: Brentano  
and representationalism
So far I have focused on the phenomenon of intentionality. I have attempted to 
characterize Brentano’s initial theory of intentionality, with its specific motivations 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
217
and concerns, and then trace it through his students’ attempts to clarify and 
develop his views, through Chisholm’s interpretation of Brentano, with its focus 
on thoughts about the non-existent, to the focus on the non-existent that has been 
so influential in contemporary theories of intentionality. I’ll now turn to a further 
way in which Chisholm’s approach to intentionality impacted twentieth-century 
philosophy of mind.
As previously noted, twentieth-century analytic philosophers typically made a 
sharp theoretical distinction between the intentional properties of mental states, 
the properties they have in virtue of being about or of something, on the one hand, 
and the conscious or phenomenological properties of mental states, the proper-
ties they have in virtue of there being ‘something it is like’ to be in them, on the 
other hand. Intentional properties and phenomenological properties were widely 
assumed to be metaphysically independent, and were accordingly studied in isola-
tion from each other.38
In this section, I’ll argue that Chisholm’s focus on existential generalization 
and the principle of substitution led to a focus on ‘propositional attitudes’, which 
in turn partly motivated the mistakenly ‘separatist’ approach to intentionality 
and phenomenology in contemporary philosophy. I’ll then summarize Brenta-
no’s unified approach to these phenomena and his rejection of what motivated 
contemporary philosophers to treat consciousness and intentionality separately. 
Although it may seem that Brentano’s view is hopelessly out of step with con-
temporary views, I’ll consider one contemporary view, representationalism, 
which looks to have strong affinities with Brentano’s views. I’ll argue that these 
affinities are superficial, but that there is another contemporary approach, per-
haps what we can call the ‘consciousness first approach’, that is far closer to the 
spirit of Brentano’s work.
5.1  The separation of phenomenology and intentionality
The explanation for the separatist approach to the phenomena of consciousness 
(phenomenology) and intentionality in recent philosophy is complicated and mul-
tifaceted, and I have the space only to gesture at two of its sources. First, recent 
theories of intentionality have tended to focus on the propositional attitudes, e.g. 
beliefs and desires, which have been almost universally assumed to lack any phe-
nomenology.39 Indeed, intentionality was often straightforwardly characterized in 
terms of propositions.
Here are two typical examples of this approach. First, according to Perry:
The phenomenon of intentionality suggests that attitudes are essentially 
relational in nature: they involve relations to the propositions at which 
they are directed. . . . An attitude seems to be individuated by the agent, 
the type of attitude (belief, desire, etc.), and the proposition at which it 
is directed.40

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
218
And Stoljar concurs:
In one formulation, the problem of intentionality is presented as con-
cerning a particular class of properties, intentional properties. Intentional 
properties are those properties expressed by predicates formed from 
verbs of propositional attitudes.41
Philosophers then took traditional propositional-attitude states to be prime exam-
ples of states that did not possess any phenomenology. Braddon-Mitchell and 
Jackson and Nelkin provide standard statements of this position. According to 
Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson,
perceptual experiences are prime examples of states for which there is 
something it is like to be in them. They have phenomenal feel, a phe-
nomenology.  .  .  . Cognitive states are prime examples of states for 
which there is not something it is like to be in them, of states that lack a 
phenomenology.
(1996, 129, 295)
And Nelkin states:
Neither the believing nor the consciousness that one oneself is believ-
ing feels like anything, if by ‘feels’ one means some sort of phenomenal 
or phenomenological state. It is only because we take sensations and 
sensation-like states as our paradigms of consciousness that we think 
that any state about which we are conscious must have phenomenologi-
cal properties.
(1989, 424; original emphasis)
A second factor that contributed to the separatist treatment of intentionality and 
phenomenology was a focus on unconscious mental states. A concern with propo-
sitional attitudes like beliefs and desires naturally leads to a concern with uncon-
scious mentality, since beliefs and desires are paradigm cases of dispositional or 
‘sub-personal’ states. Furthermore, functionalism – perhaps the dominant theory 
in analytic philosophy of mind in the second half of the twentieth century – was 
most successful in accounting for beliefs and desires; so functionalists naturally 
focused on these sorts of attitudes. More generally, the postulation of unconscious 
mentality was entirely natural within a functionalist framework, given its analysis 
of mental states partly in terms of behaviour or behavioural dispositions.42 One 
central argument for the existence of unconscious mental states is that it is neces-
sary to explain certain sorts of behaviour.43 If someone then asks why the relevant 
behaviour indicates an unconscious mental state, rather than simply indicating 
that the subject is in a particular neurological state which has certain causal prop-
erties, the functionalist has an immediate answer: for if there is a constitutive 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
219
connection between mental states and causal properties related to behaviour or 
behavioural dispositions, then exhibiting the relevant behaviour will be powerful 
evidence for – if not proof of – unconscious mental states.44
5.2  Brentano’s theory of consciousness
All this is very foreign to Brentano, who holds that there is constitutive relation-
ship between consciousness and intentionality, so that one cannot study them in 
isolation from one another. Indeed Brentano’s rejection of unconscious mentality 
is partly motivated by his theory of consciousness.
To see this, it will be helpful to begin with a general outline of his theory of con-
sciousness. Its central pillar is the idea that conscious intentional episodes are ‘of’, 
i.e. intentionally of, a whole lot more than just external world objects and proper-
ties.45 The basic idea is simple and ancient – and Aristotelian. It is that in having a 
visual experience of a tree in leaf (for example), the subject, in addition to being 
aware of the tree and any other relevant external content, is also aware of the aware-
ness of the tree. In having a particular conscious experience, the subject is always 
and necessarily also aware of that very experience itself. There is always some 
sort of awareness of the experience or experiencing: conscious awareness always 
involves – constitutively involves – some sort of awareness of that very awareness.
What I am here calling ‘awareness of awareness’ Brentano called “inner con-
sciousness” or “inner perception”.46 As mentioned in section 2, inner perception 
provides us with a special kind of access to our conscious experiences and should 
be clearly distinguished from introspection.47 Brentano does so in the following 
passage:
Psychology . . . has its basis in perception and experience. Above all, 
however, its source is to be found in the inner perception of our own 
mental phenomena. . . . Note, however, that we said that inner perception 
[Wahrnehmung] and not introspection, i.e. inner observation [Beobach-
tung], constitutes the primary and essential source of psychology. These 
two concepts must be distinguished from one another. One of the char-
acteristics of inner perception is that it can never become inner observa-
tion. We can observe objects which, as they say, are perceived externally. 
In observation, we direct our full attention to a phenomenon in order 
to apprehend it accurately. But with objects of inner perception this is 
absolutely impossible. . . . It is only while our attention is turned toward 
a different object that we are able to perceive, as it were in passing, the 
mental processes which are directed toward that object.
(22–23/29–30; translation modified)
Brentano agrees with Aristotle’s characterization of inner perception: “knowledge 
and perception and opinion and understanding have always something else as 
their object, and themselves only by the way”.48 Although this awareness is only 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
220
‘by the way’, according to Brentano, inner perception is immediate, infallible and 
self-evident (70/91).
What role did the rejection of unconscious mentality play in motivating this 
theory of consciousness? After considering several different definitions of ‘con-
sciousness’, Brentano offers the following:
I prefer to use [“consciousness”] as synonymous with “mental phenomenon,” 
or “mental act.” For, in the first place, the constant use of these compound 
designations would be cumbersome, and furthermore, the term “conscious-
ness”, since it refers to an object which consciousness is conscious of, seems 
to be appropriate to characterize mental phenomena precisely in terms of its 
distinguishing characteristic, i.e., the property of the intentional in-existence 
of an object, for which we lack a word in common usage.
(78–79/102)
‘Consciousness’ refers to an object one is conscious of.49 Since according to Bren-
tano all mental phenomena refer to an object, all mental phenomena are conscious 
in the sense that they all have an object. He then asks
whether there are any mental phenomena which are not objects of conscious-
ness. All mental phenomena are states of consciousness; but are all mental 
phenomena conscious, or might there also be unconscious mental acts?
(79/102)
For Brentano, this is the question of whether there can be mental phenomena that 
are not objects of mental acts themselves. In contemporary terms, can there be 
unconscious mental acts or states? The contemporary answer to this question is a 
resounding ‘yes’. Brentano disagrees. He spends the whole of Chapter II of Book 
Two arguing that there are no unconscious mental phenomena.
According to Brentano, a mental state is conscious if and only if it is the object 
of a mental state, and if all mental states are conscious, then all mental states 
are the objects of mental states. A mental state can be an object either if it is the 
object of a higher-order mental state, or if it is the object of the very state which 
is conscious.50 Brentano opts for the latter approach: “consciousness of the mental 
phenomena which exist in us is given in the phenomena themselves” (102/133). 
In our current terms, Brentano’s theory is a same-order theory as opposed to a 
higher-order theory of consciousness. According to a higher-order theory a mental 
state is conscious in virtue of having a distinct, unconscious higher-order state 
directed at it. According to a same-order theory, the awareness of a state that 
makes that state a conscious state is part of that very state itself.51
Brentano considers and rejects four kinds of arguments for the claim that there 
are unconscious mental phenomena: first, an argument that certain facts of experi-
ence require the postulation of unconscious mental acts; second, an argument that 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
221
certain conscious mental acts must bring about unconscious mental phenomena 
as their effects; third (and harder to follow), an argument that the relationship of 
the intensity of a mental act and its concomitant mental act requires that the latter 
be unconscious in the case of conscious mental phenomena – the strength of the 
concomitant consciousness is a function of their own strength, and that, because 
of this relationship, in certain cases in which the latter is a positive magnitude, the 
former must lack a positive value. Finally, an argument that accepting that there 
are only conscious mental acts leads to a vicious infinite regress of mental acts. 
He sums up the last argument as follows:
we could attempt to prove that the hypothesis that each mental phenom-
enon is an object of a mental phenomenon leads to an infinite complexity 
of mental states, which is both intrinsically impossible and contrary to 
experience.
(81/105)
It is in response to this fourth kind of argument that Brentano formulates his 
‘same-order’ view of consciousness. One can summarize the dialectic as follows:
[i]	 If there are no unconscious mental states, then all mental states are conscious, 
i.e. all mental states are the objects of mental states. (This follows from Bren-
tano’s understanding of the word ‘consciousness’.)
[ii]	 Prima facie objection: if all mental states are conscious, then there is a vicious 
regress of mental states.
Brentano uses hearing, the presentation of a sound, to illustrate the prima facie 
threat of a vicious regress. If no mental phenomenon is possible without a correla-
tive consciousness of it, then, along with the hearing, the presentation of a sound, 
we have to have a presentation of the hearing, i.e. a presentation of the presenta-
tion of the sound. But then it looks as if the presentation of the presentation of 
the sound must be accompanied by a presentation of it in turn. So now we have 
three presentations: the presentation of the sound, the presentation of the presenta-
tion of the sound, and the presentation of the presentation of the presentation of 
the sound. Either the series will be infinite or it will terminate in an unconscious 
presentation. (The higher-order view avoids this regress by accepting unconscious 
mental states at the second-order.) If one denies that there are unconscious pres-
entations, one seems committed to an infinite number of mental acts even for the 
simplest act of hearing.
[iii]	Same-order response to prima facie objection: the consciousness necessary 
to make a mental phenomenon conscious is built into the mental phenomenon 
itself.

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
222
In a typical perceptual experience, say, awareness of the external object and the 
awareness of the experience itself are so intimately and intrinsically related that 
they constitute a single mental state. According to Brentano,
inner experience seems to prove undeniably that the presentation of the 
sound is connected with the presentation of the presentation of the sound 
in such a peculiarly intimate way that its [the presentation of the presen-
tation’s] very existence constitutes an intrinsic prerequisite for the exist-
ence of this presentation. This suggests that there is a special connection 
between the object of inner presentation and the presentation itself, and 
that both belong to one and the same mental act.
The presentation of the sound and the presentation of the presentation 
of the sound form a single mental phenomenon; it is only by consider-
ing it in its relation to two different objects, one of which is a physi-
cal phenomenon and the other a mental phenomenon, that we divide it 
conceptually into two presentations. In the same mental phenomenon in 
which the sound is present to our minds we simultaneously apprehend 
the mental phenomenon itself. What is more, we apprehend it in accord-
ance with its dual nature insofar as it has the sound as content within it, 
and insofar as it has itself as content at the same time . . . we can say that 
the sound is the primary object of the act of hearing, and that the act of 
hearing itself is the secondary object (98–99/179–180).
[iv]	So all mental states are conscious, i.e. all mental states are the objects of 
mental states.
One can certainly hold that all mental states are conscious, and reject the same-
order view. Brentano simply argues that one can hold a view of consciousness 
according to which for a mental state to be conscious is for it to be an object 
of mental state without a regress resulting and without accepting the reality of 
unconscious mental acts.
Some have worried that even if Brentano avoids a regress of higher and higher 
mental states, there may be an internal regress for the same-order view.52 Brentano 
asks, “When we have a presentation of a sound or another physical phenomenon 
and are conscious of this presentation, are we also conscious of this consciousness 
or not?” (99/129) He believes that we must answer yes, but we can nonetheless 
avoid any internal regress:
These results show that the consciousness of the presentation of the sound 
clearly occurs together with the consciousness of this consciousness, for 
the consciousness which accompanies the presentation of the sound is a 
consciousness not so much of this presentation as of the whole mental 
act in which the sound is presented, and in which the consciousness itself 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
223
exists concomitantly. Apart from the fact that it presents the physical 
phenomenon of sound, the mental act of hearing becomes at the same 
time its own object and content, taken as a whole.
(100/129)
That is, consciousness of a mental state is self-luminous in the sense that it ‘gets a 
glimpse of itself’ because it is ‘of’ the whole mental state of which it is a constitu-
ent or part.
5.3  Representationalism: back to Brentano?
At this point, Brentano’s views appear to stand in sharp contrast to contempo-
rary theorizing about intentionality and consciousness. Not only does he treat 
these phenomena as intrinsically – metaphysically – related; he also denies the 
possibility of unconscious mentality. Interestingly, however, it seems that ‘repre-
sentationalism’, a view that rose to prominence in analytic philosophy in the clos-
ing decades of the twentieth century, shares certain affinities with the two main 
Brentanian theses discussed in this chapter (according to which all mental states 
are intentional, and intentionality and consciousness are constitutively related). 
At the same time, it seems that representationalism can accept some of the main 
theses that have motivated more recent non-Brentanian views of intentionality – 
namely the attempt to naturalize intentionality and the acceptance of unconscious 
mental states.
Is such a unification really possible? Representationalism is a view about the 
relationship between the phenomenological properties and the intentional proper-
ties of conscious mental states. There have been many variants of the view since 
its introduction into analytic philosophy,53 but its proponents have for the most 
part focused on conscious perceptual states, including bodily sensations such 
as pain and hunger.54 One important dimension of variation concerns the modal 
strength of the relationship that is taken to hold between the phenomenological 
properties of perceptual states and their intentional properties. According to the 
‘supervenience’ version of the view, the phenomenological character of a con-
scious perceptual state is (metaphysically) determined by the properties that that 
state represents. A  stronger ‘identity’ version simply identifies the two sets of 
properties. On this view, if two states represent the same properties, e.g. round-
ness and redness, the phenomenology of those states will be identical; and if two 
states share the same phenomenology, e.g. the what-it’s-likeness of experiencing 
redness and roundness, then the properties those states represent will be identical.
As stated, the strong (identity) form of representationalism doesn’t take a 
stand on which set of properties is more basic – on whether the phenomenology 
is more basic in such a way such that intentionality is grounded in phenomenol-
ogy,55 or whether intentionality is more basic in such a way that phenomenology 
is grounded in intentionality. The original proponents of representationalism sup-
ported the latter approach, however, and typically combined it with a reductive 

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
224
‘naturalization’ approach to intentionality  – a combination of views I’ll call 
‘Standard representationalism.’
The Standard representationalist view accepts both the Brentanian claim that 
all mental phenomena are intentional, and that there is a constitutive relationship 
between consciousness and intentionality. According to Standard representation-
alism, all consciousness or phenomenology is accounted for in terms of intention-
ality, so all mentality is intentional. That is, phenomenological properties just are 
a certain kind of representational content. It then follows trivially that conscious-
ness and intentionality are constitutively related. At the same time, nothing in 
Standard representationalism prevents there being unconscious mental states. An 
unconscious mental state is simply a mental state that has representational content 
but no phenomenology.
The apparent affinities between Brentano’s views and Standard representation-
alism are, however, superficial. Putting aside their disagreement about uncon-
scious mentality, I’ll focus on two other fundamental differences. First, one of the 
main motivations for Standard representationalism, which I’ll call the ‘transpar-
ency thesis’, conflicts directly with Brentano’s theory of consciousness. Second, 
although both views acknowledge a constitutive relationship between intention-
ality and consciousness, the role that intentionality plays in accounting for the 
nature of consciousness is very different in the two theories, and their views of the 
nature of consciousness are equally different.
The transparency thesis is a thesis about what we are aware of and what we can 
be aware of in having perceptual experiences.56 In particular, it is a claim about 
the sense in which we can be aware of the phenomenology of perceptual experi-
ences. Its advocates claim that our only possible access to our experiences is to 
examine them via introspection,57 and that when a subject introspects her normal 
visual experience she only ever finds the properties that objects in her environ-
ment appear to have. She does not and cannot become aware of her experience or 
any features of her experience via introspection or indeed in any other way.
Tye (2014, 40) summarizes the key transparency claims as follows:
1)	 We are not aware of features of our visual experience.
2)	 We are not aware of the visual experience itself.
3)	 We cannot attend to features of the visual experience.
4)	 The only features of which we are aware and to which we can attend are 
external features (colors and shapes of surfaces, for example).
As far as awareness goes, the thesis is that when we try to introspect a 
visual experience occurring in normal perception, we are not aware of 
the experience or its features (intrinsic or not) period.
If we take phenomenology to be an introspectible feature of experience, as 
most Standard representationalists do, and if all that is introspectible according to 
the transparency thesis are properties attributed to objects, then it’s plausible that 

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
225
all there is to the phenomenological content of an experience are the properties 
attributed to objects, i.e. the representation of properties of objects.58
Plainly, then, these “transparentist” claims about what we can and can’t be aware 
of in having conscious experience are in direct conflict with Brentano’s theory of 
consciousness. For, according to Brentano, we are always and essentially aware of 
experience in the very having of experience. That is, every conscious experience 
constitutively involves an intentional relation to itself. This feature of Brentano’s 
theory not only directly conflicts with the transparency thesis; it also makes clear 
that the way in which intentionality and consciousness are constitutively related, 
according to each theory, is very different. For Standard representationalism, con-
sciousness is accounted for in terms of the representation of the properties of 
physical objects. For Brentano, consciousness is a matter of an experience being 
intentionally related to itself.
At first glance, Standard representationalism looks as if it may help to recap-
ture some of Brentano’s insights. Further inspection reveals that the two theories 
have very little in common. There are, however, contemporary views that are much 
more in tune with Brentano’s views. The contemporary same-order and higher-order 
views of consciousness both accept the claim that a conscious state is one we are 
aware of being in, although they disagree about how to further explicate this claim. 
Searle 1992, Siewert 1998 and Strawson 1994 all argue that intentionality requires 
consciousness, what I earlier called the ‘consciousness first approach’, and all would 
claim to be entirely naturalistic in their approach to the mind. Proponents of the still 
more recent ‘phenomenal intentionality approach’ (e.g. Horgan and Kriegel) also 
accept that there is a kind of intentionality, ‘phenomenal intentionality’, which is 
essentially grounded in consciousness. It is a burden on all of these views to give an 
account of unconscious mental content, or else deny its existence, as Brentano does.
Notes
	 1	 See e.g. de Beauvoir 1949, Gurwitsch 1966, Husserl 1900–01, Heidegger 1927/1962, 
Merleau-Ponty 1945/1963, and Sartre 1948/1956.
	 2	 All of my citations from Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint are from the Eng-
lish translation. I cite the page numbers from both the 1973 and 1995 editions, with the 
1995 citation coming first.
	 3	 Brentano uses the expressions ‘mental phenomenon’, ‘mental act’ and ‘experience’ 
interchangeably. I will also sometimes speak of mental states, and intentional or propo-
sitional attitudes.
	 4	 Two notes should be made about this use of the term ‘phenomenology’. First, I will 
use the terms ‘consciousness’ and ‘phenomenology’ interchangeably. This is contro-
versial, because some contemporary philosophers argue for a non-phenomenological 
kind of consciousness. See e.g. Dennett 1991, 1993 and Nelkin 1989. Second, the term 
‘phenomenology’ was originally used to designate a method of theorizing, arguably 
initiated by Brentano and most famously practiced by Husserl 1900/1, Merleau-Ponty 
1945/1963, and Sartre 1943, according to which, one studies conscious mental phe-
nomena from the ‘first-person perspective’. My use is divorced from this tradition. For 
contemporary introductions to the phenomenological traditions see e.g. Gallagher and 
Zahavi 2008 and Moran 2000.

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
226
	 5	 Powerful thought experiments such as inverted spectrum and inverted earth thought 
experiments provide a further motivation for the metaphysical separation of intention-
ality and phenomenology. I don’t have the space to discuss these arguments in this 
chapter. See e.g. Block 1990, Shoemaker 1982 and Tye 2009.
	 6	 I will use ‘representationalism’ as a name for this position in what follows although it 
used to have a very different meaning. It referred to positions like Locke’s theory of 
perception. Dretske 1995, Tye 1995, 2009 and Lycan 1996, 2001 are central propo-
nents of representationalism, and in this chapter I will focus on them. See Armstrong 
1968 for an early endorsement of representationalism.
	 7	 It would be a mistake to charge Brentano with ‘psychologism’, understood as the doc-
trine that logic (for example) is the study of contingent psychological truths, which was 
criticized by e.g. Frege 1884 and Husserl 1900–01. I should also note that Brentano 
doesn’t use the term ‘evident’ to describe the kinds of emotions that can give us evalu-
ative knowledge. I have extended the use of ‘evident’ for ease of exposition.
	 8	 Brentano summarizes some of these disagreements in Book One, Chapter 1 of the 
Psychology.
	 9	 In his later work, Brentano distinguished between what he called ‘descriptive psychol-
ogy’ and ‘genetic psychology’. Descriptive psychology is concerned with necessary 
truths about our psychology based on evidence provided by first-person experience. 
Genetic psychology is concerned with causal laws, laws governing how mental phe-
nomena arise and the connections between the mental and the physiological. According 
to Brentano, descriptive psychology is the more fundamental in the sense that we have 
to adequately describe phenomena before we can go on to give explanations of them.
	10	 Descartes 1641.
	11	 I won’t discuss Brentano’s argument for this claim.
	12	 Remember that this is a distinction within the class of mental phenomena in our ordi-
nary larger sense of the expression of ‘mental phenomena’.
	13	 He follows Descartes in this tripartite classification, which he expounds and defends 
in Chapters 5–8 of Book Two of the Psychology. The love/hate category covers all 
emotions.
	14	 Brentano classified desires, and willing in general, as emotions.
	15	 Brentano cites Descartes, Spinoza, Kant and Bain as holding this view. Sometimes 
Brentano drops the word ‘appear’ and simply speaks of physical phenomena as having 
extension and spatial location. To avoid confusion here, it is important to always keep 
in mind that Brentano is concerned only with appearances, whether they are physical 
appearances or mental appearances.
	16	 There is still a lively debate about whether sound is inherently spatial. See e.g. P. F. 
Strawson’s 1959 famous discussion of the ‘sound world’ and O’Callaghan and Nudds’s 
2009 collection on sound.
	17	 By ‘thing’ I take Brentano to mean a particular individual thing, as opposed to some-
thing general such as a universal.
	18	 It is clear through out the Psychology that Brentano is using ‘content’ and ‘object’ 
interchangeably.
	19	 See e.g. Crane 2006, Jacquette 2004, Moran 1996, Mulligan 2004, and Smith 1994.
	20	 See e.g. Byrne 2006, Crane 2001, Dickie 2010, and Jeshion 2010.
	21	 For discussion of Brentano’s objectual theory see e.g. Chisholm 1982 and Kriegel 
2018.
	22	 Notably absent from these reductions are singular propositions of the form <a is F> 
and complex judgements involving e.g. conditionals. These are the hardest cases for 
Brentano’s theory, but I do not have the space to discuss them here. See Kriegel 2018 
for a spirited defense of Brentano’s theory.
	23	 1894/1977: 2.

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
227
	24	 1894/1977: 16. Although I don’t have the space to go into detail here, Twardowski 
offers three arguments for the content/object distinction, one of which is the familiar 
idea that we can present the same object in two different ways by having two presenta-
tions with the same object but with different contents (1894/1977: 27–33).
	25	 1904:79.
	26	 1904: 82/86. Roughly, Meinong uses the term ‘objective’ to mean abstract proposition 
or state of affairs.
	27	 See e.g. Crane 2014, Findlay 1963, Grossman 1974, Parsons 1980, Tichy 1988, and 
Zalta 1988.
	28	 Some philosophers, e.g. Byrne 2006 and Searle 1983, argue that the puzzle of thinking 
about non-existent objects dissolves once we have a content/object distinction. The basic 
idea is that the thought that the golden mountain is golden has a content, but no object.
	29	 See e.g. Chisholm 1957 and 1986.
	30	 1957/2002: 484.
	31	 1957/2002: 486.
	32	 See McAlister 1976 for a very clear criticism of Chisholm’s interpretation of Brentano.
	33	 See e.g. Quine’s (1960: 220) remark that Brentano’s thesis of intentionality is the claim 
that ‘there is no breaking out of the intentional vocabulary by explaining its members 
in other terms’.
	34	 Hartry Field claims that Brentano thought it was impossible to give a materialistically 
adequate account of the relation between a person and a proposition (1978:78).
	35	 See e.g. Dretske 1994/2002: 493.
	36	 1994/2002: 493.
	37	 See e.g. Dretske 1981, Fodor 1987, Millikan 1984, and Papineau 1993.
	38	 Although Brentano did not use the term ‘phenomenological properties’ or the ‘what 
it’s like’ locution to characterize consciousness, in being concerned with how things 
seem or appear to a subject, Brentano was essentially concerned with experiential or 
phenomenological features of consciousness.
	39	 It’s arguable that this focus on the propositional attitudes is largely due to Chisholm’s 
influential discussion of intentionality (the failures of existential generalization and the 
principle of substitution are most evident with respect to sentences reporting proposi-
tional attitudes); but Frege’s 1892 article ‘On Sense and Reference’ also contributed to 
a focus on propositional attitudes.
	40	 1994: 387–388.
	41	 1996:161.
	42	 There are many varieties of functionalism, but for my purposes here I have focused on what 
is sometimes called ‘analytic functionalism’. See e.g. Armstrong 1981 and Lewis 1972.
	43	 The ‘disassociation paradigm’ is the standard method for studying unconscious per-
ception. According to it, theorists first establish that the subject does not consciously 
perceive some stimulus x. Second, if the stimulus x has some effect, whether direct or 
indirect, on thought, evaluation, memory, recognition or some cognitive process, then 
the subject is thought to unconsciously perceive the stimulus x.
	44	 What about conscious perceptual states, which arguably have phenomenological and 
intentional properties? Even for these states, the metaphysical separation of phenome-
nology and intentionality was argued for on the basis of inverted spectrum and inverted 
earth thought experiments.
	45	 For ease of exposition, I’ll speak of external objects and properties, although this 
departs from Brentano’s restriction to physical phenomena in the 1874 publication of 
the Psychology.
	46	 Inner perception is an aspect of inner consciousness.
	47	 See Textor 2015 on Brentano’s distinction between inner perception and introspection.
	48	 Metaphysics X.9.1074b35–6; my emphasis.

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
228
	49	 Translator’s note to the Psychology: “von welchem das Bewusstein Bewusstein ist.” 
This linguistic support for the recommended usage of “Bewusstein”, depending as it 
does on the structure of the German word, does not apply to the English word “con-
sciousness” (79/102).
	50	 Brentano understands acquired or stored knowledge in terms of dispositions: “Nat-
urally philosophers were well familiar with the fact that we can possess a store of 
acquired knowledge without thinking about it. But they rightly conceived of this 
knowledge as a disposition toward certain acts of thinking, just as they conceived of 
acquired character as a disposition toward certain emotions and volitions, but not as 
cognition and consciousness (79/103).
	51	 For contemporary higher-order views, see e.g. Carruthers 2005, Gennaro 1996, Lycan 
2004, and Rosenthal 2005, 2009. For contemporary same-order views, see e.g. Kriegel 
2003, 2009, Montague 2009, Montague 2016, and Williford 2006.
	52	 See e.g. Gurwitsch 1979 and Zahavi 2006.
	53	 See e.g. Chalmers 2004, Levine 2003, and Tye 2009 for summaries of the kinds of 
representationalism.
	54	 Many have found it counterintuitive to count mental states such as pain and anxiety as 
intentional. Brentano offers a spirited argument that pain is intentional (63–5/82–5/), 
which foreshadows the representationalist attempt to deal with this difficulty. See e.g. 
Crane 2009 and Tye 2015 for a contemporary defense of this view. Although repre-
sentationalism restricts itself to a discussion of conscious perception, some account 
of conscious thought and conscious emotion is needed. See e.g. Bayne and Mon-
tague 2011 for discussion of the relationship between phenomenology and conscious 
thought.
	55	 For versions of this kind of view, see e.g. Farkas 2008, Kriegel 2013, Mendelovici 
forthcoming, Pautz 2008, 2013, Searle 1992, Siewert 1998, and Strawson 1994.
	56	 Tye has been a central advocate of the transparency thesis, since Harman expounded it 
in 1990, and I will focus on Tye’s account in what follows. G. E. Moore is sometimes 
cited as advocating the transparency thesis. Strawson 2015 argues that this is a mistake.
	57	 This conflicts directly with Brentano’s claim that our best access to our experiences is 
inner perception.
	58	 There has been a lot of discussion about exactly what the transparency thesis is, and 
how exactly it supports representationalism. See e.g. Kind 2003, Pautz 2007, Stoljar 
2004, and Strawson 2015.
Bibliography
Aristotle (c. 340/1936). De Anima. Trans. W. S. Hett. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of Mind. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul.
Armstrong, D. M. (1981) The Nature of Mind. St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press.
Bayne, T., and Montague, M. (eds.). (2011). Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Block, N. (1990). “Inverted Earth,” in Tomberlin, J. (ed.), Philosophical Perspectives, 4: 
Action Theory and Philosophy of Mind. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview: 53–80.
Brentano, F. (1874/1973, 1995). Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Trans. L. 
McAlister, A. Rancurello, and D. B. Terrell. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Byrne, A. (2006). “Intentionality,” in Pfeifer, J. and Sarkar S. (eds.), Philosophy of Science: 
An Encyclopedia. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
229
Carruthers, P. (2005). Consciousness: Essays from a Higher-order Perspective. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (2004). “The Representational Character of Experience,” in Leiter, B. (ed.), 
The Future of Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chisholm, R. (1957). Perceiving: A Philosophical Study. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Chisholm, R. (1982). The Foundations of Knowing. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.
Chisholm, R. (1986). Brentano and Intrinsic Value. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Crane, T. (2001). Elements of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crane, T. (2006). “Brentano’s Concept of Intentional Inexistence,” in Textor, M. (ed.), The 
Austrian Contribution to Philosophy. London: Routledge.
Crane, T. (2009). ‘Is Perception a Propositional Attitude?’ Philosophical Quarterly 59: 
452–469.
Crane, T. (2014). The Objects of Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Beauvoir, S. (1949/1997). The Second Sex. Trans. H. M. Parshley. London: Vintage.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston, MA: Little Brown.
Dennett, D. (1993). “Precis of Consciousness Explained,” Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research, 53(4): 889–892.
Descartes, R. (1641/1985). “Meditations and Objections and Replies,” in The Philosophi-
cal Writings of Descartes, vol. 2. Trans. J. Cottingham et al. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1994/2002). “A Recipe for Thought,” in Chalmers, D. (ed.), Philosophy of 
Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dickie, I. (2010). “We Are Acquainted With Ordinary Things,” in Jeshion, R. (ed.), New 
Essays on Singular Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Farkas, K. (2008). “Phenomenal Intentionality Without Compormise,” The Monist, 91 (2): 
273–293.
Field, H. (1978). “Mental Representation,” Erkenntnis, 13(1): 9–61.
Findlay, J. N. (1963). Meinong’s Theory of Objects and Values. Clarendon: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in Philosophy of Mind. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frege, G. (1884/1974). The Foundations of Arithmetic: A Logico-Mathematical Enquire 
into the Concept of Number. Trans. J. L. Austin. Oxford: Blackwell.
Frege, G. (1892/1980). “On Sense and Reference,” Trans M. Black, in Geach, P. and Black, 
M. (eds.), Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Gallagher, S., and Zahavi, D. (2008). The Phenomenological Mind: An Introduction to 
Philosophy of Mind and Cognitive Science. London and New York: Routledge.
Gennaro, R. (1996) Consciousness and Self-Consciousness: A  Defense of the Higher-
Order Thought Theory of Consciousness. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Grossman, R. (1974). Meinong. London: Routledge.
Gurwitsch, A. (1941/1966). “A Non-egological Conception of Consciousness”, in Studies 
in Phenomenology and Psychology. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
230
Gurwitsch, A. (1979). Human Encounters in the Social World. Trans. F. Kersten. Pitts-
burgh: Duquesne University Press.
Harman, G. (1990). “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience,” Philosophical Perspectives, 4: 
31–52.
Heidegger, M. (1927/1962). Being and Time. Trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Horgan, T., and Tienson, J. (2002). “The Intentionality of Phenomenology and the Phe-
nomenology of Intentionality,” in Chalmers, D. (ed), Philosophy of Mind: Classical and 
Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Husserl, E. (1900–1901/2001). Logical Investigations Vols 1 and 2, Trans. J. N. Findlay, 
with revised Trans. Dermot Moran. London and New York: Routledge.
Jacquette, D. (2004). “Brentano’s concept of intentionality,” in Jacquette, D. (ed.), The 
Cambridge Companion to Brentano. Cambridge: Cambridge University.
Jeshion, R. (2010). “Singular Thought: Acquaintance, Semantic Instrumentalism, and 
Cognitivism,” in Jeshion, R. (ed.), New Essays on Singular Thought. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Kind, A. (2003). “What’s So Transparent about Transparency?” Philosophical Studies: 
225–244.
Kriegel, U. (2003). “Consciousness as Intransitive Self-consciousness: Two Views and an 
Argument,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 33(1): 103–132.
Kriegel, U. (2009). Subjective Consciousness. A Self-Representational Theory. Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, U. (2013). “The Phenomenal Intentionality Research Program,” in Kriegel, U. 
(ed.), Phenomenal Intentionality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, U. (2018). “Brentano on Judgment as an Objectual Attitude,” in Gzrankowski, A. 
and Montague, M. (eds.), Non-Propositional Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Levine, J. (2003). “Experience and Representation,” in Smith, Q. and Jokic A. (eds.), Con-
sciousness: New Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1972). “Psychophysical and Theoretical Identifications,” Australasian Journal 
of Philosophy, 50: 249–258.
Lycan, W. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT 
Press.
Lycan, W. (2001). “The Case for Phenomenal Externalism,” in Tomberlin, J.E. (ed.), Philo-
sophical Perspectives 15: Metaphysics. Atascadero: Ridgeview Publishing.
Lycan, W. (2004). ‘The Superiority of HOP to HOT’, in R. Gennaro (ed.) Higher-Order 
Theories of Consciousness (Amsterdam: John Benjamns): 93–114.
McAlister, L. (1976). “Chisholm and Brentano on Intentionality,” in McAlister, L. (ed.), 
The Philosophy of Brentano. London: Duckworth.
Meinong, A. (1904). “The Theory of Objects,” Trans. I. Levi, D. B. Terrell, and R. Chisholm, 
in Chisholm, R. (ed.), Realism and the Background of Phenomenology. Atascadero, CA: 
Ridgeview, 1981: 76–117.
Mendelovici, A. (forthcoming). Phenomenal Intentionality: How to Get Intentionality from 
Consciousness.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/1962). The Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. Colin Smith. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Millikan, R. (1984). Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.

I n t e n t i o n a l i t y
231
Montague, M. (2009). “The Content of Perceptual Experience,” in McLaughlin, B. Beck-
erman, A. and Walter, S. (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Montague, M. (2016). The Given: Experience and its Content. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Moran, D. (1996). “Brentano’s Thesis,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supple-
mentary Volume 70: 1–27.
Moran, D. (2000), Introduction to Phenomenology. London: Routledge.
Mulligan, K. (2004). “Brentano on the Mind,” in Jacquett, D. (ed.), The Cambridge Com-
panion to Brentano. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nelkin, N. (1989). “Propositional Attitudes and Consciousness,” Philosophy and Phenom-
enological Research, 49(3): 413–430.
Nudds, M., and O’Callaghan, C. (2009). Sounds and Perception: New Philosophical 
Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Papineau, D. (1993). Philosophical Naturalism. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Pautz, A. (2007). “Intentionalism and Perceptual Presence,” Philosophical Perspectives, 
21: 495–541.
Pautz, A. (2008). “The Interdependence of Phenomenology and Intentionality,” The Mon-
ist, 91(2): 250–272.
Pautz, A. (2013). “Does Phenomenology Ground Mental Content?” in Kriegel, U. (ed.), 
Phenomenal Intentionality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Parsons, T. (1980). Nonexistent Objects. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Perry, J. (1994). “Intentionality,” in Guttenplan, S. (ed.), A Companion to the Philosophy 
of Mind. Oxford: Blackwell.
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rosenthal, D. (2005). Consciousness and Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rosenthal, D. (2009). “Higher Order Theories of Consciousness,” in McLaughlin, B. and 
Beckermann, A. (eds.), Oxford Handbook of the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Sartre, J. (1943/1956). Being and Nothingness. Trans. H. Barnes. New York: Philosophical 
Library.
Searle, J. (1983). Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1982). “The Inverted Spectrum,” Journal of Philosophy, 79: 357–381.
Siewert, C. (1998). The Significance of Consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Smith, B. (1994). Austrian Philosophy. LaSalle, Ill. & Chicago: Open Court.
Stoljar, D. (1996). “Nominalism and Intentionality,” Nous, 30(2): 161–181.
Stoljar, D. (2004). “The Argument from Diaphanousness,” in Escurdia, M., Stainton, R. & 
Viger, C. (eds.), Language, Mind and World: Special Issue of the Canadian Journal of 
Philosophy. University of Alberta Press: 341–390.
Strawson, G. (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
Strawson, G. (2015). “Real Direct Realism,” in Coates, P. and Coleman, S. (eds.), Phenom-
enal Qualities: Sense, Perception and Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strawson, P. F. (1959). Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics. London: 
Muthuen.
Textor, M. (2015). “Inner Perception Can Never Become Inner Observation: Brentano on 
Awareness and Observation,” Philosophers’ Imprint, 15(10): 1–19.

M i c h e l l e  M o n ta g u e
232
Tichy, P. (1988). The Foundations of Frege’s Logic. Berlin: Walter and de Gruyter & Co.
Thomasson, A.L. (2000). “After Brentano: a One-Level Theory of Consciousness,” Euro-
pean Journal of Philosophy, 8: 190–209.
Twardowski, K. (1894/1977). On the Content and Object of Presentations. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2009). “Representationalist Theories of Consciousness,” in McLaughlin, B., 
Beckerman, A. and Walter, S. (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tye, M. (2014). “Transparency, Qualia Realism, and Representationalism,” Philosophical 
Studies: 39–57.
Tye, M. (2015). “The Nature of Pain and the Appearance/Reality Distinction,” in Coates, 
P. and Coleman, S. (eds.), Phenomenal Qualities: Sense, Perception & Consciousness. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williford, K. (2006). “The Self-Representational Structure of Consciousness,” in Kriegel, 
U. and Williford, K. (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zahavi, D. (2006). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-person Perspective. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zalta, E. 1988. Intensional Logic and the Metaphysics of Intentionality. Cambridge: MIT 
Press.

233
After a brief account of Wittgenstein’s conception of philosophy (1.), I  shall 
describe what I call the ‘inner-object model’ of mental occurrences, i.e. the kind of 
dualist position that Wittgenstein argued against in different areas of the philoso-
phy of mind (2.). The following sections present his discussion of this prevalent 
misconception with regard to bodily sensations and other minds (3.), understand-
ing (4.), thinking (5.), and voluntary action (6.). Finally, I shall briefly consider the 
relation between Wittgenstein’s views and functionalism (7.).
1.  Wittgenstein’s conception of philosophy
As a young man, Wittgenstein had made himself a name as one of the foremost 
philosophers of his age by the publication of his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
(1921). In this first book, under the influence of the founding fathers of mod-
ern formal logic, Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell, he offered a unified theory 
of logic, language, and the metaphysical structure of the world. However, when 
some ten years later, after having worked for a while as a primary school teacher 
and then as an architect, he returned to philosophy, Wittgenstein found his earlier 
views deeply flawed. He began to rethink not only the details of his earlier doc-
trines, but the whole approach: the whole conception of philosophy underlying 
them. The result was his second book, the Philosophical Investigations, published 
only after his death. In it he first offers a devastating critique of his earlier theories 
(not of their technical details, but of their underlying assumptions), then sketches 
his startlingly new approach to philosophy and, finally, applies this new approach 
to various problems in the philosophy of mind.
In a famous polemical passage in his Enquiry, Hume claimed that an academic 
discipline that was neither mathematics nor empirical science could result only 
in ‘sophistry and illusion’ (Hume 1748, 165). How can philosophy, as a non-
mathematical a priori discipline avoid this verdict? Wittgenstein’s response to 
Hume’s challenge is that philosophy is indeed concerned with sophistry and 
illusion. However, what Hume failed to realise is that philosophers do not only 
produce sophisms and illusions, but that there is also the perfectly respectable, 
critical philosophical activity of dissolving sophisms and dispelling illusions – a 
9
WITTGENSTEIN AND HIS LEGACY
Severin Schroeder

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
234
philosophy that seeks clarity and understanding of difficult conceptual relations, 
rather than new knowledge or theories.
Philosophical problems come about when we fail to understand, or are even 
confused by, our concepts and the ways they relate to each other. We tend to have 
an overly simplified picture of the workings of language which, when applied to 
certain concepts, is likely to result in paradox. For example, we naturally expect 
nouns to be names of (kinds of) objects (BB 1), as suggested by words like ‘tree’, 
‘house’ or ‘foot’. Therefore, when trying to understand the meaning of a word 
such as ‘mind’, we naively assume that it too must stand for a kind of object or 
substance, the question being only what kind of object that could be: a mate-
rial object (say, the brain) or perhaps a mysterious non-spatial soul substance (as 
envisaged by Descartes). Both alternatives lead to implausible results. The mis-
take was to construe the word ‘mind’ as a name of a thing in the first place (cf. 
PI §308). Hence, the very question ‘What (kind of thing) is the mind?’ should 
not be answered, but rejected, as it is based on a conceptual misunderstanding. 
Frequently, a philosophical problem is a confusion ‘expressed in the form of a 
question that doesn’t acknowledge the confusion’ (PG 193).
In order to dissolve such philosophical problems, we need to pay more careful 
and unprejudiced attention to the actual functioning of the concepts in question. 
Hence we assemble reminders of common usage (and common sense) (PI §127), 
and we give synoptic representations of the use of the words involved (PI §122). 
The result of such philosophical investigations will be clarity: the demolition of 
illusions (PI §118), a better understanding of the relations between certain concepts. 
It will not, however, lead to any new and surprising insights or theories (BT 419). 
If one wanted to characterise Wittgenstein’s philosophy in one sentence, one could 
say that it is a defence of common sense against some clever forms of nonsense (or 
patent falsehood) suggested by a misunderstanding of the forms of our language.1
2.  The inner-object model
The starting point of Wittgenstein’s later philosophy, and one of its leitmotifs, is a 
critique of his own earlier ideas about language, in particular of a view that could 
be called referentialism: the view (already illustrated in the previous section) that 
‘a word has meaning by referring to something’ (PO 454), and that ‘language 
consists in naming objects, namely: people, species, colours, pains, moods, num-
bers, etc.’ (BT 209v). Later in the Philosophical Investigations, having discussed 
and rejected referentialism in general, Wittgenstein considers various specific 
instances of referentialism, and further confusions and problems to which it gives 
rise, in the philosophy of mind. Referentialism applied to psychological terms – 
such as ‘sensation’, ‘thought’, ‘understanding’, ‘willing’ – results in a philosophi-
cal picture which can be called the inner-object model. If words (at least nouns 
and verbs) stand for objects, then psychological words must presumably stand for 
inner objects, perceived by one’s inner sense inside one’s mind, which we tend to 
think of as a private container to which only its owner has access. (Of course the 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
235
word ‘object’ must be taken in the broadest sense to cover any objective phenom-
ena, including states, processes and events.)
‘The inner-object model’ is basically another name for ‘Cartesian dualism’. But 
whereas the latter label emphasises Descartes’s distinction between the mental and 
the physical, the former indicates the surprising thrust of Wittgenstein’s critique: 
that on Descartes’s picture the difference between the mental and the physical, far 
from being overly pronounced, appears rather too slight! The psychological realm 
is construed in parallel to the physical realm: thoughts and feelings are regarded 
as objects like chairs and tables – only located in a private mental space rather 
than the public physical space. Against this picture, Wittgenstein is going to argue 
that the differences between psychological and physical concepts are far greater 
than commonly assumed.
3.  Sensations and other minds
In §243 of the Philosophical Investigations Wittgenstein presents the idea of a 
private sensation language: ‘The individual words of this language are to refer to 
what can only be known to the person speaking; to his immediate private sensa-
tions. So another person cannot understand the language’ (PI §243). This passage 
naively expresses the dualist, or inner-object view (and not, as the following dis-
cussion shows, Wittgenstein’s own position): It is simply assumed that sensations, 
feelings, moods, and the rest are private, inner objects, inaccessible to others. 
Wittgenstein’s procedure in §§243–315 of the Investigations is to develop the 
consequences of that view with respect to words for bodily sensations and feel-
ings and then to show how those consequences lead to absurdity or contradiction. 
Chief among those consequences is the following: as an inner object a bodily 
sensation – and indeed the mind on the whole – is logically independent of any 
behavioural manifestations; just as the contents of a box are logically independent 
of the label on the box. From this follows the problem of other minds: If minds 
are logically independent of behaviour, how can we ever know for certain what 
others think or feel, or indeed, whether they think or feel anything at all? There 
is always the possibility of deception: people can hide their feelings and simulate 
feelings they do not have. And there is also the deeper worry that the contents of 
our minds may be, to some extent, incommunicable. How do you know whether 
what you call your ‘pain’ is at all like the private experience I call ‘pain’? When 
I give names to my feelings the meanings of these names are, strictly speaking, as 
inaccessible to you as those private feelings of mine. You may guess what I feel, 
and hence what my words mean, but you can never be certain about it. Thus the 
inner-object model of sensations leads to the idea of a strictly private language, 
one that could not possibly be understood by anybody else.
I shall now reconstruct Wittgenstein’s principal objections to the inner-object 
view of sensations.
(i) A first objection can be called the idle-wheel argument. Suppose that when 
people complain about pains they have experiences that vary dramatically from 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
236
person to person, but are so insuperably private that these differences can never 
be ascertained. Then, these differences can never affect the public use of the word 
‘pain’, for example the way one talks about one’s ailments to one’s doctor. Hence, 
where the meaning of our public word ‘pain’ is concerned, any entirely private 
occurrence that might accompany the use of that word ‘drops out of considera-
tion as irrelevant’ (PI §293). As Wittgenstein puts it in §271: ‘a wheel that can be 
turned though nothing else moves with it, is not part of the mechanism’.
(ii) Another line of attack against the inner-object model of sensations concerns 
the Cartesian idea of a privileged knowledge of the contents of one’s own mind:
In what sense are my sensations private? – Well, only I can know whether 
I am really in pain; another person can only surmise it. – In one way this 
is false, and in another nonsense. If we are using the word “to know” as it 
is normally used (and how else are we to use it!), then other people very 
often know when I’m in pain. – Yes, but all the same not with the cer-
tainty with which I know it myself! – It can’t be said of me at all (except 
perhaps as а joke) that I know I’m in pain.
[PI §246]
Of course, by ordinary standards, we often do know when others are in pain. In 
order to make scepticism about other minds appear at all plausible, some more 
demanding standard needs to be invoked, and that is what seems to be the infallible 
knowledge one has of one’s own sensations. By comparison with this paradigm 
of ‘real knowledge’, it would indeed appear that not much else can be ‘known’. 
Wittgenstein’s reply swiftly turns the tables: Far from being a paradigm of knowl-
edge this is not really a case of knowledge at all! Why not? The crucial point is 
that what we ordinarily call knowledge presupposes the logical possibility of error 
and ignorance. You can be said to know something only where it would also have 
been conceivable for you not to know it. Just as you cannot meaningfully be said 
to be the winner of a game in which nobody can lose, there is no sense in speaking 
of knowledge where there is, logically, no possibility of ignorance, doubt or error 
(PI p. 221: PPF §311). Hence, since one cannot be mistaken or in doubt about 
one’s own sensations (PI §288), one cannot really say that one knows of one’s 
own sensations either. Thus, scepticism about other minds is stopped in its tracks: 
By ordinary standards, it is undeniably possible often to know what others feel. 
And this cannot be said to be only an inferior kind of knowledge compared with 
my knowledge of my own pain, for I do not have knowledge of my own pain. The 
ability to express one’s own feelings is not correctly described as knowledge.2
(iii) There is yet another objection to the view that one cannot know but only 
surmise what others feel. Although apparently а consequence of the inner-object 
assumption, it is in fact inconsistent with that assumption. The claim that I know 
sensations only from inner experience is incompatible with my attributing sensa-
tions, though precariously, to others. It does not even make sense to assume that 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
237
something like one’s private experience might also be had by somebody else. This 
objection, which goes to the core of the inner-object model, may be called the 
ascribability argument. It is tempting to think: ‘If I suppose that someone has a pain, 
say, then I am simply supposing that he has just the same as this’ (cf. PI §350). Witt-
genstein’s reply is that the proponent of the inner-object model lacks the conceptual 
resources for this transition from introspection to talk about the feelings of others:
If one has to imagine someone else’s pain on the model of one’s own, 
this is none too easy a thing to do: for I have to imagine pain which I 
don’t feel on the model of the pain which I do feel. That is, what I have 
to do is not simply to make a transition in the imagination from pain in 
one place to pain in another. As, from pain in the hand to pain in the arm. 
For it is not as if I had to imagine that I feel pain in some part of his body 
(which would also be possible).
[PI §302]
According to the inner-object view, one learns what pain is by having pain. When, 
for example, I have hurt myself, I concentrate on the feeling and impress it upon 
myself that this is what one calls ‘pain’. But, Wittgenstein objects, even if that 
procedure allowed me henceforth to identify my own pains correctly, it would 
not enable me to understand statements of the form ‘NN is in pain’. Introspection 
can never teach me how to ascribe a sensation to a particular person – not even 
to myself. For when I feel pain, I do not feel my self having the pain. I only feel 
pain in a certain place, so the idea that others have pain I could only understand to 
mean that I feel pain in other bodies.
The difficulty is not how to make the transition from ‘I am in pain’ to ‘He is in 
pain’, but from ‘There is pain’ to ‘He is in pain’. From the point of view of intro-
spective consciousness that is acquainted with pain only as something felt, the 
idea of another person’s pain amounts to pain-that-is-not-felt – which must appear 
as a contradiction in terms. Roughly speaking, feeling pain (my own pain) cannot 
teach me to understand the idea of pain that is not felt (others’ pain).
In fact, in order to make sense of the assumption that someone else is in pain it is 
not the experience of pain I need, but the concept of pain. And a grasp of this concept 
includes an understanding of what it means to ascribe pain to a particular person. 
I must know, in brief, that ‘the subject of pain is the person who gives it expression’ 
(PI §302). Of course, a pain need not be expressed: one can in many cases keep 
one’s sensations to oneself. Moreover, an expression of pain may be faked. Still, it is 
part of our concept of pain that certain patterns of behaviour (crying, moaning, sigh-
ing, gnashing one’s teeth, holding or protecting the aching part of one’s body, etc.) 
are natural expressions of pain (cf. PI §244). They are the typical forms of behaviour 
of someone in pain who is unrestrained and willing to show his feelings.
Wittgenstein here introduces a useful distinction between two types of evi-
dence: criteria and symptoms. If it is part of the very meaning of a term ‘F’ that 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
238
some phenomenon is (good, though not infallible) evidence for the presence of F, 
then that phenomenon is a criterion of F. If, however, we have discovered only 
through experience that F is usually accompanied by a certain phenomenon, then 
that phenomenon is only a symptom of F (BB 24–25, cf. PI §354). The upshot 
of the ascribability argument (PI §302) is that, in order to ascribe а sensation to 
а particular person, we need а criterion by which to identify sensations in others 
(for it must be determined what it means for somebody to have a sensation). And 
there is indeed such a criterion, namely appropriate expressive behaviour, which 
is not just a symptom of sensations, but forms an integral part of the grammar 
of sensation words. But with that criterion in place, the inner-object picture col-
lapses. As there is a conceptual link between pain, for example, and certain forms 
of expressive behaviour, the idea that in spite of that behaviour – by reference to 
which the word ‘pain’ has been given its meaning (PI §244) – there might never 
be any pain becomes inconsistent.
It has to be admitted, of course, that the criterial link between the inner and the 
outer is not a neat one-to-one correlation. There is the possibility of deception: 
pain-behaviour may be insincere. However, the sceptical consequences of this 
qualification are limited, for four reasons.
First, deceit too is a distinctive form of behaviour (NfL 241d): there are criteria 
by which to tell whether someone is sincere or deceitful; otherwise we could not 
meaningfully speak of sincerity and deception (LW 42g). Although we may not 
always be able to tell whether someone is sincere or not, we can normally say 
what kind of further evidence would settle the matter.
Secondly, deceit is a rather complicated form of behaviour that can only be 
attributed to creatures whose behavioural repertoire displays a good deal of intel-
ligence. It requires a motive based on an understanding of what is to be gained by 
simulation (RPP I §824). Thus the idea that a baby may be dishonest is incoherent 
(PI §249).
Thirdly, although for any isolated utterance or piece of behaviour one could 
imagine a context that would expose it as mere pretence, this is not true of suf-
ficiently long sequences of circumstances and behaviour. If over months you 
observe someone suffering from an obvious and severe injury, it is ridiculous to 
insist that this might be a mere pretence.
Finally, that it is logically possible for a proposition to be false is not in itself 
a reason to doubt its truth. It is simply a trivial grammatical feature of any 
empirical proposition. (This is a general objection to all forms of philosophical 
scepticism.)
(iv) In one of the most discussed passages of the Philosophical Investigations, 
Wittgenstein illustrates the way sensation language is envisaged by the proponent 
of the inner-object picture. To highlight the dualist belief that sensations are logi-
cally independent of expressive behaviour it is assumed in a thought experiment 
that I have no natural expression for a given sensation, but only have the sensa-
tion (PI §256). And now: ‘I want to keep a diary about the recurrence of [that] 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
239
sensation. To this end I associate it with the sign “S” and write this sign in a diary 
for every day on which I have the sensation’ (PI §258).
Wittgenstein continues to object that when trying to keep such a private sensa-
tion diary (1) I have no criterion of correctness. Therefore, (2) whatever is going 
to seem right to me is right. And so, (3) here we can’t talk about ‘right’ (PI §258). 
This is what I call the no-criterion argument.
The final conclusion is a little exaggerated. ‘Whatever is going to seem right 
to me is right’ is not the same as, ‘Anything is right’ (which would make the use 
of the word ‘right’ pointless). It would still be wrong for me to write down ‘S’ 
on a day when none of my sensations seemed to be of the same kind as the one 
I initially called ‘S’. What Wittgenstein should have concluded is: (3*) ‘And that 
only means that here we can’t talk about an error.’ This is exactly what he says 
elsewhere about reporting one’s pain (PI §288).
Now, what about conclusion (2)? Given that there is no criterion to check 
whether truthful ‘S’ inscriptions are objectively true or false (i.e. true or false inde-
pendently of the person’s impression), is it not possible nonetheless to wonder 
whether they are? After all, there are other cases of unverifiable propositions that 
must nevertheless be objectively true or false. For example, ‘Immediately before 
her death Queen Victoria remembered her wedding day’ is presumably a proposi-
tion that is either true or false, although as it happens it can never be confirmed 
or disconfirmed. The question arises whether the private diarist’s ‘S’ inscriptions 
might not be of the same character: Could they not be objectively true or false, 
even though it is impossible to check?
There is, however, a crucial difference between those cases. In the case of the 
conjecture about Queen Victoria’s last thoughts, we may insist on truth or falsity 
because we know perfectly well what it means to say, for example, that someone 
remembers Prince Albert, etc. That is to say, although stymied in these special 
circumstances, we are able in countless other cases to ascertain whether that 
predicate applies or not. In contrast, with ‘S’ the problem is precisely that we 
cannot draw a distinction between a generally unproblematic predicate and its 
unverifiable application in only some particular cases. We cannot refer back to 
other applications of ‘S’ under more straightforward circumstances. The diarist’s 
entries are, and will remain, the only applications of ‘S’ available. There is no 
room in this case for a notion of truth that would not coincide with sincerity, not 
simply because ‘S’ inscriptions are found to be uncheckable, but because (unlike 
in the case of Queen Victoria’s last thoughts) there is no predicate involved whose 
applications would be checkable under any circumstances. Hence, the attempt to 
construe the sign ‘S’ as the name of objective mental occurrences fails.
It should be emphasised that this conclusion, (2), is not based on the contro-
versial doctrine of verificationism: the view that the sense of a proposition is its 
method of verification or falsification, and that therefore any un(dis)confirmable 
statement must be meaningless. For one thing, the issue is about simple predi-
cates, not about statements. For another thing, the claim is not that because ‘S’ 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
240
inscriptions are unverifiable they are meaningless; the claim is merely that ‘S’ 
inscriptions cannot be construed as descriptions of inner objects. After all, that 
‘S’ inscriptions are not based on criteria and therefore unverifiable does not dis-
tinguish them from countless ordinary first-person present-tense psychological 
utterances. I cannot apply any criteria to verify my claim that I have a slight head-
ache (nor can anybody else), and yet one would surely not want to dismiss that 
statement as meaningless.
The no-criterion argument provides yet another refutation of the inner-object 
model. If a sensation were an inner object perceived and identified through intro-
spection, it should be possible occasionally to misperceive and misidentify it. One 
could, for instance, be mistaken in one’s belief that one was in pain. That sounds 
absurd. For we do not identify our sensations by criteria (PI §290), and where 
there is no criterion, there is no possibility of error. But how do we identify our 
(own) sensations? The answer is that we do not identify them at all.
How then do words refer to sensations? Our natural responses to pain are not 
the result of an identification. Rather, the sensation of pain makes us cry. And later 
verbal expressions are grafted onto natural ones: we are trained until a suitable 
verbal expression comes as naturally to us as a cry or a moan (although, of course, 
we also learn to suppress all such reactions) (PI §244).
It is part of the very concept of pain that certain forms of behaviour are natural 
expressions of pain. If someone behaves in such a way, and is truthful – that is 
what we call ‘being in pain’. That is the way the concept of pain is formed. The 
question whether someone is in pain or not is decided by that person’s sincere 
behaviour. As a consequence, the philosophical query whether people’s sincere 
avowals of pain are correct – whether they are really in pain when they truthfully 
says they are – does not make sense. Sincere avowals are correct ‘by definition’; 
their correctness is built into our concept of pain.
In resolving the philosophical problem of other minds, Wittgenstein draws 
attention to its connection with another one: the problem of first-person author-
ity. As noted above, Wittgenstein’s objection to Cartesian dualism is not (as one 
might expect) that it exaggerates the distinction between the mental and the physi-
cal, but, on the contrary, that it makes it appear too slight. The dualist conception 
of psychological phenomena is too much shaped after our concept of physical 
objects or events. Construed as inner objects, sensations and thoughts in others 
become elusive; but, as Wittgenstein was the first to note, sensations and thoughts 
in ourselves become problematic too. If expressing one’s feelings were a matter 
of observing and reporting inner occurrences, the special authority we have in 
expressing what we feel would be puzzling. Error would at least appear to be a 
possibility. Only when the inner-object model is rejected, can the puzzle of first-
person authority be resolved. Our virtual infallibility (linguistic mistakes apart) in 
expressing our own feelings is not due to our eagle-eyed gaze of introspection, but 
simply to linguistic meaning. Whatever you find painful is painful to you. That is 
what we mean by ‘painful’.3

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
241
4.  Meaning and understanding: the paradox  
of the instantaneous experience of  
complex contents
Unlike bodily sensations (such as pain), understanding, thoughts, intentions, and 
memories have a specific intentional content: they are about something else. How 
is that possible? The most natural, indeed virtually unavoidable, answer is that 
such mental occurrences must be inner representations of whatever their contents 
are. But this view, Wittgenstein shows, leads to a formidable problem: Under-
standing, intention, expectation, remembering, and other such mental occurrences, 
can have remarkably rich and complex contents. It may take very long to spell out 
completely what exactly someone understood, intended, expected or remembered 
on a given occasion. And yet it appears that the understanding, intending, expect-
ing, or remembering can occur instantaneously: in a flash. How is that possible? 
How can so much be experienced in a flash?
Consider, for instance, that it is possible to grasp the meaning of a word in an 
instance (PI §§138–139), although an account of the meaning of a word, of all 
the details of its use, would have to be extremely long and complicated. How can 
it be present to my mind all at once? ‘What really comes before our mind, when 
we understand a word?’, Wittgenstein asks, and proceeds to consider the Lockean 
view that it is ‘something like a picture’ (PI §139). However, understanding a 
word cannot be the same as having a mental image, for any image can be inter-
preted, or applied, differently. For instance, the perspectival drawing of a cube (as 
a candidate for giving meaning to the word ‘cube’) may also be taken as a two-
dimensional figure consisting of a square and two trapeziums. Again, the image 
of a dog may be taken to represent: a particular golden retriever, or any golden 
retriever, or any dog, or a mammal, or an upright position, or many other things 
(cf. PI §139). Indeed, one cannot even assume that when an image is produced in 
one’s mind by hearing a word this image must represent what one takes the word 
to mean. The word ‘winter’ may produce in me the image of an old aunt pour-
ing out tea without my being under the strange misapprehension that that is what 
the word ‘winter’ means. Two people hearing a word can have the same mental 
image and yet a different understanding of the word, manifested in the different 
ways they apply it and the different explanations they give (cf. PI §140). And it is 
also possible that two people have different mental images when hearing the same 
word, although they are in perfect agreement about its meaning. These objections 
are equally applicable to the complementary account of meaning something as 
having mental images (PI §663).
So, we may indeed have a mental image of a cube in our mind when hearing 
(or uttering) the word ‘cube’, but that is not what understanding (or meaning) the 
word consists in, as one can understand without having any mental image and no 
mental image guarantees understanding. Still, the idea is there, and persistently 
recurs in the Investigations, that a mental state, possibly instantaneous, can have 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
242
a determinate content, possibly very extensive and complicated. After all, we do 
mean, understand, remember or intend complicated processes, for example:
There is no doubt that I now want to play chess, but chess is the game it 
is in virtue of all its rules (and so on). Don’t I know, then, which game 
I wanted to play until I have played it? Or is it rather that all the rules are 
contained in my act of intending?
[PI §197]
This is what I call the paradox of the instantaneous experience of complex con-
tents: The contents must all be there in a flash, for I can correctly avow that at a 
particular moment I intend (or have understood, or expect, or remember) some-
thing. But then again, the contents are not all there in a flash, for I am not really 
aware of all the details: all possible uses of the word; or all rules of chess; they are 
not all in front of my mind at the same time.
Consider the example of a pupil taught to write down (the beginning of) the 
series of even numbers on being given the order ‘+ 2’. Up to 1000 he does that 
correctly; we ask him to continue and ‘he writes 1000, 1004, 1008, 1012’ – :
We say to him: “Look what you’re doing!” – He doesn’t understand. We 
say: “You should have added two: look how you began the series!” – He 
answers: “Yes, isn’t it right? I thought that was how I had to do it.” – Or 
suppose he pointed to the series and said: “But I did go on in the same 
way.” – It would now be no use to say: “But can’t you see. . . . ?” – and 
go over the old explanations and examples for him again.
[PI §185]
Obviously, the pupil did not understand the order ‘+ 2’ the way his teacher under-
stood it and meant it. The pupil was not meant to write 1004 after 1000. Does that 
mean that the teacher had thought explicitly of 1002 as the correct number to write 
after 1000? No, or if he had thought of that particular transition, then not of count-
less others. He rather thought that the pupil ‘should write the next but one number 
after every number that he wrote’ (PI §186). This is a general rule, or formula, 
that may have been in the teacher’s mind when he gave the shorthand order ‘+ 2’. 
Now the question is whether the presence of such a rule in someone’s mind can 
account for his understanding or meaning an infinite series. Obviously not (cf. PI 
§152). The teacher may give the rule to his pupil (instead of the abbreviated signal 
‘+ 2’), make him learn it by heart, and yet there is no guarantee that the pupil will 
continue correctly. It is conceivable that he misunderstands the explicit rule just 
as he misunderstood the order ‘+ 2’: taking it as we would take the rule: ‘Add 2 up 
to 1000, 4 up to 2000, 6 up to 3000, and so on’ (PI §185). So, any rule, even the 
most explicit one, can be misunderstood; and in endless ways, too: whichever way 
the pupil continues the series, his writing can always be regarded as in accordance 
with the rule – on a suitable interpretation (cf. PI §86). And now it is puzzling 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
243
how it should be at all possible to follow a rule, for ‘Whatever I do is, on some 
interpretation, in accord with the rule’ (PI §198)!
This line of argument (which Wittgenstein does not endorse, but present for 
critical discussion) can be put as follows:
1)	 A series of numbers can be continued in various ways.
2)	 The way it is meant to be continued is expressed by a rule (or formula).
3)	 A rule (or formula) can be interpreted in various ways.
4)	 Therefore, a rule (or formula) cannot determine a continuation.
5)	 Therefore, our meaning (as expressed by a rule) cannot determine a continuation.
The final conclusion (5) is partly based on (2): That the teacher meant the series 
to be continued in a particular way we tried to explain by saying that he had some 
general rule or formula in mind. So, if that rule cannot fix a standard of correct-
ness, clearly, his meaning that rule cannot do it either.
The flaw (to which Wittgenstein wants to direct out attention) lies in the step 
from (3) to (4): That a rule can be interpreted in various ways does not entail that 
a rule cannot determine a continuation. One might as well argue as follows:
Your bicycle could always be stolen.
Therefore, it can never be used.
It is obviously fallacious to argue from ‘It can go wrong’ to ‘It can’t go right’. If your 
bicycle is indeed stolen from you, then of course you cannot use it; but it is well 
possible, perhaps even likely, that it is not stolen and then you can use it. Moreover, 
even if your bicycle is stolen, it can (and probably will) still be used – though not by 
you. Similarly: for any given continuation (e.g. 1000, 1002, 1004), a suitable rule 
(e.g. xn = 2n) can always be interpreted not to yield that result – but it need not be 
so interpreted and normally it isn’t. And even if the rule ‘xn = 2n’ is interpreted in a 
deviant way, it will still determine a continuation of the series, albeit not the one we 
expected (but perhaps the one written down by the deviant pupil).
There remains the worrying consideration that a rule needs to be interpreted at 
all. It cannot by itself determine a continuation. It seems that in order to understand 
it in some way, you need to give it an interpretation. And once you accept that an 
interpretation is necessary, you seem to be launched on an infinite regress: for what-
ever interpretation you give, it is in no better a position than the rule itself. It, too, 
needs to be interpreted in a particular way (cf. PI §86) – and so on, and so forth.
Wittgenstein’s response to that puzzling consideration is that for us to think, 
even for a moment, that on a certain understanding the formula ‘y = x2’, for exam-
ple, yields 25 for x = 5, the infinite regress that seemed to threaten must have been 
stopped. Our understanding in this case cannot just be an interpretation: that is, 
another formula to paraphrase the first, of which again it would be an open ques-
tion how to understand it (PI §201). Our understanding of a rule cannot forever be 
mediated by another rule.

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
244
What it amounts to is simply this: we are able to work out that for x = 5 the 
formula ‘y = x2’ yields 25. How? Well, ‘I have been trained to react to this sign in 
a particular way, and now I do so react to it’ (PI §198). This is the core of the mat-
ter: knowing-how (a skill) cannot, ultimately, be explained in terms of knowing-
that (a piece of information). For any piece of information, for any formula in the 
mind, we would again need to know how to apply it. It may happen occasionally 
that our understanding of a formula is based on, or mediated by, our understand-
ing of another formula. But such a translation of one formula into another cannot 
be the basic case of understanding: or else we would never begin to learn the 
meaning of any formula. Likewise, our basic linguistic understanding, the mas-
tery of our first language, can evidently not be explained in terms of translation 
into another language.
There is a strong temptation to think that when we have understood in gen-
eral how to proceed, somehow all the correct applications must be laid down 
in advance in the mind, so that each step can be justified by reference to that 
perfect mental instruction manual. But that perfect mental instruction manual is 
an illusion and (as explained) a logical impossibility. Our basic skills must stand 
on their own. They are engendered by training, but what they enable us to do is 
open-ended and cannot be exhaustively listed in training, nor could there be such 
an exhaustive list in the mind or anywhere else (cf. Z §§300–301).
The paradox of the instantaneous experience of complex, or even infinite, con-
tents resulted from a mistaken, but very natural, idea of a mental process or occur-
rence. It is extremely tempting to envisage mental occurrences as comprehensive 
representations: that must somehow contain everything the mental representation 
is about or directed at. That kind of mental representation would be astonish-
ing enough where what we have in mind is fairly complex – as with the rules of 
chess, which appear to be represented in our momentary desire to play chess (PI 
§197); but it becomes patently impossible when we mean or understand an infinite 
arithmetical series. At first glance it seemed that such infinity could conveniently 
be represented by a short formula, but then it became clear that our meaning 
or understanding the formula would have to contain how the formula was to be 
applied in an infinity of instances (to forestall an infinity of possible misunder-
standings) – which again, appears to make such meaning (or understanding) a 
mind-boggling feat. So, how can the mind perform such a feat? It cannot. The 
truth is that no such marvellously rich representation occurs; and it is an error to 
think that it needs to occur for meaning (or understanding) to be possible. That 
is Wittgenstein’s dissolution of the paradox of the immediate experience of com-
plex, or even infinite, contents.
But then: if meaning one thing rather than another is not brought about by a 
comprehensive and infallible mental representation of that thing, how is it brought 
about? – In response to this question Wittgenstein merely invites us to remember 
under what circumstances it is correct to say that somebody meant something. 
There is no such thing as an intricate mental mechanism of meaning that could 
be investigated and explained (PI §689). There is no process of meaning: ‘For 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
245
no process could have the consequences of meaning something’ (PI, p. 218: PPF 
§291). Any process you might think of can occur without your meaning the thing 
in question. What makes it true, then, that when I say ‘Let’s play a game of chess’ 
I mean the game of chess with all its rules, and not some other game? The link 
is not made by some miraculous mental mechanism, but by the circumstances in 
which the utterance is made: In English ‘chess’ is the name of a particular game 
the rules of which have been listed and widely published; there are clubs and 
organisations that insist on those rules, and people are taught those rules at home 
or at school. So when a competent and normally educated English speaker speaks 
of ‘chess’ he can be taken to mean what we all call ‘chess’ (cf. PI §197). In other 
words, there is no doubt that when he speaks of ‘chess’, he speaks of chess (cf. 
PI §687). – Admittedly, it is conceivable that someone uses the word ‘chess’, but 
means backgammon; either because his knowledge of English is less than perfect, 
or simply through a slip of the tongue. But how would such a person differ from 
someone who uses the word ‘chess’ correctly? There need not be any difference 
in what went through their heads at the time of the utterance: If God had looked 
into their minds he might not have been able to see there which game they wanted 
to play (PI, p. 217: PPF §284). Rather, to say that they meant different games 
amounts to saying that they will respond differently when, say, the pieces are set 
up in front of them, or that they would have responded differently, had the matter 
been pursued further (PI §§187, 684). Frequently, the difference between different 
thoughts or intentions is only a conditional one: one that would manifest itself (or 
would have manifested itself) under certain circumstances.
5.  Thinking
What is thinking? Again, the most natural answer will be informed by the inner-
object model. Thinking appears to take place in our minds, and so in order to get 
clear about its nature, or about the meaning of the word ‘thinking’, we watch 
ourselves, the contents of our minds, while we think, expecting that ‘what we 
observe will be what the word means’. Wittgenstein objects that ‘this concept is 
not used like that’ (PI §316). What can be observed in my consciousness when, 
for example, I am thinking that I have to write to my aunt thanking her for a 
birthday present I didn’t like at all? Not a lot. If it is not the first time that I think 
of this mildly tiresome obligation, the thought will perhaps re-appear in my mind 
as nothing more than a peculiar feeling of uneasiness. I don’t have to repeat to 
myself what I am uneasy about; I know straightaway what this feeling is about. 
When I dwell a little longer on the thought, I will perhaps see a mental image of 
the parcel I received from her together with a vague auditory image of the tel-
ephone conversation we had six months ago. Are these images the thought? No, 
for if I just told someone the images, he would not get the thought (Z §239). Even 
if I add, what is not really part of the mental images, from whom I had the parcel 
and with whom I had spoken on the telephone, it is impossible to work out that 
I am thinking of writing her a thank-you letter. Exactly the same mental images 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
246
might accompany somebody’s thought that he would not write in response to the 
parcel, or that he expected soon to receive another parcel from the same sender.
We are inclined to believe that when we think something the content of the 
thought must somehow be represented in our consciousness, but this is usually 
not the case. And even when the contents of a thought are fairly comprehensively 
expressed in foro interno, one cannot simply read off the thought from this inner 
representation. For the fact that the words ‘I have to write to my aunt to thank her 
for that awful present’ go through my mind does not necessarily mean that I am hav-
ing that thought. Just now, for example, they went through my mind when I did not 
have any such thought – merely as an example for this philosophical consideration.
The word ‘think’ functions rather differently from the word ‘write’. When I am 
writing that it will rain tomorrow, this content is completely laid down on the 
paper and can be read off there; when I am thinking that it will rain tomorrow 
there need not be any such readable representation in my mind. Usually, what can 
be found there resembles more a private shorthand, for example, a few diagonal 
lines which I take in this case as indicating that it will rain tomorrow, although 
that is not a meaning the lines have for others or in other cases.
I can see, or understand, a thought complete before my mind’s eye in a 
flash in the same sense in which I can make a note of it in a few words 
or a few pencilled dashes.
[PI §319]
That of course raises the question: ‘What makes this note into an epitome of this 
thought?’ (PI §319). The answer is: ‘The use that I make of it’ (MS 124, 218). 
Should anyone ask me what those pencilled dashes mean, I can explain it; and 
if I look at the note later it will remind me that I expected rain for the next day. 
Of course, my mental images cannot be presented to others nor kept for my own 
later recollection. But the analogy lies in the fact that I can say authoritatively 
and without being constrained by semantic conventions what the images or words 
flitting through my mind mean: what thoughts they are illustrating for me. This 
is the way our concept of thinking functions: What I think is what I can sincerely 
declare to be my thought, and what can also manifest itself in my further behav-
iour. The words and images that go through my mind when I am thinking are 
ultimately quite irrelevant.
In his early philosophy, in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Wittgenstein 
had taken thinking to be a process accompanying speech and giving it meaning, a 
process that was itself rather similar to speaking. In the Investigations he was to 
criticise that view:
When I  think in language, there aren’t ‘meanings’ going through my 
mind in addition to the verbal expressions: language itself is the vehicle 
of thought.
[PI §329]

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
247
The idea of thinking as a process that accompanies speech and gives it signifi-
cance doesn’t sit well with the fact that it is possible to think aloud. When I think 
aloud: ‘What do I have to do today? Ah, yes, write to Aunt Agatha to thank her for 
that awful present she has sent me’ – what is it that gives meaning to those words? 
Are the words accompanied by a process of thinking or meaning them? In that 
case, the actual thinking would be the accompanying process, not the words. And 
if one always needed the backing of such a mental process, it wouldn’t be possible 
at all to think aloud. But then it wouldn’t be possible to think quietly in words 
either. For surely, whether the words are uttered aloud or are only articulated qui-
etly in my mind cannot make any difference. But in fact, when I said those words 
there was nothing else going on in my mind at the time. It is possible to think in 
words, aloud or quietly, without any accompanying mental process.
Having ascertained that thinking can take the form of words uttered aloud, 
Wittgenstein raises the question whether one can imagine people who could only 
think aloud (PI §331). It is not difficult to imagine that everything somebody 
says to himself he says aloud, like a person on stage whose thinking is thus laid 
open to the audience. In that case he could not simultaneously speak to others and 
articulate thoughts to himself. But that is perhaps something most people cannot 
do anyway. I find my own mental comments are always made between public 
utterances and not simultaneously with them. So the transition from speaking qui-
etly in one’s mind to speaking aloud seems unproblematic. The crucial question, 
however, is whether it is possible for all thinking to be articulated in words.
In that case, our intellectual life would have to slow down considerably. For in 
fact, our thoughts often occur much faster than we could express them in words. 
Somebody who could think only in words would take much longer to have a 
thought in its entirety before he could act accordingly. There are many situations, 
for example when driving a car, where such a delay in one’s thoughts and actions 
could have serious consequences and be a great handicap.
However, the philosophical concern goes deeper than that. A bit further in the 
discussion, Wittgenstein raises the following point:
But didn’t I already intend the whole construction of the sentence (for 
example) at its beginning? So surely it already existed in my mind before 
I uttered it out loud!
[PI §337]
However much a person is inclined to think aloud or soliloquise, it is hardly pos-
sible that when uttering a word of his thoughts he never knows what words will 
come afterwards. If one were to speak the beginning of a sentence without any 
anticipation of the following words, one could not know why one uttered the 
first words, which frequently don’t make any sense without the sequel. In that 
case, one would have to speak as in trance. In fact, however, somebody who 
consciously expresses his thoughts (or thinks aloud) does not need to wait for the 
end of his sentences to find out himself what he was going to say. In some sense, 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
248
the thoughts are already in one’s mind before they are fully articulated. It follows 
that, even when one is thinking in words, the thoughts cannot really be identified 
with their verbal expression. My awareness of my thoughts is not read off, and not 
entirely simultaneous with, the words that may embody the thoughts.
This is closely connected with the considerations of the previous section, which 
were triggered by the puzzlement at the fact that I can in a split second have the 
intention to play chess, for example. How can something as complicated as the 
game of chess be all in my mind in such a short space of time? The same prob-
lem arises when I take the time to formulate the sentence ‘I would like to play 
chess’. For I have to utter these words with understanding: that is, I must while 
I am speaking know what I mean by ‘chess’. All the numerous details of what 
I mean (e.g., that it is a game in which every player has eight pawns that can move 
only forward) are part of my thought. (For I didn’t mean, for example, a game in 
which every player has nine pawns.) In other words, even when I am thinking in 
complete sentences, my thoughts comprise more than the mere words. They also 
comprise a certain understanding of those words: the capacity to explain them and 
to develop their countless implications.
This is the reason why thinking cannot strictly be identified with any process in 
the mind: thinking requires an understanding of its contents, a capacity to explain 
it, apply it, and draw inferences from it. Yet a capacity belongs to a different logi-
cal category from a process.
6.  Voluntary action
What is a voluntary action? How is it to be distinguished from a mere event? To 
begin with, a voluntary action is performed by a conscious agent. However, that is 
not sufficient to characterize voluntariness, for conscious agents can also be pas-
sively involved in a mere event. I can jump off a wall, but I can also inadvertently 
fall off it or be pushed off it against my will. The bodily movements in these cases 
need not be different. Suppose in a given pair of cases they are exactly the same, 
how then are we to distinguish between the voluntary action and the mere event? 
It seems that the voluntary action must contain more than the mere event: there 
must be an extra element of willing or intention. So it should be possible to isolate 
that element of willing by a thought experiment of subtraction: ‘what is left over if 
I subtract the fact that my arm rises from the fact that I raise my arm?’ (PI §621). 
What is Wittgenstein’s answer to this question? – He does not give an answer. As 
so often in philosophy, the question is misguided, and instead of answering it we 
should find out what is wrong with it. It is, in fact, another instance of referential-
ism inviting us to construct some spurious inner object (event, process, or state). 
Words used to characterize an action as voluntary (like ‘will’ and its cognates) 
are uncritically taken to denote some mental occurrence, some phenomenon that 
added to the mere bodily movement turns it into a voluntary action.
This is the inner-object model of voluntary action. According to its classical 
version, going back to Descartes and the British Empiricists, ‘what is left over if 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
249
I subtract the fact that my arm rises from the fact that I raise my arm’ is an act of 
will, or (as Hume called it) a volition. For a bodily movement to be voluntary it 
must be caused by an act of will; without such a cause the same movement would 
be involuntary. Wittgenstein was familiar with similar views held by Bertrand 
Russell and William James. He offered three objections to this theory:
The first objection is very simple: The volitions or acts of will postulated by 
the theory do not exist. If we take an impartial look at what goes on in our minds 
whenever we move our body voluntarily, no suitable mental events causing the 
movements come to light. However, the elusiveness of acts of will tends to be 
obscured by philosophers’ selective attention, when they focus on only a few 
especially favourable examples, such as this one: ‘I deliberate whether to lift a 
certain heavyish weight, decide to do it, I then apply my force to it and lift it’ (BB 
150). Here we have some occurrences that could, without absurdity, be thought 
to constitute willing: some anticipatory thinking of the action, an act of resolve, 
a sensation of bodily effort. And now we take our ideas about voluntary action 
from this kind of example and assume lightly that those ideas must apply to all 
cases of willing (BB 150). But of course not all cases are like that. We frequently 
do things without any such preliminaries. Just think of ordinary speech, which is 
often entirely unpremeditated and effortless, yet not for that matter involuntary.
Second Objection: Willing is thought to be a mental occurrence, but a mental 
occurrence must be either voluntary or involuntary. That leads to a fatal dilemma: 
If the mental act of willing is itself subject to the will, in order to be proper willing 
it would have to be willed. But then we are launched on an infinite regress: For the 
event of willing to be voluntary it has to be caused by an earlier event of willing; 
but that earlier event, too, in order to be voluntary would have to be caused by yet 
an earlier event of willing, and so on ad infinitum – which is absurd. So it seems 
more promising to deny that willing itself could be subject to the will: ‘I can’t will 
willing’ (PI §613). But that sounds odd as well. It would appear that ‘willing too 
is merely an experience . . . It comes when it comes, and I cannot bring it about’ 
(PI §611). But now the whole idea of voluntariness, of being in control of one’s 
actions, seems to be lost. That must be wrong too (PI §612). The dilemma shows 
that the whole question (whether or not willing can be willed) is misbegotten. 
Willing is not the sort of thing of which it makes sense to ask whether it is vol-
untary or involuntary. ‘Willing’ is neither the name of an action, nor of a passive 
experience. It is not the name of a mental occurrence of any kind.
Third Objection: According to the inner-object model, a voluntary bodily action 
is a bodily movement caused by a mental act. Thus, on this theory I bring it about 
that, say, my arm rises. But in fact, Wittgenstein objects, I don’t (PI §614). I don’t 
do anything else as a means to effect the rising of my arm. In particular, it cannot 
be said that I contract certain muscles in order for my arm to go up, for I don’t 
even know which muscles need to be contracted for the arm to go up. (It is rather 
the other way round: I could raise my arm in order to bring about the contraction 
of whatever muscles are involved in the process.) Nor do I bring about bodily 
movements by acts of wishing or deciding. Wishing that something may happen 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
250
is actually incompatible with doing it voluntarily (PI §616). The word ‘wish’, 
like ‘hope’, implies that one is not fully in control of what will happen. If I wish 
my arm to rise and, lo! it does – it wouldn’t be my own action and I’d be very 
surprised (Z §586b). A decision to raise my arm, on the other hand, is of course 
likely to lead to my raising my arm; but it does not just cause my arm to go up. 
Again, I’d be rather surprised if it did. It would not be my own doing (PI §627). 
A decision to do something may of course lead to a voluntary action, but it occurs 
before the action and cannot be regarded as part of it. Hence it cannot figure in the 
analysis of the concept of a voluntary action.
Those three objections show that the inner-object model of voluntary action 
must be rejected. Words like ‘voluntary’ or ‘willing’ do not stand for some distinc-
tive mental occurrence that must precede or accompany a movement for it to be 
voluntary. How, then, is the word ‘voluntary’ used? Again, we should not expect 
the answer to be an exciting revelation. The concept is a familiar one, so its philo-
sophical elucidation can only be a reminder of what in practice we are all familiar 
with. ‘Voluntary movement is marked by the absence of surprise’ (PI §628). I am 
not a third-person observer to my own behaviour: I cannot look on with interest to 
see what will happen next, and then perhaps be surprised by it. That is related to 
the observation that my action’s being voluntary is incompatible with my wishing 
for it to happen (PI §616). For one can only have wishes about what is not entirely 
under one’s control, and where something is not under one’s control one can doubt 
whether it will happen (or never have thought of it), and hence be surprised if 
it does. Of course, that is not to say that all things that happen to us come as a 
surprise; but with mere events and involuntary actions surprise is at least always 
logically possible, whereas to the extent to which an action is voluntary there is 
logically no room for surprise.
Why not? It is tempting to think that one is not surprised here because one 
knows so reliably of one’s own voluntary movements. Then naturally the next 
question is: how does one know, and the almost unavoidable answer is that one 
feels one’s own voluntary movements, perhaps in one’s muscles and joints: ‘ “How 
do you know that you have raised your arm?” – “I feel it.” ’ (PI §625). But feelings 
can be deceptive. Whatever sensations may be characteristic of raising one’s arm, 
it is surely conceivable that in a laboratory they might be produced artificially, by 
drugs or electric currents. So when now I raise my arm with my eyes shut, what-
ever sensations I have in my muscles and joints, it should be conceivable that they 
are deceptive. Hence, if my awareness of my voluntary movements were based on 
such sensations, I should be able in this situation to consider it possible that I am 
not moving my arm (PI §624). But I find myself unable to do so; for my certainty 
that I am moving my arm is not based on the evidence of such sensations. I am just 
certain that I have raised my arm, and there is no evidence on which my certainty 
is based (PI §625).
The puzzle of first-person authority about one’s own agency is not unlike that 
about one’s sensations, and Wittgenstein dissolves it in a similar way. The puzzle 
is generated by treating the case as one of knowledge; which, first, makes it appear 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
251
strange that there shouldn’t be any possibility of error, and which, secondly, 
makes us look (in vain) for some grounds or evidence on which this extraordinary 
knowledge could be based. To remove the puzzle we only need to realize that 
the certainty is the result of our grammar. It is built into our very concept of a 
voluntary action that the agent is aware of it (cf. Z §600) – which is therefore as 
unsurprising as the fact that bachelors are without exception unmarried.
Consider a related case: You express an intention to go for a walk. Now the 
question ‘How do you know?’ makes no sense (or could only be understood as 
asking: ‘How do you know that you will not be prevented?’). An expression of 
intention is not based on any evidence and cannot be erroneous. In this respect 
expressions of intention are like declarations that one acted voluntarily: the agent’s 
authority is simply built into our concepts.
7.  Wittgenstein’s influence
Wittgenstein’s anti-Cartesian insistence that there is a conceptual link between 
mental states and expressive behaviour has often been accused of being a form 
of behaviourism. But, in fact, he nowhere showed any inclination to try to reduce 
mental states to behaviour (or behavioural dispositions), and it is indeed fairly 
obvious that, for most mental phenomena, there is no immediate expressive behav-
iour. Thoughts, for example, manifest themselves in words or deeds only when 
suitably combined with other mental states or dispositions. Taking this interrelat-
edness of mental states seriously, while accepting Wittgenstein’s valuable insight 
in the importance of behaviour for the explanation of the mind, led philosophers 
in the 1970s from behaviourism to a more sophisticated theory: functionalism.
How do Wittgenstein’s views on the mind compare and relate to functionalism? 
Certain similarities are undeniable. When Wittgenstein, in order to clarify our 
concept of pain, sketches the case of a child who has hurt himself and cries, and 
is later taught verbal pain-behaviour (PI §244), one may be tempted to see that as 
an anticipation of the functionalist conception of a human being as a mechanism 
that connects certain inputs (injury) with certain outputs (crying). Teaching may 
change this input-output function, presumably by affecting the mechanism’s inner 
states that mediate between input and output.
As explained in the first section, for Wittgenstein, the only licit philosophical 
method was conceptual analysis. Yet conceptual analysis is not likely to yield a 
simple and yet non-trivial reductive formula about the nature mental states. In 
particular, conceptual analysis provides no reason to expect that our concepts cor-
respond to the functional states of a determinate input-output mechanism. For 
example, given my strong desire to eat strawberries, it may be very likely that 
coming to know that there are strawberries for me in the fridge will cause me 
to go and eat them, but then again, one can easily imagine that I won’t: – I may 
decide to keep them for later; or to offer them to my neighbour; or I may suddenly 
remember that I need to make an urgent phone call; or I refuse them because 
I don’t want to be under any obligation to the giver; or it may occur to me that 

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
252
I don’t really care for strawberries any more. And even if there is no understand-
able reason for me not to eat the strawberries, it remains certainly conceivable that 
I don’t. Sometimes people do react in strange ways that they can’t fully explain. 
Although there are conceptual links between our descriptions of beliefs, desires, 
and actions, they don’t normally allow any predictions with logical certainty. All 
we can say is that a certain desire and a certain belief make a certain action under-
standable; or: under the circumstances a certain belief was a good reason to act 
in a certain way. But other actions would have been equally understandable and 
justifiable by reasons; and even actions that are not readily or fully understandable 
would at least be conceivable.
Note also that, with the possible exception of sense perception, our concepts of 
mental states are virtually open with respect to the causal origin of those states. 
If my neighbour’s ironic smile caused in me the firm conviction that he was a 
Russian mafia boss, I might well be accused of being irrational; yet this insuf-
ficient ground for my belief would not speak against attributing this belief to me 
if I expressed it with all seriousness. It is not built into our concept of a belief 
that it has to be caused in certain specific ways. Again, we have of course some 
empirical knowledge about the likely causes of pain and might be sceptical if 
somebody complained of pain in the absence of any such likely cause; yet its not 
a conceptual truth that for something to qualify as pain it must be caused in such 
and such a way. Indeed, we know from experience that occasionally people suffer 
pain from unidentifiable psychological causes.
So a specific functionalist identity claim can certainly not be established a pri-
ori. Our concepts of mental states do not imply any specific possibilities of origin 
or causal potential. Is it then perhaps a priori plausible to assume that any mental 
state is identical with some specific functional state defined by its possible origin 
and causal potential, to be discovered by future psychological research? No, for it 
cannot be ruled out that two instances of the same mental state may differ in their 
possible origin and causal (or dispositional) potential. Thus, some instances of the 
belief that p may in a certain surrounding of other mental states cause a feeling 
s, while other instances of the same belief do not. In fact, since we don’t know 
the specific causal (or dispositional) potential of any mental states it is a priori 
unlikely that our concepts should classify mental states exactly according to their 
causal (or dispositional) potential. It appears even more unlikely if we bear in 
mind that it is an essential feature of our most common mental or psychological 
concepts that they are self-ascribable in a way that is both authoritative and not 
based on evidence. My sincere avowal of a feeling, a preference, or a belief is, 
ipso facto, an expression of what I feel, prefer, or believe, even though it is not 
based on any observation of my mind, let alone a study of its causal mechanisms. 
My sincere avowal would, obviously, itself be an effect of the mental state in 
question; an effect that, under normal circumstances, suffices for us to identify 
that mental state. So, our concepts of such mental states are such that we identify 
them by one telling effect, namely the subject’s avowal. But isn’t it highly improb-
able that a functional state, defined by a list of all its possible causes and possible 

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
253
effects, should be identifiable from only a single one of its effects? Clearly, one 
should expect that this single effect, the subject’s sincere avowal, could be caused 
by very many different functional states. The concept of a functional state is far 
more finely grained and sharply defined than that of, say, the belief that Paris is the 
capital of France, or that of an admiration for Daniel Auteuil.
Functionalism starts out with certain conceptual truths, namely that mental 
states are affected by perception and sensation; they affect or condition other men-
tal states; and they lead to, and manifest themselves in, certain forms of behav-
iour. As far as these truisms (and their importance for the philosophy of mind) are 
concerned, there is agreement between Wittgenstein and functionalism. But, then, 
functionalists are greatly impressed by the fact that these truisms highlight a certain 
similarity between a human being and a computer, a so-called Turing machine, 
with input, distinct functional states, and output. And now functionalism presses 
this analogy: insisting that it is not merely an analogy, but an identity, that, in fact, a 
human being is a Turing machine, albeit a highly complicated one, and that mental 
states just are functional states. This second step – from an analogy to an identity 
claim – is where functionalism parts company with Wittgenstein. This second step 
is neither the result of conceptual analysis, nor supported by empirical evidence. It 
is a typical philosopher’s mistake. One is enthralled by a neat and attractive picture.
Here, as in other cases, Wittgensteinian considerations have been taken up by 
later philosophers of mind, but in a very different spirit, which quickly brings 
them in conflict with Wittgenstein’s approach. His conception of philosophy lim-
iting itself to conceptual clarification has not found many followers. Too strong 
seems to be the allure of quasi-scientific theory construction in philosophy.4
Notes
	 1	 For further discussion and illustration of Wittgenstein’s conception of philosophy, see 
Schroeder 2006, 151–168.
	 2	 Admittedly, it is possible to use the expression ‘I know I am in pain’ in a meaningful 
way; but then the word ‘know’ functions rather differently from its ordinary employ-
ment. It may, for example, be used in a bad-tempered request not to be told what one 
doesn’t need to be told.
	 3	 It is important to have a clear understanding of the target of the no-criterion argument. 
Contrary to what is often maintained in the secondary literature, the argument is not 
meant to be an objection to the private sensation diary described in §258. Rather, it is 
an objection to a misconstrual of this or indeed any other sensation language: namely 
the inner-object conception and its immediate consequence that one perceives one’s 
own sensations. Hence, the no-criterion argument is also directed at the view that oth-
ers can have only an indirect perception of my sensations: For if I do not perceive my 
sensations, others cannot be said to perceive them only indirectly. The point concerns 
ordinary sensations, such as pain, just as much as the ‘private’, fictitious scenario in 
which natural expressions or a familiar use of the sensation word are set to one side. 
What the argument is not supposed to show is that one cannot keep a record of sensa-
tions without a natural expression.
	 4	 I am grateful to Amy Kind and an anonymous referee for their helpful comments on an 
earlier version of this paper.

S e v e r i n  S c h r o e d e r
254
Further Reading
Budd, M. (1989). Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Psychology. London: Routledge; new ed. 
2014.
Hacker, P.M.S. (1990). Wittgenstein: Meaning and Mind. Vol. 3 of an Analytical Commen-
tary on the Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hacker, P.M.S. (1996). Wittgenstein’s Place in Twentieth-Century Analytic Philosophy, 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Hacker, P.M.S. (2010). “The Development of Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Psychology,” 
in Cottingham, J. and Hacker, P.M.S. (eds.), Mind, Method, and Morality: Essays in 
Honour of Anthony Kenny. Oxford: OUP: 275–305.
Malcolm, N. (1970). “Wittgenstein on the Nature of Mind,” American Philosophical Quar-
terly, 4: 9–29.
Racine, T. P., & Slaney, K. L. (eds.). (2013). A Wittgensteinian Perspective on the Use of 
Conceptual Analysis in Psychology. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rundle, B. (1997). Mind in Action. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Schroeder, S. (ed.). (2001). Wittgenstein and Contemporary Philosophy of Mind. Basing-
stoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Schroeder, S. (2006). Wittgenstein: The Way Out of the Fly-Bottle. Cambridge: Polity.
Bibliography
Hume, David (1748). Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, edited by Selby‑Bigge, 
L. A. and P. H. Nidditch (1975). Oxford: OUP.
Schroeder, Severin (2006). Wittgenstein: The Way Out of the Fly-Bottle. Cambridge: Polity.
Ludwig Wittgenstein
BB	
	The Blue and Brown Books, Oxford: Blackwell, 1958.
BT	
The Big Typescript, TS 213. Edited and translated by C. Grant Luckhardt and Max-
imilian A. E. Aue. Oxford: Blackwell. (BT)
LW	
Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology, eds.: G.H. von Wright, H. Nyman; 
tr.: C.V. Luckhardt, M.A.E. Aue, Oxford: Blackwell, 1982.
MS	
Manuscript (numbered in accordance with G.H. von Wright’s catalogue, in his 
‘The Wittgenstein Papers’, in his: Wittgenstein, Oxford: Blackwell, 1982) from 
Wittgenstein’s Nachlass: The Bergen Electronic Edition. Edited by the Wittgen-
stein Archives at the University of Bergen. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
NfL	
Notes for Lectures on “Private Experience” and “Sense Data” (1934–1936), in 
PO, 202–288.
PG	
Philosophical Grammar, ed.: R. Rhees, tr.: A.J.P. Kenny, Oxford: Blackwell, 1974.
PI	
Philosophical Investigations, 4th ed.: P.M.S. Hacker & J. Schulte; trans.: G.E.M. 
Anscombe, P.M.S. Hacker, J. Schulte, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell: 2009.
PO	
Philosophical Occasions 1912–1951, eds: J. Klagge & A. Nordmann, Indianapo-
lis: Hackett, 1993.
RFM	 Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, eds: G. H. von Wright, R. Rhees, 
G.E.M. Anscombe; tr.: G.E.M. Anscombe, rev. ed., Oxford: Blackwell, 1978.

W i t t g e n s t e i n  a n d  h i s  l e g a c y
255
RPP	
Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology, 2 vols, eds.: G.E.M Anscombe, G. 
H. von Wright, H. Nyman; tr.: G.E.M Anscombe, C. V. Luckhardt, M.A.E. Aue, 
Oxford: Blackwell, 1980.
TLP	
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. D. F. Pears and B. F. McGuinness. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961.
Z	
Zettel, eds: G.E.M. Anscombe & G. H. von Wright, tr.: G.E.M. Anscombe, Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1967.

256
1. The Cartesian conception of the mind
The subject of mental processes or mental states is usually assumed to be an indi-
vidual, and hence the boundaries of mental features – in a strict or metaphorical 
sense – are naturally regarded as reaching no further than the boundaries of the 
individual. This chapter addresses various philosophical developments in the 20th 
and 21st century that questioned this natural assumption. I will frame this discus-
sion by first presenting a historically influential commitment to the individualistic 
nature of the mental in Descartes’ theory. I identify various elements in the Carte-
sian conception of the mind that were subsequently criticized and rejected by vari-
ous externalist theories, advocates of the extended mind hypothesis and defenders 
of embodied cognition. Then I will indicate the main trends in these critiques.
Descartes’ work was partly a response to developments in natural science in 
the 17th century, and one of his goals was to provide a theoretical-philosophical 
foundation for modern science which rejected Aristotelian natural philosophy. 
Descartes was not the last philosopher who hoped to make a lasting contribution 
by providing a theory that integrates philosophy with modern science. Ever since 
the 17th century, there has been an occasionally reoccurring anxiety in philoso-
phy – famously expressed for example by Kant in the Critique of Pure Reason – 
about the fact that while the sciences appear to make great progress, philosophy in 
comparison seems to make very little, if any progress. Various remedies have been 
suggested, for example by offering a methodology or grounding for philosophy 
that is either imported from the sciences, or is comparable to the objectivity and 
explanatory power of scientific method. This will be one of the persisting themes 
in this chapter. In section 2, we will see how the attempt to ground philosophi-
cal theories by semantics offers the hope of progress and questions the Cartesian 
boundaries of the mind at the same time. In section 3, we will see how naturalism 
about the mind also leads to reconsidering the issue of boundaries.
Descartes’ considerations about the nature of the mind in his Second Medita-
tion have had a profound effect on the development of philosophy in the Western 
tradition.2 In the First Meditation, Descartes considers the possibility of being 
deceived by an evil demon. The starting point is the simple observation that things 
10
THE BOUNDARIES OF THE MIND1
Katalin Farkas

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
257
can appear different from the way they are. Extending the gap between appear-
ance and reality to its extreme, it is possible, contends Descartes, that the world 
I take to be around me does not exist, that even my body does not exist, but all 
appearances of a world and my body are results of the manipulations of an evil 
demon. If I were the victim of the demon, things would appear exactly the same 
as they do now, but in reality, they would be very different. The modern version of 
this scenario of radical deception is usually known as the “brain-in-a-vat” or “the 
Matrix” scenario, where the stimuli arriving to our brain from external objects 
or the rest of our body are replaced by an elaborate machinery of virtual reality.
Even in this case of radical deception, Descartes argues, I would still be a think-
ing thing; moreover, a thinker who would have exactly the same mental features 
as I do now. The sky and earth may not exist, but I would still believe they do; 
the light I seem to see and the noise I seem to hear may not be there, but I would 
still feel that they are. Two points are worth emphasizing here. First, even though 
the demon scenario allows for the non-existence of my body, Descartes explicitly 
says that, at this point, he is still agnostic about the existence of a mind separable 
from the body. So the resulting conception is not committed to dualism about 
mind and body. Second, there is an important epistemic asymmetry between my 
mind and the rest of the world: namely, the possibility of being deceived by a 
demon, or being a brain in a vat, threatens, at least prima facie, my knowledge of 
the rest of the world, but it does not threaten my knowledge of the content of my 
mental states. This does not necessarily mean that I am omniscient or infallible 
about the nature of my mind; but it does mean that at least in this comparison – 
i.e. vulnerability to a threat from the demon scenario – the mind fares better than 
the body. The title of the Second Meditation is fittingly “The nature of the human 
mind, and how it is better known than the body”.
Eventually, by the end of the Meditations, Descartes arrives at the conclusion 
that the mind is indeed distinct from the body. At the same time, Descartes was 
very interested in the body’s contribution to our mental life, and his view can be 
summarized (with some simplification) as follows. There are mental phenomena, 
most notably, sensory (perceptual and bodily) experiences, and emotions, which 
are caused by the brain. Nerves from our sense-organs and throughout the body 
carry stimuli as far as the pineal gland in the brain. The gland has a distinctive 
state for each type of sensory or affective experience and causes our immaterial 
mind to undergo that experience. How this causal connection works between two 
entirely different substances is of course one of the greatest puzzles for a Cartesian 
dualist, but this is not the topic of this chapter (see Chapters 2 and 7). It is more 
interesting for our purposes that apparently Descartes thought that non-sensory 
or non-affective cognition (for example, pure theoretical and practical reasoning) 
need not, or indeed could not, involve the body in such an intimate way (Farkas 
2005). So there is a separation between what we may call “pure” cognition, on the 
one hand, and sensory and affective mental states, on the other. This separation, 
in itself, is not Descartes’ invention. Aristotle draws a similar distinction between 
rational and non-rational parts of the soul.

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
258
I provide this sketch of Descartes’ conception of the mind because much of the 
following discussion will be usefully understood by the various critiques’ deep or 
superficial disagreement with certain elements of the Cartesian conception. In one 
way or another, many philosophers in the 20th and 21st century objected to the 
idea that a solitary mind deceived by an evil demon or evil scientist can have the 
same mental features as we do; or to the idea that the physical basis of mental phe-
nomena can be restricted to the brain; or to the idea that pure cognition is largely 
independent of the body. This chapter focuses on developments in the analytic 
philosophical tradition (for a critique of the Cartesian conception in continen-
tal philosophy, see, for example, Hubert Dreyfus’s commentary on Heidegger’s 
Being and Time ( Dreyfus 1991). I will not attempt to reconstruct all pros and cons 
in the debates I mention; for state-of-the-art summaries of these issues, it is worth 
consulting, for example, Lau and Deutsch (2014) and Wilson and Foglia (2011). 
Instead, I shall try to trace some broad historical tendencies that influenced philo-
sophical thinking on the boundaries of the mind.
2. “Externalism” or “anti-individualism”
2.1 The semantic tradition
Gottlob Frege is often identified as one of the first and most influential figures in 
the history of analytic philosophy.3 Frege proposed the first systematic modern 
theory of semantics, that is, a theory of how the semantic values (the truth and 
reference) of linguistic expressions are determined. Semantics and symbolic logic 
have then gone on to become two of the greatest success stories in the history 
of analytic philosophy, and no doubt this is the reason why Frege is regarded 
as one of the founders of the tradition, despite the fact that he was a German 
thinker, deeply rooted in a philosophical tradition that was quite different from the 
English-speaking empiricism that forms a more congenial historical background 
to analytic philosophy. I mentioned above the occasionally reoccurring anxiety 
in philosophy about the apparent lack of progress in the several thousand years’ 
history of the subject. Semantics and logic have been seen by many as finally 
offering the prospect for real progress in philosophy, not just in semantic theory 
itself, but also as a tool to get a better grip on a wide range of philosophical issues. 
We can find a vigorous expression of this sentiment, for example, in Timothy Wil-
liamson’s 2004 paper “Must Do Better”. Williamson’s idea of progress in philoso-
phy is well expressed in these complimentary words about Michael Dummett’s 
contribution to the realism/anti-realism debate:
Instead of shouting slogans at each other, Dummett’s realist and anti-
realist would busy themselves in developing systematic compositional 
semantic theories of the appropriate type, which could then be judged 
and compared by something like scientific standards.
(Williamson 2006, 179)

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
259
In what we may call “the semantic tradition”, semantic theories and notions, like 
possible worlds, quantifiers, operators, domains of quantifications, connectives, 
and so on, have shaped and still shape the understanding of an astonishing range 
of philosophical topics, including as diverse issues as ontological realism (Chal-
mers et al. 2009), the analysis of knowledge and its relation to evidence (Wil-
liamson 2000), the metaphysics of modality (Kripke 1972), the nature of belief 
and desire (Richard 1990), the issue of cognitivism versus non-cognitivism in 
metaethics (Schroeder 2010), and many more.
One of the basic instruments in a semantic theory is to attribute a certain feature 
to each linguistic expression which Frege called “sense”. Sense determines refer-
ence (or semantic value in general) at least in that sameness of sense entails same-
ness of reference; this commitment is crucial, for the whole point of the theory 
is to identify a feature of expressions that accounts for their semantic values. 
Though this gives, in itself, very little idea of what “senses” are, it is prima facie 
plausible to identify sense with the meaning of a linguistic expression. Frege held 
that shared meaning is possible only if senses are neither mental nor physical, but 
rather belong to a third realm of beings to which thinking subjects have the same 
access. The default assumption in the subsequent history of semantics tended to 
follow this way of thinking in assuming that “propositions” (the senses of declara-
tive sentences) and “concepts” (the senses of sub-sentential expressions, the con-
stituent of propositions) are abstract entities.
Proper names pose a particular problem for the idea that expressions have 
a sense or a meaning which determines their reference. Saul Kripke’s Naming 
and Necessity, published first in 1972, was to become one of the most influen-
tial philosophical works of the 20th century, offering one of the best examples 
of how a focus on the semantic features of language can contribute to a whole 
range of philosophical problems, including metaphysics and the philosophy of 
mind. Kripke argued that names contribute their referent to complex expressions 
directly, without the mediation of senses. Hence what is expressed by names (the 
object it denotes) is often to be found outside thinking subjects. Kripke argued 
that similar considerations apply to natural kind terms denoting biological species 
or chemical kinds, like “gold” or “water” or “tiger”.
The sense/reference framework has another important consequence for names, 
indexicals and natural kind terms. Parallel to Kripke, Hilary Putnam developed in 
his papers in the seventies a theory of natural kind terms similar to the one presented 
in Naming and Necessity. In his 1975 paper “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’ ” (Putnam 
1975a), Putnam invites us to consider the consequences of this theory with the help 
of a thought experiment. Imagine a planet called Twin Earth which is an exact replica 
of Earth, with qualitatively identical counterparts of all Earthly inhabitants, including 
our protagonist, Oscar. The one difference between Earth and Twin Earth is that the 
liquid they call “water” is in fact a different chemical compound, and hence when 
Oscar and Twin Oscar talk about “water”, they refer to two different kinds.
A similar phenomenon arises in the case of names and indexical expressions. 
When Oscar and Twin Oscar use the name “Aristotle”, they refer to different 

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
260
individuals: Oscar refers to Aristotle, and Twin Oscar to Twin Aristotle (as we 
would put it). Other influential cases – based also on expressions other than names 
and natural kind terms – are discussed in the work of Tyler Burge (Burge 1979). For 
example, Burge presents two linguistic communities which use the word “arthritis” 
in slightly different ways, but focuses on two subjects, who have the same views on 
arthritis. These two subjects, just like Oscar and Twin Oscar, are internally identi-
cal, but refer to different things. As we saw, one option in the case of names is to 
say that they are directly referring expressions, without a sense. But suppose it’s 
implausible to say that some linguistic expressions which contribute to intelligent 
discourse are devoid of sense or meaning. Sense determines reference: sameness 
of sense entails sameness of reference, and hence difference of reference entails 
difference of sense. Therefore, the sense or meaning of “Aristotle” and “water” are 
different for Oscar and Twin Oscar (and similarly for Burge’s protagonists).
Many of our linguistic expressions refer to things outside us. Hence it is obvious 
that at least some semantic features, namely, the references of many expressions 
constitutively depend on things outside thinking subjects. This is uncontroversial. 
If meaning is to determine reference, and two internally identical subjects – like 
Oscar and Twin Oscar – can refer to different things, then it seems that meanings 
also have to depend on external factors. It is important to see that this conclusion 
need not depend essentially on the Kripke/Putnam theory of natural kinds, or on 
alleged intuitions about the reference of the term “water”. As long as we accept 
that two internally identical subjects can refer to different things by the use of 
names or indexicals (which is quite difficult to deny; indeed, we can stipulate 
such use of names), the requirement that sense determines reference entails that 
these subjects do not share their meanings either, despite their internal sameness. 
“Meanings ain’t in the head”, as Putnam famously declared.
2.2 The semantic conception of intentionality
The claim that meanings are not in the head is perhaps not that surprising after all. 
For example, it should be fairly uncontroversial that linguistic meaning depends 
on things outside an individual, namely on linguistic conventions being accepted 
by others in her linguistic community. Or it could depend on abstract senses that 
exist in the third realm beyond mental and physical beings. What about the idea 
that certain semantic features – other than reference – in my idiolect depend on 
things outside me? Even that is less than shocking. Semantic theories usually offer 
models which often include inevitable simplifications – this is especially true of 
formal semantic theories. All sorts of things can model all sorts of things. We can 
start with a model where the sense of a sentence is an ordered n-tuple of the senses 
of its constituents. Then we could be persuaded that names refer directly, without 
the mediation of a sense, and propose instead that the sense of sentences contain-
ing names should be modeled by an n-tuple that includes the reference, rather than 
the sense of the name. The point I want to stress is that in a way, this move is easy: 

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
261
n-tuples, whether consisting “senses” or “references” can serve as good models; 
their usefulness will depend on the explanatory power of the model.
Putnam formulated the original claim about meanings, but the thesis assumed 
its real significance and became relevant to our current topic when it was broad-
ened to include mental contents. One of the first to make this move was Tyler 
Burge (Burge 1979).4 The general argument could proceed as follows. We start 
with noting that mental states like beliefs, or entertained thoughts, can be true or 
false. Moreover, not only beliefs, but also desires, perceptual experiences, certain 
emotions, and other mental states are about things in the world: they exhibit inten-
tionality, or the mind’s direction upon objects (see Chapter 8 on Intentionality). 
The next, crucial move is to understand intentional directedness on the analogy 
of semantic reference. This is not implausible: a belief is about things, which also 
serve as referents of expressions we use to express the belief. We might think that 
fundamentally the same idea is involved when a word refers to a thing, or an idea 
is about the same thing. This move offers the possibility of importing the concep-
tual tools of semantic theory into understanding the nature of mental states: we 
attribute a semantic content to a belief which is the same as the semantic content 
of the sentence we use to express the belief.
The semantic content of sentences, hence of beliefs, is nothing other than the 
sense or meaning of a sentence. We already know that meaning is outside the 
head: so the content of beliefs is also outside the head. Similar considerations will 
apply to other instances of intentional directedness. Hence some mental features 
are constitutively determined by things outside a thinking subject. This is the view 
known as externalism or anti-individualism about mental content, and it entails 
the rejection of the internalist Cartesian conception of the mind sketched in sec-
tion 1. A solitary brain-in-a-vat or a subject deceived by an evil demon cannot 
have all the same mental states as we have, if the objects to which we refer don’t 
exist in their world. Eliminating the world outside does not leave the inner world 
of thought intact, as Descartes believed. If we want thought to be about the world, 
then even what it is possible to think will depend on how things are external to us.
Lines of resistance to the externalist conclusion open accordingly. The require-
ment that sense determines reference leads to the externalist conclusion only if 
we assume that sense alone determines reference; for if sense plus something 
else determines reference, then from different references we cannot infer differ-
ent senses (Farkas 2008, ch.7). Starting from the 2000s, there has been an intense 
debate in semantics about the role of context in determining truth-value (see Preyer 
and Peter 2007 for a representative cross-section of the debate), and a number of 
theories were developed which give up the principle that sense alone determines 
reference (MacFarlane 2005). Thus one could retain the semantic conception of 
intentionality and still resist the externalist conclusion. Alternatively, one could 
begin to question the idea that intentional directedness should be understood on 
the model of semantic reference (Crane 2014).

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
262
2.3 Two-dimensional views
A semantic theory is a theory of how the semantic value (truth, reference) of 
expressions is determined. The feature of expressions that determines their refer-
ence is variously called “meaning” or “sense” or “content”. Some philosophers 
have suggested that meanings or contents have two different aspects that can-
not be explained by a single notion. Just as in the case of semantic externalism, 
these “two-dimensional semantic theories” or “dual content theories” can be put 
forward about meanings (and, in this case, also about types of necessity), rather 
than about the mind. Chalmers (2006) gives a thorough overview of the various 
versions of this “two-dimensional” approach to contents.
David Kaplan, who is often regarded as the first to present a systematic two-
dimensional framework (Kaplan 1977), distinguished between the character and 
the content of indexical expressions. On this view, the character remains constant 
for each use of the first person pronoun “I”, and it expresses something like “the 
speaker of this utterance”. However, the contents expressed by first-person sen-
tences are different for different speakers: they are singular propositions which 
constitutively contain the subject of the utterance. Kaplan considers a Putnam-like 
scenario of Castor and Pollux, identical twins who are stipulated to have qualita-
tively identical internal states. Kaplan holds that the cognitive or psychological 
states (he uses the terms interchangeably) of the twins are exactly the same, even 
though they express different singular propositions when each says “My brother 
was born before me” (Kaplan 1977, 535). Kaplan follows Putnam’s original for-
mulation of the lesson of the Twin Earth story: semantic contents do, but psycho-
logical states don’t determine reference. As mentioned before, this is a type of 
externalism, but not externalism about the mind.
Just like in the case of the Twin Earth story, the two-dimensional framework 
was subsequently modified, so that both dimensions were brought into the men-
tal realm. The idea is that internally identical subjects in different environments 
(like Castor and Pollux, or Oscar and Twin Oscar, or me and my brain-in-a-vat 
counterpart) are similar in some mental respect, but different in another. For each 
pair, their mental states share their “narrow” contents, but differ in some of their 
“broad” contents (Fodor 1987).
The two-dimensional view has been seen by many as a judicious compromise 
between externalist and internalist views (Chalmers 2002). The broad content of 
mental states accounts for some of our practices in attributing mental states. For 
example, if we say that Castor and Pollux believe different things when they each 
think that “My brother was born before me”, it is tempting to say that the differ-
ence in beliefs is a mental difference. At the same time, we can see why Kaplan 
was inclined to say that the twins are psychologically alike. If Castor and Pollux 
are both convinced that they are second-born, this may prompt similar actions. 
When we think about how the world appears from the subjective point of view, 
or how to explain actions in terms of the subject’s mental states, it is tempting to 
discover mental similarities among internally identical agents.

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
263
Two-dimensional views, therefore, do not see broad and narrow features in 
competition: both contents can be attributed to the same mental state, for differ-
ent purposes. However, someone could raise the following worry. When I con-
sciously think to myself that “Water is wet” or “My brother was born before me”, 
it does not seem at all that I am entertaining two thoughts on each occasion, with 
two different contents. With each conscious act of thinking, there seems to be 
only one thing that I grasp. So it is not very clear how the two different contents 
are present in my mind. One natural answer on behalf of the two-dimensional 
theory is to return to the observation, made earlier, that the semantic approach to 
mental content provides models, where operations on a structure of abstract enti-
ties model some or other function that contents are supposed to do – determine 
reference, or explain action, as the case may be. Mental contents can be modeled 
by sets of possible worlds, centered world, diagonal propositions, and so on, and 
the theory need not make a claim on the experienced reality of our mental life.
2.4 The extent of inner space
So far we have seen externalist theories which handle the issue of mental con-
tent through what we could broadly describe as the “modeling approach”. In 
this section, we shall look at a rather different externalist view, defended in the 
works of Gareth Evans (Evans 1982) and John McDowell, which addresses the 
phenomenological-psychological reality of content. I shall use McDowell’s 1986 
paper “Singular Thought and the Extent of Inner Space” as a representative of this 
approach, since it explicitly tackles the issue of the boundaries of the mind.
McDowell’s target in this paper is what he calls the “fully Cartesian” picture 
of the mind. On this picture, the mental realm is what is left after entertaining the 
possibility of radical deception, and consists of transparently accessible and infal-
libly known facts. Privileged access to the inner realm makes access to the rest 
of the world correspondingly problematic, opening a gap between the inner and 
outer world that is very difficult to bridge. The Cartesian conception puts “sub-
jectivity’s very possession of an objective environment in question” (McDowell 
1986, 237). On McDowell’s view, this is not simply the epistemological anxiety 
about the possible non-existence or radical different nature of the world; rather, 
the threat is that we cannot explain how thinking about a mind-independent world 
is so much as possible.
McDowell’s answer is based on transforming Bertrand Russell’s notion of 
acquaintance (Russell 1917). Acquaintance is an epistemic-psychological rela-
tion in which we stand to objects when we are directly aware of them, without an 
intermediary process of inference or knowledge of truths. When a particular is an 
object of acquaintance, it is a constituent of the singular proposition that forms 
the content of a judgment. McDowell makes it clear that, for Russell, unlike, for 
example, for Kaplan, singular propositions are not merely part of semantics, but 
they are intended as a “distinctive kind of configuration in psychological real-
ity” (McDowell 1986, 228). However, for Russell, the psychological reality of 

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
264
singular propositions comes with a serious restriction on the range of objects that 
can enter into such propositions. Suppose – as McDowell himself would subse-
quently propose – that we allow external objects to be objects of acquaintance, 
and constituents of singular propositions. Since we can be mistaken about the 
presence of an external object, this move would open the possibility of an illusion 
of entertaining a singular proposition. This was unacceptable for Russell.
We can regain possession of the world if we allow that some of our mental 
states constitutively involve external objects, and thus “we are compelled to pic-
ture the inner and outer realms as interpenetrating, not separated from one another 
by the characteristically Cartesian divide” (McDowell 1986, 241). Some of the 
object-involving states are subjectively indistinguishable from states which do 
not involve objects, for example in a veridical perception and the matching perfect 
hallucination. On the fully Cartesian conception, the mental nature of subjectively 
indistinguishable states must be the same; otherwise we could mistake one mental 
state for another. McDowell wants to resist this move by giving up the claim that 
we are infallible about all aspects of mental states, and he accepts that mental 
states of very different nature can give rise to the same appearance:
Short of the fully Cartesian picture, the infallibly knowable fact – its 
seeming to one that things are thus and so – can be taken disjunctively, 
as constituted either by the fact that things are manifestly thus and so or 
by the fact that that merely seems to be the case.
(McDowell 1986, 242)
McDowell, like many others influenced by Oxford philosophy in the second half 
of the 20th century, can be seen as responding to a question raised prominently 
in P. F. Strawson’s work: how can we explain the very idea of a subject possess-
ing the experience of an objective environment (Strawson 1959, Chapter 2). One 
area where the question received an especially great amount of attention was per-
ception. It seems a fundamental phenomenological fact about perception that it 
appears to present a mind-independent world. How is this possible? In the empiri-
cist tradition, it was customary to view perceptual experiences as sensations, that 
is, as modifications of a subject’s consciousness – but this leaves the fundamental 
phenomenological fact unexplained.
The “disjunctive” theory of perception was developed from the 1980s partly to 
answer this challenge (see also Chapter 4, Theories of Perception). The basic idea 
is hinted in the quote from McDowell (McDowell 1986, 242) : when something 
appears to be the case, it could either an object-involving fact manifesting itself in 
experience, or an indistinguishable mere appearance – hence the name “disjunc-
tivism”. The fact that some experiences constitutively involve an external object 
is meant to explain how we can make sense of the idea that perception presents a 
mind-independent world.5 The important point for our purposes is that the mental 
nature of object-involving and non-object involving experiences are radically dif-
ferent, and this difference is due to facts external to the subject: the presence or 

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
265
absence of an object of perception. Disjunctivism and the relational views about 
experience are therefore forms of externalism about mental features.
Though Evans and McDowell have been as deeply influenced by the semantic 
theories of Frege and Russell as many of the externalist philosophers previously 
mentioned, their approach to the mind is somewhat different from those we placed 
in the “semantic tradition”. It does not seem that they are attempting to offer 
models for various possible functions of mental features. Instead, they take as a 
starting point, and as psychologically real, the phenomenologically fundamental 
features of our thinking and experience: for example, the fact that we seem to be 
in possession of a conception of an objective world. Perhaps relatedly, McDowell 
has little interest in a scientistic conception of the mind. On the contrary, one 
of his main inspirations is Wilfrid Sellars’s idea that a proper understanding of 
the mind is not possible in a merely causal-naturalistic explanatory framework 
(McDowell 1994). Hence the type of externalism that is motivated by the kind 
of considerations Evans and McDowell put forward does not fit into either of the 
broad trends we describe in this chapter: the modeling approaches presented in 
sections 2.1–2.3, or the naturalistic theories of section 3.
2.5 The boundaries of privileged access
According to externalists, Descartes was wrong in claiming that internally identi-
cal subjects always have the same mental features. It’s been argued that this entails 
that Descartes was also wrong in claiming an epistemic privilege to the mental 
realm (see Brown 2004 for various aspects of the debate). More precisely, com-
pared to internalism, externalism limits – according to this argument – the scope 
of privileged first-person knowledge of mental features. Indeed, it was claimed 
(Farkas 2008) that the restriction of privileged access is not a consequence, but 
rather a defining feature of externalist views. Arguably, this attitude was discern-
ible, for example, in McDowell’s considerations quoted in section 2.4: McDowell 
identifies the privileged epistemic status of mental facts as the central tenet of the 
fully Cartesian picture, and argues that by giving up this claim, we open the way 
towards making some of the external world constitutive of our mental states.6
It is interesting to mention here another influential view on the limitations of 
self-knowledge, represented in the work of Sigmund Freud. The two views are of 
course very different both in their theses and their motivations. But they can be 
both seen as undermining a central tenet of the Cartesian conception of the mind: 
in a manner of speaking, while externalists want to extend the boundary outwards, 
Freud suggested that the boundaries of the mind lie much deeper than the shallow 
heights reached by straightforward reflective awareness. This is the realm of the 
unconscious.
We have not addressed Freud in this chapter because Freud and psychoanaly-
sis have had remarkably little effect on mainstream analytic philosophy, com-
pared, for example, to continental philosophy, where Freud had much more of an 
influence, and compared to the rest of intellectual life and culture.7 Unconscious 

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
266
mental states are the subject of much theorizing in analytic philosophy of mind, 
but the disciplines that analytic philosophers consult about these states are either 
cognitive psychology (for example, in studying the sub-personal states involved 
in learning or perceptual processes), or social psychology (for studying phenom-
ena like implicit bias). Nonetheless, the broad influence of Freud’s ideas probably 
contributed to undermining the Cartesian conception which is the main target of 
externalist views popular in the analytic philosophical tradition and which is also 
a target of many naturalist views of the mind discussed in the next section.
3. Naturalism about the mind
3.1 The functionalist-computationalist view
In Descartes’ time, a philosopher interested in the study of the mind freely 
included anatomical, psychological, and biological considerations in his works. 
As with many other disciplines, the various sciences of the mind have subse-
quently become autonomous and separate from philosophy. Yet developments in 
the sciences continued to exercise a profound effect on philosophy, and this is 
especially apparent in analytic philosophy of mind in the 20th century. I have 
already alluded to the recurrent desire to place philosophy on a secure method-
ology that would offer a chance of progress comparable to progress in science. 
There have been two further, distinguishable, though often co-existent, manifesta-
tions of this impact.
The first is the doctrine of naturalism or physicalism. In the first half of the 20th 
century, especially after the development of the theories of relativity and quantum 
mechanics, it seemed that physics could offer an explanation of the world that was 
unparalleled in scope, depth, evidence, and explanatory power. The other natural 
sciences, even if not obviously reducible to physics, have links to physics that 
promised a unified theory of the world. This inspired a physicalist-naturalist pro-
gram: aiming at an account of all mental phenomena that is compatible with the 
thesis that everything that exists figures in the theories of natural sciences. Though 
materialism was a notable philosophical position already in ancient philosophy, 
and from the 17th century onwards, it is characteristic of philosophy of mind 
in the second half of the 20th century that physicalism (both for defenders and 
opponents) dominated the agenda in a way it never had before (see Chapters 2, 3, 
7 in this volume).
The second impact of the sciences is an increased interest in philosophy to 
approach the study of the mind from an interdisciplinary standpoint. This means 
actively trying to figure out how empirical results in psychology, evolutionary 
theory, or neuroscience may affect our philosophical theories of the mind. The 
two approaches are compatible, but independent: one could believe in a natural-
ist ontology but still rely mainly on the (broadly speaking) speculative methods 
of philosophy and not pay much attention to empirical work.8 Or someone could 
reject a physicalist or naturalist ontology (together with a somewhat surprising 

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
267
number of natural scientists),9 yet invest a lot of time in empirical studies of the 
mind in the hope that they illuminate our philosophical theories.
Starting in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the 20th century witnessed the devel-
opment of a robust and sophisticated defense of a naturalist conception of the 
mind, and the emergence of cognitive science, an interdisciplinary approach to the 
workings of the mind (see Chapter 11, the Rise of Cognitive Science). One promi-
nent idea both in naturalist theories and in cognitive science is that the mind could 
be understood on the analogy of computers (inspired by Turing’s groundbreak-
ing work for example in Turing 1950).10 According to the classic functionalist- 
computational picture of the mind, our core cognitive processes can be under-
stood as programs that manipulate certain representations stored in the brain. The 
central computing unit is connected to the periphery in two ways: our nervous 
system transduces stimuli that arrive from the world to our sensory organs, and 
also conveys certain tasks to be solved (for example by signaling that the body 
needs nutrition). The information arriving to the central system is used to build an 
inner representation of the world, which then helps the system to solve the tasks 
posed for it (for example, by computing the navigations needed to reach food). 
The solutions are then translated to action commands, which are communicated 
to another component of the periphery, the motor system (the result being that the 
organism moves towards the source of food).
One crucial point here is that in this so-called “sense-think-act cycle”, the cen-
tral thinking module, which is sandwiched between the periphery of perception 
and action, is conceived as running a highly abstract program; that is, a program 
that can be realized by very different physical mechanisms, and would be, in 
principle, compatible with a large variety of inputs and outputs, fashioned for all 
sorts of sensory organs and all sorts of bodies to be moved. This idea actually has 
very old roots: we saw a similar conception being present already in Aristotle and 
Descartes, in the view that pure cognition is independent both of the body, and the 
sensory-affective aspect of our mental life.
Descartes thought that everything material must work on mechanistic principles, 
and he simply could not imagine how a programmed mechanism could account 
for the creativity of human thought. Therefore, he held that the immaterial soul 
must be the home for rational cognition. Descartes’ argument is based on some 
empirical-scientific assumptions that are clearly superseded today. As we shall 
see in section 3.4, the classic computationalist picture has come under increased 
criticism. But even if the picture needs correction, we should not underestimate 
the significance of having a conception of mental processes, the computational- 
functionalist conception, which makes sense – in a way that’s consistent with a 
naturalist world-view – of something that completely baffled Descartes and others 
for centuries (see Rey 1997, Chapter 2).
There are at least three boundary issues raised by naturalism and the functionalist- 
computational theory of the mind. First, naturalist accounts of representations 
usually rely on an external individuation of mental content. Second, functionalism 
about the mind has the possible consequence that the physical basis of the mind 

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
268
extends beyond the boundaries of our organic body. Third, the classical compu-
tational conception was criticized for not taking into account the essential role of 
the “periphery” in cognitive processes. The resulting views – externalism about 
content, the extended mind hypothesis, and various versions of embodied cogni-
tion – assert the dependence of the mind on things outside the brain or the subject 
in rather different ways. I shall explain each of them in turn.
3.2 Naturalist reduction of content
Jerry Fodor has developed one of the most powerful and sophisticated defenses of 
the computational theory of the mind, through his landmark publications starting 
in the 1970s (Fodor 1975; 1987). Part of this project is to account for the fact that 
mental states seem to be about things in the world (see Chapter 8, Intentionality). 
As Fodor famously put it:
I suppose sooner or later the physicists will complete the catalogue 
they’ve been compiling of the ultimate and irreducible properties of 
things. When they do, the likes of spin, charm, and charge will perhaps 
appear on their list. But aboutness surely won’t: intentionality simply 
doesn’t go that deep.
(Fodor 1987, 97)
Aboutness in the computational theory of mind is approached through the notion 
of representation. The basis of the analogy with computer programs is that certain 
symbols, called “representations” are stored in the brain, and the machine – the 
mind, the brain – manipulates these symbols on the basis of their physical shapes 
(that is the only kind of feature detectable by a physical symbol-manipulator). The 
symbols represent various items in our environment, and this makes it possible 
for us to think and reason about them. If I believe that cats like cream, and I want 
give my cat a treat, I will decide to get some cream for him. But what makes it 
the case that a certain thought, realized by a symbol in the brain, represents cats, 
rather than, say, dogs? One plausible answer from a physicalist point of view is 
that there is some sort of causal or nomological connection between the presence 
of things in the world, and the presence of the representation. The crudest form 
of this would be the following: seeing a cat causes a certain brain-state which, in 
virtue of being caused by a cat, represents cats (or this particular cat). This very 
crude version is unsatisfactory, partly because it cannot account for misrepresen-
tation: if all tokenings represent their causes, no tokening will ever be mistaken. 
Accounts that try to base representation on some sort of lawful connections or 
evolved functions face better prospects.
On a nomological account (Fodor 1987), symbols represent things whose pres-
ence has a lawful correlation with the symbol. This account can employ a certain 
version of the two-dimensional framework mentioned in section 2.3. Computations 

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
269
on symbols in the brain can explain one part of cognition and the narrow aspect of 
content; the lawful connections with the world can explain the broad aspect.
The Twin Earth scenario illustrates the consequences of the nomological view 
for the individuation of content. Oscar’s “water” representations are nomologi-
cally correlated with the presence of H2O, Twin Oscar’s “water” representations 
with the presence of XYZ. The content of their representations are different. The 
nomological view entails externalism about content as it was defined in section 2. 
An even more emphatic illustration of this comes from considering a certain ver-
sion of the brain-in-a-vat scenario. In the virtual reality of brains-in-vats, presum-
ably some complex part of the computer program is responsible for the tokening 
of representations in the brains, hence these are the prime candidates for stand-
ing in a lawful correlation with the presence of representations in the brain. The 
somewhat surprising conclusion is that brains-in-vats have actually mostly true 
beliefs about the world: since they represent bits of the computer program, and 
their world does consist of bits of the computer program, they are mostly right.
Starting in the 1980s, several authors (Dretske 1981; Millikan 1984; Papineau 
1987) proposed alternative naturalist-reductive theories which analyze represen-
tation in terms of evolved functions. These views also entail externalism: if we 
imagined an artificial or accidentally created replica of a human being, her repre-
sentational states would be different, since they would lack an evolutionary his-
tory (Davidson 1987). Naturalist theories are therefore usually committed to some 
form of externalism about mental content.
3.3 Extended mind
Most naturalist-physicalist theories of the mind rely on some version of function-
alism, broadly understood. Central to this conception is the idea that what makes 
something a particular mental state depends on the role it plays in a cognitive 
system, but not on the physical constitution of the piece of machinery that realizes 
this role. This multiple realizability is often illustrated by stating that a certain 
belief or desire, or feeling pain, can be realized by neural states of quite different 
character in different species of animals, and possibly even by a creature who is 
made of inorganic material – as long as there is an isomorphism in the functional 
role the state plays in a larger system (Putnam 1960).
This raises the question of how much liberty we can take with the realization of 
functional roles. Andy Clark and David Chalmers proposed the following thought 
experiment (Clark and Chalmers 1998). Inga is an ordinary person who lives in 
New York and wants to visit the Museum of Modern Art. She recalls that the 
museum is on 53rd Street and sets off. Contrast her case with that of Otto, who 
suffers from long-term memory loss, and therefore enters all important informa-
tion into a notebook that he carries with him and consults all the time. When Otto 
wants to visit the Museum of Modern Art, he looks up the address in his notebook, 
and sets off.

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
270
It is usually agreed that Inga has the belief that the museum is on 53rd Street 
even prior to recalling this information. On a functionalist theory, this state is 
defined in terms of having a certain functional role in Inga’s cognitive system: tak-
ing into account her other mental states (for example a desire to visit a museum), 
it responds to certain inputs with certain outputs (for example setting off towards 
the museum). Clark and Chalmers argue that the information stored in Otto’s note-
book has exactly the same role in Otto’s cognitive system, and therefore we should 
attribute the same belief to Otto, even before he consults his notebook. The fact that 
the notebook is to be found outside Otto’s organic body is irrelevant here. Clark 
and Chalmers offer the following general consideration to support their claim:
If, as we confront some task, a part of the world functions as a process 
which, were it done in the head, we would have no hesitation in recog-
nizing as part of the cognitive process, then that part of the world is (so 
we claim) part of the cognitive process.
(Clark and Chalmers 1998, 8)
The principle has subsequently become known as “the Parity Principle”, and it is 
a consequence of a functionalist view of mental states. It is instructive to compare 
Otto and Inga with Ned Block’s famous example in which he imagines the popu-
lation of China realizing a system that is functionally equivalent to Block’s brain: 
such a system would arguably lack mental states altogether, hence, Block argued, 
there has to be more to mentality than playing a functional role (Block 1980). But, 
unlike the Chinese network, both Inga and Otto are bona fide cognitive agents 
with mental states, so it makes perfectly good sense to ask whether they possess 
a particular mental state (ie. the belief that the museum is on 53rd Street) or not.
If functionalism is correct, this translates to the question of whether any state 
plays the appropriate role in their cognitive system. Functionalism asks us to 
disregard physical realization, for example the difference between brain tissue 
and pages of a notebook. Moreover, as Mark Sprevak has convincingly argued 
(Sprevak 2009), the spirit of functionalism also asks us to disregard the micro-
functional differences that undoubtedly exist between Inga’s and Otto’s access to 
the relevant information. The macro-functional roles of the information stored in 
Inga’s relevant brain-state and Otto’s notebook are arguably the same. Therefore 
it seems we have to conclude that Otto also has the belief that the museum is 
on 53rd Street. The argument extends to any type of mental state which can be 
plausibly accounted for in terms of functional roles: for example, standing states 
like intentions or desires. It is less obvious whether, or how, the argument extends 
to episodes in the stream of consciousness whose identity arguably depends on 
their conscious or phenomenal character. Both Clark and Chalmers are inclined 
to think that consciousness does not extend in the way standing mental states do 
(Chalmers 2008; Clark 2010).11
The term “extended mind” suggests that the notebook is actually part of Otto’s 
mind, or, put in more functionalist terms, the notebook is part of the physical 

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
271
reality that serves as a realizer for the functional states we attribute to Otto. This 
seems to be a dependence on things outside the subject that is different from the 
dependence in externalist theories discussed in section 2. We will return to this 
question in section 4.1.
3.4 Embodied cognition
The topic of “embodied” or “situated” cognition has received a lot of attention 
in cognitive science starting in the 1990s. The debates we have discussed so far 
have, by and large, been directly motivated by questions arising within philoso-
phy: about the nature of intentionality, the proper account of representation, the 
philosophical theory of perception, the mind-body problem. In contrast, much of 
the historical and current background for discussing embodied cognition is found 
outside the usual disciplinary boundaries of philosophy. Part of the task of phi-
losophers in this debate is, and has been, to distill the philosophical significance 
of certain ideas coming from the more empirical disciplines.
Robert Wilson and Lucia Foglia (2011) identify several key historical influences 
on the formation of embodied cognitive science, including three books that they 
regard as the first landmark publications in the area. In Metaphors We Live By, 
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson argued that many central cognitive processes 
are influenced by the use of metaphors, which, in turn, are deeply influenced 
by the kind of bodies human beings have and use in interacting with the world 
(Lakoff and Johnson 1980). Francisco Varela, in his book The Embodied Mind, 
co-authored with Evan Thompson and Eleanor Rosch, proposed an “enactive” 
program for cognitive science that questions “the assumption . . . that cognition 
consists of the representation of a world that is independent of our perceptual and 
cognitive capacities by a cognitive system that exists independent of the world” 
(Varela, Thompson and Rosch 1991, xx). Instead, cognitive structures emerge 
from the organism’s interaction with the world: from the way sensory stimula-
tion systematically changes as organisms and objects move (called “sensorimotor 
patterns” or “sensorimotor dependencies”). By using the term “embodied”, the 
authors aim to highlight “first, that cognition depends upon the kinds of experi-
ence that come from having a body with various sensorimotor capacities, and sec-
ond, that these individual sensorimotor capacities are themselves embedded in a 
more encompassing biological, psychological, and cultural context” (Varela et al. 
1991, 173–174). As the quote also makes it clear, the scope of this thesis – unlike 
the extended mind thesis of the precious section – is meant to include conscious 
experiences, as well as standing states like beliefs.12
Continuing the list of key influences on embodied cognitive science, in robot-
ics, Rodney Brooks (Brooks 1991a; 1991b) reported successful work in build-
ing robots based on a view of computational intelligence which did not rely on 
“independent information processing units which must interface with each other 
via representations. Instead, the intelligent system is decomposed into inde-
pendent and parallel activity producers which all interface directly to the world 

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
272
through perception and action” (Brooks 1991a, 139). Brooks’s insights feature 
prominently in Andy Clark’s 1997 Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World 
Together Again. Further historical influences mentioned by Wilson and Foglia 
include James Gibson’s ecological view of perception (Gibson 1979), work on 
dynamical systems, and the dynamicist theory of cognitive development (Thelen 
and Smith 1994). Finally, a somewhat unexpected source of inspiration is to be 
found in the phenomenological philosophical tradition of the first part of the 20th 
century; in particular in the works of Husserl, Sartre, Heidegger, and Merleau-
Ponty (see Chapter 1, The Phenomenological Tradition).
As these summaries of the origins of the embodied conception already indi-
cate, the ideas coming together under the label of “embodied cognition” are rather 
diverse, and there isn’t one single and specific thesis that represents the move-
ment. We will now touch upon some of its central themes.
One dominant motif is a phenomenological reflection on mind and cognition, 
prominent in the works of philosophers like Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger. Phe-
nomenologists point out that our view of the world is formed in close, and often 
unreflective, active interactions with things in the world, and those interactions, 
in turn, are essentially shaped by the nature of our body and sensory system. The 
resulting view is often styled as “anti-Cartesian”, but it is instructive to see how it 
relates exactly to Descartes’ actual views. Undoubtedly, this picture has a differ-
ent flavor than the highly reflexive, contemplative, and abstract viewpoint that is 
often felt to be advocated by Descartes. There are many more, often metaphorical 
statements that aim to illustrate this contrast between “involvement” and “detach-
ment”, for example in the claim that once we get phenomenology right, we realize 
“that to perceive is to be in an interactive relationship with the world, not to be in 
an internal state that happens to be caused by the external world” (Cosmelli and 
Thompson 2011, 165). Arguably, many of these contrasts reveal an important dif-
ference in emphasis, but they hardly amount to serious doctrinal differences. After 
all, an interactive relationship is perfectly compatible with the idea that we have 
internal states caused by the world.
Second, though Descartes believed that the mind is an immaterial substance 
separable from the body, he fully acknowledged that as far as actual human psy-
chology goes, sense-experience and the involvement of the body are crucial ele-
ments. “I  am not merely present in my body as a sailor is present in a ship” 
(Descartes 1984, vol.2, 81), Descartes famously remarked.
As I mentioned in section 1, Descartes also had a partly empirical hypothesis 
about the role of the body in different mental processes. He thought that while 
brain states serve as proximal causes for sensory and affective mental states, the 
brain is not involved in pure thinking; instead, thinking takes place in the imma-
terial soul. Very few people today accept the existence of Cartesian immaterial 
substances, but it has been argued that the sharp Cartesian divide between pure 
thinking and the rest of mental phenomena survives in functionalist theories. As 
described in section 3.1, these theories hold that paradigmatic forms of cogni-
tion consist of centrally executed operations on highly abstract representations, 

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
273
sandwiched, but only contingently, between the input of a sensory system and the 
output to a motor system. A number of findings about the nature of cognition have 
been thought to undermine the classical computational picture.
Margaret Wilson (2002) provides a useful overview of some of these findings. 
First, cognition is situated: we often carry out cognitive tasks while perceptual 
information keeps coming in, and action is performed with a possible impact on 
the environment, both of which continuously modify the task at hand. Second, 
cognition is often under time-pressure that prevents building an abstract internal 
model of the world. Third, we off-load cognitive work on our body and on the 
environment: rotating the shapes in Tetris on the screen rather than in our head, we 
share the burden of holding and manipulating information with our environment. 
Fourth, much of cognition is directly for action, rather than for representation. 
All these ideas put considerable pressure on the claim that cognition is realized 
exclusively or even mainly by the kind of processes that figure in the classical 
computational view.
4. Varieties of “externalism”
4.1 Different conceptions of boundaries
The views presented so far all concern the boundaries of the mind in some sense. 
In this section, I will briefly compare these different senses. Susan Hurley distin-
guished between “what” and “how” externalism (Hurley 2010). “What” external-
ist theories (which include the theories we discussed in section 2) claim that some 
personal-level mental features – for example, content or phenomenal quality – are 
explained by external factors. Extended and embodied views belong to “how” 
externalism, on which external features “explain how the processes or mecha-
nisms work that enable mental states” of specific types (Hurley 2010, 101). In ear-
lier work (Hurley 1998), Hurley called how-externalism “vehicle” externalism, 
because it involves claims about the realizers or vehicles of mental states. In con-
trast, externalists of section 2 hold that we individuate certain mental states partly 
by their relations to their intentional objects – but this view need not say anything 
about vehicles. (I have refrained from calling embodied and embedded views 
“externalist”, reserving this term only for what Hurley calls “what-externalism”.)
Further differences between the different forms of “extensions” come to light if 
we consider the brain-in-a-vat scenario. In his review of Alva Noë’s book Action in 
Perception, Ned Block illustrates his disagreement with Noë’s enactive approach 
(which is a type of embodied view, on our classification) by speculating about a 
solitary brain-in-a-vat who, through an unlikely but not impossible chance fluctua-
tion of particles, comes to existence in exactly the same physical state as the brain 
of an embodied human being (Block 2005). Block takes Noë to hold that the brain 
would not have the same experience as its embodied counterpart, and he argues 
that this is is implausible, because the body and the environment are merely causes 
of the experience, but not constitutive parts of the realizer of the experience.13

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
274
Block claims supervenience on the brain specifically for experiences, but 
not for all mental states. Though he is an internalist about experience, like the 
majority of philosophers of mind, he is an externalist about mental contents (the 
issue of extended mind is not addressed in the review). This way of present-
ing the matter suggests that all the different debates discussed in this chapter 
can be formulated in terms of which mental features do or do not supervene 
the brain or the body. However, Evan Thompson and Diego Cosmelli (2011) 
argued that setting up the opposition this way doesn’t get to the heart of the 
enactive-embodied approach. Their interest is not the purely philosophical ques-
tion about “the minimal metaphysical supervenience base” of experiences, but 
rather an explanatory framework for interdisciplinary research – for example, 
for research in neuroscience on the neural correlates of consciousness. On this 
latter approach, an interesting question is the bioengineering task of keeping 
a brain alive and functioning in a vat, and of providing stimuli that match our 
environment. Thompson and Cosmelli investigate this question in some detail, 
and find that the task is absolutely formidable, and the only way it could be done 
is to build something like a body for the brain and place it in an appropriate 
environment. They conclude:
In the range of possible situations relevant to the explanatory framework 
of the neuroscience of consciousness, the brain in a vat thought experi-
ment, strictly speaking, doesn’t seem possible (because the envatted 
brain turns out to be an embodied brain after all).
(Cosmelli and Thompson 2011, 173)
The extended mind hypothesis (Section 3.3) is usually classified together with, 
or even as one of the possible embodied views (Section 3.4), because of the 
apparent shared interest in the realization of cognitive processes (in other 
words, because of answering a how, rather than a what-question, to use Hur-
ley’s terminology). In fact, the motivations of the two views are rather different. 
The extended mind hypothesis, as explained above, is a consequence of the 
functionalist view that only functional roles matter and the nature of the physi-
cal realizer don’t. Clearly, Otto’s notebook could be replaced by a computer, by 
a tape recorder, by any kind of device that was capable of holding the abstract 
representations stored in Otto’s notebook. This is quite alien to the spirit of 
embodied views, which emphasize the dependence of cognition on the particu-
lar shape of our bodies and the on the contingent variation of sensory stimula-
tion with our interactions with the world. The two views are not incompatible, 
but, arguably, they limit each other’s scope. States that are especially suitable 
for extension tend to employ multiply realizable, abstract representations – so 
these states are not strongly embodied. In contrast, embodied processes that 
depend on a contingent bodily setup are likely to resist extension (see also 
Clark 2008, part III).

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
275
4.2 Current state
Externalism, as defined in section 2, has become something like the orthodoxy 
in contemporary analytic philosophy of mind. Most philosophers who write on 
relevant topics are externalist at least about some mental features; that is, they 
hold that these features depend on factors external to a thinking subject.14 Many 
are externalists about (at least some aspects of) content. Defenders of disjunctivist 
and relational views of perception are externalists about experiences. A further 
proposal which generated significant interest and debate was Timothy William-
son’s claim that knowing is a state of mind (Williamson 2000). Since on this view, 
an ordinary knowing subject and her ignorant brain-in-a-vat counterpart have dif-
ferent mental states, this is also a form of externalism. In recent years, there has 
been some revival of an internalist defense (Farkas 2008; Mendola 2008), but this 
position remains in the minority.
The extended mind hypothesis, as discussed in section 3.3, remains a contro-
versial thesis in philosophy, with committed defenders, committed opponents, 
and many agnostics. The findings described in section 3.4 give strong support to 
the claim cognitive processes significantly involve sensory input, motor output 
and interaction with the environment, so embodied cognitive science remains a 
robust research program. As we have seen in section 4.1 above, the focus of this 
program is often on empirical questions that go outside the usual disciplinary 
bounds of philosophy. But while the results strongly suggest that not all cogni-
tion is offline, abstract and representational, as Margaret Wilson (2002) notes, the 
same phenomena do not show that no cognition is performed in such a way. In his 
review of Varela, Thompson, and Rosch’s Embodied Mind Daniel Dennett asked 
whether the enactive program was really revolutionary or rather a welcome shift 
in emphasis (Dennett 1993, 122). Dennett thought it was too soon to answer the 
question in 1993, and it is not obvious that the matter has been settled since then.
Notes
	 1	 I would like to thank Tim Crane, Amy Kind, Philip Walsh, and Jeff Yoshimi for valu-
able comments on an earlier draft. Research for this chapter was supported by the 
Hungarian Scientific Research Fund, grant no. OTKA K-112542.
	 2	 Descartes’ Meditations are included in the second volume of his selected philosophical 
writings (Descartes 1984).
	 3	 Frege’s most important writings, including “On Sinn and Bedeutung” (1892) and “The 
Thought” (1918) are collected in Beaney 1997.
	 4	 Putnam notes in a foreword to Pessin and Goldberg 1996 that at the time of writing 
“The Meaning of “Meaning””, he was not sure what the Twin Earth story entailed with 
respect to the mind (as opposed to meanings). But subsequently, he was persuaded by 
Burge and John McDowell that mental states also depend on factors outside us.
	 5	 For defense of the disjunctive theory of perception, see McDowell 1982, Martin 2004. 
John Campbell is not a disjunctivist, but he also defends a form of externalism about 
perceptual experiences as a response to the question of how we can possess an objec-
tive environment; see his contribution in Campbell and Cassam 2014.

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
276
	 6	 Brie Gertler (2012) assesses different detailed definitions of externalism, and con-
cludes that there is no univocal thesis of externalism and internalism.
	 7	 Here is an illustration: at the time of writing this chapter in October 2014, there are 
around 1,500 entries in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, which is the most 
widely consulted internet reference work in analytic philosophy. Ninety-two of these 
entries (mostly on continental or feminist philosophy) refer to Freud, whereas, for 
example, Hilary Putnam is mentioned in 230 entries. The SEP entry on the “Philoso-
phy of Psychiatry” does not contain a single reference to Freud’s work. The term “psy-
choanalysis” is mentioned in 76 documents. In contrast, the number of documents that 
mention “cognitive science” is 175, “artificial intelligence” 119, “quantum mechanics” 
138.
	 8	 This would be true for example of U. T. Place, J.J.C. Smart, and David Armstrong, 
who published influential work defending physicalism in the 1950s and 60s; see Place 
1956, Smart 1953 and Armstrong 1968.
	 9	 I don’t have statistics on the philosophical views of scientists, but it is interesting 
to note that most Nobel Prize winners in the 20th century who did research on the 
brain expressed some view in writing on the mind body-problem, and, with one excep-
tion, they were not physicalists. Charles Scott Sherrington (Nobel Prize 1932) held a 
“double aspect” theory; John Eccles (Nobel Prize 1963) was a dualist, Gerald Edel-
man (Nobel Prize 1972) defended non-reductive biologism, and Roger Wolcott Sperry 
(Nobel Prize 1981) defended a type of emergentism. The exception is Francis Crick 
(Nobel Prize 1962), who was an ardent physicalist.
	10	 Classic defenses of an early version of functionalism can be found in Putnam 1960 and 
1967.
	11	 For various pros and cons in the debate, see the papers collected in Menary 2010.
	12	 For another development of the enactive conception, see Noë 2005.
	13	 For this type of criticism of the extended mind view, see also Adams and Aizawa 
(2010).
	14	 According to the 2009 survey conducted by PhilPapers, 51 percent of respondents 
accept or lean toward externalism, 20 percent accept or lean towards internalism, and 
29 percent indicated “Other”. However, we should note that many philosophers who 
accept dual content theories call themselves internalists, because they recognize some 
sort of narrow content in the contested cases. This hides the fact that they accept exter-
nalism about some mental features. For example, David Chalmers and Terry Horgan, 
philosophers who argued for a robust notion of narrow content, both claim they accept 
internalism, even though they both think that there is also an aspect of mental content 
which is broad. Horgan makes this clear in a comment: “I hold that the most fundamen-
tal kind of mental content is internalist (and phenomenally constituted), but that some 
thought-constituents also have a form of intentionality that constitutively depends in 
part on internal/external linkages” (PhilPapers Survey).
Bibliography
Adams, Fred and Ken Aizawa (2010). “Defending the Bounds of Cognition,” in Menary 
(ed.): 67–80.
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Beaney, Michael (ed.). (1997). The Frege Reader. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Block, Ned (1980). “Troubles with Functionalism,” in Block, Ned (ed.) Readings in Phi-
losophy of Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press: 268–305.

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
277
Block, Ned (2005). “Review of Action in Perception by Alva Noë,” The Journal of Phi-
losophy, 102/5: 259–272.
Brown, Jessica (2004). Anti-individualism and Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brooks, Rodney (1991a). “Intelligence without Representation,” Artificial Intelligence, 47: 
139–159.
Brooks, Rodney (1991b). “Intelligence without Reason,” Proceedings of 12th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Sydney, Australia: 569–595.
Burge, Tyler (1979). “Individualism and the Mental”. Reprinted in Foundations of Mind: 
Philosophical Essays. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007: 100–150.
Campbell, John and Cassam, Quassim (2014). Berkeley’s Puzzle. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Chalmers, David (2002). “The Components of Content”, in Chalmers, David (ed.), Phi-
losophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press: 608–633.
Chalmers, David (2006). “The Foundations of Two-dimensional Semantics”, in Carpintero, 
M. Garcia, and Macia, J. (eds.), Two-dimensional Semantics: Foundations and Applica-
tions. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 55–140.
Chalmers, David (2008). “Foreword,” in Clark (ed.): ix– xxix.
Chalmers, David, Manley, David and Wasserman, Ryan (eds.). (2009). Metametaphysics. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.Clark, Andy (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and 
World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, Andy (2008). Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action and Cognitive Extension. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, Andy (2010). “Extended Mind Redux: A  Response,” http://opinionator.blogs.
nytimes.com/2010/12/14/extended-mind-redux-a-response/.
Clark, Andy and Chalmers, David (1998). “The Extended Mind,” Analysis, 58: 7–19.
Cosmelli, Diego and Thompson, Evan (2011). “Brain in a Vat or Body in a World: Brain-
bound versus Enactive Views of Experience,” Philosophical Topics, 39: 163–180.
Crane, Tim (2014). Aspects of Psychologism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Davidson, Donald (1987). “Knowing One’s Own Mind”, in Proceedings and Addresses of 
the American Philosophical Association, 60: 441–458.
Dennett, Daniel (1993). “Review of The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human 
Experience by Francisco J. Varela; Evan Thompson and Eleanor Rosch,” The American 
Journal of Psychology, 106/1: 121–126.
Descartes, René (1984). Philosophical Writings of René Descartes. 3 volumes. Edited and 
translated by J. Cottingham, R. Stoothof, D. Murdoch and A. Kenny. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Dretske, Fred (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. (1991). Being in the World: Commentary on Heidegger’s “Being and 
Time”, Division 1. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Evans, Gareth (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Edited by John McDowell, Oxford: Clar-
endon Press.
Farkas, Katalin (2005). “The unity of Descartes’s Thought,” History of Philosophy Quar-
terly, 22/1: 17–30.
Farkas, Katalin (2008). The Subject’s Point of View. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fodor, Jerry (1975). The Language of Thought. New York: Thomas Crowell.

K ata l i n  Fa r k a s
278
Fodor, Jerry (1987). Psychosemantics. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books.
Gertler, Brie (2012). “Understanding the Internalism-Externalism Debate: What is the 
Boundary of the Thinker?” Philosophical Perspectives: Philosophy of Mind: 51–75.
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Hurley, Susan (1998). Consciousness in Action. London: Harvard University Press.
Hurley, Susan (2010). “The Varieties of Externalism,” in Menary (ed.): 101–153.
Kaplan, David (1977). “Demonstratives,” in Almog, J., Perry, J. and Wettstein, H. (eds.), 
Themes from Kaplan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989: 481–563.
Kripke, Saul (1972). “Naming and Necessity,” in Davidson, D. and Harman, G. (eds.), 
Semantics of Natural Language, 2nd edition. Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Co.: 253–355.
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson (1980). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Lau, Joe and Deutsch, Max (2014). “Externalism About Mental Content,” The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2014 Edition), Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). http://
plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2014/entries/content-externalism/.
McDowell, John (1982). “Criteria, Defeasibility and Knowledge,” Reprinted in McDowell 
1998: 369–394.
McDowell, John (1986). “Singular Thought and the Extent of Inner Space,” Reprinted in 
McDowell 1998: 228–259.
McDowell, John (1994). Mind and World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McDowell, John (1998). Meaning, Knowledge and Reality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
MacFarlane, John (2005). “Making Sense of Relative Truth,” Proceedings of the Aristote-
lian Society, 105: 321–339.
Martin, M.G.F. (2004). “The Limits of Self-Awareness,” Philosophical Studies, 120: 
37–89.
Menary, Richard (ed.). (2010). The Extended Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mendola, Joseph (2008). Anti-Externalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Millikan, Ruth (1984). Language, Thought and Other Biological Categories. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Noë, Alva (2005). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Papineau, David (1987). Reality and Representation, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Pessin, Andrew and Goldberg, Sanford (eds.). (1996). The Twin Earth Chronicles. Armonk, 
NY and London: M. E. Sharpe.
PhilPapers Survey (2009). http://philpapers.org/surveys/.
Place, U.T (1956). “Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” British Journal of Psychology, 
47: 44–50.
Preyer, Gerhard and Peter, Georg (eds.). (2007). Context-Sensitivity and Semantic Mini-
malism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Putnam, Hilary (1960). “Minds and Machines,” Reprinted in Putnam 1975b, 362–385.
Putnam, Hilary (1967). “The Nature of Mental States,” Reprinted in Putnam 1975b, 
429–440.
Putnam, Hilary (1975a). “The Meaning of ‘Meaning, ” Reprinted in Putnam 1975b, 
215–271.
Putnam, Hilary (1975b). Mind, Language, and Reality, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

T h e  b o u n d a r i e s  o f  t h e  m i n d
279
Richard, Mark (1990). Propositional Attitudes: An Essay on Thoughts and How We Ascribe 
Them. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rey, G. (1997). Contemporary Philosophy of Mind: A Contentiously Classical Approach. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Russell, Bertrand (1917). “Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description,” 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1910–1911: 108–128.
Schroeder, Mark (2010). Being For: Evaluating the Semantic Program of Expressivism. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smart, J.J.C. (1953). “Sensations and Brain Processes,” Philosophical Review, 68: 
141–156.
Sprevak, Mark (2009). “Extended Cognition and Functionalism,” Journal of Philosophy, 
106(9): 503–527.
Strawson, P. F. (1959). Individuals. London: Methuen.
Thelen, E., and Smith, L. B. (1994). A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of 
Cognition and Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Turing, Alan (1950). “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind, 59: 433–460.
Varela, Francisco, Thompson, Evan and Rosch, Eleanor (1991). The Embodied Mind: Cog-
nitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Williamson, Timothy (2000). Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, Timothy (2006). “Must Do Better,” in Greenough, P. and Lynch, M. (eds.), 
Truth and Realism. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 177–187.
Wilson, Margaret (2002). “Six Views of Embodied Cognition,” Psychonomic Bulletin and 
Review, 9: 625–636.
Wilson, Robert A., and Foglia, Lucia (2011). “Embodied Cognition,” The Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2011 Edition), Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/fall2011/entries/embodied-cognition/

280
1.  Introduction
Cognitive science is the study of individual agency: its nature, scope, mecha-
nisms, and patterns. It studies what agents are and how they function. This defini-
tion is modified from one provided by Bechtel, Abrahamsen, and Graham (1998), 
where cognitive science is defined as “the multidisciplinary scientific study of 
cognition and its role in intelligent agency.” Several points motivate the modifica-
tion. First (and least consequential), the multidisciplinarity of cognitive science 
is an accident of academic history, not a fact about its subject matter (a point also 
pressed in Gardner 1985). Second, the label “intelligent” is often used as a term 
of normative assessment, when cognitive science is concerned with behavior by 
entities (including possibly groups, as individual or collective agents) that are not 
considered intelligent, as well as unintelligent behavior of intelligent agents, for 
any intuitive definition of “intelligent”.1
Third and most importantly, the term “cognition” is omitted from the definiens 
to help emphasize a position of neutrality on a number of contemporary debates. 
Cognition can often reasonably be equated with mental activity, but the mind has 
traditionally been associated or contrasted with the brain. The modified defini-
tion recognizes that whether or how much cognition is brain-based is a matter of 
considerable dispute (e.g., Clark 1997; Gallagher 2005; Adams and Aizawa 2008; 
Chemero 2011; Kiverstein and Miller 2015). That said, for reasons of brevity of 
exposition, I will often write in terms appropriate to the traditional brain-based 
framing of cognition.
In addition, the scope of cognition (and agency) is currently in flux. For exam-
ple, if plants have cognition (Trewavas 2005; Calvo and Keijzer 2009), then brains 
and animal bodies are not required for cognition or agency. Other writers are more 
restrictive. For example, Von Eckardt 2003 sees the domain of cognitive science as 
the human cognitive capacities. My working assumption is that human-style cogni-
tion is a special case. Many people are most interested in human cognition. But what 
counts as cognitive will ultimately depend on the systems to which the basic concep-
tual framework of cognitive science can be fruitfully applied.
11
THE RISE OF COGNITIVE SCIENCE 
IN THE 20TH CENTURY
Carrie Figdor

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
281
As conceptual history, the rise of cognitive science is the story of the articula-
tion of the core concepts for explaining agency. This article explains five key 
innovations comprising the basic explanatory package of cognitive science. In 
traditional philosophical terms, they constitute the conceptual framework for 
explaining how the mind could be material. This package unifies the field despite 
the remaining conceptual and practical impediments of disciplinary boundaries, 
internal debates about how the package should be refined, and its incompleteness. 
It is assumed here that this package will be elaborated, not abandoned, in future 
work, just as the theory of evolution has continually unified biology despite ten-
sions and controversies about its proper form.
The foundational ideas are associated with the main contributors and their main 
works; regrettably, discussion of the contributions of historical precursors and 
important contemporary figures is omitted for space reasons.2 These ideas include 
the information-processing program (Alan Turing), neurons as information- 
processors (Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts), feedback control of processing 
(Norbert Wiener), information as a measure of the structure of communication 
(Claude Shannon), and information-processing as a multiperspectival explanatory 
framework (David Marr). These ideas can be briefly described as follows, with 
details provided below.
Turing showed how recognizably rational behavior could be produced by an 
agent if very few distinct types of simple internal state transitions were sequenced 
in the right way. A  human computer added columns of numbers, and so too 
could a simple Turing machine sequenced in the right way. McCulloch and Pitts 
showed how the basic internal machinery of the brain could be seen to realize 
these rational transitions. They mapped inferential steps involving propositions to 
transitions in states of neurons. Wiener described how the future behavior of such 
agents could depend on the impact of their prior responses on their environment. 
An agent can learn from experience when it can adaptively modify its behavior 
in response to experience that is itself a consequence of its prior behavior. Shan-
non showed how information could be understood and quantified in terms of the 
statistical or probabilistic structure inherent in communication. This structure is 
derived from conventional regularities that agents jointly create and can individu-
ally exploit to help achieve their goals. Marr showed that information-processing 
explanations shared an explanatory structure in which goals, processing steps, and 
physical operations would all be specified. This explanatory framework applied to 
non-rational as well as rational processes.
Of the five, Turing’s and Shannon’s contributions may be most fundamental: they 
articulated the core concepts of “processing” and “information” in “information- 
processing”. In the case of Shannon, there are many other technical as well as 
colloquial concepts of information (Adriaans 2012). The admittedly controver-
sial claim made here is that Shannon’s concept is basic to cognitive science, and 
that its explanatory potential (unlike that of Turing’s model) has barely begun to 
be elaborated (see, e.g., Isaac forthcoming, Figdor (MS)). I discuss its relation 
to the philosophical notion of representation or content in section 2.4.

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
282
A potential sixth core element of the package is a theory of the goals of and 
constraints on information-processing capacities at the agent level. Proposals for 
the social root of intelligence (e.g., Jolly 1966; Humphreys 1976; Dunbar 1998; 
Sterelny 2007) are attempts to make theoretical sense of agents’ goals, assess-
ments, expectations, and responses within their social contexts. Developing and 
integrating a basic framework of agentic goals vis-à-vis other agents is one of the 
main challenges facing 21st-century cognitive science.
The discussion below emphasizes the abstract nature of the core ideas. This 
feature has led, I believe, to some misunderstanding about the relation between 
cognitive science and the discipline-specific ways in which the ideas were initially 
appropriated, articulated, investigated, and deployed in explanation. For example, 
Turing’s model did not come with fine print stating the limits of its explanatory 
power. As we are discovering, much can be done in artificial intelligence to satisfy 
military, industrial, and commercial aims without addressing the symbol ground-
ing problem – the problem of fixing the reference of symbols or concepts. Solving 
this problem may be crucial for explaining some aspects of agency, but Turing’s 
bare-bones model is not sufficient to solve it. That is why it is just a part of the 
basic explanatory package.
Similarly, the fact that post-behaviorist empirical psychology proceeded without 
looking at the brain is not the denial of an essential explanatory connection in cogni-
tive science (nor, for that matter, in psychology). Significant advances in scientific 
investigation involving the brain had to wait until the 1990s. That was when the tech-
nology to measure ongoing neural activity with some degree of specificity during 
the performance of cognitive tasks became widely available. So when Searle (1980, 
421) stated that “the whole idea of strong AI is that we don’t need to know how the 
brain works to know how the mind works. . . [W]e can understand the mind without 
doing neurophysiology,” this may be true of strong AI and parts of psychology yet 
false of cognitive science. The cognitive science-biology boundary is not yet fixed.
Finally, while the core ideas are abstract, they are fundamentally mathematical 
rather than philosophical, quantitative rather than qualitative. The genius of those 
contributing to the package was their ability to build conceptual bridges between 
intuitive conceptions of mind and non-intuition-based explanations of them. Phi-
losophers have contributed significantly to cognitive science from the start – as 
critics (e.g., Searle 1980, Dreyfus 1992), integrators (e.g., Fodor 1983), collabora-
tors (e.g., Churchland and Sejnowski 1992), champions (e.g., P. M. Churchland 
1990; P. S. Churchland 1986), and theoreticians (e.g., Fodor 1975; Dennett 1987; 
Chalmers 1995). They will continue to do so not just in one or more of these 
roles (e.g. Block 2007), but also as disseminators (Hohwy 2014, Clark 2015), 
participants (Eliasmith 2013), and articulators of new social and moral concerns 
that arise as intuitions about human cognition and agency are challenged (Rosk-
ies 2010; Allen et al. 2000). We think about the mind differently now than we did 
100 years ago, due to both theoretical and empirical advances. Future philosophi-
cal participation in cognitive science will have to take this change into account.

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
283
2.  The basic explanatory package
We do resent the hiatus between our mental terminology and our 
physical terminology. It is being attacked in a very realistic fashion 
today.
McCulloch 1943 (from the Warren S. McCulloch  
Papers, cited in Piccinini 2004)
Cognitive science aims to explain agency in material terms – in particular, in 
mathematical terms that bridge logic (mind) and engineering (matter). Oddly, 
mathematics is frequently omitted from the list of disciplines contributing to 
cognitive science even though many pioneers of cognitive science, including 
Turing, Pitts, Wiener, and Shannon, were mathematicians. In contrast, neuro-
science, philosophy, psychology, linguistics, and computer science are usually 
listed as constitutive disciplines (e.g., Bechtel et al. op.cit., 69–70; Miller 2003, 
143; Heckathorn 1989), even though (like mathematics) most areas of these dis-
ciplines have nothing to do with cognitive science. Anthropology is also included 
even though it quickly parted ways from cognitive science (Bender et al. 2010). 
Sociology or “sociocultural studies” (Bechtel et al. op.cit., 93) is mainly noted 
for its absence (Bainbridge 1994, 408), underlining the lag in integrating social 
aspects of cognition.
The omission of mathematics may be due to the fact that, until Turing, we 
lacked an empirically plausible model of how the mind could be material. With-
out such a model, materialists could do little to counter the intuition, and philo-
sophical position, that the mind is exempt from the mathematico-engineering, 
mechanical explanation of the rest of nature. Gottfried Leibniz (a mathematician) 
had the idea of a logical calculus in the 17th century, but he also denied that 
perception and consciousness could be implemented in a machine (Monadology 
17).3 With Turing’s breakthrough, we could retrospectively identify percursors – 
more mathematicians. In the 18th century, Charles Babbage invented (but did not 
fully build) an analytical engine for general computing that operated on the same 
principles as the Jacquard loom, which used sequences of punchcards to organize 
sequences of the machine’s weaving operations (Copeland 2008). George Boole 
(1854) found that mathematical operations performed on sets could also be logi-
cal operators that operated on propositions or sentential thought contents, sug-
gesting that the resulting operations were laws of thought. Gottlob Frege (1879) 
added a logic that allowed for operations on parts of propositions, formalizing 
deductive inference.
The study of these ideas, blended in mathematical logic, unified the concep-
tual founders of cognitive science (Aspray 1985). The ideas themselves provided 
materialists with a clear engineering target: to build something that can do these 
logical operations. Doing this would at least get the ball rolling.

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
284
2.1  1936: Turing: software
Turing (1936) provided the first explanatory link between these logical operations 
and a machine that could perform them. He showed that any well-defined logical or 
mathematical problem that had an effective solution – that could be solved in a finite 
number of steps – could be solved by following simple state transitions in a sequence. 
Although a Turing machine was not a physical device, each step could be imagined 
physically as a series of squares on a tape plus a read-write device. The device would 
scan a square (start the transition), erase or print a 1 or 0 on the square (perform 
a simple operation), and move to the next square (end the transition). These state 
transitions could be realized by a physical device with appropriate on/off switches as 
1s and 0s and a way to distinguish and respond to them. 1s and 0s are numerically, 
not psychologically, interpreted states, but the way was open to interpret thoughts 
as complex symbols that could be similarly manipulated. Turing also showed that 
given enough space and time a single sequence of simple steps – a universal Turing 
machine – could encompass any other sequence by embedding them (or inserting 
them as needed) in the larger sequence. Like a mind, a universal Turing machine was 
versatile (“general-purpose”): it could solve “any problem that can be reduced to a 
programme of elementary instructions” (Williams and Kilburn 1948).
But can all mental operations be reduced to a series of elementary instructions? 
Descartes argued that animals lacked minds because they lacked language, the 
means by which humans can express an infinite variety of thoughts. (He did not 
consider prelinguistic infants, inter alia.) But whether universal Turing machines 
were as versatile as minds did not have to turn on intuitive measures of versatility. 
As Alan Newell, Cliff Shaw, and Herbert Simon – pioneers in developing com-
puter programs with psychologically interpretable states and transitions4 – put it:
[A] program incorporating such [elementary information] processes, 
with appropriate organization, can in fact solve problems. This aspect of 
problem solving has been thought to be “mysterious” and unexplained 
because it was not understood how sequences of simple processes could 
account for the successful solution of complex problems. The theory dis-
solves the mystery by showing that nothing more need be added to the 
constitution of a successful problem solver.
(1958, 152)
“Dissolves” may be overstating matters, but the demystifying of mind had begun.
Turing’s theory left open how an embodied universal Turing machine might be 
designed. The first programmable computers, which were built in the 1940s (Wil-
liams and Kilburn op.cit.; von Neumann 1945; Godfrey and Hendry 1993), were 
designed to meet engineering goals. For example, optimizing operational efficiency 
by means of central program-storage unit (a Central Control) entailed minimizing 
the flexibility of the operations (von Neumann 1966: secs. 2.2, 2.3). But so what, if 
any needed flexibility could be left up to a human programmer? Similarly, ease of 

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
285
repair could be optimized by building a “fragile” machine that would stop operat-
ing at an error (von Neumann 1966: 73), even if this meant they did not operate like 
brains, which isolated problems for working on them on the side.
Such engineering decisions should not be confused with limits on the explana-
tory potential of Turing’s model. Dreyfus (1992) argued that computing can’t 
explain human intelligence because the latter is context-sensitive and thus not 
rule-governed. Similarly, the fragility of von Neumann-style computers was 
treated as a bug by early champions of connectionism (e.g., Churchland 1990), 
an alternative computing design based on neurophysiology (described below). 
Fragility, flexibility, and context-dependence are concepts in the same family as 
the intuitive idea of versatility. Turing’s model left open how any of these features 
might be realized in a universal Turing machine, and is consistent with a con-
tinuum of cognitive systems or agents of different degrees of versatility.
Nevertheless, the immediate assimilation of minds to computers by some psy-
chologists and early AI researchers revealed exuberant hopes for how much mind 
could be explained with these first incarnations of Turing’s model. Due to argu-
ments showing that no formal logical system could be used to prove all formulas 
that we recognize as being true, Turing was aware that a simple Turing machine 
could not do everything a human mind could do (Copeland and Shagrir 2013). But 
Turing (1950) also linked his processing story to human linguistic behavior by 
proposing the Turing Test, in which an interrogator tries to determine if her hidden 
interlocutor is a human or a computer. He predicted a computer would pass the 
Turing Test within fifty years; it remains unpassed. Simon reportedly predicted in 
1957 that a computer would beat a human chess champion within ten years; Big 
Blue beat Gary Kasparov in 1997.5 Searle’s (1980) Chinese-room thought experi-
ment, which concludes that there is no understanding in a system that realizes an 
unelaborated Turing machine, provided a sharp rhetorical counter to these claims.
The early exuberance may also have reflected the fact that to experimental 
psychologists Turing’s model provided a viable non-introspectivist alternative 
research programme to behaviorism. In the early days of scientific psychology, 
introspectivist or structuralist psychologists (such as Wilhelm Wundt and Edward 
Titchener) used the reports of trained introspectors as evidence for the workings 
of the mind. When introspectors disagreed, there was no objective criterion for 
determining who might be right. Such unresolvable conflicts discredited structur-
alism as scientific psychology. Radical behaviorism went to the opposite extreme: 
the only allowable evidence was observable behavior or environmental contin-
gencies, and only behavior needed to be explained. Behaviorism in this radical 
form never took hold in developmental, comparative, social, perceptual, or clini-
cal psychology, and was not dominant outside the US (Greenwood 1999; Miller 
2003); even B. F. Skinner, its most well-known defender, was conflicted about it 
(Baars 2003). But where it was influential, its influence was profound: Neisser’s 
1967 Cognitive Psychology, hailed as the ur-text of post-behavioristic experimen-
tal psychology, had six chapters on vision, four on audition, and just one slim final 
chapter on higher cognition.6

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
286
As stored-program computing took off, experimental psychologists were fac-
ing a growing pile of anomalies that motivated looking inside the behaviorist’s 
black box. Miller (1956) showed that short-term memory capacity stayed con-
stant at around seven ‘chunks’ of information because items could be recoded 
into new ‘chunks’: for example, a 10-digit number is more easily remembered by 
being recoded into three chunks (e.g., 123–456–7890). This showed that internal 
cognitive machinery was needed to explain memory. Chomsky (1959) argued that 
children’s linguistic output was governed by grammatical rules (or violated those 
rules in regular ways) that were underdetermined by the speech they heard as 
stimulus. This evidence of the ‘poverty of the stimulus’ (its inadequacy to explain 
the output) showed that internal operations were needed to explain language.
These and other results made the emerging cognitive science of information-
processing highly attractive: it seemed “complicated enough to do everything 
that cognitive theorists have been talking about” (Miller et al. 1960, 43). What 
they had been talking about, inter alia, were ways to explain phenomena that 
made behaviorism implausible. Thus, psychologists took away from Turing the 
lesson that “if they could describe exactly and unambiguously anything that a 
living organism did, then a computing machine could be built that could exhibit 
the same behavior with sufficient exactitude to confuse the observer” (Baddeley 
1994, 46).
No wonder, then, that Turing’s model was immediately elaborated at a level 
appropriate to human-centered psychology: the symbols were interpreted as natural- 
language-like concepts or mental representations, and the rules were the rules of 
deductive logic or heuristics (Fodor 1975; Newell and Simon 1976; Miller, Gal-
anter, and Pribram op.cit., 3). This ‘rules-and-representations’ research program 
came to be known as classical computationalism. The stored-program computer 
of von Neumann’s design was the machine for which these first psychologically 
interpreted internal state transitions were developed. They were specified in the 
form of software programs written in high-level programming languages.
The autonomy of psychology from biology (or neuroscience in particular) 
should also be understood in this context. Off-loading problems that are not of 
direct interest, particularly if the technology for investigating them is not yet 
available, is a rational scientific strategy. As Newell, Shaw, and Simon (op.cit.: 
163) put it: “Discovering what neural mechanisms realize these information- 
processing functions in the human brain is a task for another level of theory con-
struction.” The Turing-inspired research left open how much progress could be 
made without engaging with other levels of theory construction.
2.2  1943: McCulloch and Pitts: brainware
A materialist explanation of agency requires a theory of how physical agents 
could be cognitive systems. Assuming humans as the prototype of such an agent, 
McCulloch (a neurophysiologist) and Pitts (a mathematician) provided this the-
ory. They proposed that neurons were biological logic gates.

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
287
A logic gate is a unit whose operations can be interpreted in terms of the truth 
table for the logical operations of ‘and’ and ‘or’, the operations in Boolean logic. 
An ‘and’ gate fires a pulse if and only if its two input channels both fire, mirror-
ing the way a conjunction – A and B – is true if and only if both A and B are true. 
An ‘or’ gate fires if at least one of its two input channels fires, mirroring the way 
a disjunction – A or B – is true if and only if at least one of the constituent sen-
tences is true. A McCulloch-Pitts neuron is an abstract biological analogue of an 
electrical switch or relay, a basic component of a von Neumann computer (von 
Neumann 1945: 4.2, 4.3; Wiener 1948: Ch. 5; Arbib 2000, 212). McCulloch-Pitts 
neurons were binary in operation, so their states could be associated with proposi-
tions: activation could be associated with truth values (on/1/true, off/0/false) and 
patterns of activation with inference. While such sparse coding (i.e., 1 activated 
neuron = 1 true proposition) is empirically wildly implausible, this interpretation 
is the simplest that directly links Turing’s model, with its simple state transitions, 
to the activity of the basic operating units of actual brains.7 This link presupposed 
the discovery by neuroscientist Santiago Ramon y Cajal that neurons do not form 
a continuous net but are discrete units that stand in electrochemical relations.
The McCulloch-Pitts theory inspired connectionist or neural network comput-
ing. Connectionist networks are virtual collections of McCulloch-Pitts neurons 
running on standard computers. They have simple units (nodes) with connections 
to other nodes. Input nodes are analogous to sensory neurons, output nodes to 
motor neurons, and “hidden” layers of nodes to neurons that mediate between 
input and output. Numerical weights on the connections regulate the amount of 
input (activation) passed or propagated from one node to another. When a node 
obtains sufficient net input from its incoming connections to reach or pass a firing 
threshold, it sends its output (fires) to the nodes to which it is connected by its 
outgoing connections. The weights on the connections at one stage of processing 
determine the activation pattern at the next stage.8
Connection weights implicitly contain the record of past activation and so col-
lectively embody what the network has learned from experience. The weights are 
adjusted automatically or by a human modeler using a learning rule. For example, 
a simple Hebbian learning rule (after psychologist Donald O. Hebb) increases the 
numerical value assigned to the connection between two nodes that co-activate.  
This makes them more likely to be co-activated in the future, mimicking the 
neurophysiological feature that synaptic connections are strengthened when two 
neurons are co-activated (called long-term potentiation, or, as the slogan goes, 
“neurons that fire together wire together”).
Connectionist-style modeling of cognitive capacities began in the 1940s and 
1950s but was overshadowed by programming research until the 1986 publica-
tion of Parallel Distributed Processing (Rumelhart, McClelland, and the PDP 
Research Group 1986), which gathered papers on neural net research in per-
ception, verb parsing, and other capacities. However, while early champions of 
connectionism approvingly contrasted their brain-like architecture with that of 
stored-program computing, McCulloch-Pitts neurons are no less abstract than the 

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
288
squares on a Turing machine tape. For example, there is no distinction between 
kinds of neurons and no means to represent the role of neuromodulators in real-
izing the context-dependence and variability of neural signaling (Dayan 2012; 
Izhikevich 2007). In fact connectionist networks are now used to model all kinds 
of networks (Baronchelli et  al. 2013). Nodes and weighted connections (now 
also called edges) can represent, respectively, agents and the relative importance 
of interagent relations (Froese 2014); words and their frequency of association 
(Borge-Holthoefer and Arenas 2009; and ideas and the spread of innovation 
(Mason et al. 2008).
That said, there are important differences. In classical computing, there is one 
series of computations,, represented by symbolic-program-governed operations 
on squares of tape. (More than one series can be run in parallel, but they are 
equivalent to a single series.) In a connectionist network, multiple computations – 
each represented by the equation-governed activation of each neural logic gate – 
go on simultaneously. In classical computationalism the problem is to write a 
program that will generate the desired output given the input; in connectionism 
the problem is to get the connection weights set so that the desired output is gen-
erated from the input. These differences yield interesting differences in terms of 
their explanatory power. Serial, stored-program computing is terrific for modeling 
logical operations, while parallel, weighted-connection computing is terrific for 
partitioning data into classes by frequency of association.
The relations between these types of computing and between each type and 
psychological processes are still debated. One way this debate has been framed 
is whether connectionist networks describe a cognitive level directly or whether 
they implement classical computation (Fodor and Pylyshyn 1988; Smolensky 
1991; Aizawa 1992). Currently, the activation patterns of the hidden layers in 
neural networks that are used to model brain activity have no clear psychological 
interpretation. Whether these patterns need to be so interpreted is also a matter of 
debate (Bechtel 2009).
2.3  1948: Wiener: feedback control
Turing’s model did not say how symbols or rules for manipulating them could 
be modified. Since many agents learn from experience, their agency cannot be 
explained by Turing machines that lack an internal learning mechanism. Wiener 
provided a model of feedback control, building on ideas from 19th-century physi-
cist James Clerk Maxwell.
Wiener (with his collaborator physiologist Arturo Rosenblueth) coined the term 
“cybernetics” (from the Greek for “steersman”, 1961, 11) for the study of “con-
trol and communication in the animal and the machine” – physical systems, liv-
ing or not. A feedback loop is an agent-environment causal loop (or an epicycle 
in it) that allows for adjustment of the agent’s behavior (or a stage of it) in the 
light of what occurs in the environment as a result of its prior behavior. To use 
Wiener’s example (1961, 7), the muscle motions involved in picking up a pencil 

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
289
require some sort of information that will guide the appropriate motor commands 
at each moment in a way that depends on how much farther away the pencil is at 
any moment. The motion of your arm, hand, and fingers at any time depends on 
the way the environment now affects your eyes (the source of the visual input of 
your arm position relative to the pencil) which depends on the motion you made 
a moment ago.
Cybernetics complicated the core explanatory package structurally and con-
ceptually. In a simple Turing machine, the dependency between two states is set 
by a rule. Providing the initial input is like tapping the first domino in a series. In 
a simple feedforward neural network – in which connections propagate activa-
tion in one direction, from input to output – activation in nodes closer to output 
nodes cannot affect activation in nodes closer to input nodes. The updating of the 
network’s connection weights by the network modeler is analogous to thought-
insertion. In both cases, internal feedback loops are needed to enable outputs at 
a later stage to be used as input in an earlier stage. Of course, a system may be 
able to get feedback but not be able to use it to alter its behavior. Where there is 
feedback control, there is also the capacity to change behavior by using feedback. 
Where in addition the change in behavior is adaptive, or responsive to environ-
mental contingencies, there is also learning.
In this way, cybernetics also introduced the concepts of goals, expectations, and 
assessments into the basic explanatory package: a system that has the capacity to 
generate and use feedback to control its behavior adaptively is a system with goals 
(or final states), expectations (intermediate states), and ways to assess its input in 
the light of these expectations and goals. The feedback control concept applies to 
“a learning system that wants something, that adapts its behavior in order to maxi-
mize a special signal from the environment” (Sutton and Barto 1998: Preface). 
Understanding such a system requires understanding the many ways in which it is 
coupled with its environment.
Like the other elements of the core explanatory package, the cybernetic model 
is abstract enough to apply to a wide range of systems. Like them, too, cybernet-
ics was elaborated early on in psychological terms. Miller, Galanter, and Pribram 
(1960) adopted the model to describe “how actions are controlled by an organ-
ism’s internal representation of its universe.” Their motivation was clear:
The men who have pioneered in this area [of computing and program-
ming] have been remarkably innocent about psychology – the creatures 
whose behavior they want to simulate often seem more like a mathemati-
cian’s dream than like living animals.
(op.cit.: 3)
They theorized that stimulus and response were stages of the same complex 
feedback loop, which they called a TOTE unit (“Test-Operate-Test-Exit”). What 
an organism did was guided by the outcomes of TOTE units, which could be 
organized hierarchically (that is, feedback loops within feedback loops). Such 

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
290
complications were critical for the information-processing paradigm to even 
begin to explain human agency.
More recently, the cybernetic idea is reflected in the predictive error minimiza-
tion or Bayesian brain model of whole-brain function (Friston 2010; Clark 2015; 
Hohwy 2014), presaged by Rosenblueth, Wiener, and Bigelow (1943). A Bayes-
ian model is one in which a system’s states (often interpreted as its beliefs or 
hypotheses) are updated using Bayes’s theorem. The theorem calculates the 
adjustments in the level of belief or credence one should have in a hypothesis 
in the light of new evidence and one’s prior credence in that hypothesis. On the 
predictive brain model, the brain (or a structure within it) compares a new input 
value to an expected value, calculates the difference or error, if any, between the 
expected value and the actual input value, and makes an adjustment so that at the 
next stage its subsequent input is closer to its expectation. The system can adjust 
the hypothesis that generated the initial expected value to get a new expectation 
and then act much as it did, or it can adjust its subsequent behavior to get new 
input that will more closely match its expected value, or a bit of both.
When a feedback control loop is spatiotemporally tight, it is tempting to argue 
that a system does not require internal models or representations to explain its 
behavior. To borrow van Gelder’s (1995) illustrative example, the Watt gover-
nor for a steam engine continuously and mutually adjusts linear motion and cen-
trifugal force because these forces are realized by mechanically coupled parts 
(a throttle valve, a spinning spindle with weighted arms). But not all feedback 
control loops are so tight or so closely linked to sensorimotor capacities (as with 
Weiner’s own example of reaching for a pencil). For example, reinforcement 
learning, when rewarded behavior becomes more frequent, falls squarely within 
the cybernetic model and yet requires non-behavioristic explanation. As the pre-
dictive brain hypothesis is critically examined, the debate over the need for rep-
resentational notions in neural networks (and, by implication, brains) is likely to 
expand to include the concepts of goals, expectations, and assessments that are 
integral to cybernetics.
2.4  1948: Shannon: information
So far, the explanatory package has focused on the “processing” in “information- 
processing”. But what is information? Shannon’s (1948) answer, building on 
Nyquist (1924) and Hartley (1928), is derived from his theory of communication. 
Communication is information transfer between agents. A core concept of infor-
mation can be extracted from agents’ coordinated communicative actions, which 
can be quantified.
Warren Weaver, Shannon’s collaborator and communicator, distinguishes three 
basic problems in communication: the technical problem of accurate transfer of 
information from sender to receiver (was the message transmitted accurately?); 
the semantic problem of interpretation of meaning by the receiver as compared to 
the intended meaning of the sender (was the message understood in the intended 

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
291
way?); and the effectiveness problem of the success with which the meaning con-
veyed to the receiver leads to the receiver’s desired conduct (did the message 
lead the receiver to respond as the sender intended?). Answers to the latter two 
questions are constrained by answers to the first. As Shannon (1948, 1) notes, the 
semantic aspect of communication, and specifically the problem of reference, is 
irrelevant to “the engineering problem” of information transfer. It does not follow 
that his solution to the engineering problem is irrelevant to explaining reference 
or intentionality – that is, the ability of minds to represent aspects of the exter-
nal world in such a way that it is also possible for them to misrepresent those 
aspects). To the contrary, the theory describes the characteristics of a communica-
tion system that make reference possible. The link from reference to intentional 
contents – paradigmatically, thoughts about objects and their properties – will 
depend on how language and thought are related. For brevity, I assume here that 
at least some contentful mental states are partly, if not determinately, encoded in 
brain states (Dennett 1975), and that language expresses these contents, however 
imperfectly.
Shannon’s theory “is specifically adapted to handle one of the most significant 
but difficult aspects of meaning, namely the influence of context” (Weaver 1949):
The concept of information applies not to the individual message, as the 
concept of meaning would, but rather to the situation as a whole, the unit 
information indicating that in this situation one has an amount of free-
dom of choice, in selecting a message, which it is convenient to regard 
as a standard or unit amount.
In philosophy, a linguistic context is typically an extra-linguistic setting in which 
an utterance occurs, described in qualitative terms – who is talking to whom, 
when, where, about what. Here, a linguistic context is the structure of the lan-
guage to which the message belongs and which constrains the meanings that can 
be communicated. This linguistic context is quantified in the theory, and a quan-
titative concept of information can be extracted from it. As Weaver (op.cit.: 11) 
puts it, “information relates not so much to what you do say, but to what you could 
say.” Shannon’s theory, like the other elements of the core explanatory package, 
is apt for many kinds of agents and communication systems, such as neural sig-
nalling (Dayan and Abbott 2001). But, for brevity, I focus on the primary case of 
human linguistic communication.
In human language, the basic constraints on the set of possible messages is 
given by the statistical structure of the language in which source and receiver 
participate. The statistical structure of a language is reflected in its written form, 
which encodes the spoken form that directly expresses thought. The first letter of 
a sentence is maximally uncertain; it is most informative (has the most informa-
tion) in that it constrains all subsequent letter choices while the only constraint on 
it is that the language contains that letter.9 The frequencies of and relationships 
between letters can be quantified. The more the first choice constrains the second, 

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
292
the less information the second letter will contain: if the first letter is “Q” then 
given the features of English it is overwhelmingly likely that the next letter will 
be “U”. English is about 50 percent redundant (for strings of up to eight letters): 
about half the letters or words we use are chosen by us, and about half are deter-
mined by the statistical structure of English. This is why we can figure out badly 
garbled or incomplete messages.10
In short, in communication the U is redundant; it contains no more information 
than was given by the choice of Q; its presence is far from random; it is highly 
probable given the selection of Q; its entropy is low; we experience no surprise 
upon seeing a U; once you see a Q you already know what comes next. These are 
all ways of expressing the same probabilistic relationship that is the basis of the 
unit of information. A unit of information is a measure of how much freedom a 
source has in selecting a message. Information transfer can be quantified in terms 
of the probabilities assigned to each message in a set of possible messages that a 
sender could select to send to the receiver. The larger the set of possible messages, 
the more source freedom; the more source freedom, the more receiver uncertainty 
regarding which message will be selected. Greater freedom of choice, greater 
uncertainty, and greater quantity of information go hand in hand (Weaver 1949).
What is not stated explicitly in Shannon’s theory is the fact that the statistical 
structure captured in letter frequencies encodes some (but not all) of the conven-
tions that create a language, distinguishing utterances or inscriptions from noise. 
Meaningfulness involves further conventions, a prominent account of which has 
been developed by Skyrms 2010, following Lewis 1969 and, before him, Grice 
1957 (see also Isaac (forthcoming) and Figdor (MS), among others in this vibrant 
area of new research). Other places to look for insight into conventions these 
might well be anthropology (Bender et al. 2010) and other cultural and social 
sciences. The concept of information in standard informational or teleoinforma-
tional theories of content (e.g. Dretske 1988; Millikan 1984; Neander 2017) is in 
effect pure reference, divorced from and independent of communication. Shan-
non’s theory prompts thinking of reference as the upshot of additional constraints 
on communication, while leaving open how constrained a communication system 
must be, and which constraints it must have, in order for agents using that system 
to count as having representations (or intentionality) in the philosophical sense.11
In this vein, Weaver (op.cit.:14) speculatively adds into the communication pro-
cess a step of statistical semantic decoding after the engineering receiver decodes 
the signal back into a message (e.g., the pulses of Morse code into English letters). 
This “semantic receiver” – currently just a black box – would match the statistical 
semantic characteristics of the message to the statistical semantic characteristics 
of the totality of receivers or the subset of them that the source wishes to affect. 
Within this black box, the causal relations of informational semantics would 
appear as statistical or probabilistic patterns of agent-world interaction. From this 
perspective, the man in Searle’s (op.cit.) Chinese room does not understand the 
symbols he manipulates because his rulebook only embodies, metaphorically, the 
engineering receiver.

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
293
2.5  1982: Marr: explanation
While many of the elements in the core explanatory package were discovered or 
derived from work that occurred during World War II, the post-war period involved 
the institutionalization of cognitive science and the development of these ideas 
within recognized institutional and disciplinary strictures. (Sept. 11, 1956 – the sec-
ond day of a three-day Symposium on Information Theory at MIT – has been cited 
(Miller 2003, 142; Bechtel et al. op.cit.: 37) as an unofficial birthdate of cogni-
tive science.) Marr, a vision scientist, drew some general explanatory lessons from 
the emerging information-processing framework. Reacting to his contemporaries’ 
focus on the physiology of single neurons in visual processing, Marr held that a full 
explanation of vision would require understanding not just physical mechanisms 
but also their organization and contexts of operation.
Marr (1982, 24) proposed that explaining any information-processing sys-
tem required answering three different sorts of questions about it. These could be 
described and conceptualized in terms of three explanatory levels or analyses (Bech-
tel and Shagrir 2015; Shagrir 2010). The computational level involved explaining 
the why or goal of a particular kind of processing: What is the problem that the sys-
tem need to solve? The algorithmic level involved explaining how this goal could 
be achieved in terms of the steps or state transitions leading to it: What sorts of 
representations and rules are used to solve the problem? The implementation level 
involved explaining how physical structures might realize these state transitions: 
What physical mechanisms instantiate these representations and their processing? 
Marr’s approach yielded a common explanatory currency for integrating cognitive 
science research across disciplines, from neurobiology to cognitive psychology, and 
expanded later by Marr's collaborator Thomas Poggio to include social phenomena.
Marr, with Poggio and Ellen Hildreth, illustrated this approach by reframing 
visual processing into the same classical computational terms that were being used 
to explain higher cognitive capacities. Information-processing was not just about 
playing chess, but also perceiving objects. Systems within human agents could 
also be understood in the same basic information-processing terms. For example, 
activity in a particular area of V1 was for edge detection (computational level). It 
achieved this goal using rules for calculating zero-crossings (algorithmic level); 
and neural and other biological and biochemical machinery in this area of V1 
implemented these algorithms. V1 is the most common label for the tip of the 
occipital lobe, at the back of the brain, where visual information is initially pro-
cessed after passing through the retinas and subcortical brain structures. Additional 
processing in other visual areas would eventually yield a 3D image of an object.
The three levels of analysis could apply to many complex systems. Answers 
to any one of questions would provide constraints on answers to the others. So 
explaining any one system would require referring to systems at other levels:
It is a feature of such [complex information-processing] tasks, aris-
ing from the fact that the information processed in the machine is only 

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
294
loosely constrained by the physical properties of the machine, that they 
must be understood at different, though inter-related, levels.
(1981, 258)
In the case of vision, without answers at all three levels, describing the activity 
of neurons in response to specific stimuli, and even how these neurons are con-
nected, would not yield an explanation of the phenomenon of vision. The need for 
multiple explanatory levels is hardly limited to cognition (O’Malley et al. 2013).
Other than in machine vision, Marr’s emphasis on finding algorithms by which 
visual-feature outputs are computed (as in edge detection) has been superceded by 
a greater focus on real-world perception and embodied cognition (e.g., O’Regan 
and Noe 2001) and neural network computing methods (e.g., Olshausen and Field 
1996). Debate over the necessity for symbolic representations in cognitive science 
has also sparked debate regarding the necessity for the algorithmic level in particu-
lar, given the classical computational terms in which Marr stated his theory. The 
relative independence of the levels, or the answers to the questions, has also been 
a matter of debate (although Marr and Poggio emphasized their interdependence). 
More recently, the contemporary search for canonical neural computations (Carand-
ini 2012) pushes the explanatory framework downwards, while Poggio (2012, 1021) 
pushes it outward by adding learning and development to the three original levels.
Conclusion: what lies ahead?
As long as the mind remains a black box, there will always be a 
donkey on which to pin dualist . . . intuitions.
Greene and Cohen 2004, 1781
The first century of cognitive science was largely a matter of formulating the basic 
explanatory package for materialism and exploring how much could be explained 
by these ideas. Different disciplines interpreted that framework in the ways most 
suited to their available technologies, training, and immediate explanatory goals. 
We do not yet have a comprehensive materialism, but there are advances going 
on in every direction.
One important example may be theories of consciousness (Dehaene et al. 1998; 
Oizumi et al. 2014; Tononi and Koch 2014), which had largely been left to philos-
ophers (e.g., Chalmers op.cit., Block 1995) during “a century of taboo” in science 
(Baars 2003, fn. 1). This acceptance of consciousness as a scientific explanandum 
has been accompanied by efforts to accept reports of introspectively accessible 
conscious states as valid evidence (Jack and Roepstorff 2002; 2003). Clinical 
cases (e.g., detection of neural activity in vegetative-state patients), research in 
animal cognition, and advances in robotics are contributing to this final rejection 
of radical behaviorism and dualism.

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
295
New discoveries in neuroscience are also altering traditional ways of thinking 
about the mind. For example, the perception/cognition distinction is under siege 
given the discovery of the huge cortical allocation in higher primates to visual 
processing and new theories of vision in which the goal of vision is recognizing 
meaningful social stimuli (Nakayama 2010, 15). In memory research, our intui-
tive concept of memory as something stored in the brain, rather than constructed 
and elaborated in context, seems to get human memory wrong and computer 
memory right. Neuroimaging studies show overlap in brain areas involved in 
remembering past experiences and imagining or simulating possible future expe-
riences. This suggests that remembering and imagining may be forms of a single 
process for preparing for the future, rather than distinct processes of recalling a 
stored representation and engaging in stimulus-independent thought (Schacter 
et al. 2012).
While the 21st century has already been dubbed the century of the brain (Fla-
vell 2000), it is also likely to be the century of the social (see also Bechtel et al. 
op.cit.: 90). The fact that early conceptual innovations regarding social cognition 
arose from field work with animals (e.g. Jolly op.cit.) may explain why they were 
not integrated earlier: the very idea of animal cognition was and to some degree 
remains a matter of debate (Shettleworth 2010). But enactivist and embodied cog-
nitive research points in the opposite direction from that recommended in Fodor’s 
(1980) brief for methodological solipsism, a pragmatic recommendation for 
research modeled on Descartes’ solipsistic method for discovering the essence of 
mind. This push away from solipsism has been a thread within cognitive science 
for some time (e.g. Thelen and Smith 1994; Gibson 1979; Brooks 1990; 1991). 
Social context is now being theorized in terms of multi-agent systems engaged in 
cooperation, communication, and learning.
It seems likely that the basic conceptual package for explaining agency will 
soon be fully elaborated in outline if not in its empirical details. Near the start of 
the last century, psychologist Karl Lashley summed up the materialist viewpoint 
as follows:
The vitalist cites particular phenomena . . . and denies the possibility of 
a mechanistic account of them. But he thereby commits what we might 
call the egotistic fallacy. On analysis, his argument reduces every time 
to the form, “I am not able to devise a machine that will do these things; 
therefore no one will ever conceive of such a machine.
(1923, 269)
If one substitutes “dualism” for “vitalism”, a similar remark might be made 
regarding cognitive science at the start of the 21st century. Dualism will always 
remain conceivable, but an empirically testable theoretical framework for materi-
alism is just a matter of time.

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
296
Notes
	 1	 For example, Newell and Simon’s (1976) physical symbol system hypothesis – that a 
physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means for intelligent action – 
covered humans and computers alike. They agreed that only systems of sufficient com-
plexity and power could exhibit general intelligence, but intelligent action was not 
necessarily human action.
	 2	 Besides Bechtel et al. op.cit., Boden 2006 is an authoritative and comprehensive dis-
cussion. Aspray 1985: 120 provides a detailed chronology of key relevant works.
	 3	 The influence of Leibniz’s logic on 19th-century logicians is disputed (Peckhaus 
2009), although Wiener (1961: 12) calls Leibniz the “patron saint” of cybernetics and 
Shannon (1948: 52) in turn credits Wiener as an important influence. What is indisput-
able is that the isolated idea of a logical calculus had no impact on the development 
of a materialist alternative to dualism prior to Turing, who relied directly on Boole, as 
did Shannon; meanwhile, Pitts was a student of Carnap, and Newell, Shaw, and Simon 
demonstrated the information-processing paradigm’s possibilities when their Logic 
Theorist program provided a more elegant proof of a theorem from Russell and White-
head’s Principia Mathematica than the one in Principia (which led them to try, without 
success, to publish this result in a paper that listed Logic Theorist as a co-author).
	 4	 Newell, Shaw, and Simon (1958) developed the first list-processing language (IPL) for 
an information-processing system of psychologically interpretable transitions, rather 
than transitions in terms of 1s and 0s (Boden 1991, 10).
	 5	 I am unable to find a precise citation for the widely reported quotation attributed to 
Simon in which the prediction is made. Even if apocryphal, the prediction does capture 
the enthusiasm of these early AI pioneers.
	 6	 Radical behaviorism did leave two important legacies. First, the demand for observ-
able behavioral evidence of psychological claims (“methodological” behaviorism) is 
now entrenched. Second, by focusing on behavior rather than consciousness, behavior-
ism “helped to break down the distinction between the mental behavior of humans and 
the information processing of lower animals and machines” (Aspray (1985, 128).
	 7	 Von Neumann suggested a further analogy: the Central Control and Memory of a 
standard stored-program computer were intended to “correspond to the associative 
neurons in the human nervous system” (von Neumann: 3, sec. 2.6; sec. 4.0, 4.2) – that 
is, the hidden layers of a connectionist network.
	 8	 This description of neural networks best fits feedforward networks, such as those in 
the PDP Research Group papers cited below. In these networks, activation passes from 
input to hidden to output layers, and the output is what the nodes in the output layer 
compute. Another important strand of connectionism stems from Hopfield (1982), who 
designed a recurrent network. In a recurrent network, every node provides input to 
every other node, and the network’s output is a stable activation pattern of the whole 
network.
	 9	 In languages with non-alphabetic scripts (e.g. Chinese), the set of conventions behind 
the statistical structure of communication (discussed below) are presumably divided 
up differently from the way they are in alphabetic languages.
	10	 At http://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/ the text that the network 
modeler’s system generates illustrates the way that the statistical structure of English 
constrains letters to the extent that meaningful text emerges.
	11	 Note that Dretske’s (1981; 1983) appropriation of Shannon amounted to a causal the-
ory of content of individual thoughts; as Dretske himself admits (1983, 82), he took 
very little from Shannon’s actual theory.

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
297
Bibliography
Adams, F. and Aizawa, K. (2008). The Bounds of Cognition. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Adriaans, P. (2012). “Information,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 
edition), Zalta, E. (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/information/.
Aizawa, K. (1992). “Connectionism and Artificial Intelligence: History and Philosophi-
cal Interpretation,” Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 4: 
295–313.
Allen, C., Varner, G. and Zinser, J. (2000). “Prolegomena to Any Future Artificial Moral 
Agent,” Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 12(3): 251–261.
Arbib, M. (2000). “McCulloch’s Search for the Logic of the Nervous System,” Perspec-
tives in Biology and Medicine, 43(2): 193–216.
Aspray, W. (1985). “The Scientific Conceptualization of Information,” Annals of the His-
tory of Computing, 7(2): 117–140.
Baars, B. (2003). “The Double Life of B. F. Skinner,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 
10(1): 5–25.
Baddeley, A. (1994). “The Magical Number Seven: Still Magic After all these Years?” 
Psychological Review, 101(2): 353–356.
Bainbridge, W., Brent, E., Carley, K., Heise, D., Macy, M., Markovsky, B. and Skvoretz, 
J. (1994). “Artificial Social Intelligence,” Annual Review of Sociology, 20: 407–436.
Baronchelli, A., Ferrer-i-Cancho, R., Pastor-Satorras, R., Chater, N. and Christiansen, M. 
(2013). “Networks in Cognitive Science,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17 (7): 348–360.
Bechtel, W. (2009). “Constructing a Philosophy of Science of Cognitive Science,” Topics 
in Cognitive Science, 1: 548–569.
Bechtel, W., Abrahamsen, A. & Graham, G. (1998). “The Life of Cognitive Science,” in 
Bechtel, W. and Graham, G. (eds.), A Companion to Cognitive Science. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell: 1–104.
Bechtel, W. and Shagrir, O. (2015). “The Non-Redundant Contributions of Marr’s Three 
Levels of Analysis for Explaining Information-Processing Mechanisms,” Topics in Cog-
nitive Science, 7: 312–322.
Bender, A., Hutchins, E. and Medin, D. (2010). “Anthropology in Cognitive Science,” Top-
ics in Cognitive Science, 2: 374–385.
Block, N. (1995). “On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness,” Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 18: 227–287.
Block, N. (2007). “Consciousness, Accessibility, and the Mesh between Psychology and 
Neuroscience,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(5–6): 481–499.
Boden, M. (1991). “Horses of a Different Color?” in Ramsey, W., Stich, S. and Rumel-
hart, D. (eds.), Philosophy and Connectionist Theory. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Boden, M. (2006). Mind As Machine: A History of Cognitive Science. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Boole, G. (1854). An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which Are Founded the 
Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities. Dover: Constable.
Borge-Holthoefer, J. and Arenas, A. (2009). Navigating word association norms to extract 
semantic information. In N. A. Taatgen and H. van Rijn (eds.), Proceedings of the 31st 
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 621–2777.

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
298
Brooks, R. (1990). “Elephants Don’t Play Chess,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 6 
(1-2): 3–15.
Brooks, R. (1991). “Intelligence Without Representation,” Artificial Intelligence, 47: 
139–159.
Calvo, P., and Keijzer, F. (2009). “Cognition in Plants,” in Balušcka, F. (ed.), Plant- Envi-
ronment Interactions: Signaling and Communication in Plants. Berlin and Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag.
Carandini, M. (2012). “From Circuits to Behavior: a Bridge too Far?” Nature Neurosci-
ence, 15(4): 507–509.
Chalmers, D. (1995). The Conscious Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chemero, A. (2011). Radical Embodied Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1959). “A Review of B.F. Skinner’s Verbal Behavior,” Language, 35(1): 
26–58.
Churchland, P.M. (1990). “On the Nature of Theories: A Neurocomputational Perspective,” 
in Savage, W. (ed.), Scientific Theories (Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 
vol. 14): 59–101.
Churchland, P.S. (1986). Neurophilosophy: Towards a Unified Science of the Mind-brain. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P.S. and Sejnowski, T. (1992). The Computational Brain. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2015). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, action and the embodied mind. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Copeland, B.J. (2008). “The Modern History of Computing,” The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 edition), Zalta, E. (ed.). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
fall2008/entries/computing-history/.
Copeland, B. J. and Shagrir, O. (2013). “Turing Versus Godel on Computability and the 
Mind,” in Copeland, B. J., Posy, C. and Shagrir, O. (eds.), Computability: Turing, Godel, 
Church, and beyond. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dayan, P. (2012). “Twenty-five Lessons From Computational Neuromodulation,” Neuron 
76: 240–256.
Dayan, P. and Abbott, L. (2001). Theoretical Neuroscience: Computational and Mathemat-
ical Modeling of Neural Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dehaene, S., Kerszberg, M. and Changeux, J.-P. (1998). “A Neuronal Model of a Global 
Workspace in Effortful Cognitive Tasks,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences USA, 95(24): 14529–14534.
Dennett, D. (1975). “Brain Writing and Mind Reading,” in Gunderson, K. (ed.), Language, 
Mind, and Knowledge. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press: 403–415.
Dennett, D. (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Dretske, F. (1983). “Precis of Knowledge and the Flow of Information,” Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 6: 55–90.
Dretske, F. (1988). Explaining Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1992). What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dunbar, R. (1998). The Social Brain Hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology 6: 178–190.

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
299
Eliasmith, C. (2013). How to Build a Brain: A Neural Architecture for Biological Cogni-
tion. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Figdor, C. (MS). Shannon + Friston = Content. Under review.
Flavell, J.H. (2000). “Development of Children’s Knowledge about the Mental World,” 
International Journal of Behavioral Development 2000, 24 (1): 15–23.
Fodor, J. (1975). The Language of Thought. Thomas Y. Crowell.
Fodor, J. (1980). “Methodological Solipsism Considered as a Research Strategy in Cogni-
tive Psychology,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 63: 63–73.
Fodor, J. (1983). The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. and Pylyshyn, Z. (1988). “Connectionism and Cognitive Architecture: A Critical 
Analysis,” Cognition, 28: 3–71.
Frege, G. (1879). Begriffschrift, eine der Arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des 
reinen Denkens. Revue Philosophique de la France Et de l'Etranger, 8: 108–109.
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neu-
roscience, 11(2): 127–138.
Froese, T., Gershenson, C. and Manzanilla, L. (2014). “Can Government be Self-Organized?  
A Mathematical Model of the Collective Social Organization of Ancient Teotihuacan, 
Central Mexico,” PLoS One, 9(10): e109966.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the Body Shapes the Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gardner, H. (1985). The Mind’s New Science. New York: Basic Books.
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates.
Godfrey, M. and Hendry, D. (1993). “The Computer as von Neumann Planned It,” IEEE 
Annals of the History of Computing, 15(1): 11–21.
Greene, J., and Cohen, J. (2004). “For the Law, Neuroscience Changes Everything and 
Nothing,” Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences, 359 (1451): 1775–1785.
Greenwood, J. (1999). “Understanding the ‘Cognitive Revolution’ in Psychology,” Journal 
of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 35(1): 1–22.
Grice, H.P. (1957). “Meaning,” Philosophical Review, 66(3): 377–388.
Hartley, R. (1928). “Transmission of Information,” Bell System Technical Journal, 7(3): 
535–563.
Heckathorn, D. (1989). “Cognitive Science, Sociology, and the Theoretic Analysis of 
Complex Systems,” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 14(2–3): 97–110.
Hohwy, J. (2014). The Predictive Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hopfield, J. (1982). “Neural Networks and Physical Systems with Emergent Collective 
Computational Abilities,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 
79 (8): 2554–2558.
Humphrey, N. (1976). “The Social Function of Intellect,” in Bateson, P. and Hinde, R. 
(eds.), Growing Points in Ethology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 303–317.
Isaac, A. (forthcoming). The Semantics Latent in Shannon Information. British Journal for 
Philosophy of Science. https://doiorg.proxy.lib.uiowa.edu/10.1093/bjps/axx029.
Izhikevich, E. (2007). Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience: The Geometry of Excitability 
and Bursting. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jack, A. and Roepstorff, A. (2002). “Introspection and Cognitive Brain Mapping: from 
Stimulus-response to Script-report,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8): 333–339.
Jack, A. and Roepstorff, A. (2003). “Why Trust the Subject? Editorial Introduction to 
Trusting the Subject? The Use of Introspective Evidence in Cognitive Science,” Journal 
of Consciousness Studies, 10 (9–10): v–xx.

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
300
Jolly, A. (1966). “Lemur Social Behavior and Primate Intelligence,” Science (New Series), 
153 (3735): 501–506.
Kiverstein, J. and Miller, M. (2015). “The embodied brain: towards a radical embod-
ied cognitive neuroscience,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (9), article 237, doi: 
10.3389/fnhum.2015.00237.
Lashley, K. (1923). “The Behavioristic Interpretation of Consciousness I and II,” Psycho-
logical Review, 30 (4): 237–272 and 30 (5): 329–353.
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McCulloch, W. and Pitts, W. (1943). “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nerv-
ous Activity,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 5: 115–133.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation 
and Processing of Visual Information. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Mason, W. A., Jones, A. and Goldstone, R. L. (2008). “Propagation of Innovations in Net-
worked Groups.” Journal of Experimental Psychology, 137(3): 422–433.
Miller, G. (2003). “The Cognitive Revolution: A Historical Perspective,” Trends in Cogni-
tive Sciences, 7 (3): 141–144.
Miller, G. (1956). “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two,” Psychological 
Review, 63: 81–97.
Miller, G., Galanter, E. and Pribram, K. (1960). Plans and the Structure of Behavior. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Millikan, R. (1984). Language, Thought, and other Biological Categories. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Nakayama, K. (2010). “Introduction: Vision Going Social,” in Adams, Jr., R. N. Ambady, 
R., Nakayama, K. and Shimojo, S. (eds.), The Science of Social Vision. New York and 
Oxford: Oxford University Press: 3–17.
Neander, K. (2017). A Mark of the Mental: in defense of informational teleosemantics. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive Psychology. New York: Meredith Publishing.
Newell, A. (1982). “The Knowledge Level,” Artificial Intelligence, 18: 87–127.
Newell, A. (1993). “Reflections on the Knowledge Level,” Artificial Intelligence, 59: 31–38.
Newell, A., Shaw, J. and Simon, H. (1958). “Elements of a Theory of Human Problem 
Solving,” Psychological Review, 65(3): 151–166.
Newell, A. and Simon, H. (1976). “Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry: Symbols and 
Search,” Communications of the ACM (Association for Computing Machinery), 19(3): 
113–126.
Nyquist, H. (1924). “Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed,” Bell System Technical 
Journal.
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L. and Tononi, G. (2014). “From the Phenomenology to the Mech-
anisms of Consciousness: Integrated Information Theory 3.0,” PLoS Computational 
Biology, 10 (5): e1003588.
Olshausen, B., and Field, D. (1996). “Emergence of Simple-Cell Receptive Field Proper-
ties by Learning a Sparse Code for Natural Images,” Nature, 381: 607–609.
O’Malley, M., Brigandt, I., Love, A., Crawford, J., Gilbert, J., Knight, R., Mitchell, S., 
and Rohwer, F. “Multilevel Research Strategies and Biological Systems,” Philosophy of 
Science, 81(5): 811–828.
O’Regan, J.K., and Noe, A. (2001). “A Sensorimotor Account of Vision and Visual Con-
sciousness,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24: 939–1031.

C o g n i t i v e  s c i e n c e  i n  t h e  2 0 t h  c e n t u r y
301
Peckhaus, V. (2009). “Leibniz’s Influence on 19th Century Logic,” The Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014 edition), Zalta, E. (ed.). http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/spr2014/entries/leibniz-logic-influence/.
Piccinini, G. (2004). “The First Computational Theory of the Brain: A  Close Look at 
McCulloch and Pitts’s ‘Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity’.” Syn-
these, 141(2): 175–215.
Poggio, T. (1981). “Marr’s Computational Approach to Vision,” Trends in Neurosciences, 
10: 258–262.
Poggio, T. (2012). “The Levels of Understanding Framework,” revised. Perception, 41: 
1017–1023.
Rosenblueth, A., Wiener, N. and Bigelow, J. (1943). “Behavior, Purpose, and Teleology,” 
Philosophy of Science, 10(1): 18–24.
Roskies, A. (2010). “How Does Neuroscience Affect Our Conception of Volition?” Annual 
Reviews Neuroscience, 33: 109–130.
Rumelhart, D., McClelland, J., and the PDP Research Group (1986). Parallel Distributed 
Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Vol. 1: Foundations, and 
Vol.2: Psychological and biological models. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schacter, D., Addis, D., Hassabis, D., Martin, V., Spreng, R.N., and Szpunar, K. (2012). 
“The Future of Memory: Remembering, Imagining, and the Brain,” Neuron, 76(4): 
677–694.
Searle, J. (1980). “Minds, Brains, and Programs,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3: 417–424.
Shagrir, O. (2010). “Marr on Computational-Level Theories,” Philosophy of Science, 77 
(4): 477–500.
Shannon, C. (1948). “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” Bell System Technical 
Journal, 379–423, 623–656.
Shettleworth, S. J. (2010). Cognition, Evolution, and Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Skryms, B. (2010). Signals: Evolution, Learning, and Information. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Smolensky, P. (1991). “Connectionism, Constituency and the Language of Thought,” 
in Loewer, B. and Rey, G. (eds.), Meaning in Mind: Fodor and His Critics. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Sterelny, K. (2007). “Social Intelligence, Human Intelligence, and Niche Construction,” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362: 719–730.
Sutton, R., and Barto, A. (1998). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Cambridge, MA 
and London: MIT Press. http://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~sutton/book/ebook/the-book.html.
Thelen, E., and Smith, L. (1994). A Dynamical Systems Approach to Development of Cog-
nition and Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tononi, G., and Koch, C. (2014). “Consciousness: Here, There, but Not Everywhere”. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.7089.
Trewavas, A. (2005). “Green Plants as Intelligent Organisms,” Trends in Plant Sciences, 
10: 413–419.
Turing, A. (1936). “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidung-
sproblem,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society Series 2, 47: 230–265.
Turing, A. (1950). “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind, 59(236): 433–460.
van Gelder, T. (1995). “What Might Cognition Be, if Not Computation?” Journal of Phi-
losophy, 92 (7): 345–481.

C a r r i e  F i g d o r
302
von Eckardt, B. (2003). The Explanatory Need for Mental Representations in Cognitive 
Science. Mind & Language 18 (4): 427–439.
von Neumann, J. (1945). “First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC. Moore School of Electri-
cal Engineering, University of Pennsylvania,” Reset typescript online at: www.virtual 
travelog.net/wp/wp-content/media/2003-08-TheFirstDraft.pdf.
von Neumann, J. (1966). Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata. Edited and completed by 
Arthur W. Burks. Urbana and London: University of Indiana Press.
Weaver, W. (1949). “The Mathematics of Communication,” Scientific American, 181(1): 
11–15.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal and the 
Machine. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics. New York: M.I.T. Press.
Williams, F. and Kilburn, T. (1948). “Electronic Digital Computers,” Nature, 162 (4117): 
487.

303
A bright metallic thread of future-oriented thinking runs through the tapestry of 
the philosophy of mind, especially in those parts of the field that have grappled 
with the possibility of minds as machines. Can a robot feel pain? Can a suitably 
programmed computer think actual thoughts? Could humans survive the total 
replacement of their nervous system by neural prosthetics? As the pace of techno-
logical change quickens, what was once purely speculative is becoming more and 
more real. As society moves further into the 21st century, what are the ways that 
philosophy of mind can shape the future? What challenges will the future bring 
to the discipline? In this chapter, we examine a few suggestive possibilities. We 
begin with what we suspect will be a game changer – the development of AI and 
artificial general intelligence (AGI). We then turn to radical brain enhancements, 
urging that the future will likely introduce exciting new issues involving (inter 
alia) the extended mind hypothesis, the epistemology of evaluating the thoughts 
of vastly smarter beings, mind uploading, and more.
1.  The rise of the machines: some philosophical challenges
These last few years have been marked by the widespread cultural recognition 
that sophisticated AI is under development, and may change the face of society. 
For instance, according to a recent survey, the most cited AI researchers expect 
AI to “carry out most human professions at least as well as a typical human” 
within a 10-percent probability by the year 2024. Further, they assign a 50-percent 
probability by 2050, and a 90-percent probability by 2070 (Muller and Bostrom 
2014).1 AI critics, such as John Searle, Jerry Fodor and Hubert Dreyfus, must now 
answer to the impressive work coming out of venues like Google’s DeepMind and 
exhibited by IBM’s Watson program,2 rather than referring back to the notorious 
litany of failures of AI in the 1970s and 1980s.
Indeed, silicon seems to be a better medium for information processing than the 
brain. Neurons reach a peak speed of about 200 Hz, which is about seven orders 
of magnitude slower than current microprocessors (Bostrom 2014, 59). Although 
the brain compensates for some of this with massive parallelism, features such 
12
HOW PHILOSOPHY OF MIND CAN 
SHAPE THE FUTURE
Susan Schneider and Pete Mandik

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
304
as “hubs,” and so on, crucial mental capacities such as attention rely upon serial 
processing, which is incredibly slow, and has a maximum capacity of about seven 
manageable chunks (Miller 1956; Schneider 2014). Additionally, the number of 
neurons in a human brain is limited by cranial volume and metabolism, but com-
puters can occupy entire buildings or cities, and can even be remotely connected 
across the globe (Bostrom 2014; Schneider 2014).
Of course, the human brain is more intelligent than any modern day computer. 
Intelligent machines can in principle be constructed by reverse engineering the brain, 
however, and improving upon its algorithms, or through some combination of reverse 
engineering and judicious algorithms that aren’t based on the workings of the human 
brain. In addition, an AI program can be downloaded to different locations at once, 
is easily modifiable, and can survive under a variety of conditions that carbon-based 
life cannot. The increases in redundancy and backups that programs allow mean that 
AI minds will be hardier and more reliable than their biological counterparts.
We’ve noted AI experts’ projections that sophisticated AI may be reached within 
the next several decades. By “sophisticated AI” what is meant is artificial gen-
eral intelligence (AGI). An AGI is a flexible, domain-general intelligence – an 
intelligence that can integrate material from various domains, rather than merely 
excelling at a single task, like winning Jeopardy or playing chess. Philosophers 
have debated the possibility of AGI for decades, and we hope they will help shape 
the global understanding of AGI in the future. For instance, perhaps some philoso-
phers will discover a distinctively philosophical reason for believing that, despite 
the successes of Watson and DeepMind, experts will (and must) hit a wall when it 
comes to creating AGI – perhaps computers can excel at domain specific reason-
ing but general purpose reasoning is not amenable to computational explanation. 
Or perhaps the resources of the philosophy of mind will not unearth a deep obsta-
cle to AGI, but instead provide insights that will aid in its development.
In any case, within society at large, the earlier skepticism about AGI has given 
way. Indeed, there is now a general suspicion that once AGI is reached, it may 
upgrade itself to even greater levels of intelligence. As David Chalmers explains:
The key idea is that a machine that is more intelligent than humans will 
be better than humans at designing machines. So it will be capable of 
designing a machine more intelligent than the most intelligent machine 
that humans can design. So if it is itself designed by humans, it will be 
capable of designing a machine more intelligent than itself. By similar 
reasoning, this next machine will also be capable of designing a machine 
more intelligent than itself. If every machine in turn does what it is capa-
ble of, we should expect a sequence of ever more intelligent machines.
(Chalmers 2010)
In a similar vein, Nick Bostrom’s New York Times bestselling book Superintelli-
gence: Paths, Dangers and Strategies (2014) argues that a superintelligence could 

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
305
supplant humans as the dominant intelligence on the planet, and that the sequence 
of changes could be rapid-fire (see also Kurzweil 2005). Indeed, due in large 
part to Bostrom’s book, and the successes at DeepMind, this last year marked the 
widespread cultural and scientific recognition of the possibility of “superintel-
ligent AI.”3
Superintelligent AI: a kind of artificial general intelligence that is able 
to exceed the best human level intelligence in every field – social skills, 
general wisdom, scientific creativity, and so on
(Bostrom 2014; Kurzweil 2005; Schneider 2009a; 2015).
Superintelligent AI (SAI) could be developed during a technological singularity, 
a point at which ever more rapid technological advances, especially, an intelli-
gence explosion, reach a point at which unenhanced humans can no longer predict 
or even understand the changes that are unfolding. If an intelligence explosion 
occurs, Bostrom warns that there is no way to predict or control the final goals 
of a SAI. Moral programming is difficult to specify in a foolproof fashion, and 
it could be rewritten by a superintelligence in any case. Nor is there any agree-
ment in the field of ethics about what the correct moral principles are. Further, 
a clever machine could bypass safeguards like kill switches and attempts to box 
it in, and could potentially be an existential threat to humanity (Bostrom 2014). 
A superintelligence is, after all, defined as an entity that is more intelligent than 
humans, in every domain. Bostrom calls this problem “The Control Problem.” 
(Bostrom 2014).
The control problem is a serious problem – perhaps it is even insurmountable. 
Indeed, upon reading Bostrom’s book, scientists and business leaders such as Ste-
phen Hawking, Bill Gates, Max Tegmark, among others, commented that superin-
telligent AI could threaten the human race, having goals that humans can neither 
predict nor control. Yet most current work on the control problem is being done 
by computer scientists. Philosophers of mind and moral philosophers can add to 
these debates, contributing work on how to create friendly AI (for an excellent 
overview of the issues, see Wallach and Allen 2010).
The possibility of human or beyond-human AI raises further philosophi-
cal questions as well. If AGI and SAI are developed, would they be conscious? 
Would they be selves or persons, although they are arguably not even living 
beings? Of course, perhaps we are putting the cart before the horse in assuming 
that superintelligence can even be developed: perhaps the move from human-
level AGI to superintelligence is itself questionable (Chalmers 2010)? After all, 
how can humans create beyond-human intelligence given that our own intellec-
tual resources are only at a human level? Quicker processing speed and a greater 
number of cognitive operations do not necessarily result in a qualitative shift to a 
greater form of intelligence. Indeed, what are markers for “beyond human intel-
ligence”, and how can we determine when it has been reached?

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
306
In his groundbreaking paper on the singularity, Chalmers suggests even more 
issues that philosophers could explore:
Philosophically: The singularity raises many important philosophical 
questions. . . . The potential consequences of an intelligence explosion 
force us to think hard about values and morality and about consciousness 
and personal identity. In effect, the singularity brings up some of the 
hardest traditional questions in philosophy and raises some new philo-
sophical questions as well.
 . . . To determine whether an intelligence explosion will be a good or 
a bad thing, we need to think about the relationship between intelligence 
and value. To determine whether we can play a significant role in a post-
singularity world, we need to know whether human identity can survive 
the enhancing of our cognitive systems, perhaps through uploading onto 
new technology. These are life-or-death questions that may confront us 
in coming decades or centuries. To have any hope of answering them, we 
need to think clearly about the philosophical issues.
(Chalmers 2010)
What sorts of things can philosophers do to help tackle the issues raised by 
AI, the singularity, and other technologies on the horizon? We recommend an 
approach that draws on thought experiments of the sort traditionally considered 
by philosophers of mind, but tempered by knowledge of contemporary advances 
in science and technology.
Philosophers often view thought experiments as windows into the funda-
mental nature of things – hypothetical situations in the “laboratory of the mind” 
that depict something that exceeds the bounds of current technology or even is 
incompatible with the laws of nature, but that is supposed to reveal something 
philosophically enlightening about the topic in question (Schneider 2009b). 
Thought experiments can entertain, illustrate a puzzle, lay bare a contradic-
tion in thought, and move us toward further clarification. Yet experimental phi-
losophers have countered that thought experiments are not trustworthy guides 
to philosophical issues because they covertly rely upon intuitive judgments 
about possibility that are hostage to features like our cultural and economic 
backgrounds.
Emerging technologies introduce a host of real world cases – cases that seem 
nomologically and technologically possible – rather than relying upon dubious 
intuitions about what is possible in remote possible worlds like zombie worlds 
(worlds in which no entity is conscious, even the entities that act like they are) or 
Cartesian worlds stocked with disembodied minds. And, in the domain of emerging 
technologies – this arena in which science fiction meets science fact – philosophy  
quite possibly becomes a matter of life and death, as we will further discuss 
shortly (Chalmers 2010; Schneider 2009b; Mandik 2015).

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
307
In what follows, we identify more ways that philosophers of mind can help 
shape the 21st century. We begin with a fictional scenario that introduces issues 
about the extended mind hypothesis. We then turn to several interrelated philo-
sophical problems, based upon this scenario and others that we introduce.
2.  The ethics of brain enhancement, the extended mind, 
and human integration into a post-singularity world
Consider the following thought experiment, modified from Schneider (2009a):
Suppose it is 2025 and being a technophile, you purchase brain enhance-
ments as they become readily available. First, you add a mobile internet 
connection to your retina, then, you enhance your working memory by 
adding neural circuitry. You are now officially a cyborg. Now skip ahead 
to 2040. Through nanotechnological therapies and enhancements you 
are able to extend your lifespan, and as the years progress, you continue 
to accumulate more far-reaching enhancements. By 2060, after several 
small but cumulatively profound alterations, you are a “posthuman.” To 
quote philosopher Nick Bostrom, posthumans are possible future beings, 
“whose basic capacities so radically exceed those of present humans as 
to be no longer unambiguously human by our current standards.”
(Bostrom 2017)
At this point, your intelligence is enhanced not just in terms of speed of 
mental processing; you are now able to make rich connections that you 
were not able to make before. Unenhanced humans, or “naturals,” seem 
to you to be intellectually disabled – you have little in common with 
them – but as a transhumanist (a proponent of the sorts of cybernetic and 
genetic modifications that, in the extreme case, leads to posthumans), 
you are supportive of their right to not enhance.
(Bostrom 2017; Garreau 2004; Kurzweil 2005)
It is now 2250 AD. Over time, the slow addition of better and better neu-
ral circuitry has left no real intellectual difference in kind between you 
and AI. Your mental operations have been gradually transferring to the 
cloud, and by this point, you are silicon-based. The only real difference 
between you and an AI creature of standard design is one of origin – 
you were once a natural. But you are now almost entirely engineered by 
technology – you are perhaps more aptly characterized as a member of a 
rather heterogeneous class of AI life forms.
Of course, this is just a thought experiment, but it is hard to imagine people 
in mainstream society resisting opportunities for superior health, intelligence, 

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
308
extreme longevity and efficiency. Indeed, the advanced technologies wing of the 
defense department (DARPA) is now working on brain chips, electronic prosthet-
ics implanted in the brain, providing intriguing examples of “cyborgs.”
There are many philosophical issues that this thought experiment raises. Let us 
consider a few.
2.1  The extended mind, 2.0
Despite being implanted in brains, brain chips strike us as providing better sup-
port for the extended mind hypothesis than Clark and Chalmers’s original exam-
ples of laptops and notepads. (The extended mind hypothesis is the proposal that 
the physical substrate for the human mind is not restricted to the human central 
nervous system, but can sometimes or perhaps always include external physical 
items, as when one’s memories are stored in external media such as notebooks 
and hard drives. See Chapter 10). For it can be objected that laptops and notepads 
do not seem to exhibit a sufficiently rich cognitive integration with the brain to 
justify the claim that the mind is extended beyond the brain. Instead, information 
from notebooks and laptops enters into cognitive and perceptual systems through 
sensory transducers. When one forgets their laptop or notebook, they only have 
recourse to the processing of their brain. The brain itself seems to be the true unit 
of mentality. In contrast, brain implants could become well-integrated with the 
biological brain, for the inputs from the implants do not enter the cognitive system 
through sensory transducers, but could in principle function like actual minicol-
umns or brain regions.
You might object that it is unclear what’s “extended” about neural prostheses. 
If they aren’t outside of the body, how do they make the mind “extended”? But 
if one believes the mind is just the brain, then this makes the mind extended. 
Further, these implants need not be in the skull, they could be located elsewhere 
in the body, or even on the cloud, for instance. What is crucial is that they are as 
well integrated as components of the brain normally are. Would brain or cloud-
based implants provide better support for the view that the mind is extended? 
Further, can consciousness (as opposed to mere information processing) really 
extend beyond the biological brain? That is, can silicon minicolumns or micro-
chips be part of the neural basis of conscious experience? These are issues well-
worth considering, we believe, as we move to a future with neural enhancements 
and therapies that extend beyond the biological brain.
2.2  Human integration into a post-singularity world
Let us continue our thought experiments further into the future. Suppose that it 
is now AD 2250 and some humans have upgraded to become superintelligent 
beings, through gradual cognitive enhancements, including cloud-based compu-
tations. But suppose you resist any upgrades – you opt to stay a “Natural” – a 
member of a group resisting enhancements (Garreau 2004). Having conceptual 

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
309
resources beyond your wildest imagination, the superintelligent beings generate 
an entirely new budget of solutions to longstanding, central philosophical prob-
lems, such as the mind-body problem, the hard problem of consciousness, and the 
problem of free will. They univocally and passionately tell you that the solutions 
are obvious. But you and the other Naturals throw your hands up; these “solu-
tions” strike you and the other unenhanced as gibberish (Schneider 2009b).
You think: Who knows, maybe these “superintelligent” beings were engineered 
poorly; or maybe it is me. Perhaps the unenhanced are “cognitively closed,” as 
Colin McGinn has argued, being constitutionally unable to solve major philo-
sophical problems (McGinn 1993). The enhanced call themselves “Humans 2.0”; 
they claim the unenhanced are but an inferior version. They beg you to enhance. 
What shall you do? What shall you make of your epistemic predicament? You 
cannot grasp the contents of the superintelligent beings’ thoughts without signifi-
cant upgrades. But what if their way of thinking is flawed to begin with? In that 
case, upgrading will surely not help. Is there some sort of neutral vantage point or 
at least a set of plausible principles with which to guide you in framing a response 
to such a challenge?
This scenario is merely one example of the kind of issues that will come to 
the fore as machines outsmart humans, and as some humans themselves enhance 
their intelligence in ways that allow them to outthink ordinary humans, at least in 
certain domains. Understanding how to approach such situations requires fruitful 
collaboration between philosophers of mind, epistemologists, AI specialists, and 
others.
2.2.1  The ethics of brain enhancement decisions
Should we embrace postbiological intelligence? Enhancement decisions will 
require deep deliberation about metaphysical and ethical questions that are both 
controversial and difficult to solve: questions that require reflection about per-
sonal identity and the nature of mind, among other issues, and which draw from 
empirical work in cognitive science. As we explain below, enhancing by mov-
ing from carbon to silicon may not be something that preserves your conscious 
experience or personal identity. Given this, a precautionary stance suggests that 
we should not enhance unless it is confirmed that consciousness is preserved. 
For the enhancement is supposed to increase the quality of your life, enabling 
your survival and giving you more time on the planet as a subject of experience. 
However, in contrast to a precautionary stance is an attitude of “metaphysical 
daring” (Mandik 2015). Being metaphysically daring involves making a kind of 
bet about metaphysical issues such as whether a naturally originating mind could 
have its consciousness or identity preserved across a transformation from tissue 
to silicon chips. Metaphysically daring future humans and posthumans may reap 
the benefits of an enhanced substrate. Indeed, as Mandik argues, systems that 
exhibit high degrees of metaphysical daring may, in making many more copies of 
themselves in the form of digital backups, be more fit in a Darwinian sense than 

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
310
their more cautious evolutionary competitors. Of course, part of what makes the 
attitude daring is the lack of certainty about whether it is correct that such benefits 
are forthcoming (Mandik 2015).
Given both the lack of certainty on such matters and their life-or-death nature, a 
pluralistic society should recognize the diversity of different philosophical views 
on these matters, including a wide range from the metaphysically daring to the 
metaphysically cautious, and not assume that science itself can answer ques-
tions about whether radical forms of brain enhancement are justifiable, or are 
even compatible with survival, given different views on personal identity and the 
nature of mind. A good place to further illustrate these observations is with a very 
extreme “enhancement” case that has been in the news a good deal recently: mind 
uploading.
3.  Mind uploading (“Whole Brain Emulation”)
Science fiction has long depicted scenarios in which a person in distress, such 
as Johnny Depp’s character in Transcendence, uploads his or her brain in last 
ditch effort to avoid death. The idea behind uploading is that the person’s brain 
is scanned, and a software model of it is constructed that is so precise that, when 
run on ultra-efficient hardware, it thinks and behaves in exactly the same way as 
the original brain. The process of scanning will likely destroy the original brain, 
as in Transcendence, although non-destructive uploading has also been discussed 
as a more distant possibility (Blackford and Broderick 2014). Uploading is akin 
to migration to the cloud, but it can be more rapid fire, bypassing your cyborgiza-
tion. Uploaded beings can be computationally identical to the original human, but 
they could also become vastly smarter, and less like an ordinary human, as with 
Transcendence.
You might think that if uploading could be developed, day-to-day life would 
be drastically improved. For instance, on Monday at 6:00 PM, you could have 
sushi in Tokyo; by 7:30 PM, you could be sipping wine nestled in the hills of 
the Napa Valley; you need only rent a suitable android body in each locale. Air-
ports could become a thing of the past. Bodily harm matters little to you, for 
you just pay a fee to the rental company when your android surrogate is injured 
or destroyed. Formerly averse to risk, you find yourself skydiving and climbing 
Everest. You think: if I continue to backup, I will live forever. What a surprising 
route to immortality.
Oxford University’s Future of Humanity Institute has a brain emulation project 
that is taking the first steps toward developing uploading. The OpenWorm project 
has successfully uploaded a worm (C elegans) and downloaded it to a Lego robot, 
which behaved like a worm. Uploading could be perfected during a technological 
singularity. So suppose, like Will Caster, Johnny Depp’s character in Transcend-
ence, you have just learned you have only a few weeks to live. You recall Steven 
Hawking’s remark: “I think the brain is like a programme . . . so it’s theoretically 
possible to copy the brain onto a computer and so provide a form of life after 

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
311
death” (Collins 2013). So you wonder: could I truly transfer my consciousness to 
a computer?
Metaphysics has now become a matter of life and death for you. Would you sur-
vive? Philosophers, such as Nick Bostrom and David Chalmers, tend to respond 
with guarded optimism. But let’s consider a literary example to see if even guarded 
optimism is well-founded. In Robert Sawyer’s novel Mindscan the protagonist, 
Jake Sullivan, tries to upload to avoid dying of a brain tumor. He undergoes a 
non-destructive uploading procedure, and although the contents of his brain are 
copied precisely, he wakes up after the procedure, still on the operating table, and 
is astonished to find that he is still stuck in his original body. His consciousness 
did not “transfer”! Sullivan should have read the personal identity literature in 
metaphysics, which asks: in virtue of what do you survive over the time? Having a 
soul? Being a material being? Having the same memories and thought patterns as 
your earlier self? In deciding whether you could survive uploading, it is important 
to consider the metaphysical credentials behind each of these views (Schneider 
2009a). (See also Chapter 5 on personal identity.)
One reason Jake should have been suspicious is that objects generally follow 
a continuous trajectory through space over time – but here, for Jake to “trans-
fer” to his upload, his brain would not even move, and his consciousness would 
somehow travel inside a computer and then, at a later point, be downloaded into 
an android. And the stuff that makes up the new Jake would be entirely different. 
Further, an upload can be downloaded to multiple places at once. But, plausibly, at 
most only one of these creatures would really be Jake. Which one? Finally, notice 
that Jake survived the scan. So why believe that any of the uploads is him, rather 
than the original Jake? In the macroscopic world around us, single objects do not 
reside in multiple locations at once.
At best, so-called mind uploaders merely create computational copies of them-
selves that are forms of artificial intelligence (AI). But a copy is not the same as 
the original. It’s a copy (Schneider 2014). But if uploads are copies, why be confi-
dent, to go back to our original case of your migration to the cloud, that moving to 
the cloud really preserves your identity? Of course, maybe Derek Parfit is correct. 
Perhaps there is no identity to begin with (Parfit 1984). In this case, survival is not 
an issue for you. You may opt to upload for other reasons though – perhaps you 
believe that creating a psychological duplicate is somehow beneficial.
Or maybe there really is survival, but we are like programs, which can be 
uploaded and downloaded? In this latter case, maybe uploading can preserve 
identity because the mind is a program. A program is abstract, like a musical score 
or equation, and is not a concrete object like a coffee cup, a brain, or a chair. On 
this sort of view, minds, as programs, are abstract in the sense that the plot of a 
novel or a song’s melody is abstract. If an author emails their latest novel to their 
publisher, and the publisher prints thousands of copies of the novel, there’s only 
one story here, not thousands. If human minds are abstract in this sense, then the 
scenario of nond-estructive uploading involves only a single mind, just as there 
can be a thousand bound copies of a single novel (Mandik 2015, 146–147).

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
312
What case can be made for regarding minds as abstract? As Mandik points out:
Much of what we think, want, and experience is abstract. I can think that 
there’s a dog chasing a cat without there being some particular dog or 
particular cat that I am thereby thinking about. As Quine (1956) points 
out, the desire I express in saying “I want a sloop” can just be me want-
ing relief from slooplessness without there being some certain sloop that 
I want. Regarding experiences and “what it is like” to have them: I can 
experience a patch of red on separate occasions, and what it is like to have 
the experience on the one occasion may be exactly like what it is like on 
the other occasion. Tye (1995) characterizes all phenomenal character as 
“abstract” in this sense. If what matters for having my mind is something 
that can be characterized as abstract in these ways, the possibility opens 
of a deep analogy between a human life and the story of a novel.
(Mandik 2015, 147)
The view that the mind is abstract in a way that would allow for continuity through 
uploading is not without its opponents. For instance, Schneider has argued the mind 
is not a program. For a program or algorithm is like an equation and is abstract. In 
the fields of philosophy of mathematics and metaphysics, abstract entities are by 
definition non-spatial, non-causal, atemporal, unchanging, and non-physical. We 
can tell introspectively that time passes, so minds are temporal, and minds (or more 
specifically, mental property tokenings, or mental events) are causal, and, relat-
edly, they experience chance. An equation or algorithm is not located anywhere – 
although inscriptions and program instantiations are. Our minds and thoughts have 
concrete locations in space. At best, the mind is a program instantiation, which is a 
concrete entity – a physical object (Schneider, forthcoming).
Regardless of whether we regard the survival conditions of minds as more like 
the survival conditions for ordinary physical objects or instead like abstract enti-
ties such as songs or stories, the important thing is that these are all very contro-
versial positions, relying on certain convictions about the nature of the self, and 
they militate for different decisions about radical brain enhancement.
As the 21st century unfolds, enhancement decisions will not merely require 
scientific information about whether uploading can be developed, or whether vari-
ous minicolumns in your brain can be replaced with silicon implants. They will 
require philosophical deliberation about the nature of self and mind.
We will revisit radical brain enhancement shortly, for we have yet to explore 
the important question of whether a silicon being, whether it be you or merely an 
uploaded copy of you, could be conscious.
4.  The hard problem of AI consciousness
When we deliberate, hear music, see the rich hues of a sunset, and so on, there 
is information processing going on in the brain. But above and beyond the 

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
313
manipulation of data, there is a subjective side – there is a felt quality to our 
experience. Chalmers’s hard problem of consciousness asks: why does all this 
information processing in the human brain, under certain conditions, have a felt 
quality to it? Why aren’t we “zombies” in the philosopher’s sense, being creatures 
that lack inner experience (Chalmers 2008)?
As Chalmers emphasizes, this problem doesn’t seem to have a scientific answer. 
For instance, we could develop a complete theory of vision, understanding all of 
the details of visual processing in the brain, but still not understand why there are 
subjective experiences attached to these informational states. Chalmers contrasts 
the hard problem with what he calls “easy problems”, problems involving con-
sciousness that have eventual scientific answers, such as the mechanisms behind 
attention and how we categorize and react to stimuli (Chalmers 2008). Of course 
these scientific problem are difficult problems; Chalmers merely calls them “easy 
problems” to contrast them with the “hard problem” of consciousness, which he 
thinks will not have a purely scientific solution.
We now face yet another perplexing issue involving consciousness – a kind of 
“hard problem” concerning machine consciousness, if you will:
The Hard Problem of AI Consciousness: Would the processing of a 
silicon-based superintelligent system feel a certain way, from the inside?
A sophisticated AI could solve problems that even the brightest humans are una-
ble to solve, but still, being made of a different substrate, would its information 
processing feel a certain way from the inside (Chalmers 2008; Searle 1980; Sch-
neider 2015)?
This is not just Chalmers’s hard problem applied to the case of AI. For the hard 
problem of consciousness assumes that we are conscious – after all, each of us can 
tell from introspecting that we are conscious at this moment. It asks why we are 
conscious. Why does all your information processing feel a certain way from the 
inside? In contrast, the Hard Problem of AI Consciousness asks whether AI, being 
silicon-based, is even capable of consciousness. It does not presuppose that AI is 
conscious. These are different problems, but they are both hard problems in their 
own right – problems that science alone cannot answer.
Ned Block has raised a similar problem, which he calls “The Harder Problem 
of Consciousness” (Block 2002; McLaughlin 2003). In essence, Block focuses 
on the case of a “superficial functional isomorph” (SFI) of a human – a being 
“that is functionally isomorphic to us with respect to those causal relations among 
mental states, inputs, and outputs that are specified by ‘folk psychology’ ” (Block 
2002, 399). According to Block, a SFI need not be conscious, because for all we 
know, the capacity for consciousness may depend upon a system’s underlying 
substrate, and a silicon-based functional isomorph may lack the right substrate 
(Block 2002). Block aptly calls attention to the epistemic difficulty of determining 
whether a different realization would be conscious.

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
314
Is our problem just Block’s “Harder Problem of Consciousness” then? Block 
develops his line of thought by focusing on a case of a SFI. In contrast, our hard 
problem of AI consciousness applies to systems that are not reasonably consid-
ered functional duplicates of us, by either armchair folk psychological attribu-
tions or scientific functionalist assessments (i.e., psychofunctionalism). It applies 
to systems that are incredibly different from us with respect to their cognitive 
and perceptual capacities, such as superintelligences or AGIs not designed to be 
humanlike. Further, Block’s problem arises only for proponents of what he calls 
“Phenomenal Realism,” a view that counts among its commitments that no “a 
priori or at least armchair analyses of consciousness (or at least armchair suffi-
cient conditions) are given in non-phenomenal terms, most prominently in terms 
of representation, thought or function.” In contrast, our problem can be raised 
while being neutral about the ultimate status of such analyses. For all we know, 
there is some as yet unforeseen but correct armchair analysis of consciousness in 
terms of information processing functions. We are nonetheless currently in the 
position to be deeply perplexed about whether an AI performing such functions 
would thereby be conscious.
The problem is more general than Block’s problem then: simply put, silicon 
may not be the right medium for consciousness.
Our problem is also related to biological naturalism, a position that is com-
monly associated with John Searle that has historically denied that AI can be 
conscious (see Searle 1980). But unlike Searle, we do not find the Chinese Room 
thought experiment compelling (see Schneider 2015 and Mandik 2017 for discus-
sion).4 We do not wish to deny that machines can be conscious. Instead, we con-
sider it an open question whether silicon-based beings can be conscious.
We gain a better understanding of the hard problem of AI consciousness by 
asking: what considerations may be fueling this problem? Perhaps the problem 
is fueled, at least in part, by a kind of other minds problem, applied to the case 
of machines. The case of machines is certainly more challenging, because in the 
human case, we feel others are minded because of their behavior as well as the 
fact that they have a physiology that is similar to ours. The case with machines is 
more challenging, because of a lack of physiological similarity, and it gets quite 
difficult if a machine’s cognitive and perceptual systems are not even loosely 
similar to our own, as we may not even have similar behaviors to go on.
An other-minds problem, on its own, may fuel the problem, but it does not 
strike us as being a compelling reason to deny consciousness to AGIs or SAIs. 
Ethical considerations suggest that it is best to be charitable in these cases, for any 
mistake could wrongly influence the debate over whether such creatures might 
be worthy of special ethical consideration as sentient beings. As Asimov’s robot 
stories illustrated, any failure to be charitable to AI could come back to haunt us, 
as they may treat us as we treated them. Indeed, AIs could pose a “hard problem 
of carbon-based consciousness” about us, asking if biological, carbon-based enti-
ties have the right substrate for experience. After all, how could AI ever be certain 
that we are conscious?

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
315
The Problem of Other Minds is not the only concern that fuels the Hard Prob-
lem of AI Consciousness, however.5 A further, related concern is the following. 
Carbon molecules form stronger, more stable chemical bonds than silicon, which 
allows carbon to form an extraordinary number of compounds, and, unlike sili-
con, carbon has the capacity to more easily form double-bonds. This difference 
has important implications in the field of astrobiology, because it is for this reason 
that carbon, and not silicon, is said to be well-suited for the development of life 
throughout the universe (Bennett and Shostak 2012). If these chemical differences 
impact life itself, we should not rule out the possibility that these chemical differ-
ences also impact whether silicon gives rise to consciousness, even if they do not 
hinder silicon’s ability to process information in a superior manner. This is not an 
endorsement of biological naturalism, but is a consideration indicating that it is 
not yet clear whether AI can be conscious.
If the answer to the AI hard problem is that silicon cannot be the basis for 
consciousness, then superintelligent machines – machines that may even one day 
supplant us – will exhibit a vastly superior form of intelligence, but they will 
lack inner experience. Just as the breathtaking android in the movie Ex Machina 
(2015) convinced Caleb that she was in love with him, so too, a clever AI may 
convincingly behave as if it is conscious.
Further, if subsequent reflection on the AI hard problem reveals that even beings 
with artificial brains that are computationally like those of humans cannot be con-
scious, then, in an extreme, horrifying case, humans upload, and only nonhuman 
animals are left to feel the spark of insight, the pangs of grief, or the warm hues of 
a sunrise. This would be an unfathomable loss, one that is not offset by a mere net 
gain in intelligence. Even the slightest chance that this could happen should give 
us reason to proceed in the development of uploading and brain implant technolo-
gies with caution. These issues urgently need to be addressed.
4.1  A solution?
Is there a means to answer the AI Hard Problem? Two scenarios are suggestive.
First, although it is unlikely, we could find silicon-based natural intelligence 
on a planet – silicon-based life that arose through chemical processes, rather than 
being constructed by a biological species. If these creatures have a phenomeno-
logical vocabulary – a vocabulary of what it is like to experience the world – it 
would not be due to their being programmed by a biological species to act as 
if they had experience. Further, their phenomenological vocabulary cannot be a 
mere mimicry of the behavior or vocabulary of a biological species that evolved 
separately and had contact with them. What we need is pure, untainted silicon 
phenomenology, if you will.
If untainted naturally occurring silicon-based phenomenology was discov-
ered, this would make more plausible the claim that artificial silicon-based 
systems could support phenomenology. Of course, even in this case some may 
still doubt whether artificial systems could be conscious (based, for instance, on 

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
316
considerations about teleofunction or John Searle’s alleged derived/non-derived 
intentionality distinction) (Searle 1983).
Let’s turn now to a second suggestion for making progress on the Hard Problem 
of AI Consciousness. Let us return to the case of one’s migration to the cloud. In 
the process of migrating, neurons that form the neural basis of one’s conscious-
ness are gradually replaced by silicon chips. If, during this process, a prosthetic 
part of the brain ceases to function normally – specifically, if it ceases to give rise 
to the aspect of consciousness that that brain area is responsible for – then there 
should be behavioral indications, including verbal reports. An otherwise normal 
person should be able to detect, or at least indicate to others through odd behav-
iors, that something is amiss, as with traumatic brain injuries involving the loss of 
consciousness in some domain, such as blindsight or blindness denial. This would 
indicate a “substitution failure” of the artificial part for the original component.
But should we really draw the conclusion, from a substitution failure, that the 
underlying cause is that silicon cannot be a neural correlate of conscious experi-
ence? Why not instead conclude that scientists failed to program in a key feature 
of the original component – a problem which science can eventually solve? But 
after years and years of trying, we may reasonably question whether silicon is 
a suitable substitute for carbon when it comes to consciousness. This would be 
a sign that the answer to the hard problem of AI consciousness is negative: AI 
cannot be conscious. But even a longstanding substitution failure would not be 
definitive, for there is always the chance that our science has fallen short. But this 
scenario would provide some evidence for a negative answer.
Readers familiar with Chalmers’s “absent qualia, dancing qualia” thought 
experiment may object that we’ve missed something, for Chalmers’s thought 
experiment supports the view that consciousness supervenes on functional con-
figuration: if you fix the psychofunctional facts, you fix the qualia. But we are 
disputing that functional isomorphism occurs in the first place. We consider it an 
open question.
If silicon systems cannot be conscious, then the functional facts cannot be 
fixed. When it comes to consciousness, carbon and silicon are not functionally 
interchangeable. For why would a silicon system, S2, be a psychofunctional iso-
morph of the original system, S1, after the transfer? S2s replaced brain region, or 
minicolumn, being made of silicon, will always differ causally from the replaced 
component. For wouldn’t the new silicon component somehow signal to other 
brain areas that there is a defect in consciousness, as with neurophysiological 
deficits?
Could the silicon chip be doctored, so as to signal consciousness when con-
sciousness was absent though? This is a tricky question. It could be the case that 
there are some observational false positives, in which case, we may fail to rule out 
certain cases of non-conscious systems. But would it then be a genuine functional 
isomorph of a carbon system? It is not clear that it would be, for the brain chip 
would need to prevent signaling to other brain areas that consciousness is lacking. 

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
317
The conscious system would not. Our example does not require rejecting the view 
that qualia supervenes on functional organization, then.
Conclusion
The practical and intellectual challenges we foresee philosophers of mind help-
ing to meet have here fallen into four groups. The first group of challenges cen-
tered on the possibility of superintelligent artificial intelligence, a technology that 
may potentially populate our world with nonhuman selves bestowed with capaci-
ties that meet or exceed our own. The second group of challenges concern brain 
enhancement, extreme cases of which might result in beings more posthuman 
than human. Even more extreme transformations formed the core of the third 
group of challenges, those that centered on the hypothetical technology of mind 
uploading, which might constitute a way for human minds to survive indefinitely 
through digital backup, or might instead be merely a very expensive form of sui-
cide. Fourth and finally, we raised the hard problem of AI consciousness, a special 
form of the problem of determining whether a given entity is such that there’s 
something it feels like to itself “from the inside.” There’s an ethical element to this 
problem, for we recognize an ethical imperative not to inflict avoidable suffering 
upon any being, whether they be natural or artificial.
We surely have just scratched the surface in exploring ways that philosophy of 
mind can help shape the future. Despite the numerous ways that will surely escape 
our foresight, we are confident that the technological changes that await us, in 
particular those involving information processing technology, will pose problems 
that science alone cannot equip society to solve.
Notes
	 1	 Further, there is growing concern among policymakers and the public that AI will even-
tually outmode humans, leading to technological unemployment (Frey and Osborne, 
2013).
	 2	 DeepMind is a British artificial intelligence company acquired by Google in 2014. 
The IBM’s Watson program is a natural-language processing computer system that 
famously competed on Jeopardy! in 2011.
	 3	 Worries about technological unemployment do not assume that AGIs will be superin-
telligent; indeed, people can become unemployed due to the development of domain-
specific AI systems that are not even at the level of being AGIs.
	 4	 In Searle’s famous Chinese Room argument, Searle appeals to the thought experiment 
of the “Chinese Room” to argue against the possibility of artificial systems being genu-
inely intelligent. In the thought experiment, Searle runs a program for understanding 
Chinese despite himself understanding only English. Observers outside of the Chinese 
room send and receive messages to and from the room that lead them to believe the 
room’s inhabitant is perfectly conversant in Chinese. But Searle is orchestrating the 
message exchange solely in virtue of following instructions written in English.
	 5	 For discussion of the Chinese Room Thought experiment, see (Schneider 2015 and 
Mandik 2017).

S u s a n  S c h n e i d e r  a n d  P e t e  M a n d i k
318
Bibliography
Bennett, J., and Shostak, S. (2012). Life in the Universe, 3rd ed., Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Blackford, R., and Broderick, D., (2014). Intelligence Unbound: The Future of Uploaded 
and Machine Minds. Boston: Wiley Blackwell.
Block, N. (2002). “The Harder Problem of Consciousness,” The Journal of Philosophy, 
XCIX: 1–35.
Bostrom, D. (2017). The Transhumanist FAQ: v 2.1. World Transhumanist Association.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2010). “The Singularity: A  Philosophical Analysis,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 17, 7–65.
Chalmers, D. J. (2008). “The Hard Problem of Consciousness.” in Velmans, Max 
and Schneider, Susan (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Collins, N. (2013). “Hawking: ‘in the Future Brains Could Be Separated From the Body,’ ” 
The Telegraph, 20 September.
Corabi, J., and Schneider, S. (2012). “The Metaphysics of Uploading,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 19.
Frey, C. and and Osborne, M. (2013). https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/aca 
demic/future-of-employment.pdf
Garreau, J. (2004). Radical Evolution: The Promise and Peril of Enhancing our Minds, our 
Bodies – and What it Means to be Human. New York: Doubleday.
Kurzweil, R. (2005). The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. New 
York: Viking.
McGinn, C. (1993). Problems in Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McLaughlin Brian (2003). P. A Naturalist-Phenomenal Realist Response to Block’s Harder 
Problem, Philosophical Issues 13, 163–204.
Mandik, P. (2015). Metaphysical Daring as a Posthuman Survival Strategy, Midwest Stud-
ies in Philosophy, 39(1), 144–157.
Mandik, P. (2017). “Robot Pain,” in Corns, J. (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Philoso-
phy of Pain. New York: Routledge: 200–209.
Miller, G. A.  (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on 
our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review 63 (2), 81–97.   doi:  
10.1037/h0043158.  PMID  13310704.
Müller, V. C., and Bostrom, N. (2014). “Future Progress in Artifi-cial Intelligence: A Sur-
vey of Expert Opinion,” in Müller, Vincent C. (ed.), Fundamental Issues of Artificial 
Intelligence. Synthese Library. Berlin: Springer.
Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1956). Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes, Journal of Philosophy, 
53, 177–187.
Schneider, S. (2009a). “Mindscan: Transcending and Enhancing the Human Brain,” in 
Schneider, Susan (ed.), Science Fiction and Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing 
241–255.
Schneider, S. (2009b). “Science Fiction Thought Experiments as a Window into Philo-
sophical Puzzles,” in Science Fiction and Philosophy. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Schneider, S. (2011). The Language of Thought: A New Philosophical Direction. Boston: 
MIT Press.

H o w  p h i l o s o p h y  o f  m i n d  c a n  s h a p e  t h e  f u t u r e
319
Schneider, S. (2014). “The Philosophy of ‘Her’,” The New York Times, 2 March.
Schneider, S. (2015). “Alien Minds,” Discovery (an astrophysics trade anthology, based 
on a NASA/Library of Congress Symposium), Steven Dick, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Schneider, S. (forthcoming). “The Mind is not the Software of the Brain (Even if it is 
Computational)”, ms.
Searle, J. (1980). Minds, Brains and Programs, The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3, 
417–457.
Searle, John R. (1983). Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Tye, Michael (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the 
Phenomenal Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wallach, W. and Allen, C. (2010). Moral Machines. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

320
Note: page numbers in italic indicate a figure on the corresponding page.
INDEX
aboutness 67, 207, 268
access, privileged 263, 265 – 266
acquaintance 71, 120n11, 154, 170n6, 
263 – 264
action: broad causation and 189 – 190; 
in computationalism 267; embodied 
cognition and 273; exclusion problem 
and 181 – 182; in functionalism 267; in 
identity theory 61; intentionality and 
263; in Külpe 161; mental causation 
and 180 – 181; in physical symbol 
system hypothesis 296n1; reasons and 
180 – 181; in Wittgenstein 248 – 251
Adorno, Theodor 28
adverbialism 108, 110 – 111
agency: and anomalism problem 181; 
in cognitive science 280 – 283; and 
feedback control 288; in materialism 
286 – 287, 295; scope of 280; and 
TOTE units 289 – 290; in Wittgenstein 
250 – 251
Alexander, Samuel 88, 177 – 178
animalism 137 – 143, 144nn9,14 – 15
anomalism 180 – 184; anomalous monism 
31, 181 – 183
Anscombe, G.E.M. (Elizabeth) 12, 
108 – 109, 179, 184, 186
anti-individualism 258 – 266
Aristotle 64, 206, 209, 219, 257, 267
Armstrong, David 62, 95 – 96
artificial general intelligence (AGI) 
304 – 305
artificial intelligence (AI) 31, 42n13, 285, 
303 – 307, 311 – 317
associationism 82
Austin, J. L. 106
Ayer, A. J. 105, 167
Babbage, Charles 283
Bain, Alexander 82 – 83, 226n15
Baldwin, J. M. 81
Baldwin, Thomas 80
bat argument 69 – 70
Bayesian model of perception 116
Beauvoir, Simone de 10, 22, 27
behaviorism 2 – 4; analytical 83, 
85; cognitive science and 285; 
consciousness and 82 – 87; criticisms 
of 56 – 57; functionalism vs. 64 – 65; 
introspectionism and 148 – 149; logical 
54; methodological 83, 85; mind-body 
problem in 53 – 57; philosophical 
54 – 55; psychological 53 – 54;  
radical 53 – 54
Berkeley, George 105
Black, Max 88
Block, Ned 68, 74n19, 89, 93, 95 – 97, 
273 – 274, 313 – 314
Boole, George 283, 296n3
Boring, Edwin G. 58, 88
Bosanquet, Bernard 104
Bostrom, Nick 304 – 305, 307, 311
boundaries 273 – 274
Bradley, F. H. 104

I N D E X
321
and 288 – 290; future of 294 – 295; 
information in 290 – 292; Marr and 
293 – 294; McCulloch and 286 – 288; 
Pitts and 286 – 288; Shannon and 
290 – 292; software and 284 – 286; 
Turing and 284 – 286; Wiener and 
288 – 290
computationalism 266 – 268, 286, 288
computer revolution 7 – 9
Comte, Auguste 156 – 157, 159
conceivability argument 72
conceptual analysis 25, 29, 91, 251 – 253
connectionist networks 12, 18, 287 – 288, 
296n7
consciousness 22; in artificial intelligence 
312 – 317; behaviorism and 82 – 87; in 
Brentano 219 – 223; cognition and 87, 
94 – 98; disappearance of 82 – 87; and 
explanatory gap 87 – 94; intentionality 
and 94 – 98, 216 – 225; perception and 
79 – 83, 219 – 220; physicalism and 
87 – 94; thought and 79 – 83
constructivism 12, 113 – 119, 163
content theory 79 – 80
Cosmelli, Diego 274
Crowther, Paul 120n9
cybernetics 288 – 289, 296n3
cyborgs 308
cytoarchitectonic method 5
Davidson, Donald 74n13, 181 – 182, 
195n12
Democritus 58
Dennett, Daniel 71, 85, 96 – 97, 275
Derrida, Jacques 28
Descartes, René 52, 72, 175, 191, 248, 
256 – 258, 265 – 267, 272, 284
directedness 67, 200 – 201, 207, 216, 261
direct realism 31, 106, 108, 111 – 112, 
115 – 116
disassociation paradigm 227n43
disjunctivism 106, 111 – 112, 264 – 265, 
275, 275n5
downward causation 39 – 40, 40, 177 – 178, 
194n5
Drake, Durant 192 – 193
Dreyfus, Hubert 26, 258, 303
brain enhancement 308 – 310
brain mapping see neural localization
brainware 286 – 288
Brentano, Franz 29, 108, 157, 159, 
200 – 210, 219 – 223, 226nn7,9,15, 
228nn50,54
British Empiricists 16, 112, 161 – 163, 
248 – 249
British idealism 104 – 105
Broad, C. D. 83, 105, 151 – 152, 177
Broca, Paul 4, 194n3
Brodmann, Korbinian 5
Brooks, Rodney 271 – 272
Burge, Tyler 17, 189, 260 – 261
Butler, Bishop 127, 144n13
Caird, Edward 104
Campbell, John 275n5
Carnap, Rudolf 28 – 30, 54, 85, 87 – 88, 
296n3
Cartesian conception of mind 256 – 258
c-fibers 58 – 59, 63 – 64, 66, 194n8
Chalmers, David 71 – 72, 91 – 92, 262, 
269 – 270, 276n14, 304, 306, 308, 311, 
313, 316
Chinese Room 67, 292, 314, 317n4
Chisholm, Roderick 57, 108, 201 – 202, 
213 – 217, 227n39
Chomsky, Noam 3, 30, 42n11, 56 – 57,  
90, 286
Churchland, Patricia 19n3, 282
Churchland, Paul 73, 73n4, 116, 117, 119, 
282, 285
Church-Turing thesis 7
Clark, Andy 269 – 270, 272
cognition: in cognitive science 280; 
consciousness and 87, 94 – 98; in 
Descartes 257, 267; embodied 7, 24, 
118, 267, 271 – 273, 294; pure 257; 
social 24, 26 – 27, 31, 295
cognitive science: agency in 283; 
behaviorism and 285, 296n6; brainware 
and 286 – 288; computationalism and 
286; cybernetics and 288 – 289; defined 
280; domain of 280; explanation 
in 293 – 294; explanatory package 
of 281, 283 – 294; feedback control 

I N D E X
322
system and 269 – 271; conceptual 66; 
criticisms of 67 – 69; intentionality and 
218 – 219; mental states in 64 – 66; mind-
body problem in 63 – 69; naturalism and 
266 – 268; qualia in 68 – 69; Wittgenstein 
and 251 – 253
Gage, Phineas 4 – 5
Gall, Franz Joseph 4
Gates, Bill 305
Gertler, Brie 276n6
Gestalt psychology 26; first-person access 
and 167; hyletic data and 42n16; 
introspection and 163 – 166; perception 
and 113 – 117; psychophysical 
isomorphism and 120n12; structuralism 
and 113 – 114
Gibson, J. J. 12, 117 – 118, 272
“given” 79 – 83
grammar, pure 30
Green, T. H. 104
Grice, H. P. 127, 129
Gurwitsch, Aron 26, 28, 42nn16,18
Guthrie, Edwin R. 3
Hamilton, William 156
harmony, pre-established 193
Hawking, Stephen 305, 310 – 311
Hebb, Donald O. 287
Hebbian learning rule 287
Heidegger, Martin 22, 25 – 27, 29, 42n13, 
258, 272
Helmholtz, Hermann von 112 – 113, 
115 – 117
Hempel, Carl 54, 91, 180, 195n14
Hempel’s dilemma 195n14
higher-order representation 95
higher-order thought 95
Hildreth, Ellen 293
Hobbes, Thomas 58, 64, 73n1, 87
horizon structure 23 – 24, 34 – 35, 42n13
HOT theory 95 – 97
Hull, Clark 3, 83
human animal 137 – 141
Hume, David 34, 129, 179 – 181, 184, 
196n22, 233, 249
Hurley, Susan 273 – 274
dualism 52, 175, 179; cognitive science 
and 295; intentionality and 201; mental 
causation and 191 – 194; Wittgenstein 
and 235
Dummett, Michael 258
ecological perception 117 – 119
eliminativism 54, 56, 73n4
embodied cognition 7, 24, 118, 267, 
271 – 273, 294
emergence 40, 40, 43n27
emergentism 176 – 177, 190, 194n5, 276n9
empiricism, British 16, 112, 161 – 163, 
248 – 249
emulation, whole brain 310 – 312
epiphenomenalism 39, 61, 70, 176, 178, 
183, 185, 190 – 191, 193 – 194, 194n5, 
195n12
essences, in Husserl 24 – 25
Evans, Gareth 109, 263
exclusion problem 180 – 181, 184 – 188
experimental psychology 148, 158
explanatory gap 87 – 94
extended mind 269 – 271, 307 – 308
externalism 258 – 266, 273 – 275, 276n14
externalism problem 181, 188 – 190
Farber, Marvin 30
Farrell, B. A. 90
feedback control 288 – 290
feedforward networks 296n8
Feigl, Herbert 58, 61, 90
Ferrier, David 194n3
Field, Hartry 227n34
first-person access 167 – 168
Firth, Roderick 153, 155 – 156, 167
fission problem 131 – 132
Flourens, Pierre 4
Fodor, Jerry 62, 86 – 87, 89, 183, 188 – 189, 
268, 303
Foglia, Lucia 271
formal ontology 30
Frege, Gottlob 59, 227n39, 233,  
258 – 259, 283
Freud, Sigmund 8, 87, 265 – 266, 276n7
functionalism 21 – 22, 31; analytic 66; 
behaviorism vs. 64 – 65; cognitive 

I N D E X
323
163 – 166; restricted 159 – 160; scientific 
role of 156 – 168; in sense-datum theory 
debate 149 – 156, 168; systematic 
160 – 163; transparency and 168 – 170
inverted qualia argument 68 – 69, 82,  
89, 94
Jackson, Frank 22, 70 – 71, 74n22,  
90 – 93, 218
James, William 78, 80, 82 – 83, 157 – 158, 
171nn11,14, 177, 194n3, 249
Jaynes, Julian 85
Joachim, Harold 104
Kant, Immanuel 116, 256
Kaplan, David 17, 262 – 263
Kim, Jaegwon 64, 184 – 186, 188, 195n12
knowledge argument 70 – 71
Koffka, Kurt 12, 14, 114, 164 – 166
Köhler, Wolfgang 114, 118, 164
Kripke, Saul 73n8, 196n19, 259
Külpe, Oswald 159 – 163
Ladd, George Trumbull 80
Lashley, Karl 5, 295
Leibniz, Gottfried 193, 283, 296n3
Levinas, Emmanuel 26 – 27
Levine, Joseph 90 – 91
Lewis, C. I. 78, 81 – 82, 86, 91 – 92,  
109, 151
Lewis, David 62
Libet, B. 40
Locke, John 127, 129, 143n3
logical positivism 28, 54, 85, 87, 105
logic gate 18, 287
Lovejoy, Arthur 177
Mach, Ernst 163
Malcolm, Norman 184, 195n13
Malebranche, Nicolas 193
Marr, David 118, 281, 293 – 294
Martin, M.G.F (Michael) 82, 112, 
169 – 170
materialism 52, 87, 90 – 93, 266; agency 
and 286, 295; behaviorism and 53; 
identity theory and 88; reductive 176; 
see also physicalism
Husserl, Edmund 23 – 26, 28 – 30, 32 – 39, 
41n3, 43nn20 – 21, 81 – 82, 107 – 108, 
164 – 165
Huxley, T. H. 176, 193
hyletic data 36, 42n16
idealism, British 104 – 105
identity see personal identity
identity theory 21, 73n8; case for 58 – 62; 
mind-body problem in 57 – 63
illusions 105 – 106
imaging 6, 295
immediate retrospection 157, 162 – 163
improper category objection 179
indexical expressions 259 – 260
individualism 17, 258 – 266
information: in cognitive science 281 – 282, 
284, 286, 290 – 292; in computationalism 
13; in constructivism 115 – 116; and 
extended mind 269 – 270; intentionality 
and 215 – 216; perception and 118; in 
physicalism 71, 90
inner-object model 16, 233 – 238, 240, 
248 – 250
inner space 263 – 265
intentionalism 95 – 97, 108 – 110
intentionality 22, 31; in Brentano 
202 – 210, 219 – 223; in Chisholm 
213 – 216; consciousness and 
94 – 98, 216 – 225; dualism and 
201; functionalism and 218 – 219; 
judgments and 210 – 211; logic and 
202; in Meinong 210 – 213; mental 
phenomena and 204 – 208; perception 
and 206; phenomena and 203 – 206; 
phenomenology and 217 – 218; 
physicalism and 215; psychology and 
202 – 203; representationalism and 
202, 216 – 225; semantic 260 – 261; in 
Twardowski 210 – 213
interactionism 176, 191 – 192
introspection: behaviorism and 148 – 149; 
careful 155; conscious experience 
and 152 – 153; first-person access and 
167 – 168; Gestalt psychology and 
163 – 166; perception and 149 – 156; 
phenomenological method and 

I N D E X
324
Morgan, Lloyd 177
multiple realizability 62 – 63, 187,  
195n15, 269
Nagel, Thomas 7, 68 – 70, 89 – 90, 92 – 93
names 259 – 260
naturalism 87 – 88, 176 – 178, 256, 
266 – 273, 314 – 315
neo-Hegelians 104
neural localization 4 – 7, 11, 13
neural networks 287, 296n8
Newell. Alan 284, 296n1
no-criterion argument 239, 253n3
Noe, Alva 273
object-directedness 67, 200 – 201, 207, 
216, 261
occasionalism 193
Olson, Eric 133, 136, 138, 140
ontological dependence 30
operant conditioning 2 – 3
pain 58 – 59, 63 – 64, 66, 194n8,  
236 – 237, 240
parallelism 192 – 193
Parfit, Derek 131 – 133, 135 – 137
Parity Principle 270
Pavlov, Ivan 3, 83
Penfield, Wilder 5
perception: adverbialism and 110 – 111; 
Bayesian model of 116; consciousness 
and 79 – 83, 219 – 220; constructivism 
and 114 – 117; disjunctive theory 
of 264 – 265; disjunctivism and 
111 – 112; ecological 117 – 119; 
Gestalt psychology and 113 – 114; 
in Heidegger 25 – 26; in Husserl 25, 
37 – 38; illusions in 105 – 106; inner 
159 – 160; intentionalism and 108 – 110; 
intentionality and 206; introspection 
and 149 – 156; in Merleau-Ponty 27 – 28; 
objects of 104 – 112; qualia and 107; 
representationalism and 108 – 110, 
120n11; sense-data theory and 105 – 108, 
149 – 156; structuralism and 113 – 114
percepts 115
perceptual content 31 – 36
Maxwell, James Clerk 288
McCulloch, Warren 281, 283, 286 – 288
McCulloch-Pitts neurons 287 – 288
McDowell, John 112, 263 – 265
McGinn, Colin 90, 309
McTaggart, J.M.E. 104
meaning: consciousness and 80; in Husserl 
29; information and 290 – 291; in 
inner-object model 234; intentionality 
and 260 – 261; in logical behaviorism 
54; reference and 260; in semantic 
theory 259; in verificationism 55; in 
Wittgenstein 241 – 245
Meinong, Alexius 210 – 213
Melden, A. I. 179 – 180, 184
mental causation: anomalism and 
180 – 184; downward 178; in dualism 
191 – 194; epiphenomenalism and 178, 
193 – 194, 194n5; exclusion problem 
and 180 – 181, 184 – 190; externalism 
problem and 181; illustration of 175; 
interactionism and 191 – 192; many 
problems for 180 – 190; naturalist 
approaches to 176 – 178; occasionalism 
and 193; in parallelism 192 – 193; 
physicalism and 195n14; pre-established 
harmony and 193; property dependence 
approaches and 187 – 188; realization 
and 187 – 188; reasons as causes in 
178 – 180; supervenience and 187 – 188
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 27 – 28, 36, 
42n15, 107 – 108, 118
Millikan, Ruth 74n, 120n15, 216, 227n37, 
269, 292
Mill, James 82
Mill, John Stuart 156 – 157, 162
mind-body problem: in 20th-century 
philosophy 52 – 73; in behaviorism 
53 – 57; in functionalism 63 – 69; in 
identity theory 57 – 63; and multiple 
realizability 62 – 63; phenomenology of 
37 – 41, 38, 40; and qualia 69 – 72
mind uploading 310 – 312, 317
modularity 117
monism 31, 52, 73, 106, 181 – 183
Moore, G. E. 78 – 80, 82, 105, 149 – 152
moral programming 305

I N D E X
325
in functionalism 68 – 69; knowledge 
argument and 70 – 71; and mind-body 
problem 69 – 72; perception and 107; 
zombie argument and 71 – 72
quasi-memory 127 – 128
Quine, W. V. 85, 87 – 88
Quinton, Anthony 129 – 130
“raw feels” 82 – 87
realism, direct 67, 106, 200 – 201, 207, 
216, 261
realizability, multiple 62 – 63, 187,  
195n15, 269
reductionism 98, 135 – 137, 144nn11,13, 
186, 196n18
reductive materialism 176
referentialism 234, 248
Reid, Thomas 106
representationalism 31, 36, 95 – 96, 
108 – 112, 115, 120n11, 168 – 170, 202, 
216 – 225
retrospection, immediate 157 – 158, 162
Ricoeur, Paul 28
Rosenblueth, Arturo 288, 290
Rosenthal, David 95
Russell, Bertrand 78 – 79, 105 – 106, 177, 
233, 249, 263 – 264, 296n3
Ryle, Gilbert 29, 54, 56, 84, 179, 184, 186
Santayana, George 176, 193
Sartre, Jean-Paul 27
Schlick, Moritz 58
Schutz, Alfred 26
science: introspection and 156 – 168;  
see also cognitive science
Searle, John 31, 42n12, 67 – 68, 91, 303, 
314, 317n4
Sellars, Roy Wood 176 – 177
Sellars, Wilfrid 30, 265
semantic intentionality 260 – 261
semantic tradition 258 – 260
sensationalism 162 – 163
sense-data theory 105 – 108, 149 – 156, 168
sensorily manifest 33
Shannon, Claude 281, 290 – 292, 296n3
Shaw, Cliff 284, 296n3
Sherrington, Charles 194n3
perceptual process 112 – 119
perceptual relation 104 – 112
personal identity: animalist challenge 
in 137 – 141, 144n14; fission problem 
in 131 – 132; memory and 127 – 128; 
non-branching approach to 132 – 133; 
ontological problem in 141 – 143; and 
“plurality of worms” 133 – 134; and 
psychological continuity 126 – 131, 
144n15; questions about 126; in 
reductionism 135 – 137, 144nn11,13; 
stage view of 134 – 135
phenomenalism 106, 163
phenomenological reduction 23
phenomenology: defined 22; functionalism 
and 22; genetic 23 – 24; in Heidegger 
25 – 26; in Husserl 23 – 24; intentionality 
and 217 – 218; introspection and 
163 – 166; in Levinas 26 – 27; of mind-
body problem 37 – 41, 38, 40; overview 
of 22 – 28; and perceptual content 
31 – 36; proprietary cognitive 98; in 
relation to philosophy of mind 28 – 31
physical, as term 119n2
physicalism 52, 60, 63, 66, 69 – 73, 87 – 94; 
intentionality and 215; mental causation 
and 195n14; see also materialism
physical symbol system hypothesis 296n1
Pitts, Walter 281, 286 – 288
Place, U. T. 58, 73n1, 88, 186, 194n6
Poggio, Tomaso 293
positivism, logical 28, 54, 85, 87, 105
predicative structures 35 – 36
pre-established harmony 193
Price, H. H. 81, 105, 151 – 152, 154 – 155, 
168, 170n6
privileged access 263, 265 – 266
psychological continuity 126 – 131, 144n15
“Psychology as the Behaviorist Sees It” 
(Watson) 2
psychophysical isomorphism 120n12
“pure grammar” 30
Putnam, Hilary 57, 62 – 63, 66, 259, 
261 – 262, 276n7
qualia: bat argument and 69 – 70; 
consciousness and 81 – 82, 89, 93; 

I N D E X
326
verificationism 54 – 55, 239
Vienna Circle 85
Vienna school 28
volition 249; see also will
voluntary action: in Wittgenstein 248 – 251; 
see also action
Ward, James 83
Watson, John 2, 53 – 54, 83 – 84, 194n3
Weaver, Warren 290 – 292
Wernicke, Carl 4
Wertheimer, Max 12, 113 – 114, 163
what-externalism 273
Whitby, Blay 9, 19n8
whole brain emulation 310 – 312
Wiener, Norbert 18, 281, 288 – 290, 296n3
Wiggins, David 131
will: emergence and 41; in Libet 40; 
reasons and 181; in Wittgenstein 
248 – 251
Williams, Bernard 131
Williamson, Timothy 258, 275
Wilson, Margaret 273, 275
Wilson, Robert 271
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: agency in 250 – 251; 
anomalism and 184; behaviorism 
and 29, 54 – 56, 84 – 85, 88; Cartesian 
framework and 178; conception of 
philosophy by 233 – 234; and conceptual 
analysis 251 – 252; and dual explanation 
solutions 186; dualism and 235; 
functionalism and 251 – 253; influence 
of 251 – 253; and inner-object model 
234 – 235, 249 – 250; instantaneous 
experience of complex contents in 
241 – 245; meaning in 241 – 245; and 
no-criterion argument 239, 253n3; 
and other minds 235 – 240; pain in 61, 
236 – 237, 240; referentialism and 234; 
sensations and 235 – 240; thinking in 
245 – 248; Turing and 9; understanding 
in 241 – 245; voluntary action in 
248 – 251; will in 248 – 251
Wundt, Wilhelm 80, 112, 148, 159 – 160, 
164, 171nn11,14, 194n3, 285
zombie argument 71 – 72, 92, 306
Shoemaker, Sydney 93, 130, 140, 187
Simon, Herbert 284, 296n1
singularity, technological 305 – 310
Skinner, B. F. 2 – 3, 53 – 54, 83, 285
Smart, J.J.C. 58, 60, 88 – 89, 109, 186, 
194n6
software 284 – 286
spatiality 191
split-brain subjects 5, 7, 13
Sprigge, T.L.S. 90
Stein, Edith 26
Stout, G. F. 80 – 81, 96
Strawson, P. F. 167, 225, 228n56, 264
structuralism 12, 112 – 115, 160, 162, 285
superficial functional isomorph  
(SFI) 313
superintelligent artificial intelligence  
(SAI) 305, 314
technological singularity 305 – 310
Tegmark, Max 305
Thomasson, Amie 29
Thompson, Evan 274
Thorndike, Edward 83
thought: consciousness and 79 – 83; 
in Wittgenstein 245 – 248; see also 
cognition; consciousness
thought experiments 306; see also Chinese 
Room; Twin Earth
Titchener, Edward B. 82 – 83, 88, 112, 148, 
159 – 163, 285
Tolman, E. C. 83, 86, 89
TOTE unit 289 – 290
transparency 32, 168 – 170, 202, 224 – 225, 
228n56
Turing, Alan 7 – 9, 267, 281, 283 – 286, 
296n3
Turing test 7 – 9, 285
Twardowski, Kazimierz 210 – 213, 227n24
Twin Earth 259, 262, 269
two-dimensional views 262 – 263
Tye, Michael 93, 168
type physicalism 63, 66; see also identity 
theory
understanding: in Wittgenstein 241 – 245; 
see also cognition

