
PHOTONICS


PHOTONICS
Scientific Foundations, Technology
and Applications
Fundamentals of Photonics and Physics
Volume I
Edited by
DAVID L. ANDREWS
School of Chemical Sciences
University of East Anglia
Norwich, UK

Copyright © 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission
should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken,
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Fundamentals of photonics and physics / edited by David L. Andrews.
pages cm. – (Photonics ; volume I)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-22553-0 (cloth)
1. Photonics.
2. Photons.
3. Optics.
I. Andrews, David L., 1952–
TA1520.F86 2015
621.36′5–dc23
2014041293
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS
List of Contributors
xi
Preface
xiii
1
A Photon in Perspective
1
David L. Andrews
1.1
Introduction, 1
1.2
Foundations, 3
1.3
Medium Issues, 8
1.4
Photon Localization and Wavefunction, 10
1.5
The Quantum Vacuum and Virtual Photons, 12
1.6
Structured Light, 15
1.7
Photon Number Fluctuations and Phase, 18
1.8
The Reality of Photonics, 20
Acknowledgments, 20
References, 20
2
Coherence and Statistical Optics
27
Mayukh Lahiri
2.1
Introduction, 27
2.2
Classical Theory of Optical Coherence in the Space-Time Domain, 28
2.3
Classical Theory of Optical Coherence in the Space-Frequency
Domain, 34
2.4
Cross-Spectrally Pure Optical Fields, 38
v

vi
CONTENTS
2.5
Polarization Properties of Stochastic Beams, 43
2.6
Remarks on Partially Coherent and Partially Polarized Beams, 51
2.7
Basics of Quantum Theory of Optical Coherence, 52
2.8
Concluding Remarks, 55
Acknowledgments, 56
References, 56
3
Light Beams with Spatially Variable Polarization
61
Enrique J. Galvez
3.1
Introduction, 61
3.2
Poincar´e Modes of Beams, 62
3.3
Experimental Approaches, 69
3.4
Polarization Singularities, 70
3.5
Conclusion, 73
Acknowledgments, 73
References, 73
4
Quantum Optics
77
Howard Carmichael
4.1
Introduction, 77
4.2
Fundamentals, 78
4.3
Open Systems: Inputs and Outputs, 87
4.4
Photon Counting, 95
4.5
Cavity and Circuit QED, 105
References, 111
5
Squeezed Light
121
A. I. Lvovsky
5.1
What is Squeezed Light?, 121
5.2
Salient Features of Squeezed States, 128
5.3
Detection, 136
5.4
Preparation, 141
5.5
Applications in Quantum Information, 148
5.6
Applications in Quantum Metrology, 154
5.7
Conclusion and Outlook, 157
References, 158
6
Electromagnetic Theory of Materials
165
Tom G. Mackay
6.1
Preamble, 165
6.2
Macroscopic Viewpoint, 166
6.3
Constitutive Dyadics, 171

CONTENTS
vii
6.4
Linear Materials, 178
6.5
Nonlinear Materials, 194
6.6
Closing Remarks, 198
References, 199
7
Surface and Cavity Nanophotonics
205
Mohamed Babiker
7.1
Introduction, 205
7.2
Basic Formalism, 207
7.3
Dipole Emitter Near Edge, 211
7.4
Quantum Correlations, 215
7.5
Entanglement, 217
7.6
Wedge Cavities, 219
7.7
Conclusions, 223
Acknowledgments, 225
References, 225
8
Quantum Electrodynamics
229
A. Salam
8.1
Introduction, 229
8.2
Molecular QED: Principle of Minimal Electromagnetic
Coupling, 231
8.3
Multipolar Hamiltonian, 235
8.4
One-Photon Absorption, 241
8.5
Emission of Light: Spontaneous and Stimulated Processes, 244
8.6
Linear Light-Scattering: The Kramers–Heisenberg Dispersion
Formula, 246
8.7
Chiroptical Effects, 251
8.8
Two-Photon Absorption, 255
8.9
Nonlinear Light-Scattering: Sum-Frequency and Harmonic
Generation, 258
8.10 Resonance Energy Transfer, 261
8.11 van der Waals Dispersion Energy, 264
8.12 Radiation-Induced Interparticle Forces, 266
8.13 Summary and Outlook, 269
References, 271
9
Multiphoton Processes
279
Angus J. Bain
9.1
Introduction, 279
9.2
Molecular Two-Photon Absorption: Basic Principles, 282
9.3
Molecular Two-Photon Fluorescence, 289
9.4
Applications and Future Prospects, 307

viii
CONTENTS
9.5
Conclusions, 309
Acknowledgments, 311
References, 311
10 Orbital Angular Momentum
321
Emma Wisniewski-Barker and Miles J. Padgett
10.1 Historical Introduction, 321
10.2 Creating Beams with OAM, 324
10.3 Micro-Manipulation through the Use of OAM, 327
10.4 Beam Transformations, 329
10.5 Measuring Beams with OAM, 332
10.6 OAM in Classical Imaging, 333
10.7 OAM in Nonlinear and Quantum Optics, 333
10.8 Conclusions, 335
References, 335
11 Introduction to Helicity and Electromagnetic Duality
Transformations in Optics
341
Ivan Fernandez-Corbaton and Gabriel Molina-Terriza
11.1 Introduction, 341
11.2 Symmetries and Operators, 342
11.3 Electromagnetic Duality, 344
11.4 Optical Helicity and Electromagnetic Duality Symmetry, 346
11.5 Duality Symmetry in Piecewise Homogeneous and Isotropic Media, 347
11.6 Applications of the Framework, 351
11.7 Conclusions, 359
References, 360
12 Slow and Fast Light
363
Robert W. Boyd and Zhimin Shi
12.1 Introduction, 363
12.2 Mechanisms of Slow Light, 364
12.3 Physics with Slow and Fast Light, 367
12.4 Some Applications of Slow and Fast Light, 374
12.5 Fundamental Limits on Slow Light, 379
References, 381
13 Attosecond Physics: Attosecond Streaking Spectroscopy of Atoms
and Solids
387
Uwe Thumm, Qing Liao, Elisabeth M. Bothschafter, Frederik S¨ußmann,
Matthias F. Kling, and Reinhard Kienberger
13.1 Introduction, 387
13.2 Time-Resolved Photoemission from Atoms, 393

CONTENTS
ix
13.3 Streaked Photoemission from Solids, 407
13.4 Attosecond Streaking from Nanostructures, 425
13.5 Conclusions, 432
Acknowledgments, 434
References, 434
Index
443


LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
David L. Andrews, School of Chemistry, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
Mohamed Babiker, Department of Physics, University of York, York, UK
Angus J. Bain, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London,
London, UK
Elisabeth M. Bothschafter, Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Garching,
Germany
Physik Department, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at, Garching, Germany
Robert W. Boyd, The Institute of Optics, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY,
USA
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY,
USA
Department of Physics and School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Howard Carmichael, Department of Physics, University of Auckland, Auckland,
New Zealand
Ivan Fernandez-Corbaton, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie
University, Sydney, Australia
Enrique J. Galvez, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Colgate University,
Hamilton, NY, USA
Reinhard Kienberger, Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Garching, Germany
Physik Department, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Garching, Germany
xi

xii
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Matthias F. Kling, Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Garching, Germany
Physik Department, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at, Garching, Germany
Mayukh Lahiri, IQOQI, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Qing Liao, J.R. Macdonald Laboratory, Physics Department, Kansas-State
University, Manhattan, KS, USA
A. I. Lvovsky, Institute for Quantum Information Science, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Canada
Russian Quantum Center, Skolkovo, Moscow, Russia
Tom G. Mackay, School of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity, University Park, PA, USA
Gabriel Molina-Terriza, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie
University, Sydney, Australia
Miles J. Padgett, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, SUPA,
Glasgow, UK
A. Salam, Department of Chemistry, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC,
USA
Zhimin Shi, Department of Physics, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
Frederik S¨ußmann, Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Garching, Germany
Physik Department, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at, Garching, Germany
Uwe Thumm, J.R. Macdonald Laboratory, Physics Department, Kansas-State
University, Manhattan, KS, USA
Emma Wisniewski-Barker, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of
Glasgow, SUPA, Glasgow, UK

PREFACE
Since its inception, the term “photonics” has been applied to increasingly wide realms
of application, with connotations that distinguish it from the broader-brush terms
“optics” or “the science of light.” The briefest glance at the topics covered in these
volumes shows that such applications now extend well beyond an obvious usage of
the term to signify phenomena or mechanistic descriptions involving photons. Those
who first coined the word partly intended it to convey an aspiration that new areas of
science and technology, based on microscale optical elements, would one day develop
into a comprehensive range of commercial applications as familiar and distinctive
as electronics. The fulfilment of that hope is amply showcased in the four present
volumes, whose purpose is to capture the range and extent of photonics science and
technology.
It is interesting to reflect that in the early 1960s, the very first lasers were usually
bench-top devices whose only function was to emit light. In the period of growth
that followed, most technical effort was initially devoted to increasing laser stability
and output levels, often with scant regard for possibilities that might be presented by
truly photon-based processes at lower intensities. The first nonlinear optical processes
were observed within a couple of years of the first laser development, while quantum
optics at first grew slowly in the background, then began to flourish more spectacularly
several years later. A case can be made that the term “photonics” itself first came
into real prominence in 1982, when the trade publication that had previously been
entitled Optical Spectra changed its name to Photonics Spectra. At that time the
term still had an exotic and somewhat contrived ring to it, but it acquired a new
respectability and wider acceptance with the publication of Bahaa Saleh and Malvin
Teich’s definitive treatise, Fundamentals of Photonics, in 1991. With the passage
of time, the increasing pace of development has been characterized by the striking
xiii

xiv
PREFACE
progress in miniaturization and integration of optical components, paving the way for
fulfilment of the early promise. As the laser industry has evolved, parallel growth in
the optical fiber industry has helped spur the continued push toward the long-sought
goal of total integration in optical devices.
Throughout the commissioning, compiling, and editing that have led to the publi-
cation of these new volumes, it has been my delight and privilege to work with many
of the world’s top scientists. The quality of the product attests to their commitment
and willingness to devote precious time to writing chapters that glow with authori-
tative expertise. I also owe personal thanks to the ever-professional and dependable
staff of Wiley, without whose support this project would never have come to fruition.
It seems fitting that the culmination of all this work is a sequence of books published
at the very dawning of the UNESCO International Year of Light. Photonics is shap-
ing the world in which we live, more day by day, and is now ready to take its place
alongside electronics, reshaping modern society as never before.
David L. Andrews
Norwich, UK, July 2014

1
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
David L. Andrews
School of Chemistry, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
1.1
INTRODUCTION
It is a familiar, fundamental truth of modern Physics that light is composed of
photons, entities known as elementary particles despite possessing both particle- and
wave-like attributes. Readers of these volumes on Photonics will accede with the
view that numerous properties and interactions of light are only fully comprehensible
when represented and formulated in terms of photons. Indeed, in order to understand
certain processes, there simply appears to be no viable alternative. This is not only
the case with observations such as the photoelectric effect that have played a pivotal
role in familiar scientific history; in optics there is a wealth of recent and develop-
ing applications that also hinge on other, specifically photon-borne properties. Many
properties of light appear to manifest directly corresponding attributes of the indi-
vidual photons. Other qualities, of course, reflect ensemble characteristics that can
emerge only in a beam comprising numerous photons—but there too we find phe-
nomena dependent on statistical properties which can only make sense by reference
to photon distributions. There is a rich and deeply embedded relationship between
photons and the modern science of light.
The word photon has not yet reached its centenary; it was in fact coined in 1926
by a thermodynamics researcher named Lewis [1], who surprisingly introduced it
to describe “not light but [that which] plays an essential part in every process of
radiation.” However, the emergence of a reasonably fully fledged photon concept can
be traced back much earlier, to 1905, where it first surfaced in Einstein’s explanation
of a frequency threshold for photoelectric emission. Using the term Lichtquant, “light
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1

2
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
quantum,” Einstein wrote: “When a light ray spreads out from a point source, the
energy is not distributed continuously over an increasing volume [wave theory of
light], but consists of a finite number of energy quanta that are localized at points in
space, move without dividing, and can only be absorbed or generated as complete
units” [2].
With subsequent success in explaining the line spectra of atoms, this quantum
concept rapidly gained an apparently incontrovertible status—and given the passage
of time, one might suppose that there would now be little left to discover, little scope
for debate over what the photon truly is. However, the nature of that reality has never
been simple to explain. It is telling that Lamb, an early pioneer of modern optical
spectroscopy, would jest that it should be necessary to be granted a license before
being allowed to use the word photon [3]. Following the arrival of the laser [4] and the
subsequent emergence of the derivative term “photonics” in the 1960s, the distinctive
and sometimes paradoxical nature of the photon has become more than ever evident.
The state of knowledge even a quarter of a century ago is a pale shadow of the current
understanding; many of the issues discussed in the following were unheard of even
at that time [5]. What we now understand about photons has certainly become very
much richer, certainly less simple, than Einstein’s original conception.
It powerfully illustrates the wide diversity of interpretation that, as more and
more exotic phenomena have been identified, specially coined descriptors have been
introduced to identify and qualify particular kinds of behavior with which photons
can be associated. So we now find in the literature terms that would seem to signify
various distinctive kinds of photon, if such a thing were possible. Examples abound:
we read of photons whose character is dressed [6], ballistic or snake-like [7,8], electric
or magnetic [9,10], entangled and heralded [11,12], dipole or quadrupole [13,14],
real or virtual [15,16] … there is literature on biphotons [17]—and so the list goes
on. Different kinds of system or physical effect certainly manifest different attributes
of the photon, but it is evident that various scientific communities and practitioners
who share the use of the term would not find themselves in full agreement on every
aspect of what a photon is. Far from becoming a fixture in modern physics, the notion
of a photon has, if anything, become more of a quandary as time goes by. Many
of those who research such matters would be drawn to agree with Loudon, author
of one of the classic books on the quantum theory of light, that “it is no longer so
straightforward to explain what is meant by a photon” [18].
It is also remarkable that, in the centenary year of the photon concept, 2005, a
major international conference with the title What is a Photon? could attract wide-
ranging contributions and stimulate debate amongst leading scientists from across the
globe [19]. Indeed, that initial meeting spawned an ongoing series of conferences and
discussions in which the truth and character of the photon continues to be the subject
of highly active deliberation. So it seems fitting, in this first chapter of the series
on Photonics, to attempt an objective assessment of which, if any, of those photon
attributes are incontrovertible, representing a common ground for interpretation—
and also to provide a certain perspective on some of the more intricate and less
well-settled issues. As we shall see, even the momentum or information content of a
photon, or the existence of its wavefunction, are not entirely uncontroversial.

FOUNDATIONS
3
1.2
FOUNDATIONS
1.2.1
Modes of Optical Propagation
To lay the foundations for a discussion of the most unequivocal photon properties,
it will first be helpful to recall some established ground from classical optics—
which will also serve to introduce some key definitions. It has been known, since
the pioneering work of Maxwell, that light entails the propagation of mutually asso-
ciated, oscillatory electric and magnetic induction fields, which we shall call e and
b, respectively (lowercase symbols being used, as is common, to signify fields in
a microscopic regime). In free space these fields propagate at a speed c, and they
oscillate at a common frequency 𝜈, in phase with each other. The simplest case,
polarized monochromatic light, can be regarded as a fundamental mode of excitation
for the radiation field—an optical mode that is conveniently characterized by two
quantities: a wavevector k and a polarization 𝜂. The former is a vector in conven-
tional three-dimensional space, pointing in the direction of propagation such that the
triad of vectors e, b, and k together form a right-handed, mutually orthogonal set; its
magnitude is k = 2𝜋𝜈/c = 2𝜋/𝜆, where 𝜆is the optical wavelength.
The second mode attribute, the polarization 𝜂, which designates the disposition of
the electromagnetic oscillations, is most often a label rather than a directly quantifiable
variable. Plane (or linear) and circular polarizations are the most familiar forms:
circular polarizations in particular occupy a privileged position with regard to some
of the ancillary properties to be examined below. The terms “linear” and “circular”
are usually taken as referring to a projection of the electric field vector locus, in a
plane normal to the direction of propagation. Any more general, conventional form
of polarization can be conceived as a variant of an elliptical form, and defined as such
by the values of three classical Stokes parameters S1, S2, and S3. The corresponding
polarization state can then be regarded as mapping the coordinates of a particular
position on the surface of a Poincar´e sphere [20] whose axes are defined by those
three parameters. The fourth Stokes parameter S0, representing the extensive property
of intensity, does not carry over to the case of individual photons, since the intensity
of light will necessarily be related to the population of photons in a given volume.
Equally, any degree of polarization will signify the relative photon populations of
different polarization states. More intricate forms of polarization state exist in vector
beams, such as those with electric vectors that are radially or azimuthally directed
with respect to the direction of beam propagation. Structured light of this and other
kinds is to be discussed in Section 1.6.
Secured as solutions to Maxwell’s equations, the propagating electric and mag-
netic fields of each optical mode oscillate with a phase factor exp[i(k.r −𝜔t)], where
𝜔= 2𝜋𝜈. The form of this factor is such that a complete set of optical modes
(k, 𝜂)—a set of infinite extent for light in free space—can be regarded as the indi-
vidual components of a Fourier expansion for the radiation field. Summed over all
modes, the total electromagnetic energy is accordingly expressible as a Hamiltonian
cast as a volume integral of the energy density: see ①in Table 1.1, where 𝜀0 is the
vacuum electric permittivity. The transverse designation of the electric field vector

4
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
TABLE 1.1
Key equations and significance
Reference
Equation
Significance
①
Hrad = 𝜀0
2 ∫{e⊥2(r) + c2b2(r)}d3r
Hamiltonian is a volume integral
of an energy density that is
quadratic in the transverse
electric and magnetic fields
②
E = nh𝜈(≡nℏck)
Electromagnetic energy is
quantized in units whose
magnitude is determined by
the optical frequency
③
I = (n∕V) hc2/𝜆
For a given wavelength,
irradiance is linearly
proportional to the number of
photons per unit volume
④
Hrad |n (k, 𝜂)⟩=
(
nk,𝜂+ 1
2
)
ℏck |n (k, 𝜂)⟩
Schr¨odinger equation for light;
each mode delivers an integer
number of photon energies
plus a ground state energy
⑤
Srad = 𝜀0 ∫{
e⊥(r) × a (r)}
d3r
Spin angular momentum is the
volume integral of an operator
cross product of the electric
field and vector potential
⑥
E2 = p2c2 + m2
0c4
General equation from special
relativity theory, linking
energy with momentum and
rest mass
⑦
vg = c/[n(𝜈) + 𝜈dn(𝜈)/d𝜈]
Group velocity differs from the
phase velocity by an additional
term in the denominator
⑧
H = Hmat + Hint + Hrad
Quantum electrodynamical
Hamiltonian comprising terms
for matter, matter-radiation
coupling, and the radiation
itself
⑨
L = 𝜀0 ∫e⊥
i (r) (r × ∇) ai (r) d3r
Orbital angular momentum
operator which, together with
spin, accounts for the total
angular momentum
⑩
𝜒= 𝜀0
2
{e (r) ⋅∇× e (r) + c2b (r) ⋅∇× b (r)}
Optical chirality density derives
from projections of the curls
of both the electric and
magnetic fields

FOUNDATIONS
5
is a reminder that the defining expression applies in charge-free regions so that there
are no static (longitudinal) electric fields: the magnetic induction field is necessar-
ily transverse, too. Consequently, in each free-space mode, both fields oscillate in
directions perpendicular to the propagation wavevector.
It is interesting to observe the imperative for the energy density to take the math-
ematical structure exhibited by ①. One clear interpretive consequence of the photo-
electric effect is that photons have a directly additive energy, requiring a set of evenly
spaced energy levels for each optical mode. In fact, the quadratic dependence of ①
on conjugate pair variables e⟂and b is necessary in order for quantization to provide
energy levels forming exactly such an evenly spaced, infinite set. Without this, the
notion of a photon could not arise: there would not be a linear relationship between
the quantum number and the total electromagnetic energy. So, it has transpired that
the very existence of photons proves the energy density to be quadratic in both the
electric and magnetic fields [21].
1.2.2
Quantum Foundations
In principle the theory of quantized light begins with the simple electromagnetic
energy equation ②, E = nh𝜈, signifying a number n of discrete quanta, with each
individual photon energy given by h𝜈≡ℏck (ℏ= h/2𝜋is the Dirac constant, and
h is Planck’s constant). This formula represents the first step toward the modern,
comprehensive theory of quantum optics—a theory that in fully fledged form is
nonetheless as different in character from its origins as is modern quantum mechanics
from Bohr’s atomic theory. Equation ②also provides the basis for another, equally
useful but lesser known formula ③, that directly relates beam irradiance I (optical
power per unit area) to the mean number of photons n within a volume V. For
example, how likely is it, at any instant, to find a single photon within a cube
the size of the wavelength? This equation shows that for a laser emitting 532 nm
wavelength radiation, the necessary conditions would require an intensity of around
7 × 108 W m−2; that is about half a million times more intense than the average
intensity of sunlight on the Earth’s surface. The yet much smaller instantaneous
probability of finding a photon in the volume of a molecule, under ambient conditions,
goes some way to explaining why our comprehension of the photon has been so much
advanced by the invention of the laser.
The optical wavevector and polarization, which together define the optical mode
(k, 𝜂), characterize photons in terms of five degrees of freedom. Typically, three
(for example, three Cartesian components) can serve to define the wavevector and
the other two the polarization (such as a latitude and longitude on the Poincar´e
sphere). We now recognize that specifying these mode parameters will serve to
determine the unit values of all extensive quantities—those that directly scale with
the number of quanta within a given volume. This is true not only for energy,
but also linear momentum and spin angular momentum. The photon momentum
is given by ℏk, whilst the spin is determined by polarization state. In Section 1.3,
we shall note issues that arise for photons propagating through material media. For
the moment, we simply observe that beam attributes, such as measures of linewidth

6
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
or coherence, are not extensive quantities as they are meaningful only for photons
collectively.
1.2.3
Developing Quantum Optics
To put the theory on a firmer footing, since the photon is unequivocally a quantum
entity, it is now appropriate to formulate a proper quantum mechanical depiction,
cast in terms of state vectors and wavefunctions. The majority of light beams in
the real world do not have a well-defined value for the number of photons (we shall
return to this in Section 1.7), but it will be helpful to focus at the outset on states that
do—noting that a variety of other radiation states are nonetheless possible [22]. For
a specific optical mode (k, 𝜂), a number state with n photons is designated |n(k, 𝜂)⟩in
the standard Dirac notation. Here, it is important to recognize that the wavefunction
for the two-photon state, |2(k, 𝜂)⟩, will not be expressible as a product of one-photon
|1(k, 𝜂)⟩state functions. This is not necessarily surprising; in much the same way,
the wavefunction for a 2s electron in the hydrogen atom cannot be represented as a
product of 1s wavefunctions. The latter refutation only seems more obvious because
atomic energy levels have non-uniform energy spacing. In this respect, the fact
that the energy of a state with n photons scales directly with n can be potentially
misleading, if wrongly taken to indicate that each of those n photons has a separate
identity [23].
The quantum optical equations for light propagating in a vacuum, in which the
electric and magnetic fields are promoted to operator status, are based on developing
the radiation Hamiltonian into operator form, from the usual classical expression
for the spatially integrated energy density, ①. The Schr¨odinger equation ④for a
single electromagnetic mode can then be constructed. The quantum radiation states
|n(k, 𝜂)⟩are eigenstates of the radiation Hamiltonian; for each mode they form
a complete basis set, in terms of which other states of the same optical mode
can be expressed through use of the quantum expansion postulate. More gener-
ally, the eigenstate basis for any polychromatic radiation can be cast as a product,
|n1(k1, 𝜂1)⟩⊗|n2(k2, 𝜂2)⟩⊗|n3(k3, 𝜂3)⟩⋯. To develop the terminology, it follows
that the number of photons nk,𝜂can be interpreted as the occupancy, or occupation
number, of the corresponding optical mode. It also transpires that each term in the free-
space equation ①, of electric and magnetic origin, delivers an equal half-contribution
to the total mode energy (nk,𝜂+ 1
2)ℏck. It is therefore reasonable to consider the
photon “conveying” quanta that comprise conjoined electric and magnetic elements
of the electromagnetic field.
Just as the electromagnetic energy density is promoted to operator form in quan-
tum optics, so too are other key observables. It can be shown that all physically
meaningful observables—properties whose determination can leave the radiation
field unchanged—are associated with operators that are bilinear in the electromag-
netic fields [24, 25]. An important, further example is the operator for spin angular
momentum ⑤, the volume integral of a vector product between the transverse electric
field e⊥(r) and the vector potential a (r): the latter is related to the electric and mag-
netic fields by b (r) = ∇× a (r) ; e (r) = −̇a (r). The spin operator and the quantum

FOUNDATIONS
7
Hamiltonian together support a set of common optical eigenstates, the latter com-
prising the two circular polarization states for each wavevector k. In the usual optics
convention, the angular momentum is taken to have a positive sense of rotation for
left-circular polarization (the electric and magnetic vectors describing an anticlock-
wise helix, as the light propagates towards the observer) and a negative sign for right
circularity. It is only photons of specifically left- and/or right-handed circularity, for
which both energy and spin can be precisely quantified. The spin angular momentum
operator then delivers an eigenvalue that is an integer multiple of ℏ, the multiplier cor-
responding to the difference in numbers of left- and right-hand photons in the beam.
The result is consistent with spin angular momentum values of ±ℏ, per photon, in the
direction of k.
1.2.4
Boson Statistics
The hallmark integer spin associated with the circular polarization states for the
photon, its value one unit of ℏ, has a powerful foundational significance. It marks
out the photon as a particular kind of elementary particle: a boson, subject to Bose–
Einstein distribution laws. In the parlance of elementary particle physics, the photon
is the gauge boson for electromagnetism. This designation is distinct from fermions
(half-integer spin particles such as electrons) which satisfy Fermi–Dirac statistics. The
contrast is stark: boson states have wavefunctions that are symmetric on exchange of
any two components. In consequence, Bose–Einstein statistics impose no limitation
on the number of particles that can be accommodated in a single quantum state. In
the case of photons, this is one of the principal reasons that strongly coherent laser
light is achievable. In the nature of boson character we also find a deeper reason for
the previously noted fact that the quantum state vector for a beam conveying two or
more identical photons is not separable as a product of wavefunctions for photons
individually—this despite the fact that photon energies appear directly additive, and
there is no electrodynamic coupling between the photons themselves.
As an aside, this categorization of photons as a type of elementary particle raises
the question of whether they have any other “material” attributes. Certainly, the
photon is a stable elementary particle: there is no limit on how long a photon can live,
and we can detect light from a distant star that has taken billions of years to reach the
earth. In the realm of optics, two other fundamental properties would be charge and
mass: both are zero. The former is unsurprising; the latter is reconciled with non-zero
momentum on recognition of the special relativistic equation ⑥connecting energy E,
rest mass m0, and momentum p. For the single photon E = h𝜈; with m0 = 0 we simply
retrieve p = h𝜈/c, consistent with the magnitude h/𝜆of the momentum vector ℏk. One
does have to exercise caution in this regard, however; Einstein famously showed that
mass will indeed be conveyed (in the form of energy) from an emitter to an absorber
[26]. While relativistic issues are in scope, it is also interesting to note a curious
implication of the proper time formula from special relativity. This shows that for
a hypothetical observer moving along with the light, the photon lifetime is actually
zero: at the speed of light, all times are equal. So the times of photon emission and
detection, however remote, are in this sense simultaneous.

8
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
1.3
MEDIUM ISSUES
Before proceeding further, it is instructive to consider how some of the above material,
essentially formulated for propagation in a vacuum, needs to be extended—indeed to
some extent reinterpreted—for light passing through a material medium. The issues
that arise at this stage are not specifically associated with the quantum nature of
light; such concerns will be addressed in later sections. However, the modification by
matter of electromagnetic propagation does impinge on the way in which photons are
understood. It also transpires that one must take special care with the interpretation
of issues that might seem to impinge on causality—the tenet of special relativity that
no information can be transmitted faster than the vacuum speed of light, that is, the
signal velocity ≯c.
1.3.1
Speed of Propagation
To introduce this topic we can begin by focusing on the simplest and most familiar
aspect, the reduction of light’s speed in inverse proportion to the refractive index
n(𝜈). As each photon propagates into a material medium, it continues onward with
an unchanged energy and frequency, but its wavelength is generally shorter so that
the product of frequency and wavelength is diminished. Within the medium, the light
thus has a phase velocity given by c/n(𝜈), and generally n(𝜈) > 1. In some condensed
matter, phase velocities in the X-ray region can in fact exceed c, through a refractive
index that is a little below unity. However, measurements based on detection at
different locations will not escape from the strict conditions of relativistic causality:
information cannot be transmitted faster than the speed of light. It is usually argued
that the positional uncertainty associated with a precise wavelength (and hence precise
photon momentum) precludes causality violation.
The frequency or wavelength dependence of the refractive index means that the
velocity varies in a characteristic way across the absorption spectrum of each material.
The intricate form of this velocity dependence is captured by the familiar dispersion
curves, which plot optical frequency against wavenumber k. In frequency regions
well away from material absorption bands, these curves display an approximately
linear response with a slope approaching the vacuum speed of light c—but this line
separates off into paired asymptotes of zero slope in the vicinity of each absorption
frequency, namely, . The quantum interpretation is instructive, for in the regions of
diminished slope which appear above and below each resonant frequency, photon
behavior seamlessly changes to that of a polariton [27].
Polaritons, also sometimes termed dressed or medium-dressed photons, are asso-
ciated with strong interactions between the propagating radiation and electronic
excitations of the material, usually through electric dipole coupling. In photonic
terms, we can understand the onset of this change in behavior: as the optical fre-
quency approaches resonance with an optical absorption band, the local electronic
polarizability (or linear susceptibility) correspondingly exhibits a rapid escalation in
magnitude. In consequence, the optical fields drive increasingly strong, oscillatory
motions in the local electronic distribution, slowing down forward propagation. When

MEDIUM ISSUES
9
exact resonance is reached and the radiation can be halted by actual absorption, the
photon energy is taken up in effecting a local electronic transition to a corresponding
excited state. This excitation may itself propagate through the material by successive
processes of resonant energy transfer, the fulfillment of local energy conservation at
each step permitting a small delay in the forward progression. What is remarkable
is that there is a continuum of such behavior, the photon acquiring a progressively
modified character as its own electromagnetic fields are “dressed” by those of the
material it encounters.
In passing it is worth noting that, as its name suggests, the group velocity ⑦is
a concept designed for application to beams of light with a frequency spread. It is
here, for media exhibiting exotic dispersion features, that the much-vaunted cases
of slow light arise. It is indeed remarkable that, since the speed of light is generally
so far beyond the reach of any material motion, beams of light can be slowed to
essentially zero velocity [28]. At the other extreme is a phenomenon that has earned
the oxymoron superluminal light, in which it is observed that the peak intensity
components of short radiation pulses entering and emerging from suitably tailored
media are separated by a shorter time interval than the vacuum speed of light would
allow. Nonetheless, one cannot meaningfully interpret this as the composite effect
of individually “superluminal photons”; it is an ensemble effect associated with the
interference between photons in modes spanning the broad range of wavelengths
present in short pulses of light. So the term “superluminal” might be applied in a
limited sense to the beam, but not its constituent photons. The need for this caution
appears salutary; as Chiao and Milonni have pointed out “[In many] classic texts on
optics and electromagnetism … it is incorrectly implied that a group velocity greater
than c would contradict the special theory of relativity” [29]. Nothing could be further
from reality; no information can be conveyed at this speed. Issues that arise in the
less “real” world of virtual photons will be considered in Section 1.5.
1.3.2
Momentum
It is somewhat alarming to find that a persuasive resolution has only very recently
been found, to a long-standing controversy over the electromagnetic momentum of
light propagating through a material medium. The controversy dates back to the early
years of the twentieth century, when the photon concept was yet in its infancy. The
full development of that concept made the central question much simpler to frame,
but not to solve. In modern parlance the essence of the issue can be posed thus: is
the linear momentum of a photon diminished or increased from its free space value?
Specifically, one might argue that since the speed of light is reduced by a factor of
n(𝜈) in a medium, the linear momentum of each photon should suffer a correspond-
ing loss, and the momentum per photon would be h𝜈/n(𝜈)c. On the other hand, since
that reduced speed is associated with a proportionate decrease in the wavelength,
it might equally be supposed that the inverse relationship between the wavelength
and momentum should signify an increase in the latter, giving a photon momentum
n(𝜈)h𝜈/c. The argument over which is the correct formula has become known as
the Abraham–Minkowski controversy, respectively named after the two individuals

10
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
whose formulations would support each of these apparently irreconcilable conclu-
sions. The recently proffered solution to this enigma [30] centers on an assertion that
the Abraham momentum signifies a kinetic quantity directly relating time derivative
of a positional measurement, whilst the Minkowski version is the correct mathemat-
ical formula for canonical momentum, in the sense of Lagrangian mechanics. It is
not yet clear how widely accepted this resolution will prove to be.
1.3.3
Directedness of Propagation
In the sphere of time-gated imaging, other descriptors signifying a distinctive manner
of propagation can be found associated with photons. The terms ballistic and snake-
like [7,8] were originally introduced to signify a distinction between components of
light that, in the former case, emerged from transmission through a complex (often
biological) sample without significant scattering, compared to components emerging
after multiple scattering events within the sample. The longer, more meandering path-
way of the optical energy in the latter case, which suggests the sinuous description,
also correlates with a delayed emergence from the sample. This enables the “ballistic”
signal—which of course has a far greater capacity to produce images that resolve
interior structures—to be cleanly captured by time gating. The classic illustration is
imaging bone through tissue [31].
The terminology was never meant to suggest that there are indeed two different
kinds of photon in the source radiation; the difference in behavior simply represents
two opposite extremes within a statistical distribution of photon passage events.
Nevertheless, there is a clear inference that still demands attention: interpreting every
scattering event as a photon path deviation implies photons that continue to exist,
but with changed propagation vector. Yet, since the initial and emergent states for
each such interaction relate to quanta of excitation in different radiation modes, it
is essentially meaningless to regard the input and output as the same photon. More
correctly, one has to regard each scattering event as the annihilation of one photon
and the creation of another.
1.4
PHOTON LOCALIZATION AND WAVEFUNCTION
There is a concise measurement-based interpretation, unattributed but popularly
ascribed to one of the pioneers of optical coherence theory, asserting that: “A pho-
ton is what a photodetector does.” It is a viewpoint that is not far removed from
Bohr’s initial stance on the status of quantized radiation [32]. In the spirit of this
succinct depiction, various calculational methods have been demonstrated that can
deliver a spatially localized visualization of photon propagation—there are numer-
ous examples [33]. Some such representations have didactic value. Nonetheless, a
more accurate description of what any conventional (or quantum) photodetector does
is that it responds to the electromagnetic field of impinging radiation, thereby reg-
istering its quantum energy. It is indeed entirely consistent with the modern path
integral formulation of quantum mechanics in which theoretical derivations do not

PHOTON LOCALIZATION AND WAVEFUNCTION
11
presume to describe what intervenes between setup and measurement, but instead
make allowance for all possibilities. The post-interpretation of such calculations
in terms of specific photon attributes is notoriously misleading; it is impossible to
measure the path a photon has taken.
1.4.1
Localization
The results of double-slit experiments conducted at low intensities, which reveal
interference effects even when a single photon is present, unequivocally show that
photons have an essential spatial delocalization. Any more direct measurement that
is localized by the physical extent of a detector cannot be interpreted as signifying
localization of the photon itself. For example, since the process of light absorption
involves photon capture, it clearly effects a collapse of the state function for the
radiation field. It is salutary to recall the view of Mandel and Wolf, who pointed
out that attempts for whatever purposes to build a picture of “localized photons” are
fraught with danger, for “a photon has no precise position no matter what the state
may be” [34]. It is essential to keep in mind the notion of photons having a significant
degree of delocalization; one has to resist any temptation to think of the photon as in
any sense a point particle.
The most significant exceptions to the apparently inexorable process of state col-
lapse in most photon measurements are experiments designed to provide “quantum
non-demolition” measurements on the optical field [35, 36], specifically aiming to
circumvent the usual limitations associated with quantum measurement. One means
of achieving this is to deploy a form of interaction whose effective Hamiltonian com-
mutes with the Hamiltonian driving the system dynamics. In one such scheme based
on the optical Kerr effect [37], a beam of throughput radiation emerges unchanged
despite bringing about a modification to a second beam, coincident with it in the
nonlinear medium. Such a process can both serve to signify the presence of photons
in the former beam and also in principle to quantify, without changing, their number.
It has been suggested that non-demolition principles can be extended to the detec-
tion of single photons, [38,39] but the viability of some techniques at this level has
been contested [40]. Certainly, no such measurements can determine with arbitrary
precision in space or time exactly where any individual photon can be found.
1.4.2
Wavefunction
Authors who deploy the term “photon wavefunction” usually seem to have in mind
a quantum amplitude relating to a spatial distribution of the associated electric field,
though we have to bear in mind that there is more to the photon than its electric
field! To conceive a more specific “electric field wavefunction” basically indicates a
confusion between wavefunctions and operators.
Certainly, the quantum state of radiation comprising a single photon must have
a wavefunction—as indeed will a radiation state with any number of photons—yet
it is not in general correct or meaningful to conceive a photon wavefunction. The
important difference between the two propositions, seemingly minor in their verbal

12
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
expression, was first touched on in Section 1.2.3. The notion is almost defensible for
a one-photon state, where the distinction from state vector does not produce major
problems, and in this sense it can be found utilized in areas of application concerned
with quantum effects that are significant only at very low levels of intensity. But
as soon as we have two or more photons, the notion of a wavefunction for either
component is inadmissible. It would seem inadvisable to use, as if it were generally
applicable, a concept that is defensible only for one-photon states.
Direct insights into the specifically quantum nature of light are afforded by obser-
vations of processes such as spontaneous parametric down-conversion—essentially
the time-inverse of sum-frequency or second harmonic generation. When single pho-
tons are suitably converted into pairs that propagate off in different directions, the
detection of non-classical correlations between the polarization states of the two com-
ponents signifies quantum entanglement [41,42]. Radiation produced in this manner
is often referred to as comprising entangled photons [11, 43] or biphotons [17]; the
possibility of deducing information concerning one photon component, from a mea-
surement made on the other, also leads to the latter being described as a heralded
photon [12].
Numerous other experiments in quantum optics underscore the more general insep-
arability of two-photon states, perhaps most categorically in the Hong-Ou-Mandel
effect [44]. When a single photon is intercepted by a beam splitter, the result is a
state of the radiation field with one well-defined quantum of energy: this state can be
cast as a linear superposition of “reflected” and “transmitted” states, for which each
has a distinct photon character since two different modes are involved. Experiments
on the output generally provide results consistent with a linear combination of out-
comes, again signifying quantum entanglement [45]. What is observed is certainly
the collapse of a quantum state, but arguably not “a photon” in the sense we have
established. Recognizing that linear combinations of states are not the same as linear
combinations of particles gets to the heart of the distinction between the wavefunction
for a state comprising one photon, and a “photon wavefunction.”
All such results undermine the best intentioned attempts to portray the quantum
mechanical nature of the photon by reference to “its” wavefunction: even the most
ardent proponents of this concept will usually admit to the implication of a significant
degree of controversy [46]. It has in fact been shown that the contrivance of any
“photon wavefunction” approach can indeed only produce results already described
by standard quantum electrodynamics [47].
1.5
THE QUANTUM VACUUM AND VIRTUAL PHOTONS
1.5.1
Vacuum Fluctuations
The 1∕2ℏck = 1∕2ℏ𝜈energy term on the right in ④invites attention, for it repre-
sents the residual energy of an optical mode with zero occupancy, that is, a state in
which no photons are present. The totality of such ground-state contributions sig-
nifies the energy associated with vacuum fluctuations, the physical consequences of
which extend from spontaneous emission to Casimir forces [48]. For any given mode

THE QUANTUM VACUUM AND VIRTUAL PHOTONS
13
(k, 𝜂), the vacuum energy of the state |n(k, 𝜂)⟩, though linearly dependent on n, is
not proportional to n. For example, that energy is exactly the same, 1∕2ℏ𝜈, for both
the |1(k, 𝜂)⟩and |2(k, 𝜂)⟩states. This non-additivity of ground-state energies is yet
another feature serving to underscore the fact that there is not a separate wavefunction
for each of the photons, in a multiphoton state.
The implication of the non-zero vacuum term is that every radiation mode has an
irreducible ground state energy, consistent with quantum fluctuations in the electric
and magnetic fields, and representing as such the vacuum expectation value of the
radiation Hamiltonian ①when no observable light is present. The fact that this vacuum
energy is infinite, when summed over all radiation modes and integrated over space,
raises some interesting philosophical issues, though it is not a practical problem.
A directly significant implication is that, consistent with quantum uncertainty, it is
possible to create and then destroy photons for brief intervals of time. These photons,
whose fleeting lives begin and end as energy is borrowed from and returned to the
vacuum fluctuations, are not experimentally observable: they are accordingly termed
virtual photons.
1.5.2
Virtual Photons in Action
There are essentially two distinct types of application based on virtual photon calcu-
lations. One is for energies, the other for interactions: both arise from the following.
In general, the quantum electrodynamical Hamiltonian for a region of space contain-
ing matter of any kind, ⑧, comprises three terms. Two terms designate the quantum
energy operators for matter and for the radiation field (the latter only arises in quan-
tum operator form because we are dealing with photons). The presence of the other
term, which represents coupling between the matter and the radiation, means that
neither the eigenstates of Hmat, nor those of Hrad, are stationary states of the full
Hamiltonian H. Accordingly, Hint will act as a perturbation on those eigenstates to
produce energy shifts and transitions. Each action of Hint will create or annihilate a
photon—and since no photon created from the vacuum can be sustained beyond the
spatial and temporal limits decreed by the Uncertainty Principle, it follows that mea-
surable energy shifts and rates of transition between states of the same total energy
must be associated with the emergence and disappearance of virtual photons.
In the realm of elementary particles, all electromagnetic interactions are consid-
ered to be mediated by the interparticle propagation of such virtual photons. The
absence of any interparticle term in the Hamiltonian ⑧—which is exact when cast
in multipolar form [49]—means that there is no other means of coupling between
separate particles. In the sphere of single-particle interactions, calculations based on
the virtual photon premise also provide values for fundamental properties in pre-
cise agreement with experiment, for widely varying physical parameters. The most
notable example is the fine-structure constant—one of the fundamental constants in
the Standard Model of particle physics—whose value based on virtual photon calcu-
lations agrees with experiment at an unparalleled level of precision, better than 1 ppb
(part per billion) [50].
One key feature of the virtual photon representation is its intrinsic accommodation
of causal constraints from special relativity, which precludes instantaneous or any

14
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
other superluminal forms of coupling. In this context it is worth clarifying a mislead-
ing remark by Feynman, suggesting that by virtue of quantum uncertainty a virtual
photon might propagate faster than light [51]. In fact, by evaluating measurable
quantities associated with the duly retarded electromagnetic fields, an analysis by
Power and Thirunamachandran [24] proved strict adherence to relativistic causality.
Another notable feature is a quantum mechanical aspect, enshrined in the mathe-
matics of mode summation for each virtual photon. Enforcing summation over all
wavevectors and polarizations is consistent with the principle of summing over every
quantum variable for unobserved intermediate states. In some “self-energy” applica-
tions, the term virtual photon cloud [52] is sometimes used as a reminder that for such
calculations there is no constraint over the position or momentum of each virtual pho-
ton interaction—indeed it is as if such photons constantly emerge from, and retreat
into, the space surrounding each material particle. Matter is universally suffused with
virtual light. Moreover, the diffuse spatial character of the photon means that it is
conceivable for a photon to be created and annihilated by the same material particle.
1.5.3
Virtual Photon Propagation
To better appreciate the propagative characteristics associated with virtual photon
coupling, it proves instructive to consider the result of calculations on the simplest
two-site process. Known as resonance energy transfer, this affords the mechanism for
electronic excitation to pass between electrically neutral, independent particles [53].
The initial and final states for the system thus differ through vector displacement of the
electronic energy ΔE from the donor to the acceptor site. The principal contribution
to the quantum amplitude entails the creation of a virtual photon at one center and its
subsequent annihilation at the other. It highlights the seemingly paradoxical nature
of virtual photons that the calculation includes important contributions from virtual
photons of all energies and all directions of propagation, not only those travelling in
the same direction as the displacement of the acceptor from the energy donor. Most
counterintuitively, account must also be taken of virtual photons propagating from
the acceptor to the donor [15, 54].
The result reveals that the character of the energy transfer slowly changes between
asymptotic forms, as the distance R between the donor and acceptor increases. In the
near-field region, where R ≪ℏc∕ΔE, the net quantum amplitude exhibits an inverse
cubic dependence on distance, the rate thus falling off as R−6. This is the result
familiarly known as F¨orster (or fluorescence) energy transfer [55], often termed
“radiationless” because there is no direct observation of light emission by the donor.
But for distances R ≫ℏc∕ΔE, the amplitude moves toward an R−1 asymptote, leading
to a rate that exhibits an inverse square dependence on distance. The latter result
exactly accords with the acceptor capturing a “real” photon—one that has been
released in spontaneous emission by the donor. In fact, in not only these features,
but every respect, it turns out that as distance increases there is a smooth transition
from virtual to real photon behavior [56, 57]. This can be understood as another
manifestation of the Uncertainty Principle, corresponding to the increasingly tight
constraints on energy (and momentum) conservation as the coupling photons travel

STRUCTURED LIGHT
15
for longer (and over larger distances). The result lends a fresh interpretation to the
supposed distinction between real and virtual photons. By considering the life of a
photon as it propagates from its source of creation toward the site of its annihilation
at a detector, it becomes evident that every such photon in principle exhibits virtual
traits. As has been remarked in the context of elementary particle physics, “In a sense
every photon is virtual, being emitted and then sooner or later being absorbed” [58].
Such a perspective also lends new insights into the physical origin and form of the
electromagnetic fields in the immediate vicinity of a photon emitter. For example,
it emerges that the electric field produced by an electric dipole emitter has some
properties that disappear on propagation beyond the near-field region. An example
of such evanescent features is the fact that the electric field has longitudinal, as
well as the conventional transverse, character with respect to the displacement of a
detector from the source [15]. Related, and yet more striking, is the fact that there
is a small but significant effective variation of wavelength close to the source [59].
Caution must be exercised in interpreting such near-field behavior as evidence of
exotic properties of the virtual photon itself: in vacuum, the virtual photons always
propagate with transverse electric fields and a constant wavelength—but measurable
near-field properties will always be a result of summing over a range of virtual
photons with different directions and wavelengths [60].
1.5.4
Casimir Forces
A fascinating link between the seemingly disconnected topics of vacuum fluctuations
and virtual photons is afforded by the phenomena known as Casimir forces which are
observed to occur between electrically neutral, non-polar species separated by micro-
or nano-scale distances. One particular form of this coupling, which arises between
molecules, is commonly designated the Casimir–Polder interaction [61]. This is
manifested as a modification to the more familiar London or “dispersion” potential,
changing it from an inverse sixth power dependence on separation R to an inverse
seventh power—an exotic feature that has been convincingly proven by experiment
[62,63]. Another manifestation of similar origins, manifested as a sharply distance-
dependent attractive force between parallel conducting surfaces [64], represents a
feature that has to be corrected for in the design of nanoelectromechanical systems
[65–67]. Here, the result is a negative pressure that varies with the inverse fourth
power of R. Surprisingly, it is possible to derive equivalent expressions for such
forces either by considering the effect of matter on the vacuum radiation field, or by
formulating the interaction potential in terms of virtual photon exchange [49, 68].
1.6
STRUCTURED LIGHT
1.6.1
Complex Modes and Vector Beams
In recent years, the field of optics has undergone what can only be regarded as little
short of a revolution, through the development of new structural forms of optical
beam. Discovering a capacity to engineer beams with non-uniform, intricately crafted

16
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
wave-fronts, polarization behavior, and phase structures has stimulated the emergence
of new theory and visions of wide-ranging new applications [69]. Although it might
have been supposed that some attributes could only be supported in beams comprising
a high density of photons, it transpires that most novel features are interpretable
as reflecting the properties of individual photons. Indeed, there are experiments
demonstrating that individual photons convey full information on the structure of
complex beams [70,71]. Recalling the intrinsic delocalization of photons makes it a
little easier to comprehend how one photon might have the capacity to convey such
properties. Some of the most important examples of wave-front structures are the
complex optical modes associated with Laguerre–Gaussian, Airy, and Bessel beams
[72, 73]; many similar photonic issues arise in connection with so-called polarized
“vector” beams, as for example those with radial or azimuthal polarization [74].
1.6.2
Chirality and Angular Momentum
The most widely studied forms of structured beam are Laguerre–Gaussian modes,
often known as optical vortices, which propagate with a helically twisted wave-front.
The helical structure is characterized by an azimuthal quantum number, l, the integer
number of twists in the wave-front per unit wavelength. Detailed analysis shows that
any such mode with an occupation number n carries an axial angular momentum
of nℏl, equivalent to ℏl per photon. Thus, l acquires the status of an orbital angular
momentum quantum number, for which a positive sign once again denotes left helicity
and a negative sign, right. Generally, in order to convey orbital angular momentum,
light must have a topological charge [75], and experiments demonstrate in a direct
way that single photons carry the helical-mode information [76]. Surprisingly, it
also transpires that not just integer but even fractional values of the orbital angular
momentum per photon are attainable [77,78].
The observation of optical beams conveying such quantized orbital angular
momentum, independent of any circularity of polarization, is now understood as
exhibiting a partitioning of a total angular momentum J for the optical field. The
quantum operator for J not only comprises the spin term given by ⑤, as shown by
Mandel and Wolf [34], but also includes an orbital term L ⑨. It is encouraging to
observe that issues of gauge dependence in the standard formulation, deployed to
effect this separation of spin and orbital angular momentum components, can in fact
be fully circumvented in a photon-based representation [79].
The association between helical wave-front structure and orbital angular momen-
tum correctly suggests that both are involved with intrinsic measures of electromag-
netic chirality. First addressed in work by Lipkin, a variety of such optical chirality
measures have been discovered and all of them shown to be connected with the
conservation of polarization in the electromagnetic field [80]. Foremost amongst
these measures is an “optical chirality density” ⑩. In a quantum optical analysis,
it has recently been proven that an essentially infinite hierarchy of such helicity
measures [81] reduces to a common physically meaningful quantity: all are linearly
dependent on the difference between the number of photons with opposite polariza-
tion circularity [25].

STRUCTURED LIGHT
17
1.6.3
Multipole Emission
There exists much confusion in the literature over the issue of whether a photon
conveys any kind of imprint of the symmetry character for the electronic decay
transition in which it was originally released. For example, there is a prevalent
notion that a photon emitted in an electric dipole transition might have an undefined
yet measurably different character from the one emitted in an electric quadrupole
transition, even given identical wavelengths and polarizations. This has given rise
to the cavalier use of terms such as dipole or quadrupole photon [13, 14]. Similar
conjectures also give rise to the terms electric photon or magnetic photon [9,10]. The
latter are more obviously misnomers; Maxwell’s electromagnetism equations ensure
that it is not possible for light to have one kind of field without the other. The origin of
all such descriptors is mostly attributable to the theory of atomic transitions, in which
the spherical symmetry of atoms generally leads to mutually exclusive selection rules
for electric dipole (E1) and electric quadrupole (E2) transitions. Although similar
kinds of mutual exclusion occur in any centrosymmetric systems, most molecules
exhibit transitions that can be both E1 and E2 allowed, with no distinction between
the resulting final states. However, there are much deeper and more general factors
that undermine the notion of photons with multipolar character.
The decay of an atom or molecule by a particular multipolar transition can be
detected, through absorption of the released photon, in an excitation process of a
potentially different multipolar character [82–84]. This is a direct physical interpre-
tation of a finite quantum amplitude, despite a non-correspondence in multipoles.
In fact, retracting a detector from the immediate vicinity of the source produces
a decreasing angular uncertainty in photon propagation direction, consistent with
an angular quantum uncertainty principle, [85] and thus reflected in an increasing
range of integer values for the measured angular momentum. Indeed, the emission
of a photon in an electric quadrupole decay will generally produce a larger signal
for dipole detection than for quadrupole detection. The corollary that follows, on
considering time-reversal arguments, is that it is no more meaningful to designate
such a photon as a “quadrupole” photon than a “dipole” photon: both are equally
redundant descriptors. Of course there are differences according to the multipolar
order of each process, emission, and detection, in terms of spatial distribution and
not least the intensity (signified by the detection rate); the theory reveals the detail.
But the inference of a particular multipolarity in any particular detected photon has
no basis.
1.6.4
Information in a Photon
In the field of spin optics, standard methods provide for two independent degrees
of freedom to be communicated by photon polarization. Circular states of opposing
handedness are the most obvious candidates, though any two states corresponding
to diametrically opposite positions on the Poincar´e sphere would provide a suitable
basis. However, complex light with structured wave-fronts or vector polarization offer
additional degrees of freedom, enabling individual photons to convey a far greater

18
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
information content than was previously considered possible [86]. Nonetheless, one
must entertain reservations about the extent to which any individual photon can
convey structural information. The truth that there is an infinite range of mathemat-
ically orthogonal Laguerre–Gaussian modes, for example, has been taken by some
to suggest that in principle each photon might convey the information content of an
entire image. Such notions have to be tempered by an appreciation of the practi-
cal requirement for a detector that is already preconfigured with information on the
sought image.
There are many more realistic propositions for methods that could deploy indi-
vidual photons to encode information on beam structure—particularly topological
charge. It has been shown that the necessary modal information can be encoded in
single-photon states and resolved by beam tomography [87]. Such studies have stim-
ulated the conception of numerous schemes for quantum communication and data
handling applications, although there are daunting practical issues to be taken into
account; a useful survey has been provided by Franke-Arnold and Jeffers [88]. One
attractive possibility is to selectively divert a mixed-mode beam into components
with different orbital angular momentum content; a variety of innovative sorting and
detection schemes have been reported [34–36]. One frequently overlooked issue is
the outworking of the previously mentioned uncertainty relation that links angle and
orbital angular momentum, and which is associated with a non-zero commutator for
the two corresponding operators [85, 89]. All schemes for quantum information pro-
cessing based on photon orbital angular momentum [90] are ultimately limited by this
feature, which has been convincingly demonstrated by photon correlations in down-
conversion [91]. It is surprising that this principle, particularly relevant to low-number
states, has seemingly received very little consideration in the literature to date.
1.7
PHOTON NUMBER FLUCTUATIONS AND PHASE
As noted earlier, it should not be inferred that all of the properties of light beams
are, like intensity and other extensive quantities, equivalent to the summative effect
of individual photons; an obvious exception is the conventional linewidth. Nonethe-
less, there are numerous other beam attributes with specific photonic measures and
interpretations, such as phase, degrees of coherence, and autocorrelation functions.
1.7.1
Coherence and Fluctuations
For a variety of reasons, every beam of light exhibits fluctuations of intensity. It is clear
enough that a constant beam would require an unattainable degree of control over the
temporal regularity of individual photon emission events in its source. However, the
nature of the intensity fluctuations reflects important statistical features of the source.
For example, a perfect thermal source releases photons with a chaotic phase, whose
number distribution (directly corresponding to an intensity distribution) accordingly
follows Bose–Einstein statistics. Conversely, a perfectly coherent source delivers
photons with a Poisson number distribution [92].

PHOTON NUMBER FLUCTUATIONS AND PHASE
19
It also has to be recognized that no source has the capacity to deliver photons
that all have precisely the same wavelength—not least because this would fall foul
of quantum uncertainty in the energy released through each photon emission event.
In consequence there is a coherence length, essentially determined by the inverse
of the beam linewidth expressed in wavenumber terms [93]; this represents a maxi-
mum distance over which the electromagnetic field oscillations of the copropagating
photons are meaningfully held in phase. At any instant in time, different portions of
the beam will therefore experience different degrees of constructive and destructive
interference, correlating with the observed intensity fluctuations. This is indeed the
principle that is exploited to achieve laser mode locking, a technique that is widely
used to produce ultrashort pulses of light [94].
Under the high levels of intensity produced by ultrashort pulsed lasers, where
multiphoton absorption and other nonlinear optical process can occur, interactions
with matter generally depend not only on the mean irradiance but also on other
higher moments of the intensity distribution. For example, two-photon absorption
processes depend on the degree of second-order coherence, g(2) [18]. To understand
the quantum basis for such features, we have to go beyond a simple number state
representation.
1.7.2
Phase
Whilst it is possible to ascribe fluctuations in beam intensity to essentially stochastic
interference between modes of different wavelength and frequency, there are other,
more fundamental aspects of phase that arise at the quantum level. Each photon carries
a phase exp(ik.r −𝜔t), referring the space coordinate r and time t to the position
and time for photon creation (or annihilation, if the displacements in space and
time are taken with a negative sign). This “absolute” phase, which is conveyed by the
electromagnetic field operators in the Heisenberg representation [92], nonetheless has
little practical significance unless optical interference is engaged in some observable.
When two or more photons are present in a system, one can consider issues of relative
phase between them—yet only if the individual number of photons in each relevant
mode is not completely determined: see p. 495 in Reference 34. This constraint arises
for an important fundamental reason: the quantum operators for photon number and
phase do not commute. The mathematical formulation of a quantum phase operator
is itself fraught with difficulties [95]. Partly, but not wholly, this is due to the physical
equivalence of waveforms shifted by an integer number of wavelengths; this is a
subject of active research [96].
Loudon [18] gives a nice picture of the implications: if the exact number of photons
in a given optical mode is precisely known, then one can extract precisely no phase
information. Conversely, if one entertains quantum modes with an exact phase, then
their photon number occupancy becomes infinitely uncertain. There are, however,
quantum optical states that lie between the extremes represented by number and
phase states. An important example is the “minimum uncertainty” state known as
a coherent state [92]. Generally considered closest in form to a classical wave, and
taken as a good representation of a stable laser beam, it leads to a Poisson distribution

20
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
of photon numbers. Although it is perfectly straightforward to formulate theory for
processes such as photon absorption, using a coherent state representation for the
light, there are curious implications for the photon concept. For example, the mean
number of photons in the beam after photon absorption appears to be unchanged. On
the other hand, observed quantum interferences between different processes, such
as between single- and two-photon absorption in molecules [97], or three- and five-
photon ionization of atoms [98], cannot be represented by number states precisely
because the final states for each alternative possibility differ.
1.8
THE REALITY OF PHOTONICS
In the specific technical sense encountered earlier, it becomes apparent that no photon
can ever be regarded as entirely “real.” But, in the broader everyday sense of reality,
one can also pose the more philosophical question of whether the photon is real.
Perhaps surprisingly, not all exponents of quantum optics or quantum electrodynamics
are willing to be drawn on what such photon reality means in the case of optical
effects. Power (author of a classic textbook [99] on QED), for example, held that the
electromagnetic fields should ultimately be considered closest to irreducible reality.
Yet whether it is fields or photons in terms of which we elect to describe phenomena,
neither can represent what is actually measured. The surest ground is where theory can
explain or predict actual observations, based on given conditions. We need not venture
into the quagmire territory of quantum measurement theory [100]; it suffices that all
of the observations filling the pages of these volumes, and the applications on which
they are based, are fully explicable in photonic terms. The modern concept of the
photon, with multiple interpretations and widely differing subsidiary connotations,
supports an astonishingly rich and diverse range of phenomena. A strong case can be
made that in the modern world, Photonics has become more real than the photon.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I gratefully acknowledge insights I have gained from numerous friends, co-workers,
and correspondents, over many years. From my research group I thank David Brad-
shaw, Matthew Coles, and Mathew Williams for a meticulous reading of this chapter;
I also especially thank Mohamed Babiker and Rodney Loudon for a number of
insightful comments. Research in quantum electrodynamics at the University of East
Anglia is funded by the Leverhulme Trust and the U.K. Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council.
REFERENCES
[1] G. N. Lewis, “The conservation of photons,” Nature (Lond.) 118, 874–875 (1926).
[2] A. Einstein, “ ¨Uber einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden
heuristischen Gesichtspunkt [On a heuristic viewpoint concerning the production and
transformation of light],” Ann. Phys. 17, 132–148 (1905).

REFERENCES
21
[3] P. R. Berman and V. S. Malinovsky, Principles of Laser Spectroscopy and Quantum
Optics (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2011), p. 2.
[4] T. H. Maiman, “Stimulated optical radiation in ruby,” Nature 187(4736), 493–494
(1960).
[5] R. Kidd, J. Ardini, and A. Anton, “Evolution of the modern photon,” Am. J. Phys. 57,
27–35 (1989).
[6] M. Ohtsu, “Nanophotonics: dressed photon technology for qualitatively innovative opti-
cal devices, fabrication, and systems,” Progr. Nanophoton. 1, 1–58 (2011).
[7] K. Yoo and R. R. Alfano, “Time-resolved coherent and incoherent components of
forward light scattering in random media,” Opt. Lett. 15, 320–322 (1990).
[8] S. Farsiu, J. Christofferson, B. Eriksson, P. Milanfar, B. Friedlander, A. Shakouri, and
R. Nowak, “Statistical detection and imaging of objects hidden in turbid media using
ballistic photons,” Appl. Opt. 46, 5805–5822 (2007).
[9] Y. Koma, M. Koma, E. M. Ilgenfritz, T. Suzuki, and M. I. Polikarpov, “Duality of gauge
field singularities and the structure of the flux tube in Abelian-projected SU(2) gauge
theory and the dual Abelian Higgs model,” Phys. Rev. D 68, 094018 (2003).
[10] R. S. Lakes, “Experimental test of magnetic photons,” Phys. Lett. A 329, 298–300
(2004).
[11] W. Tittel, J. Brendel, H. Zbinden, and N. Gisin, “Quantum cryptography using entangled
photons in energy-time Bell states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4737–4740 (2000).
[12] C. I. Osorio, N. Bruno, N. Sangouard, H. Zbinden, N. Gisin, and R. T. Thew, “Her-
alded photon amplification for quantum communication,” Phys. Rev. A 86, 023815
(2012).
[13] V. B. Berestetskii, E. M. Lifshitz, and L. P. Pitaevskii, Quantum Electrodynamics,
2nd ed. (Butterworth, London, 1982), pp. 15–16.
[14] A. M. Ellis, “Spectroscopic selection rules: the role of photon states,” J. Chem. Ed. 76,
1291–1294 (1999).
[15] D. L. Andrews and D. S. Bradshaw, “Virtual photons, dipole fields and energy transfer:
a quantum electrodynamical approach,” Eur. J. Phys. 25, 845–858 (2004).
[16] C. M. Wilson, G. Johansson, A. Pourkabirian, M. Simoen, J. R. Johansson, T. Duty, F.
Nori, and P. Delsing, “Observation of the dynamical Casimir effect in a superconducting
circuit,” Nature (Lond.) 479, 376–379 (2011).
[17] A. V. Burlakov, M. V. Chekhova, O. A. Karabutova, D. N. Klyshko, and S. P. Kulik,
“Polarization state of a biphoton: quantum ternary logic,” Phys. Rev. A 60, 4209–4212
(1999).
[18] R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, 3rd ed. (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2000).
[19] D. S. Roychoudhuri, A. F. Kracklauer, and K. Creath, The Nature of Light. What Is a
Photon? (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2008).
[20] H. Poincar´e, Th´eorie Math´ematique de la Lumi`ere [Mathematical Theory of Light]
(Gauthiers-Villars, Paris, 1892), Vol. 2, Chap. 12.
[21] D. L. Andrews and L. C. D´avila Romero, “A back-to-front derivation: the equal spacing
of quantum levels is a proof of simple harmonic oscillator physics,” Eur. J. Phys. 30,
1371–1380 (2009).
[22] H. J. Carmichael, Statistical Methods in Quantum Optics 1 (Springer, Berlin, 1999),
Chap. 3.

22
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
[23] D. L. Andrews, “The irreducible photon,” Proc. SPIE 7421, 742109 (2009).
[24] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Quantum electrodynamics with non-
relativistic sources. 4. Poynting vector, energy densities, and other quadratic operators
of the electromagnetic field,” Phys. Rev. A 45, 54–63 (1992).
[25] M. M. Coles and D. L. Andrews, “Photonic measures of helicity: optical vortices and
circularly polarized reflection,” Opt. Lett. 38, 869–871 (2013).
[26] A. Einstein, “Ist die Tr¨agheit eines K¨orpers von seinem Energieinhalt abh¨angig? [Is the
inertia of a body dependent on its energy content?],” Ann. Phys. 18, 639–641 (1905).
[27] U. Fano, “Atomic theory of electromagnetic interactions in dense materials,” Phys. Rev.
103, 1202–1218 (1956).
[28] R. Zhang, S. R. Garner, and L. V. Hau, “Creation of long-term coherent optical memory
via controlled nonlinear interactions in Bose-Einstein condensates,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
103, 233602 (2009).
[29] R. Y. Chiao and P. W. Milonni, “Fast light, slow light,” Optics & Photonics News, June
2002, pp. 26–30.
[30] S. M. Barnett and R. Loudon, “The enigma of optical momentum in a medium,” Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. 368, 927–939 (2010).
[31] M. E. Zevallos, S. K. Gayen, B. B. Das, M. Alrubaiee, and R. R. Alfano, “Picosecond
electronic time-gated imaging of bones in tissues,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quant. Electron.
5, 916–922 (1999).
[32] M. Born, The Born-Einstein Letters (Walker and Co., New York, 1971).
[33] M. Ligare and R. Oliveri, “The calculated photon: visualization of a quantum field,”
Am. J. Phys. 70, 58–66 (2002).
[34] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (University Press,
Cambridge, 1995).
[35] P. Grangier, J. A. Levenson, and J.-P. Poizat, “Quantum non-demolition measurements
in optics,” Nature 396, 537–542 (1998).
[36] S. Gleyzes, S. Kuhr, C. Guerlin, J. Bernu, S. Deleglise, U. B. Hoff, M. Brune, J. M.
Raimond, and S. Haroche, “Quantum jumps of light recording the birth and death of a
photon in a cavity,” Nature 446, 297–300 (2007).
[37] N. Imoto, H. A. Haus, and Y. Yamamoto, “Quantum nondemolition measurement of the
photon number via the optical Kerr effect,” Phys. Rev. A 32, 2287–2292 (1985).
[38] B. R. Johnson, M. D. Reed, A. A. Houck, D. I. Schuster, L. S. Bishop, E. Ginossar, J.
M. Gambetta, L. DiCarlo, L. Frunzio, S. M. Girvin, et.al., “Quantum non-demolition
detection of single microwave photons in a circuit,” Nat. Phys. 6, 663–667 (2010).
[39] D. Englund, A. Majumdar, M. Bajcsy, A. Faraon, P. Petroff, and J. Vuˇckovi´c, “Ultrafast
photon-photon interaction in a strongly coupled quantum dot-cavity system,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 108, 093604 (2012).
[40] B. Fan, A. F. Kockum, J. Combes, G. Johansson, I. Hoi, C. M. Wilson, P. Delsing, G. J.
Milburn, and T. M. Stace, “Breakdown of the cross-Kerr scheme for photon counting,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 053601 (2013).
[41] Y. Shih, “Entangled biphoton source—property and preparation,” Rep. Prog. Phys. 66,
1009–1044 (2003).
[42] J. Fan, M. D. Eisaman, and A. Migdall, “Bright phase-stable broadband fiber-based
source of polarization-entangled photon pairs,” Phys. Rev. A 76, 043836 (2007).

REFERENCES
23
[43] R. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, and K. Horodecki, “Quantum entangle-
ment,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 865–942 (2009).
[44] C. K. Hong, Z. Y. Ou, and L. Mandel, “Measurement of subpicosecond time intervals
between two photons by interference,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2044–2046 (1987).
[45] C. C. Gerry and P. L. Knight, Introductory Quantum Optics (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2005).
[46] I. Bialynicki-Birula, “Photon wave function,” Progr. Opt. 36, 245–294 (1996).
[47] F. Tamburini and D. Vicino, “Photon wave function: a covariant formulation and equiv-
alence to QED,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 052116 (2008).
[48] P. W. Milonni, The Quantum Vacuum: An Introduction to Quantum Electrodynamics
(Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1994).
[49] D. P. Craig and T. Thirunamachandran, Molecular Quantum Electrodynamics (Dover,
New York, 1998).
[50] G. Gabrielse, D. Hanneke, T. Kinoshita, M. Nio, and B. Odom, “New determination
of the fine structure constant from the electron g value and QED,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97,
030802 (2006).
[51] R. P. Feynman, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 1985), p. 89.
[52] G. Compagno, R. Passante, and F. Persico, “The role of the cloud of virtual pho-
tons in the shift of the ground state of a hydrogen atom,” Phys. Lett. A 98, 253–255
(1983).
[53] D. L. Andrews and A. A. Demidov (ed.) Resonance Energy Transfer (John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, 1999).
[54] D. L. Andrews, C. Curutchet, and G. D. Scholes, “Resonance energy transfer: beyond
the limits,” Laser Photon. Rev. 5, 114–123 (2011).
[55] T. F¨orster, “Energiewanderung und Fluoreszenz [Energy migration and fluorescence],”
Naturwissenschaften 33, 166–175 (1946).
[56] D. L. Andrews, “A unified theory of radiative and radiationless molecular energy trans-
fer,” Chem. Phys. 135, 195–201 (1989).
[57] G. J. Daniels, R. D. Jenkins, D. S. Bradshaw, and D. L. Andrews, “Resonance energy
transfer: the unified theory revisited,” J. Chem. Phys. 119, 2264–2274 (2003).
[58] F. Halzen and A. D. Martin, Quarks and Leptons (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1984),
p. 140.
[59] E. M. Rice, D. S. Bradshaw, K. Saadi, and D. L. Andrews, “Identifying the development
in phase and amplitude of dipole and multipole radiation,” Eur. J. Phys. 33, 345–358
(2012).
[60] R. P. Feynman, “Mathematical formulation of the quantum theory of electromagnetic
interaction,” Phys. Rev. 80, 440–457 (1950).
[61] H. B. G. Casimir and D. Polder, “The influence of retardation of the London-van der
Waals forces,” Phys. Rev. 73, 360–372 (1948).
[62] C. I. Sukenik, M. G. Boshier, D. Cho, V. Sandoghdar, and E. A. Hinds, “Measurement
of the Casimir-Polder force,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 560–563 (1993).
[63] H. Bender, Ph. W. Courteille, C. Marzok, C. Zimmerman, and S. Slama, “Direct mea-
surement of intermediate-range Casimir-Polder potentials,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 083201
(2010).

24
A PHOTON IN PERSPECTIVE
[64] H. B. G. Casimir, “On the attraction between two perfectly conducting plates,” Proc.
Kom. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. B 51, 793–796 (1948).
[65] H. B. Chan, V. A. Aksyuk, R. N. Kleiman, P. J. Bishop, and F. Capasso, “Quantum
mechanical actuation of microelectromechanical systems by the Casimir force,” Science
291, 1941–1944 (2001).
[66] G. J. Maclay, H. Fearn, amd P. W. Milonni, “Of some theoretical significance: implica-
tions of Casimir effects,” Eur. J. Phys. 22, 463–469 (2001).
[67] C. Genet, A. Lambrecht, and S. Reynaud, “The Casimir effect in the nanoworld,” Eur.
Phys. J. Spec. Top. 160, 183–193 (2008).
[68] E. A. Power, “Casimir-Polder potential from first principles,” Eur. J. Phys. 22, 453–461
(2001).
[69] D. L. Andrews (ed.) Structured Light and Its Applications: An Introduction to Phase-
Structured Beams and Nanoscale Optical Forces (Academic Press, Burlington, MA,
2008).
[70] J. Leach, M. J. Padgett, S. M. Barnett, S. Franke-Arnold, and J. Courtial, “Measuring
the orbital angular momentum of a single photon,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 257901 (2002).
[71] E. J. Galvez, L. E. Coyle, E. Johnson, and B. J. Reschovsky, “Interferometric measure-
ment of the helical mode of a single photon,” New J. Phys. 13, 053017 (2011).
[72] G. A. Siviloglou, J. Broky, A. Dogariu, and D. N. Christodoulides, “Observation of
accelerating Airy beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 23–26 (2007).
[73] K. Dholakia and W. M. Lee, “Optical trapping takes shape: the use of structured light
fields,” Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 56, 261–337 (2008).
[74] E. J. Galvez, “Vector beams in free space,” in The Angular Momentum of Light, edited
by D. L. Andrews and M. Babiker (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2013),
Chap. 3.
[75] M. S. Soskin, V. N. Gorshkov, M. V. Vasnetsov, J. T. Malos, and N. R. Heckenberg,
“Topological charge and angular momentum of light carrying optical vortices,” Phys.
Rev. A 56, 4046–4057 (1997).
[76] E. J. Galvez, L. E. Coyle, E. Johnson, and B. J. Reschovsky, “Interferometric measure-
ment of the helical mode of a single photon,” New J. Phys. 13, 053017 (2011).
[77] J. Leach, E. Yao, and M. J. Padgett, “Observation of the vortex structure of a non-integer
vortex beam,” New J. Phys. 6, 71–78 (2004).
[78] J. B. Gotte, S. Franke-Arnold, and R. Zambrini, “Quantum formulation of fractional
orbital angular momentum,” J. Mod. Opt. 54, 1723–1738 (2007).
[79] I. Bialynicki-Birula and Z. Bialynicka-Birula, “Canonical separation of angular momen-
tum of light into its orbital and spin parts,” J. Opt. 13, 064014 (2011).
[80] D. M. Lipkin, “Existence of a new conservation law in electromagnetic theory,” J. Math.
Phys. 5, 696–700 (1964).
[81] R. P. Cameron, S. M. Barnett, and A. M. Yao, “Optical helicity, optical spin and related
quantities in electromagnetic theory,” New. J. Phys. 14, 53050 (2012).
[82] G. D. Scholes and D. L. Andrews, “Damping and higher multipole effects in the quantum
electrodynamical model for electronic energy transfer in the condensed phase,” J. Chem.
Phys. 107, 5374–5384 (1997).
[83] A. Salam, “A general formula for the rate of resonant transfer of energy between two
electric multipole moments of arbitrary order using molecular quantum electrodynam-
ics,” J. Chem. Phys. 122, 044112 (2005).

REFERENCES
25
[84] D. L. Andrews, “Optical angular momentum: multipole transitions and photonics,” Phys.
Rev. A 81, 033825 (2010).
[85] J. B. G¨otte and S. M. Barnett, “Quantum formulation of angle and orbital angular
momentum,” in The Angular Momentum of Light, edited by D. L. Andrews and M.
Babiker (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2012), pp. 135–161.
[86] J. C. Garcia-Escartin and P. Chamorro-Posada, “Quantum multiplexing with the orbital
angular momentum of light,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 062320 (2008).
[87] J. T. Barreiro, T.-C. Wei, and P. G. Kwiat, “Remote preparation of single-photon “hybrid”
entangled and vector-polarization states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 030407 (2010).
[88] S. Franke-Arnold and J. Jeffers, “Orbital angular momentum in quantum communication
and information,” in Structured Light and Its Applications, edited by D. L. Andrews
(Academic Press, Burlington, MA, 2008), pp. 271–293.
[89] D. T. Pegg, J. A. Vaccaro, and S. M. Barnett, “Quantum-optical phase and canonical
conjugation,” J. Mod. Opt. 37, 1703–1710 (1990).
[90] G. Gibson, J. Courtial, M. J. Padgett, M. Vasnetsov, V. Pas’ko, V. S. M. Barnett, and
S. Franke-Arnold, “Free-space information transfer using light beams carrying orbital
angular momentum,” Opt. Exp. 12, 5448–5456 (2004).
[91] J. Leach, B. Jack, J. Romero, A. K. Jha, A. M. Yao, S. Franke-Arnold, D. G. Ireland, R.
W. Boyd, S. M. Barnett, and M. J. Padgett, “Quantum correlations in optical angle-orbital
angular momentum variables,” Science 329, 662–665 (2010).
[92] W. H. Louisell, Quantum Statistical Properties of Radiation (John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1973).
[93] B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics (John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1991).
[94] D. L. Andrews, Lasers in Chemistry, 3rd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 1997).
[95] S. M. Barnett and D. T. Pegg, “Phase in quantum optics,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 19,
3849–3862 (1986).
[96] S. M. Barnett and J. A. Vaccarro (eds), The Quantum Phase Operator: A Review (CRC
Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2007).
[97] S. Lin, I. D. Hands, D. L. Andrews, and S. R. Meech, “Optically induced second har-
monic generation by six-wave mixing: a novel probe of solute orientational dynamics,”
J. Phys. Chem. A. 103, 3830–3836 (1999).
[98] C. Chen, Y.-Y. Yin, and D. S. Elliott, “Interference between optical transitions,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 64, 507–510 (1990).
[99] E. A. Power, Introductory Quantum Electrodynamics (Longmans, London, 1964).
[100] M. Namiki, S. Pascazio, and H. Nakazato, Decoherence and Quantum Measurements
(World Scientific, Singapore, 1997).


2
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL
OPTICS
Mayukh Lahiri
IQOQI, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
2.1
INTRODUCTION
In traditional optics, an electric field is usually represented by a deterministic function.
Although a deterministic model is useful for the analysis of many problems, it
cannot be used to explain certain physical phenomena which arise from the random
fluctuations present in optical fields. Optical coherence and optical polarization are
two examples of such phenomena. The theory of statistical optics has been being
developed to explain and analyze these types of properties of light.
The theory of optical coherence has its root in the Young’s interference experiment
which shows that light emerging from two pinholes may interfere and produce a fringe
pattern [1]. Coherence is often regarded as the ability of light to interfere. Many years
ago, Zernike introduced the concept of degree of coherence in terms of the visibility of
fringes produced in a Young’s interference experiment [2]. On the other hand, studies
on polarization properties of light began with Bartholinus’ observation of double
refraction in calcite crystals. On an apparent view it may seem that coherence and
polarization properties of light are unrelated. However, works of many distinguished
scientists have revealed that the two properties are intimately related and that both
can be viewed as manifestation of random fluctuations of optical fields. Detailed
descriptions of the history of the subject can be found in References 3–7.
In this chapter, we discuss the key foundations of the classical theory of optical
coherence and polarization. We also discuss some recent developments in this subject
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
27

28
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
and provide important references for further reading of enthusiastic readers. In the
end, we briefly discuss the foundations of the quantum theory of optical coherence.
2.2
CLASSICAL THEORY OF OPTICAL COHERENCE IN THE
SPACE-TIME DOMAIN
Light being an electromagnetic wave is always associated with electric and magnetic
fields. The effects of the magnetic field can be neglected for the purpose of studying
coherence properties of light. The electric field vector EEE (r; t) is a real quantity. Let
us express it in the form of a Fourier integral
EEE (r; t) = ∫
∞
−∞
̃EEE (r; 𝜔)e−i𝜔td𝜔= ∫
∞
0
̃EEE (r; 𝜔)e−i𝜔td𝜔+ ∫
∞
0
̃EEE (r; −𝜔)ei𝜔td𝜔,
(2.1)
where 𝜔denotes the frequency. Since EEE (r; t) is real, one must have ̃EEE (r; 𝜔) =
̃EEE
∗(r; −𝜔), where the asterisk denotes complex conjugate. The result implies that
the negative frequency part ̃EEE (r; −𝜔) does not contain any information that is not
already contained in the positive frequency part ̃EEE (r; 𝜔). Because of this, one may
omit the negative frequency part and can replace EEE (r; t) by the complex quantity
E(r; t) = ∫
∞
0
̃EEE (r; 𝜔)e−i𝜔td𝜔.
(2.2)
E(r; t) is called the complex analytic signal associated with the real electric field vector
[8, Section 3.1]. The concept of complex analytic signal was originally introduced
by Gabor [9]. E(r; t) is also called the complex electric field vector.
As already mentioned, a deterministic model of optical fields is not sufficient for
analyzing coherence and polarization properties of light. A systematic description of
statistical properties of light requires to assume that the complex electric field vector
E(r; t) is random in nature. Every component of such a field can be represented by
statistical ensembles {Ei(r; t)}, where i = x, y, z represents three arbitrary mutually
orthogonal directions in space. The simplest or lowest order1 correlation properties
of light in the space-time domain are characterized by a 3 × 3 correlation matrix
⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; t1, t2), whose elements are given by
Γij(r1, r2; t1, t2) ≡⟨E∗
i (r1; t1)Ej(r2; t2)⟩,
(i = x, y, z; j = x, y, z),
(2.3)
where the angular brackets denote ensemble average. The matrix ⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; t1, t2) is
often referred to as the mutual coherence matrix (to be abbreviated by MC matrix).
We assume that the random process is statistically stationary, at least, in the wide
1Lowest order correlation properties are often called the second-order ones in the classical theory and the
first-order ones in the quantum theory.

CLASSICAL THEORY OF OPTICAL COHERENCE IN THE SPACE-TIME DOMAIN
29
sense [8, Section 2.2] . This means that elements Γij(r1, r2; t1, t2) of the MC matrix
depend on t1 and t2 only through the difference 𝜏= t2 −t1, that is,
⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; t1, t2) ≡⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) = [⟨E∗
i (r1; t)Ej(r2; t + 𝜏)⟩] .
(2.4)
Clearly, for stationary fields choice of the origin of time is not important, as one
would expect.
For statistically stationary fields one needs to interpret the transition from EEE (r; t)
to its analytic signal E(r; t) with more caution. It is because the sample functions of a
stationary random processes are not square integrable. However, precise justification
of an analytic signal can still be given in the framework of a generalized function
theory ([10]; see also [8, Section 3.1.3]), which is outside the scope of this chapter.
2.2.1
Degree of Coherence in the Space-Time Domain
Coherence refers to the ability of light to interfere. Simplest manifestation of coher-
ence properties of light is the visibility of fringes produced in a Young’s interference
experiment (Fig. 2.1). In 1938, Zernike [2] defined the degree of coherence of a wave
field by the maximum value of visibility in the interference pattern produced by it
under the “best circumstances”2. Zernike did not take into account the time differ-
ence between the fields arriving from the pinholes. Consequently, his theory could
not address some interesting aspects of the subject. This theory was later generalized
by Wolf [11], as he introduced the time difference into the analysis. In this section
we discuss the Zernike–Wolf formulation of the theory [5, Chap. 10; 8, Chap. 4; 12,
Chap. 3].
For the sake of simplicity, we first address the subject by the use of a scalar theory.
We assume that each component of the electric field vector behaves in the same way,
so that it is sufficient to consider only one of them. This assumption holds for the
y
x
z
O
Q1(r1)
P (r)
Q2(r2)
R2
R1
z < 0
z > 0
z = 0
z = z0 > 0
A
B
FIGURE 2.1
Geometry of a Young’s interference experiment.
2By the term “best circumstances” Zernike meant that the intensities of the two interfering beams were
equal and that only small path difference was introduced between them.

30
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
light generated by many optical sources such as the extended thermal sources, which
radiate unpolarized light. A randomly fluctuating complex scalar field at a point P(r),
at a time t, can be represented by a statistical ensemble {V(r; t)} of realizations. The
MC matrix, defined by Eq. (2.4), then reduces to a correlation function given by
Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) ≡⟨V∗(r1; t)V(r2; t + 𝜏)⟩.
(2.5)
The correlation function, Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏), is known as the mutual coherence function (MC
function).
The average intensity I(r) of light at a point P(r), apart from a constant factor
depending on the choice of units, is given by ⟨|V(r; t)|2⟩. From Eq. (2.5) it follows
that
I(r) ≡⟨|V(r; t)|2⟩= Γ(r, r; 0).
(2.6)
Clearly, for statistically stationary light the average intensity does not depend on time.
Let us now consider a Young’s interference experiment (Fig. 2.1). Suppose that
a light beam is incident from the half-space z < 0 onto an opaque screen A, placed
in the plane z = 0 containing two pinholes Q1(r1) and Q2(r2). We assume that
the beam is incident normally on the screen A. In general, interference fringes
will be formed on screen B, placed in a plane z = z0 > 0, some distance behind
the screen A. The complex random field V(r; t) at a point P(r) on the screen B,
and at time t, is generated by the superposition of fields arriving from the two
pinholes. If the light takes times t1 = R1∕c and t2 = R2∕c to travel to the point
P(r) from the pinholes Q1(r1) and Q2(r2), respectively (c is the speed of light),
one has
V(r; t) = K1V(r1; t −t1) + K2V(r2; t −t2).
(2.7)
Here K1 and K2 are two purely imaginary constant factors, which take into account
the diffraction at the pinholes. Their explicit forms can be obtained from Huygen–
Fresnel principles (see, e.g., [5, Section 8.2]). On using Eqs. (2.5)–(2.7), one finds
that the average intensity at the point P(r) is given by the expression
I(r) = |K1|2I(r1) + |K2|2I(r2) + 2Re {K ∗
1 K2Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏)} ,
(2.8)
where 𝜏≡t2 −t1 = (R2 −R1)∕c is the time difference between the fields arriving at
P(r) from pinholes Q1(r1) and Q2(r2). It follows from Eq. (2.8) that if one blocks
the pinhole Q1(r1), the intensity distribution on the screen B is given by I(1)(r) =
|K1|2I(r1). Similarly, if the other pinhole Q2(r2) is closed, the intensity distribution
on the screen B becomes I(2)(r) = |K2|2I(r2). Evidently the quantities I(1)(r) and
I(2)(r) represent the contributions to the total intensity at the point P(r) from the

CLASSICAL THEORY OF OPTICAL COHERENCE IN THE SPACE-TIME DOMAIN
31
pinholes Q1(r1) and Q2(r2), respectively. If we assume that these two contributions
are equal, that is, I(1)(r) = I(2)(r) = I(0)(r), we find that
I(r) = 2I(0)(r)
{
1 +
||||||
Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏)
√
I(r1)
√
I(r2)
||||||
cos [𝛼(r1, r2; 𝜏)]
}
,
(2.9)
where 𝛼(r1, r2; 𝜏) = arg {Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏)}. It readily follows from Eq. (2.9) that the vis-
ibility of the fringes around the point, P(r), is
≡Imax −Imin
Imax + Imin
=
||||||
Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏)
√
I(r1)
√
I(r2)
||||||
.
(2.10)
The degree of coherence in the space-time domain is defined by the normalized MC
function [5, Chap. 10]
𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏) ≡
Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏)
√
I(r1)
√
I(r2)
,
(2.11)
which appears inside the modulus sign in Eq. (2.10). The visibility of fringes is always
bounded by zero and by unity and so is the modulus of the degree of coherence. It
can also be proved explicitly by the use of the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality that
0 ≤|𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏)| ≤1.
(2.12)
When |𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏)| = 1, sharpest possible fringes are obtained and the light is said to
be spatially completely coherent at the pair of points Q1(r1) and Q2(r2), for the time
delay 𝜏. In the other extreme case, when 𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏) = 0, no fringe is obtained and
the light is said to be spatially incoherent at the two points, for the time delay 𝜏. In the
intermediate case 0 < |𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏)| < 1, the light is said to be partially coherent at the
pair of points. It is to be noted that the degree of coherence is, in general, a complex
quantity. Its phase is also a meaningful physical quantity and can be, in principle,
determined from the measurements of positions of maximum and minimum in the
fringe pattern (see, e.g., [8, p. 167]).
The MC function obeys certain propagation laws which make it possible to study
changes in correlation properties of light on propagation. These propagation laws
are known as the Wolf equations. For propagation in free space, they are given by
[8, Section 4.4.1]
∇2
1Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) = 1
c2
𝜕2
𝜕𝜏2 Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏),
(2.13a)
∇2
2Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) = 1
c2
𝜕2
𝜕𝜏2 Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏),
(2.13b)

32
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
where ∇2
1 and ∇2
2 are Laplacian operators acting with respect to the points r1 and r2,
respectively. These equations imply that the state of coherence of light may change
on propagation3.
The scalar theory discussed thus far can be generalized to vector fields. If we
restrict ourselves to a light beam propagating along a particular direction (positive
z-direction, say), the 3 × 3 MC matrix, defined by Eq. (2.4), reduces to a 2 × 2 MC
matrix
⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) ≡[Γlm(r1, r2; 𝜏)] ≡[⟨E∗
l (r1; t)Em(r2; t + 𝜏)⟩],
(l = x, y; m = x, y).
(2.14)
It is convenient to represent the electric field vector by a column matrix, that is, by
E(r; t) ≡
(Ex(r; t)
Ey(r; t)
)
= ( Ex(r; t)
Ey(r; t))T,
(2.15)
where the superscript T denotes transpose of a matrix. Equation (2.14) can now be
expressed as
⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) = ⟨E∗(r1; t) ◦ET(r2; t + 𝜏)⟩,
(2.16)
where the symbol “◦” denotes matrix multiplication. The average intensity at a point
P(r) is given by
I(r) ≡⟨|Ex(r; t)|2⟩+ ⟨|Ey(r; t)|2⟩= tr⃖⃗Γ(r, r; 0),
(2.17)
where tr represents trace of a matrix. Following a procedure similar to that used for
scalar fields, one obtains the following formula for the degree of coherence4 [13]:
𝛾(r1, r2, 𝜏) ≡tr⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2, 𝜏)
√
I(r1)I(r2)
,
(2.18)
where |𝛾(r1, r2, 𝜏)| is directly related to the visibility of fringes produced in a
Young’s interference experiment. Again, one can define the complete coherence
by |𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏)| = 1, the complete incoherence by 𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏) = 0, and the partial
coherence by 0 < |𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏)| < 1.
3Considerable amount of research has been done for understanding the nature of this change. For further
details see, for example, [8, Section 4.4.]
4There exist other definitions of degree of coherence for beam-like vector fields. One of them was
introduced in Reference 14. The same concept was also extended to the frequency domain in Reference
15, which lead to some discussions on what should be an appropriate definition of degree of coherence
for beam-like vector fields (see, for example, [16, 17]). Later other approaches to define the degree of
coherence were also proposed [18–20].

CLASSICAL THEORY OF OPTICAL COHERENCE IN THE SPACE-TIME DOMAIN
33
2.2.2
Complete Spatial Coherence in the Time Domain
The concept of complete spatial coherence is often confused with monochromaticity.
Although the difference between them has been pointed out in many scholarly pub-
lications (see, e.g., [5, 8, 12, 21, 22]), the misconception persists. In this section we
discuss the difference between spatially coherent light and monochromatic light.
We consider scalar fields for simplicity. Suppose that an optical field is spatially
coherent, at a pair of points r1 and r2, for a value of 𝜏= 𝜏0, that is, |𝛾(r1, r2, 𝜏0)| = 1.
From Eqs. (2.5) and (2.11), one readily finds that
|⟨V∗(r1; t)V(r2; t + 𝜏0)⟩| =
√
I(r1)
√
I(r2).
(2.19)
Now applying the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality to V(r1; t) and V(r2; t + 𝜏0), and using
Eq. (2.6), one obtains
|⟨V∗(r1; t)V(r2; t + 𝜏0)⟩| ≤
√
I(r1)
√
I(r2),
(2.20)
where we have used the fact that for stationary fields ⟨|V(r2; t + 𝜏0)|2⟩=
⟨|V(r2; t)|2⟩= I(r2). The expression on the both sides of inequality (2.20) are equal
to each other if and only if the ratio V(r2; t + 𝜏0)∕V(r1; t) is independent of t, that is,
if and only if
V(r2; t + 𝜏0) = (𝜏0)(r1, r2)V(r1; t),
(2.21)
where (𝜏0)(r1, r2) is a time-independent, generally complex quantity. From Eqs.
(2.19) and (2.20) it, therefore, follows that an optical field is spatially completely
coherent at a pair of points r1 and r2 for a value of 𝜏= 𝜏0, if and only if Eq. (2.21)
is true. This result has important physical significance. It implies that although the
field at the the two points are represented by two random quantities V(r1; t) and
V(r2; t + 𝜏0), their ratio is a deterministic time-independent quantity (𝜏0)(r1, r2).
Clearly, spatial coherence (|𝛾(r1, r2, 𝜏0)| = 1) requires that the random field at the
two points fluctuates in unison when a suitable time delay, 𝜏0, is introduced between
them. Figure 2.2 provides a pictorial description of fluctuations in unison. It is evident
that one does not need a monochromatic field to achieve complete spatial coherence.
It is not the monochromaticity, but the fluctuations in unison that is the essence of
complete spatial coherence5. The concept of fluctuations in unison is often referred to
as the concept of statistical similarity. For more on the concept of statistical similarity
see References 24–26.
Let us note that (𝜏0)(r1, r2) is a measurable quantity. From Eqs. (2.5), (2.6),
(2.11), and (2.21), it readily follows that [24]
|(𝜏0)(r1, r2)| =
√
I(r2)
I(r1),
arg {(𝜏0)(r1, r2)} = arg {𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏0)} .
(2.22)
5The idea of fluctuations in unison is due to Verdet [23].

34
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
FIGURE 2.2
Illustrating statistical similarity between the randomly fluctuating field at a
pair of points r1 and r2. The temporal dependence of the field at the two points are identical
except a multiplicative factor and a constant time delay 𝜏0.
2.3
CLASSICAL THEORY OF OPTICAL COHERENCE
IN THE SPACE-FREQUENCY DOMAIN
The classical theory of optical coherence was originally introduced in the space-time
domain [2, 11]. However, there are certain types of problems, which turn out to be
very difficult to solve by the use of this formulation. For example, problems involving
change in coherence properties of light on propagation through various media and
the problems involving scattering of light present considerable difficulties in the time
domain. In order to address such problems, the space-frequency formulation of the
theory has been introduced [27–29]. In this section, we briefly discuss the theory of
spatial coherence in the frequency domain.
Although a stationary random function V(r; t) is not Fourier integrable within the
framework of the ordinary function theory, it is reasonable to assume that the Fourier
transform of the MC function Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) exists6. One can then define a function
W(r1, r2; 𝜔), which together with Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) form a Fourier transform pair, that is,
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 1
2𝜋∫
∞
−∞
Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏)ei𝜔𝜏d𝜏,
(2.23a)
Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) = ∫
∞
0
W(r1, r2; 𝜔)e−i𝜔𝜏d𝜔.
(2.23b)
The lower limit of the integration in Eq. (2.23b) is 0, because Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) is a complex
analytic signal. The quantity W(r1, r2; 𝜔) is called the cross-spectral density function
(to be abbreviated by CSD function). It can be shown with the help of coherent mode
6A rigorous explanation can be given using the Wiener–Khintchine theorem, an account of which can be
found in Section 2.4 of Reference 8.

CLASSICALTHEORYOFOPTICALCOHERENCEINTHESPACE-FREQUENCYDOMAIN
35
representation that W(r1, r2; 𝜔) is also a correlation function [8, Section 4.7.2], that
is, it can be represented in the form
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) = ⟨U∗(r1; 𝜔)U(r2; 𝜔)⟩,
(2.24)
where U(r; 𝜔) is a typical member of a suitably constructed ensemble of monochro-
matic realizations, all of frequency 𝜔.
The spectral density S(r; 𝜔) at a point r, at frequency 𝜔, is given by the formula
S(r; 𝜔) = W(r, r; 𝜔) = ⟨|U(r; 𝜔)|2⟩.
(2.25)
From Eqs. (2.23b) and (2.25) it readily follows that
∫
∞
0
S(r; 𝜔) d𝜔= Γ(r, r; 0) = I(r).
(2.26)
Clearly, S(r; 𝜔) can be regarded as equivalent to the average intensity at a particular
frequency. The normalized spectral density S (r; 𝜔) is given by the formula
S (r; 𝜔) =
S(r; 𝜔)
∫∞
0
S(r; 𝜔) d𝜔
= S(r; 𝜔)
I(r) .
(2.27)
It is to be noted that the spectral density of a field can change on propagation even
through free space [30,31]. This discovery is one of the many successes of the theory
of optical coherence in the space-frequency domain.
2.3.1
Degree of Coherence in the Space-Frequency Domain
The spectral degree of coherence 𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔), that is, the spatial degree of coherence
at frequency 𝜔, is defined by the expression [8, Section 4.3.2]
𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) ≡
W(r1, r2; 𝜔)
√
S(r1, 𝜔)
√
S(r2, 𝜔)
.
(2.28)
It can be readily shown that 0 ≤|𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| ≤1. When |𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| = 1, the field
is said to be spectrally completely coherent at the pair of points r1 and r2, at the
frequency 𝜔. If 𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 0, the field is said to be spectrally completely incoherent
at the two points, at that frequency. In the intermediate case, it is said to be spectrally
partially coherent at those points, at frequency 𝜔.
The physical significance of 𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) can be elucidated by a Young’s interfer-
ence experiment (Fig. 2.1). However, one now needs to separately analyze the fringe
visibility produced by each frequency component that is present in the spectrum. This
situation can be realized by imagining that the incident light is filtered to have only

36
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
one frequency 𝜔before reaching the pinholes. Under the assumption that contribu-
tions from the two pinholes are equal, the spectral density S(r; 𝜔), at a point P(r) on
the screen B, is given by the expression [8, Section 4.3.2]
S(r; 𝜔) = S(1)(r; 𝜔) {1 + |𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| cos [arg {𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)} −𝛿]} . (2.29)
Here S(1)(r; 𝜔) is the contribution of light reaching at P(r) from either of the two
pinholes and 𝛿= 𝜔(R2 −R1)∕c. The formula (2.29) is known as the spectral intensity
law. One can readily show that |𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| is equal to the visibility of the fringes
associated with the frequency component 𝜔. A prescription of measuring modulus
and phase of 𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) can be found in Reference 32.
Like the MC function, the CSD function also obeys certain propagation laws
which are given by [8, Section 4.4.1]
∇2
1W(r1, r2; 𝜔) + k2W(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 0,
(2.30a)
∇2
2W(r1, r2; 𝜔) + k2W(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 0.
(2.30b)
These equations show that the spectral degree of coherence of light can change due
to propagation.
The theory can also be generalized to the vector fields. For an optical beam
propagating along a particular direction, one can define a 2 × 2 matrix, known as the
cross-spectral density matrix (CSD matrix), which is the Fourier transform of the
2 × 2 MC matrix [12, Chap. 9]:
⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) ≡1
2𝜋∫
∞
−∞
⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) exp[i𝜔𝜏]d𝜏,
(2.31a)
⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏) = ∫
∞
0
⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) exp[−i𝜔𝜏]d𝜔.
(2.31b)
As in the scalar case, it can be shown that each element of the CSD matrix is a
correlation function [12, Chap. 9], i.e.,
Wij(r1, r2; 𝜔) = ⟨E∗
i (r1; 𝜔)Ej(r2; 𝜔)⟩,
(2.32)
where Ei(r; 𝜔) is a typical member of an ensemble of monochromatic realizations.
Each element of a CSD matrix obeys definite propagation laws which are analogous
to Eqs. (2.30), viz.,
∇2
1⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) + k2⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 0,
(2.33a)
∇2
2⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) + k2⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 0.
(2.33b)
The spectral density S(r; 𝜔) of a vector field is given by the expression
[12, Chap. 9]
S(r; 𝜔) = tr⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔),
(2.34)

CLASSICALTHEORYOFOPTICALCOHERENCEINTHESPACE-FREQUENCYDOMAIN
37
and the spectral degree of coherence is given by the expression7 [12, Chap. 9]
𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) =
tr⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔)
√
S(r1; 𝜔)
√
S(r2; 𝜔)
.
(2.35)
Elements of the CSD matrix are measurable quantities. A theoretical prescription
to determine them was proposed in Reference 33. Later they were also experimentally
determined for a laser beam [34].
2.3.2
Complete Spatial Coherence in the Frequency Domain
The concept of statistical similarity, which is discussed in Section 2.2.2, can also
be extended to elucidate complete spatial coherence in the frequency domain [35].
For simplicity, we once again restrict our analysis to scalar fields. If the field is
spectrally completely coherent at the pair of points (r1, r2), at frequency 𝜔, that is, if
|𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| = 1, it readily follows from Eqs. (2.24), (2.25), and (2.28) that
||⟨U∗(r1; 𝜔)U(r2; 𝜔)⟩||
2 =
⟨
||U(r1; 𝜔)||
2⟩⟨
||U(r2; 𝜔)||
2⟩
.
(2.36)
Applying the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality to the random quantities U(r1; 𝜔) and
U(r2; 𝜔) one obtains
||⟨U∗(r1; 𝜔)U(r2; 𝜔)⟩||
2 ≤
⟨
||U(r1; 𝜔)||
2⟩⟨
||U(r2; 𝜔)||
2⟩
.
(2.37)
The expressions on both sides of this inequality are equal to each other if and only
if the ratio U(r2; 𝜔)∕U(r1; 𝜔) is a deterministic function, that is, if and only if the
following relation holds:
U(r2; 𝜔) = (r1, r2; 𝜔)U(r1; 𝜔),
(2.38)
where (r1, r2; 𝜔) is a deterministic function of its arguments. From Eqs. (2.36)
and (2.37), it is clear that complete spectral coherence at a pair of points (r1, r2),
at frequency 𝜔, requires the random quantities U(r1; 𝜔) and U(r2; 𝜔) to obey the
relation (2.38) and vice versa8. Using Eqs. (2.24), (2.25), (2.28), and (2.38), one can
show that
|(r1, r2; 𝜔)| =
√
S(r2; 𝜔)
S(r1; 𝜔),
arg {(r1, r2; 𝜔)} = arg {𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)} . (2.39)
Clearly, (r1, r2; 𝜔) is a measurable quantity.
The relation (2.38), which plays a role analogous to the relation (2.21), can
be regarded as the statistical similarity relation in the space–frequency domain. It
elucidates the concept of complete spectral coherence at a pair of points. However, the
7Other definitions of the degree of coherence are also proposed as discussed in footnote 4 of Section 2.2.1.
8The proof of sufficiency is straightforward: Using Eqs. (2.28) and (2.38), one readily finds that
|𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| = 1.

38
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
P1(r1)
P0(r0)
P2(r2)
R2
R1
z < 0
z > 0
z = 0
z = z0 > 0
A
B
FIGURE 2.3
A Young’s interference experiment.
statistical similarity relations in the space-time and in the space-frequency domains
must not be confused with each other. It must be noted that no temporal parameter
is involved in Eq. (2.38). This equation cannot, therefore, be interpreted as the
fluctuations of the optical field in unison. In fact, the statistical similarity relations in
the two domains have different physical significance. We elucidate this point further
in the next section.
2.4
CROSS-SPECTRALLY PURE OPTICAL FIELDS
When two light beams of the same normalized spectral distribution are superposed,
they produce a new beam whose normalized spectral distribution is, in general,
different from that of the parent beams [36–38]. Mandel, however, showed that it is
possible to obtain certain conditions under which the normalized spectral distribution
is not affected by superposition [39]. An optical field obeying these conditions is
called a cross-spectrally pure field9. A field that is not cross-spectrally pure cannot
generate the same spectral distribution in a superposition experiment; such a field
is called spectrally impure field. Mandel also introduced a degree of cross-spectral
purity [39]. In this section we, however, restrict ourselves only to the cross-spectrally
pure fields.
Let us consider a Young’s interference experiment (Fig. 2.3), in which the pinholes
are located at the points, P1(r1) and P2(r2). A field is said to be cross-spectrally pure
at the pair of points r1 and r2 if it satisfies the following two conditions ([40]; see
also [8, Section 4.5.1]):
1. The normalized spectral densities of the light at the two points, P1(r1) and
P2(r2), are equal to each other at all frequencies present in its spectrum, that
9The term “pure” was used in analogy with its usage in genetics.

CROSS-SPECTRALLY PURE OPTICAL FIELDS
39
is, S (r1; 𝜔) = S (r2; 𝜔) for all 𝜔. Using Eq. (2.27), this condition can be
expressed as
S(r1; 𝜔)
I(r1)
= S(r2; 𝜔)
I(r2) ,
∀𝜔.
(2.40)
2. There exists a point P0(r0) on the screen B, around which the normalized
spectral density is equal to that at the pinholes for all frequencies present in the
spectrum of the light, that is, S (r0; 𝜔) = S (r1; 𝜔) = S (r2; 𝜔) for all possible
values of 𝜔. Using the formulas for intensity and spectral density at the point
P0(r0), this condition can be expressed in the form
𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏0) exp [i𝜔𝜏0
] ,
∀𝜔,
(2.41)
where 𝜏0 = (R2 −R1)∕c is confined to a range Δ𝜏≪1∕Δ𝜔, Δ𝜔being the
frequency-width of the spectrum.
We now show that the concept of cross-spectral purity plays an important role in
distinguishing between complete spatial coherence in the time and frequency domains
[41,42]. First we establish that if |𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏0)| = 1, the field is cross-spectrally pure
at the pair of points r1 and r2. Let us recall that if |𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏0)| = 1, the statistical
similarity relation (2.21) in the space-time domain holds and vice versa. It follows
from Eqs. (2.5), (2.21), and (2.23a) that in this case, for all values of 𝜔present in the
spectrum,
W(r1, r2; 𝜔) = exp [i𝜔𝜏0
] (𝜏0)(r1, r2)S(r1; 𝜔) = exp [i𝜔𝜏0
]
S(r2; 𝜔)
{(𝜏0)(r1, r2)}∗.
(2.42)
This formula immediately leads to the relation
S(r1; 𝜔) =
S(r2; 𝜔)
||(𝜏0)(r1, r2)||
2 .
(2.43)
Using Eqs. (2.22) and (2.43), one then finds that S(r1; 𝜔)∕I(r1) = S(r2; 𝜔)∕I(r2), that
is, such a field satisfies the first condition [Eq. (2.40)] of cross-spectrally purity. From
Eqs. (2.21), (2.28), and (2.42) it follows that
𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) = exp [i𝜔𝜏0
] (𝜏0)(r1, r2)
|(𝜏0)(r1, r2)|.
(2.44)
Here we have used the fact that
√
z∕z∗= z∕|z|, for any complex number z. It
is thus clear that in this case |𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| = 1 = |𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏0)|, for all frequen-
cies 𝜔present in the spectrum. Now using Eqs. (2.22) and (2.44), one finds that

40
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔) = 𝛾(r1, r2; 𝜏0) exp[i𝜔𝜏0], that is, the second condition [Eq. (2.41)] of
cross-spectral purity is also satisfied. Thus we have established that complete spatial
coherence in the time domain always ensures cross-spectral purity10.
We now show that complete spectral coherence (|𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| = 1) for all fre-
quency 𝜔, at a pair of points, does not ensure cross-spectral purity. We recall that
if |𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| = 1, the statistical similarity relation (2.38) in the space-frequency
domain holds and vice versa. From Eq. (2.39), it readily follows that the ratio
S(r2; 𝜔)
S(r1; 𝜔) = |(r1, r2; 𝜔)|2,
(2.45)
in general, depends on 𝜔. However, the first condition of cross-spectral purity (Eq.
2.40) requires that the ration S(r2; 𝜔)∕S(r1; 𝜔) must be independent of frequency
𝜔. Hence complete spectral coherence (|𝜇(r1, r2; 𝜔)| = 1) does not always imply
cross-spectral purity.
From the foregoing discussion of this section, it is clear that the concept of cross-
spectral purity can be used to elucidate the difference between complete spatial
coherence in the time and frequency domains. It is also clear that statistical similarity
relations in the space-time and in the space-frequency domains are not equivalent to
each other; the former ensures cross-spectral purity, whereas the latter does not.
2.4.1
Application of Coherence Theory in Structure Determination
of Random Media
Determining structures of objects has been a subject of interest because of its appli-
cations in various branches of science, for example, in physics, chemistry, biology,
medicine, etc. The subject originated in the classic x-ray diffraction technique intro-
duced in works of Laue, Friedrich, Knipping, W. H. Bragg, W. L. Bragg, and Ewald
in the early part of the previous century ([43–48]; for a collection of important papers
on this topic, see Reference 49). In the usual reconstruction techniques, the refrac-
tive index (often equivalent to the electric permittivity) of a medium is assumed
to be a deterministic function of position. Such a medium can be characterized
by the so-called scattering potential, which is defined at a point r′ by the formula
[5, Section 13.1.1]
F(r′; 𝜔) = k2
4𝜋
[n2(r′; 𝜔) −1] ,
(2.46)
where n(r′, 𝜔) is the refractive index of the medium at frequency 𝜔.
However, there exists a type of media whose refractive indices vary randomly
with position and time. They are generally called random media (see, for example,
Reference 50). Blood cells, certain types of biological tissues, rain drops, clouds, etc.,
10The converse is, in general, not true; a cross-spectrally pure field can be partially coherent.

CROSS-SPECTRALLY PURE OPTICAL FIELDS
41
are some examples of such media. The usual reconstruction technique does not apply
to them. We now discuss a theory of determining the structure of random media.
We consider a random medium which can be effectively represented by an ensem-
ble of sample media. Such a random medium may be characterized by the correlation
function of its scattering potential at two points r′
1 and r′
2, that is, by [12, Section 6.3]
CF(r′
1, r′
2; 𝜔) = ⟨F∗(r′
1; 𝜔)F(r′
2; 𝜔)⟩m,
(2.47)
where the angular brackets with subscript m denote the average taken over the ensem-
ble of sample media. We assume that CF is a well-behaved deterministic function.
Suppose that a spectrally coherent plane light wave, propagating in a direction
specified by a real unit vector s0, is incident on the medium which occupies a finite
domain D in space (see Fig. 2.4). The CSD function of the incident light at a pair of
points r1 and r2 is given by the formula
W(i)(r1, r2, s0; 𝜔) = S(i)(𝜔) exp [iks0 ⋅(r2 −r1)] ,
(2.48)
where S(i)(𝜔) is the spectral density of the incident light. We assume that the medium is
a weak scatterer, so that the scattering may be analyzed within the accuracy of the first
Born approximation [5, Section 13.1.2] . The CSD function of the scattered light in the
P
P
FIGURE 2.4
A coherent plane wave propagating along s0 is scattered by a random medium
D. P1(rs1) and P2(rs2) are two points in the far zone.

42
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
far zone, at two points specified by position vectors rs1 and rs2, (|s1|2 = 1, |s2|2 = 1),
is given by the formula [12, Section 6.3.2]
W(∞)
s
(rs1, rs2, s0; 𝜔) = S(i)(𝜔)
r2
̃
CF
[−k(s1 −s0), k(s2 −s0); 𝜔] .
(2.49)
Here
̃
CF
[K1, K2; 𝜔] = ∫D ∫D
CF(r′
1, r′
2; 𝜔) exp [−i(K1 ⋅r′
1 + K2 ⋅r′
2)] d3r′
1d3r′
2
(2.50)
is the six-dimensional Fourier transform of the correlation function of the scattering
potential, and
K1 = −k(s1 −s0),
K2 = k(s2 −s0).
(2.51)
The vectors K1 and K2 are analogous to the momentum transfer vector of the quantum
mechanical theory of potential scattering. From Eqs. (2.51) it follows that when the
unit vector s1 varies over all possible directions and the direction s0 of incidence is
kept fixed, the end points of the vectors K1 move on the surface of a sphere of radius k
centered at the point ks0 (see Fig. 2.5). Similarly, with s0 kept fixed and the direction
s2 changing, the end points of the vector K2 move on the surface of another sphere
of radius k centered at the point with position vector −ks0. Each of these spheres
are analogous to the classic Ewald sphere of reflection used in the theory of X-ray
diffraction of crystals. It is clear from Eqs. (2.51) that 0 ≤|K1| ≤2k = 4𝜋∕𝜆and
1
1
2
2
FIGURE 2.5
The shaded spheres are analogous to the “Ewald’s spheres of reflection” for a
particular direction s0 of incidence of a plane wave, with wave number k. These spheres are the
region of accessible Fourier components for a particular direction of incidence s0. The large
spheres are analogous to the Ewald’s limiting sphere. Adapted from Reference 51.

POLARIZATION PROPERTIES OF STOCHASTIC BEAMS
43
0 ≤|K2| ≤2k = 4𝜋∕𝜆, where 𝜆is the wavelength corresponding to the frequency
𝜔. Figure 2.5 illustrates the domain of the accessible Fourier components of the two-
point spatial correlation function of the scattering potential for a particular direction
of incidence s0. However, it follows from Eqs. (2.51) that K1 and K2 are coupled,
because both depend on the vector s0. In fact, it can be shown that they obey the
inequality [51]
|K1 + K2| = k|s2 −s1| ≤4𝜋
𝜆.
(2.52)
Therefore, the Fourier components associated with K1 and K2 cannot be treated
independently. Nonetheless, as s0 is varied, the vectors (K1,K2) sweep out a con-
tinuous, albeit complicated six-dimensional volume V(K1, K2) in the Fourier space.
Equation (2.49) makes it possible to express the six-dimensional Fourier transform
of the correlation function of the scattering potential in terms of the CSD function of
the scattered far field. Using Eqs. (2.49) and (2.50), one can obtain an approximation,
CF(r′
1, r′
2; 𝜔), of the correlation function of the scattering potential in terms of the
inverse Fourier transform of the CSD function:
CF(r′
1, r′
2; 𝜔) =
r2
(2𝜋)6S(i)(𝜔) ∬V(K1,K2)
W(∞)
s
(rs1, rs2, s0; 𝜔)
exp[i(K1 ⋅r′
1 + K2 ⋅r′
2)]d3K1d3K2.
(2.53)
Evaluation of the integral can be computationally involved in some cases. However,
it can be fairly straightforward when the medium possesses certain spatial symmetry.
2.5
POLARIZATION PROPERTIES OF STOCHASTIC BEAMS
To analyze the polarization properties of light, one needs to consider the vector nature
of the fluctuating electric field. The foundations of the subject was laid down by Stokes
in 1852. He described the polarization properties of a light beam in terms of certain
parameters, now known as Stokes parameters ([52]; see also [5, 53, 54]). In 1892,
Poincar´e developed a rigorous mathematical treatment of optical polarization [55]. He
introduced the concept of Poincar´e sphere, which conveniently represented the state
of polarization of a light beam. In the 1930s, a matrix treatment of optical polarization
was introduced by Wiener who showed that a relationship may exist between field
correlations and polarization properties of light [56]. Later Wolf used the matrix
formulation for systematic studies of polarization properties of statistically stationary
light beams11 [57]. For beam-like optical fields, the Stokes–Poincar´e representation
is equivalent to the Wiener–Wolf matrix representation. In this section, we briefly
discuss the matrix representation of the theory.
11A detailed historical description of the development of the subject can be found in Reference 7.

44
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
FIGURE 2.6
A light beam passing through a compensator followed by a polarizer.
2.5.1
Matrix Formulation of the Theory of Polarization
Let us consider a statistically stationary light beam propagating along a particu-
lar direction. Without any loss of generality, we choose the direction to be along
positive z-axis. As already mentioned [see Eq. (2.14)], in this case the simplest corre-
lation properties of the beam are characterized by the 2 × 2 MC matrix, ⃖⃗Γ(r1, r2; 𝜏).
Let us define a matrix ⃖⃗J(r) ≡⃖⃗Γ(r, r; 0). It readily follows from Eq. (2.14) that
[5, Section 10.9.1]
⃖⃗J(r) ≡[Jij(r)] ≡[⟨E∗
i (r; t)Ej(r, t)⟩] ,
i = x, y,
j = x, y.
(2.54)
The elements of ⃖⃗J(r) are equal-time correlation functions of statistically stationary
field components and, therefore, have no temporal dependence. This matrix, ⃖⃗J(r),
is often called the coherency matrix. The coherency matrix can characterize the
polarization properties of light at a point in space, in the time domain. All the Stoke’s
parameters can be expressed in terms of its elements [5, Section 10.9.3].
Suppose that the beam passes through a compensator, followed by a polarizer
(see Fig. 2.6). The axis of the polarizer makes an angle, 𝜃, say, with a chosen x-
direction, so that the electric field vector after passing through the polarizer becomes
linearly polarized along a direction making an angle 𝜃with the positive x-axis.
The compensator introduces phase delays 𝜖1 and 𝜖2 in the x and the y compo-
nents of the electric field, respectively. The average intensity of the light emerg-
ing from the polarizer, apart from a constant factor, is given by the expression [5,
Section 10.9.1]
I(𝜃, 𝜖) = Jxx cos2 𝜃+ Jyy sin2 𝜃+ 2
√
Jxx
√
Jyy cos 𝜃sin 𝜃|jxy| cos(𝛽xy −𝜖),
(2.55)
where jxy = Jxy∕√JxxJyy, 𝜖= 𝜖2 −𝜖1, 𝛽xy is the argument of jxy, and dependence on r
is suppressed for brevity. With the help of this intensity law, it is possible to determine

POLARIZATION PROPERTIES OF STOCHASTIC BEAMS
45
the elements of the coherency matrix [5, Section 10.9.1], viz.,
Jxx = I(0, 0),
(2.56a)
Jyy = I(𝜋∕2, 0),
(2.56b)
Jxy = 1
2
[I(𝜋∕4, 0) −I(3𝜋∕4, 0)] + i
2
[I(𝜋∕4, 𝜋∕2) −I(3𝜋∕4, 𝜋∕2)] ,
(2.56c)
Jyx = 1
2
[I(𝜋∕4, 0) −I(3𝜋∕4, 0)] −i
2
[I(𝜋∕4, 𝜋∕2) −I(3𝜋∕4, 𝜋∕2)] .
(2.56d)
2.5.2
Unpolarized, Polarized, and Partially Polarized Light Beam
If a light beam is unpolarized, the intensity of the light emerging from the polarizer
(Fig. 2.6) must be independent of 𝜃and 𝜖. From Eq. (2.55), it follows that this will
be the case if |jxy| = 0 and Jxx = Jyy. Clearly, the coherency matrix of an unpolarized
beam has the form [5, Section 10.9.1]
⃖⃗J(u)(r) = J(u)
xx (r)
(
1
0
0
1
)
.
(2.57)
In the other extreme case when |jxy| = 1, the light is completely polarized. One
can show that the elements of the corresponding coherency matrix factorize in the
form [5, Section 10.9.1]
J(p)
ij (r) = ∗
i (r)j(r),
(i = x, y; j = x, y),
(2.58)
where i(r) is a time-independent deterministic function of position. One can notice
that the coherency matrix of a polarized beam is identical with that of a monochro-
matic electric field E(r; t) = i(r)e−i𝜔t. However, a polarized light beam must not
be confused with a monochromatic beam. A light beam of any bandwidth becomes
polarized after passing through a polarizer. It can also be shown that if a light beam is
filtered to become very narrowband, its degree of polarization might not be equal to
unity [58]. We elaborate this point later in Section 2.5.4. Any optical beam, which is
neither unpolarized nor polarized, is said to be partially polarized. In other words, its
coherency matrix cannot be expressed either in the form (2.57) or in the form (2.58).
However, such a coherency matrix can always be uniquely decomposed into the sum
of two matrices, one representing an unpolarized field and the other representing a
polarized one [5, Section 10.9.2], that is,
⃖⃗J(r) = ⃖⃗J(u)(r) + ⃖⃗J(p)(r).
(2.59)
Consequently, the average intensity [I(r) ≡tr⃖⃗J(r)] of any light beam, at a point, has
contributions from a completely unpolarized part and from a completely polarized

46
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
part. The degree of polarization12, at a point r, is defined as the ratio of the average
intensity of the polarized part to the total average intensity at that point [57]. It is
given by the expression13 [5, Section 10.9.2]
(r) ≡I(p)(r)
I(r)
=
√
1 −4Det⃖⃗J(r)
[tr⃖⃗J(r)]2 ,
(2.60)
where Det denotes the determinant. It is evident that the degree of polarization is
always bounded between zero and unity, that is,
0 ≤(r) ≤1.
(2.61)
It can be readily checked by the use of Eqs. (2.57) and (2.60) that if the light
is unpolarized at a point r, the degree of polarization (r) = 0. Similarly from
Eqs. (2.58) and (2.60), it follows that the condition, (r) = 1, implies complete
polarization at the point r.
2.5.3
Statistical Similarity and Complete Polarization
It was pointed out in Section 2.2.2 that the complete spatial coherence can be viewed as
the statistical similarity between fluctuating fields at a pair of points. Analogously, one
can show that the statistical similarity between two mutually orthogonal components
of the fluctuating transverse electric vector at a certain point, implies that the beam
is completely polarized at that point. It was shown in Reference 25 that if (r) = 1,
the following relation holds and vice versa14:
Ey(r, t) = A(r)Ex(r, t),
(2.62)
where A(r) is a deterministic, generally complex function of position.
Modulus and phase of A(r) are given by the expressions
|A(r)| =
Jyy(r)
Jxx(r),
arg {A(r)} = arg {Jxy(r)} .
(2.63)
Equation (2.62) has an important physical significance. It implies that complete
polarization at a point in the beam is achieved if and only if the two mutually
orthogonal components of the random electric vector, at that point, fluctuate in unison.
Figure 2.7 illustrates the statistical similarity between two mutually orthogonal field
components.
12If the optical field is not beam-like, it is quite challenging to provide an appropriate definition of the
degree of polarization. Several definitions have been proposed by different research groups (see, for
example, [59–63]; see also [64]).
13In the Poincar´e sphere representation, (r) represents the distance between the center of the sphere and
the point representing the state of polarization.
14Analogous relations can also be obtained for complete polarization in the space-frequency domain
[65,66].

POLARIZATION PROPERTIES OF STOCHASTIC BEAMS
47
FIGURE 2.7
Illustrating statistical similarity between two randomly fluctuating orthogonal
field components at a point r. The temporal dependence of the field components is identical
except a multiplicative factor.
It is clear that the concept of statistical similarity elucidates both complete spatial
coherence and complete polarization. However, a difference should be noted between
the two. In case of complete spatial coherence, one is allowed to accommodate
a constant time difference, 𝜏0, in the statistical similarity relations (see Eq. 2.21
and Fig. 2.2). But in the case of complete polarization no time difference can be
accommodated in the statistical similarity relation (see Eq. 2.62 and Fig. 2.7).
2.5.4
Polarization Properties of Light in the Frequency Domain
The theory of optical polarization can also be formulated in the space-frequency
domain (see, for example, [12, Section 9.2]). The central quantity in that formulation
is the equal-point CSD matrix15⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔). We refer to the matrix ⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔) as the
spectral polarization matrix (SP matrix). Following a procedure similar to that dis-
cussed in Section 2.5.2, one can obtain general forms of the SP Matrix for unpolarized
and polarized light beams. It can be shown that if a light beam is unpolarized, at a
frequency 𝜔, its SP matrix has the form
⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(u)(r, r; 𝜔) = W(u)
xx (r, r; 𝜔)
(
1
0
0
1
)
.
(2.64)
Similarly one can also show that each element of the SP matrix of a completely
polarized beam can be factorized in the form
W(p)
ij (r, r; 𝜔) = E ∗
i (r; 𝜔)Ej(r; 𝜔),
(i = x, y; j = x, y),
(2.65)
where Ei(r; 𝜔) is not a random quantity.
15See Eqs. (2.31) and (2.32) for definition of the CSD matrix.

48
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
FIGURE 2.8
An optical beam passing through a narrowband filter (adapted from Reference
58).
It can be proved that the SP matrix of a partially polarized beam, at a point r, can
always be uniquely decomposed into a polarized and an unpolarized parts, that is,
⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔) = ⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(u)(r, r; 𝜔) + ⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(p)(r, r; 𝜔).
(2.66)
The spectral degree of polarization (the degree of polarization at a frequency 𝜔) may
be introduced in a manner similar to that used in the space-time domain analysis. It
is given by the expression [12, Section 9.2]
P(r; 𝜔) ≡
√
1 −4Det⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔)
[tr⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔)]2 .
(2.67)
We now discuss the physical significance of the spectral degree of polarization.
Suppose that a statistically stationary electromagnetic beam of arbitrary bandwidth
propagates along the positive z-direction. Suppose further that this beam passes
through a linear filter (see Fig. 2.8) and becomes narrowband, with mean frequency
𝜔0. We assume that the effective bandwidth Δ𝜔of the filtered beam is small compared
to its mean frequency 𝜔0, that is, Δ𝜔∕𝜔0 ≪1.
Let
⃖⃗T(𝜔0)(r; 𝜔) =
(
T(𝜔0)
xx
(r; 𝜔)
T(𝜔0)
xy
(r; 𝜔)
T(𝜔0)
yx
(r; 𝜔)
T(𝜔0)
yy
(r; 𝜔)
)
(2.68)
be the transmission matrix of the filter. Such a transformation matrix is generally
called a Jones matrix (see, for example, [67, Chap. 9]. Representing the field vec-
tors by column matrices, one can show that each member of the ensemble of the
monochromatic realizations of the electric field of the transmitted beam is given by
the expression
E(𝜔0)(r; 𝜔) = ⃖⃗T(𝜔0)(r; 𝜔)◦E(r; 𝜔),
(2.69)

POLARIZATION PROPERTIES OF STOCHASTIC BEAMS
49
where the superscript 𝜔0 indicates that the beam is filtered around that frequency
and the product on the right-hand side represents matrix multiplication. By the use of
Eqs. (2.32) and (2.69), the CSD matrix of the narrowband beam emerging from the
filter can be shown to be given by the formula [68]
⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(𝜔0)(r1, r2; 𝜔) = ⃖⃗T(𝜔0)†(r1; 𝜔)◦⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2, 𝜔)◦⃖⃗T(𝜔0)(r2; 𝜔).
(2.70)
On using Eqs. (2.31b) and (2.70), the elements of the MC matrix of the filtered
narrowband beam are found to be given by
Γ(𝜔0)
ij
(r1, r2; 𝜏) =
∑
k
∑
l ∫
∞
0
T(𝜔0)∗
ik
(r1; 𝜔)T(𝜔0)
jl
(r2; 𝜔)Wkl(r1, r2; 𝜔) exp [−i𝜔𝜏] d𝜔.
(2.71)
Because of the assumption that Δ𝜔∕𝜔0 ≪1, the quantity Wkl(r1, r2; 𝜔) does not
change appreciably as function of frequency 𝜔over the narrow bandwidth 𝜔0 −
Δ𝜔∕2 ≤𝜔≤𝜔0 + Δ𝜔∕2, and so is approximately equal to Wkl(r1, r2; 𝜔0). From
Eq. (2.71) it then follows that
Γ(𝜔0)
ij
(r1, r2; 𝜏) ≈
∑
k
∑
l
Wkl(r1, r2; 𝜔0)
∫
𝜔0+Δ𝜔∕2
𝜔0−Δ𝜔∕2
T(𝜔0)∗
ik
(r1; 𝜔)T(𝜔0)
jl
(r2; 𝜔) exp [−i𝜔𝜏] d𝜔.
(2.72)
If one assumes that the filter is homogeneous and isotropic, the elements of the
transmission matrix are of the form
T(𝜔0)
ij
(r; 𝜔) = T(𝜔0)(𝜔)𝛿ij,
(2.73)
where 𝛿ij is the Kronecker symbol. From Eqs. (2.72) and (2.73), one then has
Γ(𝜔0)
ij
(r, r; 0) ≈Wij(r, r; 𝜔0) ∫
𝜔0+Δ𝜔∕2
𝜔0−Δ𝜔∕2
|T(𝜔0)(𝜔)|2d𝜔.
(2.74)
Using Eqs. (2.60), (2.67), and (2.74) we see at once that
(𝜔0)(r) ≈P(r; 𝜔0),
(2.75)
where (𝜔0)(r) denotes the degree of polarization in the space-time domain of the
narrowband beam of mean frequency 𝜔0. Equation (2.75) implies that if a statistically
stationary electromagnetic beam of arbitrary bandwidth is filtered to become narrow-
band of mean frequency 𝜔0, the space-time degree of polarization of the filtered beam
is equal to the spectral degree of polarization at the frequency 𝜔0.

50
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
Equation (2.75) also implies that even if a stochastic light beam is filtered to a
very narrow frequency range, its degree of polarization may not be equal to unity; its
value would depend on the spectral polarization properties of the original beam. On
the other hand, a monochromatic deterministic field is always completely polarized
[5, Section 1.4.2], that is, its degree of polarization is unity at every point. Thus
from Eq. (2.75) one may conclude that, as regards the polarization properties, a
narrowband electromagnetic beam cannot, in general, be approximated by the usual
monochromatic model [58].
2.5.5
Remarks on Polarization Properties of Light in Time and Frequency
Domains
It is clear from the discussion of Section 2.5.4 that the spectral degree of polarization,
P(r; 𝜔), characterizes polarization properties of the beam at a frequency 𝜔. However,
when all frequencies present in the spectrum are taken into account, the space-time
degree of polarization, (r), represents the polarization properties of the beam. Since
the spectrum of an optical field is always distributed over a finite non-zero frequency
range, it is reasonable to ask whether a beam can exhibit different polarization prop-
erties at different frequencies present in its spectrum. By investigating the connection
between (r) and P(r; 𝜔) in further detail, one can show that the answer to this
question is affirmative [69,70].
The space-time degree of polarization (r) is obtained from the coherency matrix
[⃖⃗J(r) = ⃖⃗Γ(r, r; 0)], which does not depend on time delay 𝜏. On the other hand, the
spectral degree of polarization P(r; 𝜔) is obtained from the SP matrix ⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔),
which is the Fourier transform of ⃖⃗Γ(r, r; 𝜏). One may, therefore, expect that the formu-
las (2.60) and (2.67) do not provide the same information as regards the polarization
properties of a beam. It can be established that even if a beam is spectrally polar-
ized at a point and at every frequency, its space-time degree of polarization may
not be unity at that point [70]. It can also be shown that P(r; 𝜔) may vary with
frequency 𝜔and, therefore, may not be equal to (r) [70, 71]. However, P(r; 𝜔)
would be independent of 𝜔and would be equal to (r) if the following conditions
hold [71]:
Sx(r; 𝜔)
Ix(r)
=
Sy(r; 𝜔)
Iy(r) , ∀𝜔,
(2.76a)
wxy(r, r; 𝜔) = jxy(r), ∀𝜔,
(2.76b)
where
Sx(r; 𝜔) = Wxx(r, r; 𝜔),
Sy(r; 𝜔) = Wyy(r, r; 𝜔),
wxy(r; 𝜔) = Wxy(r, r; 𝜔)∕
√Sx(r; 𝜔)Sy(r; 𝜔), and jxy(r) = Jxy(r)∕√Jxx(r)Jyy(r). Equation (2.76a) implies that
the normalized spectral densities associated with the x and the y components of the
field, at a point r, are equal to each other for all frequencies present in the spectrum.
Equation (2.76b) implies that the normalized space-frequency correlation function
of the two mutually orthogonal transverse field components is always equal to the
normalized space-time correlation function of the field components.

REMARKS ON PARTIALLY COHERENT AND PARTIALLY POLARIZED BEAMS
51
2.6
REMARKS ON PARTIALLY COHERENT AND PARTIALLY
POLARIZED BEAMS
It has been mentioned in the beginning of Section 2.5 that polarization properties of
a beam can also be analyzed by employing the Stokes–Poincar´e formulation. This
formulation does not require explicit use of correlation functions of optical field
components. Since polarization properties of light have been traditionally studied by
the use of this formulation, the importance of statistical fluctuations in the theory
of optical polarization has not been properly emphasized for quite some time. The
Wiener–Wolf matrix formulation shows that the polarization property of a light beam
can be viewed as manifestation of field correlations and thus opens up the possibility
of investigating the connection between the coherence and the polarization properties
of light.
We have seen that polarization properties of light beams are usually characterized
by correlation matrices which depend on a single point, r, in space. For example,
the spectral polarization properties are described by the SP matrix ⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔) that
is obtained from the CSD matrix, ⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔), by setting r1 = r2 ≡r. Elements of
⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r1, r2; 𝜔), which are functions of two points in space, obey definite propagation
laws [see Eq. (2.33)]. However, it is not possible to obtain any such propagation
equation for the elements of the SP matrix. This implies that if the SP matrix,
⃖⃖⃖⃗
W(r, r; 𝜔), is specified at every point at a secondary source plane, it is, in general, not
possible to determine the SP matrix at an arbitrary point in the beam. However, if the
CSD matrix is specified at every pair of points in a secondary source plane, the SP
matrix can be determined at any point in the beam. It is thus clear that although the
degree of polarization is defined at a single point, knowledge of two-point correlation
functions is required for having a deeper insight into the polarization properties of a
beam.
Inclusion of the two-point CSD matrix in the theory of optical polarization leads
to some interesting observations. The most notable one is probably the discovery
that the state of polarization of a beam can change on propagation even through
free space [72]. Furthermore, it has been recently shown that unlike the elements of
the SP matrix, the elements of the CSD matrix cannot, in general, be expressed in
factorized form [73,74]. Similarly, although the SP matrix of an unpolarized beam is
proportional to unit matrix, the CSD matrix is, in general, not so [75]. It is also not
possible to decompose the CSD matrix of a partially polarized beam into a polarized
and an unpolarized parts, whereas it is possible for the SP matrix [76].
Since elements of two-point correlation matrices can also characterize the spatial
coherence of a beam, it gives an indication that spatial coherence and polarization
might be related to each other. In fact, many years ago, Wolf called for a unified
treatment of the theories of partial coherence and partial polarization [77]. Later
it was shown that a two-point correlation matrix can be used to study both spatial
coherence and polarization of a quasi-monochromatic light beam [78,79]. Not long
ago, Wolf proposed a unified theory of coherence and polarization of optical beams
in the space-frequency domain [80]. The essence of the unified theory lies in the fact

52
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
that if the CSD matrix is known at a cross-section of a beam, its spatial coherence
and polarization properties can be determined at all cross-sections. This theory also
reveals that the propagation law of CSD matrix governs the changes in spectrum,
state of coherence and state of polarization of a beam on propagation [81].
Investigation of physical phenomena involving partially coherent and partially
polarized optical beams is an active field of research. It has not only led to many
interesting results, but also has opened up new research directions. Recently, it has
been revealed that some mathematical techniques, which are applied to study quantum
entanglement, can also be used in the field of optical coherence and polarization (see,
for example, [82,83]).
2.7
BASICS OF QUANTUM THEORY OF OPTICAL COHERENCE
The classical theory of statistical optics does not take into account the effects of
measurements. It is, therefore, not useful to analyze certain types of problems, espe-
cially the ones, which are related to the detection of single or few light quanta. Such
problems can be dealt in the framework of the quantum theory of light. Studies in this
subject began with Dirac’s quantization of electromagnetic fields [84]. Later Glauber
introduced the quantum theory of statistical optics [21,22]. The subject, being quite
vast and important, requires to be dealt in detail with proper attention. The readers
are encouraged to read References 8 and 22 for further details. In this section, we
briefly discuss the basics of quantum theory of optical coherence to show how some
of the concepts introduced in the classical coherence theory can be incorporated into
the quantum mechanical version of the theory.
It is well known that in quantum theory any measurable quantity is associated with
a Hermitian operator. The Hermitian operator representing a quantized electric field
may be expressed in the form16 [8, Section 10.4.5]
̂E(r, t) = i
∑
k
∑
s
(1
2ℏ𝜔
) 1
2 [
̂ak,sCk,s𝝐k,sei(k⋅r−𝜔t) −̂a†
k,sC∗
k,s𝝐∗
k,se−i(k⋅r−𝜔t)]
,
(2.77)
where the wave vectors k labels plane wave modes, |k| = k = 𝜔∕c, Ck,s is a constant,
and 𝝐k,s (s = 1, 2) are mutually orthonormal base vectors obeying the conditions17
k ⋅𝝐k,s = 0,
𝝐∗
k,s ⋅𝝐k,s′ = 𝛿ss′,
𝝐k,1 × 𝝐k,2 = k∕k.
(2.78)
16Here the field is expanded in discrete modes. Such a representation is useful and appropriate in many
cases, for example, when treating an electric field inside a cavity. In more general situations, a continuous
mode representation may be employed (see [8, Section 10.10]).
17The unit base vectors 𝝐k1, 𝝐k2 may be chosen to be complex for general expansion of the field, for
example, for resolving the field into two orthogonal components of elliptic polarization.

BASICS OF QUANTUM THEORY OF OPTICAL COHERENCE
53
In the expansion (2.77), ̂ak,s and ̂a†
k,s are the photon annihilation and the photon
creation operators, respectively, for the mode labeled by k and s. These operators
obey the well-known commutation relations (see, e.g., [8, Section 10.3])
[̂ak,s,̂a†
k′,s′] = 𝛿3
kk′𝛿ss′,
[̂ak,s,̂ak′,s′] = 0,
[̂a†
k,s,̂a†
k′,s′] = 0,
(2.79)
where 𝛿ij is the Kronecker symbol. It is evident from Eq. (2.77) that the electric field
operator consists of a positive frequency part
̂E(+)(r, t) = i
∑
k
∑
s
(1
2ℏ𝜔
) 1
2 ̂ak,sCk,s𝝐k,sei(k⋅r−𝜔t)
(2.80)
and a negative frequency part ̂E(−)(r, t), where ̂E(−)(r; t) = {̂E(+)(r; t)}†.
The positive and the negative frequency parts of the field operator ̂E(r; t) may be
introduced in an alternative manner. Let us represent ̂E(r; t) as a Fourier integral18
̂E(r; t) = ∫
∞
−∞
̂e(r; 𝜔)e−i𝜔td𝜔.
(2.81)
Using the Hermitian property of ̂E(r; t), one readily finds that ̂e†(r; 𝜔) = ̂e(r; −𝜔).
One can now express Eq. (2.81) in the form
̂E(r; t) = ∫
∞
0
̂e(r; 𝜔)e−i𝜔td𝜔+ ∫
∞
0
̂e(r; −𝜔)ei𝜔td𝜔.
(2.82)
The first terms on the right is the positive frequency part ̂E(+)(r; t) of the electric
field operator and the second terms is the negative frequency part ̂E(−)(r; t) of the
field operator. One can notice that Eq. (2.82) is analogous to Eq. (2.1). Clearly, the
classical analogue of ̂E(+)(r; t) is the complex analytic signal of a real electric field.
However, the operator ̂E(+)(r; t), which consists of photon annihilation operators, has
deeper physical significance than its classical counterpart.
The state of the field may be characterized by a state vector |i⟩in the Fock space
or, more generally, by a density operator19 ̂𝜌= {⟨i| |i⟩}average, where the average is
18In absence of a Fourier integral, the positive and negative frequency parts of the field may be represented
by the formulas [21]
̂E(+)(r; t) = lim
𝜂→0+
1
2𝜋i ∫
∞
−∞
̂E(r, t −𝜏)
𝜏−i𝜂
d𝜏,
̂E(−)(r; t) = −lim
𝜂→0+
1
2𝜋i ∫
∞
−∞
̂E(r, t −𝜏)
𝜏+ i𝜂
d𝜏.
19For a discussion on density operator, see Reference 85.

54
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
taken over an appropriate ensemble. The expectation value ⟨̂O⟩of any operator ̂O is
defined, in the usual way, as
⟨
̂O
⟩
= tr
{
̂𝜌̂O
}
= tr
{
̂Ô𝜌
}
.
(2.83)
Let us now consider detection of a photon by a photo-detector at a space-time point
(r, t). We assume the photo-detector to be ideal in the sense that it is of negligible
size and has a frequency-independent photo absorbtion probability. Suppose that due
to the detection of a photon the field goes from the initial state |i⟩to the final state
|f⟩. Since, in the quantum mechanical interpretation, a photon can be detected only
by annihilating (absorbing) it, the probability associated with this process is given by
|||⟨f| ̂E(+)(r; t) |i⟩|||
2. The counting rate in the detector is obtained by summing over all
the final states, which can be reached from |i⟩by absorption of a photon. Because
the states that cannot be reached in this process do not contribute to the result, one
can extend the summation over a complete set of final states. The counting rate of the
detector then becomes proportional to
∑
f
|||⟨f| ̂E(+)(r; t) |i⟩|||
2 = ⟨i| ̂E(−)(r; t) ⋅̂E(+)(r; t) |i⟩,
(2.84)
where the dot (⋅) denotes scalar product. If one considers the random fluctuations
associated with light, that is, if one allows the possibility of having a statistical
ensemble of initial states |i⟩, one leads to a more general expression involving the
density operator. The average counting rate of a photo-detector placed at a position r
at time t then becomes proportional to
R(r; t) ≡tr
{
̂𝜌̂E(−)(r; t) ⋅̂E(+)(r; t)
}
=
⟨
̂E(−)(r; t) ⋅̂E(+)(r; t)
⟩
.
(2.85)
The classical counterpart of R(r; t) is the average intensity discussed earlier.
The first(lowest)-order correlation properties of light may be specified by a 3 × 3
correlation matrix [21]
⃖⃖⃗G(1)(r, t; r′, t′) ≡
[
G(1)
𝜇𝜈(r, t; r′, t′)
]
≡
[
tr
{
̂𝜌̂E(−)
𝜇(r, t)̂E(+)
𝜈(r′, t′)
}]
,
(2.86)
where 𝜇, 𝜈label the mutually orthogonal components of the electric field operator.
It is important to note that ̂E(−)(r; t) and ̂E(+)(r; t) do not commute with each other.
The order in which they appear in Eqs. (2.85) and (2.86) must, therefore, be strictly
maintained.
For the sake of simplicity, let us neglect the polarization properties of the light.
In this case, with a suitable choice of axes, only one element G(1)
𝜇𝜇(r, t; r′, t′) (no

CONCLUDING REMARKS
55
summation over repeated indices) of ⃖⃖⃗G(1)(r, t; r′, t′) would completely characterize
the first-order correlation properties of the field in the space-time domain. We omit
the suffix 𝜇and write
G(1)(r, t; r′, t′) = tr
{
̂𝜌̂E(−)(r; t)̂E(+)(r′; t′)
}
.
(2.87)
The first-order coherence properties of light, in the space-time domain, are character-
ized by the correlation function ⃖⃖⃗G(1)(r, t; r′, t′). One can define the first-order degree
of coherence by the formula [21]
g(1)(r, t; r′, t′) ≡
G(1)(r, t; r′, t′)
√
G(1)(r; t; r; t)
√
G(1)(r′; t′; r′; t′)
.
(2.88)
The modulus of g(1)(r, t; r′, t′) may be shown to be bounded by zero and unity [21],
that is,
0 ≤|g(1)(r, t; r′, t′)| ≤1.
(2.89)
It can be shown that this quantity is related to fringe visibility in interference exper-
iments (see, e.g., [22, Section 2.7.2]). Complete first-order coherence is character-
ized by the condition |g(1)(r, t; r′, t′)| = 1, and complete first-order incoherence by
g(1)(r, t; r′, t′) = 0. Although Eq. (2.88) looks similar to Eq. (2.11), one must appre-
ciate the fact that the quantum mechanical formulation is much more effective as one
goes to a low-intensity range where one needs to consider the effects of absorption
or emission of one or few numbers of photons.
2.8
CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have discussed the classical theory of optical coherence both in the space-time
and the space-frequency domains. We have shown how coherence properties of
light can be used in inverse-scattering problems to determine structures of random
media. There are, of course, many other applications of the coherence theory in
imaging science, for example, in microscopy and tomography. The space-frequency
formulation of the theory is often used to study the change of correlation properties
of light on propagation and on scattering. These studies led to the discovery of some
interesting physical phenomena. Two examples of such phenomena are correlation-
induced spectral changes on propagation [31] and on scattering [86]. Recently, it
has also been shown that coherence properties of light can change on refraction and
on reflection at a planar interface separating two media [87] and furthermore on
propagation through a stratified medium [88].
We have provided a brief discussion of the quantum theory of optical coherence
in the space-time domain. Although not included in this chapter, the theory can also
be formulated in the space-frequency domain [89].

56
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
We have also given an overview of the classical theory of optical polarization.
Although we have not discussed the quantum theory of optical polarization, a notice-
able amount of work has been done on this subject. The quantum mechanical oper-
ators for the classical Stokes parameters have been introduced by Fano [90]. Some
implications of quantum theory on polarization properties of light have been briefly
discussed by Glauber [21]. Further work on nonclassical optical polarization has also
been done by Luis [91, 92] . Recently, the Wiener–Wolf formulation of the theory
of optical polarization has been explored in the quantum domain [93]. Polarization
properties of light generated by superposition in a single-photon interference experi-
ment have also been analyzed; the analysis reveals that wave–particle duality can play
an important role in determining the polarization properties of the light generated by
superposition [94].
Coherence and statistical optics is an important branch of optics. In this chapter, we
have restricted ourselves to the lowest order correlation properties of light. However,
optical phenomena involving higher order correlation functions are also important
topics of research both in classical and quantum optics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Professor Emil Wolf for many helpful discussions. This work was
carried out during the author’s stay at the Department of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Rochester, NY, USA and was supported by the US Air Force Office of
Scientific Research under grant No. FA9550-12-1-0284.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Young, “An account of some cases of the production of colours, not hitherto described,”
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 92, 387 (1802).
[2] F. Zernike, “The concept of degree of coherence and its application and its application to
optical problems,” Physica 5, 785 (1938).
[3] E. T. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity: From the Age of
Descartes to the Close of the Nineteenth Century (Longmans, Green, and Co., London,
1910).
[4] E. T. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, Vol. 2: The Modern
Theories, 1900-1926 (Harper, 1960).
[5] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, 7th ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1999).
[6] E. Wolf, “The influence of Young’s interference experiment on the development of
statistical optics,” Prog. Opt. 50, 251 (2007).
[7] C. Brosseau, “Polarization and coherence optics: historical perspective, status, and future
directions,” Prog. Opt. 54, 149 (2010).
[8] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1995).

REFERENCES
57
[9] D. Gabor, “Theory of communication”, J. Inst. Elec. Eng. (London) 93, Pt. III, 429
(1946).
[10] N. Wiener, “Generalized harmonic analysis”, Acta Math. 55, 117 (1930).
[11] E. Wolf, “A macroscopic theory of interference and diffraction of light from finite sources
II. Fields with a spectral range of arbitrary width,” Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 230, 246
(1955).
[12] E. Wolf, Introduction to the Theory of Coherence and Polarization of Light (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2007).
[13] B. Karczewski, “Coherence theory of the electromagnetic field,” Nuovo Cimento 30, 906
(1963).
[14] J. Tervo, T. Set¨al¨a, and A. T. Friberg, “Degree of coherence for electromagnetic fields,”
Opt. Exp. 11, 1137 (2003).
[15] T. Set¨al¨a, J. Tervo, and A. T. Friberg, “Complete electromagnetic coherence in the space-
frequency domain,” Opt. Lett. 29, 328 (2004).
[16] E. Wolf, “Comment on complete electromagnetic coherence in the space-frequency
domain,” Opt. Lett. 29, 1712 (2004).
[17] T. Set¨al¨a, J. Tervo, and A. T. Friberg, “Reply to comment on complete electromagnetic
coherence in the space-frequency domain,” Opt. Lett. 29, 1713 (2004).
[18] P. R´efr´egier, “Mutual information-based degrees of coherence of partially polarized light
with Gaussian fluctuations,” Opt. Lett. 30, 3117 (2005).
[19] P. R´efr´egier and F. Goudail “Invariant degrees of coherence of partially polarized light,”
Opt. Exp. 13, 6051 (2005).
[20] A. Luis, “Degree of coherence for vectorial electromagnetic fields as the distance between
correlation matrices,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 24, 1063 (2007)
[21] R. J. Glauber, “The quantum theory of optical coherence” Phys. Rev. 130, 2529
(1963).
[22] R. J. Glauber, Quantum Theory of Optical Coherence (Selected Papers and Lectures)
(WILEY-VCH Verlag Gmbh & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2007).
[23] E. Verdet, “Etude sur la constitution de la lumiere non polaris´ee et de la lumiere partielle-
ment polaris´ee,” Annales scientifiques de l’E.N.S. 2, 291 (1865).
[24] S. Ponomarenko, H. Roychowdhury, and E. Wolf, “Physical significance of complete
spatial coherence of optical fields,” Phys. Lett. A 345, 10–12 (2005).
[25] H. Roychowdhury and E. Wolf, “Statistical similarity and the physical significance of
complete spatial coherence and complete polarization of random electromagnetic beams”,
Opt. Commun. 248, 327 (2005).
[26] E. Wolf, “Statistical similarity as a unifying concept of the theories of coherence and
polarization of light”, Opt. Commun. 283, 4427 (2010).
[27] E. Wolf, “New spectral representation of random sources and of the partially coherent
fields that they generate”, Opt. Commun. 38, 3 (1981).
[28] E. Wolf, “New theory of partial coherence in the space-frequency domain. Part I: spectra
and cross spectra of steady-state sources,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 72, 343 (1982).
[29] E. Wolf, “New theory of partial coherence in the space-frequency domain. Part II: steady-
state fields and higher-order correlations,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 3, 76 (1986).
[30] E. Wolf, “Invariance of the spectrum of light on propagation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1370
(1986).

58
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
[31] E. Wolf, “Non-cosmological redshifts of spectral lines” Nature 326, 363 (1987).
[32] D. F. V. James and E. Wolf, “Determination of the degree of coherence of light from
spectroscopic measurements”, Opt. Commun. 145, 1 (1998).
[33] H. Roychowdhury and E. Wolf, “Determination of the electric cross-spectral density
matrix of a random electromagnetic beam”, Opt. Commun. 226, 57 (2003).
[34] B. Kanseri and H. Kandpal, “Experimental determination of electric cross-spectral den-
sity matrix and generalized Stokes parameters for a laser beam,” Opt. Lett. 33, 2410
(2010).
[35] M. lahiri and E. Wolf, “Implications of complete coherence in the space-frequency
domain,” Opt. Lett. 36, 2423 (2011).
[36] W. P. Alford and A. Gold, “Laboratory measurement of the velocity of light,” Amer. J.
Phys. 56, 481 (1957).
[37] M. P. Givens, “Photoelectric detection of interference between two Light beams having
a large path difference,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 51, 1030 (1961).
[38] L. Mandel, “Interference and the Alford and Gold effect,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 52, 1335
(1962).
[39] L. Mandel, “Spectral coherence and the concept of cross-spectral purity,” J. Opt. Soc.
Am. 51, 1342 (1961).
[40] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, “Concept of cross-spectral purity in coherence theory,” J. Opt.
Soc. Am. 66, 529 (1976).
[41] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Relationship between complete coherence in the space-time and
in the space-frequency domains,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 063901 (2010).
[42] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Statistical similarity and cross-spectral purity of stationary
stochastic fields,” Opt. Lett. 37, 963 (2012).
[43] W. Friedrich, P. Knipping, and M. von Laue, Sitzungsberichte d. Bayer (Akademie der
Wissenschaften, 1912), p. 303.
[44] W. H. Bragg, “X rays and crystals,” Nature 90, 219 (1912).
[45] W. L. Bragg, “The specular reflection of X rays,” Nature 90, 410 (1912).
[46] W. L. Bragg, “The diffraction of short electromagnetic waves by a crystal,” Proc. Camb.
Phil. Soc. 17, 43 (1913).
[47] P. P. Ewald, “Zur Theorie der Interferenzen der R¨ontgenstrahlen in Kristallen,” Phys.
Zeit. 14, 465 (1913).
[48] P. P. Ewald, “Das “reziproke Gitter” in der Strukturtheorie,” Zeit. f. Krist. 56, 129 (1921).
[49] G. E. Bacon, X-ray and Neutron Diffraction (Pergamon Press, 1966).
[50] A. Ishimaru, Wave Propagation and Scattering in Random Media (Academic Press, New
York, 1978), Vols. 1 and 2.
[51] M. Lahiri, E. Wolf, D. G. Fischer, and T. Shirai, “Determination of correlation functions
of scattering potentials of stochastic media from scattering experiments,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
102, 123901 (2009).
[52] G. G. Stokes, “On the composition and resolution of streams of polarized light from
different sources,” Trans. Cambr. Phil. Soc. 9, 399 (1852).
[53] C. Brosseau, Fundamentals of Polarized Light: A Statistical Optics Approach (Wiley,
1995).
[54] E. Collett, Polarized Light : Fundamentals and Applications (Marcel Dekker, New York,
1993).

REFERENCES
59
[55] H. Poincar´e, Th´eorie Math´ematique de la Lumi`ere: Vol. 2 (Georges Carr´e, Paris, 1892).
[56] N. Wiener, “Coherency matrices and quantum theory”, J. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 7, 109
(1927–1928).
[57] E. Wolf, “Coherence properties of partially polarized electromagnetic radiation”, Nuovo
Cimento 13, 1165 (1959).
[58] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Does a light beam of very narrow bandwidth always behave as
a monochromatic beam?” Phys. Lett. A 374, 997 (2010).
[59] T. Set¨al¨a, A. Shevchenko, M. Kaivola, and A. T. Friberg, “Degree of polarization for
optical near fields,” Phys. Rev. E 66, 016615 (2002).
[60] J. Ellis, A. Dogariu, S. Ponomarenko, and E. Wolf, “Degree of polarization of statistically
stationary electromagnetic fields,” Opt. Commun. 248, 333–337 (2005).
[61] A. Luis, “Degree of polarization for three-dimensional fields as a distance between
correlation matrices,” Opt. Commun. 253, 10–14 (2005).
[62] M. R. Dennis, “A three-dimensional degree of polarization based on Rayleigh scattering,”
J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 24, 2065 (2007).
[63] X.-F. Qian and J. H. Eberly, “Entanglement and classical polarization states,” Opt. Lett.
36, 4110 (2011).
[64] C. Brosseau and A. Dogariu, “Symmetry properties and polarization descriptors for an
arbitrary electromagnetic wavefield,” Prog. Opt. 49, 315 (2006).
[65] M. Lahiri, “Contributions to the Theories of Coherence and Polarization of Light,”
Doctoral thesis, University of Rochester, (2012).
[66] J. Chen, Y. Chen, F. Chen, Y. Xin, Y. Wang, Q. Zhao, and M. Zhou, “Physical significance
of complete coherence and complete polarization of random electromagnetic beams in
the space-frequency domain,” Opt. Las. Tech. 47, 174 (2013).
[67] E. L. O’Neill, Introduction to Statistical Optics (Addison-Wesley Publication Company,
Inc., 1963)
[68] O. Korotkova and E. Wolf, “Effects of linear non-image-forming devices on spectra
and on coherence and polarization properties of stochastic electromagnetic beams: part-I
General theory,” J. Mod. Opt. 52, 2659 (2005).
[69] M. Lahiri, “Polarization properties of stochastic light beams in the space-time and space-
frequency domains,” Opt. Lett. 34, 2936 (2009).
[70] T. Set¨al¨a, F. Nunziata, and A. T. Friberg, “Differences between partial polarizations in
the space-time and space-frequency domains,” Opt. Lett. 34, 2924 (2009).
[71] M. Lahiri, “Concept of purity in the theory of optical polarization,” Opt. Lett. 38, 866
(2013).
[72] D. F. V. James, “Change in polarization of light beams on propagation in free space,” J.
Opt. Soc. Am. A 11, 1641 (1994).
[73] F. Gori, “Partially correlated sources with complete polarization,” Opt. Lett. 33, 2818–
2820 (2008).
[74] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Cross-spectral density matrix of polarized light beams,” Opt.
Lett. 34, 557 (2009).
[75] F. Gori, J. Tervo, and J. Turunen, “Correlation matrices of completely unpolarized beams,”
Opt. Lett. 34, 1447–1449 (2009).
[76] E. Wolf, “Can a light beam be considered to be the sum of a completely polarized and a
completely unpolarized beam?” Opt. Lett. 33, 642 (2008).

60
COHERENCE AND STATISTICAL OPTICS
[77] E. Wolf, “Optics in terms of observable quantities,” Nuovo Cimento 12, 884 (1954).
[78] F. Gori, “Matrix treatment for partially polarized, partially coherent beams,” Opt. Lett.
23, 241 (1998).
[79] F. Gori, M. Santarsiero, S. Vicalvi, R. Borghi, and G. Guattari, “Beam coherence-
polarization matrix,” Pure Appl. Opt. 7, 941 (1998).
[80] E. Wolf, “Unified theory of coherence and polarization of random electromagnetic
beams,” Phys. Lett. A 312, 263 (2003).
[81] E. Wolf, “Correlation-induced changes in the degree of polarization, the degree of coher-
ence, and the spectrum of random electromagnetic beams on propagation” Opt. Lett. 28,
1078 (2003).
[82] B. N. Simon, S. Simon, F. Gori, M. Santarsiero, R. Borghi, N. Mukunda, and R. Simon,
“Nonquantum entanglement resolves a basic issue in polarization optics,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
104, 023901 (2010).
[83] K. H. Kagalwala, G. D. Giuseppe, A. F. Abouraddy, and B. E. A. Saleh, “Bell’s measure
in classical optical coherence,” Nat. Phot. 7, 72–78 (2013).
[84] P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed. (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1957).
[85] U. Fano, “Description of states in quantum mechanics by density matrix and operator
techniques,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 74 (1957).
[86] E. Wolf, J. T. Foley, and F. Gori, “Frequency shifts of spectral lines produced by scattering
from spatially random media,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 6, 1142 (1989).
[87] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Theory of refraction and reflection with partially coherent
electromagnetic beams,” Phys. Rev. A 86, 043815 (2012).
[88] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Propagation of electromagnetic beams of any state of spatial
coherence and polarization through multilayered stratified media,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 30,
2547 (2013).
[89] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Quantum theory of optical coherence of non-stationary light in
the space-frequency domain ,” Phys. Rev. A 82, 043837 (2010).
[90] U. Fano, “A Stokes-parameter technique for the treatment of polarization in quantum
mechanics”, Phys. Rev. 93, 121 (1954).
[91] A. Luis, “Degree of polarization in quantum optics,” Phys. Rev. A 66, 013806 (2002).
[92] A. Luis, “Nonclassical polarization states,” Phys. Rev. A 73, 063806 (2006).
[93] M. Lahiri and E. Wolf, “Quantum analysis of polarization properties of optical beams,”
Phys. Rev. A 82, 043805 (2010).
[94] M. Lahiri, “Wave-particle duality and partial polarization of light in single-photon inter-
ference experiments,” Phys. Rev. A 83, 045803 (2011).

3
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY
VARIABLE POLARIZATION
Enrique J. Galvez
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Colgate University, Hamilton, NY, USA
3.1
INTRODUCTION
Polarization optics is a mature field of photonics technology. The fundamentals are
amply treated in countless textbooks and journal articles. Yet, new developments have
come forward that deserve revisiting new treatments and manipulation of polarization
that are opening new research topics and creating new applications. The purpose of
this chapter is to bring attention to emerging aspects of polarization optics that bring
new impetus to established principles and proven technologies.
These new developments are connected to the polarization of optical beams. As
it is well known, the uniform polarization of an optical beam can be understood in
terms of well-characterized states of the electromagnetic field. A modern field of
research and technology involves the study of spatial modes of the electromagnetic
field, which only 20 years ago led to the discovery of orbital angular momentum
[1,2], a form of angular momentum that is encoded in wavefronts that have a helical
shape. There is renewed interest in spatial modes: some old, such as Hermite–Gauss
[3]; some also old but seen in a new light, such as Laguerre–Gauss [4]; and some
novel, such as Bessel– [5], Mathieu– [6], Ince–Gaussian [7], and rediscovered Airy
beams [8]. These are just salient examples, of a vibrant growing collection of beam
studies, known as Complex Light or Structured Light [9].
In parallel with these researches has come the study of the forces that optical beams
can exert on matter, and the applications of these, channeled mainly through a modern
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
61

62
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
device: optical tweezers. Spatial modes and polarization are currently used to exert
forces and torques to trap, manipulate, channel, sort, bind, and spin material particles
of various compositions, sizes, and shapes. Research in complex light has also made
inroads in finding new ways to encode information, both quantum mechanical [10]
and classical [11].
The emergence of multi-modal beams, of combined spatial mode and polarization,
topic of this chapter, has interesting features and applications that are only starting
to be realized. Such multi-modal beams result in optical beams that exhibit trans-
verse modes where the polarization state varies from point to point. It is a class of
beams that had its beginnings in vector beams, with notable cases being radial and
azimuthal vector beams [12], where the mode consists of a field of linearly polar-
ized states pointing either radially outward or perpendicularly to the radial direction,
respectively. Further work has produced more elaborate manifestations, with multi-
modes exhibiting all polarization states, also referred to as full-Poincar´e, or simply
Poincar´e modes, because they contain single or multiple mappings of the Poincar´e
sphere, onto points along the transverse mode of the beam.
This class of beams falls under an interesting new category of optical beams, called
singular beams. These are beams that contain points in their transverse mode where
one or more parameters of the polarization state, or wave attribute, are undefined
or singular. Polarization singularities emerged in theoretical treatments that have
preceded experiments [13–16]. Only recently, different technologies have been able
to produce singular beams of various forms, as is described later in more detail.
In this chapter we will describe their main characteristics framed in terms of state
superpositions, which in itself is a method of production of singular beams.
In the second section we review the formalism of polarization and mode. The third
section covers the methods of production of singular beams, and the fourth section
discusses the studies of polarization singularities.
3.2
POINCAR ´E MODES OF BEAMS
There are two aspects to the discussion presented here. One involves a polarization
component, and the other a spatial mode component. So we divide this section into
three subsections: 3.2.1, to discuss polarization; 3.2.2, to discuss spatial modes; and
3.2.3, to discuss the combined spatial-polarization mode.
3.2.1
States of Polarization
The Poincar´e sphere is the fundamental graphical object to represent the states of
polarization. A unique point on the surface of the sphere represents a pure state
of polarization. Major states are the north and south poIes of the sphere, which
represent the states of right and left circular polarization, respectively. We use the
convention in optics for these states, in which at any given time the electric field of the
light describes a right-handed corkscrew along the propagation direction. Conversely,
when looking into the beam, the electric field rotates clockwise in any plane that is

POINCAR´E MODES OF BEAMS
63
FIGURE 3.1
(a) Poincar´e sphere and (b) states of polarization as a function of the angles
𝜒and 𝜃. Right- and left-handed ellipses are colored red and blue, respectively. (For a color
version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
transverse to the propagation direction [17,18]. Points along the equator of the sphere
are those representing all the orientations of linear polarization, with antipodes having
orthogonal orientations. The northern and southern hemispheres represent points of
right-handed and left-handed elliptical polarization, respectively, with the ratio of the
semiminor to the semimajor axes decreasing when going from a pole to the equator
along a meridian, and with semimajor axis orientation varying when going around
the sphere along a parallel. The Poincar´e sphere is shown in Figure 3.1a.
The sphere is centered at the origin of a set of coordinate axes that is aligned with
three pairs of polarization eigenstates, as shown in Figure 3.1a. The ends of one axis
denote the right- and left-handed circular polarization states by ̂eR and ̂eL, respectively.
A second axis is aligned with the x- and y-linearly polarized states, which we refer
to, respectively, as horizontally and vertically polarized light, and denote respectively
as ̂eH and ̂eV. The third axis is aligned with the linearly polarized states oriented
at 45 degrees to the horizontal axis, defined as diagonal, ̂eD = 2−1∕2(̂eH + ̂eV); and
antidiagonal, ̂eA = 2−1∕2(−̂eH + ̂eV).
We can represent any state of polarization by superpositions of eigenstates. Using
the circular basis, we express it as
̂e = ̂eRei𝜃cos 𝜒+ ̂eLe−i𝜃sin 𝜒.
(3.1)
This notation is convenient for the reasons illustrated in Figure 3.1. The variable 𝜒,
which is half the polar angle of the sphere, determines the ratio of the amplitudes
of the two circular polarization components, and consequently, the ellipticity of the
state of polarization, defined as
𝜖= tan(𝜋∕4 −𝜒) = b
a,
(3.2)
where b and a are the semiminor and semimajor axes of the ellipse, respectively.

64
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
Note a few important consequences: when the two circularly polarized eigenstates
have the same amplitude (i.e., 𝜒= 𝜋∕4), the total polarization is linear; and when
either eigenstate dominates (0 < 𝜒< 𝜋∕4 or 𝜋∕4 < 𝜒< 𝜋∕2), the polarization is
elliptical of the same handedness as the dominant eigenstate, and with ellipticity
given by Eq. (3.2); and circular polarization states result when one of the eigenstates
has zero amplitude. The angle 𝜃, half of the phase difference between the two
eigenstates, is the orientation of the semimajor axis of the ellipse (or orientation of
linear polarization) regardless of the value of the ellipticity. A map of polarization
states in terms of the variables 𝜒and 𝜃is shown in Figure 3.1b.
We could equally represent states in terms of the other two mentioned pairs of
eigenstates, either the conventional linear horizontal and vertical:
̂e = ̂eHei𝜑cos 𝜂+ ̂eVe+i𝜑sin 𝜂,
(3.3)
or the diagonal and antidiagonal:
̂e = ̂eDei𝛼cos 𝜉+ ̂eAe+i𝛼sin 𝜉,
(3.4)
where 2𝜒, 2𝜂, and 2𝜉are the angles that ̂e makes with the three axes, as shown in
Figure 3.2. The normalized Stokes parameters s1, s2, and s3 are the coordinates of
the radius vector representing the state of polarization, ̂e. Therefore, we can express
them as
s1 = cos 2𝜂= cos2 𝜂−sin2 𝜂= IH −IV
I0
,
(3.5)
FIGURE 3.2
Poincar´e sphere showing the angles that define the Stokes parameters of a
particular state of polarization ̂e.

POINCAR´E MODES OF BEAMS
65
where IH and IV are the intensities of the light that would be transmitted through
H and V polarizers, respectively, and I0 = IH + IV is the total intensity (assuming
totally coherent light). Similarly, the other parameters are given by
s2 = cos 2𝜉= ID −IA
I0
(3.6)
and
s3 = cos 2𝜒= IR −IL
I0
,
(3.7)
where ID, IA, IR, IL are the intensities past filters that transmit, respectively, D, A,
R, and L states. Thus, the six intensity measurements can be used to define state ̂e.
Indeed, this is a standard method of polarimetry.
3.2.2
Spatial Modes
As mentioned earlier, there are numerous families of spatial modes that have been
studied in recent years. None have attracted as much attention as Laguerre–Gauss
(LG) modes. Their intrinsic interest is that via the orbital angular momentum that
they can carry, they add a novelty that was not present when spatial modes were first
studied, as part of the development of lasers. Our discussion is going to be limited
to LG beams, but we should be mindful that there is a rich variety of beams that
can be used. We focus on LG beams because they are symmetric, which provide a
convenient setting for the production of Poincar´e beams.
The scalar portion of the amplitude of an LG beam is given in cylindrical coordi-
nates as [1,4]
LG𝓁
p = Ap,𝓁r|𝓁|ei𝓁𝜙G L|𝓁|
p
W,
(3.8)
where
Ap,𝓁=
(
p!2|𝓁|+1
𝜋(|𝓁| + p)!)
)1∕2
1
w|𝓁|+1
(3.9)
is a constant that normalizes the integrated amplitude;
G = e−r2∕w2
(3.10)
is the Gaussian envelope, with w being the beam width (or spot). The term L|𝓁|
p
is
the associated Laguerre polynomial, which is a function of 2r2∕w2. The last term of
Eq. (3.8) is
W = e−i(x2+y2)∕(2R)−i𝜑.
(3.11)

66
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
The first part of the exponential corrects for the curvature of the wavefront, which
is often neglected for simplicity, but which accounts for the spiral patterns in the
fringes of measured beams. The second term in the exponential is the Gouy phase,
given by
𝜑= (2p + |𝓁| + 1) tan−1(z∕zR),
(3.12)
where zR is the Rayleigh range. For a pure mode the Gouy phase is an overall term
that has no effect, but in a superposition it leads to a relative phase between the
component modes, leading often to the transverse rotation of the mode about the
beam center as the beam propagates [19].
LG modes are multiringed, with p nodes between r = 0 and r = ∞. Commonly
used LG modes have p = 0 and exhibit a classic single-ring or “doughnut” shape.
The radius of the ring (where amplitude is maximum) is given by
r𝓁=
(
𝓁
2
)1∕2
w,
(3.13)
and so it increases with 𝓁, also known as the topological charge of the mode.
Figure 3.3b shows the diffraction pattern produced by a forked amplitude grating
(a), where the diffraction orders n are LG modes with n = 𝓁.
The most important element of the LG modes is the azimuthal phase, given by
𝓁𝜙. Transverse phase maps for LG modes are given in the bottom of Figure 3.3b.
The points in the beam that have the same phase, that is, the wavefront, make
surfaces that consist of 𝓁-intertwined helices. These tilted wavefronts are able to
exert torques on irregularly shaped objects [20]. Absorption of LG light also gives
rise to particle rotation. In the quantum limit, single photons carry the entire mode
of the field [21], and an angular momentum given by 𝓁ℏ[1]. This is in addition to
the angular momentum that it may have due to right or left circular polarization (−ℏ
or +ℏ, respectively). Finally, LG beams are also interesting because they carry an
interesting type of scalar optical singularity: an optical vortex. This is a point in the
FIGURE 3.3
(a) Forked amplitude diffraction grating used to produce LG modes in (b).
Each order has a different topological phase, shown below in colored phase maps, where each
color is a unique phase (modulo 2𝜋). (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate
section.)

POINCAR´E MODES OF BEAMS
67
transverse plane where the intensity is zero, and where the phase is multiply defined.
The topological charge of the vortex is 𝓁, the multiple of 2𝜋that the phase advances
on a closed loop about the vortex [2]. Vortices of varying charge are seen at the center
of the colored phase maps of Figure 3.3b. In three dimensions, the vortices propagate
as lines of darkness, which may not only move and rotate, but also form loops and
knots [22–24].
Since LG modes are a complete set of functions, they can be used to create other
modes via their superposition. Another important family is that of Hermite–Gauss
(HG) modes, which we will not discuss here in detail. They are solutions of the
paraxial equation in Cartesian coordinates. These modes are commonly produced
by lasers with a rectangular symmetry, but carry no orbital angular momentum. An
interesting new type of beams, called Ince–Gaussian beams, is a hybrid mixture of
LG and HG modes [7]. Another class of beams not discussed here is nondiffracting
Bessel beams [5].
3.2.3
Poincar´e Modes
The new development in polarization optics of the last 10 years is the generation
and use of optical beams that are not in a unique state of polarization. Instead, the
polarization varies across the profile of the beam [25]. The label Poincar´e beams
or modes are a compelling one, but not unique. These types of beams are also
known as beams with space-variant polarization, vector beams, and also singular
beams. The latter comes owing to the polarization singularities that they contain, as
mentioned below.
These types of modes have been recognized for a longtime. As seen in Eqs.
(3.1), (3.3), and (3.4), a general state of polarization is constructed with a pair
of orthogonal states of polarization with varying amplitudes and relative phases.
Spatial modes exhibit space-variant amplitudes and phases, so superpositions of
distinct spatial modes in orthogonal states lead to modes with a spatially varying
polarization state.
Interest in these types of beams gained momentum with radially polarized beams.
These are beams where the electric field is linearly polarized along the radial direction
[26]. It was recognized that when focused, they generate an axial electric field at the
center of the waist, which could potentially be used for charge particle acceleration
[27]. A similar counterpart is the azimuthally polarized beam, where the linear
polarization of the beam is at every point perpendicular to the radial direction, and
which produces an axial magnetic field when focused [28]. Radial vector beams
also gain interest for particle manipulation owing to their smaller waist [29]. These
linearly polarized beams have been known as vector beams and constitute a subset
of the class that we call Poincar´e beams.
A general expression for a mode with space-variant polarization is given by a
nonseparable superposition of spatial modes and polarization:
V = (a1M1̂e1 + a2M2̂e2
) ,
(3.14)

68
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
where a1 and a2 are normalized complex amplitudes, M1 and M2 are orthogonal
spatial modes, and ̂e1 and ̂e2 are orthogonal polarization eigenstates. If we use a
particular case, LG spatial modes with unit-norm amplitudes, we get a Poincar´e
mode [30]:
V =
1
√
2
(LG𝓁1
p1 ei𝛼̂eR + LG𝓁2
p2 e−i𝛼̂eL
).
(3.15)
The case of vector beams corresponds to the setting p1 = p2 = 0, 𝓁1 = −𝓁2 = 1, and
𝛼= 0 for radial or 𝛼= 𝜋∕2 for azimuthal modes [31].
Equation (3.15) can be rewritten in the following form:
V = NGWei(𝓁1+𝓁2)𝜙∕2 (cos 𝜒ei𝜃̂eR + sin 𝜒e−i𝜃̂eL
) ,
(3.16)
where
𝜒= tan−1 Ap2,𝓁2r|𝓁2|L|𝓁2|
p2
Ap1,𝓁1r|𝓁1|L|𝓁1|
p1
,
(3.17)
and
𝜃= (𝓁1 −𝓁2)𝜙∕2 + 𝛼,
(3.18)
with N being a normalization constant. Equations (3.17) and (3.18) reveal that the
elipticity of the states composing the mode depends only on the radial coordinate,
and their orientation depends only on the transverse angular coordinate.
Let us understand this in more detail with an example. Figure 3.4a shows the
pattern of polarization states for the case p1 = p2 = 0 and 𝓁1 = 0 and 𝓁2 = −1. Mode
LG0
0 is the fundamental Gaussian beam, which peaks at r = 0 and decreases to zero
FIGURE 3.4
(a) Lemon polarization pattern formed by a superposition of LG modes, one
with topological charges 1 and 0, in opposite states of circular polarization. (b) Illustration
of the mapping of the beam pattern onto the Poincar´e sphere. Right- and left-handed ellipses
are colored red and blue, respectively. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate
section.)

EXPERIMENTAL APPROACHES
69
at r = ∞following the Gaussian function of Eq. (3.10). (We also note that L0
0 = 1.)
The mode LG1
0 is, as mentioned earlier, a ring. Between r = 0 and w∕
√
2 we have
that |LG0
0| > |LG−1
0 |, and so the mode is composed of right-handed ellipses, with
r = 0 containing the state of right circular polarization and with ellipticity increasing
as a function of r. At r = w∕
√
2 the amplitudes of the spatial modes are equal, and so
specify a ring of linearly polarized states. At greater radii, the mode is dominated by
left-handed ellipses, with ellipticity increasing to left circular polarization at r = ∞.
Every point in the transverse plane has a distinct polarization state. In essence, the
mode is a mapping of the Poincar´e sphere onto the transverse plane of the mode.
Figure 3.4b depicts the way the modes are mapped: a radial trajectory from r = 0 is
equivalent to following a meridian on the sphere, from the north pole to the south
pole; and a circular trajectory centered about r = 0 counter-clockwise, corresponds
to following a parallel on the sphere from west to east.
3.3
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACHES
Early work with beams with space-variant polarization focused on radial vector beams
[12]. These have been produced in free space using superposition HG or LG beams
of opposite polarization [32], essentially creating a superposition such as the one
represented by Eq. (3.14). It consists of a polarization interferometer, where each arm
has one state of linear polarization (horizontal and vertical), and in each arm a distinct
spatial mode is encoded. This can be accomplished with the use of polarizing beam
splitters, both in the separation of orthogonal components and in their recombination.
In the case of radial vector beams we need either a superposition of first-order HG
modes, HG10 and HG01, in orthogonal linear polarization eigenstates or first-order LG
modes, LG+1
0 and LG1
0, in orthogonal circular polarization eigenstates (for a review of
experiments, see References [12] and [31]). The spatial modes were prepared either
directly from laser emission (in the case of HG modes, and rotating one of them) or by
the use of diffractive optical elements, such as spiral phase plates or forked gratings.
Poincar´e beams have been produced using this basic scheme, by using high-order LG
modes, implementing Eq. (3.16) [30]. Circular or elliptical polarization eigenstates
can be prepared after the polarization inteferometer using standard waveplates. Since
the states leaving the interferometer are orthogonal, the unitary transformation of
one of them into an elliptical state automatically prepares the other in the orthogonal
state [33]. The previous method is limited by the availability of diffractive optical
elements. A more flexible device uses a spatial light modulator (SLM) for encoding
the two modes, and encode in principle any superposition [34].
This can be accomplished with the setup of Figure 3.5, which is basically a
polarization interferometer with the SLM serving as one of the reflective elements
of the interferometer. In the case shown, a single SLM was also used to encode
both spatial modes. Briefly, the laser beam is expanded and split by a non-polarizing
beam splitter. The two parallel beams are incident on the SLM, which diffracts
them with two separate patterns encoded in the same SLM. The polarization of both
beams is the same due to the polarization sensitivity of the SLM. After the SLM,

70
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
FIGURE 3.5
Apparatus to create Poincar´e modes. It uses beam splitters that are unpolarized
(B), polarized (P), half (H), and quarter (Q) waveplates to manipulate the polarization and an
SLM to encode the spatial modes.
the polarization of one of the components is rotated via a half-wave plate. The two
beams are merged with a polarizing beam splitter. A quarter-wave plate after the
interferometer transforms the two linear polarizations into circular eigenstates.
A second class of production methods uses single elements that optically generate
the spatial-polarization state. The earliest type of element was used specifically for
producing radial vector beams. It used an optical element that consisted of a mosaic
of half-wave plates with fast axes oriented appropriately [35,36]. Other devices that
rotate the polarization in a smoother way have been developed. Sub-wavelength
gratings have been used to create vector beams via their space-variant patterning
designs [37]. It has been shown that few-mode optical fibers can be used to produce
vector beams [38–40], and more recently, spun fibers have been used as well [41].
Liquid crystals have emerged as powerful method to manipulate phase, via SLMs.
However, engineered liquid crystal cells can also be used to smoothly rotate the
polarization to generate radially or azimuthally polarized beams from an incident
linearly polarized beam [42]. More recently, the interaction of liquid crystals with
polarized light has been used to couple the spin (polarization) and orbital (spatial)
modes of light. A new device that has attracted attention is called the “q-plate,” which
also uses an engineered liquid crystal cell [43, 44], but which can be electrically or
thermally tuned to produce a greater variety of mode–polarization combinations
[45]. The nonlinearity of liquid crystals can also be exploited for the purpose of
spin–orbit coupling via cross-phase-modulation [46]. Self-induced nonlinearity of
liquid crystals [47] and other crystals [48] can also be used for the same purpose.
The greater array of polarization singularities exhibited by Poincar´e beams has been
achieved in a very unique way using stress birefringence [49].
There is a growing interest in the generation of polarization patterns and the study
of singularities in birefringent [50–52], nematic [53], and anisotropic [54,55] media.
This work complements the studies of polarization singularities in speckle fields
[56–58].
3.4
POLARIZATION SINGULARITIES
In the past 20 years much work has been done on scalar singularities, such as optical
vortices [59]. That work is still evolving and finding applications. As the work with

POLARIZATION SINGULARITIES
71
scalar singularities matures, there is a growing interest on vector singularities [60]. In
terms of the polarization of light, polarization singularities manifest as places where
the parameters of the polarization ellipse are undefined. In the case of Figure 3.4a,
the central point is known as a C-point, where the orientation of the semimajor axis
of the ellipse is undefined [14, 15]. Surrounding it are ellipses, whose semimajor
axis rotates counter-clockwise by 180 degrees per counter-clockwise turn around the
C-point. An important morphological characteristic of the field of ellipses that sur-
round the C-point is that there is a single line originating from the C-point where all
the ellipses have an orientation in the radial direction. This type of C-point is known
as a lemon [14,15]. The singularity index denotes the winding of the field of ellipses
around the C-point. It is defined as [61]
IC = Δ𝜃
2𝜋.
(3.19)
If 𝜃is the orientation of the ellipses around a C-point (see Eq. 3.18), then we define
Δ𝜃as the change in 𝜃per turn around the singularity. Thus, for the lemon IC = +1∕2.
Shown in Figure 3.6a is another type of C-point, known as a star. It is constructed
with Eq. (3.15) and 𝓁1 = 0 and 𝓁2 = +1, or with 𝓁1 = −1 and 𝓁2 = 0. In this case,
the semimajor axis of the surrounding ellipses rotates clockwise by 180 degrees per
counter-clockwise turn around the C-point, and thus having IC = −1∕2. This type of
singularity has three lines that are oriented radially. Figure 3.6b shows a measurement
of a Poincar´e beam prepared using the setup of Figure 3.5. The states of the beam were
measured using Stokes polarimetry, as described in the section 3.2.1. A third type
of C-point is part lemon and part star, and so it is called monstar [14]. Surrounding
this type of C-point is a field of ellipses that have a semimajor axis that rotates in the
same sense as those of the lemon, but have three lines where the semimajor axes of
the ellipses are radially oriented.
FIGURE 3.6
(a) Polarization-state map for a star pattern, created by the superposition of LG
modes with topological charges 1 and 0, in opposite circular polarization states, but the reverse
combination as Figure 3.4. (b) Measured polarization field for the pattern corresponding to a
star, taken with the setup of Figure 3.5. The color map is the phase of the Stokes field 𝜎12. (For
a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)

72
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
The field of polarization singularities can be viewed from a different perspective,
in terms of the Stokes parameters. If we define the complex scalar field as [61–65]
𝜎12 = s1 + is2,
(3.20)
and similarly with the other pairwise combinations of Stokes parameters, then the
phase of the Stokes field Φ = arg(𝜎12) will reveal C-points at a dislocation. In the
case of 𝜎12, the phase will also be the orientation of the semimajor axis of the ellipses
in the field. Figure 3.6b shows a color map of 𝜎12 [66].
Another type of polarization singularity is the L-line, which is a linearly polarized
boundary of regions of opposite elliptical handedness [13]. For example, in Figures
3.4a and 3.6a, L-lines are the circles that contain linearly polarized states. Under
certain conditions we can have a field of states that have the same ellipticity. One
such case is that of a field of linearly polarized states with distinct orientations at
different angles, as shown in Figure 3.7a [30,63]. The central point is also known as a
vector singularity, or V-point. If we define the singularity index for this point similarly
to Eq. (3.19), then IV = +3. It can be constructed using Eq. (3.15) with 𝓁1 = +3 and
𝓁2 = −3. It does not show any other state of polarization because modes LG+3
0
and LG−3
0
have the same radial dependence (see Eq. 3.8), so the opposite states
of polarization in Eq. (3.1) always have the same amplitude (in absolute value, or
𝜒= 𝜋∕4). If instead of circular polarization eigenstates we have linear polarization
eigenstates, we get the pattern shown in Figure 3.7b, The central point is singular as
well, because it has all ellipticities of diagonal and antidiagonal orientations.
Polarization singularities are sensitive to perturbations: other fields [61] and inho-
mogeneities in the medium [54,55,67]. This leads to the motion of the singularities
and the breakup of singularities of high index, as illustrated by the polarization
FIGURE 3.7
(a) Polarization patterns produced by the superposition of LG+3
0
and LG−3
0
modes in circular polarization eigenstates. (b) LG+2
0
and LG−2
0
modes in linear polarization
eigenstates. The central points are singular. Regions of right- and left-handed ellipticity are
colored red and blue, respectively. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate
section.)

REFERENCES
73
pattern of clear sky [68]. Polarization singularities in partially coherent light also
show interesting results [69].
3.5
CONCLUSION
An emerging development of space-variant polarization of light beams constitutes a
significant fundamental advance in an otherwise mature field of polarization optics.
Polarization singularities hold much promise in optical diagnosis [70], as a technique
where singularities become sensitive probes of perturbations to the wave field. On the
fundamental side, work on polarization effects in three dimensions has only started
[71,72] and holds promise of more interesting developments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank G. Milione and F. De Zela for stimulating discussions. This work was
funded by National Science Foundation and U.S. Air Force.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Allen, M. W. Beijersbergen, R. J. C. Spreeuw, and J. P. Woerdman, “Orbital angular
momentum of light and the transformation of Laguerre-Gauss modes,” Phys. Rev. A 92,
8185–8189 (1992).
[2] L. Allen, S. M. Barnett, and M. J. Padgett, Eds., Optical Angular Momentum (Institute
of Physics, Bristol, 2003).
[3] A. E. Siegman, Lasers (University Science Books, Mill Valley, CA, 1986).
[4] M. W. Beijersbergen, L. Allen, H. E. L. O. van der Veen, and J. P. Woerdman, “Astigmatic
laser mode converters and transfer of orbital angular momentum,” Opt. Commun. 96,
123–132 (1993).
[5] J. Durnin, J. J. Miceli, Jr., and J. H. Eberly, “Diffraction-free beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58,
1499–1501 (1987).
[6] J. C. Gutierrez-Vega, M. D. Iturbe-Castillo, and S. Chavez-Cerda, “Alternative formula-
tion for invariant optical fields: mathieu beams,” Opt. Lett. 25, 1493–1495 (2000).
[7] M. A. Bandres and J. C. Gutierrez-Vega, “Ince-Gaussian beams,” Opt. Lett. 29, 144–146
(2004).
[8] G. A. Siviloglou, J. Broky, A. Dogariu, and D. N. Christodoulides, “Observation of
accelerating airy beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 213901 (2007)
[9] D. Andrews, Structured Light and Its Applications: An Introduction to Phase-Structured
Beams and Nanoscale Optical Forces (Academic Press-Elsevier, Burlington, 2008).
[10] A. Mair, A. Vaziri, G. Weihs, and A. Zeilinger, “Entanglement of the orbital angular
momentum states of photons,” Nature (London) 412, 313–316 (2001).
[11] G. Gibson, J. Courtial, M. Padgett, M. Vasnetsov, V. Pas’ko, S. M. Barnett, and S.
Franke-Arnold, “Free-space information transfer using light beams carrying orbital angu-
lar momentum,” Opt. Express 12, 5448–5456 (2004).

74
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
[12] Q. Zhan, “Cylindrical vector beams: from mathematical concepts to applications,” Adv.
Opt. Photon. 1, 1–57 (2009).
[13] J. F. Nye, “Line singularities in wave fields,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 387, 105–132 (1983).
[14] J. F. Nye, “Lines of circular polarization in electromagnetic wave fields,” Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. A 389, 279–290 (1983).
[15] J. F. Nye, Natural Focusing and Fine Structure of Light (Institute of Physics, Bristol,
1999).
[16] M. V. Berry and M. R. Dennis, “Polarization singularities in isotropic random vector
waves,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 457, 141–155 (2001).
[17] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, 7th ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 2010).
[18] W. A. Shurcliff, Polarized Light (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1966).
[19] S. M. Baumann, D. M. Kalb, L. H. MacMillan, and E. J. Galvez, “Propagation dynamics
of optical vortices due to Gouy phase,” Opt. Express 17, 9818–9827 (2009).
[20] A. I. Bishop, T. A. Niemen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Optical
microrheology using rotating laser-trapped particles,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 198104 (2004).
[21] E. J. Galvez, L. E. Coyle, E. Johnson, and B. J. Reschovsky, “Interferometric measurement
of the helical mode of a single photon,” New J. Phys. 13, 053017 (2011).
[22] M. V. Berry and M. R. Dennis, “Knotted and linked phase singularities in monochromatic
waves,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 457, 2251–2263 (2001).
[23] M. V. Berry and M. R. Dennis “Knotting and unknotting of phase singularities: Helmholtz
waves, paraxialwaves and waves in 2+1 spacetime,” J. Phys. A 34, 8877–8888 (2001).
[24] J. Leach, M. R. Dennis, J. Courtial, and M. J. Padgett, “Vortex knots in light,” New J.
Phys. 7, 1–11 (2005).
[25] T. Brown, “Unconventional polarization states: beam propagation, focusing, and imag-
ing,” Prog Optics 56, 81–129 (2011).
[26] Y. Mushiake, K. Matsumura, N., and Nakajima, “Generation of radially polarized optical
beam mode by laser oscillation,” Proc. IEEE 60, 1107–1109 (1972).
[27] J. R. Fontana, and R. H. Pantell, “A high-energy laser accelerator for using the inverse
Cherenkov effect,” J. Appl. Phys. 54, 4285–4288 (1983).
[28] K. S. Youngsworth and T. G. Brown, “Focusing of high numerical aperture cylindrical
vector beams,” Opt. Express 7, 77–87 (2000).
[29] S. Quabis, R. Dorn, M. Eberler, O. Gl¨ockl, and G. Leuchs, “Focusing light to a tighter
spot,” Opt. Commun. 179, 1–7 (2000).
[30] E. J. Galvez, S. Khadka, W. H. Schubert, and S. Nomoto, “Poincar´e-beam patterns
produced by nonseparable superpositions of Laguerre-Gauss and polarization modes of
light,” Appl. Opt. 51, 2925–2934 (2012).
[31] E. J. Galvez, “Vector beams in free space,” in The Angular Momentum of Light, edited
by D. L. Andrews and M. Babiker (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2012).
[32] S. C. Tidwell, D. H. Ford, and W. D. Kimura, “Generating radially polarized beams
interferometrically,” Appl. Opt. 29, 2234–2239 (1990).
[33] E. J. Galvez and S. Khadka, “Poincar´e modes of light,” Proc. SPIE 8274, 82740Y 1–8
(2012).
[34] C. Maurer, A. Jesacher, S. F¨urhapter, S. Bernet, and M. Ritsch-Marte, “Tailoring of
arbitrary optical vector beams,” New J. Phys. 9, 78–1–20 (2007).

REFERENCES
75
[35] S. Quabis, R. Dorn, and G. Leuchs, “Generation of a radially polarized doughnut mode
of high quality, Appl. Phys. B 81, 597–600 (2005).
[36] G. Machavariani, Y. Lumer, I. Moshe, A. Meir, and S. Jackel, “Efficient extracavity
generation of radially and azimuthally polarized beams,” Opt. lett. 32, 1468–1470 (2007).
[37] Z. Bomzon, G. Biener, V. Kleiner, and E. Hasman, “Radially and azimuthally polarized
beams generated by space variant dielectric subwavelength gratings,” Opt. Lett. 27, 285–
287 (2002).
[38] G. Volpe and D. Petrov, “Generation of cylindrical vector beams with few-mode fibers
excited by Laguerre-Gaussian beams,” Opt. Commun. 237, 89–95 (2004).
[39] S. Ramachandran, P. Kristensen, and M. F. Yan, “Generation and propagation of radially
polarized beams in optical fibers,” Opt. Lett. 34, 2525–2527 (2009).
[40] N. K. Viswanathan and V. V. G. Inavalli, “Generation of optical vector beams using a
two-mode fiber,” Opt. Lett. 34, 1189–1191 (2009).
[41] G. Milione, H. I. Sztul, R. R. Alfano, and D. A. Nolan, “Stokes polarimetry of a hybrid
vector beam from a spun elliptical core optical fiber,” Proc. SPIE 7613, 761305–761310
(2009).
[42] M. Stalder and M. Schadt, “Linearly polarized light with axial symmetry generated by
liquid-crystal polarization converters,” Opt. Lett. 21, 1948–1950 (1996).
[43] L. Maruuucci, C. Manzo, and D. Paparo, “Optical spin-to-orbital angular momentum
conversion in inhomogeneous anisotropic media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 163905 (2006).
[44] E. Karimi, S. Slussarenko, L. Marrucci, and E. Santamato, “Polarization-controlled evo-
lution of light transverse modes and associated Pancharatnam geometric phase in orbital
angular momentum,” Phys. Rev. A 81, 053813 (2010).
[45] F. Cardano, E. Karimi, S. Slussarenko, L. Marrucci, C. de Lisio, and E. Santamato, “Polar-
ization pattern of vector vortex beams generated by q-plates with different topological
charges,” Appl. Opt. 51, C1–C6 (2012).
[46] E. Brasselet, “Spin-orbit optical cross-phase-modulation,” Phys. Rev. A 82, 063836
(2010).
[47] M. El Ketara and E. Brasselet, “Self-induced nonlinear spin-orbit interaction of light in
liquid crystals,” Opt. Lett. 37, 602–604 (2012).
[48] S. Mosca, B. Canuel, E. Karimi, B. Piccirillo, L. Marrucci, R. De Rosa, E. Genin, L.
Milano, and E. Santamato, “Photon self-induced spin-to-orbital conversion in a terbium-
gallium-garnet crystal at high laser power,” Phys. Rev. A 82, 043806 (2010).
[49] A. M. Beckley, T. G. Brown, and M. A. Alonso, “Full Poincar´e beams,” Opt. Express 18,
10777–10785 (2010).
[50] A. V. Volyar and T. A. Fadeyeva, “Decay and fusion pf polarization umbilics in a singular
beam passed through a crystal,” Opt. Spectrosc. 95, 792–799 (2003).
[51] F. Flossmann, U. T. Schwarz, M. Maier, and M. R. Dennis, “Polarization singularities
from unfolding optical vortex through a birefringent crystal,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 253901
(2005).
[52] T. A. Fadeyeva, V. G. Shvedov, Y. V. Izdebskaya, A. V. Volyar, E. Brasselet, D. N. Neshev,
A. S. Desyatnikov, W. Krolikowski, and Y. S. Kivshar, “Spatially engineered polarization
states and optical vortices in uniaxial crystal,” Opt. Express 18, 10848–10863 (2010).
[53] I. O. Buinyi, V. G. Denisenko, and M. S. Soskin, “Topological structure in polarization
resolved conoscopic patterns for nematic liquid crystal cells,” Opt. Commun. 282, 143–
155 (2010).

76
LIGHT BEAMS WITH SPATIALLY VARIABLE POLARIZATION
[54] K. Y. Bliokh, A. N. Kleiner, and E. Hasman, “Singular polarimetry: evolution of polariza-
tion singularities in electromagnetic waves propagating in weakly anisotropic medium,”
Opt. Express 16, 695–709 (2008).
[55] V. Ponevchinsky, A. I. Goncharuk, V. I. Vasilev, N. I. Lebovka, and M. S. Soskin,
“Optical singularities induced in a nematic-cell by carbon nanotubes,” Proc. SPIE 7613,
761306 (2010).
[56] R. I. Egorov, M. S. Soskin, and I. Freund, “Experimental optical diabolos,” Opt. Lett. 31,
2048–2050 (2006).
[57] V. Vasil’ev and M. S. Soskin, “Topological and morphological transformations of devel-
oping singular paraxial vector light fields,” Opt. Commun. 281, 5527–5540 (2008).
[58] F. Flossmann, K. O’Holleran, M. R. Dennis, and M. J. Padgett, “Polarization singularities
in 2D and 3D speckle fields,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 203902 1–4 (2008).
[59] M. S. Soskin and M. V. Vasnetsov, “Singular optics,” Prog. Optics 42, 219–276 (2001).
[60] M. R. Dennis, K. O’Holleran, M. J. Padgett, “Singular optics: optical vortices and polar-
ization singularities,” Prog. Optics 53, 293–363 (2009).
[61] I. Freund, “Polarization singularity indices in Gaussian laser beams,” Opt. Commun. 201,
251–270 (2002).
[62] I. Freund, “Poincar´e vortices,” Opt. Lett. 26, 1996–1998 (2001).
[63] I. Freund, “Polarization flowers, Opt. Commun. 199, 47–63 (2001).
[64] I. Freund, “Stokes singularity relations,” Opt. Lett. 27, 545–547 (2002).
[65] M. R. Dennis, “Polarization singularities in paraxial vector fields: morphology and statis-
tics,” Opt. Commun. 213, 201–221 (2002).
[66] E. J. Galvez, B. L. Rojec, and K. R. McCullough, “Understanding optical singularities:
understanding the duality of C-points and optical vortices,” Proc. SPIE 8637, 863706
(2013).
[67] O. V. Angelsky, Y. Y. Tomka, A. G. Ushenko, Y. G. Ushenko, and Y. A. Ushenko, “Inves-
tigation if 2D Mueller marix structure of biological tissues for preclinical diagnostics of
their pathological states,” J. Phys. D 38, 4227–4235 (2005).
[68] M. V. Berry, M. R. Dennis, and R. L. Lee Jr., “Polarization singularities in the clear sky,”
New J. Phys. 6, 162 1–14 (2004).
[69] A. A. Chernyshov, C. V. Felde, H. V. Bogatyryova, P. V. Polyanskii, and M. S. Soskin,
“Vector singularities of the combined beams assembled from mutually incoherent orthog-
onally polarized components,” J. Opt. A 11, 094010 (2009).
[70] O. V. Angelsky, P. V. Polyanskii, I. I. Mokhum, C. Y. Zenkova, H. V. Bogatyryova, C.
V. Felde, V. T. Bachinskiy, T. M. Boichuk, and A. G. Ushenko, “Optical coherence mea-
surements: polarization and coherence of light fields,” in Modern Metrology Concerns,
edited by L. Cocco ( InTech, 2012).
[71] I. Freund, “M¨obius strips and twisted ribbons in intersecting Gauss Laguerre beams,”
Opt. Commun. 284, 3816–3845 (2011).
[72] M. R. Dennis, “Fermionic out-of-plane structure of polarization singularities,” Opt. Lett.
36 3765–3767 (2011).

4
QUANTUM OPTICS
Howard Carmichael
Department of Physics, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
4.1
INTRODUCTION
It is often said that optics is an enabling science. Quantum optics might be seen to
hold a similar position in the field of photonics. If not “enabling” in the very same
sense, it does provide background on the quantum mechanical nature of light across a
wide range of topics which fall, perhaps more directly, within the gamut of photonics.
There is overlap with so many chapters in the first three volumes of this work that
no purpose is served by choosing amongst them to make a list. Choosing, however,
is precisely the challenge faced when one begins to map out a chapter on a subject
that already fills many well-regarded books [1–3]. My choice has been to organize
material around four broad themes, each judged a central thread in quantum optics or
in what it provides as background to the wide sweep of photonics. The chapter starts
out in Section 4.2 with a review of the simple quantum mechanics encountered in any
quantum optics discussion: the quantum mechanics of the harmonic oscillator and the
two-level system or qubit, along with their interaction. Then the quantum mechanics
of light must deal with irreversible photon exchange, photo-emissive sources, and
loss. Section 4.3 covers the topic by taking up the theme of open quantum systems,
treating issues like inputs and outputs, Lindblad master equations, and the quantum
regression procedure. Next, the notion of classical versus nonclassical fields is central
to understanding the “quantum” in quantum optics. It arises through measurement,
photoelectric detection. It is addressed in Section 4.4, where the heading is photon
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
77

78
QUANTUM OPTICS
counting and the topics covered include photon antibunching, homodye/heterodyne
detection, squeezed light, and quantum trajectories. Finally, in Section 4.5, the theme
is cavity and circuit QED. It is in this context that the quantum side of light is brought
most vividly to attention, and perhaps where one sees most clearly that someday an
important branch of photonics will be optical engineering with single photons.
For all that is left out of this synopsis, and that is a great deal, I trust I can rely on
other chapters of this multi-volume work.
4.2
FUNDAMENTALS
4.2.1
Quantum Mechanics of the Harmonic Oscillator
The quantum mechanics of light is essentially the quantum mechanics of the har-
monic oscillator, after the manner of Dirac [4]. Although quantum optics deals with
the creation and annihilation of photons and is formally a part of quantum electrody-
namics, it limits attention to nonrelativistic energies (1 eV, even 1 μeV, not 1 MeV)
so there is no creation and annihilation of mass. Each mode of the electromagnetic
field is quantized as a formal harmonic oscillator, whose elementary properties we
first recall.
4.2.1.1
Hamiltonian and Observables
The Hamiltonian of one mode of the field,
with frequency 𝜔, is conveniently written
H = ℏ𝜔(X2 + Y2),
(4.1)
with the observables X and Y related to position and momentum operators, q and p,
of a harmonic oscillator of unit mass:
X =
√
𝜔
2ℏq,
Y =
1
√
2ℏ𝜔
p.
(4.2)
Operators that annihilate and create photons are the ladder operators
a = X + iY,
a† = X −iY.
(4.3)
The canonical commutation relation, [q, p] = iℏ, is equivalently
[X, Y] = −i
2,
[a, a†] = 1,
(4.4)
the latter the boson commutation relation of quantum field theory. The form of the
Hamiltonian encountered most often in quantum optics is
H = ℏ𝜔
(
N + 1
2
)
,
(4.5)

FUNDAMENTALS
79
with N = a†a the photon number operator. It is commonly written with the ground
state or vacuum energy, ℏ𝜔∕2, omitted.
4.2.1.2
Energy Spectrum and Photon Number
Let |E⟩denote an eigenket of
H with eigenvalue E. It is straightforward to show that a†|E⟩is also an eigenket,
eigenvalue E + ℏ𝜔, and so is a|E⟩, with eigenvalue E −ℏ𝜔. Applying a† and a
repeatedly generates a ladder of energies stepping away from E in units of ℏ𝜔. With
regard to repeated application of a, it is necessary to impose the requirement that
the energy does not go negative. This constraint nails down the absolute position of
the energy ladder. In summary, energy eigenkets may be labeled by an nonnegative
integer n, with
H|n⟩= ℏ𝜔
(
n + 1
2
)
|n⟩.
(4.6)
The Fock states |n⟩, n = 0, 1, 2, …, are eigenkets of the photon number operator N:
N|n⟩= n|n⟩.
(4.7)
Furthermore, it may be shown that if |n⟩denotes the normalized eigenket, then
a|n⟩=
√
n|n⟩,
a†|n⟩=
√
n + 1|n + 1⟩.
(4.8)
The observable N counts the number of photons of frequency 𝜔, which are annihilated
by a and created by a†. The state |0⟩of zero photon number is the vacuum state.
4.2.1.3
Rotation, Displacement, and Squeeze
Elementary manipulations of the
harmonic oscillator operators and states are carried out by unitary rotation, displace-
ment, and squeeze operators:
R(𝜃) = exp(i𝜃a†a),
D(𝛼) = exp(𝛼a† −𝛼∗a),
(4.9)
and
S(𝜉) = exp
[
1
2
(𝜉∗a2 −𝜉a†2)]
,
(4.10)
where 𝜃is a real parameter (angle) and both 𝛼and 𝜉are arbitrary complex numbers.
The unitary transformation of operators is conveniently provided by the transforma-
tion of the annihilation operator:
R†(𝜃)aR(𝜃) = ei𝜃a,
D†(𝛼)aD(𝜃) = a + 𝛼,
(4.11)
and, writing 𝜉= rei2𝜃, r and 𝜃real parameters,
S†(𝜉)aS(𝜉) = a cosh r −ei2𝜃a† sinh r.
(4.12)

80
QUANTUM OPTICS
X
Y
X
Y
X
Y
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 4.1
Mapping of phase-space regions for the harmonic oscillator through (a) a
rotation, (b) a displacement, and (c) a squeeze (in the X-direction).
Alternatively, in the case of the squeeze, the coordinate system is first rotated, e−i𝜃a =
X𝜃+ iY𝜃, and then the shrinking and stretching of the transformation is apparent:
S†(𝜉)X𝜃S(𝜉) = e−rX𝜃,
S†(𝜉)Y𝜃S(𝜉) = erY𝜃.
(4.13)
The three transformations are illustrated by mapping regions in the phase space of
the harmonic oscillator in Figure 4.1.
The form of Hamiltonian H shows that the free motion of the harmonic oscillator
is continuous rotation at frequency 𝜔. The important physical role played by dis-
placements comes from their connection to the coherent states. Applying D(𝛼) to the
equation a|0⟩= 0,
[D(𝛼)aD†(𝛼)]D(𝛼)|0⟩= 0
⇒
aD(𝛼)|0⟩= 𝛼D(𝛼)|0⟩.
(4.14)
From this a has eigenket D(𝛼)|0⟩, a coherent state, for any complex 𝛼:
a|𝛼⟩= 𝛼|𝛼⟩,
|𝛼⟩= D(𝛼)|0⟩.
(4.15)
Coherent states are prepared by quasiresonant driving of a damped harmonic oscillator
(Section 4.3.2.3). They are central to Glauber’s theory of coherence and the distinction
between classical and nonclassical fields (Section 4.4.2). Their Fock state expansion,
following from the eigenvalue equation, is
|𝛼⟩= e−|𝛼|∕2
∞
∑
n=0
𝛼n
√
n!
|n⟩.
(4.16)
The physical significance of the squeeze transformation comes from squeezed light
(Section 4.4.3.2) and related phenomena (Section 4.4.3.3).
4.2.2
The Electromagnetic Field
As is recounted in any standard textbook, the general solution to Maxwell’s equa-
tions, in the absence of charges and currents, may be expanded as a Fourier series

FUNDAMENTALS
81
in space and time. The expansion in space introduces mode functions, conveniently
taken to correspond to plane running waves. Such mode functions arise, along with
a countable set of wavevectors, by adopting periodic boundary conditions. The free
space dispersion relation relates space and time; it assigns a frequency 𝜔and har-
monically oscillating coefficient to each one of the modes. These coefficients become
harmonic oscillator annihilation operators when the field is quantized. For simplicity
details are given for the electric field operator only and only in 1D.
4.2.2.1
Expansion in 1D
The free electromagnetic field expanded with periodic
boundary conditions, period L, has electric field operator
E(z, t) = E(+)(z, t) + E(−)(z, t),
(4.17)
with E(−) the adjoint of E(+), and positive frequency part
E(+)(z, t) = i
∑
j,𝜉
̂ej,𝜉
√
ℏ𝜔j
2𝜖0ALaj,𝜉exp[−i(𝜔jt −kjz)].
(4.18)
The mode with annihilation operator aj,𝜉has wavenumber kj = j2𝜋∕L, j an integer,
frequency 𝜔j = |kj|c, and unit polarization vector ̂ej,𝜉; the area A serves as an effective
cross-section for the “plane-wave” modes.
4.2.2.2
Energy Density and Photon Flux
Due to its high frequency, it is not
possible to measure the electric field in quantum optics directly. Measurements rely
in one way or another on photon counting (Section 4.4). It is therefore often convenient
to introduce photon flux units. A plane electromagnetic wave, E(z, t) = 2E0 cos(𝜔t −
kz), has energy density U = 2𝜖0E2
0. The units of the scaled field
(z, t) =
√
2𝜖0cA
ℏ𝜔E(z, t)
(4.19)
are t−1∕2. The scaled intensity, ||2, has units of photon flux (photons per second
through cross-section A). Strictly, the frequency dependence of the photon energy
demands a different scale factor for every mode. A quasi-monochromatic field may
nevertheless be cast in photon flux units by writing the electric field operator as
(+)(z, t) = i
√
c
L
∑
j,𝜉
̂ej,𝜉aj,𝜉exp[−i(𝜔jt −kjz)].
(4.20)
Dropping the frequency dependence is acceptable as an approximation across all
occupied modes.

82
QUANTUM OPTICS
4.2.3
Phase-Space Representations of the Quantum State
Fock state expansions of a ket vector or, more generally, a density operator are
widely used to represent the quantum state of an electromagnetic field mode. Other
representations can be more useful, though; not the standard position and momentum
representations but representations that in a sense fall in between. There are many
options (in fact infinitely many), but all are representations in phase space, that is,
involve functions of both X and Y (read here as numbers). Three are commonly used
in quantum optics. Two are derived from the following elementary properties of the
coherent states: (i) coherent states satisfy the completeness relation
∫d2𝛼|𝛼⟩⟨𝛼| = 𝜋;
(4.21)
and (ii) unlike Fock states, which as eigenstates of a Hermitian operator are orthog-
onal,
|⟨𝛼|𝛽⟩|2 = exp (−|𝛼−𝛽|2) ≠0.
(4.22)
4.2.3.1
The Q or Husimi Function
The Q or Husimi function [5] is defined as the
diagonal coherent state matrix element of the density operator 𝜌. When normalized
so that its integral over the complex plane is unity,
Q(𝛼, 𝛼∗) = 𝜋−1⟨𝛼|𝜌|𝛼⟩.
(4.23)
The function is clearly positive definite, and for pure state |𝜓⟩is the squared inner
product |⟨𝛼|𝜓⟩|2∕𝜋. It is tempting to read it as the probability for coherent state |𝛼⟩to
be occupied. The apparent ready interpretation is not permitted, though, as coherent
states are not orthogonal to one another. The Q function is a quasi-probability density.
It allows operator averages placed in antinormal order (a’s to the left and a†’s to
the right) to be calculated as phase-space integrals (use Eq. 4.21 and properties of
the trace):
⟨apa†q⟩= ∫d𝛼2𝛼p𝛼∗qQ(𝛼, 𝛼∗).
(4.24)
4.2.3.2
The P Function
The P function plays a featured role in Glauber’s coher-
ence theory [6–8], where for some field states it maps quantum mechanical correlation
functions to classical expressions. It underlies the distinction made in quantum optics
between so-called classical versus nonclassical fields (Section 4.4.2.1).
The P function allows operator averages in normal order (a†’s to the left and a’s
to the right) to be calculated as phase-space integrals. Given the nonorthogonality of
coherent states, a purely diagonal coherent state expansion of 𝜌may be posited,
𝜌= ∫d2𝛼P(𝛼, 𝛼∗)|𝛼⟩⟨𝛼|.
(4.25)

FUNDAMENTALS
83
It is then easy to show that
⟨a†qap⟩= ∫d2𝛼𝛼p𝛼∗qP(𝛼, 𝛼∗).
(4.26)
The P function need not be positive definite and it may or may not exist as an ordinary
function. Its potential nonexistence is appreciated from the alternate definition of P
as the 2D Fourier transform of the characteristic function
𝜒N(z, z∗) = tr
(
𝜌eiz∗a†eiza)
.
(4.27)
The Fock state |1⟩, for example, has 𝜒N(z, z∗) = 1 −z∗z. This is not a square integrable
function and has no Fourier transform in the usual sense. Generalized functions, or the
generalized P representations of Drummond and Gardiner [9], are needed in a case
like this. Sudarshan’s optical equivalence theorem [10] accepts P as a generalized
function (tempered distribution).
4.2.3.3
The Wigner Function
The Wigner function [11] may be defined as the
Fourier transform of a different characteristic function:
W(𝛼, 𝛼∗) = 𝜋−2
∫d2z𝜒S(z, z∗)e−iz∗𝛼∗e−iz𝛼,
(4.28)
with
𝜒S(z, z∗) = tr
(
𝜌ei(z∗a†+za))
= e−z∗z∕2𝜒N(z, z∗).
(4.29)
The prefactor e−z∗z∕2 ensures that the Fourier transform always exists as an ordinary
function, though W need not be positive definite. It is in a sense intermediate between
Q and P, allowing for the evaluation of symmetrically ordered (Weyl ordered) operator
averages, for example,
∫d2𝛼𝛼𝛼∗W(𝛼, 𝛼∗) = 1
2
(⟨a†a⟩+ ⟨aa†⟩) .
(4.30)
Having met with two characteristic functions it will come as no surprise that the Q
function is the Fourier transform of a third, 𝜒A(z, z ∗), defined by interchanging the
exponentials in Eq. (4.27).
The Wigner function is often the object reconstructed in quantum state tomography
(Section 4.4.3.3). It presents a particularly accessible route to the quantum features
of a field mode, as it is always an ordinary function and displays its quantum side by
becoming negative. Its fringes, as in the examples of Figure 4.2, are a form of quantum
interference, closely related to the concept of interference in phase space [12, 13].
The Q function contains the same information, but smeared out by a convolving of

84
QUANTUM OPTICS
–3
–2
–1
0
X
1
2
3
–3
–2
–1
0
1
Y
2
3
–3
–2
–1
0
X
1
2
3
–3
–2
–1
0
1
Y
2
3
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.2
Wigner functions for (a) the Fock state |2⟩and (b) the coherent state superpo-
sition |3⟩−| −3⟩. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
W against a Gaussian. The P function exists only as generalized function for the
examples of Figure 4.2.
4.2.4
Two-State System or Qubit
With the growth of the field of quantum information, the two-state system has acquired
elevated status as the fundamental “bit” of information, the qubit. It has a longer his-
tory in quantum optics, though, employed as the simplest approximation to a material
resonance beyond the Lorenz oscillator model. Its nonharmonic character leads to
a number of topical markers in quantum optics, including the Mollow spectrum
(Section 4.3.3.4), photon antibunching (Section 4.4.2.2), and the Jaynes–Cummings
model (Section 4.5.1). Many of the basics return to the physics of the original (and
genuine) two-state system, electron spin.
4.2.4.1
Pauli Operators
Pauli operators are familiar from the study of spin- 1
2,
where the spin operator is written s = ℏ𝝈∕2, with the three Pauli operators the com-
ponents of 𝝈. Their common matrix representation makes the z-component diagonal,
which gives
𝜎x ↔
( 0
1
1
0
)
,
𝜎y ↔
( 0
−i
i
0
)
,
𝜎z ↔
(1
0
0
−1
)
.
(4.31)
They satisfy commutation and anticommutation relations,
[𝜎i, 𝜎j] = 2i𝜎k,
[𝜎i, 𝜎j]+ = 2𝛿ij,
(4.32)
with i, j, k a cyclic permutation of x, y, z. By combining 𝜎x and 𝜎y raising and lowering
operators,
𝜎+ = 1
2
(𝜎x + i𝜎y
) ↔
( 0
1
0
0
)
and
𝜎−= 1
2
(𝜎x −i𝜎y
) ↔
( 0
0
1
0
)
(4.33)

FUNDAMENTALS
85
are obtained, along with their commutation relations:
[𝜎+, 𝜎−] = 𝜎z,
[𝜎±, 𝜎z] = ∓2𝜎±.
(4.34)
4.2.4.2
Rotations and the Bloch Sphere
From their association with angular
momentum, Pauli operators generate rotations. Since we most generally consider a
pseudo-spin in quantum optics, the rotation is usually not one in 3-space. Rotation
through an angle 𝜑about axis ̂n is generated by the unitary operator
R(̂n, 𝜑) = exp
(
−i𝝈⋅̂n
2
𝜑
)
= cos(𝜑∕2)𝟙−i sin(𝜑∕2)𝝈⋅̂n.
(4.35)
An arbitrary ket vector |𝜓⟩written as
|𝜓⟩= cos(𝜃∕2)ei𝜙∕2|+⟩+ sin(𝜃∕2)e−i𝜙∕2|−⟩,
(4.36)
with |±⟩the eigenkets of 𝜎z, is defined by the angles 𝜃and 𝜙. It may thus be
represented on the Bloch (unit) sphere by the Bloch vector [14]
⟨𝝈⟩= (sin 𝜃cos 𝜙, sin 𝜃sin 𝜙, cos 𝜃)T .
(4.37)
The components of the Bloch vector are expectations of the respective Pauli operators.
A rotated ket |𝜓′⟩= R(̂n, 𝜑)|𝜓⟩is represented by a rotated Bloch vector. From
⟨𝜓′|𝝈|𝜓′⟩= ⟨𝜓|𝝈′|𝜓⟩, ⟨𝝈⟩rotates through angle 𝜑about axis ̂n.
4.2.5
Electric Dipole Interaction
4.2.5.1
Hamiltonian and Coupling Strength
In view of the long wavelength of
light on the scale of an atom, interactions with matter are generally treated in the
electric dipole approximation. Only if the electric dipole transition is forbidden, is it
necessary to consider the much weaker electric quadrupole or magnetic dipole terms.
The interaction Hamiltonian in the electric dipole approximation is
HI = −d ⋅E(ra),
(4.38)
where the dipole operator d = −e ∑
j(rj −ra) sums over electron positions relative to
a positive nuclear charge at ra, and E(ra) is the electric field operator at the location of
the nucleus. When considering a quasiresonant transition between a lower state |−⟩
and upper state |+⟩, the dipole operator expands as d = 𝝁−+|−⟩⟨+| + 𝝁+−|+⟩⟨−|,
with 𝝁+−= 𝝁∗
−+ the atomic dipole matrix element; diagonal elements (permanent
dipole moments) are assumed by symmetry to vanish. For one field mode (wavevector
k, frequency 𝜔= kc, polarization ̂e),
E(ra) = îe
√
ℏ𝜔
2𝜖0V
(aeik⋅ra −a†e−ik⋅ra) .
(4.39)

86
QUANTUM OPTICS
It is usual in quantum optics to also make the rotating wave approximation, where
photon creation (annihilation) simultaneous with atomic excitation (deexcitation) is
neglected, in which case
HI = iℏg(ei𝜑a𝜎+ −e−i𝜑a†𝜎−),
(4.40)
where the phase 𝜑depends on the atomic position and the phase of ̂e ⋅𝝁−+, and
g =
√
𝜔
2ℏ𝜖0V |̂e ⋅𝝁+−|
(4.41)
is the dipole coupling constant. As the rotating wave approximation requires g to
be small relative to the frequency of the transition, it is not necessarily such a good
approximation—or can even be a bad approximation—in the context of cavity and
circuit QED. Beyond strong coupling (Section 4.5.3) there is a regime of ultrastrong
coupling where the rotating wave approximation fails [15].
4.2.5.2
Classical Drive: Optical Bloch Equations
For a classical drive, E(z, t) =
̂eE sin(𝜔t −kz), the interaction Hamiltonian carries over with the photon annihilation
operator replaced by the time-dependent complex amplitude 𝛼(t) = |𝛼| exp(−i𝜔t),
where |𝛼| defines the Rabi frequency [16]
Ω = 2g|𝛼| = |̂e ⋅𝝁+−|
ℏ
E.
(4.42)
Adding the free Hamiltonian HA = ℏ𝜔a𝜎z∕2, Heisenberg equations yield the equation
of motion satisfied by the Bloch vector,
⟨̇𝝈⟩= Beff(t) × ⟨𝝈⟩,
(4.43)
with
Beff(t) = (Ω sin(𝜔t −𝜑), Ω cos(𝜔t −𝜑), 𝜔a
)T
(4.44)
an effective rotating magnetic field. The equation is familiar from Bloch’s treatment
of nuclear induction [14]. The response is easy to recover in a frame rotating at
the frequency of the drive: the Bloch vector ⟨𝝈′⟩= (u, v, w) precesses about the
now stationary Beff = (0, Ω, 𝜔a −𝜔), that is, the two-state system executes a Rabi
oscillation (Fig. 4.3).
Applications in optics may encounter energy damping and dephasing of the atomic
dipole moment. In that case terms −𝛾⟂⟨𝜎x⟩, −𝛾⟂⟨𝜎y⟩, and −𝛾∥
(⟨𝜎z⟩+ 1) damp the
respective Bloch vector components, with 𝛾⟂= 1∕T2 and 𝛾∥= 1∕T1 in the notation
of Bloch.

OPEN SYSTEMS: INPUTS AND OUTPUTS
87
1
Beff
–1
0
–1
1
0
–1
1
V
W
n
FIGURE 4.3
The Bloch sphere: for on-resonance driving the precessing Bloch vector
describes a circle in a plane parallel to the orange (u,w)-plane. (For a color version of this
figure, see the color plate section.)
4.3
OPEN SYSTEMS: INPUTS AND OUTPUTS
Sources of light emit photons, whether they be laser sources, sources of filtered
chaotic (thermal) light, or something more exotic emitting a stream of antibunched
photons or a beam of squeezed light. Such sources are open quantum systems, often
built around a driven or pumped material system inside an optical resonator. Quantum
optics has made major contributions to the repository of concepts and methods used to
analyze open quantum systems and their outputs. Most of this work makes a Markov
approximation, which enormously simplifies the treatment and provides for a broad
range of interconnecting techniques and applications. The product may be thought
of as a low energy scattering theory, something to connect input optical drives and
pumping—or input vacuum fields—to output optical fields. While each fundamental
tool is based either on the Heisenberg picture or on the Schr¨odinger picture, in practice
applications generally rely on a combination of both views.
4.3.1
Heisenberg Picture
Senitzky [17,18] pioneered the Heisenberg picture approach to dissipation in a paper
published in the year of the first operational laser. The developed form used in
quantum optics to relate inputs to outputs is due to Collett and Gardiner [19,20] and
appeared some 25 years later, stimulated by the need to understand squeezed light.
At its center is the quantum Langevin equation and its relation to the input field that
drives it and the output field for which it is the source.
4.3.1.1
Model in 1D
Considering one mode of the single-input optical cavity
illustrated in Figure 4.4 and the 1D expansion of the electric field operator in

88
QUANTUM OPTICS
Optical cavity 
Input field 
Output field
z = 0
z = L/2
z = –L/2 
in
(+)(z,t) 
out
(+)(z,t)
FIGURE 4.4
Schematic of an open system (lossy cavity mode) as a scattering scenario in
1D.
Section 4.2.2, the coupling of light through the input–output mirror is modeled
with Hamiltonian
H = ℏ𝜔ca†a +
∑
j
ℏ𝜔jb†
j bj + ℏg
∑
j
(ab†
j + a†bj
),
(4.45)
where the input field operator (z < 0), in photon flux units, is
(+)
in (z, t) = 𝜉(t −z∕c),
𝜉(t) = i
√
c
L
∑
j
bje−i𝜔jt.
(4.46)
The cavity has resonance frequency 𝜔c and energy damping rate 2𝜅= Tc∕𝓁, with
𝓁the cavity length and T the mirror transmission coefficient. Fermi’s golden rule
sets the phenomenological coupling coefficient at g =
√
2𝜅
√
L∕c (density of states
L∕2𝜋c), and [𝜉(t′), 𝜉†(t′′)] = 𝛿(t′ −t′′) (in the L →∞limit) so (+)
in (z, t) and (−)
in (z, t)
obey the commutation relation of a free field.
4.3.1.2
Quantum Langevin Equation and Output Field
The quantum Langevin
equation is the Heisenberg equation of motion for annihilation operator a with the
response of modes bj formally eliminated in favor of an integral (up to time t) over
a and the free oscillation bj exp(−i𝜔jt). The assumed frequency-independent mode
density and coupling g allow the sum over exp[−i𝜔j(t −t′)] (extended to negative
𝜔j) to yield a 𝛿-function and the integral over a to be evaluated. The resulting
equation is
da
dt = −(𝜅+ i𝜔c)a −
√
2𝜅𝜉(t).
(4.47)

OPEN SYSTEMS: INPUTS AND OUTPUTS
89
The same sum taken over the formal solution for bj(t) yields the output field operator
(z > 0)
(+)
out (z, t) = 𝜉(t −z∕c) +
√
2𝜅a(t −z∕c),
(4.48)
and at the discontinuity (input–output mirror),
(+)(0, t) = 𝜉(t) + 1
2
√
2𝜅a(t).
(4.49)
Formal integration of Eq. (4.47) gives results for commutators [a(t′), a†(t′′)] and
[𝜉(t′), a†(t′′)] such that (−)
out (z, t) and (+)
out (z, t) also obey the commutation relation of
a free field.
4.3.2
Schr¨odinger Picture
As is commonly the case in quantum mechanics, Heisenberg equations of motion
can be difficult to solve. The Langevin equation above raises no problem as the
chosen example of a freely decaying cavity mode yields a linear equation. The more
interesting situation, however, is where the cavity mode also interacts with a material
system—atom, quantum dot, nonlinear crystal—and the Heisenberg picture yields
a coupled set of nonlinear operator equations. In such a situation the Schr¨odinger
picture is likely preferred for making calculations, though the Heisenberg connection
between input and output fields is still used. Mollow’s calculation [21] of the power
spectrum of resonance fluorescence (Section 4.3.3.4) is an early example of the
method; the operator input–output relation is first provided, Eqs. (2.11) and (2.12),
and a master equation, Eq. (3.9), is then introduced.
4.3.2.1
Lindblad Master Equation
The master equation is an autonomous equa-
tion of motion for the reduced density operator of the cavity mode 𝜌= trB(𝜒); the
trace is over all modes bj, and the density operator 𝜒satisfies the Schr¨odinger
(Liouville) equation with Hamiltonian H. The explicit form depends on the state of
the input field through correlation functions. Considering broadband chaotic light,
for example, photon number nb per mode, the relevant correlation functions are
⟨𝜉†(t′)𝜉(t′′)⟩= nb𝛿(t′ −t′′),
⟨𝜉(t′)𝜉†(t′′)⟩= (nb + 1)𝛿(t′ −t′′),
(4.50)
and the master equation is
d𝜌
dt = −i𝜔c[a†a, 𝜌] + 𝜅(nb + 1)[a]𝜌+ 𝜅nb[a†]𝜌.
(4.51)
Terms appear describing incoherent pumping and decay, expressed through the Lind-
blad superoperator (the dot shows where the argument goes)
[𝜂] = 2𝜂⋅𝜂† −𝜂†𝜂⋅−⋅𝜂†𝜂.
(4.52)

90
QUANTUM OPTICS
The Lindblad form is generic to all physically acceptable reduced evolutions. It
obviously preserves the trace of 𝜌but, more particularly, ensures that it evolves under
a completely positive map [22].
4.3.2.2
Rate Equations: The Pauli Master Equation
The derivation of Eq. (4.51)
is largely a familiar exercise in time-dependent perturbation theory. Its most immedi-
ate content is a rate equation that might be reached equally well from Fermi’s golden
rule:
d𝜌n,n
dt
= 2𝜅(nb + 1)[(n + 1)𝜌n+1,n+1 −n𝜌n,n]
+ 2𝜅nb[n𝜌n−1,n−1 −(n + 1)𝜌n,n],
(4.53)
where 𝜌n,n = ⟨n|𝜌|n⟩is the probability for n photons in the cavity. The term with
coefficient 2𝜅(nb + 1)(n + 1) is the rate of stimulated plus spontaneous emission,
taking n + 1 photons to n, while the term with coefficient 2𝜅nbn is the rate of
absorption, taking n −1 photons to n. Equating transition rates between neighboring
energy levels—for example, first and last terms (or second and third)—yields the
steady-state photon number distribution,
𝜌n,n =
nn
b
(nb + 1)n+1 ,
(4.54)
of chaotic light. An equation like Eq. (4.53) balancing incoherent transitions in and
out of a quantum state is an example of a Pauli master equation [23].
4.3.2.3
Coherent Drive
The signature of quantum optics is coherence. As an
operator equation, the Lindblad master equation can deal with coherent driving as
well. Setting one mode of the reservoir, frequency 𝜔, in coherent state |i𝛽⟩, the input
field 𝜉(t) gains a nonzero mean:
−
√
2𝜅⟨𝜉(t)⟩= 𝜀e−i𝜔t,
𝜀=
√
2𝜅
√
c
L𝛽.
(4.55)
If all other modes bj are in the vacuum state, the master equation is
d𝜌
dt = −i𝜔c[a†a, 𝜌] + 𝜀[aei𝜔t −a†e−i𝜔t, 𝜌] + 𝜅[a]𝜌,
(4.56)
with the drive interaction appearing at first order. Its solution shows the cavity filling
up with coherent light. For initial state |0⟩, the state at time t is the coherent state
|𝛼(t)⟩= D(𝛼(t))|0⟩,
𝛼(t) =
𝜀e−i𝜔t
𝜅+ i(𝜔c −𝜔)(1 −e−𝜅t).
(4.57)

OPEN SYSTEMS: INPUTS AND OUTPUTS
91
4.3.3
Quantum Regression
The master equation is solved for a quantum state of the cavity mode, most generally, a
mixed state 𝜌(t). Output field properties such as the power spectrum (Section 4.3.3.4),
spectrum of squeezing (Section 4.4.3.2), and photon counting statistics (Sections
4.3.3.3 and 4.4), are not accessible from 𝜌(t) alone. They depend on correlation
functions, whose computation relies on a strategy for evaluating two- (or multi-) time
operator averages. The strategy is the quantum regression procedure of Lax [24–26].
It may be set out in two different, though equivalent, forms.
4.3.3.1
Solve the Master Equation Twice
The master equation accounts only for
one-time averages of the intracavity field operators, for example,
⟨a(t)⟩= tr[a𝜌(t)].
(4.58)
Nonetheless, a Lindblad master equation describes a Markov process. This means
that the same equation of motion can provide multi-time averages with an appropriate
change made to its initial condition. The situation is analogous to writing a two-time
joint probability density P(x2, t2 ∧x1, t1) as P(x2, t2|x1, t1)P(x1, t1), where both the
one-time density and conditional density obey the same equation of motion.
Working from the one-time average ⟨a(t)⟩as an example, the quantum regression
procedure calls for the master equation to be solved a second time, as an equation in
𝜏> 0, to evaluate a two-time average
⟨A(t)a(t + 𝜏)B(t)⟩= tr[aRB𝜌(t)A(𝜏)].
(4.59)
The operators A and B are arbitrary and the quantity RB𝜌(t)A(𝜏) obeys the master
equation with initial condition
RB𝜌(t)A(0) = B𝜌(t)A.
(4.60)
4.3.3.2
In the Manner of Lax
Lax sets the procedure out in a different way
[24–26]. Staying with the same example, he starts with the equation of motion for
the one-time average,
d⟨a⟩
dt
= −(𝜅+ i𝜔c)⟨a⟩.
(4.61)
The quantum regression procedure then asserts that the angle brackets may be
removed throughout, the time argument changed from t to t + 𝜏, and then any oper-
ators A(t) and B(t) may be inserted before replacing the angle brackets. The result is
an equation of motion for a correlation function,
d⟨A(t)a(t + 𝜏)B(t)⟩
d𝜏
= −(𝜅+ i𝜔c)⟨A(t)a(t + 𝜏)B(t)⟩,
(4.62)

92
QUANTUM OPTICS
which can be solved if the average at 𝜏= 0 is known. The procedure extends to the
less trivial case where one-time averages obey a set of coupled equations (Section
4.3.3.4).
Equations (4.61) and (4.62) both follow from Eq. (4.47), where one sees that the
regression procedure relies on the fact that the input field 𝜉(t + 𝜏) is uncorrelated
with operators of the cavity evaluated at an earlier time, that is, ⟨A(t)𝜉(t + 𝜏)B(t)⟩=
⟨A(t)B(t)⟩⟨𝜉(t + 𝜏)⟩= 0.
4.3.3.3
Hanbury Brown and Twiss
The photon bunching effect of Hanbury
Brown and Twiss serves well as a first example of the quantum regression pro-
cedure. For their application in astronomy they considered the correlation of two
light intensities recorded at different points in space [27–30]. The bunching of ther-
mal light is captured just as well, however, by the correlation of intensities displaced
in time.
Consider a modification of Figure 4.4 with the cavity open at both ends, decay
rates 𝛾(left) and 𝜅(right). Broadband chaotic (thermal) light is input from the left
and a filtered output field transmitted to the right; the input field to the right is in
the vacuum state. The equation of motion for the mean number of photons in the
cavity is
d⟨N⟩
dt
= −2(𝛾+ 𝜅)⟨N⟩+ 2𝛾nb,
(4.63)
from which, according to the quantum regression procedure in its second form, the
intensity correlation function in the longtime (stationary) limit obeys the equation of
motion
⟨a†(0)N(𝜏)a(0)⟩
d𝜏
= −2(𝛾+ 𝜅)⟨a†(0)N(𝜏)a(0)⟩+ 2𝛾nb⟨N(∞)⟩.
(4.64)
The solution is
lim
t→∞⟨a†(0)N(𝜏)a(0)⟩= ⟨N(∞)⟩2 (1 + e−2(𝛾+𝜅)|𝜏|) ,
(4.65)
with ⟨N(∞)⟩= 𝛾nb∕(𝛾+ 𝜅). It exhibits photon bunching (Section 4.4.2.2).
4.3.3.4
The Mollow Spectrum
The power spectrum of quasi-elastic scattering
from a two-state system driven by monochromatic laser light, that is, the spectrum
of resonance fluorescence, provides a second notable application of the quantum
regression procedure. Mollow [21] used this method to calculate the spectrum in 1969
(following some erroneous calculations). Schuda et al. [31] experimentally verified
his result in 1974. Although of 40-year vintage, the Mollow spectrum continues to
be encountered along new experimental pathways, for example, in experiments with
quantum dots inside microcavities [32] and in circuit QED [33].

OPEN SYSTEMS: INPUTS AND OUTPUTS
93
–20
–10
0
10
20
3/2
3/2
1
1
1
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
–0.3
0.0
0.3
y
∑
∑
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
x
FIGURE 4.5
Incoherent part of the Mollow spectrum for radiative decay and strong
drive (𝛾∥= 2𝛾⟂= 𝛾and Ω ≫𝛾). Fourier transforms of the correlation functions Σx,y(𝜏) =
⟨Δ𝜎+(0)Δ𝜎x,y(𝜏)⟩contribute the central peak (Σx) and sidebands (Σy).
The spectrum is the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation of the dipole moment,
⟨𝜎+(t)𝜎−(t + 𝜏)⟩, of the driven two-state system. It is calculated by applying the
quantum regression procedure to the optical Bloch equations (Section 4.2.5.2): for
arbitrary operators A and B in the longtime limit,
d⟨A𝝈′(𝜏)B⟩
d𝜏
=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
−𝛾⟂−z
y
z
−𝛾⟂−x
−y
x
−𝛾∥
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⟨A𝝈′(𝜏)B⟩−𝛾∥
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
0
0
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⟨AB⟩,
(4.66)
where 𝝈′ refers to a frame of reference rotating at the frequency of the drive, so
that Beff(t) →(x, y, z) = (0, Ω, 𝜔a −𝜔), with Ω the Rabi frequency. The required
autocorrelation is calculated with A = 𝜎′
+ and B = 𝟙.
Figure 4.5 illustrates the main features of the dipole autocorrelation and the inco-
herent (inelastic) part of the Mollow spectrum. There are two pieces to the auto-
correlation: the first shows the decay of fluctuations in quadrature to the drive and
contributes the central spectral peak; the second shows the modulated (at the Rabi
frequency) decay of fluctuations in phase with the drive and contributes the Mollow
sidebands. The three-peak structure may also be understood from a dressed-state
point of view (Section 4.5.1.2).
4.3.4
Quantum Jumps
The quantum jump is rooted in the time of the old quantum theory and finds expression
in master equations of the Pauli type (Section 4.3.2.2), where the dynamic is one of
incoherent transitions (jumps) between stationary states. Operator master equations

94
QUANTUM OPTICS
combine coherent and incoherent evolution, with the jump part buried in the Lindblad
superoperator [𝜉]. The connection is fully elaborated in quantum trajectory theory
(Section 4.4.4). It is reach most directly in elementary form from a Dyson expansion
of the solution 𝜌(t) to a Lindblad master equation.
4.3.4.1
Dyson Expansion for the Master Equation
For a simplest example
(Eq. 4.51 with nb = 0), the superoperator on the right-hand side may be separated
into two pieces mimicking the free Hamiltonian and interaction Hamiltonian of time-
dependent perturbation theory:
−i𝜔c[a†a, ⋅] + 𝜅[a] = 0 + J,
(4.67)
with
0 = −i𝜔c[a†a, ⋅] −𝜅[a†a, ⋅]+,
J = 2𝜅a ⋅a†.
(4.68)
In the open systems context, 0 might be called the null-measurement (no-jump)
superoperator, with J the jump superoperator. The Dyson expansion sums over the
number of quantum jumps (photons lost) up to time t:
𝜌(t) =
∞
∑
n=0 ∫
t
0
dtn ⋯∫
t2
0
dt1 (t, tn)J … J(t1, 0)𝜌(0),
(4.69)
where (tk, tk−1) = exp[0(tk −tk−1)]. It is clear that J extracts one photon from
the cavity. The other part of the original 𝜅[a], the anticommutator in 0, effectively
adds an imaginary part to the energy.
4.3.4.2
`A la Dehmelt
In a short abstract published in 1975 in the Bulletin of
the American Physical Society [34], Hans Dehmelt outlined his “electron shelv-
ing” scheme. He conceived it as a method of amplification for monitoring the state
(ground or excited) of a weak metastable transition, by recording the fluorescence
from a simultaneously driven strong dipole-allowed transition: the electron is in the
shared ground state if the fluorescence is “on” and the weak excited state if “off” [Fig.
4.6a]. With continuous driving of both transitions, spontaneous switching of the fluo-
rescence “on” and “off” records quantum jumps between the ground and metastable
state. Such switching was subsequently observed [35–37], and electron shelving is
now widely used as a monitor of qubit states in the field of quantum information.
Quantum jumps in single molecules [38] and in a single-electron cyclotron [39] have
been seen; in a reversal typical of microwave cavity QED (Section 4.5.1.1) where a
stream of Rydberg atoms monitors the photon state, quantum jumps of photons have
also been reported [40].
Quantum jumps as inferred from the on–off switching of a measurement record are
related to, though distinct from, the formal jumps employed by quantum trajectory
theory (Section 4.4.4). The latter are the discrete events written into the record
(e.g., the recording of one count in fluorescence), while the former are inferred from

PHOTON COUNTING
95
(weak)
281.5 nm
2P3/2
2P1/2
2D5/2
2D3/2
5d106p
5d 6s
9
2
5d106s S
2
1/2
194 nm
(strong)
0
4X105
3X105
2X105
9.46x104
9.50x104
9.54x104
0.0
0.5
1.0
Probability
1X105
Time (strong transition lifetimes)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.6
(a) Level scheme used for the realization of quantum jumps in Mercury II [37].
(b) The probability to occupy the weak excited state evolves continuously (green curve) in
a quantum trajectory simulation (Section 4.4.4.2). (For a color version of this figure, see the
color plate section.)
the latter, or more precisely from their absence, that is, from the null-measurement
inference [41]: if no fluorescence count is being recorded over an extended interval
of time, then the electron is increasingly likely to be shelved. When the drive light
is incoherent, as it is in the theoretical treatment of Cook and Kimble [42], jumps
within the atom might be adopted as primary events. When the drive is coherent that
option is withdrawn. Whatsoever is the state of the atom is then an inference, drawn
from a continuous Schr¨odinger evolution conditioned upon whatever information is
(or may be) recorded in the environment. The inferred passage to the shelved state is
continuous, as in Figure 4.6, a jump only in coarse-grained time, the course-graining
set by the bandwidth of the monitoring scheme.
4.4
PHOTON COUNTING
Photon or photo-electron counting is the basis of most measurements of light. Even
when there is no counting of individual photons, recording at the level of photon
counts is fundamental to an understanding of shot-noise-limited and sub-shot-noise
measurements. A related and recurring theme in quantum optics is the distinction
drawn between classical and nonclassical fields. Of course, all radiation is quantum
mechanical in theory. A line of demarkation may nonetheless be defined; it is drawn
from the theory of photon counting.
4.4.1
Basics
4.4.1.1
Glauber Coherence Theory and the Kelley-Kleiner Formula
Glauber
coherence theory [6–8] is built around the normally ordered correlation functions
(more generally with space-time arguments)
G(n)(t1, … , tn, tn+1, … , t2n) = ⟨E(−)(t1) … E(−)(tn)E(+)(tn+1) … E(+)(t2n)⟩.
An optical field is coherent at order n if G(n) factorizes as a 2n-fold product. The
normal ordering of operators means the field is coherent to all orders when it is in

96
QUANTUM OPTICS
a multi-mode coherent state. First-order coherence and second-order coherence are
most commonly discussed, often for a time-stationary field, where one introduces the
normalized autocorrelation of the electric field, or degree of first-order coherence,
g(1)(𝜏) = G(1)(𝜏)
G(1)(0),
G(1)(𝜏) = lim
t→∞G(1)(t, t + 𝜏),
(4.70)
whose Fourier transform is the optical spectrum, and the autocorrelation of intensity,
or degree of second-order coherence,
g(2)(𝜏) =
G(2)(𝜏)
[G(1)(0)]2 ,
G(2)(𝜏) = lim
t→∞G(2)(t, t + 𝜏, t + 𝜏, t),
(4.71)
which plays an important role in the characterization of photon statistics. Glauber
based his correlation functions on considerations of photoelectron counting. The
time-symmetric ones (t2n−k = tk+1) are, aside from a scale factor, nonexclusive pho-
toelectron counting probability densities, that is, rates for photoelectron counts at
times t1, … , tn, without regard to the number of counts that may or may not occur at
other times. They enter in this capacity into the probability for counting n photoelec-
trons between t and t + T:
P(n) =
⟨
: [Ω(t, t + T)]n
n!
exp[−Ω(t, t + T)] :
⟩
.
(4.72)
This quantum-averaged Poisson distribution is known as the Kelley–Kleiner formula
[43]. It is a Poisson distribution in the integrated photon flux operator Ω(t, t + T) =
𝜂∫t+T
t
dt′(−)(t′)(+)(t′), where 𝜂< 1 is the quantum efficiency. The double dots
indicate normal ordering of the field operators.
4.4.1.2
Shot Noise and the Fano Factor
Normal ordering means that the inte-
grated photon flux operator Ω(t, t + T) is replaced by a number when the field is
coherent to all orders (multi-mode coherent state). The photon counting distribution
is then a regular Poisson distribution with variance equal to the mean. The residual
fluctuation in the number of counts is the shot noise traditionally associated with the
random conversion of a light flux into a flux of discrete (countable) photoelectric
pulses. The semiclassical treatment of photoelectric detection (Section 4.4.2.1) sets
this shot-noise level as a barrier; sub-shot-noise detection is not possible. The barrier
may be broken in quantum mechanics (Sections 4.4.2.2 and 4.4.3.2). The Fano factor
[44] is a simple relative measure of deviations from the shot-noise level.
For light that is not fully coherent, factorial moments of n are calculated as
derivatives w.r.t. y of the generating function ⟨:exp{−[yΩ(t, t + T)]}:⟩. Considering
a stationary field and the cavity model of Section 4.3, the photon number count
variance is
⟨Δn2⟩= ⟨n⟩+ (𝜂2𝜅)2⟨N(∞)⟩2
∫
t+T
t
dt′
∫
t+T
t
dt′′[g(2)(|t′ −t′′|) −1], (4.73)

PHOTON COUNTING
97
and for a counting interval short compared to the correlation time,
⟨Δn2⟩−⟨n⟩= (𝜂2𝜅T)2[⟨ΔN2(∞)⟩−⟨N(∞)⟩].
(4.74)
Counts may be super-Poisson or sub-Poisson according to whether the photon number
distribution of the light inside the cavity is super-Poisson or sub-Poisson, though the
degree of departure from a Poisson distribution depends on the factor 𝜂2𝜅T, the mean
number of counts per intracavity photon. The Fano factor is a simple ratio,
F = ⟨Δn2⟩
⟨n⟩,
(4.75)
which quantifies the departure from a Poisson. Mandel’s Q = F −1 [45] does an
equivalent job. The semiclassical treatment of photoelectric detection limits Q to
nonnegative values.
4.4.2
Classical and Nonclassical Fields
4.4.2.1
Mandel Formula: The P Function and BKS
Mandel discussed photo-
electron counting and its relation to photon statistics as early as 1959 [46, 47]. His
arguments are semiclassical, in so far as the light is viewed as a classical Maxwell
wave with fluctuating intensity, and its intensity (averaged over an optical cycle)
governs the rate at which photoelectrons are created—at random in accord with
Fermi’s golden rule. The Mandel counting formula looks like Eq. (4.72), but with
the quantum average replaced by an average over the classical random variable
Ω(t, t + T). For stationary intensity fluctuations, the average is a time average.
Mandel’s semiclassical result is recovered from the full quantum treatment if the
state of the field may be represented by a P function (Section 4.2.3.2) that is an
ordinary function and positive definite. It is then a statistical mixture over coherent
states and the normal ordering of Eq. (4.72) recasts the quantum average as a classical
average. Sudarshan’s optical equivalence theorem [10] extends this connection to all
field states by admitting P functions as generalized functions. The extension is a
formal (not operational) one.
The existence of an ordinary positive definite P function defines what in quantum
optics is called a classical field. Nonexistence defines a nonclassical field. It is
interesting to note as a historical aside that classical fields are those whose behavior
in photoelectric detection is consistent with the so-called BKS proposal [48], the last
valiant effort of Bohr to save the idea of light as a classical wave. Glauber coherence
theory and the P function formalize the failure, in general, of the BKS proposal vis `a
vis photoelectric detection.
4.4.2.2
Photon Antibunching and Single-Photon Sources
The photon bunching
of Hanbury Brown and Twiss (Section 4.3.3.3) stimulated much of the early work
on photon counting. Both Mandel [46] and Glauber [6,7] open their seminal papers

98
QUANTUM OPTICS
with references to Hanbury Brown and Twiss. Photon “bunching” refers to a ten-
dency of photoelectrons to be produced in bunches in photoelectric detection; photon
“antibunching” to a tendency toward photoelectrons equally spaced in time. These
tendencies are revealed in the intensity autocorrelation, g(2)(𝜏), whose behavior sets
the variance of the photon counting distribution (Section 4.4.1.2). The light is bunched
when the autocorrelation decays to unity from an initial value greater than one (e.g.,
Eq. 4.65); when it approaches unity from a smaller initial value—that is, it rises to
unity from below—it is antibunched.
In photon counting terms, the intensity autocorrelation is proportional to the
probability to detect a pair of photons separated by 𝜏; it measures the delayed photon
coincidence rate. Thus the ideal antibunched light source emits a stream of single-
photon pulses regularly space in time. Due largely to interests in the field of quantum
information, a great deal of effort has gone into the realization of this ideal in recent
years [49].
The first observation of antibunched light employed scattering from a single two-
state atom. The experiment by Kimble et al. [50] followed a flurry of theoretical
work on the photon statistics of resonance fluorescence [51–54]. Although photons
are scattered one at a time in this one-atom system, their timing and direction are
unpredictable, a deficiency for a practical light source. The example nevertheless
serves to illustrate matters of principle. Figure 4.7 compares a simulated (at unit
0
0
1
2
g(2)
Intensity
Time
(a)
0
0
1
2
g(2)
(b)
Intensity
Time
Time
0
0
1
2
g(2)
(c)
FIGURE 4.7
Simulated photon counting sequences: (a) filtered thermal light, (b) laser turn-
on, and (c) resonance fluorescence. Green curves plot the a priori rate of events (classical
intensity); an event rate for resonance fluorescence must include back-action (Section 4.4.4.2).
(For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)

PHOTON COUNTING
99
efficiency) detection time series for resonance fluorescence with similar series for
filtered thermal light (Section 4.3.3.3) and a simple laser model. It is noticeably more
regular. It is also nonclassical, in so far as it cannot be generated as a point process
from a fluctuating rate of events (classical intensity) as the others can.
4.4.3
Homodyne/Heterodyne Detection
Homodyne and heterodyne detection are methods of demodulation originally devel-
oped for applications in the RF. Stable lasers extend these methods into the optical
domain [55], where balanced homodyne detection, in particular, is the method of
choice for measuring optical squeezing [56]. It provides access to the observables
mapped by the squeeze transformation (Section 4.2.1.3) and is therefore a funda-
mental tool in the field of continuous variable quantum information. Heterodyne
detection, although less widely used in quantum optics, is an important measurement
technique in circuit QED (Section 4.5.1.1).
Homodyne and heterodyne detection superpose the signal field of interest with
a local oscillator field prior to making a photon counting measurement. They may
be seen and analyzed as applications of the photon counting theory of Glauber and
Kelley–Kleiner (Section 4.4.1.1), with its explicit normal ordering of operators. The
square of a quadrature amplitude, like X = 1
2(a + a†), is not a normally ordered
operator. It therefore has a nonzero vacuum average, coming from the commutator
[a, a†] = 1, that is, from the vacuum fluctuations. Squeezing is all about reducing this
vacuum average. One might then ask: how can a measurement of optical squeezing,
which relates to a nonzero vacuum average, emerge from the explicit normal ordering
of the Glauber and Kelley–Kleiner theory? The story in detail is a little involved [57],
but boils down to the fact that shot noise appears in the semiclassical treatment of
photoelectric detection too. Its story is carried by the underlying Poisson structure of
the photon counting formula and need not be associated with a vacuum state operator
average. Vacuum fluctuation bookkeeping [56,58] is simpler, though, and is used in
this section.
4.4.3.1
Simple Single-Mode Scheme
In a simple single-mode model, balanced
homodyne/heterodyne detection is described by the mapping of a signal mode a and
local oscillator mode b through the arrangement of beam splitters in Figure 4.8a.
The mapping at the initial 50/50 beam splitter is expressed through the unitary
transformation of annihilation operators
B†(𝜆)
(a
b
)
B(𝜆) =
( cos 𝜆i sin 𝜆
i sin 𝜆cos 𝜆
)( a
b
)
,
(4.76)
B(𝜆) = exp[i𝜆(ab† + a†b)], with 𝜆= 𝜋∕4. The other beam splitters add vacuum
modes v1 and v2 to account for nonunit detection efficiency 𝜂. These modes com-
bine with the outputs of the 50/50 beam splitter through similar transformations,
with cos 𝜆= √𝜂, sin 𝜆=
√
1 −𝜂. Local oscillator mode b is in a coherent state

100
QUANTUM OPTICS
a
b
d1
d2
v1
v2
50
50
η
η
1-
η
1-
η
(a)
(b)
a
v
NX
50
50
X
(–)
NY
(–)
Y
Homodyne
detector
Homodyne
detector
FIGURE 4.8
Inputs and outputs for (a) homodyne detection and (b) heterodyne detection
(as a dual homodyne scheme).
|𝛽⟩of large amplitude, and by subtraction the reduced photon number difference
N(−)(t) = ⟨𝛽|d†
1(t)d1(t) −d†
2(t)d2(t)|𝛽⟩is measured, where output modes d1 and d2
are defined in Figure 4.8a. Keeping terms of order 𝛽only, the photon number
difference is
N(−)(t) = i𝜂[𝛽(t)a†(t) −𝛽∗(t)a(t)] +
√
𝜂(1 −𝜂)[𝛽(t)v†(t) + 𝛽∗(t)v(t)], (4.77)
𝛽(t) = 𝛽exp(−i𝜔t), where v is a linear combination of v1 and v2.
Balanced homodyne detection matches the local oscillator frequency to the fre-
quency of the signal, and the relevant vacuum mode v is similarly matched. Then
setting the local oscillator phase 𝜃, writing 𝛽= −i|𝛽|ei𝜃,
N(−) = 2𝜂|𝛽|X𝜃−i
√
𝜂(1 −𝜂)|𝛽|(v† −v),
(4.78)
where X𝜃denotes the quadrature amplitude of the signal field in the local-oscillator-
selected rotating frame: ei𝜃exp(i𝜔at)a(t) = X𝜃+ iY𝜃. At unit detector efficiency the
vacuum term is zero. It then follows that moments of homodyne detection data yield
the symmetrically ordered moments of the operator X𝜃, that is, moments of the Wigner
function (Section 4.2.3.3).
Balanced heterodyne detection works in a similar way, but introduces a frequency
offset Δ between the local oscillator and signal. This provides for a modulated photon
number difference,
N(−)(t) = 𝜂|𝛽|(e−iΔta† −eiΔta) +
√
𝜂(1 −𝜂)|𝛽|(e−iΔtv† + eiΔtv),
(4.79)
which may be demodulated to recover both the signal amplitude and phase. The
demodulation effectively measures two quadrature amplitudes at once, and therefore
calls for further signal splitting. For clarity, the overall scheme may be analyzed using

PHOTON COUNTING
101
the dual homodyne setup of Figure 4.8b. Considering unit detection efficiency for
simplicity,
N(−)
X
= |𝛽|(X + Xv),
N(−)
Y
= |𝛽|(Y + Yv),
(4.80)
where a = X + iY and v = Xv + iYv. The effective number operator after demodula-
tion is
(
N(−)
X
)2
+
(
N(−)
Y
)2
= |𝛽|2(aa† + v†v).
(4.81)
Operationally the number operator v†v may be dropped, and the result shows how
moments of heterodyne detection data yield quantum averages of signal field opera-
tors placed in antinormal order, that is, moments of the Q function (Section 4.2.3.1).
4.4.3.2
Squeezed Light
Harmonic oscillator minimum uncertainty states of
unequal uncertainty were known before they attracted wide attention in quantum
optics, beginning in the 1970s, with the recognition of their potential to improve
performance in optical communications [55]. Many early references appear in a
paper by Yuen that looks ahead in this direction [59]. Squeezed states today are
the foundation of continuous variable quantum information. In the simple single-
mode scheme, squeezing is described by the squeeze transformation of Eq. (4.13)
and generated, ideally, through the two-photon interaction of parametric down con-
version, which realizes the squeeze operator. The physical implication is seen with
aj𝜉→ei𝜃(X𝜃+ iY𝜃) in the expansion of the electric field, Eqs. (4.17) and (4.18): the
amplitude and its quantum fluctuations of the sin(𝜔jt −kjt −𝜃) oscillation is reduced,
while for the cos(𝜔jt −kjt −𝜃) oscillation they increase. The reduced fluctuations are
seen in balanced homodyne detection, where Eq. (4.78) gives a number difference
variance (assuming zero mean)
⟨N(−)N(−)⟩= 𝜂|𝛽|2[4𝜂⟨X2
𝜃⟩+ (1 −𝜂)].
(4.82)
The result is 𝜂|𝛽|2 (shot noise) if the signal mode is in the vacuum state. When the
vacuum is squeezed, ⟨X2
𝜃⟩= e−2r 1
4, it is less.
The squeezing of light was first observed in 1985 [60] in an experiment that
realized the squeeze interaction through four-wave mixing in sodium vapor in an
optical cavity. The next year significantly larger squeezing was achieved in parametric
down conversion [61]. Most generally, squeezing experiments call for a multi-mode
discussion [62, 63], where shot-noise reduction at RF frequency 𝜔is caused by
correlated photon pairs, whose frequencies 𝜔a + 𝜔and 𝜔a −𝜔are symmetrically
placed with respect to the central signal frequency 𝜔a. For a stationary signal, for
example, the output of a parametric oscillator (output coupling rate 2𝜅), a spectrum
of squeezing is defined as the ratio of measured noise power to shot-noise power at
frequency 𝜔:
P𝜃(𝜔)∕Pshot = 1 + 8𝜂𝜅∫
∞
−∞
d𝜏e−i𝜔𝜏⟨:X𝜃(t)X𝜃(t + 𝜏):⟩,
(4.83)

102
QUANTUM OPTICS
where double dots indicate time and normal order. In this formula X𝜃refers to a
lossy cavity mode, while it refers to a mode of the output field in Eq. (4.82); the
connection, from Eq. (4.48), adds the delta-function correlation of the input field
[57]: 2𝜅⟨:X𝜃(t)X𝜃(t + 𝜏):⟩= ⟨X𝜃
out(t)X𝜃
out(t + 𝜏)⟩−1
4𝛿(𝜏).
Squeezed light generation and detection is sensitive to loss, as the above
𝜂-dependence shows. Experimental progress toward useful squeezing has never-
theless raised the initial 7% noise reduction [60] to a factor of ten [64]. In the
reverse direction, the extremely weak squeezing of single-atom resonance fluores-
cence [65,66] is of interest as a fundamental example of nonclassical light, although
difficult to measure. It has been observed with one trapped atom in a cavity [67]
following an earlier few-atom experiment [68].
4.4.3.3
Quantum State Tomography and Teleportation
Quantum state tomogra-
phy refers to the reconstruction of a quantum state, in one representation or another,
from repeated measurements made on an ensemble of identically prepared systems.
The version originally proposed in quantum optics [69] and realized soon thereafter
[70] is a remarkable application of homodyne detection. As shown by Eq. (4.78), the
moments of balanced homodyne detection data are moments of the Wigner function;
specifically, they are moments of the marginal distribution obtained by integrating
out the Y𝜃-dependence of W when X𝜃is measured; a histogram of data values is the
marginal distribution. The Wigner function can then be reconstructed, as a represen-
tation of the quantum state, if marginal distributions are measured for all 𝜃(many in
practice) and the set inverted with the inverse Radon transformation. This raw idea
has seen considerable development [71, 72], with one off-shoot adopted as a stan-
dard procedure for characterizing the quantum state of qubits [73] and operations on
qubits [74].
Continuous variable quantum teleportation aims not to reconstruct the quantum
state of a field mode, but to transfer it between two parties, usually given the names
Alice and Bob. Its realization as a protocol in quantum optics [75–77] substitutes field
modes that are infinitely squeezed in either X or Y for the position and momentum
eigenstates in a scheme proposed by Vaidman [78]. Although it is usual to speak
about the transfer of a “state”, the protocol is far more accessible seen as a mapping
of fields, as sketched in Figure 4.9. Mode a is an input field sent to Alice and
mode b an output field received by Bob. Modes c and d are squeezed, one in X
and the other in Y. If Alice’s balanced homodyne detector outputs are mapped as
operators, in line with Eq. (4.78) (set 𝜂= 1), the overall mapping from Alice to
Bob is
b =
1
√
2
(c −d) +
[
a +
1
√
2
(c† + d†)
]
= a +
√
2(Xc −iYd).
(4.84)
With Xc and Yd both infinitely squeezed, they are, in effect, zero; so the field received
by Bob is the field presented to Alice.

PHOTON COUNTING
103
50
50
50
50
a
c
d
X
Y
Homodyne
detector
Homodyne
detector
b
Alice
Bob
+
(c – d)
√
2
1
(Xc + Xd)
√
2
1
Xa +
(Yc + Yd)
√2
1
Ya –
FIGURE 4.9
Schematic of continuous variable teleportation viewed as a mapping of quan-
tum fields.
4.4.4
Quantum Trajectory Theory
Quantum trajectory theory is built around a relationship between Lindblad loss (Sec-
tion 4.3.2.1) and photon counting theory, in particular, the Kelley–Kleiner formula
(Section 4.4.1.1). It relates the photon counting statistics of output fields to the solu-
tion of a Lindblad master equation written as a Dyson expansion (Section 4.3.4.1)
[79–81]. Although it is not necessary to follow the photon counting connection to
reach the Monte Carlo algorithm that makes quantum trajectories such a useful tool
[82], it is fundamental, and important for interpretation and developing variations on
the basic theme [83,84].
4.4.4.1
Counts for Photoemissive Sources: Davies Meets Lindblad
Some few
years after the seminal work of Mandel [46, 47], Glauber [6–8], and Kelley and
Kleiner [43], Davies [85,86] outlined a mathematical description of realistic photon
counting (as opposed to instantaneous quantum measurement) within the framework
of quantum stochastic processes. While later a disagreement with the traditional
approach was claimed [87], the confusion is resolved by noting that the Kelly–
Kleiner formula holds for the output fields of an open system [88, 89]; there is an
underlying assumption that counted photons have already escaped their source and are
not extracted from it by the presence of the detector. Indeed, rather than disagreement
there is a close connection between a Davies process and Kelly–Kleiner. Quantum
trajectory theory is built upon it.
The Dyson series for the solution to a Lindblad master equation connects the
Kelly–Kleiner formula to a Davies quantum stochastic process. In the notation of
quantum trajectories, the series is recast as a decomposition of the density operator
into a mixture of pure states, each labeled by a history of photon emission times:
𝜌(t) =
∞
∑
n=0 ∫
t
0
dtn … ∫
t2
0
dt1P({t1, … , tn})|𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩⟨𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)|,
(4.85)

104
QUANTUM OPTICS
with P({t1, … , tn}) = ⟨̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)| ̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩the exclusive probability density for
emissions at times t1, … , tn and none in between these times, and |𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩the
normalized | ̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩. The Kelley–Kleiner formula uses nonexclusive probabili-
ties and does not appear to be connected to this series. It may nevertheless be rewritten
in terms of exclusive probabilities for an output field like that of Eq. (4.48). It is then
seen (with efficiency 𝜂= 1) to be nothing but the trace of the nested integral of order n
inside the sum. Moreover, equating photon emissions with photon counts, the explicit
form of the unnormalized ket,
| ̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩= N(t, tn)J ⋯JN(t1, 0)|𝜓(0)⟩,
(4.86)
with operators (for the simple example of Section 4.3.4.1)
N(tk, tk−1) = exp[−(𝜅+ i𝜔c)a†a(tk −tk−1)],
J =
√
2𝜅a,
(4.87)
shows the connection to a Davies process. From an initial ket |𝜓(0)⟩, the evolution
for a given count (emission) sequence passes through a series of null measurement
intervals and quantum jumps.
4.4.4.2
Simulated Detection Records: Master Equation Unravelings
The cen-
tral object in quantum trajectory theory is the ket | ̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩, with its label of
photon count times. Its norm is the exclusive probability density for the specified
record of photon counts, and the normalized ket derived from it is the state of the
photoemissive light source inferred from, or conditioned upon, the record of photon
counts. The expansion of 𝜌(t) as a generalized sum over conditional kets is referred to
as an unraveling of the master equation. Unravelings provide a route to Monte-Carlo
simulation of photon count records and their associated conditional kets; this follows
from a simple application of Bayesian inference, whereby, assuming |𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩is
known, the probability density for photon count n + 1 to occur at t is
⟨̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)|J†J| ̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩
⟨̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)| ̄𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩
= 2𝜅⟨𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)|a†a|𝜓{t1,…,tn}(t)⟩.
(4.88)
By drawing uniformly distributed random numbers, one decides at each time step
whether to use J or N(Δt) to map the ket, thus generating trajectories (conditional
kets and their records) automatically ensemble weighted as the exclusive probability
densities dictate.
Master equation unravelings come in infinite variety. The connection with photon
counting makes this plain, since a photoemissive light source might alternatively be
directed to a homodyne or heterodyne detector or experience some other passive
transformation before the final recording of photon counts. Homodyne/heterodyne
detection yields a diffusive evolution since a counted photon is far more likely

CAVITY AND CIRCUIT QED
105
0
5
10
15
20
–1
0
1
⟨
Time (atomic lifetimes)
Time (atomic lifetimes)
⟩
z REC
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
–1
0
1
⟨
⟩
z REC
(a)
–1
0
1
–1
0
1
⟨
⟩
y REC
⟨
⟩
x REC
(c)
FIGURE 4.10
Three unravelings of resonance fluorescence: (a) direct detection, (b) in-phase
homodyne detection, and (c) heterodyne detection. All curves are projections of a path on the
Bloch sphere.
to come from the local oscillator than from the signal. The generated stochas-
tic Schr¨odinger equation (in the interaction picture and for the simple example of
Section 4.3.4.1) is
d|𝜓′
REC⟩=
(
−𝜅a†adt +
{ e−i𝜃
1
} √
2𝜅adq
)
|𝜓′
REC⟩,
(4.89)
with record “charge” increment
dq =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
2
√
2𝜅⟨X𝜃⟩RECdt + dW
homodyne
√
2𝜅⟨a†⟩RECdt + dZ
heterodyne ,
(4.90)
where dW and dZ = (dWx + idWy)∕
√
2 are Wiener increments. The norm of ket
|𝜓′
REC⟩is arbitrary, though expectations are normalized. Figure 4.10 shows sample
trajectories for three different unravelings of resonance fluorescence.
4.5
CAVITY AND CIRCUIT QED
The interaction of electromagnetic radiation and matter inside cavities is an old
and persistent theme in quantum optics, taking us back to early work on masers
and lasers [90,91], then forward to the recent realization of the Dicke quantum phase
transition [92,93] with a superfluid gas in an optical cavity [94,95] and the first Bose–
Einstein condensation of photons [96]. Cavity and circuit QED claim their special
place in this long history by realizing single-photon dipole interaction strengths that

106
QUANTUM OPTICS
are very large. The goal is achieved either through a cavity design that by spatial
confinement achieves high one-photon energy density [97], or by exploiting the
large dipole moments of Rydberg atoms or Josephson junctions. Dipole coupling
strengths (Section 4.2.5.1) as large or larger than spontaneous emission and cavity
decay rates are realized, and in this way, resonances labeled by photon number, not
merely cavity modes, are spectroscopically addressable. The spectroscopy is that of
the Jaynes–Cummings model.
4.5.1
Jaynes–Cummings Model
In 1963 Jaynes and Cummings published a paper containing the model now associated
with their names: “Comparison of quantum and semiclassical radiation theories with
application to the beam maser” [98]. Although focused on the success of semiclassical
Maxwell–Bloch equations for describing light-matter interactions—even at the one
photon level—the legacy is a quantum mechanical model for the interaction of a
two-state system with one mode of the radiation field. Harry Paul published the same
model in 1963 [99]. The interaction is described by the dipole interaction Hamiltonian
taken in the rotating wave approximation (Section 4.2.5.1):
HJC = ℏ𝜔ca†a + 1
2ℏ𝜔a𝜎z + ℏg(a𝜎+ + a†𝜎−),
(4.91)
with g the dipole coupling strength, and 𝜔c and 𝜔a the resonance frequencies of a
cavity mode and two-state system (e.g., atom). Most work in cavity and circuit QED
is built around realizations of this model, although ultrastrong coupling requires that
the rotating wave approximation not be made [15,100].
4.5.1.1
Realization: Atoms, Dots, Superconducting Circuits
Attempts to realize
the fully quantum mechanical Jaynes–Cummings model, so its semiclassical approx-
imation might be questioned in the lab, begin with superconducting microwave
cavities, where the large dipole moments and low spontaneous emission rates of
Rydberg atoms mean that coupling to just one photon can overcome losses. This
strategy is followed in the micromaser [101, 102], and in a long series of exper-
iments performed in Paris [103]. Optical frequency realizations use either single
dipole-trapped atoms [104, 105] or quantum dots [106]. Cavities might be dielec-
tric supermirror Fabry–Perot interferometers [107], microtoroids [108], or of the
micropillar or photonic crystal variety [97]. While single-photon coupling well in
excess of loss rates is achieved with atoms, loss is not eliminated, and the paradigm is
the Jaynes–Cummings model with decay (Section 4.5.2). Realizations in circuit QED
[109] complete the circle, returning to the microwave regime. Two-state systems are
engineered in a variety of designs from Josephson junctions (superconducting qubits)
and interact with superconducting resonators in integrated superconducting circuits.
Extremely large dipole coupling relative to loss is achieved, although loss channels
are not simply ignored, as they provide for the coupling of electromagnetic signals
into and out of the resonator.

CAVITY AND CIRCUIT QED
107
4.5.1.2
Energy Spectrum: Dressed States
The Jaynes–Cummings interaction
conserves excitation number. Base kets above the ground state are therefore cou-
pled in pairs. The energy spectrum comprises a ground state energy, E0 = −1
2ℏ𝜔a,
and an infinite ladder of doublets [Fig. 4.11a]:
En,± =
(
n −1
2
)
ℏ𝜔c ± ℏ
√(𝜔c −𝜔a
2
)2
+ ng2,
(4.92)
n = 1, 2, …. Above the ground state, a twofold degeneracy on resonance is symmet-
rically split, with level shifts showing characteristic dependence on the square root
of the photon number, ΔEn,± = ℏ
√
ng. The eigenkets above the ground states are the
so-called dressed states,
|En,±⟩= cos(𝜃n,±∕2)|n −1, +⟩± sin(𝜃n,±∕2)|n, −⟩,
tan 𝜃n,± = ∓2
√
ng
𝜔c −𝜔a
,
0 < 𝜃n,± < 𝜋.
(4.93)
Transitions due to spontaneous emission high up the ladder of dressed states provide
a quick path to the main features of the Mollow triplet spectrum of resonance fluo-
rescence [Fig. 4.11b] [110]; although the Mollow spectrum does not rely on quantum
aspects of the field (the quantum number n) and was derived by Mollow using a
classical driving field (Section 4.3.3.4).
The Jaynes–Cummings Hamiltonian with classical drive (Section 4.2.5.2) is time
dependent and periodic:
H(t) = 1
2ℏ𝜔a𝜎z + ℏ𝜀(e−i𝜔t𝜎+ + ei𝜔t𝜎−).
(4.94)
One may speak of dressed states in this context too. They carry over as periodic
solutions to the Schr¨odinger equation with a technical definition taken from Floquet
theory [111]. The dressed states
|E±(t)⟩= cos(𝜃±∕2)e
1
2 i𝜔t|+⟩± sin(𝜃±∕2)e−1
2 i𝜔t|−⟩,
tan 𝜃± = ∓
2𝜀
𝜔−𝜔a
,
0 < 𝜃± < 𝜋,
(4.95)
evolve under the periodic Hamiltonian in much the same way as the eigenkets |En,±⟩
do under the Jaynes–Cummings Hamiltonian: each simply acquires an additional
overall phase factor, exp(−i𝜔±t),
𝜔± = ±
√(𝜔−𝜔a
2
)2
+ 𝜀2,
(4.96)

108
QUANTUM OPTICS
(a)
|0,–⟩
|1,–⟩
|2,–⟩
|0,+⟩
|1,+⟩
|E0⟩
|E1,–⟩
|E1,+⟩
|E2,–⟩
|E2,+⟩
hωc
hωa
(b)
|n–1,–⟩
|n,–⟩
|n–2,+⟩
|n–1,+⟩
|En–1,–⟩
|En–1,+⟩
|En,–⟩
|En,+⟩
(c)
|E–⟩
|E+⟩
|E–⟩
|E+⟩
ω
1
2
+
ω
1
2
+
ω
1
2
–
ω
1
2
–
+ ω+
+ ω+
+ ω–
+ ω–
FIGURE 4.11
Dressed state energies: (a) lower rungs of the Jaynes–Cummings ladder; (b)
equally split doublets for n ≫1; (blue, red, green) transitions yield the (lower, center, upper)
peaks of the Mollow spectrum (Section 4.3.3.4); (c) quasi-energies show the same transition
frequencies as (b). (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
with E± = ℏ𝜔± the associated quasienergies [Fig. 4.11c]. The difference frequency
𝜔+ −𝜔−is the generalized Rabi frequency (compare Eq. 4.42).
4.5.1.3
Quantum Rabi Oscillation: Collapse and Revival
According to the
Jaynes–Cummings model, Bloch equations (Section 4.2.5.2) are unable to provide a
complete description of the response of a two-state system to a quantum mechanical
drive. In place of the Bloch sphere representation of a pseudo-spin (Section 4.2.4.2),
a countable infinity of spheres is needed, one for each Jaynes–Cummings doublet
(independent coupled two-state manifold). The state of the two-state system plus field
is entangled, and there is no definite Rabi frequency, unless the field starts out in an
eigenstate of photon number. Most generally, the simple Rabi oscillation response is
dramatically altered and depends on the initial state of the field [112]. For a coherent
state of amplitude 𝛼and with the two-state system prepared in |−⟩, the probability
for excitation to |+⟩after time t is (𝜔c = 𝜔a)
p+(t) = e−|𝛼|2 1
2
∞
∑
n=0
|𝛼|2n
n! [1 −cos(
√
ngt)].
(4.97)
The anharmonic dependence on photon number causes the quantum Rabi oscillation
to collapse, due to dephasing, and at a later time revive [113]. The revival is a direct
result of the discrete dependence on photon number; there is collapse but no revival if
a Gaussian integral replaces the Poisson sum. This emphatic signature of the quantum
nature of the radiation field can be traced through 20 years of experimentation in cavity
and circuit QED, from early micromaser experiments [114], to the first definitive
demonstration of quantum Rabi oscillation in a microwave field [115] and its analog
in the quantized motion of a trapped ion [116], to dramatic results for superconducting
qubits [117].

CAVITY AND CIRCUIT QED
109
4.5.2
Jaynes–Cummings Model with Decay
Experimental measurements are made against a background of spontaneous emission
and cavity loss. The Jaynes–Cummings model with decay includes these processes
and generally coherent driving of the cavity mode or the two-state system. It is defined
by the Lindblad master equation (Sections 4.3.2.1 and 4.3.2.3)
d𝜌
dt = 1
iℏ[HJC, 𝜌] + 𝜂d
({
a
𝜎−
}
ei𝜔dt −
{
a†
𝜎+
}
e−i𝜔dt
)
+ 𝜅[a] + 𝛾
2[𝜎−],
(4.98)
with 𝜂d and 𝜔d the drive amplitude and frequency, 𝛾the spontaneous emission rate,
and 2𝜅the energy loss rate for the cavity; Lindblad superoperator [𝜉] is defined in
Eq. (4.52). If dephasing is an issue, due to phonons in quantum dots, for example,
additional Lindblad terms may be added [118]. Experimental observation of quantum
Rabi oscillation calls for very large dipole coupling g relative to loss rates 𝛾and 𝜅.
Such strong coupling is one but not the only aim of cavity and circuit QED. Cavities
can act as a preferred channel in the perturbative interaction of a two-state system
with its electromagnetic environment, thus controlling the rate and direction of photon
emission.
4.5.2.1
The Purcell Effect
The Purcell effect [119] can be understood from a
simple application of Fermi’s golden rule to the coupling of a two-state system to
a lossy cavity mode. Say the cavity mode has line profile (𝜅∕𝜋)[𝜅2 + (𝜔−𝜔c)2]−1,
which, for the sake of the argument, may be read as a box of unit area, width 𝜋𝜅,
and mode density (𝜋𝜅)−1. Then, with coupling strength g, Fermi’s golden rule gives
a spontaneous emission rate through the cavity channel of 2𝜋g2(𝜋𝜅)−1 = 2g2∕𝜅.
For large enough g, the net rate 𝛾+ 2g2∕𝜅of spontaneous emission can be sig-
nificantly enhanced, with a significant fraction of photons emitted in a controlled
direction. It is required that 𝜅be larger than g for a photon to escape the cavity before
being reabsorbed—justification for Fermi’s golden rule. Nonetheless, the degree of
enhancement and directionality can be very high if 𝛾is much smaller than g.
The first experimental realization of the Purcell effect was made for dye molecules
near surfaces as early as 1974 [120]; early experiments in cavities date back many
years as well [121,122]. The topic is still important, however, with the Purcell effect
one factor in optimizing the design of quantum dot microlasers and single-photon
sources [123, 124]. A factor of equal importance is the related effect of sponta-
neous emission inhibition [125–127], now commonly realized in photonic crystals
[128,129]. Near perfect control of emission channels is possible in superconducting
circuits, as shown, for example, by the demonstration of asymmetric—transmission
versus reflection—photon statistics [130] for a near-ideal 1D (artificial) atom [131].
4.5.2.2
Cooperativity and Saturation Photon Number
The Purcell enhancement
factor may be given as a ratio of rates—the rate of spontaneous emission through

110
QUANTUM OPTICS
the cavity mode to the rate of emission to all other modes. This ratio, 2C = 2g2∕𝛾𝜅,
is sometimes termed the single-atom cooperativity. The terminology began with
superradiance, and the original sense of “cooperation” hardly carries over to one atom.
The meaning relative to the Purcell effect is clear. If a good rather than bad cavity is
considered, 2C measures the spoiling of the cavity Q by absorption: 𝜅→𝜅+ 2g2∕𝛾.
The Jaynes–Cummings model with decay depends on one coupling constant and two
decay rates, so a second dimensionless parameter fully defines an operating regime.
Often a saturation photon number, nsat = 𝛾2∕8g2, is given. At weak coupling nsat is
large and is the number of cavity photons needed to saturate the two-state system.
4.5.3
Strong Coupling
In order to realize controlled coherent interactions, like those required by the field of
quantum information, dipole coupling strengths far in excess of spontaneous emission
and cavity decay rates are needed. At the threshold of this regime, strong coupling
allows the
√
n-spectroscopy of the Jaynes–Cummings model to be addressed. Exper-
iments on quantum Rabi oscillation (Section 4.5.1.3) are the earliest in this direction,
though direct frequency domain measurements of Jaynes–Cummings spectroscopy
had a decade to wait. In all sub-fields of cavity and circuit QED, the first step toward
strong coupling is the demonstration of so-called vacuum Rabi splitting.
4.5.3.1
Vacuum Rabi Splitting
Vacuum-field Rabi splitting [132,133] might more
correctly be termed one-photon Rabi splitting, as it refers to the Jaynes–Cummings
doublet at the first excited state (Section 4.5.1.2). It may nevertheless be probed
with an arbitrarily weak cavity drive, where normal-mode frequencies of the coupled
cavity field and two-state polarization are roots to the characteristic equation [134]
det
|||||
Λ + i𝜔c + 𝜅
ig
ig
Λ + i𝜔a + 𝛾∕2
|||||
= 0.
(4.99)
The two roots are
Λ± = i𝜔c + 𝜔a
2
−1
2
(
𝜅+ 𝛾
2
)
± i
√
g2 +
[𝜔c −𝜔a
2
+ i1
2
(
𝜅−𝛾
2
)]2
,
(4.100)
and their resolved splitting at the avoided crossing (𝜔c = 𝜔a) provides direct spec-
troscopic evidence of strong coupling. The normal modes are sometimes referred to
as cavity polaritons.
The first experimental observations were made in optical cavities and with atomic
beams [135–137]. The collective polarization of many atoms is coupled to the cavity
mode in a setup like this and the dipole coupling strength is collectively enhanced.
Observed normal-mode doublets do not demonstrate strong coupling at the one-atom
level. One-atom experiments followed after a wait of a decade and a half [138,139],
and along with them the first realization of vacuum Rabi splitting for a single quantum
dot in a photonic crystal cavity [140,141] and in superconducting circuits [142].

REFERENCES
111
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
25
50
75
100
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Photon number
2
1
Probe frequency
0
2
1
0
FIGURE 4.12
Cavity photon number for increasing drive strength (red to cyan); for 𝜔c = 𝜔a,
𝛾∕𝜅= 0, and g∕𝜅= 50. One- and two-photon resonances are shown on the left and photon
blockade on the right. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
4.5.3.2
Multi-photon Resonance and Photon Blockade
The unique signature of
the Jaynes–Cummings spectrum is its
√
n-dependence. Unlike vacuum Rabi doublets
(cavity polaritons), which are formed when a resonator is coupled to any polarizable
medium, the
√
n-signature holds for one two-level system only. It is a feature of the
cavity probe transmission spectra at stronger drive, where a sequence of resonances
appear due to two-photon, three-photon, four-photon, etc., absorption from the ground
to the second, third, fourth, etc., excited states [143], as shown in Figure 4.12.
The two-photon resonance was first observed in experiments with a trapped atom
coupled to one mode of a Fabry–Perot microcavity [144], and in the same year in
superconducting circuits [145]. A second experiment with superconducting circuits
[146] observed resonances all the way up to five-photon absorption.
Photon blockade is a related effect which demonstrates the anharmonicity of the
Jaynes–Cummings spectrum in a perhaps even more dramatic way. If one cavity
polariton (sub-level at the first excited state) is brought to resonance and the dipole
coupling is strong, transitions from the first- to the second-excited state are far from
resonance (see the inset in Figure 4.12); one photon in the cavity (one polariton) blocks
the absorption of a second so that the dressed cavity behaves as a two-level system
[147]. As an analog of electron physics, the phenomenon is called photon blockade
[148]. The dressed cavity exhibits all the phenomenology of resonance fluorescence,
including photon antibunching (Section 4.4.2.2) [149], a Mollow spectrum (Section
4.3.3.4) [33], and a phenomenon-dubbed “supersplitting” [146], which is related to
the drive-induced splitting of the Mollow triplet but measured in heterodyne rather
than direct detection.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, 3rd ed. (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2000).

112
QUANTUM OPTICS
[2] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, 3rd ed. (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1995).
[3] H. Paul, Introduction to Quantum Optics: From Light Quanta to Quantum Teleportation,
English translation by I. Jex (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004).
[4] P. A. M. Dirac, “The quantum theory of the emission and absorption of radiation,” Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. 114, 243–265 (1927).
[5] K. Husimi, “Some formal properties of the density matrix,” Proc. Phys. Math. Soc. Jpn.
22, 264–314 (1940).
[6] R. J. Glauber, “Photon correlations,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 84–86 (1963).
[7] R. J. Glauber, “The quantum theory of optical coherence,” Phys. Rev. 130, 2529–2539
(1963).
[8] R. J. Glauber, “Coherent and incoherent states of the radiation field,” Phys. Rev. 131,
2766–2788 (1963).
[9] P. D. Drummond and C. W. Gardiner, “GeneralisedP-representations in quantum optics,”
J. Phys. A 13, 2353–2368 (1980).
[10] E. C. G. Sudarshan, “Equivalence of semiclassical and quantum mechanical descriptions
of statistical light beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 277–279 (1963).
[11] E. Wigner, “On the quantum correction for thermodynamic equilibrium,” Phys. Rev. 40,
749–759 (1932).
[12] W. Schleich, D. F. Walls, and J. A. Wheeler, “Area of overlap and interference in phase
space versus Wigner pseudoprobabilities,” Phys. Rev. A 38, 1177–1186 (1988).
[13] W. Schleich, Quantum Optics in Phase Space (Wiley-VCH, Berlin, 2001).
[14] F. Bloch, “Nuclear induction,” Phys. Rev. 70, 460–474 (1946).
[15] C. Ciuti and I. Carusotto, “Input-output theory of cavities in the ultrastrong coupling
regime: the case of time-independent cavity parameters,” Phys. Rev. A 74, 033811-1-13
(2006).
[16] I. I. Rabi, “Space quantization in a gyrating magnetic field,” Phys. Rev. 51, 652–654
(1937).
[17] I. R. Senitzky, “Dissipation in quantum mechanics: the harmonic oscillator,” Phys. Rev.
119, 670–679 (1960).
[18] I. R. Senitzky, “Dissipation in quantum mechanics: the harmonic oscillator. II,” Phys.
Rev. 124, 642–648 (1961).
[19] M. J. Collett and C. W. Gardiner, “Squeezing of intracavity and traveling-wave light
fields produced in parametric amplification,” Phys. Rev. A 30, 1386–1391 (1984).
[20] C. W. Gardiner and M. J. Collett, “Input and output in damped quantum systems:
quantum stochastic differential equations and the master equation,” Phys. Rev. A 31,
3761–3774 (1985).
[21] B. R. Mollow, “Power spectrum of light scattered by two-level atoms,” Phys. Rev. 188,
1969–1975 (1969).
[22] G. Lindblad, “On the generators of quantum dynamical semigroups,” Commun. Math.
Phys. 48, 119–130 (1976).
[23] W. Pauli, in Probleme der Modernen Physik, Arnold Sommerfeld zum 60. Geburtstage
gewidmet von seinen Sch¨ulern, edited by P. Debye (Hirzel Verlag, Leipzig, 1928),
Vol. 1.
[24] M. Lax, “Formal theory of quantum fluctuations from a driven system,” Phys. Rev. 129,
2342–2348 (1963).

REFERENCES
113
[25] M. Lax, “Quantum noise. X. Density-matrix treatment of field and population-difference
equations,” Phys. Rev. 157, 213–231 (1967).
[26] M. Lax, “The Lax-Onsager regression ‘theorem’ revisited,” Optics Commun. 179, 463–
476 (2000).
[27] R. Hanbury Brown and R. Q. Twiss, “Correlation between photons in coherent beams
of light,” Nature 177, 27–29 (1956).
[28] R. Hanbury Brown and R. Q. Twiss, “A test of a new type of stellar interferometer on
Sirius,” Nature 178, 1046–1048 (1956).
[29] R. Hanbury Brown and R. Q. Twiss, “Interferometry of the intensity fluctuations in light
I. Basic theory: the correlation between photons in coherent beams of radiation,” Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond. A 242, 300–324 (1957).
[30] R. Hanbury Brown and R. Q. Twiss, “Interferometry of the intensity fluctuations in light
II. An experimental test of the theory for partially coherent light,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.
A 243, 291–319 (1958).
[31] F. Y. Schuda, C. F. Stroud Jr., and M. Hercher, “Observation of the resonant Stark effect
at optical frequencies,” J. Phys. B 7, L198–203 (1974).
[32] S. M. Ulrich, S. Ates, S. Reitzenstein, A. L¨offler, A. Forchel, and P. Michler, “Dephasing
of triplet-sideband optical emission of a resonantly driven InAS/GaAs quantum dot
inside a microcavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 247402-1-4 (2011).
[33] C. Lang, D. Bozyigit, C. Eichler, L. Steffen, J. M. Fink, A. A. Abdumalikov Jr., M. Baur,
S. Filipp, M. P. da Silva, A. Blais, et al., “Observation of resonant photon blockade at
microwave frequencies using correlation function measurements,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,
243601-1-4 (2011).
[34] H. G. Dehmelt, “Proposed 1014D𝜈< 𝜈laser fluorescence spectroscopy of Tl+
mono-ion oscillator II (spontaneous quantum jumps),” Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 20, 60
(1975).
[35] W. Nagourney, J. Sandberg, and H. Dehmelt, “Shelved optical electron amplifier: obser-
vation of quantum jumps,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2797–2799 (1986).
[36] Th. Sauter, W. Neuhauser, R. Blatt, and P. E. Toschek, “Observation of quantum jumps,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1696–1698 (1986).
[37] J. C. Berquist, R. G. Hulet, W. M. Itano, and D. J. Wineland, “Observation of quantum
jumps in a single atom,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1699–1702 (1986).
[38] Th. Basch´e, S. Kummer, and C. Br¨auchle, “Direct spectroscopic observation of quantum
jumps in a single molecule,” Nature 373, 132–134 (1995).
[39] S. Peil and G. Gabrielse, “Observing the quantum limit of an electron cyclotron: QND
measurements of quantum jumps between Fock states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1287–1290
(1999).
[40] S. Gleyzes, S. Kuhr, C. Guerlin, J. Bernu, S. Del´eglise, U. B. Hoff, M. Brune, J.-M.
Raimond, and S. Haroche, “Quantum jumps of light recording the birth and death of a
photon in a cavity,” Nature 446, 297–300 (2007).
[41] M. Porrati and S. Putterman, “Wave-function collapse due to null measurements: the
origin of intermittent atomic fluorescence,” Phys. Rev. A 36, 929–932 (1987).
[42] R. J. Cook and H. J. Kimble, “Possibility of direct observation of quantum jumps,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 54, 1023–1026 (1985).
[43] P. L. Kelley and W. H. Kleiner, “Theory of electromagnetic field measurement and
photoelectron counting,” Phys. Rev. 136, A316–A334 (1964).

114
QUANTUM OPTICS
[44] U. Fano, “Ionization yield of radiations. II. The fluctuations of the number of ions,”
Phys. Rev. 72, 26–29 (1947).
[45] L. Mandel, “Sub-Poissonian photon statistics in resonance fluorescence,” Opt. Lett. 4,
205–207 (1979).
[46] L. Mandel, “Fluctuations of photon beams and their correlations,” Proc. Phys. Soc. 72,
1037–1048 (1958).
[47] L. Mandel, “Fluctuations of photon beams: the distribution of the photo-electrons,”
Proc. Phys. Soc. 74, 233–243 (1959).
[48] N. Bohr, H. A. Kramers, and J. C. Slater, “The quantum theory of radiation,” Philos.
Mag. 47, 785–802 (1924).
[49] M. D. Eisaman, J. Fan, A. Migdall, and S. V. Polyakov, “Single-photon sources and
detectors,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 82, 071101-1-25 (2011).
[50] H. J. Kimble, M. Dagenais, and L. Mandel, “Photon antibunching in resonance fluores-
cence,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 691–695 (1977).
[51] B. R. Mollow, “Pure-state analysis of resonant light scattering: radiative damping,
saturation, and multiphoton effects,” Phys. Rev. A 12, 1919–1943 (1975).
[52] H. J. Carmichael and D. F. Walls, “Proposal for the resonant Stark effect by photon
correlation techniques,” J. Phys. B 9, L43–L46 (1976).
[53] H. J. Carmichael and D. F. Walls, “A quantum mechanical master equation treatment of
the dynamical Stark effect,” J. Phys. B 9, 1199–1219 (1976).
[54] H. J. Kimble and L. Mandel, “Theory of resonance fluorescence,” Phys. Rev. A 13,
2123–2144 (1976).
[55] H. P. Yuen and J. H. Shapiro, “Optical communication with two-photon coherent states–
part III: quantum measurements realizable with photoemissive detectors,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory IT-26, 78–92 (1980).
[56] H. P. Yuen and V. W. S. Chan, “Noise in homodyne and heterodyne detection,” Opt.
Lett. 8, 177–179 (1983).
[57] H. J. Carmichael, “Spectrum of squeezing and photocurrent shot noise: a normally
ordered treatment,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 4, 1588–1603 (1987).
[58] J. H. Shapiro, “Quantum noise and excess noise in optical homodyne and heterodyne
receivers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 237–250 (1985).
[59] H. P. Yuen, “Two-photon coherent states of the radiation field,” Phys. Rev. A 13, 2226–
2243 (1976).
[60] R. E. Slusher, L. W. Hollberg, B. Yurke, J. C. Mertz, and J. F. Valley, “Observation of
squeezed states generated by four-wave mixing in an optical cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
55, 2409–2412 (1985).
[61] L.-A. Wu, H. J. Kimble, J. L. Hall, and H. Wu, “Generation of squeezed states by
parametric down conversion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2520–2523 (1986).
[62] C. M. Caves and B. L. Schumaker, “New formalism for two-photon quantum optics. I.
Quadrature phases and squeezed states,” Phys. Rev. A 31, 3068–3092 (1985).
[63] B. L. Schumaker and C. M. Caves, “New formalism for two-photon quantum optics. II.
Mathematical foundation and compact notation,” Phys. Rev. A 31, 3093–3111 (1985).
[64] H. Valbruch, M. Mehmet, S. Chelkowski, B. Hage, A. Franzen, N. Lastzka, S. Großler,
K. Danzmann, and R. Schnabel, “Observation of squeezed light with 10-dB quantum-
noise reduction,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 033602-1-4 (2008).

REFERENCES
115
[65] D. F. Walls and P. Zoller, “Reduced quantum fluctuations in resonance fluorescence,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 709–711 (1981).
[66] H. J. Carmichael, “Photon antibunching and squeezing for a single atom in a resonant
cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2790–2793 (1985).
[67] A. Ourjoumtsev, K. Kubanek, M. Koch, C. Sames, P. W. H. Pinkse, G. Rempe, and
K. Murr, “Observation of squeezed light from one atom excited by two photons,”
Nature 474, 623–626 (2011).
[68] G. T. Foster, L. A. Orozco, H. M. Castro-Beltran, and H. J. Carmichael, “Quantum state
reduction and conditional time evolution of wave-particle correlations in cavity QED,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3149–3152 (2000).
[69] K. Vogel and H. Risken, “Determination of quasiprobability distributions in terms of
probability distributions for the rotated quadrature phase,” Phys. Rev. A 40, 2847–2849
(1989).
[70] D. T. Smithey, M. Beck, M. G. Raymer, and A. Faridani, “Measurement of the Wigner
distribution and the density matrix of a light mode using optical homodyne tomogra-
phy: application to squeezed states and the vacuum,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1244–1247
(1993).
[71] A. I. Lvovsky and M. G. Raymer, “Continuous-variable optical quantum-state tomog-
raphy,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 299–332 (2009).
[72] M. D’Ariano, M. G. A. Paris, and M. F. Sacchi, “Quantum tomography,” Adv. Imaging
Electron Phys. 128, 205–308 (2003).
[73] J. B. Altepeter, J. R. Jeffrey, and P. G. Kwiat, “Photonic state tomography,” Adv. At.
Mol. Opt. Phys. 52, 105–159 (2005).
[74] I. L. Chuang and M. A. Nielsen, “Prescription for the experimental determination of the
dynamics of a quantum black box,” J. Modern Opt. 44, 2455–2467 (1997).
[75] S. L. Braunstein and H. J. Kimble, “Teleportation of continuous quantum variables,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 869–872 (1998).
[76] A. Furusawa, J. L. Sørensen, S. L. Braunstein, C. A. Fuchs, H. J. Kimble, and
E. S. Polzik, “Unconditional quantum teleportation,” Science 282, 706–709 (1998).
[77] W. P. Bowen, N. Treps, B. C. Buchler, R. Schnabel, T. C. Ralph, H.-A. Bachor,
T. Symul, and P. K. Lam, “Experimental investigation of continuous variable quan-
tum teleportation,” Phys. Rev. A 67, 032302-1-4 (2003).
[78] L. Vaidman, “Teleportation of quantum states,” Phys. Rev. A 49, 1473–1476 (1994).
[79] H. J. Carmichael, S. Singh, R. Vyas, and P. R. Rice, “Photoelectron waiting times and
atomic state reduction in resonance fluorescence,” Phys. Rev. A 39, 1200–1218 (1989).
[80] H. J. Carmichael, An Open Systems Approach to Quantum Optics, Lecture Notes in
Physics, New Series m-Monographs (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1993), Vol. m18.
[81] H. J. Carmichael, Statistical Methods in Quantum Optics 2: Non-Classical Fields
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008).
[82] J. Dalibard, Y. Castin, and K. Mølmer, “Wave-function approach to dissipative processes
in quantum optics,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 580–583 (1992).
[83] A. Barchielli and M. Gregoratti, Quantum Trajectories and Measurements in Continuous
Time, Lecture Notes in Physics 782 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009).
[84] H. M. Wiseman and G. J. Milburn, Quantum Measurement and Control (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2010).

116
QUANTUM OPTICS
[85] E. B. Davies, “Quantum stochastic processes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 15, 277–304
(1969).
[86] E. B. Davies, Quantum Theory of Open Systems (Academic Press, London, 1976).
[87] M. D. Srinivas and E. B. Davies, “Photon counting probabilities in quantum optics,”
Opt. Acta 28, 981–996 (1981).
[88] L. Mandel, “Comment on ‘photon counting probabilities in quantum optics’,” Opt. Acta
28, 1447–1450 (1981).
[89] M. D. Srinivas and E. B. Davies, “What are the photon counting probabilities for open
systems—a reply to Mandel’s comments,” Opt. Acta 29, 235–238 (1982).
[90] A. L. Schawlow and C. H. Townes, “Infrared and optical masers,” Phys. Rev. 112,
1940–1949 (1958).
[91] M. Scully and W. E. Lamb Jr., “Quantum theory of an optical maser,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
16, 853–855 (1966).
[92] R. H. Dicke, “Coherence in spontaneous radiation processes,” Phys. Rev. 93, 99–110
(1954).
[93] K. Hepp and E. H. Lieb, “On the superradiant phase transition for molecules in a
quantized radiation field,” Ann. Phys. 76, 360–404 (1973).
[94] K. Baumann, C. Guerlin, F. Brennecke, and T. Esslinger, “Dicke quantum phase transi-
tion with a superfluid gas in an optical cavity,” Nature 464, 1301–1306 (2010).
[95] F. Dimer, B. Estienne, A. S. Parkins, and H. J. Carmichael, “Proposed realization of the
Dicke-model quantum phase transition in an optical cavity QED system,” Phys. Rev. A
75, 031804-1-14 (2007).
[96] J. Klaers, J. Schmitt, F. Vewinger, and M. Weitz, “Bose-Einstein condensation of photons
in an optical microcavity,” Nature 468, 445–448 (2010).
[97] K. J. Vahala, “Optical microcavities,” Nature 424, 839–846 (2003).
[98] E. T. Jaynes and F. W. Cummings, “Comparison of quantum and semiclassical radiation
theories with application to the beam maser,” Proc. IEEE 51, 89–109 (1963).
[99] H. Paul, “Induzierte Emission bei starker Einstralung,” Annalen der Physik 466, 411–
412 (1963).
[100] T. Niemczyk, F. Deppe, H. Huebl, E. P. Menzel, F. Hocke, M. J. Schwarz, J. J. Garcia-
Ripoll, D. Zueco, T. H¨ummer, E. Solano, et al., “Circuit quantum electrodynamics in
the ultrastrong-coupling regime,” Nature Phys. 6, 772–776 (2010).
[101] H. Walther, B. T. H. Varcoe, B.-G. Englert, and T. Becker, “Cavity quantum electrody-
namics,” Rep. Prog. Phys. 69, 1325–1382 (2006).
[102] M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1997), Chap. 13.
[103] J. M. Raimond, M. Brune, and S. Haroche, “Manipulating quantum entanglement with
atoms and photons in a cavity,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 565–582 (2001).
[104] H. Mabuchi and A. C. Doherty, “Cavity quantum electrodynamics: coherence in con-
text,” Science 298, 1372–1377 (2002).
[105] R. Miller, T. E. Northup, K. M. Birnbaum, A. Boca, A. D. Boozer, and H. J. Kimble,
“Trapped atoms in cavity QED: coupling quantized light and matter,” J. Phys. B 38,
S551–S565 (2005).
[106] A. Kiraz, C. Reese, B. Gayral, L. Zhang, W. V. Schoenfeld, B. D. Gerardot, P. M. Petroff,
E. L. Hu, and A. Imamoˇglu “Cavity-quantum electrodynamics with quantum dots,”
J. Opt. B: Quantum. Semiclass. Opt. 5, 129–137 (2003).

REFERENCES
117
[107] C. J. Hood, H. J. Kimble, and J. Ye, “Characterization of high-finesse mirrors: loss,
phase shifts, and mode structure in an optical cavity,” Phys. Rev. A 64, 033804-1-7
(2001).
[108] D. K. Armani, T. J. Kippenberg, S. M. Spillane, and K. J. Vahala, “Ultra-high-Q toroid
microcavity on a chip,” Nature 421, 925–928 (2003).
[109] R. J. Schoelkopf and S. M. Girvin,“Wiring up quantum systems,” Nature 451, 664–669
(2008).
[110] C. Cohen-Tannoudji and S. Reynaud, “Dressed-atom description of resonance fluores-
cence and absorption spectra of a multi-level atom in an intense laser beam,” J. Phys. B
10, 345–363 (1977).
[111] J. H. Shirley, “Solution of the Schr¨odinger equation with a Hamiltonian periodic in
time,” Phys. Rev. 138, B979–B987 (1965).
[112] F. W. Cummings, “Stimulated emission of radiation in a single mode,” Phys. Rev. 140,
A1051–A1056 (1965).
[113] J. H. Eberly, N. B. Narozhny, and J. J. Sanchez-Mondragon, “Periodic spontaneous
collapse and revival in a simple quantum model,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1323–1326
(1980).
[114] G. Rempe, H. Walther, and N. Klein, “Observation of quantum collapse and revival in
a one-atom maser,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 353–356 (1987).
[115] M. Brune, F. Schmidt-Kaler, A. Maali, J. Dreyer, E. Hagley, J. M. Raimond, and S.
Haroche, “Quantum Rabi oscillation: a direct test of field quantization in a cavity,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1800–1803 (1996).
[116] D. M. Meekhof, C. Monroe, B. E. King, W. M. Itano, and D. J. Wineland, “Genera-
tion of nonclassical motional states of a trapped ion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1796–1799
(1996).
[117] M. Hofheinz, E. M. Weig, M. Ansmann, R. C. Bialczak, E. Lucero, M. Neeley, A. D.
O’Connell, H. Wang, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland, “Generation of Fock states in
a superconducting quantum circuit,” Nature 76, 310–314 (2008).
[118] C. Roy and S. Hughes, “Influence of electron-acoustic-photon scattering on intensity
power broadening in a coherently driven quantum-dot-cavity system,” Phys. Rev. X 1,
021009-1-19 (2011).
[119] E. M. Purcell, “Spontaneous emission probabilities at radio frequencies,” Phys. Rev. 69,
681 (1946).
[120] K. H. Drexhage, “Interaction of light with monomolecular dye layers,” in Progress in
Optics, edited by E. Wolf (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1974), Vol. XII, pp. 165–232.
[121] P. Goy, J. M. Raimond, M. Gross, and S. Haroche, “Observation of cavity-enhanced
single-atom spontaneous emission,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1903–1906 (1983).
[122] D. J. Heinzen, J. J. Childs, J. E. Thomas, and M. S. Feld, “Enhanced and inhibited
visible spontaneous emission by atoms in a confocal resonator,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58,
1320–1323 (1987).
[123] J. M. G´erard, B. Sermage, B. Gayral, B. Legrand, E. Costard, and V. Thierry-Mieg,
“Enhanced spontaneous emission by quantum boxes in a monolithic optical microcav-
ity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1110–1113 (1998).
[124] M. Munsch, J. Claudon, J. Bleuse, N. S. Malik, E. Dupuy, J. M. G´erard, Y. Chen, N.
Gregersen, and J. Mørke, “Linearly polarized single-mode spontaneous emission in a
photonic nanowire,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 077405-1-5 (2012).

118
QUANTUM OPTICS
[125] D. Kleppner, “Inhibited spontaneous emission,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 233–236 (1981).
[126] G. Gabrielse and H. Dehmelt, “Observation of inhibited spontaneous emission,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 55, 67–70 (1985).
[127] R. G. Hulet, E. S. Hilfer, and D. Kleppner , “Inhibited spontaneous emission by a
Rydberg atom,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2137–2140 (1985).
[128] E. Yablonovitch, “Inhibited spontaneous emission in solid state physics and electronics,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059–2062 (1987).
[129] S. John, “Strong localization of photons in certain disordered dielectric superlattices,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2486–2489 (1987).
[130] H. J. Carmichael, “Quantum trajectory theory for cascaded open systems,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 70, 2273–2276 (1993).
[131] I.-C. Hoi, T. Palomaki, J. Lindkvist, G. Johansson, P. Delsing, and C. M. Wilson,
“Generation of nonclassical microwave states using an artificial atom in 1D open space,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 263601-1-5 (2012).
[132] J. J. Sanchez-Mondragon, N. B. Narozhny, and J. H. Eberly, “Theory of spontaneous
emission lineshape in an ideal cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 550–553 (1983).
[133] G. S. Agarwal, “Vacuum-field Rabi splittings in microwave absorption by Rydberg
atoms in a cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 1732–1734 (1984).
[134] H. J. Carmichael, “Quantum fluctuations in absorptive bistability without adiabatic
elimination,” Phys. Rev. A 33, 3262–3269 (1986).
[135] M. G. Raizen, R. J. Thompson, R. J. Brecha, H. J. Kimble, and H. J. Carmichael,
“Normal-mode splitting and linewidth averaging for two-state atoms in an optical cav-
ity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 240–243 (1989).
[136] Y. Zhu, D. J. Gauthier, S. E. Morin, Q. Wu, H. J. Carmichael, and T. W. Mossberg,
“Vacuum Rabi splitting as a feature of linear dispersion theory: analysis and experimental
observations,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2499–2502 (1990).
[137] R. J. Thompson, G. Rempe, and H. J. Kimble, “Observation of normal-mode splitting
for an atom in an optical cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1132–1135 (1992).
[138] A. Boca, R. Miller, K. M. Birnbaum, A. D. Boozer, J. McKeever, and H. J. Kimble,
“Observation of the vacuum Rabi spectrum for one trapped atom,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
233603-1-4 (2004).
[139] P. Maunz, T. Puppe, I. Schuster, N. Syassen, P. W. H. Pinkse, and G. Rempe, “Normal-
mode spectroscopy of a single-bound-atom-cavity system,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 033002-
1-4 (2005).
[140] Y. Yoshie, A. Scheer, J. Hendrickson, G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, G. Rupper, C. Eli, O.
B. Shchekin, and D. G. Deppe, “Vacuum Rabi splitting with a single quantum dot in a
photonic crystal nanocavity,” Nature 432, 200–203 (2004).
[141] G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, M. Kira, S. W. Koch, and A. Scherer, “Vacuum Rabi splitting
in semiconductors,” Nature Phys. 2, 81–90 (2006).
[142] A. Wallraff, D. I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R.-S. Huang, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S. M.
Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, “Strong coupling of a single photon to a superconducting
qubit using circuit quantum electrodynamics,” Nature 431, 162–167 (2004).
[143] H. J. Carmichael, L. Tian, W. Ren, and P. Alsing, “Nonperturbative atom-photon inter-
actions in an optical cavity,” in Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics, Advances in Atomic
Molecular and Optical Physics, edited by P. R. Berman (Academic Press, Orlando,
1994), pp. 381–423.

REFERENCES
119
[144] I. Schuster, A. Kubanek, A. Fuhrmanek, T. Puppe, P. W. H. Pinske, K. Murr, and
G. Rempe, “Nonlinear spectroscopy of photons bound to one atom,” Nature Phys. 4,
382–385 (2008).
[145] J. M. Fink, M. G¨oppl, M. Baur, R. Bianchetti, P. J. Leek, A. Blais, and A. Wallraff,
“Climbing the Jaynes-Cummings ladder and observing its
√
n nonlinearity in a cavity
QED system,” Nature 454, 315–318 (2008).
[146] L. V. Bishop, J. M. Chow, J. Koch, A. A. Houck, M. H. Devoret, E. Thuneberg,
S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, “Nonlinear response of the vacuum Rabi resonance,”
Nature Phys. 5, 105–109 (2009).
[147] L. Tian and H. J. Carmichael, “Quantum trajectory simulations of two-state behavior in
an optical cavity containing one atom,” Phys. Rev. A 46, R6801–R6804 (1992).
[148] A. Imamoˇglu, H. Schmidt, G. Woods, and M. Deutsch, “Stongly interacting photons in
a nonlinear cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1467–1470 (1997).
[149] K. M. Birnbaum, A. Boca, R. Miller, A. D. Boozer, T. E. Northup, and H. J. Kimble,
“Photon blockade in an optical cavity with one trapped atom,” Nature 436, 87–90 (2005).


5
SQUEEZED LIGHT
A. I. Lvovsky1,2
1Institute for Quantum Information Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada
2Russian Quantum Center, Skolkovo, Moscow, Russia
5.1
WHAT IS SQUEEZED LIGHT?
5.1.1
Single-Mode Squeezed Light
In squeezed states of light, the noise of the electric field at certain phases falls below
that of the vacuum state. This means that, when we turn on the squeezed light, we
see less noise than no light at all. This apparently paradoxical feature is a direct
consequence of quantum nature of light and cannot be explained within the classical
framework.
The basic idea of squeezing can be understood by considering the quantum har-
monic oscillator, familiar from undergraduate quantum mechanics. Its vacuum state
wavefunction in the dimensionless position basis is given by1
𝜓0(X) =
1
𝜋1∕4 e−X2∕2,
(5.1)
which in the momentum basis corresponds to
̃𝜓0(P) =
1
√
2𝜋∫
+∞
−∞
e−iPX𝜓0(X)dX =
1
𝜋1∕4 e−P2∕2
(5.2)
1We use convention [ ̂X, ̂P] = i for the quadrature observables.
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
121

122
SQUEEZED LIGHT
(so the vacuum state wavefunction is the same in the position and momentum bases).
The variance of the position and momentum observables in the vacuum state equals
⟨0| ΔX2 |0⟩= ⟨0| ΔP2 |0⟩= 1∕2.
The wavefunction of the squeezed-vacuum state ||sqR⟩with the squeezing factor
R > 0 is obtained from that of the vacuum state by means of scaling transformation:
𝜓R(X) =
√
R
𝜋1∕4 e−(RX)2∕2
(5.3)
and
̃𝜓R(P) =
1
𝜋1∕4√
R
e−(P∕R)2∕2
(5.4)
in the position and momentum bases, respectively. In this state, the variances of the
two canonical observables are
⟨ΔX2⟩= 1∕(2R2)
and
⟨ΔP2⟩= R2∕2.
(5.5)
If R > 1, the position variance is below that of the vacuum state, so ||sqR⟩is position-
squeezed; for R < 1 the state is momentum-squeezed. In other words, if we prepare
multiple copies of ||sqR⟩, and perform a measurement of the squeezed observable on
each copy, our measurement results will exhibit less variance than if we performed
the same set of measurements on multiple copies of the vacuum state.
More generally, we say that a state of a single harmonic oscillator exhibits (quadra-
ture) squeezing if the variance of the position, momentum, or any other quadrature2 in
that state exhibits variance below 1∕2. In accordance with the uncertainty principle,
both position and momentum observables, or any two quadratures associated with
orthogonal angles, cannot be squeezed at the same time. For example, in state (5.3)
the product ⟨ΔX2⟩⟨ΔP2⟩= 1∕4 is the same as that for the vacuum state.
Squeezing is best visualized by means of the Wigner function—the quantum ana-
log of the phase-space probability density. Figures 5.1a and 5.1b display the Wigner
functions of the position- and momentum-squeezed vacuum states, respectively. The
squeezing feature becomes apparent when these Wigner functions are compared with
those of the vacuum state (Fig. 5.1a). Figure 5.1e and 5.1f show squeezed coherent
states, which are analogous to the squeezed vacuum except that their Wigner functions
are displaced from the phase-space origin akin to the coherent state (Fig. 5.1b).
The state shown in Figure 5.1f is particularly interesting because it exhibits, as
a consequence of momentum squeezing, phase squeezing—reduction of the uncer-
tainty in the phase with respect to a coherent state of the same amplitude. Because
the Schr¨odinger evolution under the standard harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian cor-
responds to clockwise rotation of the phase space around the origin point, the phase
squeezing property is preserved under this evolution. In the same context, the state
in Figure 5.1e is sometimes called amplitude-squeezed.
2The field quadrature is observable ̂X𝜃= ̂X cos 𝜃+ ̂P sin 𝜃(where 𝜃is a real number known as quadrature
angle).

WHAT IS SQUEEZED LIGHT?
123
(a)
(c)
(e)
(b)
(f)
6
4
2
–2
–2
–2
–2 0
0 2
2
4 6
–2
–2 0
0 2
2
4 6
–2
–2
–2
–2
–2
–2 0
0 2
2
4 6
–2
–2
–2
–2
–2
–2 0
0 2
2
4 6
–2
–2 0
0 2
2
4 6
–2
–2 0
0 2
2
4 6
2
P
X
6
4
2
2
P
X
6
4
2
2
2
2
P
X
6
4
2
2
P
X
(d)
6
4
2
2
P
X
6
4
2
2
P
X
P
X
P
X
P
X
P
X
P
X
P
X
FIGURE 5.1
Wigner functions of certain single-oscillator states. (a) Vacuum state. (b)
Coherent state. (c,d) Position- and momentum-squeezed vacuum states. (e,f) Position- and
momentum-squeezed coherent states with real amplitudes. Panels (b) and (f) show the phase
uncertainties of the respective states to emphasize the phase squeezing of state (f). Insets show
wavefunctions in the position and momentum bases.
According to the quantum theory of light, the Hilbert space associated with a
mode of the electromagnetic field is isomorphic to that of the mechanical harmonic
oscillator. The role of the position and momentum observables in this context is
played by the electric field magnitudes measured at specific phases. For example, the
field at phase zero (with respect to a certain reference) corresponds to the position
observable, that at phase 𝜋∕2 to the momentum observable, and so on. Accord-
ingly, phase-sensitive measurements of the field marnitude in an electromagnetic
wave are affected by quantum uncertainties. For the coherent and vacuum states,
this uncertainty is phase-independent and equals
√
ℏ𝜔∕2𝜀0V (the standard quan-
tum limit, or SQL), where 𝜔is the optical frequency and V is the quantization
volume [1]. But squeezed optical states exhibit uncertainties below SQL at certain
phases.

124
SQUEEZED LIGHT
Depending on whether the mean coherent amplitude of the state is zero or not,
squeezed optical states are classified into squeezed vacuum and (bright) squeezed
light. Squeezed coherent states form a subset of bright squeezed light states.
How can one generate optical squeezed states in experiment? Consider the state
|𝜓⟩= |0⟩−
s
√
2
|2⟩,
(5.6)
where |0⟩and |2⟩are photon number (Fock) states and s is a real positive number.
We assume s to be small, so the norm of state (5.6) is close to one. The mean value
of the position operator ̂X = (̂a + ̂a†)∕
√
2 in this state is zero while its variance
equals
⟨ΔX2⟩= ⟨𝜓| (̂a + ̂a†)2
2
|𝜓⟩= 1
2 −s,
(5.7)
so state |𝜓⟩is position squeezed for positive s.
This result illustrates one of the primary methods of producing squeezing. Spon-
taneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC) is a nonlinear optical process in which
a photon of a powerful laser field propagating through a second-order nonlin-
ear optical medium may split into two photons of lower energy. The frequencies,
wavevectors, and polarizations of the generated photons are governed by phase-
matching conditions. Single-mode squeezing, such as that in the above example, is
obtained when SPDC is degenerate: the two generated photons are indistinguish-
able in all their parameters: frequency, direction, and polarization. The quantum
state of the optical mode into which the photon pairs are emitted exhibits squeezing
(Figure 5.2a).
Aside from being an interesting physical entity by itself, squeezed light has a
variety of applications. One of the primary applications of single-mode squeezed
light is in precision measurements of distances. Such measurements are typically
done by means of interferometry. Quantum phase noise poses an ultimate limit to
interferometry, and the application of squeezing (in particular, the phase-squeezed
state discussed earlier) permits expanding this limit beyond that fundamental bound-
ary. For example, squeezing is employed in the new generation of gravitational wave
detectors.
(a)
(b)
Pump
Photon pair
Crystal
Photon
pair
Pump
Crystal
FIGURE 5.2
Spontaneous parametric down-conversion. (a) Degenerate configuration, lead-
ing to single-mode squeezed vacuum. (b) Non-degenerate configuration, leading to two-mode
squeezed vacuum.

WHAT IS SQUEEZED LIGHT?
125
5.1.2
Two-Mode Squeezed Light
A state that is closely related to the single-oscillator squeezed vacuum in its theoret-
ical description and experimental procedures, but quite different in properties is the
two-mode squeezed vacuum (TMSV), also known as the twin-beam state. As the
name suggests, this is a state of not one, but two mechanical or electromagnetic
oscillators. We introduce this state by first analyzing the tensor product |0⟩⊗|0⟩
of vacuum states of the two oscillators. In the position basis, its wavefunction
(Fig. 5.3a),
Ψ00(Xa, Xb) =
1
√
𝜋
e−X2
a∕2e−X2
b∕2,
(5.8)
PA
PA
XA
XA
XB
PB
PB
XB
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 5.3
Wavefunctions (not Wigner functions!) of two-mode states in the position (left)
and momentum (right) bases. (a) The double-vacuum state is uncorrelated in both bases. (b) The
two-mode squeezed state with position observables correlated, and momentum observables
anticorrelated beyond the standard quantum limit.

126
SQUEEZED LIGHT
can be rewritten as
Ψ00(Xa, Xb) =
1
√
𝜋
e−(Xa−Xb)2∕4e−(Xa+Xb)2∕4.
(5.9)
Here, Xa and Xb are the position observables of the two oscillators which are tra-
ditionally associated with fictional experimentalists Alice and Bob. The meaning of
Eq. (5.9) is that the observables (Xa −Xb)∕
√
2 and (Xa + Xb)∕
√
2 have a Gaussian
distribution with variance 1∕2. This is not surprising because in the double-vacuum
state Alice’s and Bob’s position observables are uncorrelated and both of them have
variance 1∕2. The behavior of the momentum quadratures in this state is analogous
to that of the position.
The wavefunction of the two-mode squeezed vacuum state ||TMSVR⟩is given by
ΨR(Xa, Xb) =
1
√
𝜋
e−(Xa+Xb)2∕(4R2)e−R2(Xa−Xb)2∕4,
(5.10)
where R, as previously, is the squeezing factor (Figure 5.3c). In contrast to the double-
vacuum state, TMSV is an entangled state, and Alice’s and Bob’s position observables
are nonclassically correlated, thanks to that entanglement. For R > 1, the variance of
(Xa −Xb)∕
√
2 is less than 1∕2, that is, below the value for the double-vacuum state.
The wavefunction of TMSV in the momentum basis is obtained from Eq. (5.10)
by means of Fourier transform by both Alice’s and Bob’s observables:
̃ΨR(Pa, Pb) =
1
√
𝜋
e−(Pa−Pb)2∕(4R2)e−R2(Pa+Pb)2∕4.
(5.11)
We see that for R > 1 Alice’s and Bob’s momenta are anticorrelated, that is, the
variance of the sum (Pa + Pb)∕
√
2 is below the level expected from two vacuum
states (Fig. 5.3d).
The two-mode squeezed vacuum does not imply squeezing in each individual
mode. On the contrary, Alice’s and Bob’s position and momentum observables in
TMSV obey a Gaussian probability distribution with variance
⟨ΔX2
a⟩= ⟨ΔX2
b⟩= ⟨ΔP2
a⟩= ⟨ΔP2
b⟩= 1 + R4
4R2
(5.12)
that exceeds that of the vacuum state for any R ≠1. In other words, each mode of
a TMSV considered individually is in the thermal state. With increasing R > 1, the
uncertainty of individual quadratures increases, while that of the difference of Alice’s
and Bob’s position observables as well as the sum of their momentum observables
decreases.

WHAT IS SQUEEZED LIGHT?
127
In the extreme case of R →∞, the wavefunctions of the two-modes squeezed state
take the forms
ΨR(Xa, Xb) ∝𝛿(Xa −Xb)
and
(5.13)
̃ΨR(Pa, Pb) ∝𝛿(Pa + Pb).
(5.14)
Both Alice’s and Bob’s positions are completely uncertain, but at the same time
precisely equal, whereas the momenta are uncertain and precisely opposite. This state
is the basis of the famous quantum nonlocality paradox in its original formulation of
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR) [2]. EPR argued that by choosing to perform
either a position or momentum measurement on her portion of the TMSV, Alice
remotely prepares either a state with a certain position or one with a certain momentum
at Bob’s location. But according to the uncertainty principle, certainty of position
implies complete uncertainty of momentum, and vice versa. In other words, by
choosing the setting of her measurement apparatus, Alice can instantly and remotely,
without any interaction, prepare at Bob’s station one of two mutually incompatible
physical realities. This apparent contradiction to basic principles of causality has lead
EPR to challenge quantum mechanics as complete description of physical reality and
triggered a debate that continues to this day.
Experimental realization of TMSV is largely similar to that of single-mode squeez-
ing. SPDC is the primary method; however, in contrast to the single-mode case, it
is implemented in the non-degenerate configuration. The photons in each generated
pair are emitted into two distinguishable modes that become carriers of the TMSV
state (Fig. 5.2b).
In order to understand how non-degenerate SPDC leads to squeezing, consider the
two-mode state
|Ψ⟩= |0⟩⊗|0⟩+ s |1⟩⊗|1⟩,
(5.15)
that is, a pair of photons has been emitted into Alice’s and Bob’s modes with amplitude
s. Now if we evaluate the variance of the observable (Xa −Xb)∕
√
2, we find
1
2⟨Δ(Xa −Xb)2⟩= 1
4 ⟨Ψ| (̂a + ̂a† −̂b −̂b†)2 |Ψ⟩= 1
2 −s,
(5.16)
that is, Alice’s and Bob’s position observables are correlated akin to TMSV. A similar
calculation shows anticorrelation of Alice’s and Bob’s momentum observables.
Both the single-mode and two-mode squeezed vacuum states are valu-
able resources in quantum optical information technology. TMSV, in particu-
lar, is useful for generating heralded single photons and unconditional quantum
teleportation.

128
SQUEEZED LIGHT
5.2
SALIENT FEATURES OF SQUEEZED STATES
5.2.1
The Squeezing Operator
We now proceed to a more rigorous mathematical description of squeezing. Single-
mode squeezing occurs under the action of operator
̂S(r) = exp[(r̂a2 −r̂a†2)∕2],
(5.17)
where r = ln R is the squeezing parameter, upon the vacuum state. Note that, for a
small r, the squeezing operator (5.17) acting on the vacuum state generates the state
̂S(r) |0⟩≈[1 + (r̂a2 −r̂a†2)∕2] |0⟩= |0⟩−(r∕
√
2) |2⟩,
(5.18)
which is consistent with Eq. (5.6) for s = r.
The action of the squeezing operator can be analyzed as fictitious evolution under
Hamiltonian
̂H = iℏ𝛼[̂a2 −(̂a†)2]∕2
(5.19)
for time t = r∕𝛼(so that ̂S(r) = e−i( ̂H∕ℏ)t). Analyzing this evolution in the Heisenberg
picture, we use [̂a, ̂a†] = 1 to find that
̇̂a = i
ℏ[ ̂H, ̂a] = −𝛼̂a†
(5.20)
and
̇̂a† = −𝛼̂a.
(5.21)
Now using the expressions for quadrature observables
̂X = (̂a + ̂a†)∕
√
2
and
̂P = (̂a −̂a†)∕
√
2i,
(5.22)
we rewrite Eqs. (5.20) and (5.21) as
̇̂X = −𝛼X;
(5.23a)
̇̂P = 𝛼P.
(5.23b)
If this evolution continues for time t, we will have
̂X(t) = ̂S†(r) ̂X(0)̂S(r) = ̂X(0)e−r;
(5.24a)
̂P(t) = ̂S†(r)̂P(0)̂S(r) = ̂P(0)er,
(5.24b)
which correspond to position squeezing by factor R = er and corresponding momen-
tum antisqueezing (Fig. 5.4). If the initial state is vacuum, the evolution will result in
a squeezed vacuum state; coherent states will yield squeezed light [3].

SALIENT FEATURES OF SQUEEZED STATES
129
P
X
FIGURE 5.4
Transformation of quadratures under the action of the squeezing Hamiltonian
(5.19) with 𝛼> 0. Gray areas show examples of Wigner function transformations with r =
𝛼t = ln 2, so R = 2.
The corresponding transformation of the creation and annihilation operators is
given by
̂a(t) = ̂a(0) cosh r −̂a†(0) sinh r;
(5.25a)
̂a†(t) = ̂a†(0) cosh r −̂a(0) sinh r,
(5.25b)
known as Bogoliubov transformation.
Two-mode squeezing is treated similarly. The two-mode squeezing operator is
̂S2(𝜁) = exp[(−𝜁̂âb + 𝜁∗̂a†̂b†)].
(5.26)
Assuming, again, a real 𝜁= r, introducing the fictitious Hamiltonian and recalling
that the creation and annihilation operators associated with different modes commute,
we find
̂a(t) = ̂a(0) cosh r + ̂b(0)† sinh r;
(5.27a)
̂b(t) = ̂b(0) cosh r + ̂a(0)† sinh r;
(5.27b)

130
SQUEEZED LIGHT
and hence
̂Xa(t) ± ̂Xb(t) = [ ̂Xa(0) ± ̂Xb(0)]e±r;
(5.28a)
̂Pa(t) ± ̂Pb(t) = [̂Pa(0) ± ̂Pb(0)]e∓r.
(5.28b)
Initially, Alice’s and Bob’s modes are in vacuum states, and the quadrature observ-
ables in these modes are uncorrelated. But as the time progresses, Alice’s and Bob’s
position observables become correlated while the momentum observables become
anticorrelated.
5.2.2
Photon Number Statistics
An important component in the theoretical description of squeezed light is its decom-
position in the photon number basis, that is, calculating the quantities ⟨n ||sqR⟩for
the single-mode squeezed state and ⟨mn ||TMSVR⟩for the two-mode state. Due to
non-commutativity of the photon creation and annihilation operators, this calcula-
tion turns out surprisingly difficult even for basic squeezed vacuum states, let alone
squeezed coherent states and the states that have been affected by losses. Possible
approaches to this calculation include the disentangling theorem for SU(1,1) Lie
algebra [4], direct calculation of the wavefunction overlap in the position space [5],
or transformation of the squeezing operator [6]. Here, we derive the photon number
statistics of single- and two-mode squeezed vacuum states by calculating their inner
product with coherent states.
The wavefunction of a coherent state with real amplitude 𝛼is
𝜓𝛼(X) =
1
𝜋1∕4 e−(X−𝛼
√
2)2∕2,
(5.29)
so its inner product with the position squeezed state (5.3) equals
⟨𝛼||sqR⟩= ∫
+∞
−∞
𝜓𝛼(X)𝜓R(X)dX =
√
2R
1 + R2 e−R2
1+R2 𝛼2
.
(5.30)
Now we recall that the coherent state is decomposed into the Fock basis according to
|𝛼⟩=
∞
∑
n=0
e−𝛼2∕2 𝛼n
√
n!
|n⟩,
(5.31)
so we have
∞
∑
n=0
⟨n ||sqR⟩𝛼n
√
n!
=
√
2R
1 + R2 e
1−R2
2(1+R2) 𝛼2
.
(5.32)

SALIENT FEATURES OF SQUEEZED STATES
131
Decomposing the exponent in the right-hand side of the above equation into the
Taylor series with respect to 𝛼, we obtain
∞
∑
n=0
⟨n ||sqR⟩𝛼n
√
n!
=
√
2R
1 + R2
∞
∑
m=0
[
1 −R2
2(1 + R2)
]m 𝛼2m
m! .
(5.33)
Because this equality must hold for any real 𝛼, each term of the sum in the left-hand
side must equal its counterpart in the right-hand side that contains the same power of
𝛼. Hence, n = 2m and
⟨2m ||sqR⟩=
√
2R
1 + R2
[
1 −R2
2(1 + R2)
]m √
(2m)!
m!
.
(5.34)
Since R = er, we have
2R
1 + R2 =
1
cosh r
and
1 −R2
1 + R2 = −tanh r,
(5.35)
so Eq. (5.34) can be rewritten as
||sqR⟩=
1
√
cosh r
∞
∑
m=0
(−tanh r)m
√
(2m)!
2mm! |2m⟩.
(5.36)
We stop here for a brief discussion. First, we note that for r ≪1, Eq. (5.36)
becomes
||sqR⟩= |0⟩−(r∕
√
2) |2⟩+ O(r2),
(5.37)
consistent with Eq. (5.18). Second, note that the squeezed vacuum state (5.36) con-
tains only terms with even photon numbers. This is a fundamental feature of this state;
in fact, one of the earlier names for squeezed states has been “two-photon coherent
states” [7]. This feature follows from the nature of the squeezing operator (5.17):
in its decomposition into the Taylor series creation and annihilation operators occur
only in pairs. Pairwise emission of photons is also a part of the physical nature of
SPDC: due to energy conservation a pump photon can only split into two photons of
half its energy.
We now turn to finding the photon number decomposition of the two-mode
squeezed state. We first notice, by looking at Eq. (5.26), that ||RAB⟩must only
contain terms with equal photon numbers in Alice’s and Bob’s modes. This circum-
stance allows us to significantly simplify the algebra. We proceed along the same

132
SQUEEZED LIGHT
route as outlined above, calculating the overlap of ||TMSVR⟩with the tensor product
|𝛼𝛼⟩of identical coherent states |𝛼⟩in Alice’s and Bob’s channels using Eqs. (5.10)
and (5.29):
⟨𝛼𝛼||TMSVR⟩= ∫
+∞
−∞
𝜓𝛼(Xa)𝜓𝛼(Xb)ΨR(Xa, Xb)dXadXb =
2R
1 + R2 e−
2
1+R2 𝛼2
. (5.38)
Decomposing the coherent states in the left-hand side into the Fock basis accord-
ing to Eq. (5.31) and keeping only the terms with equal photon numbers,
we have
∞
∑
n=0
⟨nn|| TMSVR⟩𝛼2n
n! =
2R
1 + R2 e−1−R2
1+R2 𝛼2
.
(5.39)
Now writing the Taylor series for the right-hand side and using Eq. (5.35), we
obtain
||TMSVR⟩=
∞
∑
n=0
1
cosh r tanhn r |nn⟩.
(5.40)
Similar to the single-mode squeezing, it is easy to verify that the above result is
consistent with state (5.15) for small r. Remarkably, the energy spectrum of TMSV
follows Boltzmann distribution with mean photon number in each mode ⟨n⟩= sinh2 r.
This is in agreement with our earlier observation that Alice’s and Bob’s portions of
TMSV considered independently of their counterpart are in the thermal state, that
is, the state whose photon number distribution obeys Boltzmann statistics with the
temperature given by e−ℏ𝜔∕kT = tanh r.
While the present analysis is limited to pure squeezed vacuum states, photon
number decompositions of squeezed coherent states and squeezed states that have
undergone losses can be found in the literature [8, 9]. In contrast to pure squeezed
vacuum states, these decompositions have nonzero terms associated with nonpaired
photons. The origin of these terms is easily understood. If a one- or two-mode
squeezed vacuum state experiences a loss, it may happen that one of the photons in a
pair is lost while the other one remains. If the squeezing operator acts on a coherent
state, the odd photon number terms will appear in the resulting state because they are
present initially.
Photon statistics of both classes of squeezed states have been tested experimentally,
as discussed in Section 5.3. An example is shown in Figure 5.5.
5.2.3
Interconversion Between Single- and Two-Mode Squeezing
If the modes of the TMSV are overlapped on a symmetric beam splitter, two unen-
tangled single-mode vacuum states will emerge in the output (Fig. 5.6). To see this,

SALIENT FEATURES OF SQUEEZED STATES
133
Squeezed vacuum state
<n> = 3.0
Var(n) = 16.4
14
12
10
8
6
Photon number n
p(n)
4
2
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
FIGURE 5.5
Experimentally reconstructed photon number statistics of the squeezed vacuum
state. For low photon numbers, the even terms are greater than the odd terms due to pairwise
production of photons, albeit the odd term contribution is nonzero due to loss. Reproduced
from Reference 10.
we recall the beam splitter transformation
̂a′ = 𝜏̂a −𝜌̂b;
(5.41a)
̂b′ = 𝜏̂b + 𝜌̂a,
(5.41b)
where 𝜏and 𝜌are the beam splitter amplitude transmissivity and reflectivity, respec-
tively. For a symmetric beam splitter, 𝜏= 𝜌= 1∕
√
2. In writing Eqs. (5.41), we
neglected possible phase shifts that may be applied to individual input and output
modes [5].
In accordance with the definition (5.22) of quadrature observables, Eqs. (5.41)
apply in the same way to the position and momentum of the input and output modes.
Applying this to Eqs. (5.28), we find
̂X′
a,b = [ ̂Xa(t) ∓̂Xb(t)]∕
√
2
= e∓r[ ̂Xa(0) ∓̂Xb(0)]∕
√
2
(5.42)
Two-mode
squeezer
Two-mode
squeezed
vacuum
Momentum-squeezed
vacuum F
Position-squeezed
vacuum
Fictitious
input
vacuum
Input
vacuum
ˆ(0)
a
ˆ(0)
b
ˆ( )
a t
ˆ( )
b t
ˆ ( )
a t
ˆ ( )
b t
0
ˆa
0
ˆb
FIGURE 5.6
Interconversion of the two-mode squeezed vacuum and two single-mode
squeezed vacuum states. Dashed lines show a fictitious beam splitter transformation of a
pair of vacuum states such that the modes ̂a′(t), ̂b′(t) are explicitly single-mode squeezed with
respect to modes ̂a′0, ̂b′0.

134
SQUEEZED LIGHT
for the output positions and
̂P′
a,b = [̂Pa(t) ∓̂Pb(t)]∕
√
2
= e±r[̂Pa(0) ∓̂Pb(0)]∕
√
2
(5.43)
for the momenta. In order to understand what state this corresponds to, let us assume,
for the sake of the argument, that vacuum modes ̂a and ̂b at the SPDC input have been
obtained from another pair of modes by means of another symmetric beam splitter:
̂a0 = [̂a(0) −̂b(0)]∕
√
2
(5.44)
̂b0 = [̂a(0) + ̂b(0)]∕
√
2.
(5.45)
Of course, since modes ̂a(0) and ̂b(0) are in the vacuum state, so are ̂a0 and ̂b0. We
then have
̂X′
a,b = e∓r ̂X0
a,b;
̂P′
a,b = e±r ̂P0
a,b,
(5.46)
where superscript 0 associates the quadrature with modes ̂a0 and ̂b0. We see that
modes ̂a′ and ̂b′ are related to vacuum modes ̂a0 and ̂b0 by means of position and
momentum squeezing transformations, respectively.
Because the beam splitter transformation is reversible, it can also be used to
obtain a TMSV from two single-mode squeezed vacuum states with squeezing in
orthogonal quadratures. This technique has been used, for example, in the experiment
on continuous-variable quantum teleportation [11].
5.2.4
Squeezed Vacuum and Squeezed Light
Squeezed vacuum and bright squeezed light are readily converted between each
other by means of the phase-space displacement operator [5], whose action in the
Heisenberg picture can be written as
̂D†(𝛼)̂a† ̂D(𝛼) = ̂a + 𝛼.
(5.47)
This means, in particular, that the position and momentum transform according to
̂X ↦̂X + Re 𝛼
√
2;
(5.48)
̂P ↦̂P + Im 𝛼
√
2,
(5.49)

SALIENT FEATURES OF SQUEEZED STATES
135
Low-reflectivity
beam splitter
ˆa
ˆa
ˆb
FIGURE 5.7
Implementation of phase-space displacement. 𝜌≪1 is the beam splitter’s
amplitude reflectivity.
so, under the action of ̂D(𝛼), the entire phase space displaces itself, thereby chang-
ing the coherent amplitude of the squeezed state without changing the degree of
squeezing.
Phase-space displacement can be implemented experimentally by overlapping the
signal state with a strong coherent state |𝛽⟩on a low reflectivity beam splitter (Fig.
5.7). Applying the beam splitter transformation (5.41), we find for the signal mode
̂a′ = 𝜏̂a −𝜌̂b.
(5.50)
Given that mode ̂b is in a coherent state (i.e., an eignestate of ̂b) and that 𝜌≪1 (i.e.,
𝜏∼1), we have
̂a′ = ̂a −𝜌𝛽
(5.51)
in analogy to Eq. (5.47). The displacement operation has been used to change the
amplitude of squeezed light in many experiments, for example, in Reference 12.
5.2.5
Effect of Losses
Squeezed states that occur in practical experiments necessarily suffer from losses
present in sources, transmission channels, and detectors. In order to understand the
effect of propagation losses on a single-mode squeezed vacuum state, we can use the
model in which a lossy optical element with transmission T is replaced by a beam
splitter (Fig. 5.8). At the other input port of the beam splitter, there is a vacuum
state. The interference of the signal mode ̂a with the vacuum mode ̂v will produce a
mode with operator ̂a′ = 𝜏̂a −𝜌̂v (with 𝜏2 = T and 𝜌2 = 1 −T being the beam splitter
transmissivity and reflectivity, respectively) in the beam splitter output. Accordingly,
we have
̂X𝜃,out = 𝜏̂Xa,𝜃−𝜌̂Xv,𝜃.
(5.52)
Signal
ˆa
ˆv
Vacuum
Output
out
ˆa
FIGURE 5.8
The beam splitter model of loss.

136
SQUEEZED LIGHT
Because the quadrature observable of the signal and vacuum states are uncorrelated,
and since ⟨Δ(X𝜃)2⟩= 1∕2, it follows that
⟨
ΔX2
𝜃,out
⟩
= 𝜏2 ⟨Δ(Xa,𝜃)2⟩+ 𝜌2 ⟨Δ(Xv,𝜃)2⟩
= T ⟨Δ(Xa,𝜃)2⟩+ (1 −T)∕2.
(5.53)
Analyzing Eqs. (5.41) we see that the optical loss alone, no matter how significant it
is, cannot eliminate the property of squeezing completely.
Ideal squeezed-vacuum and coherent states have the minimum-uncertainty prop-
erty: the product of uncertainties ⟨ΔX2
out⟩⟨ΔP2
out⟩reaches the theoretical minimum
of 1∕4. But this is no longer the case in the presence of losses. The deviation of the
uncertainty from the minimum can be used to estimate the preparation quality of a
squeezed state. Suppose a measurement of a squeezed state yielded the minimum and
maximum quadrature uncertainty values of ⟨ΔX2
min⟩and ⟨ΔX2
max⟩, respectively. One
can assume that the state has been obtained from an ideal (minimum-uncertainty)
squeezed state with squeezing R by means of loss channel with transmissivity T.
Using Eq. (5.5) and solving Eqs. (5.53), one finds T [13], which one can then com-
pare with the values expected from the setup at hand, and thereby find out if any
unexpected losses are present in it.
5.3
DETECTION
5.3.1
Balanced Homodyne Detection
In order to detect squeezing, we need to perform multiple measurements of the field
quadrature, that is, the observable ̂X𝜃= ̂X cos 𝜃+ ̂P sin 𝜃= [e−i𝜃̂A + ei𝜃̂A†]∕
√
2,
where ̂A is the annihilation operator of the mode of interest. The task of measur-
ing optical fields in a phase-sensitive fashion may appear daunting, as these fields
oscillate at frequencies on a scale of hundreds of terahertz. Fortunately, however,
such a measurement can be implemented using a relatively simple interference setup.
The technique known as balanced homodyne detection proposed in 1983 by Yuen
and Chan [14] and subsequently implemented by Abbas et al. [15] to this day remains
the method of choice for quadrature measurements. Reference 16 provides a review
of the current state of the art in this area.
Here I start with a brief overview of this technique, in the way it is presented in
most textbooks. Subsequently, I will discuss a more complex but important question
of identifying the temporal mode whose quadrature is being measured. For simplicity,
I will start in the classical language.
Suppose the field to be measured (referred to as signal) is centered at frequency
Ω. We write for the field magnitude E(t) ∝a(t)e−iΩt + a∗(t)eiΩt, where a(t) is slowly
varying. For quadrature measurement, this field is overlapped on a symmetric (50:50)
beam splitter with a strong laser field at frequency Ω, known as the local oscillator
(LO), with amplitude aLO(t): ELO(t) ∝aLO(t)e−iΩt+i𝜃+ a∗
LO(t)eiΩt−i𝜃. The phase 𝜃of

DETECTION
137
Signal
ˆsa
Local
oscillator
LO
ˆa
Piezo
Symmetric
beam splitter
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
LO
s
a
a
a
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
LO
s
a
a
a
dt
FIGURE 5.9
The principle of balanced homodyne detection.
the local oscillator is controlled, for example, by a piezoelectric transducer. The two
beam splitter output fields impinge onto two photodiodes whose output photocurrents
are electronically subtracted (Fig. 5.9).
In order to see how the detector output relates to the signal quadrature, we write
the amplitudes of the beam splitter outputs as
a1,2(t) = aLO(t)ei𝜃± a(t)
√
2
.
(5.54)
The detector’s output current is then proportional to the intensity difference
I−(t) ∝a1(t)∗a1(t) −a2(t)∗a2(t)
= a(t)a∗
LO(t)e−i𝜃+ a∗(t)aLO(t)ei𝜃.
(5.55)
Assuming that aLO(t) is real (this is a matter of choosing the zero phase reference
point), the quantity in the right-hand side of Eq. (5.55) is an instantaneous (or,
rather, averaged over the detection electronics’ response time) value of the classical
quadrature a(t)e−i𝜃+ a∗(t)ei𝜃.
Switching to quantum treatment, we replace the classical amplitude a(t) by oper-
ator ̂a(t). This operator is defined as
̂a(t) =
1
√
2𝜋∫
+∞
−∞
̂a𝜔e−i(𝜔−Ω)td𝜔,
(5.56)
where ̂a𝜔is the annihilation operator of a plane wave mode of optical frequency
𝜔familiar from the electromagnetic field quantization procedure. One can think
of ̂a(t) as the annihilation operator of a photon of frequency Ω at time moment t.
Such a description is of course unphysical because of the time-frequency uncertainty
principle; yet it is quite useful for visualization.
As to the local oscillator, we recall that it is in a high-amplitude coherent state
so the relative quantum noise of its amplitude is negligible. Hence, we can continue

138
SQUEEZED LIGHT
to treat the LO amplitude aLO(t) as a number, not an operator. Equation (5.55)
simplifies to
̂I−(t) ∝𝛼LO(t)[̂a(t)e−i𝜃+ ̂a†(t)ei𝜃].
(5.57)
There are two primary approaches to the acquisition and analysis of the subtraction
photocurrent of the homodyne detector. In time-domain analysis, the photocurrent is
measured using a time-resolving device, such as an oscilloscope. In frequency-domain
measurements, one instead looks at the electronic spectrum of the photocurrent.
5.3.2
Time-Domain Approach
In the time-domain approach, the goal is to measure the quadrature of a limited
duration temporal mode defined by annihilation operator
̂A = ∫
+∞
−∞
𝜑(t)̂a(t)dt,
(5.58)
where 𝜑(⋅) is some normalized real function of bounded support. Following Eq.
(5.57), this measurement can be realized by multiplying the subtraction photocurrent,
obtained from the homodyne detector with a constant LO, by the mode function and
integrating it over time:
∫
+∞
−∞
𝜑(t)̂I(t)dt ∝aLO(̂Ae−i𝜃+ ̂A†ei𝜃) =
√
2aLO ̂X𝜃.
(5.59)
This approach works if the temporal resolution of the acquisition electronics (typically
on a scale of nanoseconds) is fast compared to the duration of the mode of interest,
such as in Reference 17.
The opposite extreme that frequently occurs in experimental practice is that the
squeezed state is prepared using a pico- or femtosecond pulsed laser, and its temporal
mode is defined by the laser pulse. In this case, the quadrature measurement can be
accomplished in spite of lack of resolution at the electronic level by using the same
laser as the local oscillator. We then have aLO(t) ∝𝜑(t) and hence ∫+∞
−∞̂I(t) dt ∝̂X𝜃.
Because of the slow electronics’ response, the integration occurs in this setting
automatically. The output of the homodyne detector is an electrical pulse whose
shape is determined by the response function, and magnitude is proportional to the
quadrature [18].
Time-domain homodyne detection permits full reconstruction of the state in the
acquisition mode. By varying the local oscillator phase 𝜃, one can obtain noise
statistics for all quadratures. Probability distributions pr(X𝜃) = ⟨X𝜃| ̂𝜌|| X𝜃⟩for all
phase angles are sufficient to obtain full information about density operator ̂𝜌of
the signal, such as its Wigner function or the density matrix in the photon number
representation. This method of measuring the quantum state of light is referred to as
optical homodyne tomography [5,16].

DETECTION
139
Homodyne tomography was first proposed in 1989 [19] and implemented exper-
imentally in application to single-mode squeezed vacuum in 1993 [20] and to two-
mode squeezed vacuum in 2000 [21].
5.3.3
Frequency-Domain Approach
Theoretically, if squeezing is generated in a continuous nonlinear process, it could be
observed by measuring the variance of the homodyne detector output photocurrent
as a function of the local oscillator phase. In practice, however, this measurement is
obscured by various spurious noises produced by either the source or the detector.
For example, the reflectivity of the homodyne detector’s beam splitter can vary as a
function of time due to minute perturbations to its orientation. However small such
variation may be, it may affect precise subtraction of the LO amplitudes. As a result,
the mean value of the output photocurrent will drift with time, and the drift amplitude
can exceed the shot noise level, thereby obscuring the observation of quantum noise
(Fig. 5.10).
Fortunately, such technical (classical) noises of the photocurrent can be distin-
guished from the quantum noise by analyzing their spectral behavior. Technical
noises often occur within specific frequency bands; for example, the slow drift of the
zero point is limited to low frequencies (Fig. 5.10b). The quantum noise, on the other
hand, is “white”: it is constant for all frequencies within the detector’s bandwidth
(Fig. 5.10a). One can therefore observe squeezing, even in the presence of technical
noises, by only looking at those sidebands in which they do not appear (Fig. 5.10c). A
further advantage of the frequency-domain method is that, by measuring the quantum
noise at different sidebands, one is able to analyze the properties of the source and
detector; in particular, measure the spectral band in which the squeezing is present.
We start our theoretical analysis of frequency-domain measurements by finding
the Fourier transform of the photocurrent (5.57) using Eq. (5.56):
̃̂I(𝜈) =
1
√
2𝜋∫
+∞
−∞
̂I(t)ei𝜈tdt ∝̂aΩ+𝜈e−i𝜃+ ̂a†
Ω−𝜈ei𝜃,
(5.60)
where 𝜈is the electronic frequency. By some algebra, we can express the right-hand
side of this equation as
̂aΩ+𝜈e−i𝜃+ ̂a†
Ω−𝜈ei𝜃= ̂X+ cos 𝜃+ ̂P+ sin 𝜃−i ̂X−sin 𝜃+ i ̂P−cos 𝜃
= ̂X+,𝜃+ i ̂X−,𝜋∕2+𝜃,
(5.61)
where
̂X±,𝜃=
1
√
2
[ ̂X𝜃(Ω + 𝜈) ± ̂X𝜃(Ω −𝜈)].
(5.62)

140
SQUEEZED LIGHT
1
2
3
4
5
2
4
6
8
10
10
8
6
4
2
Photocurrent (a.u.)
Photocurrent (a.u.)
Frequency (MHz)
Frequency (MHz)
5
4
3
2
1
(a)
(c)
(b)
Spectral power
(a.u.)
Spectral power
(a.u.)
102
105
104
103
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Power relative to the SNL (dB)
Frequency (Hz)
a
b
c
Time (μs)
Time (μs)
FIGURE 5.10
Frequency-domain approach to homodyne measurements. (a) Simulated out-
put of a homodyne detector exhibiting noise corresponding to the SQL (bottom). Its spectrum
(top) is flat. (b) The same output affected by the drift of the zero point on a time scale of 2 μs.
Direct variance measurement of the photocurrent will not give SQL. However, the spectral
power remains at the SQL level for frequencies above 1 MHz and hence allows observation
of squeezing. (c) Bona fide spectrum of the homodyne detector from Reference 22 showing
similar behavior. Curve a corresponds to SQL, b to squeezed vacuum, and c to the detector’s
electronic noise (in the absence of LO). The noise peaks arise from harmonics of 50 Hz power
line and the phase locking signal (20 kHz).

PREPARATION
141
This means that measuring the real and imaginary parts of ̃̂I(𝜈) is equivalent to sub-
jecting frequency modes Ω + 𝜈and Ω −𝜈to a beam splitter operation and performing
homodyne measurements of the beam splitter outputs at LO phases 𝜃and 𝜋∕2 + 𝜃
[23].
Suppose that the state entering the homodyne detector is squeezed—that is, the
noise of ̂I(t) is below the standard quantum limit for a certain local oscillator phase
𝜃. But this would also imply that its Fourier transform—both the real and imaginary
parts of ̃̂I(𝜈) — exhibit fluctuations below SQL. This would in turn mean that that
observables ̂X+,𝜃and ̂X−,𝜋∕2+𝜃exhibit reduced variance at the same time—that is,
modes Ω + 𝜈and Ω −𝜈are in the two-mode squeezed state (cf. Section 5.2.3). In
other words, single-mode squeezing in the time domain is equivalent to two-mode
squeezing in the frequency domain. An explicit experimental demonstration to that
effect has been presented by Huntington et al. [24].
Simultaneous measurements of the real and imaginary parts of ̃̂I(𝜈) are possible
using lock-in amplifiers. In this way, one can perform full quantum-state tomography
of the modes defined by operators (̂aΩ+𝜈± ̂a†
Ω−𝜈)∕
√
2. In a classic work of 1997,
Breitanbach et al. [10] used this approach for tomography of an extended family
of Gaussian states, including coherent, squeezed vacuum, as well as amplitude- and
phase-squeezed light states (Fig. 5.11).
It is common to use the electronic spectrum analyzer rather than lock-in ampli-
fiers for frequency-domain measurements. The spectrum analyzer displays the mean
squared power of the photocurrent’s sideband:
⟨
|||
̃̂I(𝜈)|||
2 ∝̂X2
+,𝜃+ ̂X2
−,𝜋∕2+𝜃
⟩
.
(5.63)
Because observables ̂X+,𝜃and ̂X−,𝜋∕2+𝜃are simultaneously squeezed, the spectrum
analyzer will show reduced signal at frequency 𝜈. In this way, the spectrum analyzer
can measure squeezing in spite of being unable to resolve the two terms of Eq. (5.61).
This result is consistent with the common sense expectation: if the time-dependent
photocurrent I(t) exhibits reduced noise, so will its frequency spectrum.
An important shortcoming of the spectrum analyzer is that it does not enable
quantum state tomography. It provides information about the variance of the quadra-
ture probability distribution, but not the probability distribution itself. This does not
matter, however, if the variance (i.e., the amount of squeezing) is the only quantity
of interest, and state reconstruction is not the goal.
5.4
PREPARATION
In Section 5.2.1, we had a conceptual discussion of a Hamiltonian that squeezes
the phase space. But in fact, almost any Hamiltonian that is at least quadratic in
the creation and annihilation operators brings about sophisticated trajectories in the
phase space and can result in squeezing. Similarly, a Hamiltonian that is bilinear in

142
SQUEEZED LIGHT
1
1
0.5
0.5
0
0
0
0
1
0.5
0
0
1
0.5
0
0
1
0.5
Time (ms)
0
100
Noise current iΩ (arbitrary units)
200
0
0
–10
–10
0
0
10
10
–10
0
10
–10
–10
0
0
–10
10
10
0
10
–10
0
Quadrature amplitude x
x0
x  /2
Phase angle   
10
2
π
π
θ
θ
π
2
π
π
2
π
π
2
π
π
2
π
π
P (x )
θ
θ
P (x )
θ
θ
P (x )
θ
θ
P (x )
θ
θ
P (x )
θ
θ
FIGURE 5.11
Optical homodyne measurements of coherent and squeezed states of light.
Top to bottom: coherent state, phase (position) squeezed light, 45◦quadrature squeezed light,
amplitude (momentum) squeezed light, position squeezed vacuum. Left column: statistics
of quadrature measurements obtained with a balanced homodyne detector while the local
oscillator phase is varied. Middle column: histograms pr(X𝜃) of these measurements asso-
ciated with specific values 𝜃of the phase. These histograms are integral projections of the
Wigner functions onto vertical planes positioned at angle 𝜃with respect to the position axis
of the phase space. The histograms are used to reconstruct the Wigner fucntions (right col-
umn) of the corresponding states in a procedure similar to computer tomography scanning
in medicine. They were also used to reconstruct the states’ density matrices in the photon
number basis (Fig. 5.5) by means of the quantum state sampling method [5]. Reproduced from
Reference 10.
the creation and annihilation operators of two modes is likely to generate two-mode
squeezing. Accordingly, there exist many physical processes that can be employed to
prepare single- and two-mode squeezed states of the electromagnetic field.
An important limitation to the above is the requirement that the Hamiltonian
evolution that leads to squeezing be not compromised by competing non-unitary
processes that increase noise. For example, attempts to achieve squeezing in atomic
systems have for a long time met with limited success due to incoherent spontaneous
emission into the signal mode, which leads to thermalization of the signal state and
loss of squeezing.

PREPARATION
143
Most frequently, squeezing is obtained by nonlinear optical wave-mixing pro-
cesses, in which pairs of photons are emitted into degenerate (single-mode squeez-
ing) or non-degenerate (two-mode squeezing) modes. An example is spontaneous
parametric down-conversion, a three-wave mixing between the pump field and the
two photons of squeezed vacuum that occurs due to second-order optical nonlinear-
ity. Another way to generate squeezing is four-wave mixing, a third-order nonlinear
process in which two strong waves, interacting with a nonlinear medium, give rise to
a pair of photons. Let us discuss these two processes in more detail.
5.4.1
Via Parametric Down-Conversion
In order to mathematically describe nonlinear-optical squeezing, we begin with equa-
tions for the propagation of classical electromagnetic fields through a nonlinear
medium. We then quantize the fields and replace their amplitudes with corresponding
creation and annihilation operators, thereby obtaining their evolution in the Heisen-
berg picture.
Consider a three-wave mixing process in which a strong pump field of frequency
2Ω interacts with weak signal and idler fields of frequencies Ω ± 𝜈, respectively,
with 𝜈≪Ω, in a crystal with effective nonlinearity 𝜒eff. All fields are continuous
in time, but the amplitudes3 𝜀s(z) and 𝜀s(z) of the signal and idler change with the
propagation distance z due to the nonlinear interaction. The pump amplitude ap is
assumed to remain constant because 𝜀p ≫𝜀s, 𝜀i, so there is no depletion. We further
assume that the crystal is perfectly phase matched for this nonlinear process.
In the slowly varying envelope approximation [25], the equations of motion for
the signal and idler fields take the form
𝜕
𝜕z
𝜀s,i(z) = i(Ω ± 𝜈)
2𝜖0nc PNL(Ω ± 𝜈),
(5.64)
where n is the refractive index and the nonlinear polarization amplitude is given by
PNL(Ω ± 𝜈) = 2𝜀0𝜒eff𝜀p𝜀∗
i,s(z),
(5.65)
𝜒eff being the effective nonlinear succeptibility. Without loss of generality, we can
define the phase of the pump such that iap is real and positive. Then, solving these
equations for propagation length L under assumption 𝜈≪Ω, we find
𝜀s(L) = 𝜀s(0) cosh r + 𝜀∗
i (0) sinh r;
(5.66a)
𝜀i(L) = 𝜀i(0) cosh r + 𝜀∗
s (0) sinh r
(5.66b)
3The amplitude is defined according to E(z, t) = 𝜀(z)eikz−i𝜔t + c.c., for E(z, t) being the value of the field
in space in time.

144
SQUEEZED LIGHT
with
r = 𝜒effΩ
nc |ap|L.
(5.67)
We now quantize the signal and idler fields according to 𝜀s,i →̂aΩ±𝜈, but continue to
treat the macroscopic pump field as classical. This leads to
̂aΩ±𝜈(L) = ̂aΩ±𝜈(0) cosh r + ̂a†
Ω∓𝜈(0) sinh r,
(5.68)
which is identical to Eqs. (5.27). In other words, if the signal and idler fields of
frequencies Ω ± 𝜈before the crystal are in the vacuum state, they will be in a two-
mode squeezed state after the crystal.
As discussed in the previous section, such a state manifests itself as single-mode
squeezing when a homodyne measurement with the local oscillator tuned to frequency
Ω is performed.
One can readily estimate the amount of squeezing one can obtain. Consider, for
example, an L = 5 mm periodically poled potassium titanyl phosphate (PPKTP)
crystal with the signal wavelength of 𝜆= 780 nm and the pump field of power
P = 100 mW focused into a spot of w = 50 μm radius. The relevant effective nonlinear
coefficient of PPKTP is 𝜒eff = 14 pm V−1, refractive index n = 1.8.
Under these conditions, the pump intensity is Ip = P∕𝜋w2 = 1.3 × 107 W m−2
and the field amplitude |𝜀p| =
√
Ip∕2n𝜖0c = 3.6 × 104 Vm−1. Substituting this value
into Eq. (5.67), we find r = 1.1 × 10−2. We see that the amount of squeezing obtained
by a single pass of a continuous-wave pump laser through a nonlinear crystal of a
reasonable size is very small.
There are two primary methods of addressing this complication. First, one could
use an ultrashort pulsed laser, thereby greatly increasing the pump amplitude. The
above theory, developed for continuous-wave pump, has only limited application
for pulsed pump; the amount of squeezing strongly depends on the shape 𝜑(t) of
the temporal mode chosen for the measurement [13]. Nevertheless, squeezing has
been demonstrated in the single-pass pulsed regime as soon as one year after the first
experimental observation of squeezed light [26] and the degree of squeezing has been
increased to several decibels4 in subsequent years [27].
The second approach is to place the crystal inside a Fabry-Perot cavity. The cavity
can be resonant to the pump light, thereby enhancing the effective pump power,
or to the signal, effectively allowing multiple passing of the signal through the
crystal, or both. The case when the cavity is resonant to the signal is most common;
this configuration is referred to as the optical parametric oscillator or amplifier
(OPO/OPA). A theory of squeezing inside an OPA has been developed by Gardiner
4Decibel (dB) is a common unit of squeezing in experiment. The degree of squeezing in decibels is
calculated according to 10 log10(2 ⟨ΔX2⟩). The standard quantum limit corresponds to a squeezing of 0
dB, the reduction of quadrature variance by a factor of 2 to about 3 dB, factor of 4 to about 6 dB, factor of
10 to 10 dB, and so on.

PREPARATION
145
and Savage [28] and reviewed, for example, in Reference 8. Without derivation, we
present the result for the quadrature noise levels associated with the antisqueezed
(𝜗+ = 𝜋∕2) and squeezed (𝜗−= 0) quadratures:
V±(𝜈) = 1
2 ± 𝜂
2
√
P∕Pth
(𝜈∕𝛾)2 + (1 ∓
√
P∕Pth)2 ,
(5.69)
where 2𝛾is the cavity linewidth, 𝜂is the overall quantum efficiency, P is the pump
power, and Pth is the threshold power, that is, the pump power at which the nonlinear
process in the cavity leads to macroscopic optical oscillations. By analyzing this
result, we see that the squeezing occurs at sideband frequencies 𝜈less than or on the
order of the cavity linewidth. This is not surprising: the enhancement effect of the
cavity is only present within its resonance.
The squeezing is strongest at the threshold point, when the amplification in a single
pass through the nonlinear crystal is equal to the loss occurring in a roundtrip of the
signal through the cavity, including that at the output coupling mirror. The gain equals
e2r ≈1 + 2r for r ≪1. In the numerical example studied above, r = 1.1 × 10−2, so
at the threshold point we would have a full roundtrip loss on a scale of T = 0.02.
This loss occurs due to the transmission through the output coupling mirror as well as
spurious losses on all other optical elements inside the cavity. Assuming, for example,
that the mirror has a transmissivity of 0.015, and the spurious losses add up to 0.005,
we find 𝜂= 0.015∕(0.015 + 0.005) = 0.75, which means that at the threshold, for
𝜈≪𝛾, we will see a variance of V−≈1∕2 −𝜂∕2, or about 6 dB.
Let us now estimate the bandwidth within which the squeezing is generated. This
bandwidth is the same as the cavity linewidth 𝛾, which, in turn, is the ratio of the
cavity’s free spectral range and finesse. Assuming that the cavity is of a bow-tie
configuration (Fig. 5.12) with a full length of Lc = 30 cm, its free spectral range is
c∕L = 1 GHz. The finesse is 𝜋∕T ≈160, so 𝛾≈6 MHz.
Historically, the first observation of squeezing using an OPA cavity has been
achieved by Wu et al. in 1986 [29]. The squeezing reached in that experiment was
about 3 dB. Since then, many groups made efforts to further develop this approach.
One of the most recent results reported a squeezing of 12.7 dB [30]. This remarkable
achievement required the overall quantum efficiency (including that of the OPA
cavity, homodyne detection, mode matching, etc.) to approach 95%.
Pump
Output
squeezed vacuum
Output coupler
Nonlinear
crystal
Resonated signal
field
FIGURE 5.12
Squeezing in an OPA cavity. The cavity mirrors are reflective to the signal
field, but transparent to the pump.

146
SQUEEZED LIGHT
OPAs can as well be used successfully to generate two-mode squeezing. The first
experiment to that effect was reported by Ou et al. in 1992 [31]. In that work, the
signal and idler fields resonated in the cavity were of the same frequency, but different
polarizations, and were mixed with one another using polarization optics after exiting
the OPA.
5.4.2
In Atomic Ensembles
As mentioned above, high optical nonlinearity is at the heart of most squeezing
processes. Anatominteractingwithanopticalwaveresonantwithoneofitstransitions
is an intrinsically nonlinear object. Atoms begin to exhibit nonlinear optical properties
at intensity levels on a scale of the saturation intensity, which is many orders of
magnitude lower than the intensity levels required for significant nonlinear effects in
ferroelectric crystals. Therefore, atomic ensembles have been considered an attractive
medium for the preparation of squeezed optical states from early days of quantum
optics.
A typical mechanism that leads to the generation of squeezing is four-wave mixing
(Fig. 5.13). A Λ-shaped atomic energy level configuration contains two ground states
coupled to a single excited state by optical transitions of degenerate or nondegenerate
frequencies. This configuration can be found, in particular, in alkali atoms, where the
ground level is split into two hyperfine sublevels.
Suppose the atom is initially in ground state |b⟩. The pump field of frequency
Ω excites the |a⟩−|b⟩transition, driving the atom into the other ground state |c⟩
through Raman scattering, which results in emission of a Stokes photon of frequency
Ω −Δ. Level |c⟩is in turn excited by the pump field and the atom goes back into |b⟩,
accompanied by emission of an anti-Stokes photon of frequency Ω + Δ. If the entire
Antistokes
Pump
Pump
Stokes
⎜a
⎜c
⎜b
FIGURE 5.13
Quantum four-wave mixing in an atomic Λ system leads to emission of the
Stokes and anti-Stokes photons akin to signal and idler in parametric down-conversion. Two-
mode squeezing obtains for non-degenerate and single-mode squeezing for degenerate ground
states.

PREPARATION
147
process is coherent, the Stokes and anti-Stokes emission modes will find themselves
in the two-mode squeezed state.
This mechanism was used in the very first observation of optical squeezing by
Slusher et al. [32]. In that experiment, atomic vapor of sodium has been used and two
Fabry-Perot cavities resonant with the pump and the Stokes/anti-Stokes fields have
been placed around the vapor sample for amplification. A two-mode squeezed state
at frequencies Ω ± Δ was observed at a ∼0.3 dB level using a homodyne detector
with the local oscillator at frequency Ω.
The state observed by Slusher and co-workers did not approach the minimum-
uncertainty limit. This is largely due to processes in atoms that occur concurrently
to four-wave mixing and lead to incoherent emission into the signal modes, such as
Brillouin and incoherent Raman scattering. Further hindrance is presented by various
dephasing phenomena such as time-of-flight decoherence that inhibit coherent four-
wave mixing. All these processes contribute to the “thermalization” of the optical
state in the signal modes and degrade the squeezing.
This appears to be a common problem in experiments using atomic ensembles for
squeezing. This is the primary reason that ferroelectric crystals, rather than atomic
systems became the workhorse of squeezed light generation. In recent years, however,
atomic systems have been revisited and significant squeezing has been demonstrated
in experiments involving four-wave mixing [33, 34] and polarization self-rotation
[35,36].
5.4.3
In Fibers
Optical fibers are typically made of glass, an amorphous material with inversion sym-
metry. Accordingly, they normally possess no second-order nonlinearity. However,
fibers enable propagation of focused optical wavepackets over long distances, so the
effects of third-order (Kerr) nonlinearities on these wavepackets become significant.
One of these effects is squeezing.
Squeezing in optical fiber is best explained in terms of the nonlinear refractive
index. In a Kerr medium, the refractive index depends on intensity I of the propagating
light according to
n = n0 + n2I,
(5.70)
where n2 is related to the third-order nonlinear susceptibility 𝜒(3). The phase of
light that has propagated through such a material will then depend on the intensity,
resulting in the transformation of the Wigner function as illustrated in Figure 5.14.
The parts of the Wigner function that are associated with higher and lower intensities
becomes shifted in the phase space with respect to each other, resulting in squeezing.
Homodyne detection of squeezing in this configuration is complicated by the
macroscopic mean amplitude of the signal required to take advantage of Eq. (5.70).
The amplitude could, in principle, be eliminated by means of phase-space displace-
ment (see Section 5.2.4); however, this would require a powerful laser and excellent

148
SQUEEZED LIGHT
FIGURE 5.14
Effect of a Kerr medium on a coherent state. Different intensities experience
different refractive indices, resulting in quadrature squeezing. From Reference 37.
phase stabilization. A more common detection method involves causing two fiber-
squeezed fields to interfere with each other so the resulting phase-space displacement
and rotation make one of the resulting fields amplitude-squeezed. Amplitude squeez-
ing is then readily observed by measuring the intensity with a single high-efficiency
detector and evaluating the variance of the photocurrent noise.
There are a number of ways such interference can be implemented. For example,
in a Sagnac-type interferometer the initial laser pulse impinges on a beam splitter,
after which the transmitted and reflected fields enter the fiber from two ends. Upon
exiting the fiber, the fields interfere on the same beam splitter, and one of the resulting
fields is measured [38]. Alternatively, a polarization-maintaining fiber is used, so that
the fields in both polarizations become squeezed at the fiber output. These fields are
then brought into interference using waveplates positioned at the output end of the
fiber [39].
Squeezing in optical fibers is limited by phase noise associated with thermal fluc-
tuations of the refractive index, in particular guided acoustic wave Brilloun scattering.
An additional degrading factor, particularly significant for very short pulses, is Raman
scattering [38]. Both these phenomena allow precise theoretical treatment, and can be
minimized by wise choice of experimental parameters [40,41]. As a result, squeezing
up to about 7 dB has been obtained [41].
5.5
APPLICATIONS IN QUANTUM INFORMATION
Squeezed light is a primary resource in continuous-variable5 quantum information
processing. In addition to fundamental interest such as implementation of the original
5The term “continuous-variable” refers to optical quantum information protocols that involve manipulation
of a state in phase space, that is, displacement, squeezing, quadrature measurements, and so on. It is usually
contrasted with “discrete-variable” methods dealing with manipulating and measuring single photons. This

APPLICATIONS IN QUANTUM INFORMATION
149
EPR paradox, it is the basis of many basic applications such as universal quantum
computing, dense coding, and quantum key distribution. The limited volume of this
manuscript does not permit a comprehensive review of these applications; such a
review can be found, for example, in References 42 and 43. Here we will concentrate
on only two important examples.
5.5.1
Quantum-Optical State Engineering
Lasers generate coherent states and their statistical mixtures — the states of light
known as classical. While such states are useful for some applications, many emerg-
ing quantum technologies require a supply of optical states that lie outside the classical
domain. Nonclassical optical states cannot be achieved by linear-optical manipula-
tion: interference of coherent states necessarily leads to coherent states. Production
of nonclassical states therefore requires nonlinear optics.
Parametric down-conversion is a nonlinear phenomenon capable of producing
quantum states of light with high efficiencies and with well-defined spatiotemporal
properties. This property is unique among existing methods of non-classical light
generation (see, e.g., Reference 44). However, the only states that SPDC can produce
are the single- and dual-mode squeezed vacua. For this reason, the past decade has
seen extensive efforts to use these states as “primitives” to produce (“engineer”)
various other states of light. As we see in this section, application of tools such
as linear-optical manipulation, interference with coherent states, and conditional
measurements allows one to accomplish this task successfully. However small the
degree of squeezing may be, even a single squeezed resource permits producing a
wide variety of complex optical states [16,45].
A TMSV with a weak level of squeezing can be used to generate heralded single
photons. To that end, one channel of that state (idler) is monitored by a single-photon
detector. If the detector “clicks,” we know, according to Eq. (5.40), that a photon must
have been emitted into the other (signal) channel as well. If the squeezing parameter r
is sufficiently small, the contribution of higher photon numbers in the signal channel
can be neglected.
In 2001, this technique was used to generate a heralded single photon in a definite
spatiotemporal mode, characterize it using homodyne tomography and, for the first
time, observe a negative Wigner function [46]. This method was later extended
to generate and measure the two- [47] and three-photon [48, 49] states. In these
extensions, the idler channel of SPDC was split into multiple photon detectors, and
their coincident “clicks” were required for a heralding event.
A modification of this scheme shown in Figure 5.15 permits producing arbitrary
superpositions of photon number states. Prior to detection, the light in the idler
channel is mixed with weak ancillary coherent states on beam splitters. In this way, a
detector registering a photon “does not know” whether it comes from SPDC or from
separation is largely of historical and technological nature; in fact, more and more interesting applications
now arise at the boundary between the two domains [16,88].

150
SQUEEZED LIGHT
Parametric down-conversion
Idler
Signal
Homodyne detection
Remote state preparation
SPCM
Local oscillator
Weak coherent states
SPCM
FIGURE 5.15
Generating arbitrary superpositions of the zero-, one-, and two-photon states.
The light in the idler channel of parametric down-conversion is brought into interference
with two weak coherent states and subsequently detected by single-photon counting modules
(SPCMs). A double “click” heralds the generation of the desired state in the signal channel.
(For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
a coherent state. This indistinguishability results in the idler channel of SPDC being
effectively projected onto a superposition of Fock states. Thanks to entanglement of
the TMSV, this superposition is automatically transferred to the signal channel. The
weight of each component of the superposition can be controlled by the amplitudes
and phases of the ancilla coherent states. This technique has been demonstrated for
superpositions of up to the two- [50] and three-photon [49] terms, but can, in principle,
be extended to higher numbers. One of the possible applications of this method is
the implementation of the cubic phase gate for universal quantum computation in the
continuous-variable setting.
In the above examples, a low magnitude of the squeezing parameter does not
degrade the fidelity of engineered quantum states. Quite the contrary, it ensures that
the state is not contaminated by higher photon number components. However, low
squeezing also reduces the probability of the heralding event, which can make the
method unpractical. One must choose the degree of squeezing as a compromise
between the fidelity and the state production rate.
In the next example, in contrast, a non-negligible value of squeezing is essential
for obtaining the desired state — a superposition |𝛼⟩± |−𝛼⟩of two coherent states
of opposite amplitudes. This state is of interest to the quantum community because,
while being a linear combination of classical states, it is highly nonclassical, and
hence reminiscent of the famous “Schr¨odinger cat” Gedankenexperiment.
Remarkably, the squeezed vacuum is quite similar to the state |𝛼⟩+ |−𝛼⟩(“even
Schr¨odinger kitten”) for 𝛼≲1. To see this, recall the Fock decomposition (5.31) of

APPLICATIONS IN QUANTUM INFORMATION
151
Master
laser
Doubler
Local oscillator
Down-
converter
Trigger photon
Trigger
detector
Homodyne
detector
Low-reflectivity
beam splitter
Squeezed
vacuum
Weak coherent state
Signal
state
FIGURE 5.16
Conditional preparation of the “odd Schr¨odinger kitten” by applying photon
annihilation to the squeezed vacuum state (the “even Schr¨odinger kitten”). The dashed lines
shows the additional elements used to generate arbitrary superpositions of states |𝛼⟩and |−𝛼⟩
as in Reference 57.
the coherent state. The sum of two coherent states of opposite amplitudes will contain
only even photon number terms,
|𝛼⟩+ |−𝛼⟩∝|0⟩+ 𝛼2
√
2
|2⟩+ O(𝛼4),
(5.71)
in the same way as the squeezed vacuum state (5.37). With a sufficiently small 𝛼,
only the first two terms of these decompositions are significant, and setting r = 𝛼2
makes them mutually identical for the two states.
Because coherent states are eigenstates of the photon annihilation operator ̂a,
applying that operator to |𝛼⟩+ |−𝛼⟩produces 𝛼(|𝛼⟩−|−𝛼⟩), that is, an “odd
Schr¨odinger kitten.” This idea was implemented experimentally by Wenger et al. [51]
and later refined in References 52–55. For photon annihilation, squeezed vacuum pro-
duced by means of degenerate SPDC was transmitted through a low reflectivity beam
splitter (Fig. 5.16). Detection of a photon in the reflected channel indicates that a
photon has been removed from the squeezed vacuum — that is, a photon annihilation
event has occurred [56].
If a weak ancilla coherent state is injected into the heralding detector using an
additional beam splitter (Fig. 5.16), the heralding photon cannot be definitively traced
back to the squeezed state or that ancilla. If the event comes from the squeezed state,
the photon subtraction takes place and the signal output is the odd Schr¨odinger kitten;
if it comes from the coherent state, the signal output is the same as the input, that is,
the even Schr¨odinger kitten. Because these two possibilities are indistinguishable, the
output state becomes a coherent superposition of the even and odd kittens, with the
magnitude and phase of the terms in the superposition dependent on the parameters
of the ancilla. In this way, arbitrary superpositions of states |𝛼⟩and |−𝛼⟩— an optical
continuous-variable qubit — are generated [57].

152
SQUEEZED LIGHT
EPR source
ˆa
a
X
ˆb
ˆc
bP
Alice
Bob
ˆa
ˆb
FIGURE 5.17
The scheme of quantum teleportation. Operator ̂D(X′
a + iP′
b) denotes phase-
space displacement.
5.5.2
Continuous-Variable Quantum Teleportation
Teleportation is a quantum communication protocol in which a quantum state is
transferred between two locations without utilizing any direct quantum communi-
cation channel. The transfer is enacted by local interference of the signal state with
a portion of the entangled resource shared between the two locations, as well as
local measurements, classical communications, and local quantum operations. The
teleportation protocol was first proposed for qubits in 1993 by Bennett et al. [58],
and for continuous variables in 1994 by Vaidman [59]. The latter protocol utilizes
the two-mode squeezed vacuum as the entangled resource; its major advantage is
the principal capability of complete transfer of a quantum state of an optical mode,
independent, in particular, of the number of photons therein.
Figure 5.17 shows the scheme of the protocol. The sender, Alice, has the signal
state she wishes to teleport in mode ̂a. In addition, she and the receiver, Bob, share a
two-mode squeezed state in modes ̂b and ̂c. In order to perform teleportation, Alice
overlaps modes ̂a and ̂b on a symmetric beam splitter and preforms position and
momentum measurements in its outputs using two homodyne detectors. She then
communicates the results of her measurement to Bob via a classical channel. Bob
performs phase-space displacement of mode ̂c in accordance with that information,
after which the state of this mode becomes identical to the initial state of mode ̂a.
In order to visualize the physics of teleportation, let us think of the signal state as
a point (Xa, Pa) in the phase space (neglect the uncertainty principle for a moment).
Further, we assume the initial two-mode squeezing of modes ̂b and ̂c to be infinite:
Xb = Xc and Pb = −Pc, with both these quantities being completely uncertain. The
beam splitter transformation, in accordance with Eqs. (5.41), makes the position
in mode ̂a equal to X′
a = (Xa −Xb)∕
√
2 while the momentum in mode ̂b becomes
P′
b = (Pa + Pb)∕
√
2.

APPLICATIONS IN QUANTUM INFORMATION
153
Suppose now that the position and momentum of these modes are measured. Let
the measurement results be X′
a and P′
b, respectively. This means that the position
of mode ̂b prior to the beam splitter has been Xb = Xa −X′
a
√
2 and its momentum
Pb = −Pa + P′
b
√
2. Because of the infinite two-mode squeezing of modes ̂b and ̂c
this implies, in turn, that Xc = Xa −X′
a
√
2 and Pc = Pa −P′
b
√
2.
We see that, after Alice’s measurement, the position and momentum of Bob’s
mode become certain and related to those of the initial state. Furthermore, if Alice
communicates the observed values of X′
a and P′
b to Bob (via a classical channel), Bob
will be able to perform a phase-space displacement operation (see Section 5.2.4) on
his mode, obtaining the position and momentum equal to Xa and Pa, respectively,
that is, identical to those of the initial signal state.
A more rigorous argument can be presented in terms of Wigner functions. Let
the initial Wigner function of the signal state be Wa(Xa, Pa). The Wigner function
of the EPR state shared between Alice and Bob is Wbc(Xb, Pb, Xc, Pc) ∝𝛿(Xb −
Xc)𝛿(Pb + Pc). The three-mode Wigner function is then Wabc(Xa, Pa, Xb, Pb, Xc, Pc) =
Wa(Xa, Pa)Wbc(Xb, Pb, Xc, Pc). After the beam splitter in Alice’s channel, it will
transform into
W′
abc(X′
a, P′
a, X′
b, P′
b, Xc, Pc) ∝Wa
(
X′
a + X′
b
√
2
,
P′
a + P′
b
√
2
)
×𝛿
(
−X′
a + X′
b
√
2
−Xc
)
𝛿
(
−P′
a + P′
b
√
2
+ Pc
)
,
(5.72)
where the primed indices refer to the quadratures of the modes after the beam splitter.
A measurement of X′
a and P′
b will yield, in mode ̂c,
W′
c(Xc, Pc) =
∞
∬
−∞
W′
abc(X′
a, P′
a, X′
b, P′
b, Xc, Pc)dP′
adX′
b
∝Wa
(
Xc + X′
a
√
2, Pc + P′
b
√
2
)
.
(5.73)
Again, applying displacement to Bob’s mode, we recover a state with the Wigner
function equal to that of the initial signal that is, the state identical to the
initial.
In experimental practice, the teleportation performance is degraded by a number
of factors, of which the primary ones are the optical losses, optical phase fluctuations,
and imperfect squeezing of the TMSV resource. A variety of performance metrics has
been proposed [42,60–63]. The most common one is the coherent-state fidelity, which
is the average, over all coherent states |𝛼⟩, of the fidelity Fc = ⟨𝛼||| ̂T(|𝛼⟩⟨𝛼|)||| 𝛼⟩,
where ̂T(|𝛼⟩⟨𝛼|) is the density operator of the teleported state. For a perfect telepor-
tation procedure, Fc = 1. On the other hand, the best fidelity that can be achieved

154
SQUEEZED LIGHT
without the use of entangled resource, simply by Alice’s measuring the position and
momentum quadratures of the input state and Bob’s recreating a coherent state with
the same central position and momentum, is Fc = 1∕2. The value of Fc reaching a
value of 2∕3, known as the no-cloning fidelity [62], guarantees that nobody else can
have a better copy of the input state than Bob. For this reason, the no-cloning fidelity
is of relevance to continuous-variable quantum communication. The value of 2∕3 is
also the minimum required for obtaining teleported states with negative values of the
Wigner function.
The first continuous-variable quantum teleportation experiment was reported by
Furusawa and colleagues in 1998 [11]. The TMSV resource has been obtained from
two single-mode squeezed fields generated as counterpropagating modes in a single
OPA cavity. Phase-space displacement was implemented using a low-transmissivity
beamsplitter, with the amplitude and phase of the displacement beam regulated by
electro-optical modulator. The resulting fidelity, Fc = 0.58, exceeded the classical
benchmark.
Thereafter, numerous efforts have been reported to refine the protocol and teleport
increasingly complex quantum states. For example, Takei and colleagues [64] in
2005 demonstrated entanglement swapping (teleportation of one channel of a TMSV
state), which is an essential component of quantum repeaters. Yonezawa et al. [65]
teleported in 2007 a squeezed vacuum state and obtained, for the first time, squeezing
in the output. The first teleportation of states with a negative Wigner function, such
as the single photon and “Schr¨odinger kitten” [52] was implemented in 2011 [66].
This work was followed by unconditional high fidelity teleportation of dual-rail
single-photon qubits [67].
5.6
APPLICATIONS IN QUANTUM METROLOGY
Squeezed light can be useful in any task that requires precise evaluation of the optical
phase. Such tasks occur, for example, in optical communications [68] and metrol-
ogy [69]. Phase evaluation typically involves an interferometer, and its precision is
determined by the phase uncertainty of the fields used. The coherent state, which
is readily obtained from lasers, has a phase uncertainty on a scale of the inverse
of its amplitude, or inverse square root of its photon number 1∕
√
N (Fig. 5.1b).
However, employing nonclassical states has a potential to improve the precision up
to the fundamental limit ∼1∕N established by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Among the many approaches leading to this goal [70], phase squeezing is perhaps
the most straightforward (Fig. 5.1f). In this section, we discuss a prominent example:
the application of squeezed light in gravitational wave detection.
Gravitational waves (GWs) are deformations of the space-time continuum caused
by accelerating massive objects. GWs, which propagate at the speed of light, are a
primary prediction of Einstein’s general relativity, but they have not yet been observed
due to their minuscule magnitude. The strongest GWs reaching the Earth are expected
to cause deformations on a scale of 1 part in 1020, and their detection constitutes one
of the most significant challenges faced by modern physics.

APPLICATIONS IN QUANTUM METROLOGY
155
Gravitational wave detectors use a Michelson-type laser interferometer to detect
small perturbations to positions of massive, freely suspended mirrors in its two arms.
The action of a GW stretches one of the arms and compresses the other, thereby
affecting the path-length difference and changing the intensity of the output signal.
At present, the world’s most sensitive GW detectors are TAMA in Japan, GEO
600 in Germany, LIGO in the United States and VIRGO in Italy. These detectors
utilize a number of techniques in order to enhance their signal.
r The interferometer arms are constructed up to a few kilometers in length in
order to increase the absolute displacement of the mirrors.
r Both arms of the interferometer are turned into high-finesse Fabry-Perot cavities
by means of additional mirrors placed near the Michelson interferometer beam
splitter.
r Massive (tens of kilograms) mirrors are used in order to reduce the radiation
pressure noise and the mirrors’ Brownian motion.
r Laser powers of up to hundreds of watt are employed to minimize the phase
uncertainty.
Further enhancement of any of these parameters would be prohibitive in terms
of costs and resources. This is why additional sensitivity improvement associated
with squeezing becomes useful. The idea of this improvement was proposed by
Caves in 1981 [71] and involves injecting squeezed vacuum into the dark port of the
interferometer.
Suppose the interferometer input mode ̂a is fed with a strong laser field in coherent
state |𝛼⟩(Fig. 5.18a). We assume 𝛼to be real. The other input mode, ̂b, is in the vacuum
or squeezed vacuum state. The beam splitter implements the mode transformation
according to ̂a′ = (̂a + ̂b)∕
√
2, ̂b′ = (̂a −̂b)∕
√
2. Let the interferometer paths be
slightly unbalanced in length so that, upon return to the beam splitter, mode ̂b′
acquires a small phase shift 𝜑which we wish to evaluate. After interacting, for
the second time, on the beam splitter, the modes become ̂a′′ = (̂a′ + ̂b′ei𝜑)∕
√
2,
̂b′′ = (̂a′ −̂b′ei𝜑)∕
√
2. Using ei𝜑≈1 + i𝜑, we find
̂b′′ = ̂b −i𝜑̂a.
(5.74)
Because 𝜑is small, the second term in Eq. (5.74) effectively results in displacement
of the (squeezed) vacuum mode ̂b along the momentum axis by 𝜑𝛼(Fig. 5.18b).
A momentum quadrature measurement performed on mode ̂b′′ by means of a
homodyne detector will yield this value, with an uncertainly equal to the momentum
uncertainty of the initial state of mode b. If this state is momentum squeezed, the
measurement sensitivity is enhanced accordingly, as illustrated in Figure 5.18c.
The actual measurement procedure that is currently implemented in GEO 600
[72] and LIGO [73] largely follows the above description. A major challenge is to
construct a source capable of generating squeezing in the frequency band compatible
with gravitational waves. Typical GWs are produced in the audio range between 150

156
SQUEEZED LIGHT
ˆa
ˆa
ˆa
ˆb
ˆb
ˆb
Homodyne
detector
Squeezing
source
Optical isolator
Michelson
interferometer
P
X
P
X
Time (ms)
)
stin
u .le
r( t
n
e
rr
u
c 
o
t
o
h
P
0
5
10
Noise
squeezing
(i)
(ii)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Freely suspended
end mirrors
FIGURE 5.18
Using squeezed vacuum to enhance the sensitivity of interferometric phase
detection. (a) Scheme of the setup. The squeezed vacuum is injected through the dark port
(mode ̂b) of the interferometer. An optical isolator is used to separate the input and output
modes ̂b and ̂b′′, and also to prevent scattering of the macroscopic light inside the interferometer
into the squeezed vacuum source. For clarity, the end mirrors are sketched as retroreflectors. (b)
The Wigner function of the state in mode ̂b′′ for the vacuum (left) and squeezed (right) input in
mode ̂b. The momentum quadrature measurement by the homodyne detector is proportional to
the interferometer path length difference; the measurement precision is enhanced by the initial
momentum squeezing of mode ̂b. (c) Simulation from Reference 69 illustrating how squeezing
helps revealing a small oscillation. Left, no squeezing; right, squeezing present.

CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
157
and 300 Hz, whereas most OPA-based squeezing sources built until recently exhibited
significant technical noises at frequencies below 1 MHz. A series of breakthroughs
achieved over the past decade helped identifying and eliminating the sources of these
noises [69].
The primary issue turned out to be macroscopic optical field at the wavelength of
the desired squeezing present within the OPA cavity. Mechanical fluctuations of the
cavity length (which occur at low frequencies) randomly affect the magnitude and
phase of that field and subsequently contaminate the output. The remedy consisted
of preventing the ambient laser field from penetrating into the cavity. This included
using a field of different frequency to lock the cavity length [74], using an optical
isolator to prevent the reflection of the local oscillator from the homodyne detector
photodiodes into the OPA cavity [22] and even minimization of scattering from the
nearby optical elements [75].
The most recent result on incorporating squeezed light into a GW detector has
been reported for LIGO [73]. Enhancement of sensitivity of up to 2.2 dB for fre-
quencies down to 150 Hz is reported. Note that this enhancement is far below the
>10 dB degree of squeezing produced by the source employed. This is because of
the losses introduced when injecting the squeezed field into the Michelson interfer-
ometer, imperfect mode matching with the carrier field, and phase fluctuations. It
is expected that the next generation of LIGO (the so-called Advanced LIGO) will
address most of these shortcomings [73].
5.7
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Over the past 30 years, the science of squeezed light has experienced enormous
progress and made significant influence on the entire field of physics. Its primary
effect, in my opinion, was to radically change the physicists’ perception of quantum
theory of electromagnetic radiation. Prior to the observation of squeezing, it was a
largely abstract discipline, having little connection to experimental practice. Obser-
vation of squeezing and subsequent development of optical homodyne tomography
resulted in techniques of creating, manipulating, and measuring quantum states of
light, allowing the postulates of quantum theory of light to be directly tested and
applied in experiment.
The second important contribution of squeezing is that to quantum informa-
tion science. It provided an entangled resource for many quantum information
protocols. Additionally, it gave rise to deeper understanding of parametric down-
conversion, allowing preparation of other important quantum optical resources such
as polarization-entangled photon pairs. As a result, optics has become, for at least a
decade, the main test bed for quantum information science, effectively jump starting
this field.
What developments can be expected in the next years? We are currently witnessing
the emergence of new means of production of squeezing, e.g. by bringing light into
interaction with an optomechanical cavity, that is, a optical cavity with one of its
elements suspended so as to form on a high quality mechanical resonator [76, 77].

158
SQUEEZED LIGHT
The pressure of light inside the cavity on that resonator results in optical nonlin-
earities described by equations similar to (5.70), thereby leading to the squeezing.
The promise of this new method is the possibility to manufacture on-chip sources
of squeezed light, enabling compact optical sensors and new fundamental tests of
physics.
In terms of applications, major results are awaited in gravitational wave detection.
Although squeezed light has already been integrated into some of the detectors,
it has not yet been used in actual data acquisition runs. In Advanced LIGO, the
squeezing is expected to enhance the sensitivity by up to a factor of ten. Hopefully,
such a detector will not only be able to prove the existence of GWs, but also provide
information about their spatial distribution and temporal dynamics. This would result
in a fundamentally new method for observing the universe, which has a potential to
revolutionize the entire field of astronomy.
No less exciting are squeezed light’s contributions to quantum information sci-
ence. Existing techniques of two-mode squeezing and quantum teleportation can be
employed for the development of the continuous-variable quantum repeater [78],
which will dramatically enhance the quantum communication distance leading to
global “quantum internet.” The unsolved challenges in this domain are long-term
storage of squeezed light [79–81] as well as methods of distilling the two-mode
squeezed state that has experienced losses [82,83].
Recently, exciting developments have been reported on creation of multimode
quadrature-entangled states by simultaneous pumping of multiple spatial [84], spec-
tral [85, 86], or temporal [87] modes of an SPDC arrangement. In this way, a
large-scale, individually addressable entangled state is created that may be possible
to use in measurement-based quantum computation and other quantum information
applications.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Loudon and P. Knight, “Squeezed light,” J. Mod. Opt. 34, 709–759 (1987).
[2] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-mechanical description of phys-
ical reality be considered complete?” Phys. Rev. 47, 777–780 (1935).
[3] K. Schneider, M. Lang, J. Mlynek, and S. Schiller, “Generation of strongly squeezed
continuous-wave light at 1064 nm,” Opt. Exp. 2, 59–64 (1998).
[4] V. Buzek and P. L. Knight, Squeezed States: Basic Principles (Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 2004), pp. 3–32.
[5] U. Leonhardt, Measuring the Quantum State of Light, Cambridge Studies in Modern
Optics (Cambridge University Press, 1997).
[6] B. L. Schumaker and C. M. Caves, “New formalism for two-photon quantum optics.
ii. Mathematical foundation and compact notation,” Phys. Rev. A 31, 3093–3111
(1985).
[7] H. P. Yuen, “Two-photon coherent states of the radiation field,” Phys. Rev. A 13, 2226–
2243 (1976).
[8] M. Scully and S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics (Cambridge University Press, 1997).

REFERENCES
159
[9] V. V. Dodonov, O. V. Man’ko, and V. I. Man’ko, “Photon distribution for one-mode mixed
light with a generic gaussian Wigner function,” Phys. Rev. A 49, 2993–3001 (1994).
[10] G. Breitenbach, S. Schiller, and J. Mlynek, “Measurement of the quantum states of
squeezed light,” Nature 387, 471–475 (1997).
[11] A. Furusawa, J. L. S¨orensen, S. L. Braunstein, C. A. Fuchs, H. J. Kimble, and E. S.
Polzik, “Unconditional quantum teleportation,” Science 282, 706–709 (1998).
[12] R. Schnabel, H. Vahlbruch, A. Franzen, S. Chelkowski, N. Grosse, H.-A. Bachor, W.
Bowen, P. Lam, and K. Danzmann, “Squeezed light at sideband frequencies below 100
khz from a single OPA,” Opt. Commun. 240, 185–190 (2004).
[13] W. Wasilewski, A. I. Lvovsky, K. Banaszek, and C. Radzewicz, “Pulsed squeezed light:
simultaneous squeezing of multiple modes,” Phys. Rev. A 73, 063819 (2006).
[14] H. P. Yuen and V. W. S. Chan, “Noise in homodyne and heterodyne detection,” Opt. Lett.
8, 177–179 (1983).
[15] G. L. Abbas, V. W. S. Chan, and T. K. Yee, “Local-oscillator excess-noise suppression
for homodyne and heterodyne detection,” Opt. Lett. 8, 419–421 (1983).
[16] A. I. Lvovsky and M. G. Raymer, “Continuous-variable optical quantum-state tomogra-
phy,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 299–332 (2009).
[17] W. Wasilewski, T. Fernholz, K. Jensen, L. S. Madsen, H. Krauter, C. Muschik, and E. S.
Polzik, “Generation of two-mode squeezed and entangled light in a single temporal and
spatial mode,” Opt. Exp. 17, 14444–14457 (2009).
[18] H. Hansen, T. Aichele, C. Hettich, P. Lodahl, A. I. Lvovsky, J. Mlynek, and S. Schiller,
“Ultrasensitive pulsed, balanced homodyne detector: application to time-domain quantum
measurements,” Opt. Lett. 26, 1714–1716 (2001).
[19] K. Vogel and H. Risken, “Determination of quasiproba-bility distributions in terms of
probability distributions for the rotated quadrature phase,” Phys. Rev. A 40, 2847–2849
(1989).
[20] D. T. Smithey, M. Beck, M. G. Raymer, and A. Faridani, “Measurement of the Wigner
distribution and the density matrix of a light mode using optical homodyne tomogra-
phy: application to squeezed states and the vacuum,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1244–1247
(1993).
[21] M. Vasilyev, S.-K. Choi, P. Kumar, and G. M. D’Ariano, “Tomographic measurement of
joint photon statistics of the twin-beam quantum state,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2354–2357
(2000).
[22] K. McKenzie, N. Grosse, W. P. Bowen, S. E. Whitcomb, M. B. Gray, D. E. McClelland,
and P. K. Lam, “Squeezing in the audio gravitational-wave detection band,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 161105 (2004).
[23] F. A. Barbosa, A. S. Coelho, K. N. Cassemiro, P. Nussen- zveig, C. Fabre, M. Martinelli,
and A. S. Villar, “Beyond spectral homodyne detection: complete quantum measurement
of spectral modes of light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 200402 (2013).
[24] E. H. Huntington, G. N. Milford, C. Robilliard, T. C. Ralph, O. Gl¨ockl, U. L. Andersen,
S. Lorenz, and G. Leuchs, “Demonstration of the spatial separation of the entangled
quantum sidebands of an optical field,” Phys. Rev. A 71, 041802 (2005).
[25] R. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, (Academic Press, 2003).
[26] R. E. Slusher, P. Grangier, A. LaPorta, B. Yurke, and M. J. Potasek, “Pulsed squeezed
light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2566–2569 (1987).

160
SQUEEZED LIGHT
[27] C. Kim and P. Kumar, “Quadrature-squeezed light detection using a self-generated
matched local oscillator,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1605–1608(1994).
[28] C. Gardiner and C. Savage, “A multimode quantum theory of a degenerate parametric
amplifier in a cavity,” Opt. Commun. 50, 173–178 (1984).
[29] L.-A. Wu, H. J. Kimble, J. L. Hall, and H. Wu, “Generation of squeezed states by
parametric down conversion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2520–2523 (1986).
[30] T. Eberle, S. Steinlechner, J. Bauchrowitz, V. H¨andchen, H. Vahlbruch, M. Mehmet,
H. Maller-Ebhardt, and R. Schnabel, “Quantum enhancement of the zero-area sagnac
interferometer topology for gravitational wave detection,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 251102
(2010).
[31] Z. Y. Ou, S. F. Pereira, H. J. Kimble, and K. C. Peng, “Realization of the einstein-podolsky-
rosen paradox for continuous variables,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3663–3666 (1992).
[32] R. E. Slusher, L. W. Hollberg, B. Yurke, J. C. Mertz, and J. F. Valley, “Observation of
squeezed states generated by four-wave mixing in an optical cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 55,
2409–2412 (1985).
[33] C. F. McCormick, V. Boyer, E. Arimondo, and P. D. Lett, “Strong relative intensity
squeezing by four-wave mixing in rubidium vapor,” Opt. Lett. 32, 178–180 (2007).
[34] V. Boyer, A. M. Marino, R. C. Pooser, and P. D. Lett, “Entangled images from four-wave
mixing,” Science 321, 544–547 (2008).
[35] J. Ries, B. Brezger, and A. I. Lvovsky, “Experimental vacuum squeezing in rubidium
vapor via self-rotation,” Phys. Rev. A 68,025801 (2003).
[36] S. Barreiro, P. Valente, H. Failache, and A. Lezama, “Polarization squeezing of light by
single passage through an atomic vapor,” Phys. Rev. A 84, 033851 (2011).
[37] I. Rigas, A. B. Klimov, L. L. Snchez-Soto, and G. Leuchs, “Nonlinear cross-Kerr quasi-
classical dynamics,” New J. of Phys. 15, 043038 (2013).
[38] P. Drummond, R. Shelby, S. Friberg, and Y. Yamamoto, “Quantum solitons in optical
fibres,” Nature 365, 307–313 (1993).
[39] J. Heersink, V. Josse, G. Leuchs, and U. L. Andersen, “Efficient polarization squeezing
in optical fibers,” Opt. Lett. 30, 1192–1194 (2005).
[40] J. F. Corney, P. D. Drummond, J. Heersink, V. Josse, G. Leuchs, and U. L. Andersen,
“Many-body quantum dynamics of polarization squeezing in optical fibers,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 97, 023606 (2006).
[41] R. Dong, J. Heersink, J. F. Corney, P. D. Drummond, U. L. Andersen, and G. Leuchs,
“Experimental evidence for raman-induced limits to efficient squeezing in optical fibers,”
Opt. Lett. 33, 116–118 (2008).
[42] S. L. Braunstein and P. van Loock, “Quantum information with continuous variables,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 513–577 (2005).
[43] U. L. Andersen, G. Leuchs, and C. Silberhorn, “Continuous-variable quantum information
processing,” Laser Photon. Rev. 4, 337–354 (2010).
[44] P. Grangier, B. Sanders, and J. Vuckovic, “Focus on single photons on demand,” New J.
Phys. 6 (2004).
[45] F. DellAnno, S. De Siena, and F. Illuminati, “Multiphoton quantum optics and quantum
state engineering,” Phys. Reports 428, 53–168 (2006).
[46] A. I. Lvovsky, H. Hansen, T. Aichele, O. Benson, J. Mlynek, and S. Schiller, “Quantum
state reconstruction of the single-photon Fock state,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 050402 (2001).

REFERENCES
161
[47] A. Ourjoumtsev, R. Tualle-Brouri, and P. Grangier, “Quantum homodyne tomography of
a two-photon Fock state,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 213601 (2006).
[48] M. Cooper, L. J. Wright, C. Soller, and B. J. Smith, “Experimental generation of multi-
photon fock states,” Opt. Exp. 21, 5309–5317 (2013).
[49] M. Yukawa, K. Miyata, T. Mizuta, H. Yonezawa, P. Marek, R. Filip, and A. Furusawa,
“Generating superposition of up-to three photons for continuous variable quantum infor-
mation processing,” Opt. Exp. 21, 5529–5535 (2013).
[50] E. Bimbard, N. Jain, A. MacRae, and A. Lvovsky, “Quantum-optical state engineering
up to the two- photon level,” Nat. Photon. 4, 243–247 (2010).
[51] J. Wenger, R. Tualle-Brouri, and P. Grangier, “Non-Gaussian statistics from individual
pulses of squeezed light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 153601 (2004).
[52] A. Ourjoumtsev, R. Tualle-Brouri, J. Laurat, and P. Grangier, “Generating optical
Schr¨odinger kittens for quantum information processing,” Science 312, 83–86 (2006).
[53] J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen, B. M. Nielsen, C. Hettich, K. Mølmer, and E. S. Polzik, “Gener-
ation of a superposition of odd photon number states for quantum information networks,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 083604 (2006).
[54] K. Wakui, H. Takahashi, A. Furusawa, and M. Sasaki, “Photon subtracted squeezed states
generated with periodically poled KTiOPO4,” Opt. Exp. 15, 3568–3574 (2007).
[55] T. Gerrits, S. Glancy, T. S. Clement, B. Calkins, A. E. Lita, A. J. Miller, A. L. Migdall, S.
W. Nam, R. P. Mirin, and E. Knill, “Generation of optical coherent-state superpositions
by number-resolved photon subtraction from the squeezed vacuum,” Phys. Rev. A 82,
031802 (2010).
[56] R. Kumar, E. Barrios, C. Kupchak, and A. I. Lvovsky, “Experimental characterization of
bosonic creation and annihilation operators,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 130403 (2013).
[57] J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen, M. Takeuchi, K. Wakui, H. Takahashi, K. Hayasaka, M. Takeoka,
and M. Sasaki, “Optical continuous-variable qubit,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 053602 (2010).
[58] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W. K. Wootters, “Teleport-
ing an unknown quantum state via dual classical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen channels,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1895–1899 (1993).
[59] L. Vaidman, “Teleportation of quantum states,” Phys. Rev. A 49, 1473–1476 (1994).
[60] S. L. Braunstein, C. A. Fuchs, and H. J. Kimble, “Criteria for continuous-variable quantum
teleportation,” J. Mod. Opt. 47, 267–278 (2000).
[61] T. C. Ralph and P. K. Lam, “Teleportation with bright squeezed light,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
81, 5668–5671 (1998).
[62] F. Grosshans and P. Grangier, “Continuous variable quantum cryptography using coherent
states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 057902 (2002).
[63] K. Hammerer, M. M. Wolf, E. S. Polzik, and J. I. Cirac, “Quantum benchmark for storage
and transmission of coherent states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 150503 (2005).
[64] N. Takei, H. Yonezawa, T. Aoki, and A. Furusawa, “High-fidelity teleportation beyond
the no-cloning limit and entanglement swapping for continuous variables,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 94, 220502 (2005).
[65] H. Yonezawa, S. L. Braunstein, and A. Furusawa, “Experimental demonstration of quan-
tum teleportation of broadband squeezing,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 110503 (2007).
[66] N. Lee, H. Benichi, Y. Takeno, S. Takeda, J. Webb, E. Huntington, and A. Furusawa,
“Teleportation of non-classical wave packets of light,” Science 332, 330–333 (2011).

162
SQUEEZED LIGHT
[67] S. Takeda, T. Mizuta, M. Fuwa, P. van Loock, and A. Fu-rusawa, “Deterministic quantum
teleportation of photonic quantum bits by a hybrid technique,” Nature 500, 315–318
(2013).
[68] R. Slavik, F. Parmigiani, J. Kakande, C. Lundstr¨om, M. Sj¨odin, P. A. Andrekson, R.
Weerasuriya, S. Sygle-tos, A. D. Ellis, L. Gr¨oner-Nielsen, et al., “All-optical phase and
amplitude regenerator for next-generation telecommunications systems,” Nat. Photon. 4,
690–695 (2010).
[69] R. Schnabel, N. Mavalvala, D. E. McClelland, and P. K. Lam, “Quantum metrology for
gravitational wave astronomy,” Nat. Commun. 1, 121 (2010).
[70] V. Giovannetti, S. Lloyd, and L. Maccone, “Advances in quantum metrology,” Nat.
Photon. 5, 222–229 (2011).
[71] C. M. Caves, “Quantum-mechanical noise in an interferometer,” Phys. Rev. D 23,
1693 (1981).
[72] J. Abadie, B. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. Abbott, M. Aber-nathy, C. Adams, R. Adhikari, C.
Affeldt, B. Allen, G. Allen, et al., “A gravitational wave observatory operating beyond
the quantum shot-noise limit,” Nat. Phys. 7, 962–965 (2011).
[73] J. Aasi, J. Abadie, B. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. Abbott, M. Abernathy, C. Adams, T. Adams,
P. Addesso, R. Adhikari, et al., “Enhanced sensitivity of the ligo gravitational wave
detector by using squeezed states of light,” Nat. Photon. 7, 613–619 (2013).
[74] H. Vahlbruch, S. Chelkowski, B. Hage, A. Franzen, K. Danzmann, and R. Schnabel,
“Coherent control of vacuum squeezing in the gravitational-wave detection band,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 97, 011101 (2006).
[75] H. Vahlbruch, S. Chelkowski, K. Danzmann, and R. Schnabel, “Quantum engineering
of squeezed states for quantum communication and metrology,” New J. Phys. 9, 371
(2007).
[76] A. H. Safavi-Naeini, S. Gro¨oblacher, J. T. Hill, J. Chan, M. Aspelmeyer, and O. Painter,
“Squeezed light from a silicon micromechanical resonator,” Nature 500, 185–189 (2013).
[77] T. P. Purdy, P.-L. Yu, R. W. Peterson, N. S. Kampel, and C. A. Regal, “Strong optome-
chanical squeezing of light,” Phys. Rev. X 3, 031012 (2013).
[78] H.-J. Briegel, W. D¨ur, J. I. Cirac, and P. Zoller, “Quantum repeaters: the role of imperfect
local operations in quantum communication,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5932–5935 (1998).
[79] K. Honda, D. Akamatsu, M. Arikawa, Y. Yokoi, K. Akiba, S. Nagatsuka, T. Tanimura,
A. Furusawa, and M. Kozuma, “Storage and retrieval of a squeezed vacuum,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 100, 093601 (2008).
[80] J. Appel, E. Figueroa, D. Korystov, M. Lobino, and A. I. Lvovsky, “Quantum memory
for squeezed light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 093602 (2008).
[81] A. I. Lvovsky, B. C. Sanders, and W. Tittel, “Optical quantum memory,” Nat. Photon. 3,
706–714 (2009).
[82] H. Takahashi, J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen, M. Takeuchi, M. Takeoka, K. Hayasaka, A.
Furusawa, and M. Sasaki, “Entanglement distillation from gaussian input states,” Nat.
Photon. 4, 178–181 (2010).
[83] Y. Kurochkin, A. S. Prasad, and A. Lvovsky, “Distillation of the two-mode squeezed
state,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 070402 (2014).
[84] S. Armstrong, J.-F. Morizur, J. Janousek, B. Hage, N. Treps, P. K. Lam, and H.-A. Bachor,
“Programmable multimode quantum networks,” Nat. Commun. 3, 1026 (2012).

REFERENCES
163
[85] N. C. Menicucci, S. T. Flammia, and O. Pfister, “One-way quantum computing in the
optical frequency comb,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 130501 (2008).
[86] M. Pysher, Y. Miwa, R. Shahrokhshahi, R. Bloomer, and O. Pfister, “Parallel generation
of quadripartite cluster entanglement in the optical frequency comb,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
107, 030505 (2011).
[87] S. Yokoyama, R. Ukai, S. C. Armstrong, C. Sornphiphat-phong, T. Kaji, S. Suzuki,
J.-i. Yoshikawa, H. Yonezawa, N. C. Menicucci, and A. Furusawa, “Optical generation
of ultra-large-scale continuous-variable cluster states,” Nature Photonics. 7, 982 (2013).
[88] U. L. Andersen, J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen, P. van Loock, A. Furusawa, Hybrid quantum
information processing, arxiv.org/1409.3719


6
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY
OF MATERIALS
Tom G. Mackay
School of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
and
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, USA
6.1
PREAMBLE
This chapter concerns the theory which underpins the electromagnetic properties
of materials. A “material” is taken to be an assembly of a great number of atoms
or molecules, each of which is much smaller than the electromagnetic wavelengths
under consideration. Accordingly, we employ macroscopic electromagnetic fields,
and the materials in question are characterized by their constitutive relations. The
structure of these relations is considered for isotropic, anisotropic, and bianisotropic
materials; these materials may be either spatially homogeneous or nonhomogeneous.
We concentrate on linear materials, but nonlinear materials are described too. Thus, a
very wide range of both naturally occurring and artificial materials are included within
our scope. The focus of our attention is skewed toward anisotropic and bianisotropic
materials; while these are less often described in standard textbook presentations on
the electromagnetic properties of materials, they are of increasing importance from
a technological viewpoint, particularly given recent rapid developments in the fields
pertaining to artificial materials and metamaterials.
In the notation employed, vector quantities are underlined and the overhead ̂
symbol is used to denote a unit vector. In particular, the unit vectors aligned with the
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
165

166
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
Cartesian axes are written as ̂x, ̂y, and ̂z. Double underlining and normal (bold) face
signify a 3×3 (6×6) dyadic. The inverse and transpose of a dyadic Q are represented
by Q−1 and QT, respectively. Angular frequency is denoted by 𝜔and the permittivity
and permeability of free space are written as 𝜖0 and 𝜇0. The operators Re{⋅} and Im{⋅}
deliver the real and imaginary parts of complex-valued quantities while i =
√
−1. SI
units are adopted.
6.2
MACROSCOPIC VIEWPOINT
A material contains a vast number of atoms and each atom typically contains many
charged particles. Accordingly, the determination of the electromagnetic fields—
which are functions of both position r and time t coordinates—inside a material only
becomes a tractable problem if we consider fields which are averaged over a volume
that is large compared with the volume occupied by a single atom. These fields are
called macroscopic fields [1]. In fact, the averaging process should be carried out over
both r and t coordinates; but in practice this may be achieved by spatial averaging
alone on account of the finite speed of light.
6.2.1
Maxwell Postulates
Electromagnetic fields are governed by the physical principles encapsulated in the
Maxwell postulates. From the macroscopic perspective, these are represented by the
coupled differential equations [2]
∇× ̃E(r, t) + 𝜕
𝜕t
̃B(r, t) = 0
∇× ̃B(r, t) −𝜖0𝜇0
𝜕
𝜕t
̃E(r, t) = 𝜇0̃J(r, t)
∇∙̃E(r, t) = 1
𝜖0
̃𝜌(r, t)
∇∙̃B(r, t) = 0
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.1)
Herein the macroscopic fields ̃E(r, t) and ̃B(r, t) are the spatial averages of micro-
scopic electric and magnetic fields, respectively; the macroscopic charge and current
densities ̃𝜌(r, t) and ̃J(r, t) are likewise related to their microscopic counterparts.
When
considering
materials,
it
is
helpful
to
distinguish
between
free
charges (which are externally impressed) and bound charges (which are gen-
erated by internal mechanisms). Accordingly, let us introduce the polariza-
tion ̃P(r, t) and magnetization
̃M(r, t) macroscopic fields to characterize the

MACROSCOPIC VIEWPOINT
167
bound source densities. These allow us to define externally impressed source
densities as1
̃𝜌e(r, t) = ̃𝜌(r, t) + ∇∙̃P(r, t)
̃Je(r, t) = ̃J(r, t) −𝜕
𝜕t
̃P(r, t) −∇× ̃M(r, t)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.2)
In addition, the notions of polarization and magnetization give rise to two more
macroscopic fields:
̃D(r, t) = 𝜖0 ̃E(r, t) + ̃P(r, t)
̃H(r, t) = 1
𝜇0
̃B(r, t) −̃M(r, t)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.3)
The four macroscopic electromagnetic fields, ̃E(r, t), ̃D(r, t), ̃B(r, t), and ̃H(r, t), are
piecewise differentiable vector functions of position r and time t. The fields ̃E(r, t)
and ̃B(r, t) are the primitive fields; these are directly measurable quantities which
together generate the Lorentz force [2]
̃FLor(r, t) = q [ ̃E(r, t) + v(r, t) × ̃B(r, t)]
(6.4)
acting on a point charge q (located at r, at time t) travelling at velocity v(r, t). The
fields ̃D(r, t) and ̃H(r, t) are the induction fields; these develop inside a material in
response to the primitive fields. Somewhat confusingly, the primitive fields ̃E(r, t) and
̃B(r, t) are often called the electric field and magnetic induction, while the induction
fields ̃D(r, t) and ̃H(r, t) are often called the dielectric displacement and magnetic
field.
In terms of ̃E(r, t), ̃D(r, t), ̃B(r, t), and ̃H(r, t), the mathematical representation of
the Maxwell postulates (6.1) is given as
∇× ̃H(r, t) −𝜕
𝜕t
̃D(r, t) = ̃Je(r, t)
∇× ̃E(r, t) + 𝜕
𝜕t
̃B(r, t) = −̃Jm(r, t)
∇∙̃D(r, t) = ̃𝜌e(r, t)
∇∙̃B(r, t) = ̃𝜌m(r, t)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.5)
1If we replace ̃P(r, t) by ̃P(r, t) −∇× ̃A(r, t) and ̃M(r, t) by ̃M(r, t) + (𝜕∕𝜕t)̃A(r, t), then Eqs. (6.2) would
still be satisfied for any differentiable vector function ̃A(r, t). Therefore Eqs. (6.2) do not uniquely
specify ̃P(r, t) and ̃M(r, t). Indeed, as a consequence, the induction fields ̃D(r, t) and ̃H(r, t) are not
uniquely specified either. However, this gauge freedom is eliminated by the establishment of constitutive
relations [3].

168
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
Herein the magnetic current and magnetic charge densities ̃Jm(r, t) and ̃𝜌m(r, t) do
not represent physical quantities; they are added for the reasons of mathematical
convenience [4]. The source terms on the right side of Eqs. (6.5) satisfy the continuity
relations
∇∙̃Je(r, t) + 𝜕
𝜕t ̃𝜌e(r, t) = 0
∇∙̃Jm(r, t) + 𝜕
𝜕t ̃𝜌m(r, t) = 0
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.6)
Observe that the Maxwell divergence postulates (6.5)3,4 may be derived from the
Maxwell curl postulates (6.5)1,2 under the assumption of source continuity as repre-
sented by Eqs. (6.6).2
6.2.2
Constitutive Relations
In practice, it is the Maxwell curl postulates (6.5)1,2 that are used to determine the
fields inside materials. However, these provide a system of only two linear vector
differential equations, whereas there are four vector fields to be determined, namely
̃E(r, t), ̃B(r, t), ̃D(r, t), and ̃H(r, t). Further information, linking the two primitive vector
fields ̃E(r, t) and ̃B(r, t) to the two induction vector fields ̃D(r, t) and ̃H(r, t), is needed
to solve the differential equations (6.5)1,2. This further information is provided by the
constitutive relations which characterize the electromagnetic response of a material.
These may be written in the general form [5]
̃D = { ̃E, ̃B}
̃H = { ̃E, ̃B}
}
,
(6.7)
where and are linear functions (possibly incorporating differential/integral oper-
ators) of ̃E and ̃B for linear materials and nonlinear functions (possibly incorporating
differential/integral operators) of ̃E and ̃B for nonlinear materials. We shall return to
the topic of nonlinear materials in Section 6.5, but for now we concentrate on linear
materials.
In general, the induction fields for a material at a certain location r = r0 and time
t = t0 depend not only on the primitive fields at r = r0 and t = t0 but also on the
primitive fields in the vicinity of r = r0 and at times leading up to t = t0. Thus, a
general linear material is characterized by constitutive relations that are nonlocal with
respect to both space and time per [6]
2The subscripts on (6.5)1,2 signify the upper two equations in Eqs. (6.5), and the subscripts on (6.5)3,4
signify the lower two equations in Eqs. (6.5).

MACROSCOPIC VIEWPOINT
169
̃D(r, t) = ∫t′ ∫r′
[
̃𝜖
EB(r′, t′) ∙̃E(r −r′, t −t′) + ̃𝜉
EB
(r′, t′) ∙̃B(r −r′, t −t′)
]
d3r′ dt′
̃H(r, t) = ∫t′ ∫r′
[
̃𝜁
EB
(r′, t′) ∙̃E(r −r′, t −t′) + ̃𝜇−1
EB
(r′, t′) ∙̃B(r −r′, t −t′)
]
d3r′ dt′
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.8)
where ̃𝜖
EB(r, t), ̃𝜉
EB
(r, t), ̃𝜁
EB
(r, t), and ̃𝜇−1
EB
(r, t) are 3×3 constitutive dyadics (i.e.,
second–rank Cartesian tensors). Conventionally, ̃𝜖
EB(r, t) and ̃𝜇−1
EB
(r, t) are called the
permittivity and inverse permeability dyadics, while ̃𝜉
EB
(r, t) and ̃𝜁
EB
(r, t) are called
magnetoelectric dyadics.
If electromagnetic wavelengths are of the same order of magnitude as a char-
acteristic length scale in the material, then spatial nonlocality can be an important
phenomenon [7]. However, in many commonly encountered scenarios the effects
of spatial nonlocality are negligible. On the other hand, temporal nonlocality often
leads to readily observable effects in materials. Accordingly, henceforth we shall
restrict our attention to spatially local, temporally nonlocal materials described by
constitutive relations of the form
̃D(r, t) = ∫t′
[
̃𝜖
EB(r, t′) ∙̃E(r, t −t′) + ̃𝜉
EB
(r, t′) ∙̃B(r, t −t′)
]
dt′
̃H(r, t) = ∫t′
[
̃𝜁
EB
(r, t′) ∙̃E(r, t −t′) + ̃𝜇−1
EB
(r, t′) ∙̃B(r, t −t′)
]
dt′
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.9)
6.2.3
Time/Frequency Domain
The constitutive relations (6.9) provide a time-domain description. While such a
description is physically intuitive, the convolution integrals featuring in Eqs. (6.9)
lead to considerable mathematical difficulties when combined with the Maxwell
postulates. These difficulties can be bypassed by switching to the frequency domain.
This involves taking the temporal Fourier transform of Eqs. (6.9); application of the
convolution theorem [8] then delivers the frequency-domain constitutive relations
as [9]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
EB(r, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉
EB
(r, 𝜔) ∙B(r, 𝜔)
H(r, 𝜔) = 𝜁
EB
(r, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇−1
EB
(r, 𝜔) ∙B(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.10)

170
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
with 𝜔being the angular frequency. The 𝜔-dependent terms
(r, 𝜔) = ∫
∞
−∞
̃(r, t) exp(i𝜔t) dt,
(
∈
{
𝜖
EB, 𝜉
EB
, 𝜁
EB
, 𝜇−1
EB
, E, D, B, H
})
,
(6.11)
are the temporal Fourier transforms of the corresponding t-dependent terms. In the
frequency domain, the Maxwell curl postulates are represented as
∇× H(r, 𝜔) + i𝜔D(r, 𝜔) = Je(r, 𝜔)
∇× E(r, 𝜔) −i𝜔B(r, 𝜔) = −Jm(r, 𝜔)
}
,
(6.12)
where the source terms Je,m(r, 𝜔) are the temporal Fourier transforms of ̃Je,m(r, t),
defined as in Eq. (6.11) with = Je,m.
There is a price to be paid in terms of physical interpretation for the mathematical
simplicity of Eqs. (6.10) as compared to Eqs. (6.9): the frequency-domain terms
are complex valued in general, whereas the time-domain terms are real valued. The
frequency-domain terms E(r, 𝜔), D(r, 𝜔), B(r, 𝜔), and H(r, 𝜔) are called field phasors.
Since the inverse temporal Fourier transform
̃(r, t) = 1
2𝜋∫
∞
−∞
(r, 𝜔) exp(−i𝜔t) d𝜔,
(
∈
{
𝜖
EB, 𝜉
EB
, 𝜁
EB
, 𝜇−1
EB
, E, D, B, H
})
,
(6.13)
is required to be real valued, the symmetry
∗(r, 𝜔) = (r, −𝜔)
(6.14)
relates to its complex conjugate ∗; and it therefore follows that
Re {(r, 𝜔)} = Re {(r, −𝜔)}
Im {(r, 𝜔)} = −Im {(r, −𝜔)}
}
,
(6.15)
where the operators Re {⋅} and Im {⋅} deliver real and imaginary parts, respectively.
In characterizing the electromagnetic properties of materials, it can be convenient
to consider ̃E(r, 𝜔) partnered with ̃H(r, 𝜔) instead of ̃B(r, 𝜔). For example, boundary
conditions and the time-averaged Poynting vector are formulated in terms of ̃E(r, 𝜔)

CONSTITUTIVE DYADICS
171
partnered with ̃H(r, 𝜔). Accordingly, it is desirable to express the constitutive relations
(6.10) in the form
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.16)
where
𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
EB(r, 𝜔) −𝜉
EB
(r, 𝜔) ∙𝜇
EB
(r, 𝜔) ∙𝜁
EB
(r, 𝜔)
𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) = 𝜉
EB
(r, 𝜔) ∙𝜇
EB
(r, 𝜔)
𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔) = −𝜇
EB
(r, 𝜔) ∙𝜁
EB
(r, 𝜔)
𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇
EB
(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.17)
The constitutive relations (6.10) are sometimes called the Boys–Post constitutive rela-
tions, while the constitutive relations (6.16) are sometimes called the Tellegen con-
stitutive relations [10]. The subscripts “EB” signify Boys–Post constitutive dyadics,
while the subscripts “EH” signify Tellegen constitutive dyadics.
A note of caution should be added here: in writing down Eqs. (6.17) we have
assumed 𝜇−1
EB
(r, 𝜔) to be invertible. While this is nearly always the case, instances of
singular constitutive dyadics can arise—see Section 6.4 for examples.
6.3
CONSTITUTIVE DYADICS
In the most general linear scenario, spatially local materials are specified in the
frequency domain by the four constitutive dyadics 𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔), 𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔), 𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔),
and 𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) (or equivalently, 𝜖
EB(r, 𝜔), 𝜁
EB
(r, 𝜔), 𝜉
EB
(r, 𝜔), and 𝜇
EB
(r, 𝜔)). In
other words, up to 36 complex-valued parameters are needed to specify such a
material. There are however certain constraints on these parameters and important
specializations that reduce the number of independent parameters needed.
6.3.1
Constraints
6.3.1.1
Causality
The principle of causality—namely, that “effect” cannot pre-
cede “cause”—must be adhered to by all real materials [11, 12]. In terms of

172
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
the time-domain constitutive relations (6.9), this principle is represented by the
constraints
̃𝜖
EB(r, t) −𝜖0𝛿(t)I ≡0
̃𝜉
EB
(r, t) ≡0
̃𝜁
EB
(r, t) ≡0
𝜇−1
0 𝛿(t)I −̃𝜇−1
EB
(r, t) ≡0
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
for
t ≤0,
(6.18)
wherein 𝛿(⋅) denotes the Dirac delta function and I is the identity 3×3 dyadic. These
constraints result in integral relations between the real and imaginary parts of the
frequency-dependent constitutive parameters, as follows.
Let the scalar function ̃f(r, t) be an arbitrary component of ̃𝜖
EB(r, t) −𝜖0𝛿(r)I,
̃𝜉
EB
(r, t), ̃𝜁
EB
(r, t), or 𝜇−1
0 𝛿(r)I −̃𝜇−1
EB
(r, t). Then, in light of the causality constraint
(6.18), the temporal Fourier transform of ̃f(r, t) may be written as
f(r, 𝜔) = ∫
∞
0
̃f(r, t) exp(i𝜔t) dt.
(6.19)
The Cauchy integral formula delivers the analytic continuation of f(r, 𝜔) into the
upper complex-𝜔plane per
f(r, 𝜔) =
1
2𝜋i ∮
f(r, s)
s −𝜔ds,
(6.20)
wherein the integration paths lie in the upper half of the complex plane, as illustrated
in Figure 6.1. In the limit | s | →∞, the integrand in Eq. (6.20) vanishes, due to the
exp(i𝜔t) term introduced by the integral representation (6.19). The contour integral
in Eq. (6.20) therefore simplifies to an integral along the real axis. As the single pole
on the real axis at s = 𝜔contributes a half-residue to the integration, we find
f(r, 𝜔) = 1
𝜋i𝖯∫
∞
−∞
f(r, s)
s −𝜔ds,
(6.21)
with 𝖯denoting the Cauchy principal value. Taking real and imaginary parts, the
Hilbert transforms emerge as
Re {f(r, 𝜔)} = 1
𝜋𝖯∫
∞
−∞
Im {f(r, s)}
s −𝜔
ds
Im {f(r, 𝜔)} = −1
𝜋𝖯∫
∞
−∞
Re {f(r, s)}
s −𝜔
ds
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.22)

CONSTITUTIVE DYADICS
173
Im{s}
Re{s}
FIGURE 6.1
An integration path for the right side of Eq. (6.20).
By exploiting the symmetry condition (cf. Eq. (6.14))
f(r, −𝜔) = f ∗(r, 𝜔),
(6.23)
which relates f to its complex conjugate f ∗, Eqs. (6.22) may be expressed in terms of
integrations over positive-valued angular frequency as
Re {f(r, 𝜔)} = 2
𝜋𝖯∫
∞
0
s Im {f(r, s)}
s2 −𝜔2
ds
Im {f(r, 𝜔)} = −2
𝜋𝖯∫
∞
0
𝜔Re {f(r, s)}
s2 −𝜔2
ds
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.24)
These relations (6.24) are called the Kramers–Kronig relations [13]. While the
Kramers–Kronig relations are fundamentally important in the electromagnetic the-
ory materials, they are also utilized in practical applications such as in experimental
determinations of constitutive parameters [14,15].
The presentation in this section delivered the Kramers–Kronig relations (6.24)
for components of the Boys–Post constitutive dyadics. Analogous relations for com-
ponents of the Tellegen constitutive dyadics may be delivered by implementing the
transformations (6.17).
6.3.1.2
Onsager Relations
The Onsager relations apply to coupled linear phe-
nomenons at macroscopic length scales [16–18], but they are derived from the
assumption of microscopic reversibility [19]. Since microscopic processes cannot
occur in vacuum, the electromagnetic properties of vacuum must first be factored
out before applying the Onsager relations to materials. This can be done neatly by
means of the frequency-dependent polarization and magnetization vectors P(r, 𝜔) and

174
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
M(r, 𝜔), which are the temporal Fourier transforms of ̃P(r, t) and ̃M(r, t) introduced
in Eqs. (6.2); these deliver the electromagnetic response of a material relative to the
electromagnetic response of free space. In the case of linear homogeneous materials
characterized by the Boys–Post constitutive relations (6.10), we have
P(r, 𝜔) =
[
𝜖
EB(𝜔) −𝜖0I
]
∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉
EB
(𝜔) ∙B(r, 𝜔)
M(r, 𝜔) = −𝜁
EB
(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) +
[
1
𝜇0
I −𝜇−1
EB
(𝜔)
]
∙B(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.25)
Suppose now that the material characterized by the constitutive relations (6.25)
is subjected to a spatially uniform, magnetostatic field Bdc. The Onsager relations
impose the constraints [20]
𝜖
EB(𝜔) |||Bdc
= 𝜖T
EB(𝜔) |||−Bdc
𝜉
EB
(𝜔) |||Bdc
= 𝜁T
EB
(𝜔) |||−Bdc
𝜇−1
EB
(𝜔) |||Bdc
=
(
𝜇−1
)T
EB
(𝜔) |||−Bdc
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
(6.26)
on the Boys–Post constitutive dyadics. Equivalently, the Tellegen constitutive dyadics
are constrained as
𝜖
EH(𝜔) |||Bdc
= 𝜖T
EH(𝜔) |||−Bdc
𝜉
EH
(𝜔) |||Bdc
= −𝜁T
EH
(𝜔) |||−Bdc
𝜇
EH
(𝜔) |||Bdc
= 𝜇T
EH
(𝜔) |||−Bdc
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.27)
6.3.1.3
Post Constraint
The Post constraint relates to linear materials which
exhibit magnetoelectric coupling [13]. It is expressed mathematically as
tr
[
𝜁
EB
(r, 𝜔) −𝜉
EB
(r, 𝜔)
]
= 0
(6.28)
for materials characterized by the Boys–Post constitutive relations (6.10) or as
tr
{
𝜇−1
EH
(r, 𝜔) ∙
[
𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔)
] }
= 0
(6.29)

CONSTITUTIVE DYADICS
175
for materials characterized by the Tellegen constitutive relations (6.16). By invoking
the Post constraint, the number of independent complex-valued constitutive parame-
ters needed to specify the most general linear material reduces from 36 to 35.
There are several routes to the Post constraint, for example, via the Lorentz
covariance of the Maxwell equations [13,21], a uniqueness requirement [22,23], and
multipole considerations [24]. However, experimental evidence of violation of the
Post constraint at low frequencies has been reported [25]. The theoretical predictions
and experimental observations have yet to be reconciled [26].
6.3.2
Specializations
6.3.2.1
Lorentz Reciprocity
Suppose that Jp
e(r, 𝜔) and Jq
e(r, 𝜔) represent two
frequency-domain electric source current densities, whereas Jp
m(r, 𝜔) and Jq
m(r, 𝜔)
represent two frequency-domain magnetic source current densities. The fields
Ep(r, 𝜔) and Hp(r, 𝜔) are generated by the sources labelled “p,” while the fields
Eq(r, 𝜔) and Hq(r, 𝜔) are generated by the sources labelled “q.” The reaction [9,27]
⟨⟨p, q⟩⟩= ∫Vp
[ Jp
e(r, 𝜔) ∙Eq(r, 𝜔) −Jp
m(r, 𝜔) ∙Hq(r, 𝜔) ] d3r
(6.30)
characterizes the interaction of the “p” sources with the fields generated by the
“q” sources; herein, the integration region Vp contains the “p” sources. In a similar
fashion, the interaction of the “q” sources with the field generated by the “p” sources
is characterized by the reaction ⟨⟨q, p⟩⟩. The material which supports Jp,q
e,m(r, 𝜔),
Ep,q(r, 𝜔), and Hp,q(r, 𝜔) is called Lorentz reciprocal provided that the reaction of the
“p” fields on the “q” sources is the same as the reaction of the “q” fields on the “p”
sources, that is, Lorentz reciprocity is signalled by
⟨⟨p, q⟩⟩= ⟨⟨q, p⟩⟩.
(6.31)
The reaction difference ⟨⟨p, q⟩⟩−⟨⟨q, p⟩⟩may be calculated by integrating the
Maxwell curl postulates (6.12) in conjunction with the Tellegen constitutive relations
(6.16). Thus, we find
⟨⟨p, q⟩⟩−⟨⟨q, p⟩⟩= −i𝜔∫Vp∪Vq
{
Eq(r, 𝜔) ∙
[
𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) −𝜖T
EH(r, 𝜔)
]
∙Ep(r, 𝜔)
+ Hp(r, 𝜔) ∙
[
𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜇T
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]
∙Hq(r, 𝜔)
+ Eq(r, 𝜔) ∙
[
𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) + 𝜁T
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]
∙Hp(r, 𝜔)
+ Hp(r, 𝜔) ∙
[
𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉T
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]
∙Eq(r, 𝜔)
}
d3r,
(6.32)

176
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
wherein both the “p” and the “q” sources lie within the integration domain Vp ∪Vq.
Accordingly, we see that the Tellegen constitutive dyadics of Lorentz–reciprocal
materials satisfy the relations [28]
𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖T
EH(r, 𝜔)
𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) = −𝜁T
EH
(r, 𝜔)
𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇T
EH
(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.33)
The corresponding relations for the Boys–Post constitutive dyadics are
𝜖
EB(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖T
EB(r, 𝜔)
𝜉
EB
(r, 𝜔) = 𝜁T
EB
(r, 𝜔)
𝜇−1
EB
(r, 𝜔) =
(
𝜇−1)T
EB(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.34)
Clearly, in the absence of a magnetostatic field, the Lorentz–reciprocity conditions
(6.33) and (6.34) are the same as the Onsager relations (6.26) and (6.27).
6.3.2.2
Dissipative, Nondissipative, and Active Materials
In accordance with the
principle of causality, passive materials cannot respond instantaneously to an applied
electromagnetic field [29, 30].3 Dissipation is therefore unavoidable in all passive
materials. However, for certain materials, it may well be the case that dissipation is
tiny over length scales of interest, within a narrow frequency range at least; under
these circumstances such materials may be regarded as nondissipative.
In order to pursue this matter, let us introduce the notion of monochromatic
fields. A monochromatic field, which oscillates at an angular frequency 𝜔, may be
represented by the vector
̃mono(r, t) = Re { ̌(r, 𝜔) exp (−i𝜔t)} ,
(∈{E, B, D, H}),
(6.35)
with the amplitude ̌(r, 𝜔) ∈ℂ3 in general. The energy flow (i.e., energy per unit
area per unit time), averaged over the time period 2𝜋∕𝜔, associated with such a
3Since it is not a material, free space is excluded from our consideration here.

CONSTITUTIVE DYADICS
177
monochromatic field is provided by the time-averaged Poynting vector for monochro-
matic fields, namely [29]4
⟨̌S(r, 𝜔)⟩t = 1
2Re
{
̌E(r, 𝜔) × ̌H
∗(r, 𝜔)
}
.
(6.36)
It is the divergence of ⟨̌S(r, 𝜔)⟩t that is used to establish whether dissipation occurs
within a material. By first combining the source-free versions of the Maxwell curl
postulates (6.12) and the Tellegen constitutive relations (6.16) to calculate ⟨̌S(r, 𝜔)⟩t,
and then taking the divergence, we find [9]
∇∙⟨̌S(r, 𝜔)⟩t = 𝜔
4
[ ̌E(r, 𝜔) ̌H(r, 𝜔)
]∗∙m(r, 𝜔) ∙
[ ̌E(r, 𝜔)
̌H(r, 𝜔)
]
,
(6.37)
wherein the 6×6 Hermitian dyadic
m(r, 𝜔) = i
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) −𝜖†
EH(r, 𝜔)
𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜁†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜉†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜇†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
(6.38)
has been introduced, with the superscript † indicating the conjugate transpose.
Thus, the following three material specializations arise:
(i) A nondissipative material is characterized by ∇∙⟨̌S(r, 𝜔)⟩t = 0. That is, the
Tellegen constitutive dyadics for a nondissipative material are required to
conform to [29]
𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖†
EH(r, 𝜔)
𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) = 𝜁†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.39)
4Parenthetically, the definition of the Abraham momentum density for monochromatic fields is the
same as that for the time-averaged Poynting vector provided in Eq. (6.36), except for a scalar
multiplicative factor. However, the Abraham momentum density is defined differently from the
Minkowski momentum density; the physical interpretation of these momentum densities is a controversial
issue [31].

178
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
or, equivalently in terms of Boys–Post constitutive dyadics,
𝜖
EB(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖†
EB(r, 𝜔)
𝜉
EB
(r, 𝜔) = −𝜁†
EB
(r, 𝜔)
𝜇−1
EB
(r, 𝜔) =
(
𝜇−1
EB
)†
(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.40)
(ii) A dissipative material is characterized by ∇∙⟨̌S(r, 𝜔)⟩t < 0. The dyadic
m(r, 𝜔) must be negative definite in order to satisfy this inequality. It follows
that a material is dissipative if and only if the two 3×3 dyadics [32]
m
1(r, 𝜔) = i
[
𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) −𝜖†
EH(r, 𝜔)
]
m
2(r, 𝜔) = i
{
𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜇†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
−
[
𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜉†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]
∙m−1
1 (r, 𝜔) ∙
[
𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜁†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]}
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.41)
expressed in terms of Tellegen constitutive dyadics, are negative definite.
Equivalently, a material is dissipative if and only if the two 3×3 dyadics [32]
m
3(r, 𝜔) = i
[
𝜇
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜇†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]
m
4(r, 𝜔) = i
{
𝜖
EH(r, 𝜔) −𝜖†
EH(r, 𝜔)
−
[
𝜉
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜁†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]
∙m−1
3 (r, 𝜔) ∙
[
𝜁
EH
(r, 𝜔) −𝜉†
EH
(r, 𝜔)
]}
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
(6.42)
are negative definite.
(iii) An active material is one that is neither dissipative nor nondissipative, that is,
it is characterized by ∇∙⟨S(r, 𝜔)⟩t > 0.
6.4
LINEAR MATERIALS
In this section we survey the commonly encountered classifications (and subclassifi-
cations) of linear materials. The constitutive dyadics determine these classifications.
Tellegen constitutive dyadics will be used to represent the classifications, on the
understanding that the corresponding representations in terms of Boys–Post consti-
tutive dyadics may be readily achieved via Eqs. (6.17). We will largely focus on

LINEAR MATERIALS
179
homogeneous materials—the constitutive dyadics for these are independent of the
space coordinate r—but some notable examples of nonhomogeneous materials are
also presented.
6.4.1
Isotropic Materials
6.4.1.1
Dielectric–Magnetic Materials
Mathematically at least, the simplest
homogeneous materials are isotropic dielectric–magnetic materials. Their frequency-
domain Tellegen constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖(𝜔) E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇(𝜔) H(r, 𝜔)
}
(6.43)
are given in terms of the scalar permittivity 𝜖(𝜔) and scalar permeability 𝜇(𝜔).
Thus, the field phasors D, E, B, and H are parallel for such a material. In the
case of a dissipative material, both 𝜖and 𝜇are 𝜔dependent and complex valued.
Furthermore, as a consequence of the sign convention for the exponent of the temporal
Fourier transform kernel in Eq. (6.11), we have that Im {𝜖(𝜔)} > 0 and Im {𝜇(𝜔)} > 0
for dissipative materials. In the case of an isotropic dielectric material, we have
𝜇(𝜔) = 𝜇0, while in the case of an isotropic magnetic material, we have 𝜖(𝜔) = 𝜖0.
Note that the category of isotropic dielectric materials includes crystals belonging to
the cubic crystal system.
There are subtleties lurking in the electromagnetic properties of isotropic
dielectric–magnetic materials, despite the mathematical simplicity of their consti-
tutive relations. For example, such a material can support the propagation of uniform
plane waves with negative phase velocity—which is a property intimately related
to that of negative refraction and one which has been the focus of intense research
activity for the past 12 years [33]—provided that the condition [34]
Re {𝜖(𝜔)}
Im {𝜖(𝜔)} + Re {𝜇(𝜔)}
Im {𝜇(𝜔)} < 0
(6.44)
is satisfied at a given angular frequency 𝜔.
6.4.1.2
Isotropic Chiral Materials
By introducing magnetoelectric coupling,
more general isotropic materials may be realized. An isotropic chiral material is
characterized by the frequency-domain Tellegen constitutive relations [35]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖(𝜔) E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜒(𝜔) H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = −𝜒(𝜔) E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇(𝜔) H(r, 𝜔)
}
.
(6.45)
Thus, three complex-valued, 𝜔-dependent scalars specify such a material: permittivity
𝜖, permeability 𝜇, and the chirality parameter 𝜒. The mirror conjugate of the material

180
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
characterized by Eqs. (6.45) is characterized by the same constitutive relations and
parameters but with 𝜒replaced by −𝜒.
Most notably, isotropic chiral materials can distinguish between left-handed and
right-handed electromagnetic fields; that is, they exhibit optical activity [36]. How-
ever, an equally–proportioned mixture of an isotropic chiral medium and its mirror
conjugate does not exhibit optical activity (assuming that no chemical reactions or
molecular conformational changes occur); such a mixture—which is known as a
racemic mixture—is an isotropic dielectric–magnetic material, as specified by the
constitutive relations (6.43).
Isotropic chiral materials are Lorentz reciprocal, per the account of Lorentz reci-
procity presented in Section 6.3. An isotropic material which is non-Lorentz recip-
rocal is characterized by the Tellegen constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖(𝜔) E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜒1(𝜔) H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜒2(𝜔) E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇(𝜔) H(r, 𝜔)
}
,
(6.46)
with 𝜒1(𝜔) ≠−𝜒2(𝜔). Such a material is called a biisotropic material. However, the
existence of biisotropic materials is at odds with the Post constraint and is therefore
controversial.
6.4.2
Anisotropic Materials
By definition, in anisotropic materials the primitive field phasor E is not aligned
with the induction field phasor D and/or the primitive field phasor B is not aligned
with the induction field phasor H. Accordingly 3×3 dyadics are needed to spec-
ify the constitutive properties of anisotropic materials. Manifestations of dielectric
anisotropy are widely encountered in crystal optics, while the magnetic properties of
many diamagnetic and paramagnetic materials are significantly anisotropic.
6.4.2.1
Uniaxial Materials
Uniaxial materials are characterized by a single dis-
tinguished axis at macroscopic length scales. The crystalline structure or some other
underlying microscopic structure (e.g., deriving from the orientation of electromag-
netically small component particles) may give rise to the distinguished axis. Suppose
that this distinguished axis is aligned with the unit vector ̂u.
A uniaxial homogeneous dielectric material is characterized by the frequency-
domain Tellegen constitutive relations [29]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
uni(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇0 H(r, 𝜔)
}
,
(6.47)
wherein the 𝜔-dependent permittivity dyadic
𝜖
uni(𝜔) = 𝜖(𝜔)
(
I −̂u ̂u
)
+ 𝜖u(𝜔) ̂u ̂u.
(6.48)

LINEAR MATERIALS
181
The permittivity scalars 𝜖(𝜔), 𝜖u(𝜔) ∈ℂ, while for a dissipative material Im{𝜖(𝜔)} >
0 and Im{𝜖u(𝜔)} > 0 per the principle of causality. Let us note that uniaxial dielectric
materials include crystals belonging to the hexagonal, tetragonal, and trigonal crystal
systems.
In an analogous fashion, the Tellegen constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖0 E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇
uni
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
(6.49)
characterize a uniaxial homogeneous magnetic material. The permeability constitu-
tive dyadic has the form
𝜇
uni
(𝜔) = 𝜇(𝜔)( I −̂u ̂u ) + 𝜇u(𝜔) ̂u ̂u,
(6.50)
with the 𝜔-dependent parameters 𝜇and 𝜇u being located in the upper half of the
complex plane for dissipative materials.
The effective union of Eqs. (6.47) and (6.49), namely
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
uni(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇
uni
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.51)
characterizes a uniaxial dielectric–magnetic material.
6.4.2.2
Biaxial Materials
Generalizing Eq. (6.47), the Tellegen constitutive rela-
tions [37]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖ortho
bi
(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇0 H(r, 𝜔)
}
(6.52)
characterize a homogeneous orthorhombic biaxial dielectric material. Here, for a
suitable orientation of the coordinate axes, the permittivity dyadic has the diagonal
form
𝜖ortho
bi
(𝜔) = 𝜖x(𝜔) ̂x ̂x + 𝜖y(𝜔) ̂y ̂y + 𝜖z (𝜔)̂z ̂z,
(6.53)
with Im{𝜖x(𝜔)} > 0, Im{𝜖y(𝜔)} > 0, and Im{𝜖z(𝜔)} > 0 for a dissipative material,
in conformity with the principle of causality.

182
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
While the diagonal dyadic representation (6.53) is convenient mathematically, it is
not especially insightful from a physical viewpoint. The dual-axis symmetry is more
clearly highlighted in the equivalent representation [29]
𝜖ortho
bi
(𝜔) = 𝜖p(𝜔) I + 𝜖q(𝜔) (̂um ̂un + ̂un ̂um
) .
(6.54)
For nondissipative materials, the permittivity scalars 𝜖p and 𝜖q are real-valued, and
the unit vectors ̂um and ̂un are aligned with the optic ray axes . In general, there
are two different modes of propagation for electromagnetic radiation in a biaxial
material, with the rates of energy flow for these modes generally being different.
However, the optic ray axes are oriented in the two privileged directions for which
there is only one rate of energy flow [37]. One should be careful to distinguish the
optic ray axes from the optic axes which are oriented in the two privileged directions
for which electromagnetic radiation propagates in a biaxial material with only one
phase speed. For dissipative materials, the interpretation is more complicated as
both 𝜖p and 𝜖q are complex valued with Im{𝜖p(𝜔), 𝜖q(𝜔)} > 0; in this case there are
different pairs of (̂um, ̂un) axes associated with Re{𝜖p(𝜔), 𝜖q(𝜔)} and Im{𝜖p(𝜔), 𝜖q(𝜔)}
[38].
More general biaxial dielectric materials are possible [39]. Monoclinic and triclinic
biaxial dielectric materials are characterized by the Tellegen constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) =
𝜖mono
bi
(𝜔)
𝜖tri
bi(𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇0 H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.55)
respectively. For suitable orientations of the coordinate axes, the corresponding 3×3
permittivity dyadics have the symmetric forms
𝜖mono
bi
(𝜔) = 𝜖x(𝜔) ̂x ̂x + 𝜖y(𝜔) ̂y ̂y + 𝜖z (𝜔)̂z ̂z + 𝜖𝛼(𝜔)
(
̂x ̂y + ̂y ̂x
)
(6.56)
and
𝜖tri
bi(𝜔) = 𝜖x(𝜔) ̂x ̂x + 𝜖y(𝜔) ̂y ̂y + 𝜖z (𝜔)̂z ̂z
+ 𝜖𝛼(𝜔)(̂x ̂y + ̂y ̂x) + 𝜖𝛽(𝜔) (̂x ̂z + ̂z ̂x) + 𝜖𝛾(𝜔)(̂y ̂z + ̂z ̂y).
(6.57)
Herein the 𝜔-dependent permittivity scalars 𝜖x, 𝜖y, 𝜖z ∈ℂwith Im{𝜖x(𝜔), 𝜖y(𝜔),
𝜖z(𝜔)} > 0 for dissipative materials, per the principle of causality. But the off-diagonal
𝜔-dependent scalars 𝜖𝛼, 𝜖𝛽, 𝜖𝛾∈ℝ.

LINEAR MATERIALS
183
The permittivity dyadics given in Eqs. (6.53), (6.56), and (6.57) specify biaxial
materials which belong to the orthorhombic, monoclinic, and triclinic crystal sys-
tems, respectively [39]. The three biaxial crystal systems are distinguished by the
symmetries of their primitive unit cells associated with their corresponding Bravais
lattices. For the orthogonal crystal system, all three basis vectors of the primitive unit
cell are mutually orthogonal; for the monoclinic crystal system, only two of the three
basis vectors are orthogonal; and for the triclinic crystal system, none of the three
basis vectors are orthogonal [40].
Biaxial magnetic materials are specified in precisely the same way as biaxial
dielectric materials. That is, the Tellegen constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖0 E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) =
𝜇ortho
bi
(𝜔)
𝜇mono
bi
(𝜔)
𝜇tri
bi
(𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
(6.58)
characterize orthorhombic, monoclinic, and triclinic biaxial magnetic materials,
respectively, wherein the corresponding permeability dyadics have symmetric forms
which are analogous to those presented in Eqs. (6.53), (6.56), and (6.57). Furthermore,
the amalgamation of a biaxial dielectric material with a biaxial magnetic material
results in a biaxial dielectric–magnetic material which is biaxial with respect to both
its dielectric and magnetic properties. The Tellegen constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
bi(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇
bi
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
(6.59)
characterize such a material, with the symmetric permittivity and permeability
dyadics 𝜖
bi(𝜔) and 𝜇
bi
(𝜔), being of the orthorhombic, monoclinic, or triclinic types.
6.4.2.3
Gyrotropic Materials
The foregoing examples of uniaxial and biaxial
anisotropy are characterized by symmetric permittivity and permeability dyadics.
Accordingly, such anisotropic materials are Lorentz reciprocal. As we describe in
this section, gyrotropic materials are fundamentally different: they are characterized
by anti-symmetric permittivity and/or permeability dyadics and such materials are
accordingly non-Lorentz reciprocal.
As a concrete example of a manifestation of gyrotropy, we consider an incompress-
ible plasma of electrons in thermal motion, subjected to a quasistatic magnetic field
Bqs = Bqŝu [41]. This magnetic field has strength Bqs and is applied in the direction
of the unit vector ̂u. The plasma consists of nel electrons per unit volume; the charge
density and mass density of the plasma are −nelqel and nelmel, respectively, with

184
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
the electronic charge being qel = 1.6022 × 10−19 C and the electronic mass being
mel = 9.1096 × 10−31 kg. The plasma is assumed to be homogeneously distributed
in free space, and its density is sufficiently low that collisions between electrons may
be neglected. The average electron velocity is ̄v(r, t).
The electromagnetic properties of the plasma are described by the time-domain
Maxwell curl postulates
∇× ̃H(r, t) −𝜖0
𝜕
𝜕t
̃E(r, t) = −nelqel ̃v(r, t)
∇× ̃E(r, t) + 𝜇0
𝜕
𝜕t
̃H(r, t) = 0
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.60)
together with the equation of motion
−nelqel
[
̃E(r, t) + ̃v(r, t) × Bqs
]
= nelmel
𝜕
𝜕t ̄v(r, t).
(6.61)
By combining Eqs. (6.60) and (6.61) and then comparing with the source-free versions
of the Maxwell curl postulates (6.5)1,2, the constitutive relations for the plasma are
developed as [42]
̃D(r, t) = ̃𝜖
gyro ∙{ ̃E(r, t)}
̃H(r, t) = 1
𝜇0
̃B(r, t)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.62)
Herein the permittivity dyadic term ̃𝜖
gyro{⋅} is a differential operator defined as
̃𝜖
gyro = 𝜖0I + 𝜖0𝜔2
p
[
I 𝜕2
𝜕t2 −𝜔c
(
̂u × I
) 𝜕
𝜕t
]−1
,
(6.63)
where
𝜔p = qel
( nel
mel𝜖0
)1∕2
(6.64)
is the plasma frequency, while
𝜔c = qel
Bqs
mel
(6.65)
is the gyrofrequency; also the following interpretation
( 𝜕
𝜕t
)−1
f(t) ≡∫
t
−∞
f(s) ds
(6.66)
should be attached to the inverse of the temporal differential operator.

LINEAR MATERIALS
185
More conveniently, Eq. (6.63) may be re-arranged as [29]
̃𝜖
gyro = 𝜖0
[ (
I −̂u ̂u
) (
1 +
𝜔2
p
𝜔2
c + 𝜕2∕𝜕t2
)
+
(
̂u × I
)
𝜔2
p𝜔c
(𝜔2
c + 𝜕2∕𝜕t2) 𝜕∕𝜕t
+ ̂u ̂u
(
1 +
𝜔2
p
𝜕2∕𝜕t2
) ]
,
(6.67)
where the interpretation
g(t) =
1
𝛼+ 𝜕2∕𝜕t2 f(t)
⇐⇒
(
𝛼+ 𝜕2
𝜕t2
)
g(t) = f(t)
(6.68)
should be inferred.
Temporal dispersion is implied by the partial derivative operators appearing in
Eqs. (6.63) and (6.67). The differential operator 𝜕∕𝜕t is converted to the multiplica-
tive factor −i𝜔upon taking the temporal Fourier transform. Thus, the time-domain
constitutive relations (6.62) correspond to the Tellegen frequency-domain constitutive
relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
gyro(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇0 H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.69)
with the 𝜔-dependent permittivity dyadic being given as
𝜖
gyro(𝜔) = 𝜖0
[ (
1 +
𝜔2
p
𝜔2
c −𝜔2
) (
I −̂u ̂u
)
+
i𝜔2
p𝜔c
(𝜔2
c −𝜔2) 𝜔
̂u × I
+
(
1 −
𝜔2
p
𝜔2
)
̂u ̂u
]
.
(6.70)
The gyrotropic form (6.70) combines uniaxial anisotropy in the direction of the
quasistatic magnetic field, together with antisymmetric terms associated with the
plane normal to the magnetic field.
Notice that the gyrotropic plasma characterized by the permittivity dyadic (6.70)
is nondissipative. If electron collisions were taken into account then a more realistic
characterization may be achieved. In effect, the characterization of such a dissipative
plasma could result from replacing 𝜔with 𝜔−i𝜈dp, with 𝜈dp ∈ℝbeing an appropriate
damping parameter [6].

186
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
Gyrotropy is not exclusively a dielectric phenomenon—magnetic materials, such
as ferrites [43], also exhibit gyrotropic behavior. A gyrotropic magnetic material may
be characterized by the Tellegen constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖0 E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇
gyro
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.71)
The 𝜔-dependent permeability dyadic herein has the form
𝜇
gyro
(𝜔) = 𝜇(𝜔)( I −̂u ̂u ) + i𝜇g(𝜔) ̂u × I + 𝜇u(𝜔) ̂u ̂u ;
(6.72)
the constitutive parameters 𝜇(𝜔), 𝜇u(𝜔), 𝜇g(𝜔) ∈ℝfor nondissipative materials
whereas 𝜇(𝜔), 𝜇u(𝜔), 𝜇g(𝜔) ∈ℂfor dissipative materials.
6.4.3
Bianisotropic Materials
In a bianisotropic material, D(r, t) is anisotropically coupled to both E(r, t) and B(r, t),
and H(r, t) is anisotropically coupled to both E(r, t) and B(r, t) [6,42]. Therefore, in
general, a linear bianisotropic material is described by four 3×3 constitutive dyadics,
as in the Tellegen constitutive relations (6.16).
Bianisotropy crops up in variety of different ways. A number of naturally occurring
minerals are bianisotropic at low frequencies and temperatures, albeit the magnitudes
of their bianisotropic effects are typically small [44,45]. Perhaps more significantly
from a technological perspective, artificial composite materials and metamaterials
can be readily conceptualized which exhibit appreciable bianisotropic effects [46];
indeed, this bianisotropy may be harnessed to realize exotic and potentially useful
phenomenons such as negative refraction [47]. Other manifestations of bianisotropy
arise in relativistic scenarios; here the bianisotropy may be induced by uniform motion
[29] or gravitational fields [48].
6.4.3.1
Uniaxial and Biaxial Materials
The notions of uniaxial and biaxial
anisotropy introduced earlier in Section 6.4 for dielectric and magnetic materials
generalize in a natural way to bianisotropic scenarios. Accordingly, the general form
for the Tellegen constitutive relations of a homogeneous material which is biaxially
bianisotropic is [49]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
bi(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉
bi
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜁
bi
(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇
bi
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.73)

LINEAR MATERIALS
187
where each of the four 3×3 constitutive dyadics has the symmetric form

bi(𝜔) = x(𝜔) ̂x ̂x + y(𝜔) ̂y ̂y + z (𝜔)̂z ̂z + 𝛼(𝜔)(̂x ̂y + ̂y ̂x) + 𝛽(𝜔) (̂x ̂z + ̂z ̂x)
+ 𝛾(𝜔)(̂y ̂z + ̂z ̂y),
(∈{𝜖, 𝜉, 𝜁, 𝜇}) ,
(6.74)
with the 𝜔-dependent constitutive parameters 𝜖x,y,z, 𝜉x,y,z, 𝜁x,y,z, 𝜇x,y,z ∈ℂand 𝜖𝛼,𝛽,𝛾,
𝜉𝛼,𝛽,𝛾, 𝜁𝛼,𝛽,𝛾, 𝜇𝛼,𝛽,𝛾∈ℝ. The specialization
𝛼,𝛽,𝛾(𝜔) = 0,
(∈{𝜖, 𝜉, 𝜁, 𝜇}) ,
(6.75)
applies to orthorhombic bianisotropic materials, while the specialization
x(𝜔) = y(𝜔),
(∈{𝜖, 𝜉, 𝜁, 𝜇}) ,
(6.76)
combined with the conditions (6.75) applies to uniaxial bianisotropic materials.
6.4.3.2
Simultaneously Mirror-Conjugated and Racemic Chiral Materials
A
special form of chirality can be exhibited by a certain bianisotropic material wherein
both mirror-conjugated and racemic characteristics co-exist. The Tellegen constitutive
relations for such a material may be expressed as [50]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
MCR(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉
MCR
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = −𝜉
MCR
(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇
MCR
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.77)
where the constitutive dyadics have the diagonal forms
𝜖
MCR(𝜔) = 𝜖(𝜔) (I −̂z ̂z) + 𝜖z (𝜔) ̂z ̂z
𝜉
MCR
(𝜔) = 𝜉(𝜔) (̂x ̂x −̂y ̂y)
𝜇
MCR
(𝜔) = 𝜇(𝜔) (I −̂z ̂z) + 𝜇z (𝜔) ̂z ̂z
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.78)
for a particular orientation of the coordinate axes. This material is uniaxial in terms
of its dielectric and magnetic properties, but biaxial in terms of its magnetoelectric
properties. Also, the structure of the magnetoelectric dyadic 𝜉
MCR
(𝜔) indicates chi-
rality of opposite handedness along the x and y coordinate axes while its null-valued
̂z ̂z term indicates achirality along the z coordinate axis. Notably, the magnetoelectric
dyadic 𝜉
MCR
(𝜔) is singular.

188
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
Nature provides some minerals of the type RXO4, where R is a trivalent rare
earth, X is either vanadium or arsenic or phosphorus, and O is oxygen [51, 52],
which are described by the constitutive relations (6.77) at temperatures below their
N´eel temperatures. In addition, artificial materials described by the constitutive rela-
tions (6.77) may be conceptualized through immersing an array of parallel identical
springs in an isotropic dielectric–magnetic host material [53, 54], provided that the
linear spring dimensions are sufficiently small compared to the electromagnetic wave-
lengths. Right- and left-handed springs should be aligned in equal linear densities
along the x- and y-directions on a square lattice, respectively, while in the z-direction
either no springs at all or equal proportions of left- and right-handed springs should
be aligned to simulate either achirality or racemic chirality, respectively [50].
6.4.3.3
Faraday Chiral Materials
Faraday chiral materials may be conceived
as homogenized composite materials (HCMs) [55]. That is, their existence comes
about through mixing together two (or more) component materials, where the linear
dimensions of the particles that make up the component materials are at least an
order of magnitude smaller than the electromagnetic wavelengths involved. If the
component materials are anisotropic (or bianisotropic), or if the component particles
have asymmetric shapes and a preferred orientation, then the resulting HCM can have
a complex anisotropic or bianisotropic structure which represents an amalgamation of
the complexities of the component materials. In the case of Faraday chiral materials,
the manifestation of bianisotropy is due to one of the component materials being
isotropic chiral while the other is a gyrotropic material which supports Faraday
rotation [29, 43, 56]. For example, the gyrotropic component material could be a
magnetically biased ferrite [57] or it could be a magnetically biased plasma [58].
Gyrotropic materials are non-Lorentz reciprocal and consequently Faraday chiral
materials are also non-Lorentz reciprocal.
The frequency-domain Tellegen constitutive relations for a homogeneous Faraday
chiral material are [59]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
FCM(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + i𝜉
FCM
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = −i𝜉
FCM
(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇
FCM
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.79)
The 3×3 constitutive dyadics all have same form, namely

FCM(𝜔) = (𝜔) I + [u(𝜔) −(𝜔) ] ̂u ̂u + ig(𝜔) ̂u × I,
(∈{𝜖, 𝜉, 𝜇}) .
(6.80)
Herein the unit vector ̂u is aligned with the direction of the biasing magnetic field
for the gyrotropic component material. The 𝜔-dependent constitutive parameters 𝜖,
𝜖u, 𝜖g, 𝜉, 𝜉g, 𝜉u, 𝜇, 𝜇g, and 𝜇u are real valued for a nondissipative Faraday material,
otherwise they are nontrivially complex valued.

LINEAR MATERIALS
189
The constitutive dyadic form in Eq. (6.80) arises in the case where the component
materials in the homogenization procedure are composed of spherical particles. More
general constitutive dyadic forms for Faraday chiral materials result if the component
materials are composed of aligned nonspherical particles [58,60].
Parenthetically, let us add that a material which is characterized as isotropic chiral
by a stationary observer is characterized as Faraday chiral by a uniformly moving
observer.
6.4.3.4
Pseudochiral Materials
A pseudochiral omega material is one character-
ized by the Tellegen constitutive relations [61].
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
Ω(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) −𝜉
Ω
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜉T
Ω
(𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇
Ω
(𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.81)
wherein the 3×3 constitutive dyadics are of the form
𝜖
Ω(𝜔) = 𝜖x(𝜔) ̂x ̂x + 𝜖y(𝜔) ̂y ̂y + 𝜖z (𝜔) ̂z ̂z
𝜉
Ω
(𝜔) = 𝜉(𝜔) ̂z ̂y
𝜇
Ω
(𝜔) = 𝜇x(𝜔) ̂x ̂x + 𝜇y(𝜔) ̂y ̂y + 𝜇z (𝜔) ̂z ̂z
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.82)
for a particular orientation of the coordinate axes. Such a material is orthorhombic
biaxial as far as its dielectric and magnetic properties are concerned, and the mag-
netoelectric coupling is such that the material is Lorentz reciprocal. Notably, the
magnetoelectric dyadic 𝜉
Ω
(𝜔) is singular.
A microstructure involving arrays of identically oriented Ω-shaped particles
embedded in an isotropic dielectric–magnetic host material [62] can give rise to
a pseudochiral omega material. For the coordinate axis orientation represented in
Eqs. (6.82), the stems of the Ω-shaped particles are aligned with the Cartesian y-axis.
We note that constitutive dyadics of the form of Eqs. (6.82) also characterize certain
metamaterials which support negative refraction; in this case the microstructure is
based on arrays of electromagnetically small split-ring resonators [63].
6.4.3.5
Motion-Induced Bianisotropy
Consider an inertial reference frame Σ′
which moves at constant velocity v = v̂v relative to an inertial reference frame Σ. The
Lorentz transformation [29]
r′ = Y ∙r −𝛾vt
t′ = 𝛾
(
t −
r ∙v
c2
0
)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.83)

190
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
with
Y = I + (𝛾−1) ̂v ̂v
𝛾=
[
1 −
(
v
c0
)2]−1
2
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(6.84)
relates the spacetime coordinates (r′, t′) in Σ′ to the spacetime coordinates (r, t) in Σ.
Here c0 = (𝜖0𝜇0)−1∕2 is the speed of light in free space.5
If the Lorentz transformation (6.83) is applied to the time-domain fields ̃E(r, t),
̃B(r, t), ̃D(r, t), and ̃H(r, t) in the inertial reference frame Σ, then one finds that
corresponding fields in inertial reference frame Σ′ are given as [29]
̃E′(r′, t′) = 𝛾
[
Y−1 ∙̃E(r, t) + v × ̃B(r, t)
]
̃B′(r′, t′) = 𝛾
[
Y−1 ∙̃B(r, t) −1
c2
0
v × ̃E(r, t)
]
̃D′(r′, t′) = 𝛾
[
Y−1 ∙̃D(r, t) + 1
c2
0
v × ̃H(r, t)
]
̃H′(r′, t′) = 𝛾
[
Y−1 ∙̃H(r, t) −v × ̃D(r, t)
]
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.85)
Furthermore, the Maxwell postulates have same form in inertial reference frame Σ′
as they have in inertial reference frame Σ. Since they retain their form under the spa-
tiotemporal transformation (6.83), they are said to be Lorentz covariant. However,
the concepts of isotropy and anisotropy are not invariant under the Lorentz trans-
formation (6.83). In other words, a material which is isotropic or anisotropic in one
inertial reference frame is generally bianisotropic in all other inertial reference frames
[29]. A further complication is that a homogeneous material which is spatially local
but temporally nonlocal in one inertial reference frame is generally spatiotemporally
nonlocal in all other inertial reference frames [22,64].
6.4.4
Nonhomogeneous Materials
Thus far in this section materials have been classified as isotropic, anisotropic, or
bianisotropic on the basis of constitutive dyadics which are independent on the
position vector r. However, for many materials of theoretical and practical interest, the
dependency of their constitutive properties on r is crucial. Of course, nonhomogeneity
generally increases the complexity of mathematical descriptions of electromagnetic
5In classical electromagnetic theory free space and vacuum are regarded as being equivalent. The nonclas-
sical representation of vacuum is described in Section 6.5.

LINEAR MATERIALS
191
properties, but for certain nonhomogeneous anisotropic and bianisotropic materials
well-developed theoretical descriptions have been established. A selection of such
nonhomogeneous materials is presented in the following subsections.
6.4.4.1
Periodically Nonhomogeneous Materials
Chiral nematic liquid crystals
(also known as cholesteric liquid crystals) constitute an especially well-studied class
of materials that are both anisotropic and periodically nonhomogeneous. Their crys-
talline structure consists of helicoidal arrangements of aciculate molecules. This
structure endows such liquid crystals with periodically twisted, uniaxial dielectric
properties. The Tellegen frequency-domain constitutive relations for chiral nematic
liquid crystals may be expressed as [65,66]
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
CNLC(z, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇0 H(r, 𝜔)
}
,
(6.86)
with the nonhomogeneous permittivity dyadic having the uniaxial form
𝜖
CNLC(z, 𝜔) = 𝜖a(𝜔) I + [ 𝜖b(𝜔) −𝜖a(𝜔)] ̂u(z) ̂u(z).
(6.87)
Herein the orientation of the coordinate axes has been chosen such that rotational
axis of 𝜖
CNLC(z, 𝜔) coincides with the Cartesian z-axis. The 𝜔-dependent, permittivity
scalars 𝜖a and 𝜖b are real valued for the nondissipative case and nontrivially complex
valued for dissipative case. The unit vector
̂u(z) = ̂x cos 𝜋z
Ωdp
± ̂y sin 𝜋z
Ωdp
(6.88)
is defined in terms of the dielectric periodicity along the z-direction, namely 2 Ωdp;
structural right-handedness is signalled by choosing the “+” sign, while structural
left-handedness is signalled by choosing the “−” sign.
Chiral smectic liquid crystals—which may be regarded as generalizations of their
nematic counterparts—are characterized by the constitutive relations which are sim-
ilar to Eqs. (6.86) except that the corresponding permittivity dyadic has a biaxial
form [67].
The helicoidal structure of chiral liquid crystals is analogous to that of chiral
sculptured thin films (CSTFs) [68]. Such a film consists of an array of parallel helical
nanowires grown on a substrate. CSTFs can be manufactured by vapor deposition
methods, with the substrate being rotated at constant circular speed throughout the
deposition process. Locally, the dielectric properties of the nanowires may be charac-
terized as orthorhombic biaxial. The helicity of their component nanowires results in
CSTFs exhibiting structural chirality. These materials have been extensively studied
for the past 17 years or more on account of their technologically promising optical
properties [69].

192
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
In the case where the component nanowires coil around the direction of the
Cartesian z-axis, a CSTF may be characterized by the Tellegen frequency-domain
constitutive relations
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
CSTF(z, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜇0 H(r, 𝜔)
}
.
(6.89)
The nonhomogeneous permittivity dyadic
𝜖
CSTF(z, 𝜔) = S
z(z) ∙S
y(𝜓) ∙
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
𝜖u(𝜔)
0
0
0
𝜖v(𝜔)
0
0
0
𝜖w(𝜔)
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
∙S−1
y (𝜓) ∙S−1
z (z)
(6.90)
is expressible in terms of three complex-valued, 𝜔-dependent parameters 𝜖u, 𝜖v and
𝜖w, along with the rotation and tilt dyadics
S
y(𝜓) =
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
cos 𝜓
0
−sin 𝜓
0
1
0
sin 𝜓
0
cos 𝜓
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
,
(6.91)
S
z(z) =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
cos
(
𝜋z
Ωhp
)
−h sin
(
𝜋z
Ωhp
)
0
h sin
(
𝜋z
Ωhp
)
cos
(
𝜋z
Ωhp
)
0
0
0
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
.
(6.92)
Herein Ωhp is the half–pitch of the helical nanowires, h = +1 signifies structural
right-handedness, h = −1 signifies the structural left-handedness, and 𝜓∈[0, 𝜋∕2].
The bianisotropic generalization of the CSTF characterized by Eqs. (6.89) and
(6.90) is called a helicoidal bianisotropic material [70]. Its Tellegen frequency-domain
constitutive relations may be written as
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖
HBM(z, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜉
HBM
(z, 𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔) = 𝜁
HBM
(z, 𝜔) ∙E(r, 𝜔) + 𝜇
HBM
(z, 𝜔) ∙H(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.93)
All four of its 3×3 nonhomogeneous constitutive dyadics have the form

HBM(z, 𝜔) =
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
11(z, 𝜔)
12(z, 𝜔)
13(z, 𝜔)
21(z, 𝜔)
22(z, 𝜔)
23(z, 𝜔)
31(z, 𝜔)
32(z, 𝜔)
33(z, 𝜔)
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
,
(∈{𝜖, 𝜉, 𝜁, 𝜇}) ,
(6.94)

LINEAR MATERIALS
193
which decomposes as

HBM(z, 𝜔) = S
z(z) ∙
HBM(0, 𝜔) ∙S−1
z (z),
(∈{𝜖, 𝜉, 𝜁, 𝜇}) .
(6.95)
6.4.4.2
Material Analogues of Curved Spacetime
Although not explicitly stated,
we have so far in this chapter been describing electromagnetic theory in flat spacetime.
We now extend our presentation by considering the electromagnetic properties of free
space in curved spacetime. As we shall elaborate upon shortly, free space in curved
spacetime is not electromagnetically isotropic in general—in fact, its electromagnetic
properties are equivalent to those of a nonhomogeneous, nondissipative bianisotropic
material in flat spacetime.
Conventionally, the curvature of spacetime induced by a gravitational field is
characterized by a metric, which is a symmetric covariant tensor of rank 2 [71]. Let
us introduce the symmetric, real-valued, 4×4 matrix ̃𝗀(r, t) whose components are the
same as those of the spacetime metric. In general, the matrix ̃𝗀(r, t) is both spatially
nonhomogeneous and time dependent.
Following the approach of Tamm and others [72–74], by expressing the covariant
Maxwell equations in noncovariant form, one finds that the electromagnetic response
of free space in curved spacetime is equivalent to that of a certain material in flat
spacetime which is described by the Tellegen time-domain constitutive relations
[48,75]
̃D(r, t) = 𝜖0 ̃𝛾
GAV
(r, t) ∙̃E(r, t) −1
c0
̃ΓGAV(r, t) × ̃H(r, t)
̃B(r, t) = 𝜇0 ̃𝛾
GAV
(r, t) ∙̃H(r, t) + 1
c0
̃ΓGAV(r, t) × ̃E(r, t)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.96)
Herein the 3×3 dyadic ̃𝛾
GAV
(r, t) has components
[
̃𝛾
GAV
(r, t)
]
𝓁m
= −
[
−det ̃𝗀(r, t)
]1∕2
[
̃𝗀(r, t)
]
1,1
[
̃𝗀−1(r, t)
]
𝓁+1,m+1
,
(𝓁, m ∈{1, 2, 3}) ,
(6.97)
while the 3-vector
̃ΓGAV(r, t) =
([
̃𝗀(r, t)
]
1,1
)−1
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
[
̃𝗀(r, t)
]
1,2
[
̃𝗀(r, t)
]
1,3
[
̃𝗀(r, t)
]
1,4
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
,
(6.98)

194
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
with [ ̃𝗀(r, t)]𝓁,m representing the (𝓁, m)-th component of ̃𝗀(r, t). Thus, the mathe-
matical description of the electromagnetic properties of free space subjected to a
gravitational field is isomorphic to the description for a fictitious material charac-
terized by the constitutive relations (6.96) in the absence of a gravitational field.
Accordingly, well-established analytical techniques used to investigate the electro-
magnetic properties of materials may be implemented in the study of gravitational
fields. The nature of the fictitious material characterized by Eqs. (6.96) is determined
by the underlying metric. In general, this material is bianisotropic, nondissipative,
and non-Lorentz reciprocal, but it does satisfy the Post constraint (6.29) [21]. Its
constitutive dyadics are both spatially nonhomogeneous and time varying. The sym-
metry of the matrix ̃𝗀(r, t) implies that the permittivity and permeability dyadics
𝜖0 ̃𝛾
GAV
(r, t) and 𝜇0 ̃𝛾
GAV
(r, t), respectively, are of the orthorhombic biaxial type;
furthermore these constitutive dyadics share the same eigenvectors. In the absence of
a gravitational field, the matrix ̃𝗀(r, t) reduces to the constant diagonal matrix
̃𝗀(r, t) =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
,
(6.99)
and the constitutive relations (6.96) simplify to the familiar form
̃D(r, t) = 𝜖0 ̃E(r, t)
̃H(r, t) = 1
𝜇0
̃B(r, t)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.100)
The formal equivalence between a fictitious material characterized by the con-
stitutive relations (6.96) and gravitationally affected free space opens to the door to
the construction of material analogues of curved spacetime, at least in principle. In
practice, real materials cannot respond instantaneously as the fictitious material is
required to do, nevertheless perhaps useful approximate analogues could be achieved
within certain restricted frequency ranges. For example, metamaterial analogues of a
spinning cosmic string [76] and Schwarzschild-(anti-)de Sitter spacetime [77] have
recently been proposed. In the latter case, the metamaterial in question takes the form
of a HCM, with an inverse homogenization procedure [78] being implemented to
derive the required constitutive parameters.
6.5
NONLINEAR MATERIALS
Our focus so far has largely been on materials wherein the induction fields are
linearly proportional to the primitive fields. Let us close this chapter with a brief

NONLINEAR MATERIALS
195
outline of the rather more complicated scenario involving nonlinear proportionality.
Materials characterized by nonlinear constitutive relations are of tremendous tech-
nological importance. Even in the earliest years of electromagnetics, the nonlinear
permeability of ferromagnetic materials was much exploited in electrical machines
[79], for example. Since nonlinear optical properties are generally exhibited at high
light intensities, the invention of the laser resulted in the rapid expansion of the field
of nonlinear optics in the 1960s [79,80].
Let us consider the concept of nonlinearity within the general framework of
homogeneous bianisotropic materials. As our starting point, we turn to the frequency-
domain versions of the definitions of the induction fields provided in Eqs. (6.3),
that is,
D(r, 𝜔) = 𝜖0 E(r, 𝜔) + P(r, 𝜔)
H(r, 𝜔) = 1
𝜇0
B(r, 𝜔) −M(r, 𝜔)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
,
(6.101)
with the frequency-domain polarization P(r, 𝜔) and magnetization M(r, 𝜔) being the
temporal Fourier transforms of ̃P(r, t) and ̃M(r, t), respectively, per Eq. (6.11). For
compact presentation, the following 6-vectors are introduced:
N(r, 𝜔) =
[
P(r, 𝜔)
M(r, 𝜔)
]
,
C(r, 𝜔) =
[
D(r, 𝜔)
B(r, 𝜔)
]
,
F(r, 𝜔) =
[
E(r, 𝜔)
H(r, 𝜔)
]
.
(6.102)
Thus nonlinear constitutive relations may be written in the 6-vector/dyadic notation
as [81]
C(r, 𝜔) = K
0 ∙F(r, 𝜔) + N(r, 𝜔),
(6.103)
where
K
0 =
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝜖0 I
0
0
𝜇0 I
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
(6.104)
is the 6×6 Tellegen constitutive dyadic of free space.
Now we write the 6-vector N(r, 𝜔) as the sum of linear and nonlinear parts
N(r, 𝜔) = NL(r, 𝜔) + NNL(r, 𝜔).
(6.105)
The linear contribution
NL(r, 𝜔) =
[
KL(𝜔) −K
0
]
∙F(r, 𝜔)
(6.106)

196
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
is specified by the 6×6 Tellegen constitutive dyadic K
L(𝜔) which characterizes the
linear response of the nonlinear material. In the case of a material whose linear
properties are characterized by the four 3×3 Tellegen constitutive dyadics 𝜖(𝜔), 𝜉(𝜔),
𝜁(𝜔), and 𝜇(𝜔), we have
K
L(𝜔) =
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝜖(𝜔)
𝜉(𝜔)
𝜁(𝜔)
𝜇(𝜔)
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
.
(6.107)
The exclusively nonlinear contribution NNL(r, 𝜔) arises under the simultaneous stim-
ulation of an ensemble of M > 1 fields F(r, 𝜔m), (m = 1, 2, … , M). At the frequency
𝜔= 𝜔NL, the jth component of NNL(r, 𝜔NL) may be expressed as
[ NNL(r, 𝜔NL)]
j =
6
∑
j1=1
6
∑
j2=1
⋯
6
∑
jM=1
{
𝜒NL
jj1j2⋯jM
(𝜔NL; ) M
∏
n=1
[ F(r, 𝜔n) ]
jn
}
,
(j ∈[1, 6]) ,
(6.108)
with the constitutive properties being encapsulated by the nonlinear susceptibility
tensor 𝜒NL
jj1j2⋯jM(𝜔NL; ). The set of angular frequencies = { 𝜔1, 𝜔2, … , 𝜔M },
wherein it is possible for two (or more) elements of to be the same. The angular
frequency 𝜔NL is determined by the elements of according to the sum
𝜔NL =
M
∑
n=1
an𝜔n,
an = ±1,
(6.109)
on the understanding that if an = −1, then [ F(r, 𝜔n) ]jn in Eq. (6.108) is to be replaced
by [ F(r, 𝜔n) ]∗
jn. Thus, electromagnetic fields oscillating at angular frequency 𝜔NL
arise as a consequence of launching electromagnetic fields oscillating at angular
frequencies 𝜔m ∈in the nonlinear material.
The constitutive relation (6.108) accommodates a vast range of nonlinear dielec-
tric, magnetic and magnetoelectric properties [82–84], including a host of frequency-
mixing processes [80,85].
6.5.1
Nonlinearity of Quantum Electrodynamics Vacuum
Classically, vacuum (or free space) is regarded as a linear medium (not a material)
which is characterized by the permittivity scalar 𝜖0 and permeability scalar 𝜇0. As
outlined in Section 6.4, when subjected to a gravitational field, the electromagnetic
properties of classical vacuum are effectively the same as those of a linear bian-
isotropic material. We now depart from this classical viewpoint in order to present

NONLINEAR MATERIALS
197
an example of nonlinearity which is of fundamental significance: vacuum is electro-
magnetically nonlinear within the realm of quantum electrodynamics (QED) [2].
Suppose QED vacuum is subjected to a quasistatic magnetic field Bqs(r) = Bqs(r) ̂u,
directed along the unit vector ̂u. If the magnetic field is sufficiently strong, then the
constitutive relations characterizing QED vacuum can be linearized, as follows. For
definiteness, let us consider the case of optical fields ̃opt(r, t) (= E, B, D, H) in the
time domain. Provided that | ̃Bopt(r, t) | ≪| Bqs(r) | ∀r, the optical fields are governed
by the source-free Maxwell postulates represented as
∇× ̃Eopt(r, t) + 𝜕
𝜕t
̃Bopt(r, t) = 0
∇× ̃Hopt(r, t) −𝜕
𝜕t
̃Dopt(r, t) = 0
∇∙̃Dopt(r, t) = 0
∇∙̃Bopt(r, t) = 0
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
.
(6.110)
According to the QED theory—which involves implementing the Heisenberg–Euler
effective Lagrangian of the electromagnetic field [86,87]—the optical fields appearing
in Eqs. (6.110) satisfy the Boys–Post constitutive equations [88]
̃Dopt(r, t) = 𝜖
QV(r) ∙̃Eopt(r, t)
̃Hopt(r, t) = 𝜇−1
QV
(r) ∙̃Bopt(r, t)
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
.
(6.111)
Here the permittivity and inverse permeability dyadics are both of the uniaxial type,
that is,
𝜖
QV(r) = 𝜖0
{[
1 −8
𝜇0
ΘQVB2
qs(r)
]
I + 28
𝜇0
ΘQVB2
qs(r) ̂u ̂u
}
,
(6.112)
𝜇−1
QV
(r) = 1
𝜇0
{[
1 −8
𝜇0
ΘQVB2
qs(r)
]
I −16
𝜇0
ΘQVB2
qs(r) ̂u ̂u
}
,
(6.113)
wherein the scalar parameter
ΘQV =
q4
elℏ
45(4𝜋𝜖0)2m4
elc7
0
= 8.3229 × 10−32 kg−1 m s2,
(6.114)
with the electronic charge qel = 1.6022 × 10−19 C, the electronic mass mel =
9.1096 × 10−31 kg, and the reduced Planck constant ℏ= 1.0546 × 10−34 J s.

198
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
Thus, the optical properties of QED vacuum are equivalent to those of a spa-
tiotemporally local, spatially nonhomogeneous, uniaxial dielectric–magnetic mate-
rial. However, the degree of anisotropy exhibited by QED vacuum is exceedingly
small, even for the largest values | Bqs(r) | that can be practicably achieved in the
laboratory, as may be inferred from the tiny value of ΘQV given in Eq. (6.114).
Accordingly, a direct measurement of QED vacuum anisotropy poses formidable
challenges to experimentalists [89,90].
However, the electromagnetic properties of QED vacuum may be accessible to
experiment by indirect means, via a material analogue that is electromagnetically
equivalent to QED vacuum subject to an affine transformation of the spatial coordi-
nates. That is, under the affine transformation
r ↦r′ ≡J ∙r,
(6.115)
where the transformation dyadic
J = 𝛽1
[
I −
1
| Bqs(r) |2 Bqs(r) Bqs(r)
]
+ 𝛽2 Bqs(r) Bqs(r),
(6.116)
the uniaxial dielectric–magnetic nature of QED vacuum may be preserved but the
degree of anisotropy may be greatly exaggerated provided that appropriate values are
selected for the two scalar parameters 𝛽1 and 𝛽2. Indeed, such a material analogue
may be conceived as a HCM, with an inverse homogenization procedure [78] yielding
appropriate values for 𝛽1 and 𝛽2 [91].
Parenthetically, notice that if one sets ℏ= 0, then the constitutive relations of QED
vacuum (6.111) reduce to those of classical vacuum (6.100) for which the quasistatic
magnetic field has no influence on the optical fields.
6.6
CLOSING REMARKS
A survey of the mathematical framework for characterizing the electromagnetic prop-
erties of materials, in terms of constitutive relations and dyadics, is presented in this
chapter. Constraints and specializations of the constitutive dyadics are discussed
for linear materials. The classifications of isotropy, anisotropy, and bianisotropy
are defined and illustrated for both spatially homogeneous and spatially nonhomo-
geneous materials. A brief general overview of nonlinearity, within the setting of
bianisotropic materials, is provided too. This mathematical framework is essential to
our understanding of materials and crucial to future technological developments. Fur-
thermore, fundamental physical studies of scenarios in special and general relativity,
and in QED, may be facilitated by exploiting electromagnetic constitutive relations
to construct material analogues.

REFERENCES
199
REFERENCES
[1] J. Z. Buchwald, From Maxwell to Microphysics: Aspects of Electromagnetic Theory in
the Last Quarter of the Nineteenth Century (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL,
1985).
[2] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1999).
[3] M. Bornatici and O. Maj, “The effective polarization and magnetization fields in terms
of charge-current densities,” Phys. Scr. 73, 160–163 (2006).
[4] A. Lakhtakia, “Covariances and invariances of the Maxwell postulates,” in Advanced
Electromagnetism: Foundations, Theory and Applications, edited by T. W. Barrett and
D. M. Grimes (World Scientific, Singapore, 1995), pp. 390–410.
[5] T. G. Mackay and A. Lakhtakia, Electromagnetic Anisotropy and Bianisotropy: A Field
Guide (World Scientific, Singapore, 2010).
[6] W. S. Weiglhofer, “Constitutive characterization of simple and complex mediums,” in
Introduction to Complex Mediums for Optics and Electromagnetics, edited by W. S.
Weiglhofer and A. Lakhtakia (SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, 2003), pp. 27–61.
[7] S. Ponti, C. Oldano, and M. Becchi, “Bloch wave approach to the optics of crystals,”
Phys. Rev. E 64, 021704 (2001).
[8] G. B. Arfken and H. J. Weber, Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 4th ed. (Academic
Press, London, 1995).
[9] J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986).
[10] W. S. Weiglhofer, “A perspective on bianisotropy and Bianisotropics ’97,” Int. J. Appl.
Electromagn. Mech. 9, 93–101 (1998).
[11] J. S. Toll, “Causality and the dispersion relation: logical foundations,” Phys. Rev. 104,
1760–1770 (1956).
[12] J. Hilgevoord, Dispersion Relations and Causal Descriptions (North–Holland, Amster-
dam, 1962).
[13] E. J. Post, Formal Structure of Electromagnetics (Dover Press, New York, 1997).
[14] C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles
(John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, 1983).
[15] L. Ward, The Optical Constants of Bulk Materials and Films, 2nd ed. (Institute of Physics,
Bristol, 2000).
[16] L. Onsager, “Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. I,” Phys. Rev. 37, 405–426
(1931).
[17] L. Onsager, “Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. II,” Phys. Rev. 38, 2265–2279
(1931).
[18] H. B. G. Casimir, “On Onsager’s principle of microscopic reversibility,” Rev. Mod. Phys.
17, 343–350 (1945).
[19] C. Altman and K. Suchy, Reciprocity, Spatial Mapping and Time Reversal in Electro-
magnetics (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1991).
[20] A. Lakhtakia and R. A. Depine, “On Onsager relations and linear electromagnetic mate-
rials,” Int. J. Electron. Commun. (AE ¨U) 59, 101–104 (2005).
[21] A. Lakhtakia, “On the genesis of Post constraint in modern electromagnetism,” Optik
115, 151–158 (2004).

200
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
[22] A. Lakhtakia and W. S. Weiglhofer, “Lorentz covariance, Occam’s razor, and a constraint
on linear constitutive relations,” Phys. Lett. A 213, 107–111 (1996). Corrections: 222,
459 (1996).
[23] A. Lakhtakia and W. S. Weiglhofer, “Constraint on linear, spatiotemporally nonlocal,
spatiotemporally nonhomogeneous constitutive relations,” Int. J. Infrared Millim Waves
17, 1867–1878 (1996).
[24] O. L. de Lange and R. E. Raab, “Post’s constraint for electromagnetic constitutive rela-
tions,” J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 3, L23–L26 (2001).
[25] F. W. Hehl, Y. N. Obukhov, J.–P. Rivera, and H. Schmid, “Relativistic analysis of mag-
netoelectric crystals: extracting a new 4-dimensional P odd and T odd pseudoscalar from
Cr2O3 data,” Phys. Lett. A 372, 1141–1146 (2007).
[26] A. Lakhtakia, “Remarks on the current status of the Post constraint,” Optik 120, 422–424
(2009).
[27] V. H. Rumsey, “Reaction concept in electromagnetic theory,” Phys. Rev. 94, 1483–1491
(1954). Corrections: 95, 1705 (1954).
[28] C. M. Krowne, “Electromagnetic theorems for complex anisotropic media,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propagat. 32, 1224–1230 (1984).
[29] H. C. Chen, Theory of Electromagnetic Waves (McGraw–Hill, New York, 1983).
[30] W. S. Weiglhofer and A. Lakhtakia, “On causality requirements for material media,” Arch
Elektron ¨Ubertrag 50, 389–391 (1996).
[31] S. M. Barnett, “Resolution of the Abraham-Minkowski dilemma,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104
070401 (2010).
[32] E. L. Tan, “Reduced conditions for the constitutive parameters of lossy bi–anisotropic
media,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 41, 133–135 (2004).
[33] S. A. Ramakrishna and T. M. Grzegorczyk, Physics and Applications of Negative Refrac-
tive Index Materials (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2008).
[34] R. A. Depine and A. Lakhtakia, “A new condition to identify isotropic dielectric-magnetic
materials displaying negative phase velocity,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 41, 315–316
(2004).
[35] A. Lakhtakia, Beltrami Fields in Chiral Media (World Scientific, Singapore, 1994).
[36] A. Lakhtakia (ed.), Selected Papers on Natural Pptical Activity (SPIE Optical Engineering
Press, Bellingham, WA, 1990).
[37] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, 7th (expanded) ed. (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1999).
[38] T. G. Mackay and W. S. Weiglhofer, “Homogenization of biaxial composite mate-
rials: dissipative anisotropic properties,” J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 2, 426–432
(2000).
[39] J. F. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1985).
[40] N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Saunders, Philadelphia, PA,
1976).
[41] L. B. Felsen and N. Marcuvitz, Radiation and Scattering of Waves (IEEE Press, Piscat-
away, NJ, 1994).
[42] W. S. Weiglhofer, “A flavour of constitutive relations: the linear regime,” in Advances in
Electromagnetics of Complex Media and Metamaterials, edited by S. Zouhdi, A. Sihvola,
and M. Arsalane (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2003), pp. 61–80.

REFERENCES
201
[43] B. Lax and K. J. Button, Microwave Ferrites and Ferrimagnetics (McGraw–Hill, New
York, 1962).
[44] T. H. O’Dell, The Electrodynamics of Magneto–Electric Media (North–Holland, Ams-
terdam, 1970).
[45] H. Schmid, “Magnetoelectric effects in insulating magnetic materials,” in Introduction to
Complex Mediums for Optics and Electromagnetics, edited by W. S. Weiglhofer and A.
Lakhtakia (SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, 2003), pp. 167–195.
[46] T. G. Mackay, “Linear and nonlinear homogenized composite mediums as metamaterials,”
Electromagnetics 25, 461–481 (2005).
[47] T. G. Mackay and A. Lakhtakia, “Negative refraction, negative phase velocity, and coun-
terposition in bianisotropic materials and metamaterials,” Phys. Rev. B 79, 235121 (2009).
[48] W. Schleich and M. O. Scully, “General relativity and modern optics,” in New Trends
in Atomic Physics, edited by G. Grynberg and R. Stora (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1984),
pp. 995–1124.
[49] T. G. Mackay and W. S. Weiglhofer, “A review of homogenization studies for biaxial
bianisotropic materials,” in Advances in Electromagnetics of Complex Media and Meta-
materials, edited by S. Zouhdi, A. Sihvola, and M. Arsalane (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2003),
pp. 211–228.
[50] A. Lakhtakia and W. S. Weiglhofer, “Electromagnetic waves in a material with simul-
taneous mirror–conjugated and racemic chirality characteristics,” Electromagnetics 20,
481–488 (2000).
[51] G. Gorodetsky, R. M. Hornreich, and B. M. Wanklyn, “Statistical mechanics and critical
behavior of the magnetoelectric effect in GdVO4,” Phys. Rev. B 8, 2263–2267 (1973).
[52] A. H. Cooke, S. J. Swithenby, and M. R. Wells, “Magnetoelectric measurements on
holmium phosphate, HoPO4,” Int. J. Magnetism 4, 309–312 (1973).
[53] J. C. Bose, “On the rotation of plane of polarization of electric waves by a twisted
structure,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 63, 146–152 (1898).
[54] K. W. Whites and C. Y. Chung, “Composite uniaxial bianisotropic chiral materials char-
acterization: comparison of prediction and measured scattering,” J. Electromag. Waves
Applics 11, 371–394 (1997).
[55] N. Engheta, D. L. Jaggard, and M. W. Kowarz, “Electromagnetic waves in Faraday chiral
media,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 40, 367–374 (1992).
[56] R. E. Collin, Foundations for Microwave Engineering (McGraw-Hill, New York,
1966).
[57] W. S. Weiglhofer, A. Lakhtakia, and B. Michel, “On the constitutive parameters of a
chiroferrite composite medium,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 18, 342–345 (1998).
[58] W. S. Weiglhofer and T. G. Mackay, “Numerical studies of the constitutive parameters
of a chiroplasma composite medium,” Arch. Elektr. ¨Ubertrag. 54, 259–265 (2000).
[59] W. S. Weiglhofer and A. Lakhtakia, “The correct constitutive relations of chiroplasmas
and chiroferrites,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 17, 405–408 (1998).
[60] T. G. Mackay, A. Lakhtakia, and W. S. Weiglhofer, “Ellipsoidal topology, orientation
diversity and correlation length in bianisotropic composite mediums,” Arch. Elektr.
¨Ubertrag. 55, 243–251 (2001).
[61] A. Serdyukov, I. Semchenko, S. Tretyakov, and A. Sihvola, Electromagnetics of Bi–
Anisotropic Materials (Gordon and Breach, Amsterdam, 2001).

202
ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF MATERIALS
[62] M. M. I. Saadoun and N. Engheta, “A reciprocal phase shifter using novel pseudochiral
or omega medium,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 5, 184–188 (1992).
[63] X. Chen, B.-I. Wu, J. A. Kong, and T. M. Grzegorczyk, “Retrieval of the effective
constitutive parameters of bianisotropic materials,” Phys. Rev. E 71, 046610 (2005).
Corrections: 73, 019905(E) (2006).
[64] D. Censor, “Electrodynamics, topsy–turvy special relativity, and generalized Minkowski
constitutive relations for linear and nonlinear systems,” Prog. Electromagn. Res. 18,
261–284 (1998).
[65] S. Chandrasekhar, Liquid Crystals, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1992).
[66] P. G. de Gennes and J. A. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, 2nd ed. (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1993).
[67] I. Abdulhalim, “Light propagation along the helix of chiral smectics and twisted nemat-
ics,” Opt. Commun. 64, 443–448 (1987).
[68] V. C. Venugopal and A. Lakhtakia, “Sculptured thin films: conception, optical properties
and applications,” in Electromagnetic Fields in Unconventional Materials and Structures,
edited by O. N. Singh and A. Lakhtakia (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2000), pp. 151–
216.
[69] A. Lakhtakia and R. Messier, Sculptured Thin Films: Nanoengineered Morphology and
Optics (SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, 2005).
[70] A. Lakhtakia and W. S. Weiglhofer, “On light propagation in helicoidal bianisotropic
mediums,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 448, 419–437 (1995). Corrections: 454, 3275 (1998).
[71] R. d’Inverno, Introducing Einstein’s Relativity (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992).
[72] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1975), Section 90.
[73] G. V. Skrotskii, “The influence of gravitation on the propagation of light,” Soviet Phys.–
Dokl. 2, 226–229 (1957).
[74] J. Pl´ebanski, “Electromagnetic waves in gravitational fields,” Phys. Rev. 118, 1396–1408
(1960).
[75] A. Lakhtakia and T. G. Mackay, “Towards gravitationally assisted negative refraction of
light by vacuum,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 37, L505–L510 (2004). Corrections: 37, 12093
(2004).
[76] T. G. Mackay and A. Lakhtakia, “Towards a metamaterial simulation of a spinning cosmic
string,” Phys. Lett. A 374, 2305–2308 (2010).
[77] T. G. Mackay and A. Lakhtakia, “Towards a realization of Schwarzschild-(anti-)de Sitter
spacetime as a particulate metamaterial,” Phys. Rev. B 83, 195424 (2011).
[78] T. G. Mackay and A. Lakhtakia, “Determination of constitutive and morphological param-
eters of columnar thin films by inverse homogenization,” J. Nanophoton. 4, 041535
(2010).
[79] N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics, 4th ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1996).
[80] R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, 3rd ed. (Academic Press, London, 2008).
[81] A. Lakhtakia and W. S. Weiglhofer, “Maxwell Garnett formalism for weakly nonlin-
ear, bianisotropic, dilute, particulate composite media,” Int. J. Electron. 87, 1401–1408
(2000).

REFERENCES
203
[82] S. Kielich and A. Piekara, “Frequency– and spatially variable electric and magnetic
polarizations induced in nonlinear media by electromagnetic fields,” Acta Physica Polo
29, 875–898 (1966).
[83] P. W. Atkins and L. D. Barron, “Quantum field theory of optical birefringence phenomena
I. Linear and nonlinear optical rotation,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 304, 303–317 (1968).
[84] W. S. Weiglhofer and A. Lakhtakia, “Mediation of nonlinear polarization by the magnetic
field in a composite medium with a chiral component,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 13,
285–287 (1996).
[85] T. Kobayashi, “Introduction to nonlinear optical materials,” Nonlin. Opt. 1, 91–117
(1991).
[86] W. Heisenberg and H. Euler, “Folgerungen aus der Diracschen Theorie des Positrons,”
Z Phys. 98, 714–732 (1936).
[87] J. Schwinger, “On gauge invariance and vacuum polarization,” Phys. Rev. 82, 664–679
(1951).
[88] S. L. Adler, “Photon splitting and photon dispersion in a strong magnetic field,” Ann.
Phys. (NY) 67, 599–647 (1971).
[89] E. Iacopini and E. Zavattini, “Experimental method to detect the vacuum birefringence
induced by a magnetic field,” Phys. Lett. B 85, 151–154 (1979).
[90] E. Zavattini, G. Zavattini, G. Ruoso, E. Polacco, E. Milotti, M. Karuza, U. Gastaldi,
G. Di Domenico, F. Della Valle, R. Cimino, et al., “Experimental observation of optical
rotation generated in vacuum by a magnetic field,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 110406 (2006).
See also: Editorial Note, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 129901 (2007).
[91] T. G. Mackay and A. Lakhtakia, “Towards an experimental realization of affinely trans-
formed linearized quantum electrodynamics vacuum via inverse homogenization,” J. Opt.
Soc. Amer. B 29, 1680–1684 (2012).


7
SURFACE AND CAVITY
NANOPHOTONICS
Mohamed Babiker
Department of Physics, University of York, York, UK
7.1
INTRODUCTION
The interfaces separating dissimilar materials in contact have played crucial roles
in many physical phenomena over a wide range of length scales and have led to
the realization of a number of important applications. Not surprisingly, therefore,
nanophysics—the physics of nanomaterials—would be dominated by the presence
of surfaces. The subject of nanophysics spans a broad range of phenomena far beyond
the remit of this chapter, which is narrowly focused on surface nanophotonics. We
define the nanophysics of concern in this chapter as the area dealing with quan-
tum processes involving photons, both virtual and real, which are influenced by the
nanoscale environment and their interaction with matter in the vicinity of the inter-
faces. The realization that the presence of matter at the nanoscale near a surface leads
to observable changes of its basic properties has been known for a considerable time.
Purcell [1] was the first to suggest that the emission rate of an excited emitter
should be modified or even completely suppressed when the emitter is placed inside
a cavity [2,3]. Quantum theory would describe the modification of the de-excitation
phenomenon as follows: Let the emitter-field combined state be an initial excited
state, denoted by |i, {0}⟩, with i indicating an upper energy state of the emitter of
energy Wi, whereas |{0}⟩represents the vacuum field state with zero photons in
the cavity. The final state is |f; Q⟩, in which the emitter state is changed to a lower
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
205

206
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
energy state f of energy Wf and a single mode |Q⟩of frequency 𝜔Q has been emitted.
Here, we set up the formalism which describes the de-excitation process and detail
the underlying principles and the main results of this striking phenomenon. Recent
advances have shown that the emitter position and its characteristics such as dipole
orientation can be experimentally determined with considerable accuracy [4–10] and
it is possible to in situ control single quantum systems such as atoms, molecules, and
quantum wells [11].
It is clear, however, that, in addition to the changes of de-excitation rates, the
physics involving surfaces and cavities involves many other phenomena depending
on the materials forming the cavity and the surface geometry. Furthermore, structured
surfaces, in principle, of any required shape, can now be realized using lithographic
and deposition techniques [12] and remarkable advances have recently been made in
detection techniques.
Of special interest are the surface photonic effects involving quantum correlations.
Here, a system of emitters interacts with each other via the cavity fields which
conform to the type and surface geometry. The simplest correlations arise between
two identical emitters. If one emitter is excited and the other in its ground state, the
two-emitter system can either be in one of two possible quantum pair states, either
a symmetric or an antisymmetric state, and such pair states are identified as two of
Bell states [13]. The effects of the surface on pair correlations have been shown to
lead to further enhancements and suppressions of the emission process [14–17].
The single surface is the simplest cavity. Here, real space is divided by a planar
boundary along one direction. Two or more planar surfaces generate an open or closed
cavity. The most widely discussed open cavities that are created using two planar
surfaces are the parallel plates cavity and when two planes form a wedge of a given
opening angle [18–20]. Open and closed cylindrical cavities have also been discussed
[21] and finally a thin metallic or dielectric film can form a nanocavity [22, 23]. If
such a film is sandwiched between two thick dielectric slabs, we have symmetric
and asymmetric cavities. Quantum emitters localized inside, on the same side or on
opposite sides of the film, experience cavity effects, including pair correlations.
There are other cavities of great variety, so we must restrict our attention to the
simplest situations in which the formalism is manageable. In particular, we will focus
on cavities formed by the intersection of the planar surfaces of the same material in
contact with vacuum, or a dielectric where quantum systems are localized. We are
concerned with quantum effects of contemporary relevance, namely the one-center
system and the two-center correlations. Besides its significance as a quantum effect in
its own right, the process involving two-center correlations is of relevance to quantum
gates in quantum computing [13] and the involvement of surfaces has been identified
as of practical significance for scalable quantum computing. It is well known that in a
space free from boundaries a pair of identical electric dipole emitters one of which is
excited would discharge the excitation in a manner dependent on the relative dipole
orientations and their separation apart, and when the emitters are at close proximity,
the de-excitation process becomes either superradiant or subradiant. The proximity
of the system to surfaces adds further complexity, with possibilities of increased
superradiance and subradiance.

BASIC FORMALISM
207
This chapter begins with a brief outline of field quantization in general and moves
on to consider the de-excitation process for a number of representative cavities. It
also deals with correlation effects in the presence of cavities and the Dicke-type
phenomena [24] that would arise in this context.
7.2
BASIC FORMALISM
7.2.1
Hamiltonian and Essential States
Formally, in general, the quantum mechanical description of the processes mentioned
above begins with the Hamiltonian which we write as follows:
̂H = ̂Ha + ̂Hf + ̂Hint,
(7.1)
where ̂Ha is the unperturbed Hamiltonian of the two-level system such that
̂Ha |i⟩= Wi |i⟩;
⟨i‖ j⟩= 𝛿ij;
(i, j = 1, 2).
(7.2)
The two-level model is the simplest model for the atom, molecule, or quantum
dot, but it is known to be suitable for the description of a number of processes, most
notably the emission and absorption of quanta. The field states, however, require
quantization before the effects of the interaction can be properly evaluated. The
quantized form of the electric field can be written as follows:
̂E(r, t) =
∑
Q
{F(r, t, Q)̂aQ + h.c.},
(7.3)
where h.c. stands for “Hermitian conjugate”; F(r, t, Q) is the electric field distribution
function of the mode Q and ̂aQ is the boson annihilation operator of the mode
satisfying boson commutation rules. The main requirement to be satisfied by the
electric field function for the mode Q is that the electromagnetic field energy is
normalized such that
𝜀0𝜀∫
V
F(r, t, Q) ⋅F ∗(r, t, Q)dV = 1
2ℏ𝜔Q,
(7.4)
where V is a cavity quantization volume. Finally, the interaction Hamiltonian ̂Hint is
defined by
̂Hint = −̂𝝁⋅̂E(r, t),
(7.5)
where ̂𝝁is the dipole moment vector operator of the atom such that the matrix
elements between the two atomic states are given by
⟨1| ̂𝝁| 2⟩= 𝝁;
⟨i| ̂𝝁| i⟩= 0;
i = 1, 2.
(7.6)

208
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
In general, the de-excitation rate of a dipole-active emitter accompanied by photon
emission is given by a standard result of time-dependent perturbation theory known
as the Fermi golden rule formula [25]. The Fermi golden rule formula for the photon
emission rate Γ can be written as
Γ = 2𝜋
ℏ2
∑
Q
|||
⟨i; {0} | ̂Hint|f; {Q}⟩|||
2 𝛿[𝜔0 −𝜔(Q)],
(7.7)
where 𝜔0 = (Wi −Wf )∕ℏ. Perturbation theory also predicts the existence of an energy
shift Δ(i)(z) for a quantum system at distance z from the planar surface. This is
given by
Δ(i)(z) =
∑
j≠i
∑
Q
{
| ⟨i; {0} | ̂Hint| j, Q⟩|2
Wi −Wj −ℏ𝜔(Q)
}
−Rc,
(7.8)
where Rc is a counter-term representing the shift in unbounded space.
For an emitter in unbounded space, Rc = 0, and the mode functions F(r, t, Q) are
plane waves in three-dimensional space. There are two wave polarizations with unit
vectors ̃e𝜂with 𝜂= 1, 2. In this case, Q stands for (k, 𝜂), where k is the wavevector
which is orthogonal to both ̃e1 and ̃e2. The dispersion relation is k = 𝜔
√
𝜀∕c. The
mode functions are
F(r, t, k, 𝜂) = i
(
ℏ𝜔
2𝜀𝜀0V
)1∕2
̃e𝜂ei(k⋅r−𝜔t).
(7.9)
The evaluation of the emission rate in unbounded space, denoted by Γ0, leads to
the well-known result
Γ0 =
𝜔3
0𝜇2S(𝜔0)
3ℏ𝜋𝜀0c3
√
𝜀(𝜔0),
(7.10)
where S(𝜔0) is a factor representing the local field correction for an emitter localized
within the dielectric. There are several forms of S(𝜔0) in the literature, but here we
shall adopt the Glauber–Lewinstein’s expression [26].
S(𝜔0) =
(
3
2𝜀(𝜔0) + 1
)2
(7.11)
In free space vacuum S = 1.
For a cavity, the field states are the normal modes which conform to the presence
of interfaces and the topology of the space which forms the cavity. The spectrum of
the allowed frequencies is also a function of the cavity nature, shape, and dimension.
It follows that the emission rate as well as the energy shift would be modified when
the emitter is placed inside the cavity.

BASIC FORMALISM
209
2.0
(a)
(b)
PC
0
Dielectric
Z
Z
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.00
2
π
ε
π
3π
4π
5π
Dipole
FIGURE 7.1
(a) Schematic representation of a dipole emitter at distance z from a planar
perfect conductor (PC) surface. (b) The variation of the emission rate (in units of Γ0) with
distance (in units of k0z), with the full (dashed) curve representing the case of the dipole
perpendicular (parallel) to the surface.
7.2.2
Single Interface—the Simplest Open Cavity
The simplest cavity is formed by a single planar surface as shown in Figure 7.1a sep-
arating two different media, namely a dielectric half-space z > 0 of dielectric constant
𝜀in contact with another (here taken as a perfect conductor) occupying the half space
z < 0. An excited dipole emitter (identified as a dipole) positioned at a distance z from
the surface would discharge its excitation energy at a rate that depends on its location
near the surface, experiencing either an enhanced rate (superradiance) or a diminished
rate (subradiance). These markedly different types of behavior depend not just on the
position, but also on the orientation of the transition dipole moment relative to the
surface. The outline of the physics describing these features, are as follows.
The electromagnetic modes for the scenario in Figure 7.1a can now be discussed
with reference to the general scheme described above. The perfect conductor is taken
to exclude all electromagnetic fields from its interior, and so Maxwell’s equations
demand that at the surface z = 0 the tangential components of the electric and
magnetic field vectors must vanish identically everywhere on the surface. In that
case, the modes Q are identified with the states |Q⟩≡|{k||, kz, 𝜂}⟩and the quantized
electric field operator can be written as
̂E(r, t) = ∫d2k||
∞
∫
0
dkz
{Fs(k||, kz; r, t)̂as + Fp(k||, kz; r, t)̂ap + h.c.} ,
(7.12)
where Fs and Fp are the mode functions for s- and p-polarizations corresponding to
index 𝜂= s, p. The explicit forms of these mode functions are as follows:
Fs(k||, kz; r, t) = As(̂k|| × ̂z) sin(kzz)ei(k||⋅r||−𝜔t),
(7.13)
Fp(k||, kz; r, t) = Ap
{
̂k||
(ikz
𝜔
)
sin(kzz) −̂z
(k||
𝜔
)
cos(kzz)
}
ei(k||⋅r||−𝜔t),
(7.14)

210
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
where As and Ap are overall energy normalization factors emerging from the appli-
cation of the condition in Eq. (7.4).
As for the unbounded space case, the de-excitation of the emitter accompanied by
quantum emission is described by the rate of emission Γ and derives from the Fermi
golden rule formula
Γ = 2𝜋
ℏ2
∑
𝜂∫d2k||
∞
∫
0
dkz |||
⟨i; {0} | ̂Hint|f; {k||, kz, 𝜂}⟩|||
2 𝛿[𝜔0 −𝜔(k||, kz)],
(7.15)
where 𝜔0 = (Wi −Wf )∕ℏ. Perturbation theory also predicts the existence of a level
energy shift Δ(i)(z), of level i for a quantum system at a distance z from the planar
surface. This is given by
Δ(i)(z) =
∑
j≠i
∑
(𝜂=s,p)
∞
∫
0
dkz ∫d2k||
{
| ⟨i; {0} | ̂Hint| j; {k||, kz, 𝜂}⟩|2
Wi −Wj −ℏ𝜔(k||, kz)
}
−Rc,
(7.16)
where, as above, ̂Hint = −̂𝝁⋅̂E(R, t) is the interaction Hamiltonian with ̂𝝁the electric
dipole moment operator and ̂E(R, t) is the electric field vector at the position of the
dipole. Here, the counter term Rc is defined formally as the shift in unbounded space.
The field states are the normal modes which conform to the presence of the interface.
Clearly the emission rate as well as the energy shift is bound to be modified when
the emitter is placed near the surface.
For a dipole oriented parallel to the surface the de-excitation rate is dented Γ|| and
is found to have the functional form
Γ|| = Γ0
{
1 −3
2
(sin(2k0z)
(2k0z)
+ cos(2k0z)
(2k0z)2
−sin(2k0z)
(2k0z)3
)}
= 1
3Γ0
{J2(2k0z) −2J0(2k0z)} ,
(7.17)
where J0 and J2 are Bessel functions and Γ0 is the de-excitation rate for the dipole
emitter in the absence of the surface, given by Eq. (7.10) and k0 = 𝜔0
√
𝜀∕c, when
the dipole vector is normal to the surface the de-excitation rate is
Γ|| = Γ0
{
1 −3
(cos(2k0z)
(2k0z)2
−sin(2k0z)
(2k0z)3
)}
= Γ0
{1 + J2(2k0z) + J0(2k0z} .
(7.18)
Figure 7.1b shows the variation of the de-excitation rates in Eqs. (7.17) and (7.18)
as functions of k0z. Note that in the limit of large distances z, both de-excitation rates

DIPOLE EMITTER NEAR EDGE
211
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
50
0
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
z (nm)
(MHz)
Δ
= 5.76
ε
= 52.96 * 1015 s–1
ω
FIGURE 7.2
Variation of the energy shift with the position of the dipole emitter z from a
planar dielectric surface. The red curve represents the excited state shift and the blue curve the
ground state, while the black represents the pure van der Waal’s potential. (For a color version
of this figure, see the color plate section.)
tend to the free space value Γ0. On the other hand, in the limit of small z the upper
curve tends to 2Γ0 and the lower curve tends to zero rate. This is the origin of the
phenomena of superradiance and subradiance which are experienced by radiating
atoms in the vicinity of the surface.
Figure 7.2 shows the variation of the energy shift Δ, Eq. (7.8), with the distance
z from the surface. The formal expressions leading to Figure 7.2 emerge from com-
plicated evaluations and the reader is referred to the literature for details [22]. The
plots in Figure 7.2 have been evaluated for a specific transition of a Rb atom in the
vicinity of the surface of a material with dielectric constant 𝜀= 5.76. Clearly for
small distances both shifts tend to the van der Waal’s potential, while for large z both
energy shifts tend to the same value.
The modifications of the de-excitation rate are more amenable to experimental
detection than the level shifts, so in the rest of this chapter we shall confine attention to
de-excitation and the signature of correlations in the context of cooperative emission.
7.3
DIPOLE EMITTER NEAR EDGE
7.3.1
Normal Modes
The next cavity offering more confinement, but still an open cavity is the one made
of two planar boundaries intersecting at a right angle, as schematically shown in
Figure 7.3.
A dipole emitter is assumed to be localized in the dielectric medium at the general
point (x, y) on the plane z = 0. We shall assume that this plane is where this and other
emitters are localized and that the surfaces are those due to a perfect conductor. Then,

212
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
PC
PC
r0
y
X
(x0, y0, 0)
ε
μ
FIGURE 7.3
The region of space forming a right-angle open cavity where a dielectric
occupying the region x > 0, y > 0 smoothly joins the conducting surfaces, denoted by PC.
Emitters are localized in the dielectric region such as the one shown at the point (x0, y0, 0).
the quantized modes are those satisfying the electromagnetic boundary conditions
everywhere on the two conductor surfaces. The boundary conditions are
Ex(y = 0) = 0 = Ez(y = 0) and Ey(x = 0) = 0 = Ez(x = 0).
(7.19)
The quantized modes must also satisfy transversality, namely that ∇⋅E = 0. There
are two types of mode, namely transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM).
We have [20]
FTE(r, t) =
(𝜀𝜀0ℏ𝜔
𝜋3
)1∕2 {ky
k cos(kxx) sin(kyy)̂x −kx
k sin(kxx) cos(kyy)̂y
}
eikzz−i𝜔t,
(7.20)
FTM(r, t) =
(𝜀𝜀0ℏ𝜔
𝜋3
)1∕2 ⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
kz
k
[kx
k cos(kxx) sin(kyy)̂x +
ky
k sin(kxx) cos(kyy)̂y
]
−i sin(kxx) sin(kyy)̂z
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
eikzz−i𝜔t.
(7.21)
The quantized field is now formally given by
E(x, y, t) =
∑
𝜂=TE,TM ∫d3k {F𝜂(k, x, y, t)̂a(k, 𝜂) + h.c.},
(7.22)
where ̂a(k, 𝜉) are annihilation operators for the mode of wavevector k and polarization
𝜂conforming to the commutation relation
[̂a(k, 𝜂), ̂a†(k′, 𝜂′)] = 𝛿𝜂𝜂′𝛿(k −k′).
(7.23)

DIPOLE EMITTER NEAR EDGE
213
The quantized magnetic field is such that −i𝜔B𝜂= ∇× E𝜂using Eqs. (7.20) and
(7.21) which further satisfy the energy normalization condition, namely that the field
Hamiltonian reduces to the canonical form
1
2𝜀0 ∫d3r {𝜀E2 + c2B2} = 1
2
∑
𝜂∫d3kℏ𝜔(k,𝜂) {̂a(k,𝜂)̂a†(k,𝜂) + ̂a†(k,𝜂)̂a(k,𝜂)} .
(7.24)
With the mode functions defined as in Eqs. (7.20) and (7.21), the quantized field
is formally given by Eq. (7.22) and this allows investigation of the influence of the
quantized fields in this open cavity on the properties of emitters localized in the
vicinity.
7.3.2
Single-Emitter De-excitation Rate
For a single emitter situated at the general point (x, y) on the z-plane, the de-excitation
rate follows again using the Fermi golden rule. As aforementioned, the emitter is
represented by a two-level system of the excited state |2⟩and the ground state |1⟩
of energy separation ℏ𝜔0. The field state |{k, 𝜉}⟩now contains one field mode of
energy ℏ𝜔(k, 𝜂), and |{0}⟩is the corresponding vacuum state. We have
Γ(x, y) = 2𝜋
ℏ2
∑
𝜂∫d3k| ⟨2; {0}| μ ⋅E(x, y) |1; {k, 𝜂}⟩|2𝛿[𝜔0 −𝜔(k, 𝜂)],
(7.25)
where E(x, y) is the quantized electric field, defined in Eqs. (7.20)–(7.24). The evalu-
ations can be done analytically for an arbitrary dipole orientation, but the details will
not be presented here.
The physics of the situation is best explored for special cases in which the dipole
moment is oriented in high symmetry directions. This will allow us to draw con-
clusions when making a comparison of the situation in the open cavity with that in
unbounded space. Dipole orientations can in principle be selected in a desired direc-
tion by optical means, simply sending a light pulse with the desired polarization.
7.3.3
Dipole Moment Normal to the z-Plane.
When the emitter is localized at the general point (x, y) on the z = 0 plane with its
dipole moment vector pointing along the z-axis we have [19,20]
Γ(z)(x, y) =
𝜇2𝜔3
0
3𝜀0𝜋ℏc3 U(x, y)|k0
(7.26)
The function U(x, y) is given by the following integral over the solid angle in
k-space
U(x, y) = 3
8𝜋∫dΩk
(1 −̃k2
z
) [1 −cos(2k.x) −cos(2k.y) −cos(2k.{x + y})]
= 1 −Gzz(2x) −Gzz(2y) −Gzz(2[x + y]),
(7.27)

214
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
where x = x̂x and tildes denote unit vectors. The integration in Eq. (7.27) can be done
analytically in terms of the diagonal terms of the dyadic function Gij(R) defined as
Gij(R) = (𝛿ij −̃Ri ̃Rj)sin(𝜔0R∕c)
(𝜔0R∕c)
+ (𝛿ij −3̃Ri ̃Rj)
{cos(𝜔0R∕c)
(𝜔0R∕c)2
−sin(𝜔0R∕c)
(𝜔0R∕c)3
}
.
(7.28)
The final result is
Γ(z) = Γ0{1 −Gzz(2x) −Gzz(2y) −Gzz(2[x + y])},
(7.29)
where Γ0 is the de-excitation rate in an unbounded dielectric including local field
corrections, given by Eq. (7.10). Note that 𝜀is the dielectric constant of the material
filling the region of the open cavity in which the emitter is located. The results for a
dipole oriented along the z-axis are shown in Figure 7.4a which displays the spatial
distribution of the ratio Γ(z)∕Γ0 in the z = 0 plane of the right-angle open cavity.
Distances are measured in units of the reduced wavelength −𝜆= 1∕k = c∕(
√
𝜀𝜔0).
It can be seen that there are regions of enhanced de-excitation rate (superradiance)
and diminished rates (subradiance).
1.5
1
0.5
0
0
2
4
6
ky
kx
8
10 10
8
6
4
2
0
2
1
0
2
4
6
(a)
(b)
8
10
10
8
6
4
2
0
kx
ky
FIGURE 7.4
(a) Spatial distribution of Γ(z)∕Γ0, the relative de-excitation rate on the z = 0
plane of the right-angle cavity. The dipole moment is oriented in the z-direction, that is, parallel
to both surfaces. The color code is such that from blue to red is equivalent to from minimum
to maximum. (b) Spatial distribution of Γy∕Γ0, the de-excitation rate in the z = 0 plane of the
open right-angle cavity. The dipole moment is oriented along the y-direction, that is, normal
to one of the surfaces. The color code is such that from magenta to red is equivalent to from
minimum to maximum. See the text for further details. (For a color version of this figure, see
the color plate section.)

QUANTUM CORRELATIONS
215
7.3.4
Dipole Along the y-Axis
A similar evaluation along the lines followed in the previous section can now be
done for the case in which the dipole moment is taken along the y-axis. The details
will not be presented here and we simply display the result in Figure 7.4b. Here the
spatial variation is no longer symmetrical, with the maxima of the de-excitation rate
now larger than those in Figure 7.4a and are located near the boundary normal to the
direction of the dipole.
7.4
QUANTUM CORRELATIONS
The simplest quantum system displaying correlations consists a pair of such emitters.
In unbounded space, the de-excitation rate shows superradiance and subradiance
phenomena akin to those displayed in Figure 7.1b, depending on the relative positions
of the emitters and their dipole orientations. As for the de-excitation of a single emitter,
discussed in the previous sections, pair correlation effects would be dependent on the
nature of the modes available. We expect the correlations to be modified when the
two emitters are located within the open cavity discussed here.
We assume that the emitters are localized at the positions r1 and r2 in the dielectric
region, as shown in Figure 7.5. Each emitter, as before, is represented as a two-level
system of the ground state ||gi⟩of energy Wg and the excited state ||ei⟩of energy Wi,
so that the energy difference is Wi −Wg = ℏ𝜔0. Since the emitters are identical, the
ground state has energy 2Wg and is simply written as
|g⟩= ||g1g2⟩.
(7.30)
There are two quantum states which span the degenerate energy eigenvalue Wg +
We = Wg + ℏ𝜔0 and are either the symmetric (+) or the antisymmetric (−) state:
||e±
⟩=
1
√
2
{||e1g2⟩± ||e2g1⟩} .
(7.31)
1
μ
2
μ
r1
O
2r
FIGURE 7.5
Schematic showing a pair of dipole emitters interacting via and with the
quantum field inside a right-angle wedge cavity.

216
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
The energy separation between ||e±
⟩and the ground state |g⟩is again ℏ𝜔0. It is
important to note at the outset that the ||e±
⟩states given in Eq. (7.31) are two of the
well-known Bell states exhibiting quantum entanglement [13].
The two emitters interact with the quantized electromagnetic fields in the open
cavity so that the interaction Hamiltonian is formally given by
̂Hint = ̂H′(r1) + ̂H′(r2) where ̂H′(ri) = −̂𝝁i ⋅E(ri),
(7.32)
where ̂𝝁i,i = 1, 2, stands for the dipole moment vector operator of the emitter i.
The quantized electric field in the open cavity is described in Eqs. (7.20)–(7.23)
and the evaluation turns out to be a little cumbersome, albeit formally carried out
along the lines followed for the single emitter de-excitation rate. It turns out that
the de-excitation process is different for the two excited states and it is found to be
given by
Γ± = 1
2
{Γ(r1) + Γ(r2)} +
∑
𝛼,𝛽
𝜇𝛼Γ𝛼𝛽(r1, r2)𝜇𝛽,
(7.33)
where 𝜇𝛼and 𝜇𝛽are Cartesian components of the dipole moment matrix element;
Γ(r1) and Γ(r2) are the de-excitation rates of individual emitters at their location,
each of which conforms with the results shown in the previous section, so that the
expression 1
2
{Γ(r1) + Γ(r2)} appearing in Eq. (7.33) involves individual contribu-
tions which depend on the location and dipole orientation of the respective emitters.
The last term involving the summation over Cartesian components in Eq. (7.33)
includes the functions Γ𝛼𝛽(r1, r2), which depend on the emitter positions within the
open cavity. The details are not presented here and can be found in the literature [20].
The contribution of this term to the de-excitation rate is in excess of the isolated rates.
It embodies the correlation effects and depends on positions as well as the relative
dipole orientations. We write
Γ =
∑
𝛼,𝛽
𝜇𝛼Γ𝛼𝛽(r1, r2)𝜇𝛽.
(7.34)
To illustrate the variation of this across the open cavity, we can conveniently fix
the position of one of the emitters and vary the position of the second, while fixing
both dipole orientations.
Figure 7.6a shows the variation of Γ across the z-plane when one of the emitters,
designated by a cross (X) is fixed in position at the point (x1, y1) = ( −𝜆, −𝜆), where
−𝜆= k−1
0
= c∕(
√
𝜀𝜔0) is the reduced transition wavelength. The second emitter has
varying positions within this plane of the open cavity. Here both dipoles are oriented
parallel to the y-axis.
Clearly regions where the color code indicates high values are those where the two
emitters are at close proximity. There are regions where the correlation is very small
and is even negative, as shown by the darker color. As expected, the region with the

ENTANGLEMENT
217
10
5
00
5
(a)
(b)
10
–0.6
0
Γ
1.4 10
5
00
5
10
–0.3
0
Γ
0.5
FIGURE 7.6
Spatial distribution of the pair correlation term Γ defined by Eq. (7.34) in the
z = 0 plane of the right-angle cavity. One of the emitters is fixed at the point (x1, y1) = ( −𝜆, −𝜆),
shown by the cross, while the position of the second emitter is varied across the z-plane. (a)
Both dipoles are parallel to the y-axis, shown by the arrow. (b) Both dipoles are parallel to the
z-axis, indicated by the dot inside a circle. (For a color version of this figure, see the color
plate section.)
largest values is where there are maximum cavity effects, namely closest to the edge
where the surfaces intersect.
Figure 7.6a differs from Figure 7.6b in that in the latter the dipole orientation is
along the z-axis, that is, parallel to both surfaces. The position of the fixed emitter
is again taken as (x1, y1) = ( −𝜆, −𝜆) and the second emitter position varies across the
plane of the cavity.
7.5
ENTANGLEMENT
The cases we have highlighted so far are (i) a single excited emitter discharging its
excitation in the open cavity and (ii) two emitters cooperatively partaking in the de-
excitation process in the open cavity. The work points to the existence of an interesting
quantum phenomenon in which the open cavity mode at the excitation frequency is
said to be entangled with the quantum system, but in a manner strongly dependent
on the emitter positions and the dipole orientation. The concept of entanglement
appears to be rather strange in the context of a real quantum system and a cavity as a
macroscopic object.
In the case of a perfect conductor half-space it has been pointed out [22] that
the de-excitation process for a single two-level system localized at a distance z from
the planar surface is equivalent to that of a pair of two-level systems in unbounded
space (one real and another fictitious) separated by a distance of 2z, but with the
dipole moment of the fictitious two-level system electrically inverted, as in the image.
It has been verified by explicit evaluations that the de-excitation rate for a single
emitter in this case involves the emitter/cavity ground state
|g⟩= ||ggI⟩,
(7.35)

218
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
where g(gI) and e(eI) designate the ground state of the real (fictitious) and excited
state of the real (fictitious) two-level systems, respectively. It turns out, however, that
the excited state of the entangled system is only the symmetric (+) Bell state:
||e+
⟩=
1
√
2
{||egI⟩+ ||eIg⟩} .
(7.36)
The results for the single emitter/half-space open cavity confirm that the de-
excitation process involves an entanglement between the two-level system and its
image in the conductor. In reality, however, the image is equivalent to an induced
electric charge distribution on the surface of the conductor, involving what is essen-
tially a classical concept in a quantum scenario.
The results presented in Figures 7.6a and 7.6b for a single two-level emitter in
the case of an open cavity formed by two orthogonal planar surfaces indicate that
entanglement is indeed present between the real two-level system and a number of
fictitious two-level systems forming the set of images. It is easy to verify that there
are three images one in each surface as follows: (a) an upright image at distance 2y
perpendicular to the x-axis, (b) a second inverted image at a distance 2x perpendicular
to the y-axis, and (c) a third inverted image at a distance 2
√
x2 + y2 across the
diagonal passing through the intersection point. The de-excitation rate clearly exhibits
entanglement showing enhancement and suppression regions, as would be the case for
a system of four real emitters in free space separated by the distances indicated above.
The evaluation of the de-excitation rate discussed here is based on the construction
of the cavity mode that satisfies the electromagnetic boundary conditions at the
surfaces. An alternative method is to evaluate the cooperative emission rate of the
four emitters shown in Figure 7.7 where the system’s lowest energy state is such that
each of the four emitters occupies its own ground state, so that we have
|g⟩= ||ggI1gI2gI3⟩.
(7.37)
x 
y
(x,y)
FIGURE 7.7
A schematic drawing showing the real emitter localized at the point (x, y) and
its three images in the two surfaces of the open cavity. For simplicity, we have chosen the
dipole orientation along y.

WEDGE CAVITIES
219
FIGURE 7.8
A schematic drawing showing four real emitters and their set of images in the
two surfaces of the right-angle cavity. For simplicity we have chosen the dipole orientation
along the y-axis.
The excited state would clearly be a symmetric linear combinations of four terms
in which one of the emitters is excited. We have
||e+
⟩= 1
2
{||egI1gI2gI3⟩+ ||geI1gI2gI3⟩+ ||ggI1eI2gI3⟩+ ||ggI1gI2eI3⟩} ,
(7.38)
where e and g designate the ground and excited states of the real emitter, whereas gIi
and eIi stand for the ground and excited states of the ith image, respectively.
When there are two real emitters, we then have six images, three for each emitter,
as shown in Figure 7.7 in addition to the two real emitters. The ground and excited
states are direct generalizations of Eqs. (7.37) and (7.38). This argument can be
extended to any number of real emitters, as shown in Figure 7.8 where there are four
real emitters near the edge of the right-angle cavity.
7.6
WEDGE CAVITIES
The open cavities we have so far considered, namely a single planar surface and two
surfaces at right angles, are the simplest in terms of analysis. Both are, in fact, special
cases of a general wedge cavity with a varying wedge angle [19, 20]. The planar
single surface corresponds to a wedge angle equal to 𝜋, while the right-angle cavity
corresponds to a wedge opening angle of 𝜋∕2.
Fortunately, even the general case of an arbitrary opening angle wedge is amenable
to analysis although it is understandably more analytically complex than the special
cases discussed so far.
The wedge cavity of an opening angle Φ0 is schematically represented in
Figure 7.9, where two planar surfaces intersect at a line taken as the spine of the
wedge along the z-axis. The shaded region is assumed to be homogeneous and it is
convenient to continue to consider the simplest case of a perfect conductor. Dipole
emitters are localized in the dielectric region close to the edge. Figure 7.9 shows a
single emitter localized at the point R = (r∥, Φ, 0) in cylindrical coordinates, where
r∥is the in-plane polar coordinate in the x–y plane and the polar angle Φ is in the
range (0, Φ0). The analog of Figure 7.7 for an obtuse angle is shown in Figure 7.10,

220
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
R = (r,   , 0)
=
ϕ
= 0
ϕ
x
y
=
ϕ
ϕ0
FIGURE 7.9
A schematic drawing showing the wedge cavity formed by the intersection of
two planar surfaces at an opening angle Φ0. Dipole emitters are localized as shown within the
dielectric region (unshaded) at close proximity to the cavity edge.
which illustrates the way one constructs the positions and sense of the images of the
real emitter localized within the dielectric wedge cavity. A necessary guide is that
one must obtain a closed system of emitter and images. The de-excitation rate in this
case can be interpreted as a cooperative effect between the real dipole and its five
images in the wedge cavity.
The de-excitation rate for a single dipole emitter can be evaluated once the elec-
tromagnetic fields are expressed in terms of field quanta satisfying electromagnetic
boundary conditions at the wedge interfaces. For perfectly conducting boundaries,
the field modes emerge as either transverse electric TE, for which Ez = 0 or transverse
magnetic TM for which Bz = 0. Using cylindrical coordinates we write
E(r∥, Φ, z, t) =
∑
𝜂=1,2,n ∫dkz ∫d2k∥
(
F(𝜂)
(k∥,kz,n)(r∥, z, t)a𝜂(k∥, kz, n) + h.c.
)
(7.39)
I3
I1
I5
I4
I2
FIGURE 7.10
Images of a single dipole in a wedge with acute opening angle. Here there
are five images: two first-order images (I1 and I2) and three second-order images (I3 to I5).

WEDGE CAVITIES
221
where k∥is a two-dimensional wavevector in the x–y plane. The operator a𝜂(k∥, kz, n)
and its Hermitian conjugate are annihilation and creation operators for the quanta
of the mode of polarization 𝜂which becomes TE for when 𝜂= 1, or TM, when 𝜂= 2.
The vector functions F𝜂
(k∥,kz,n)(r∥, z, t) are the mode spatial distribution functions.
The procedure leading to the evaluation of these functions is the same as for other
geometries. The main requirements are again that they should satisfy the energy
normalization condition as well as the electromagnetic boundary conditions at the
wedge surfaces [19]. For TE modes (𝜂= 1), we have
F(1)
k∥,kz,n(r∥, z, t) = C(1)
k∥,kz,n
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
Jm(k∥, r∥)(n𝜋∕Φ0) sin(n𝜋Φ∕Φ0)̃r∥
−
𝜕Jm(k∥, r∥)
𝜕r∥
cos(n𝜋Φ∕Φ0) ̃Φ
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
ei(kzz−𝜔(k∥,n)t),
(7.40)
where Jm(k∥, r∥) is the Bessel function of order m, with m = n𝜋∕Φ0 and tildes here
denote unit vectors. For TM modes (𝜂= 2), we have
F(2)
k∥,kz,n(r∥, z, t) = Ck∥,kz,n
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
𝜉(k∥)
𝜕Jm(k∥, r∥)
𝜕r∥
sin(n𝜋Φ∕Φ0)̃r∥
+ 𝜉(k∥)Jm(k∥, r∥)(n𝜋Φ0) cos(n𝜋Φ∕Φ0) ̃Φ∕r∥
+
(
c2k2
∥∕𝜔2√
𝜀
)
Jm(k∥, r∥) sin(n𝜋Φ∕Φ0)̃z
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪⎭
ei(kzz−𝜔(k∥,n)t),
(7.41)
where
𝜉(k∥) =
(
1 −
c2k2
∥
𝜀𝜔2
)
(7.42)
Note that the quantized fields so derived apply to all opening angles in the range
Φ0 = (0, 2𝜋).
For obtuse angles, such as 3𝜋∕4, the system becomes that of an emitter embedded
in a bulk dielectric near and outside a metallic protrusion of wedge shape. In the
limit of Φ0 close to 2𝜋we have an emitter localized near the edge of a metallic
sheet. It should be emphasized that the formalism, outlined above, is applicable to
all these cases. It is possible to examine the manner in which the de-excitation rate
distribution for emitters localized in the x–y plane evolves with changing opening
angle between the two extreme cases mentioned above. Illustrative results, as dis-
played in Figures 7.11a and 7.11b, are in the form of color-coded graphs in which
the rate is enhanced in certain regions (regions of superradiance) and suppressed in
other regions (regions of subradiance).
In Figures 7.11a and 7.11b we should note in particular the marked change in
behavior when the dipole orientation is switched from parallel (along the z-axis) and

222
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20–20 –15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2.5
1.5
0.5
2
1
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18 20
16
4
3.5
3
2
1
2.5
1.5
0.5
0
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(f)
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
2.5
1.5
0.5
0
2
1
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20–20 –15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–20 –15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
FIGURE 7.11
De-excitation rates in units of Γ0 for dipole moments localized in the x–y
plane near the wedge edge in a wedge with an opening angle of Φ0 = 𝜋∕4 (dipole parallel to
plane) (a); with an opening angle of Φ0 = 𝜋∕4 (dipole perpendicular to the plane) (b); with
an opening angle Φ0 = 3𝜋∕4 (c) (note the tendency to the planar surface case (attained when
Φ0 = 𝜋) as the opening angle increases); with an opening angle of Φ0 = 3𝜋∕2 (d), but dipole
moments are oriented in the direction of increasing Φ; with an opening angle of Φ0 ≈2𝜋
(e), but dipole moments are oriented in the direction of increasing Φ; with an opening angle
of Φ0 ≈2𝜋(f), but the dipole moments are oriented in the z-direction. Distances along the
horizontal (x-axis) and vertical (y-axis) are in units of −𝜆, the reduced transition wavelength.
(For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)

CONCLUSIONS
223
perpendicular (in the x–y plane). Note also that in the parallel polarization case the
region nearest to the wedge tip is a region of high suppression. Excited emitters
situated in this region, in principle, preserve their state of excitation indefinitely. If
an emitter which is situated in these dark regions suddenly made to change its state
of polarization (for example by optical means) from parallel to perpendicular, the
emitter should be de-excited and in certain positions the de-excitation process is
enhanced. As we explain in the concluding section, we envisaged that this in situ
control of de-excitation from subradiant to superradiant could be useful in quantum
information processing. Figure 7.11c shows the change in the distribution as the
opening angle increases to 3𝜋∕4 and we note the tendency of the distribution to
increasingly resemble that near a planar surface.
We should also highlight the interesting extreme case of the system we have
defined, namely the case in which the angle Φ0 increases beyond the planar surface
attained when Φ0 = 𝜋and ultimately becomes approximately equal to 2𝜋. Fig-
ure 7.11d displays the de-excitation rate in units of Γ0 in a wedge with an opening
angle of Φ0 = 3𝜋∕2 for dipole moments oriented in the direction of increasing Φ.
The ultimate case is when the opening angle is nearly 2𝜋. In this limit the dipole
emitter is near a metallic sheet half-plane occupying half the x–z plane, with the rest
of the space occupied by the dielectric. It is seen from Figure 7.11e that the rate
varies symmetrically round the line of termination (the z-axis) for all excited emitters
localized in the dielectric in the vicinity of the edge. A change in the polarization
modifies the edge of rate distribution markedly, as in Figure 7.11f with considerable
enhancement experienced in the vicinity of the termination line. This limit of the gen-
eral treatment is a convenient route to tackle the problem of the dipole decay near the
termination line of a metallic half plane, which would be of interest in its own right,
with applications extending, beyond the current interest in quantum information to
near field spectroscopy and microscopy.
7.7
CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, we have explored some particular aspects of the photonics of quantum
systems in the vicinity of interfaces of some simple structures. We have been con-
cerned with structures possessing only one and two surfaces forming an open cavity.
Although the geometry appears seemingly uncomplicated, we have shown that these
scenarios do indeed adequately serve to reveal much of the essential physics for
excited dipole emitters discharging their excitations at nanoscale distances from the
structure surfaces. We have shown that the analysis of the de-excitation process in
the case of a single emitter is relatively straightforward, but turns out to be quite
complex when we considered correlations involving two or more emitters coopera-
tively partaking in the emission process near the surfaces. Quantum correlations are
important for the realization of scalable architectures for quantum computing, and
the properties of quantum systems inside cavities, near cavity surfaces, and within
photonic crystals have been highlighted as constituting promising scenarios in that
context [27–43].

224
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
We have outlined a general framework that quantifies the de-excitation rate for
polarizable dipolar emitters embedded in a wedge-shaped dielectric surrounded by
high conductivity metal. The treatment is general in the sense that it is capable of
predicting de-excitation rate distributions for the case of a wedge of an arbitrary angle
Φ0 and we have highlighted the significance of the results in the limit of Φ0 close to
2𝜋, corresponding to dipole decay near the termination line of a metallic half-plane.
The essential features of the physics behind the effect of surfaces on de-excitation
rates have been clarified first for a single emitter localized within distances which
are multiples of the reduced transition wavelength −𝜆. Here we have found that the
de-excitation of dipoles localized in the space close to surface experiences significant
changes. The effect, which we have studied here using the concepts involving emis-
sion of quantized modes satisfying the boundary conditions at the various surfaces,
can also be explained as arising from a cooperative emission process involving the real
emitter and its images. Thus even for a single emitter the process involves quantum
correlation, as though it is between real dipole emitters. However, in practice, it has
been shown in the case of a single emitter and its image, only the symmetric excited
state contributes when the image is replaced by a real emitter, with an appropriate
set of image dipole orientations. The results can thus be regarded as an entanglement
of the real emitter with its set of images, or equivalently, an entanglement of the real
emitter with the surfaces forming the cavity. We have also seen that a pair of two
identical emitters sharing the excitation also experiences a modified rate, depending
on their relative positions and dipole orientations. For a right-angle cavity, the number
of two-level systems is multiplied by four when localized within the open cavity. It
should be clear from this observation that the scenario can be generalized to any num-
ber of emitters as, for example, the case of four real emitters with dipoles all parallel
to the y-axis, as shown in Figure 7.8. The cooperative rate will now involve quantum
states that are direct generalizations of Eqs. (7.35) and (7.36). We envisage that an
ordered system of emitters as, for example, in a periodic array, would show evidence
of periodicity and the system behavior can be controlled by optical manipulation of
individual emitters as explained earlier.
The right-angle cavity is one of the simplest and it is in fact a special case of
wedge cavities with a varying wedge angle. The correlations for the general case of
a wedge of an arbitrary angle involve multiple images for each emitter. For example
in the case of a 𝜋∕3 opening angle, there are five images for each emitter and the
correlations would be modified in accordance with the degree of confinement of the
open cavity.
The prospect of the applicability of the work presented here to the area of quantum
information processing rests in the suggestion that the de-excitation rate of dipole
emitters near the narrow end of the wedge can be controlled optically from totally
dark to superradiant by a change of dipole orientation.
The two-body and multibody quantum correlations for systems localized in the
same environment are envisaged to be important for the realization of two-bit quantum
gates [13]. It would be interesting also to find out how transfer of excitation between
such emitters is influenced by their proximity to the narrow end of material wedges.
The experimental realization of such a system is not expected to pose difficulties

REFERENCES
225
since any desired shape made with a variety of different materials can now be created,
thanks to advances in material preparation at the nanoscale using modern deposition
techniques and lithography. These advances, coupled with parallel advances in the
detection of atomic and molecular position to nanometer accuracy, should make the
predictions described above amenable to direct experimental investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Much of the work presented in this chapter was carried out in collaboration with
a number of colleagues and former doctorate students. I am particularly grateful to
Drs. M. Al-Amri, G. Banyard, C. R. Bennett, G. Juzeliunas, and S. Skipsey.
REFERENCES
[1] E. M. Purcell, “Spontaneous transition probabilities in radio-frequency spectroscopy,”
Phys. Rev. 69, 681 (1946).
[2] S. Haroche, “Cavity quantum electrodynamics,” in Les Houche, Fundamental Systems in
Quantum Optics, LIII, edited by J. Dalibard, J. M. Raimond, and J. Zinn-Justin (Elsevier
Science Publishers, BV, 1992), p. 263.
[3] E. A. Hinds, “Cavity quantum electrodynamics,” Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 28, 237 (1991).
[4] J. Michaelis, C. Hettish, M. Mlynek, and V. Sandoghdar, “Optical microscopy using a
single-molecule light source,” Nature 405, 325 (2000).
[5] A. Beveratos, R. Brouri, T. Cacoin, J. Ph. Poizat, and P. Grangier, “Nonclassical radiation
from diamond nanocrystals,” Phys. Rev. A 64, 061802(R) (2001).
[6] C. Hettich, C. Schmitt, J. Zitzmann, S. K¨uhn, I. Gerhardt, and V. Sandoghdar, “Nanometer
resolution and coherent optical dipole coupling of two individual molecules,” Science
298, 385 (2002).
[7] T. Kalkbrenner, M. Ramstein, J. Mlynek, and V. Sandoghdar, “A single gold particle
as a probe for apertureless scanning near-field optical microscopy,” J. Microsc. 202, 72
(2001).
[8] G. Colas des Francs, C. Girard, and A. Dereux, “Theory of near-field optical imaging
with a single molecule as light source,” J. Chem. Phys. 117, 4659 (2002).
[9] S. K¨uhn, C. Hettich, C. Schmitt, J.-Ph. Poizat, and V. Sandoghdar, “Diamond colour
centres as a nanoscopic light source for scanning near-field optical microscopy,”
J. Microsc. 202, 2 (2001).
[10] S. G¨otzinger, L. de, S. Menezes, A. Mazzei, S. K¨uhn, V. Sandoghdar, and O. Benson,
“Controlled photon transfer between two individual nanoemitters via shared high-Q
modes of a microsphere resonator,” Nano Lett. 6, 1151 (2006).
[11] C. Toninelli, Y. Delley, T. St¨oferle, A. Renn, S. G¨otzinger, and V. Sandoghdar, “A
scanning microcavity for in situ control of single-molecule emission,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
97, 021107 (2010).
[12] C. Welch and J. Burgoyne, “Vacuum challenges and solutions,” Physics World 19, 21
(2006).

226
SURFACE AND CAVITY NANOPHOTONICS
[13] S. M. Barnett, Quantum Information (Oxford University Press, New York, 2009).
[14] M. Babiker, “Super-radiance near conductor and plasma surfaces,” J. Phys. A 9, 799
(1976).
[15] M. Al-Amri and M. Babiker, “Quantum correlations across a metallic screen,” Phys. Rev.
A 67, 043820 (2003).
[16] D. Meschede, “Radiating atoms in confined space: from spontaneous emission to micro-
masers,” Phys. Rep. 211, 201 (1992).
[17] M. Babiker, “ID image-molecular quantum states in layered media,” J. Phys. Condens.
Matter 5, 2137 (1993).
[18] P. W. Milonni and P. L. Knight, “Spontaneous emission between mirrors,” Opt. Commun.
9, 119 (1973).
[19] S. C. Skipsey, M. Al-Amri, M. Babiker, and G. Juzeliunas, “Controllable spontaneous
decay at material wedges,” Phys. Rev. A 73, 011803 (2006).
[20] S. C. Skipsey, G. Juzeliunas, M. Al-Amri, and M. Babiker, “Dipole de-excitation near
orthogonal conductor surfaces,” Optics Commun. 254, 262–270 (2005).
[21] G. Banyard, C. R. Bennett, and M. Babiker, “Enhancement of energy relaxation rates
near metal-coated dielectric cylinders,” Opt. Commun. 207, 195 (2002).
[22] M. Al-Amri and M. Babiker, “Quantum frequency shifts of qubits in heterostructures,”
Phys. Rev. A 69, 065801 (2004).
[23] C. R. Bennett, M. Babiker, and J. B. Kirk, “Spontaneous emission and cooperative effects
near a thin metallic film,” J. Mod. Optics 49, 269 (2002).
[24] R. H. Dicke, “Coherence in spontaneous radiation processes,” Phys. Rev. 93, 99 (1954).
[25] A. I. M. Rae, Quantum Mechanics, 5th ed. (IOP Publications, Bristol, 2007).
[26] R. J. Glauber and M. Lewenstein, “Quantum optics of dielectric media,” Phys. Rev. A 43,
467 (1991).
[27] J. I. Cirac, P. Zoller, H. J. Kimble, and H. Mabucci, “Quantum state transfer and entan-
glement distribution among distant nodes in a quantum network,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
127902 (2004).
[28] H. J. Kimble, “The quantum internet,” Nature 453, 1023 (2008).
[29] K. J. Vahala, “Optical microcavities,” Nature 424, 839 (2003).
[30] B. Lev, K. Srinivasan, P. Barclay, O. Painter, and H. Mabuchi, “Feasibility of detecting
single atoms using photonic bandgap cavities,” Nanotechnology 15, S556 (2004).
[31] B. Dayan, A. S. Parkins, T. Aoki, E. Ostby, K. J. Vahala, and H. J. Kimble, “A photon
turnstile dynamically regulated by one atom,” Science 319, 1062 (2008).
[32] G. Lepert, M. Trupke, M. J. Hartmann, M. B. Plenio, and E. A. Hinds, “Arrays of
waveguide-coupled optical cavities that interact strongly with atoms,” New J. Phys. 13,
113002 (2011).
[33] L. M. Duan and H. J. Kimble, “Scalable photonic quantum computation through cavity-
assisted interactions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 127902 (2004).
[34] J. T. Shen and S. Fan, “Coherent single photon transport in one-dimensional waveguides
coupled with superconducting quantum bits,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 213001 (2005).
[35] F. Le Kien, S. D. Gupta, K. P. Nayak, and K. Hakuta, “Nanofiber-mediated radiative
transfer between two distant atoms,” Phys. Rev. A 72, 063815 (2005).
[36] D. Dzsotjan, A. S. Sorensen, and M. Fleishhauer, “Quantum emitters coupled to surface
plasmons of a nanowire.” Phys. Rev. B 82, 075427 (2010).

REFERENCES
227
[37] F. Le Kien and K. Hakuta, “Cooperative enhancement of channeling of emission from
atoms into a nanofiber,” Phys. Rev. A 77, 013801 (2008).
[38] D. E. Chang, L. Jiang, A. V. Goshkov, and H. J. Kimble, “Cavity QED with atomic
mirrors,” New J. Phys. 14, 063003 (2012).
[39] H. Zoubi and H. Ritsch, “Optical properties of collective excitations for an atomic chain
with vacancies,” New J. Phys. 12, 103014 (2010).
[40] D. E. Chang, A. S. Sorensen, E. A. Demler, and M. D. Lukin, “A single-photon transistor
using nano-scale surface plasmons,” Nat. Phys. 3, 807 (2007).
[41] Y. Chang, X. R. Gong, and C. P. Sun, “Multiatomic mirror for perfect reflection of single
photons in a wide band of frequency,” Phys. Rev. A 83, 013825 (2011).
[42] J. K. Asboth, H. Ritsch, and P. Domokos, “Optomechanical coupling in a one-dimensional
optical lattice,” Phys. Rev. A 77, 063424 (2008).
[43] S.-B. Zheng, “Virtual-photon-induced quantum phase gates for two distant atoms trapped
in separate cavities,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 154101 (2009).


8
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
A. Salam
Department of Chemistry, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC, USA
8.1
INTRODUCTION
While the first serious articulation of the concept of electromagnetic radiation having
particle-like characteristics can be traced back to Newton’s corpuscular theory of
light, it was not until 1926 that the term “photon” was first introduced into the
lexicon by the American chemist Gilbert N. Lewis [1]. This was necessitated in
large part by the reappearance of the idea of the light particle as a result of Planck’s
quantum hypothesis in 1900, and Einstein’s novel explanation and understanding
of the photoelectric effect in 1905, as well as his radical work on relativity theory,
along with that of Planck on the thermodynamics of radiation. While these advances
preceded the subsequent development and application of the new quantum theory,
the latter continued to help further propel and establish the notion of light quanta,
especially to the interpretation and calculation of atomic spectra, and confirming the
validity of microscopic conservation of energy and momentum in the Compton effect,
where a quantum of light is scattered by a stationary electron [2].
It required Dirac’s genius, however, to take the next step in quantizing the elec-
tromagnetic field [3], from which light quanta or photons emerged naturally as a
consequence. In the process this gave rise to the first quantum field theory, which,
at the time, for radiation interacting with slowly moving, bound electrons was called
Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) [4]. This formulation finally enabled the wave
and particle pictures of electromagnetic radiation to be successfully reconciled. Sub-
sequent research was preoccupied with extending the treatment of matter to ever
higher energies and to speeds approaching that of light as in the work of Jordan,
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
229

230
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
Pauli, and Heisenberg [5,6] first by employing relativistic quantum mechanics, and
the later telling contributions of Schwinger, Tomonaga, Feynman, and Dyson [4, 7]
which culminated in the establishment of the fully covariant form of QED theory and
the renormalization program. This last advance enabled a number of key physical
quantities to be computed such as the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron
[8], spontaneous emission rates [3], and Bethe’s non-relativistic calculation of the
Lamb shift in atomic hydrogen [9]. These initial successes inspired confidence in the
theory and highlighted the necessity of properly including radiative effects. Agree-
ment between theory and experiment has remained singularly impressive, with recent
values for the electronic g-factor, for example, in units of Bohr magnetons given by
g(theory) = 2.00231930436558 [10] and g(expt) = 2.00231930436146 [11,12]. With
the discovery of the laser soon thereafter taking the field of spectroscopy to unprece-
dented levels of precision, as well as giving rise to numerous new linear and nonlinear
optical phenomena, quantum field theoretic treatments and descriptions in terms of
photons became ever more popular and widespread, and increased in importance.
This continues to the present day.
The range of applicability of QED is not only limited to interaction of electromag-
netic radiation with matter. Coupling between matter can also be treated successfully
using the techniques of quantized radiation field theory since fundamentally, inter-
particle interactions of the type manifested by atomic and molecular species are
electromagnetic in origin. Perhaps the most celebrated example is provided by the
Casimir–Polder dispersion potential between neutral non-polar systems [13], whose
long-range behavior exhibits inverse seventh power interparticle distance depen-
dence. This is attributed to retardation effects, which weakens the coupling relative
to the inverse sixth power law obtained by London, who made the approximation that
signals propagate instantaneously between centers.
The case mentioned immediately above serves to highlight important differences
that can arise when adopting the so-called semiclassical approach compared to the
fully quantum mechanical theory of radiation–matter interaction such as QED. In
the former method only the material system obeys quantum mechanical laws with
the electromagnetic field taken to be a classical external perturbation [14]. While the
use of semiclassical methods is commonplace, most certainly due to its conceptual,
formal, and actual computational simplicity relative to QED, in many cases yielding
identical results to the latter, it often produces incorrect results and inferior physical
insight, particularly in applications that require an explanation and understanding in
terms of photons. A few well-knownexamples will beusedinwhat follows toillustrate
the power of a fully quantum mechanical description of light–matter interaction over
semiclassical ones. These applications will come from atomic, molecular, optical,
and chemical physics, where the non-relativistic form of QED has been applied
most fruitfully.
This version of the theory can be obtained on making the approximation that the
velocity of the particles is significantly less than that of light, and assuming their
mass to be constant. The molecular QED Hamiltonian operator for the total system
composed of radiation and matter in mutual interaction can also be derived from
first principles starting from the classical Lagrangian function for a slowly moving

MOLECULAR QED: PRINCIPLE OF MINIMAL ELECTROMAGNETIC COUPLING
231
charged particle coupled to electromagnetic radiation. This is the approach taken in
Section 8.2, which outlines the fundamentals of the theory. The treatment holds for
non-conservation of photon number. The number of charged particles, on the other
hand, remains constant, thereby excluding electron-positron creation-destruction pro-
cesses. Hence, there is strict conservation of charge and mass. The theory is therefore
readily applicable to non-relativistic charged particles such as bound electrons inter-
acting with the electromagnetic field, with energy and not matter being exchanged
between these two sub-systems. The remainder of this chapter is then devoted to
photonic applications, beginning with the elementary processes of single-photon
absorption, and stimulated and spontaneous emission, and computation of Einstein
A and B coefficients. A presentation of two-photon processes—absorption and emis-
sion of light, both from different and identical beams, as well as linear scattering of
light—both elastic and inelastic varieties, follows this. Additional nonlinear optical
processes are considered next, with sum-frequency generation spectroscopy being
used as a representative example. A brief survey of other important multiphoton
light-scattering phenomena will also be given, such as optical rotation and circular
dichroism, and their laser-induced analogs, magnetic circular dichroism, and second-
and third-harmonic generation. While all of the above-mentioned examples involve
the creation and destruction of real photons, this is not the only type of light quantum
permitted by the theory. The other is the virtual photon, identical in all respects to
their real counterparts except that they are absorbed very soon after their creation,
and thus avoid detection. Even though the theory fundamentally makes no distinction
between these two types of photons, the ascribed labels prove convenient in further
helping to categorize and organize processes. Thus, virtual photons feature in the
explanation of the manifestation of interparticle forces and in their evaluation. Two
basic applications will be covered which illustrate single- and double-virtual pho-
ton exchange between two bodies, by which interaction between them is mediated.
In the former case, resonance energy transfer will serve as the example of choice,
while the van der Waals dispersion energy shift will be used to illustrate two virtual
photon exchange. Finally, intermolecular forces modified by external radiation will
be presented. As a topic of much recent theoretical and experimental interest, this
application involves participation by both real and virtual photons. A brief summary
and outlook then concludes the chapter.
8.2
MOLECULAR QED: PRINCIPLE OF MINIMAL
ELECTROMAGNETIC COUPLING
A common starting point in the rigorous quantum mechanical solution of a problem
involving the interaction of photons with non-relativistic matter is the Hamilto-
nian operator for the total system composed of the material particles—atoms and
molecules, the electromagnetic field, and their mutual interaction. One fundamental
way to arrive at such an operator form is to write the classical Lagrangian function
for the coupling of a charged particle, say an electron of charge –e, mass m to a
radiation field described by a scalar and vector potential 𝜙(⃗r) and ⃗a(⃗r) respectively.

232
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
Defining ⃗q𝛼to be the generalized coordinate of the charged particle 𝛼, along with its
generalized velocity ̇⃗q𝛼= d⃗q𝛼
dt , a suitable Lagrangian is [15]
L =
∑
𝛼
1
2m𝛼̇⃗q
2
𝛼−V(⃗q𝛼) + 𝜀0
2 ∫
{ ̇⃗a
2(⃗r) −c2(∇× ⃗a(⃗r))2}
d3⃗r + ∫
⃗j(⃗r) ⋅⃗a(⃗r)d3⃗r
−∫𝜌(⃗r)𝜙(⃗r)d3⃗r,
(8.1)
a sum of particle, field, and interaction terms, where V(⃗q𝛼) is the potential energy
operator. Appearing in the interaction term of Eq. (8.1) are the charge and current
density 𝜌(⃗r) and ⃗j(⃗r), respectively. Introduction of 𝜙(⃗r) and ⃗a(⃗r) and re-expressing
Maxwell’s equations in terms of these quantities guarantee flexibility in the choice
of gauge function that maybe chosen, thereby ensuring that the microscopic electric
and magnetic field vectors, ⃗e(⃗r) and ⃗b(⃗r), remain invariant [16]. A gauge that confers
special advantages in the construction of the theory is the one in which div ⃗a(⃗r) = 0,
known as the Coulomb, radiation or transverse gauge. Decomposing any vector field
into its parallel and perpendicular components via application of Helmholtz’s theorem
and substituting for the electromagnetic potentials and fields in Maxwell’s equations,
it is found that the Coulombic and solenoidal fields are completely decoupled: ⃗e∥=
−∇𝜙and ⃗e⊥= −̇⃗a. Thus 𝜙(⃗r) satisfies Poisson’s equation and ⃗a(⃗r) the wave equation
with transverse current ⃗j⊥(⃗r), as its source. As a consequence, the interaction term in
Eq. (8.1) therefore simplifies to ∫⃗j⊥(⃗r) ⋅⃗a(⃗r)d3⃗r.
That the Lagrangian (Eq. 8.1) with modified Coulomb gauge interaction term
constitutes an acceptable function depends on whether or not it leads to the correct
equations of motion. Invoking Hamilton’s principle, and applying the calculus of
variations yields the Euler-Lagrange equations [17]
d
dt
𝜕L
𝜕̇q𝛼
−𝜕L
𝜕q𝛼
= 0,
𝛼= 1, 2, … , N,
(8.2)
for a system of particles with N degrees of freedom. For the electromagnetic field,
an analogous relation ensues but with an additional term that accounts for spa-
tial variation of the continuous field variable. It is found that for the particles the
Lagrangian gives rise to Newton’s equations of motion with extra Lorentz force law
terms describing the coupling of charged particles to the transverse radiation field,
while the vector potential satisfies the inhomogeneous wave equation with trans-
verse current as its source, thereby confirming the initial choice of the Lagrangian.
From inspection of the Lagrangian it is seen that the dynamical variables are the
coordinates and velocities of the particles, ⃗q𝛼and ̇⃗q𝛼, and of the field, ⃗a(⃗r) and ̇⃗a(⃗r),
respectively. The next step in the development involves the evaluation of particle and
field canonical momenta, ⃗p𝛼= 𝜕L∕𝜕̇⃗q𝛼, and ⃗Π(⃗r) = 𝜕L∕𝜕̇⃗a(⃗r), and the construction
of the Hamiltonian function via
H = Σ𝛼⃗p𝛼⋅̇⃗q𝛼+ ∫
⃗Π(⃗r) ⋅̇⃗a(⃗r)d3⃗r −L,
(8.3)

MOLECULAR QED: PRINCIPLE OF MINIMAL ELECTROMAGNETIC COUPLING
233
after eliminating the velocities in favor of the momenta. The resulting Hamiltonian
is called the minimal-coupling Hamiltonian, and is given explicitly by [15,18–22]
Hmin = Σ𝛼
1
2m𝛼
{⃗p𝛼−e𝛼⃗a(⃗q𝛼)}2 + V(⃗q) + 1
2𝜀0 ∫{⃗Π2(⃗r) + 𝜀2
0c2(∇× ⃗a(⃗r))2}d3⃗r.
(8.4)
To facilitate application of Eq. (8.4) to atomic and molecular systems, the charged
particles 𝛼are grouped into aggregates 𝜉constituting a bound framework, and a sum
taken over species 𝜉yields a many-body Hamiltonian. Note that V(⃗q) in Eq. (8.4)
is composed of both intramolecular and intermolecular contributions. Electronic
and nuclear degrees of freedom are separated at this point and the latter are taken
to be stationary. This approximation is easily justified on comparing the mass of
the electron to that of the nuclear particles. It is clearly unnecessarily restrictive if
vibrational effects are to be examined or the dynamics of chemical and biological
reactions are to be studied, but can be readily relaxed [23].
The final step involves promotion of the classical variables to their quantum
mechanical operator form [24], thereby yielding the quantum electrodynamical
minimal-coupling Hamiltonian for the interaction of matter with electromagnetic
radiation. The particle and field operators satisfy the equal-time commutation
relations
[qi(𝛼)(𝜉), pj(𝛽)(𝜁)] = iℏ𝛿ij𝛿𝛼𝛽𝛿𝜉𝜁
(8.5)
and
[ai(⃗r), Πj(⃗r′)] = iℏ𝛿⊥
ij (⃗r −⃗r′),
(8.6)
respectively, where 𝛿⊥
ij (⃗r) is the transverse delta-function dyadic, and i and j denote
Cartesian tensor components in a space-fixed frame of reference, with the Einstein
summation convention being adopted for repeated indices. The procedure described
above is formally known as canonical quantization and, as a means for going from
classical to quantum mechanics, is widespread. It is worth pointing out that the
familiar ′⃗p ⋅⃗a′ and ′⃗a2′ interaction terms associated with the minimal-coupling
Hamiltonian (Eq. 8.4) follow on expanding the first term. Moreover, it is evident
that including the radiation field at the outset in the classical Lagrangian will nec-
essarily entail its quantization once the Hamiltonian operator form is arrived at.
The electromagnetic field contribution is given by the last term in Eq. (8.4) and is
written in canonical form. On using the definition ⃗b(⃗r) = ∇× ⃗a(⃗r) and the relation
⃗Π(⃗r) = −𝜀0⃗e⊥(⃗r) in minimal-coupling, the radiation field Hamiltonian in this frame-
work may be re-expressed in terms of microscopic transverse electric and magnetic
fields as
Hmin
rad = 𝜀0
2 ∫{⃗e⊥2(⃗r) + c2⃗b2(⃗r)}d3⃗r.
(8.7)

234
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
Of historical note is that Born, Heisenberg ,and Jordan [25] realized in 1926 that
a mode description of classical electromagnetic radiation confined to a fixed volume
V is equivalent to a mechanically oscillating system. This led Dirac [3] to quantize
the free radiation field in the following year by expressing it in terms of a collection
of non-interacting harmonic oscillator Hamiltonians,
Hrad =
∑
⃗k,𝜆
1
2
{
p(𝜆)2
⃗k
+ m𝜔2q(𝜆)2
⃗k
}
,
(8.8)
one for each mode (⃖⃗k, 𝜆) of the radiation field, where ⃖⃗k symbolizes the direction of
propagation or wavevector, and 𝜆is the polarization index. To facilitate quantization,
Dirac worked in the occupation number representation and introduced the bosonic
lowering and raising operators, a(𝜆)(⃖⃗k) and a†(𝜆)(⃖⃗k), which depend on the canonically
conjugate dynamical variables and, respectively, decrease and increase by one the
number of particles of light of mode (⃖⃗k, 𝜆)—the photons. Hence, Eq. (8.8) could be
rewritten in quantum mechanical form as
Hrad =
∑
⃗k,𝜆
{a†(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)a(𝜆)(⃖⃗k) + 1
2}ℏ𝜔,
(8.9)
where 𝜔= ck is the circular frequency and a(𝜆)(⃖⃗k) and a†(𝜆)(⃖⃗k) obey the commutator
relation
[a(𝜆)(⃖⃗k), a†(𝜆′)(⃗k′)] = 𝛿𝜆𝜆′𝛿⃗k⃖⃗k′,
(8.10)
all other combinations vanishing. The factor a†a is the number operator, whose
expectation value gives the number of quanta present. Hence, in this second quantized
formalism, the eigenvalue spectrum of the quantized electromagnetic field is easily
seen to be (n + 1
2)ℏ𝜔, n = 0, 1, 2, …, where n designates the number of photons.
Each annihilation and creation operator acts on a number state of the field, which is
represented by the ket |n(⃖⃗k, 𝜆) >, as follows:
a(𝜆)(⃗k)|n(⃗k, 𝜆) >=
{0, n = 0
n1∕2|(n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆) >, n = 1, 2, …
(8.11a)
a†(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)|n(⃖⃗k, 𝜆) >= (n + 1)1∕2|(n + 1)(⃖⃗k, 𝜆) >, n = 0, 1, 2, …
(8.11b)
It is readily apparent that the field state in which n = 0 for all radiation modes
corresponds to the electromagnetic vacuum. Even though there is a complete absence
of photons, the field still possesses energy, 1
2ℏ𝜔per mode. A photon cannot be anni-
hilated in this state, but it can be created via action of the a† operator. This emission
process ultimately gives rise to a number of observable phenomena that obviously

MULTIPOLAR HAMILTONIAN
235
require quantization of the electromagnetic field for their proper explanation and
computation, and are collectively attributed to vacuum field fluctuations and zero-
point energy [26]. A few of these manifestations will be examined in the sections
to follow.
The Maxwell field operators may be expanded as a mode sum in terms of a and
a† as in
⃖⃗e⊥(⃗r) = i
∑
⃗k,𝜆
(
ℏck
2𝜀0V
)1∕2
[⃖⃗e(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)a(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)ei⃗k.⃗r −⃖⃗e
(𝜆)
(⃖⃗k)a†(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)e−i⃗k.⃗r]
(8.12)
and
⃖⃗b(⃗r) = i
∑
⃗k,𝜆
(
ℏk
2𝜀0cV
)1∕2
[⃖⃗b(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)a(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)ei⃗k.⃗r −⃖⃗b
(𝜆)
(⃖⃗k)a†(𝜆)(⃖⃗k)e−i⃗k.⃗r],
(8.13)
where ⃖⃗e(𝜆)(⃖⃗k) and ⃖⃗b(𝜆)(⃖⃗k) = ̂k × ⃖⃗e(𝜆)(⃖⃗k) are complex unit electric and magnetic polar-
ization vectors and the overbar signifies the complex conjugate quantity. Quantization
occurs in a box of volume V, which limits the allowed values of the wavevector in each
of the three spatial directions to a triple of integers and applies to two modes of the
vector field, the third component being the direction of propagation itself. The oper-
ators (Eqs. 8.12 and 8.13) are normalized to reproduce the correct electromagnetic
field energy.
In principle, the quantum electrodynamical minimal-coupling Hamiltonian
(Eq. 8.4) can be employed to solve any problem involving the interaction of elec-
tromagnetic radiation with matter, as well as situations involving coupling between
atoms and molecules, as is frequently done so in solid-state physics. In practice,
however, in many cases its adoption proves to be difficult. This is because of the
appearance of particle momentum and vector potential operators in the interaction
terms, along with the presence of the cumbersome static interparticle Coulomb term
when the application involves two or more material bodies. An alternative Hamil-
tonian, one that offers many advantages when employed, and is now more often
the preferred option, is the multipolar coupling Hamiltonian. This may also be con-
structed on its own right from first principles, beginning with an appropriate classical
Lagrangian. Alternatively, the minimal-coupling Hamiltonian may be transformed.
This is outlined in the next section.
8.3
MULTIPOLAR HAMILTONIAN
Conversion of the minimal-coupling Hamiltonian to its more widely applicable mul-
tipolar form may be accomplished by application of a quantum canonical trans-
formation to the former [24]. Under this transformation, the Heisenberg operator
equations of motion and commutator relations for the canonically conjugate dynami-
cal variables remain unaltered. Formally, this is analogous to the situation in classical

236
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
mechanics [17], where a dynamical system described by a Hamiltonian function is
subject to a contact transformation. In this case, Hamilton’s canonical equations and
the Poisson bracket do not change. A transformation that can be employed between
two operators to affect the change min →mult is of the form
Hmult = eiSHmine−iS.
(8.14)
The specific choice of generating function S that carries this out [12, 27–30] is
when
S = 1
ℏ∫⃖⃗p⊥(⃗r) ⋅⃖⃗a(⃗r)d3⃗r,
(8.15)
where ⃖⃗p⊥(⃗r) is the transverse electric polarization field. On introducing a reference
point ⃗R𝜉associated with centre 𝜉, about which an electric multipole moment expan-
sion can be made, this field is defined as [28]
⃖⃗p⊥(⃗r) =
∑
𝛼,𝜉
e𝛼(⃖⃗q𝛼(𝜉) −⃖⃗R𝜉)
1
∫
0
𝛿(⃗r −⃖⃗R𝜉−𝜆(⃖⃗q𝛼(𝜉) −⃖⃗R𝜉))d𝜆.
(8.16)
It is interesting to note that since S is a function of the generalized coordinates
only, they remain invariant, with only the canonically conjugate particle and field
momenta being transformed. The transformed variables are given by
⃗pmult
𝛼
(𝜉) = ⃗pmin
𝛼
(𝜉) + e⃗a(⃗q𝛼(𝜉)) −∫⃗n𝛼(𝜉; ⃗r) × ⃗b(⃗r)d3⃗r,
(8.17)
and
⃗Πmult(⃗r) = ⃗Πmin(⃗r) −⃖⃗p⊥(⃗r),
(8.18)
where ⃖⃗n𝛼(𝜉;⃗r) is the vector field
⃗n𝛼(𝜉; ⃗r) = −e(⃗qa(𝜉) −⃗R𝜉)
1
∫
0
𝜆𝛿(⃗r −⃗R𝜉−𝜆(⃗qa(𝜉) −⃗R𝜉))d𝜆.
(8.19)
Substituting for the new dynamical variables into the minimal-coupling Hamilto-
nian (Eq. 8.4) yields the multipolar form [15,18–22,27,29,30]
Hmult =
∑
𝜉
[
1
2m
∑
𝛼
{
⃗p𝛼(𝜉) + ∫⃗n𝛼(𝜉; ⃗r) × ⃗b(⃗r)d3⃗r
}2
+ V(𝜉)
]
+ 1
2𝜀0 ∫
{[
⃗Π(⃗r) + ⃗p⊥(⃗r)
]2
+ 𝜀2
0c2(∇× ⃗a(⃗r))2
}
d3⃗r +
∑
𝜉<𝜁
Vinter(𝜉, 𝜁),
(8.20)

MULTIPOLAR HAMILTONIAN
237
where the Coulomb potential has been decomposed into intramolecular and inter-
molecular contributions, with the latter one given by the last term in Eq. (8.20).
Inspection of the multipolar Hamiltonian reveals that there is a term which is pro-
portional to ⃗p⊥2(⃗r), and which is composed of intramolecular and intermolecular
terms. It is remarkable that the intermolecular part exactly cancels the intermolecular
Coulomb potential term ∑
𝜉<𝜁Vinter(𝜉, 𝜁), leaving behind an intramolecular trans-
verse polarization squared contribution [19]. On employing Eqs. (8.17) and (8.18),
the multipolar Hamiltonian (Eq. 8.20) becomes
Hmult = Hmult
mol + Hmult
rad + Hmult
int
+ 1
2𝜀0 ∫
∑
𝜉
|⃗p⊥(𝜉; ⃗r)|
2d3⃗r,
(8.21)
where the first three individual terms are the familiar molecular Hamiltonian,
Hmult
mol =
∑
𝜉
{
1
2m
∑
𝛼
⃗p2
𝛼(𝜉) + V(𝜉)
}
,
(8.22)
the Hamiltonian for the radiation field,
Hmult
rad =
1
2𝜀0 ∫{⃗d⊥2(⃗r) + 𝜀2
0c2⃗b2(⃗r)}d3⃗r,
(8.23)
and that for the radiation-molecule coupling Hamiltonian,
Hmult
int
= −𝜀−1
0 ∫⃗p(r) ⋅⃗d⊥(⃗r)d3⃗r −∫
⃗m(⃗r) ⋅⃗b(⃗r)d3⃗r
+ 1
2 ∫oij(⃗r, ⃗r′)bi(⃗r)bj(⃗r′)d3⃗rd3⃗r′.
(8.24)
It is interesting to note the presence of the transverse displacement field, ⃗d⊥(⃗r), in
the last two expressions. This is a direct consequence of the multipolar formalism,
where from relation (8.18) it is seen that the canonically conjugate field momentum,
⃗Πmult(⃗r) = −𝜀0⃗e⊥(⃗r) −⃗p⊥(⃗r) = −⃗d⊥(⃗r), and whose mode expansion is
⃗d⊥(⃗r) = i
∑
⃗k,𝜆
(ℏck𝜀0
2V
)1∕2
[⃗e(𝜆)(⃗k)a(𝜆)(⃗k)ei⃗k⋅⃗r −̄⃗e
(𝜆)(⃗k)a†(𝜆)(⃗k)e−i⃗k⋅⃗r].
(8.25)
Rather than the electromagnetic potentials, the multipolar Hamiltonian is
expressed entirely in terms of Maxwell fields. The magnetization, ⃗m(⃗r), and

238
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
diamagnetization, oij(⃗r, ⃗r′), fields appearing in the interaction Hamiltonian (Eq. 8.24)
are defined as
⃗m(⃗r) = 1
2m
∑
𝜉,𝛼
{⃗n𝛼(𝜉; ⃗r) × ⃗p𝛼(𝜉) −⃗p𝛼(𝜉) × ⃗n𝛼(𝜉; ⃗r)}
(8.26)
and
oij(⃗r, ⃗r′) =
∑
𝜉,𝜁
1
m𝜀ikl𝜀jmlnk(𝜉; ⃗r)nm(𝜁; ⃗r′),
(8.27)
respectively. It is convenient to expand the electric polarization, magnetization, and
diamagnetization fields in a Taylor series about ⃗R𝜉and retain the first few terms. The
interaction Hamiltonian (Eq. 8.24) then becomes
Hmult
int (𝜉) = −𝜀−1
0 ⃗𝜇(𝜉) ⋅⃗d⊥(⃗R𝜉) −𝜀−1
0 Qij(𝜉)∇jd⊥
i (⃗R𝜉) −⃗m(𝜉) ⋅⃗b(⃗R𝜉)
+ e2
8m
∑
𝛼
{(⃗q𝛼(𝜉) −⃗R𝜉) × ⃗b(⃗R𝜉)}2 + ⋯,
(8.28)
a sum of familiar electric dipole, electric quadrupole, magnetic dipole, and lowest
order diamagnetic coupling terms. From inspection of Hmult
int
it is seen that atoms and
molecules couple directly to the electromagnetic fields through their molecular multi-
pole moments. Interaction between particles occurs exclusively through the exchange
of transverse photons, which propagate at the speed of light and are properly retarded
since the Maxwell fields ⃗d⊥(⃗r) and ⃗b(⃗r) are strictly causal. All static interparticle
interaction terms have been eliminated. Individual or collective contributions due to
specific multipole moment terms are easily identified and extracted.
The contribution to Hmult arising from the one-center transverse electric polariza-
tion, the last term written in Eq. (8.21), does not depend on the electromagnetic field
and so can be ignored in the calculation of most radiative processes. For interactions
involving self-energy corrections, however, such as the Lamb shift [9,19,31], it must
be retained.
A brief outline was given above of how the multipolar Hamiltonian could be
obtained from the minimal-coupling one by performing a canonical transformation.
This is not the only way of deriving Hmult. Another approach is to modify the minimal-
coupling Lagrangian (Eq. 8.1) so as to obtain an equivalent Lagrangian, Lmult, by
adding to the former the time derivative of a function of the coordinates and the time
only [12, 32, 33]. Such an addition leaves the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion
invariant. It can be shown [19, 22] that the function, f, and the generator, S, used in
the canonical transformation are related via f = −ℏS. Hence, from Eq. (8.15)
Lmult = Lmin −d
dt ∫⃗p⊥(⃗r) ⋅⃗a(⃗r)d3⃗r.
(8.29)

MULTIPOLAR HAMILTONIAN
239
By carrying out the canonical quantization procedure, the multipolar Hamiltonian
is evaluated via
Hmult =
∑
𝜉,𝛼
⃗p𝛼(𝜉) ⋅⃗q𝛼(𝜉) + ∫
⃗Π(⃗r) ⋅⃗a(⃗r)d3⃗r −Lmult,
(8.30)
yielding Eq. (8.20).
For the sake of completeness, it should be pointed out that the transformation
from minimal to multipolar-coupling frameworks may also be achieved by effecting
a gauge transformation on Lmin when the scalar and vector potential are written in
line integral form in the Coulomb gauge. Altering the curve changes the polarization
and magnetization fields in a particular way that generates an equivalent multipolar
Lagrangian. Further details may be found in References 34–36.
In addition to the texts already cited on the subject, there are other notable books
that treat foundational aspects of the quantum theory of radiation–matter interaction
[37–41], as well as a number of comprehensive review articles [42–48], many of
which also deal with applications.
The quantum mechanical solution of the interacting radiation–matter system,
described in either minimal- or multipolar-coupling versions of the theory, represents
a formidable problem. A standard method of solution makes use of the fact that
the non-relativistic coupling between electrons and photons is small compared to
the magnitude of Coulomb fields present within atoms and molecules. Hence, the
interaction Hamiltonian is taken to be a small perturbation on the system, and the
total Hamiltonian is divided according to
H = H0 + Hint,
(8.31)
where the unperturbed Hamiltonian, H0, is a sum of molecular and radiation field
terms
H0 = Hmin∕mult
mol
+ Hmin∕mult
rad
,
(8.32)
and the interaction Hamiltonians in minimal- and multipolar-coupling schemes are
given by
Hmin
int = e
m
∑
𝜉,𝛼
⃗p𝛼(𝜉) ⋅⃗a(⃗q𝛼(𝜉)) + e2
2m
∑
𝜉,𝛼
⃗a2(⃗q𝛼(𝜉)) + Vinter,
(8.33)
and Eq. (8.24), respectively, remembering to add the final term on the right-hand side
of Eq. (8.21) to Eq. (8.24) when computing self-energy corrections. It is important to
note that if Hint vanishes the unperturbed Hamiltonian is separable. Its eigenfunctions
are a product of wavefunctions for the non-interacting molecular and radiation field
subsystems. The former are assumed known from quantum chemistry and denoted by
a ket containing an appropriate label (quantum number) such as |m> for an atom or
molecule in electronic state with quantum number m. As mentioned earlier, number

240
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
states are used to quantify the number of photons of a particular mode in the free
radiation field via the ket |n(⃗k, 𝜆) >. The total energy is therefore given by the sum
of the component eigenergies, Em + nℏck. Thus, the eigenvalue solution to the unper-
turbed problem is
H0|m > |n(⃗k, 𝜆) >= (Em + nℏck)|m > |n(⃗k, 𝜆) >,
(8.34)
and hence the unperturbed molecule-field product state |m; n(⃗k, 𝜆) > may be
employed as base states for the solution of the perturbed Hamiltonian (Eq. 8.31).
The dynamics are governed by the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation
iℏ𝜕
𝜕t|Ψ(t) >= H|Ψ(t) >,
(8.35)
in which the total system wavefunction, Ψ(t), is taken to be time-dependent, as
is characteristic of the Schr¨odinger picture. Since it is the effect of the interaction
Hamiltonian on the system that is of interest, it is convenient to isolate this contribution
via the introduction of an appropriate time evolution operator, U(tf , ti), which acts on
the state of the system at initial time ti, |Ψ(ti) >, giving the wavefunction at time t,
|Ψ(t) >= U(t, ti)|Ψ(ti) >. A power series solution for U(tf , ti) in terms of Hint is then
generated, from which the probability amplitude for a process occurring between
initial state |i> at ti to the final time tf when the system is in state |f> and is induced
by the perturbation is readily evaluated as
Mfi = < f|Hint|i > +
∑
I
< f|Hint|I >< I|Hint|i >
Ei −EI
+
∑
I,II
< f|Hint|II >< II|Hint|I >< I|Hint|i >
(Ei −EI)(Ei −EII)
+ ⋯
(8.36)
a sum of first-, second-, … , order terms in the perturbation operator [24,49], where
at the initial time, U(ti, ti) is taken to be unity. Quantum mechanical observables
then readily follow from application of Eq. (8.36). Diagrams depicting the time-
ordered sequence of photon absorption and emission events and the time evolution
of the material system facilitate the evaluation of a specific contribution to the matrix
element. These are modified forms [50] of the diagrams introduced by Feynman to
represent the total system propagator [51, 52]. Examples of time-ordered diagrams
will be given in the applications to follow, and their advantage as a book-keeping
device will become apparent when higher-order processes are considered.
It should be mentioned that an alternate visual depiction of electron–photon cou-
plings exists. Known as the state sequence representation [53], it has the advantage
that all possible time-orderings are contained in one diagram. In addition, seemingly
different physical processes can be described by a state sequence figure possessing
identical features and structural components, thereby providing useful insight into
the underlying inter-relatedness of a variety of phenomena. A formal mathematical

ONE-PHOTON ABSORPTION
241
scheme has been devised that allows the state sequence diagram to be drawn for
any particular radiation–molecule or intermolecular process that involves distinct or
indistinguishable photon creation and destruction events for prescribed initial and
final system states. Permutational calculus coupled with formal linkage rules enable
individual paths to be traced in space and time so that the evolution of the system
from |i> to |f> via appropriate intermediate states may be followed allowing the com-
plete diagram to be sketched. A single path corresponds to one time-ordered diagram
and a unique term in the contribution to the probability amplitude obtained from
time-dependent perturbation theory. The method has been successfully applied to a
number of different processes including linear absorption, emission and scattering
of light, second-harmonic generation [53], energy transfer and pooling [54–56], the
Casimir–Polder potential [57], and its modification by external radiation [58], being
especially beneficial for the treatment of higher-order processes for which the number
of time-ordered diagrams is frequently large. Identical results are of course obtained
no matter which pictorial representation is employed in any particular computation.
In what follows, only the more familiar time-ordered diagram methodology will be
used to illustrate processes of interest, while the reader interested in the state sequence
approach may consult the references cited in this paragraph for further details of the
latter representation.
Development of the theory thus far has been in the Schr¨odinger representation
of quantum mechanics in which the operators are time-independent and the states
evolve in time. Molecular QED has, however, also been formulated in the Heisenberg
picture [59,60]. Now the state vectors are stationary and the operators are dependent
on time. The time evolution is evaluated by solving the Heisenberg operator equation
of motion for the dynamical variable. Due to formal equivalence of this viewpoint
with the Hamiltonian description of classical mechanics, the Heisenberg picture is
often used to study a variety of processes associated with the QED Maxwell fields,
including observables such as the electromagnetic energy density and Poynting vector
[61], and intermolecular energy shifts via response theory [62–64]. Identical results
are of course obtained for any physical quantity computed in either the Schr¨odinger or
Heisenberg representations since the two pictures are related via a unitary transforma-
tion [24]. It is also worth noting that in the Heisenberg treatment of molecular QED,
the physical picture is one in which electron and photon wavefields interact, and the
techniques of second quantization are employed to describe their coupling in terms
of a many-particle occupation number representation, in the process highlighting the
duality of wave and particle viewpoints.
8.4
ONE-PHOTON ABSORPTION
Perhaps the most elementary process involving the interaction of radiation with matter
is the absorption of a single photon by an atom or molecule. A rigorous description is
furnished by the molecular QED approach and is detailed below, serving as a useful
introductory application of the theory, upon which more sophisticated processes are
ultimately based.

242
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
Consider a sample of N identical non-interacting atoms or molecules, all initially
in their ground electronic state |E0 > in the presence of a single mode laser. From
Eq. (8.21), after neglecting the transverse polarization term, the total Hamiltonian for
such a system is given by
H =
N
∑
𝜉=1
Hmol(𝜉) + Hrad+
N
∑
𝜉=1
Hint(𝜉),
(8.37)
a sum of familiar molecule, field, and interaction Hamiltonians, each term of which
was given explicitly in the previous section, either in the minimal-coupling or in the
multipolar scheme. On making the long-wavelength approximation, in which there
is no spatial variation of the vector potential over the dimensions of each absorber, it
is sufficient to retain the first term in the multipolar Hamiltonian (Eq. 8.28), namely
the electric dipole contribution,
Hint(𝜉) = −𝜀−1
0 ⃗𝜇(𝜉) ⋅⃗d⊥(⃗R𝜉),
(8.38)
where ⃗R𝜉denotes the position vector of body 𝜉. On employing a number state
representation for the radiation field, if each entity absorbs a single photon of mode
(⃗k, 𝜆) from the incident beam containing n photons and is subsequently excited to the
electronic state |Em > with energy Em, then the initial and final total system states
are written as
|i >= |n(⃗k, 𝜆) >
N
∏
𝜉=1
|E0 >
(8.39a)
and
|f >= |(n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆) > |Em(𝜉) >
N
∏
𝜁≠𝜉
|E0(𝜁) >,
(8.39b)
respectively. Overall, energy is conserved subject to the Bohr frequency condition
Em −E0 ≈ℏ𝜔. The time-ordered diagram shown in Figure 8.1 may be used to illus-
trate this fundamental process. Time progresses upward. The solid line denotes the
electronic state of the atom or molecule. The dashed line denotes the photon, with
only changes in the state of the radiation field being shown or written. Coupling
between matter and field occurs at the intersection of dashed and solid lines via Hint,
and is known as an interaction vertex. In this linear optical process, the matrix element
is given by the first-order term in Eq. (8.36)
Mfi(𝜉) =< f|Hint|i >=< (n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆)| < Em| −𝜀−1
0 ⃗𝜇(𝜉) ⋅⃗d⊥(⃗R𝜉)|E0 > |n(⃗k, 𝜆) >,
(8.40)

ONE-PHOTON ABSORPTION
243
(k,   )
λ
Hint
|E0> 
|Em>
FIGURE 8.1
Time-ordered diagram representing one-photon absorption.
where it has been assumed that absorption of the photon is equally likely at any
of the absorbing species. Hence on using the expansion for the transverse elec-
tric displacement field (Eq. 8.25) and the operator relation (Eq. 8.11a), the matrix
element is
Mfi(𝜉) = −i
(
nℏck
2𝜀0V
)1∕2
⃗e(𝜆)(⃗k) ⋅⃗𝜇m0(𝜉)ei⃗k⋅⃗R𝜉,
(8.41)
where the transition electric dipole moment is ⃗𝜇m0 (𝜉) =< Em| ⃗𝜇(𝜉) |E0 >. The tran-
sition rate is given by the Fermi golden rule,
Γ =
2𝜋𝜌f
ℏ
|Mfi(𝜉)|2,
(8.42)
which is applicable to transitions occurring between a discrete state and a continuum,
with 𝜌f the density of final states. In the present case, the final state is N-fold
degenerate. Summing over the rate for each individual absorption event yields the
total rate
Γ =
2𝜋𝜌f
ℏ
(
nℏck
2𝜀0V
) N
∑
𝜉=1
|⃗e(𝜆)(⃗k) ⋅⃗𝜇mo(𝜉)|2,
(8.43)
which holds for atoms or molecules in a fixed orientation relative to the field polar-
ization. For species in the fluid phase, where random orientations feature, rotational
averaging gives the isotropic rate formula
< Γ >=
(2𝜋N𝜌f
3ℏ
) (
nℏck
2𝜀0V
)
| ⃗𝜇m0|2,
(8.44)
with the angular brackets denoting the averaged quantity. It is straightforward to
express the rate (Eq. 8.44) in terms of the Einstein B coefficient. Recognizing that the
energy of the radiation field in the interval Δ𝜔is 𝜌f ℏΔ𝜔nℏ𝜔, or alternatively in terms

244
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
of the radiant energy density per unit frequency interval J(𝜔), 𝜌f = J(𝜔)V∕2𝜋nℏ2𝜔,
Eq. (8.44) becomes
< Γ >= NBJ(𝜔),
(8.45)
where
B =
1
6𝜀0ℏ2 | ⃗𝜇m0|2.
(8.46)
8.5
EMISSION OF LIGHT: SPONTANEOUS
AND STIMULATED PROCESSES
The second fundamental radiation-matter process, which together with single-photon
absorption forms the basis by which all other spectroscopic and particle–particle inter-
actions can be understood, is emission of radiation. This is of two types: spontaneous
and induced. The former requires the quantum theory of radiation for its proper
description and computation. The second phenomenon is the basis of laser light.
Both are examined below.
Consider an atom or molecule, initially in some excited electronic state |m>, with
energy Em. It is well known that such an entity will decay to the ground state |0>,
with energy E0, by either the spontaneous or stimulated emission of a photon. In the
former case the emitted radiation possesses arbitrary polarization and propagation
direction, which for convenience are specified by the mode label (⃗k, 𝜆). Hence, the
initial and final radiation-matter states are
|i >= |Em; 0 >
(8.47a)
and
|f >= |E0; 1(⃗k, 𝜆) >,
(8.47b)
where the ket |0> denotes the state of the radiation field which contains no photons,
corresponding to the electromagnetic vacuum, bearing in mind that this coupling
is never actually switched off at any time. Diagrammatically, spontaneous emission
can be pictured as in Figure 8.2. Remaining within the electric dipole approximation
through use of the coupling Hamiltonian (Eq. 8.38), along with the use of Eq. (8.25)
and the result for the action of the photon creation operator on a number state of the
field (Eq. 8.11b), the first-order matrix element is found to be
M(1)
fi
=< 1(⃗k, 𝜆); E0| −𝜀−1
0 ⃗𝜇⋅⃗d⊥(⃗R)|Em; 0 >= i
(
ℏck
2𝜀0V
)1∕2
̄⃗e
(𝜆)(⃗k) ⋅⃗𝜇0me−i⃗k ⋅⃗R.
(8.48)

EMISSION OF LIGHT: SPONTANEOUS AND STIMULATED PROCESSES
245
(k,   )
Hint
|Em>
|E0>
λ
FIGURE 8.2
Spontaneous emission of a photon from an excited atom.
With the density of final states for emission into a cone of solid angle dΩ cen-
tered around the wavevector ̂k and given the polarization 𝜆expressed as 𝜌f =
k2dΩV∕(2𝜋)3ℏc, the total spontaneous emission rate after substituting Eq. (8.48)
and 𝜌f into the Fermi golden rule (Eq. 8.42) is
< Γ >=
k3
3𝜋𝜀0ℏ| ⃗𝜇0m|2,
(8.49)
for isotropic atoms, where summation over the two polarizations and integration over
all spherical angles has been carried out. From the rate (Eq. 8.49), the Einstein A
coefficient is readily seen to be
A = 2k3
3𝜀0h| ⃗𝜇0m|2.
(8.50)
It is important to note that the spontaneous emission rate, Γ, and the radiative
lifetime, 𝜏, are related via Γ𝜏= 1. Thus, the vacuum electromagnetic field, whose
quantization gives rise to zero-point energy of 1
2ℏ𝜔per mode, produces observable
effects, in this case a measurable spontaneous emission rate. Further, the rate above
applies to matter in free space. If the total system resides in a cavity [65], the rate
differs considerably due to changes in the field energy density and its mode structure.
In the case of stimulated emission, action of an applied electromagnetic field of a
particular mode induces emission of a photon with identical polarization and direc-
tion of propagation by an excited atom or molecule, which undergoes a downward
transition, possibly to the lowest electronic level. Figure 8.2 may be used to illustrate
the effect, bearing in mind that the laser contains n photons of mode (⃗k, 𝜆). Hence,
the initial and final states (Eq. 8.47) are modified to read
|i >= |Em; n(⃗k, 𝜆) >,
(8.51a)
and
|f >= |E0; (n + 1)(⃗k, 𝜆) >,
(8.51b)

246
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
for coherent emission with the atom populating the ground electronic state finally.
Energy conservation is given by Em0 ≈ℏ𝜔. First-order perturbation theory yields the
matrix element
Mfi = i
((n + 1)ℏ𝜔
2𝜀0V
)1∕2
̄⃗e
(𝜆)(⃗k) ⋅⃗𝜇0me−i⃗k⋅⃗R,
(8.52)
from which the isotropic transition rate is easily found to be
< Γ >=
(2𝜋N𝜌f
3ℏ
) ((n + 1)ℏ𝜔
2𝜀0V
)
| ⃗𝜇m0|2,
(8.53)
which can also be expressed in terms of the Einstein B coefficient (Eq. 8.46) via
Eq. (8.45). Stimulated emission is clearly evident on account of the factor n+1.
Obviously, the spontaneous emission rate is recovered on letting n →0 in Eq. (8.53).
For large n, the contribution from induced emission is larger than that arising from
the spontaneous term. When a system subject to irradiation is at equilibrium, the rates
of upward and downward transitions are of course equal.
8.6
LINEAR LIGHT-SCATTERING: THE KRAMERS–HEISENBERG
DISPERSION FORMULA
Having examined in the two previous sections the absorption and emission of light,
respectively, it is now possible to treat the processes that simultaneously involve both
of these types of photonic events. One of the most elementary is the scattering of
light, of which two of the best-known examples include Rayleigh scattering and the
Raman effect. Before going on to study these phenomena, a general expression is
obtained for light scattering by an atom–the Kramers–Heisenberg dispersion formula
[66,67].
Consider an atom initially in the electronic state |p>, absorbing a photon from a
radiation field containing n photons of mode (⃗k, 𝜆) and emitting a photon of mode
(⃗k′, 𝜆′) and ending up in the electronic state |q>. Therefore, the initial and final total
system states are, respectively,
|i >= |p; n(⃗k, 𝜆) >
(8.54a)
and
|f >= |q; (n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆), 1(⃗k′, 𝜆′) >.
(8.54b)

LINEAR LIGHT-SCATTERING: THEKRAMERS–HEISENBERGDISPERSIONFORMULA
247
(b)
(a)
q 
′
′)
r 
p 
(k,
)
λ
λ
(k,
q 
(k,′
′)
r 
p 
(k,
)
λ
λ
FIGURE 8.3
Linear scattering of light.
Two diagrams can be sketched to represent the scattering, as shown in Figure 8.3,
reflecting the different ordering in time of the photon absorption and emission events.
Energy is conserved only between the initial and final states according to
Ep + ℏck = Eq + ℏck′.
(8.55)
Linear light scattering is a second-order process as seen by the two interaction
vertices in Figure 8.3. Hence, second-order time-dependent perturbation theory is
required for the computation of the matrix element,
M(2)
fi
=
∑
I
< f|Hint|I >< I|Hint|i >
Ei −EI
,
(8.56)
where the summation is executed over all intermediate states that connect |i> to |f>.
From Figure 8.3, these are easily seen to be
|Ia >= |Er; (n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆) >
(8.57a)
and
|Ib >= |Er; n(⃗k, 𝜆), 1(⃗k′, 𝜆′) >,
(8.57b)
the first of these corresponding to the case in which a photon of mode (⃗k, 𝜆) is
absorbed first and the atom is excited to the intermediate state |r> as illustrated in
part (a), while |Ib > represents the other possible time-ordering in which the photon
of mode (⃗k′, 𝜆′) is emitted first followed by absorption of the (⃗k, 𝜆) photon, with
the atom going through the same intermediate state |r>. There is no conservation
of energy condition applied to the intermediate states, their manifestation occurring
through processes that are termed virtual, and can be rationalized on the basis of the

248
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
time–energy uncertainty relation. Working within the electric dipole approximation,
the matrix element is readily evaluated using Eqs. (8.56) and (8.38), together with
states (Eqs. 8.54 and 8.57). Using the density of final states for emission of the
(⃗k′, 𝜆′) photon in a solid angle dΩ′ around ̂k′ and employing the Fermi golden rule,
the differential scattering cross-section is found to be
d𝜎
dΩ′ =
kk′3
16𝜋2𝜀2
0
||||||
∑
r
{
( ⃗𝜇qr ⋅̄⃗e
′)( ⃗𝜇rp ⋅⃗e)
Erp −ℏck
+ ( ⃗𝜇qr ⋅⃗e)( ⃗𝜇rp ⋅̄⃗e
′)
Erp + ℏck′
}||||||
2
,
(8.58)
which is the Kramers–Heisenberg dispersion formula [68]. In terms of the irradiance,
I, Eq. (8.58) can be written as
I(⃗k′) = dΓ
dΩ′ ℏck′ =
Ik′4
16𝜋2𝜀2
0
̄e′
ieje′
k̄el𝛼qp
ij (𝜔, −𝜔′)̄𝛼qp
kl (𝜔, −𝜔′),
(8.59)
where the second-rank tensor 𝛼qp
ij (𝜔, −𝜔′) is defined as
𝛼qp
ij (𝜔, −𝜔′) =
∑
r
{ 𝜇qr
i 𝜇rp
j
Erp −ℏ𝜔+
𝜇qr
j 𝜇rp
i
Erp + ℏ𝜔′
}
.
(8.60)
The result (Eq. 8.58) is now applied to two cases. In the first, the absorbed and
scattered photons are identical in energy and the atom remains in the same state. This
corresponds to Rayleigh scattering. In the second case, which gives rise to the Raman
effect, the scattering is inelastic and the atom changes the state.
Consider a sample of identical ground state atoms 𝜉undergoing elastic scattering of
radiation, for which |⃗k| = |⃗k′|, represented by the initial and final states, respectively,
|i >= |n(⃗k, 𝜆) >
∏
𝜉
|0(𝜉) >
(8.61a)
and
|f >= |(n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆), 1(⃗k′, 𝜆′) >
∏
𝜉
|0(𝜉) >.
(8.61b)
In the electric dipole approximation the matrix element is
Mfi = −
(
ℏck
2𝜀0V
)
n1∕2̄e′
iej𝛼00
ij (𝜔, −𝜔)
∑
𝜉
ei(⃗k−⃗k′) ⋅⃗R𝜉,
(8.62)

LINEAR LIGHT-SCATTERING: THEKRAMERS–HEISENBERGDISPERSIONFORMULA
249
where 𝛼00
ij (𝜔, −𝜔) is the ground state dynamic polarizability. In the so-called forward
scattering, ⃗k = ⃗k′, the phase factor in Eq. (8.62) is unity and the scattering is inde-
pendent of the position of the particles, being simply N times the single atom matrix
element. Hence, forward scattering is coherent and the intensity varies as the square
of the number of atoms,
I(⃗k′) = N2Ik′4
16𝜋2𝜀2
0
̄e′
ieje′
k̄el𝛼00
ij (𝜔, −𝜔)̄𝛼00
kl (𝜔, −𝜔).
(8.63)
For ⃗k ≠⃗k′, corresponding to non-forward scattering, Eq. (8.62) depends on the
positions of atoms forming the assembly. For low particle density and atoms dis-
tributed randomly in space, the scattered intensity is N times the single atom scattered
intensity and is said to be incoherent. It is given by expression (8.63) divided by N,
I(⃗k′) =
NIk4
16𝜋2𝜀2
0
|⃗e ⋅̄⃗e
′|2|𝛼(𝜔)|2,
(8.64)
where 𝛼(𝜔) is the atomic polarizability, and the intensity is dependent upon the
incident and scattered beam polarization. Regardless of whether scattering is forward
or non-forward, the characteristic 𝜔4 dependence of Rayleigh scattering is found.
Because dynamic molecular polarizability is orientation dependent, the matrix
element for Rayleigh scattering by a collection of molecules is of the form
Mfi = −
(
ℏck
2𝜀0V
)
n1∕2̄e′
iej
∑
𝜉
𝛼00
ij (𝜔, −𝜔; 𝜉)ei(⃗k−⃗k′) ⋅⃗R𝜉,
(8.65)
in contrast to expression (8.62). Thus, the modulus square produces two- as well
as one-center terms. For non-forward scattering, the two-center contributions vanish
when averaging over all relative intersite separation distances, leaving only one-center
terms to contribute to the scattered intensity, as in
I(⃗k′) =
NIk4
16𝜋2𝜀2
0
̄e′
ieje′
k̄el < 𝛼00
ij (𝜔, −𝜔)̄𝛼00
kl (𝜔, −𝜔) >,
(8.66)
where the angular brackets indicate an average over ground state dynamic molecular
polarizabilities. Unlike the case for atoms, for linearly polarized incident beam,
the polarization of radiation scattered by randomly oriented molecules is no longer
confined to the ⃗êk′−plane and is depolarized.
When the frequency of the emitted photon differs from that of the incident beam,
and the initial and final particle states are not identical, the scattering process is
known as the Raman effect [69]. The difference in frequency 𝜔′ −𝜔usually cor-
responds to characteristic vibrational and rotational frequencies associated with the
scattering center.

250
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
In order to treat molecular vibrational Raman scattering, it is advantageous to
invoke the Born–Oppenheimer approximation and separate the electronic and nuclear
degrees of freedom. Let the wavefunction of an electron in a state with quantum num-
ber s be 𝜓s(q, Q), where q denotes the set of electronic coordinates and the parameter
Q the normal coordinates of the nuclei. Thus, 𝜓s(q, Q), is known for fixed values
of Q. Let the vibrational wavefunction for an oscillator in the vth level of electronic
state s at nuclear coordinate Qk be given by 𝜙sv(Qk), the total wavefunction being
a product of electronic and nuclear wavefunctions, 𝜓s(q, Q)𝜙sv(Q). If the molecule
changes its vibrational state from v →w but remains in the electronic ground state
|0>, as in vibrational Raman scattering, the initial and final states can be written,
respectively, as
|i >= |𝜓0(q, Q) > |𝜙0v(Q) >
(8.67a)
and
|f >= |𝜓0(q, Q) > |𝜙0w(Q) >.
(8.67b)
From Eq. (8.59), the scattered intensity is
I(⃗k′) = NIk′4
16𝜋2𝜀2
0
̄e′
ieje′
k̄el𝛼0w,0v
ij
(𝜔, −𝜔′)̄𝛼0w,0v
kl
(𝜔, −𝜔′),
(8.68)
where the tensor 𝛼0w,0v
ij
is defined as
𝛼0w,0v
ij
(𝜔, −𝜔′) =
∑
r,x
{< 𝜙0w| < 𝜓0|𝜇i|𝜓r > |𝜙rx >< 𝜙rx| < 𝜓r|𝜇j|𝜓0 > |𝜙0v >
Er0 + 𝜀rx,0v −ℏ𝜔
+
< 𝜙0w| < 𝜓0|𝜇j|𝜓r > |𝜙rx >< 𝜙rx| < 𝜓r|𝜇i|𝜓0 > |𝜙0v >
Er0 + 𝜀rx,0v + ℏ𝜔′
}
,
(8.69)
where Er0 and 𝜀rx,0v refer to differences in electronic and vibrational energy, respec-
tively. The result (Eq. 8.68) holds for both resonant and non-resonant Raman scat-
tering, though the tensor (Eq. 8.69) may be simplified in the latter case on account
of |Er0 −ℏ𝜔| ≫0. For randomly oriented molecules, a variety of depolarization and
reversal ratios may be evaluated, as given in Section 6.5 of Reference 19.
As for other processes involving spectroscopic transitions, whether they are
observable or not ultimately depends on the derivation of pertinent selection rules.
For electric dipole coupling, for instance, the matrix element between two states,
< f| ⃗𝜇|i >, vanishes unless the direct product of the irreducible representations of
|i>, |f>, and ⃗𝜇spans the totally symmetric representation of the group. In general,
therefore, transitions that are infrared active are Raman inactive, and vice versa.

CHIROPTICAL EFFECTS
251
8.7
CHIROPTICAL EFFECTS
In all of the applications considered thus far it has been sufficient to work within
the electric dipole approximation. This is easily justified on the grounds that this
is the leading term for the coupling of a neutral species to electromagnetic radia-
tion, in general giving the dominant contribution to the probability amplitude. Hence
the succeeding terms in Hint (Eq. 8.28) such as the magnetic dipole and electric
quadrupole contributions, for example, are commonly neglected, being a factor of
the fine structure constant smaller in magnitude than ⃗𝜇. For many situations, however,
the electric dipole approximation is inadequate, and higher-order multipole moments
must be accounted for. One important class of problems where this is the case are
those involving the interaction of light with chiral molecules. Such species possess the
property of handedness, namely that their mirror image forms are non-superposable.
A characteristic feature of this type of structure is the absence of an improper rotation
axis. A consequence of the reduced symmetry is the relaxation of spectroscopic selec-
tion rules, with higher multipole moment transitions now allowed. These compounds
exhibit optical activity and their fundamental interactions with light have given rise
to a number of key chiroptical techniques such as optical rotation, circular dichroism,
and circular differential Rayleigh and Raman scattering, which are routinely used in
the determination of chemical and biochemical structures.
When radiation traverses a chiral medium, the angle of the plane of polarization,
𝜃, undergoes rotation. Taking the optically active substance to be transparent to
absorption, optical rotation may be understood in terms of forward scattering in
which the state of the molecule remains the same with only the polarization index of
radiation changing. A two-state model may therefore be adopted with
|i >= |n(⃗k, 𝛼) >,
(8.70a)
and
|f >= |(n −1)(⃗k, 𝛼), 1(⃗k, 𝛽) >,
(8.70b)
corresponding to an initial state where there are n photons of wavevector ⃗k and
polarization in a state “𝛼”, and finally n −1 of such photons together with one with a
polarization state “𝛽”. Coupling between these states is weak and occurs via virtual
transitions. Solution of the time-dependent 2 × 2 eigenvalue problem yields
|Ψ(t) >= {cos(Mfit∕ℏ)|𝛼> −sin(Mfit∕ℏ)|𝛽>}e−iEt∕ℏ,
(8.71)
for the state of the forward scattered beam, with E the photon energy. For small
clockwise rotation in the dilute medium approximation,
𝜃= n−1∕2 Mfil
ℏc ,
(8.72)

252
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
where the path length, l = ct. To leading (second) order, the matrix element for a fluid
sample undergoing transitions between states (Eq. 8.70) in the electric and magnetic
dipole approximation is
Mfi =
(
2ℏ2ck2
3𝜀0V
)
n1∕2 ∑
r
i Im ⃗𝜇0r ⋅⃗mr0
(ℏck)2 −E2
r0
,
(8.73)
where ∑
r |r > is a complete set of virtual molecular states. Inserting Eq. (8.73) in
(8.72) and defining the specific rotation, 𝜙as the rotation per unit path length of
sample yields the Rosenfeld–Condon formula [70]
𝜙= −2𝜂ℏk2
3𝜀0
∑
r
Im
⃗𝜇0r ⋅⃗mr0
(ℏck)2 −E2
r0
,
(8.74)
noting that for real wavefunctions ⃗𝜇0r is pure real and ⃗mr0 is pure imaginary, and
𝜂is the number of optically active molecules per unit volume of the sample. The
dependence of 𝜙on 𝜔= ck of the incident light is known as optical rotatory disper-
sion. Chirality of the sample is manifest by appearance of the pseudoscalar ⃗𝜇0r ⋅⃗mr0,
which changes sign when one enantiomer is replaced by its mirror-image form.
The difference in absorption of left (L)- and right (R)-circularly polarized light
by a chiral molecule is known as circular dichroism. It may also be computed using
the methods of molecular QED [71]. Let an optically active molecule, initially in the
ground electronic state, absorb a single, circularly polarized photon and be excited to
the electronic state |m>. Thus,
|i >= |E0; n(⃗k, L∕R) >,
(8.75a)
and
|f >= |Em; (n −1)(⃗k, L∕R) >,
(8.75b)
with Em0 ≈ℏck. Retaining only the electric and magnetic dipole coupling terms from
Eq. (8.28) since the electric dipole–quadrupole contribution to circular dichroism is
zero for an isotropic sample, the matrix element is evaluated to be
M(L∕R)
fi
= −i
(
nℏck
2𝜀0V
)1∕2
e(L∕R)
i
(⃗k)
[
𝜇0m
i
∓i
cmm0
i
]
,
(8.76)
for the molecule positioned at the origin, the upper and lower signs referring to L
and R circular polarizations, respectively, whose unit electric polarization vector is

CHIROPTICAL EFFECTS
253
⃗e(L∕R)(⃗k). From the Fermi golden rule, the difference in absorption rates for the two
forms of light is easily evaluated to be
< Γ(L) > −< Γ(R) >= −i
(8𝜋N
3ℏc
) (
nℏck
2𝜀0V
)
𝜌f ⃗𝜇0m ⋅⃗mm0,
(8.77)
where N is the number of absorbers, and the contribution dependent upon the square of
the transition electric or magnetic dipole moment is independent of the handedness of
the incident beam, and clearly vanishes, leaving behind the interference term between
these two moments. The result (Eq. 8.77) is also directly proportional to the scalar
product of ⃗𝜇0m and ⃗mm0 which is of opposite sign for enantiomers.
Achiral molecules also exhibit circular dichroism. This occurs in the presence
of a static magnetic field and is known as magnetic circular dichroism [72]. The
effect arises from the interference of the first-order matrix element for the electric
dipole allowed absorption of a single circularly polarized photon and the second-
order contribution where a magnetic field, ⃗B, is also applied. For randomly oriented
molecules, the circular differential absorption rate is
<Γ(L)> −<Γ(R)> =
(4𝜋N
3ℏ
) (
nℏck
2𝜀0V
)
𝜌f (⃗B ⋅⃗k)𝜀𝜆𝜇v𝜇m0
𝜆Im
∑
r
{𝜇mr
𝜇̄mr0
v
Er0
+
̄mmr
v 𝜇r0
𝜇
Er0 −ℏck
}
(8.78)
with a |m> ←|0> transition taking place in the achiral species. Circular dichroism
vanishes when the magnetic field is perpendicular to the direction of propagation of
the incident radiation and is a maximum when these two vectors are parallel to one
another.
Irradiation of achiral molecules by an intense beam of circularly polarized light
can also result in optical rotation and circular dichroism. The former is a coherent
four-photon process in which circularly polarized light is scattered but otherwise
unchanged, and a second collinear plane-polarized beam changes its polarization
state. It corresponds to the process
|E0; n1(⃗k, L), (n2 −1)(⃗k2, 𝛼), 1(⃗k2, 𝛽) >←|E0; n1(⃗k1, L), n2(⃗k2, 𝛼) >.
(8.79)
Laser-induced circular dichroism is described as
|Em; n1(⃗k1, L), (n2 −1)(⃗k2, L∕R) >←|E0; n1(⃗k1, L), n2(⃗k2, L∕R) >,
(8.80)
and corresponds to a three-photon process in which the probe beam (⃗k2, L∕R) is
resonant with the transition m ←0, in the achiral molecule, and chirality is induced
by the non-resonant circularly polarized laser (⃗k2, L). The phenomenon arises from
interference of one- and three-photon amplitudes. Further details of these two effects
may be found in Chapter 9 of Reference 19.

254
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
Chiral molecules also scatter circularly polarized light at different rates, as exem-
plified by circular differential Rayleigh and Raman processes. As for other chiroptical
effects, theory is developed by including higher multipole moment terms, with a non-
vanishing contribution arising from electric quadrupole coupling, in a systematic
extension of the method [73] outlined in Section 8.6. For non-forward Rayleigh
scattering, with the initial and final states
|i >= |E0; n(⃗k, L∕R) >,
(8.81a)
and
|f >= |E0; (n −1)(⃗k, L∕R), 1(⃗k′, 𝜆) >,
(8.81b)
respectively, and circular differential effects arise from interference between pure
electric dipole and mixed electric-magnetic dipole and electric dipole–quadrupole
amplitudes. The former contribution to the differential elastic scattered intensity for
an isotropic system is
I(L →𝜆) −I(R →𝜆) = −
I0k4
240𝜋2𝜀2
0c
Im[(1 −3|̂k ⋅⃗e(𝜆)|2)𝛼𝜆𝜆(𝜔) ̄G𝜇𝜇(𝜔)
+ (7 −|̂k ⋅⃗e(𝜆)|2)𝛼𝜆𝜇(𝜔) ̄G𝜆𝜇(𝜔)
−5(̂k ⋅̂k′){𝛼𝜆𝜆(𝜔)G𝜇𝜇(𝜔) −𝛼𝜆𝜇(𝜔)G𝜆𝜇(𝜔)}],
(8.82)
where I0 is the power per unit area of the incident beam and Gij(𝜔) is the dynamic
mixed electric–magnetic dipole polarizability. The analogous electric quadrupole-
dependent contribution is
I(L →𝜆) −I(R →𝜆) = −
I0k5
240𝜋2𝜀2
0
(1 −3|̂k ⋅⃗e(𝜆)|2 −3(̂k ⋅̂k′))𝜀𝜆v𝜋𝛼𝜆𝜇(𝜔)Av𝜋𝜇(𝜔),
(8.83)
where Aijk(𝜔) is the frequency-dependent mixed electric dipole–quadrupole polar-
izability tensor. The differential intensities (Eqs. 8.82 and 8.83) are about one-
thousandth that of the total Rayleigh intensity (Eq. 8.63). Raman scattering by chiral
molecules follows in a straightforward manner as presented in the previous section.
In addition to optical activity occurring at one center, chiral discriminatory effects
can also manifest in two or more bodies, which may or may not be coupled inter-
molecularly. Optical rotation, circular dichroism, as well as Rayleigh and Raman
scattering have all been evaluated in the so-called two-group model, where two achi-
ral functional groups or chromophores are well separated, with chirality arising from
their relative placement and orientation. Frequently the electric dipole approximation

TWO-PHOTON ABSORPTION
255
is sufficient to describe transitions taking place within each center. For two identical
functional groups, the rotationally averaged circular differential absorption rate is
< ΔΓ(±) >= ± J(𝜔)
2𝜀0ℏ2
(coskR
kR
−sinkR
k2R2
)
[ ⃗𝜇m0(A) × ⃗𝜇m0(B)] ⋅̂R,
(8.84)
for the two stationary states
1
√
2{|EA
m, EB
0 > ±|EA
0 , EB
m >} and where J(𝜔) is the radiant
energy density per unit frequency interval of the incident radiation. Thus, the circular
dichroism is equal and opposite for the symmetric and anti-symmetric states.
Optical activity can also be induced in an achiral species via intermolecular cou-
pling with a chiral body in close proximity. Circular dichroism or circularly polar-
ized luminescence occurs at a frequency characteristic of a transition in the achiral
molecule with the chiral entity being transparent. Electric dipole transitions take place
in the achiral species while both electric and magnetic dipole ones occur to leading
order in the chiral body. Interference between first- and third-order terms (in the
absence and presence of interparticle coupling) yields circular dichroism transition
rates [74]. With continuing technological advances being made in the generation of
coherent sources of laser light, new chiroptical spectroscopies have been proposed
and developed, especially those involving nonlinear optics [75].
8.8
TWO-PHOTON ABSORPTION
Relative to scattering of light perhaps a more fundamental second-order radiation-
molecule process is two-photon absorption of light. This is directly amenable to
measurement with the wide availability of tunable lasers [76]. It is useful to give the
general theory for absorption from two different beams before specializing to the
more common case of two-photon absorption from the same beam.
Consider an atom or molecule initially in the ground electronic state |0> being
excited to the electronic state |q> by absorbing two photons, one of mode (⃗k, 𝜆) and
the other of mode (⃗k′, 𝜆′) from two different lasers containing n(⃗k, 𝜆) and n′(⃗k′, 𝜆′)
photons, respectively. The initial and final states are then
|i >= |E0; n(⃗k, 𝜆), n′(⃗k′, 𝜆′) >
(8.85a)
and
|f >= |Eq; (n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆), (n′ −1)(⃗k′, 𝜆′) >,
(8.85b)
respectively. The process may be represented by the two time-ordered diagrams
of Figure 8.4, corresponding to the situation in which a photon of mode (⃗k, 𝜆) is
absorbed before or after that of mode (⃗k′, 𝜆′). |p> is an intermediate level of the
particle and which is taken to be non-resonant with respect to the energy associated
with one-photon absorption. Hence, there are two possible virtual states that need to

256
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
q
q
p
p
(k,′
′
λ )
(k, λ)
(k, λ)
0
(k,′
′
λ )
0
FIGURE 8.4
Two-photon absorption from two different beams.
be accounted for. Staying within the electric dipole approximation, using Eqs. (8.38)
and (8.56) yields the matrix element
Mfi =
(
nℏck
2𝜀0V
)1∕2 (
n′ℏck′
2𝜀0V
)1∕2
e(𝜆′)
i
(⃗k′)e(𝜆)
j (⃗k)𝛼q0
ij (𝜔, 𝜔′),
(8.86)
where e(𝜆′)
i
(⃗k′) and e(𝜆)
j (⃗k) denote the polarizations of the two distinct photon modes,
and the tensor 𝛼q0
ij (𝜔, −𝜔′) is given by Eq. (8.60). Analogous to Eq. (8.45), the
absorption rate for a randomly oriented sample of N absorbing bodies may be
written as
< Γ >= N ̄J1(𝜔)̄I2B(2),
(8.87)
where ̄J1(𝜔) is the mean intensity of the laser of frequency 𝜔, and ̄I2 =< n′ > ℏc2k′∕V
is the mean irradiance of the second beam, and the factor B(2) is found to be
B(2) =
1
120ℏ2𝜀2
0c
[A𝛼q0
𝜆𝜆(𝜔, 𝜔′)̄𝛼q0
𝜇𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔′) + B𝛼q0
𝜆𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔′)̄𝛼q0
𝜆𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔′)
+ C𝛼q0
𝜆𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔′)̄𝛼q0
𝜇𝜆(𝜔, 𝜔′)].
(8.88)
In Eq. (8.88), Greek subscripts denote Cartesian tensor components in the
molecule-fixed frame of reference, and as a result of fourth-rank tensor averaging
and contraction,
A = 4|⃗e ⋅⃗e′|2 −1 −|⃗e ⋅̄⃗e
′|2; B = −|⃗e ⋅⃗e′|2 + 4 −|⃗e ⋅̄⃗e
′|2;
C = −|⃗e ⋅⃗e′|2 −1 + 4|⃗e ⋅̄⃗e
′|2;
(8.89)
noting that ⃗e ⋅⃗e′ and ⃗e ⋅̄⃗e
′ are equal only for linear polarizations.

TWO-PHOTON ABSORPTION
257
From the above, it is straightforward to obtain results when two identical photons
are absorbed from the same beam, characterized by n(⃗k, 𝜆). Then, the states (Eq. 8.85)
become
|i >= |E0; n(⃗k, 𝜆) >
(8.90a)
and
|f >= |Eq; (n −2)(⃗k, 𝜆) > .
(8.90b)
Now only one graph and one type of intermediate state contributes to the matrix
element, which from Eq. (8.86) is easily seen to be
Mfi =
(
ℏck
4𝜀0V
)
[n(n −1)]1∕2e(𝜆)
i (⃗k)e(𝜆)
j (⃗k)𝛼q0
ij (𝜔, 𝜔),
(8.91)
where a factor of one-half has been introduced on account of i,j-index symmetry.
Evaluating the isotropic transition rate for N molecules via the Fermi golden rule
results in an expression similar to Eq. (8.87),
< Γ >= NJ(𝜔)̄Ig(2)B(2),
(8.92)
where the new two-photon B-coefficient is given by
B(2) =
1
240ℏ2𝜀2
0c
[(2|⃗e ⋅⃗e|2 −1)𝛼q0
𝜆𝜆(𝜔, 𝜔)̄𝛼q0
𝜇𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔)
−(|⃗e ⋅⃗e|2 −3)𝛼q0
𝜆𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔)̄𝛼q0
𝜆𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔)],
(8.93)
on using the 𝜆,𝜇-index symmetry property of the 𝛼-tensor, and the degree of second-
order coherence is given by the two-photon correlation factor g(2) =< n(n −1) >∕
< n >2. Two-photon transitions are allowed between the states of the same parity.
The process opposite to the absorption of two photons from two different lasers,
namely spontaneous two-photon emission, may be calculated in a manner similar to
that described earlier. Normally in such calculations it is assumed that the emission
does not take place via one-photon processes. Analogously to stimulated emission,
two-photon stimulated emission can also occur. If a laser of frequency 𝜔′ irradiates a
molecule undergoing two-photon emission at energy Em0 with 𝜔′ < 𝜔m0 then an extra
contribution to the transition rate arises from stimulated emission of a photon with
energy ℏck′ with the same mode characteristics as the stimulating beam, as well as
the spontaneous emission of a photon with frequency 𝜔m0 −𝜔′ and any polarization
and direction of propagation. The matrix element is easily computed to be
Mfi =
(
ℏck
2𝜀0V
)1∕2 (
n′ℏck′
2𝜀0V
)1∕2
̄eīe′
j𝛼m0
ji (𝜔, 𝜔′),
(8.94)

258
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
from which the Fermi golden rule transition rate for all possible relative orientations
of the particle with respect to the applied laser field is found to be
< Γ >=
I′𝜔3
18𝜋𝜀2
0ℏc4 𝛼m0
𝜆𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔′)̄𝛼m0
𝜆𝜇(𝜔, 𝜔′),
(8.95)
exhibiting 𝜔3 dependence on frequency.
8.9
NONLINEAR LIGHT-SCATTERING: SUM-FREQUENCY AND
HARMONIC GENERATION
While the field of quantum optics is mature, it continues to develop both experimen-
tally and in the prediction of novel phenomena, going beyond multiphoton absorption
and emission processes and linear light scattering, to include nonlinear light scatter-
ing applications [14,39,40,75]. A couple of these are described in this section such as
sum-frequency generation and second- and third-harmonic generation, upon which
more esoteric processes are typically based.
Consider an optically active molecule in the ground electronic state subject to
two incident monochromatic laser fields with occupation number n photons of mode
(⃗k, 𝜆) and n′ photons of mode (⃗k′, 𝜆′). Sum-frequency generation corresponds to
the situation in which the molecule absorbs a single photon from each beam and
emits a single photon at the sum frequency, whose mode is (⃗ks, 𝜆s), and remains
in the ground state. Energy is conserved according to ℏ𝜔s = ℏ(𝜔+ 𝜔′). A signal is
manifested from this type of spectroscopy only if the scattering medium is isotropic
and non-centrosymmetric. It was first proposed by Giordmaine [77] and affords a
means by which the structure of chiral liquids may be interrogated and the handedness
of the solution determined. Intensities have been successfully recorded for 1,1′-bi-
2-napthol and limonene [78, 79]. The initial and final states are therefore written,
respectively, as
|i >= |E0; n(⃗k, 𝜆), n′(⃗k′, 𝜆′) >
(8.96a)
and
|f >= |E0; (n −1)(⃗k, 𝜆), (n′ −1)(⃗k′, 𝜆′), 1(⃗ks, 𝜆s) > .
(8.96b)
The matrix element is evaluated using third-order time-dependent perturbation
theory together with the aid of six time-ordered diagrams, one of which is shown in
Figure 8.5, in which |p> and |q> denote intermediate electronic states of the scattering
entity. Even though linear light scattering by chiral molecules requires electric and
magnetic dipoles, and electric quadrupole coupling terms to leading order for a proper
description, it is sufficient to remain within the electric dipole approximation to treat

NONLINEAR LIGHT-SCATTERING
259
0
ωs
q
p
′
ω
ω
0
FIGURE 8.5
One of six diagrams contributing to sum-frequency generation.
this three-photon process. For coherent forward scattering by N centers, the matrix
element is [80–83],
Mfi = −iN
(
ℏc
2𝜀0V
)3∕2
(kk′ks)1∕2(nn′)1∕2e(𝜆)
i (⃗k)e(𝜆′)
j
(⃗k′)̄e(𝜆s)
k
(⃗ks)𝛽ijk,
(8.97)
where 𝛽ijk is the first molecular hyperpolarizability tensor
𝛽ijk =
∑
p,q
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
𝜇0q
k 𝜇qp
j 𝜇p0
i
(Ep0 −ℏ𝜔)(Eq0 −ℏ𝜔−ℏ𝜔′) +
𝜇0q
k 𝜇qp
i 𝜇p0
j
(Ep0 −ℏ𝜔′)(Eq0 −ℏ𝜔−ℏ𝜔′)
+
𝜇0q
j 𝜇qp
k 𝜇p0
i
(Ep0 −ℏ𝜔)(Eq0 −ℏ𝜔+ ℏ𝜔s) +
𝜇0q
i 𝜇qp
k 𝜇p0
j
(Ep0 −ℏ𝜔′)(Eq0 −ℏ𝜔′ + ℏ𝜔s)
+
𝜇0q
j 𝜇qp
i 𝜇p0
k
(Ep0 + ℏ𝜔s)(Eq0 −ℏ𝜔+ ℏ𝜔s) +
𝜇0q
i 𝜇qp
j 𝜇p0
k
(Ep0 + ℏ𝜔s)(Eq0 −ℏ𝜔′ + ℏ𝜔s)
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
,
(8.98)
and which vanishes for centrosymmetric species.
In terms of the incident beam irradiances I and I′, the integrated intensity for
emission at the sum-frequency in a cone centered around ̂ks is then
Isfg = ℏcks
dΓ
dΩ =
II′k4
s N2
32𝜋2𝜀3
0c
|e(𝜆)
i (⃗k)e(𝜆′)
j
(⃗k′)̄e(𝜆s)
k
(⃗ks) < 𝛽ijk > |2,
(8.99)
where < 𝛽ijk > denotes an orientational average of the response tensor (Eq. 8.98). An
expression for difference-frequency generation is easily obtained on replacing 𝜔′ by

260
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
−𝜔′ in Eq. (8.99). The result (Eq. 8.99) is proportional to the square of the number of
scatterers and to the fourth power of the sum-frequency and is linearly dependent on I
and I′. In addition to the signal intensity applicable to isotropic molecules, theory has
also been developed for molecules that are partially oriented, aligned within thin films,
or adsorbed on a surface [40,80], the presence of an interface clearly resulting in the
breakdown of spatial inversion symmetry. Further work included studying the effect
of a static electric field on a chiral liquid undergoing sum-frequency generation, with
measurements being reported on 1,1′-bi-2-napthol dissolved in tetrahydrofuran solu-
tion [84]. Interestingly, the cross-term between static field-free and field-dependent
contributions enables the absolute configuration and chirality of a solution of opti-
cally active molecules to be determined since it depends on a parity-odd seventh-rank
observable quantity [83]. Both the coherent and incoherent integrated signal intensi-
ties are directly proportional to the strength of the dc field.
A noteworthy special case of sum-frequency generation occurs when the frequen-
cies of the two incoming beams are identical, namely 𝜔= 𝜔′. The resulting process
is the well-known second-harmonic generation, with emission occurring at 𝜔s = 2𝜔
[85, 86]. Since the two absorbed photons are identical, only three diagrams of the
type shown in Figure 8.5 contribute to the matrix element, which from Eq. (8.97) is
easily found to be
Mfi = −i
2N
(
ℏck
𝜀0V
)3∕2
[n(n −1)]1∕2e(𝜆)
i (⃗k)e(𝜆)
j (⃗k)̄e(𝜆s)
k
(⃗ks)𝛽ijk,
(8.100)
with Eq. (8.98) modified appropriately to give the pertinent response tensor 𝛽ijk.
Making proper allowance for photon statistics, the harmonic intensity is readily
obtained from Eq. (8.100) as
Ishg =
̄I2k4N2g(2)
2𝜋2𝜀3
0c
|eiej̄es
k < 𝛽ijk > |2.
(8.101)
Employing the relations between the components of the hyperpolarizability tensor
in the lab and molecule fixed frames, < 𝛽ijk >= 1
6𝜀ijk𝜀𝜆𝜇v𝛽𝜆𝜇v, and noting that eiej is
symmetric while 𝜀ijk is antisymmetric to interchange of indices i and j, leads to the
well-known result that the second-harmonic intensity arising from an isotropic source
is zero. The vanishing of the intensity occurs for all multipole orders for coherent
generation of even harmonics in free molecules [85].
Second-harmonic generation in free molecules is allowed if the spatial isotropy is
broken. This can occur by application of a static electric field [87], with the radiant
intensity given by
I = E2̄I2g(2)k4N2
450𝜋2𝜀3
0c
|{3(̄⃗e
′ ⋅⃗e)(⃗e ⋅̂E) −(̄⃗e
′ ⋅̂E)(⃗e ⋅⃗e)}𝜒𝜆𝜆𝜇𝜇
−{(̄⃗e
′ ⋅⃗e)(⃗e ⋅̂E) −2(̄⃗e
′ ⋅̂E)(⃗e ⋅⃗e)}𝜒𝜆𝜇𝜇𝜆|2,
(8.102)

RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER
261
where 𝜒𝜆𝜇𝜈𝜋is a 24-term 𝜇𝜈-symmetric response tensor, and the static electric
field ⃗E = E ̂E has the magnitude E and the direction indicated by the unit vector
̂E. Clearly Eq. (8.102) vanishes when ̂E||̂k since ⃗e and ⃗e′ are then perpendicular to ̂k.
Even though hyper-Rayleigh second-harmonic generation and electric field-induced
second-harmonic generation are both independently symmetry allowed in any liquid,
the incoherent cross-term between these processes is zero for mutually perpendicular
incident, emitted, and dc fields [83].
Third-harmonic generation in a gaseous sample is allowed. This fourth-order
process arises when three photons of frequency 𝜔are absorbed, and one at frequency
3𝜔is emitted. The coherent forward scattered intensity is
I = 81̄I3g(3)k4N2
64𝜋2𝜀4
0c2
|̄e′
iejekel < 𝛾ijkl > |2,
(8.103)
where g(3) =< n(n −1)(n −2) > ∕< n >3 is the degree of third-order coherence and
𝛾ijkl is a fourth-rank hyperpolarizability tensor that is symmetric in j, k, and l. For
randomly oriented molecules the intensity is found to be
I = 81̄I3g(3)k4N2
1600𝜋2𝜀4
0c2 |⃗e ⋅⃗e|2|⃗e ⋅̄⃗e
′|2|𝛾𝜆𝜆𝜇𝜇|2,
(8.104)
from which it is seen that the polarization of the harmonic is in the same direction as
the polarization of the incoming radiation when the latter is linearly polarized.
Numerous other nonlinear and quantum optical processes such as four-, five-, …
wave mixing, hyper-Rayleigh and Raman scattering, and Kerr effect have been suc-
cessfully treated using quantized radiation field methods and may be found in specific
texts on the subject [14,39,40,88,89].
8.10
RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER
All of the processes considered thus far have either involved the absorption or emis-
sion, or a combination thereof, of real photons. These, however, are not the only types
of photons permitted by the theory. As stated in Section 8.1, virtual photons are also
allowed and are rationalized using time–energy uncertainty relations. This type of
photon is used in molecular QED theory to understand the origin and manifestation
of interparticle forces, as well as in self-energy corrections, as is done in quantum
field theory when coupling between elementary particles is being computed.
Two fundamental intermolecular interactions will be examined. They bring to the
fore the characteristic features associated with mediation of forces between bodies
by virtual photon exchange. These include resonance energy transfer, to be exam-
ined briefly below, with other aspects being considered in the chapter by Andrews,
Bradshaw, and Scholes, followed by van der Waals dispersion interactions, which
will be studied in the next section.

262
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
A particularly insightful example of coupling between a pair of atoms, molecules,
chromophores, or other such functional units that occurs via the exchange of a single
virtual photon is the resonant transfer of excitation energy. In this situation, an
initially electronically and/or vibrationally excited species, A, located at ⃗RA, transfers
its energy resonantly to a neighboring species B, positioned at ⃗RB, which then becomes
excited after initially being in its lowest level, with A decaying to the ground state.
This has been a much studied problem in the field of QED, dating back to an early
calculation by Fermi [42], and further investigation by numerous other workers since
then [90–101]. This longstanding and ongoing interest in resonance energy transfer
is due to the crucial role it plays when it comes to tackling fundamental issues
associated with violation or otherwise of Einstein causality of the propagated signal,
to questions related to state specification and preparation of quantum mechanical
systems, to the burgeoning field of quantum information theory, and more recently
to applications of energy transfer to chemical, physical, and biological systems such
as in the light-harvesting complex of the photosynthetic unit, and other antennae
structures, dendrimers, photovoltaics, and organic light-emitting diodes, to give but
a few examples [97,101].
The matrix element and transfer rate are readily calculable using molecular QED
techniques. With the donor species initially in the excited state |m>, the initial and
final states of the total system are written, respectively, as
|i >= |EA
m, EB
0 >
(8.105a)
and
|f >= |EA
0 , EB
m >,
(8.105b)
with no photons (real or virtual) present before or after transfer. For electric dipole–
dipole exchange, two time-ordered diagrams, depicted in Figure 8.6, contribute to
m
0
Hint (B)
+ A ⇔ B
(p, ε)
Hint (A)
0
m
B
A
FIGURE 8.6
Time-ordered diagrams for resonance energy transfer.

RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER
263
the matrix element. Employing second-order perturbation theory and standard calcu-
lational techniques yields, for the matrix element, the expression
Mfi = 𝜇0m
i (A)𝜇m0
j (B)Vij(km0, ⃗R),
(8.106)
where the internuclear separation distance vector, ⃗R = ⃗RB −⃗RA, and Vij(k, ⃗R) is the
retarded resonant dipole–dipole exchange tensor
Vij(k, ⃗R) =
1
4𝜋𝜀0R3 [(𝛿ij −3̂Ri ̂Rj)(1 −ikR) −(𝛿ij −̂Ri ̂Rj)k2R2]eikR.
(8.107)
Inspection of Eq. (8.107) reveals that the commonly used R−3 static (𝜔= 0) dipolar
coupling follows on making the near-zone approximation kR ≪1. Interestingly, at
very long-range (kR ≫1) Vij(k, ⃗R) exhibits inverse separation distance dependence,
with photon exchange being exclusively transverse in nature. From the last two
formulae the Fermi golden rule transition rate is easily obtainable. For completely
randomly oriented donor and acceptor species, as occurs in a fluid medium, the
transfer rate is
< Γ >=
𝜌f
36𝜋ℏ𝜀2
0R6 | ⃗𝜇0m(A)|2| ⃗𝜇m0(B)|2[k4
m0R4 + k2
m0R2 + 3],
(8.108)
and which holds for all R outside the region of overlap of electronic charge clouds.
When charge distributions overlap, Dexter theory [102] may be employed to compute
the stronger direct- and exchange-type force terms.
The result (Eq. 8.108) provides an all encompassing formula for long-range trans-
fer of energy, incorporating two distinct mechanisms at its asymptotic limits. These
correspond to the widely used R−6-dependent F¨orster rate law [103] in which near-
zone migration of energy is understood as radiationless, arising from static coupling
between centers, to transfer in the far zone which is radiative and displays inverse
square separation distance dependence. At this extreme, exchange of energy is viewed
as arising from emission of a photon by the excited donor followed by its capture by
the unexcited acceptor moiety with the propagated photon acquiring ever more real
character as R →∞. Hence, molecular QED provides a unified theory of resonant
transfer of energy and a description in terms of virtual photon exchange.
Even though the presentation given above has been confined to migration of energy
between two units in a vacuum, theory has been developed to take into account the
effects of a medium [104, 105]. One way this has been done is via the introduction
of medium-dressed photons that arise on quantizing the bath. The latter subsystem
is composed of entities comprising the surrounding environment, their interaction
with the radiation field, and the electromagnetic field itself. The resulting particle
is the polariton, which mediates transfer in the medium instead of a photon, which

264
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
propagates in vacuum [106, 107]. With local field factors also correctly accounted
for, the transfer tensor in a medium may be written in terms of Eq. (8.107) as
Vmed
ij
(k, ⃗R) = 1
n2
(
n2 + 2
3
)2
Vij(nk, ⃗R),
(8.109)
where n is the complex refractive index of the medium at a frequency correspond-
ing to the resonant transfer of energy. This has the consequence of modifying the
transfer rate by a scale factor, with dispersion and attenuation effects accounted for.
Another approach is to solve explicitly for the Maxwell fields as they traverse a
medium with dielectric and/or magnetic properties via the introduction of complex
electric permittivity, magnetic permeability, and refractive index, and evaluate the
appropriate matrix element directly from the operator forms of the fields [108,109].
Typically, enhancement of the rate in a medium is small. Yet another method is to
take a microscopic approach and calculate the change in transfer rate due to the pres-
ence of a third-, fourth-, … body, which mediates exchange between the pair, these
additional particles constituting the medium in the limit of very large particle number
[54,56,110,111].
8.11
VAN DER WAALS DISPERSION ENERGY
A second example illustrating the role of virtual photons in mediating forces between
particles, and which is of historical significance, is the calculation of the van der
Waals dispersion interaction using field theoretic techniques by Casimir and Polder
in 1948 [13]. Although their technically demanding computation was carried out in
the minimal-coupling framework of QED, their result may be obtained a little more
straightforwardly using the multipolar version of the theory. Recall that in this for-
malism, molecules couple directly to the Maxwell fields via their molecular multipole
moments and the interaction is properly retarded since all static intermolecular cou-
pling terms have been eliminated. For two neutral, electric dipole polarizable atoms
or molecules A and B in their ground electronic states, the initial and final states are
given by
|i >= |f >= |EA
0 , EB
0 >,
(8.110)
with no photons present, either real or virtual. Hence the dispersion force is another
phenomenon that may be attributed to zero-point energy and fluctuations associated
with the vacuum electromagnetic field. In the multipolar coupling scheme, the dis-
persion force is viewed as arising from two virtual photon exchange. A representative
time-ordered diagram depicting the interaction is shown in Figure 8.7. Evidently, to
leading order fourth-order time-dependent perturbation theory is necessary to eval-
uate the energy shift, with 24 diagrams contributing in total. These are reduced in
number by a half since both virtual photon polarizations and momenta are summed,

VAN DER WAALS DISPERSION ENERGY
265
0
(p,′ ′ε )
s
(p, ε)
0
0
r
0
B
A
FIGURE 8.7
One of 24 diagrams contributing to Casimir–Polder energy shift.
rendering them ultimately indistinguishable. An oft-repeated calculation leads to the
Casimir–Polder dispersion potential energy formula [13,15,19,21,22,26,57,112]
ΔE = −
ℏc
16𝜋3𝜀2
0
∞
∫
0
duu6e−2uR𝛼(A; iu)𝛼(B; iu)
[
1
u2R2 +
2
u3R3 +
5
u4R4 +
6
u5R5 +
3
u6R6
]
,
(8.111)
which applies to all interparticle separation distances R between randomly oriented
A and B, and is written in terms of the polarizability 𝛼(𝜉; iu) of body 𝜉= A, B at
imaginary frequency 𝜔= icu,
𝛼(𝜉; iu) = 2
3
∑
t
| ⃗𝜇0t(𝜉)|2Et0
E2
t0 + (ℏcu)2 .
(8.112)
Asymptotic limits at the extremes of separation follow readily from result
Eq. (8.111). In the far-zone kR ≫1, and the polarizabilities may be taken to be
static (𝜔→0) and the u-integral carried out to yield the familiar R−7 dependence of
the Casimir–Polder dispersion potential,
ΔEFZ = −
23ℏc
64𝜋3𝜀2
0R7 𝛼(A; 0)𝛼(B; 0).
(8.113)
At short separations, but still outside the overlap region, kR ≪1 and it is sufficient
to retain the dominant R−6-dependent term in Eq. (8.111) and approximate e−2uR by
unity. Integration results in the familiar London dispersion energy [113]
ΔENZ = −
1
24𝜋2𝜀2
0R6
∑
r,s
| ⃗𝜇0r(A)|2| ⃗𝜇s0(B)|2
Er0 + Es0
,
(8.114)

266
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
and which is identical to the form obtained using semiclassical theory in which
coupling between the pair is viewed as being static in origin. That the interaction
energy weakens by a factor of R−1 at long-range relative to its near-zone counterpart
is due to the effects of retardation, with correlation between the dipolar fluctuations
in charge distribution at each center occurring at the speed of light, rather than
instantaneously.
The van der Waals dispersion potential has been recalculated using a number
of differing physical viewpoints within the framework of molecular QED in the
multipolar coupling scheme. These include response theory [60,62,63], and coupling
of induced multipole moments [114] as well as simplification of the computation via
introduction and employment of an effective two-photon interaction Hamiltonian
[115]. Subsequent work has involved the calculation of dispersion energy shifts
between one ground and one excited molecule [116] and between two excited species
[117], as well as contributions to the dispersion force arising from higher multipole
moment terms, of particular interest being the discriminatory energy shift between
two chiral molecules [64, 118, 119]. Theory has also been developed to treat three-
and many-body retarded dispersion forces [120], extending familiar semiclassical
results of Axilrod and Teller, and Muto [121].
8.12
RADIATION-INDUCED INTERPARTICLE FORCES
A particularly interesting phenomenon from the viewpoint of molecular QED is the
influence of an external radiation field on the coupling of two or more atoms or
molecules. Both real and virtual photons are therefore involved in this application,
with the most common manifestation being the modification of the dispersion force
by an intense laser. Thirunamachandran was the first to predict such an effect in
1980 [122]. He evaluated the change in the van der Waals dispersion energy shift
caused by the action of an applied electromagnetic field using perturbation theory
within the molecular QED formalism. Prior to this proposal, experimental work had
been confined to cooling and trapping single particles in an intense beam of laser
light, most notably in the pioneering work of Ashkin [123]. Continuing progress in
laser technology eventually led to the realization that two or more particles attracted
and then situated in the high intensity focal point region couple to one another,
and to the demonstration and measurement of so-called optical binding forces, as
first carried out by Burns, Fournier, and Golovchenko [124], and then verified and
extended by other experimental groups [125–127]. Possibilities therefore arise for
utilizing these optomechanical forces in nano-electromechanical applications and
devices, especially as a result of nanoparticle aggregation and particle array formation.
Specifics may be found in a few recent review articles [128–130], the last two of
which also cover theoretical approaches, and examine the consequences of using
broadband or coherent state throughput radiation and other forms of structured light
[131] such as beams of the Laguerre–Gaussian type. In what follows, the change
in energy shift between a pair of neutral, polarizable molecules in their ground
electronic states induced by radiation described by a number state is evaluated using

RADIATION-INDUCED INTERPARTICLE FORCES
267
diagrammatic perturbation theory techniques, in keeping with the approach employed
thus far.
For molecules A and B, located at ⃗RA and ⃗RB, respectively, with ⃗R = ⃗RB −⃗RA,
subject to an intense beam of laser light of mode (⃗k, 𝜆) the initial and final system
states are given by
|i >= |f >= |EA
0 , EB
0 ; n(⃗k, 𝜆) >.
(8.115)
Remaining within the electric dipole approximation, the total Hamiltonian for the
two bodies and radiation field in mutual interaction is given by
H =
∑
𝜉=A,B
Hmol(𝜉) + Hrad −𝜀−1
0
∑
𝜉=A,B
⃗𝜇(𝜉) ⋅⃗d⊥(⃗R𝜉).
(8.116)
Since the dependence of the energy shift on R is of interest, interaction of radiation
with either A or B in the absence of interparticle coupling, corresponding to a dynamic
Stark shift, is ignored. Hence, the leading term is of fourth order and involves the
scattering of a real photon and the exchange of a virtual photon of mode (⃗p, 𝜀) between
the pair. For absorption and emission of a (⃗k, 𝜆)−photon at different centers, 48 time-
ordered diagrams have to be summed over in order to obtain the change in interaction
energy. One of these is shown in Figure 8.8.
The energy shift for a pair of oriented molecules in a fixed orientation relative to
the direction of propagation of the incoming beam is given by [58,122,132]
ΔEd = Nℏck
𝜀0V 𝛼jl(A; k)𝛼ik(B; k)̄e(𝜆)
i (⃗k)e(𝜆)
j (⃗k)ReVkl(k, ⃗R) cos(⃗k ⋅⃗R),
(8.117)
where 𝛼ij(𝜉; k) is the dynamic electric dipole polarizability of species 𝜉= A, B and
ReVij(k, ⃗R) is the real part of the retarded resonant electric dipole–dipole coupling
tensor (Eq. 8.107). The contribution above is often known as the “dynamic” (d) term
0
0
s
(p, ε)
r
0
0
(k, λ)
(k, λ)
B
A
FIGURE 8.8
One of 48 diagrams contributing to dynamic radiation-induced intermolecular
energy shift.

268
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
0
0
(k, λ)
s
(p, ε)
r
0
0
(k, λ)
B
A
FIGURE 8.9
One of 48 diagrams contributing to static radiation-modified inter-particle
interaction energy.
since a real and finite amount of energy is exchanged between the pair. If one or both
species is polar, there is another term contributing to the field-modified interaction
energy. Coupling between the pair still exists, but now scattering of the real photon
takes place at the same center, either at A or at B. One of the 48 contributing graphs
is shown in Figure 8.9. Because in this instance virtual photon exchange involves no
net transfer of energy, this contribution is termed the “static” (s) one. It is found to
be [58,133]
ΔEs = Nℏck
2𝜀0V e(𝜆)
i (⃗k)e(𝜆)
j (⃗k)[𝛽ijk(A; k)𝜇00
l (B) + 𝜇00
l (A)𝛽ijk(B; k)]Vkl(0, ⃗R),
(8.118)
where 𝛽ijk(𝜉; k) is the hyperpolarizability tensor, and Vij(0, ⃗R) is the static electric
dipolar coupling tensor. Note that expression (8.118) vanishes for centrosymmetric
molecules. The total change in energy shift is therefore given by the sum of ΔEd and
ΔEs. Performing the molecular average results in ΔEs = 0. Carrying out both the
molecular average and the pair orientational average on ΔEd yields
< ΔEd > = −
Nℏck
8𝜋𝜀2
0R3V
𝛼(A; k)𝛼(B; k)
[
kR sin 2kR + 2 cos 2kR −5sin 2kR
kR
−6cos 2kR
k2R2
+ 3sin 2kR
k3R3
]
,
(8.119)
and which applies for isotropic A and B, and for all directions of ⃗R relative to
⃗k. The result is seen to be proportional to the intensity of the incident radiation,
I = Nℏc2k∕V, and to the polarizability of each molecule. It is independent of the
polarization characteristics of the beam. At short range, the energy shift exhibits an
inverse dependence on R, which can become significant for the situation in which
there are a large number of molecular pairs in close proximity, as opposed to the
London dispersion energy, which has the more rapid R−6 fall-off. In the far zone, the
interaction energy (Eq. 8.119) has a modulated inverse square dependence. Interesting

SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
269
topological features of the potential energy landscape, such as regions of maxima and
minima, other islands of stability, and conditions that lead to particle array formation,
have been examined, and details may be found in References 129,130, and 134.
Finally, it should be mentioned that the results for static and dynamic contri-
butions to the field-induced energy shift have been evaluated using the method of
fluctuating electric dipole moments [119,132–136]. In this picture, the applied elec-
tric field induces an electric moment at each centre, which interact via the dipole-
dipole coupling tensor. Interaction energies are obtained on taking expectation values
over molecular ground electronic states, and a state of the radiation field contain-
ing N photons of mode (⃗k, 𝜆). As expected, identical results ensue. This method
was found to be advantageous when accounting for the effects of higher molecular
multipole moments, as for example in the case of optical binding forces between
chiral molecules [135], and when treating the effects of three and many bodies in the
presence of an applied field and the resulting change in interaction energy [136].
8.13
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
In this chapter, the theory of QED has been outlined, with special emphasis placed
on the coupling of radiation with non-relativistic matter. This version of the theory,
formulated in the Coulomb gauge, is ideally suited to treat the interaction of elec-
tromagnetic fields with atoms and molecules, whose electrons are bound and move
slowly relative to the speed of light. Its characteristic feature is that both the radiation
field and the system of material particles are subject to the postulates of quantum
mechanics. As a consequence, photons emerge automatically as quantized particles
of light on describing the Maxwell fields as a collection of independent mechanical
oscillators. Construction of the theory is carried out via the familiar techniques of
canonical quantization applied to the interaction of a charged particle with the radi-
ation field. This is achieved by starting with the total classical Lagrangian function
for the material particle, the electromagnetic field, and their mutual interaction, and
culminates in the QED Hamiltonian operator for the total many-body system. While
the resulting minimal-coupling Hamiltonian can and has been applied successfully
to solve problems involving the coupling of electrons and photons, it suffers from a
couple of drawbacks which often limits its use. These include the explicit appearance
of momentum and vector potential operators in the interaction term, along with static
interparticle coupling terms. A more widely adopted alternative QED Hamiltonian,
obtained via transformation of the minimal-coupling one, in which instantaneous
interatomic interactions have been eliminated, and coupling between radiation and
matter occurs via the interaction of electric and magnetic multipole moments with
causal Maxwell field operators, and named the multipolar Hamiltonian, has also been
presented, and is clearly better suited to applications in theoretical chemistry and
atomic, molecular, and optical physics.
A number of fundamental linear radiation-molecule processes were then dis-
cussed. These included one-photon absorption, spontaneous and stimulated emission,
Rayleigh and Raman scattering, as well as examples of chiroptical spectroscopies

270
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
such as circular dichroism, its magnetic field-induced analog, and optical rotation.
Nonlinear optical processes such as two-photon absorption, sum-frequency gener-
ation, and second- and third-harmonic generation were also delineated. These and
other types of optical phenomena are readily interpretable in terms of the elementary
processes of absorption and emission of the requisite number of real photons in con-
cert with changes in energy of the associated material particles, as represented by the
initial and final state specification of the system, and any possible intermediate states
that link the two. One common method of solution of the QED Hamiltonian applied to
a particular problem is via time-dependent perturbation theory together with the aid
of Feynman-like diagrams by separating the total Hamiltonian into unperturbed and
perturbed parts, with the latter composed of the interaction Hamiltonian. Probability
amplitudes are then evaluated, from which quantum mechanical observable quanti-
ties are then obtained. While this diagrammatic approach has been stressed in the
coverage presented, and is characteristic of the Schr¨odinger picture, computational
advantages and additional insight often accrue by working in the Heisenberg picture,
especially when evaluating intermolecular processes or properties associated with
electromagnetic radiation, for example.
Within the limits of the time–energy uncertainty principle, theory allows for the
creation and destruction of so-called virtual photons, which are undetectable by
definition. This type of particle is used to explain self-interactions, as manifest in
the Lamb shift, for instance, as well as in the renormalization of the charge and
mass of the electron. Exchange of one or more virtual photons between two or
more bodies is used to understand the origin of interparticle forces. Two well-known
examples, which serve to highlight the accurate treatment of, as well as the superior
physical insight afforded by QED, were presented, namely the resonant transfer of
energy, and the van der Waals dispersion potential. Because signals are transmitted
at the correct speed of light in QED, the familiar semiclassical expressions for
the two mentioned intermolecular effects are valid only in the near-zone regime,
where electromagnetic influences propagate instantaneously. Retardation modifies
the functional form of the transfer rate or dispersion energy shift, which now holds for
all separation distances outside overlap of electronic charge distributions and extends
out to infinity. Semiclassical results follow on taking the short-range asymptotic limit
of the QED expression.
While QED and its non-relativistic version now rest on solid theoretical foun-
dations, corroborated where possible by experiments in which unprecedented levels
of agreement have been achieved, there remains much work to be done. Continuing
efforts to develop theory for condensed phases, extended systems and accounting for
the effects of an environment have occupied the attention of many workers, advanc-
ing the successful treatment of electron–photon interactions in vacuum. These forays
have included interparticle forces in metals, dielectrics, semiconductors, and insula-
tor materials for systems adopting a variety of geometrical configurations, possibly
at vanishing or non-zero temperatures, as manifest, for instance, in a number of
Casimir effects, where the Lifshitz theory, the Drude model, and the proximity force
approximation have all been placed under greater scrutiny, as well as investigating the
effects of an electric and/or magnetic dielectric medium on absorptive and emissive

REFERENCES
271
processes, and the mediation of interparticle forces. Another fruitful avenue of
research is to apply many of the general theoretical results obtained via QED tech-
niques to specific chemical and physical systems. This is now possible and is begin-
ning to take place by taking advantage of the considerable advances that have been
made in computational electronic structure theory which have enabled high quality
wavefunctions to be evaluated using a number of post-Hartree–Fock methods that
include a high-level of electron correlation effects, or by employing density func-
tional theory to calculate ground and excited electronic state properties. Finally, there
is still plenty of room to employ and apply QED theory for predictive purposes, by
proposing new phenomena, especially within the realm of photonics, thereby ensur-
ing QED remains relevant to current and future generations of researchers working
in chemical physics.
REFERENCES
[1] G. N. Lewis, “The conservation of photons,” Nature (London) 118, 874–875 (1926).
[2] A. Pais, Subtle Is the Lord (Oxford University Press, Clarendon, 1982).
[3] P. A. M. Dirac, “The quantum theory of the emission and absorption of radiation,” Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond. A 114, 243–265 (1927).
[4] J. S. Schwinger (ed.), Selected Papers on Quantum Electrodynamics (Dover, New York,
1958).
[5] P. Jordan and W. Pauli, “Zur Quantenelektrodynamik Ladungsfreier Felder,” Z. Phys.
47, 151–173 (1928).
[6] W. Heisenberg and W. Pauli, “Zur Quantendynamik der Wellenfelder,” Z. Phys. 56,
1–61 (1929); “Zur Quantentheorie der Wellenfelder. II,” Z. Phys. 59, 168–190 (1930).
[7] S. S. Schweber, QED and the Men Who Made It (Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1994).
[8] J. S. Schwinger, “On quantum-electrodynamics and the magnetic moment of the elec-
tron,” Phys. Rev. 73, 416 (1948).
[9] H. A. Bethe, “The electromagnetic shift of energy levels,” Phys. Rev. 72, 339–341
(1947).
[10] T. Aoyama, M. Hayakawa, T. Kinoshita, and M. Nio, “Revised value of the eighth-order
contribution to the electron g-2,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 110406 1–4 (2007).
[11] D. Hanneke, S. Fogwell, and G. Gabrielse, “New measurement of the electron magnetic
moment and the fine structure constant,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 120801 1–4 (2008).
[12] M. Babiker, E. A. Power, and T. Thirunamachandran, “On a generalization of the
Power-Zienau-Woolley transformation in quantum electrodynamics and atomic field
equations,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 338, 235–249 (1974).
[13] H. B. G. Casimir and D. Polder, “The influence of retardation on the London-van der
Waals forces,” Phys. Rev. 73, 360–372 (1948).
[14] G. Grynberg, A. Aspect, and C. Fabre, Introduction to Quantum Optics (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2010).
[15] E. A. Power, Introductory Quantum Electrodynamics (Longmans, London, 1964).
[16] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1975).

272
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
[17] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1980).
[18] W. P. Healy, Non-relativistic Quantum Electrodynamics (Academic Press, London,
1982).
[19] D. P. Craig and T. Thirunamachandran, Molecular Quantum Electrodynamics
(Academic Press, London, 1984).
[20] C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. DuPont-Roc, and G. Grynberg, Photons & Atoms (John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York, 1989).
[21] G. Compagno, R. Passante, and F. Persico, Atom-Field Interactions and Dressed Atoms
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995).
[22] A. Salam, Molecular Quantum Electrodynamics (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New Jersey,
2010).
[23] D. Masiello, E. Deumens, and Y. ¨Ohrn, “On the canonical formulation of electrodynam-
ics and wave mechanics,” Adv. Quant. Chem. 49, 249–297 (2005).
[24] P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Clarendon, Oxford, 1958).
[25] M. Born, W. Heisenberg, and P. Jordan, “Zur Quantenmechanik II.,” Z. Phys. 35, 557–
615 (1926).
[26] P. W. Milonni, The Quantum Vacuum (Academic Press, San Diego, 1994).
[27] E. A. Power and S. Zienau, “Coulomb gauge in non-relativistic quantum electrody-
namics and the shape of spectral lines,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 251, 427–454
(1959).
[28] R. G. Woolley, “Molecular quantum electrodynamics,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 321,
557–572 (1971).
[29] E. A. Power, “A review of canonical transformations as they affect multiphoton pro-
cesses,” in Multiphoton Processes, edited by J. H. Eberly and P. Lambropoulos (John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1978), pp. 11–46.
[30] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “The multipolar Hamiltonian in radiation
theory,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 372, 265–273 (1980).
[31] E. A. Power, “Zero-point energy and the lamb shift,” Am. J. Phys. 34, 516–518 (1966).
[32] M. G¨oppert-Mayer, “ ¨Uber Elementarakte mit Zwei Quantenspr¨ungen,” Ann. Phys.
Leipzig 9, 273–294 (1931).
[33] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “On the nature of the Hamiltonian for the
interaction of radiation with atoms and molecules:
(
e
mc
)
p ⋅A, −𝜇⋅E, and all that,” Am.
J. Phys. 46, 370–378 (1978).
[34] R. G. Woolley and J. E. Cordle, “On the gauge invariance of the Schr¨odinger equation,”
Chem. Phys. Lett. 22, 411–413 (1973).
[35] W. P. Healy, “Line integral Lagrangians for the electromagnetic field interacting with
charged particles,” Phys. Rev. A 19, 2353–2359 (1979).
[36] R. G. Woolley, “Gauge invariant wave mechanics and the Power-Zienau-Woolley trans-
formation,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 13, 2795–2806 (1980).
[37] W. Heitler, The Quantum Theory of Radiation (Clarendon, Oxford, 1954).
[38] R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000).
[39] S. Mukamel, Principles of Nonlinear Optical Spectroscopy (Oxford University Press,
New York, 1995).
[40] D. L. Andrews and P. Allcock, Optical Harmonics in Molecular Systems (Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim, 2002).

REFERENCES
273
[41] L. D. Barron, Molecular Light Scattering and Optical Activity (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2004).
[42] E. Fermi, “Quantum theory of radiation,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 4, 87–132 (1932).
[43] R. G. Woolley, “The electrodynamics of atoms and molecules,” Adv. Chem. Phys. 33,
153–233 (1975).
[44] P. W. Milonni, “Semi-classical and quantum electrodynamical approaches in non-
relativistic radiation theory,” Phys. Rep. 25, 1–81 (1976).
[45] D. P. Craig and T. Thirunamachandran, “Radiation-molecule interactions in chemical
physics,” Adv. Quant. Chem. 16, 97–160 (1982).
[46] D. P. Craig and T. Thirunamachandran, “Radiation-molecule and molecule-molecule
interactions. A unified viewpoint from quantum electrodynamics,” Acc. Chem. Res. 19,
10–16 (1986).
[47] D. L. Andrews, D. P. Craig, and T. Thirunamachandran, “Molecular quantum electro-
dynamics in chemical physics,” Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 8, 339–383 (1989).
[48] G. Compagno, G. M. Palma, R. Passante, and F. Persico, “Atoms dressed and partially
dressed by the zero-point fluctuations of the electromagnetic field,” J. Phys. B: At. Mol.
Opt. Phys. 28, 1105–1158 (1995).
[49] J. M. Ziman, Elements of Advanced Quantum Theory (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1969).
[50] J. F. Ward, “Calculation of nonlinear optical susceptibilities using diagrammatic pertur-
bation theory,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 37, 1–18 (1965).
[51] R. P. Feynman, “Space-time approach to non-relativistic quantum mechanics,” Rev.
Mod. Phys. 20, 367–387 (1948).
[52] R. P. Feynman, “Space-time approach to quantum electrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. 76,
769–789 (1949).
[53] R. D. Jenkins, D. L. Andrews, and L. C. D´avila-Romero, “A new diagrammatic method-
ology for non-relativistic quantum electrodynamics,” J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 35,
445–468 (2002).
[54] R. D. Jenkins and D. L. Andrews, “Three-centre systems for energy pooling: quantum
electrodynamical theory,” J. Phys. Chem. A 102, 10834–10842 (1998).
[55] G. J. Daniels and D. L. Andrews, “The electronic influence of a third-body on resonance
energy transfer,” J. Chem. Phys. 116, 6701–6712 (2002).
[56] R. D. Jenkins and D. L. Andrews, “Multichromophore excitons and resonance energy
transfer: molecular quantum electrodynamics,” J. Chem. Phys. 118, 3470–3479 (2003).
[57] B. W. Alligood and A. Salam, “On the application of state sequence diagrams to the
calculation of the Casimir-Polder potential,” Mol. Phys. 105, 395–404 (2007).
[58] D. S. Bradshaw and D. L. Andrews, “Optically induced forces and torques: interactions
between nanoparticles in a laser beam,” Phys. Rev. A 72, 033816 1–14 (2005).
[59] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Quantum electrodynamics with non-
relativistic sources. I. Transformation to the multipolar formalism for second-quantized
electron and Maxwell interacting fields,” Phys. Rev. A 28, 2649–2662 (1983).
[60] A. Salam, “Molecular quantum electrodynamics in the Heisenberg picture: a field the-
oretic viewpoint,” Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 27, 405–448 (2008).
[61] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Quantum electrodynamics with non-
relativistic sources. IV. Poynting vector, energy densities and other quadratic operators
of the electromagnetic field,” Phys. Rev. A 45, 54–63 (1992).

274
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
[62] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Quantum electrodynamics with non-
relativistic sources. III. Intermolecular interactions,” Phys. Rev. A 28, 2671–2675 (1983).
[63] T. Thirunamachandran, “Vacuum fluctuations and intermolecular interactions,” Phys.
Scripta T21, 123–128 (1988).
[64] J. K. Jenkins, A. Salam, and T. Thirunamachandran, “Retarded dispersion interaction
energies between chiral molecules,” Phys. Rev. A 50, 4767–4777 (1994).
[65] P. R. Berman, Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics (Academic Press, Boston, MA, 1994).
[66] H. A. Kramers and W. Heisenberg, “Uber die Streuung von Strahlung Durch Atome,”
Z. Phys. 31, 681–708 (1925).
[67] P. A. M. Dirac, “The quantum theory of dispersion,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 114,
710–728 (1927).
[68] W. P. Healy, “A generalization of the Kramers-Heisenberg dispersion formula,” Phys.
Rev. A 16, 1568–1574 (1977).
[69] C. V. Raman and K. S. Krishnan, “A new type of secondary radiation,” Nature (London)
121, 501–502 (1928).
[70] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Optical activity as a two-state process,” J.
Chem. Phys. 55, 5322–5328 (1971).
[71] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Circular dichroism: a general theory based on
quantum electrodynamics,” J. Chem. Phys. 60, 3695–3701 (1974).
[72] W. P. Healy, “The multipole Hamiltonian and magnetic circular dichroism,” J. Chem.
Phys. 64, 3111–3117 (1976).
[73] D. L. Andrews, “Rayleigh and Raman optical activity: an analysis of the dependence
on scattering angle,” J. Chem. Phys. 72, 4141–4144 (1980).
[74] D. P. Craig, E. A. Power, and T. Thirunamachandran, “The dynamic terms in induced
circular dichroism,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 348, 19–38 (1976).
[75] P. Fischer and F. Hache, “Nonlinear optical spectroscopy of chiral molecules,” Chirality
17, 421–437 (2005).
[76] W. M. McClain, “Two-photon molecular spectroscopy,” Acc. Chem. Res. 7, 129–135
(1974).
[77] J. A. Giordmaine, “Nonlinear optical properties of liquids,” Phys. Rev. 138 A, 1599–
1606 (1965).
[78] M. A. Belkin, S. H. Han, X. Wei, and Y. R. Shen, “Sum-frequency generation in chiral
liquids near electronic resonance,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 113001 1–4 (2001).
[79] P. Fischer, K. Beckwitt, F. W. Wise, and A. C. Albrecht, “The chiral specificity of
sum-frequency generation in solutions,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 352, 463–468 (2002).
[80] D. L. Andrews and I. D. Hands, “Sum frequency generation from partially ordered media
and interfaces: a polarization analysis,” J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31, 2809–2824
(1998).
[81] S. Cheon and M. Cho, “Circularly polarized infrared and visible sum-frequency gener-
ation spectroscopy: vibrational optical activity measurement,” Phys. Rev. A 71, 013808
1–8 (2005).
[82] O. Roslyk and S. Mukamel, “A unified description of sum-frequency generation, para-
metric down conversion and two-photon fluorescence,” Mol. Phys. 107, 265–280 (2009).
[83] P. Fischer and A. Salam, “Molecular QED of coherent and incoherent sum-frequency
and second-harmonic generation in chiral liquids in the presence of a static electric
field,” Mol. Phys. 108, 1857–1868 (2010).

REFERENCES
275
[84] P. Fischer, A. D. Buckingham, K. Beckwitt, D. S. Wiersma, and F. A. Wise, “New electro-
optic effect: sum-frequency generation from optically active liquids in the presence of
a dc electric field,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 173901 1–4 (2003).
[85] D. L. Andrews, “Harmonic generation in free molecules,” J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.
Phys. 13, 4091–4099 (1980).
[86] D. L. Andrews, “Molecular theory of harmonic generation,” Adv. Chem. Phys. 85,
545–606 (1993).
[87] Y. T. Lam and T. Thirunamachandran, “DC-induced second-harmonic generation by
chiral molecules,” J. Chem. Phys. 77, 3810–3814 (1982).
[88] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1995).
[89] N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics (Benjamin, New York, 1965).
[90] R. R. McLone and E. A. Power, “On the interaction between two identical neutral dipole
systems, one in the excited state and the other in the ground state,” Mathematika 11,
91–94 (1964).
[91] J. S. Avery, “Resonance energy transfer and spontaneous photon emission,” Proc. Phys.
Soc. London A 88, 1–8 (1966).
[92] D. L. Andrews and B. S. Sherborne, “Resonant excitation transfer: a quantum electro-
dynamical study,” J. Chem. Phys. 86, 4011–4017 (1987).
[93] A. K. Biswas, G. Compagno, G. M. Palma, R. Passante, and F. Persico, “Virtual photons
and causality in the dynamics of a pair of two-level atoms,” Phys. Rev. A 42, 4291–4301
(1990).
[94] D. P. Craig and T. Thirunamachandran, “An analysis of models for resonant transfer of
excitation using quantum electrodynamics,” Chem. Phys. 167, 229–240 (1992).
[95] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Analysis of the causal behaviour in energy
transfer between atoms,” Phys. Rev. A 56, 3395–3408 (1997).
[96] D. L. Andrews and A. A. Demidov (eds.), Resonance Energy Transfer (John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd., Chichester, 1999).
[97] G. D. Scholes, “Long-range resonance energy transfer in molecular systems,” Ann. Rev.
Phys. Chem. 54, 57–87 (2003).
[98] G. J. Daniels, R. D. Jenkins, D. S. Bradshaw, and D. L. Andrews, “Resonance
energy transfer: the unified theory revisited,” J. Chem. Phys. 119, 2264–2274
(2003).
[99] A. Salam, “A general formula for the rate of resonant transfer of energy between two
electric multipole moments of arbitrary order using molecular quantum electrodynam-
ics,” J. Chem. Phys. 122, 044112 1–12 (2005).
[100] V. May and O. K¨uhn, Charge and Energy Transfer Dynamics in Molecular Systems
(Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2011).
[101] G. D. Scholes, “Energy transfer from F¨orster-Dexter theory to quantum coherent light-
harvesting,” Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 30, 49–77 (2011).
[102] D. L. Dexter, “A theory of sensitized luminescence in solids,” J. Chem. Phys. 21,
836–850 (1953).
[103] T. F¨orster, “Zwischenmolekulare Energiewanderung und Fluoreszenz,” Ann. Phys. 6,
55–75 (1948).
[104] M. Agranovitch and A. Maradudin, Electronic Excitation Energy Transfer in Condensed
Matter (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982).

276
QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
[105] J. Knoester and S. Mukamel, “Intermolecular forces, spontaneous emission, and super-
radiance in a dielectric medium: polariton-mediated interactions,” Phys. Rev. A 40,
7065–7080 (1989).
[106] G. Juzeliunas and D. L. Andrews, “Quantum electrodynamics of resonant energy transfer
in condensed matter,” Phys. Rev. B 49, 8751–8763 (1994).
[107] G. Juzeliunas and D. L. Andrews, “Quantum electrodynamics of resonance energy
transfer,” Adv. Chem. Phys. 112, 357–410 (2000).
[108] J. J. Rodriguez and A. Salam, “Influence of medium chirality on electric dipole-dipole
resonance energy transfer,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 498, 67–70 (2010).
[109] J. J. Rodriguez and A. Salam, “Effect of medium chirality on the rate of resonance
energy transfer,” J. Phys. Chem. B 115, 5183–5190 (2011).
[110] D. P. Craig and T. Thirunamachandran, “Third-body mediation of resonance coupling
between identical molecules,” Chem. Phys. 135, 37–48 (1989).
[111] A. Salam, “Mediation of resonance energy transfer by a third molecule,” J. Chem. Phys.
136, 014509 1–5 (2012).
[112] J. F. Babb, “Casimir effects in atomic, molecular, and optical physics,” Adv. At. Mol.
Opt. Phys. 59, 1–20 (2010).
[113] F. London, “The general theory of molecular forces,” Trans. Faraday Soc. 33, 8–26
(1937).
[114] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Casimir-Polder potential as an interaction
between induced dipoles,” Phys. Rev. A 48, 4761–4763 (1993).
[115] D. P. Craig and E. A. Power, “The asymptotic Casimir-Polder potential from second-
order perturbation theory and its generalization for anisotropic polarizabilities,” Int. J.
Quant. Chem. 3, 903–911 (1969).
[116] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Dispersion forces between molecules with
one or both molecules excited,” Phys. Rev. A 51, 3660–3666 (1995).
[117] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “Quantum electrodynamics with non-
relativistic sources. V. Electromagnetic field correlations and intermolecular interac-
tions between molecules in either ground or excited states,” Phys. Rev. A 47, 2539–2551
(1993).
[118] C. Mavroyannis and M. J. Stephen, “Dispersion forces,” Mol. Phys. 5, 629–638
(1962).
[119] D. P. Craig and T. Thirunamachandran, “New approaches to chiral discrimination in
coupling between molecules,” Theo. Chem. Acc. 102, 112–120 (1999).
[120] E. A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, “The non-additive dispersion energies for
N-molecules: a quantum electrodynamical theory,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 401,
267–279 (1985).
[121] B. M. Axilrod and E. Teller, “Interaction of the van der Waals type between three atoms,”
J. Chem. Phys. 11, 299–300 (1943).
[122] T. Thirunamachandran, “Intermolecular interactions in the presence of an intense radi-
ation field,” Mol. Phys. 40, 393–399 (1980).
[123] A. Ashkin, “Acceleration and trapping of particles by radiation pressure,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 24, 156–159 (1970).
[124] M. M. Burns, J.-M. Fournier, and J. A. Golovchenko, “Optical binding,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
63, 1233–1236 (1989).

REFERENCES
277
[125] T. M. Grzegorczyk, B. A. Kemp, and J. A. Kong, “Trapping and binding of an arbitrary
number of cylindrical particles in an in-plane electromagnetic field,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A
23, 2324–2330 (2006).
[126] N. K. Metzger, E. M. Wright, W. Sibbett, and K. Dholakia, “Visualization of optical
binding of microparticles using a femtosecond fiber optical trap,” Opt. Exp. 14, 3677–
3687 (2006).
[127] F. Chen, G. L. Klimchitskaya, V. M. Mostepanenko, and U. Mohideen, “Demonstration
of optically modulated dispersion forces,” Opt. Exp. 15, 4823–4829 (2007).
[128] K. Dholakia, P. Reece, and M. Gu, “Optical micromanipulation,” Chem. Soc. Rev. 37,
42–55 (2008).
[129] T. Czim´ar, L. C. D´avila-Romero, K. Dholakia, and D. L. Andrews, “Multiple optical
trapping and binding: new routes to self-assembly,” J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 43,
102001 1–25 (2010).
[130] A. Salam, “Molecular quantum electrodynamics of radiation-induced intermolecular
forces,” Adv. Quant. Chem. 62, 1–34 (2011).
[131] D. L. Andrews (ed.), Structured Light and Its Applications (Elsevier, Burlington, MA,
2008).
[132] A. Salam, “Intermolecular interactions in a radiation field via the method of induced
moments,” Phys. Rev. A 73, 013406 1–8 (2006).
[133] A. Salam, “Two alternative derivations of the static contribution to the radiation-induced
intermolecular energy shift,” Phys. Rev. A 76, 043805 1–5 (2007).
[134] J. Rodriguez, L. C. D´avila-Romero, and D. L. Andrews, “Optical binding in nanoparticle
assembly: potential energy landscapes,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 043805 1–7 (2008).
[135] A. Salam, “On the effect of a radiation field in modifying the intermolecular interaction
between two chiral molecules,” J. Chem. Phys. 124, 014302 1–6 (2006).
[136] L. C. D´avila-Romero and D. L. Andrews, “A retarded coupling approach to intermolec-
ular interactions,” J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 42, 085403 1–10 (2009).


9
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
Angus J. Bain
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London, UK
9.1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides an introduction to the fundamental physics governing the
simultaneous absorption of two or more photons by molecules. Multiphoton absorp-
tion has been at the forefront of scientific research for close to five decades, first
as a spectroscopic tool providing new and complimentary information on molecular
structure and dynamics to conventional (single-photon) techniques. More recently,
multiphoton absorption has found widespread application at the interface between the
physical and life sciences through its ability to provide inherent confocal resolution
in fluorescence microscopy, allowing the investigation of complex biological samples
and the study of molecular interactions in live cells.
Multiphoton absorption processes are examples of nonlinear optical phenomena
[1–4]. Nonlinear optics covers a wide range of intensity-dependent optical processes
where the applied electromagnetic (EM) fields are of sufficient intensity to modify the
intrinsic (linear) optical properties of a medium (e.g., refractive index, birefringence,
absorption coefficient). These interactions also give rise to the mixing of optical
fields and the generation of new optical frequencies via second harmonic generation
[5], sum and difference frequency generation [6], four-wave mixing [7], and super
continuum generation [8]. Self-action effects where an EM wave modifies the optical
properties of the medium through which it is propagating lead to phenomena such
as self-focusing [9] and self-phase modulation [10]. The interplay between self-
phase modulation and material dispersion is exploited in long low-loss optical fiber
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
279

280
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
communications via the formation of optical solitons [11]. Soliton formation through
the interaction of self-phase modulation, self-focusing, and material dispersion is
exploited in Kerr lens mode locking of femtosecond Ti:sapphire lasers [12, 13].
The development of the broadly tunable femtosecond Ti:sapphire laser has played a
pivotal role in driving new applications of two- and multiphoton fluorescence in the
life sciences [14].
All multiphoton processes depend on the intensity of the interacting fields. At
very high optical field strengths where the interaction between the field and the
medium can no longer be treated as a perturbation, in that the applied optical fields
are of a similar or greater magnitude to those that bind the participating electrons,
effects such as extreme/high harmonic generation [15], multiple ionization [16],
and plasma production [17] are observed. For photon fluxes up to 1035 photons
cm−2 s−1, perturbation theory is applicable [18]. The diffraction-limited focal spot
of a 100-mW, 76-MHz, 100-fs mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser at 800 nm using a
1.2-NA microscope objective yields a photon flux of 6 × 1031 photons cm−2 s−1
and for focused nanosecond dye lasers used for wavelength-dependent two-photon
excitation typical photon fluxes are on the order of 1028 photons cm−2 s−1 [19].
Both are therefore well within the perturbative regime. Perturbative nonlinear optical
phenomena can be classified as either dissipative or parametric processes [7, 20],
the former involving a net energy exchange between the applied optical field(s) and
the medium. Multiphoton absorption phenomena are wholly dissipative processes;
parametric nonlinear optical phenomena have been extensively reviewed by a number
of authors [7, 20, 21].
Following an introduction to the nonlinear optical responses/susceptibilities that
govern multiphoton absorption, we will cover fundamental aspects of molecular
two-photon absorption in liquids and gases. Applications of two- and multiphoton
absorption in molecular imaging, the investigation of molecular order, and motion
and studies of resonance energy transfer will also be discussed.
9.1.1
Historical Perspective
Two-photon absorption is the simplest and most widely exploited multiphoton pro-
cess. In its most fundamental form it is the process whereby two photons with fre-
quency 𝜈are simultaneously absorbed by a quantum system in a transition between an
initial (ground) state and an (allowed) excited state with an energy separation of 2h𝜈.
Three decades separate the publication of the theoretical foundation of two-photon
absorption in 1931 by Maria G¨oppert-Mayer [22] and its experimental realization in
an Eu2+-doped CaF crystal by Kaiser and Garrett in 1961 [23]. The experiments of
Kaiser and Garrett were a rapid exploitation of the coherent pulsed output of the ruby
laser developed by Maiman in 1960 [24]. In the ruby laser, oscillation is restricted
to two lines at 692.7 and 694.5 nm and the ability to investigate two-photon absorp-
tion spectra needed a tunable laser source. Early experiments combined a pulsed
ruby laser and the spectrally filtered output of a Xe flash lamp to achieve two-color
two-photon absorption of molecular crystals [25] and liquids [26–28]. This approach

INTRODUCTION
281
suffered from low resolution (about 100 cm−1) and had limited tuning. High reso-
lution two-photon spectra required the development of tunable visible laser sources.
To this end Bergman and Jortner [29,30] utilized a dye laser pumped by the second
harmonic output of a Q-switched ruby laser to obtain the two-photon fluorescence
excitation spectrum of anthracene in a solution. Improvements in dye laser tech-
nology involving N2 laser pumping of a H¨ansch type dye laser [31] were used by
Hochstrasser and co-workers to obtain high resolution spectra of biphenyl, benzene,
and naphthalene crystals [32–34]. Two-photon absorption of gas-phase molecules
was first demonstrated for benzene by Hochstrasser and co-workers in 1974 [35] fol-
lowed by nitric oxide [36]. The expansion in two-photon spectroscopy from this point
was rapid with the development of techniques for non-fluorescent species involving,
for example, multiphoton ionization [37–39] and the exploitation of the two-photon
resonant contribution to three-wave mixing [20, 40]. Two-photon absorption from
dual counter-propagating beams yielded sub-Doppler resolution in gas-phase two-
photon absorption [41,42], allowing the hitherto unobserved rovibronic structure of
polyatomic molecules to be investigated [43]. Scientific interest in molecular two-
photon absorption was initially focused on exploiting the fundamental differences
in the selection rules for single- and two-photon absorption (see below), allowing
the identification and characterization of new and hitherto inaccessible (dipole for-
bidden) electronic transitions in molecules. Developments in molecular two-photon
spectroscopy up to 1997 have been reviewed in detail by McClain [44], Friedrich and
McClain [45], Goodman and Rava [46], Birge [47], Lin et al. [16], and Callis [48].
Improvements in the tunability and peak power of mode-locked lasers in the
1970s and 1980s led to rapid advances in the fields of nonlinear optics and nonlinear
spectroscopy. These were paralleled by the development of molecules and materials
with enhanced nonlinear optical responses together with new laser gain media. In
1986, the broad near-infrared laser gain properties of titanium sapphire (Ti:sapphire)
were investigated by Moulton [49] shortly followed by the first demonstration of
continuous-wave laser oscillation [50]. The broad lasing bandwidth of Ti:sapphire
heralded the possibility of tunable femtosecond laser oscillation. Active mode-locking
of continuous-wave Ti:sapphire lasers yielding stable 150 fs pulse trains was demon-
strated in 1991 by Curley et al. [51]. Sub-100-fs Ti:sapphire oscillation using passive
mode-locking was achieved in 1991 by Keane and co-workers [52] and Spinelli
et al. [12]. Stable femtosecond continuous-wave passive mode-locking in Ti:sapphire
was shown to arise from the intensity-dependent refractive index and termed Kerr
lens mode-locking [13], a patent for the Kerr lens mode-locking technique was
subsequently assigned to Coherent [12]. At this time the recently developed two-
photon scanning fluorescence microscope [53] had utilized two-photon fluorescence
excited by a non-tunable (630-nm) colliding pulse mode-locked (CPM) dye laser
[54] limiting its practical application. Replacement of the CPM laser by a femtosec-
ond Ti:sapphire laser transformed two-photon microscopy; near-infrared two-photon
excitation yielded visible fluorescence in a wide range of fluorescent dyes and the
then newly emerging fluorescent proteins [55,56]. The first commercial two-photon
microscope was marketed by BioRad in 1996. Research activity involving two- and

282
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1960
1970
1980
1990
Year
A
B
C
D1
D2
E
F
G
Number of publications
2000
2010
FIGURE 9.1
The results of a search (Scopus) for journal and conference articles between
1962 and 2012 that contain the terms two-photon or multiphoton in their title, abstract, or full
bibliographic record. Milestones along the timeline are as follows: (A) The development of
the ruby laser by Mainman in 1960, (B) the first observation of molecular two-photon excited
fluorescence in 1966, (C) nanosecond tunable dye lasers used to obtain the first two-photon
fluorescent excitation spectra in liquids by Jortner et al. in 1972 and gases by Hochstrasser
et al. in 1973, (D1) the development of both narrow bandwidth and sub-picosecond dye lasers
from the 1970s to 1980s, (D2) Ti:sapphire laser first demonstrated by Moulton in 1986, (E)
development of two-photon laser scanning microscopy using modelocked dye lasers by Denk
et al. in 1990) and the demonstration of about 60–150-fs Ti:sapphire pulse widths using active
mode-locking by Ferguson et al. and passive mode-locking by Spence et al. and Spinelli and
Negus in 1991, (F) US patent for Kerr lens mode-locking issued to Coherent (Negus and
Spinelli) in 1992, and (G) the development of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)
by the Tsein laboratory in 1995, and the first commercial two-photon confocal microscope
launched by BioRad in 1996.
multiphoton processes has seen a marked increase over the past 20 years as can be
seen from Figure 9.1.
9.2
MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON ABSORPTION: BASIC PRINCIPLES
In simple terms two-photon absorption can be thought of as two instantaneously
consecutive single-photon transitions that take place via a set of “virtual” intermedi-
ate states. Virtual states are those which can be coupled (allowed) by single-photon
electric dipole transitions to the ground and excited states. In its current usage molec-
ular two-photon absorption generally involves the absorption of red to near-infrared
photons, wavelengths for which there are no single-photon electronic transitions. The
virtual states are thus strongly off-resonance and as a result their contributions to the

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON ABSORPTION: BASIC PRINCIPLES
283
Sn
S1
S0
50:50 beam splitter 
Fluorescent
dye solution
Camera
(a)
(b)
Δt ≅ h/(4  ΔE)
Δt
e
n
g
FIGURE 9.2
(a) Pictorial representation of molecular two-photon absorption between the
molecular ground state |g⟩and the excited state |e⟩via a virtual state |n⟩. The virtual state
has a lifetime Δt determined by the uncertainty principle. For two-photon absorption to occur
the time difference between the two photons must be on or below Δt. The value of Δt is
given by the difference between the photon energy and the nearest (single-photon) resonant
state which for an 800-nm photon is on the order of 0.21 fs. (b) Two-photon fluorescence
laser pulse autocorrelation: the output of a mode-locked laser is split and the two counter
propagating pulse trains are recombined in a cell containing a two-photon fluorescing dye.
The fluorescence signal is maximized in the region where the laser pulses are temporally
overlapped the photographic image can be analyzed to yield an intensity versus distance (time)
distribution proportional to 1 + 2G(2) (𝜏).
nonlinear polarization exist on a time scale Δt that is governed by the uncertainty
principle,
Δt ≈ℏ∕2ΔE,
(9.1)
with
ΔE = En −h𝜈.
(9.2)
Here, En is the energy of the virtual state and h𝜈is the incident photon energy
(Fig. 9.2a). The nearest electronic state that in principle could act as a virtual state
would be the first excited (singlet) state with a transition energy corresponding to
photons in the visible to ultraviolet regions. The energy gap ΔE is therefore on
the order of h𝜈; for a typical two-photon excitation wavelength of 800 nm, these
considerations yield a value for Δt of 2.1 × 10−16 s (0.21 fs). This is less than the
oscillation period for light at 800 nm. Thus for two-photon absorption to occur a
favorable quantum mechanical transition probability must also be combined by the
effectively instantaneous interaction of both photons with the molecule. The probabil-
ity of two photons interacting with a molecule simultaneously is therefore dependent
on the intensity of the light source employed together with the statistical nature of its

284
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
short-time intensity distribution [57]. Two-photon-induced fluorescence was rou-
tinely used as a means of determining the second-order autocorrelation function of
mode-locked (picosecond) laser pulses [58, 59] as depicted in Figure 9.2b. Two-
photon absorption can be regarded as a dissipative third-order nonlinear process
[1, 20]; the fundamental Physics of third-order nonlinear optics and two-photon
absorption are covered in the sections 9.2.1 and 9.2.2.
9.2.1
The Nonlinear Optical Polarization
From Maxwell’s constitutive relations [1, 3], the electric displacement D induced by
an EM field E is given by
D = 𝜀𝜀0E = 𝜀0(1 + 𝜒)E,
(9.3)
where 𝜀signifies a dimensionless relative dielectric constant. The susceptibility 𝜒
represents the response of the medium to the applied field giving rise to an induced
polarization P,
P = 𝜀0𝜒E.
(9.4)
With the low electric field strengths provided by conventional light sources, the
response of the medium to the applied field is linear. For the higher electric fields
present in intense lasers, the induced polarization contains additional terms,
P = 𝜀0𝜒E +
∑
N≥2
𝜒(N)(E)N.
(9.5)
The nonlinear susceptibilities 𝜒(N) depend on fundamental material properties
and intrinsic symmetry [1]. In the simple case of a monochromatic wave of angular
frequency 𝜔and wavevector k, E has the following form:
E (r, t) = E𝜔
2 exp[i(𝜔t −k ⋅r)] +
E
∗
𝜔
2 exp[−i(𝜔t −k ⋅r)].
(9.6)
Substituting Eq. (9.4) into Eq. (9.3) yields
P = 𝜀0𝜒E (r, t) + PNL.
(9.7)
Here, PNL is the nonlinear polarization induced by E (r, t) which is given by
PNL =
∑
N≥2
𝜒(N)(𝜔′) 1
2N (E(𝜔) exp[i(𝜔t −k ⋅r)] + E(𝜔)∗exp[−i(𝜔t −k ⋅r)])N.
(9.8)
The 𝜔′ dependence of 𝜒(N) arises from different frequencies (𝜔′) that origi-
nate from the products of the Fourier components of the powers of E (r, t) given in
Eq. (9.6). Using PNL as the source term in Maxwell’s equations leads to the nonlinear

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON ABSORPTION: BASIC PRINCIPLES
285
wave equation from which the nonlinear optical interactions arising from the various
susceptibilities can be described. From Maxwell’s third equation, we have [3]
∇× H = 𝜎E + 𝜕D
𝜕t .
(9.9)
For a nonlinear response, the electric displacement becomes
D = 𝜀𝜀0E + PNL.
(9.10)
Substitution of Eq. (9.10) into Eq. (9.9) gives
∇× H = 𝜎E + 𝜀𝜀0
𝜕E
𝜕t + 𝜕PNL
𝜕t
.
(9.11)
From Maxwell’s equations, we have
∇2E = 𝜇𝜇0
𝜕
𝜕t(∇× H),
(9.12)
where 𝜇is a relative magnetic permeability, and 𝜇0 the vacuum value. Combining
Eqs. (9.11) and (9.12) yields
∇2E = 𝜇𝜇0
𝜕
𝜕t
(
𝜎E + 𝜀𝜀0
𝜕E
𝜕t + 𝜕PNL
𝜕t
)
.
(9.13)
For a dielectric medium that is lossless at 𝜔the conductivity 𝜎is zero, and provided
that PNL is much smaller than the linear polarization, then the solutions to
∇2E = 𝜇𝜇0𝜀𝜀0
𝜕2E
𝜕t2 + 𝜇𝜇0
𝜕2PNL
𝜕t2
(9.14)
will have the same form as in Eq. (9.6) in that the waves generated by the non-
linear polarization are superimposed on those of the linear solution of Eq. (9.14)
when PNL = 0. For interactions in which 𝜔≠𝜔′, phase matching considerations
come into play as the generated waves at 𝜔′ do not propagate with the same spatial
phase as that of the driving fields that give rise to PNL. Thus, over a finite interac-
tion length, destructive interference will occur and the nonlinear interaction will be
greatly reduced [1, 3]. Symmetry considerations impose restrictions on the nonlinear
interactions that are allowed. In addition to phase mismatching constraints, nonlinear
optical interactions are governed by material symmetry. If we consider the first two
terms in PNL remembering that PNL is a vector quantity as are the electric fields
involved in the two products, we can write the second- and third-order nonlinear
polarizations, respectively, as
P
(2)
i
= c2𝜒(2)
ijk EjEk
(9.15)

286
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
and
P
(3)
i
= c3𝜒(3)
ijklEjEkEl,
(9.16)
where i is the component of the nonlinear polarization (x, y, or z) and j, k, and l are the
polarization components (x, y, or z) of the input fields. In a medium with inversion
symmetry, the 𝜒(N) will be invariant to inversion of the co-ordinate system (i.e., (x, y,
z) →(−x, −y, −z)), whilst the polarization components of PNL, and the input fields
all change sign, giving
−P
(2)
i
= c2𝜒(2)
ijk (−Ej)(−Ek)
(9.17)
and
−P
(3)
i
= c3𝜒(3)
ijkl(−Ej)(−Ek)(−El).
(9.18)
Equating Eqs. (9.15)–(9.18), we have
P
(2)
i
= c2𝜒(2)
ijk EjEk
−P
(2)
i
= c2𝜒(2)
ijk EjEk,
(9.19)
−P
(3)
i
= −c3𝜒(3)
ijklEjEkEl
P
(3)
i
= c3𝜒(3)
ijklEjEkEl.
(9.20)
From Eq. (9.19), P
(2)
i
= −P
(2)
i
which means that 𝜒(2)
ijk is necessarily zero. No
such restriction is placed on 𝜒(3)
ijkl. Irrespective of phase matching considerations,
second-order nonlinear optical phenomena require a non-centrosymmetric medium
and third-order nonlinear optical phenomena are in principle allowed in all media.
Third harmonic generation arising from the Fourier combination of 𝜔′ = 𝜔+ 𝜔+ 𝜔is
possible but is restricted by the phase matching consideration that requires k3𝜔= 3k𝜔,
and the relationship between the wavevector and the refractive index n is given by
k𝜔= 𝜔n𝜔
c
.
(9.21)
Third harmonic generation requires
3k𝜔= 3𝜔n𝜔
c
= k3𝜔= 3𝜔n3𝜔
c
⇒n𝜔= n3𝜔.
(9.22)
Due to material dispersion, the difference between n𝜔and n3𝜔is substantial and
third harmonic generation efficiencies are generally low [60]. The most commonly
observed third-order nonlinear optical effect that is observed with a single driving
frequency is the intensity-dependent refractive index n2 [61–65]. The combination

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON ABSORPTION: BASIC PRINCIPLES
287
of fields in Eq. (9.16) that give rise to a nonlinear polarization oscillating at 𝜔is
given by
P
(3)
i
(𝜔) = 3
4𝜒(3)
ijklEjE
∗
kE
∗
l
1
2 exp
[
i
(
𝜔t −k ⋅r
)]
+ cc.
(9.23)
By convention, a summation over all the field polarization components j, k, and l
is implicit [1, 3]. For simplicity, let us take i = j = k = l = x. The electric displacement
arising from this polarization is thus
D = 𝜀𝜀0
(
Ex
2 exp
[
i
(
𝜔t −k ⋅r
)]
+ cc
)
+ 3
4𝜒(3)
xxxx
|||Ex
|||
2
(
Ex
2 exp
[
i
(
𝜔t −k ⋅r
)]
+ cc
)
.
(9.24)
Rearranging leads to
D = 𝜀𝜀0
(
Ex
2 exp
[
i
(
𝜔t −k ⋅r
)]
+ cc
) (
1 +
3
4𝜀𝜀0
𝜒(3)
xxxx
|||Ex
|||
2)
.
(9.25)
The effective dielectric constant for the medium is thus
𝜀EFF = 𝜀
(
1 + 3
4
𝜒(3)
xxxx
𝜀𝜀0
|||Ex
|||
2
)
.
(9.26)
The refractive index of the medium thus becomes
n = n0
(
1 + 3
4
𝜒(3)
xxxx
𝜀𝜀0
|||Ex
|||
2
) 1
2
,
(9.27)
where n0 is the linear refractive
(√
𝜀
)
index of the medium. Provided the change in
refractive index is small, Eq. (9.27) can be written as
n = n0
(
1 + 3
8
𝜒(3)
xxxx
𝜀𝜀0
|||Ex
|||
2
)
.
(9.28)
Given that the relationship between |E|2 and the intensity I of the applied optical
field
|||Ex
|||
2 = 2Ix
(𝜇𝜇0
𝜀𝜀0
) 1
2
,
(9.29)

288
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
the refractive index is given by
n = n0 + 3
4
𝜒(3)
xxxx
n0𝜀0
(𝜇𝜇0
𝜀𝜀0
) 1
2
Ix.
(9.30)
The intensity-dependent index of refraction n2 is thus
n2 = 3
4
(𝜇𝜇0
𝜀𝜀0
) 1
2 𝜒(3)
xxxx
n0𝜀0
.
(9.31)
In a wholly analogous manner to single-photon absorption, the imaginary part of
n2 is responsible for two-photon absorption.
9.2.2
The Two-Photon Absorption Cross-Section
The rate of energy exchange per unit volume W, between a light wave with electric
field E, and a medium is given by the cycle-averaged scalar product
dW
dt =
⟨
E.dP
dt
⟩
,
(9.32)
where P is the polarization induced in the medium by E. Following Yariv [3] and
substituting Eqs. (9.6) and (9.23) and expressing the third-order susceptibility in
terms of real and imaginary components gives
dW
dt = 3
4𝜒(3)
xxxx
|||Ex|||
2
⟨⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
i𝜔
E
2
x
4 exp
[
2i
(
𝜔t −k ⋅r
)] (Re𝜒(3)
xxxx −iIm𝜒(3)
xxxx
)
+ i𝜔ExEx ∗
4
(
Re𝜒(3)
xxxx −iIm𝜒(3)
xxxx
) −i𝜔ExEx ∗
4
(
Re𝜒(3)
xxxx + iIm𝜒(3)
xxxx
)
−i𝜔
E
∗2
x
4 exp
[
−2i
(
𝜔t −k ⋅r
)] (Re𝜒(3)
xxxx + iIm𝜒(3)
xxxx
)⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⟩
(9.33)
All the terms containing the real components of 𝜒(3) vanish in the cycle average
giving
dW
dt = 3
8
|||Ex|||
4 𝜔Im𝜒(3)
xxxx.
(9.34)

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
289
Substituting Eq. (9.29) in Eq. (9.34), we have
dW
dt = 3𝜔
2
(𝜇𝜇0
𝜀𝜀0
)
Im𝜒(3)
xxxxI2
x.
(9.35)
The two-photon absorption cross-section 𝜎(2)
𝜔
is defined in terms of the photon
absorption rate equation
dnP
dt = 𝜎(2)
𝜔NGS
I2
x
ℏ2𝜔2 ,
(9.36)
where nP is the photon number, NGS is the ground state population of absorbing
species, and I∕ℏ𝜔is the photon flux
dW
dt = 𝜎(2)
𝜔NGS
I2
x
ℏ𝜔.
(9.37)
The two-photon cross-section in units of m4 s per photon is thus
𝜎(2)
𝜔= 3ℏ𝜔2𝜇𝜇0
2NGS𝜀𝜀0
Im𝜒(3)
xxxx =
3ℏ𝜔2
2NGSc2𝜀2𝜀2
0
Im𝜒(3)
xxxx,
(9.38)
where 𝜒(3) has the SI units of m2 V−2 and 𝜎(2)
𝜔m4 s−1 per photon. Two-photon cross-
sections are generally quoted in units of cm4 s per photon or in G¨oppert Mayer (GM)
units, where 1 GM = 10−50 cm4 s per photon [28]. In fluorescent species, two-photon
absorption cross-sections are often quoted as the product of 𝜎(2)
𝜔
and the quantum
yield of fluorescence of the molecule. This product 𝜎(2)
𝜔𝜙is termed the two-photon
action cross-section. Two-photon action cross-sections of both intrinsic and synthetic
fluorophores are shown in Table 9.1. In recent years, there has been considerable effort
directed toward the design and synthesis of molecules with significantly enhanced
two-photon cross-sections [64–72]. Two-photon action cross-sections as large as
12,000 GM have been achieved [72]. Research in this area has been driven by the
large degree of potential applications of two-photon absorbing materials including
optical power limiting [73,74], microfabrication [75,76], biological imaging [53], and
three-dimensional data storage [75, 77, 78], comprehensive reviews of work in this
active area have been produced by Blanchard-Desce et al. [79] and Anderson and co-
workers [80]. Fundamental limitations to two-photon cross-sections and third-order
nonlinear susceptibilities have been discussed by Kuzyk [81] and Samoc [82].
9.3
MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
In quantum mechanical terms, the cross-section for the absorption of two photons of
polarizations 𝛼and 𝛽between states |g⟩and |e⟩is proportional to the squared modulus

290
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
TABLE 9.1
Two-photon action cross-sections of common fluorophores
𝜎(2)𝜙(GM)
Excitation
wavelength 𝜆(nm)
Extrinsic (synthetic) fluorophores
Rhodamine B
153.00
800
Fluorescein
37.33
770–790
Alexa 488
97.94
691
Coumarin 307
12
700
Intrinsic fluorophores
Green fluorescent protein (GFP) wild type
6.43
800
Enhanced GFP (EGFP)
76.30
880
NADH
6.9 × 10−2
720
Folic acid
7.161 × 10−3
700
Retinol
6.8 × 10−2
700
The data given is a subset of an extensive compilation of the wavelength dependence of the two-photon
action cross-sections of extrinsic and intrinsic fluorophores by the Developmental Resource for Biophysical
Imaging Opto-Electronics (DRBIO) at Cornell University (W. Webb and co-workers): http://www.drbio
.cornell.edu/cross_sections.html
of the tensor We→e
𝛼𝛽
defined by a sum of single-photon electric dipole transition
moments ⟨g| 𝜇|n⟩⟨n| 𝜇|e⟩involving the intermediate (virtual) states |n⟩[83],
|||Wg→e
𝛼𝛽
|||
2 =
|||||
∑
n
(𝛼⋅⟨g| 𝜇|n⟩⟨n| 𝜇|e⟩⋅𝛽
𝜈n −𝜈𝛼+ iΓn
+ 𝛽⋅⟨g| 𝜇|n⟩⟨n| 𝜇|e⟩⋅𝛼
𝜈n −𝜈𝛽+ iΓn
)|||||
2
,
(9.39)
where 𝜈n and Γn are the transition frequency and homogeneous line-width of each |n⟩,
respectively. For identical photons with the same polarization (𝛼= 𝛽= ̂e), Eq. (9.39)
becomes
||Wg→e (̂e)||
2 ∝
||||||
̂e ⋅
[
∑
n
(⟨g| 𝜇|n⟩⟨n| 𝜇|e⟩
𝜈n −𝜈𝛼+ iΓn
)]
⋅̂e
||||||
2
.
(9.40)
The selection rules for two-photon absorption are determined by the products of
single-photon matrix elements ⟨g| 𝜇|n⟩⟨n| 𝜇|e⟩. For single-photon electric dipole
transitions a change in parity + ↔−must take place [84] and where the molecule
possesses a center of symmetry a change in g/u electronic symmetry (g ↔u, u ↔g)
is required. For two-photon absorption the corresponding selection rules are thus
+ ↔+, −↔−, g ↔g, u ↔u. The differences in selection rules between single-
and two-photon absorption are analogous to those between infrared and Raman
spectroscopy. Two-photon absorption allows spectroscopic access to excited states
largely inaccessible to one-photon spectroscopy and hidden g symmetry electronic
states have been discovered [26, 85–89]. In molecules of lower symmetry, the

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
291
Sn
S1
S0
Pump
FIGURE 9.3
A Jablonski diagram indicating the excitation and relaxation pathways that
lead to two-photon excited fluorescence. Excitation occurs from the molecular ground state
S0 to an excited singlet state Sn. This is followed by rapid (𝜏IC sub-picosecond) internal
conversion and collisional relaxation to lower vibrational levels of S1. Spontaneous emission
(nanoseconds) takes place to high vibrational levels of the ground state with fast (𝜏R sub-
picosecond) collisional relaxation returning molecules to the initially populated levels.
differences between one- and two-photon electronic transitions are more subtle,
and the selection rules forbidding certain transitions can be relaxed by the coupling
of electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom (vibronic coupling). Vibronic cou-
pling and other perturbations make different contributions to one- and two-photon
electronic spectra and the study of two-photon spectra in aromatic molecules and
polyenes has proved most fruitful in investigating these phenomena. Comprehensive
reviews of this research have been provided by Goodman and Rava [46 ] and Hollas
[90]. Two- and multiphoton absorption in freely rotating molecules will be discussed
in Section 9.3.3.
A simplified picture (Fig. 9.3) of molecular two-photon absorption and spon-
taneous emission using sub-picosecond laser pulses for a solvated population of
molecules is shown in the Jablonski diagram. Initial excitation from low-lying vibra-
tional levels in the molecular electronic ground state (S0) takes place via the simul-
taneous absorption of two (non-resonant) near-infrared photons (see Section 9.2).
The initially excited state (Sn) undergoes rapid (sub-picosecond) internal conversion
and vibrational relaxation in collisions with surrounding solvent molecules leading

292
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
Single-photon excitation
Two-photon excitation
Fluorescein in methanol, 5 × 10–4M
700
650
600
550
500
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Wavelength (nm)
Normalized signal (a.u.)
FIGURE 9.4
Steady-state fluorescence spectra of fluorescein obtained using single-photon
excitation at 500 nm and two-photon excitation at 800 nm. Although the two-photon transition
energy is higher, 3.1 eV versus 2.48 eV, fast relaxation within the excited state manifold leads to
the rapid population of the same low-lying vibrational levels in S1 as shown by the equivalence
of the emission spectra. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
to the population of lower vibrational levels in S1. In the absence of external per-
turbations, the population in S1 decays by spontaneous emission (about 10−9 s) to
upper vibrational levels of S0 consistent with the Franck–Condon principle. Solvent
deactivation of the vibrationally hot ground state population is correspondingly rapid.
The fluorescence induced by molecular two-photon excitation in general originates
from the same levels that are accessed by single-photon excitation (see Fig. 9.4); here,
excitation is directly into high vibrational levels of S1 with rapid solvent-mediated
vibrational relaxation prior to fluorescence.
9.3.1
Polarization Dependence of Two-Photon Absorption
In addition to the intensity-dependent transition probability, the excitation of two-
photon fluorescence differs from single-photon excitation in that the absorption proba-
bility is intrinsically polarization dependent. A fundamental property of single-photon
transitions in an isotropic medium is that the transition probability is independent of
the polarization of the incident light [91]. However, for two-photon absorption, the
transition does not involve a simple dipolar rearrangement of electronic charge den-
sity but depends on a sum of products of all the allowed single-photon electric dipole
transition moments between the ground, virtual, and final states. In simple terms, the
“first” photon can be thought of as selecting an oriented (virtual) molecular array
with which the “second” photon interacts. The polarization dependence of molecular
two-photon absorption was first investigated in azulene by Peticolas and co-workers
in 1965 [92]. A theoretical treatment of polarized two-photon absorption in benzene
was presented by Honig et al. in 1967 [93]. Monson and McClain’s experimental and

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
293
475
495
Wavelength (nm)
Intensity (a.u.)
415
435
455
0
2
4
6
8
(b)
Wavelength (nm)
N
N
Intensity (a.u.)
Polarization ratio Ω
410
0
2
4
6
8
(a)
450
490
530
570
610
650
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
FIGURE 9.5
(a) The two-photon excitation spectrum of pyrimidine in a 0.7M n-hexane
solution at room temperature (−−−−) and the one-photon absorption spectrum (
) is
plotted at one half of the actual transition energy. The two-photon polarization ratios Ω across
the two-photon absorption spectrum are also shown (−∙−∙−). (b) Comparison of the two-
photon fluorescence excitation spectra for linear and circularly polarized light in the region of
the overlapping B2 (𝜋𝜋∗) and A2 (n𝜋∗) two-photon transitions. Adapted from Reference 96.
theoretical work on polarized two-photon absorption in randomly oriented molecules
showed how the combination of linear and circularly polarized photons could be
used to determine the symmetry of the participating electronic states [27, 28, 94].
Drucker and McClain [95] introduced the concept of the two-photon polarization
ratio—the transition probability/cross-section ratio for circular to linear polarization
Ω = 𝜎(2) (circ)/𝜎(2) (lin). These studies adopted a Cartesian tensor formalism which
was extended by Nascimento [19] who expressed the polarization dependence of
the participating transitions via a direction cosine formalism with the orientational
average between the laboratory and molecular frames calculated via the connecting
Euler rotation [91]. This work confirmed earlier theoretical predictions and predicted
additional symmetry–polarization relationships. The utility of combining linear and
circular polarization in two-photon absorption spectroscopy are clearly demonstrated
in the study of pyrimidine by Callis et al. [96], in which the measurement of linear and
circularly polarized two-photon excited fluorescence spectra and the measurement
of Ω revealed the hitherto unobserved A2 (𝜋𝜋∗) ←Ag transition (see Fig. 9.5). The
importance of polarization measurements in determining the states involved in two-
photon absorption [19, 27, 28, 48, 94–108] and higher order (multiphoton) transitions
[109–115] is well established, providing information on fundamental photophysics,
molecular structure, solvation symmetry, and protein secondary structure.
In this chapter, we will adopt a spherical tensor formalism for two-photon absorp-
tion [116]; following Wan and Johnson [117], the two-photon orientation-dependent
transition probability for two identical photons (i.e., 𝛼= 𝛽= ̂e) can be expressed as
A (Ω) = ||̂e ⋅S ⋅̂e||
2 ,
(9.41)
S ∝
∑
n
(⟨g| 𝜇|n⟩⟨n| 𝜇|e⟩
𝜈n −𝜈𝛼+ iΓn
)
,
(9.42)

294
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
where ̂e is the polarization vector of the light and S is a second rank tensor describing
the angular properties of the two-photon transition; ̂e and S are defined by the labo-
ratory frame angles Ω (𝛼𝛽𝛾). For the absorption of two identical photons, Eq. (9.41)
can be written as
A (Ω) = ||T ⋅S||
2 .
(9.43)
The polarization tensor T is given by the direct product of the two polarization
vectors
T = (̂e ⊗̂e) =
∑
l,m
Tl
m (Lab).
(9.44)
Expressing S and T as spherical tensors, the scalar product in Eq. (9.44)
becomes
T ⋅S =
∑
l,m
Tl
m (Lab) Sl
−m (Lab) (−1)m .
(9.45)
The transition tensor S is determined by molecular frame quantities (i.e., the prod-
ucts of the single-photon molecular transition dipole matrix elements in Eq. (9.45)).
However, the scalar product in Eq. (9.44) is expressed in the laboratory frame, where
the components of T are determined by the excitation polarization vectors. The com-
ponents of S in the laboratory frame are obtained by an Euler rotation D(ΩLM) that
connects the laboratory and molecular reference frames [91],
Sl
−m (Lab) =
∑
n
Sl
n (Mol)Dl
n−m(ΩLM).
(9.46)
Substituting into Eq. (9.45) yields
T ⋅S =
∑
l,m,n
Tl
m (Lab) Dl
n−m(ΩLM)Sl
n (Mol) (−1)m .
(9.47)
The transition probability is thus
A (Ω) =
||||||
∑
l,m,n
Tl
m (Lab) Dl
n−m
(ΩLM
) Sl
n (Mol) (−1)m
||||||
2
,
(9.48)
A (Ω) =
∑
l, l′,m, m′,n,n′
Tl
m (Lab) Tl′
m′ (Lab)∗Dl
n−m
(ΩLM
) Dl′
n′−m′(ΩLM)∗
× Sl
n (Mol) Sl′
n′
∗(Mol) (−1)m+m′ .
(9.49)

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
295
After some manipulation and the contraction of rotation matrix elements [91], the
transition probability becomes
A (Ω) =
∑
K,Q,N
AK
NQDK
−N−Q(ΩLM),
(9.50)
where
AK
QN = (2K + 1) (−1)N
∑
l, l′,m, m′,n,n′
[(
l
l′
K
m
−m′
−Q
) (
l
l′
K
−n
n′
−N
)
× Tl
m (Lab) Tl′
−m′ (Lab) Sl
n (Mol) Sl′
−n′ (Mol)
]
.
(9.51)
The laboratory frame tensor components for linear and circularly polarized photons
(from Eq. (9.44)) are given by
e1
0 ⊗e1
0 =
1
√
3
(√
2T2
0 (Lab) −T0
0 (Lab)
)
,
(9.52)
e1
1 ⊗e1
1 = T2
2 (Lab) .
(9.53)
The linearly and circularly polarized laboratory frame tensor products are,
respectively,
2T2
0 (Lab) T2
0 (Lab) + T0
0 (Lab) T0
0 (Lab) −2
√
2T2
0 (Lab) T0
0 (Lab)
3
(9.54)
and
T2
2 (Lab) T2
−2 (Lab) .
(9.55)
For linear and circularly polarized excitation there is an overall (laboratory) axis
of cylindrical symmetry and Q = 0 in both Eqs. (9.54) and (9.55). It should be noted
however that these laboratory-fixed axes are not equivalent and are determined by the
polarization vector and the direction of propagation of the exciting radiation field for
linearly and circularly polarized excitation, respectively (see Fig. 9.6). From the 3j
symbols in Eq. (9.51) and with reference to Eqs. (9.52) and (9.53), it can be seen that
the excited state is characterized by tensors of rank K = 0, 2, and 4 (A0
00, A2
N0, and
A4
N0). Unlike single-photon excitation, the relative values of these moments depend
not only on the excitation polarization but also on the structure of the molecular
frame transition tensor S. The relationship between the Cartesian and spherical com-
ponents of a second rank tensor can be calculated using standard angular momentum

296
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
54.7°
54.7°
z
z
Iz(t)
Iz(t)
Ix(t)
Ix(t)
R(t) =
Iz(t) – Ix(t)
Iz(t) + 2Ix(t)
R(t) =
Iz(t) – Ix(t)
Iz(t) + 2Ix(t)
Sample
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Sample
FIGURE 9.6
Excitation–detection geometries for the determination of the transition strength
for (a) linearly polarized and (b) circularly polarized two-photon excitation. Fluorescence inten-
sity measurements are made at magic-angle polarization settings with respect to the quanti-
zation (symmetry) axis for the two polarizations. Alternatively, the fluorescence intensity can
be constructed from IV (t) + 2IH (t) and 2IV (t) + IH (t) measurements for linear and circu-
lar polarizations, respectively. (c) Excitation–detection geometry for fluorescence anisotropy
measurements following linearly polarized two-photon excitation.
methods [118] and the coupling coefficients can be expressed in the following matrix
form:
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
S0
0
S2
−2
S2
−1
S2
0
S2
1
S2
2
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
−1
√
3
0
0
0
−1
√
3
0
0
0
−1
√
3
1
2
−i
2
0
−i
2
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
−i
2
1
2
−i
2
0
−1
√
6
0
0
0
−1
√
6
0
0
0
√
2
3
0
0
−1
2
0
0
−i
2
−1
2
−i
2
0
1
2
i
2
0
i
2
−1
2
0
0
0
0
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
×
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
SXX
SXY
SXZ
SYX
SYY
SYZ
SZX
SZY
SZZ
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
.
(9.56)

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
297
The difference between the laboratory frame polarization tensors is reflected in
the degree to which linear and circularly polarized two-photon absorption “sample”
the molecular fixed transition moments. The two-photon absorption cross-sections
for linear and circularly polarized excitation are proportional to the scalar component
A0
00 of ||T ⋅S||
2
A0
00 (lin) =
(T2
0 (Lab))2
5
∑
n
(−1)2−n S2
n (Mol) S2
−n (Mol) + (T0
0 (Lab))2(S0
0 (Mol))2 ,
(9.57)
A0
00 (circ) =
T2
2 (Lab) T2
−2 (Lab)
5
∑
n
(−1)2−n S2
n (Mol) S2
−n (Mol) .
(9.58)
Expressing the laboratory frame polarization tensors in Cartesian form
(Eq. (9.56)), the ratio of circularly polarized to linearly polarized two-photon cross-
sections is given by
Ω =
A0
00(circ)
A0
00 (Lin)
=
3(TXY)2 ∑
n
(−1)2−n S2
n (Mol) S2
−n (Mol)
(TZZ)2
[
5 (S0
0 (Mol))2 + 2 ∑
n
(−1)2−n S2
n (Mol) S2
−n (Mol)
] .
(9.59)
The polarization tensors TXY and TZZ have equal magnitude and the ratio Ω is
simply
Ω =
3 ∑
n
(−1)2−n S2
n (Mol) S2
−n (Mol)
5 (S0
0 (Mol))2 + 2 ∑
n (−1)2−n S2
n (Mol) S2
−n (Mol)
.
(9.60)
Linear and circularly polarized two-photon transitions show different sensitivities
to the molecular frame tensor components. For planar aromatic molecules, the two-
photon transition is dominated by transition moments in the plane of the molecule. If
we consider a planar molecule for which there are no molecule frame Z components,
Ω is given by
Ω = (SXX + SYY)2 + 3(SXX −SYY)2 + 3(SXY + SYX)2
4(SXX + SYY)2 + 2(SXX −SYY)2 + 2(SXY + SYX)2 .
(9.61)
For the absorption of two identical photons, SAB = SBA, and Eq. (9.61)
simplifies [117]
Ω = (SXX + SYY)2 + 3(SXX −SYY)2 + 12(SXY)2
4(SXX + SYY)2 + 2(SXX −SYY)2 + 8(SXY)2 .
(9.62)

298
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
Normalizing with respect to SXX, we have
Ω = (1 + S)2 + 3 (1 −S)2 + 12D2
4 (1 + S)2 + 2 (1 −S)2 + 8D2 .
(9.63)
In terms of the 𝛿F, 𝛿G, and 𝛿H tensor parameters of Monson and McClain [28],
the absorption polarization ratio becomes
Ω = −𝛿F + 3𝛿G′
𝛿F + 2𝛿G′ ,
𝛿F = C (1 −S)2 ,
𝛿G′ = W[(1 + S)2 + (1 −S)2 + 4D2],
(9.64)
where W is a constant of proportionality.
Excitation of diagonal tensor elements corresponds to two parallel transition
moments, which requires simultaneous action by the applied electric field twice along
a single symmetry axis. Conversely, the preparation of off-diagonal terms requires
simultaneous action by the applied electric filed along two orthogonal axes. These
considerations imply that the former is favored for linearly polarized excitation and
the latter for circular polarization. This is borne out by the relative weighting of the
diagonal and off-diagonal elements in the circular and linear polarization elements in
Eq. (9.62). For a transition tensor with S = 1, the weighting of off-diagonal to diago-
nal elements in circularly polarized excitation is 3:1, whereas for linear polarization,
the weighting of diagonal to off-diagonal elements is 2:1. Transitions into non-totally
symmetric upper states have only mixed Cartesian elements in the transition tensor
(SXX = SYY = 0) and Ω = 1.5, conversely in transitions to totally symmetric excited
states diagonal elements are dominant [96] and a lower value of Ω results. The two-
photon absorption of pyrimidine shows a significant dip and rise in Ω across the main
absorption feature at 415–495 nm (Fig. 9.5). Callis et al. [96] show that this arises
from transitions to the totally symmetric A2 (n𝜋∗) and non-symmetric B2 (𝜋𝜋∗) states.
For a single element diagonal transition tensor, S = D = 0 and Ω = 2∕3. With no off-
diagonal elements (D = 0), values for Ω can vary from 3/2 (S = −1) to 1/4 (S = 1)
as shown in Figure 9.7. The relative absorption strengths for linear and circularly
polarized two-photon absorption can be determined from the integrated fluorescence
intensity for the relevant excitation polarization,
Ω = IC
ABS
/IL
ABS = ∫IC
F (t) dt
/
∫IL
F (t) dt.
(9.65)
The total fluorescence intensity can be obtained from a “magic-angle” polariza-
tion measurement at 54.7◦to the symmetry axis (axis of cylindrical symmetry for the
transition). Measurement of fluorescence intensity and anisotropy data in linearly and
circularly polarized, two-photon excited fluorescence necessarily requires different
experimental arrangements [117, 119]. In particular, two “magic-angle” configura-
tions are required for fluorescence lifetime and absorption anisotropy experiments

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
299
|D| >> S
|D| = 10
|D| = 5
|D| = 4
|D| = 3
|D| = 2
|D| = 1
|D| = 0.5
|D| = 0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
–10
–5
0
5
10
SYY/SXX
Ω
FIGURE 9.7
Variation in the absorption ratio Ω as a function of S and D. For a single
element transition tensor S = D = 0 and Ω = 2∕3. The limits of Ω vary between 0.25 (S = 1,
|D| = 0) and 1.5 (|D| ≤1).
[103] (Fig. 9.6). An alternative approach applicable to non-fluorescent materials
using polarized Z-scan measurements has recently been demonstrated by Vivas and
co-workers [107]. Polarization-dependent studies of two-photon absorption have
until recently been wholly concerned with isotropically oriented samples. In a novel
advance Hochstrasser and co-workers employed polarized single- and two-photon
fluorescence excitation of surface-attached single rhodamine B molecules—an inter-
action where the isotropic laboratory–molecular frame orientation averaging does not
exist [120]. Here, circularly polarized excitation provided equivalent photoselection
in the plane parallel to the surface (X–Y) while retaining sensitivity to out-of-plane
molecularorientations(Z).Consequentiallytheintensityhistogramofsinglemolecule
emitters was used to obtain the out-of-plane orientational distribution function of the
population.
9.3.2
Two-Photon Excited Fluorescence
Fluorescence arising from two-photon absorption is generally spectrally and tempo-
rally identical to that arising from single-photon absorption, as in both cases, emission
takes place from the lowest excited singlet state as discussed earlier. The fluorescence
anisotropy arising from single- and two-photon excitation can however be markedly
different highlighting the distinct photoselection mechanisms that operate in each
process. Fluorescence anisotropy is an important experimental tool yielding informa-
tion on molecular re-orientation [121–124], activated barrier crossing [125], the local
environment of fluorescent probes [126,127], and resonant energy transfer [128–130],

300
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
with two-photon excitation now complimenting single-photon techniques in many of
these fields [117, 131–133]. A sound understanding of polarized two-photon photo-
selection is therefore essential.
The intensity of fluorescence of polarization i emitted by an excited population of
molecules at time t following short pulsed excitation is given by
Ii (t) ∝N (t) ∫A (Ω, t)Bi (Ω) dΩ,
(9.66)
where N (t) is the population at time t, A (Ω, t) is the orientational distribution function
of the molecular axes in laboratory frame, and Bi (Ω) is the detection probability for
fluorescence of polarization i. For spontaneous emission, Bi (Ω) is constructed from
the scalar product of laboratory frame spherical polarization vectors T1
q and molecular
frame transition dipole moments 𝜇1
n in an analogous manner to Eqs. (9.44)–(9.46),
B (Ω) =
∑
q,q′n,n′
(
T1
q𝜇1
n (−1)q D1
−qn (Ω)
) (
T1
q′𝜇1
n′ (−1)q′ D1
−q′n′ (Ω)
)∗
(9.67)
yielding
B (Ω) =
∑
q,q′n,n′
T1
qT1
−q′𝜇1
n (−1)q+1 𝜇1
−n′ (−1)q′+1 (−1)q′−n′ D1
−qn (Ω) D1
q′−n′ (Ω).
(9.68)
Contracting the rotation matrices yields
B (Ω) =
∑
K,q,q′n,n′
T1
qT1
−q′𝜇1
n𝜇1
−n′ (−1)q−q′+Q−N
× (2K + 1)
(
1
1
K
−q
q′
Q
) (
1
1
K
n
−n′
N
)
DK
−Q−N (Ω) .
(9.69)
From the 3j symbols Q = q −q′ and N = n′ −n, B (Ω) becomes
B (Ω) =
∑
K, N, Q
BK
NQDK
−N−Q (Ω) ,
(9.70)
where
BK
−Q−N =
∑
q, q′,n, n′
(−1)N T1
qT1
−q′𝜇1
n𝜇1
−n′ (2K + 1)
(
1
1
K
n
−n′
N
) (
1
1
K
−q
q′
Q
)
.
(9.71)

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
301
The fluorescence intensity for polarization i is
Ii (t) ∝N (t)
∑
K,Q,N
AK′
N′Q′ (Ω, t)BK
NQ(
⌢i ) ∫DK
NQ (Ω) DK
−N−Q (Ω) dΩ.
(9.72)
Using standard rotation matrix orthogonality [91], this becomes
Ii (t) ∝N (t)
∑
K,Q,N
8𝜋2
2K + 1 (−1)N−Q AK
NQ (Ω, t)BK
−N−Q(i).
(9.73)
In two-photon excitation with both linearly and circularly polarized excitation, we
have a laboratory frame axis of cylindrical symmetry (see Fig. 9.6) and only moments
with Q = 0 are prepared. Consequently only BK
0N terms have a non-zero orientation
average, from the properties of the 3j symbols in Eq. (9.71) only moments of rank
K = 0 and 2 are allowed. For Z and X polarized emissions, the polarization tensors
are given by
eZe∗
Z = T1
0T1
0,
(9.74)
eXe∗
X = −1
√
2
(T1
1 −T1
−1
) −1
√
2
(−T1
1 + T1
−1
) = −1
2
(T1
1T1
1 −2T1
1T1
−1 + T1
−1T1
−1
) .
(9.75)
The cylindrically symmetric component of Eq. (9.75) is T1
1T1
−1; for Z and X
detection polarizations, the BK
0N terms are thus
BK
0−N (Z) = T1
0T1
0 (2K + 1)
(1
1
K
0
0
0
) ∑
n ,n′
(−1)N 𝜇1
n𝜇1
−n′
(1
1
K
n
−n′
N
)
,
(9.76)
BK
0−N (X) = T1
1T1
−1 (2K + 1)
(1
1
K
1
−1
0
) ∑
n ,n′
(−1)N 𝜇1
n𝜇1
−n′
(1
1
K
n
−n′
N
)
.
(9.77)
The polarization tensor products are related by T1
0T1
0 = −T1
1T1
−1 = −1, and the
B0
00 terms are given by
B0
00 (Z) = B0
00 (X) = 1
3
∑
n
𝜇1
n𝜇1
−n (−1)1−n .
(9.78)
The B2
0−N terms are given by
BK
0−N (Z) =
10
√
30
∑
n ,n′
(−1)N 𝜇1
n𝜇1
−n′
(
1
1
2
n
−n′
N
)
= −2BK
0−N (X) .
(9.79)

302
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
The fluorescence anisotropy R (t) is constructed from the Z and X polarized emis-
sion intensities
R (t) = IZ (t) −IX (t)
IZ (t) + 2IX (t) =
∑
K,N
(−1)N AK
N0(Ω,t)
2K+1
(BK
0−N (Z) −BK
0−N (X))
∑
K,N
(−1)N AK
N0(Ω,t)
2K+1
(BK
0−N (Z) + 2BK
0−N (X)). (9.80)
From Eqs. (9.78) and (9.79), the anisotropy becomes
R(t) =
1
10
∑
N
(−1)N A2
N0 (Ω, t) B2
0−N(Z)
A0
00 (Ω, t) B0
00(Z)
.
(9.81)
Using Eq. (9.56) to express the molecular frame transition dipole products in
Cartesian form, we have
B0
00 (Z) = B0
00 (X) = 1
3
(
𝜇2
x + 𝜇2
y + 𝜇2
z
)
B2
00 (Z) = 1
3
[
2𝜇2
z −
(
𝜇2
x + 𝜇2
y
)]
= −2B2
00 (X)
B2
0±2 (Z) =
1
√
6
[
𝜇2
x −𝜇2
y ∓2i𝜇x𝜇y
]
= −2B2
0±2 (X)
B2
0±1 (Z) = ∓2
√
6
𝜇z
[𝜇x ± i𝜇y
] = −2B2
0±1 (X) .
(9.82)
Similar relations have been derived by Zannoni [134]. For a planar transition,
𝜇z = 0 and B2
0±1 terms are zero. Substituting Eq. (9.82) into Eq. (9.81) yields
R(t) = 3
10
[
A2
00 (Ω, t)
3
[
−
(
𝜇2
x + 𝜇2
y
)]
+
(A2
02 (Ω, t) + A2
0−2 (Ω, t)) [
𝜇2
x −𝜇2
y
]
√
6
−
(A2
02 (Ω, t) −A2
0−2 (Ω, t)) [2i𝜇x𝜇y
]
√
6
] [
A0
00 (Ω, t) (𝜇2
x + 𝜇2
y)
]−1
.
(9.83)
Measurement of the Z and X polarized fluorescence intensities prior to the onset
of orientational relaxation of the molecular distribution yields the initial fluorescence
anisotropy R (0). This provides complimentary information to Ω as to the structure
of the two-photon transition tensor [103, 117, 132, 133, 135, 136]. The variation in
the initial (or collision free) fluorescence anisotropy with excitation polarization in
both single- and two-photon excited fluorescence can be used to probe the degrees of
alignment in ordered systems [118, 137–140].
Substituting the AK
0N expressions (obtained from Eqs. (9.51), (9.56), and (9.83))
for linear and circularly polarized excitation as measured in Figure 9.6, the initial

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
303
anisotropies for linear and circularly polarized two-photon excitation after some
manipulation are
RL (0) = 1
7
[
1 +
9(1 −S2) (cos2 𝜃M −sin2 𝜃M
) + 4 (1 + S) D sin 𝜃M cos 𝜃M
2(1 + S2) + (1 −S2) + 4D2
]
,
(9.84)
RC(0) = 1
7
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
(1 + S)2 + 3[(1 −S)2 + 4D2] −6
[ (cos2 𝜃M −sin2 𝜃M
) (1 −S2)
+ 4D(1 + S) sin 𝜃M cos 𝜃M
]
(1 + S)2 + 3(1 −S)2 + 12D2
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
,
(9.85)
where 𝜃M is the angle made by the emission transition dipole with respect to X
in the plane of the molecule and S and D are the SYY and SXY (= SYX) transition
tensor components normalized to SXX as in Eq. (9.63), respectively. For a diagonal
single-element transition, tensor RL (0) is given by
RL (0) = 1
7
[1 + 3 (cos2 𝜃M −sin2 𝜃M
)] = 4
7
[3 cos2 𝜃M −1
2
]
.
(9.86)
When 𝜃M = 0, RL (0) is maximized at 4/7, the initial fluorescence anisotropy for
single-photon absorption shows an identical dependence on 𝜃M (where X defines the
direction of the absorption transition moment) with a maximum value of 2/5 when
𝜃M = 0. The variation in RL (0) and RC (0) with the structure of the transition tensor
has been discussed at length by Callis [135] and Johnson and Wan [117, 136].
The contribution of the A2
0N (Ω, t) excited state moments to the fluorescence
anisotropy is the same irrespective of the excitation process; however, the initial
A2
0N (Ω, 0) values will differ between single- and two-photon excitation due to the
difference between the space and molecule frame fixed orientational photoselec-
tion in the two processes. A comparison between the time-resolved fluorescence
anisotropy decays of rhodamine 6G for linearly polarized single- and two-photon
excitation is shown in Figure 9.8. Both decays are well described by single expo-
nential orientational relaxation times of 2.72 ns and 2.77 ns, respectively, and have
initial anisotropies close to the 2/5 and 4/7 limits (0.35 and 0.52, respectively). The
S0→S1 emission transition dipole moment in rhodamine 6G is oriented along the
long molecular axis of the xanthene ring [141, 142], and the similarity of the fluo-
rescence anisotropy decays and the values of the initial anisotropies are consistent
with the principal axis of the transition tensor lying along this axis with S ≈1 > D. A
more complex transition tensor coupled with bi-exponential orientational dynamics
is provided by perylene, studied initially by Pauls et al. [132], with a later study by
Johansson and co-workers comparing single- and two-photon fluorescence anisotropy
decays [133]. These were found to be well described by the same correlation times.
The differing contribution of diagonal and off-diagonal terms to RL and RC, as seen
for example by Eqs. (9.84) and (9.85), makes a comparison between linearly and cir-
cularly polarized anisotropy decays an additional route to determining the structure of

304
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
0.6
0.4
R(0) = 0.52,  ROT = 2.72 ns
R(0) = 0.35,  ROT = 2.77 ns
4/7
2/5
0.2
0
0
4
8
12
Time (ns)
R(t)
FIGURE 9.8
A comparison between single- and two- photon excited fluorescence anisotropy
decays recorded in our laboratory for rhodamine 6G in ethylene glycol, the initial anisotropies
for both processes are close to the theoretical maxima (dashed lines) for excitation from
an isotropic ground state and (in the case of the two-photon excited population) a diagonal
transition tensor dominated by SXX.
the transition tensor [117]. Although single- and two-photon anisotropy decays probe
the same orientational dynamics, two-photon excitation leads to the creation of more
highly ordered arrays of molecular orientations in the laboratory frame; this gives
rise not only to increased values of the fluorescence anisotropy but also to the cre-
ation of moments of rank K = 4 (i.e., A4
0N), which are forbidden from contributing to
spontaneous emission observables [143]. Measurement of these “hidden” degrees of
molecular order created by two-photon excitation is possible via the interaction with
a third photon and measurement of a vector quantity such as the resulting (altered)
fluorescence anisotropy [143, 144]. Using this approach Bain and co-workers have
used polarized stimulated emission depletion to measure the K = 4 orientational
relaxation dynamics of two-photon excited rhodamine 6G [144]. The measurement
of higher order correlation functions for molecular motion in condensed phases is
an attractive proposition as this affords a test of fundamental theories of molecular
relaxation [145]. Third-order pump-probe [146] and fluorescence anisotropy mea-
surements [121–124] are restricted to K = 2 relaxation dynamics. A number of pump-
probe techniques have been developed which access odd rank correlation functions
in non-centrosymmetric molecules; terahertz-field-induced second-harmonic gener-
ation [147] provides a direct measurement of K = 1 reorientation, whilst six-wave
mixing is sensitive to both K = 1 and K = 3 relaxation [148]. Two-photon excitation
coupled with a suitable probe (e.g., STED) provides a non-symmetry restricted means
of accessing the K = 4 dynamics of a fluorescent probe.
9.3.3
Two- and Multiphoton Absorption in Free Rotors
In the gas phase, the time between molecular collisions is in general long compared
to that for free rotation. Consequently the molecular angular momentum J and its

MOLECULAR TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE
305
laboratory frame projection M are good quantum numbers and the classical treatment
of molecular photoselection and fluorescence anisotropy above does not hold. A treat-
ment of the linear and circular polarization dependence of two-photon absorption in
diatomic molecules was first developed by Bray and Hochstrasser [149], and subse-
quent work by McClain and Harris [83] and Dixon and co-workers [113] considered
two- and three-photon absorption in symmetric rotors, respectively. These approaches
while allowing an interpretation of the linear and circular polarization dependence
of the observed line strengths did not extend to the properties of the excited state
that was created by the nonlinear absorption process. Orientational photoselection
in rotationally resolved two- and multiphoton excitation was first developed by Bain
and McCaffery [150]. In freely rotating molecules, orientational photoselection is
described in terms of the M state population distribution prepared as a result of
polarized photoselection. This is conveniently handled in terms of a spherical tensor
(state multipole) expansion of the excited state density matrix [116, 150–153]. The
excited state density matrix elements for non-resonant two-photon excitation from
ground-state rovibronic level ||J′′M′′⟩of a diatomic molecule to an excited rovibronic
level |J⟩with two co-propagating photons of frequency 𝜈is given by
JJ𝜌M1M2 ∝
||||||
∑
n,M′′′
(
⟨J′′M′′| ⃗e ⋅⃗d |n⟩⟨n| e ⋅𝜇||JM1⟩
𝜈n −𝜈+ iΓn
+ ⟨J′′M′′| ⃗e ⋅⃗d |n⟩⟨n| ⃗e ⋅⃗d ||JM1⟩
𝜈n −𝜈+ iΓn
)
×
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
⟨J′′M′′| ⃗e ⋅⃗d |n⟩∗⟨n| ⃗e ⋅⃗d ||JM2⟩
∗
𝜈n −𝜈−iΓn
+ ⟨J′′M′′| ⃗e ⋅⃗d |n⟩∗⟨n| ⃗e ⋅⃗d ||JM2⟩
∗
𝜈n −𝜈−iΓn
)||||||
2
.
(9.87)
The resonant frequencies and linewidths of the intermediate (virtual) states |n⟩are
𝜈n and Γn, respectively, and the summation extends over the intermediate states and
the M′′ quantum numbers of the ground state rotational level J′′. If the excitation
frequency 𝜈is well detuned from 𝜈n, the intermediate levels do not develop in time.
The tensor density matrix elements or state multipoles of the excited state are defined
by [150–153]
JJ𝜌K
Q =
∑
M1,M2
(−1)J−M1 (2K + 1)
(
J
J
K
M1
−M2
Q
)
JJ𝜌M1M2.
(9.88)
Substitution of Eq. (9.87) into Eq. (9.88) and application of the Wigner–Eckart
theorem yields a lengthy expression in terms of the reduced matrix elements of the
allowed transitions [153]. The excited state is characterized by well-defined values of
the state multipoles where the tensorial rank K ranges from zero to four; in the case of
circularly polarized excitation, both even- and odd-order rank multipoles are created.
Although with opposing circular polarizations of the same frequency, the excited state
is characterized by even-order moments as is found for linearly polarized excitation.
This is in contrast to the circularly polarized photoselection of fluorescent probes in
condensed phases where the ‘effective excitation and observation’ of all rotational
branches have opposing (or zero) contributions to K = 1 and K = 3 observables.

306
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
In rotationally resolved two-photon absorption, it was found that for transitions in
which the change in rotational quantum number ΔJ = ±2 (the R and S branches)
the expressions for the relative values of the state multipoles were considerably
simplified, on contracting the summations over 5-3j symbols [154].
JJ𝜌K
Q(qA, qA) ∝
√
5
{
1
1
2
J′′
J
J′
} ∑
a2
(−1)J+J′+qA (2a2 + 1) (2K + 1)
1
2
×
{
2
1
a2
J′
J
J′′
} {
a2
1
K
J
J
J′′
}(
2
1
a2
−2qA
qA
qA
) (
a2
1
K
qA
qA
Q
)
,
(9.89)
where qA denotes the polarization component of the photon (qA= 0, linear qA = +1
or −1 circular) and J′ is the rotational quantum number of the single virtual level
(J′ = J′′+1 or J′′ −1). For linearly polarized excitation in the case of transitions
dominated by pure Q steps, that is, J = J′ = J′′, Eq. (9.89) becomes
JJ𝜌K
Q(qA, qA) ∝
√
5
{
1
1
2
J
J
J
} ∑
a2
(−1)J+J′ (2a2 + 1) (2K + 1)
1
2
×
{
2
1
a2
J
J
J
} {
a2
1
K
J
J
J
} (
2
1
a2
0
0
0
) (
a2
1
K
0
0
Q
)
.
(9.90)
The degree of circular polarization C, linear polarization P, and anisotropy R
in rotationally resolved fluorescence to a final rotational level J′′′ are given by
[150, 153]
P = −3
( JJ𝜌2
0
JJ𝜌0
0
)
{
1
1
2
J
J
J′′′
}
{
1
1
0
J
J
J′′′
}
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
√
8 −
( JJ𝜌2
0
JJ𝜌0
0
)
{
1
1
2
J
J
J′′′
}
{
1
1
0
J
J
J′′′
}
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
−1
R =
2P
3 −P
(9.91)
C = −
( JJ𝜌2
0
JJ𝜌0
0
)
{
1
1
1
J
J
J′′′
}
{
1
1
0
J
J
J′′′
}
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
√
2
3 −
√
1
3
( JJ𝜌2
0
JJ𝜌0
0
)
{
1
1
2
J
J
J′′′
}
{
1
1
0
J
J
J′′′
}
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
−1
Substitution of the specific values of the JJ𝜌K
Q obtained by this analysis into
Eq. (9.91) leads to fluorescence anisotropies significantly higher than the single-
photon values for C and P (and R). The degree of circular polarization C tends to

APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
307
a value of −7/8 for (P↑P↑) R↓and (R↑R↑) P↓and +7/8 for (P↑P↑) P↓and (R↑
R↑) R↓, the highest values of C obtained for single-photon excited fluorescence in
the high J limit are +5/7 (R↑R↓and P↑P↓) and -5/7 (P↑R↓and R↑P↓). The degree
of linear polarization P for near resonant two-photon excitation dominated by the
Q↑Q↑path is also high tending to +2/3 in the high-J limit. The above analysis was
further applied to multiphoton absorption, in the case where ΔJ = ±n, n being the
number of photons absorbed the state multipoles. In this limit the state multipoles
characterizing the final state are determined by n effective single-photon transitions
via (n −1) “virtual multipoles.”
Two-photon and multiphoton excitation routes that have a wholly angular
momentum-based polarization dependence rather than a potentially complex and
unknown dependence on the excitation pathway are ideally suited as a means of prob-
ing the alignment of molecular populations in molecular dynamics studies [119]. The
determination of molecular alignment parameters using rotationally resolved polar-
ized two-photon excitation and ionization-based detection is now a well-established
tool in state-selected molecular dynamics [155–159].
9.4
APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Two-photon excitation techniques now find widespread application in the biological
sciences, perhaps the most significant contribution two-photon excited fluorescence
has made to date is in fluorescence microscopy. Prior to the invention and com-
mercial realization of the two-photon microscope, depth resolution in fluorescence
microscopy was achieved using the confocal microscope [160], the principles of
which are illustrated in Figure 9.9. Fluorescence is excited via single-photon absorp-
tion using a continuous wave laser (typically an argon ion laser line), and this is
scanned in the X–Y plane to build up an image of the sample. However, a consider-
able degree of fluorescence is generated both above and below the focal plane and,
if allowed to reach the detector, will cause blurring of the final image. In a confocal
microscope, a pinhole is introduced in front of the detector in a position that prevents
emission from above and below the focal plane of the sample when the focal plane
of illumination and detection are the same. The drawbacks are that large regions of
the sample outside the region of interest are excited; this carries a significant risk
of damage (particularly for studies of live cells) arising from heat deposition and
photochemical reactions. In addition, the presence of the confocal pinhole results in
reduced collection efficiency with a subsequent increase in data collection time. In
two-photon fluorescence, excitation is restricted to the waist region of the laser focus
[14] and excitation of fluorescence outside the Rayleigh range of the laser focus is
significantly reduced. The spatial differences between the two- and single-photon
excitation are clearly illustrated in Figure 9.10.
Two-photon excitation is ideally suited for scanning fluorescence microscopy,
allowing confocal resolution with a significant reduction in the drawbacks outlined
above. The use of near-infrared wavelengths in two-photon excitation as opposed

308
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
Detector
Emission pinhole
Ar+ laser
Filter
Dichroic mirror
Objective
Non-focal point
Pinhole and filter
Focal point
FIGURE 9.9
Principles of the confocal fluorescence microscope; single-photon excited
fluorescence occurs along the entire beam path; however, the insertion of a pinhole in the
focal plane of the objective ensures that fluorescence from outside the focal point of the laser
(dashed line) is prevented from reaching the detector. The laser is scanned in the x–y plane to
build up an image of the sample for a given depth. Translation of the sample in the z-direction
allows images (optical sections) to be recorded as a function of depth.
Two-photon
excitation
800 nm
(b)
Single-photon
excitation
488 nm
(a)
FIGURE 9.10
A direct comparison between the spatial dependence of two- and single-
photon absorption from a fluorescent probe in an isotropic solution contained in a cuvette and
viewed at 90◦to the excitation direction. (a) Single-photon excitation at 488 nm produces
fluorescence throughout the sample, whereas (b) the restriction of two-photon fluorescence
(excited at 800 nm) to the Rayleigh range around the laser focus is clearly evident. The
photographs were provided courtesy of Dr. Mireille Blanchard-Desce (CNRS Bordeaux).

CONCLUSIONS
309
to visible and ultra-violet wavelengths in single-photon excitation is in itself less
detrimental to studies of living cells. In tissues better penetration is afforded due to
lower scattering losses and (single-photon) absorption by endogenous molecules. The
so-called biological window between 700 and 1200 nm coincides with the two-photon
absorption bands of many fluorescent probes. A two-photon scanning microscope thus
provides near confocal resolution with increased fluorescence collection efficiency
and a reduction in sample damage. The principles of operation of a two-photon
microscope and an example of deep (1 mm) tissue imaging in a live heart are presented
in Figure 9.11.
Two-photon microscopy has been coupled with time-resolved single-photon
counting detection to enable two-photon fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy
(FLIM). F¨orster resonance energy transfer (FRET) studies using two-photon FLIM
with fluorescent protein pairs have proved a highly effective tool in cell biophysics
research [130, 161, 162]. While there has been considerable activity in this field,
there has until recently been little research directed toward understanding the fun-
damental nature of two-photon absorption process in fluorescent proteins and their
optimization for multiphoton excitation. Drobizhev and co-workers have undertaken
a detailed and systematic study of two-photon absorption across a wide range of
fluorescent proteins [163–165]; a new model for vibronic coupling in red fluores-
cent proteins and an investigation of the mechanisms operating in photobleaching
have been reported [166,167]. The utility of employing two-photon excitation in the
study of FRET between fluorescent protein pairs has recently been demonstrated by
Masters et al. [168]. It is clear that research into the fundamental nature of two- and
multiphoton excitations in, and the photophysics of, fluorescent proteins will be an
area of increasing activity and interest.
9.5
CONCLUSIONS
Research into multiphoton absorption in molecules was initially driven by the excite-
ment of investigating a hitherto unobservable physical phenomenon. The development
of two-photon absorption as a widely applicable measurement technique in molecular
and chemical physics advanced rapidly, and polarized two- and multiphoton exci-
tation techniques after nearly three decades still find wide application in the study
of molecular dynamics. With the development of near-infrared tunable femtosecond
lasers, the study and exploitation of two- and multiphoton absorption became pos-
sible with significantly lower energy laser pulses. These advances ushered in new
applications—most notably the two-photon confocal fluorescence microscope. The
drive to incorporate spectroscopic techniques into fluorescence microscopy to probe
molecular interactions and dynamics in living cells and tissue and the need to develop
new and improved fluorescent proteins have in turn led to renewed interest into the
fundamental nature of multiphoton absorption and photophysics. After 50 years,
the field has advanced to a point where there is real synergy between fundamental
research and practical applications.

XY
scanner
Data Acquisition:
imaging, time correlated
single-photon counting,
Photodetector:
PMT, avalanche photodiode
Ti:S laser
Pump laser
FIGURE 9.11
(a) Principles of operation of a two-photon fluorescence microscope system, two-photon excitation within the sample
is achieved using the output of a Ti:sapphire laser. This is scanned in the x–y plane to produce an image of a section of the sample.
(b) Two-photon microscopy of an isolated, perfused mouse heart using a Zeiss 510 NLO microscope. Cardiomyocyte cells are
revealed by the striated (mitochondrial) fluorescence of the metabolic cofactor NAD(P)H (I). Endothelial cells (II) stained by the
voltage-sensitive dye ANEPPS lie beneath the cardiomyocites. Scale bar 20 μm. Image courtesy of Sean M. Davidson, The Hatter
Cardiovascular Institute (UCL).
310

REFERENCES
311
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My introduction to two-photon absorption and third-order nonlinear optics began
during my D. Phil research with Tony McCaffery at the University of Sussex and
continued during a postdoctoral fellowship with the late Robin Hochstrasser at the
University of Pennsylvania. I am indeed grateful to both Tony and Robin for their
good-humored supervision and for many interesting discussions over the years. I am
happy to acknowledge the contribution of my research group, some of whose work
is cited in this chapter. I have endeavored to provide within the practical limitations
of a chapter as comprehensive a review of the fundamental physics and coverage of
the development and application of two- and multiphoton absorption as possible. I
would also like to thank Tom Blacker for careful proofreading of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Butcher and D. Cotter, The Elements of Nonlinear Optics (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1990).
[2] Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics (John Wiley & Sons, London, 2002).
[3] A. Yariv, Optical Electronics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990).
[4] R. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, 3rd ed. (Academic Press, London, 2008).
[5] M. Bass, P. A. Franken, A. E. Hill, C. W. Peters, and G. Weinrich, “Optical mixing,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 8, 18 (1962).
[6] R. C. Miller and A. Savage, “Harmonic generation and mixing of CaWO4: Nd3+ and
ruby pulsed laser beams in piezoelectric crystals,” Phys. Rev. 128, 2175–2179 (1962).
[7] J. F. Reintjes, Nonlinear Optical Parametric Processes in Liquids and Gases (Academic
Press, New York, 1984).
[8] R. R. Alfano (ed.), The Supercontinuum Laser Source, 2nd ed. (Springer, New York,
2006).
[9] Y. R. Shen, “Self-focusing: Experimental,” Prog. Quantum Electron. 4, 1–34 (1975).
[10] G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fibre Optics, 1st ed. (Academic Press, New York, 1989).
[11] A. Barthelemy, S. Maneuf, and C. Froehly, “Propagation soliton et auto-confinement de
faisceaux laser par non linearit´e optique de kerr,” Opt. Commun. 55, 201–206 (1985).
[12] D. K. Negus and L. Spinelli, “Mode-locked laser using non-linear self-focusing ele-
ment,” US Patent No. 5,097,471A, 1992.
[13] L. Spinelli, N. Couillaud, N. Goldblatt, and D. K. Negus. “Starting and generation
of sub-100 fs pulses in Ti:sapphire by self focusing,” in Conference on Lasers and
Electro-optics, 1991, Washington, DC, CPDP7, Optical Society of America.
[14] B. Larijani and A. J. Bain, “Single and two-photon fluorescence in biology,” in Chemical
Biology: Techniques and Applications, edited by B. Larijani, C. A. Rosser, and R.
Woscholski (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2006).
[15] J. G. Eden, “High-order harmonic generation and other intense optical field-matter
interactions: review of recent experimental and theoretical advances,” Prog. Quantum
Electron. 28, 197–246 (2004).
[16] S. H. Lin, Y. Fujimura, H. J. Neusser, and E. W. Schlag, Multiphoton Spectroscopy of
Molecules (Academic Press, London, 1984).

312
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
[17] P. Mulser, R. Sigel, and S. Witkowski, “Plasma production by laser,” Phys. Rep. 6,
187–239 (1973).
[18] P. Lambropoulos, “Topics on multiphoton processes in atoms,” Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 12,
87–164 (1976).
[19] M. A. C. Nascimento, “The polarization dependence of two-photon absorption rates for
randomly oriented molecules,” Chem. Phys. 74, 51–66 (1983).
[20] B. Dick, R. M. Hochstrasser, and H. P. Trommsdorff, Non-linear Properties of Organic
Molecules and Crystals, edited by D. S. Chemla and J. Zyss (Academic Press, London,
1987), pp. 167–170.
[21] M. D. Levenson and S. S. Kano, Introduction to Nonlinear Laser Spectroscopy, 2nd ed.
(Academic Press, London, 1988).
[22] M. G¨oppert-Mayer, “ ¨Uber elementarakte mit zwei quantenspr¨ungen,” Ann. Phys. 401,
273–294 (1931).
[23] W. Kaiser and C. G. B. Garrett, “Two-photon excitation in CaF2:Eu2+,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
7, 229–231 (1961).
[24] T. H. Maiman, “Stimulated optical radiation in ruby,” Nature 187, 493–494 (1960).
[25] D. Fr¨ohlich and H. Mahr, “Two-photon spectroscopy in anthracene,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
16, 895–987 (1966).
[26] K. B. Eisenthal, M. W. Dowley, and W. L. Peticolas, “Two-photon spectrum of a liquid,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 93–95 (1968).
[27] P. R. Monson and W. M. McClain, “Polarization dependence of the two-photon absorp-
tion of tumbling molecules with application to liquid 1-chloronaphthalene and benzene,”
J. Chem. Phys. 53, 29–37 (1970).
[28] P. R. Monson and W. M. McClain, “Complete polarization study of the two-
photon absorption of liquid 1-chloronaphthalene,” J. Chem. Phys. 56, 4817–4825
(1972).
[29] A. Bergman and J. Jortner, “Two-photon spectroscopy utilizing dye lasers,” Chem. Phys.
Lett. 15, 309–315 (1972).
[30] A. Bergman and J. Jortner, “Two-photon absorption spectra of crystalline naphthalene
and of the naphthalene molecule in solution,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 26, 323–326 (1974).
[31] T. W. H¨ansch, “Repetitively pulsed tunable dye laser for high resolution spectroscopy,”
Appl. Opt. 11, 895–898 (1972).
[32] R. M. Hochstrasser, H. N. Sung, and J. E. Wessel, “High resolution two-photon excitation
spectra,” J. Chem. Phys. 58, 4694–4695 (1973).
[33] R. M. Hochstrasser, H. N. Sung, and J. E. Wessel, “Moderate-resolution study of the
two-photon spectrum of the 1B2u state of benzene-h6 and benzene-d6,” Chem. Phys. Lett.
24, 7–10 (1974).
[34] R. M. Hochstrasser, H. N. Sung, and J. E. Wessel, “Moderate-resolution two-photon
spectrum of the naphthalene crystal and naphthalene in durene,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 24,
168–171 (1974).
[35] R. M. Hochstrasser, J. E. Wessel, and H. N. Sung, “Two-photon excitation spectrum of
benzene in the gas phase and the crystal,” J. Chem. Phys. 60, 317–318 (1974).
[36] R. G. Bray, R. M. Hochstrasser, and J. E. Wessel, “Continuously tunable two-photon
excitation of individual rotational levels of the A2𝜎+ state of nitric oxide,” Chem. Phys.
Lett. 27, 167–171 (1974).

REFERENCES
313
[37] P. M. Johnson, “Multiphoton ionization spectroscopy: a new state of benzene,” J. Chem.
Phys. 62, 4562–4563 (1975).
[38] P. M. Johnson, “The multiphoton ionization spectrum of trans-1,3-butadiene,” J. Chem.
Phys. 64, 4638–4644 (1976).
[39] P. M. Johnson and C. E. Otis, “Molecular multiphoton spectroscopy with ionization
detection,” Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 32, 139–157 (1981).
[40] R. M. Hochstrasser, G. R. Meredith, and H. P. Trommsdorff, “Two-photon spectra of
gases by three-wave mixing,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 53, 423–428 (1978).
[41] F. Biraben, B. Cagnac, and G. Grynberg, “Experimental evidence of two-photon transi-
tion without Doppler broadening,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 643–645 (1974).
[42] J. P. Woerdman, “Doppler-free two-photon transitions of the sodium molecule,” Chem.
Phys. Lett. 43, 279–282 (1976).
[43] E. Riedle, H. J. Neusser, and E. W. Schlag, “Electronic spectra of polyatomic molecules
with resolved individual rotational transitions: benzene,” J. Chem. Phys. 75, 4231–4240
(1981).
[44] W. M. McClain, “Two-photon molecular spectroscopy,” Acc. Chem. Res. 7, 129–135
(1974).
[45] D. M. Friedrich and W. M. McClain, “Two-photon molecular electronic spectroscopy,”
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 31, 559–577 (1980).
[46] L. Goodman and R. P. Rava, “Two-photon spectra of aromatic molecules,” Acc. Chem.
Res. 17, 250–257 (1984).
[47] R. R. Birge, “Two-photon spectroscopy of protein-bound chromophores,” Acc. Chem.
Res. 19, 138–146 (1986).
[48] P. R. Callis, “Two-photon-induced fluorescence,” Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 48, 271–297
(1997).
[49] P. F. Moulton, “Spectroscopic and laser characteristics of Ti:Al2O3,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B
3, 125–133 (1986).
[50] P. Albers, E. Stark, and G. Huber, “Continuous-wave laser operation and quantum
efficiency of titanium-doped sapphire,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 3, 134–139 (1986).
[51] P. F. Curley and A. I. Ferguson, “Actively mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser producing
transform-limited pulses of 150-fs duration,” Opt. Lett. 16, 1016–1018 (1991).
[52] D. E. Spence, P. N. Kean, and W. Sibbett, “60-fsec Pulse generation from a self-mode-
locked Ti:sapphire laser,” Opt. Lett. 16, 42–44 (1991).
[53] W. Denk, J. H. Strickler, and W. W. Webb, “Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence
microscopy,” Science 248, 73–76 (1990).
[54] R. L. Fork, B. I. Greene, and C. V. Shank, “Generation of optical pulses shorter than 0.1
psec by colliding pulse mode locking,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 38, 671–672 (1981).
[55] M. Chalfie, Y. Tu, G. Euskirchen, W. W. Ward, and D. C. Prasher, “Green fluorescent
protein as a marker for gene expression,” Science 263, 802–805 (1994).
[56] R. Heim, A. B. Cubitt, and R. Y. Tsien, “Improved green fluorescence,” Nature 373,
663–664 (1995).
[57] R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1983).
[58] J. A. Giordmaine, P. M. Rentzepis, S. L. Shapiro, and K. W. Wecht, “Two-photon
excitation of fluorescence by picosecond light pulses,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 11, 216–218
(1967).

314
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
[59] J. R. Klauder, M. A. Duguay, J. A. Giordmaine, and S. L. Shapiro, “Correlation effects
in the display of picosecond pulses by two-photon techniques,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 13,
174–176 (1968).
[60] P. D. Maker and R. W. Terhune, “Study of optical effects due to an induced polarization
third order in the electric field strength,” Phys. Rev. 137, A801–A818 (1965).
[61] R. W. Hellwarth, A. Owyoung, and N. George, “Origin of the nonlinear refractive index
of liquid CCl4,” Phys. Rev. A 4, 2342–2347 (1971).
[62] J. H. Marburger, “Self-focusing: theory,” Prog. Quantum Electron. 4, 35–110 (1975).
[63] P. P. Ho and R. R. Alfano, “Optical kerr effect in liquids,” Phys. Rev. A 20, 2170–2187
(1979).
[64] G. S. He, J. D. Bhawalkar, C. F. Zhao, and P. N. Prasad, “Optical limiting effect in a
two-photon absorption dye doped solid matrix,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 2433–2435 (1995).
[65] J. E. Ehrlich, X. L. Xu, I.-Y. S. Lee, X.-Y. Hu, H. R¨ockel, S. R. Marder, and J. W. Perry,
“Two-photon absorption and broadband optical limiting with bis-donor stilbenes,” Opt.
Lett. 22, 1843–1845 (1997).
[66] G. S. He, L. Yuan, N. Cheng, J. D. Bhawalkar, P. N. Prasad, L. L. Brott, S. J. Clarson,
and B. A. Reinhardt, “Nonlinear optical properties of a new chromophore,” J. Opt. Soc.
Am. B 14, 1079–1087 (1997).
[67] M. Albota, D. Beljonne, J.-L. Bredas, J. E. Ehrlich, J.-Y. Fu, A. A. Heikal, S. E. Hess,
T. Kogej, M. D. Levin, S. R. Marder, et al., “Design of organic molecules with large
two-photon absorption cross sections,” Science 281, 1653–1656 (1998).
[68] A. Abbotto, L. Beverina, R. Bozio, S. Bradamante, C. Ferrante, G. A. Pagani, and R.
Signorini, “Push-pull organic chromophores for frequency-upconverted lasing,” Adv.
Mater. 12, 1963–1967 (2000).
[69] O. Mongin, L. Porr`es, C. Katan, T. Pons, J. Mertz, and M. Blanchard-Desce, “Synthe-
sis and two-photon absorption of highly soluble three-branched fluorenylene-vinylene
derivatives,” Tetrahedron Lett. 44, 8121–8125 (2003).
[70] L. Porr`es, O. Mongin, C. Katan, M. Charlot, B. K. G. Bhatthula, V. Jouikov, T. Pons,
J. Mertz, and M. Blanchard-Desce, “Two-photon absorption and fluorescence with
quadrupolar and branched chromophores—effect of structure and branching,” J. Non-
linear Opt. Phys. Mater. 13, 451–460 (2004).
[71] O. Mongin, L. Porr`es, M. Charlot, C. Katan, and M. Blanchard-Desce, “Synthesis, fluo-
rescence, and two-photon absorption of a series of elongated rodlike and banana-shaped
quadrupolar fluorophores: a comprehensive study of structure–property relationships,”
Chem. Eur. J. 13, 1481–1498 (2007).
[72] C. Katan, S. Tretiak, M. H. V. Werts, A. J. Bain, R. J. Marsh, N. Leonczek, N. Nicolaou, E.
Badaeva, O. Mongin, and M. Blanchard-Desce, “Two-photon transitions in quadrupolar
and branched chromophores: experiment and theory,” J. Phys. Chem. B 111, 9468–9483
(2007).
[73] M. Charlot, N. Izard, O. Mongin, D. Riehl, and M. Blanchard-Desce, “Optical limit-
ing with soluble two-photon absorbing quadrupoles: structure–property relationships,”
Chem. Phys. Lett. 417, 297–302 (2006).
[74] N. S. Makarov, M. Drobizhev, and A. Rebane, “Two-photon absorption standards in the
550-1600 nm excitation wavelength range,” Opt. Exp. 16, 4029–4047 (2008).
[75] B. H. Cumpston, S. P. Ananthavel, S. Barlow, D. L. Dyer, J. E. Ehrlich, L. L. Erskine,
A. A. Heikal, S. M. Kuebler, I.-Y. S. Lee, D. McCord-Maughton, et al., “Two-photon

REFERENCES
315
polymerization initiators for three-dimensional optical data storage and microfabrica-
tion,” Nature 398, 51–54 (1999).
[76] W. Zhou, S. M. Kuebler, K. L. Braun, T. Yu, J. K. Cammack, C. K. Ober, J. W. Perry, and
S. R. Marder, “An efficient two-photon-generated photoacid applied to positive-tone 3d
microfabrication,” Science 296, 1106–1109 (2002).
[77] D. A. Parthenopoulos and P. M. Rentzepis, “Three-dimensional optical storage memory,”
Science 245, 843–845 (1989).
[78] S. Kawata and Y. Kawata, “Three-dimensional optical data storage using photochromic
materials,” Chem. Rev. 100, 1777–1788 (2000).
[79] F. Terenziani, C. Katan, E. Badaeva, S. Tretiak, and M. Blanchard-Desce, “Enhanced
two-photon absorption of organic chromophores: theoretical and experimental assess-
ments,” Adv. Mater. 20, 4641–4678 (2008).
[80] M. Pawlicki, H. A. Collins, R. G. Denning, and H. L. Anderson, “Two-photon absorption
and the design of two-photon dyes,” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48, 3244–3266 (2009).
[81] M. G. Kuzyk, J. P´erez-Moreno, and S. Shafei, “Sum rules and scaling in nonlinear
optics,” Phys. Rep. 529, 297–398 (2013).
[82] M. Samo´c, “Third-order nonlinear optical materials: practical issues and theoretical
challenges,” J. Mol. Model. 17, 2183–2189 (2011).
[83] W. M. McClain and R. A. Harris, “Two-photon molecular spectroscopy in liquids and
gases,” in Excited States, edited by E. C. Lim (Academic Press, New York, 1977),
pp. 1–56.
[84] P. W. Atkins and R. S. Friedman, Molecular Quantum Mechanics, 3rd ed. (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1999).
[85] P. M. Johnson, “The multiphoton ionization spectrum of benzene,” J. Chem. Phys. 64,
4143–4148 (1976).
[86] T. M. Stachelek, T. A. Pazoha, W. M. McClain, and R. P. Drucker, “Detection and
assignment of the ‘phantom’ photochemical singlet of trans-stilbene by two-photon
excitation,” J. Chem. Phys. 66, 4540–4543 (1977).
[87] M. F. Granville, G. R. Holtom, B. E. Kohler, R. L. Christensen, and K. L.D’Amico,
“Experimental confirmation of the dipole forbidden character of the lowest excited
singlet state in 1,3,5,7-octatetraene,” J. Chem. Phys. 70, 593–594 (1979).
[88] B. Dick and G. Hohlneicher, “Two-photon spectroscopy of dipole-forbidden transitions:
the low-lying singlet states of anthracene,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 83, 615–621 (1981).
[89] B. Dick and G. Hohlneicher, “Two-photon spectroscopy of the low-lying singlet states
of naphthalene and acenaphthene,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 84, 471–478 (1981).
[90] J. M. Hollas, “Progress in electronic spectroscopy of large molecules,” J. Chem. Soc.
Faraday Trans. 94, 1527–1540 (1998).
[91] D. M. Brink and G. R. Satchler, Angular Momentum, 3rd ed. (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1994).
[92] W. L. Peticolas, R. Norris, and K. E. Rieckhoff, “Polarization effects in the two-photon
excitation of anthracene fluorescence,” J. Chem. Phys. 42, 4164–4169 (1965).
[93] B. Honig, J. Jortner, and A. Sz¨oke, “Theoretical studies of two-photon absorption
processes. i. molecular benzene,” J. Chem. Phys. 46, 2714–2727 (1967).
[94] W. M. McClain, “Excited state symmetry assignment through polarized two-photon
absorption studies of fluids,” J. Chem. Phys. 55, 2789–2796 (1971).

316
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
[95] R. P. Drucker and W. M. McClain, “Dye laser two-photon excitation study of several
0,0′-bridged biphenyls,” J. Chem. Phys. 61, 2616–2619 (1974).
[96] P. R. Callis, T. W. Scott, and A. C. Albrecht, “Polarized two-photon fluorescence
excitation studies of pyrimidine,” J. Chem. Phys. 75, 5640–5646 (1981).
[97] J. M. Hollas, B. J. Langham, H. Musa, and T. Ridley, “The ̃A1A1- ̃X1A1 two-photon
fluorescence excitation spectrum of 1,2-difluorobenzene,” J. Mol. Spec. 97, 405–419
(1983).
[98] J. M. Hollas, H. Musa, and T. Ridley, “The ̃A1B2- ̃X1A1 two-photon fluorescence exci-
tation spectrum of 1,3-difluorobenzene,” J. Mol. Spec. 98, 125–137 (1983).
[99] M. J. Wirth, A. C. Koskelo, and C. E. Mohler, “Study of solvation symmetry by two-
photon polarization measurements,” J. Phys. Chem. 87, 4395–4400 (1983).
[100] C. E. Mohler and M. J. Wirth, “Solvent perturbations on the excited state symmetry of
randomly oriented molecules by two-photon absorption,” J. Chem. Phys. 88, 7369–7375
(1988).
[101] A. A. Rehms and P. R. Callis, “Resolution of La and Lb bands in methyl indoles by
two-photon spectroscopy,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 140, 83–89 (1987).
[102] D. Scherer, R. D¨orfler, A. Feldner, T. Vogtmann, M. Schwoerer, U. Lawrentz, W.
Grahn, and C. Lambert, “Two-photon states in squaraine monomers and oligomers,”
Chem. Phys. 279, 179–207 (2002).
[103] R. J. Marsh, N. D. Leonczek, D. A. Armoogum, L. Porr`es, O. M. Mongin , M. H.
Blanchard-Desce, and A. J. Bain, “Stimulated emission depletion dynamics in push-
push polyenes,” Proc. SPIE 5510 (2004).
[104] D. Wanapun, R. D. Wampler, N. J. Begue, and G. J. Simpson, “Polarization-dependent
two-photon absorption for the determination of protein secondary structure: a theoretical
study,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 455, 6–12 (2008).
[105] Elles, C. G., Rivera, C. A., Zhang, Y., Pieniazek, P. A., and Bradforth, S. E., “Elec-
tronic structure of liquid water from polarization-dependent two-photon absorption
spectroscopy,” J. Chem. Phys. 130, 084501 (2009).
[106] N. Amit and G. Debabrata, “Polarization induced control of single and two-photon
fluorescence,” J. Chem. Phys. 132, 154508 (2010).
[107] M. G. Vivas, D. L. Silva, L. De Boni, Y. Bretonniere, C. Andraud, F. Laibe-Darbour,
J.-C. Mulatier, R. Zale´sny, W. Bartkowiak, S. Canuto et al., “Revealing the electronic
and molecular structure of randomly oriented molecules by polarized two-photon spec-
troscopy,” J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 4, 1753–1759 (2013).
[108] M. G. Vivas, C. Diaz, L. Echevarria, C. R. Mendonca, F. E. Hern´andez, and L. De
Boni, “Two-photon circular–linear dichroism of perylene in solution: a theoretical–
experimental study,” J. Phys. Chem. B 117, 2742–2747 (2013).
[109] W. M. McClain, “Polarization dependence of three-photon phenomena for randomly
oriented molecules,” J. Chem. Phys. 57, 2264–2272 (1972).
[110] D. L. Andrews and W. A. Ghoul, “Polarization studies in multiphoton absorption spec-
troscopy,” J. Chem. Phys. 75, 530–538 (1981).
[111] D. L. Andrews, “The theory of double-beam three-photon absorption,” J. Chem. Phys.
77, 2831–2835 (1982).
[112] D. L. Andrews, “The theory of double-beam three-photon absorption. ii. polarization
ratio analysis,” J. Chem. Phys. 78, 1731–1734 (1983).

REFERENCES
317
[113] R. N. Dixon, J. M. Bayley, and M. N. R. Ashfold, “The rotational structure of three-
photon resonances of polyatomic molecules,” Chem. Phys. 84, 21–34 (1984).
[114] J. M. Leeder and D. L. Andrews, “A molecular theory for two-photon and three-photon
fluorescence polarization,” J. Chem. Phys. 134, 094503 (2011).
[115] D. L. Andrews, “Symmetry characterization in molecular multiphoton spectroscopy,”
Spectrochim. Acta A: Mol. Spec. 46, 871–885 (1990).
[116] D. A. Case, G. M. McClelland, and D. R. Herschbach, “Angular momentum polarization
in molecular collisions: classical and quantum theory for measurements using resonance
fluorescence,” Mol. Phys. 35, 541–573 (1978).
[117] C. Wan and C. K. Johnson, “Time-resolved anisotropic two-photon spectroscopy,”
Chem. Phys. 179, 513–531 (1994).
[118] R. N. Zare, Angular Momentum–Understanding Spatial Aspects in Chemistry and
Physics (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1988).
[119] A. J. Bain and A. J. McCaffery, “On the measurement of molecular anisotropies using
laser techniques. III. Detection of the higher multipoles,” J. Chem. Phys. 83, 2641–2645
(1985).
[120] M. A. Bopp, Y. Jia, G. Haran, E. A. Morlino, and R. M. Hochstrasser, “Single-molecule
spectroscopy with 27 fs pulses: time-resolved experiments and direct imaging of orien-
tational distributions,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 7–9 (1998).
[121] T. Tao, “Time-dependent fluorescence depolarization and Brownian rotational diffusion
coefficients of macromolecules,” Biopolymers 8, 609–632 (1969).
[122] M. J. Sanders and M. J. Wirth, “Evidence for solvation structural dependence of rota-
tional diffusion anisotropy,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 101, 361–366 (1983).
[123] L. X.-Q. Chen, R. A. Engh, and G. R. Fleming, “Reorientation of tryptophan and
simple peptides: onset of internal flexibility and comparison with molecular dynamics
simulation,” J. Phys. Chem. 92, 4811–4816 (1988).
[124] J. Szubiakowski, A. Balter, W. Nowak, A. Kowalczyk, K. Wi´sniewski, and M.
Wierzbowska, “Anisotropic reorientation of perylene and 3,9-dibromoperylene in glyc-
erol: fluorescence anisotropy decay and quantum-mechanical study,” Chem. Phys. 208,
283–296 (1996).
[125] T. S. Blacker, R. J. Marsh, M. R. Duchen, and A. J. Bain, “Activated barrier crossing
dynamics in the non-radiative decay of NADH and NADPH,” Chem. Phys. 422, 184–194
(2013).
[126] N. Chadborn, J. Bryant, A. J. Bain, and P. O’Shea, “Ligand-dependent conformational
equilibria of serum albumin revealed by tryptophan fluorescence quenching,” Biophys.
J. 76, 2198–2207 (1999).
[127] C. W. Ko, Z. Wei, R. J. Marsh, D. A. Armoogum, N. Nicolaou, A. J. Bain, A. Zhou,
and L. Ying, “Probing nanosecond motions of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 by
time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy,” Mol. Biosyst. 5, 1025 (2009).
[128] R. M. Hochstrasser and D. K. Negus, “Picosecond fluorescence decay of tryptophans in
myoglobin,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 81, 4399–4403 (1984).
[129] F. Huang, S. Rajagopalan, G. Settanni, R. J. Marsh, D. A. Armoogum, N. Nicolaou,
A. J. Bain, E. Lerner, E. Haas, L. Ying, et al., “Multiple conformations of full-length
p53 detected with single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer,” Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 106, 20758–20763 (2009).

318
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
[130] T. A. Masters, V. Calleja, D. A. Armoogum, R. J. Marsh, C. J. Applebee, M. Laguerre,
A. J. Bain, and B. Larijani, “Regulation of 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase
1 activity by homodimerization in live cells,” Sci. Signal. 3, ra78 (2010).
[131] S.-Y. Chen and B. W. Van der Meer, “Theory of two-photon induced fluorescence
anisotropy decay in membranes,” Biophys. J. 64, 1567–1575 (1993).
[132] S. W. Pauls, J. F. Hedstrom, and C. K. Johnson, “Rotational relaxation of perylene
in n-alcohols and n-alkanes studied by two-photon-induced anisotropy decay,” Chem.
Phys. 237, 205–222 (1998).
[133] L. Ryderfors, E. Mukhtar, and L. B.- ˚A. Johansson, “Excited-state symmetry and reori-
entation dynamics of perylenes in liquid solutions: time-resolved fluorescence depolar-
ization studies using one- and two-photon excitation,” J. Phys. Chem. A 112, 5794–5803
(2008).
[134] C. Zannoni, “A Theory of fluorescence depolarization in membranes,” Mol. Phys. 42,
1303–1320 (1981).
[135] P. R. Callis, “The theory of two-photon-induced fluorescence anisotropy,” in Topics in
Fluorescence Spectroscopy, edited by J. R. Lakowicz (Kluwer Academic Publishing,
New York, 2002).
[136] C. K. Johnson and C. Wan, “Anisotropy decays induced by two-photon excitation,”
Topics in Fluorescence Spectroscopy, edited by J. R. Lakowicz (Kluwer Academic
Publishing, New York, 2002).
[137] A. J. Bain and A. J. McCaffery, “On the measurement of molecular anisotropies
using laser techniques. I. polarized laser fluorescence,” J. Chem. Phys. 83, 2627–2631
(1985).
[138] C. H. Greene and R. N. Zare, “Determination of Product population and alignment using
laser-induced fluorescence,” J. Chem. Phys. 78, 6741–6753 (1983).
[139] A. C. Kummel, G. O. Sitz, and R. N. Zare, “Determination of population and alignment
of the ground state using two-photon nonresonant excitation,” J. Chem. Phys. 85, 6874–
6897 (1986).
[140] E. M. Monge, D. A. Armoogum, and A. J. Bain, “Single- and two-photon time-resolved
polarized fluorescence studies of probe molecule dynamics in nematic liquid crystals,”
Proc. SPIE 4797 (2002).
[141] A. Penzkofer and J. Wiedmann, “Orientation of transition dipole moments of rhodamine
6g determined by excited state absorption,” Opt. Commun. 35, 81–86 (1980).
[142] F. L´opez Arbeloa and V. Mart´ınez Mart´ınez, “Orientation of adsorbed dyes in the
interlayer space of clays. 2 fluorescence polarization of rhodamine 6g in laponite films,”
Chem. Mater. 18, 1407–1416 (2006).
[143] R. J. Marsh, D. A. Armoogum, and A. J. Bain, “Stimulated emission depletion of
two-photon excited states,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 366, 398–405 (2002).
[144] A. J. Bain, R. J. Marsh, D. A. Armoogum, O. Mongin, L. Porr`es, and M. Blanchard-
Desce, “Time-resolved stimulated emission depletion in two-photon excited states,”
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 31, 1047–1051 (2003).
[145] D. Laage and J. T. Hynes, “A molecular jump mechanism of water reorientation,”
Science 311, 832–835 (2006).
[146] F. W. Deeg, J. J. Stankus, S. R. Greenfield, V. J. Newell, and M. D. Fayer, “Anisotropic
reorientational relaxation of biphenyl: transient grating optical kerr effect measure-
ments,” J. Chem. Phys. 90, 6893–6902 (1989).

REFERENCES
319
[147] D. J. Cook, J. X. Chen, E. A. Morlino, and R. M. Hochstrasser, “Terahertz-field-induced
second-harmonic generation measurements of liquid dynamics,” Chem. Phys. Lett. 309,
221–228 (1999).
[148] S. Lin, I. D. Hands, D. L. Andrews, and S. R. Meech, “Optically induced second har-
monic generation by six-wave mixing: a novel probe of solute orientational dynamics,”
J. Phys. Chem. A 103, 3830–3836 (1999).
[149] R. G. Bray and R. M. Hochstrasser, “Two-photon absorption by rotating diatomic
molecules,” Mol. Phys. 31, 1199–1211 (1976).
[150] A. J. Bain and A. J. McCaffery, “Multipolar evolution in two- and n-photon excitation,”
Chem. Phys. Lett. 108, 275–282 (1984).
[151] M. D. Rowe and A. J. McCaffery, “Transfer of state multipoles in excited A 1Σ+
u
7Li2
following rotationally inelastic collisions with he: experiment and theory,” Chem. Phys.
43, 35–54 (1979).
[152] A. J. Bain and A. J. McCaffery, “Complete determination of the state multipoles of
rotationally resolved polarized fluorescence using a single experimental geometry,” J.
Chem. Phys. 80, 5883 (1984).
[153] A. J. Bain, “Polarised laser fluorescence studies of ground and excited state dynamics,”
D. Phil. Thesis, University of Sussex (1984).
[154] A. P. Yutsis, I. B. Levinson, V. V. Vanagas, and A. Sen, Mathematical Apparatus of the
Theory of Angular Momentum (Israel Program for Scientific Translations, 1962).
[155] S.-L. Cong, K.-L. Han, G.-Z. He, and N.-Q. Lou, “Determination of population, ori-
entation and alignment of symmetric top molecule using laser-induced fluorescence,”
Chem. Phys. 256, 225–237 (2000).
[156] S. Manzhos, C. Romanescu, H.-P. Loock, and J. G. Underwood, “Two-photon state
selection and angular momentum polarization probed by velocity map imaging:
application to h atom photofragment angular distributions from the photodissocia-
tion of two-photon state selected HCl and HBr,” J. Chem. Phys. 121, 11802–11809
(2004).
[157] A. J. Alexander, “Determination of the helicity of oriented photofragments,” J. Chem.
Phys. 123, 194312 (2005).
[158] A. I. Chichinin, P. S. Shternin, N. G¨odecke, S. Kauczok, C. Maul, O. S. Vasyutinskii,
and K.-H. Gericke, “Intermediate state polarization in multiphoton ionization of HCl,”
J. Chem. Phys. 125, 034310 (2006).
[159] P. S. Shternin, V. K. Ivanov, A. G. Suits, and O. S. Vasyutinskii, “The role of interme-
diate state polarization in determination of vector properties of the ground state using
multiphoton excitation,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 2972 (2006).
[160] M. Minsky, “Microscopy apparatus,” US Patent No. 3,013,467 A, 1961.
[161] V. Calleja, S. Ameer-Beg, B. Vojnovic, R. Woscholski, J. Downward, and B. Lari-
jani, “Monitoring conformational changes of proteins in cells by fluorescence lifetime
imaging microscopy,” Biochem. J. 372, 33–40 (2003).
[162] R. D. Byrne, C. Applebee, D. L. Poccia, and B. Larijani, “Dynamics of PLCy and
src family kinase 1 interactions during nuclear envelope formation Revealed by FRET-
FLIM,” PLoS ONE 7(7), e40669 (2012).
[163] M. Drobizhev, N. S. Makarov, T. Hughes, and A. Rebane, “Resonance enhancement
of two-photon absorption in fluorescent proteins,” J. Phys. Chem. B 111, 14051–14054
(2007).

320
MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES
[164] M. Drobizhev, S. Tillo, N. S. Makarov, T. E. Hughes, and A. Rebane, “Absolute two-
photon absorption spectra and two-photon brightness of orange and red fluorescent
proteins,” J. Phys. Chem. B 113, 855–859 (2009).
[165] M. Drobizhev, N. S. Makarov, S. E. Tillo, T. E. Hughes, and A. Rebane, “Two-photon
absorption properties of fluorescent proteins,” Nat. Methods 8, 393–399 (2011).
[166] M. Drobizhev, N. S. Makarov, S. E. Tillo, T. E. Hughes, and A. Rebane, “Describing two-
photon absorptivity of fluorescent proteins with a new vibronic coupling mechanism,”
J. Phys. Chem. B 116, 1736–1744 (2012).
[167] M. Drobizhev, T. E. Hughes, Y. Stepanenko, P. Wnuk, K. O’Donnell, J. N. Scott, P. R.
Callis, A. Mikhaylov, L. Dokken, and A. Rebane, “Primary role of the chromophore
bond length alternation in reversible photoconversion of red fluorescence proteins,” Sci.
Rep. 2, 688 (2012).
[168] T. A. Masters, R. J. Marsh, D. A. Armoogum, N. Nicolaou, B. Larijani, and A. J. Bain,
“Restricted state selection in fluorescent protein f¨orster resonance energy transfer,”
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 7883–7890 (2013).

10
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
Emma Wisniewski-Barker and Miles J. Padgett
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, SUPA, Glasgow, UK
10.1
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION
For more than a century, scientists have known that light carries momentum. In 1909,
Poynting stated that circularly polarized light, should have angular momentum of
𝜎ℏper photon, where ℏis Plank’s constant, h, divided by 2𝜋and 𝜎= ±1 for right-
and left-circularly polarized light, respectively [1]. This angular momentum became
known as spin angular momentum (SAM). Poynting reasoned that the effects of SAM
were very small and would be extremely difficult to detect experimentally, but in 1936
Beth performed an experiment in which he observed the physical effects of SAM.
Beth suspended a waveplate from a quartz fiber, and as the circularly polarized light
passed through the waveplate, the handedness of the light was switched. The quartz
fiber gave a low friction suspension so that the angular momentum transferred from
the light to the waveplate by the reversal of the handedness of the circular polarization
caused the waveplate to rotate [2].
While the physical effects of angular momentum can be difficult to see (although
not impossible), it is simple to determine the interactions between light and atoms.
The angular momentum of an atom is changed by ±ℏwhen it emits a circularly
polarized photon [3]; however, a higher order transition, such as a quadrupole tran-
sition, results in an angular momentum transfer of a higher integer multiple of ℏ.
Circularly polarized light, and thus SAM, alone cannot account for this; therefore,
another type of angular momentum is required. In 1932, Darwin (the grandson of
the famous evolutionary scientist) described how a photon emitted a short distance
from the center of mass of an atom would provide the additional angular momentum
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
321

322
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
needed for higher order transitions [4]. This angular momentum eventually become
known as orbital angular momentum (OAM). In 1992, Allen et al. released a seminal
article that described OAM as a natural property of light beams with helical phase
fronts and noted that these beams could be generated quite easily in the laboratory [3].
OAM-carrying beams often take the form of (but not limited to) Laguerre-Gaussian
(LG) beams, with amplitude distributions, LGpl described as
LGpl =
√
2p!
𝜋(p + |l|)!
1
w(z)
[
r
√
2
w(z)
]|l|
exp
[
−r2
w2(z)
]
L|l|
p
(
2r2
w2(z)
)
exp [il𝜃]
exp
[
ik0r2z
2 (z62 + z2
R
)
]
exp
[
−i(2p + |l| + 1) tan−1
(
z
zR
)]
,
(10.1)
where r is the radius, w(z) = w(0)[(z2 + z2
R)∕z2
R]1∕2 with w(0) as the beam waist, zR
as the Rayleigh range, and (2p + |l| + 1) tan−1(z∕zR) as the Gouy phase [5]. L|l|
p is a
Laguerre polynomial that is a result of
L|l|
p (x) = (−1)|l| d|l|
dx|l| Lp+|l|(x),
(10.2)
where l is the azimuthal index resulting in OAM of L = lℏper photon, as shown in
Figure 10.1, and p is the number of radial nodes in the intensity distribution. The
FIGURE 10.1
Interfering a helical phase front and a plane wave results in spoked fringes.
Using beams with slightly different radii of curvature turns normal spoked fringes into the
beautiful spiral fringes shown here for l = 0 through l = +3.

HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION
323
simplest OAM beam has a phase in the transverse plane of 𝜙(𝜃) = l𝜃, where 𝜃is the
angular coordinate and l is any integer. Allen et al. derived that all light beams with
helical phase fronts described by eil𝜃have an OAM of lℏper photon [3]. This value
for the OAM is consistent with a simple geometrical argument based on the helical
phase fronts. The local momentum flow is directed along a normal to the phase fronts.
For helical phase fronts, this implies that the local momentum flow is not directed
in the global direction of beam propagation, rather than it is skewed to the beam
axis by an angle 𝛽= l∕k0r [6, 7], where k0 = 2𝜋∕𝜆is the wavenumber and 𝜆is the
wavelength of light. Associating a linear momentum of ℏk along this direction gives
an azimuthal component to the momentum of
p = ℏk0l𝜆
2𝜋r
(10.3)
per photon and results in an angular momentum along the beam axis of lℏ[8].
One ubiquitous feature of beams with helical phase fronts is that they have a phase
singularity running down their center, which is an intensity null surrounded by a
2𝜋l phase change [9]. The mathematical similarity between helically phased beams
and superfluid vortices led to these phase singularities being named optical vortices
[10]. These optical vortices do not carry any angular momentum themselves, as they
are points of zero energy; all angular momenta in the beam come from the field
surrounding the singularity.
In the 1970s, there were two important developments in the study of phase sin-
gularities. First, Nye and Berry investigated phase singularities in ultrasound waves
in order to model radio wave echoes off arctic ice sheets [11]. Second, Vaughan and
Willets created a phase singularity in a laser beam by combining high order Hermite–
Gaussian (HG) modes [12], which are the solutions of the paraxial wave equation
in Cartesian coordinates. The handedness of these singularity-carrying beams was
studied by breaking the cylindrical symmetry of an output beam of a laser [13] and
through the recognition of a bistable helical phase [14,15]. These developments cul-
minated in the realization of the importance of LG modes, which are the solutions of
the paraxial wave equation in cylindrical coordinates, as described by D’Alessandro
and Oppo [16]. Helical phase fronts are not unique to LG beams; Bessel beams [17],
Mathieu beams [18], and Ince–Gaussian beams [19] also have helical phase fronts.
All beams with helical phase fronts give rise to spiral interference fringes when inter-
fered with a plane wave with a slightly different radius of curvature [20–22], shown
in Figure 10.1.
OAM can lead to quite simple descriptions of situations that are rotationally sym-
metric or contain singularities. One instance where OAM is useful in understanding a
broad concept is the angular uncertainty relationship. Similar to the more widely rec-
ognized Heisenberg uncertainty relationship, an uncertainty relationship for angular
momentum can be described quite simply. If a beam did not have an angular restric-
tion from an aperture, the full cyclic nature of the azimuthal phase could be observed
and would result in no uncertainty in the OAM and a single-valued OAM state.
However, light restricted to a certain azimuthal range by an aperture is described by

324
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
a spread of OAM states [23]. The relation between the width of the aperture and the
spread of OAM values has been studied extensively [24–27] and is an example of an
uncertainty relationship. For apertures of width Δ𝜃, the spread in OAM states, ΔL,
is described by the angular uncertainty relationship:
Δ𝜃ΔL ≥1
2ℏ|1 −2𝜋P(𝜃)|,
(10.4)
where P(𝜃) is the angular probability density of the boundary of the angular range and
takes the periodicity of the angle into account [25]. For a narrow Gaussian aperture,
this relationship simplifies to Δ𝜃ΔL > ℏ∕2.
10.2
CREATING BEAMS WITH OAM
There are many ways to create beams that have OAM. One of the earliest methods of
creating OAM-carrying beams is to use a pair of cylindrical lenses that transform a HG
beam to an LG beam. This kind of mode transformation was the method used by Allen
et al. in 1992 [3]. HG and LG modes are both complete sets, which means that a mode
of either set can be described as a superposition of modes of the other. As the beam is
focused in the cylindrical lens pair, it acquires an additional Gouy phase determined
by the orientation and mode indices of the HG mode used, which will cause the HG
mode to rephase into a specific LG mode [28]. There are two varieties of cylindrical
lens mode converters, both of which are shown in Figure 10.2; a 𝜋∕2 converter will
transform HG modes into LG modes when there is a beam waist midway between
the cylindrical lenses, whereas a 𝜋converter will transform any mode of collimated
light into its own mirror image. In this way, a 𝜋converter is optically equivalent to
a Dove prism [29]. These 𝜋and 𝜋∕2 mode converters are mathematically analogous
to polarization-converting half-wave plates and quarter-wave plates, respectively.
Instead of using cylindrical lenses to convert between HG and LG modes, spiral
phase plates can be used to change plane waves into helically phased waves. Spiral
phase plates are transmissive plates that increase in thickness with azimuthal angle
with a discontinuity step of one wavelength, such that a plane wave passing through
f
f
f
f
2f
FIGURE 10.2
𝜋∕2 converters (left) switch between HG and LG modes, whereas 𝜋converters
(right) switch modes to their mirror images.

CREATING BEAMS WITH OAM
325
s
β
r
FIGURE 10.3
A plane wave gains a helical phase front when shone through a spiral phase
plate with a skew angle 𝛽at a distance r from the center and a step height s.
the spiral phase plate exits with a helical phase front. An example of this is shown
in Figure 10.3. The required step height, s, of a spiral phase plate for light with a
wavelength of 𝜆is
s =
l𝜆
(n −1),
(10.5)
where n is the refractive index of the medium from which the plate is made. Applying
Snell’s law leads to the angular change in the transmitted ray, or skew angle, being
𝛽= l∕k0r, as stated previously.
The required level of precision of the spiral phase plate’s thickness is very difficult
to obtain for light beams, and so to circumvent these difficulties, Beijersbergen et al.
placed a spiral phase plate in a fluid bath. The temperature of the bath was tuned to
achieve the proper index of refraction and thus the difference in thickness, or step
height, for a certain wavelength [30]. More recently, micro-fabrication techniques
have allowed for direct construction of millimeter wave [7] and optical spiral phase
plates [31,32]. However, individual physical spiral phase plates have to be constructed
for each wavelength of light being investigated, due to the relation of the wavelength
to the necessary thickness of the spiral phase plate.
Holographic alternatives to physical spiral phase plates are created through the
use of diffractive optical elements (DOEs). Holograms can be used to shape a
beam’s intensity or phase. The advantage of phase-only holograms is that nearly

326
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
Incident plane wave
Forked diffraction grating
+1st
0th
–1st
FIGURE 10.4
Plane waves gain a helical phase front when shone through a forked diffraction
grating, resulting in 1st and -1st order diffracted beams. The +1st and −1st order diffracted
beams are shown here with l = +1 and −1, respectively.
all the incident light can be directed with the desired phase profile into the first
diffracted order. By adding the desired phase profile modulo 2𝜋to a linear phase
ramp, any phase profile can be generated in the first diffracted order, as shown in
Figure 10.4. In the case of a helical beam, this hologram is a diffraction grating with an
l-pronged dislocation at the center [33–35], as shown in Figure 10.4. Spatial light
modulators (SLMs) have been developed and refined over the past decade and have
greatly increased the ease with which holograms can be implemented. Spatial light
modulators use liquid crystal controlled by a video interface on a computer to act as
holograms that can be easily changed in real time. SLMs have become widely used
due to the ease of creating and changing the displayed hologram in real time, the
circumvention of the manuacturing problems associated with making spiral phase
plates, and their ability to work for a wide range of wavelengths within the visible
spectrum.
As an alternative to diffractive optics, OAM-carrying beams can be made with
Q-plates, which are birefringent liquid crystal plates with spatially varying optical
axes [36, 37]. Q-plates have an azimuthal spatial dependence and thus are able to
transform between spin and orbital angular momenta by taking a circularly polarized
beam and adding an azimuthally dependent phase that gives the transmitted beam
a helical phase. This process also makes Q-plates useful for creating entanglement
between spin and orbital angular momenta [38].
Phase singularities can also occur naturally, without the use of spiral phase plates,
DOEs, or Q-plates. Simply interfering three or more plane wave components of
similar intensity results in many vortices in any field cross-section [39,40]. A common
example of this is laser speckle, where each black speck is an optical vortex [41].
While the previously described methods of obtaining helically phased beams all
use spatially coherent light, spatial and temporal coherence are not fundamental
requirements for creating OAM. The description of a helical phase front implies a
coherence of phase across the beam; however, it is possible to illuminate a spiral
phase plate or forked diffraction grating with a spatially incoherent source. If light

MICRO-MANIPULATION THROUGH THE USE OF OAM
327
FIGURE 10.5
A spiral phase plate illuminated by incoherent light produces an incoherent
vortex in the far field.
rays are projected through the center of a spiral phase plate at small radii, as shown
in Figure 10.5, incoherent vortices are generated in the far field; their time-averaged
intensity is not zero [42]. Therefore, a vortex beam can be used to determine spatial
coherence. A vortex beam with zero on-axis intensity implies spatial coherence,
whereas nonzero on-axis intensity indicates spatial incoherence.
One can see by comparing the energy, momentum, and angular momentum of
a photon that linear momentum per unit energy is inversely proportional to phase
velocity and that angular momentum is inversely proportional to frequency. These
relationships are not exclusive to light waves but do in fact apply to all forms of waves.
It follows, then, that orbital angular momentum is not only a property of light. Early
rotational Doppler shift studies were conducted at millimeter wave frequencies, as
experiments at these wavelengths were easier to align [7,43]. Radio waves carrying
OAM have also been proposed for applications in astronomy and radio frequency
communications, using arrays of antennae for detection [44]. Coherent arrays of
detectors or emitters act on longer wavelengths much like a spatial light modulator
does for optical frequencies. A synchotron, or cyclical particle accelerator, along
with the correct diffractive optics results in an X-ray vortex, which could be used for
determining molecular structure in X-ray diffraction [45]. OAM can also be created in
electron beams. Putting a spiral phase plate into an electron microscope can increase
edge detection in low-contrast imaging [46], which has led to a new holographic
reconstruction technique in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) [47].
10.3
MICRO-MANIPULATION THROUGH THE USE OF OAM
OAM has been observed in several experiments and has even become a method of
manipulating physical objects. One way of using the orbital OAM of light to manip-
ulate particles was discovered through the development of optical tweezers. Optical
tweezers use highly focused laser radiation to trap and move micron-sized dielec-
tric particles [48], which are often made of glass, silica, or polystyrene. Introducing
OAM-carrying beams with the use of SLMs allows us to expand the functionality
of optical tweezers, enabling them to act as optical spanners [49]. Optical spanners

328
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
FIGURE 10.6
Different rotation conditions for spin and orbital angular momentum. SAM
makes the particle spin about its own axis (a), whereas OAM orbits the particle about the beam
axis (b). For a beam much smaller than the particle, SAM and OAM will both make the particle
spin in the same way (c). For a large beam, OAM will make the particle orbit the beam (d).
work in a very similar way to optical tweezers, with the added cability to rotate the
trapped object. For example, for a beam with l = 1 and 𝜎= ±1, when the sign of
the SAM is positive, the particle will spin. When the sign of the SAM is negative,
the particle will stop [50]. If the center of mass of the particle is on the beam axis, then
SAM and OAM will both spin the particle about its axis, although they can be in the
same or in opposite directions. If the center of mass is off-axis, SAM and OAM will
act differently, with the SAM spinning the particle about its own axis and the OAM
spinning the particle in an orbit [51]. SAM is intrinsic, as its rotation is independent
of the choice of axis used to calculate it. OAM is said to be quasi-intrinsic when the
center of mass is on-axis, because in that case it spins about both its axis and the beam
axis, which happens to be the same. However, when the center of mass is off-axis, it
is said to be extrinsic, or dependent upon the axis about which it is calculated [51].
These situations are illustrated in Figure 10.6.
As the phase of an OAM-carrying beam changes with the spatial position in the
beam, mechanical effects of SAM and OAM depend on the size of the beam with
respect to the size of the particle. If the beam size is larger than the particle size, then
a beam carrying SAM will make the particle spin about its own axis and one carrying
OAM will make the particle rotate around the beam. If the beam size is much smaller
than the particle size, SAM and OAM will both make the particle spin the same way,
as a rotation around a beam of that size does not move the particle and instead just
spins it as if the beam were the rotation axis, also shown in Figure 10.6.
When light with SAM and/or OAM is spinning a particle of radius r, the light can
exert a maximum torque of the order ℏk0r on the particle [52]. This torque can be
used to create micromachines for the manipulation of particles. The sign of the total

BEAM TRANSFORMATIONS
329
angular momentum (SAM and OAM added together) determines the direction of the
particles rotation [53]. One benefit of using angular momentum as a micromachine is
that the “axle” is optical and hence will never wear out. One of the most common type
of micromachines is the micropump, which can be made by an array of beams with
OAM that causes a circulation of microparticles. The fluid flows through the array
and carries other particles with it [54]. Another way to design a micropump using
angular momentum is to transfer SAM to two birefringent particles to spin them in
opposite directions. This leads to a flow along the channel between them [55].
SAM and OAM interact with cold atoms in distinct ways. Circular polarization and
SAM play a role in atomic selection rules, whereas OAM does not, as a helical phase
front is locally indistinguishable from an inclined phase front. However, absorption
of a photon from a plane wave by a gas will lead to isotropic spontaneous emission
with the atoms or molecules recoiling away from the incident light. For a helically
phased beam with a force acting at any distance from the beam axis, there will be
a torque continually acting on the center of mass of the atom such that the repeated
recoil will guide the atom in a spiral [56]. As the atoms travel around the beam axis,
this torque is seen as a manifestation of the rotational Doppler shift [57], described
later. The annular intensity of a helically phased beam with the region of darkness
in the center allows for blue-detuned atom trapping, where there is a force attracting
the particles to the center of the beam [58]. This blue-detuned atom trapping acts in
a similar fashion to optical tweezers for low index particles.
10.4
BEAM TRANSFORMATIONS
SAM and OAM are usually separable, as they are typically independent when travel-
ing through a transparent, homogeneous medium with no spatially dependent optical
properties. However, transfer of SAM to OAM can happen in such a medium if a
Gaussian beam [59] or a circularly polarized vortex beam [60] is tightly focused
through a high numerical-aperture lens. This occurs in the optical spanners described
above. Although SAM and OAM can interchange in this way, the mechanisms for
transferring SAM and OAM are not the same. SAM affects particles that are birefrin-
gent. Given the right conditions, birefringent materials change circular polarization to
linear polarization, causing the SAM to change and therefore the birefringent particle
to spin [61]. Birefringence does not affect helical phase fronts and thus does not
interact with the OAM at all. Astigmatism, however, does change the helical phase
front, which means that it affects the OAM of the beam, while leaving polarization
and SAM unchanged.
There are two basic types of transformations. The first type of transformation is
a coordinate transformation, which is equivalent to a rotation of the state about the
optical axis and results in no change in angular momentum. For polarization, this
type of rotation about the optical axis could arise from optical activity, Faraday-type
effects, or a phase difference between the circularly polarized states. Optically active
materials do not alter the OAM state of the transmitted light [62,63]. Image rotation
is the equivalent transformation for an OAM-carrying beam to that of optical activity
for an SAM-carrying beam [64]. This second type of transformation is a rephasing of

330
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
linear states. This rephasing of the linear states does change the angular momentum,
which for polarization comes from birefringence. For OAM, the rotation of the
state manifests as a rotation about the optical axis of the mode or the superposition
of modes. This rotation corresponds to a changing in phase between positive and
negative OAM states. The equivalence between the rotation of polarization and the
rotation of an image has been used recently to investigate photon drag [65].
Photon drag was studied in depth experimentally by Jones in the 1970s. He
called it Fresnel or aether drag, and he showed that light passing through a moving
medium would be dragged either longitudinally or transversely by the medium [66].
In addition, he showed that the polarization of light through a spinning disk could be
rotated by a small angle, Δ𝜃pol, which is defined as
Δ𝜃pol = Ω
(
ng −1
n𝜙
)
L
c ,
(10.6)
where Ω is the angular velocity of the medium, L is its length, and ng and n𝜙are,
respectively, the group and phase refractive indices of the light in the medium [67].
Recent experimental work by Franke-Arnold et al. has shown that a spinning disk
drags the image through the same rotation angle as the polarization [65],
Δ𝜃pol = Δ𝜃image = Ω
(
ng −1
n𝜙
)
L
c .
(10.7)
In other words, photon drag has the same effect on spin and orbital angular momenta.
The equivalent rotation of polarization and image is shown in Figure 10.7.
FIGURE 10.7
Equivalent dragging of polarization (top) and transmitted image (bottom)
through a rotating medium.

BEAM TRANSFORMATIONS
331
FIGURE 10.8
Poincar´e sphere for polarization (left) and the an alogous Bloch sphere for
OAM (right).
As mentioned above, HG and LG modes are both complete sets, and any mode
in one set can be made by a superposition of modes in the other set. Polarization
is a useful analogy for the transformation between HG and LG modes. A Poincar´e
sphere shows how right- and left-circularly polarized states can be combined to form
linearly polarized states, as shown in Figure 10.8. Any two-dimensional space can be
described by an analogous Bloch sphere [68,69]. A generalized two-state system in
the OAM basis, |a⟩, can be written as:
|a⟩= cos
(𝜃a
2
)
|l⟩+ ei𝜙a sin
(𝜃a
2
)
| −l⟩,
(10.8)
where a = (sin (𝜃a) cos (𝜙a), sin (𝜃a) sin (𝜙a), cos (𝜃a)) is a vector with longitude
0 ≤𝜙a ≤2𝜋and latitude 0 ≤𝜃a ≤𝜋. On the Bloch sphere, the longitudinal posi-
tion, 𝜙, gives the orientation of the mode superposition. Figure 10.8 shows both the
Poincar´e sphere for polarization and the analogous Bloch sphere for OAM.
It is well known that light emitted from a moving source undergoes a frequency
shift, a concept known as the Doppler shift. This effect was seen by Garetz in the
1970s for rotation between a detector and a source of circularly polarized light. Garetz
showed this effect by spinning one half-wave plate with respect to another half-wave
plate, showing that the polarization state was rotated at twice the rotational speed of
the waveplate, and measuring the corresponding frequency shift [70,71]. There is a
similar effect for a helically phased beam [57,72]. The single rotation of a helically
phased beam changes the field by l cycles, and this can be easily implemented by
rotating Dove prisms or cylindrical lenses [43]. When light has both SAM spin and
OAM, a single rotation of the beam about the beam axis changes the phase by (l + 𝜎)
cycles and the frequency by Δ𝜔= JΩ [73], which is proportional to the total angular
momentum of light. The beam cross-section has an (l + 𝜎)-fold rotation symmetry.

332
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
SAM and OAM act similarly when being rotated about the beam axis, so the total
angular momentum is the important parameter.
10.5
MEASURING BEAMS WITH OAM
We have discussed how to create a beam having nonzero OAM, how to observe the
physical effects of OAM, how to manipulate OAM, and how to transform between
different modes and between SAM and OAM. We have yet to discuss how to measure
OAM. Sometimes it is not enough to simply know that a beam has a helical phase
front; there are situations where we want to quantify the OAM. There are many ways
to measure OAM. First is through the use of forked diffraction gratings. As we have
discussed previously, to generate an OAM-carrying beam, one can use the collimated
output of a single mode fiber to illuminate a forked diffraction grating and get a vortex
beam in the far field [33], as shown in Figure 10.4. If, instead, one wants to measure
a beam with OAM, this process can be reversed. A vortex beam incident on a forked
grating will result in a fundamental Gaussian beam only if the OAM of the incoming
beam is opposite to that of the diffraction grating. By scanning the diffraction grating
through all possible OAM states and detecting which state corresponds to a detected
photon after a single mode fiber, the mode of the incident photon can be deduced
[74]. This method works with low levels of light down to single photons. However,
when working with single photons, the efficiency of the detection system is only 1∕N,
where N is the number of states to be assessed, and so for effective detection of the
OAM mode, many photons must be prepared in the same state.
Another method for measuring OAM is to interfere the unknown helically phased
beam with a plane wave. The resulting fringes are spiral in nature, and the number
of forked fringes matches the l of the beam [20], shown in Figure 10.1. Interference
can be used to determine OAM for a diffraction pattern from any aperture as well.
For single and double slits, there is a displacement due to the helical phase front
that is perpendicular to the slit direction and leads to a sharp bend in the otherwise
straight fringes. The direction of the bend depends on the handedness of the helicity
[74, 75]. More complicated diffraction patterns can also be used to measure OAM.
One interesting case is when an LG beam is diffracted through a triangular aperture.
The result is an array of (l + 1)(l + 2)∕2 spots in a triangular configuration, set at a
right angle to the aperture’s orientation, with the sign of l determining the direction
of the orientation [76]. All of these interferometric methods allow for the measure
of both the magnitude and the sign of the OAM. However, these approaches require
many photons, and thus cannot measure the l of single photons.
The rotational frequency shift that was discussed previously can also be used to
measure OAM, where each value of l results in a frequency sideband [77]. However,
in low light it is difficult to measure both the frequency and the beam rotation. If a
fixed rotation is used, a static, l-dependent phase shift is created [78]. Dove prisms
can be used to make an image rotation, and this has been built into Mach-Zehnder
[79] and Sagnac [24] interferometers. This rotational frequency shift method can be
used to measure the OAM or the total angular momentum [80]. This method requires

OAM IN NONLINEAR AND QUANTUM OPTICS
333
N −1 interferometers to measure N states, which limits this technique to measuring
a small number of states.
A recently-developed method for measuring OAM is through the use of mode
sorters. The azimuthal position of the input beam is transformed into a transverse
position in the output beam [81,82]. This takes a helically phased beam and turns it
into a transverse phase gradient. The reformatting introduces a phase aberration, but
it can be corrected in the output plane. Spatial light modulators have been used to
create a system that both reformats the image and also corrects the phase. A lens then
focuses the input modes to separate lateral positions, where they can be detected using
a detector array [83]. This method is less technically demanding than interferometric
approaches and can measure the l of single photons [84], and although not perfect, it
is more efficient than other common techniques.
10.6
OAM IN CLASSICAL IMAGING
OAM measurement methods can be used in imaging by placing a forked hologram
in the Fourier plane of the object [35, 85]. This technique is especially useful for
contrast enhancement in optical microscopy. When the phase mask corresponds to
a spiral phase plate, the point spread function of the microscope is changed into
a helically phased ring, and the phase edges appear as bright lines, a process that
is referred to as unidirectional edge enhancement. This technique has been used at
the single-photon level in ghost imaging [86], which we will describe later. Varying
the technique slightly results in spiral interferometry, where spiral fringes replace the
common circular fringes. This allows for the recovery of information that is usually
lost by the up/down degeneracy of traditional interferometric techniques. Beyond
forked holograms, the same technique can be used in phase contrast and dark field
microscopy. A spatial light modulator can be used instead of having separate phase
masks for each imaging modality [87].
Apart from being used in a microscope, OAM can also be exploited in telescopes
for the detection of off-axis light. The phase discontinuity caused by a spiral phase
plate placed within a telescope blocks on-axis light and allows for fainter off-axis
light to be detected [88]. This has proven interesting to astronomers, who hope to
attenuate bright stars in order to look for nearby planets whose light would otherwise
be eclipsed by the star [89,90].
10.7
OAM IN NONLINEAR AND QUANTUM OPTICS
Optical vortices in nonlinear materials are often studied within a Kerr medium. A Kerr
medium is one in which the refractive index changes with the intensity of the incident
light [91], a third-order nonlinear interaction. If the increase in intensity increases
the refractive index, the transmitted beam will self-focus. Conversely, if the increase
in intensity decreases the refractive index, the transmitted beam will self-defocus as
it passes through the medium. In this situation, a beam carrying OAM, which has an

334
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
annular intensity, will create a path of high refractive-index material that can guide a
second beam through the Kerr medium [92].
Another category of nonlinear processes is second-order nonlinear interactions,
where two low-frequency waves, 𝜔1 and 𝜔2, exchange energy with 𝜔3, a higher
frequency wave [91]. Energy conservation requires the frequencies to be related by
𝜔1 + 𝜔2 = 𝜔3 and momentum conservation requires the momenta to be related by
k1 + k2 = k3, where k1, k2, and k3 are the momentum vectors of the three waves
and |k| = 𝜔n(𝜔)∕c. The conservation of momentum is much more complicated than
energy conservation, because the refractive index, n(𝜔), is a function of the frequency,
𝜔. The various approaches to modify n(𝜔) include temperature and angle tuning of
the crystal, and these lead to different phase-matching conditions. For example, type
I phase matching is where the medium is such that the refractive indices of all three
waves are the same.
A specific example of second-order nonlinear interactions is parametric down-
conversion, where the energy from one high-frequency wave is transferred to two
lower-frequency waves. This process is only partially constrained in that the frequen-
cies of 𝜔1 and 𝜔2 can vary, so long as they sum to give 𝜔3, the frequency of the starting
wave [93]. The two emitted beams are each spatially incoherent, whilst being phase
conjugate with respect to each other, leading to quantum entanglement of the spatial
modes [79, 94]. The measurement of one photon in a particular basis collapses the
two-photon state and, because of entanglement, immediately gives knowledge about
the same basis for the other photon, regardless of the photons’ spatial separation.
OAM can be used for the encoding of both classical and quantum information
[76]. OAM is potentially useful in quantum cryptography, as it gives access to an
unbounded number of states, in contrast to the two states associated with SAM, thus
greatly increasing the amount of information that can be transmitted on each pho-
ton [95,96]. Other quantum phenomena explored with OAM-carrying light include
hyperentanglement, multiple variables including OAM are entangled simultaneously
[97], and hybrid entanglement, where there is entanglement between OAM and a
different variable [38,98].
OAM can be used in various tests of quantum mechanics. As discussed earlier,
a Poincar´e sphere equivalent exists for OAM, and by drawing direct analogy with
polarization, it is possible to formulate a Bell-type argument for OAM that discounts
the local hidden-variable theory [99]. Violation of the Bell inequality has been shown
for the case where the phase filter is nonlocal with respect to the object [86]. In a
different type of test of quantum mechanics using wedge-shaped apertures and forked
holograms, it has also been shown that the EPR paradox also applies to OAM and
angular position [100].
With possibilities for carrying an unbounded state space, OAM presents itself as
an extremely useful tool to increase information capacity in quantum information.
However, a drawback to using OAM is that the decomposition of an OAM-carrying
beam into its eigenstates depends on both its transverse and angular alignment.
Because it is an extended beam, the phase fronts and the OAM spectrum are sensitive
to atmospheric turbulence [100–102]. Despite these sensitivities, OAM multiplexing
has recently been shown to result in very high data rates [103].

REFERENCES
335
10.8
CONCLUSIONS
OAM has helped scientists think differently about light and has led to a number
of discoveries both on the microscopic and macroscopic level. It has proven use-
ful for applications in micromanipulation, imaging, and communication systems.
Knowledge and study of OAM has increased with the development of spatial light
modulators, which have allowed increased control over both the phase and intensity of
light. OAM has also allowed for new demonstrations of quantum entanglement, and
the multidimensional OAM basis set has led to higher numbers of states for encoding
of information. In the 20 years since Allen et al. published the groundbreaking paper
on OAM, we have learned much about OAM, but there is no doubt that there are
more areas to explore.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Poynting, “The wave motion of a revolving shaft, and a suggestion as to the angular
momentum in a beam of circularly polarised light,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond., A 82, 560–567
(1909).
[2] R. Beth, “Mechanical detection and measurement of the angular momentum of light,”
Phy. Rev. 50, 115–125 (1936).
[3] L. Allen, M. Beijersbergen, R. Spreeuw, and J. Woerdman, “Orbital angular momentum
of light and the transformation of laguerre-gaussian laser modes,” Phy. Rev. A 45,
8185–8189 (1992).
[4] C. G. Darwin, “Notes on the theory of radiation,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond., A 136, 36–52
(1932).
[5] L. Allen, M. J. Padgett, and M. Babiker, “The orbital angular momentum of light,” Prog.
Opt. 39, 291–372 (1999).
[6] M. J. Padgett and L. Allen, “The poynting vector in laguerre-gaussian laser modes,”
Opt. Commun. 121, 36–40 (1995).
[7] G. A. Turnbull, D. A. Robertson, G. M. Smith, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett, “Generation
of free-space laguerre-gaussian modes at millimetre-wave frequencies by use of a spiral
phaseplate,” Opt. Commun. 127(4–6), 183–188 (1996).
[8] J. Leach, S. Keen, M. J. Padgett, C. Saunter, and G. D. Love, “Direct measurement
of the skew angle of the poynting vector in a helically phased beam,” Opt. Exp. 14,
11919–11924 (2006).
[9] M. Berry, J. Nye, and F. Wright, “The elliptic umbilic diffraction catastrophe,” Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 291, 453–484 (1979).
[10] P. Coullet, G. Gil, and F. Rocca, “Optical vortices,” Opt. Commun. 73, 403–408 (1989).
[11] J. F. Nye and M. Berry, “Dislocations in wave trains,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond., A 336,
165–190 (1974).
[12] J. M. Vaughan and D. Willetts, “Interference properties of a light-beam having a helical
wave surface,” Opt. Commun. 30, 263–267 (1979).
[13] L. A. Lugiato, F. Prati, L. M. Narducci, and G.-L. Oppo, “Spontaneous breaking of the
cylindrical symmetry in lasers,” Opt. Commun. 69, 387–392 (1989).

336
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
[14] C. Tamm, “Frequency locking of 2 transverse optical modes of a laser,” Phys. Rev. A
38, 5960–5963 (1988).
[15] C. Tamm and C. Weiss, “Bistability and optical switching of spatial patterns in a laser,”
J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 7, 1034–1038 (1990).
[16] G. D’Alessandro and G.-L. Oppo, “Gauss-laguerre modes: a sensible basis for laser
dynamics,” Opt. Commun. 88, 130–136 (1992).
[17] D. McGloin and K. Dholakia, “Bessel beam: difraction in a new light, contemporary,”
Physics 46, 15–28 (2005).
[18] J. C. Gutierrez-Vega, M. D. Iturbe-Castillo, and S. Chavez-Cerda, “Alternative formula-
tion for invariant optical fields: Mathieu beams,” Opt. Lett. 25, 1493–1495 (2000).
[19] M. A. Bandres and J. C. Guttierrez-Vega, “Ince-Gaussian beams,” Opt. Lett. 29, 144–146
(2004).
[20] M. Harris, C. A. Hill, and J. M. Vaughan, “Optical helices and spiral interference
fringes,” Opt. Commun. 106, 161–166 (1994).
[21] M. J. Padgett, J. Arlt, N. Simpson, and L. Allen, “An experiment to observe the intensity
and phase structure of laguerre-gaussian laser modes,” Am. J. Phys. 64, 77–82 (1996).
[22] M. S. Soskin, V. N. Gorshkov, M. V. Vasnetsov, J. T. Malos, and N. R. Heckenberg,
“Topological charge and angular momentum of light beams carrying optical vortices,”
Phys. Rev. A. 56, 4064–4075 (1997).
[23] G. W. Forbes and M. A. Alonso, “Measures of spread for periodic distributions and the
associated uncertainty relations,” Am. J. Phys. 69, 340–347 (2001).
[24] E. Yao, S. Franke-Arnold, J. Courtial, M. J. Padgett, and S. M. Barnett, “Observation of
quantum entanglement using spatial light modulators,” Opt. Exp. 14(26), 13089–13094
(2006).
[25] S. Franke-Arnold, S. M. Barnett, E. Yao, J. Leach, J. Courtial, and M. Padgett, “Uncer-
tainty principle for angular position and angular momentum,” New J. Phys. 6, 1–8
(2004).
[26] G. W. Forbes and M. A. Alonso, “Consistent analogs of the Fourier uncertainty relation,”
Am. J. Phys. 69, 1091 (2001).
[27] J. ˇReh´aˇcek, Z. Bouchal, R. ˇCelechovsk´y, Z. Hradil, and L. L. S´anchez-Soto, “Experi-
mental test of uncertainty relations for quantum mechanics on a circle,” Phys. Rev. A.
77, 13 (2008).
[28] M. Beijersbergen, L. Allen, H. van der Veen, and J. Woerdman, “Astigmatic laser mode
converters and transfer of orbital angular momentum,” Opt. Commun. 96, 123–132
(1993).
[29] N. Gonz´alez, G. Molina-Terriza, and J. P. Torres, “How a dove prism transforms the
orbital angular momentum of a light beam,” Opt. Exp. 14(20), 9093–9102 (2006).
[30] M. W. Beijersbergen, R. P. C. Coerwinkel, M. Kristensen, and J. P. Woerdman, “Helical-
wavefront laser beams produced with a spiral phaseplate,” Opt. Commun. 112(5–6),
321–327 (1994).
[31] S. S. R. Oemrawsingh, J. A. W. van Houwelingen, E. R. Eliel, J. P. Woerdman, E. J. K.
Verstegen, J. G. Kloosterboer, and G. W. Hooft, “Production and characterization of
spiral phase plates for optical wavelengths,” Appl. Opt. 43(3), 688–694 (2004).
[32] K. Sueda, G. Miyaji, N. Miyanaga, and M. Nakatsuka, “Laguerre-Gaussian beam gen-
erated with a multilevel spiral phase plate for high intensity laser pulses,” Opt. Exp.
12(15), 3548–3553 (2004).

REFERENCES
337
[33] V. Y. Bazhenov, M. V. Vasnetsov, and M. S. Soskin, “Laser-beams with screw disloca-
tions in their wave-fronts,” JETP Lett. 52(8), 429–431 (1990).
[34] V. Y. Bazhenov, M. S. Soskin, and M. V. Vasnetsov, “Screw dislocations in light wave-
fronts,” J. Mod. Opt. 39, 985–990 (1992).
[35] N. R. Heckenberg, R. McDuff, C. P. Smith, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and M. J. Wegener,
“Laser beams with phase singularities,” Opt. Quant. Electron. 24(9), S951–S962 (1992).
[36] L. Marrucci, C. Manzo, and D. Paparo, “Optical spin-to-orbital angular momentum
conversion in inhomogeneous anisotropic media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 163905 (2006).
[37] L. Marrucci, E. Karimi, S. Slussarenko, B. Piccirillo, E. Santamato, E. Nagali, and
F. Scia-rrino, “Spin-to-orbital conversion of the angular momentum of light and its
classical and quantum applications,” J. Opt. 13, 064001 (2011).
[38] E. Nagali, L. Sansoni, F. Sciarrino, F. De Martini, L. Marrucci, B. Piccirillo, E. Karimi,
and E. Santamato, “Optimal quantum cloning of orbital angular momentum photon
qubits through Hong-Ou-Mandel coalescence,” Nat. Photon. 3(12), 720–723 (2009).
[39] J. Masajada and B. Dubik, “Optical vortex generation by three plane wave interference,”
Opt. Commun. 198(1–3), 21–27 (2001).
[40] K. O’Holleran, M. J. Padgett, and M. R. Dennis, “Topology of optical vortex lines formed
by the interference of three, four, and five plane waves,” Opt. Exp. 14(7), 3039–3044
(2006).
[41] J. F. Nye, Natural Focusing and Fine Structure of Light: Caustics and Wave Dislocations.
Taylor & Francis, 1999).
[42] G. A. Swartzlander and R. I. Hernandez-Aranda, “Optical rankine vortex and anomalous
circulation of light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(16), (2007).
[43] J. Courtial, K. Dholakia, D. A. Robertson, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett, “Measurement
of the rotational frequency shift imparted to a rotating light beam possessing orbital
angular momentum,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80(15), 3217–3219 (1998).
[44] B. Thid´e, H. Then, J. Sjoholm, K. Palmer, J. Bergman, T. D. Carozzi, Y. N. Istomin,
N. H. Ibragimov, and R. Khamitova, “Utilization of photon orbital angular momentum
in the low-frequency radio domain,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(8), 1–4 (2007).
[45] S. Sasaki and I. McNulty, “Proposal for generating brilliant x-ray beams carrying orbital
angular momentum,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(12), (2008).
[46] M. Uchida and A. Tonomura, “Generation of electron beams carrying orbital angular
momentum,” Nature 464, 737–739 (2010).
[47] J. Verbeeck, H. Tian, and P. Schattschneider, “Production and application of electron
vortex beams,” Nature 467, 301–304 (2010).
[48] H. He, M. E. J. Friese, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Direct obser-
vation of transfer of angular momentum to absorptive particles from a laser beam with
a phase singularity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75(5), 826–829 (1995).
[49] M. Padgett and L. Allen, “Optical tweezers and spanners,” Phy. World 10(9), 35–38
(1997).
[50] N. B. Simpson, K. Dholakia, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett, “Mechanical equivalence of
spin and orbital angular momentum of light: an optical spanner,” Opt. Lett. 22(1), 52–54
(1997).
[51] A. T. O’Neil, I. MacVicar, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett, “Intrinsic and extrinsic nature
of the orbital angular momentum of a light beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88(5), 053601
(2002).

338
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
[52] J. Courtial and M. J. Padgett, “Limit to the orbital angular momentum per unit energy
in a light beam that can be focussed onto a small particle,” Opt. Commun. 173, 269–274
(2000).
[53] M. E. J. Friese, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, J. Gold, P. Hagberg, and D. Hanstorp, “Optically
driven micromachine elements,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 78(4), 547–549 (2001).
[54] K. Ladavac and D. Grier, “Microoptomechanical pumps assembled and driven by holo-
graphic optical vortex arrays,” Opt. Exp. 12(6), 1144–1149 (2004).
[55] J. Leach, H. Mushfique, R. Di Leonardo, M. Padgett, and J. M. Cooper, “An optically
driven pump for microfluidics,” Lab Chip 6(6), 735–739 (2006).
[56] M. Babiker, W. L. Power, and L. Allen, “Light-induced torque on moving atoms,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 73(9), 1239–1242 (1994).
[57] L. Allen, M. Babiker, and W. L. Power, “Azimuthal doppler-shift in light-beams with
orbital angular-momentum,” Opt. Commun. 112(3–4), 141–144 (1994).
[58] T. Kuga, Y. Torii, N. Shiokawa, T. Hirano, Y. Shimizu, and H. Sasada, “Novel optical
trap of atoms with a doughnut beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 78(25), 4713–4716 (1997).
[59] T. A. Nieminen, A. B. Stilgoe, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Angular
momentum of a strongly focused gaussian beam,” J. Opt. A 10(11), (2008).
[60] Y. Zhao, J. S. Edgar, G. D. M. Jeffries, D. McGloin, and D. T. Chiu, “Spin-to-orbital
angular momentum of a strongly focused optical beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 073901
(2007).
[61] M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Optical
alignment and spinning of laser-trapped microscopic particles,” Nature 394(6691), 348–
350 (1998).
[62] D. L. Andrews, L. C. D. Romero, and M. Babiker, “On optical vortex interactions with
chiral matter,” Opt. Commun. 237(1–3), 133–139 (2004).
[63] F. Araoka, T. Verbiest, K. Clays, and A. Persoons, “Interactions of twisted light with
chiral molecules: an experimental investigation,” Phys. Rev. A 71(5), 055401 (2005).
[64] L. Allen and M. Padgett, “Equivalent geometric transformations for spin and orbital
angular momentum of light,” J. Mod. Opt. 54(4), 487–491 (2007).
[65] S. Franke-Arnold, G. Gibson, R. W. Boyd, and M. J. Padgett, “Rotary photon drag
enhanced by a slow-light medium,” Science 333, 65–67 (2011).
[66] R. Jones, “‘fresnel aether drag’ in a transversely moving medium,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond.,
A. 328, 337–352 (1972).
[67] R. V. Jones, “Rotary ‘aether drag’,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond., A 349, 423–439 (1976).
[68] M. J. Padgett and J. Courtial, “Poincare-sphere equivalent for light beams containing
orbital angular momentum,” Opt. Lett. 24(7), 430–432 (1999).
[69] E. J. Galvez, P. R. Crawford, H. I. Sztul, M. J. Pysher, P. J. Haglin, and R. E. Williams,
“Geometric phase associated with mode transformations of optical beams bearing orbital
angular momentum,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90(20), 203901 (2003).
[70] B. A. Garetz and A. S, “Variable frequency-shifting of circularly polarized laser-
radiation via a rotating half-wave retardation plate,” Opt. Commun. 31(1), 1–3 (1979).
[71] B. A. Garetz, “Angular dopper efect,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 71(5), 609–611 (1981).
[72] I. V. Basistiy, V. V. Slyusar, M. S. Soskin, M. V. Vasnetsov, and A. Y. Bekshaev,
“Manifestation of the rotational Doppler efect by use of an of-axis optical vortex beam,”
Opt. Lett. 28(14), 1185–1187 (2003).

REFERENCES
339
[73] G. Nienhuis, “Doppler efect induced by rotating lenses,” Opt. Commun. 132, 8–14
(1996).
[74] D. Ghai, P. Senthilkumaran, and R. S. Sirohi, “Single-slit difraction of an optical beam
with phase singularity,” Opt. Lasers Eng. 47(1), 123–126 (2009).
[75] H. I. Sztul and R. R. Alfano, “Double-slit interference with Laguerre-Gaussian beams,”
Opt. Lett. 31(7), 999–1001 (2006).
[76] J. M. Hickmann, E. J. S. Fonseca, W. C. Soares, and S. Ch´avez-Cerda, “Unveiling a
truncated optical lattice associated with a triangular aperture using light’s orbital angular
momentum,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 053904 (2010).
[77] J. Courtial, D. A. Robertson, and K. Dholakia, “Rotational frequency shift of a light
beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81(22), 4828–4830 (1998).
[78] G. Molina-Terriza, J. P. Torres, and L. Torner, “Management of the angular momentum of
light: preparation of photons in multidimensional vector states of angular momentum,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88(1), 013601 (2002).
[79] A. Mair, A. Vaziri, G. Weihs, and A. Zeilinger, “Entanglement of the orbital angular
momentum states of photons,” Nature 412(6844), 313–316 (2001.
[80] S. N. Khonina, V. V. Kotlyar, R. V. Skidanov, V. A. Soifer, P. Laakkonen, and
J. Tu-runen, “Gauss-Laguerre modes with different indices in prescribed diffraction
orders of a diffractive phase element,” Opt. Commun. 175(4–6), 301–308 (2000).
[81] O. Bryngdahl, “Geometrical transformations in optics,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 64, 1092–1099
(1974).
[82] W. J. Hossack, A. M. Darling, and A. Dahdouh, “Coordinate transformations with mul-
tiple computer-generated optical-elements,” J. Mod. Opt. 34(9), 1235–1250 (1987).
[83] G. C. G. Berkhout, M. P. J. Lavery, J. Courtial, M. W. Beijersbergen, and M. J. Padgett,
“Efficient sorting of orbital angular momentum states of light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105(15),
153601 (2010).
[84] M. P. J. Lavery, D. J. Robertson, G. C. G. Berkhout, G. D. Love, M. J. Padgett, and
J. Courtial, “Refractive elements for the measurement of the orbital angular momentum
of a single photon,” Opt. Exp. 20(3), 2110–2115 (2012).
[85] L. Torner, J. P. Torres, and S. Carrasco, “Digital spiral imaging,” Opt. Exp. 13(3),
873–881 (2005).
[86] B. Jack, J. Leach, J. Romero, S. Franke-Arnold, M. Ritsch-Marte, S. M. Barnett, and
M. J. Padgett, “Holographic ghost imaging and the violation of a bell inequality,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 103(8), 083602 (2009).
[87] S. Furhapter, A. Jesacher, S. Bernet, and M. Ritsch-Marte, “Spiral phase contrast imag-
ing in microscopy,” Opt. Exp. 13(3), 689–694 (2005).
[88] G. A. Swartzlander, “Peering into darkness with a vortex spatial filter,” Opt. Lett. 26(8),
497–499 (2001).
[89] J. H. Lee, G. Foo, E. G. Johnson, and G. A. Swartzlander, “Experimental verification of
an optical vortex coronagraph,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97(5), (2006).
[90] G. Swartzlander, E. Ford, R. Abdul-Malik, L. Close, M. Peters, D. Palacios, and
D. Wilson, “Astronomical demonstration of an optical vortex coronagraph,” Opt. Exp.
16(14), 10200–10207 (2008).
[91] A. M. Yao and M. J. Padgett, “Orbital angular momentum: origins, behavior and appli-
cations,” Adv. Opt. Photon. 3, 161–204 (2011).

340
ORBITAL ANGULAR MOMENTUM
[92] G. A. Swartzlander and C. T. Law, “Optical vortex solitons observed in Kerr nonlinear
media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 69(17), 2503–2506 (1992).
[93] J. Arlt, K. Dholakia, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett, “Parametric down-conversion for light
beams possessing orbital angular momentum,” Phys. Rev. A 59(5), 3950–3952 (1999).
[94] R. Ghosh and L. Mandel, “Observation of nonclassical effects in the interference of two
photons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 59(17), 1903–1905 (1987).
[95] A. Vaziri, G. Weihs, and A. Zeilinger, “Experimental two-photon, three-dimensional
entanglement for quantum communication,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 89(24), 4 (2002).
[96] G. Molina-Terriza, A. Vaziri, J. ˇReh´aˇcek, Z. Hradil, and A. Zeilinger, “Triggered qutrits
for quantum communication protocols,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92(16), 167903 (2004).
[97] J. T. Barreiro, N. K. Langford, N. A. Peters, and P. G. Kwiat, “Generation of hyper-
entangled photon pairs,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 260501 (2005).
[98] E. Karimi, J. Leach, S. Slussarenko, B. Piccirillo, L. Marrucci, L. Chen, W. She,
S. Franke-Arnold, M. Padgett, and E. Santamato, “Spin-orbit hybrid entanglement of
photons and quantum contextuality,” Phys. Rev. A 82, 02215 (2010).
[99] J. Leach, B. Jack, J. Romero, M. Ritsch-Marte, R. W. Boyd, A. K. Jha, S. M. Barnett,
S. Franke-Arnold, and M. J. Padgett, “Violation of a bell inequality in two-dimensional
orbital angular momentum state-spaces,” Opt. Exp. 17(10), 8287–8293 (2009).
[100] J. Leach, B. Jack, J. Romero, A. K. Jha, A. M. Yao, S. Franke-Arnold, D. G. Ireland,
R. W. Boyd, S. M. Barnett, and M. J. Padgett, “Quantum correlations in optical angle-
orbital angular momentum variables,” Science 329, 662–665 (2010).
[101] J. Romero, J. Leach, B. Jack, M. R. Dennis, S. Franke-Arnold, S. M. Barnett, and
M. Padgett, “Entangled optical vortex links,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 100407 (2011).
[102] V. D. Salakhutdinov, E. R. Eliel, and W. L¨offler, “Full-field quantum correlations of
spatially entangled photons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 173604 (2012).
[103] S. Barreiro and J. W. R. Tabosa, “Generation of light carrying orbital angular momentum
via induced coherence grating in cold atoms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90(13), (2003).

11
INTRODUCTION TO HELICITY AND
ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY
TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
Ivan Fernandez-Corbaton and Gabriel Molina-Terriza
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
11.1
INTRODUCTION
The scientific laws that we use to understand natural phenomena typically stem
from the conservation of a few fundamental quantities like electric charge, energy,
or angular momentum. There is an intimate connection between conserved quan-
tities and the symmetries of the system under study. For this reason, symmetries,
both continuous and discrete, are a powerful tool for studying nature. According to
Noether’s celebrated theorem [1], any continuous symmetry of a system gives rise
to a conserved quantity in the dynamic equations. In modern algebraic terms we say
that when a system is invariant under the continuous transformation generated by a
given operator, the observable represented by that operator is a conserved quantity.
For example, rotational and translational invariances are associated with the con-
servation of angular momentum and linear momentum because, as transformations,
rotations are generated by the components of angular momentum and translations are
generated by the components of linear momentum. Conversely, conserved quantities
always indicate the presence of a symmetry of the system. For example, angular
momentum is conserved by spherically symmetric systems. A spherically symmetric
system has the property of being identical to any rotated version of itself. We then
say that such a system is invariant under rotations. Identifying symmetric patterns
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
341

342
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
in natural systems and their related conserved quantities is therefore essential in the
most areas of science. Geometrical symmetries, such as the above-mentioned spher-
ical symmetry, are not always easily identifiable, but it is even more challenging to
ascertain symmetries which do not have a geometrical origin.
In this chapter we will present a detailed introduction to a fundamental non-
geometrical symmetry of electromagnetic fields: electromagnetic duality. This sym-
metry appears in free-space Maxwell equations which remain invariant under the
exchange of electric and magnetic fields E →H and H →−E. More generally, they
also remain invariant under certain parametric combinations of the electric and mag-
netic vector fields of which the exchange referred to before is a particular case.
This continuous symmetry is called electromagnetic duality. The conserved quantity
related to electromagnetic duality is the optical helicity. An introduction to electro-
magnetic duality can be found in most books in electrodynamics and electromag-
netism, even though the connection with helicity is usually lacking. The extension
of the connection between helicity and duality to material systems turns this rela-
tionship into a powerful tool for the study of light–matter interactions. Our aim in
this chapter is to present a detailed account of the fundamental properties of both
electromagnetic duality and optical helicity and how to use and measure them in
photonics experiments. We start by presenting a formalism which is seldom used in
electromagnetism and photonics, but that constitutes the mathematical framework for
this chapter.
11.2
SYMMETRIES AND OPERATORS
The paradigm that we will follow in this chapter is the use of symmetries and
conserved quantities for the study of electromagnetic problems. We will focus on
classical Maxwell fields. Symmetry operations like rotations and translations are
linear transformations that apply to the fields. Similarly, we model the light–matter
interactions as linear transformations of the free space fields. Nonlinear interactions
are out of the scope of this chapter, but can be treated in a similar manner. We will
work in regions of space which are absent of free charges and currents, thus the
fields themselves will always be transverse. These ideas are best formalized using
the mathematical setting of Hilbert spaces. Therefore, we will make extensive use of
the concepts and tools associated with a vector space endowed with an inner product,
that is, a Hilbert space and the linear operators acting within that vector space.
The vector space we consider is the space of transverse solutions of Maxwell’s
equations, or transverse Maxwell fields, which we call 𝕄. A linear operator within
𝕄takes one of its vectors, a transverse Maxwell field, and transforms it into another
vector of the space, still a transverse solution of Maxwell’s equations. We are inter-
ested in transformations of the fields such as time translation, spatial translations and
rotations, etc. These transformations are operators acting within 𝕄. Such continuous
operations are generated by hermitian operators, also acting within 𝕄, which are
associated with properties of the fields. For instance, energy generates time trans-
lations, the components of linear momentum generate spatial translations and the

SYMMETRIES AND OPERATORS
343
components of angular momentum generate spatial rotations. A hermitian operator
O generates a continuous transformation T(𝜃) by means of
T(𝜃) = exp(−i𝜃O) =
∑
n
(−i𝜃O)n
n!
.
(11.1)
As an example of the use of this kind of formalism in classical Maxwell fields, the
interested reader can see Section 21 of Reference 2, where it is applied to angular
momentum and its generated transformation, spatial rotations. The fact that 𝕄has an
inner product allows us to speak of hermitian operators. It also allows us to construct
orthonormal basis into which any transverse Maxwell field can be expanded. The basis
vectors can be chosen to be transverse fields which are simultaneous eigenvectors of
four commuting hermitian operators.
The consideration of the set of orthonormal functions, the hermitian operators
associated with the fundamental quantities of the field and the transformations that
these operators generate, allows to study electromagnetic problems using Maxwell
fields together with the powerful framework of symmetries and conserved quanti-
ties. When the electromagnetic equations of a given system are invariant under the
transformations generated by a given hermitian operator, the property of the field
associated with that operator is a constant of the motion. Conversely, if the system
does not possess that symmetry, we know that the associated property can, in gen-
eral, change during evolution. The effect of the symmetry of the system is quite
strong: it must preserve the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the operator generating
the symmetry, thus offering an adequate basis of vectors to solve the electromagnetic
problem. As it will be seen, this is a simple yet insightful approach to electromag-
netic problems. In this approach, we only use properties of the electromagnetic field
which are associated with a hermitian operator in 𝕄. Only then can we consider
their associated symmetry. In this context one can write the operators for the angular
momentum J, the linear momentum P, the energy H, and, as we will discuss more
in detail later on, the helicity Λ in different representations. In the most commonly
used representation, the expressions corresponding to these operators are
H = i 𝜕
𝜕t,
P = −i∇,
J = L + S,
(11.2)
Λ = J ⋅P
|P| .
L and S are typically understood as the orbital angular momentum and the spin
angular momentum, respectively, and they can be expressed as
L = −ir × ∇
(11.3)
Sk
nm = −i𝜖knm,
(11.4)

344
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
where the kth component of the vector S, Sk, is a matrix of indexes nm defined using
the totally antisymmetric tensor 𝜖knm with 𝜖123 = 1. Note however that the operators
L and S are not operators in 𝕄, because they break the transversality of the fields
[3, 4, BI.2] . On the other hand, all the operators in (11.2) are well behaved in this
sense and can operate within the set 𝕄of solutions of free-space Maxwell equations.
In our notation we use capital letters like Jz and Px to denote operators, and lower
case letters like jz (or n) and kx to denote their eigenvalues. When we speak of a
field having a “sharp” or “well-defined” value for an operator, we mean that the
field is an eigenvector of that operator with eigenvalue equal to its “sharp” value.
In the text, names like “helicity” or “third component of angular momentum” refer
to the operators unless it is clear from the context that this is not the case. Also, all
calculations in this chapter assume a time harmonic decomposition of the fields with
an exp(−iwt) dependence.
Finally, we would like to repeat that the main context of this chapter is that of
classical Maxwell fields. Nevertheless, the approach here taken, which is based on
the study of symmetries, is general and often used in Quantum Mechanics and other
areas of modern Physics.
11.3
ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY
In this context, we now embark on the study of the electromagnetic duality symmetry.
Electromagnetic duality is a transformation where the roles of electric and magnetic
fields are mixed. Mathematically, the duality transformation of electromagnetic fields
is expressed as
E →E𝜃= cos(𝜃)E −sin(𝜃)H,
(11.5)
H →H𝜃= sin(𝜃)E + cos(𝜃)H.
The typical exchange transformation, E →H and H →−E, is recovered by setting
𝜃= −𝜋
2 . In the absence of charges and currents, Eq. (11.5) is a symmetry of Maxwell’s
equations: if the electromagnetic field (E, H) is a solution of the free-space Maxwell
equations, then the field (E𝜃, H𝜃) is also a solution. In 1965, Calkin [5] showed that
helicity was the conserved quantity related to such symmetry. With the notation of
the last section, if we think of duality as an operator in 𝕄which depends on 𝜃, like
T(𝜃) in (11.1), the hermitian operator which plays the role of the generator O in Eq.
(11.1) is the helicity.
Helicity is defined [6, Chapter 8.4.1] as the projection of the total angular momen-
tum J onto the linear momentum direction P∕|P|, that is, Λ = J ⋅P∕|P|. In the case
of the electromagnetic field the eigenvalues of helicity are ±1. It is possible to intu-
itively understand the meaning of helicity when considering the wave function of the
particle in the momentum representation, that is, as a superposition of plane waves.
In this representation, helicity is related to the handedness of the polarization of each
and every plane wave. Only when all the plane waves have the same handedness
with respect to their momentum, the helicity of the particle is well defined. This is

ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY
345
= 1
= −1
undetermined
FIGURE 11.1
A field composed by the superposition of five plane waves is an eigenstate of
helicity with eigenvalue equal to one if all the plane waves have left-handedness (left panel),
equal to minus one if they all have right-handedness (central panel) and it is not an eigenstate
of helicity if some plane waves have a handedness and others have the opposite (right panel).
(For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
illustrated in Figure 11.1. Note that polarization in momentum space and polarization
in real space are not the same concept.
What Calkin showed is that, as an operator, helicity generates duality transfor-
mations in the same way that linear momentum generates translations and angular
momentum generates rotations. Since that seminal work, the role of helicity as the
generator of duality symmetry transformations for the free-space Maxwell’s equa-
tions has been reported several times [7–10]. Other related works, also in free space,
include dual-symmetric Lagrangians [11–13] and optical chirality [14,15].
In 1968, Zwanzinger [16] extended this free-space invariance and conservation
law to a material quantum field theory with both electric and magnetic charges. The
symmetry studied by Zwanzinger has not been experimentally confirmed due to the
lack of experimental evidence of magnetic charges.
In this chapter we will show that in photonics experiments, the concepts of helic-
ity and duality are still relevant. The key to understand this is that duality can be
restored for the macroscopic Maxwell’s equations for material systems characterized
by electric permittivities and magnetic permeabilities. The restoration condition for
a system composed of different isotropic and homogeneous domains depends only
on the materials and is independent of the shapes of the domains. When the system
is dual, the helicity of the light interacting with it is preserved.
This geometrical independence of helicity in material systems turns the relation-
ship between helicity and duality into a simple and powerful tool for the practical
study of light–matter interactions using symmetries and conserved quantities [17].
This tool has provided insight in nanophotonics [18–20], optical activity [21], and
metamaterials [22,23].
The practical applicability of our ideas is enabled by a fact of crucial importance:
measurement and preparation of light beams with well-defined helicity can be done
with very simple optical elements. Armed with this tool, we can experimentally
investigate helicity transformations in focused light fields interacting with different
scatterers.
Let us first explain more in detail how the relation between helicity and duality is
derived and how to use the operator formalism in this context.

346
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
11.4
OPTICAL HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC
DUALITY SYMMETRY
In our derivations, we will use a harmonic decomposition of the fields and assume
an exp(−i𝜔t) dependency with the angular frequency 𝜔. Additionally, we will work
in the representation of space-dependent vectorial fields, also known as the real
representation. This setting is different from those in References 5 and 16, and,
although the final result is not new, the derivation in this section sets the stage for the
study of the piecewise homogeneous and isotropic case.
The expression of the helicity operator for monochromatic fields in the real rep-
resentation can be obtained directly from the definition of helicity:
Λ = J ⋅P
|P| = (S + L) ⋅P
|P|
= S ⋅P
|P| = ∇×
k ,
(11.6)
where S and L are, respectively, the spin and orbital angular momentum operators,
the third equality follows from the orthogonality of L = r × P and P, and the last one
is valid in the real representation because S ⋅P = ∇× [24, Expr. XIII.93] and |P| is
equal to the wavenumber k for monochromatic fields.
Related to the different settings mentioned above, a clarification regarding different
definitions of helicity is in order before we start. In Reference 5, helicity appears as an
operator in the Fock space representation and in Reference 16 as an integral involving
the electric and magnetic fields and potentials operators. Both of these definitions
have since then appeared in the literature several times. Here are the two expressions
in a slightly different notation from that of the original references:
Λ = ℏ∫dk
(
a†
k+ak+ −a†
k−ak−
)
,
(11.7)
where the Fock space operators (a†
k±, ak±) create and annihilate photons of definite
momentum k and helicity ±. And
Λ = 1
2 ∫dr ( ̂A(r) ⋅̂H(r) −̂C(r) ⋅̂E(r)) ,
(11.8)
where ( ̂E, ̂H) are the electric and magnetic field operators and ( ̂C, ̂A) the electric
and magnetic potential operators [16].
All of the expressions (11.6)–(11.8) generate the same fundamental symmetry
transformation, albeit in different representation spaces.
We start the derivation by setting convenient units of 𝜖0 = 𝜇0 = 1 for the vacuum
electric and magnetic constants (thus c = 1 and k = 𝜔). We can then use (11.6) to
write the free-space Maxwell equations as
∇× E = i 𝜔H ⇒H = −i ΛE
(11.9)
∇× H = −i 𝜔E ⇒E = i ΛH.

DUALITY SYMMETRY IN PIECEWISE HOMOGENEOUS AND ISOTROPIC MEDIA
347
Equations (11.9) already reveal that Λ is an operator that transforms electric fields
into magnetic fields and vice versa. Note that invariance under duality transformation
can be interpreted as equivalence between electric and magnetic responses. In the
same way that angular momentum generates rotation matrices [2], let us use Λ as
the generator of a continuous transformation parametrized by the real number 𝜃:
D(𝜃) = exp(i𝜃Λ). To obtain an explicit expression for the transformation that D(𝜃)
performs on the fields, we start by showing that Λ2 is the identity operator for Maxwell
fields.
Λ2E = Λ
( H
−i
)
= E, Λ2H = Λ
(E
i
)
= H,
(11.10)
where the equalities in each equation follow from (11.9). Since (11.10) is valid for
all E and H, we conclude that Λ2 = I for Maxwell fields. Using that Λ2 = I and
the Taylor expansion of the exponential, the continuous transformation generated by
helicity can be written:
D(𝜃) = exp(i𝜃Λ) = cos(𝜃)I + i sin(𝜃)Λ.
(11.11)
The application of D(𝜃) to both electric and magnetic fields reads
E𝜃= (cos(𝜃)I + i sin(𝜃)Λ) E,
(11.12)
H𝜃= (cos(𝜃)I + i sin(𝜃)Λ) H,
which, after using (11.9) again, becomes the well-known [25, Chapter 6.11] duality
transformation of electromagnetic fields written in (11.5).
11.5
DUALITY SYMMETRY IN PIECEWISE HOMOGENEOUS
AND ISOTROPIC MEDIA
We will now show that the duality symmetry can be restored in the macroscopic
Maxwell’s equations independently of the shapes of the material domains involved.
The macroscopic Maxwell equations are valid whenever the electric and magnetic
fields are averaged over many of the atoms or molecules composing the materials.
In this way, for most situations, the electromagnetic properties of the materials are
determined only by the electric permittivities 𝜖and magnetic permeabilities 𝜇.
We consider an inhomogeneous medium Ω composed of several material domains
with arbitrary geometry. We assume that each domain i is homogeneous and isotropic
and fully characterized by its electric 𝜖i and magnetic 𝜇i constants (we again use
𝜖0 = 𝜇0 = 1). In each domain, the constitutive relations are B = 𝜇iH, D = 𝜖iE, and
the curl equations for monochromatic fields read
∇× H = −i𝜔D = −i𝜔𝜖iE, ∇× E = i𝜔B = i𝜔𝜇iH.
(11.13)

348
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
Using Λ = (1∕k)∇× from (11.6) and 𝜔= k0 = k∕√𝜖i𝜇i, we obtain
ΛH = −i
√𝜖i
𝜇i
E,
ΛE = i
√𝜇i
𝜖i
H.
(11.14)
Note that to arrive at this result, the fact that the wavenumber in each medium is
k = k0
√𝜖i𝜇i has to be used in the expression of the helicity operator. With this
change, we are able to obtain the formal expression of the helicity operator for a
material medium. Now, we can normalize the electric field in (11.14) by E →
√𝜖i
𝜇i E
to show that we can recover the exact form of Maxwell’s equations in free space (11.9).
Clearly, the normalization can only be done when all the different materials have the
same ratio 𝜖i
𝜇i = 𝛼∀i. When the normalization is possible, the electromagnetic field
equations on the whole medium Ω are invariant under the duality transformations
of (11.5).
The remaining question is what happens at the interfaces between the different
domains, where the material constants are discontinuous. We now examine the bound-
ary conditions in Ω. At the interfaces between media, the electromagnetic boundary
conditions impose the following restrictions on the fields:
̂n × (E1 −E2) = 0,
̂n × (H1 −H2) = K,
(11.15)
̂n ⋅(D1 −D2) = 𝜎,
̂n ⋅(B1 −B2) = 0,
where K is the surface current density, 𝜎the charge density, and ̂n the unit vector
perpendicular to the interface. The boundary conditions can be seen as applying
point to point to a differential surface area at the interface between the two media
[26, Chapter 2.8]. Let us choose a particular point r on the interface. Assuming no
free charges, that is, K = 0 and 𝜎= 0, Eqs. (11.15) may be interpreted as a linear
transformation applied to the fields at one medium which results in the fields at
the other medium. Using (11.15) and the constitutive relations, the transformation
equation reads
[
E2(r)
H2(r)
]
=
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
𝜖1
𝜖2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
𝜇1
𝜇2
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
[
E1(r)
H1(r)
]
,
(11.16)
where we have oriented our reference axis so that ̂n = ̂z.

DUALITY SYMMETRY IN PIECEWISE HOMOGENEOUS AND ISOTROPIC MEDIA
349
On the other hand, the duality transformation (11.5) may also be written in matrix
form:
[
E𝜃
H𝜃
]
=
[
I cos(𝜃)
−I sin(𝜃)
I sin(𝜃)
I cos(𝜃)
][
E
H
]
= U(𝜃)
[
E
H
]
,
(11.17)
where I is the 3 × 3 identity matrix. It is a trivial exercise to check that the transfor-
mation matrix of (11.16) commutes with U(𝜃) if and only if 𝜖1∕𝜇1 = 𝜖2∕𝜇2. In such
case, the fields in each of the two media can be transformed as in (11.5) while still
meeting the boundary conditions at point r. We can now vary r to cover all the points
of the interface and repeat the same argument: the fact that U(𝜃) does not depend on
the spatial coordinates allows to reorient the reference axis as needed to follow the
shape of the interface between two media. The derivation is hence independent of
the shape of the interface, and we may say that the boundary conditions are invariant
under duality transformations when 𝜖1∕𝜇1 = 𝜖2∕𝜇2. The above derivations show that
both the equations and the boundary conditions in Ω are invariant under (11.5) when
𝜖i
𝜇i = 𝛼∀domain i. As a conclusion, we can state that independently of the shapes of
each domain, a piecewise homogeneous and isotropic system has an electromagnetic
response that is invariant under duality transformations if and only if all the materials
have the same ratio of electric and magnetic constants:
𝜖i
𝜇i
= 𝛼∀domain i.
(11.18)
In this case, since helicity is the generator of duality transformations, the system
preserves the helicity of light interacting with it.
Our results are in agreement with Bialynicki-Birula’s wave equation for photons
propagating in a linear, time-independent, isotropic, and inhomogeneous medium. In
Section 2 of Reference 27, he shows that the two helicities of the photon are only
coupled through the gradient of
√
𝜇(r)
𝜖(r) .
In the same review [Section 11 of Reference 27], the author discusses the conser-
vation of helicity in arbitrarily curved spacetime. This notable fact is related to the
equivalence of the free space Maxwell’s equations on an arbitrary spacetime geom-
etry and the macroscopic equations on a flat spacetime occupied by an anisotropic
medium. This equivalence is fundamental in transformation optics [Section 4 of
Reference 28], the theoretical basis for metamaterials. Not all anisotropic media
represent spacetime geometries, there is a necessary and sufficient condition for it
[Section 4 of Reference 28]: The electric permittivity and magnetic permeability ten-
sors must be equal to each other and equal to a certain function of the spacetime metric
𝜖i,j = 𝜇i,j = f(gi,j) [Section 4 of Reference 28]. At this point, the possible relationship
with our results is apparent through the condition 𝜖i,j = 𝜇i,j and the conservation
of helicity discovered by Bialynicki-Birula. Extending the proof in this section to
interfaces between anisotropic media could lead to new insights.
Relation (11.18) is often referred to as surface impedance matching condition.
It has already been explored in scattering from spheres [29] and in the context of

350
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
(a)
× 10–2
+
≠μ
×4
×100
×4
×100
× 10–1
× 10–1
× 10–2
14
18
4
3
2
1
0
15
10
5
0
6
4
2
0
10
5
0
(b)
(d)
(c)
ε
=μ
ε
≠μ
ε
=μ
ε
+
–
–
+
+
–
–
FIGURE 11.2
Impact of the different symmetries on the field scattered by two dielectric
structures. The upper row shows the scattered intensity for a symmetric cylinder and the
lower row for a panflute like shape without any rotational, translational or spatial inversion
symmetry. The length and diameter of the cylinder are 200 nm. The panflute is made of
cylinders of different lengths and diameters, the longest one is 200 nm long and the total
panflute’s width is around 200 nm. In (a) and (c) the structures have 𝜖= 2.25, 𝜇= 1, while
in (b) and (d) we enforced duality symmetry by setting 𝜖= 𝜇= 𝜖glass = 2.25. The incident
field is a plane wave of well defined helicity equal to 1, momentum vector pointing to the
positive z axis and a wavelength of 633 nm. Its electric field is (̂x + îy)∕
√
2 exp(kz −𝜔t).
The left half side of each subfigure corresponds to the scattered field with helicity equal to the
incident plane wave Λ+; the right half is for the opposite helicity Λ−. The calculation plane
is perpendicular to the z axis and 20 nm away from the surface of the scatterers opposite to
the one where the incident field comes from. The calculation area is 700×700 nm. For color
scaling purposes, the right half side is multiplied by the factor in the upper right corner. The
(lack of) cylindrical symmetry of the structures results in (non-)cylindrically symmetric field
patterns, which is consistent with the geometry of each case. On the other hand, both scatterers
behave identically with respect to conservation of helicity, which is seen to depend exclusively
on the electromagnetic properties of the material. (For a color version of this figure, see the
color plate section.)
plasmonic metamaterials [30]. The above derivation shows that these particular cases
are part of a more general, geometry independent symmetry: electromagnetic duality.
The independence of helicity conservation from geometry is illustrated in Fig-
ure 11.2. We analyzed the helicity change for two different dielectric structures in
free space: A circular cylinder, which is symmetric under rotations along its axis, and
a curved pan-flute like structure without any rotational or translational symmetry. Two

APPLICATIONS OF THE FRAMEWORK
351
versions of each structure were simulated, corresponding to two different materials:
the first one would represent silica by setting 𝜖= 𝜖glass = 2.25 and 𝜇= 𝜇glass = 1. In
the second material we enforce duality (11.18), by setting 𝜖= 𝜇= 𝜖glass = 2.25. The
incident field is a circularly polarized plane wave (i.e., it has well defined helicity)
propagating parallel to the axis of the cylinder and the curved surface of the pan-flute.
The intensities of the two helicities (±) are computed as |E ± iH|2. In Section 2.1
of Reference 27, it is shown that E ± iH (with our choice of units) separates the two
helicity components. Figure 11.2 shows that helicity is conserved independently of
the spatial symmetries, whenever Eq. (11.18) is fulfilled, that is, under conditions of
duality symmetry. On the other hand, conservation of angular momentum, resulting
in cylindrical symmetry of the scattered fields, is only achieved in the case of the
cylinder.
We would like to now turn our attention to some electromagnetic problems where
the application of these concepts provides new insight and allows a simple and deep
understanding.
11.6
APPLICATIONS OF THE FRAMEWORK
11.6.1
Spin to Orbit Angular Momentum Transfer
The conversion between spin and orbital angular momentum is widely used to explain
phase singularities in numerical simulations of tightly focused fields [31–33], and in
scattering experiments [34–36]. A detailed discussion of the SAM to OAM conversion
can be found in Reference 37.
We will now use symmetries and conserved quantities arguments, particularly
those related to Jz and Λ, to identify the actual physical reasons for those observa-
tions. We will demonstrate that the mechanism responsible for the presence of optical
vortices in focused fields is totally different from the one responsible for the obser-
vation of optical vortices in scattering experiments. This, in our opinion, shows that
the SAM-OAM formulation can be quite misleading: it assigns the same explanation
to two distinct physical phenomena.
The analytical tools and methodology employed in this section allow a simple
application of the ideas developed in the previous section to practical electromagnetic
problems.
11.6.2
Bessel Beams with Well Defined Angular Momentum and Helicity
As already mentioned, Jz and Λ commute. For our analysis we will need a basis of
transverse electromagnetic modes which are simultaneous eigenvectors of Jz and Λ.
One such set of modes is a particular type of Bessel beams. Bessel beams have been
thoroughly studied. See for instance the series of papers [38], [39], and [40].
A complete orthonormal basis for transverse electromagnetic fields consisting
of Bessel beams with well defined third component of angular momentum Jz and
helicity Λ can be constructed. These modes appear in Reference 3, although their
relationship with helicity is not considered in that paper. In Reference 38, these type

352
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
of electromagnetic modes are obtained in a different way as linear combinations of
other type of more commonly used Bessel beams, the transverse electric (TE) and
transverse magnetic (TM) modes.
The real space expressions for this set of Bessel beams in cylindrical coordinates
read as
Cmp𝜌(𝜌, 𝜃, z) =
√p𝜌
2𝜋in exp(i(pzz + n𝜃))
(
i
√
2
((
1 + pz
k
)
Jn+1(p𝜌𝜌) exp(i𝜃)̂r +
(
1 −pz
k
)
Jn−1(p𝜌𝜌) exp(−i𝜃)̂l
)
−
p𝜌
k Jn(p𝜌𝜌)̂z
)
,
Dmp𝜌(𝜌, 𝜃, z) =
√p𝜌
2𝜋in exp(i(pzz + n𝜃))
(
i
√
2
((
1 −pz
k
)
Jn+1(p𝜌𝜌) exp(i𝜃)̂r +
(
1 + pz
k
)
Jn−1(p𝜌𝜌) exp(−i𝜃)̂l
)
+
p𝜌
k Jn(p𝜌𝜌)̂z
)
,
(11.19)
where a harmonic exp(−iwt) dependence has been assumed and
p𝜌=
√
k2
x + k2
y, k2 = p2
𝜌+ p2
z,
̂l = ̂x + îy
√
2
, ̂r = ̂x −îy
√
2
.
By construction, the two types of vector wave functions Cmp𝜌and Dmp𝜌have a
sharp value of the z component of angular momentum Jz equal to m and a sharp value
of helicity Λ equal to −1 and +1, respectively. Additionally, they have well defined
values for the energy H and the z component of the linear momentum Pz proportional
to k and pz, respectively. For a given value of k, a well defined value of Pz implies a
well defined value of the transverse momentum P𝜌proportional to p𝜌. Modes (11.19)
form a complete orthonormal basis of transverse electromagnetic fields when
k ∈[0, ∞), n ∈[0, ±1, ±2, …], p𝜌∈[0, ∞), and Λ = ±1,
(11.20)
and both signs of pz in pz = ±
√
k2 −p2
𝜌are considered. In the following, the consid-
eration of both signs of pz is implicitly made.
11.6.3
Optical Vortices in Focusing
In order to study why optical vortices seem to appear in numerical studies of focal-
ization of apparently vortex free beams [31–33], we analyze the aplanatic lens model
[41], which is routinely used to study the effects of high numerical aperture lenses.

APPLICATIONS OF THE FRAMEWORK
353
The action of an aplanatic lens preserves Jz and Λ [37]. The cylindrical symmetry of
the model can be reasonably expected, but its invariance under duality transformations
is “hidden” in the assumption that the lens transmission coefficients for the two
polarization components, TE and TM, are identical and that there is no crosstalk
between input and output TE and TM components. That this assumption implies
duality symmetry (helicity conservation) is proved in Appendix A of Reference 18.
The preservation of Λ by an aplanatic lens has been discussed in Reference 37 without
using its relationship to electromagnetic duality.
Even though the model has both cylindrical and duality symmetries, the focalized
beam is quite different from the input beam: some other symmetry must be broken.
In this case, it is clear that we lack translational symmetry on the plane perpendicular
to the optical axis of the lens. We know that the transverse momentum components
Px and Py are the generators of that symmetry. We will now show that the differences
between the input and focalized beams are due to changes in (kx, ky). We will prove
this point using the basis introduced in (11.19).
Let us take a collimated right circularly (RC) polarized Gaussian beam going
through an aplanatic lens of high numerical aperture. The linear momentum compo-
nents of a collimated beam are all almost totally aligned with the propagation direction
z: pz ≈k. Consequently, a collimated beam only has components with small trans-
verse momentum value p𝜌. With respect to (11.19), in the limit when pz ≈k (
p𝜌
k →0),
both Cmp𝜌and Dmp𝜌approach pure RC and LC polarized modes, respectively. This
can be easily seen by setting a
p𝜌
k →0 ⇒(pz ≈k) in (11.19):
Cmp𝜌(𝜌, 𝜃, z) ≈
√p𝜌
𝜋in+1 exp(ipzz)Jn+1(p𝜌𝜌) exp(i𝜃(n + 1))̂r,
(11.21)
Dmp𝜌(𝜌, 𝜃, z) ≈
√p𝜌
𝜋in+1 exp(ipzz)Jn−1(p𝜌𝜌) exp(i𝜃(n −1))̂l.
(11.22)
The other polarization components, the opposite circular and the longitudinal ̂z com-
ponent, are strongly attenuated in this regime. Importantly though, they are actually
present: without them, the modes are not solutions of Maxwell’s equations, and can-
not be consistently analyzed by means of the transformation properties of general
electromagnetic fields.
From (11.21), and since the collimated input RC Gaussian beam does not have a
phase singularity in its ̂r dominant polarization, we can conclude that mostly C type
modes with n = −1 will exist in its expansion in the (11.19) basis:
Einput = ∫
∞
0
dp𝜌cinput
−1,p𝜌Cmp𝜌,
(11.23)
where cinput
−1,p𝜌is only significant when
p𝜌
k →0. Equation (11.23) defines a beam with
a sharp value of Jz, n = −1, and a sharp value of Λ, 𝜆= −1. As per the above
discussion regarding symmetries, the output beam must also have sharp Jz and Λ

354
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
values of n = −1 and 𝜆= −1. Focusing can hence only change the relative weight of
p𝜌components. Intuitively, modes with higher transverse momentum are needed to
expand the field after focusing.
Efoc = ∫
∞
0
dp𝜌cfoc
−1,p𝜌Cmp𝜌,
(11.24)
this is in line the non-preservation of (kx, ky) due to broken transverse translational
symmetry. The fact that the change is limited to p𝜌=
√
k2
x + k2
y could have been
foreseen: it stems from the cylindrical symmetry of the model.
Now, let’s go back to Eq. (11.19) and check the spatial shape of Cmp𝜌modes when
m = −1 and the condition
p𝜌
k →0 is not met:
Cmp𝜌(𝜌, 𝜃, z) = −
√p𝜌
2𝜋i exp(ipzz)
(
i
√
2
(
1 + pz
k
)
J0(p𝜌𝜌)̂r
+
i
√
2
(
1 −pz
k
)
J−2(p𝜌𝜌) exp(−i2𝜃)̂l −
p𝜌
k J−1(p𝜌𝜌) exp(−i𝜃)̂z
)
.
(11.25)
The Cmp𝜌,
p𝜌
k →0 modes are almost purely right polarized, but when p𝜌increases,
the terms multiplying ̂l and ̂z become significant. As it can be seen in (11.25), for
m = −1 these newly enhanced terms have phase singularities of orders minus two
and minus one, respectively. Figure 11.3 shows the radial spatial profiles of the three
0
1
2
3
A.U
−5
5
0
k
ρ
k
ρ
|Er|2
107 × |El|2
103 × |Ez|2
|Er|2
|El|2
|Ez|2
kρ
k = 0.1
kρ
k = 0.9
0
1
2
−
5
0
5
FIGURE 11.3
Normalized field intensity for the right, left and longitudinal polarization
components for two Cmp𝜌, n = −1 modes, one with
p𝜌
k = 0.1 (left figure) and the other with
p𝜌
k = 0.9. Note the scaling of the non-dominant polarization components on the
p𝜌
k = 0.1 case.

APPLICATIONS OF THE FRAMEWORK
355
polarization components for two C−1,p𝜌(𝜌, 𝜃, z) modes, one with
p𝜌
k = 0.1 and the
other with
p𝜌
k = 0.9. In the small p𝜌case (Fig. 11.3a), the dominant polarization
component ̂r is much stronger than the ̂l and ̂z components (which are nonetheless
present). In the large p𝜌case (Fig. 11.3b), the relative weight between the intensity
of the different polarizations has shifted significantly. The vortices of charge −1 in ̂z
and charge −2 in ̂l (see Eq. 11.25) become relatively more important.
We argue that these are the optical vortices appearing in numerical simulations
of focused beams are due to the inherent spatial properties of light modes with
definite energy, Pz, Jz and Λ propagating through a system that conserves energy, Λ
and Jz while breaking transverse translational invariance. The lens shifts the weight
distribution towards modes with larger p𝜌values and optical vortices already existing
in the initially strongly attenuated polarization components of the input beam gain
relative importance in the focalized beam.
For the theoretical study of optical vortices in focused beams, References 31 and
37 use solutions of the paraxial equation as the input modes, instead of using solutions
of the full Maxwell equations as we have done. Since paraxial input modes do not
have the attenuated phase singularities in the other polarization components because
only a single polarization component is non zero, the appearance of optical vortices
upon focusing was attributed to SAM to OAM conversion.
It is worth mentioning that J can always be decomposed into two separately
meaningful operators ̂S = Λ P
|P| and ̂L = J −̂S such that J = ̂L + ̂S [3,24,38,42,43].
However, these two operators are not angular momenta since they do not fulfill the
correct commutation relationships, but their components might be used to analyze
electromagnetic problems in a way similar to how we have used Jz and Λ. There
is one important caveat though: loss of geometry independence. This is illustrated
by the fact that the property associated with ΛPz∕|P| is not preserved upon focus-
ing. Helicity is conserved but, due to the lack of of translational symmetry in the
transverse plane, P𝜌changes, which implies that Pz changes. The fact that the lack
of a “geometrical” symmetry breaks the conservation law corresponding to ΛPz∕|P|
indicates that the symmetry transformation generated by such “spin operator” is, in
general, not independent of the geometry of the problem. In a recent work [44], it
has been shown that the components of ̂S are the generators of helicity and frequency
dependent translations while the components of ̂L generate commuting compositions
of rotations and the transformations generated by ̂S. Simultaneous eigenvectors of
̂S and parity seem to have a role in the study of the interaction of light with chiral
molecules.
11.6.4
Optical Vortices in Scattering
The experimental observation of optical vortices in scattered fields has been reported
in the literature [34–36]. In these papers, the observations are explained by means of
spin to orbit angular momentum conversion during the interaction with the scatterer.
Recently, similar observations have been analyzed in Reference 45 using symmetries

356
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
and conserved quantities. In line with the discussion of the last paper, we will show
in this section that these experimental observations can be explained as a partial
helicity change during the light-matter interaction due to the breaking of electromag-
netic duality symmetry in the system. We will also argue that the helicity change
is enhanced by physical effects which strongly break duality, beyond the inherent
duality asymmetry of general planar multilayer structures.
We have already mentioned several times that helicity transforms independently
of the geometry of the scatterer. In particular, it transforms independently of whether
the considered system has cylindrical symmetry or not. Nevertheless, as seen below,
a change in helicity is very clearly identifiable in the spatial patterns of the scattered
fields when the system has cylindrical symmetry. Several of the experimental setups
and input beams in the articles cited in this section have cylindrical symmetry and
are similar to the system in Figure 11.4, which we will now analyze.
In Figure 11.4, we distinguish the preparation and measurement apparatus from
the focusing and scattering part of the setup. In the preparation stage, a collimated
Gaussian beam goes through a linear polarizer (LP) and quarter wave plate (QWP),
which results in a beam with well defined values of Jz and Λ (see more details below).
In the central part, the beam is focused onto a cylindrically symmetric target and the
resulting scattered light is collected by another lens. The measurement part of the
setup uses another QWP and LP to project light with different helicity depending on
the setting of the LP (see more details below).
Laser
LP
QWP
Lens
Lens
QWP
LP
CCD
Preparation
Cylindrical symmetry
Measurement
FIGURE 11.4
Archetypal experimental setup. A collimated beam is circularly polarized by
means of a linear polarizer (LP) and a quarter wave plate (QWP). After focusing, the beam
interacts with a cylindrically symmetric target, in this example, a circular nano-aperture in a
metallic film on a substrate. A portion of the scattered field is collected and collimated by
a second lens, analyzed by a second set of QWP an LP, and its spatial profile is imaged into a
Charged Couple Device (CCD) camera. The two orthogonal settings of the last LP allow the
projection of the two collimated helicity modes (see the text for details).

APPLICATIONS OF THE FRAMEWORK
357
At first sight, the central part is cylindrically symmetric but lacks translational
symmetry in the transverse plane. We should hence expect conservation of Jz and,
as in Section 11.6.3, non-conservation of P𝜌. Since the lenses preserve helicity, the
behavior of the system with respect to Λ depends on whether the target sample meets
condition (11.18). Let us assume that it does not meet such condition.
Let us imagine that, after the first LP and QWP, the input to the first lens is a
predominantly RC polarized Gaussian beam. Assuming perfect optical elements, and
using the same arguments as in Section 11.6.3, we can see that the input beam can be
expanded using basis (11.19) into modes with
p𝜌
k →0 and sharp values of Jz, n = −1,
and of Λ, 𝜆= −1. The first lens will focus the beam into the sample without altering
either Jz or Λ, then, since it is assumed that the sample does not meet (11.18), part
of the light will change helicity upon interacting with the cylindrically symmetric
target and, after collimation with the second lens, there will be two types of colli-
mated modes, both with n = −1, but differing in the value of helicity. Schematically
representing the actions of the lenses and the cylindrically symmetric scatterer as
transformations of fields expanded in the basis (11.19) by coordinates cmp𝜌and dmp𝜌,
we may summarize the whole sequence as
c−1,
p𝜌
k →0
Lens
←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←→c−1,k𝜌
Scattering
←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←→(c−1,k𝜌, d−1,k𝜌)
Lens
←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←←→
(
c−1,
p𝜌
k →0, d−1,
p𝜌
k →0
)
.
(11.26)
The corresponding modal expressions for the components of the two types of
output modes are
C−1
p𝜌
k →0(𝜌, 𝜃, z) ≈
√p𝜌
𝜋i2 exp(ipzz)J0(p𝜌𝜌)̂r,
(11.27)
D−1
p𝜌
k →0(𝜌, 𝜃, z) ≈
√p𝜌
𝜋i2 exp(ipzz)J−2(p𝜌𝜌) exp(−i2𝜃)̂l.
That is, a predominantly RC beam similar to the input, without any phase singu-
larity in ̂r and a predominantly LC vortex beam with a singularity of charge two in ̂l.
If we set the last LP to project the LC component of the output collimated beam, this
vortex will appear in the CCD camera.
We argue that these are the vortices observed in the cylindrically symmetric
scattering experiments of [34, Fig. 4], [35, Figs. 2(c)–(d)] and [36], and that the
underlying reason for their appearance is that the electromagnetic duality symmetry
is broken in those systems.
The samples used in References 34 and 35 consist of nano-apertures on metallic
thin films. The breaking of duality in a general planar multilayer structure, and in
particular when it includes a metal, is clear since the relative electric and magnetic
constants of the system will not meet condition (11.18). Nevertheless, as shown in
Reference 45, the effect due to the multilayer alone is typically small in terms of

358
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
helicity conversion. The reason why the helicity conversion is enhanced making it
easily detectable, is that the nano-apertures allow for light to couple to the natural
modes of the multilayer system, where duality is strongly broken. In a multilayer
system, the natural modes are either TE or TM resonances. Since a mode with well
defined helicity has equal contributions from TE and TM components (see Appendix
A in Reference 18), a TE only or TM only resonance implies a strong breaking
of electromagnetic duality. The interfaces between a metal and a dielectric allow
the existence of surface plasmon polaritons of TM only character. As shown in
Reference 45, the influence of these modes in the transmitted light is responsible for
the experimentally detectable helicity change.
In Reference 36, optical vortices are observed upon propagation of light through a
planar semiconductor microcavity, still a cylindrically symmetric system as noted in
that work. In this case, duality is strongly broken in the multilayer itself by the energy
splitting between TE and TM modes in the structure. This splitting is identified in
that work as the enabler for SAM to OAM conversion.
References 34 and 35 contain also results for non-cylindrically symmetric setups.
Even though their study using Jz is not as simple, we are confident that the generality
of the methodology that we propose can lead to further physical insights. For instance,
for the square nano-apertures studied in Reference 35, the same argumentation about
the nano-aperture mediated coupling onto strong duality breaking multilayer natural
modes applies.
11.6.5
Kerker Conditions
Consider the unusual scattering effects for magnetic spheres reported by Kerker [29].
One of them refers to the fact that a plane wave impinging on a vacuum embedded
sphere with 𝜖
𝜇= 1 does not produce any backscattered field (at a 180◦scattering
angle). This effect, which has been referred to as an anomaly [46], can be easily
understood using our results. Let us take as incident field a circularly polarized plane
wave with is momentum aligned along the z axis. Its angular momentum is also aligned
with the z axis and, in natural units of ℏ= 1, equal to ±1 depending on the handedness
of the polarization. We now know (Eq. 11.18) that, based only on the properties of the
materials, helicity has to be preserved in the interaction between the plane wave and
a dual sphere. Let us now assume that there exist a component of backscattered field
at 180◦, that is, a plane wave whose linear momentum is the negative of the linear
momentum of the incident plane wave. Recalling that Λ = J ⋅P∕|P|, we see that,
to preserve helicity, the angular momentum of the backscattered plane wave must
also change sign with respect to the angular momentum of the incident plane wave.
But such change is impossible: the rotational symmetry of the sphere implies that
angular momentum is preserved in all axes, in particular along the axes shared by
the incident and the backscattered plane waves. As a consequence, the backscattering
amplitude must be zero. Since this argument applies independently to both circular
polarizations, the backscattering gain will be zero for any polarization of the incoming
plane wave. What is sometimes referred to as the first Kerker condition is hereby
explained. Interestingly, zero backscattering from dual objects has already been the

CONCLUSIONS
359
object of investigation by the radar community [47]: in these works, the connection
between duality and helicity is not recognized.
In the same paper, Kerker finds that upon scattering off a vacuum embedded
sphere with 𝜖
𝜇= 1, the state of polarization of light is preserved independently of the
scattering angle. The root cause of such interesting phenomenon is the simultaneous
invariance of the system with respect to duality transformations, due to the materials,
and any mirror operations through planes containing the origin of coordinates, due
to the geometry. In the helicity basis, the 2×2 scattering matrix between an incident
and a scattered plane wave [48, Chapter 3] must be diagonal because of helicity
preservation. Additionally, it must also preserve the linear polarizations parallel and
perpendicular to the plane containing the two plane wave momentum vectors, because
a mirror operation across such plane leaves the sphere and both momentum vectors
invariant. Using then that helicity flips with mirror operations, it can be easily shown
that all the 2×2 scattering matrices are indeed diagonal and hence preserve the state
of polarization between any pair of incident and scattered plane waves.
11.7
CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, we have shown that the restoration of duality symmetry is possible
for the macroscopic Maxwell’s equations, even though the microscopic equations are
rendered asymmetric by the empirical absence of magnetic charges. The restoration
of the symmetry is independent of the geometry of the problem: a system made of
piecewise isotropic and homogeneous domains of different materials characterized
by electric and magnetic constants (𝜖i, 𝜇i) is invariant under duality transformations if
and only if 𝜖i
𝜇i = 𝛼∀media i. This result is independent of the shapes of the domains.
With this result, the known relationship between helicity and duality transformations,
namely that the former is the generator of the latter, is turned into a simple and
powerful tool for the practical study of light-matter interactions using symmetries
and conserved quantities.
We are confident that the reader will find the analytical tools that we have explained
here, mainly the use of duality symmetry and its related helicity conservation, useful
in the treatment of problems in photonics and electromagnetism. In particular, we
have shown how to apply it to some experiments and gain valuable insight with it.
We have also shown how to use these concepts to explain some unusual scattering
effects in a straightforward way. In Reference 18, it allowed to proof the inconsistency
of the concept of optical spin to orbital angular momentum conversion in focusing
and scattering, and to propose a substitute framework based on helicity. Another
example where the use of the concept helicity is relevant is in the treatment of optical
activity [21].
Our results may be useful in other fields. For example, they may prove important
in the field of metamaterials and transformation optics [49], which is dramatically
extending the range of wavelengths where effective electric and magnetic constants
can be engineered. The transfer of helicity between light and matter remains an
open line of research, which could have importance in the fields of plasmonics and

360
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
“spintronics” [50], where the control of the helicity of electrons is crucial. Finally,
it can be seen that the same tools we have developed here can be successfully used
to explain recently reported effects in electron beams [51]. This parallelism is an
encouraging sign towards the possibility of simulating particle interactions on an
optical table [52].
REFERENCES
[1] A. Noether, “Invariante variationsprobleme,” Nachr. D. K¨onig. Gesellsch. D. Wiss. Zu
G¨ottingen, Math-Phys. 235–257 (1918).
[2] M. E. Rose, Elementary Theory of Angular Momentum (Wiley, New York, 1957).
[3] S. J. Van Enk and G. Nienhuis, “Commutation rules and eigenvalues of spin and orbital
angular momentum of radiation fields,” J. Mod. Opt. 41(5), 963–977 (1994).
[4] C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Dupont-Roc, and G. Grynberg, Photons and Atoms - Introduction
to Quantum Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York, 1989).
[5] M. G. Calkin, “An invariance property of the free electromagnetic field,” Am. J. Phys.,
33(11), 958 (1965).
[6] W.-K. Tung, Group Theory in Physics (World Scientific, 1985).
[7] S. Deser and C. Teitelboim, “Duality transformations of abelian and non-abelian gauge
fields,” Phys. Rev. D, 13(6), 1592–1597 (1976).
[8] I. Salom, “Algebraic approach to the duality symmetry,” arXiv:hep-th/0602282v1 (2006).
[9] R. P. Cameron, S. M. Barnett, and A. M. Yao, “Optical helicity, optical spin and related
quantities in electromagnetic theory,” New J. Phys. 14(5), 053050 (2012).
[10] S. M. Barnett, R. P. Cameron, and A. M. Yao, “Duplex symmetry and its relation to the
conservation of optical helicity,” Phys. Rev. A 86(1), 013845 (2012).
[11] P. D. Drummond, “Dual symmetric lagrangians and conservation laws,” Phys. Rev. A
60(5), R3331–R3334 (1999).
[12] P. D. Drummond, “Dual-symmetric lagrangians in quantum electrodynamics: I. conser-
vation laws and multipolar coupling,” J. Phys. B 39(15), S573 (2006).
[13] K. Y. Bliokh, A. Y. Bekshaev, and F. Nori, “Dual electromagnetism: helicity, spin, momen-
tum and angular momentum,” New J. Phys. 15(3), 033026 (2013).
[14] K. Y. Bliokh and F. Nori, “Characterizing optical chirality,” Phys. Rev. A 83(2), 021803
(2011).
[15] M. M. Coles and D. L. Andrews, “Chirality and angular momentum in optical radiation,”
Phys. Rev. A 85(6), 063810 (2012).
[16] D. Zwanziger, “Quantum field theory of particles with both electric and magnetic
charges,” Phys. Rev. 176, 1489–1495 (1968).
[17] I. Fernandez-Corbaton, X. Zambrana-Puyalto, N. Tischler, X. Vidal, M. L. Juan, and
G. Molina-Terriza, “Electromagnetic duality symmetry and helicity conservation for the
macroscopic maxwells equations,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111(6), 060401 (2013).
[18] I. Fernandez-Corbaton, X. Zambrana-Puyalto, and G. Molina-Terriza, “Helicity and angu-
lar momentum: a symmetry-based framework for the study of light-matter interactions,”
Phys. Rev. A 86(4), 042103 (2012).

REFERENCES
361
[19] X. Zambrana-Puyalto, I. Fernandez-Corbaton, M. L. Juan, X. Vidal, and G. Molina-
Terriza, “Duality symmetry and kerker conditions,” Opt. Lett. 38(11), 1857–1859
(2013).
[20] X. Zambrana-Puyalto, X. Vidal, M. L. Juan, and G. Molina-Terriza, “Dual and anti-dual
modes in dielectric spheres,” Opt. Express 21(15), 17520–17530 (2013).
[21] I. Fernandez-Corbaton, X. Vidal, N. Tischler, and G. Molina-Terriza, “Necessary sym-
metry conditions for the rotation of light,” J. Chem. Phys. 138(21), 214311–214311–7
(2013).
[22] I. Fernandez-Corbaton and G. Molina-Terriza, “Role of duality symmetry in transforma-
tion optics,” Phys. Rev. B 88(8), 085111 (2013).
[23] I. Fernandez-Corbaton, “Forward and backward helicity scattering coefficients for sys-
tems with discrete rotational symmetry,” Opt. Express 21(24), 29885–29893 (2013).
[24] A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics (Dover, 1999).
[25] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley & Sons, 1998).
[26] L. Novotny and B. Hecht, Principles of Nano-Optics (Cambridge University Press, 2006).
[27] I. Bialynicki-Birula, “Photon wave function,” in Progress in Optics, edited by E. Wolf
(Elsevier, 1996), Vol. 36, pp. 245–294.
[28] U. Leonhardt and T. G. Philbin, “Transformation optics and the geometry of light,” Prog.
Opt. 53, 69–152 (2009).
[29] M. Kerker, D. S. Wang, and C. L. Giles, “Electromagnetic scattering by magnetic spheres,”
J. Opt. Soc. Am. 73(6), 765–767 (1983).
[30] J. W. Lee, M. A. Seo, J. Y. Sohn, Y. H. Ahn, D. S. Kim, S. C. Jeoung, C. Lienau, and Q.-H.
Park, “Invisible plasmonic meta-materials through impedance matching to vacuum,” Opt.
Express 13(26), 10681–10687 (2005).
[31] Y. Zhao, J. S. Edgar, G. D. M. Jeffries, D. McGloin, and D. T. Chiu, “Spin-to-orbital
angular momentum conversion in a strongly focused optical beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99,
073901 (2007).
[32] T. A. Nieminen, A. B. Stilgoe, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Angular
momentum of a strongly focused gaussian beam,” J. Opt. A 10(11), 115005 (2008).
[33] A. M. Yao and M. J. Padgett, “Orbital angular momentum: origins, behavior and appli-
cations,” Adv. Opt. Photon. 3(2), 161–204 (2011).
[34] Y. Gorodetski, N. Shitrit, I. Bretner, V. Kleiner, and E. Hasman, “Observation of optical
spin symmetry breaking in nanoapertures,” Nano Lett. 9(8), 3016–3019 (2009).
[35] L. T. Vuong, A. J. L. Adam, J. M. Brok, P. C. M. Planken, and H. P. Urbach, “Electro-
magnetic spin-orbit interactions via scattering of subwavelength apertures,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 104, 083903 (2010).
[36] F. Manni, K. G. Lagoudakis, T. K. Para¨ıso, R. Cerna, Y. L´eger, T. C. H. Liew, I. A.
Shelykh, A. V. Kavokin, F. Morier-Genoud, and B. Deveaud-Pl´edran, “Spin-to-orbital
angular momentum conversion in semiconductor microcavities,” Phys. Rev. B 83, 241307
(2011).
[37] K. Y. Bliokh, E. A. Ostrovskaya, M. A. Alonso, O. G. Rodr´ıguez-Herrera, D. Lara, and
C. Dainty, “Spin-to-orbital angular momentum conversion in focusing, scattering, and
imaging systems, Opt. Express 19(27), 26132–26149 (2011).
[38] R. J´auregui and S. Hacyan, “Quantum-mechanical properties of Bessel beams,” Phys.
Rev. A 71, 033411 (2005).

362
HELICITY AND ELECTROMAGNETIC DUALITY TRANSFORMATIONS IN OPTICS
[39] R. J´auregui, “Rotational effects of twisted light on atoms beyond the paraxial approxi-
mation,” Phys. Rev. A 70, 033415 (2004).
[40] S. Hacyan and R. J´auregui, “A relativistic study of Bessel beams,” J. Phys. B 39, 1669
(2006).
[41] B. Richards and E. Wolf, “Electromagnetic diffraction in optical systems. II. Structure
of the image field in an aplanatic system,” Proc. R. Soc. London 253(1274), 358–379
(1959).
[42] K. Y. Bliokh, M. Alonso, E. Ostrovskaya, and A. Aiello, “Angular momenta and spin-orbit
interaction of nonparaxial light in free space,” Phys. Rev. A 82(6), 063825 (2010).
[43] I. Bialynicki-Birula and Z. Bialynicka-Birula, “Canonical separation of angular momen-
tum of light into its orbital and spin parts,” J. Opt. 13(6), 064014 (2011).
[44] I. Fernandez-Corbaton, X. Zambrana-Puyalto, and G. Molina-Terriza, “On the transfor-
mations generated by the electromagnetic spin and orbital angular momentum operators,”
J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 31(9), 2136–2141 (2014).
[45] I. Fernandez-Corbaton, X. Zambrana-Puyalto, N. Tischler, X. Vidal, M. L. Juan and G.
Molina-Terriza, “Electromagnetic Duality Symmetry and Helicity Conservation for the
Macroscopic Maxwell’s Equations,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111(6), 060401 (2013).
[46] M. Nieto-Vesperinas, R. Gomez-Medina, and J. J. Saenz, “Angle-suppressed scattering
and optical forces on submicrometer dielectric particles,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 28(1), 54–60
(2011).
[47] I. Lindell, A. Sihvola, P. Yla-Oijala, and H. Wallen, “Zero backscattering from self-dual
objects of finite size,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 57(9), 2725 –2731 (2009).
[48] S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields (Volume 1), 1st ed. (Cambridge University
Press, 1995).
[49] H. Chen, C. T. Chan, and P. Sheng, “Transformation optics and metamaterials,” Nature
Mater. 9(5), 387–396 (2010).
[50] S. O. Valenzuela and M. Tinkham, “Direct electronic measurement of the spin hall effect,”
Nature 442(7099), 176–179 (2006).
[51] E. Karimi, L. Marrucci, V. Grillo, and E. Santamato, “Spin-to-orbital angular momentum
conversion and spin-polarization filtering in electron beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 044801
(2012).
[52] R. Gerritsma, G. Kirchmair, F. Zahringer, E. Solano, R. Blatt, and C. F. Roos, “Quantum
simulation of the Dirac equation,” Nature 463(7277), 68–71 (2010).

12
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
Robert W. Boyd1,2,3 and Zhimin Shi4
1The Institute of Optics, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
3Department of Physics and School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
4Department of Physics, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
12.1
INTRODUCTION
The pursuit of understanding the propagation of light has fascinated generations of
scientists as well as the general public. The speed of light in vacuum, c, is a very impor-
tant physical quantity for many fundamentals of our living universe, including the
special relativity, Maxwell’s equations. Yet while one talks about the speed of light in
a medium, extra attention is needed to what she/he means by the speed of light [1]. For
a monochromatic light, that is, an electromagnetic plane wave at a single frequency,
the speed of light is usually defined by how fast a constant phase plane propagates.
Mathematically, the phase velocity vp of light within a medium is given by
vp = 𝜔
k = c
n,
(12.1)
where k and 𝜔are the wave number and the angular frequency of the monochromatic
field within the medium, respectively, and n is known as the refractive index of the
medium at frequency 𝜔, which describes the material response of the medium to
light at this specific frequency. Thus, such a speed is referred to as the phase velocity
of light.
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
363

364
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
On the other hand, the propagation speed of a wave packet, for example, a light
pulse, could be quite different from the phase velocity. A wave packet can be seen as
a temporal–spatial constitution of a group of different frequency components. To the
first-order approximation, the propagation of such a wave packet can be considered as
the propagation of a point for which the phase relation among all spectral components
is retained. Such speed is usually referred to as the group velocity of light which is
given by
vg = d𝜔
dk = c
ng
,
(12.2)
where
ng ≡n + 𝜔dn∕d𝜔
(12.3)
is known as the group index of the medium at frequency 𝜔. “Slow light” indicates
the situation when 𝜔dn∕d𝜔> 0, so the group index ng is larger than n, and the group
velocity vg becomes smaller than the phase velocity vp. On the other hand, “fast light”
represents situations when 𝜔dn∕d𝜔is negative, but its absolute value is less than n;
the group velocity vg becomes smaller than the phase velocity vp. Note that 𝜔dn∕d𝜔
can be equal to or even less than −n. In such cases, the group velocity becomes
infinity or even negative, and such phenomena are also known as “stopped light” or
“backward light”, respectively.
The recent surge of interest in controlling the group velocity of light propagation,
which started in the late 1990s, is partly indebted to the latest technologies that
enable the achievement of exotic group indices. Remarkably slow group velocities
of light, 17 ms−1 and 57 ms−1, have been experimentally observed in Bose–Einstein
condensates (BEC) [2] and in room-temperature Ruby crystals [3], respectively. Such
a broad class of science and technologies that can dramatically change the group index
of a medium within certain wavelength range is known as “slow and fast light” [1,4]
or simply “slow light”.
12.2
MECHANISMS OF SLOW LIGHT
In the last decade, scientists have explored a vast amount of various approaches to
achieve slow light, which typically fall into one of the two general categories: material
slow light and structural slow light.
12.2.1
Material Slow Light
Material slow light (also known as “microscopic slow light”) refers to those processes
in which the change of group index is mainly due to light–matter interactions at
the atomic or molecular level, that is, the interaction of light with a homogeneous

MECHANISMS OF SLOW LIGHT
365
medium. The optical property of a non-magnetic material is often described by the
dielectric susceptibility 𝜒. Generally speaking, 𝜒is a complex function of frequency
𝜔and is related to the generalized complex refractive index ̃n through the relation of
̃n2 = 1 + 𝜒or ̃n ≈1 + 0.5𝜒when |𝜒| ≪1.
While material slow light only indicates exotic frequency dependence of the real
part of the complex refractive index ̃n (or 𝜒), the real part n′ and the imaginary part
n′′ of the refractive index as two functions of frequency 𝜔actually are related through
the following Kramers–Kronig relation [5,6]:
n′(𝜔) = 1
𝜋∫
∞
−∞
n′′(𝜔′)
𝜔′ −𝜔d𝜔′,
(12.4)
n′′(𝜔) = −1
𝜋∫
∞
−∞
n′(𝜔′)
𝜔′ −𝜔d𝜔′.
(12.5)
Note that the Kramers–Kronig relation is the description of causality in the fre-
quency domain. As a consequence, the real part of the refractive index typically has
a rapid swing in the vicinity of an absorption or gain feature. For example, the gain
coefficient, refractive index, and reduced group index of an unsaturated Lorentzian
gain line [7,8] as functions of the frequency detuning 𝜈′ = 𝜈−𝜈0 from the resonance
center 𝜈0 are given by
g(𝜈′) = g0
𝛾2
𝜈′2 + 𝛾2 ,
(12.6)
n(𝜈′) = n(0) + g0c
4𝜋𝜈0
𝛾𝜈′
𝜈′2 + 𝛾2 ,
(12.7)
n′
g(𝜈′) = cg0𝛾
4𝜋
−𝜈′2 + 𝛾2
(𝜈′2 + 𝛾2)2 ,
(12.8)
where g0 is the gain coefficient at the center frequency 𝜈0, respectively, 𝛾is the half
width at half maximum (HWHM) linewidth, and n(0) is the background refractive
index at the resonance center. Here n′
g ≡ng −n is defined as the reduced group
index. The profile of g, n, and ng near a Lorentzian-shaped gain feature is shown in
Figure 12.1, which shows that one can achieve slow light (ng > n) near the center of
the resonance and fast light (ng < n) in the wings of the resonance.
While such absorption-induced-slow-light features can be found in naturally avail-
able materials, such as atomic vapors [9], semiconductors [10], a lot of efforts have
been given to use nonlinear optical processes to create controllable slow light at spe-
cific frequency range of interest. Some examples of such controllable slow light
include electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) [2], coherent population
oscillations (CPO) [3,11–13], stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) [14], spectral hole
burning [15], parametric amplification [16,17].

366
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
5
−5
5
−5
5
−5
0
0
0
0
 
n 
g
− 1
ng − n
0
0
Slow light
Fast light
FIGURE 12.1
Gain coefficient g, real part of refractive index n and group index ng as
functions of frequency detuning near a Lorentzian shape gain resonance.
12.2.2
Structural Slow Light
The second general category is “structural” (or “macroscopic”) slow light, which
indicates that the manipulation of the “effective group velocity” of light in the medium
is achieved through the interaction between light and the structural geometry of an
element that is comparable or larger than the optical wavelength. A macroscopic slow-
light element is typically not spatially homogeneous but has a structural geometry
with characteristic feature size comparable to or much larger than the wavelength. In
such cases, the slow-light effect is best described by the group delay of propagation
through the entire element, or at least one period of the periodic structure as follows:
𝜏g = d𝜙(𝜔)
d𝜔,
(12.9)
where 𝜙(𝜔) is the phase of the complex transfer function ̃H(𝜔) = A(𝜔) exp[i𝜙(𝜔)].
Sometimes it is convenient to define the effective refractive index neff and effective
group index ng,eff by assuming that the medium is effectively homogeneous:
neff(𝜔) = 𝜙(𝜔)c
𝜔L ,
(12.10)
ng,eff = neff + 𝜔dneff
d𝜔,
(12.11)
where c is the speed of light in vacuum, and L is the length of the element or one
period of the periodic structure.
For example, photonic crystal (PhC) structure has been particularly of interest for
many on-chip applications. Figure 12.2a shows an example of a slab PhC single-
line-defect waveguide [18]. The light is confined by index contrast in the z-direction
and by the photonic crystal structures in the x−y plane. One advantage of PhC slow
light is that the dispersive property can be highly controlled or designed through the
geometry, rather than the material, of the structure. Here, Li et al. [18] suppressed the
higher order dispersion of the PhC waveguide through fine-tuning the super-lattice

PHYSICS WITH SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
367
0.6
0.7
0.3
0.4
0.5
2
2.4
Mode index
1.55
1.56
1.54
0
200
400
(μm)
Reduced
 group index
k (unit of 2 /a)
Light line 
in air
x
y
z
In the second
Brillouin zone 
Preferred operating region
1/ vac ( μm–1)
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
FIGURE 12.2
(a) Schematics of a flat-band PhC line-defect waveguide [18]; (b) Dispersion
relations of the fundamental guided Bloch modes of a PhC W1 waveguide; and corresponding
effective mode index (c) and reduced group index n′
g (d) as functions of wavelength for such a
waveguide structure.
geometry such that the group index exhibits a plateau near the desired working
bandwidth (Fig. 12.2d).
Other structural slow light includes photonic bandgap structures [19–24], single
and coupled ring resonators [25–27], fiber or waveguide grating structures [28].
12.3
PHYSICS WITH SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
12.3.1
Common Slow-Light Processes
It is clear from our discussion of the Kramers–Kronig relations in Section 2.1 that any
rapid variation of the absorption coefficient of a material system will be accompanied
by a rapid spectral variation of the refractive index. This variation will make a large
contribution to the group index in accordance with the standard result
ng = n + 𝜔dn∕d𝜔.
(12.12)
Most material mechanisms for slow light can be understood simply from this point
of view. In this section we review some examples of this behavior.
12.3.1.1
Slow Light Based on the Linear Response of Atomic Absorption Lines
One of the simplest laboratory procedures for observing an appreciable slowdown
of the group velocity of light is to make use of the linear response of an isolated
atomic resonance. Atomic vapors tend to possess well-separated absorption lines.
The strongest of these lines can possess oscillator strengths with values approaching

368
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
unity and linewidths determined by Doppler broadening which is often of the order of
magnitude of 1 GHz. Under these conditions, a simple order of magnitude calculation
leads to the conclusion that the group index is of the order of 100.
Some simple variations of this idea can be implemented to achieve improved
results. One such example is the work of Camacho et al. [9] who obtained enhanced
group indices by working with the 852 nm 62S1∕2 to 62P3∕2 resonance of the cesium
atom. These researchers tuned their laser to a frequency between the two hyperfine
resonances associated with the 9.2 GHz splitting of the 62S1∕2 electronic ground
state into F = 3 and F = 4 components. For this detuning, the slow-light contribution
from the two resonances added, the group velocity dispersion of the two resonances
tended to cancel, and absorption was minimized by tuning away from line center.
They found that they could delay a 740 ps input pulse by up to 59 ns, corresponding
to a delay of approximately 80 pulse widths. Tunability was achieved by adjusting
the cesium temperature.
12.3.1.2
Slow Light Based on EIT
EIT is a coherent nonlinear optical process
[2]. It can be used to obtain much larger slow-light effects (much larger group indices)
than can be obtained by isolated atomic resonances. The EIT process is often studied
in the so-called Λ configuration. Typically the signal wave to be slowed is tuned close
to the a →b atomic transition, and a strong pump wave is tuned to the c →b atomic
transition. Here b is an excited state and a and c are low-lying states, perhaps different
hyperfine levels of the electronic ground state. The presence of the strong pump field
creates a narrow spectral hole in the otherwise broad a →b optical transition. This
dip can be extremely narrow, as its width depends on the relaxation rate between
levels a and c, which for the case of hyperfine transitions can be very small. This
narrow dip then gives rise to a large group index, which can be of the order of one
million under proper transitions.
One of the early dramatic demonstrations of slow-light effects was that of Hau
et al. (1999) [29] and made use of EIT effects in an ensemble of sodium atoms.
The experiment was performed at very low temperature, very close to the transition
temperature to a BEC. These workers were able to slow the group velocity of light
to the extremely small value of 17 ms−1 and showed that they could delay an optical
pulse by as much as five pulse widths. Later work by Kash et al. [30] showed that
nearly comparable results could be obtained in a warm atomic vapor. This crucial
observation was extremely important as it removed the perceived restriction of needed
to work in a Doppler-free regime or in a BEC in order to observe slow light.
12.3.1.3
Slow Light Based on Stimulated Brillouin Scattering
Stimulated
Brillouin Scattering (SBS) has proven to be a useful and versatile means for inducing
slow-light effects. SBS is a pure gain process, that is, one of the waves (the Stokes
wave) experiences amplification at the expense of the pump wave. The gain is largest
when the Stokes and pump waves are detuned from one another by the acoustic
resonance frequency of the medium, which is given by Ω = 2𝜔vn∕c, where 𝜔is the
pump-wave frequency, v is the velocity of sound in the material, and n is its refractive
index. Conversely, an anti-Stokes wave will experience attenuation. Consequently,

PHYSICS WITH SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
369
the Stokes wave will experience a strong slow-light effect and the anti-Stokes wave
will experience a fast-light effect. Slow light by means of SBS was discovered nearly
simultaneously by Okawachi et al. [7] and by Gonzalez-Herraez et al. [31]. It is
easy to show that the slow-light delay, defined here as the difference in transit times
through a medium of length L for a resonant signal pulse in the presence and the
absence of the pump wave, is given by
ΔTd = G
ΓB
,
(12.13)
where G = g0IpL is the single-pass gain parameter, and ΓB is the acoustic damp-
ing rate that determines the width of the Brillouin resonance. In their initial study,
Okawachi et al. observed delays of as large as 20 ns for a 15-ns-long input pulse for
a gain parameter of g = 11.
Much of the attraction of the use of SBS for slow light is that its properties are
readily controllable. For example, Shi et al. [32] showed that they could control
the shape of the SBS gain curve by using several overlapping gain lines. The central
frequency of each gain lines was tuned through the use of a Mach–Zehnder modulator.
These authors found that through use of a three overlapping gain lines they were
able to achieve twice as much the delay as from a single gain line while obtaining a
modulation bandwidth three-times as large and with good fidelity (i.e., with good eye-
opening diagrams: the “0”s and “1”s were well separated). In a separate experiment,
Zhu et al. [33] described an optical memory for a stream of data pulses based on the
properties of SBS. Specifically, the information content is written into an acoustic
excitation which can later be read out through the use of an intense read beam. Storage
of 2-ns-long pulses for as long as 12 ns was reported.
12.3.1.4
Slow Light Based on CPO
Slow light based on CPO is another broadly
employed procedure for controlling the group velocity of light. In the CPO process,
pump and probe beams detuned from one another by an amount 𝛿𝜔co-propagate
through a saturable absorbing medium. If the frequency difference 𝛿𝜔is smaller
than the inverse of the population decay time T1, the ground state population is
induced to oscillate with appreciable amplitude at the beat frequency 𝛿𝜔. Detailed
calculation [3] shows that these oscillations will lead to a decrease in the absorption
over a frequency band of the order of 𝛿𝜔. This narrow dip in absorption leads to a
rapid swing in the real part of the refractive index, producing a large contribution
to the group index. In their original paper, Bigelow et al. observed velocities as
small as 60 ms−1 corresponding to a group index of 5 × 106. Many researches have
made use of the CPO model and find that it is extremely useful in describing their
experimental data.
Certain aspects of the CPO process can be understood intuitively by means of a
model first formulated by Basov and coworkers [34] for the case of a saturable gain
medium with non-instantaneous response. Because of saturation, the leading edge of
the pulse will experience more amplification than the trailing edge of the pulse. The
peak of the pulse will thus tend to move to earlier times, that is, the pulse will show

370
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
“fast-light” effects. For the case of non-instantaneous saturable absorber, just the
opposite happens and the system shows slow-light effects. The Basov model is useful
in giving an intuitive picture for the origin of slow and fast light in non-instantaneous
saturable materials. However, it does not readily provide quantitative predictions,
because numerical methods must be used to determine how a pulse will propagate
through such a material. An advantage of the CPO model is that it leads to simple
analytic predictions for the properties of slow-light effect. For example, it is easy to
show that under CPO conditions the group index is given by
ng = 1
2𝛼0T1c
I∕Is
(1 + I∕Is)3 ,
(12.14)
where 𝛼0 is the unsaturated absorption coefficient of the material.
12.3.2
Superluminal and Backward Light
As noted above, the group index of a dispersive medium is given by
ng = n + 𝜔dn∕d𝜔.
(12.15)
Under appropriate conditions (near the center for an absorption line, or in the wings
for a gain line), the second contribution to ng can become negative, and if this
contribution is sufficiently large, the group index can become smaller than unity.
Under these circumstances, the group velocity of light can exceed the vacuum speed
of light [12, 35], which at first sight might seem inconsistent with the principle of
causality. The resolution to this paradox is a bit subtle and has been discussed by
several workers [1,36]. In brief summary, the propagation of a light pulse cannot be
described by a single velocity. Different definitions of velocity need to be introduced
to describe different aspects of pulse propagation. In addition to the well-known
phase velocity and group velocity, one sometimes needs to introduce the information
velocity (the velocity at which information is transported through a system) and the
front velocity (the velocity at which a sharp dislocation in the pulse propagates). It
is surmised that the front velocity is equal to the information velocity and that in
fact both of these are equal to the vacuum speed of light c. The rationale for this
argument is that information is encoded at points of non-analyticity of the wavefront,
and the broad frequency spectrum that accompanies these points will not experience
the slow- or fast-light effects that tend to be confined to narrow frequency ranges.
There is an even more exotic phenomenon that can occur when the second con-
tribution to ng is negative and larger in magnitude than the first contribution. Under
these circumstances the group index and also the group velocity become negative.
Thus pulses propagate in a direction opposite to that of their propagation vector k.
This exotic behavior had been predicted theoretically by several workers [37] and
was observed unambiguously by Gehring et al. [38]. Under these circumstances, the
peak of a pulse exiting the medium exits before the peak of the incident pulse enters
the medium. Also, the peak of the pulse moves in the backward direction within

PHYSICS WITH SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
371
the medium. Again, causality is preserved in this process, because this behavior can
be observed only in the case of smooth pulses with “infinite support.” For example,
a Gaussian pulse has wings that extend from −∞to +∞, and thus in a real sense
the pulse is “everywhere” at all times, and there can be no concern with causality
violation.
12.3.3
Kinetics Properties and Photon Drag
Because of the change in the group velocity when a pulse enters a dispersive medium,
there is inherently a change in the pulse duration and hence in the energy density
of the pulse. For example, when a pulse enters a slow-light medium, it will become
spatially compressed and its energy density will increase. Exactly the opposite will
happen when a pulse enters a fast-light medium. Here we describe the kinematics of
this process. We will describe the consequence of this behavior on nonlinear optics
in the following section.
It turns out that it is straightforward to derive Poynting’s Theorem for the case of a
dispersive (homogeneous) medium [39–41]. One finds that the intensity (magnitude
of the Poynting vector) is given by
S = 1
2n𝜀0|E|2
(12.16)
and that the energy density is given by
u = 1
2nng𝜀0|E|2.
(12.17)
As usual, the group velocity is given by
vg = c∕ng.
(12.18)
These results lead to the intuitively pleasing conclusion that
S = uvg.
(12.19)
One should note that even though the energy density is enhanced in a material slow-
light medium, the electric field strength is not enhanced. This fact has important
consequences for the nonlinear optics of slow-light materials.
Dispersive media can also show enhanced photon drag effects. The transverse
photon drag effect was measured by Jones in 1972 [42]. In his experiment, a glass
slab of length L was translated in the transverse direction at a velocity v = 200 cm s−1.
It was found that a beam of light incident on the slab was dragged in the transverse
direction by a small but measurable amount of 6 nm. Theoretical work [43] showed
that the transverse displacement is given by
Δx = (vL∕c)(ng −1∕n).
(12.20)

372
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
We thus see that photon drag effects can be increased enormously through the use of
a slow-light medium.
Motivated by this conclusion, Franke-Arnold et al. [44] performed an experiment
to observe a rotary photon drag effect. In their experiment, an elliptically shaped
laser beam was transmitted through a rotating ruby rod. The ruby showed a very
strong self-pumped slow-light effect (the group index was of the order of 106) as a
result of the CPO mechanism mentioned above. It was found that the elliptical beam
became rotated by several degrees in either the clockwise or the counter-clockwise
direction depending on the direction of rotation of the ruby rod. A refinement of
this experiment was reported more recently by Wisniewski-Barker et al. [45]. In this
experiment, a dark line in the form of a topological defect was first impressed on
the laser beam before it passed through the ruby. It was found that the dark line was
rotated along with the rest of the elliptical beam. The fact that laser light was found
in the regions that were originally dark and that “darkness” was found in the regions
that were originally bright rules out other possible interpretations of the experiment
of Franke-Arnold et al., such as certain simple forms of pulse reshaping.
Another topic of considerable interest is the question of the momentum carried by
a photon in a material medium. As is well known, the momentum carried by a photon
traveling in vacuum is
pv = ℏ𝜔∕c.
(12.21)
The question is how to generalize this result for the case of a material medium.
This question has been a topic of discussion for at least 100 years, and there is still
some uncertainty as to the complete answer to this question. In fact, there are two
competing theories to determine this momentum and each theory has arguments that
tend to support it. We quote results for the case of a dispersive medium. The case of
a non-dispersive medium can be treated simply by replacing the group index ng by
the refractive index n in all formulas.
The Abraham form assumes that the electromagnetic momentum density is given
by
P = E × H∕c2.
(12.22)
A straightforward consequence of this assumption is that the momentum carried by
a photon is given by [46,47]
pA = (ℏ𝜔∕c)(1∕ng).
(12.23)
It is commonly accepted that the Abraham momentum is associated with the kinetic
(i.e., the “mv”) momentum of the photon. It is also taken to be the momentum of the
field itself (without the material response that is naturally associated with it. It is also
the momentum that is deduced by the Einstein block (or Balazs block) argument.
The Minkowski form of the momentum assumes that
P = D × B.
(12.24)

PHYSICS WITH SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
373
Here there is some disagreement as to the momentum of the photon. Milonni and
Boyd [47] deduce that
pM = (ℏ𝜔∕c)(n21∕ng
),
(12.25)
whereas Barnett deduces that
pM = (ℏ𝜔∕c)n.
(12.26)
We believe that there is no fundamental disagreement between these two treatments.
We believe that the two sets of authors are simply following different conventions.
And specifically, we are unaware of any situations in which the measurable predictions
of the two formalisms are in disagreement. The Minkowski momentum is associated
with the canonical momentum and corresponds to Planck’s constant h divided by the
de Broglie wavelength for a massive particle. It is also the momentum that comes out
of Fermi’s Doppler-shift analysis.
12.3.4
Enhancement of Nonlinearity
12.3.4.1
Slow Light and Enhancement of Optical Nonlinearities
There has been
discussion in the scientific literature regarding the conditions under which slow-light
effects can be used to enhance optical nonlinearities. Common sense might seem
to suggest that nonlinear effects would be enhanced for any slow-light interaction,
because the light spends more time interacting with the medium. But this argument
is invalid. Nonlinear optical effects occur as a consequence of propagation effects
and thus depend on the distance of nonlinear material through which the light travels.
How long it takes light to travel through the medium is of no concern.
This issue has been analyzed by Boyd [48]. He finds that whether nonlinear
effects are enhanced depends critically upon whether the slow light occurs because
of a material resonance or a structural resonance. As we remarked earlier, in relation
to Eq. (12.16), there is no (or little) enhancement in the electric field amplitude when
a light wave enters a slow-light medium. The boundary conditions on Maxwell’s
equations dictate that any change in field amplitude will depend on the discontinuity
in the refractive index, not the group index, and the discontinuity in the refractive
index tends to lead to a very small effect. The situation is quite different when light
enters a medium in which light is slowed down by a structural resonance, such as for
a fiber Bragg grating (FBG). In this case there is an enhancement in the nonlinear
optical response, which tends to scale as the square of the group index [49]. On the
one hand, the field amplitude is increased inside the structure by one power of the
group index because of the resonator nature of elements of the FBG. In addition, the
effective pathlength through the structure is increased by another factor of the group
index because of the tendency of light to circulate many times through the structure
before being fully transmitted.

374
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
12.4
SOME APPLICATIONS OF SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
12.4.1
Optical Tunable Delay Lines
One of the most promising applications that use slow and fast light is optical tunable
delay lines. Such capabilities allow dynamically adjusting the transit time of optical
signal fields propagating through an slow-light medium, which is required for many
applications in all-optical domain including buffering, signal processing, data traffic
control, signal re-synchronization.
One of the most dominantly used media to carry optical signals today is optical
fiber, which can be found today from transcontinental communication networks to
super-computing centers. In optical fibers, SBS is one commonly used slow-light
technique. Through the interaction between photons and acoustic phonons, a pump
field at frequency 𝜈would give a narrow gain feature in the vicinity of the Stokes
frequency 𝜈−ΩB and a narrow absorption feature in the vicinity of the anti-Stokes
frequency𝜔+ ΩB. HereΩB istheSBSStokesfrequencyshift,whichisapproximately
10 GHz in optical fibers. The intrinsic linewidth of SBS process is typically of the
order of a few tens of MHz. However, the SBS-induced complex refractive index
profile is indeed the convolution of SBS intrinsic lineshape and the spectrum of the
pump profile, that is,
̃n(𝜈) = cg0
4𝜋𝜈
𝛾
𝜈+ i𝛾∗P(𝜈+ Ωs),
(12.27)
where g0 is the SBS gain coefficient of the medium, 𝛾is the SBS linewidth, P(𝜈+
Ωs) is the pump power spectrum, and Ωs is the SBS Stokes frequency shift of the
medium.
By modifying the pump field spectrum using, for example, intensity modulation,
phase modulation, or laser injection current modulation, SBS slow light with working
bandwidth ranging from tens of MHz to tens of GHz has been achieved to accom-
modate different needs of signal bandwidth. Since the SBS Stokes frequency shift
Ωs in optical fibers is approximately 10 GHz, the gain profile broadening becomes
much more challenging when the signal bandwidth goes beyond 2Ωs when the Stokes
gain profile and the anti-Stokes absorption profile starts to overlap at the pump cen-
ter frequency. This limit can be overcome by using multiple pump fields, in which
the Stokes gain feature of one pump frequency compensates the anti-Stokes absorp-
tion feature of some other pump frequency. This scheme is demonstrated to achieve
20 GHz slow light using SBS in fiber [50].
For even larger bandwidth with sub-picosecond light pulses, stimulated Raman
scattering (SRS) becomes a more suitable slow-light technique. The intrinsic
linewidth of SRS in optical fibers is approximately a few THz, and 85% delay
of 430 fs pulses has been demonstrated in optical fibers [51].
Besides the optical fiber, photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are playing more
and more important rule in communication and signal processing. Both SBS and
SRS slow light has been demonstrated in nano-wire optical waveguides on either
chalcogenide [52] or silicon platforms [14].

SOME APPLICATIONS OF SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
375
Moreover, PIC is a convenient platform to realize structural slow light. Xia et al.
demonstrated a compact optical buffer on silicon chip using up to 100 cascaded ring
resonators and achieved 10 bits of delay at a data rate of 20 Gbps [53]. Baba et al.
demonstrated a tunable delay line with a maximum delay of 40 ps for signals with a
bandwidth of 1.4 THz using photonic crystal line defect waveguides [54].
12.4.2
Optical Memories
Besides tunable optical delay lines, an all-optical communication system or infor-
mation processing system is also inevitably in need of memories in an all-optical
fashion. The ability to completely halt the propagation of a light pulse is also known
as “stopped light.” There have been a lot of designs and implementations of optical
memories using the concept of “stopped light.” Particularly, the physics of “stopped
light” using material slow light and structure slow light could be quite different.
In material slow light, the spatial extension of an optical pulse along the propa-
gation direction is inversely proportional to the magnitude of the group index. For
example, the longitudinal extension of an 1 ms optical pulse in vacuum is approx-
imately 300 km. When such a pulse enters an EIT medium whose group index is
107, the longitudinal extension of such a pulse is compressed by a factor of 107
and becomes 3 cm. Such dramatic spatial compression of the pulse greatly reduces
the physical size of a slow-light-based optical memory. Meanwhile, material slow
light typically indicates a strong interaction between the optical field and some other
physical quantities, such as atomic coherence in an EIT medium. Moreover, such
strong interaction can usually be controlled through additional optical control fields,
that is, be turned on and off using a second beam.
We here describe a typical process of “stopped” light using material slow light.
The slow-light medium is first prepared with the presence of a control field. As
the signal field enters the medium, it interacts strongly with the medium and the
information is partially transferred to the medium in some physical quantity. After
the signal field completely enters the medium, the control field is turned off, which
changes the interaction condition between the signal field and the medium. However,
the information of the optical signal field is already partially present in the medium,
which does not propagates, that is, the optical information is stored in the medium.
After the desired “storage” time elapses, the “read-out” control field is turned back on,
and the information stored in the medium is transferred back to a regenerated signal
field. Such a “write” and “read” process stores the optical information to medium
during the “storage” period, which constitutes an optical memory in analogue of the
more familiar electronic memories.
An optical memory using EIT was first demonstrated by Liu et al. [55], in which an
11 μs pulse is stored in ultracold EIT medium for 1 ms. Phillips et al. [56] separately
demonstrated a similar EIT-based optical storage experiment with a delay time up
to 200 μs. Camacho et al. [57] demonstrated an system using four-wave mixing
in hot atomic vapors. Their demonstration simultaneously generates two entangled
read-out pulses, which can potentially serve for applications in quantum information
science. Zhu et al. demonstrated an all-fiber optical memory based on SBS [33]. Their

376
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
demonstration can potentially work at any telecommunication wavelength, which
makes it easy to be integrated with existing fiber-optic communication systems.
The “stopped” light using structural slow light works in a different way, in which
light interacts more with the geometry of the medium rather than the material. Gener-
ally speaking, after the optical signal pulse enters the “device” regime, the properties
of the device are tuned such that the light bounces back and forth, or “stays”, inside
the device until the device is tuned again to release the signal field. Xu et al. demon-
strated a stopped-light device consisting of two rings and two coupled waveguides
on silicon-on-insulator platform [58]. The turning on and off of the device is realized
through tuning the resonance wavelength of the ring resonators with respect to the
signal field. Saito and Baba proposed a technique of stopping light pulses using a
slow-light device based on photonic crystal coupled waveguide (PCCW). The stop-
ping of light is realized through dynamically tuning the material index chirp in the
PCCW and by adiabatically transforming slow-light pulses into stopped ones [59].
As the nanofabrication technique is advanced, integrated optical memory devices can
have much better performance.
12.4.3
SLIDAR
Light detection and ranging (LIDAR) is employed in a wide variety of remote sens-
ing applications, such as measuring atmospheric properties, detecting chemical and
biological agents, vehicle surveillance, and aerial/bathymetric surveying. The key
performance parameters of a LIDAR system include its transverse and longitudinal
resolutions. Similar to imaging systems, the far-field transverse resolution of a LIDAR
system depends on the aperture size of its emitter. Recently, multi-aperture systems
are studied for various optical applications including high-performance telescopes
and high-power lasers. Compared to a single large aperture, a multi-aperture system
can achieve a larger effective aperture size, that is, fine far-field transverse resolution,
without the need of heavy and slow opto-mechanical components.
Since the signals from different emitters need to be coherently combined in the
far-field, a multi-aperture LIDAR requires precise optical phase control of every
emitter’s output. Furthermore, a LIDAR working in a pulsed mode faces an additional
challenge. When the beam is steered far off from the direction normal to the emitter
array plane, the emitters at one side of the system become closer to the far-field target
than those on the other side. Thus, the signal pulses sent from different emitters may
no longer overlap in time when they reach the far field. Such a group delay mismatch
will significantly degrade both the longitudinal and transverse resolutions of the
system. Thus, it is crucial to dynamically correct the group delay mismatch such that
the pulsed signals emitted from different channels are always aligned properly in
time when they reach the far field.
Schweinsberg et al. have demonstrated a multi-aperture slow-light laser radar
(SLIDAR) system. In their work, two independent tunable slow-light mechanisms,
namely dispersive delay and SBS slow light [7], are incorporated to realize dynamic
group delay synchronization while the system scans in two orthogonal directions.
Furthermore, a heterodyne locking scheme is also used to control the optical phase
of the output of each emitter to realize coherent beam combining at the far field.

SOME APPLICATIONS OF SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
377
−10
0
10
–10
0
10
Time (ns)
−10
0
10
Time (ns)
Time (ns)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
x
y
x
y
x
y
Matched
Mismatch
Mismatch
Corrected
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Other
components
g
g
g
Group delay 
matching plane
Group delay 
compensated
2-D 
group delay
control
Opt. phase
control
Power
control
Emitters
Emitter
 plane
on-axis
 x & y tilt
 x tilt
5.9 ns
Ch.1
Ch.3
Ch.2
5.9 ns
5.8 ns
9.2 ns
Far-field 
pattern
Corrected
10.2 ns
Combined signal
FIGURE 12.3
(a) The schematics of a SLIDAR system capable of 2D beam steering;
normalized time traces of the returned signal when the system is pointing on-axis (b), tilted in
the x-direction (c), and tilted in both the x- and y-directions (d). (For a color version of this
figure, see the color plate section.)
A schematic of the demonstrated 2D SLIDAR system is shown in Figure 12.3a,
which uses three emitters arranged in a right-angle 2D pattern. Such an arrangement
contains all of the conceptual difficulties of a multi-channel system.
The time traces of the returned signal are plotted in Figures 12.3b–12.3d when the
system is pointing in the normal, x-tilted and x- and y-tilted directions, respectively.
The thick red line is the combined signal, while the thin lines are the signal from three
individual channels. It is clear that when the system is pointing at off-axis directions,
the group delay mismatch will result in significant signal broadening, indicating
serious degradation in both the longitudinal and transverse resolutions. When the 2D
group delay control units are turned on, the group delay mismatch is compensated
well and there is no pulse broadening in the returned signal.
Note that similar slow-light approaches have also been studied in the context of
microwave photonics and synthetic aperture radar [60,61].
12.4.4
Interferometric Spectrometers
While many current applications of slow light focus on taking advantage of control-
lable group delay of optical pulses propagating through a slow-light medium, the

378
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
impact of the large dispersion inside a slow-light medium on the phase change of
different frequency components of the optical fields has sometimes been overlooked.
Interferometric spectrometers refer to a large family of instrument that extract the
spectral information of an given optical field through optical interference. Spectrome-
ters with high spectral sensitivity are becoming more and more desired in applications
such as metrology [62], optical sensing [63], quantum information processing [64],
biomedical engineering [65].
One way to see this enhancement effect is to study the output of a Mach–Zehnder
(M–Z) interferometer. When the optical path difference between the two routes
through the M–Z interferometer is caused only by a medium with length L and
refractive index n, the phase difference of the two beams passing through two different
routes is given by
Δ𝜙= 𝜔
c nL,
(12.28)
where 𝜔is the optical frequency of the input light and c is the velocity of light in
vacuum. The intensity transmission of such an M–Z interferometer is given by
T = 1
2(1 + cos Δ𝜙).
(12.29)
Note that Δ𝜙can further be a function of transverse coordinates and Δ𝜙appears also
in the expressions for the transmission of many other types of interferometers.
For a spectroscopic interferometer, a change in frequency 𝜔will produce a change
in the phase difference term Δ𝜙, which will consequently lead to a change in intensity
and enables the detection of the frequency shift. Thus, the sensitivity of a spectro-
scopic interferometer can typically be described in terms of the quantity dΔ𝜙∕d𝜔,
and an interferometer is especially sensitive to a shift in frequency if the value of
dΔ𝜙∕d𝜔is large. Using Eq. (12.28), one can rewrite dΔ𝜙∕d𝜔as follows,
dΔ𝜙
d𝜔= d
d𝜔
(𝜔nL
c
)
= L
c
(
n + 𝜔dn
d𝜔
)
=
Lng
c ,
(12.30)
where ng ≡n + 𝜔dn∕d𝜔is the group index.
Thus, one sees that the spectral sensitivity is proportional to the group index
ng of the medium that is inside the interferometer. For common interferometers in
which non-dispersive media (or media with small dispersion) are used, ng equals (or
approximates) the phase index n, and therefore the dependence of spectral sensitivity
on dispersion can often be neglected. However, if a slow-light medium with very
large group index ng is used, the spectral sensitivity of such an interferometer can be
greatly enhanced.
The enhancement by using slow light has been experimentally demonstrated in a
various interferometer constructions [10,66,67]. Similar concept has been extended
to integrated arrayed waveguide gratings (AWGs) [68, 69] and other structures
as well.

FUNDAMENTAL LIMITS ON SLOW LIGHT
379
While slow light can greatly enhance the spectral resolution of an given interfer-
ometer construction, for a given required spectral sensitivity, a shorter path length can
be used for a slow-light medium. The resulting reduction in the device size could be
important in applications where space is limited or where high stability is required.
12.5
FUNDAMENTAL LIMITS ON SLOW LIGHT
12.5.1
Limits for Optical Delay Lines
While the magnitude of the group index of a medium is an important figure of merit
for exploring the fundamentals of slow light, a more practical figure of merit for
delay-line applications is how much time delay a slow-light element can provide as
compared to the temporal duration of a signal pulse or of one data bit.
This thought can be quantified using the maximum fractional delay [70] (also
known as the delay-bandwidth product [71]). One definition for the maximum frac-
tional delay ΔTmax is given by
ΔTmax ≡ΔTmax
Δ𝜏
= 2𝜋Δ𝜈ΔTmax,
(12.31)
where ΔTmax is the maximum achievable absolute delay, Δ𝜏= 1∕(2𝜋Δ𝜈) is the
temporal duration of the pulse, and Δ𝜈is the signal bandwidth.
In practice, a practical slow-light medium typically has frequency-dependent gain
and group index. These frequency dependencies can lead to pulse distortion and/or
power level change [72], which can consequently deteriorate the quality of transmitted
information.
To quantify the impact of pulse distortion and power level change, various criteria
have been used based on different considerations.
One set of criteria is based on the physical origins of the various distortions, known
as the gain distortion factor and phase distortion factor, respectively [73]. Since a
practical medium cannot provide arbitrarily large gain to the signal, an additional
criterion is often set on the maximum frequency-dependent amplitude gain within
the bandwidth Gmax, such as 3.5, corresponding to a maximum power gain of less
than 30 dB. While such criteria emphasize the physical origin of the distortion and
provide a intuitive picture of whether a given gain profile is optimum or not, the
magnitude of the two distortion factors are quite difficult to be measured. Thus, there
are also other distortion factors that is more measurable and can be tested, such as
the change of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the temporal duration of
the signal pulse.
When individual pulse delay is studied, the group delay is usually defined in terms
of the peak position of a single Gaussian pulse [32, 73–78]. In a real telecommuni-
cation system, however, data packets are comprised of varying sequences of “0” and
“1” bits in designated time slots, and the peak positions of individual pulses often
experience a pattern-dependent delay [79] due to inter-symbol interference (ISI) [80],

380
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
etc. Thus, an alternative way to determine the delay of a data packet through a slow-
light medium is to define it in terms of the best-decision-time (BDT) topt in the eye
diagram when highest data fidelity (i.e., lowest bit error rate (BER)) is achieved.
Note that the eye diagram is also most open at topt; this thought can be quantified
using the eye-opening metric. Consequently, the BDT delay of a data packet can be
determined by comparing the values of topt for propagation through the slow-light
medium and through a reference medium. In such cases, it makes more sense to
quantify the distortion in terms of system metrics, such as the eye-opening penalty
EOP [32,81] or the Q-factor penalty [79].
There have been various approaches to optimize the gain profile or dispersion of
practical slow-light processes to maximize its fractional delay. Generally speaking,
the approaches are often to create a flat-top gain profile or to create two separated
absorption profiles with a transparent window in between. The achievable fractional
delay is consequently limited by the amount of gain or absorption one can achieve.
Typically, a fractional delay of approximately 2 is achievable using gain-induced slow
light with maximum gain of approximately 30 dB, and fractional delay of hundreds
can be achieved using double-absorption-line features in atomic vapors.
Alternatively, one can describe the limit in a more concise manner. For example,
Miller [82] has given a limit, which relates the maximum achievable fractional delay
𝜏gΔ𝜈of a device of size L with its average refractive index navg and its maximum
variation of Δn over Δ𝜈near the center wavelength 𝜆0 through the relation
𝜏gΔ𝜈≤navgLΔn∕(
√
3𝜆0).
(12.32)
This expression sets a upper bound on the fractional delay for any 1D slow-light
medium. And it is consistent with the criteria set in maximum gain. There have been
proposals to overcome such a limit by using systems with higher dimensions, for
example, by allowing different frequency components to propagate through spatially
separated channels [83].
12.5.2
Limits for Interferometric Spectroscopy
While fractional delay is the primary figure of merit of slow-light media for delay-line
applications, it is more convenient to use some other criteria that directly related to
the need of spectroscopy when one quantifies the limit of slow light for spectroscopy
applications. Typically, spectral resolution 𝛿𝜈is one important figure of merit for any
spectrometer.
Although different types of interferometers have very different geometrical con-
struction, they actually share surprising similarity in the expression of spectral resolu-
tion in terms of the parameters such as length and group index of the medium [69,84].
In ideal cases when the slow-light medium is transparent to input light, the spectral
performance is typically given by
𝛿𝜈=
c
ngL,
(12.33)

REFERENCES
381
where L is the length of the slow-light medium. One sees that in such ideal cases, the
spectral resolution can be linearly enhanced by the magnitude of the group index ng.
However, most practical slow-light media have associated gains and losses, and
this eventually limits the finest spectral resolution that is achievable. In particular,
when a lossy slow-light medium is used, the characteristic resolution of slow-light
interferometers becomes
𝛿𝜈= c𝛼
ng
,
(12.34)
where 𝛼is the loss coefficient of the slow-light medium.
Besides the spectral resolution, the number of resolving spectral lines within
the working bandwidth is often another important criterion. Since both ng and 𝛼
are often highly frequency dependent, one way to set a bound is to require that the
spectral resolution should not vary by a certain amount (e.g., 10%) within the working
bandwidth Δ𝜈. After that, one can use the quantity working finesse w defined as
follows:
w ≡Δ𝜈
𝛿𝜈=
ngΔ𝜈
c𝛼.
(12.35)
To increase the spectral resolution, one essentially needs to maximize ng∕𝛼. Mean-
while, the key to improve the working finesse w is to optimize the gain–loss-ratio
profile so it exhibits a plateau over which ng∕𝛼remains a constant.
REFERENCES
[1] P. W. Milonni, Fast Light, Slow Light and Left-Handed Light (Institute of Physics, Bristol
and Philadelphia, 2005).
[2] S. E. Harris and L. V. Hau, “Nonlinear optics at low light levels,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,
4611–4614 (1999).
[3] M. S. Bigelow, N. N. Lepeshkin, and R. W. Boyd, “Observation of ultraslow light
propagation in a ruby crystal at room temperature,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 113903 (2003).
[4] R. W. Boyd and D. J. Gauthier, “ ‘Slow’ and ‘fast’ light,” in Progress in Optics, edited
by E. Wolf (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 2002), Vol. 43, pp. 497–530.
[5] R. D. L. Kronig, “On the theory of dispersion of x-rays,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 12(6), 547–556
(1926).
[6] H. Kramers, “La diffusion de la lumiere par les atomes,” Atti Cong. Intern. Fisica,
(Transactions of Volta Centenary Congress) Como 2, 545–557 (1927).
[7] Y. Okawachi, M. S. Bigelow, J. E. Sharping, Z. Zhu, A. Schweinsberg, D. J. Gauthier,
R. W. Boyd, and A. L. Gaeta, “Tunable all-optical delays via Brillouin slow light in an
optical fiber,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94(15), 153902 (2005).
[8] J. Sharping, Y. Okawachi, and A. Gaeta, “Wide bandwidth slow light using a Raman fiber
amplifier,” Opt. Express 13(16), 6092–6098 (2005).

382
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
[9] R. M. Camacho, M. V. Pack, J. C. Howell, A. Schweinsberg, and R. W. Boyd, “Wide-
bandwidth, tunable, multiple-pulse-width optical delays using slow light in Cesium
vapor,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98(15), 153601 (2007).
[10] Z. Shi, R. W. Boyd, D. J. Gauthier, and C. C. Dudley, “Enhancing the spectral sensitivity
of interferometers using slow-light media,” Opt. Lett. 32(8), 915–917 (2007).
[11] P. Ku, C. Chang-Hasnain, and S. Chuang, “Variable semiconductor all-optical buffer,”
Electron. Lett. 38, 1581–1583, (2002).
[12] M. S. Bigelow, N. N. Lepeshkin, and R. W. Boyd, “Superluminal and slow light propa-
gation in a room-temperature solid,” Science 301(5630), 200–202 (2003).
[13] A. Schweinsberg, N. N. Lepeshkin, M. S. Bigelow, R. W. Boyd, and S. Jarabo, “Observa-
tion of superluminal and slow light propagation in erbium-doped optical fiber,” Europhys.
Lett. 73, 218–224 (2006).
[14] Y. Okawachi, M. A. Foster, J. E. Sharping, A. L. Gaeta, Q. Xu, and M. Lipson, “All-optical
slow-light on a photonic chip,” Opt. Express 14, 2317–2322 (2006).
[15] R. M. Camacho, M. V. Pack, and J. C. Howell, “Slow light with large fractional delays
by spectral hole-burning in rubidium vapor,” Phys. Rev. A 74(3), 033801 (2006).
[16] L. Yi, W. Hu, Y. Su, M. Gao, and L. Leng, “Design and system demonstration of a
tunable slow-light delay line based on fiber parametric process,” IEEE Phot. Tech. Lett.
18, 2575–2577 (2006).
[17] E. Shumakher, A. Willinger, R. Blit, D. Dahan, and G. Eisenstein, “Large tunable delay
with low distortion of 10 Gbit/s data in a slow light system based on narrow band fiber
parametric amplification,” Opt. Express 14(19), 8540–8545 (2006).
[18] J. Li, T. P. White, L. O’Faolain, A. Gomez-Iglesias, and T. F. Krauss, “Systematic design
of flat band slow light in photonic crystal waveguides,” Opt. Express 16(9), 6227–6232
(2008).
[19] M. Soljaˇci´c, S. G. Johnson, S. Fan, M. Ibanescu, E. Ippen, and J. D. Joannopoulos,
“Photonic-crystal slow-light enhancement of nonlinear phase sensitivity,” J. Opt. Soc.
Amer. B 19, 2052–2059 (2002).
[20] H. Gersen, T. J. Karle, R. J. P. Engelen, W. Bogaerts, J. P. Korterik, N. F. van Hulst, T.
F. Krauss, and L. Kuipers, “Real-space observation of ultraslow light in photonic crystal
waveguides,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 073903 (2005).
[21] Y. A. Vlasov, M. O’Boyle, H. F. Hamann, and S. J. McNab, “Active control of slow light
on a chip with photonic crystal waveguides,” Nature 438(3), 65–69 (2005).
[22] T. F. Krauss, “Slow light in photonic crystal waveguides,” J. Physics D: Appl. Phys. 40(9),
2666–2670 (2007).
[23] T. Baba, “Slow light in photonics crystals,” Nature Photonics 2, 465–473 (2008).
[24] S. P. Anderson, A. R. Shroff, and P. M. Fauchet, “Slow light with photonic crystals for
on-chip optical interconnects,” Adv. Opt. Technol. 2008, 293531 (2008).
[25] J. E. Heebner and R. W. Boyd, “Slow light with low dispersion and nonlinear enhance-
ment in a lattice-shifted photonic crystal waveguide,” J. Mod. Opt. 49(14), 2629–2636
(2002).
[26] A. Yariv, Y. Xu, R. K. Lee, and A. Scherer, “Coupled-resonator optical waveguide: a
proposal and analysis,” Opt. Lett. 24(11), 711–713 (1999).
[27] F. Xia, L. Sekaric, and Y. Vlasov, “Ultracompact optical buffers on a silicon chip,” Nature
Photonics 1, 65–71 (2007).

REFERENCES
383
[28] D. Janner, G. Galzerano, G. D. Valle, P. Laporta, S. Longhi, and M. Belmonte, “Slow
light in periodic superstructure Bragg gratings,” Phys. Rev. E 72, 056605 (2005).
[29] L. V. Hau, S. E. Harris, Z. Dutton, and C. H. Behroozi, “Light speed reduction to 17
metres per second in an ultracold atomic gas,” Nature 397, 594–598 (1998).
[30] M. M. Kash, V. A. Sautenkov, A. S. Zibrov, L. Hollberg, G. R. Welch, M. D. Lukin,
Y. Rostovtsev, E. S. Fry, and M. O. Scully, “Ultraslow group velocity and enhanced
nonlinear optical effects in a coherently driven hot atomic gas,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,
5229–5232 (1999).
[31] M. Herr´aez, K. Y. Song, and L. Th´evenaz, “Optically controlled slow and fast light
in optical fibers using stimulated Brillouin scattering,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 081113
(2005).
[32] Z. Shi, R. Pant, Z. Zhu, M. D. Stenner, M. A. Neifeld, D. J. Gauthier, and R. W. Boyd,
“Design of a tunable time-delay element using multiple gain lines for increased fractional
delay with high data fidelity,” Opt. Lett. 32(14), 1986–1988 (2007).
[33] Z. Zhu, D. J. Gauthier, and R. W. Boyd, “Stored light in an optical fiber via stimulated
Brillouin scattering,” Science 318, 1748–1750 (2007).
[34] N. G. Basov, R. V. Ambartsumyan, V. S. Zuev, P. G. Kryukov, and V. S. Letokhov,
“Nonlinear amplification of light pulses,” Sov. Phys. JETP 23, 16–22 (1966).
[35] L. J. Wang, A. Kuzmich, and A. Dogariu, “Gain-assisted superluminal light propagation,”
Nature 406, 277–279 (2000).
[36] R. Y. Chiao, “Superluminal (but causal) propagation of wave packets in transparent media
with inverted atomic populations,” Phys. Rev. A 48, R34–R37 (1993).
[37] M. Ware, S. Glasgow, and J. Peatross, “Energy transport in linear dielectrics,” Opt.
Express 9, 519–532 (2001).
[38] G. M. Gehring, A. Schweinsberg, C. Barsi, N. Kostinski, and R. W. Boyd, “Observation of
backwards pulse propagation through a medium with a negative group velocity,” Science
312, 895–897 (2006).
[39] H. Haus, “Momentum, energy and power densities of {TEM} wave packet,” Physica
43(1), 77–91 (1969).
[40] P. W. Milonni, “Field quantization and radiative processes in dispersive dielectric media,”
J. Mod. Opt. 42(10), 1991–2004 (1995).
[41] S. E. Harris, “Pondermotive forces with slow light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4032–4035
(2000).
[42] R. V. Jones, “Fresnel aether drag’ in a transversely moving medium,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond.
A. 328, 337–352 (1972).
[43] M. Padgett, G. Whyte, J. Girkin, A. Wright, L. Allen, P. ¨Ohberg, and S. M. Barnett,
“Polarization and image rotation induced by a rotating dielectric rod: an optical angular
momentum interpretation,” Opt. Lett. 31, 2205–2207 (2006).
[44] S. Franke-Arnold, G. Gibson, R. W. Boyd, and M. J. Padgett, “Rotary photon drag
enhanced by a slow-light medium,” Science 333, 65–67 (2011).
[45] E. Wisniewski-Barker, G. Gibson, S. Franke-Arnold, Z. Shi, R. W. Boyd, and M. J.
Padgett, “Evidence of slow-light effects from rotary drag of structured beams,” New J.
Phys. 15(8), 083020 (2013).
[46] D. H. Bradshawa, Z. Shib, R. W. Boydb, and P. W. Milonni, “Electromagnetic momenta
and forces in dispersive dielectric media,” Opt. Commun. 283(5), 650–656 (2010).

384
SLOW AND FAST LIGHT
[47] P. W. Milonni and R. W. Boyd, “Momentum of light in a dielectric medium,” Adv. Opt.
Photon. 2, 519–553 (2010).
[48] R. W. Boyd, “Material slow light and structural slow light: similarities and differences
for nonlinear optics [invited],” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 28, A38–A44 (2011).
[49] N. A. R. Bhat and J. E. Sipe, “Optical pulse propagation in nonlinear photonic crystals,”
Phys. Rev. E 64, 056604 (2001).
[50] K. Y. Song and K. Hotate, “25 GHz bandwidth Brillouin slow light in optical fibers,”
Opt. Lett. 32(3), 217–219 (2007).
[51] J. Sharping, Y. Okawachi, and A. Gaeta, “Wide bandwidth slow light using a raman fiber
amplifier,” Opt. Express 13, 6092–6098 (2005).
[52] R. Pant, C. G. Poulton, D.-Y. Choi, H. Mcfarlane, S. Hile, E. Li, L. Thevenaz, B. Luther-
Davies, S. J. Madden, and B. J. Eggleton, “On-chip stimulated brillouin scattering,” Opt.
Express 19, 8285–8290 (2011).
[53] F. Xia, L. Sekaric, and Y. Vlasov, “Ultracompact optical buffers on a silicon chip,” Nature
Photonics 1, 65–71 (2007).
[54] T. Baba, T. Kawaaski, H. Sasaki, J. Adachi, and D. Mori, “Large delay-bandwidth product
and tuning of slow light pulse in photonic crystal coupled waveguide,” Opt. Express 16,
9245–9253 (2008).
[55] C. Liu, Z. Dutton, C. H. Behroozi, and L. V. Hau, “Observation of coherent optical
information storage in an atomic medium using halted light pulses,” Nature 409, 490–
493 (2001).
[56] D. F. Phillips, A. Fleischhauer, A. Mair, R. L. Walsworth, and M. D. Lukin, “Storage of
light in atomic vapor,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 783–786 (2001).
[57] R. M. Camacho, P. K. Vudyasetu, and J. C. Howell, “Four-wave-mixing stopped light in
hot atomic rubidium vapour,” Nature Photonics 3, 103–106 (2009).
[58] Q. Xu, P. Dong, and L. Michal, “Breaking the delay-bandwidth limit in a photonic
structure,” Nature Physics 3, 406–410 (2007).
[59] Y. Saito and T. Baba, “Stopping of light by the dynamic tuning of photonic crystal slow
light device,” Opt. Express 18, 17141–17153 (2010).
[60] L. Gao, S. I. Herriot, and K. H. Wagner, “Sluggish light for radio-frequency true-time-
delay applications with a large time-bandwidth product,” Opt. Lett. 31, 3360–3362 (2006).
[61] A. Zadok, O. Raz, A. Eyal, and M. Tur, “Optically controlled low-distortion delay of
Ghz-wide radio-frequency signals using slow light in fibers,” Photon. Technol. Lett.,
IEEE 19, 462–464 (2007).
[62] O. P. Lay, S. Dubovitsky, R. D. Peters, J. P. Burger, S.-W. Ahn, W. H. Steier, H. R.
Fetterman, and Y. Chang, “Mstar: a submicrometer absolute metrology system,” Opt.
Lett. 28(11), 890–892 (2003).
[63] Z. Xie and H. F. Taylor, “Fabry-Perot optical binary switch for aircraft applications,” Opt.
Lett. 31(18), 2695–2697 (2006).
[64] X.-F. Mo, B. Zhu, Z.-F. Han, Y.-Z. Gui, and G.-C. Guo, “Faraday-Michelson system for
quantum cryptography,” Opt. Lett. 30(19), 2632–2634 (2005).
[65] S. Sakadzic and L. V. Wang, “High-resolution ultrasound-modulated optical tomography
in biological tissues,” Opt. Lett. 29(23), 2770–2772 (2004).
[66] Z. Shi, R. W. Boyd, R. M. Camacho, P. K. Vudyasetu, and J. C. Howell, “Slow-light
Fourier transform interferometer,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(24), 240801 (2007).

REFERENCES
385
[67] U. Bortolozzo, S. Residori, and J.-P. Huignard, “Slow-light birefringence and polarization
interferometry,” Opt. Lett. 35, 2076–2078 (2010).
[68] O. Matos, M. Calvo, P. Cheben, S. Janz, J. Rodrigo, D.-X. Xu, and A. Delage, “Arrayed
waveguide grating based on group-index modification,” J. Lightwave Technol. 24, 1551–
1557 (2006).
[69] Z. Shi and R. W. Boyd, “Fundamental limits to slow-light arrayed-waveguide-grating
spectrometers,” Opt. Express 21, 7793–7798 (2013).
[70] R. W. Boyd, D. J. Gauthier, A. L. Gaeta, and A. E. Willner, “Maximum time delay
achievable on propagation through a slow-light medium,” Phys. Rev. A 71(2), 023801
(2005).
[71] R. Tucker, P. Ku, and C. Chang-Hasnain, “Delay–bandwidth product and storage density
in slow-light optical buffers,” Electron. Lett. 41(4), 208–209 (2005).
[72] R. W. Boyd and P. Narum, “Slow- and fast-light: fundamental limitations,” J. Mod. Opt.
54(16–17), 2403–2411 (2007).
[73] M. D. Stenner, M. A. Neifeld, Z. Zhu, A. M. Dawes, and D. J. Gauthier, “Distortion
management in slow-light pulse delay,” Opt. Express 13(25), 9995–10002 (2005).
[74] A. Minardo, R. Bernini, and L. Zeni, “Low distortion Brillouin slow light in optical fibers
using AM modulation,” Opt. Express 14(13), 5866–5876 (2006).
[75] T. Schneider, M. Junker, K. Lauterbach, and R. Henker, “Distortion reduction in cascaded
slow light delays,” Electron. Lett. 42, 1110–1111 (2006).
[76] J. B. Khurgin, “Performance limits of delay lines based on optical amplifiers,” Opt. Lett.
31(7), 948–950 (2006).
[77] A. Zadok, A. Eyal, and M. Tur, “Extended delay of broadband signals in stimulated
Brillouin scattering slow light using synthesized pump chirp,” Opt. Express 14(19),
8498–8505 (2006).
[78] Z. Lu, Y. Dong, and Q. Li, “Slow light in multi-line Brillouin gain spectrum,” Opt. Express
15(4), 1871–1877 (2007).
[79] C. Yu, T. Luo, L. Zhang, and A. E. Willner, “Data pulse distortion induced by a slow-light
tunable delay line in optical fiber,” Opt. Lett. 32(1), 20–22 (2007).
[80] G. P. Agrawal, Fiber-Optic Communication Systems, 3rd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 2002), Chapter 4.
[81] J. Downie, “Relationship of Q penalty to eye-closure penalty for NRZ and RZ signals
with signal-dependent noise,” J. Lightwave Technol. 23, 2031–2038 (2005).
[82] D. A. B. Miller, “Fundamental limit to linear one-dimensional slow light structures,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(20), 203903 (2007).
[83] Z. Shi and R. W. Boyd, “Discretely tunable optical packet delays using channelized slow
light,” Phys. Rev. A 79(1), 013805 (2009).
[84] Z. Shi and R. W. Boyd, “Slow-light interferometry: practical limitations to spectroscopic
performance,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer. B 25(12), C136–C143 (2008).


13
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS:
ATTOSECOND STREAKING
SPECTROSCOPY OF ATOMS
AND SOLIDS
Uwe Thumm1, Qing Liao1, Elisabeth M. Bothschafter2,3,
Frederik S¨ußmann2,3, Matthias F. Kling2,3, and
Reinhard Kienberger2,4
1J.R. Macdonald Laboratory, Physics Department, Kansas-State University,
Manhattan, KS, USA
2Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Garching, Germany
3Physik Department, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at, Garching, Germany
4Physik Department, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Garching, Germany
13.1
INTRODUCTION
Irradiation of atoms and surfaces with ultrashort pulses of electromagnetic radiation
leads to photoelectron emission if the incident light pulse has a short enough wave-
length or has sufficient intensity (or both) [1,2]. For pulse intensities sufficiently low
to prevent multiphoton absorption, photoemission occurs provided that the photon
energy is larger than the photoelectron’s binding energy prior to photoabsorption,
ℏ𝜔> IP. Photoelectron emission from metal surfaces was first analyzed by Albert
Einstein in terms of light quanta, which we now call photons, and is commonly known
as the photoelectric effect [3]. Even though the photoelectric effect can be elegantly
interpreted within the corpuscular description of light, for strong fields it can be
equally well described if the incident radiation is represented as a classical electro-
magnetic wave [4,5]. With the emergence of lasers able to generate very intense light,
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
387

388
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
it was soon shown that at sufficiently high intensities (routinely provided by modern
laser systems) the condition ¯h𝜔< IP no longer precludes photoemission. Instead, the
absorption of two or more photons can lead to photoemission, where a single photon
would fail to provide the ionization energy Ip [6]. For more than a century, photoelec-
tron spectroscopy has supplied information about the structure of atoms, molecules,
and solid matter [1, 6, 7]. In conjunction with quantum theory, it was, and contin-
ues to be, instrumental in revealing the microscopic, electronic, and morphological
properties of matter.
Starting in the 1990s, laser technology [8, 9] had advanced to provide intense
pulses of light short enough to resolve the nuclear motion in molecules [10–15] in
experiments using mutually delayed pulses. By varying the delay 𝜏between the first
(pump) pulse and second (probe) pulse, stroboscopic pictures of the nuclear motion
could be obtained by recording a movie-like stroboscopic sequence of events. Typi-
cally, these molecular (or atomic) movies were assembled in a destructive way: The
pump pulse creates an excited state which, over a range of pump-probe delays, is
stroboscopically imaged by dissociative ionization of the molecule (or ionization of
the highly excited atom) by the ultrashort probe pulse, which destroys the particular
sample under study. Typical lengths for the pump and probe pulses in such experi-
ments are of the order of several femtoseconds (1 fs = 10−15 seconds), short enough
to resolve the rotational and vibrational motion of molecules as well as the largely
classical, slow motion of highly excited Rydberg electron wave packets in atoms.
13.1.1
The Advent of Attosecond Physics
More recently, starting in the new millennium, advances in laser technology enabled
attosecond pulses which opened the door to attosecond physics [10,11,16]. Attosec-
ond physics includes (but is not limited to) a variety of phenomena that occur in
strong laser fields. It is thus not surprising that the first attosecond light pulses were
created by the interaction of strong laser fields with gaseous, atomic targets [10,11].
One attosecond is staggeringly short, 1 as = 10−18 seconds, and one attosecond com-
pares to one second in the way one second compares to the age of the universe. The
timescale is so short that light in vacuum, which moves at a speed of 299,792,458 m
s−1, travels only about 0.3 nm (1 nm = 10−9 m) during 1 as. Attosecond physics is
therefore intrinsically connected not only to an ultrashort timescale but also to very
small length scales [16].
Modern laser technology currently provides table-top laser systems in state-of-
the-art laboratories that generate short pulses in the near-infrared (NIR) spectral
range with peak intensities reaching 1022 W cm−2, corresponding to electric field
strengths in the range of 1014 V m–1. Such sources have not yet reached few-cycle
pulse durations and have limited repetition rates in the sub-Hz range. The repetition
rates of laser sources capable of exceeding peak intensities in the 1014 W cm−2 range,
however, reach 10 kHz and higher [13]. Optical parametric chirped-pulse amplifier
(OPCPA) lasers [14] have extended intense short-pulse generation to the mid-infrared
and permit repetition rates in the 100 kHz range [15]. Laser pulses with intensities
up to 1015 W cm−2, in turn, are used to generate ultrashort radiation in the extreme

INTRODUCTION
389
Space (m)
Molecules
Atoms
Nanostructures
Molecules and solids
ΔWelectron/hole ~ sub-eV
ΔWvib ~ milli-eV
ΔWvalence >> 1 eV
ΔWcore >> 10 eV
10–9
10–12
10–15
10–18
10–15
10–12
Attosecond physics
Femtochemistry
Nuclear distance
Time (s)
Electrons
Electrons in
Atoms
Atoms in
FIGURE 13.1
Time and length scales for ultrafast processes. Adapted from Reference 16.
ultraviolet (XUV) and soft X-ray range with pulse lengths down to 70 as [16–18].
While such attosecond pulses enable unprecedented resolution in time, their spectral
width is of the order of several electron volts (eV), and thus tends to compromise
precise measurements in the energy domain.
Which particles move at the speeds corresponding to attosecond timescales?
Nuclear motion in molecules happens on much longer timescales, well above the
attosecond threshold. This is on the order of tens of femtoseconds, or slower
(Fig. 13.1). The study of the formation and breaking of chemical bonds with (longer-
duration) femtosecond laser fields has given rise to the field of Femtochemistry [9].
For phenomena that happen at the attosecond timescale, we must turn to particles
that are much lighter than the protons and neutrons of the nucleus: electrons. Electrons
balance the positive charge of the atomic cores, form the glue for chemical bonds,
and are responsible for electric conduction in solids (to name only a few examples).
As an electron weighs about 1/1836 of a proton [19], their motion can occur much
faster than the motion of nuclei, and they can also react much faster to an external
electromagnetic force. As an example, one roundtrip of an electron in the first Bohr
orbit in atomic hydrogen takes about 152 as [16]. More generally, the energy spacing
of the involved electronic levels, Δ𝜀, directly relates to the timescale of electron
motion as shown in Figure 13.1 [16].
13.1.2
Ultrashort Laser Pulses Exert Well-Defined Electromagnetic Forces
Electrons (as charged particles) are susceptible to electric fields and can thus be driven
by them. As electrons have very little mass, they can be driven at high frequencies,

390
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
FIGURE 13.2
Carrier–envelope phase (CEP) stable, few-cycle pulses at 800 nm. The electric
fields for different CEP values are shown in color. The pulse envelope is indicated as a solid
black line. Reproduced from Reference 27 with the permission of the PCCP Owner Societies.
(For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
orders of magnitude above the current gigahertz–terahertz rates (109–1012 Hz) used
in contemporary electronics. Advances in laser technology have allowed tailoring
the lightwave’s electric field (in the optical spectral region) with sub-femtosecond
precision [20]. If this well-defined force is used to control electron motion, petahertz
(1 pHz = 1015 Hz) lightwave electronics can be realized [21–23].
The electric field of a light pulse in the few-cycle domain may be described as
E (t) = E0 (t) cos(𝜔t + 𝜙CEP)
(13.1)
with envelope E0 (t), carrier frequency 𝜔, and the phase between the carrier wave
and the envelope (carrier–envelope phase, CEP), 𝜙CEP. Examples of few-cycle pulses
with different CEP values are shown in Figure 13.2. To utilize the CEP as a con-
trol parameter, the electric field waveform of a few-cycle laser pulse can either
be stabilized [24] or precisely measured for each laser shot [25, 26]. Light that is
synthesized from ultra-broadband continua (spanning over more than one octave)
permits sculpting of the electric field waveform with subcycle precision [20]. Such
synthesized fields permit the control of electron dynamics on attosecond to femtosec-
ond timescales.
The duration of such short pulses may be monitored with commercial dispersion-
balanced autocorrelators or frequency-resolved optical gating (FROG) devices [28].
One of the most precise ways to determine the subcycle evolution of the electric field
of an intense laser pulse relies on the attosecond streaking technique [29,30], which
will be introduced in Section 13.2.2.
13.1.3
Attosecond Light Pulses Through High Harmonic Generation
In most materials, electrons react so fast to external forces that their motion can be
easily manipulated by a laser’s electromagnetic field. Driven electron motion is at the
heart of high harmonic generation (HHG) and the creation of attosecond light pulses.
HHG is most easily described by way of the three-step model [31]. Here, a strong
laser field (strong enough to distort the Coulomb potential that binds an electron to an

INTRODUCTION
391
(a)
x
e–
e–
Core
(b)
1.2
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–200
Time (as)
FROG-CRAB retrieved
PROOF retrieved
67 ± 2 as
–100
0
100
200
1.0
Wkin
Wb
Wbind
0
0.8
3
0
2
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Normalized intensity
Phase (rad)
FIGURE 13.3
(a) High harmonic generation process illustrated for an atom. Reprinted from
Reference 48 with copyright permission of Annual Reviews. (b) Retrieved pulse duration (with
two retrieval algorithms indicated in the legend, for details see Reference 18) of an isolated
attosecond pulse spanning a spectral range from 55 to 130 eV. Reprinted from Reference 18
with copyright permission of OSA. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate
section.)
atom) results in tunnel ionization where an electron tunnels through a potential barrier
(step 1). This electron is then accelerated in the field-dressed potential (step 2), and
finally recollides with the core. This recollision results not only in the recombination
of the electron with the atom, but also in the emission of high energy photons
(step 3). These photons have energies that are multiples of the photon energy in
the driving laser pulses, see Figure 13.3a. The highest energy photon that can be
generated in this process is given by the classical cut-off formula
Emax = 3.17Up + Ip,
(13.2)
where Ip is the ionization potential of the atom and Up is the ponderomotive potential
given as the average, classical kinetic energy of an electron in the laser’s electric field,
Up =
e2E2
0
4me𝜔2 ,
(13.3)
with elementary charge e, electron mass me, and the peak electric field E0.
The first step requires high electromagnetic field strength and therefore occurs at
(or near) the peaks of the external electric field. This leads to a good synchronization
between the external field and the “birth” time of the electron (when the electron is
emitted into the continuum). In the case of optical fields, this synchronization occurs
on a sub-femtosecond timescale. The three-step HHG process is repetitive and can
occur near each peak of the driving laser field. Considering rare gas targets (or other
targets with inversion symmetry) which are often used in HHG, this periodically
driven electron rescattering process leads (for long driving pulses) to the emission
of very distinct frequency combs with equidistant energy spacing ΔE = 2ℏ𝜔[32].
Attosecond light pulses are generated by selecting and superimposing a sufficiently

392
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
broad spectral range of (very) approximately constant spectral intensity in these
combs, typically by sending the higher harmonic radiation through a thin metal foil.
The generation of attosecond light pulses can be controlled by certain parameters
of the driving laser field such as its polarization, frequency, waveform, envelope,
and intensity, as well properties of the laser–target interaction (type of target, tar-
get density, laser caustic) [16, 33–36]. A wealth of research has been devoted to
the production of attosecond pulses and the use of HHG as a spectroscopic tool to
explore attosecond phenomena in atoms and molecules (cf. [37–41]). Using various
techniques to limit HHG to below a single cycle of the driving pulse, the repeti-
tive character can be interrupted, and isolated attosecond pulses can be generated
[17, 24, 42–44]. These isolated pulses can be characterized by streaking measure-
ments (see Section 13.2.2) and by making use of retrieval algorithms such as FROG-
CRAB (Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating for Complete Reconstruction of Attosec-
ond Bursts) [45,46] or PROOF (Phase Retrieval by Omega Oscillation Filtering) [47].
The current record for the shortest, isolated attosecond pulses is 67 as [18], see Fig-
ure 13.3b, covering a spectral range from 55 to 130 eV.
13.1.4
Time-Resolving Basic Optoelectronic Phenomena on
an Attosecond Scale
Advances in attosecond metrology enabled the resolution in time of photoioniza-
tion processes on their natural time scale (tens of attoseconds) for valence electron
motion in atoms [10, 49, 50] and solids [51, 52]. So far, this was mainly achieved
through pump-probe experiments with intense, ultrashort NIR and XUV pulses of
electromagnetic radiation. This ultrahigh time resolution allows for the unprecedented
observation of an apparent time delay between the detection of multiple photoelec-
trons emitted by the same pulse of XUV photons but from different electronic levels
of atoms and solids. Measured relative time delays for photoemission from different
initial states are of the order of tens of attoseconds or less [52] and constitute accurate
probes for the entirety of photoemission dynamics [51–55].
Time-resolved photoelectron emission experiments carried out by atomic, molecu-
lar, and optical (AMO) physics research groups have established “attosecond physics”
as a promising research area [16,48,56–60]. Since the year 2007, attosecond physics
has started to extend into solid-state physics, with the prospect of allowing the time-
resolved observation of ultrafast electronic processes in metals [51, 52, 61], semi-
conductors, insulators [22, 23, 62, 63], and nanostructures [64–66]. Time-resolved
photoemission experiments at the intrinsic time scales of the correlated dynamics of
two electrons [67–71] or the collective motion of many electrons [61,65,72] promise
unprecedentedly sensitive experimental tests of electronic phenomena in solids and
novel nanodevices [73, 74]. The results of these tests will be relevant to lightwave
electronics and the emerging field of nanophotonics [75].
In this chapter, we review the basic physics behind recent attosecond measure-
ments of electronic dynamics in atoms, solid surfaces, and nanoparticles at a level
accessible to a beginning physics graduate student. We will discuss time-resolved
“dressed” (or “streaked”) photoemission and photoemission delay times based on the

TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
393
comparison of calculated, time-resolved photoelectron spectra [4,51,61,76–86] with
recent experiments [51–53]. Examined on an attosecond timescale, photoemission
from atoms is sensitive to details in the modeling, such as the electronic structure of
the target and the photoemission dynamics. The interplay of experimental and theo-
retical investigations in the field of attosecond physics therefore allows for extremely
sensitive tests which enhance our understanding of electronic and photonic dynam-
ics in matter. As compared to gaseous targets, for solid targets the understanding
of streaked photoelectron spectra is further complicated by the substrate dielectric
response [61] and electron-propagation effects [4,5,77,78] during the laser-assisted
XUV excitation and emission processes. However, these “complications” could pos-
sibly offer a new approach for the time-resolved observation of collective (plasmon)
excitations in large atoms, nanoparticles, and solids. As an added effect for attosecond
time-resolved photoemission from nanometer-sized particles, the influence of local
electric (and magnetic) field enhancements near the particle’s surface needs to be
taken into account [75].
13.2
TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
13.2.1
Emission and Characterization of Photoelectron Wave Packets
Upon absorption of a photon, an atom may release a photoelectron. In this sub-
section, we describe this process for model atoms exposed to short pulses of XUV
radiation (Fig. 13.4a). For simplicity, we only consider one spatial dimension. The
generalization to three spatial dimensions, which more realistically account for the
(a)
Hat
EX
|i >
|i(t) > = |i > e−i  it
ω
ω X
|k(t) > = |k > e−i  kt
ω
|ψPE (t) >
(b)
FIGURE 13.4
(a) Basic scenario for atomic photoionization by an ultrashort XUV pulse.
The electric XUV field, EX, acts on an atom as described by the Hamiltonian Hat and generates
a photoelectron wave packet ||ΨPE (t)⟩. (b) Schematic energy-level diagram. The absorption of
one XUV photon results in electronic excitation from the bound atomic initial state |i⟩with
energy 𝜔i to a superposition of unbound continuum states |k⟩of energy 𝜔k. At large distances
between the photoelectron and the atom, this superposition forms ||ΨPE (t)⟩.

394
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
electronic structure and photoemission dynamics, is conceptually straightforward but
technically more challenging.
We describe the model atom in terms of the atomic Hamilton operator Hat and
assume that the atom is initially in a bound state, |i⟩. Absorption of one XUV photon
with energy 𝜔X > IP ionizes the atom by emitting an electron into a continuum state
with energy 𝜔k and momentum k. Here, and throughout this chapter, we use atomic
units (a.u.), unless stated otherwise, for which ℏ= 1, elementary charge = 1, electron
mass = 1, Bohr radius = 1, 4𝜋𝜀0 = 1. The initial bound and final continuum states of
the active (photo)electron are given as solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation (SE),
Hat ||i >= 𝜔i|| i > Hat ||k >= 𝜔k|| k >.
(13.4)
Disregarding all bound states with the exception of |i⟩, the general state of the
atom after ionization is a superposition of the bound state and continuum states,
|𝜓(t) >= g (t)| i (t) > + ∫dk ak (t) |k (t)⟩.
(13.5)
Designating the electronic potential in the electric field, EX (t), of the XUV
pulse as
VX (t) = −zEX (t) ∝z ∫d𝜔X ̃EX(𝜔X)e−i𝜔xt,
(13.6)
the time-dependent coefficients in (13.5) are obtained by solving the time-dependent
Schr¨odinger equation (TDSE)
i d
dt |𝜓(t)⟩= [Hat + VX (t)]
|𝜓(t)⟩
(13.7)
subject to the initial conditions
g (−∞) = 1,
ak (−∞) = 0.
(13.8)
Consistent with our assumption that just one XUV photon is absorbed, we treat the
XUV pulse as a weak perturbation and neglect couplings between continuum states
by the XUV field. This means that we assume
⟨k|VX|k′⟩≈0.
(13.9)
To first order in VX, the expansion coefficients in (13.5) now follow as
g (t) = 1,
ak (t) = −i
t
∫
−∞
dt′⟨k(t′)|VX|i(t′)⟩.
(13.10)

TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
395
The second term in (13.5) describes the photoelectron wave packet. For sufficiently
large times after the interaction of the XUV pulse with the atom, the wave packet has
moved far enough away from the atom so as to no longer overlap with the initial-state
wavefunction. By combining the second term in Eqs. (13.5), (13.10), and (13.6), the
photoelectron wave packet can be written as
|𝜓PE(t)> ∝∫dk |k⟩⟨k |z| i⟩̃EX(𝜔ki)e−i𝜔kt
(13.11)
that is, in terms of the spectral profile of the XUV pulse, ̃EX, and the dipole
matrix element, ⟨k |z| i⟩, with 𝜔ki = 𝜔k −𝜔i. Both factors are shown schematically in
Figure 13.5. Owing to the limited range of the initial state in the configuration (and
in momentum) representation, the dipole matrix element monotonously decreases
at sufficiently large momenta, k. Assuming an XUV spectral pulse profile with a
pronouced maximum at the momentum kX
max, the photoelectron wave packet has its
strongest spectral component at the momentum kmax close to and slightly red-shifted
from kX
max.
In position representation, the photoelectron wavefunction can be written as
𝜓PE (z, t) ∝∫dk|A (k) | exp(i[arg⟨k|z|i⟩+ kz −𝜔kt]),
(13.12)
where the complex-valued expansion coefficients
A (k) = ⟨k |z| i⟩̃EX
(𝜔ki
)
(13.13)
PE spectral center: kmax
k
<k|z|i>
EX,0
∼
FIGURE 13.5
Sketch of the determinants of a photoelectron wave packet, generated by
XUV photoemission, as a function of the momemtum k: dipole matrix element ⟨k |z| i⟩and
envelope ̃EX,0 (k) of the spectral profile of the XUV pulse electric field ̃EX(𝜔ki). The dominant
spectral contribution to the photoelectron wave packet has the momentum kmax.

396
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
are separated into their magnitude, |A (k)|, and phase, arg (A) = arg (⟨k |z| i⟩). Taylor
expansion of the phase of the dipole matrix element around the dominant momentum
component,
arg ⟨k |z| i⟩= arg ⟨kmax |z| i⟩+ d
dk arg ⟨k |z| i⟩|kmax(k −kmax) + ⋯,
(13.14)
leads to the photoelectron probability density
||𝜓PE (z, t)||
2 ∝||||∫dk |A (k)| exp(i[k(z −zX) −𝜔kt])||||
2
,
(13.15)
where we define
zX = −d
dk arg ⟨k |z| i⟩|kmax.
(13.16)
The distance zX can be thought of as the displacement of the photoelectron wave
packet from a hypothetical reference wave packet with zX = 0, while both wave
packets propagate with the same group velocity, vg = d𝜔k∕dk|kmax, as illustrated in
Figure 13.6.
The time the photoelectron would need to catch up with the reference wave packet
(if the reference wave packet could hypothetically remain stationary in space) defines
the time delay,
tX = zX∕vg = −d
d𝜔arg ⟨k |z| i⟩|kmax,
(13.17)
where we assume free-electron dispersion, 𝜔k = k2∕2, in the last part of the equation.
Such a time delay was first introduced within the context of particle scattering. It can
be related to the width (in energy) of scattering resonances and is often referred to
Hypothetical reference
z
zX
kmax
ΨPE
=
vg =
ω
d  k
dk
FIGURE 13.6
Displacement of the photoelectron wave packet ||𝜓PE (t)⟩, relative to a fictitious
reference wave packet. Both wave packets move with group velocity vg to a photoelectron
detector. A photoemission time delay can be defined as tX = zX∕vg. (For a color version of this
figure, see the color plate section.)

TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
397
< z >
(0,0)
Time
zX
Large t
zX
tX
Extrapol.
Reference
PE
FIGURE 13.7
Interpretation of the photoemission time delay tX, as delayed photoemission,
starting at the position z = 0. Long after the photoemission, the photoelectron is assumed to
move freely and is displaced by zX from a reference wave packet, and its position expectation
value ⟨z⟩= ⟨ΨPE (t) |z| ΨPE (t)⟩is extrapolated to z = 0.
as the “Wigner time delay” [87–89]. Mostly within particle scattering investigations,
several definitions of time delays and so-called “dwell times” were introduced in the
past half century. (For a comprehensive review cf. Reference 90.) For photoemission, a
back-of-the-envelope approximation for the delay time, based on order-of-magnitude
estimates for atomic and XUV parameters, shows that tX is within the attosecond
time domain. For Ip = 10 eV and 𝜔X = 100 eV, kmax ≈2.6 and vg ≈2.4. Taking the
de Broglie wavelength, 2𝜋∕kmax, as an upper limit for zX now results in the upper
limit of 1 a.u. = 24 as for tX.
The delay time, tX, can also be viewed as a delayed start time of a photoelectron
relative to a non-delayed reference photoelectron by comparing the position expec-
tation values of both wave packets (Fig. 13.7) long after ionization [53, 79, 82, 83],
⟨z⟩= lim
n→∞⟨z⟩ref −zX.
(13.18)
13.2.2
Influence of the IR Streaking Field on the Photoemission Process
Measurement of photoionization time delays requires a time reference. In theory, the
time reference can be a reference wave packet, as discussed in Section 13.2.1. In
practice, such a reference can be provided by simultaneously measuring photoemis-
sion from two energetically distinct initial states—of either the same target or two
different targets–in the same streaked photoelectron spectrum. The energy mismatch
of the two initial states needs to be large enough to be distinguishable in the photo-
electron spectrum. For example, in order to measure time delays for photoionization

398
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
of target atoms A out of the bound state |A : i⟩, with an admixture of a gas of refer-
ence atoms B, that are ionized out of the state |B : i⟩, one would measure the relative
time delay ΔtX,A−B = tX,B −tX,A. If the reference time delay tX,B, is known, one can
obtain tX,A. By measuring the time difference relative only to a single reference,
the contributions of tX,B and tX,A to the absolute time delays cancel. However, this
lost information may be (to some extent) recovered by examining relative delays for
different references and under different conditions, for example, with different XUV
pulse parameters [80].
As the simple back-of-the-envelope example given in Section 13.2.1 has shown,
photoionization time delays are of the order of attoseconds and therefore many orders
of magnitude too short to be resolved with state-of-the-art electronics. Instead, yet
another reference is needed. Such a reference is provided by employing a second
pulse of electromagnetic radiation, typically in the IR spectral range, with a fixed,
but variable time delay 𝜏relative to the center of the ionizing XUV pulse (Fig. 13.8).
The IR field modulates the photoelectron energy, and XUV photoelectron energies
obtained as a function of 𝜏are referred as “IR-streaked” photoemission spectra.
Recording XUV photoionization yields, assisted by delayed IR pulses, as a func-
tion of 𝜏generates streaked photoelectron spectra that effectively convert photoe-
mission time delays into photoelectron energy shifts. Thus, relative photoemis-
sion delays can be obtained by analyzing the temporal shift (i.e., the phase shift 𝜏
between two streaking traces in the photoelectron spectrum, as shown schematically in
Figure 13.9a). Assuming, for the time being, that the IR-pulse intensities are small
enough to prevent any distortion of the target’s electronic structure, photoelectron
streaking can be analyzed classically by solving Newton’s equation,
dp
dt = F = −EIR,
(13.19)
for the motion of a photoelectron that is released instantaneously at time 𝜏by the
XUV pulse into the IR electric field EIR (t) with the momentum
p0 =
√
2(𝜔X −𝜔i).
(13.20)
EIR (t)
EX (t)
> 0
τ
FIGURE 13.8
Streaked photoelectron spectra are obtained by recording XUV photoemission
spectra for a range of delays 𝜏between the centers of the XUV pulse and IR laser pulse.

TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
399
XUV-IR delay
Delay (fs)
–4
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Ne
Counts/ΔE
0
4
8
12
(b)
–3 –2 –1
0
1
2
3
4
Relative time delay ΔtX
 ΔtX,2p–2s = (21 ± 5) as
(a)
Center of energy
Energy (eV)
FIGURE 13.9
(a) Illustration of the relative photoemission time delay, ΔtX, for photoion-
ization from two energetically separate atomic levels. The two initial states yield energetically
separated streaking traces in the photoelectron streaking spectrum. ΔtX is obtained from the
phase difference between the centers of energy of the two traces. (b) Measured photoemission
streaking spectrum for XUV photoionization of Ne. The relative photoemission time delay
for emission out of 2s and 2p levels is determined as ΔtX,2p−2s = (21 ± 5). Adapted from
Reference 53. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
For the initial electron momentum (13.20), integration of (13.19) yields the
momentum long after the emitted electron has been subjected to the IR pulse,
p (∞) = p0 −AIR (𝜏) ,
(13.21)
in terms of the IR-pulse vector potential, AIR (𝜏) = ∫∞
𝜏
dtEIR (t). The photoelectron
momentum and energy registered by a photoelectron detector thus oscillate 90◦out
of phase with the IR-laser vector potential as a function of the delay between the
XUV and IR pulses. Figure 13.9b shows as an example a measurement of IR-streaked
XUV photoemission from neon atoms with a measured relative photoemission delay
of ΔtX,2p−2s = (21 ± 5) as [53].
In practice, appropriate peak intensities of the IR streaking field are limited. A
lower limit is given by the need to clearly resolve streaking oscillations (i.e., by the
energy resolution of the photoelectron detector). An upper limit is vaguely defined
as the onset of distortions in the streaking spectra by the streaking IR field. The inter-
pretation of streaked photoemission thus requires an understanding of the influence
of the measurement itself (time to energy mapping in the IR field) on the measured
observables: photoemission spectra and time delays. In the following subsections, we
discuss this basic concern of quantum measurement. We will separately discuss effects
that distortions of the initial and final quantum mechanical state of the active electron
by the streaking electric field may have on photoemission spectra and time delays.
13.2.2.1
Initial-State Perturbation
We examine the effect of a weak IR streaking
field
EIR (t) = EIR,0 cos(𝜔IRt + 𝜙CEP)
(13.22)

400
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
|i(t)> = |i > e−i  it
ω
|e(t)> = |e > e−i  et
ω
|k(t)> = |k > e−i  kt
ω
ω X
ω IR
ω
Δei(  IR)
FIGURE 13.10
Schematic energy level diagram for XUV photoionization of an atom by
absorption of a single XUV photon with energy 𝜔i in the presence of a streaking IR laser field
of energy 𝜔IR. The streaking field perturbs the initial state |i⟩by coupling it to an excited state
|e⟩that is detuned from resonance by Δei(𝜔IR).
on streaked photoemission for model atoms with two bound, in which the excitation
energy from a state |i⟩to an excited state |e⟩is detuned by the energy Δei(𝜔IR) from
the photon energy 𝜔IR of the IR field (Fig. 13.10). The influence of the IR field on
the initial state of the target results in replacing the unperturbed initial state |i⟩in
Figure 13.10 by the state
||𝜓i (t) >= g (t)|| i (t) > +h (t) |e (t)⟩.
(13.23)
For the initial condition g (–∞) = 1, h (–∞) = 0, the TDSE for the active electron,
including intra-atomic forces, accounted for by the Hamiltonian Hat and the force the
photoelectron experiences in the IR laser field (in dipole approximation),
i d
dt
|||𝜓i (t) >= [Hat −zEIR (t)]||| 𝜓i (t) >
(13.24)
yields, to first order in EIR,
g (t) = 1, h (t) = iEIR,0 ⟨e |z| i⟩sin(Δeit∕2)
Δei
ei(Δeit∕2−𝜙CEP).
(13.25)
Retracing the steps that lead to the photoelectron wave packet in Eq. (13.11), we
see that the effect of the IR field on the photoelectron effectively amounts to replacing
the dipole matrix element ⟨k |z| i⟩in (13.11) by
⟨k |z| i⟩
[
1 + iEIR,0
⟨k |z| e⟩⟨e |z| i⟩
⟨k |z| i⟩
sinΔei
Δei
ei(Δei∕2−𝜔ei)𝜏−i𝜙CEP
]
= ⟨k |z| i⟩[1 + B] ,
(13.26)

TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
401
where B is defined as the delay-dependent, complex-valued second term inside the
second factor. Replacing the dipole matrix element in the XUV photoemission delay
(13.17) with (13.26) and neglecting the influence of the IR field on both kmax and vg
yields the photoemission delay
tX,IR ≈tX −Re(B)
vg
d
dkarg {⟨k |z| e⟩−⟨k |z| i⟩} |kmax
(13.27)
in which the IR electric field appears as an additive, linear perturbation (second
term) to the unperturbed delay tX. The IR-field-dependent term is largest at reso-
nance, where Δei = 0. It oscillates with the XUV-IR delay so that within this per-
turbative analysis, (i.e., for sufficiently small EIR,0) the influence of the streaking
field on the photoemission time delay tends to cancel (on average) over one IR
period. The oscillation occurring with the delay is a result of measuring tX and dis-
torts the sinusoidal behavior of the streaking traces in the photoelectron spectra as
predicted—without taking the streaking field into account—by Eq. (13.21). As an
example of the signature of the initial-state perturbation on streaked photoemission
spectra, Figure 13.11 shows numerical results obtained for one-dimensional, model
hydrogen atoms in which the electron and nucleus interact via the soft-core Coulomb
potential
V (x) =
−1
√
x2 + a2
.
(13.28)
The parameter a is adjusted to the ionization energy of hydrogen atoms (13.6 eV).
The calculation was performed with the following parameters: for the XUV pulses,
a central energy of 25 eV and a pulse length of 200 as were used; for the streaking
IR pulses, a wavelength of 800 nm at a peak intensity of 2 × 1012 W cm−2 and
a pulse length of 5 fs [80] were employed. For photoionization from the relatively
strongly bound ground state, the streaking field’s effect on both the photoelectron
spectrum and the streaking trace’s center of energy is very small (Fig. 13.11a–c). In
contrast, for photoionization from the model atom’s first excited state, the streaking
field severely distorts the central energy and the sinusoidal shape of the unperturbed
streaking trace (Fig. 13.11d–f).
13.2.2.2
Final-State Interactions
In deriving the streaking momentum of the
emitted photoelectron in Eq. (13.21), we assumed that the active electron is instan-
taneously released by the absorption of one XUV photon, and that the photoelectron
continues to move classically solely under the influence of the electric field it expe-
riences in the IR streaking pulse. All other forces, such as the interaction of the
photoelectron with the residual ion, are excluded in this approach. The implemen-
tation of this idea—the sudden release of a photoelectron and subsequent disregard
of all but the IR-laser field—within a quantum mechanical model is straightforward
and referred to as “strong-field approximation (SFA)” (Fig. 13.12) [4, 80, 91]. The

402
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
16
14
XUV photoemission from ground state
XUV photoemission from first excited state
Polarized
Unpolarized
Polarized
Unpolarized
12
10
8
24
22
20
18
16
14
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
12
8
4
16
12
8
4
28
24
20
16
12
28
24
20
16
12
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
Photoelectron energy (eV)
Photoelectron energy (eV)
ECOE (eV)
ECOE (eV)
4
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
4
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
4
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
4
FIGURE 13.11
The effect of initial-state perturbation (here referred to as “polarization”) by
the IR streaking field on XUV photoemission from the ground state of an 1D model hydrogen
atom for ℏ𝜔X = 25 eV XUV pulses with a pulse length of 300 as. (a) Spectrogram including
initial state polarization. (b) Spectrogram without initial state polarization. (c) Correspond-
ing central energies ECOE (𝜏) obtained as first moments in energy from the streaking traces.
(d, e, f) Same as (a, b, c) for XUV photoionization from the first excited state of the model
hydrogen atom. Adapted from Reference 80. (For a color version of this figure, see the color
plate section.)
SFA takes advantage of the fact that the TDSE for the motion of an electron that is
exposed solely to an oscillating electromagnetic field can be solved analytically. The
corresponding closed-form solutions are the so-called Volkov states [6,92]
|k (t) >Volkov= ||k + AIR (t)⟩eiΦ(t).
(13.29)

TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
403
EIR (t)
|k(t) >Volkov
|i(t) > = |i > e–i  it
ω
t ≈τ
X
ω
FIGURE 13.12
Schematic energy level diagram for XUV photoemission at the specific
XUV–IR delay 𝜏. In strong-field approximation, the final photoelectron state |k (t) >Volkov is
modeled as an eigenstate of the photoelectron in the electric field, EIR (t) of the IR laser field.
The Volkov phase
Φ (t) = −1
2
t
∫dt′ [k2 + 2kAIR(t′) + AIR(t′)2]
(13.30)
includes three terms with a distinct physical meaning. The first term simply corre-
sponds to the kinetic energy, k2∕2, of a free electron with momentum k. The second
and third terms depend on the streaking field. The second term represents the energy
shift that the active electron experiences due to the streaking field and explains the
energy oscillations in photoelectron streaking spectra with kAIR (𝜏). This is consistent
with the classical derivation of the final photoelectron momentum in Eq. (13.21). The
third (so-called “ponderomotive”) term is the energy associated with the photoelec-
tron’s quiver motion in the streaking field and can be neglected for typical streaking
field intensities.
The SFA allows photoemission streaking spectra to be easily modeled in quantum
mechanical calculations by replacing the free final state of the photoelectron in
Eq. (13.10), |k (t)⟩, with the Volkov state (13.29) [4,5,80,91]. Since the oscillatory
behavior of the streaking traces is explained by the Volkov phase (13.30) alone,
the question arises to what extent photoemission streaking spectra and time delays
are affected by replacing the free-electron momentum eigenstate |k⟩, in the phase
arg ⟨k |z| i⟩of the dipole matrix element in Eqs. (13.12) and (13.13) with the state
||k + AIR (𝜏)⟩corresponding to the electron’s kinematic momentum in the field. We
seek an answer to this question by expanding the phase of the IR-field-dressed
dipole matrix element in both, AIR,0 and the momentum difference k – kmax. Since
k-independent terms do not change the photoelectron probability density (13.15), we
do not keep these terms and obtain
arg ⟨k + AIR (𝜏) |z| i⟩= −{zX + ΔzIR (𝜏)} k + O
(
A2
IR,0; [k −kmax]2)
,
(13.31)
with the definition
ΔzIR (𝜏) = d2
dk2 arg < k |z| i > |kmaxAIR (𝜏) .
(13.32)

404
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
The presence of the streaking field thus adds the displacement ΔzIR to the IR-
field-free displacement zIR in Eq. (13.16) and Figure 13.6. Consequently, the IR field
changes the field-free photoemission time delay tX in Eq. (13.17) to
tX,IR (𝜏) = zX + ΔzIR (𝜏)
vg + AIR (𝜏) = tX + ΔtIR (𝜏) + O
(
A2
IR,0
)
,
(13.33)
with the first-order correction
ΔtIR (𝜏) = ΔzX
vg
−tX
AIR (𝜏)
vg
.
(13.34)
The first term in the IR-field-induced temporal shift, ΔtIR, corresponds to the extra
time the photoelectron needs to cover the displacement ΔzIR at the group velocity vg.
The second term accounts for the IR-laser-induced change of the group velocity in the
denominator of Eq. (13.33). ΔtIR oscillates with the XUV–IR delay 𝜏, and vanishes
in the average over one IR period (for sufficiently long IR pulses). Averaged over the
IR-laser period, the change of the phase in (13.31), ΔzIR (𝜏) k, due to a weak streaking
field therefore does not affect relative photoemission time delays. IR-laser-induced
changes in (13.31) can, however, modify the shape of the photoelectron dispersion
wave packet in streaking traces; this is similar to the effect of initial-state distortions
discussed above (cf. Fig. 13.11).
13.2.2.3
Coulomb–Laser Interactions
For theoretical studies of streaked photo-
electron spectra and photoemission time delays, the SFA is a convenient scheme
thanks to a particularly simple representation of the photoelectron’s final state.
The availability of a closed-form expression for the final-state wavefunction of
the photoelectron facilitates photoemission calculations significantly. In addition,
quantum-mechanical photoemission streaking calculations with Volkov final states
yield streaking traces that follow, without distortion, the laser vector potential. This is
in agreement with the simple classical result for the final photoelectron momentum,
Eq. (13.21). In order to examine to what extent effects that are not accounted for in
the SFA influence streaked photoemission spectra, we proceed by using the results
of the SFA calculations as a reference [80].
An important shortcoming of the SFA is its complete neglect of the interac-
tion between the emitted electron and the residual, positively charged ion. In order
to include this interaction (i.e., both the influence of the streaking laser’s electric
field and the residual ion’s Coulomb field) on the motion of the photoelectron,
we seek an approximation for the full Coulomb–Volkov final-state wavefunction
that goes beyond the SFA. For clarity and simplicity, we continue to illustrate our
discussion with numerical results of a one-dimensional simulation of the photoion-
ization process. For a single-active-electron description in full dimensionality, see
Reference 93.
From the SFA analysis, we learned that the streaking of photoelectron energies in
the IR-laser electric field is approximately represented by the phase of the final-state

TIME-RESOLVED PHOTOEMISSION FROM ATOMS
405
wavefunction. Taking the SFA as a guide, we now write the final-state wavefunction
as
𝜓EA
k
(x, t) ∼e−ik2t∕2−iSEA(x,t)
(13.35)
and split the action function, SEA, into two parts—the known action in the SFA, SSFA,
and a to-be-determined action, SCL,
SEA = SSFA + SCL.
(13.36)
In order to determine SCL, we apply the semiclassical eikonal approximation (EA)
[6,80,93]. In the EA, the quantum mechanical wavefunction is written in the form of
Eq. (13.35), and the action, SEA, is determined classically by calculating the phase
accumulation along classical electron trajectories xfree(x, t′) = x + k(t −t′) that start
at position x at time t. For the motion of photoelectrons subjected to the potential of
the residual ion, VIon (x), and the laser electric field, the accumulated “Coulomb-laser
(CL)” phase (13.36) is given by [80]
SCL (x, t) =
∞
∫
t
dt′ 𝛿VIon
[xfree
(x, t′)]
𝛿xfree
Δx (t′) + O
(
A2
IR,0
)
.
(13.37)
In classical mechanics (expressed in terms of action and angle variables), the
negative time derivative of an action results in an energy [94]. Here, the time derivative
of SEA with (13.37) results in the expression
𝛿EEA (x, 𝜏) = −𝛿SEA (x, t)
𝛿t
|||||𝜏
= −
[
k +
||VIon (x)||
k
]
AIR (𝜏)
+
∞
∫
−𝜏
dt
𝛿VIon
[x′ (t)]
𝛿x′
AIR (t)
(13.38)
for the energy shift in the IR streaking field. The first term in this formula is the
familiar streaking shift in SFA,
𝛿ESFA (𝜏) = −𝛿SSFA (t)
𝛿t
|||||𝜏
= −kAIR (𝜏) .
(13.39)
The second and third terms include the combined interaction of the photoelectron
with the laser and Coulomb fields. In our numerical applications for typical streaking
parameters [80], we find that the third term can be neglected in comparison with the
second term.
In order to reveal changes—relative to the SFA predictions—in the streaking
amplitude and photoemission delay due to the simultaneous interaction of the emitted

406
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
photoelectron with the Coulomb and IR-laser fields, we fit local amplitude and delay
functions, K(x) and ΔtX (x), to the streaking shift (13.38),
𝛿EEA (x, 𝜏) = −K (x) AIR
[𝜏−ΔtX (x)] .
(13.40)
Numerical tests for streaked photoemission from one-dimensional model hydro-
gen atoms with the soft-core Coulomb potential (13.28) [80] show dominant con-
tributions to the local streaking shift at x = 0 where the initial-state wavefunction is
localized. Numerical results for the same target atom also show very close agreement
between the EA and full TDSE solutions, while TDSE calculations deviate noticeably
from results obtained in SFA.
Figures 13.13a and b show streaked photoemission spectra for an IR field with a
peak intensity of 2 × 1012 W cm−2. Here, the XUV pulses have a pulse length of
300 as and central photon energies of 90 eV (Fig. 13.13a) and 25 eV (Fig. 13.13b).
Figure 13.13c shows the corresponding centers of energy relative to the SFA shift
(13.39). The centers of energy are evaluated as first moments of the streaking traces
in Figures 13.13a and 13.13b, respectively. The two curves are shifted by 50 as. The
deviation from the SFA results for ℏ𝜔X = 90 eV are smaller than for 25 eV, as one
80
90
70
20
15
10
5
2
0
–2
–4
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
1.16
1.12
1.08
TDSE
EA
TDSE
EA
1.04
K/k
1
30
45
60
75
90
Kinetic energy (eV)
ECOE (eV)
δ
ΔtX (as)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
–2
–1
0
1
Relative time delay (fs)
2
h  X (eV)
ω
FIGURE 13.13
Streaked photoemission from model hydrogen atoms. Results obtained by
numerically solving the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation (TDSE) for XUV pulses with
(a) ℏ𝜔X = 90 eV and (b) 25 eV. (c) Corresponding center-of-energy shifts 𝛿ECOE (𝜏) for
ℏ𝜔X = 90 eV (solid line) and 25 eV (dashed line). To facilitate the identification of the temporal
shifts Δt × 𝛿ECOE(𝜏, ℏ𝜔X = 90 eV) is normalized to the ℏ𝜔X = 25 eV result. (d) ΔtX (x = 0)
and (e) oscillation amplitude K (x = 0) in Eq. (13.40) relative to the strong-field approximation
(SFA) for TDSE (full line) and eikonal-approximation (EA, dashed line) calculations. Adapted
from Reference 80.

STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
407
would expect in view of faster photoelectrons being affected less by their interaction
with the residual ion.
In Figures 13.13d and e we compare the EA results with the TDSE results for
XUV photon energies between 25 and 90 eV. Figure 13.13d compares the change in
photoemission time delay relative to the SFA photoemission delay, obtained by fitting
Eq. (13.40) and evaluated at x = 0, with the prediction of full TDSE calculations.
Figure 13.13e shows the amplitude K (x = 0) in EA relative to the SFA streaking
amplitude k obtained by fitting Eq. (13.40) to Eq. (13.38). The EA and TDSE results
are in good agreement and converge, as expected, to the SFA results for higher
photoelectron energies.
13.3
STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
13.3.1
Principle and Setup for Fs to Sub-Fs Time-Resolved Experiments
on Surfaces
NIR-dressed, attosecond XUV-photoemission spectroscopy, as described in the pre-
vious sections, can be used to investigate fs to sub-fs dynamics in solids. In order to
apply this spectroscopic method to the study of surface-electron dynamics, special
experimental conditions are necessary which are introduced here first. We then review
some benchmark experimental results achieved with this method [52,95,96], which
shall give a taste of the exciting insights into surface dynamics and spectroscopy that
can be expected when investigating the ultrafast interaction of solid-state systems
with attosecond light pulses.
The most direct access to electron dynamics in regions near a surface is granted
by photoemission, since the typical escape depth (taken as the electron mean-free
path (MFP), 𝜆) of photoelectrons excited by XUV photons is in the range of
5–10 ˚A, which corresponds to only two to three lattice constants [97]. Conceptu-
ally, the simplest way to resolve attosecond dynamics by photoemission would be to
perform pump-probe measurements using attosecond XUV pulses for both triggering
and probing excitations in the substrate as it is done in the femtosecond domain with
UV two-photon photoemission (cf. [98]). However, this approach is so far stymied by
the low intensities available from contemporary high harmonic (HH) light sources.
Nevertheless, a high time resolution can be achieved by using the attosecond streaking
technique, where single-photon photoionization is initiated by an XUV pulse in the
presence of a strong NIR laser field. If the duration of the XUV-induced photoelectron
wave packet becomes shorter than half the period of the dressing field (∼1.3 fs for
NIR pulses) the wave packet’s energy is modified according to the vector potential
of the dressing field at the instant of emission. This technique was introduced in
Section 13.2.2 as a tool for characterizing light pulses and electronic dynamics with
sub-fs time resolution.
The NIR-induced energy shift in streaked electron spectra is highly dependent on
the time when the electrons enter the laser-dressed continuum. Therefore, relative
photoemission time delays, ΔtX, between the release of photoelectrons from different

408
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
Z 
X 
Y 
Load-lock
system 
LEED 
Knudsen cell 
Sputter gun
Gas doser 
Desorption
 sensor
Sample 
TOF 
HEA 
Two-component
mirror
X-ray
source
Gas  
nozzle 
CCD 
Entry
port
MCP 
CCD 
FIGURE 13.14
Apparatus for attosecond photoemission experiments in UHV. The sample is
transferred from ambient into the preparation chamber (left), where an atomically clean surface
can be prepared under UHV conditions. The UHV conditions are achieved and maintained
by combining standard turbomolecular pumps (Turbo) with liquid nitrogen-cooled titanium
sublimation pumps (TSPs) and high temperature bake-out after each venting procedure. The
quality of the surface preparation can be monitored with low-energy electron diffraction
(LEED). Atomic mono- and multilayers of various materials can be evaporated onto the sample
with a Knudsen cell and calibrated with a desorption sensor. The attosecond photoemission
experiments are performed in a second UHV chamber (right), which is connected to the
NIR–XUV beamline and incorporates two electron energy analyzers, a simple time-of-flight
(TOF) electron spectrometer, and a hemispherical analyzer (HEA) for resolving the lateral
momentum. The various degrees of freedom for the positioning of individual components
are indicated by dashed arrows (from Reference 95 with copyright permission of Springer).
A charge-coupled device (CCD) combined with a XUV-sensitive multichannel plate detector
(MCP) allows for detection and optimization of the XUV beam profile before sending both the
XUV and NIR beams on the two-component mirror.
electronic states in a solid can be resolved by varying the relative delay, 𝜏, between
the NIR and XUV pulses, since any time delay in emission will be mapped in
streaked photoemission spectra as a relative shift between the streaking traces along
the NIR–XUV delay axis (cf. Section 13.2.2).
The typical experimental setup necessary for attosecond streaking measurements
on solids as presented in Reference 95 is summarized in Figure 13.14: HH radiation
is generated by exposing neon atoms to intense, waveform-controlled, few-cycle NIR
laser pulses (violet beam). A thin metal filter spatially separates the low-divergence
XUV radiation (blue beam) from the residual NIR light. The two collinear beams are
reflected by a two-component mirror. The outer portion of this mirror is fixed and
focuses the NIR pulses onto the sample while the inner part serves as a band-pass
reflector in order to filter isolated sub-fs XUV pulses from the HH cutoff continuum.
Moving the inner mirror back and forth changes the length of the pathway for the
XUV pulses and therefore introduces a delay between the XUV and NIR pulses. This
is made possible by a piezo-electric translation stage onto which the inner mirror
is mounted. Both pulses are spatially and temporally overlapped on the sample
surface positioned in the focus of the double mirror assembly [99]. The kinetic

STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
409
energies of the XUV-induced photoelectrons emitted along the surface normal are
analyzed by a TOF spectrometer as a function of the relative delay between the NIR
and XUV pulses.
Due to the high surface sensitivity of XUV photoemission, the experiments must
be performed under excellent ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions (base pressure
<10−10 mbar) to avoid the disrupting influence of adsorbed atomic impurities on the
surface [100]. The end-station used for the experiments presented in the next section
is divided into two segments. The first chamber accommodates several surface-
science diagnostic tools such as a sputter gun, evaporators, a gas-dosing system, and
a LEED system, which are necessary for preparing and characterizing atomically
clean, single-crystal surfaces and well-defined adsorbate layers [97]. Sample transfer
from the ambient into the UHV system is enabled by a load-lock system. The sample
is mounted on a motorized, 360◦rotatable XYZ manipulator. Full temperature control
of the sample (in the range of ∼10–2500 K) is provided by an integrated flow-cryostat
(operated with liquid helium) and the combination of heating filaments with a variable
sample potential up to ∼1 kV. The second chamber is connected to the NIR–XUV
beamline and is dedicated to attosecond streaking experiments. It houses different
electron analyzers (e.g., TOF or hemispherical energy analyzer, HEA) and the double-
mirror assembly. A cross-sectional view of the UHV system is schematically depicted
in Figure 13.14.
13.3.2
Photoemission Delay Measured for Tungsten Surfaces
In the case of multiple, distinct emission lines in the photoelectron spectrum, the
attosecond streaking technique can be used to compare the characteristics of pho-
toelectrons originating from the different states. For example, the photoelectron
spectrum of a (110)-oriented tungsten surface obtained with attosecond XUV pulses
(Fig. 13.15) shows two distinct peaks originating from 5d/6sp valence/conduction
band (VB, CB) electrons and 4f/5p core levels. By employing the attosecond streak-
ing technique, the relative timing of the photoelectron emission, the instant when
they leave the surface, can be determined.
As is illustrated in Figure 13.16, photoelectrons leaving the surface at different
instants are subjected to different phases of the streaking field. It is possible to extract
an effective emergence time for the electrons using the waveform-controlled streaking
field [30]. Here, we ignore the streaking field inside the solid which, due to the metal’s
optical properties, is weak [101]. As a result, the effective delay in photoemission
can be reconstructed from the spectrograms.
A tungsten (110) surface was the sample used in the first proof-of-principle exper-
iment [51]. From clean W(110), two nearly parallel spectrograms are observed that
originate from different electronic bands, the 5d valence and 6sp conduction band,
and the 4f/5p core level band, which are emitted with different kinetic energies
(Fig. 13.17a). The large bandwidth of the excitation pulse does not allow separation
of the 4f/5p, and the 5d/6sp intensities, respectively. However, due to their com-
paratively small ionization cross-sections and densities of states, the 5p and 6sp
contributions are minor, and the spectra are dominated by 5d valence and 4f core

410
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Kinetic energy (eV)
Photoelectron counts (a.u.)
 
 
XUV + IR
XUV only
ATI
FIGURE 13.15
Raw photoelectron spectra of tungsten (110) measured with (red curve) and
without (blue curve) the presence of the probe NIR streaking field using 91 eV, XUV photons.
The spectra show two distinct peaks originating from 5d/6sp valence and 4f/5p core levels
at ∼83 and ∼56 eV, respectively. In the presence of the NIR probe field, there is an intense
photoelectron signal below 35 eV induced by above threshold ionization (ATI). Each spectrum
was obtained by integration over 60,000 laser pulses (from Reference 95 with permission of
John Wiley & Sons). (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
emission lines. Both spectrograms show the change in electron energy correspond-
ing to the evolution of the electric field of the NIR streaking pulse. Figure 13.17b
shows a center-of-mass (COM) analysis of the spectrograms. For this analysis, the
time-dependent COM of both emission lines were calculated in a global fit of the
function:
COM (𝜏) = ae−4 ln(2) (𝜏−t0−ΔtX)2
FWHM2
sin(𝜔𝜏+ 𝜙CEP −𝜔ΔtX) + offset,
(13.41)
where a and offset denote the respective streaking amplitudes and the time-
independent positions of the emission lines, respectively. t0 and FWHM denote center
and full width at half maximum of the Gaussian-shaped envelope of the streaking
field, respectively, and 𝜙CEP gives its carrier envelope offset phase. The relative
photoemission delay ΔtX accounts for a temporal shift between the spectrograms of
both emission lines. The fit results are shown as solid lines in Figure 13.17b, and a
temporal shift in the streaking of ΔtX = 85 ± 45 as is extracted. This result is in good
agreement with the initial study, where the valence electrons were found to be emitted
approximately 100 as earlier than their tightly bound core-state counterparts [51].

Few-cycle
infrared (IR)
laser pulse
IR
E(t1)
E(t2)
Δv1
Δv2
Δt = t2 – t1
t1
t1
t0
t2
Fast electron
Slow electron
IR
XUV
XUV
Experiment geometry
(a)
Fast electron escapes
(c)
(b) Electrons released by XUV pulse
(d) Slow electron escapes
Attosecond
extreme
ultraviolet
(XUV) pulse
FIGURE 13.16
Attosecond spectroscopy on solids: Electrons arriving at the surface at different instants are subjected to different phases of
the streaking field outside the metal. In panel (a) an isolated attosecond XUV pulse and a delayed few-cycle, waveform-controlled streaking
field are incident on a solid surface. In panel (b), at time t0, the XUV pulse is absorbed in the solid and two types of photoelectrons are born,
for simplicity one photoelectron is called “slow,” the other “fast”. In panel (c), at time t1, the fast electron has propagated to the surface and
is now subjected to the strong streaking field, which modulates its outgoing kinetic energy which is dependent on the instant of release. In
panel (d) at time t2, the slow electron has reached the surface and feels the strong streaking field on the vacuum side; since it has emerged at
a different time, the modulation of its kinetic energy will vary depending on the precise delay in emission. By evaluation of the full streaking
spectrograms, collected as a function of relative delay between the attosecond XUV pulse and the streaking field, the delay in photoemission
can be determined. Compared to streaking experiments at isolated particles, detailed models of electron localization, and electron and photon
transport and interactions in the surface are necessary for the evaluation of such spectrograms correct: (from Reference 96 with permission
of John Wiley & Sons).
411

412
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
−4
−2
0
2
4
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Kinetic energy (eV)
Photoelectron counts (a.u.)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
−4
–2
0
2
4
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Energy shift (norm.)
(b)
85  35 as
XUV-IR delay   (fs)
XUV-IR delay   (fs)
(a)
fit CB
fit 4f
COM CB
COM 4f
FIGURE 13.17
(a) Raw attosecond streaking technique spectrogram of a tungsten (110)
surface. Photoelectron intensities are given in arbitrary units. (b) Center-of-mass (COM) anal-
ysis of the spectrogram. The COM of both emission lines measured are given as dots, and a
global fit to both COM traces is shown in solid lines (from Reference 96 with permission of
John Wiley & Sons). (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
These results demonstrate the technical capability of measuring photon-induced
electron release, electron transport through the topmost atomic layers of a solid
sample, and emission into the vacuum in real time, with attosecond temporal reso-
lution. Explaining the state-dependent differences of the emission dynamics seen in
the streaking experiment is unfortunately a much more challenging task for metal
surfaces than for gaseous targets [30].
13.3.3
Theoretical Modeling of Attosecond Photoemission from Tungsten
Four different theoretical approaches explaining the dynamics seen in this W(110)
experiment have been put forward, all yielding delayed emission between the core
and valence electrons varying from 42 to 110 as. The first theoretical approach by
Cavalieri et al. [51] explained the delayed emission of the core electrons by different
group velocities of the final states. Assuming the validity of the static band-structure
picture, the authors showed that for the photon energy of the experiment (91 eV) the
final-state bands of the valence electrons exhibit stronger dispersion than those of
the core electrons. As a result, a smaller effective mass, larger group velocity, and

STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
413
more rapid transport were extracted for the valence electrons, explaining the observed
timing. As for the theoretical models discussed below, a critical point of this model
was the application of the static band structure.
Considering this, in a second study Kazansky and Echenique have investigated the
relative contributions of final- and initial-state effects on the observed dynamics [78].
In their revised quantum model, they treat core electrons as localized, and valence
electrons as completely delocalized. Attenuation by inelastic scattering is taken into
account in addition to electron–hole interaction for the inner-shell levels (but not for
valence states). The streaking field inside the metal is set to zero. Pseudopotentials
obtained for copper are used to model electron transport in tungsten. Calculations
based on this one-dimensional theory also reproduce the experimentally obtained
results quite well. Compared with the first approach, however, the relative magnitudes
of final- and initial-state effects are reversed.
The authors show that different final state energies for core and valence emission
contribute only 10 as to the net relative photoemission delay. To understand this, it
must be remembered that the initial energies for valence and core states are different;
therefore, their final kinetic energies will be different even if absorbing the same
XUV photon. However, standardizing the final energy of core emission to match
with that of valence band emission induces only 10 as to the relative delay mentioned
above. As this factor is minor it is largely ignored, and the observed relative delay
is attributed to the contrast in wavefunction localization between the core-level and
valence-band states.
A third theoretical study by Lemell et al. models the attosecond streaking experi-
ment within a classical electron-transport approach [77]. Quantum effects enter this
classical calculation via a stochastic force Fstoc(t) containing elastic and inelastic
scattering with tungsten cores as well as with conduction electrons. Other forces
changing the electrons’ momenta result from the NIR streaking field, which pene-
trates ∼85 layers of the solid in their model, and from the potential barrier at the
surface. Rather detailed assumptions are made concerning the properties of the vari-
ous involved electronic states. The authors discriminate 5p and 4f core electrons and
5d and 6s valence electrons, and treat only the 6s band as delocalized. Elastic scatter-
ing cross-sections, used as input for the classical calculation, are calculated with the
ELSEPA package [102]. Inelastic scattering cross-sections and angular distributions
of inelastically scattered electrons are obtained from the momentum distribution and
energy-dependent dielectric constant of tungsten. Two limiting cases are considered
for the final states: (i) a free-particle dispersion relation and (ii) the group-velocity
distribution (cf. supplementary material in [51]). Depending on these two alterna-
tives, emission of the core electrons is found to be delayed from 42 as (case i) to 110
as (case ii). The authors point out, however, that the group-velocity distribution from
Reference 79 had to be blue-shifted by 8 eV to obtain the maximum effect. For the
limiting case (i), the larger emission depth of core electrons and inelastic scattering of
valence electrons (which enter into the energy region of the core photoelectrons) are
the main sources of the observed delay. This occurs as these electrons require addi-
tional time to escape, again due to inelastic scattering. These electrons are missing
in the valence streaking trace, but are included in the core streaking trace. We note

414
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
that the authors address possible extensions of their model, particularly the inclu-
sion of local field enhancements at the surface (due to plasmon excitation), which
might affect emission and transport of localized and delocalized states differently
(cf. Section 13.4).
Here, we will detail the fourth, quantum-mechanical study by Zhang and Thumm
[4, 5], since the main characteristics of streaked photoemission from solid metal
surfaces can be understood within a quantum mechanical, one-active-electron model
that includes simplifying assumptions. Compared to Reference 78, the authors include
the streaking field inside the solid. Solving Helmholtz’ equation for the IR electric
field, they calculate a skin depth (∼100 ˚A) that is much larger than the electrons’ MFP,
𝜆(∼5 ˚A). The precise value of the skin depth is then irrelevant, since photoelectrons
originating at a distance from the surface of more than a few times 𝜆do not contribute
noticeably to the measured photocurrent. The interaction of the photoelectron with
the streaking IR field is treated non-perturbatively, and the photoemission by the XUV
pulse is treated in first-order perturbation theory. The initial states are assumed as
fully localized core and fully delocalized valence electrons. Core-level photoelectrons
from different lattice layers are added coherently to the photoemission yield. Within
this model, the interference between photoelectron emissions from 4f core levels
(that are localized in different lattice planes parallel to the surface) is the main source
of the delay. For this relative delay between core-level and CB emission they obtain
110 as, a value compatible with the experiment.
Apart from restricting the electron dynamics to one active electron, simplifying
assumptions in the model of Zhang and Thumm [4,5] are included in their represen-
tation of (i) the initial state of the active electron, (ii) the propagation of the released
photoelectron into the bulk and near the surface, and (iii) the final photoelectron
states in terms of a modified Volkov wave (13.29). To further simplify the discussion
and remain consistent with the numerical modeling [4,76,86,91,95,103] of recently
performed experiments on tungsten [51], platinum [104], rhenium [96], and magne-
sium [52] surfaces, they assume linearly polarized, grazingly incident XUV and IR
pulses with electric field vectors that may be approximated as being perpendicular to
the surface.
Due to the large XUV photon energy, XUV photoemission by one or several XUV
photons can easily be distinguished in streaked photoelectron spectra. As for the
description of photoelectron wave packets in Section 13.2, we therefore accurately
model XUV photoabsorption in the first-order perturbation theory. The transition
amplitude for absorption of a single XUV photon resulting in the emission of an elec-
tron from an initial Bloch state, |Ψ⃗k (t) >= |||Ψ⃗k
⟩e
−i𝜀⃗kt, with the crystal momentum
⃗k, and energy 𝜀⃗k, of a metal substrate to an IR-field-dressed final continuum state,
|Ψf >, is then given by [4,5]
T⃗k = −i
+∞
∫
−∞
dt
⟨
Ψf |||⃗r ⋅⃗EX (t + 𝜏)||| Ψ⃗k
⟩
.
(13.42)

STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
415
As mentioned earlier, the most elementary quantum-mechanical description of
photoelectrons is achieved in the SFA, which represents the interaction of the
photo-released electron with the IR streaking field by a Volkov final-state wavefunc-
tion (13.29). Including elastic and inelastic scattering of the photo-released electron
before its emission from the surface (in terms of the damping factor e𝜅z), the final
photoemission state is represented as a Volkov wave that is exponentially damped
inside the surface [4,5,76],
Ψf
(⃗r, t) = (2𝜋)−3∕2 e
i
[
⃗kf+⃗AIR(t)
]
⋅⃗r+iΦ⃗kf (t) [Θ (z) −Θ (−z) e𝜅z] ,
(13.43)
with the Volkov phase (cf. Eq. 13.30)
Φ⃗kf (t) = −1
2
t
∫dt′ [
⃗kf + ⃗AIR(t′)
]2
(13.44)
and the unit step function Θ (z). In this model, all propagation effects that the electron
encounters inside the substrate are included in the finite MFP 𝜆= 1∕(2𝜅) [2, 97].
Integration of (13.42) over all momenta ⃗k in the first Brillouin zone [2] yields the
photoemission probability
P
(
⃗kf, 𝜏
)
=
∫
⃗k 𝜀1. BZ
d⃗k|T⃗k (𝜏) |2.
(13.45)
The initial state |Ψ⃗k⟩in (13.42) is composed of Bloch waves, |Ψ⃖⃖⃗
k−⟩and |Ψ⃖⃖⃗
k+⟩,
for electrons moving with (crystal) momenta ⃖⃖⃖⃗
k± = (⃗k, ± kz) inside the solid toward
and away from the surface, respectively, and a transmitted wave [4, 5, 76]. The
transmitted wave decays exponentially into the vacuum (z > 0) and is negligible in the
applications discussed below. For photoemission from core levels, the Bloch waves
are linear superpositions of tightly bound atomic levels, |ΨC >, that are localized at
the lattice points, ⃗Rj, of the substrate. In an elementary approach, the atomic core
levels can be approximated by closed-form expressions (e.g., screened hydrogenic
wavefunctions), and adjusted to the core-level energies 𝜀B, of the substrate,
Ψ±
⃗k (⃗r, t) = e−i𝜀Bt ∑
j
ei⃖⃖⃗
⃗k± ⃗RjΨC
(
⃗r −⃗Rj
)
.
(13.46)
Thus, the corresponding transition amplitude includes the interlayer interference
effects, mentioned earlier, in terms of a coherent sum over contributions to the
photocurrent from different substrate layers. The relevant layers are located within a
distance equal to a small multiple of 𝜆from the surface. In the numerical applications

416
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
shown below, we model |ΨC > by adjusting hydrogenic ground-state orbitals to the
core-level binding energy [4,5].
In general, the representation of the initial states in terms of Bloch waves (13.46)
can be applied to localized core levels and delocalized valence and conduction-band
(CB) states of the substrate. Assuming fully delocalized CB states, an alternative
and technically convenient approach consists in representing the substrate’s CB with
the so-called “jellium” approximation [97, 105]. In the jellium model, electronic
motion in the initial states is regarded as free, while the active electron’s motion
(perpendicular to the surface) is described in terms of eigenfunctions
Ψ⃗k(⃗r, z, t) ∼e−i𝜀⃗kte−i⃗k⃗r(eikzz + Re−ikzz)
(13.47)
of the step potential U (x, y, z) = –U0Θ (z), with U0 = 𝜀F + WU, Fermi energy 𝜀F,
work function W, and reflection coefficient R(U0, kz). The photoemission yield in
the jellium approximation is obtained by replacing the integrals in (13.45) with an
integral over the Fermi volume (containing all initially occupied CB states).
13.3.4
Modeling of Photoemission Delays in Tungsten
XUV pulses can release electrons from either bound core levels or delocalized con-
duction band states of a metal surface. The released photoelectrons get exposed to
(and “streaked”) by the same IR probe pulse used to generate the XUV pulse via
harmonic generation [31,55]. The two laser pulses are thus synchronized. By varying
their delay, 𝜏, Cavalieri et al. [51] measured time-resolved, photoelectron kinetic
energy distributions P(𝜀f , 𝜏) and deduced a relative delay of 110 ± 70 as between the
detection of photoelectrons emitted from 4f core and CB levels of a W(110) surface
by absorption of a single XUV photon (Fig. 13.18, left column; see also Figs. 13.15
and 13.17).
To compare model calculations [4, 5] with this streaking experiment, the IR and
XUV pulses with Gaussian envelopes are assumed and the experimental parameters
of Reference 51 for IR and XUV pulse lengths (𝜏IR = 6.5 fs and 𝜏X = 0.29 fs
(FWHM)), photon energies (ℏ𝜔IR = 1.7 eV and ℏ𝜔X =91 eV), and IR peak intensity
(2 × 1012 W cm−2) are used. For the W(110) surface, measured values for the work
function and Fermi energy are 5.5 eV and 𝜀F = 4.5 eV, respectively, and the lattice
constant in direction perpendicular to the surface is 3.13 ˚A. Figures 13.18 and 13.19
show that the simulated modulation of the photoelectron kinetic energy agrees with
the measurement. In order to find the relative photoemission delay between the two
calculated spectra in the right column of Figure 13.18, it is important to compute the
center of energies (first moments in energy) in the calculated spectra for the same
spectral intervals for which the central energies were deduced from the measured
spectra (Fig. 13.19). The relative photoemission delay ΔtX,4f−CB between the 4f-
core level and the CB photoelectrons corresponds to the temporal shift between the
two calculated centers of energy shown in Figure 13.19b. It agrees well with the
experiment for an adjusted electron MFP of 𝜆= 2.65 ˚A [4,5,97].

96
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
94
92
90
88
86
64
62
60
58
56
–6
4f kinetic energy (eV) cond. kinetic energy (eV)
–4
–2
0
2
4
Relative delay   (fs)
Relative delay   (fs)
FIGURE 13.18
Time-resolved, streaked photoelectron spectra for emission from the CB
(top) and 4f-core levels (bottom) of a W(110) surface as a function of the delay between the
XUV and IR pulses. Linear intensity scales. Experimental results of Cavalieri et al. [51] (left)
in comparison with numerical simulations of Reference 4 (right). Reprinted with permissions
of APS. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
–0.8
–0.4
 0
 0.4
 0.8
 1.2
Cond. band
4f states
–8
–4
 0
 4
 8
 12
–6
–4
–2
 0
 2
 4
 6
Energy shift (ev)
Cond. band
4f states
(a)
(b)
Relative delay   (fs)
FIGURE 13.19
Streaked electron spectra for photoemission from CB and 4f-core levels of
a W(110) surface. (a) Measured center-of-energy shifts as a function of the delay between the
XUV and IR pulses. The damped sinusoidal curves are fits to the raw experimental data (points
with error bars) and are shifted by a relative photoemission time delay of 110 ± 70 as. Adapted
from Reference 51. (b) Calculated center-of-energy shifts showing a relative photoemission
time delay of 110 as between the two groups of electrons. The central energy shifts for the 4f
photoelectrons are multiplied by 2.5 in (a) and 1.1 in (b). Adapted from Reference 4.

418
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
13.3.5
Attosecond Photoemission from Rhenium Surfaces
The time delay measured in the first proof-of-principle experiment with ∼300-as
XUV pulses centered near 90 eV has a comparably large experimental uncertainty
[51]. The accuracy with which such time shifts can be extracted from a streak-
ing spectrogram depends mainly on the depth of the NIR-induced modulation in
the photoelectron spectra, the energetic separation between the photoemission lines
(whose emission timing should be analyzed), and the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio
of the photoelectron spectra. Experimentally, the modulation depth can be con-
trolled by the NIR field intensity which, however, has to be restricted to much
lower values compared to gas-phase experiments in order to avoid an excessive back-
ground signal due to above-threshold photoemission (ATP) electrons. ATP stems
from the CB electrons of the solid and is generated by the absorption of multiple
NIR photons from the streaking field. To enable an unambiguous analysis of the
streaked electron distributions, this background should not overlap with the XUV-
induced photoemission lines. In this respect, the use of higher XUV photon energies
is beneficial.
Figure 13.20a shows the photoemission spectrum obtained from the (0001) sur-
face of rhenium with ∼350-as XUV pulses with a central photon energy of 125 eV.
Two emission lines corresponding to the 4f and the CB states are well resolved,
but are superimposed by a background originating from inelastically scattered XUV
photoelectrons. This background (dashed line) has to be subtracted from the spectra
prior to the analysis, which represents a further complication compared to gas-
phase streaking experiments. A background-corrected spectrogram obtained with
a 4 × 1011 W cm−2 NIR dressing field is depicted in panel b. The results of the
data evaluation are shown as crosses in panel c, along with a global fit of both
traces to the same parameterized NIR waveform (shown as solid lines). A rela-
tive shift of 100 as of the 4f trace to positive NIR–XUV delays is clearly dis-
cernible and reveals the delayed emission of the 4f electrons with respect to the
CB electrons.
13.3.6
Attosecond Photoemission from Magnesium Surfaces
Neppl et al. [52] measured the relative time delay in the emission of VB and core-level
electrons from Mg(0001) surfaces. Mg as a test material is well suited to discern the
possible effects of the delay in photoemission since the band structure for this mate-
rial is “free-electron-like.” The influence of the group velocity of the photoelectron
wave packet on the photoemission delay can thus be calculated and accounted for.
Figure 13.21 shows the streaking spectrograms for both types of electrons. There is
no measureable delay in the streaking traces. A simple estimation of the respective
“travel time” using free-particle velocities and calculated penetration depths [52]
shows that the vanishing time delay can be well accounted for by simply considering
transport effects—hinting at a negligible contribution from other phenomena, such
as initial-state effects.

STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
419
Kinetic energy (eV)
Intensity (a.u.)
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
0
1
2
3
0
–1
–1
Relative NIR-XUV delay (fs)
Induced energy shift (eV)
–2
–2
–3
–3
–4
–5
1
2
3
4
5
CB states
Re4f states
 Re4f
CB
Inelastically
scattered
electrons
(a)
(c)
100 as
0
–1
–2
–3
1
2
3
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Kinetic energy (eV)
Relative NIR-XUV delay (fs)
 Re4f
 CB (×7)
(b)
FIGURE 13.20
Attosecond, time-resolved photoemission from the (0001) surface of rhe-
nium. (a) Static photoelectron emission from rhenium (in the absence of the NIR streaking
field) obtained with HH radiation filtered by a 6-eV (FWHM) bandwidth mirror centered near
125 eV. The background of inelastically scattered electrons (blue dashed line) is removed
before the analysis. The full streaking spectrogram is shown in panel (b), with the CB inten-
sity scaled by a factor of 7. The comparison of the first moments of the streaked electron
distributions as a function of the NIR–XUV delay, shown in panel (c), reveals emission of the
4f photoelectrons from the metal surface delayed by 100 as compared to the photoelectrons
released from the conduction-band states. (Adapted from Reference 96, with permission of
John Wiley & Sons). (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
Numerical results for streaked photoemission from Mg(0001) are shown in Fig-
ure 13.22. The calculations were performed within a quantum mechanical model
[103, 106] similar to the one discussed in Section 13.3.3, and with the IR laser and
XUV parameters of the experiment [52]. In contrast to the model discussed in Section
13.3.3, the VB of Mg(0001) is modeled by a more realistic potential (the Chulkov
potential [106, 107]). Additionally, the 2p-core level is represented by combining
Chulkov and Yukawa potentials [78,106]. These potentials reproduce the respective

420
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
Relative XUV-NIR delay (fs)
Energy shift (eV)
−4
−3
−2
–2
−1
−1
0
VB – Fit
2p – Fit
VB – COEs
2p – COEs
0
1
1
2
2
3
4
FIGURE 13.21
Timing analysis of the VB and 2p core-level photoemission from Mg(0001).
Calculated center-of-energies (COE) for the VB and 2p region of the spectrogram (depicted as
crosses) are fitted to a pair of parameterized analytic functions describing the vector potential
of the NIR streaking pulse. The absence of a relative shift between the fitted functions, shown
as red solid line for the VB and blue dotted line for the 2p emission, provides evidence for a
synchronous release of these electrons from the metal surface. Adapted from Reference 52.
(For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
band structures at the level of density-functional theory. The intensity of the NIR
pulse is assumed to decay exponentially inside the solid with a skin depth of about
one lattice constant 𝛿L = 2 ˚A [78,101]. The energy-dependent electron MFP is also
taken into account in the calculations. Electron MFPs are adjusted to reproduce the
measured XUV synchrotron photoemission spectrum for VB and vanishing relative
photoemission delays for 2p-core level emission. The resultant MFP values are 5.0 ˚A
for VB photoelectrons and 4 ˚A for 2p-core level photoelectrons, complying with
previously published data [2,52,108].
Figure 13.22a shows the calculated streaking traces for core level and VB emis-
sion. The spectral profile of the photoelectron wave packet and its variation as a
function of 𝜏shown in Figure 13.22a are, in general, determined by the spectral
profile of the XUV pulse and the dipole matrix element, as detailed in Section 13.2.
Surprisingly, the spectrograms exhibit distinct 𝜏-dependent dispersion. The 2p-core
level photoelectron dispersion is found to be dominantly determined by the XUV
pulse and robust against MFP variations. In contrast, the VB photoelectron disper-
sion is found to be determined by both the XUV pulse and the MFP-dependent dipole
matrix element. The corresponding COE shifts in Figure 13.22b do not reveal any
noticeable relative photoemission delay, in agreement with the experimental results
given in Figure 13.21.
13.3.7
Toward Time Resolving Collective Electrons Dynamics: Probing
Plasmon-Response Effects in Streaked Photoelectron Spectra
Under the correct conditions, the external electromagnetic field can excite modes of
collective electron motion where the excited electrons oscillate in unison, so-called

STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
421
2p
60
65
70
75
Relative XUV−NIR delay (fs)
Kinetic energy (eV)
VB
(a)
105
110
115
120
125
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−2
−1
0
1
2
Relative XUV−NIR delay (fs)
Energy shift (eV)
 
 
(b)
VB
2p
FIGURE 13.22
(a) Calculated streaked photoemission spectrum for a Mg(0001) surface.
The XUV-chirp rate is 𝛽= −2 fs−2 and the NIR-field CEP is 𝜙= 1.22𝜋. The MFPs are
𝜆= 5.0 ˚A for VB photoelectron and 𝜆= 4 ˚A for 2p-core level photoelectron. (b) Corresponding
center-of-energy shift. The 2p-core level center-of-energy shift is multiplied by 1.09 for better
comparison. Adapted from Reference 103. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate
section.)
plasmons. Plasmons can either be confined to a single nanoparticle (as localized sur-
face plasmons, see Fig. 13.23a), or propagate along metal–dielectric interfaces (as sur-
face plasmon polaritons, see Fig. 13.23b [109]). In both cases, energy from the exter-
nal electromagnetic field can be localized below the diffraction limit—to nanometer
scales [110]. Some of the spectral properties of plasmons in nanoparticles—as a func-
tion of particle size, shape, and dielectric properties—are reasonably well understood
and can be predicted by solving the classical Maxwell equations, including quantum
mechanical aspects by appropriate modeling of the particle’s dielectric response
[111]. These dielectric properties are typically described in terms of phenomeno-
logical dielectric response functions that are adjusted to fit measured photoemission
and absorption spectra [112, 113]. However, the subcycle dynamics of collective
electronic excitations in strong laser fields (i.e., how such excitations are formed
and how their phase coherence is lost) have not been directly measured, and the

422
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
Metal
Dielectric
(a)
(b)
+
Propagation
+ +
−−−
+
+
−
−
+
+
−
−
E
E
FIGURE 13.23
Field configurations of (a) a localized surface plasmon of a metal nanosphere
in an external light field and (b) a traveling surface plasmon polariton along a metal–dielectric
interface. Adapted from Reference 109.
accurate modeling of the creation and decay of plasmons in nanostructures creates
a formidable challenge to theory [109]. The field-free dephasing time of a nanolo-
calized plasmon is typically in the lower femtosecond domain across the plasmonic
spectrum [75].
Photoelectron emission from a metal surface by a sub-femtosecond XUV pulse and
the subsequent propagation of those electrons through and near the solid provokes
a dielectric response in the substrate that acts back on the electron wave packet
[61, 114–117] (Fig. 13.24). In an attempt to model this many-electron response, a
combined classical and quantum mechanical model was suggested [61]. The classical
part of this model assumed that the photoelectron moves as a classical particle at speed
vz, in a direction perpendicular to the surface, corresponding to the charge density
Vacuum
z
z
z
ν
Metal
Image charge
+
+
++
+
+++
+
FIGURE 13.24
A photoelectron held at distance z from the surface of a perfect conductor
induces a redistribution of the electronic surface-charge density that exerts the same static force
on the photoelectron as a fictitious positive image charge inside the substrate. For non-perfect
conductors and moving photoelectrons, the self-interaction of the photoelectron deviates from
the static image force due to the finite response time of surface and bulk plasmons.

STREAKED PHOTOEMISSION FROM SOLIDS
423
𝜚(r, t) = 𝛿(r‖)𝛿(z −vzt). The response of the solid is described by the complex self-
interaction potential
Σ(z, vz) = Σr(z, vz) + iΣi(z, vz),
(13.48)
which converges for large distances from the surface to the classical image poten-
tial −1
4z. Its real part, Σr, represents an energy shift of the photoelectron by virtual
excitations of bulk and surface plasmons and electron–hole pairs in the solid, while
its imaginary part, Σi, accounts for a loss of photoelectron current due to the inter-
action between the photoelectron and collective modes of the substrate [61, 114].
The electronic self-interaction potential (13.48) is subsequently employed in the
quantum-mechanical description of the photoemission process.
The solid is modeled as a wide slab in jellium approximation (see Section
13.3.3), and the time-independent SE is first solved numerically for the potential
VJ (z) + Σr (z, 0), with the smeared-out jellium step potential of width a at both
sides of the solid–vacuum interface, VJ (z) = −
U0
{1+exp( z
a )}, and the static energy shift
Σr (z, 0) [114]. This provides the initial bound slab eigenfunctions and their corre-
sponding energies. The effect of the full dielectric response, (13.48), on the released
photoelectron wave packet is then accounted for by numerically propagating the
TDSE with the potential VJ (z) + Σ(z, vz), and the potentials for the active electron’s
interaction with the XUV and IR pulses [61].
The self-interaction potential Σ(z, vz) can be calculated based on phenomeno-
logical dielectric functions, 𝜀B (k, 𝜔) and 𝜀S (k, 𝜔), that model bulk- and surface-
plasmon and particle-hole excitations by the photoelectron in the bulk and at the
surface [118, 119]. The calculation proceeds analytically by propagating the ini-
tial state of the bulk and surface plasmon quantum field, Ψ (t = 0), subject to the
interaction Hint = ∫dr𝜚(r, t) Ψ (r, t = 0) [120, 121]. This propagation calculation
can be mostly carried out analytically and results in a lengthy expression [61] for
Σ(t, vz) = 1
2 ⟨Ψ (t) |Hint (t) |Ψ (t)⟩that depends on the bulk (𝜔B) and surface plasmon
frequencies (𝜔S = 𝜔B∕
√
2). Figure 13.25 shows streaked photoemission spectra for
an aluminum model surface with U0 = 10.2 eV, 𝜔S = 0.378, a = 1.4 ˚A, 𝜆= 5 ˚A, and
𝛿L = 0, and a 300-as XUV pulse centered at ℏ𝜔X = 40 eV. The streaked spectrum
shown in Figure 13.25a is calculated by solving the TDSE with the “dynamical”
plasmon response Σ(z, vz). As a reference, Figure 13.25b shows the photoemission
spectrum obtained using the “static” response Σr (z, 0) in the propagation calcula-
tion. The central energies for the two spectra are shifted by the streaking-time-delay
difference ΔtX,wake = tX,dyn −tX,sta = 100 as (Fig. 13.25c).
Streaking-delay differences ΔtX,wake are shown for different MFPs in Figure 13.26a
and for different plasmon frequencies (i.e., electron densities) in Figure 13.26b as
a function of ℏ𝜔X. Figure 13.26a shows results for the surface-plasmon frequency
𝜔S = 0.378 and Figure 13.26b for the MFP 𝜆= 5 ˚A. All other parameters are as
in Figure 13.25. Increasing 𝜆by a factor of two significantly increases ΔtX,wake for
XUV photon energies ℏ𝜔X < 50 eV, but has little influence at larger 𝜔X (Fig. 13.26a).

424
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
XUV-IR time delay (fs)
XUV-IR time delay (fs)
Dyn-ph
(a) Dyn-ph
Sta
(b) Sta
Kinetic energy (eV)
ECOE (eV)
δ
−4
−2
(c)
0
20
25
30
35
20
25
30
35
2
4
−4
−2
−2
0
0
1
2
0
2
4
FIGURE 13.25
Streaked photoelectron spectra as a function of the pump-probe delay for
a model aluminum surface and ℏ𝜔X = 40 eV, including (a) the dynamical plasmon response
during the motion of the photoelectron and (b) the plasmon response in static (adiabatic)
approximation, allowing the plasmon field an infinite time to adjust to the perturbation by a
classical photoelectron at any given position. (c) Central energies of the spectra in (a) and (b)
showing a streaking-time-delay difference of 100 as. Adapted from Reference 61.
30
0
40
80
120
160
0
40
80
120
160
40
(b)
(a)
50
60
= 5 Å
λ
= 10 Å
λ
Δ  wake (as)
τ
70
80
90
100
X (eV)
hω
s = 12 eV
hω
s = 8 eV
hω
s = 10 eV
hω
FIGURE 13.26
Streaking-delay difference ΔtX,wake, induced by the non-adiabatic response
of model substrates, as a function of the XUV photon energy for different (a) electron MFPs
𝜆, and (b) surface plasmon frequencies 𝜔s. Adapted from Reference 61.

ATTOSECOND STREAKING FROM NANOSTRUCTURES
425
The results shown in Figure 13.26 appear to be incompatible with the interpretation
[51,78] of the observed [51] delay between photoemission from core and conduction-
band levels in tungsten in terms of the photoelectron’s travel time in the solid, 𝜆∕⟨vz⟩.
Decreasing 𝜔S shifts the double-hump structure to lower 𝜔X (lower photoelectron
energies), as expected in view of the decreased thresholds for plasmon excitations
(Fig. 13.26b).
13.4
ATTOSECOND STREAKING FROM NANOSTRUCTURES
The spatial homogeneity of the driving laser field is one of the key aspects in the
attosecond streaking of atoms or surfaces [17, 30, 122]. Nanosystems, in contrast,
can exhibit vast spatial variations of local field profiles especially in amplitude and
phase. Nanoscopic effects such as field enhancement, resonant (plasmonic) oscil-
lations, and coupling of multiple elements is dependent on material properties as
well as shape and environment [113]. The spectral composition of the incident
radiation gives a certain control over these effects. As nanofabrication technology
progresses, ever-increasing control over these properties is gained. The result is cus-
tom or tailored materials which can be produced to respond in specific ways to
external fields.
Based on theoretical work, in the following we discuss attosecond nanoplasmonic
streaking and its application in the measurement of collective electron dynamics
within nanostructures in external fields.
13.4.1
Instantaneous Versus Ponderomotive Streaking
The principle regimes for attosecond streaking from nanostructures were introduced
by Stockman et al. [65] and will be discussed next for spherical metal nanoparticles.
Here, we will follow the formalism and presentation in References 66 and 109. The
experimental arrangement, depicted in Figure 13.27, is identical to streaking from
gases or surfaces as discussed above. The main difference is that a nanostructure
(here a single nanoparticle) is the target.
Electrons are emitted by an attosecond XUV pulse, which can be synchronized to a
driving laser field in the optical region. On their way to the detector, the photoelectrons
are accelerated by the near-field which results in an effective change in their kinetic
energy. For more complex nanostructure geometries, the electric near-field may need
to be evaluated using numerical computations such as the finite-difference time-
domain (FDTD) method [123]. For spherical nanoparticles, Mie theory [124] can
be employed. The inset in Figure 13.27 shows the maximum near-field of a Au
nanoparticle resulting from the interaction of a few-cycle pulse at 800 nm with a
100 nm diameter gold nanosphere [66]. The enhancement of the near-field close the
surface of the gold sphere is clearly visible and takes a dipolar shape. The spatial
inhomogeneity of this near-field leads to substantial differences in the acceleration
of the electrons as compared to streaking in gases or from planar surfaces.

426
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
z/R
x/R
−2
−1
0
1
2
−2
−1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
α
NIR pump
e−
FIGURE 13.27
Attosecond nanoplasmonic streaking principle illustrated for a spherical
metal particle. An NIR pump pulse excites a localized surface plasmon in a metal nanoparticle,
and a synchronized attosecond extreme-ultraviolet (XUV) pulse ejects photoelectrons. The
field caused by the collective electron motion in the nanoparticle is imprinted in the kinetic
energy of the electrons, which are measured by TOF spectroscopy. The inset shows the near-
field around the nanoparticle as calculated by Mie theory in the y = 0 plane through the center
of the sphere [66]. Due to the symmetry of the plasmonic field in nanoparticles with diameters
much smaller than the laser wavelength, the point of electron emission is uniquely defined
by the angle 𝛼. Reprinted from Reference 66 with copyright permission of APS. (For a color
version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
The final drift velocity of a photoelectron emitted from a nanoparticle by an XUV
pulse at time te with initial velocity ⃗𝜈0 can be obtained by integrating the electron’s
classical equation of motion
⃗vf(te) = ⃗v0 −∫
∞
te
⃗E(⃗r, t)dt.
(13.49)
The initial velocity is determined by the spectrum of the attosecond XUV pulse
and the material’s work function. The kinetic energy of released electrons is then
given by the difference between the photon energy and the local work function. It
was shown that the evolution of plasmonic near-fields from many simple nanostruc-
tured surfaces into free space can be well approximated by an exponential function
[125]. Introducing the spatial decay constant 𝜒, the decay of the field component
perpendicular to the surface can be written as
E (x, t) = Epl (t) exp
(−x (t)
𝜒
)
,
(13.50)

ATTOSECOND STREAKING FROM NANOSTRUCTURES
427
where it is assumed that the surface is normal to the x-axis and the electron is emitted
in the x-direction (toward the TOF detector). Note that 𝜒is not a constant and depends
on the emission position from the nanostructure (for a nanosphere given by the angle
𝛼in Figure 13.27) and the emission angle of the electron trajectory. The change in the
electron’s drift velocity by acceleration in the near-field of the nanostructure is typi-
cally smaller than the initial velocity 𝜈0. For example, an electron with Ekin = 100 eV
and a streaking amplitude of 10 eV experience a relative change in velocity of only
(𝜈0+Δ𝜈)
𝜈0
≈5%. The electron’s distance from the surface can thus be approximated by
x (t) ≈x0 + 𝜈0(t −te).
(13.51)
Inserting x (t) into Eq. (13.50) yields
E (x, t) = Epl (t) exp
(−𝜈0(t −te)
𝜒
)
= Epl (t) exp
(−(t −te)
𝜏s
)
,
(13.52)
where the spatial decay time is defined as 𝜏s = 𝜒
v0 . Treating the plasmonic response
as a damped, driven oscillator [113] results in an exponential decay of Epl (t) after its
excitation at t = 0, which may be described by
Epl (t) = E0 cos(𝜔t −𝜙CEP) exp
(
−t
𝜏pl
)
.
(13.53)
where E0 is the peak field amplitude, 𝜙CEP the carrier-envelope phase of the plasmonic
field, and 𝜏pl the temporal decay constant. Inserting Eqs. (13.51), (13.52), and (13.53)
into (13.49) yields
Δ𝜈(te) = 𝜈0 −𝜈f(te) = −
∞
∫
te
E0 exp
(
−t
𝜏pl
−t −te
𝜏s
)
cos(𝜔t −𝜙CEP)dt.
(13.54)
With the simplifications made above, Eq. (13.54) can be integrated (for the result
see [66]). Note that this equation only holds for probing the field after its excitation
when the plasmon is decaying. The streaking amplitude will exhibit an exponential
decay exp(–te∕𝜏pl) which directly reflects the temporal decay of the near-field. The
streaking regime can be characterized by the phase shift Δ𝜙s between the waveform
which is apparent in the streaking spectrogram and the local near-field oscillation
(see Figure 13.28a),
Δ𝜙s = arctan
( 𝜏pl𝜏s𝜔
𝜏pl + 𝜏s
)
.
(13.55)

428
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
Delay (fs)
Energy (eV)
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
80
90
100
110
120
ϕ
Δ s
ΔE
(b)
χ (nm)
Ekin (eV)
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Δ s(rad)
ϕ
(a)
FIGURE 13.28
(a) Phase shift Δ𝜙s between the waveform apparent in the streaking spectro-
gram (red line) and the local near-field oscillation (blue dash-dotted line). (b) Phase shift Δ𝜙s
as a function of initial electron energy Ekin and spatial decay constant 𝜒for a fixed plasmonic
decay constant of 𝜏pl = 10 fs and a laser wavelength of 𝜆= 720 nm [109]. The upper left corner
(Δ𝜙s close to zero) corresponds to the instantaneous streaking regime. The lower right corner
(Δ𝜙s close to 𝜋/2) corresponds to the ponderomotive streaking regime. (For a color version of
this figure, see the color plate section.)
If the plasmonic decay constant is much smaller than the spatial decay constant
(due to the motion of the electron in the inhomogeneous field), 𝜏pl ≪𝜏s, the phase
shift can be reduced to Δ𝜙s ≈arctan(𝜏pl𝜔). In this case Δ𝜙s is close to 𝜋∕2 for
oscillating fields with a period shorter than its envelope (𝜔−1) < 𝜏pl, which is the
case for few-cycle and longer fields. This regime resembles conventional streaking,
where the streaking energy shift is proportional to the vector potential (see Section
13.2.2). It is referred to as the ponderomotive regime.
In the opposite limiting case where 𝜏pl ≪𝜏s and 𝜏s ≪(𝜔−1), the electron will leave
the surface during a fraction of a half-cycle of the laser field. In this case the spatial
decay time constant is small compared to both the temporal decay constant and the
oscillation period. This results in a phase shift close to zero: Δ𝜙s = arctan(𝜏s𝜔) ≈0.
The measured streaking waveform will thus directly reflect the electric field of the
plasmonic oscillation. This regime is referred to as the instantaneous regime.
So far, we have not considered the interaction of near-field-accelerated electrons
with the external driving laser field. “Fast” electrons, which leave the near-field
within a fraction of an optical period (in the instantaneous regime), are only mini-
mally accelerated by the near-field as compared to ponderomotive streaking in the
surrounding external laser field. Under these conditions, the impact of the near-field
is determined by its relative strength compared to the driving field, which is simply
known as the field-enhancement factor (here denoted as Q). The direct field-probing
regime is therefore only achievable with sufficiently high Q, present in so-called
“hot spots” (with enhancement factors of 2–4 orders of magnitude) [65]. The field
enhancement factor and pattern around Au spheres remains similar to the one shown
in Figure 13.27 (Q ≈3) even when decreasing the particle size. For such simple
geometries, the instantaneous regime cannot be reached and the streaking amplitude
is dominated by ponderomotive acceleration in the ambient laser field.

ATTOSECOND STREAKING FROM NANOSTRUCTURES
429
13.4.2
Modeling of the Attosecond Streaking from Metal Nanoparticles
To get more insight into the possible outcome of an attosecond nanoplasmonic streak-
ing experiment, numerical simulations have been performed for rectangular Au anten-
nas [64,126] and spherical particles made of both Au [66,126,127] and Ag [128]. The
key results from spherical Au particles will be outlined as an example, and special
emphasis will be placed on the dependence of the streaking traces on the emission
position of the electrons [66].
In the simulations contained in Reference 66, the equations of motion (13.49) were
integrated for different emission times te, to obtain a complete streaking waveform.
The laser field was assumed to have a Gaussian envelope of 5 fs (FWHM of the electric
field), a center wavelength of 𝜆= 720 nm, and a peak intensity of 1 × 1012 W cm−2.
The local field was calculated by Mie theory [124], where only the solution for the
center wavelength was considered. This is well justified for sizes between 10 and
100 nm considered here. The kinetic energy of the electrons after their photoemission
was fixed to Ekin = 100 eV.
Figures 13.29a and b show simulated streaking curves for different emission
positions, defined by the angle 𝛼for two different gold spheres, with diameters
d = 10 nm and 100 nm, respectively. The driving field is depicted by the blue dashed-
dotted line in all plots. For the 10-nm spheres, emission at the pole (𝛼= 0) leads
to a phase shift of about 0.3 𝜋with respect to the (negative) driving field. This
indicates that the streaking process is in an intermediate regime. Emission at larger
angles causes larger phase shifts. For a sphere diameter of 100 nm, the dependence
on emission position is even stronger. Here, electrons emitted at the pole show a
streaking waveform which is phase offset by 𝜋/2 relative to the driving near-field
(ponderomotive regime). Going to larger angles 𝛼, the streaking amplitude decreases
rapidly but only a minor phase shift occurs.
If an experiment does not allow for the discrimination of the emission position
(such as with TOF spectroscopy, see Figure 13.27), the attosecond nanoplasmonic
streaking spectrogram may contain contributions from all emission positions. The
weighting of the contributions from different emission positions depends on the XUV
absorption and photoemission. Since typical spot sizes of XUV foci for the photon
energy considered here (around 100 eV) are in the micrometer range (much larger
than the nanoparticle diameters considered), photoemission will take place over the
entire illuminated side of the nanoparticle and, attenuated by the transmission through
the material, also on its backside.
Figure 13.30 shows streaking spectrograms for 10 and 100 nm Au particles that
have been computed via Monte-Carlo simulations [66]. The attosecond probe pulse
was assigned a pulse length of 250 as, a spectrum centered at 105 eV, and a band-
width of 7 eV. The emission was assumed to occur from a well-defined, narrow
valence band.
The smaller Au sphere exhibits a streaking spectrogram with relatively high con-
trast and the contributions from different emission positions on the sphere cause a
distortion of the waveform. As expected, the spectrogram for the 100-nm sphere
is drastically different. The streaking features are blurred and the spectrogram has
lost its waveform-like character. The findings are in good agreement with another

430
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
80
100
120
−4
−2
0
2
4
80
100
120
Energy (eV)
Delay (fs)
(b)
(a)
EX (V/nm)
EX
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
(deg)
α  
FIGURE 13.29
Simulated streaking waveforms for electrons emitted at different positions
(defined by the angle 𝛼in Figure 13.27) on a Au sphere with a diameter of 10 nm (a) and
100 nm (b). The blue dash-dotted line indicates the driving field. Adapted from Reference
66 with copyright permission of APS. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate
section.)
Delay (fs)
Energy (eV)
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
80
90
100
110
120
(a)
Delay (fs)
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
80
90
100
110
120
0
40
80
120
(b)
Counts
10 nm
100 nm
FIGURE 13.30
Simulated streaking spectrograms for 10 nm (a) and 100 nm (b) Au spheres.
The red line shows the contribution of electrons emitted on axis with the laser polarization
vector. Reprinted from Reference 66 with copyright permission of APS. (For a color version
of this figure, see the color plate section.)

ATTOSECOND STREAKING FROM NANOSTRUCTURES
431
study on spherical gold particles [126], where the plasmon decay time was taken into
account. In the considered case of a single TOF detector, the streaking spectrograms
are not easy to interpret if the system is not well known. Nevertheless, major prop-
erties of the plasmonic oscillation can still be recovered. Inspecting Figures 13.29
and 13.30, the streaking curves of all trajectories exhibit a crossing at almost the
same time for each half-cycle. This results in the characteristic periodic spots in
the streaking spectrogram. From the period, one can directly deduce the frequency of
the plasmonic oscillation as proposed by Borisov et al. [126]. Also, the envelope, and
thus the lifetime, can be recovered from the spectrogram by analyzing the maximum
streaking amplitudes at each delay step. Prell et al. proposed using photoelectron
angular distributions measured by velocity-map imaging to reconstruct the dipole
moment of Ag nanospheres [128].
Similar results were shown for coupled systems on a substrate [64], where the
streaking process from the gap region of a coupled antenna was simulated. The
results show that due to the high homogeneity of the field enhancement within
the gap region, averaging over electron emission positions yields clear streaking
spectrograms predominantly in the ponderomotive regime [64].
13.4.3
Attosecond Nanoplasmonic Microscopy
Combining the described nanoplasmonic streaking technique with ultrahigh, nanome-
ter spatial resolution is highly desirable for measurements on surface-assembled
nanostructures.
Stockman et al. proposed the combination of photoemission electron microscopy
(PEEM) and attosecond nanoplasmonic streaking for the non-invasive, direct probing
of nanoplasmonic fields with nanometer (spatial) and attosecond (temporal) resolu-
tion [65]. The principle of this technique is shown in Figure 13.31. A short, NIR
TOF-PEEM
Sample
MCP/DLD
Electrons
NIR
XUV
Local plasmonic field
Δt
FIGURE 13.31
Principle of the attosecond nanoplasmonic microscope (adapted from Ref-
erence 65). A short NIR pulse induces plasmonic oscillations which are probed by a time-
delayed attosecond XUV pulse. The streaked photoelectrons are imaged with a time-of-flight
PEEM (TOF-PEEM), where their TOF and position are detected by a microchannel plate
(MCP)/delay-line detector. Streaking spectrograms for each image point can be measured by
scanning the delay between the pump and probe pulses.

432
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
laser pulse excites the collective electron dynamics on a nanostructured surface, then
a synchronized attosecond XUV pulse photoemits electrons from the surface. These
electrons are then accelerated in the plasmonic near-fields as described in the last sec-
tion. However, in contrast to conventional streaking spectroscopy, now the detector is
a TOF-PEEM, which enables the imaging of photoelectrons from the sample surface
with nanometer resolution [129]. By scanning the delay between the NIR pump and
XUV probe pulses, a streaking spectrogram is obtained for each image point on the
TOF-PEEM, representing a small volume on the sample surface.
The theoretical study by Stockman et al. included calculations for a rough silver
surface with hot spots exhibiting field enhancement factors of Q = 30 and a spatial
extent of only a few nanometers [65]. These hot spots are so small that the electron
escape time is much smaller than the plasmonic oscillation period. For this limiting
case, a direct mapping of the near-fields in the instantaneous regime is possible.
Results of the calculations by Stockman et al. [65] are shown in Figure 13.32.
An attosecond XUV pulse at 90 eV with a pulse duration of 170 as was employed.
The XUV pulse is synchronized with a few-cycle optical field (5 fs in duration) for
the excitation of the nanosystem, and both are focused onto the sample. Due to their
large kinetic energy and short emission time, the XUV-emitted VB photoelectrons
escape from the nanometer-sized regions of local electric field enhancement within a
fraction of the oscillation period of the driven plasmonic field.
The spatial resolution is limited by the aberrations of the TOF-PEEM electron
optics and experimental conditions (such as space-charge generation). Using UV
excitation, Lin et al. reached 25-nm spatial resolution with a TOF-PEEM [129].
The application of attosecond XUV photoemission in TOF-PEEM and PEEM poses
some challenges. These have been outlined in References 130 and 131, but even in
those studies resolutions in the few-100-nanometer range have already been real-
ized and will likely improve. The temporal resolution is determined by the duration
of the attosecond pulse and the TOF of the photoelectrons through the local-field
region. This can be on the order of a few hundred attoseconds. Figure 13.32 shows
that streaking amplitudes of up to approximately 10 eV at an NIR intensity of
1 × 1010 W cm−2 can be achieved for typical experimental parameters [65]. At this
intensity of the driving NIR-laser pulse, the direct streaking of the electrons by the
external NIR field can be neglected. These theoretical studies show that spatiotem-
poral measurements in the nanometer–attosecond range can be achieved. The full
experimental implementation of the attosecond nanoplasmonic field microscope will
thus mark an important advancement of attosecond photoelectron spectroscopy and
its applications.
13.5
CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, we reviewed the basic physics behind state-of-the-art investigations
of ultrafast electronic dynamics in atoms, solid surfaces, and nanoparticles. We dis-
cussed how XUV photoelectron emission can, with the help of a streaking IR laser

CONCLUSIONS
433
δECOE (eV)
 
12
0
–12
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
t = t1
t = t1 + 0.38 fs
t = t1 + 0.77 fs
t = t1 + 1.16 fs
FIGURE 13.32
Topographic color maps of the streaking energy shift 𝛿ECOE, of electrons
emitted by an XUV pulse in the plane of this nanostructure. (a)–(d) Different times after
excitation of the nanostructure by a 5.5-fs pulse at 800 nm. The time t1 corresponds to a time
at which the near-field in the hotspot has reached a peak. Adapted from Reference 65 with
copyright permission of Nature. (For a color version of this figure, see the color plate section.)
field, measure time differences between the emission of electrons from two differ-
ent initial states at the time-scale of the motion of electrons in matter. We further
analyzed the influence the streaking electric field has on the measured observables,
XUV–IR-pulse-delay-dependent photoelectron energy distributions (photoelectron
dispersion) and photoemission time delays, and provided simple examples to illus-
trate the effects of initial- and final-state distortions on streaked photoelectron spec-
tra. We discussed recently measured streaking experiments for photoemission from
metal surfaces in comparison with theoretical models. For streaked photoemission
from nanoscale particles, we explained simulation results that reveal effects due to the
significant local electric field enhancement at nanometer-sized “hot spots” near the
nanoparticle surface.

434
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
Attosecond physics has been rapidly established over the past decade as a promis-
ing research direction, to a large part through novel, attosecond time-resolved laser-
streaked XUV photoemission spectroscopy of atoms in the gas phase. More recently,
over the past few years, attosecond physics has begun to branch out to more com-
plex systems, holding promise to enable, with attosecond resolution in time and
(tens of) nanometer spatial resolution, investigations of basic electronic process on
(adsorbate-covered) solid surfaces, semiconductor interfaces, nanostructures, and
large biomolecules.
The extension of attosecond science to include complex systems has the potential
to promote the development of diagnostic tools for basic research with atomic-scale
resolution in both, space and time, and to lead to novel devices for information
processing, drug delivery, and imaging in medicine in material science.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge countless contributions to the presented work by our coworkers
and collaborators at JRML, KSU, MPQ, LMU, and TUM. This work was supported
by the MPG and the DFG via the excellence cluster “Munich Center for Advanced
Photonics (MAP)” and SPP1391. We acknowledge partial support by the NSF and
the Division of Chemical Sciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Office of Energy
Research, U.S. Department of Energy.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Hertz, “ ¨Uber einen Einfluss des ultravioletten Lichtes auf die electrische Entladung,”
Ann. Phys. 267, 983–1000 (1887).
[2] S. H¨ufner, Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Principles and Applications, 3rd ed. (Springer,
Berlin; New York, 2003).
[3] A. Einstein, “ ¨Uber einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden
heuristischen Gesichtspunkt [AdP 17, 132 (1905)],” Ann. Phys. 14, 164–181 (1905).
[4] C. H. Zhang and U. Thumm, “Attosecond photoelectron spectroscopy of metal surfaces,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 123601 (2009).
[5] C. H. Zhang and U. Thumm, “Erratum: Attosecond photoelectron spectroscopy of metal
surfaces [Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 123601 (2009)],” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 239902 (2009).
[6] B. H. Bransden and C. J. Joachain, Physics of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd ed. (Prentice
Hall, Harlow, England; New York, 2003).
[7] M. C. Desjonqu`eres and D. Spanjaard, Concepts in Surface Physics, 2nd ed. (Springer,
Berlin; New York, 1996).
[8] J. Ullrich, A. Rudenko, and R. Moshammer, “Free-electron lasers: new avenues in
molecular physics and photochemistry,” Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 63, 635–660 (2012).
[9] A. H. Zewail, “Femtochemistry: atomic-scale dynamics of the chemical bond,” J. Phys.
Chem. A 104, 5660–5694 (2000).

REFERENCES
435
[10] M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, C. Spielmann, G. A. Raider, N. Milosevic, T. Brabec,
P. Corkum, U. Heinzmann, M. Drescher, and F. Krausz, “Attosecond metrology,” Nature
414, 509–513 (2001).
[11] P. M. Paul, E. S. Toma, P. Breger, G. Mullot, F. Aug´e, P. Balcou, H. G. Muller, and
P. Agostini, “Observation of a train of attosecond pulses from high harmonic generation,”
Science 292, 1689–1692 (2001).
[12] V. Yanovsky, V. Chvykov, G. Kalinchenko, P. Rousseau, T. Planchon, T. Matsuoka,
A. Maksimchuk, J. Nees, G. Cheriaux, G. Mourou, et al., “Ultra-high intensity-300-TW
laser at 0.1 Hz repetition rate,” Opt. Exp. 16, 2109–2114 (2008).
[13] X. Zhang, E. Schneider, G. Taft, H. Kapteyn, M. Murnane, and S. Backus, “Multi-
microjoule, MHz repetition rate Ti:sapphire ultrafast regenerative amplifier system,”
Opt. Exp. 20, 7015–7021 (2012).
[14] A. Dubietis, R. Butkus, and A. P. Piskarskas, “Trends in chirped pulse optical parametric
amplification,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quant. Electr. 12, 163 (2006).
[15] O. Chalus, P. K. Bates, M. Smolarski, and J. Biegert, “Mid-IR short-pulse OPCPA with
micro-Joule energy at 100 kHz,” Opt. Exp. 17, 3587–3594 (2009).
[16] F. Krausz and M. Ivanov, “Attosecond physics,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 163–234 (2009).
[17] E. Goulielmakis, M. Schultze, M. Hofstetter, V. S. Yakovlev, J. Gagnon, M. Uiberacker,
A. L. Aquila, E. M. Gullikson, D. T. Attwood, R. Kienberger, et al., “Single-cycle
nonlinear optics,” Science 320, 1614–1617 (2008).
[18] K. Zhao, Q. Zhang, M. Chini, Y. Wu, X. Wang, and Z. Chang, “Tailoring a 67 attosecond
pulse through advantageous phase-mismatch,” Opt. Lett. 37, 3891–3893 (2012).
[19] “CODATA Value: proton-electron mass ratio.” The NIST Reference on Constants,
Units, and Uncertainty (US National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2011).
http://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/cuu/Value?mpsme
[20] A. Wirth, M. T. Hassan, I. Grguras, J. Gagnon, A. Moulet, T. T. Luu, S. Pabst,
R. Santra, Z. A. Alahmed, A. M. Azzeer, et al., “Synthesized light transients,” Sci-
ence 334, 195–200 (2011).
[21] E. Goulielmakis, V. S. Yakovlev, A. L. Cavalieri, M. Uiberacker, V. Pervak, A. Apolon-
ski, R. Kienberger, U. Kleineberg, and F. Krausz, “Attosecond control and measurement:
lightwave electronics,” Science 317, 769–775 (2007).
[22] A. Schiffrin, T. Paasch-Colberg, N. Karpowicz, V. Apalkov, D. Gerster, S. M¨uhlbrandt,
M. Korbman, J. Reichert, M. Schultze, S. Holzner, et al., “Optical-field-induced current
in dielectrics,” Nature 493, 70–74 (2013).
[23] M. Schultze, E. M. Bothschafter, A. Sommer, S. Holzner, W. Schweinberger, M. Fiess,
M. Hofstetter, R. Kienberger, V. Apalkov, V. S. Yakovlev, et al., “Controlling dielectrics
with the electric field of light,” Nature 493, 75–78 (2013).
[24] A. Baltuska, T. Udem, M. Uiberacker, M. Hentschel, E. Goulielmakis, C. Gohle,
R. Holzwarth, V. S. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi, T. W. Hansch, et al., “Attosecond control
of electronic processes by intense light fields,” Nature 421, 611–615 (2003).
[25] T. Rathje, N. G. Johnson, M. M¨oller, F. S¨ußmann, D. Adolph, M. K¨ubel, R. Kienberger,
M. F. Kling, G. G. Paulus, and A. M. Sayler, “Review of attosecond resolved measure-
ment and control via carrier-envelope phase tagging with above-threshold ionization,”
J. Phys. B 45, 074003 (2012).
[26] T. Wittmann, B. Horvath, W. Helml, M. G. Sch¨atzel, X. Gu, A. L. Cavalieri, G. G. Paulus,
and R. Kienberger, “Single-shot carrier-envelope phase measurement of few-cycle laser
pulses,” Nat. Phys. 5, 357–362 (2009).

436
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
[27] M. F. Kling, P. von den Hoff, I. Znakovskaya, and R. de Vivie-Riedle, “(Sub-)
femtosecond control of molecular reactions via tailoring the electric field of light,”
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 15, 9448–9467 (2013).
[28] R. Trebino, Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating: The Measurement of Ultrashort Laser
Pulses (Springer, 2002).
[29] J. Itatani, F. Quere, G. L. Yudin, M. Y. Ivanov, F. Krausz, and P. B. Corkum, “Attosecond
streak camera,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 173903 (2002).
[30] R. Kienberger, E. Goulielmakis, M. Uiberacker, A. Baltuska, V. S. Yakovlev, F. Bammer,
A. Scrinzi, T. Westerwalbesloh, U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, et al., “Atomic transient
recorder,” Nature 427, 817–821 (2004).
[31] P. B. Corkum, “Plasma perspective on strong-field multiphoton ionization,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 71, 1994–1997 (1993).
[32] M. Lewenstein, P. Balcou, M. Y. Ivanov, A. L’Huillier, and P. B. Corkum, “Theory of
high-harmonic generation by low-frequency laser fields,” Phys. Rev. A 49, 2117–2132
(1994).
[33] G. Sansone, E. Benedetti, F. Calegari, C. Vozzi, L. Avaldi, R. Flammini, L. Poletto,
P. Villoresi, C. Altucci, R. Velotta, et al., “Isolated single-cycle attosecond pulses,”
Science 314, 443–446 (2006).
[34] I. J. Sola, E. Mevel, L. Elouga, E. Constant, V. Strelkov, L. Poletto, P. Villoresi,
E. Benedetti, J. P. Caumes, S. Stagira, et al., “Controlling attosecond electron dynamics
by phase-stabilized polarization gating,”. Nat. Phys. 2, 319–322 (2006).
[35] H. Mashiko, S. Gilbertson, C. Li, S. D. Khan, M. M. Shakya, E. Moon, and Z. Chang,
“Double optical gating of high-order harmonic generation with carrier-envelope phase
stabilized lasers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 103906 (2008).
[36] T. Popmintchev, M.-C. Chen, P. Arpin, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, “The
attosecond nonlinear optics of bright coherent X-ray generation,” Nat. Photon. 4, 822–
832 (2010).
[37] O. Smirnova, Y. Mairesse, S. Patchkovskii, N. Dudovich, D. Villeneuve, P. Corkum, and
M. Y. Ivanov, “High harmonic interferometry of multi-electron dynamics in molecules,”
Nature 460, 972–977 (2009).
[38] R. M. Lock, S. Ramakrishna, X. Zhou, H. C. Kapteyn, M. M. Murnane, and T. Sei-
deman, “Extracting continuum electron dynamics from high harmonic emission from
molecules,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 133901 (2012).
[39] W. Li, X. Zhou, R. Lock, S. Patchkovskii, A. Stolow, H. C. Kapteyn, and M. M.
Murnane, “Time-resolved dynamics in N2O4 probed using high harmonic generation,”
Science 322, 1207–1211 (2008).
[40] S. Haessler, J. Caillat, and P. Salieres, “Self-probing of molecules with high harmonic
generation,” J. Phys. B 44, 203001 (2011).
[41] M. C. Kohler, T. Pfeifer, K. Z. Hatsagortsyan, and C. H. Keitel, “Frontiers of atomic
high-harmonic generation,” in Advances in Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics,
edited by P. Berman, E. Arimondo, and C. Lin (Elsevier, 2012), Vol. 61, pp. 159–208.
[42] F. Ferrari, F. Calegari, M. Lucchini, C. Vozzi, S. Stagira, G. Sansone, and M. Nisoli,
“High-energy isolated attosecond pulses generated by above-saturation few-cycle
fields,” Nat. Photon. 4 (2010).
[43] A. L. Cavalieri, E. Goulielmakis, B. Horvath, W. Helml, M. Schultze, M. Fieß,
V. Pervak, L. Veisz, V. S. Yakovlev, M. Uiberacker, et al., “Intense 1.5-cycle near

REFERENCES
437
infrared laser waveforms and their use for the generation of ultra-broadband soft-x-ray
harmonic continua,” New J. Phys. 9, 242 (2007).
[44] X. Feng, S. Gilbertson, H. Mashiko, H. Wang, S. D. Khan, M. Chini, Y. Wu, K. Zhao,
and Z. Chang, “Generation of Isolated attosecond pulses with 20 to 28 femtosecond
lasers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 183901 (2009).
[45] Y. Mairesse and F. Quere, “Frequency-resolved optical gating for complete reconstruc-
tion of attosecond bursts,” Phys. Rev. A 71, 011401(R) (2005).
[46] J. Gagnon, E. Goulielmakis, and V. S. Yakovlev, “The accurate FROG characteri-
zation of attosecond pulses from streaking measurements,” Appl. Phys. B 92, 25–32
(2008).
[47] M. Chini, S. Gilbertson, S. D. Khan, and Z. Chang, “Characterizing ultrabroadband
attosecond lasers,” Opt. Exp. 18, 13006–13016 (2010).
[48] M. F. Kling and M. J. J. Vrakking, “Attosecond electron dynamics,” Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem. 59, 463–492 (2008).
[49] P. B. Corkum and F. Krausz, “Attosecond science,” Nat. Phys. 3, 381–387 (2007).
[50] E. Goulielmakis, Z. H. Loh, A. Wirth, R. Santra, N. Rohringer, V. S. Yakovlev, S.
Zherebtsov, T. Pfeifer, A. M. Azzeer, M. F. Kling, et al., “Real-time observation of
valence electron motion,” Nature 466, 739–743 (2010).
[51] A. L. Cavalieri, N. Muller, T. Uphues, V. S. Yakovlev, A. Baltuska, B. Horvath, B.
Schmidt, L. Blumel, R. Holzwarth, S. Hendel, et al., “Attosecond spectroscopy in
condensed matter,” Nature 449, 1029–1032 (2007).
[52] S. Neppl, R. Ernstorfer, E. M. Bothschafter, A. L. Cavalieri, D. Menzel, J. V. Barth, F.
Krausz, R. Kienberger, and P. Feulner, “Attosecond time-resolved photoemission from
core and valence states of magnesium,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 087401 (2012).
[53] M. Schultze, M. Fieß, N. Karpowicz, J. Gagnon, M. Korbman, M. Hofstetter, S. Neppl,
A. L. Cavalieri, Y. Komninos, T. Mercouris, et al., “Delay in photoemission,” Science
328, 1658–1662 (2010).
[54] K. Kl¨under, J. M. Dahlstr¨om, M. Gisselbrecht, T. Fordell, M. Swoboda, D. Guenot, P.
Johnsson, J. Caillat, J. Mauritsson, A. Maquet, et al., “Probing single-photon ionization
on the attosecond time scale,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 143002 (2011).
[55] J. M. Dahlstrom, A. L’Huillier, and A. Maquet, “Introduction to attosecond delays in
photoionization,” J. Phys. B: Atom. Mol. Opt. Phys. 45, 183001 (2012).
[56] T. Schultz and M. J. J. Vrakking, Attosecond and XUV Spectroscopy (John Wiley &
Sons, 2013).
[57] L. Gallmann, C. Cirelli, and U. Keller, “Attosecond science: recent highlights and future
trends,” Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 63, 447–469 (2012).
[58] A. Scrinzi, M. Y. Ivanov, R. Kienberger, and D. M. Villeneuve, “Attosecond physics,”
J. Phys. B 39, R1–R37 (2006).
[59] Attosecond Physics: Attosecond Measurement and Control of Physical Systems
(Springer, 2013), Vol. 177.
[60] Z. Chang, Fundamentals of Attosecond Optics (CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group,
2011).
[61] C. H. Zhang and U. Thumm, “Probing dielectric-response effects with attosecond
time-resolved streaked photoelectron spectroscopy of metal surfaces,” Phys. Rev. A
84, 063403 (2011).

438
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
[62] M. Gertsvolf, M. Spanner, D. M. Rayner, and P. B. Corkum, “Demonstration of attosec-
ond ionization dynamics inside transparent solids,” J. Phys. B 43, 131002 (2010).
[63] A. V. Mitrofanov, A. J. Verhoef, E. E. Serebryannikov, J. Lumeau, L. Glebov, A. M.
Zheltikov, and A. Baltuska, “Optical detection of attosecond ionization induced by a
few-cycle laser field in a transparent dielectric material,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 147401
(2011).
[64] E. Skopalova, D. Y. Lei, T. Witting, C. Arrell, F. Frank, Y. Sonnefraud, S. A. Maier,
J. W. G. Tisch, and J. P. Marangos, “Numerical simulation of attosecond nanoplasmonic
streaking,” New J. Phys. 13, 083003 (2011).
[65] M. I. Stockman, M. F. Kling, U. Kleineberg, and F. Krausz, “Attosecond nanoplasmonic-
field microscope,” Nat. Photon. 1, 539–544 (2007).
[66] F. S¨ußmann and M. F. Kling, “Attosecond nanoplasmonic streaking of localized fields
near metal nanospheres,” Phys. Rev. B 84, 121406(R) (2011).
[67] M. Drescher, M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, M. Uiberacker, V. S. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi,
T. Westerwalbesloh, U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, and F. Krausz, “Time-resolved
atomic inner-shell spectroscopy,” Nature 419, 803–807 (2002).
[68] L. Miaja-Avila, G. Saathoff, S. Mathias, J. Yin, C. La-o-vorakiat, M. Bauer, M. Aeschli-
mann, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, “Direct measurement of core-level relaxation
dynamics on a surface-adsorbate system,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 046101 (2008).
[69] L. R. Moore, M. A. Lysaght, J. S. Parker, H. W. van der Hart, and K. T. Taylor, “Time
delay between photoemission from the 2p and 2s subshells of neon,” Phys. Rev. A 84,
061404 (2011).
[70] S. Nagele, R. Pazourek, J. Feist, and J. Burgd¨orfer, “Time shifts in photoemission from
a fully correlated two-electron model system,” Phys. Rev. A 85, 033401 (2012).
[71] R. Pazourek, J. Feist, S. Nagele, and J. Burgd¨orfer, “Attosecond streaking of correlated
two-electron transitions in helium,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 163001 (2012).
[72] A. Kubo, K. Onda, H. Petek, Z. J. Sun, Y. S. Jung, and H. K. Kim, “Femtosecond
imaging of surface plasmon dynamics in a nanostructured silver film,” Nano Lett. 5,
1123–1127 (2005).
[73] M. Sukharev and T. Seideman, “Phase and polarization control as a route to plasmonic
nanodevices,” Nano Lett. 6, 715–719 (2006).
[74] F. Le, N. Z. Lwin, N. J. Halas, and P. Nordlander, “Plasmonic interactions between a
metallic nanoshell and a thin metallic film,” Phys. Rev. B 76, 165410 (2007).
[75] M. I. Stockman, “Nanoplasmonics: the physics behind the applications,” Phys. Today
64, 39–44 (2011).
[76] C. H. Zhang and U. Thumm, “Laser-assisted photoemission from adsorbate-covered
metal surfaces: time-resolved core-hole relaxation dynamics from sideband profiles,”
Phys. Rev. A 80, 032902 (2009).
[77] C. Lemell, B. Solleder, K. Tokesi, and J. Burgd¨orfer, “Simulation of attosecond streaking
of electrons emitted from a tungsten surface,” Phys. Rev. A 79, 062901 (2009).
[78] A. K. Kazansky and P. M. Echenique, “One-electron model for the electronic response
of metal surfaces to subfemtosecond photoexcitation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 177401
(2009).
[79] A. S. Kheifets and I. A. Ivanov, “Delay in atomic photoionization,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,
233002 (2010).

REFERENCES
439
[80] C. H. Zhang and U. Thumm, “Electron-ion interaction effects in attosecond time-
resolved photoelectron spectra,” Phys. Rev. A 82, 043405 (2010).
[81] S. Nagele, R. Pazourek, J. Feist, K. Doblhoff-Dier, C. Lemell, K. Tokesi, and J.
Burgd¨orfer, “Time-resolved photoemission by attosecond streaking: extraction of time
information,” J. Phys. B 44, 081001 (2011).
[82] I. A. Ivanov, “Time delay in strong-field photoionization of a hydrogen atom,” Phys.
Rev. A 83, 023421 (2011).
[83] C. H. Zhang and U. Thumm, “Streaking and Wigner time delays in photoemission from
atoms and surfaces,” Phys. Rev. A 84, 033401 (2011).
[84] C. H. Zhang and U. Thumm, “Effect of wave-function localization on the time delay in
photoemission from surfaces,” Phys. Rev. A 84, 065403 (2011).
[85] E. E. Krasovskii, “Attosecond spectroscopy of solids: streaking phase shift due to lattice
scattering,” Phys. Rev. B 84, 195106 (2011).
[86] A. G. Borisov, D. Sanchez-Portal, A. K. Kazansky, and P. M. Echenique, “Resonant and
nonresonant processes in attosecond streaking from metals,” Phys. Rev. B 87, 121110(R)
(2013).
[87] L. Eisenbud, “Formal properties of nuclear collisions,” PhD thesis, Princeton University,
1948.
[88] F. T. Smith, “Lifetime matrix in collision theory,” Phys. Rev. 118, 349–356 (1960).
[89] E. P. Wigner, “Lower limit for the energy derivative of the scattering phase shift,” Phys.
Rev. 98, 145–147 (1955).
[90] C. A. A. de Carvalho and H. M. Nussenzveig, “Time delay,” Phys. Rep. 364, 83 (2002).
[91] J. C. Baggesen and L. B. Madsen, “Theory for time-resolved measurements of laser-
induced electron emission from metal surfaces,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 032903 (2008).
[92] H. Friedrich, Theoretical Atomic Physics, 3rd ed. (Springer, Berlin, New York, 2005).
[93] O. Smirnova, M. Spanner, and M. Ivanov, “Analytical solutions for strong field-driven
atomic and molecular one- and two-electron continua and applications to strong-field
problems,” Phys. Rev. A 77, 033407 (2008).
[94] H. Goldstein, C. P. Poole, and J. L. Safko, Classical Mechanics, 3rd ed. (Addison
Wesley, San Francisco, 2002).
[95] E. Bothschafter, S. Neppl, and R. Kienberger, “Few-femtosecond and attosecond elec-
tron dynamics at surfaces,” in Progress in Ultrafast Intense Laser Science IX, edited by
K. Yamanouchi (Springer, 2013), pp. 183–211.
[96] A. Cavalieri, F. Krausz, R. Ernstorfer, R. Kienberger, P. Feulner, J. Barth, and D.
Menzel, “Attosecond time-resolved spectroscopy at surfaces,” in Dynamics at Solid
State Surfaces and Interfaces, (John Wiley & Sons, 2010), pp. 537–553.
[97] A. Zangwill, Physics at surfaces (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Cam-
bridgeshire, New York, 1988).
[98] H. Petek and S. Ogawa, “Femtosecond time-resolved two-photon photoemission studies
of electron dynamics in metals,” Prog. Surf. Sci. 56, 239–310 (1997).
[99] M. Drescher, M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, G. Tempea, C. Spielmann, G. A. Raider,
P. Corkum, and F. Krausz, “X-ray pulses approaching the attosecond frontier,” Science
291, 1923–1927 (2001).
[100] E. Magerl, S. Neppl, A. L. Cavalieri, E. M. Bothschafter, M. Stanislawski, T. Uphues,
M. Hofstetter, U. Kleineberg, J. V. Barth, D. Menzel, et al., “A flexible apparatus for

440
ATTOSECOND PHYSICS
attosecond photoelectron spectroscopy of solids and surfaces,” Rev. Sci. Instr. 82, 063104
(2011).
[101] E. E. Krasovskii, V. M. Silkin, V. U. Nazarov, P. M. Echenique, and E. V. Chulkov,
“Dielectric screening and band-structure effects in low-energy photoemission,” Phys.
Rev. B 82, 125102 (2010).
[102] F. Salvat, A. Jablonski, and C. J. Powell, “ELSEPA—Dirac partial-wave calculation
of elastic scattering of electrons and positrons by atoms, positive ions and molecules,”
Comput. Phys. Commun. 165, 157–190 (2005).
[103] Q. Liao and U. Thumm, “Attosecond time-resolved photoelectron dispersion and pho-
tochemistry time delays,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 023602 (2014).
[104] L. Miaja-Avila, C. Lei, M. Aeschlimann, J. L. Gland, M. M. Murnane, H. C. Kapteyn,
and G. Saathoff, “Laser-assisted photoelectric effect from surfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97,
113604 (2006).
[105] U. Thumm, “Theory of fast ion surface collisions at grazing-incidence—emission of
electrons due to capture and loss to the continuum,” J. Phys. B 25, 421–435 (1992).
[106] Q. Liao and U. Thumm, “Initial-state, mean-free-path, and skin-depth dependence of
attosecond time-resolved IR-streaked XUV photoemission from single-crystal magne-
sium,” Phys. Rev. A 89, 033849 (2014).
[107] E. V. Chulkov, V. M. Silkin, and P. M. Echenique, “Image potential states on metal
surfaces: binding energies and wave functions,” Surf. Sci. 437, 330–352 (1999).
[108] S. Tanuma, C. J. Powell, and D. R. Penn, “Calculations of electron inelastic mean free
paths. IX. Data for 41 elemental solids over the 50 eV to 30 keV range,” Surf. Interface
Anal. 43, 689–713 (2011).
[109] F. S¨ußmann, S. L. Stebbings, S. Zherebtsov, S. H. Chew, M. I. Stockman, E. R¨uhl,
U. Kleineberg, T. Fennel, and M. F. Kling, “Attosecond electron dynamics in nanostruc-
tures,” in Attosecond Physics, edited by T. Schultz, and M. J. J. Vrakking (John Wiley
& Sons, 2013).
[110] D. K. Gramov and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, “Plasmonics beyond the diffraction limit,” Nat.
Photon. 4, 83–91 (2010).
[111] C. Varin, C. Peltz, T. Brabec, and T. Fennel, “Attosecond plasma wave dynamics in
laser-driven cluster nanoplasmas,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 175007 (2012).
[112] C. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles
(John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1983).
[113] S. Maier, Plasmonics: fundamentals and applications (Springer, New York, 2007).
[114] P. K¨urpick, U. Thumm, and U. Wille, “Resonance formation of hydrogenic levels in
front of metal surfaces,” Phys. Rev. A 56, 543–554 (1997).
[115] J. Ducr´ee, H. J. Andr¨a, and U. Thumm, “Neutralization of hyperthermal multiply charged
ions at surfaces: comparison between the extended dynamical overbarrier model and
experiment,” Phys. Rev. A 60, 3029–3043 (1999).
[116] A. Schmitz, J. Shaw, H. S. Chakraborty, and U. Thumm, “Band-gap-confinement and
image-state-recapture effects in the survival of anions scattered from metal surfaces,”
Phys. Rev. A 81, 042901 (2010).
[117] B. Obreshkov and U. Thumm, “H-formation in collisions of hydrogen atoms with an
Al(100) surfaces,” Phys. Rev. A 87, 022903 (2013).
[118] F. J. Garc´ıa de Abajo and P. M. Echenique, “Wake potential in the vicinity of a surface,”
Phys. Rev. B 46, 2663–2675 (1992).

REFERENCES
441
[119] F. J. Garc´ıa de Abajo and P. M. Echenique, “Surface wake in the random-phase approx-
imation,” Phys. Rev. B 48, 13399–13407 (1993).
[120] J. I. Gersten and N. Tzoar, “Many-body formalism for photoemission studies,” Phys.
Rev. B 8, 5671–5683 (1973).
[121] N. Tzoar and J. I. Gersten, “Calculation of many-body effects on energy-distribution
curves in photoemission,” Phys. Rev. B 8, 5684–5695 (1973).
[122] E. Goulielmakis, M. Uiberacker, R. Kienberger, A. Baltuska, V. S. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi,
T. Westerwalbesloh, U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, M. Drescher, et al., “Direct mea-
surement of light waves,” Science 305, 1267–1269 (2004).
[123] A. Taflove and S. C. Hagness, Computational Electrodynamics: the Finite-Difference
Time-Domain Method, 3rd ed. (Artech House, Boston, MA, 2005).
[124] G. Mie, “Beitr¨age zur Optik tr¨uber Medien, speziell kollodialer Metall¨osungen,” Ann.
Phys. 330, 337–445 (1908).
[125] S. Lal, N. K. Grady, G. P. Goodrich, and N. J. Halas, “Profiling the near field of a
plasmonic nanoparticle with Raman-based molecular rulers,” Nano Lett. 6, 2338–2343
(2006).
[126] A. G. Borisov, P. M. Echenique, and A. K. Kazansky, “Attostreaking with metallic
nano-objects,” New J. Phys. 14, 023036 (2012).
[127] F. Kelkensberg, A. F. Koenderink, and M. J. J. Vrakking, “Attosecond streaking in a
nano-plasmonic field,” New J. Phys. 14, 093034 (2012).
[128] J. S. Prell, L. J. Borja, D. M. Neumark, and S. R. Leone, “Simulation of attosecond-
resolved imaging of the plasmon electric field in metallic nanoparticles,” Ann. Phys.
525, 151–161 (2013).
[129] J. Lin, N. Weber, A. Wirth, S. H. Chew, M. Escher, M. Merkel, M. F. Kling,
M. I. Stockman, F. Krausz, and U. Kleineberg, “Time of flight-photoemission elec-
tron microscope for ultrahigh spatiotemporal probing of nanoplasmonic optical fields,”
J. Phys. Cond. Mat. 21, 314005 (2009).
[130] S. H. Chew, S. S¨ußmann, C. Sp¨ath, A. Wirth, J. Schmidt, S. Zherebtsov, A. Guggen-
mos, A. Oelsner, N. Weber, J. Kapaldo, et al., “Time-of-flight-photoelectron emission
microscopy on plasmonic structures using attosecond extreme ultraviolet pulses,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 100, 051904 (2012).
[131] A. Mikkelsen, J. Schwenke, T. Fordell, G. Luo, K. Kl¨under, E. Hilner, N. Anttu, A.
A. Zakharov, E. Lundgren, J. Mauritsson, et al., “Photoemission electron microscopy
using extreme ultraviolet attosecond pulse trains,” Rev. Sci. Instr. 80, 123703 (2009).


INDEX
Note: Page number followed by f indicates figure only.
Above-threshold photoemission (ATP)
electrons, 418
Abraham–Minkowski controversy, 9–10
Abraham momentum, 372
Abraham momentum density, 178
Achiral molecules, irradiation of, 253
Active material, 178
Advanced LIGO, 157, 158
Aether drag, 330
Alice’s and Bob’s position observables, 126
Amplitude-squeezed, 122
Angular momentum, 16, 321
Angular uncertainty relationship, orbital
angular momentum and, 323–324
Anisotropic materials, 180
biaxial materials, 181–183
gyrotropic materials, 183–186
uniaxial materials, 180–181
Annihilation operator, 137, 138
Anti-Stokes wave, 368–369
Arrayed waveguide gratings (AWGs), 378
Astigmatism, 329
Atomic ensembles, for squeezed light
generation, 146–147
Attosecond, 388
Attosecond light pulses, 388
generation of, 390–392
Attosecond nanoplasmonic microscopy,
431–432, 433f
Attosecond physics, 388
advent of, 388–389
attosecond light pulses through HHG,
390–392
attosecond streaking from
nanostructures, 425
attosecond nanoplasmonic
microscopy, 431–432, 433f
instantaneous versus ponderomotive
streaking, 425–428
modeling of, 429–431
electromagnetic forces by ultrashort
laser pulses, 389–390
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
443

444
INDEX
Attosecond physics (Continued)
streaked photoemission from solids
fs to sub-fs time-resolved
experiments on surfaces, 407–409
modeling of photoemission delay in
tungsten, 416–417
photoemission delay measured for
tungsten surfaces, 409–412
photoemission from magnesium
surfaces, 417–420
photoemission from rhenium
surfaces, 417
plasmon-response effects in,
420–425
theoretical models on, 412–416
time-resolved photoemission from atoms
emission and characterization of
photoelectron wave packets,
393–397
IR streaking field, influence of,
397–407
time-resolving optoelectronic
phenomena on attosecond scale,
392–393
Attosecond streaking technique, 390, 407,
409
Attosecond timescales, phenomena at, 389
Azimuthal index, 322
Backward light, 364
Balanced homodyne detection, 136–138
Basov model, 370
Beam splitter model of loss, 135, 135f
Beam splitter transformation, 133–134
Beam transformations, 329–332
coordinate transformation, 329
rephasing of linear states, 329–330
Bell inequality, violation of, 334
Bell states, 216
Bessel beams, 323, 351–352
Bialynicki–Birula’s wave equation, 349
Bianisotropic material
Faraday chiral materials, 188–189
mirror-conjugated and racemic chiral
materials, 187–188
motion-induced bianisotropy, 189–190
pseudochiral materials, 189
uniaxial and biaxial materials, 186–187
Biaxially bianisotropic, 186
Biaxial materials, 181–183
Biisotropic material, 180
Biphotons, 12
Birefringent materials, 329
BKS proposal, 97
Black speck, 326
Bloch sphere, 85, 87f
for OAM, 331, 331f
Blue-detuned atom trapping, 329
Bogoliubov transformation, 129
Born–Oppenheimer approximation, 250
Bose–Einstein condensates (BEC), 364
Bose–Einstein statistics, 7
Boys–Post constitutive relations, 171, 174
Brilloun scattering, 147, 148
Canonical momentum, 10
Canonical quantization, 233
Carrier–envelope phase (CEP), 390, 390f
Casimir forces, 15
Casimir–Polder dispersion potential energy
formula, 265
Cauchy integral formula, 172
Causality, 171–173
Cavity and circuit QED, 105–106
Jaynes–Cummings model, 106–108
Jaynes–Cummings model with decay,
109–110
strong coupling, 110–111
Center-of-mass (COM) analysis of
spectrograms, 410, 412f
Chirality, 16
Chiral nematic liquid crystals, 191
Chiral sculptured thin films (CSTFs),
191–192
Chiral smectic liquid crystals, 191
Chiroptical effects, 251–255
Cholesteric liquid crystals, see Chiral
nematic liquid crystals
Circular dichroism, 251–255
Circular differential Rayleigh and Raman
scattering, 251, 254
Circularly polarized light, 321
Circularly polarized luminescence, 255
Classical field, quantum optics, 97
Classical Maxwell fields, 342–344
Classical optical state, 149

INDEX
445
Classical theory of coherence, 28–38
geometry of Young’s interference
experiment, 29
in space-frequency domain, 34–38
complete spatial coherence, 37–38
cross-spectral density function,
34–35
degree of coherence, 35–37
stationary random function, 34
in space-time domain, 28–34
complete spatial coherence, 33–34
degree of coherence, 29–32
fluctuations in unison, 33
in structure determination of random
media, 40–43
Coherence, 18–19
classical theory of, 28–38
in space-frequency domain, 34–38
in space-time domain, 28–34
overview, 27–28
quantum theory of, 52–55
Coherent arrays of detectors/emitters, 327
Coherent drive, 90
Coherent plane wave propagation, 41
Coherent population oscillations (CPO),
365, 369–370
Coherent-state fidelity, 153
Coherent states, 80
Colliding pulse mode-locked (CPM) dye
laser, 281
Complete spatial coherence
in space-frequency domain, 37–38
in space-time domain, 33–34
Complete spectral coherence,
cross-spectrally pure field for,
39–40
Conduction-band (CB) states, 416
Confocal fluorescence microscope, 307,
308f
Constitutive dyadics, 171
constraints, 171–175
causality, 171–173
Onsager relations, 173–174
Post constraint, 174–175
specializations, 175–178
dissipative, nondissipative, and active
materials, 176–178
Lorentz reciprocity, 175–176
Constitutive relations, 168–169
Continuous-variable quantum information
processing, 148. See also
Squeezed light
Continuous-variable quantum repeater, 158
Continuous-variable quantum teleportation,
102–103, 152–154
Coordinate transformation, 329
Coulomb gauge, 232
Coulomb-laser (CL) phase, 405
CPO, see Coherent population oscillations
(CPO)
Cross-spectral density function (CSD
function), 34–35
Cross-spectral density matrix (CSD matrix),
36–37
equal-point, 47
two-point, 51–52
Cross-spectrally pure field, 38–43
complete spectral coherence and, 39–40
conditions for, 38–39
CSTFs, see Chiral sculptured thin films
(CSTFs)
Cyclical particle accelerator, 327
Cylindrical lens mode converters, 324, 324f
Data packets, in telecommunication system,
379
De-excitation phenomenon, modification
of, 205–206
Degree of coherence
in space-frequency domain, 35–37
in space-time domain, 29–32
Degree of polarization, 3
Dehmelt, Hans, 94
Dehmelt scheme, 94–95
Delay-bandwidth product, 379
Dexter theory, 263
Dielectric–magnetic materials, 179
Diffractive optical elements (DOEs),
325–326
Dipole emitter near edge
dipole along y-axis, 215
dipole moment normal to z-plane,
213–214
normal modes, 211–213
single-emitter de-excitation rate, 213
Dipole or quadrupole photons, 17

446
INDEX
Dispersion-balanced autocorrelators, 390
Dispersion curve, 8
Dispersive media, photon drag effects by,
371–372
Dissipation, in materials, 176, 178
Distances, measurements of, by
single-mode squeezed light, 124
DOEs, see Diffractive optical elements
(DOEs)
Doppler shift, 331
Dove prisms, 324, 332
Dressed or medium-dressed Photons, 8–9
Dressed states, 107–108
Duality symmetry, in piecewise
homogeneous and isotropic
media, 347–351
Duality transformation of electromagnetic
fields, 344. See also
Electromagnetic duality and
optical helicity
Dual-rail single-photon qubits, 154
Dwell times, 397
Dynamic radiation-induced intermolecular
energy shift, 267, 267f
Dyson expansion for master equation, 94
Eikonal approximation (EA), 405
Einstein A coefficient, 245
Einstein B coefficient, 246
EIT, see Electromagnetically induced
transparency (EIT)
Electric photon, 17
Electromagnetically induced transparency
(EIT), 365, 368, 375
Electromagnetic duality and optical helicity,
342, 344–347
applications of framework
Bessel beams, 351–352
Kerker conditions, 358–359
optical vortices in focusing, 352–355
optical vortices in scattering,
355–358
spin to orbit angular momentum
transfer, 351
duality symmetry in piecewise
homogeneous and isotropic
media, 347–351
symmetries and operators, 342–344
Electromagnetic energy equation, 5
Electromagnetic theory of materials, 165
constitutive dyadics, 171
constraints, 171–175
specializations, 175–178
linear materials, 178–179
anisotropic materials, 180–186
bianisotropic material, 186–190
isotropic materials, 179–180
nonhomogeneous materials, 190–194
macroscopic viewpoint, 166
constitutive relations, 168–169
Maxwell postulates, 166–168
time/frequency domain, 169–171
nonlinear materials, 194–196
nonlinearity of quantum
electrodynamics vacuum, 196
notation employed, 166
Electron, 389–390
Electron beams, OAM in, 327
Emission of light, 244–246
spontaneous, 244–245, 245f
stimulated, 245–246
Energy spectrum, 107–108
Entangled photons, 12
Entanglement swapping, 154
Equal-point CSD matrix, 47
Equal-time correlation functions, 44
Euler–Lagrange equations, 232
Even Schr¨odinger kitten, 150, 151f
Ewald’s spheres of reflection, 42
Eye-opening penalty, 380
Fabry-Perot cavity, 144
Fano factor, 97
Faraday chiral materials, 188–189
Fast electrons, 428
Fast light, 364
Femtochemistry, 389
Femtosecond Ti:sapphire laser, 280
Fermi golden rule formula, 208, 210
Ferroelectric crystals, 147
Few-cycle laser pulse, 390
Fiber Bragg grating (FBG), 378
Fiber or waveguide grating structures, 367
Field phasors, 170
Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
method, 425
Fluctuations in unison, 33
Fluorescence, 14

INDEX
447
Fluorescence anisotropy, 299–304
Fock space operators, 346
Forked diffraction grating, for measuring
OAM, 332
Forked holograms, 333
F¨orster energy transfer, 14
F¨orster resonance energy transfer (FRET)
studies, 309
Forward scattering, 249
Franck–Condon principle, 291
Free charges, and bound charges, 166
Free rotors, two- and multiphoton
absorption in, 304–307
Frequency-domain approach, to homodyne
measurements, 139–141, 140f
Frequency-domain constitutive relations,
169–170
Frequency-resolved optical gating (FROG)
devices, 390
Fresnel drag, 330
FROG-CRAB (Frequency-Resolved
Optical Gating for Complete
Reconstruction of Attosecond
Bursts), 392
Front velocity, 370
Gain distortion factor, 379
GEO 600, Germany, 155
Geometrical symmetries, 341–342
Glauber coherence theory, 95–96
Glauber–Lewinstein’s expression, 208
Glauber’s theory of coherence, 80
G¨oppert Mayer (GM) units, 289
Gouy phase, 66, 322
Gravitational wave detection, application of
squeezed light in, 154–157
Gravitational wave detectors, 155
squeezing in, 124
Gravitational waves (GWs), 154
Group index of dispersive medium, 370
Group velocity of light, 9, 364
GWs, see Gravitational waves (GWs)
Gyrofrequency, 184
Gyrotropic materials, 183–186
Hamiltonian and essential states, 207–208
Harmonic oscillator, quantum mechanics of,
78–80
Helically phased beams, 322f, 323
Helicoidal bianisotropic material, 192
Heralded photon, 12
Heralded single photons, 149
Hermite-Gaussian (HG) modes, 323, 331.
See also Orbital angular
momentum (OAM)
Hermite–Gauss (HG) modes, 67, 69
Hermitian operator, transformations
generated by, 342–344
HG modes, see Hermite–Gauss (HG)
modes
HHG, see High harmonic generation
(HHG)
High harmonic generation (HHG), 390–392
Hilbert space, 123, 342
Hilbert transforms, 172
Holograms, 325
phase-only, 325–326
Homodyne and heterodyne detection, 99,
105
quantum state tomography and
teleportation, 102–103
simple single-mode model, 99–101
squeezed light, 101–102
Homodyne tomography, 138–139
Homogenized composite materials
(HCMs), 188
Hot spots, 428
Hybrid entanglement, 334
Hyperpolarizability tensor, 268
Image rotation, 329
Ince–Gaussian beams, 67, 323
Incoherent vortices, by spiral phase plate,
327, 327f
Induction fields, 167
Information velocity, 370
Instantaneous regime, 428
Intensity-dependent refractive index, 286,
288
Intensity fluctuations, 18–19
Interaction Hamiltonian, 238, 239
Interaction vertex, 242
Interferometric methods, for measuring
OAM, 332
Interferometric spectrometers, 377–379,
380–381
Interferometry, 124
IR-streaked photoemission spectra, 398

448
INDEX
IR streaking field, influence of, on
photoemission process, 397–399
Coulomb–laser interactions, 404–407
final-state interactions, 401–404
initial-state perturbation, 399–401
Isotropic chiral materials, 179–180
Isotropic materials, 179–180
dielectric–magnetic materials, 179
isotropic chiral materials, 179–180
Jablonski diagram, 291
Jaynes–Cummings Hamiltonian, 107
Jaynes–Cummings model with decay,
109–110
Jellium model, 416
Kelley–Kleiner formula, 96, 103–104
Kerker conditions, 358–359
Kerr medium, 333
effect of, on coherent state, 147, 148f
Kramers–Heisenberg dispersion formula,
246–250
Kramers–Kronig relations, 173, 365
Laguerre–Gaussian (LG) beams, 322, 323.
See also Orbital angular
momentum (OAM)
Laguerre–Gauss (LG) modes, 65–69
azimuthal phase, 66
forked amplitude diffraction grating for,
66
Lemon polarization pattern, 68
transverse phase maps for, 66
with unit-norm amplitudes, 68
Laguerre polynomial, 322
Lamb shift, 238
Laser beam, phase singularities in, 323
Laser-induced circular dichroism, 253
Laser speckle, 326
Laser technology, 387
advances in, 388. See also Attosecond
physics
starting of, 388
Lemon polarization pattern, 68
Lewis, Gilbert N., 229
Light beams
partially polarized, 45–46, 51–52
Poincar´e modes of, 67–69
polarized light, 45–46
with spatially variable polarization,
61–73
spatial modes, 65–67
unpolarized, 45–46
Light beams with helical phase fronts, 322f,
323
Light detection and ranging (LIDAR), 376
Light (photon) propagation
directedness of, 10
equations for, 6
material medium and, 8–10
momentum, 9–10
spatial modes, 65–67
speed of, 8–9
LIGO, United States, 155, 157
Lindblad master equation, 89–90, 103
Linear light scattering, 247, 247f. See also
Quantum electrodynamics
(QED)
Linear materials, 178–179
anisotropic materials, 180
biaxial materials, 181–183
gyrotropic materials, 183–186
uniaxial materials, 180–181
bianisotropic material, 186
Faraday chiral materials, 188–189
mirror-conjugated and racemic chiral
materials, 187–188
motion-induced bianisotropy,
189–190
pseudochiral materials, 189
uniaxial and biaxial materials,
186–187
isotropic materials, 179–180
dielectric–magnetic materials, 179
isotropic chiral materials, 179–180
nonhomogeneous materials, 190–191
material analogues of curved
spacetime, 193–194
periodically nonhomogeneous
materials, 191–193
Linear polarizer (LP), 356
Linear transformations, 342
Liquid crystals, 70
L-lines, 72
Localization, 11
Local oscillator (LO), 136
London dispersion energy, 265, 268
Lorentz covariant, 190

INDEX
449
Lorentz force, 167
Lorentz reciprocity, 175–176
Mach–Zehnder (M–Z) interferometer, 332,
378
Mach–Zehnder modulator, 369
Macroscopic fields, 166–167
Macroscopic slow light, see Structural slow
light
Magic-angle configurations, 298
Magnetic circular dichroism, 253
Magnetic photon, 17
Magnetoelectric dyadics, 169
Mandel formula, 97
Markov approximation, 87
Master equation unravelings, 104–105
Material analogues of curved spacetime,
193–194
Material slow light, 364–365, 366f, 375.
See also Slow and fast light
Material specializations, 177–178
Mathieu beams, 323
Maximum fractional delay, 379
Maxwell postulates, 166–168
MC function, see Mutual coherence
function (MC function)
Mean-free path (MFP), electron, 407, 414,
420
Metric, 193
Michelson-type laser interferometer,
155
Micro-fabrication techniques, 325
Micromachines, 328–329
Micropump, 329
Microscopic slow light, see Material slow
light
Mie theory, 425
Millimeter wave, 325, 327
Minimal-coupling Hamiltonian, 233
Minkowski momentum, 372–373
Mirror-conjugated and racemic
characteristics, in bianisotropic
material, 187–188
Mode sorters, use of, for measuring OAM,
333
Mollow spectrum, 92–93
Momentum carried by photon in material
medium, 372–373
Momentum conservation, 334
Momentum-squeezed vacuum state, Wigner
function of, 122, 123f
Monochromatic field, 176–177
Monoclinic biaxial dielectric materials, 182
Motion-induced bianisotropy, 189–190
Multimode quadrature-entangled states, 158
Multiphoton absorption, 279. See also
Multiphoton process
Multiphoton process, 279–280
applications and future prospects,
307–309
historical perspective, 280–281, 282f
molecular two-photon fluorescence,
289–292
applications and future prospects,
307–309
polarization dependence of
two-photon absorption, 292–299
two- and multiphoton absorption in
free rotors, 304–307
two-photon excited fluorescence,
299–304
two-photon absorption, 282
basic principles, 282–284
nonlinear optical polarization,
284–288
two-photon absorption cross-section,
288–289
Multi-photon resonance, 111
Multipolar coupling Hamiltonian, 235–241
Multipole emission, 17
Mutual coherence function (MC function),
30
M–Z interferometer, see Mach–Zehnder
(M–Z) interferometer
Nanophysics, 205
Newton’s equation, 398
No-cloning fidelity, 154
Noether’s celebrated theorem, 341
Nonclassical field, quantum optics, 97
Nonclassical optical states, 149
Nondissipative material, 177–178
Non-forward scattering, 249
Nonhomogeneous materials, 190–191
material analogues of curved spacetime,
193–194
periodically, 191–193
Nonlinear light scattering, 258–261

450
INDEX
Nonlinear materials, 194–196
Nonlinear optical effects, enhancement of,
373
Nonlinear optical polarization, 284–288
Nonlinear optics, 279
Nonlinear processes, OAM in, 333–334
Non-Lorentz reciprocal, 180, 183
OAM, see Orbital angular momentum
(OAM)
OAM-carrying beams, 322
Occupation number, 6
“Odd Schr¨odinger kitten,” 151, 151f
One-photon absorption, 241–244
Onsager relations, 173–174
Open quantum systems, 87
Heisenberg picture, 87
model in 1D, 87–88
quantum Langevin equation and
output field, 88–89
quantum jump, 93–94
Dehmelt scheme, 94–95
Dyson expansion for master
equation, 94
quantum regression, 91
Hanbury Brown and Twiss photon
bunching effect, 92
in manner of Lax, 91–92
Mollow spectrum, 92–93
solving master equation twice, 91
Schr¨odinger picture, 89
coherent drive, 90
Lindblad master equation, 89–90
Pauli master equation, 90
Optical beam, through narrowband filter, 48
Optical binding forces, 266
Optical coherence, see Coherence
Optical eigenstates, 6–7
Optical fibers, 374
squeezing in, 147–148
Optical helicity, 342
Optical homodyne tomography, 138
Optical memories, 375–376
Optical parametric amplifier (OPA),
squeezing in, 144–146, 145f
Optical parametric chirped-pulse amplifier
(OPCPA) lasers, 388
Optical parametric oscillator/amplifier
(OPO/OPA), 144
Optical rotation, 251, 253, 254
Optical solitons, 280
Optical spanners, 327–329
Optical spiral phase plates, 325
Optical tunable delay lines, 374–375
Optical tweezers, 327
Optical vortices, 16, 323
in focusing, 352–355
in scattering, 355–358
Optic axes, 182
Optomechanical cavity, 157
Orbital angular momentum (OAM),
322–323, 351
and angular uncertainty relationship,
323–324
beams with, creation of, 324–327
cylindrical lenses, 324, 324f
diffractive optical elements, 325–326
Q-plates, 326
spiral phase plates, 324–325, 325f
beam transformations, 329–332
in classical imaging, 333
drawback of use of, 334
measuring of, 332
forked diffraction grating, use of, 332
interferometric methods, 332
mode sorters, use of, 333
rotational frequency shift method,
332–333
micro-manipulation through use of,
327–329
in nonlinear and quantum optics,
333–334
Orthorhombic bianisotropic materials, 187
Orthorhombic biaxial dielectric material,
181
Parametric amplification, 365
Parametric down-conversion, 143–146, 149,
334
Partially coherent light, 31, 51–52
Partially polarized light beam, 45–46, 51–52
Pauli master equation, 90
Pauli operators, 84–85
PCCW, see Photonic crystal coupled
waveguide (PCCW)
Periodically nonhomogeneous materials,
191–193
Permittivity and permeability dyadics, 169

INDEX
451
Perturbation theory, 208
Perturbative nonlinear optical phenomena,
280
Petahertz lightwave electronics, 390
P function, 82–83
Phase, 19–20
Phase distortion factor, 379
Phase singularities, 323
Phase-space displacement, implementation
of, 135, 135f
Phase squeezing, 122, 123f
Phase velocity, 8, 363
Photoelectric effect, 387
Photoelectron, 393
Photoelectron emission, 387
Photoelectron wave packets
emission and characterization of,
393–397
Photoemission electron microscopy
(PEEM), 431
Photon antibunching and single-photon
sources, 97–99
Photon blockade, 111
Photon bunching, 98
Photon bunching effect, of Hanbury Brown
and Twiss, 92
Photon counting, 95
classical and nonclassical fields, 97–99
Glauber coherence theory, 95–96
homodyne and heterodyne detection,
99–103
Kelley–Kleiner formula, 96
quantum trajectory theory, 103–105
shot noise and Fano factor, 96–97
Photon drag, 330, 330f, 371–372
Photonic bandgap structures, 367
Photonic crystal coupled waveguide
(PCCW), 376
Photonic crystal (PhC) structure, 366–367,
367f
Photonic integrated circuits (PICs),
374–375
Photon momentum, 5, 9–10
angular, 16
Photon number statistics, 130–132
Photons, 1, 387
Bose–Einstein statistics for, 7
categorization, 7
characteristics of, 2
coherence and fluctuations, 18–19
definition of, 1–2
dipole or quadrupole, 17
dressed or medium-dressed, 8–9
entangled, 12
heralded, 12
information in, 17–18
localization, 11
momentum, 5, 9–10
optical propagation, modes of, 3–5. See
also Light (photon) propagation
polarization and, 3
overview, 1–2
phase, 19–20
quantum foundations, 5–6
quantum optics, development of, 6–7
superluminal, 9
virtual, see Virtual photons
wavefunction, 11–12
Photon wavefunction, 11–12
PICs, see Photonic integrated circuits
(PICs)
Plank’s constant, 321
Plasma frequency, 184
Plasmons, 421–422
Poincar´e modes, 67–69
apparatus for creation, 70
Poincar´e sphere, 62–64
for polarization, 331, 331f
Polaritons, 8–9, 263
Polarization, 3, 331
of light
in frequency domain, 47–50
in time and frequency domains, 50
matrix formulation of, 44–45
patterns produced by superposition, 72
space-time degree of, 50
spatially variable, 61–73
experimental approaches for, 69–70
overview, 61–62
states of, 62–65
statistical similarity and complete, 46–47
of stochastic beams, 43–50
Polarization-maintaining fiber, 148
Polarization singularities, 70–73
C-point, 71–72
L-line, 72
perturbations and, 72–73
Polarization-state map, for star pattern, 71

452
INDEX
Polarized light beam, 45–46
Ponderomotive regime, 428
Position-squeezed vacuum state, Wigner
function of, 122, 123f
Post constraint, 174–175
Primitive fields, 167
Principle of causality, 171–172
Principle of minimal electromagnetic
coupling, 231–235
PROOF (Phase Retrieval by Omega
Oscillation Filtering), 392
Pseudochiral materials, 189
Purcell effect, 109
Q-factor penalty, 380
Q or Husimi function, 82
Q-plates, 326
Quadrature angle, 122
Quadrupole transition, 321
Quantum canonical transformation, 235
Quantum correlations, 215–217
Quantum cryptography, 334
Quantum electrodynamics (QED), 229–231
chiroptical effects, 251–255
emission of light, 244–246
spontaneous, 244–245, 245f
stimulated, 245–246
linear light scattering, 246–250
molecular, 231–235
multipolar coupling Hamiltonian,
235–241
nonlinear light-scattering, 258–261
one-photon absorption, 241–244
radiation-induced interparticle forces,
266–269
resonance energy transfer, 261–264
two-photon absorption, 255–258
van der Waals dispersion interactions,
264–266
Quantum electrodynamics (QED) vacuum,
nonlinearity of, 196
Quantum harmonic oscillator, 121–122
Quantum information, application of
squeezed light in, 148–154, 157
“Quantum internet,” 158
Quantum jump, 93–95
Quantum Langevin equation, 88–89
Quantum mechanics, use of OAM in tests
of, 334
Quantum metrology, application of
squeezed light in, 154–157
Quantum-optical state engineering,
149–151
Quantum optics, 6–7, 77–78
cavity and circuit QED, 105–106
Jaynes–Cummings model, 106–108
Jaynes–Cummings model with
decay, 109–110
strong coupling, 110–111
electric dipole interaction
classical drive, 86
Hamiltonian and coupling strength,
85–86
electromagnetic energy density in, 6–7
electromagnetic field, 80–81
energy density and photon flux, 81
expansion in 1D, 81
equations for light propagation in
vacuum, 6
open systems, 87. See also Open
quantum systems)
Heisenberg picture, 87–89
quantum jump, 93–95
quantum regression, 91–93
Schr¨odinger picture, 89–90
phase-space representations of quantum
state, 82
P function, 82–83
Q or Husimi function, 82
Wigner function, 83–84
photon counting, 95
classical and nonclassical fields,
97–99
Glauber coherence theory, 95–96
homodyne and heterodyne detection,
99–103
Kelley–Kleiner formula, 96
quantum trajectory theory, 103–105
shot noise and Fano factor, 96–97
quantum mechanics of harmonic
oscillator, 78
energy spectrum and photon number,
79
Hamiltonian and observables, 78–79
rotation, displacement, and squeeze,
79–80
radiation Hamiltonian, 6
two-state system or qubit, 84

INDEX
453
Pauli operators, 84–85
rotations and Bloch sphere, 85
Quantum Rabi oscillation, 108
Quantum regression, 91–93
Quantum state tomography and
teleportation, 102
Quantum teleportation protocol, 152, 152f.
See also Continuous-variable
quantum teleportation
Quantum trajectory theory, 103, 104
counts for photoemissive sources,
103–104
simulated detection records, 104–105
Quantum vacuum, 12–15
Casimir forces and, 15
fluctuation, 12–13
virtual photons and, 13–15
Quarter wave plate (QWP), 356
Rabi frequency, 86
Rabi oscillation, 86
Racemic mixture, 180
Radiation Hamiltonian, 6
Radiation-induced interparticle forces,
266–269
Radio waves with OAM, 327
Raman effect, 248, 249–250. See also
Quantum electrodynamics (QED)
Raman scattering, 147, 148
Rayleigh range, 322
Rayleigh scattering, 248–249. See also
Quantum electrodynamics (QED)
Reference time delay, 398
Relative time delay, 398
Rephasing of linear states, 329–330
Resonance energy transfer, 14, 261–264
Right-angle cavity, 224. See also Surface
and cavity nanophotonics
Right circularly (RC) polarized Gaussian
beam, 353
Rosenfeld–Condon formula, 252
Rotational Doppler shift, 329
Rotational frequency shift method, for
measuring OAM, 332–333
Rotations, in quantum optics, 85
Ruby crystals, 364
Sagnac interferometer, 332
Sagnac-type interferometer, 148
SAM, see Spin angular momentum (SAM)
SBS, see Stimulated Brillouin Scattering
(SBS)
SBS Stokes frequency shift, 374
Schr¨odinger equation (SE), 394
Second-harmonic generation, 260–261
Second-order nonlinear interactions, 334
Self-action effects, 279
Self-phase modulation, 279
SFA, see Strong-field approximation
(SFA)
Shot noise, 96–97
Simple single-mode model,
homodyne/heterodyne detection,
99–101
Simplest open cavity, 209–211
Single and coupled ring resonators, 367
Single-atom cooperativity, 109
Single-mode squeezed light, 121–124
Single-photon counting modules (SPCMs),
150f
Singularity index, 71
SLM, see Spatial light modulator (SLM)
Slow and fast light, 363–364
applications of
interferometric spectrometers,
377–379
light detection and ranging, 376–377
optical memories, 375–376
optical tunable delay lines, 374–375
common slow-light processes, 367–370
and enhancement of optical
nonlinearities, 373
fundamental limits on
for interferometric spectroscopy,
380–381
for optical delay lines, 379–380
kinetics properties and photon drag,
371–373
linear response of atomic absorption
lines for, use of, 367–368
mechanisms of slow light, 364
material slow light, 364–365, 366f
structural slow light, 366–367
slow light based on CPO, 369–370
slow light based on EIT, 368
slow light based on SBS, 368–369
superluminal and backward light,
370–371

454
INDEX
Slow light, 9, 364. See also Slow and fast
light
Slow-light delay, 369
Slow-light laser radar (SLIDAR) system,
376–377
Snell’s law, 325
Soliton formation, 280
Space-time degree of polarization, 50
Spatial light modulator (SLM), 69–70, 326,
333
Spatially variable polarization, 61–73
experimental approaches for, 69–70
overview, 61–62
Poincar´e modes, 67–69
states of, 62–65
Spatial nonlocality, 169
SPDC, see Spontaneous parametric
down-conversion (SPDC)
Spectral hole burning, 365
Spectral intensity law, 36
Spectral polarization matrix (SP matrix), 47
Spectrum analyzer, electronic, 141
Speed of light
in medium, 363–364. See also Slow and
fast light
in vacuum, 363
Spherically symmetric system, 341
Spin angular momentum (SAM), 321,
328–329, 328f, 331–332, 351.
See also Orbital angular
momentum (OAM)
Spintronics, 360
Spiral interferometry, 333
Spiral phase plates, 324–325, 325f
SP matrix, see Spectral polarization matrix
(SP matrix)
Spontaneous emission of radiation,
244–245, 245f
Spontaneous parametric down-conversion
(SPDC), 124, 127, 131, 149
degenerate, 124, 124f
non-degenerate, 124f, 127
Squeezed coherent states, 122, 123f, 124
Squeezed light, 101–102, 121, 134–135
detection of
balanced homodyne detection,
136–138
frequency-domain approach,
139–141
time-domain approach, 138–139
preparation, 141–143
in atomic ensembles, 146–147
in fibers, 147–148
via parametric down-conversion,
143–146
in quantum information, 149
continuous-variable quantum
teleportation, 152–154
quantum-optical state engineering,
149–151
in quantum metrology, 154–157
single-mode, 121–124
two-mode, 125–127
Squeezed optical states, 124
Squeezed states, features of
effect of losses, 135–136
photon number statistics, 130–132
single- and two-mode squeezing,
interconversion between,
132–134
squeezed vacuum and squeezed light,
134–135
squeezing operator, 128–130
Squeezed vacuum, 134–135
Squeezing operator, 128
single-mode squeezing, 128–129
two-mode squeezing, 129–130
Squeezing parameter, 122, 128
SRS, see Stimulated Raman scattering
(SRS)
Standard quantum limit (SQL), 123
State sequence representation, 240–241
Static electric dipolar coupling tensor, 268
Static radiation-induced intermolecular
energy shift, 268, 268f
Stimulated Brillouin Scattering (SBS),
368–369, 374
Stimulated emission of radiation, 245–246
Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS), 365,
374
Stochastic beams, polarization properties
of, 43–50. See also Light beams
complete polarization, 46–47
in frequency domain, 47–50
matrix formulation, 44–45
statistical similarity, 46–47
in time and frequency domains, 50
unpolarized, polarized, and partially
polarized, 45–46
Stokes parameters, 3

INDEX
455
Stokes wave, 368–369
Stopped light, 364, 375
Strong-field approximation (SFA), 401–403
Structural slow light, 366–367, 376. See
also Slow and fast light
Structured light, 15–18
chirality and angular momentum, 16
complex modes, 15–16
information in photon, 17–18
multipole emission, 17
vector beams, 15–16
Sum-frequency generation, 258–260, 259f
Superluminal and backward light, 9,
370–371
Superluminal photons, 9
Surface and cavity nanophotonics, 205–207
dipole emitter near edge
dipole along y-axis, 215
dipole moment normal to z-plane,
213–214
normal modes, 211–213
single-emitter de-excitation rate,
213
entanglement, 217–219
Hamiltonian and essential states,
207–208
quantum correlations, 215–217
simplest open cavity, 209–211
wedge cavities, 219–223
Surface impedance matching condition,
349
Symmetries and operators, 342–344
Synchotron, 327
Table-top laser systems, 388
TAMA, Japan, 155
TDSE, see Time-dependent Schr¨odinger
equation (TDSE)
Technical noises, and quantum noise, 139
Teleportation, 152. See also
Continuous-variable quantum
teleportation
Telescopes, OAM in, for detection of
off-axis light, 333
Tellegen constitutive relations, 171
Temporal nonlocality, 169
Third-harmonic generation, 261, 286
Third-order nonlinear interaction, 333
Time-averaged Poynting vector, 178
Time delay, 396–397
Time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation
(TDSE), 394, 402, 406–407
Time-domain constitutive relations, 169
Time-domain homodyne detection,
138–139
Time-of-flight PEEM (TOF-PEEM), 432
Time-ordered diagrams, 240–241
one-photon absorption, 242, 243f
for resonance energy transfer, 262, 262f
Time-resolved photoelectron emission
experiments, 392
TMSV, see Two-mode squeezed vacuum
(TMSV)
Total system propagator, 240
Transmission electron microscope (TEM),
327
Transverse Maxwell fields, 342
Triclinic biaxial dielectric materials, 182
Twin-beam state, see Two-mode squeezed
vacuum (TMSV)
Two-level model, 207
Two-mode squeezed vacuum (TMSV),
125–127
heralded single photons by, 149
use of, 127
wavefunction of, 125–126
Two-photon absorption, 280. See also
Multiphoton process
polarization dependence of, 292–299
Two-photon absorption cross-section,
288–289
Two-photon absorption of light, 255–258
Two-photon excited fluorescence, 299–304
Two-photon fluorescence lifetime imaging
microscopy (FLIM), 309
Two-photon microscope, 309, 310f
Two-photon resonance, 111
Ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions, 409
Ultrashort radiation in extreme ultraviolet
(XUV) radiation, 388–389,
393–397
Ultrasound waves, phase singularities in,
323
Uncertainty principle, 122, 127, 154
Uniaxial anisotropic materials, 180–181
Uniaxial bianisotropic materials, 187
Unidirectional edge enhancement, 333
Unperturbed Hamiltonian, 239
Unpolarized light beam, 45–46

456
INDEX
Vacuum-field Rabi splitting, 110
Vacuum fluctuation, 12–13
Van der Waals dispersion interactions,
264–266
Vector beams, 3, 15–16
Vector space, 342
VIRGO, Italy, 155
Virtual, 247
Virtual photon cloud, 14
Virtual photons, 231, 261, 264, 270
in action, 13–14
definition of, 13
propagation of, 14–15
Virtual states, 282
Volkov states, 402
Vortex beam, and spatial coherence,
327
Wave packet, propagation speed of,
364
Wedge cavities, 219–223
Wigner function, 83–84, 122, 153
of single-oscillator states, 122, 123f
Wigner time delay, 397
X-ray vortex, 327

FIGURE 3.1
(a) Poincar´e sphere and (b) states of polarization as a function of the angles 𝜒and 𝜃. Right- and left-handed
ellipses are colored red and blue, respectively.
FIGURE 3.3
(a) Forked amplitude diffraction grating used to produce LG modes in (b). Each order has a different
topological phase, shown below in colored phase maps, where each color is a unique phase (modulo 2𝜋).
FIGURE 3.4
(a) Lemon polarization pattern formed by a superposition of LG modes, one with topological charges 1
and 0, in opposite states of circular polarization. (b) Illustration of the mapping of the beam pattern onto the Poincar´e
sphere. Right- and left-handed ellipses are colored red and blue, respectively.
Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I, First Edition.
Edited by David L. Andrews.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

FIGURE 3.6
(a) Polarization-state map for a star pattern, created by the superposition of LG modes with topological
charges 1 and 0, in opposite circular polarization states, but the reverse combination as Figure 3.4. (b) Measured
polarization field for the pattern corresponding to a star, taken with the setup of Figure 3.5. The color map is the phase of
the Stokes field 𝜎12.
FIGURE 3.7
(a) Polarization patterns produced by the superposition of LG+3
0 and LG−3
0 modes in circular polarization
eigenstates. (b) LG+2
0 and LG−2
0 modes in linear polarization eigenstates. The central points are singular. Regions of right-
and left-handed ellipticity are colored red and blue, respectively.
–3
–2
–1
0
X
1
2
3
–3
–2
–1
0
1
Y
2
3
–3
–2
–1
0
X
1
2
3
–3
–2
–1
0
1
Y
2
3
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.2
Wigner functions for (a) the Fock state |2⟩and (b) the coherent state superposition |3⟩−| −3⟩.

1
Beff
–1
0
–1
1
0
–1
1
V
W
n
FIGURE 4.3
The Bloch sphere: for on-resonance driving the precessing Bloch vector describes a circle in a plane
parallel to the orange (u,w)-plane.
(weak)
281.5 nm
2P3/2
2P1/2
2D5/2
2D3/2
5d106p
5d 6s
9
2
5d106s S
2
1/2
194 nm
(strong)
0
4X105
3X105
2X105
9.46x104
9.50x104
9.54x104
0.0
0.5
1.0
Probability
1X105
Time (strong transition lifetimes)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.6
(a) Level scheme used for the realization of quantum jumps in Mercury II [37]. (b) The probability to
occupy the weak excited state evolves continuously (green curve) in a quantum trajectory simulation (Section 4.4.4.2).
0
0
1
2
g(2)
Intensity
Time
(a)
0
0
1
2
g(2)
(b)
Intensity
Time
Time
0
0
1
2
g(2)
(c)
FIGURE 4.7
Simulated photon counting sequences: (a) filtered thermal light, (b) laser turn-on, and (c) resonance
fluorescence. Green curves plot the a priori rate of events (classical intensity); an event rate for resonance fluorescence
must include back-action (Section 4.4.4.2).

(a)
|0,–⟩
|1,–⟩
|2,–⟩
|0,+⟩
|1,+⟩
|E0⟩
|E1,–⟩
|E1,+⟩
|E2,–⟩
|E2,+⟩
hωc
hωa
(b)
|n–1,–⟩
|n,–⟩
|n–2,+⟩
|n–1,+⟩
|En–1,–⟩
|En–1,+⟩
|En,–⟩
|En,+⟩
(c)
|E–⟩
|E+⟩
|E–⟩
|E+⟩
ω
1
2
+
ω
1
2
+
ω
1
2
–
ω
1
2
–
+ ω+
+ ω+
+ ω–
+ ω–
FIGURE 4.11
Dressed state energies: (a) lower rungs of the Jaynes–Cummings ladder; (b) equally split doublets for
n ≫1; (blue, red, green) transitions yield the (lower, center, upper) peaks of the Mollow spectrum (Section 4.3.3.4); (c)
quasi-energies show the same transition frequencies as (b).
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
25
50
75
100
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Photon number
2
1
Probe frequency
0
2
1
0
FIGURE 4.12
Cavity photon number for increasing drive strength (red to cyan); for 𝜔c = 𝜔a, 𝛾∕𝜅= 0, and g∕𝜅= 50.
One- and two-photon resonances are shown on the left and photon blockade on the right.
Parametric down-conversion
Idler
Signal
Homodyne detection
Remote state preparation
SPCM
Local oscillator
Weak coherent states
SPCM
FIGURE 5.15
Generating arbitrary superpositions of the zero-, one-, and two-photon states. The light in the idler
channel of parametric down-conversion is brought into interference with two weak coherent states and subsequently
detected by single-photon counting modules (SPCMs). A double “click” heralds the generation of the desired state in the
signal channel.

5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
50
0
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
z (nm)
(MHz)
Δ
= 5.76
ε
= 52.96 * 1015 s–1
ω
FIGURE 7.2
Variation of the energy shift with the position of the dipole emitter z from a planar dielectric surface. The
red curve represents the excited state shift and the blue curve the ground state, while the black represents the pure van
der Waal’s potential.
1.5
1
0.5
0
0
2
4
6
ky
kx
8
10 10
8
6
4
2
0
2
1
0
2
4
6
(a)
(b)
8
10
10
8
6
4
2
0
kx
ky
FIGURE 7.4
(a) Spatial distribution of Γ(z)∕Γ0, the relative de-excitation rate on the z = 0 plane of the right-angle
cavity. The dipole moment is oriented in the z-direction, that is, parallel to both surfaces. The color code is such that from
blue to red is equivalent to from minimum to maximum. (b) Spatial distribution of Γy∕Γ0, the de-excitation rate in the z
= 0 plane of the open right-angle cavity. The dipole moment is oriented along the y-direction, that is, normal to one of
the surfaces. The color code is such that from magenta to red is equivalent to from minimum to maximum. See the text
for further details.
10
5
00
5
(a)
(b)
10
–0.6
0
Γ
1.4 10
5
00
5
10
–0.3
0
Γ
0.5
FIGURE 7.6
Spatial distribution of the pair correlation term Γ defined by Eq. (7.34) in the z = 0 plane of the right-angle
cavity. One of the emitters is fixed at the point (x1, y1) = ( −𝜆, −𝜆), shown by the cross, while the position of the second
emitter is varied across the z-plane. (a) Both dipoles are parallel to the y-axis, shown by the arrow. (b) Both dipoles are
parallel to the z-axis, indicated by the dot inside a circle.

20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20–20 –15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2.5
1.5
0.5
2
1
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18 20
16
4
3.5
3
2
1
2.5
1.5
0.5
0
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(f)
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
2.5
1.5
0.5
0
2
1
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20–20 –15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–20 –15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
FIGURE 7.11
De-excitation rates in units of Γ0 for dipole moments localized in the x–y plane near the wedge edge in
a wedge with an opening angle of Φ0 = 𝜋∕4 (dipole parallel to plane) (a); with an opening angle of Φ0 = 𝜋∕4 (dipole
perpendicular to the plane) (b); with an opening angle Φ0 = 3𝜋∕4 (c) (note the tendency to the planar surface case
(attained when Φ0 = 𝜋) as the opening angle increases); with an opening angle of Φ0 = 3𝜋∕2 (d), but dipole moments
are oriented in the direction of increasing Φ; with an opening angle of Φ0 ≈2𝜋(e), but dipole moments are oriented in the
direction of increasing Φ; with an opening angle of Φ0 ≈2𝜋(f), but the dipole moments are oriented in the z-direction.
Distances along the horizontal (x-axis) and vertical (y-axis) are in units of −𝜆, the reduced transition wavelength.
Single-photon excitation
Two-photon excitation
Fluorescein in methanol, 5 × 10–4M
700
650
600
550
500
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Wavelength (nm)
Normalized signal (a.u.)
FIGURE 9.4
Steady-state fluorescence spectra of fluorescein obtained using single-photon excitation at 500 nm and
two-photon excitation at 800 nm. Although the two-photon transition energy is higher, 3.1 eV versus 2.48 eV, fast
relaxation within the excited state manifold leads to the rapid population of the same low-lying vibrational levels in S1 as
shown by the equivalence of the emission spectra.

= 1
= −1
undetermined
FIGURE 11.1
A field composed by the superposition of five plane waves is an eigenstate of helicity with eigenvalue
equal to one if all the plane waves have left-handedness (left panel), equal to minus one if they all have right-handedness
(central panel) and it is not an eigenstate of helicity if some plane waves have a handedness and others have the opposite
(right panel).
(a)
× 10–2
+
≠μ
×4
×100
×4
×100
× 10–1
× 10–1
× 10–2
14
18
4
3
2
1
0
15
10
5
0
6
4
2
0
10
5
0
(b)
(d)
(c)
ε
=μ
ε
≠μ
ε
=μ
ε
+
–
–
+
+
–
–
FIGURE 11.2
Impact of the different symmetries on the field scattered by two dielectric structures. The upper row
shows the scattered intensity for a symmetric cylinder and the lower row for a panflute like shape without any rotational,
translational or spatial inversion symmetry. The length and diameter of the cylinder are 200 nm. The panflute is made
of cylinders of different lengths and diameters, the longest one is 200 nm long and the total panflute’s width is around
200 nm. In (a) and (c) the structures have 𝜖= 2.25, 𝜇= 1, while in (b) and (d) we enforced duality symmetry by setting
𝜖= 𝜇= 𝜖glass = 2.25. The incident field is a plane wave of well defined helicity equal to 1, momentum vector pointing
to the positive z axis and a wavelength of 633 nm. Its electric field is (̂x + îy)∕
√
2 exp(kz −𝜔t). The left half side of
each subfigure corresponds to the scattered field with helicity equal to the incident plane wave Λ+; the right half is for
the opposite helicity Λ−. The calculation plane is perpendicular to the z axis and 20 nm away from the surface of the
scatterers opposite to the one where the incident field comes from. The calculation area is 700×700 nm. For color scaling
purposes, the right half side is multiplied by the factor in the upper right corner. The (lack of) cylindrical symmetry of
the structures results in (non-)cylindrically symmetric field patterns, which is consistent with the geometry of each case.
On the other hand, both scatterers behave identically with respect to conservation of helicity, which is seen to depend
exclusively on the electromagnetic properties of the material.

−10
0
10
–10
0
10
Time (ns)
−10
0
10
Time (ns)
Time (ns)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
x
y
x
y
x
y
Matched
Mismatch
Mismatch
Corrected
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Other
components
g
g
g
Group delay 
matching plane
Group delay 
compensated
2-D 
group delay
control
Opt. phase
control
Power
control
Emitters
Emitter
 plane
on-axis
 x & y tilt
 x tilt
5.9 ns
Ch.1
Ch.3
Ch.2
5.9 ns
5.8 ns
9.2 ns
Far-field 
pattern
Corrected
10.2 ns
Combined signal
FIGURE 12.3
(a) The schematics of a SLIDAR system capable of 2D beam steering; normalized time traces of
the returned signal when the system is pointing on-axis (b), tilted in the x-direction (c), and tilted in both the x- and
y-directions (d).
FIGURE 13.2
Carrier–envelope phase (CEP) stable, few-cycle pulses at 800 nm. The electric fields for different CEP
values are shown in color. The pulse envelope is indicated as a solid black line. Reproduced from Reference 27 with the
permission of the PCCP Owner Societies.

(a)
x
e–
e–
Core
(b)
1.2
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–200
Time (as)
FROG-CRAB retrieved
PROOF retrieved
67 ± 2 as
–100
0
100
200
1.0
Wkin
Wb
Wbind
0
0.8
3
0
2
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Normalized intensity
Phase (rad)
FIGURE 13.3
(a) High harmonic generation process illustrated for an atom. Reprinted from Reference 48 with copyright
permission of Annual Reviews. (b) Retrieved pulse duration (with two retrieval algorithms indicated in the legend, for
details see Reference 18) of an isolated attosecond pulse spanning a spectral range from 55 to 130 eV. Reprinted from
Reference 18 with copyright permission of OSA.
Hypothetical reference
z
zX
kmax
ΨPE
=
vg =
ω
d  k
dk
FIGURE 13.6
Displacement of the photoelectron wave packet ||𝜓PE (t)⟩, relative to a fictitious reference wave packet.
Both wave packets move with group velocity vg to a photoelectron detector. A photoemission time delay can be defined
as tX = zX∕vg.
XUV-IR delay
Delay (fs)
–4
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Ne
Counts/ΔE
0
4
8
12
(b)
–3 –2 –1
0
1
2
3
4
Relative time delay ΔtX
 ΔtX,2p–2s = (21 ± 5) as
(a)
Center of energy
Energy (eV)
FIGURE 13.9
(a) Illustration of the relative photoemission time delay, ΔtX, for photoionization from two energetically
separate atomic levels. The two initial states yield energetically separated streaking traces in the photoelectron streaking
spectrum. ΔtX is obtained from the phase difference between the centers of energy of the two traces. (b) Measured
photoemission streaking spectrum for XUV photoionization of Ne. The relative photoemission time delay for emission
out of 2s and 2p levels is determined as ΔtX,2p−2s = (21 ± 5). Adapted from Reference 53.

16
14
XUV photoemission from ground state
XUV photoemission from first excited state
Polarized
Unpolarized
Polarized
Unpolarized
12
10
8
24
22
20
18
16
14
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
12
8
4
16
12
8
4
28
24
20
16
12
28
24
20
16
12
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
Photoelectron energy (eV)
Photoelectron energy (eV)
ECOE (eV)
ECOE (eV)
4
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
4
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
4
–4
–2
0
2
Relative time delay (fs)
4
FIGURE 13.11
The effect of initial-state perturbation (here referred to as “polarization”) by the IR streaking field on
XUV photoemission from the ground state of an 1D model hydrogen atom for ℏ𝜔X = 25 eV XUV pulses with a pulse
length of 300 as. (a) Spectrogram including initial state polarization. (b) Spectrogram without initial state polarization.
(c) Corresponding central energies ECOE (𝜏) obtained as first moments in energy from the streaking traces. (d, e, f) Same
as (a, b, c) for XUV photoionization from the first excited state of the model hydrogen atom. Adapted from Reference 80.

30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Kinetic energy (eV)
Photoelectron counts (a.u.)
 
 
XUV + IR
XUV only
ATI
FIGURE 13.15
Raw photoelectron spectra of tungsten (110) measured with (red curve) and without (blue curve) the
presence of the probe NIR streaking field using 91 eV, XUV photons. The spectra show two distinct peaks originating
from 5d/6sp valence and 4f/5p core levels at ∼83 and ∼56 eV, respectively. In the presence of the NIR probe field, there
is an intense photoelectron signal below 35 eV induced by above threshold ionization (ATI). Each spectrum was obtained
by integration over 60,000 laser pulses (from Reference 95 with permission of John Wiley & Sons).
−4
−2
0
2
4
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Kinetic energy (eV)
Photoelectron counts (a.u.)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
−4
–2
0
2
4
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Energy shift (norm.)
(b)
85  35 as
XUV-IR delay   (fs)
XUV-IR delay   (fs)
(a)
fit CB
fit 4f
COM CB
COM 4f
FIGURE 13.17
(a) Raw attosecond streaking technique spectrogram of a tungsten (110) surface. Photoelectron inten-
sities are given in arbitrary units. (b) Center-of-mass (COM) analysis of the spectrogram. The COM of both emission
lines measured are given as dots, and a global fit to both COM traces is shown in solid lines (from Reference 96 with
permission of John Wiley & Sons).

96
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
94
92
90
88
86
64
62
60
58
56
–6
4f kinetic energy (eV) cond. kinetic energy (eV)
–4
–2
0
2
4
Relative delay   (fs)
Relative delay   (fs)
FIGURE 13.18
Time-resolved, streaked photoelectron spectra for emission from the CB (top) and 4f-core levels
(bottom) of a W(110) surface as a function of the delay between the XUV and IR pulses. Linear intensity scales.
Experimental results of Cavalieri et al. [51] (left) in comparison with numerical simulations of Reference 4 (right).
Reprinted with permissions of APS.
Kinetic energy (eV)
Intensity (a.u.)
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
0
1
2
3
0
–1
–1
Relative NIR-XUV delay (fs)
Induced energy shift (eV)
–2
–2
–3
–3
–4
–5
1
2
3
4
5
CB states
Re4f states
 Re4f
CB
Inelastically
scattered
electrons
(a)
(c)
100 as
0
–1
–2
–3
1
2
3
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Kinetic energy (eV)
Relative NIR-XUV delay (fs)
 Re4f
 CB (×7)
(b)
FIGURE 13.20
Attosecond, time-resolved photoemission from the (0001) surface of rhenium. (a) Static photoelectron
emission from rhenium (in the absence of the NIR streaking field) obtained with HH radiation filtered by a 6-eV (FWHM)
bandwidth mirror centered near 125 eV. The background of inelastically scattered electrons (blue dashed line) is removed
before the analysis. The full streaking spectrogram is shown in panel (b), with the CB intensity scaled by a factor of
7. The comparison of the first moments of the streaked electron distributions as a function of the NIR–XUV delay,
shown in panel (c), reveals emission of the 4f photoelectrons from the metal surface delayed by 100 as compared to the
photoelectrons released from the conduction-band states. (Adapted from Reference 96, with permission of John Wiley &
Sons).

Relative XUV-NIR delay (fs)
Energy shift (eV)
−4
−3
−2
–2
−1
−1
0
VB – Fit
2p – Fit
VB – COEs
2p – COEs
0
1
1
2
2
3
4
FIGURE 13.21
Timing analysis of the VB and 2p core-level photoemission from Mg(0001). Calculated center-of-
energies (COE) for the VB and 2p region of the spectrogram (depicted as crosses) are fitted to a pair of parameterized
analytic functions describing the vector potential of the NIR streaking pulse. The absence of a relative shift between the
fitted functions, shown as red solid line for the VB and blue dotted line for the 2p emission, provides evidence for a
synchronous release of these electrons from the metal surface. Adapted from Reference 52.
2p
60
65
70
75
Relative XUV−NIR delay (fs)
Kinetic energy (eV)
VB
(a)
105
110
115
120
125
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−2
−1
0
1
2
Relative XUV−NIR delay (fs)
Energy shift (eV)
 
 
(b)
VB
2p
FIGURE 13.22
(a) Calculated streaked photoemission spectrum for a Mg(0001) surface. The XUV-chirp rate is
𝛽= −2 fs−2 and the NIR-field CEP is 𝜙= 1.22𝜋. The MFPs are 𝜆= 5.0 ˚A for VB photoelectron and 𝜆= 4 ˚A for 2p-core
level photoelectron. (b) Corresponding center-of-energy shift. The 2p-core level center-of-energy shift is multiplied by
1.09 for better comparison. Adapted from Reference 103.

z/R
x/R
−2
−1
0
1
2
−2
−1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
α
NIR pump
e−
FIGURE 13.27
Attosecond nanoplasmonic streaking principle illustrated for a spherical metal particle. An NIR pump
pulse excites a localized surface plasmon in a metal nanoparticle, and a synchronized attosecond extreme-ultraviolet
(XUV) pulse ejects photoelectrons. The field caused by the collective electron motion in the nanoparticle is imprinted in
the kinetic energy of the electrons, which are measured by TOF spectroscopy. The inset shows the near-field around the
nanoparticle as calculated by Mie theory in the y = 0 plane through the center of the sphere [66]. Due to the symmetry of
the plasmonic field in nanoparticles with diameters much smaller than the laser wavelength, the point of electron emission
is uniquely defined by the angle 𝛼. Reprinted from Reference 66 with copyright permission of APS.
Delay (fs)
Energy (eV)
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
80
90
100
110
120
ϕ
Δ s
ΔE
(b)
χ (nm)
Ekin (eV)
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Δ s(rad)
ϕ
(a)
FIGURE 13.28
(a) Phase shift Δ𝜙s between the waveform apparent in the streaking spectrogram (red line) and the
local near-field oscillation (blue dash-dotted line). (b) Phase shift Δ𝜙s as a function of initial electron energy Ekin and
spatial decay constant 𝜒for a fixed plasmonic decay constant of 𝜏pl = 10 fs and a laser wavelength of 𝜆= 720 nm [109].
The upper left corner (Δ𝜙s close to zero) corresponds to the instantaneous streaking regime. The lower right corner (Δ𝜙s
close to 𝜋/2) corresponds to the ponderomotive streaking regime.

80
100
120
−4
−2
0
2
4
80
100
120
Energy (eV)
Delay (fs)
(b)
(a)
EX (V/nm)
EX
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
(deg)
α  
FIGURE 13.29
Simulated streaking waveforms for electrons emitted at different positions (defined by the angle 𝛼in
Figure 13.27) on a Au sphere with a diameter of 10 nm (a) and 100 nm (b). The blue dash-dotted line indicates the driving
field. Adapted from Reference 66 with copyright permission of APS.
Delay (fs)
Energy (eV)
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
80
90
100
110
120
(a)
Delay (fs)
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
80
90
100
110
120
0
40
80
120
(b)
Counts
10 nm
100 nm
FIGURE 13.30
Simulated streaking spectrograms for 10 nm (a) and 100 nm (b) Au spheres. The red line shows the
contribution of electrons emitted on axis with the laser polarization vector. Reprinted from Reference 66 with copyright
permission of APS.

δECOE (eV)
 
12
0
–12
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
60
40
20
x (nm)
z (nm)
20
40
60
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
t = t1
t = t1 + 0.38 fs
t = t1 + 0.77 fs
t = t1 + 1.16 fs
FIGURE 13.32
Topographic color maps of the streaking energy shift 𝛿ECOE, of electrons emitted by an XUV pulse in
the plane of this nanostructure. (a)–(d) Different times after excitation of the nanostructure by a 5.5-fs pulse at 800 nm.
The time t1 corresponds to a time at which the near-field in the hotspot has reached a peak. Adapted from Reference 65
with copyright permission of Nature.

