

Physics of Photonic Devices 

WILEY SERIES IN PURE AND APPLIED OPTICS 
Glenn Boreman, Series Editor 
BABCOCK * Silicate Glass Technology Methods 
BARRETT AND MYERS * Foundations of Image Science 
BEISER * Holographic Scanning 
BERGER-SCHUNN * Practical Color Measurement 
BOND * Crystal Technology 
BO YD * Radiometry and The Detection of Optical Radiation 
BUCK * Fundamentals of Optical Fibers, Second Edition 
CATHEY *Optical Information Processing and Holography 
CHUANG * Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition 
DELONE AND KRAINOV * Fundamentals of Nonlinear Optics of Atomic Gases 
DERENIAK AND BOREMAN * Infrared Detectors and Systems 
DERENIAK AND CROWE * Optical Radiation Detectors 
DE VANY * Master Optical Techniques 
ELMEER * Optical Design Of Reflectors, Second Edition 
ERSO Y * Diffraction, Fourier Optics and Imaging 
GASKILL * Linear Systems, Fourier Transform, and Optics 
GOODMAN * Statistical Optics 
HOBBS * Building Electro-Optical Systems: Making it All Work 
HUDSON * Infrared System Engineering 
IIZUKA * Elements of Photonics, Volume I: In Free Space and Special Media 
IIZUKA * Elements of Photonics, Volume II: For Fiber and Integrated Optics 
JUDD AND WYSZECKl * Color in Business, Science, and Industry, Third Edition 
KAFRI AND GLATT * The Physics of Moire Metrology 
KAROW * Fabrication Methods for Precision Optics 
KLEIN AND FURTAK * Optics, Second Edition 
KHOO * Liquid Crystals, Second Edition 
MA AND ARCE * Computational Lithography 
MALACARA * Optical Shop Testing, Third Edition 
MILONNI AND EBERLY * Lasers 
NASSAU * The Physics and Chemistry of Color: The Fifteen Causes of Color, Second Edition 
NIETO-VESPERINAS * Scattering and Diffraction in Physical Optics 
OSCHE * Optical Detection Theory for Laser Applications 
O'SHEA * Elements of Modern Optical Design 
OZAKTAS * The Fractional Fourier Transform 
PRATHER * Photonic Crystals: Theory, Applications and Fabrication 
SALEH AND TEICH * Fundamentals of Photonics, Second Edition 
SCHUBERT AND WILHELMI * Nonlinear Optics and Quantum Electronics 
SHEN * The Principles of Nonlinear Optics 
UDD * Fiber Optic Sensors: An Introduction for Engineers and Scientists 
UDD * Fiber Optic Smart Structures 
VANDERLUGT * Optical Signal Processing 
VEST * Holographic Interferometry 
VINCENT * Fundamentals of Infrared Detector Operation and Testing 
WALKER * Marine Light Field Statistics 
WEINER * Ultrafast Optics 
WILLIAMS AND BECKLUND * Introduction to the Optical Transfer Function 
WYSZECKl AND STILES * Color Science: Concepts and Methods, Quantitative Data and Formulae, Second 
Edition 
XU AND STROUD * Acoustic-Optic Devices 
YAMAMOTO * Coherence, Amplification, and Quantum Effects in Semiconductor Lasers 
YARIV AND YEH * Optical Waves in Crystals 
YEH * Optical Waves in Layered Media 
YEH * Introduction to Photorefractive Nonlinear Optics 
YEH AND GU * Optics of Liquid Crystal Displays, Second Edition 

Physics of Photonic Devices 
Second Edition 
SHUN LIEN CHUANG 
Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
WILEY 
A JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., PUBLICATION 

Copyright © 2009 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved 
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey 
Published simultaneously in Canada 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior 
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee 
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, 
fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should 
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, 
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission. 
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or 
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable 
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor 
author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited 
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages. 
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our 
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at 
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002. 
Wiley also publishes its books in variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not 
be available in electronic format. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at 
www.wiley.com. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Pubtication Data: 
Chuang, Shun Lien. 
Physics of photonic devices / Shun Lien Chuang.—2nd ed. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-470-29319-5 (cloth) 
1. Electrooptics. 2. Electrooptical devices. 3. 
Semiconductors 
QC673.C482009 
621.38Γ045—dc22 
I. Title. 
2008022814 
Printed in Mexico 
10 9 
8 7 6 5 

To My Wife, Shu-Jung, with Love 


Contents 
Preface 
xiii 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
1 
1.1 
Basic Concepts of Semiconductor Band and Bonding Diagrams 
1 
1.2 
The Invention of Semiconductor Lasers 
4 
1.3 
The Field of Optoelectronics 
8 
1.4 
Overview of the Book 
15 
Problems 
19 
References 
19 
Bibliography 
21 
PART I 
FUNDAMENTALS 
25 
Chapter 2. Basic Semiconductor Electronics 
27 
2.1 
Maxwell's Equations and Boundary Conditions 
27 
2.2 
Semiconductor Electronics Equations 
30 
2.3 Generation and Recombination in Semiconductors 
40 
2.4 
Examples and Applications to Optoelectronic Devices 
48 
2.5 
Semiconductor p-N and n-P Heterojunctions 
53 
2.6 
Semiconductor n-N Heterojunctions and 
Metal-Semiconductor Junctions 
69 
Problems 
73 
References 
74 
Chapter 3. Basic Quantum Mechanics 
77 
3.1 
Schrödinger Equation 
78 
3.2 The Square Well 
80 
3.3 The Harmonic Oscillator 
90 
3.4 
The Hydrogen Atom and Exciton in 2D and 3D 
95 
3.5 
Time-Independent Perturbation Theory 
97 
3.6 Time-Dependent Perturbation Theory 
104 
Appendix 3A: Löwdin's Renormalization Method 
107 
Problems 
110 
References 
111 

viii 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 4. Theory of Electronic Band Structures 
in Semiconductors 
113 
4.1 
The Bloch Theorem and the k · p Method for Simple Bands 
113 
4.2 
Kane's Model for Band Structure: The k · p Method with 
the Spin-Orbit Interaction 
118 
4.3 Luttinger-Kohn Model: The k · p Method for 
Degenerate Bands 
126 
4.4 The Effective Mass Theory for a Single Band and 
Degenerate Bands 
130 
4.5 
Strain Effects on Band Structures 
132 
4.6 Electronic States in an Arbitrary One-Dimensional Potential 
144 
4.7 
Kronig-Penney Model for a Superlattice 
152 
4.8 Band Structures of Semiconductor Quantum Wells 
158 
4.9 Band Structures of Strained Semiconductor 
Quantum Wells 
168 
Problems 
172 
References 
174 
PART II 
PROPAGATION OF LIGHT 
179 
Chapter 5. Electromagnetics and Light Propagation 
181 
5.1 
Time-Harmonic Fields and Duality Principle 
181 
5.2 
Poynting's Theorem and Reciprocity Relations 
183 
5.3 
Plane Wave Solutions for Maxwell's Equations 
in Homogeneous Media 
186 
5.4 
Light Propagation in Isotropie Media 
186 
5.5 
Wave Propagation in Lossy Media: Lorentz Oscillator Model 
and Metal Plasma 
189 
5.6 
Plane Wave Reflection from a Surface 
197 
5.7 
Matrix Optics 
202 
5.8 
Propagation Matrix Approach for Plane Wave Reflection 
from a Multilayered Medium 
206 
5.9 
Wave Propagation in Periodic Media 
210 
Appendix 5A: Kramers-Kronig Relations 
220 
Problems 
223 
References 
224 
Chapter 6. Light Propagation in Anisotropie Media 
and Radiation 
227 
6.1 
Light Propagation in Uniaxial Media 
227 
6.2 
Wave Propagation in Gyrotropic Media: 
Magnetooptic Effects 
239 

CONTENTS 
ix 
6.3 
General Solutions to Maxwell's Equations and 
Gauge Transformations 
246 
6.4 
Radiation and the Far-Field Pattern 
249 
Problems 
254 
References 
256 
Chapter 7. 
Optical Waveguide Theory 
257 
7.1 
Symmetric Dielectric Slab Waveguides 
257 
7.2 
Asymmetric Dielectric Slab Waveguides 
268 
7.3 
Ray Optics Approach to Waveguide Problems 
271 
7.4 
Rectangular Dielectric Waveguides 
273 
7.5 
The Effective Index Method 
279 
7.6 
Wave Guidance in a Lossy or Gain Medium 
281 
7.7 
Surface Plasmon Waveguides 
285 
Problems 
290 
References 
293 
Chapter 8. 
Coupled-Mode Theory 
295 
8.1 
Waveguide Couplers 
295 
8.2 
Coupled Optical Waveguides 
300 
8.3 
Applications of Optical Waveguide Couplers 
307 
8.4 
Optical Ring Resonators and Add-Drop Filters 
311 
8.5 
Distributed Feedback (DFB) Structures 
322 
Appendix 8A: Coupling Coefficients for Parallel Waveguides 
332 
Appendix 8B: Improved Coupled-Mode Theory 
333 
Problems 
334 
References 
339 
PART III 
GENERATION OF LIGHT 
345 
Chapter 9. Optical Processes in Semiconductors 
347 
9.1 
Optical Transitions Using Fermi's Golden Rule 
347 
9.2 
Spontaneous and Stimulated Emissions 
353 
9.3 
Interband Absorption and Gain of Bulk Semiconductors 
360 
9.4 
Interband Absorption and Gain in a Quantum Well 
365 
9.5 
Interband Momentum Matrix Elements of Bulk and 
Quantum-Well Semiconductors 
371 
9.6 
Quantum Dots and Quantum Wires 
375 
9.7 
Intersubband Absorption 
384 
9.8 
Gain Spectrum in a Quantum-Well Laser with Valence-Band 
Mixing Effects 
391 

x 
CONTENTS 
Appendix 9A: Coordinate Transformation of the Basis Functions 
and the Momentum Matrix Elements 
398 
Problems 
401 
References 
405 
Chapter 10. Fundamentals of Semiconductor Lasers 
411 
10.1 Double-Heterojunction Semiconductor Lasers 
412 
10.2 Gain-Guided and Index-Guided Semiconductor Lasers 
428 
10.3 Quantum-Well Lasers 
432 
10.4 Strained Quantum-Well Lasers 
446 
10.5 
Strained Quantum-Dot Lasers 
457 
Problems 
472 
References 
474 
Chapter 11. Advanced Semiconductor Lasers 
487 
11.1 
Distributed Feedback Lasers 
487 
11.2 Vertical Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers 
502 
11.3 Microcavity and Photonic Crystal Lasers 
515 
11.4 Quantum-Cascade Lasers 
530 
11.5 GaN-Based Blue-Green Lasers and LEDs 
548 
11.6 Coupled Laser Arrays 
571 
Appendix 11 A: Hamiltonian for Strained Wurtzite Crystals 
578 
Appendix 1 IB: Band-Edge Optical Transition Matrix Elements 
581 
Problems 
583 
References 
584 
PART IV 
MODULATION OF LIGHT 
603 
Chapter 12. Direct Modulation of Semiconductor Lasers 
605 
12.1 Rate Equations and Linear Gain Analysis 
605 
12.2 High-Speed Modulation Response with Nonlinear 
Gain Saturation 
611 
12.3 Transport Effects on Quantum-Well Lasers: Electrical 
versus Optical Modulation 
614 
12.4 Semiconductor Laser Spectral Linewidth and the 
Linewidth Enhancement Factor 
622 
12.5 Relative Intensity Noise Spectrum 
629 
Problems 
632 
References 
632 
Chapter 13. Electrooptic and Acoustooptic Modulators 
639 
13.1 Electrooptic Effects and Amplitude Modulators 
639 
13.2 Phase Modulators 
648 

CONTENTS 
13.3 Electrooptic Effects in Waveguide Devices 
652 
13.4 Scattering of Light by Sound: Raman-Nath and 
Bragg Diffractions 
658 
13.5 Coupled-Mode Analysis for Bragg Acoustooptic 
Wave Couplers 
661 
Problems 
664 
References 
666 
Chapter 14. Electroabsorption Modulators 
669 
14.1 General Formulation for Optical Absorption Due to 
an Electron-Hole Pair 
670 
14.2 Franz-Keldysh Effect: Photon-Assisted Tunneling 
673 
14.3 Exciton Effect 
677 
14.4 Quantum Confined Stark Effect (QCSE) 
683 
14.5 Electroabsorption Modulator 
691 
14.6 Integrated Electroabsorption Modulator-Laser (EML) 
693 
14.7 
Self-Electrooptic Effect Devices (SEEDs) 
702 
Appendix 14A: Two-Particle Wave Function and the Effective 
Mass Equation 
705 
Appendix 14B: Solution of the Electron-Hole Effective-Mass 
Equation with Excitonic Effects 
709 
Problems 
714 
References 
714 
PART V 
DETECTION OF LIGHT AND SOLAR CELLS 
721 
Chapter 15. Photodetectors and Solar Cells 
723 
15.1 
Photoconductors 
723 
15.2 p-n Junction Photodiodes 
734 
15.3 p-i-n Photodiodes 
740 
15.4 Avalanche Photodiodes 
744 
15.5 Intersubband Quantum-Well Photodetectors 
756 
15.6 Solar Cells 
761 
Problems 
776 
References 
778 
Appendix A. 
Semiconductor Heterojunction Band Lineups in the 
Model-Solid Theory 
787 
Appendix B. Optical Constants of GaAs and InP 
797 

Xll 
CONTENTS 
Appendix C. 
Electronic Properties of Si, Ge, and a Few Binary, 
Ternary, and Quaternary Compounds 
801 
Appendix D. Parameters for InN, GaN, AIN, and Their 
Ternary Compounds 
807 
Index 
811 

Preface 
Since the publication of the first edition, Physics of Optoelectronic Devices, by 
Wiley in 1995, significant advancements in the scientific field of optoelectronics, 
or photonics in general, have been made. The purpose of this new edition is to 
incorporate the new device concepts and to introduce novel photonic devices 
developed over the past years. 
The new topics covered in this edition include a brief history on the invention of 
semiconductor lasers, the Lorentz dipole model and metal plasma, matrix optics, 
surface plasma waveguides, and optical ring resonators. Surface plasmonics and 
microring resonators have emerged as a new field of research for near-field 
imaging and biophotonics sensing applications. Therefore, we include them in the 
new edition. 
On the generation of light, quantum dots have been researched in the past decade 
for applications to semiconductor lasers and nanophotonics applications. I include the 
theory of optical absorption in quantum dots and quantum wires, and their appli-
cations to semiconductor lasers. The sections on DFB lasers and VCSELs are 
revised with a more compact analysis with numerical examples. Novel microcavity 
and photonic crystal lasers, quantum-cascade lasers, and GaN blue-green lasers are 
exciting research subjects, and they are discussed within the context of advanced 
semiconductor lasers. 
High-speed modulation of quantum-well and quantum-dot lasers, electrical and 
optical modulations, relative-intensity noise, and integrated electroabsorption modu-
lator-laser (EML) play important roles in optical communications. They are presented 
in the section on the modulation of light. 
Solar cells have played an important role in clean energy for the environment, and 
discussion of III-V p-n junction based solar cells has been added. 
INTENDED AUDIENCE 
The book is intended as a textbook for senior undergraduate and graduate students in 
the areas of optics and photonics. Chapters 5-8 and 13 on propagation of light and 
electrooptical modulators can be used independently for students in the optics and 
electromagnetics areas for undergraduate seniors. Chapters 2-4, 9-12, and 14-15 
on semiconductor band structures, semiconductor lasers, electroabsorption modu-
lators, photodetectors, and solar cells will be useful to graduate students as well as 
professionals in the photonics and optoelectronics community. This book will be 
useful for researchers and graduate students in physics, electrical engineering, 
mechanical engineering, and material science. The book covers strained quantum 
Xlll 

XIV 
PREFACE 
wells and quantum dots, semiconductor band structures, and optoelectronic device 
physics. Most of the required formulations are shown in great detail. Selective 
experimental results are included. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I am indebted to many colleagues and students for their collaboration and technical 
discussions during the preparation of the manuscript. During the past years, I have 
had interactions with many colleagues. I am especially grateful to Professor Nick 
Holonyak, Jr., for his guidance, encouragement, and inspiration through coffee 
hours. I collaborate extensively with many colleagues and would like to thank 
them for their technical discussions, challenges, and contributions on many research 
ideas and projects: Professors Connie Chang-Hasnain, Paul D. Coleman, K. Y. Cheng, 
Russell Dupuis, Cun-Zheng Ning, S. H. Park, Hailing Wang, Weng Wang, Ming Wu, 
and Peidong Yang. I also benefited from technical discussions with Professors 
Yasuhiko Arakawa, Dieter Bimberg, Peter Blood, Yong-Hee Lee and Dr. Mitsuru 
Sugawara. I would like to thank my former and current students, postdocs, and visi-
tors for their technical contributions to many publications in the field. Special thanks 
to Doyeol Ahn, Wei-chiao Fang, Matt Fisher, Alan Hsu, X. Jin, Tom Keating, Jungho 
Kim, Piotr Kondratko, Donghan Lee, Maytee Letteramb, Guobin Liu, Jeff Minch, 
and Jean-Francois Seurin for their recent contributions. 
In preparation of the revised edition, I am indebted to Shu-Wei Chang for proof-
reading the entire manuscript. My group members, Guoen Chang, Adrian C. Y. Ni, 
T. R. Lin, Jian Li, Akira Matsudaira, Shin Mou, David Nielsen, and Adam Petschke, 
have contributed technically to the preparation of the figures and proofreading. I also 
thank Kelly C. Voyles for typing most of the chapters. I would like to express my 
gratitude to the students whose enthusiastic response and feedback help with my pres-
entation of the concepts. 
I am deeply indebted to my mother and brother for their unconditional support. 
I am grateful to my wife, Shu-Jung, for her love, dedication, and for inspiration 
from her poetic writing. Without her constant support, this work would have been 
impossible. I thank my children, Kendall, Kanglin, and Kangway, who have been 
a constant joy to our lives. 
SHUN LIEN CHUANG 
May 2008 
Urbana-Champaign, Illinois 

Preface to the First Edition 
This textbook is intended for graduate students and advanced undergraduate students 
in electrical engineering, physics, and material science. It also provides an overview 
of the theoretical background for professional researchers in optoelectronic industries 
and research organizations. This book deals with the fundamental principles in 
semiconductor electronics, physics, and electromagnetics, and then systematically 
presents practical optoelectronic devices including semiconductor lasers, optical 
waveguides, directional couplers, optical modulators, and photodetectors. Both 
bulk and quantum-well semiconductor devices are discussed. Rigorous derivations 
are presented and the author attempts to make the theories self-contained. 
Research on optoelectronic devices has been advancing rapidly. To keep up with the 
progress in optoelectronic devices, it is important to grasp the fundamental physical 
principles. Only through a solid understanding of the fundamental physics are we 
able to develop new concepts and design novel devices with superior performances. 
The physics of optoelectronic devices is a broad field with interesting applications 
based on electromagnetics, semiconductor physics, and quantum mechanics. 
I have developed this book for a course on optoelectronic devices which I have 
taught at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign during the past ten years. 
Many of our students are stimulated by the practical applications of quantum 
mechanics in semiconductor optoelectronic devices because many quantum 
phenomena can be observed directly using artificial materials such as quantum-well 
heterostructures with absorption or emission wavelengths determined by the quantized 
energy levels. 
SCOPE 
This book emphasizes the theory of semiconductor optoelectronic devices. 
Comparisons between theoretical and experimental results are also shown. The 
book starts with the fundamentals, including Maxwell's equations, the continuity 
equation, and the basic semiconductor equations of solid-state electronics. These 
equations are essential in learning semiconductor physics applied to optoelectronics. 
We then discuss the propagation, generation, modulation, and detection of light, 
which are the keys to understanding the physics behind the operation of optoelec-
tronic devices. For example, knowledge of the generation and propagation of light 
is crucial for understanding how a semiconductor laser operates. The theory of 
gain coefficient of semiconductor lasers shows how light is amplified, and waveguide 
theory shows how light is confined to the waveguide in a laser cavity. An understand-
ing of the modulation of light is useful in designing optical switches and modulators. 
XV 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 
The absorption coefficient of bulk and quantum-well semiconductors demonstrates 
how light is detected and leads to a discussion on the operating principles of 
photodetectors. 
FEATURES 
• Important topics such as semiconductor heterojunctions and band structure 
calculations near the band edges for both bulk and quantum-well semicon-
ductors are presented. Both Kane's model assuming parabolic bands and 
Luttinger-Kohn's model with valence-band mixing effects in quantum wells 
are presented. 
• Optical dielectric waveguide theory is discussed and applied to semiconductor 
lasers, directional couplers, and electrooptic modulators. 
• Basic optical transitions, absorption, and gain are discussed with the time-
dependent perturbation theory. The general theory for gain and absorption is 
then applied to studying interband and intersubband transitions in bulk and 
quantum-well semiconductors. 
• Important semiconductor lasers such as double-heterostructure, stripe-geometry 
gain-guided semiconductor lasers, quantum-well lasers, distributed feedback 
lasers, coupled laser arrays, and surface-emitting lasers are treated in great 
detail. 
• High-speed modulation of semiconductor lasers using both linear and nonlinear 
gains is investigated systematically. The analytical theory for the laser spectral 
linewidth enhancement factor is derived. 
• New subjects such as the theories on the band structures of strained semicon-
ductors and strained quantum-well lasers are investigated. 
• The electroabsorptions, in bulk (Franz-Keldysh effects) and quantum-well 
semiconductors (quantum confined Stark effects), are discussed systematically 
including exciton effects. Both the bound and continuum states of excitons 
using the hydrogen atom model are discussed. 
• Intersubband transitions in quantum wells, in addition to conventional interband 
absorptions for far-infrared photodetector applications, are presented. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
After receiving a rigorous training in my Ph.D. work on electromagnetics at 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, I became interested in semiconductor 
optoelectronics because of recent development in quantum-well devices with many 
applications of wave mechanics. I thank Professor J. A. Kong, my Ph.D. thesis 
adviser, and many of my professors for their inspirations and insight. 
Because of the significant number of research results appearing in the literature, it 
is difficult to list all of the important contributions in the field. For a textbook, only 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 
xvii 
the fundamental principles are emphasized. I thank those colleagues who granted me 
permission to reproduce their figures. I apologize to all of my colleagues whose 
important contributions have not been cited. I am grateful to many colleagues and 
friends in the field, especially D. A. B. Miller, W. H. Knox, M. C. Nuss, A. F. J. 
Levi, J. O'Gorman, D. S. Chemla, and the late S. Schmitt-Rink, with whom I had 
many stimulating discussions on quantum-well physics during and after my sabbati-
cal leave at AT&T Bell Laboratories. I would also like to thank many of my students 
who provided valuable comments, especially C. S. Chang and W. Fang, who proof-
read the manuscript. I thank many of my research assistants, especially D. Ahn, 
C. Y. P. Chao, and S. P. Wu, for their interactions on research subjects related to 
this book. The support of my research on quantum-well optoelectronic devices by 
the Office of Naval Research during the past years is greatly appreciated. I am grateful 
to L. Beck for reading the whole manuscript and Kelly C. Voyles for typing many 
revisions of the manuscript in the past years. The constant support and encourage-
ment of my wife, Shu-Jung, are deeply appreciated. Teaching and conducting 
research have been the stimulus for writing this book; it was an enjoyable learning 
experience. 
SHUN LIEN CHUANG 
Illinois, March 1995 


1 
Introduction 
Semiconductor photonic devices such as laser diodes, light-emitting diodes, optical 
waveguides, directional couplers, electrooptic modulators, and photodetectors have 
important applications in lightwave technology systems. To understand the physics 
and the operational characteristics of these photonic devices, we have to understand 
the fundamental principles. In this chapter, we review some of the basic concepts of 
semiconductor electronics, provide a brief history of the invention of semiconductor 
lasers and light-emitting diodes, review the general field of optoelectronics, then 
present the overview of this book. 
1.1 BASIC CONCEPTS OF SEMICONDUCTOR BAND 
AND BONDING DIAGRAMS 
The basic idea is that for a semiconductor, such as GaAs or InP, many interesting 
optical properties occur near the band edges. For example, Table 1.1 shows part of 
the periodic table with many of the elements that are important for semiconductors 
[1], including group IV, III-V, and II-VI compounds. For a III-V compound semi-
conductor such as GaAs, the gallium (Ga) and arsenic (As) atoms form a zinc-blende 
structure, which consists of two interpenetrating face-centered-cubic lattices, one 
made of gallium atoms and the other made of arsenic atoms (Fig. 1.1). The Ga 
atom has an atomic number of 31, which has an [Ar] 3dl04s24p1 
configuration; 
that is, three valence electrons on the outermost shell (4s and 4p states). (Here [Ar] 
denotes the configuration of Ar, which has an atomic number of 18, and the 18 elec-
trons are distributed as 
\s22s22p63s23p6.) 
The As atom has an atomic number of 33 with an [Ar] 3dw4s24p3 configuration or 
five valence electrons in the outermost shell (4s and 4p states). For a simplified view, 
we show a planar bonding diagram [2, 3] in Fig. 1.2a, where each bond between two 
nearby atoms is indicated with two dots representing two valence electrons. These 
valence electrons are contributed by either Ga or As atoms. The bonding diagram 
shows that each atom such as Ga is connected to four nearby As atoms by four 
valence bonds or eight valence electrons. If we assume that none of the bonds is 
broken, then all of the electrons are in the valence band, and no free electrons are 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
1 

Table 1.1 
Part of the Periodic Table Containing Group II-VI Elements 
A 
4 Be 
\s22s2 
12 Mg 
[Ne] 3s2 
20 Ca 
[Ar] 4ί2 
38 Sr 
[Kr] 5s2 
56 Ba 
[Xe] 6s2 
Group Π 
B 
30 Zn 
[Ar] 3dl04s2 
48 Cd 
[Ki]4d105s2 
80 Hg 
[Xe]4f45d106s2 
Group 
A 
5 B 
li 22j 22p' 
13 Al 
[Ne] 3s23pl 
31 Ga 
[Ar] 
3dl04s24p1 
49 In 
[Kr] 4<i105i25p1 
III 
B 
21 Sc 
[Ar] 3dl4s2 
39 Y 
[Kr] 4dl5s2 
Group 
A 
6 C 
1ί22ί22ρ2 
14 Si 
[Ne] 3i23p2 
32 Ge 
[Ar] 3a!104i24p2 
50 Sn 
[Kr] 4d105i25p2 
IV 
B 
22 Ti 
[Ar] 3d24s2 
40 Zr 
[Kr] 4a!25i2 
Group 
A 
7N 
1ί22ί22ρ3 
15 P 
[Ne] 3s23p3 
33 As 
[Ar] 3</104s24p3 
51 Sb 
[Kr] 4rf105i25p3 
V 
B 
23 V 
[Ar] 3rf34i2 
41Nb 
[Kr] 4<fV 
Group 
A 
8 0 
1ί22ί22ρ4 
16 S 
[Ne] 3s23p4 
34 Se 
[Ar] 3rf104i24p4 
52 Te 
[Kr] 4d105i25p4 
VI 
B 
24 Cr 
[Ar] 3d54sl 
42 Mo 
[Kr] 4ds5sl 
Note: [Ne] = ls22s22p6; [Ar] = [Ne] 3s23p6; [Kr] = [Ar] 3rf104i24p6; [Xe] = [Kr] 4d105i25p6 

1.1 
BASIC CONCEPTS OF SEMICONDUCTOR BAND 
3 
f(*+y+z) 
Figure 1.1 
(a) A zinc-blende structure such as those of GaAs and InP semiconductors, (b) The zinc-
blende structure consists of two interpenetrating face-centered-cubic lattices separated by a constant 
vector (a/4)(x + y + z), where a is the lattice constant of the semiconductor. 
(a) 
Bonding diagram 
(c) 
Bonding diagram 
Θ : © 
©: φ 
® · © 
(b) 
Energy band diagram 
Energy 
Empty 
(d) 
Energy band diagram 
Energy 
Full 
Figure 1.2 
(a) A planar bonding diagram for a GaAs lattice. Each bond consists of two valence electrons 
shared by a gallium and an arsenic atom, (b) The energy band diagram in real space shows the valence-band 
edge £v below which all states are occupied and the conduction-band edge Ec above which all states are 
empty. The separation £ c-£ v is the band gap £g. (c) A bonding diagram showing a broken bond due to 
the absorption of a photon with energy above the band gap. A free electron-hole pair is created. Note 
that the photogenerated electron is free to move around, and the hole is also free to hop around at different 
bonds between the Ga and As atoms, (d) The energy band diagram showing the energy levels of the 
electron and the hole. 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
in the conduction band. The energy band diagram as a function of position is shown 
in Fig. 1.2b, where Ec is the band edge of the conduction band and Ev is the band edge 
of the valence band. 
When a photon with an optical energy hv above the band-gap energy Eg is incident 
on the semiconductor, optical absorption is significant. Here h is the Planck constant 
and v is the frequency of the photon, 
he 
1 24 
hv = ^ = ^ 
(eV) 
(1.1.1) 
Λ 
Λ 
where c is the speed of light in free space, and λ is wavelength in micrometers (μπι). 
The absorption of a photon may break a valence bond and create an electron-hole pair, 
shown in Fig. 1.2c, where an empty position in the bond is represented by a hole. The 
same concept in the energy band diagram is illustrated in Fig. 1.2d, where the free elec-
tron propagating in the crystal is represented by a dot in the conduction band. It is 
equivalent to acquiring an energy larger than the band gap of the semiconductor, 
and the kinetic energy of the electron is that amount above the conduction-band 
edge. The reverse process can also occur if an electron in the conduction band recom-
bines with a hole in die valence band; this excess energy may emerge as a photon, 
and the process is called spontaneous emission. In the presence of a photon propagat-
ing in the semiconductor with electrons in the conduction band and holes in the valence 
band, the photon may stimulate the downward transition of the electron from the con-
duction band to the valence band and emit another photon of the same wavelength and 
polarization, which is called a stimulated emission process. Above the conduction-
band edge or below the valence-band edge, we have to know the energy versus momen-
tum relation for the electrons or holes. These relations provide important information 
about the number of available states in the conduction band and in the valence band. By 
measuring the optical absorption spectrum as a function of the optical wavelength, we 
can map out the number of states per energy interval. This concept of joint density of 
states, which is discussed further in the following chapters, plays an important role in 
the optical absorption and gain processes in semiconductors. 
1.2 
THE INVENTION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The first papers about the MASER (microwave amplification by stimulated emission of 
radiation) were published in early 1951 as a result of investigations carried out almost 
simultaneously by Charles Townes and co-workers at Columbia University in 
New York and by Nikolai Basov and Alexander Prokhorov at the Lebedev Institute 
in Moscow [4]. The experimental demonstration of the maser was realized in 1954 
using ammonia gas at 23,870 MHz, which was utilized as a frequency standard for 
some years. The concept of LASER (light amplification by stimulated emission of radi-
ation) was proposed during 1958 to 1960 (called optical maser initially) first by Arthur 
Schawlow and Charles Townes [5] and by other groups [6]. There was a 30-year patent 
war that ended with the award of a few laser patents to Gordon Gould [6], who was the 
first person to use the word laser. The first experimental demonstration was realized 
in 1960 by Theodore Maiman [7] who designed a three-level ruby laser pumped by 

1.2 THE INVENTION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
5 
high-power flashes of intense light. It was then followed by the invention of helium-
neon (HeNe) gas lasers by Ali Javan et al. [8] at Bell Laboratories in 1960. 
At the Solid State Device Research Conference in July 1962, an MIT Lincoln 
Laboratory group and RCA Laboratories reported extremely high efficiency (85% to 
100%) electroluminescence from GaAs diffused junction diodes. Semiconductor 
lasers were invented during September to October 1962 by four groups within 30 
days [9-12] (see the review article by Dupuis in Ref. 13). They were led by Robert 
N. Hall of General Electric Research Development Center, Schenectady, New York; 
Nick Holonyak Jr. of General Electric, Syracuse, New York; Marshall I. Nathan of 
the IBM Research Laboratory, Yorktown Heights, New York; and Robert Rediker 
of the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, Massachusetts. Among the four groups, 
only Holonyak's laser diodes and light-emitting diodes (LEDs) were created from 
single-crystal GaAs^Pj^ alloy material grown by vapor-phase transport and were 
the only devices emitting in the visible region. This work was also the beginning of 
band-gap engineering of ternary compound semiconductors beyond the binary com-
pounds. The other three groups used zinc (Zn) diffused GaAs p-n junction emitting 
in the infrared. Figure 1.3 shows the evolution of visible-spectrum LEDs in terms of 
the electrical to optical power conversion (lumens/watt) since 1962 [14-16]. Over 
the past decades, remarkable progress in the performance of LEDs using compound 
semiconductors has been realized. Improvement of three orders of magnitude in 
power conversion efficiency has been achieved, hence the term Alloy Road (based 
on various compound semiconductors as opposed to single elements such as silicon 
Evolution of LED Efficiency 
Following The Alloy Road 
Vapor-Phase Epitaxy, Liquid-Phase Epitaxy 
200 
100 
3= 
UJ 
1 ■: 
0.1 \ 
Metalorganie 
Chemical Vapor 
Deposition 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000 
2010 
Figure 1.3 The evolution of the electrical to optical power conversion of visible LEDs or the Alloy Road 
based on compound semiconductors. The vertical axis labels the performance (Lumens/Watt) of LEDs 
starting from Holonyak's first commercial GaAsP LED. The performance of Edison's first light bulb is 
also shown. (Reprinted with permission from [161 © 2008 IEEE.) 

(a) 
Conduction band 
Photon emission 
Valence band 
Before 
After 
(b) 
Incident 
photon 
Before 
INTRODUCTION 
Conduction band 
Incident and 
emitted photons 
Valence band 
After 
Figure 1.4 The electron occupation in the conduction and valence bands of a semiconductor, (a) 
Spontaneous emission occurs when an electron in the conduction band recombines with a hole in the 
valence band, (b) Stimulated emission occurs when an incident photon stimulates the recombination of 
an electron-hole pair and generates another photon of the same energy (and polarization). 
and germanium) shown in Fig. 1.3 was coined after the presentation of LumiLeds 
[14-16]. More recently, the realization of the blue and green LEDs based on InGaN 
and their power conversion started to take off in the early 1990s. 
An electron in the conduction band can recombine with a hole (or empty state) in the 
valence band and emit a photon close to the band-gap energy—a process called spon-
taneous emission or more commonly called radiative recombination (Fig. 1.4a). When 
a photon is propagating in the semiconductor with electrons in the conduction band and 
holes in the valence band, a stimulated emission process can cause the number of 
photons to increase. Figure 1.4b shows the electron occupation before and after the 
stimulated emission process. The photons can also be absorbed by exciting electrons 
from the valence band to the conduction band, a process called stimulated absorption. 
However, if we are able to inject enough electrons and holes into the semiconductor to 
reach the so-called population inversion condition, which means that there are more 
downward than upward stimulated transitions, there will be a net gain of the photon 
number or optical intensity. Gain is not the only requirement for a laser. It requires a 
resonator, which can be a one-, two-, or three-dimensional structure. The most 
common one is the Fabry -Perot resonator formed by two parallel mirrors with a 
cavity length L. The light is reflected back and forth between the two mirrors, thus a 
standing wave pattern can be formed for certain resonant wavelengths (Fig. 1.5a). 
When the round-trip gain of the optical intensity is large enough to balance the loss 
due to waveguide absorption and mirror transmission, a threshold condition can be 
reached. It means that the optical field after the round-trip propagation reaches a reson-
ance condition with a constructive phase and an amplitude of 1, 
r\r2e· 
i2kL+(G-a)L 
1 
(1-2.1) 
where rx and r2 are the reflection coefficients of the optical fields from the two end 
facets, k is the propagation constant, 
k = 2πη/λ = 2irvn/c, 
(1.2.2) 

1.2 THE INVENTION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
7 
(a) 
output - f W V W W W V W W W W W W W l 
emission 
Mirror facet 
(b) 
Optical 
emission 
power 
_ 
Output 
emission 
Mirror facet 
\J UUu 
Mode spacing 
Wavelength 
(c) 
Light output power 
Injection current 
Figure 1.5 
(a) Standing wave in a Fabry-Perot cavity, (b) Amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) spec-
tram from a Fabry-Perot cavity, (c) The light output power of a laser diode as a function of the injection 
current. The inset shows the ASE spectrum below threshold and the lasing spectrum above threshold, Zu, 
indicates the threshold current. 
and n is the refractive index of the semiconductor. G is the modal gain coefficient of the 
guided optical mode in the semiconductor waveguide, and a is the absorption coeffi-
cient. Equation (1.2.1) leads to the phase and magnitude conditions for lasing, 
2kL = Ιηιττ 
G = a-{ 
ln( 
2L 
\RiR2 
(1.2.3) 
(1-2.4) 
where/?i= |r]|2andÄ2 = k2|2are the power reflectivities. The phase condition(l. 2.3) 
leads to the Fabry-Perot resonance spectrum 
mc 
2nL 
m = integer. 
(1.2.5) 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
If we ignore the dispersion of the semiconductor (i.e., assuming that n is independent of 
the frequency), the mode spacing is given by Δν = c/(2nL), which is inversely pro-
portional to the cavity length and the refractive index. 
When we inject enough electrons and holes into the semiconductor active region 
such that the gain of the propagation mode becomes significant, the emission of the 
photons gives the so-called amplified spontaneous emission spectrum (ASE), 
Fig. 1.5b. If the gain is large enough to balance the losses of the cavity, (1.2.4), 
the laser threshold can be reached. When we increase the gain by further increasing 
the injection current, laser action is expected to occur. Figure 1.5c shows the laser 
light output power as a function of the injection current. Below a threshold current 
value, the light output power is small and consists of the amplified spontaneous emis-
sion from Fabry-Perot modes. Above threshold, the lasing action occurs, and the 
optical power comes from the modes closest to the peak gain. The field of optoelec-
tronics became possible with the success of semiconductor lasers using various 
heterojunctions, quantum wells, quantum wires, and quantum dots such that the 
optical gain can be enhanced without the energy spread of the carriers due to the 
improvement of the density of states in low-dimensional quantum structures. 
1.3 
THE FIELD OF OPTOELECTRONICS 
Semiconductor crystal growth techniques such as liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE), vapor-
phase epitaxy (VPE), and chemical-vapor deposition (CVD) have been used to grow 
wafers for device applications. The recent progress in modern crystal growth tech-
niques [17] such as molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and metal-organic chemical 
vapor deposition (MOCVD) has demonstrated that it is possible to grow semiconduc-
tors of different atomic compositions on top of another semiconductor substrate with 
monolayer precision. This opens up extremely exciting possibilities of the so-called 
band-gap engineering. For example, aluminum arsenide (AlAs) has a similar lattice 
constant to that of gallium arsenide (GaAs). One can grow a few atomic layers of 
AlAs on top of a GaAs substrate, then grow alternate layers of GaAs and AlAs. 
One can also grow a ternary compound such as Al^Gai -^As (where the aluminum 
mole fraction x can be between 0 and 1) on a GaAs substrate and form a heterojunc-
tion, Fig. 1.6a. Interesting applications have been found using heterojunction struc-
tures. For example, when the wide band-gap MjGa\ -xAs is doped by donors, the 
free electrons from the ionized donors tend to fall to the conduction band of 
the GaAs region because of the lower potential energy on that side, as shown by 
the band diagram in Fig. 1.6b. (This band bending is investigated in Chapter 2.) 
An applied field in a direction parallel to the junction interface will create conduction 
current. Because these electrons conduct in a channel on the GaAs region, which is 
undoped, the amount of impurity scattering can be reduced. Therefore, the electron 
mobility can be enhanced. Based on this concept, the high-electron-mobility transis-
tor (HEMT) has been realized. 
For optoelectronic device applications, heterojunction structures [18] play import-
ant roles. For example, when semiconductor lasers were invented, they had to be 

1.3 
THE FIELD OF OPTOELECTRONICS 
(a) 
Ev 
(b) 
E, 
"" 
E, 
GaAs 
iV-Al^Gaj 
xAs 
Figure 1.6 
(a) A GaAs/AUGa^^As heterojunction formed with different band gaps. The band edge 
discontinuities in the conduction band and the valence band are KEC = 0.67A£g and Δ£ν = 0.33A£g, 
where A£g is the difference of the two band gaps, (b) With n-type doping in the wide gap Al^Ga, _tAs 
region, the electrons ionized from the donors fall into the heterojunction surface layer on the GaAs side 
where the energy is smaller. An internal electric field pointing from the ionized (positive) donors in the 
Alj-Gaj-^As region toward the electrons with negative charges creates band bending, which forms a 
triangular potential in the conduction band to confine the electrons. 
cooled down to cryogenic temperature (77K), and the lasers could läse only in a 
pulsed mode. These lasers had large threshold current densities, which mean that a 
large amount of current has to be injected before the laser can start lasing. With 
the introduction of the heterojunction semiconductor lasers, the concept of carrier 
and photon confinements makes room temperature continuous wave (cw) operation 
possible, because the electrons and holes, once injected by the electrodes on both 
sides of the wide band-gap P-N regions (Fig. 1.7), will be confined in the central 
GaAs region, where the band gap is smaller, resulting in a smaller potential energy 
for the electrons in the conduction band as well as a smaller potential energy for 
holes in the valence band. We note that the energy for the holes is measured down-
ward, which is opposite to that of the electrons. For the photons, it turns out that the 
optical refractive index of the narrow band-gap material (GaAs) is larger than that of 
the wide band-gap material (Al^Gaj -jAs). Therefore, the photons can be confined 
in the active region as well. This double confinement of both carriers and photons 
makes the stimulated emission process more efficient and leads to the room tempera-
ture operation of laser diodes. 
. 
Δ£, 
' 
t 
1.424 eV 
t 
Δ £ ν ■ 
l 
£ gW 
r 
GaAs 
AljjGaj^As 
Electrons 

10 
INTRODUCTION 
£c 
o 
P - A l / S a ^ A s 
ns 
Position z 
Figure 1.7 
A double-heterojunction semiconductor laser structure, where the central GaAs region 
provides both the carrier confinement and optical confinement because of the conduction and valence 
band profiles and the refractive index profile. This double confinement enhances stimulated emissions 
and the optical modal gain. 
The control of the mole fractions of different atoms also makes the band-gap 
engineering extremely exciting. For optical communication systems, it has been 
found that minimum attenuation [19] in the silica optical fibers occurs at 1.30 μπι 
and 1.55 μπι (Fig. 1.8a). The dispersion of light at 1.30 μιη is actually zero 
(Fig. 1.8b). It is therefore natural to design sources such as light-emitting diodes 
and laser diodes, semiconductor modulators, and photodetectors operating at these 
desired wavelengths. In addition, many wavelengths, or the so-called optical channels 
for dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM) applications, near 1550 nm 
with constant frequency spacing such as 50, 100, or 200 GHz can be used to take 
advantage of the broad 24 THz frequency bandwidth near the minimum attenuation. 
For example, by controlling the mole fraction of gallium and indium in an 
In] ^Ga^As material, a wide tunable range of band gap is possible because In As 
has a 0.354 eV band gap and GaAs has a 1.424 eV band gap at room temperature. 
The lattice constant of the ternary alloy has a linear dependence on the mole fraction 
a{AxBx_xC) = xa{AC) + (1 -x)a(BC) 
(1.3.1) 
where a(AC) is the lattice constant of the binary compound AC and a(BC) is that of 
the compound BC. This linear interpolation formula works very well for the lattice 
constant, but not for the band gap. For the band-gap dependence, a quadratic 
/7^. 
Photon 
emission 
GaAs 
- £ v 
N-Al/ja^As 
Refractive index 
profile 

1.3 THE FIELD OF 
(a) 
10 
Optical 
attenuation 
1 
dB/km 
0.5 
0.1 
1.3 
1.55 
Wavelength (μιτι) 
(b) 
Chromatic 
dispersion 
o 
ps/nm/km 
-10 
Figure 1.8 
Simplified illustrations of (a) attenuation spectrum and (b) the dispersion parameter of light 
propagating in silica optical fiber. 
dependence on the mole fraction x is usually required (see Appendices C and D on 
pages 801-809 for some important material systems) 
EZ{AXBX_XC) = xEs(AC) + (1 - x)Eg(BC) -bx(l- 
x) 
(1.3.2) 
where b is called the bowing parameter because it causes a deviation of the ternary 
band-gap energy away from a linear interpolation of the two band-gap energies of 
the binary compounds. Figure 1.9 plots the band-gap energy at T = OK as a function 
of the lattice constant for many binary and ternary compound semiconductors [20]. 
For example, GaAs has a band gap of 1.519 eV at low temperature and a lattice con-
stant of 5.6533 A, whereas InAs has a band gap of 0.417 eV and a lattice constant of 
6.0584 A, as indicated. A ternary In] ^Ga^As compound has the two end points at 
GaAs (x = 0) and InAs (x = 1) and its band gap has a slight downward bowing 
below a linear interpolation. At x = 0.468, the In0.532Gao.468As alloy has a lattice 
constant matched to that of the InP (5.8688 Ä). 
For Al^Gai jAs ternary compounds with 0 < x < 0.4, the following formula is 
commonly used at room temperature: 
£g(AlxGa,_^As) = 1.424 + 1.247* (eV). 
(1.3.3) 
Most ternary compounds require a quadratic term because the bowing parameter is 
not zero. From the above formula, we can calculate the conduction and valence 
band edge discontinuities between a GaAs and an Al^Gai -^As heterojunction using 
ECTRONICS 
11 
■=>°: 
ID 
J 
L 
1.3 
1.55 
Wavelength (μιη) 

12 
INTRODUCTION 
3.0 
2.5 
5~ 2.0 
30* 
Q. 
a 1.5 
>, 
e> 
£ 1.0 
UJ 
0.5 
5.4 
5.6 
5.8 
6.0 
6.2 
6.4 
6.6 
Lattice constant (A) 
Figure 1.9 
A plot of band-gap energy at T= OK as a function of the lattice constant for a few III-V 
compound semiconductors and their ternary alloys. The Γ-valley gives the direct band gap (solid), and 
the indirect X- and L-valleys are indicated by dotted and dashed lines, respectively. After [20] © 2001, 
American Institute of Physics [Reprint with permission]. 
AEC = 0.67A£g and AEV = 0.33A£g where AES = 1.247* (eV). When very thin layers 
of heteroj unction structures are grown with a layer thickness thinner than the coherent 
length of the conduction band electrons, quantum size effects occur. These include the 
quantization of the subband energies with corresponding wave functions (Fig. 1.10a). 
The success in the growth of quantum-well (QW) structures makes a study of the 
introductory quantum physics realizable in these man-made semiconductor materials 
[21, 22]. Because of the low-dimensional confinement of electrons and holes in the 
quantum structures, many electronic and optical properties differ significantly from 
those of the bulk materials. Many interesting quantum mechanical phenomena using 
quantum structures and their applications have been predicted and confirmed exper-
imentally [22]. For a simple quantum-well potential, we have the particle in a box 
model. These quantized energy levels appear in the optical absorption and gain 
spectra with exciting applications to electroabsorption modulators, quantum-well 
lasers and photodetectors, because an enhanced absorption occurs when the optical 
energy is close to the difference between the conduction and hole subband levels, as 
shown in Fig. 1.10a. The density of states in the quasi-two-dimensional (2D) structure 
is also different from that of a bulk semiconductor. A significant discovery is that the 
quantum mechanical phenomena can be observed at room temperature using these 
structures. When an electric field is applied across the quantum-well region using a 
p-n junction diode structure, the potential energy profile is tilted and the energy 
levels of the quantized subbands are shifted (Fig. 1.10b). Therefore, the optical 
absorption spectrum can be changed by an electric field bias. This makes practical 
the applications of electroabsorption modulators using these quantum-well structures. 
Experimental work on low threshold current quantum-well lasers [21 -23] has been 
reported for different material systems, such as GaAs/AlGaAs, InGaAsP/InP, and 
InGaAs/InGaAsP. Advantages of the quantum-well lasers, such as a higher temperature 
T 
1 
r—' 
1 
■ 
1 
■ 
r 

1.3 THE FIELD OF OPTOELECTRONICS 
13 
(a) 
Field = 0 
(b) 
Field > 0 
Ξ&Ε 
3^E 
Figure 1.10 
(a) A semiconductor quantum well without an applied electric field bias showing the quan-
tized subbands and the corresponding wave functions, (b) With an applied electric field, the tilted potential 
shifts the quantized energy levels due to the field. The wave functions are skewed from the previous even or 
odd symmetric wave functions of the zero field case. 
stability and an improved linewidth enhancement factor and wavelength tunability, have 
also been demonstrated. These devices are based on the band structure engineering 
concept using, for example, a separate-confinement-heterostructure (SCH) quantum-
well structure to enhance the carrier and the optical confinements (Fig. 1.11). 
The effect of uniaxial stress perpendicular to the junction on the threshold current of 
GaAs double-heterostructure lasers was studied experimentally in the 1970s. The idea 
of using strained quantum wells [22-24] by growing semiconductors with different 
lattice constants for tunable wavelength photodetectors and semiconductors has also 
been explored in the 1980s. For example, if a "thin" or quantum-well layer of semicon-
ductor Q is grown on top of a thick substrate of semiconductor P, an in-plane strain due 
to the deformation of the lattice of semiconductor Q in order to match the in-plane 
lattice constant of the substrate P occurs (Fig. 1.12). If the growth axis is along the z 
direction, the in-plane {x-y plane) strain parallel to the quantum-well plane is 
defined as 
a(P) - a(Q) 
a(Q) 
(1.3.4) 
If the in-plane strain is negative, that is, a(Q) is larger than a(P), the in-plane strain 
forces the lattice of the epitaxy layer Q in the x and y directions to match those of the 

14 
INTRODUCTION 
\ GaAs f 
AlyGa^As 
P-A^Ga, xAs 
N- Al/Ja^As 
Figure 1.11 
The energy band diagram of a separate-confinement heterostructure (SCH) quantum-well 
laser structure. The active GaAs layer, which has a dimension around 100 A, provides the carrier confine-
ment and is sandwiched between two Al^Gai _y\s layers, where the aluminum mole fraction y is smaller 
than those (x) of the outermost Al^Gai ^xAs cladding regions. The AlyG&t _y\s layers are of the order sub-
micrometers (or an optical wavelength) and provide the optical confinement. The mole fraction y can also 
be graded such that it varies with the position along the crystal growth direction. 
substrate P, and the strain is called biaxially compressive. On the other hand, the 
strain is called biaxially tensile if a(Q) is smaller than a(P), because a tension 
exists along the x and y directions in order to "stretch" the lattice of the epilayer Q 
to match the lattice of the substrate P. For example, if we grow a thin In^^Ga^As 
layer on top of InP substrate, we will have an in-plane strain of 
a(InP) — a(Ini_^Ga^As) 
a(InP) — aCIn^Ga^As) 
a(Ini_^Ga^As) 
a(InP) 
(1.3.5) 
(a) 
a(Q) 
\ 
v 
i 
/ 
(b) 
Compressive 
strain —» 
Substrate 
a(P) 
Figure 1.12 
Growth of a semiconductor layer of lattice constant a(Q) on top of a substrate with a lattice 
constant a(P) before (a) and after (b) growth with a coherent strain deformation that forces the in-plane 
lattice constant of the layer Q equal to that of the substrate. Therefore, an in-plane strain given by 
(1.3.4) is induced. 

1.4 OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK 
15 
At x = 0.468, we have zero strain (the so-called lattice-matched condition). When 
x < 0.468, we have an indium-rich compound and the in-plane strain is compressive 
in nature because the InGaAs lattice constant is larger than that of InP. The ternary 
InGaAs lattice will be deformed elastically in the x-y plane to match the lattice of 
the InP substrate, and an in-plane compressive strain exists with a corresponding 
tension along the growth (z) axis. 
Strained-layer quantum-well lasers have been investigated for low threshold current 
operation, polarization switching, and bistability applications [23-28]. Important 
advantages using a strained-layer superlattice or quantum wells include the reduction 
of the threshold current density due to the lowering of the light-hole band relative to 
the heavy-hole band, the reduction of the in-plane heavy-hole effective mass, the 
elimination of intervalence band absorption, and the reduction of Auger recombination 
[25,26]. Because of the selection rule for optical transitions, the polarization-dependent 
gains are also changed by the strain because the optical gain is mainly transverse 
magnetically (TM) polarized for the transition between the electron and the light-
hole bands and transverse electrically (TE) polarized for the transition between 
the electron and the heavy-hole bands [27, 28]. Many of these details for valence 
subband electronic properties and polarization selection rules in quantum-well 
devices will be explained in Chapters 4, 9, and 10. 
The next major breakthrough in crystal growth [29-31] was the realization of 
semiconductor quantum dots, which confine electrons and holes in a three-dimen-
sional structure. The quantization of electron energy in all three directions makes 
the energy levels discrete instead of being continuous. Therefore, applications to 
devices such as quantum-dot semiconductor lasers, similar to gas lasers with a dis-
crete density of states, become a reality. The reason is that the injected electrons 
and holes will occupy a discrete density of states; therefore, population inversion 
for laser action is easier to achieve at a lower carrier density. 
A layer of material having a lattice constant different from that of the substrate may 
transform spontaneously to an array of three-dimensional islands after some critical 
thickness is deposited. The evolution of an initially two-dimensional growth into a 
three-dimensional corrugated growth front has been observed in many systems. 
Actually, Stranski and Krastanow (SK) initially proposed the possibility of island for-
mation on an initially flat heteroepitaxial surface for the growth of lattice matched 
ionic crystals that had different charges [29]. It was then discovered that the 
growth of islands relaxed by misfit dislocations in strained heteroepitaxy is possible. 
The formation of coherent or defect-free islands as a result of SK growth of strained 
heterostructures becomes an important method of growing quantum dots. However, 
there remain challenges to grow uniform quantum dots due to the self-assembled 
or spontaneous formation process of the strained dots. We will discuss quantum-
dot lasers in Chapters 9 and 10. 
1.4 
OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK 
This book is divided into five parts: I, Fundamentals; II, Propagation of Light; III, 
Generation of Light; IV, Modulation of Light; and V, Detection of Light and Solar 

16 
INTRODUCTION 
Cells. We start with the fundamentals on semiconductor electronics, quantum 
mechanics, solid-state physics, and electromagnetics, with the emphasis on their 
applications to optoelectronic devices. In Fig. 1.13, we illustrate the important funda-
mental equations and their applications. In the presence of injection of electrons and 
holes using a current bias or an optical source, the semiconductor materials may 
change from being absorptive to gain media due to population inversion effect. 
This implies that the optical dielectric function is also changed. This change can 
be modeled with the knowledge of the electronic band structures, which require 
the solutions of the Schrödinger equation or the so-called effective-mass equation 
for the given bulk or quantum-well semiconductors. By solving Maxwell's equations, 
we obtain the optical field from the dielectric function of the semiconductors. The 
electronic band structure is also dependent on the static electric bias voltage, which 
determines the electron and hole current densities. 
The semiconductor electronic equations governing the electron and hole carrier 
concentrations and their corresponding current densities have to be solved. The 
device operation characteristics such as the current-voltage relation in a p-n junction 
structure, the external quantum efficiency for the conversion of electric to optical 
power in a semiconductor laser, or the quantum efficiency for converting optical 
power to current in a photodetector have to be investigated using these semiconductor 
electronic equations. These fundamental equations are coupled to each other, and the 
most complete solution would require a self-consistent scheme, which would require 
Schrödinger Equation 
(Effective Mass Theory) 
(Electronic band structures, 
energy levels, wave functions, 
dielectric function, absorption 
and gain spectra) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Maxwell's Equations 
(Optical electric and magnetic 
fields, guided modes and 
propagation constants) 
' ' 
< 
1 
Semiconductor Electronics 
Equations 
(Carrier densities, potential, bias 
voltage, quasi-Fermi levels and 
current densities) 
Optoelectronic Device 
Characteristics 
(Current vs. voltage curve, 
responsivity, quantum efficiency, 
and semiconductor laser output) 
Figure 1.13 
Fundamental equations and their applications to optoelectronic device characteristics. 

1.4 
OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK 
17 
heavy computations. Fortunately, with good understandings of most of the device 
physics, various approximation methods, such as the depletion approximation and 
perturbation theories for various device operation conditions, are possible. The 
validity of the models can be checked with full numerical solutions and 
confirmed with experimental observations. On the basic semiconductor electronics 
(Chapter 2), we investigate questions such as: How are the energy band diagrams 
drawn for heterojunctions such as P-n, N-p, p-N, or n-P junctions? (Here a capital 
letter such as P refers to a wide band-gap material doped P type and a small p 
refers to a smaller band-gap semiconductor doped p type.) We then review the 
basic quantum mechanics (Chapter 3) and theory of electronic band structures in 
semiconductors (Chapter 4). 
In Part II, Propagation of Light, we review electromagnetics and light wave propa-
gation (Chapter 5), anisotropic media and radiation (Chapter 6), optical waveguide 
theory (Chapter 7), and coupled-mode theory (Chapter 8). The optical waveguide 
plays an important role not only in guiding the light but also functions as a gain 
medium where the electrons and holes are confined in a double heterojunction 
laser structure, where the two end facets of the waveguide serve as reflection 
mirrors, Fig. 1.14a. Surface plasma waveguides, which have been intensively 
researched recently, are discussed. We then describe the coupled-mode theory and 
its applications to parallel waveguide directional couplers and optical ring resonators 
as add-drop filters. We also investigate the coupled waves that propagate in opposite 
directions in a distributed feedback structure. The distributed feedback (DFB) struc-
ture has important applications in a single-wavelength semiconductor laser for 
telecommunication applications, Fig. 1.14b. 
In Part III, Generation of Light, we start with the fundamental optical processes in 
semiconductors (Chapter 9) and present the theories for optical gain and absorption 
in semiconductor bulk, quantum-well, and quantum-dot structures. We then discuss 
semiconductor lasers in Chapters 10 and 11. We cover quantum-well and quantum-
dot Fabry-Perot lasers and distributed-feedback lasers. We also cover more advanced 
structures such as vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs), photonic crystal 
lasers, and quantum-cascade lasers in the mid-infrared (3-12 μπι) and terahertz 
(THz) wavelength ranges. 
(a) 
(b) 
V-±-
ν/Μ//»Μ/Μ//Μ//Μ//Μ//π7777?λ 
X 
\ 
0*00.0*0 o*o.*o.o*c 
I 
N 
t 
4 
rmm**mmm*rr*r,fmtfmms/m 
Light 
output 
1i\r V Ξ 
•»»///W//////?»MW/////MW/WM 
W V W X A A A A ■*■ DFB structure 
1— Active region 
N 
v/mM/Mwms//s/MW/mMW//m. 
Figure 1.14 
A cross section of (a) a double-heterojunction (DH) Fabry-Perot (FP) semiconductor laser 
and (b) a distributed-feedback (DFB) semiconductor laser which contains a grating structure for wavelength 
selectivity for single-wavelength operation. 

18 
INTRODUCTION 
Optical 
input 
P» = Pin- pfe 
AW^>p 
Figure 1.15 A directional-coupler modulator of which the output light power may be switched by an 
electric field bias. 
In Part IV, Modulation of Light, we investigate how to modulate the optical inten-
sity or phase. We include direct modulation of semiconductor lasers (Chapter 12), 
electrooptic and acoustooptic modulators (Chapter 13), and electroabsorption modu-
lators (Chapter 14). An example of an electrically controlled directional coupler is 
shown in Fig. 1.15, where the coupling of two parallel waveguides is controlled by 
a pair of electrodes via the change of the refractive index through the electrooptical 
effects. The voltage bias can switch the output light from the same waveguide a to 
the other waveguide b when the input light is into the waveguide a. 
In Part V, Detection of Light and Solar Cells, we discuss photodetectors and solar 
cells (Chapter 15). What are the different types of photodetectors and their oper-
ational characteristics? A simple example is a p-n junction photodiode as shown in 
Fig. 1.16. The absorption of photons and the conversion of optical energy to electric 
current will be investigated. Novel photodetectors using quantum wells will be 
presented. The physical processes in solar cells are strikingly similar to those of 
the p-n junction photodetectors, and they will be discussed. 
Many of these novel optoelectronic devices and physics are still research issues 
under intensive investigation. The materials presented in this book emphasize the 
Photons 
Ϋ////////Λ 
V////M/A 
Photons 
Figure 1.16 A p-n junction photodiode with optical illumination from the top or from the bottom. 

REFERENCES 
19 
fundamental principles and analytical skills on the essentials of the physics of opto-
electronic devices. The book was written with the hope that the readers of this book 
will acquire fundamental analytical skills and knowledge in the physics of optoelec-
tronic devices to analyze their research results, to understand more advanced 
materials in journal papers and research monographs, and to generate novel 
designs of optoelectronic devices. Many books that are highly recommended for 
further reading are listed in the bibliography. 
PROBLEMS 
1.1 
(a) Calculate the band-gap wavelength Ag for Si, GaAs, InAs, InP, and GaP at 
300K. Use the band-gap energies in Table C.l of Appendix C (page 802). 
(b) Find the optical energy corresponding with the wavelength 1.30 μπι and 
with the wavelength 1.55 μπι. 
1.2 
(a) Find the gallium mole fraction x for h^ ^Ga^As compound semiconductor 
such that its lattice constant matches that of InP. 
(b) Find the aluminum mole fraction x for Al^Inj-^As such that its lattice con-
stant is the same as that of InP. 
1.3 
Calculate the band edge discontinuities AEC and AEV for GaAs/Al^Ga! ^As 
heterojunction if x = 0.2 and 0.3. 
1.4 
Plot the energy band-gap Es versus the lattice constant for the two ternary 
compounds, Ini_xGaxAs and ALJni ^As. Label the values for the binary 
compounds, InAs, GaAs, AlAs, and InP. The band-gap formulas at 300K are 
£g(In, -^Ga^As) = 0.36 + 0.505* + 0.555x2 
£g(AUn,_^As) = 0.36 + 2.35* + 0.24x2. 
Show on your plot the locations (and values) of the lattice match conditions for 
the InP substrate. 
1.5 
For telecommunication wavelength near 1.55 μιυ, find the optical wavelength 
spacing in nanometer (nm) for dense wavelength division multiplexing 
(DWDM) systems when the frequency spacing is 50 GHz. 
REFERENCES 
1. C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th ed., Wiley, New York, 2005. 
2. B. G. Streetman and S. Banerjee, Solid State Electronic Devices, 6th ed., Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005. 
3. R. F. Pierret, Solid State Semiconductor Fundamentals, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2007. 
4. K. Iga, Fundamentals of Laser Optics, Plenum, New York, 1994. 

20 
INTRODUCTION 
5. A. Schawlow and C. H. Townes, "Infrared and optical masers," Phys. Rev. 112, 
1940-1949(1958). 
6. J. Hecht, "Winning the laser patent war," Laser Focus World, 49-51, December 1994. 
7. T. H. Maiman, "Stimulated optical radiation in ruby," Nature 187, 493-494 (1960). 
8. A. Javan, W. R. Bennett, Jr., and D. R. Herriot, "Population inversion and continuous 
optical maser oscillation in a gas discharge containing a He-Ne mixture," Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 6, 106-110(1961). 
9. R. N. Hall, G. E. Fenner, J. D. Kingsley, T. J. Soltys, and R. O. Carlson, "Coherent light 
emission from GaAs junctions," Phys. Rev. Lett. 9, 366-368 (1962). [Received date: Sept. 
24, 1962.] 
10. M. I. Nathan, W. P. Dumke, G. Burns, F. H. Dill, Jr., and G. Lasher, "Simulated emission 
of radiation from GaAs p-n junctions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 1, 62-64 (1962). [Received date: 
Oct. 6, 1962.] 
11. N. Holonyak, Jr., and S. F. Bevacqua, "Coherent (visible) light emission from 
Ga(Asi_xPJ junctions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 1, 82-83 (1962). [Received date: Oct. 17, 
1962.] 
12. T. M. Quist, R. H. Rediker, R. J. Keyes, W. E. Krag, B. Lax, A. L. McWhorter, and 
H. J. Zeiger, "Semiconductor maser of GaAs," Appl. Phys. Lett. 1, 91-92 (1962). 
[Received date: Oct. 23, 1962.] 
13. R. D. Dupuis, "The diode laser—the first 30 days, 40 years ago," Optics and Photonics 
News, April, 30-35 (2004). 
14. M. G. Craford, N. Holonyak, Jr., and F. A. Kish, "In pursue of the ultimate lamp," Sei. Am. 
284, 63-67 (2001). 
15. N. Holonyak, Jr., "From transistors to lasers and light-emitting diodes," Mater. Res. Bull. 
30, 509-517 (2005). 
16. R. D. Dupuis and M. R. Krames, "History, development, and applications of high-
brightness visible light-emitting diodes," J. Lightwave Technol. 26, 1154-1171 (2008). 
17. W. T. Tsang, Vol. Ed., Lightwave Communications Technology, vol. 22, Parts A-E, in 
R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductor and Semimetals, Academic 
Press, New York, 1985. 
18. H. C. Casey, Jr., and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part A and B, Academic Press, 
Orlando, 1978. 
19. T. Miya, Y. Terunuma, T. Hosaka, and T. Miyashita, "An ultimate low loss single mode 
fiber at 1.55 μπι," Electron. Lett. 15, 106-108 (1979). 
20. I. Vurgaftman, J. R. Meyer, and L. R. Ram-Mohan, "Band parameters for ΙΠ-V compound 
semiconductors and their alloys," Appl. Phys. Rev. 89, 5815-5875 (2001). 
21. N. Holonyak, Jr., R. M. Kolbas, R. D. Dupuis, and P. D. Dapkus, "Quantum-well hetero-
structure lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-16, 170-186 (1980). 
22. D. S. Chemla and A. Pinczuk, Guest Editor, Special issue on Semiconductor Quantum 
Wells and Superlattices: Physics and Applications. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-22 
(1986). 
23. P. S. Zory, Jr., Ed., Quantum Well Lasers, Academic Press, San Diego, 1993. 
24. T. P. Pearsall, Vol. Ed., Strained Layer Superlattices: Physics, vol. 32, 1990; and Strained 
Layer Superlattices: Materials Science and Technology, vol. 33, 1991, in R. K. Willardson 
and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductor and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
21 
25. A. R. Adams, "Band-structure engineering for low-threshold high-efficiency semiconduc-
tor lasers," Electron. Lett. 22, 249-250 (1986). 
26. E. Yablonovitch and E. O. Kane, "Reduction of lasing threshold current density by the 
lowering of valence band effective mass," J. Lightwave Technol. 4, 504-506 (1986). 
27. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Optical gain in a strained-layer quantum-well laser," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 24, 2400-2406 (1988). 
28. C. S. Chang and S. L. Chuang, "Modeling of strained quantum-well lasers with spin-orbit 
coupling," IEEEJ. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 1, 218-229 (1995). 
29. D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann, and N. N. Ledentsov, Quantum Dot Heterostructures, Wiley, 
New York, 2001. 
30. D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann, N. N. Ledentsov, M. H. Mao, Ch. Ribbat, R. Sellin, 
V. M. Ustinov, A. E. Zhukov, Zh. I. Alferov, and J. A. Lott, "Novel infrared quantum 
dot lasers: theory and reality," Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 224, 787-796 (2001). 
31. N. N. Ledendsov, "Long-wavelength quantum-dot lasers on GaAs substrate: from media to 
device concepts," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 8, 1015-1024 (2002). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Historical 
1. J. Orton, The Story of Semiconductors, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2004. 
2. C. H. Townes, How the Laser Happened—Adventures of a Scientist, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1999. 
3. T. Maiman, The Laser Odyssey, Laser Press, Blaine, WA, 2000. 
4. N. Taylor, Laser—The Inventor, the Nobel Laureate, and the Thirty-Year Patent War, 
Simon & Schuster, New York, 2000. 
Semiconductor Physics and Devices 
5. M. Shur, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1990. 
6. G. Bastard, Wave Mechanics Applied to Semiconductor Heterostructures, Wiley, 
New York, 1991. 
7. C. Weisbuch and B. Vinter, Quantum Semiconductor Structures, Academic Press, 
New York, 1991. 
8. M. Fox, Optical Properties of Solids, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2002. 
9. B. K. Ridley, Quantum Processes in Semiconductors, 4th ed., Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 2000. 
10. P. K. Basu, Theory of Optical Processes in Semiconductors—Bulk and Microstructures, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1997. 
11. C. F. Klingshirn, Semiconductor Optics, 3rd ed., Springer, Berlin, 2006. 
12. N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
New York, 1976. 
13. S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 2007. 
14. S. Wang, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Theory and Device Physics, Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989. 

22 
INTRODUCTION 
15. F. Bassani and G. P. Parravicini, Electronic States and Optical Transitions in Solids, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1975. 
16. K. Seeger, Semiconductor Physics—An Introduction, 9th ed., Springer, Berlin, 2004. 
17. K. Hess, Advanced Theory of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley-IEEE Press, New York, 1999. 
18. P. Y. Yu and M. Cardona, Fundamental of Semiconductors: Physics and Materials 
Properties, 2nd ed., Springer, New York, 1999. 
19. K. W. Böer, Survey of Semiconductor Physics-Electrons and Other Particles in Bulk 
Semiconductors, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1990. 
Quantum Electronics, Photonics, and Optoelectronics 
20. A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Photonics-Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, 6th ed., 
Oxford University Press, New York, 2007. 
21. A. Yariv, Quantum Electronics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 2001. 
22. B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentah of Photonics, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 2007. 
23. S. O. Kasap, Optoelectronics and Photonics—Principles and Practices, Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001. 
24. E. Rosencher and B. Vinter, Optoelectronics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, 2002. 
25. H. A. Haus, Waves and Fields in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1984. 
26. P. Bhattacharya, Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ, 1996. 
27. J. Singh, Semiconductor Optoelectronics: Physics and Technology, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1995. 
28. K. Iizuka, Elements of Photonics, Vol. I and Π, Wiley, New York, 2002. 
29. J. Wilson and J. F. B. Hawkes, Optoelectronics: An Introduction, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1998. 
30. C. R. Pollock, Fundamentals of Optoelectronics, Irwin, Chicago, 1995. 
31. K. J. Ebeling, Integrated Optoelectronics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993. 
32. V. V. Mitin, V. A. Kochelap, and M. A. Stroscio, Quantum Heterostructures-
Microelectronics and Optoelectronics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1999. 
33. A. K. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 1989. 
34. J. T. Verdeyen, Laser Electronics, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1994. 
35. H. Haken, Light, Vol. I: Waves, Photons, Atoms, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1986. 
36. R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000. 
37. H. Haug and S. W. Koch, Quantum Theory of the Optical and Electronic Properties of 
Semiconductors, 4th ed., World Scientific, Singapore, 2004. 
38. W. T. Tsang, Vol. Ed., Lightwave Communications Technology, vol. 22, Part A to E, in 
Semiconductor and Semimetals, R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Academic 
Press, New York, 1985. 
39. R. Dingle, Vol. Ed., Applications of Multiquantum Wells, Selective Doping, and 
Superlattices, vol. 24 in Semiconductor and Semimetals, R. K. Willardson and 
A. C. Beer, Eds., Academic Press, New York, 1985. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
23 
40. M. M-K. Liu, Principles and Applications of Optical Communications, Irwin, Chicago, 1996. 
41. P. Meystre and M. Sargent III, Elements of Quantum Optics, 3rd ed., Springer, Berlin, 1999. 
Semiconductor Lasers and LEDs 
42. E. Kapon, Ed., Semiconductor Lasers I. Fundamentals, II. Materials and Structures, 
Academic Press, San Diego, 1999. 
43. L. A. Coldren and S. W. Corzine, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits, Wiley, 
New York, 1995. 
44. S. Nakamura and G. Fasol, The Blue Laser Diode—GaN Based Light Emitters and Lasers, 
Springer, Berlin, 1997. 
45. E. F. Schubert, Light-Emitting Diodes, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, 2006. 
46. M. Fukuda, Reliability and Degradation of Semiconductor Lasers and LEDs, Artech 
House, Boston, 1991. 
47. O. Ueda, Reliability and Degradation oflll-V Optical Devices, Artech House, Boston, 1996. 
48. C. Wilmsen, H. Temkin, and L. A. Coldren, Eds., Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting 
Lasers: Design, Fabrication, Characterization, and Applications, Cambridge University 
Press, 1999. 
49. H. Ghafouri-Shiraz, Distributed Feedback Laser Diodes: Principles and Physical 
Modelling, Wiley, New York, 1996. 
50. G. Morthier and P. Vankwikelberge, Handbook of Distributed-Feedback Laser Diodes, 
Artech House, Boston, 1997. 
51. G. H. B. Thompson, Physics of Semiconductor Laser Devices, Wiley, New York, 1980. 
52. H. C. Casey, Jr., and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part A and B, Academic Press, 
Orlando, 1978. 
53. G. P. Agrawal and N. K. Dutta, Long-Wavelength Semiconductor Lasers, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, New York, 1986. 
54. P. S. Zory, Jr., Ed., Quantum Well Lasers, Academic Press, San Diego, 1993. 
55. G. A. Evans and J. M. Hammer, Eds., Surface Emitting Semiconductor Lasers and Arrays, 
Academic Press, San Diego, 1993. 
56. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Lasers, Junctions, Transport, vol. 14 in 
Semiconductors and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1979. 
57. W. W. Chow, S. W. Koch, and M. Sargent HI, Semiconductor-Laser Physics, Springer, 
Berlin, 1994. 
58. W. W. Chow and S. W. Koch, Semiconductor Laser Fundamentals: Physics of the Gain 
Materials, Springer, Berlin, 2006. 
59. J. K. Butler, Ed., Semiconductor Injection Lasers, IEEE Press, New York, 1980. 
60. J. J. Coleman, Ed., Selected Papers on Semiconductor Diode Lasers, SPIE Milestone 
Series, Vol. MS50, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, Bellingham, WA, 1992. 
Optical Waveguides, Modulators, and Fiber Optical Communications 
61. H. Nishihara, M. Haruna, and T. Suhara, Optical Integrated Circuits, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1989. 

24 
INTRODUCTION 
62. R. G. Hunsperger, Integrated Optics: Theory and Technology, 5th ed., Springer, Berlin, 2002. 
63. T. Tamir, Integrated Optics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979. 
64. T. Tamir, Guided Wave Optoelectronics, 2nd ed., Springer, Berlin, 1990. 
65. D. Marcuse, Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides, Academic Press, New York, 1974. 
66. A. W. Snyder and J. D. Love, Optical Waveguide Theory, Chapman and Hall, London, 
1983. 
67. A. B. Buckman, Guided-Wave Photonics, Saunders College Publishing, New York, 1992. 
68. A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals, Wiley, New York, 1984. 
69. S. V. Kartalopoulos, Introduction to DWDM Technology: Data in a Rainbow, Wiley-IEEE 
Press, New York, 2000. 
70. D. K. Mynbaev and L. L. Scheiner, Fiber-Optic Communications Technology, Prentice 
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001. 
71. J. C. Palais, Fiber Optic Communications, 5th ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 
2005. 
72. G. Keiser, Optical Fiber Communications, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, Boston, 2000. 
73. G. Agrawal, Fiber-Optic Communication Systems, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 2002. 
74. J. Hecht, Understanding Fiber Optics, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2006. 
Photodetectors 
75. J. D. Vincent, Fundamentals of Infrared Detector Operation and Testing, Wiley, 
New York, 1990. 
76. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Infrared Detectors, vol. 5, in Semiconductors and 
Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1970. 
77. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Infrared Detectors II, vol. 12 in Semiconductors 
and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1977. 
78. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Mercury Cadmium Telluride, vol. 18 in 
Semiconductors and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1981. 
79. A. Rogalski, Ed., Selected Papers on Semiconductor Infrared Detectors, SPIE Milestone 
Series, Vol. MS66, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, Bellingham, WA, 1992. 
80. M. O. Manasreh, Ed., Semiconductor Quantum Wells and Superlattices for Long-
Wavelength Infrared Detectors, Artech House, Norwood, 1993. 
Nonlinear Optics 
81. N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, 1992. [Originally 
published by W. A. Benjamin, Inc., 1965.] 
82. R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, 2nd ed., Academic Press, San Diego, 2002. 
83. A. C. Newell and J. V. Moloney, Nonlinear Optics, New ed., Westview Press, 2003. 
84. Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, reprint ed., Wiley, New York, 2002. 
85. H. M. Gibbs, Optical Bistability: Controlling Light with Light, Academic Press, 
San Diego, 1985. 
86. H. Haug, Ed., Optical Nonlinearities and Instabilities in Semiconductors, Academic Press, 
San Diego, 1988. 

Part I 
Fundamentals 


2 
Basic Semiconductor Electronics 
In the study of semiconductor devices such as diodes and transistors, the characteristics 
of the devices are described by the voltage-current relations. The injection of 
electrons and holes by a voltage bias and their transport properties are studied. 
When optical injection or emission is involved, such as in laser diodes and photo-
detectors, we are interested in the optical field in the device as well as the light-
matter interaction. In this case, we look for the light output versus the device bias 
current for a laser diode, or the change in the voltage-current relation due to the illu-
mination of light in a photodetector. In general, it is useful to know the voltage, 
current, or quasi-static potentials and electric field in the electronic devices and the 
optical electric and magnetic fields in the optoelectronic devices. Thus, a full under-
standing of the basic equations for the modeling of these devices is very important. In 
this chapter, we will review the basic Maxwell's equations, semiconductor electronics 
equations, and boundary conditions. We also study the generation and recombination 
of carriers in semiconductors. The general theory for semiconductor heterojunctions 
and semiconductor/metal junctions is also investigated. 
2.1 MAXWELL'S EQUATIONS AND BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 
Maxwell's equations are the fundamental equations in electromagnetics. They were 
first established by James Clerk Maxwell in 1873 and were verified experimentally 
by Heinrich Hertz in 1888 [1-3]. Maxwell unified all knowledge of electricity 
and magnetism, added a displacement current density term dD/dt in Ampere's 
law, and predicted electromagnetic wave motion. He explained light propagation 
as an electromagnetic wave phenomenon. Heinrich Hertz demonstrated experimen-
tally the electromagnetic wave phenomenon using a spark-gap generator as a trans-
mitter and a loop of wire with a very small gap as a receiver. He then set off a 
spark in the transmitter and showed that a spark at the receiver was produced. By 
moving the relative position of the receiver from a metallic reflecting wall, standing 
wave effects were demonstrated. Thus electromagnetic wave theory was confirmed. 
For a historical account of the classic and quantum theory of light, see, for 
example, Ref. 3. 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
27 

28 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
2.1.1 Maxwell's Equations in MKS Units 
The well-known Maxwell's equations in MKS (meter, kilogram, and second) units 
are written as 
Faraday's law 
(2.1.1) 
Ampere's law 
(2.1.2) 
Gauss's law 
(2.1.3) 
Gauss's law 
(2.1.4) 
where E is the electric field (V/m), H is the magnetic field (A/m), D is the electric 
displacement flux density (C/m2), and B is the magnetic flux density (Vs/m2 or 
Webers/m2). The two source terms, the charge density p(C/m3) and the current 
density J (A/m2), are related by the continuity equation 
V - J + ^ p = 0 
(2.1.5) 
where no net generation or recombination of electrons is assumed. In the study of 
electromagnetics, one usually assumes that the source terms p and J are given 
quantities. It is noted that (2.1.4) is derivable from (2.1.1) by taking the divergence 
of (2.1.1) and noting that V· (V x E) = 0 for any vector E. Similarly, (2.1.3) is 
derivable from (2.1.2) using (2.1.5). Thus, we have only two independent vector 
equations (2.1.1) and (2.1.2), or six scalar equations as each vector has three com-
ponents. However, there are E, H, D, and B, 12 scalar unknown components. 
Thus, we need six more scalar equations. These are the so-called constitutive relations 
that describe the properties of a medium. In isotropic media, they are given by 
D = eE 
Β = μΗ. 
(2.1.6) 
In anisotropic media, they may be given by 
ϋ = ε · Ε 
Β = μ · Η 
(2.1.7) 
where ε is the permittivity tensor and μ is the permeability tensor: 
&xx 
&xy &xz 
£ = 
SyX 
£yy 
Gyz 
_ εζχ 
&zy 
ε ζ ζ 
For electromagnetic fields at optical frequencies, p = 0 and J = 0. 
V x E = - — B 
at 
V x H = J 
V-D = p 
V-B = 0 
dD 
~dt 
Mxr 
&xy 
Pxz 
l^yx 
Pyy 
M-yz 
^zx 
&zy 
/^zz 
(2.1.8) 

2.1 
MAXWELL'S EQUATIONS AND BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 
29 
2.1.2 
Boundary Conditions 
By applying the first two Maxwell's equations over a small rectangular surface 
with a width δ (dashed line in Fig. 2.1a) across the interface of a boundary and 
using Stokes' theorem between a line integral over a contour C and the surface S 
enclosed by the contour 
ndS 
<bE-itf = [v xE-hdS = -— iß-
c 
s 
s 
| Η · < # = [ V x H-ndS = I J-ndS + — \D-ndS, 
(2.1.9a) 
(2.1.9b) 
the following boundary conditions can be derived by letting the width δ approach 
zero [1]: 
fix (Ei 
fix (Η, 
•E2): 
H2) 
0 
(2.1.10) 
(2.1.11) 
where Js(=limJS) is the surface current density (A/m). Note that the unit normal 
vector h points from medium 2 to medium 1. Similarly, if we apply Gauss's laws 
(2.1.3) and (2.1.4) and integrate over a small volume (Fig. 2.1b) with a surface 
area A and a thickness δ and let δ approach zero, for example, 
(J)D· ndS = 
V· Odv = \pdv = p8A, 
we obtain the following boundary conditions: 
n ( D , 
n ( B , 
D2) = Ps 
B2) = 0, 
where ps( = limp5) is the surface charge density (C/m2). 
p-^oo, 5-»0 
(2.1.12) 
(2.1.13) 
(a) 
Ei, Hi, Di, Bi 
c 
j _ 
E21 H2, D2, B2 
(b) 
5 i 
E1' H1 
D^B, 
E2, H2 
D2, B2 
Figure 2.1 
Geometry for deriving the boundary conditions across the interface of two media, region 1 
and 2. (a) A rectangular surface is enclosed by the contour C (dashed line), (b) A small volume with a thick-
ness δ. The unit normal vector points from region 2 toward region 1. 

30 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
For an interface across two dielectric media, where no surface current or charge 
density can be supported, Js = 0, and ps = 0, we have 
ή x Ei = ή x E2 
ή x Hi = ή x H2 
- 
(2.1.14) 
fi · D] = A · D2 
ft· 
Bi = n · B2. 
For an interface between a dielectric medium and a perfect conductor, 
fi x Ei = 0 
fi 
x Hi = Js 
(2.1.15) 
n · D| = ps 
fi 
· B] = 0 
as the fields E2, H2, D2, and B 2 inside the perfect conductor vanish. The 
surface charge density and the current density are supported by the perfect 
conductor surface. 
2.1.3 
Quasi-electrostatic Fields 
For devices with a dc or low-frequency bias, because the time variation is very slow 
(d/dt ~ 0), we usually have 
V x E = 0 
(2.1.16) 
V - D = p 
(2.1.17) 
and H = 0, B = 0 for the electronic devices for which no external magnetic fields are 
applied. In this case, the solution of the electric field can be put in the form of the 
gradient of an electrostatic potential φ 
Ε = - ν ψ 
(2.1.18) 
and 
ν · ( ε ν φ ) = - ρ 
(2.1.19) 
in an isotropic medium. Equation (2.1.19) is Poisson's equation. When the frequency 
becomes higher (e.g., in a microwave transistor), one may include the displacement 
current density d(eE)/dt in the total current density in addition to the conduction 
current density Jcon 
Jtot = Jcon+|(eE). 
(2.1.20) 
2.2 SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS EQUATIONS 
In this section, we present the basic semiconductor electronics equations, which are 
very useful in the modeling of semiconductor devices [4—7]. These equations are 
actually based on the Maxwell's equations and the charge continuity equations. 

2.2 
SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS EQUATIONS 
31 
2.2.1 
Poisson's Equation 
As shown in the previous section, Poisson's equation in the semiconductor is given 
by (2.1.19), 
ν·(εν</>) = - ρ , 
(2.2.1) 
where φ is the electrostatic potential and p is the charge density given by 
p = q {p - n + C0) 
(2.2.2) 
C0 = N+-N^. 
(2.2.3) 
Here q (= 1.6 x 10 19 C) is the magnitude of a unit charge, p is the hole concen-
tration, n is the electron concentration, N£ is the ionized donor concentration, and 
N^ is the ionized acceptor concentration. 
2.2.2 
Continuity Equations 
From the Ampere's law 
V x H = J c o n + - D 
(2.2.4) 
ot 
where the conduction current density is 
Jcon ~ Jp ~r Jn 
\Z.Z.J) 
and Jp and J„ are the hole and electron current densities, respectively, we have 
0 = ν · ( ν χ Η ) = ν · Ι ο ο „ + ^ ν · Ο 
(2.2.6) 
at 
or 
V - J c o n + ^ p = 0. 
(2.2.7) 
Assuming Q = NQ — N^ is independent of time, we have 
V-(Jp+Jn) 
+ q-(p-n) 
= 0. 
(2.2.8) 
Thus, we may separate the above equation into two parts for electrons and holes, 
X/-ln-q-n 
= +qR 
(2.2.9) 
\7-Jp + q-p 
= -qR 
(2.2.10) 

32 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
where R is the net recombination rate (cm- s~ ) of electron-hole pairs. Sometimes 
it is convenient to write the generation rates (Gp and Gn) and recombination rates 
(Rp and /?„) explicitly 
R = Rn-Gn 
(2.2.11) 
for electrons and 
R = Rp-Gp 
(2.2.12) 
for holes. Thus, we have the current continuity equations for the carriers. 
^ = G „ - / ? „ + - V - J „ 
(2.2.13) 
at 
q 
% = GP-Rp--V-Sp. 
(2.2.14) 
at 
q 
2.2.3 
Carrier Transport Equations 
The carrier transport equations assuming Boltzmann distributions for carriers can be 
written as 
J„ = qμnn E + qDnVn 
(2.2.15) 
Jp = qμpp E - qDpVp 
(2.2.16) 
where E = — V<£ is the electric field, μη and μρ are the electron and hole mobility, and 
D„ and Dp are the electron and hole diffusion coefficient, respectively, which follow the 
Einstein relation, Dn/μη = Dpjμρ = kT/q. We may express the electric field in terms 
of the electrostatic potential in the carrier transport equation. We then have Jp, Jn, φ, ρ, 
n, or nine scalar components as unknowns. We also have (2.2.1), (2.2.13), (2.2.14), 
(2.2.15), (2.2.16), or nine scalar equations. We may also eliminate Jp and Jn using 
(2.1.15) and (2.2.16) and reduce the number of equations to three, 
- ^ = Gn-Rn + - V · [-qwV4> 
+ qD„Vn] 
(2.2.17) 
at 
q 
-£ = GP-RP--V- 
[-qßpPV<f> - qDpVp] 
(2.2.18) 
V-(eV4>) = -<7(/>-n + Co) 
(2.2.19) 
with three unknowns n, p, and φ. In principle, these three unknowns can be solved 
using the above three equations once we specify the boundary conditions for a given 
device geometry. 

2.2 SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS EQUATIONS 
33 
2.2.4 Auxiliary Relations 
Often, it is convenient to introduce two auxiliary relations with two "imref" functions, 
Fn(r) and Fp(r), or the quasi-Fermi levels for the electrons and holes, respectively, 
n(r) = m exp 
p(r) = m exp 
~Fn(T) -
kB 
£i(r) -
*B 
- £i(r)l 
T 
- wi 
T 
(2.2.20) 
(2.2.21) 
where the intrinsic carrier concentration n, depends on the band edge concentration 
parameters Nc and Nv, the band gap and the temperature 
m = 
VKKe-E*/(2kBT) 
and the intrinsic energy level is 
£i(r) = -<?<fti·) + £ref 
(2.2.22) 
(2.2.23) 
Here, fijEf is a reference constant energy. We may substitute (2.2.20) and (2.2.21) into 
(2.2.17)- (2.2.19), and use only three unknowns, φ(τ), φη(τ), and φρ{τ), which have the 
same units (volts) 
F„(r) = -<?Φ„(Γ) + Eref 
Fp(r) = -q<f>p(r) + Εκί. 
(2.2.24) 
(2.2.25) 
The two auxiliary relations are for nondegenerate semiconductors, for which the 
Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics are applicable. To take into account the effect of degen-
eracy or high carrier density case, one may modify (2.2.20) and (2.2.21) simply by 
using the Fermi-Dirac statistics together with the electron and hole density-of-state 
functions pe(E) and Ph(E) 
(£)Pe(£) dE 
(2.2.26) 
and 
p=\fp(E)ph(E)dE 
where 
ME) 
1 
1 _|_ e(E-F„)/kBT 
(2.2.27) 
(2.2.28) 

34 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
is the Fermi -Dirac distribution for electrons and 
is the Fermi-Dirac distribution for the holes. 
Density of States The density of states for electrons, pe(E), is derived as follows. 
The number of electrons per unit volume is given by 
"=^ΣΣΣ>(£) 
(2·
2·
30) 
where the factor of 2 takes care of both spins of the electrons. For the electron states 
above the conduction band, we may assume that the electrons are in a box with a 
volume LxLyLz with wave numbers satisfying 
2π 
, 
2π 
, 
„2-7Γ 
. 
kx = m — , ky = n — , kz = I — , 
m, n, I = integers. 
LX 
Liy 
Lz 
Thus, the number of available states in a small cube dkxdkydkz (=d k) in the k-space 
is i/3k divided by the amount 
for each state. In other words, we replace the sum over wavenumbers (or states) by 
integrations 
2 v-^ x-~» x—v 
2 f dkx 
{ dky 
f dkz 
r-v -s—^ γ ^ 
2 f dkx 
I dky ( 
νΊ?Ίζ'ΊΪ 
= Ϋ) 
2TT/Lx\27r/Ly)27r/Lz 
\4irk2dk 
(k2dk 
fJ Jk 
[4irkzdk 
[k2dk 
, „ „ „ „ , 
\τ^=\^τ = \-^ 
(2·232) 
for a parabolic band model with a spherical symmetry. For electrons in the conduction 
band, the energy band structure is 
h2k2 
E = EC+1*- 
(2.2.33) 
2m* 
where Ec is the conduction-band edge; we obtain 
OO 
f k2dk 
f 
J ^ = 
J dEpe(E) 
(2.2.34) 

2.2 
SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS EQUATIONS 
35 
where pe(E) is called the density of states for the electrons in the conduction band 
Pe(E) = 1 /2 m! 
2^\h2 
3/2 
(E - £c)1/2 
for E > Ec 
(2.2.35) 
and pe(E) is zero if E < Ec. A similar expression holds for the density of states of the 
holes in the valence band, 
1 /2m*\3/2 
Ρ„(£) = ^ ( - τ Ί 
( £ ν - £ ) 1 / 2 
for£<£v 
(2.2.36) 
and ρ^(Ε) is zero for E > Ev, where Ev is the valence-band edge. In the nondegene-
rate limit, it can be shown that (2.2.26) and (2.2.27) reduce to (2.2.20) and (2.2.21). 
Using the Fermi-Dirac integral denned by 
Fjir,) = 
1 
x^dx 
r ( 7 + l ) J 1 + e^~^ 
o 
(2.2.37) 
where Γ is the Gamma function, we may rewrite (2.2.26) and (2.2.27) as 
n = NCF 
>Fn 
^ 
--*,«;■. 
fE^Jlp 
Vc/*l/2 
kBT 
, p = NvFl/2 
where 
Nr 
yvv = 2 
m*ekBT 
2ττΗ2 
m*hkBT 
2τήι 
3/2 
knT 
\3/2 
i* T \> 
2 -
5 1 x l °
i y | - ^ cm~ 
. m0 300/ 
3/2 
Λ19 
< 
T \ 
3/2 
= 2.51 x 10'Ί — 
I cm 
\mo300/ 
(2.2.38) 
(2.2.39a) 
(2.2.39b) 
and Γ(3/2) = \/ϊτ/2 has been used. 
Approximate Formula for the Fermi-Dirac Integral 
An approximate analytic 
form for the Fermi-Dirac integral /·}(η) valid for -oo < η < oo is given by [5, 8-10] 
Fjiv) 
1 
e^> + Cj{rj) 
where, for y = 1/2, one can use [8] (or other expression in [9]) 
3(ΤΓ/2)'/2 
(2.2.40a) 
C\/2(V) 
η + 2.13 + (\η - 2.13|12/5 + 9.β\ 
5/12' 3/2 ' 
(2.2.40b) 

36 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
102 
a 10" 
I I I ■ I—I I J I I I I 
Boltzmann 
,'p 
i„\ 
exp(7j) 
/U 
Figure 2.2 
A plot of the Fermi-Dirac integral F1/2(rj) versus η and its asymptotic limits for η <g -1 
and i | > l . 
The maximum error of (2.2.40) is only 0.5%. We also see that 
Fx/iiv) ~ β7] 
for T/ <C — 1 
4/VY/2 , 
(2.2.41) 
These asymptotic limits are shown as dashed lines and compared with the exact 
numerical integration in Fig. 2.2. 
Determination of the Fermi Level EF 
For a bulk semiconductor under thermal 
equilibrium, the Fermi level EF (= F„ = Fp) is determined by the charge neutrality 
condition 
n0 + NA =p0+ 
N£ 
(2.2.42) 
where NA is the ionized acceptor concentration and N£ is the ionized donor concen-
tration. We have 
N 
NA 
(2.2.43) 
where gA is the ground state degeneracy factor for acceptor levels. gA equals 4 
because in Si, Ge, and GaAs, each acceptor level can accept one hole of either 
spin and the acceptor level is doubly degenerate as a result of the two degenerate 

2.2 SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS EQUATIONS 
37 
valence bands at k = 0, and 
Ν+=ΝΌ 
1 
1 
ΕΌ - EF 
—e*P 
, 
x 
(2.2.44) 
where gD is the ground state degeneracy of the donor impurity level and equals 2. The 
Fermi level is the only unknown in the charge neutrality condition and can be found 
numerically from (2.2.42). 
The carrier densities at thermal equilibrium for nondegenerate carrier densities are 
«o = n\ exp 
po = rti exp 
EF-
. *B 
E-
~Ei 
T . 
-EF 
kvT 
Nc exp 
Nv exp 
EF-
'Ev-
-Ec 
T \ 
-EF 
k*T 
(2.2.45a) 
(2.2.45b) 
(Note that at thermal equilibrium, τζο/Ό = «?■) For extrinsic semiconductors, we have 
two cases: 
1. n-type, N^ — NA 3> nu therefore, 
n0~N+-Nl 
and 
Po = nj/(N+ - NA). 
(2.2.46a) 
2. p-type, NA — N£ » nu therefore, 
p0~Nl-N+ 
and no = nf/(NA ~ N+). 
(2.2.46b) 
The intrinsic energy level can be found from (2.2.45) and the definitions of Nc and Nv 
in (2.2.39a) and (2.2.39b) 
„ 
£c + £v , 3kBT 
(ml 
E, = — 
— In —-
2 
4 
v«; 
(2.2.47) 
Thus far, we assume p is given by the heavy holes only, as the density of states of 
the heavy holes is usually much larger than that of the light holes. If we 
take into account the contribution due to light holes, the total hole concentration 
should be 
P =Phh + Pa 
(2.2.48a) 

38 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
where 
3/2 
phh = ^ , / 2 ( = ^ j . 
"Jn = 2(^gr) 
WS» 
— M ' W 
«f-Κ^Θ ■ <2-2-48c) 
Both terms have to be used in determining the Fermi level EF using the charge 
neutrality condition. 
An inversion formula is sometimes convenient if we know the carrier concen-
tration n. Define 
n 
£F — Er 
u = — = F1/2(TJ) 
V = —, 
(2.2.49) 
Then, an approximate formula is [11] 
1η(κ) 
i 7 ~ - 
~ + 
1-w2 
1+(0.24+1.08r)- 2 
x2/3 
/3^τκΥ/3 
V={—) 
■ 
(2.2.50) 
The maximum error [10, 11] of the above formula is 0.006. Further improvement by 
two orders of magnitude is possible [12]. 
2.2.5 
Boundary Conditions 
On the surface of ideal ohmic contacts [6] 
φ = φ0 + Vappi. 
(2.2.51a) 
n = no. 
(2.2.51b) 
p=p0- 
(2.2.51c) 
The quasi-Fermi potentials satisfy 
φη = φρ = Vappi. 
(2.2.52) 
at the ohmic contacts. Here φο, η0, andp0 are the values of the corresponding variables 
for space-charge neutrality at equilibrium. On some interface with surface recombina-
tion, such as that along a Si—S1O2 interface in a metal-oxide-semiconductors 
field-effect transistor (MOSFET), surface of a semiconductor laser, or back surface 

2.2 
SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS EQUATIONS 
39 
of a solar cell, one may have 
ή · J„ = -qRs 
njp= 
qRs 
(2.2.53) 
where Rs is the surface recombination rate and the unit vector is pointing toward the 
surface from the semiconductor to account for carrier loss due to surface recombina-
tion. When interface charges ps exist, such as those of the effective oxide charges on 
the Si—Si02 interface, one has 
- n · (ε,νφ, - ε 2νψ 2) = Ps 
(2.2.54) 
where ή points from region 2 to region 1. On a semiconductor-insulator interface 
where no surface recombination exists, one has 
fi · in = n · Jp = 0. 
(2.2.55) 
Example 
We assume the donor concentration ΝΌ is lxl0 1 7cm~ 3 in a GaAs 
sample and these donors are ionized at room temperature. Because ΝΌ 3> nx — 
2.1 x 106cm~3, the intrinsic carrier concentration, we have the electron 
concentration 
«O = J V D = 1 X 1017 
cm 
and 
p0 = —'- = 4.41 x 10"5 cm" 3«no. 
ΝΌ 
We can also calculate the band edge concentration parameters using m* = 0.0665 mo 
and ml = 0.50 m0 and T= 300K 
,Vc = 2 ( ' ^ f i 
2= 2.51 x 1 0 1 9 ( ^ — Y "cm"3 = 4.30 x lO^cm"3 
im* T \3^2 
Wv = 2.51 x 1019 -±— 
cm"3 = 8.87 x 1018 cm"3. 
V^o 300/ 
The Fermi level can be obtained from the inversion formula (2.2.50) using 
"o 
1 x 1017 
U = N~r 4.30 x 10Π = 0.2326 
and we find 
η ~ —1.381 
Ep — Ec = 7] kßT = -35.7 meV. 

40 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
That is the Fermi level is 35.7 meV below the conduction band edge. If we use η ~ In 
u = —1.458, we obtain EP — Ec= -37.7 meV. The error is only 2 meV. 
2.3 GENERATION AND RECOMBINATION IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
In this section, we describe a phenomenological approach to the carrier generation and 
recombination processes in semiconductors. A quantum mechanical approach can also 
be taken using the time-dependent perturbation theory (i.e., Fermi's golden rule). The 
latter approach will be discussed when we study the optical absorption or gain in semi-
conductors in Chapter 9. In general, these generation/recombination processes can be 
classified into radiative and nonradiative. The radiative transitions involve the creation 
or annihilation of photons. The nonradiative transitions do not involve photons; they 
may involve the interaction with phonons or the exchange of energy and momentum 
with another electron or hole. The fundamental mechanisms can all be described using 
Fermi's golden rule with the energy and momentum conservation satisfied by these 
processes. The processes may also be discussed in terms of band-to-bound state tran-
sitions and band-to-band transitions. 
2.3.1 
Radiative Band-to-Band Generation-Recombination Processes 
For radiative band-to-band (or interband) transitions [13-15] especially due to 
spontaneous emission of photons from semiconductors as shown in Fig. 2.3, the 
recombination rate of electrons and holes should be proportional to the electron 
and hole concentrations 
Rn=Rp=Bnp 
(2.3.1) 
where B is called the bimolecular recombination coefficient or capture coefficient. 
The generation rate due to thermal or optical processes may be written as 
Gn = Gp= et 
(2.3.2) 
(a) 
Gn = Gp=et 
* Φ -
O 
Figure 2 3 
The energy band diagrams for (a) generation and (b) recombination of an electron-hole pair. 
(b) 
Rn = Rp = Bnp 

2.3 GENERATION AND RECOMBINATION IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
41 
where er is an emission rate. The net recombination rate is 
R = Rn-Gn=Rp-Gp 
= Bnp- er. 
(2.3.3) 
If there is no external perturbation such as electric or optical injection of carriers, the 
net recombination rate should vanish at thermal equilibrium 
0 = Bn0po = er 
where n0 and p0 are the electron and hole concentrations at thermal equilibrium 
«oPo = nf- The net recombination rate can be written as 
R = B(np-noPo). 
(2.3.4) 
If the carrier concentrations n and p deviate from their thermal equilibrium values by 
8n and δρ, respectively, 
n = «o + 8n 
p = po + δρ 
(2.3.5) 
we find that the recombination rate under the condition of low-level injection, δη, 
δρ < («o + Po) is given by 
δη 
R = B(n0 +Po + δη)δη = — 
(2.3.6) 
T 
where δη = δρ because electrons and holes are created in pairs for interband tran-
sitions, and the radiative lifetime is 
B(no + po + δη)' 
In the case of high-level injection such as a semiconductor laser with forward bias, 
δη= δρ^> («ο + po), we have the radiative or spontaneous emission rate: 
Rsp = B(n0 +po + δη)δη ~ Β(δη)2 ~ Bn2. 
(2.3.8) 
Generation of electron-hole pairs by optical injection is commonly used in optical 
pumping or photoluminescence setups. When the semiconductor sample is illumi-
nated with photons with energy larger than the band gap, electron-hole pairs can 
be generated due to the absorption of photons. Figure 2.4 shows the optical absorp-
tion spectrum of a few semiconductor materials including indirect band gap materials 
as well as direct band gap materials [16]. The open symbols were obtained from 
simultaneous measurements of reflectance and transmittance to extract the absorption 
coefficient for a given thickness of the sample. The solid symbols were obtained from 
spectral ellipsometry (SE) [16]. A typical absorption coefficient is above l/μπι = 
10,000/cm for photon energies above the band gap. The exact lineshape of the 
absorption spectrum depends on the interband joint density of states and other 

42 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
100 
10 
7 
E 
3 
1 
!3 
0.1 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
Energy (eV) 
Figure 2.4 
Optical absorption spectrum of a few semiconductors obtained from spectral ellipsometry 
(SE) and simultaneous measurements of reflectance and transmittance (/?, 7"). GaNPAs has approximate 
composition GaNo.04Po.76Aso.2- GalnNAs has approximate composition Gao.95Irio.05No.01Aso.99. 
(Reprinted with permission from Γ16] © 2002 IOP Publishing Ltd.) 
effects such as electron-hole Coulomb interaction, which will be discussed later in 
Chapters 9 and 14. The key idea is that the generation of electron-hole pairs 
depends on the incident optical power or number of photons injected per second 
and the absorption coefficient. This concept will be useful in studying photodetectors 
and solar cells. 
2.3.2 Nonradiative Generation-Recombination Processes 
Nonradiative recombination occurs mainly as a result of crystalline defects, 
impurities, and Auger processes [17-22]. The energy released through the recombi-
nation usually excites phonons and enhances the degradation of the devices. The crys-
talline defects include point defects (such as vacancies, interstitial atoms, and their 
complex), dislocations, and stacking faults. These defects change the perfect periodic 
structure nature of the crystal or its band diagram and generate either discrete trap 
states or continuum of states, where electrons or holes recombine most often 
nonradiatively or sometimes radiatively in a different photon wavelength from that 
of the band gap. 
Hall-Shockley-Read 
(HSR) Recombination-Generation at Defects 
The 
simplest model is that net recombination rate is proportional to the excess carrier 
density beyond the thermal equilibrium value and the trap density [17] 
R = aVthNt8n 
(2.3.9) 
fl.'j 
SE R,T 
• 
T 
■ 
— 
--
0 
7 
D 
GaP 
GaNPAs 
GalnNAs 
GaAs 
Si 
Ge 

2.3 GENERATION AND RECOMBINATION IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
43 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
* — T — 
—4— 
-
%
-
*
■ 
1 
Rn = cnnNS\-ft 
Gn = enNJt 
Rp = cpPNJt 
Gp = 
epNt(l-ß 
Figure 2.5 The energy band diagrams for the Hall-Shockley-Read generation-recombination pro-
cesses: (a) electron capture, (b) electron emission, (c) hole capture, and (d) hole emission. 
where σ is the capture cross section, v^ is the thermal velocity of the electrons, Nt is 
the trap (or defect) density for electron capture, and 8n is the excessive electron 
concentration. More details analysis is basically from four processes [18-21] 
shown in Fig. 2.5. These processes may all be caused by the absorption or emission 
of phonons [20, 21]. 
1. Electron Capture: The recombination rate for the electrons is proportional to 
the density of electrons n, and the concentration of the traps Nt, multiplied 
by the probability that the trap is empty (1 — /,), where ft is the occupation 
probability of the trap, Rn = cnnNt{\ —ft), where c„ is the capture coefficient 
for the electrons. 
2. Electron Emission: The generation rate of the electrons due to this process is 
Gn = en Ntft, where en is the emission coefficient and Ntft = n, is the density of 
the traps that are occupied by the electrons. 
3. Hole Capture: Rp = cpp Ntft. 
4. Hole Emission: Gp = ep Nt(l —ft), where ep is the emission coefficient for 
the holes. 
Based on the principle of detail balancing, there should be zero net generation-
recombination of electrons and holes, respectively, at thermal equilibrium. We 
have R„ — Gn = 0, and Rp — Gp = 0. Thus, we obtain relations between c„ 
and en as well as cp and ep. The net recombination rate is 
Rn-Gn=Rp-Gp= 
CnC*n\ 
Cn\ 
Nt 
cnn + en + cpp + ep 
np — nf 
(2.3.10) 
Tp(n + nx) + rn(p + pi) 
where τρ = l/cpNt and τ„ = l/cnNt, which are the hole and electron lifetimes, 
respectively. We also have nx = en/cn, pl = ep/cp, n\px = n\. We note that the 
above capture and emission processes can be due to optical illumination at the 

2.3 GENERATION AND RECOMBINATION IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
45 
1. Electron Capture: An electron in the conduction band recombines with a 
hole in the valence band and releases its energy to a nearby electron. This 
process destroys an electron-hole pair. The recombination rate is 
Rn = Cnn2p. 
(2.3.13) 
An important Auger process, called CHCC process, is shown in Fig. 2.7a in the 
momentum space. An electron (1) in the conduction (C) band interacts with 
another electron (2) in the conduction (C) band via Coulomb interaction, result-
ing in the recombination of electron (2) with a heavy (H) hole in the valence 
band (2'). The emitted band-gap energy due to this electron-hole recombina-
tion is picked up by electron (1) being excited to a higher energy state (1')· In 
this process, the hole density in the heavy-hole band and the electron density in 
the conductor band should be used in (2.3.13). 
2. Electron Emission: An incident (energetic) electron in the conduction band 
creates impact ionization by breaking a bond, thus causing an electron in 
the valence band jump to the conduction band. This process creates an 
electron-hole pair. The generation rate is 
Gn = enn. 
(2.3.14) 
3. Hole Capture: An electron in the conduction band recombines with a hole in 
the valence band with the released energy taken up by a nearby hole. This 
process destroys an electron-hole pair. The recombination rate is 
Rp = Cpnp2. 
(2.3.15) 
Two important Auger processes related to hole captures, called CHSH and 
CHLH processes, are shown in Fig. 2.7b and Fig. 2.7c, respectively. In the 
CHSH process, a conduction (C) band electron recombines with a heavy 
hole (H), and the emitted band-gap energy is picked up by a nearby heavy 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
C = Conduction band 
L = Light-hole band 
H = Heavy-hole band 
S = Spin-orbit split-off band 
Figure 2.7 
Band-to-band Auger recombination processes, (a) CHCC, (b) CHSH, (c) CHLH, and 
(d) CHHH processes. 

2.3 GENERATION AND RECOMBINATION IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
45 
1. Electron Capture: An electron in the conduction band recombines with a 
hole in the valence band and releases its energy to a nearby electron. This 
process destroys an electron-hole pair. The recombination rate is 
Rn = Cnn2p. 
(2.3.13) 
An important Auger process, called CHCC process, is shown in Fig. 2.7a in the 
momentum space. An electron (1) in the conduction (C) band interacts with 
another electron (2) in the conduction (C) band via Coulomb interaction, result-
ing in the recombination of electron (2) with a heavy (H) hole in the valence 
band (2'). The emitted band-gap energy due to this electron-hole recombina-
tion is picked up by electron (1) being excited to a higher energy state (1')· In 
this process, the hole density in the heavy-hole band and the electron density in 
the conductor band should be used in (2.3.13). 
2. Electron Emission: An incident (energetic) electron in the conduction band 
creates impact ionization by breaking a bond, thus causing an electron in 
the valence band jump to the conduction band. This process creates an 
electron-hole pair. The generation rate is 
Gn=enn. 
(2.3.14) 
3. Hole Capture: An electron in the conduction band recombines with a hole in 
the valence band with the released energy taken up by a nearby hole. This 
process destroys an electron-hole pair. The recombination rate is 
Rp = Cpnp2. 
(2.3.15) 
Two important Auger processes related to hole captures, called CHSH and 
CHLH processes, are shown in Fig. 2.7b and Fig. 2.7c, respectively. In the 
CHSH process, a conduction (C) band electron recombines with a heavy 
hole (H), and the emitted band-gap energy is picked up by a nearby heavy 
C = Conduction band 
L = Light-hole band 
H = Heavy-hole band 
S = Spin-orbit split-off band 
Figure 2.7 
Band-to-band Auger recombination processes, (a) CHCC, (b) CHSH, (c) CHLH, and 
(d) CHHH processes. 

46 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
(H) hole being excited to a spin-orbit split-off (S) hole band. In the CHLH 
process, a conduction (C) band electron recombines with a heavy hole (H), 
and the emitted band-gap energy is picked up by a nearby heavy (H) hole 
being excited to a light (L) hole band. In this case, Cp is the sum of CHLH 
and CHSH processes. The fourth process is the CHHH process, Fig. 2.7d, 
where an nearby heavy (H) hole is excited to the heavy (H) hole band when 
an electron (C) and heavy hole (H) recombine. 
4. Hole Emission: An electron in the valence band jumps to the conduction 
band (or the breaking of a bond to create an electron-hole pair) due to 
the impact ionization of an energetic hole in the valence band. The gene-
ration rate is 
Gp=epP. 
(2.3.16) 
At thermal equilibrium, no net generation/recombination exists. We thus have 
process a and its reverse process b balancing each other, as do processes c 
and d. Therefore, 
Rn ~ Gn = 0 = C„nlp0 - enn0 
or 
en = Cnn0po = Cnn\. 
(2.3.17) 
Similarly, ep = Cpn\. The total net Auger recombination rate is the sum of 
the net rates of electrons and holes as each process creates or destroys one 
electron-hole pair. Therefore, 
R = Rn-Gn+Rp-Gp 
= (Cnn + Cpp)(np - nf). 
(2.3.18) 
In semiconductor lasers with a high-level of carrier injection, n = p > « j , w e 
have simply the total Auger recombination rate 
/?Aug = Cn3 
(2.3.19) 
where C is due to the sum of all CHCC, CHLH, and CHSH Auger recombina-
tion processes. 
2.3.3 
The Intrinsic Quantum Efficiency 
The total recombination rate when n » (n0 + Po)ls 
R = An + Bn2 + Cn3 = -^- 
(2.3.20) 
τ{η) 

2.3 GENERATION AND RECOMBINATION IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
47 
where the carrier lifetime is 
τ{η) = (A + Bn + Cn2)~l. 
(2.3.21) 
Often, we define the radiative and nonradiative lifetimes: 
T<=Tn 
T"'^Tü?· 
( 2 3· 2 2 ) 
The intrinsic quantum efficiency is the ratio of the radiative recombination rate to the 
total recombination rate 
^ 
= l/rr+l/rm=^T^/ 
( 2 · 3 · 2 3 ) 
which is an important parameter for LEDs. Under a forward bias of a LED, the 
current injection determines the carrier density; therefore, the radiative recombination 
due to the spontaneous emission of photons (Bn2) and the nonradiative recombina-
tions (An + Cn3). 
2.3.4 
Recombination by the Stimulated Emission Process 
In semiconductor lasers and LEDs, stimulated emission of photons by incident 
photons causes recombination of electron-hole pairs, as shown in Fig. 1.4b. This 
recombination rate is given by the photon density S multiplied by the rate of 
growth, or group velocity (vg) times gain coefficient g(n) 
R = vgg(n)S. 
(2.3.24) 
The stimulated rate plays an important process in semiconductor lasers and will be 
used again in Chapter 10 for the analysis of semiconductor lasers to predict the 
light output power versus the injection current. It is also useful to predict the band-
width of a directly modulated semiconductor laser when the injection current is 
modulated by an ac signal above threshold. 
2.3.5 
Impact lonization Generation-Recombination Process [6] 
This process is very much the same as the reverse Auger processes discussed above. 
However, the hot electron impact ionization processes usually depend on the incident 
current densities instead of the carrier concentrations. Microscopically, the processes 
are identical to the Auger-generation processes 2 and 4, which create an electron-
hole pair due to an incident energetic electron or hole. These rates are usually 
given by 
Gn = aM 
Gp = ßp^ 
(2.3.25) 
q 
p q 

48 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
where an and ßp are the ionization coefficients for electrons and holes, respectively. 
an is the number of electron-hole pairs generated per unit distance due to an incident 
electron. ßp is the number of electron-hole pairs created per unit distance due to an 
incident hole. 
The total net recombination rate is 
R = -Gn-Gp = -aM-ßp^. 
(2.3.26) 
q 
p q 
Usually the ionization coefficients are related to the electric field E in the ionization 
region by the empirical formulas 
an(E) = α~εχρ[-(£ηο/£)η 
(2.3.27) 
ßp{E) = ß;exp[-(Epc/E)y] 
(2.3.28) 
where Enc and £pc are the critical fields and usually 1 < γ < 2. These impact ioni-
zation coefficients will be used in the study of avalanche photodiodes in Chapter 15. 
2.4 
EXAMPLES AND APPLICATIONS TO OPTOELECTRONIC 
DEVICES 
In this section, we consider a few simple examples to illustrate the optical generation 
and recombination processes and their effects on photodetectors. More details about 
photodetectors are discussed in Chapter 15. In the presence of optical injection, the 
continuity equations are 
dn 
1 d 
— = Gn-Rn+- 
— Jn(x) 
(2.4.1) 
ot 
qox 
dp_ 
Id 
- - G
p - R
p - ~ 
GP-RP- 
-JTJPW- 
( 2 A 2 ) 
If a semiconductor is p-type doped with an acceptor concentration NA, we know that 
Po^NA 
and n0~nf/NA. 
(2.4.3) 
2.4.1 
Uniform Optical Injection 
Suppose the optical generation rate is uniform across the semiconductor, G„ = G„(i), 
which is independent of the position (Fig. 2.8) and the recombination rate is Rn = 
8η/τη. We then have 
dn 
8n 
— = Gn(t) 
. 
(2.4.4) 
ot 
τη 

2.4 EXAMPLES AND APPLICATIONS TO OPTOELECTRONIC DEVICES 
49 
Optical injection 
s 
s 
$ s-
MM 
Figure 2.8 
A homogeneous semiconductor under a uniform optical illumination from the side. 
The new carrier densities are 
P = Po + δρ, 
n = n0 + δη 
(2.4.5) 
where the excess carrier concentrations are equal δρ = δη for the interband optical 
generation process, as we assume that electrons and holes are created in pairs. 
Furthermore, for a constant light intensity, Gn(t) = G0, we find the steady-state solution 
δη = G0T„. 
(2.4.6) 
Therefore, the amount of the excess carrier concentration is simply the optical gener-
ation rate G0 multiplied by the carrier lifetime. In the presence of an electric field E 
along the x direction, the conduction current density is 
J = Jn+Jp= 
(?(/!„« + μρρ)Ε = σΕ = σ-
with the conductivity 
σ = <?(/*„« + μρρ) 
(2.4.7) 
(2.4.8) 
and V is the applied voltage and i is the length of the semiconductor. At thermal 
equilibrium when there is no optical illumination 
σο = <7(μ·„«ο + μ-ρΡώ 
is the dark conductivity, and 
Δσ = η(μηδη + μρδρ) = <7(μ„ + μρ)Ο0τη 
(2.4.9) 
(2.4.10) 
is called the photoconductivity, which is proportional to the generation rate and the 
carrier lifetime. The photocurrent is 
Δ/ = Δ ο ^ V = <7(μ„ + μρ) 
G^n-V 
(2.4.11) 

50 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
and A is the cross-sectional area of the semiconductor. For most semiconductors, the 
electron mobility is much larger than the hole mobility. Because vd = μ„(ν/£) is the 
average drift velocity of the electrons, we can write the photocurrent as 
M~q{GoAO— 
(2.4.12) 
where rt = £/vd is the average transit time of the electrons across the photoconductor of 
a length £ and (G0A£) is just the total number of generated electron-hole pairs in a 
volume AL The ratio of the carrier recombination lifetime r„ to the transit time τ, is 
the photoconductive gain. 
Example 
A homogeneous germanium photoconductor (Fig. 2.8) is illuminated 
with an optical beam with the wavelength λ = 1.55 μιη and an optical power 
P = 1 mW. Assume the optical beam is absorbed uniformly by the photoconductor 
and each photon creates one electron-hole pair, that is, the intrinsic quantum 
efficiency 17; is unity. The optical energy hv is 
Λν = Α^ = - ^ = 0.8 (eV) 
λ 
λ 
where λ is in micrometers in the above formula. The photon flux Φ{ is the number of 
photons injected per second 
P 
lmW 
„ 
, 
^ 
= fa = 0.8x(1.6xl0-»)J = 7 - 8 1 X l ° 
S 
Because we assume all the photons are absorbed and the intrinsic quantum efficiency 
is unity, we have the generated rate per unit volume in (wd£) 
G0 = qty/(wd£) 
= 7.81 x \0l5/(wd£) 
(s-1 cm-3). 
We use 
μη = 3900 cm2 V"'s"1 
μρ = 1800cm2 V"1 s"1 
T„ = 10" 3S 
νν=10μπι 
d=\\Lrci 
£ = 1 mm 
The injected "primary" photocurrent is ^i7iOf= 1.6x 10 19 x 7.81 x 1015 A — 1.25 mA. 
The average electron transit time is 
£ 
0.1cm 
fi 
Ttn = — i 7 = -, 
7X , , ,, . = 2.56 x 10"6s 
μη-7 
3900 
/„„„„crn^A ( 1 V 
ί 
\ 
W-sJ\p.lcm 

2.4 EXAMPLES AND APPLICATIONS TO OPTOELECTRONIC DEVICES 
51 
and the average transit time for holes is 
5.56 x l(T6s. 
Mi *£ 
The photocurrent in the photoconductor is 
Δ/ = q^n + μρ)Ο0τη ^ V = (^,Φ, ) (— + —) 
t 
\Ttn 
Ttp/ 
1.25 mA 
10"3 
10"3 
■ + -
,2.56 xlO"6 
5.56X10-6, 
= 0.71A 
where a photoconductive gain of around 570 occurs in this example. 
2.4.2 
Nonuniform Carrier Generation 
If the carrier generation rate is not uniform, carrier diffusion will be important. For 
example, if the optical illumination on the semiconductor is limited to only a 
width 5, instead of the length £, Fig. 2.9a, the excess carriers generated in the illumi-
nation region will diffuse in both directions, assuming there is no external field 
applied in the jc-direction [13]. Another example is in a stripe-geometry semiconduc-
tor laser [23] with an intrinsic region as the active layer where the carriers are injected 
Optical illumination 
(c) 
Gn = J<Jqd 
0 
S/2 
SI2 
->y 
(b) 
N 
Y///////M 
°··ο· 
°· o 
A an(y) 
Figure 2.9 
(a) Carrier generation by optical excitation or absorption of photons in a semiconductor. The 
optical illumination is over a width S. (b) Current injection into the active intrinsic (i) region with a 
thickness d of a stripe-geometry semiconductor laser, (c) The carrier generation rate as a function of the 
position y. (d) The excess carrier distribution after diffusion. 

52 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
by a uniform current density within a stripe width 5, Fig. 2.9b. We ignore the current 
spreading outside the region |_y| < 5/2. 
The continuity equation for the electrons in the bulk semiconductor in Fig. 2.9a or 
in the intrinsic region in Fig. 2.9b is 
dn 
Gn 
8n 
i a Jn{y) 
dt 
τη 
qdy 
and the electron current density in the P-region is dominated by diffusion: 
dn 
Jn{y) ~ qDn —. 
dy 
At steady state, d/dt = 0, and 
rj2 
C 
dy1 
τ„ 
(2.4.13) 
(2.4.14) 
(2.4.15) 
Here the generation rate Gn(y) is given by the optical intensity in Fig. 2.9a or, in the 
case of electric injection with a current density J0 from the stripe 5, Fig. 2.9c, 
Gn(y) 
(2.4.16) 
Go = nA, 
\y\<S/2 
qd 
0, 
\y\ > 5/2 
where q = 1.6 x 10 l9 C, η; is the injection efficiency, and d is the thickness of the 
active region. The solution to Eq. (2.4.13) is 
8n{y) 
' Ae-y^ 
+ Be+y^ 
+ G0T„ 
\y\ < 5/2 
Ce-^-i)'L" 
\y\ > 5/2 
(2.4.17) 
where L„ = (D„T„Y' 
is the electron diffusion length. From the symmetry of the 
problem, we know that Sn(y) must be an even function of y. Therefore, the coeffi-
cients A and B must be equal. Another way to look at this is that the ^-component 
of the electron current density Jn(y) must be zero at the symmetry plane y = 0. 
Therefore, d(8ri)/dy = 0 at y = 0, which also gives A = B. 
Matching the boundary conditions at y = 5/2, in which 8n{y) and Jn(y) are con-
tinuous, we find A and C. The final expressions for 5n(y) can be put in the form 
8n(y) 
GQT„ 1 -£>-s/2/-cosh[ — 
-WLn 
G0T„ sinh( — 
)e 
\y\ < s/2 
\y\ > s/2. 
(2.4.18) 
The total carrier concentration n(y) = n0 + 8n(y) ~ 8n(y); as the active region is 
undoped, n0 is very small. This carrier distribution n{y) (Fig. 2.9d) is proportional 

2.5 
SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
53 
to the spontaneous emission profile from the stripe-geometry semiconductor 
laser measured experimentally. In Chapter 10, we will discuss in more detail the 
stripe-geometry gain-guided semiconductor laser. 
2.5 
SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
When two crystals of semiconductors with different energy gaps are combined, a 
heterojunction is formed [23-28]. The conductivity type of the smaller energy gap 
crystal is denoted by a lowercase n or p and that of the larger energy gap crystal 
is denoted by an uppercase N or P. Here we discuss the basic Anderson model 
for the heterojunctions [24, 25]. It has been pointed out that a more fundamental 
approach using the bulk and interface properties of the semiconductors should be 
used for the heteroj unction model [26-28]. In Appendix A (page 787), we also 
discuss the model-solid theory for the band lineups of semiconductor heterojunc-
tions including the strain effects, which are convenient for the estimation of band 
edge discontinuities. 
Consider first ap-type narrow gap semiconductor such as GaAs in contact with an 
N-type wide band-gap semiconductor such as Al^Ga! -xAs (Fig. 2.10). Let χ be the 
electron affinity, which is the energy required to take an electron from the conduction-
band edge to the vacuum level, and let Φ be the work function, which is the energy 
difference between the vacuum level and the Fermi level. In each region, the Fermi 
level is determined by the charge neutrality condition. For example, in the p 
region, the electron density n and hole density p satisfy 
n + N~=p 
+ N+ 
(2.5.1) 
where n and p are related to the quasi-Fermi levels Fn and Fp, respectively, through 
(2.2.39) or (2.2.40). We may denote Na = N~— N£ as the "net" acceptor concen-
tration. If Na ~S> «j, we then have, p = Na, which will determine the Fermi level Fp 
in the p region, Fig. 2.10a. A similar equation holds for the carrier densities, N 
and P, in the N region. Using ΛΌ = N£ — N^ as the "net" ionized donor concen-
tration, we have, N ~ Afo 3> n-,, which determines the bulk Fermi levels FN in the 
N region before contact. When the two crystals are in contact, the Fermi levels will 
line up to be a constant across the junction under thermal equilibrium conditions 
without any voltage bias, Fig. 2.10b. Thus there will be redistributions of electrons 
and holes such that a built-in electric field exists to prevent any current flow in the 
crystal. To find the band bending, we use the depletion approximation. 
2.5.1 
Depletion Approximation for an Unbiased p-N Junction 
The charge density is 
p{x) = q{p-n 
+ N+ - N~) 
(2.5.2) 

54 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
- Vacuum level 
(b) 
T 
-qv0 
XN 
-qm 
ECN 
Figure 2.10 Energy band diagram for a p-N heterqjunction (a) before contact and (b) after contact. 
in the narrow gap (p) region and similar expressions with P and N in the wide gap N 
region. Because free carriers are depleted in the space charge region near the junction, 
we have, Fig. 2.1 la and 2.1 lb, 
p(x) 
—qNa —xp < x < 0 
+qNj) 
0 < x < xN 
(2.5.3) 
where ΝΆ is the net acceptor concentration in the /?-side and ND is the net donor 
concentration on the iV-side. 
From Gauss's law, V · (εΕ) = p, we have 
-q Na/ep 
<LE(X)= 
I ~H " a / ° p 
dx 
I +q ΝΌ/εΝ 
0 < x < xN 
xp < x < 0 
(2.5.4) 

2.5 SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
55 
(a) 
N 
xN 
*-χ 
<d) 
1 
-χΡ 
Vop 
- * 
f 
. 
" 
xN 
Figure 2.11 
Illustrations of (a) ap-N junction geometry, (b) the charge distribution, (c) the electric field, 
and (d) the electrostatic potential based on the depletion approximation. 
where ερ and ε^ are the permittivity in the p and N regions, respectively. The above 
Gauss's law states that the slope of the E(x) profile is given by the charge density 
divided by the permittivity. Thus the electric field is given by two linear functions 
E(x) 
-q Na(x + χρ)/ερ 
+q Νχ)(χ — XN)/BN 
0 < X < XN 
-xp < x < 0 
(2.5.5) 
in the depletion region and zero outside, Fig. 2.11c. The boundary condition states 
that the normal displacement vector D = εΕ is continuous at x = 0 
e„ E(0_) = εΝ Ε(0+) 
or 
ly^Xp 
ΝΌχΝ. 
(2.5.6) 
(2.5.7) 
The electrostatic potential distribution φ(χ) across the junction is related to the electric 
field by E(x) = —άφ(χ)/άχ, which means that the slope of the potential profile is 
given by the negative of the electric field profile. If we choose the reference potential 
to be zero for x < — xp, we have, Fig. 2.1 Id, 
Φ(χ) 
qN*< 
_L 
Λ2 
(X + Xp) 
2ερ 
<ιΝΛχΙ 
2ε„ 
<ΐΝΏ 
2εΝ 
ylxXft — xr) 
-xp < x < 0 
0 < x < XN 
XN < x 
(2.5.8) 

56 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
where the contact potential V0 is 
V0 = V0p + V0N 
V0p = ΦΦ) = qNaJp/2ep 
Von = 
qNO^N/2sN. 
(2.5.9) 
We see that Vo is the total potential drop across the junction, whereas V0p is the 
portion of the voltage drop on the p-side and V0N on the N-side. The contact potential 
is evaluated using the bulk values of the Fermi levels Fp and FN measured from the 
valence or conduction band edges Ewp and ECN, respectively, before contact (see 
Fig. 2.10a), 
[Egp 
Fp)/q 
- AEC - (Fp 
(ECN - FN)]/q 
and 
AEC ~ 0.67 (EQN — Egp) for GaAs-Al^Gai-^As system. 
For nondegenerate semiconductors, 
EQN 
FN 
E, vp 
-kBTln(N/NCN) 
-kBT\n(p/Nvp) 
(2.5.10) 
(2.5.11) 
(2.5.12a) 
(2.5.12b) 
where NCN and Nvp are evaluated from (2.2.39a) and (2.2.39b) for the N and p 
regions, respectively. Because the electron concentration on the N-side is N ~ ΛΌ, 
and the hole concentration on the /?-side is p ~ ^Va, the contact potential V0 can be 
evaluated from the above equations when the doping concentrations Na and ND are 
known. Using the two conditions (2.5.7) and (2.5.9) and the total width of the 
depletion region JCW from 
we find immediately that 
ΝΌ 
Na+ND 
Xyf — Xp + XN 
-*w 
XN 
Na 
Na+NO *w-
Thus we may relate JCW to V0 directly, 
2epV0 
JCw 
^a^Dr^vD + ^ ^ a j 
1/2 
(^Va + ^VD). 
(2.5.13) 
(2.5.14) 
(2.5.15) 

2.5 SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
57 
The band edge Ev(x) from the p-side to the N-side is given by (choosing Ev(— oo) = 0 
as the reference potential energy) 
[ —Δ£ν - <7<£C*) N-side 
where φ(χ) is given in Eq. (2.5.8). The conduction band edge Ec(x) is above Ev(x) by 
an amount Ew on the p-side and by an amount EGN on the N-side, as shown in 
Fig. 2.9b 
E^={EE^tt 
Xx>0. 
W» 
Example 
A p-GaAs/N- Al^Gai _^As (JC = 0.3) heterojunction is formed at thermal 
equilibrium without an external bias at room temperature. The doping concentration 
is Na = 1 x 1018 cm - 3 in the p-side and iVD = 2 x 1017 cm~3 in the N-side. Assume 
that the density-of-states hole effective mass for Al^Gai -^As is 
m£(x) = (0.50 + 0.29*)mo 
0 < x < 0.45 
which accounts for both the heavy-hole and light-hole density of states. Other para-
meters are 
m* = (0.0665 + 0.083x)m0 
£g(jc) = (1.424 + 1.247*) (eV) 
ε(χ) = (13.1 -3.0ϊ)εο 
(0 < x < 0.45) 
where x is the mole fraction of aluminum. 
(a) We obtain for x = 0.3 
p-GaAs: m* = 0.0665 w0, ml = 0.50 m0, ερ = 13.1 ε0, £gp = 1.424 eV. 
N-Alo.3Gao.7As: w* = 0.0914 mo, ml = 0.587 m0, εΝ = 12.2 ε0, 
EZN = 1.798 eV. 
The band edge discontinuities are 
AEg = 1.247 x 0.3 = 0.374 eV = 374 meV 
AEC = 0.67Δ£„ = 250.6 meV 
Δ£ν = 0.33Δ£„ = 123.4 meV. 
(b) We calculate the quasi-Fermi levels Fp and FN for the bulk semiconductors for 
the given Na and ΝΌ separately. 

58 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
p-GaAs region: 
\3/2 
(
m* T \ 
- * 
cm"3 = 4.30 x 1017cm-3 
/w0300/ 
,3/2 
yVv = 2.51 x 10'" I 
'^-— 
cm"3 = 8.87 x 1018 cm"3 
m0 300/ 
p = Na = NvFx/2[EZ 
Fp I = JVvexpl 
Γ p 
tL\p 
kßT 
- £ B n n ~ = 56.4meV. 
k*T 
\ 
KB 
N-Alo.3Gao.7As region: 
Nc = 2.51 x 1019(0.0914)3/2 = 6.94 x 1017cnr3 
Ny = 2.51 x 1019(0.587)3/2 = 1.13 x 1019 cm"3 
FN — EcN 
N = ND = NCF 
c^l/2 
kBT 
., 
(FN — ECN 
ECN ~ FN 
-kvTln^- 
= -25.85 I n ^ ^ X l " 
= 32.2 meV. 
Nc 
6.94 x 1017 
(c) The contact potential is 
V0 = [Egp + AEC - (Fp - Ew) - (EcN - FN)]/g 
= (1424 + 250.6 - 56.4 - 32.2) mV = 1586 mV. 
(d) The depletion widths are 
2spV0 
1 1/2 
qNaNO[NO+^Na εΝ 
Nr, 
2x 13.1 x 8.854 x 10"14 x 1.586 
1.6 x 10"19x 10 1 8x2x 10 1 7(2x 1 0 1 7 + — x l O 1 8 
12.2 
= 0.019 μηι 
^ = ^ - ^ = 0.095^01 
ΝΌ 
XW=XP+XN=0A 
14 μιτι. 
The energy band diagram is plotted in Fig. 2.12. 
1/2 
x 2 x 1017 

2.5 SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
59 
1800 
1200 
p-GaAs 
Ai-Al03Ga07AS 
600 
U 
0 r 
2 
-600 
a 
1200 -
I I I I I I 
I ' ' ' ' ■ Γ ■ ' ' ' ' I 
-1800 
-0.06 
-0.03 
IjnliiiilMiit.nX..*—*■»*. 
-AE„ = 123.4 meV 
' " N 
32.2 meV 
0.00 
0.03 
0.06 
Position * (Jim) 
0.09 
0.12 
Figure 2.12 
Band diagram of a p-GaAs/N-Alo^Gao^As heterojunction with JVa = 1 x 1018 cm 3 in the 
narrow gap p region and ΝΌ = 2 x 1017 cm~3 in the wide gap N region. 
2.5.2 
Biased p-N Junction 
With an applied voltage V across the diode, Fig. 2.13a, the potential barrier is reduced 
by q V if the voltage is a forward bias. Note that our convention for the polarity of the 
bias voltage V is that the positive electrode is connected to the p-side of the diode. 
Thus the depletion width ;tw is reduced. Explicitly, 
<Κχ) 
2ερ 
2ερ 
2εΝ 
Vo-V 
-χρ < χ < 0 
0 < χ < ΧΝ 
%Ν — Χ· 
(2.5.18) 
(a) 
Ρ 
Ν 
—1111 
>χ 
Figure 2.13 (a) A p-N junction with a bias Vand (b) the corresponding electrostatic potential φ(χ) (solid 
curve for V > 0 and dashed curve for V = 0). 

60 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
The potential drop on the p-side of the depletion region is <£(0) shown in Fig. 2.13b, 
-Jt? 
(2.5.19) 
V0p - V, 
qNa 
P 
2ε/'" 
which is reduced from V0p by an amount Vp. Similarly, the voltage drop across the 
iV-side of the depletion region is 
VON — VM — — 
XI, 
2εΝ 
(2.5.20) 
which is reduced from V0N by an amount VN. The sum of Vp and VN has to be equal to 
the bias voltage V 
VP + VN = V. 
(2.5.21) 
Again the charge neutrality condition 
Naxp = ΝΌχΝ 
and 
together with 
lead to 
x\v — xP + XN 
*-" = £*+£"i 
(2.5.22) 
(2.5.23) 
(2.5.24) 
*w 
28 P(V 0 - 
V) 
qNaNO(NO+^N, 
1/2 
(Na + ND). 
(2.5.25) 
.1/2 
Thus the depletion region is reduced as x w is proportional to (V0 - V) ' . If the diode 
is reverse-biased, V is negative and JCW becomes wider. The potential function φ(χ) in 
(2.5.18) determines the band bendings Ew(x) and Ec(x) through (2.5.16) and (2.5.17). 
The resultant band diagrams for a forward-biased and a reverse-biased diode are 
shown in Fig. 2.14a and Fig. 2.14b, respectively. 
2.5.3 
Quasi-Fermi Levels and Minority Carrier Injections 
The quasi-Fermi levels Fp(x) and FN(x) are separated by the bias voltage V multiplied 
by the magnitude of the electron charge q = 1.6 x 10 19 C 
qV. 
(2.5.26) 

2.5 
SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
(a) 
_ 
61 
FHW 
! 
F„ 
^-L-
~
^
1 
1(V0-V) 
-vP q<y0p-Vp) .tj. 
^ 
-90W 
0 
*w 
i(V0-V) 
^αν 
"^ 
Γ ^ 
FN 
Fp{x) 
"l 
WON-VN) 
-q<Kx) 
0 
% 
Figure 2.14 
Energy band diagrams for a p-N heterojunction under (a) forward bias and (b) reverse bias 
based on the depletion approximation. 
This fact can be seen clearly by comparing the band diagrams of the zero bias and 
forward bias cases in Fig. 2.10b and Fig. 2.14a, respectively. To find the variations 
of the quasi-Fermi levels Fp(x) and F^x) 
as functions of the position, we have to 
find the carrier concentrations everywhere in the diode. Assuming a low-level injec-
tion condition, which means that the amount of injected excess carriers due to the 
voltage bias is always much less than the majority carrier concentration in each 
region, the minority carrier concentration is much more strongly affected than is 
the majority carrier concentration in each region. As a result of this, there are two 
different quasi-Fermi levels F^x) 
and Fp(x) for the electron and the hole concen-
trations, respectively, near the junction region. Far away from the junction region, 
the quasi-Fermi level should approach its thermal equilibrium value in the bulk 
region, respectively, that is, FN(x —>+oo) —»· FN (bulk value on the /V-side) and 
Fp(x-
o o ) - > F 
(bulk value on the /?-side), as the carrier concentrations are 
hardly affected away from the junction. 

62 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
It is usually assumed that the quasi-Fermi levels stay as constants across the 
depletion region, that is, FN(x) = FN for — xp<x<+°°, 
and Fp{x) = Fp for 
— oo < x < χΝ, as shown in Fig. 2.14. This is equivalent to the statement that the 
carrier distribution in energy for the same species of carrier across the depletion 
region stays the same in the depletion region. As a result of this assumption, we 
find that, for the Boltzmann distribution, on the p-side 
Pp{x) = Nvpe(EM-FPM)/kBT 
(2.5.27a) 
np(x) = Ncpe(FN(x)-E<(x))lk»T. 
(2.5.27b) 
On the N-side 
PN{x) = NvNe(EAx)-FPM)/kBT 
(2.5.28a) 
NN(x) = Ν(,Νβ(^Μ-ΕΛχ))βΒτ _ 
(2.5.28b) 
Because at thermal equilibrium (i.e., no cunent injection, V= 0), Fp(x) = F^x) 
nPPP = NVpNcpe-^-E^k^T 
= n\ 
(2.5.29) 
where ηψ is the intrinsic carrier concentration on the p-side. Thus, if V φ 0, for 
—xp < x < 0, 
npPp = nle(F"-F")/kBT 
= n\eqVlw'. 
(2.5.30) 
At the edge of the depletion region, x = —xp, pp(—xp) —Ppo — Na. Therefore, 
„,(-*„) ~ nie«vlk»T 
= np0e"v^T. 
(2.5.31) 
" a 
Here the subscript "0" in p^ and ripo refers to their thermal equilibrium values. The 
minority carrier near the edge of the depletion region, np(—xp), differs by a factor 
exp(qV/knT) from its thermal equilibrium value ripo due to the carrier injection. 
Similarly, at the edge of the depletion region on the Λί-side, x = xN, the minority 
carrier concentration is 
PN(XN) = PNoeqV/kBT 
(2.5.32) 
where /Vo = n^/Nu, where niN is the intrinsic carrier concentration on the N-side. 

2.5 SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
63 
If we compare the current density equations for the p-side of the diode, assuming 
that ripo and Ppo are independent of x, dn/dx = dSn/dx, dp/dx = d8p/dx, 
Jn = qVnnE + Φη ^~ &l 
(2.5.33a) 
ox 
Jp = ημρΡΕ - qDp — 8p 
(2.5.33b) 
we see that in general, μηηΕ <§; μρρΕ, as n -C p on thep-side of the diode. If J„ and Jp 
are of the same order of magnitude and the charge neutrality condition, 8n(x) ~ 8p(x), 
applies in the quasi-neutral region (i.e., x < —xp), where E is very small, we expect 
that the drift current is much less than the diffusion current for the electrons. Thus, the 
minority current density Jn is only dominated by the diffusion current density (this is 
not true for the majority current density as will be seen later) 
Jn~qDn7-8n{x). 
(2.5.34) 
ax 
Using the charge continuity equation for the electrons 
! * = - * + ! * , „ 
(2.5.35) 
at 
τ„ 
q ax 
under steady-state conditions, we obtain the diffusion equation: 
D„ -— δη(χ) - ^ 
= 0. 
(2.5.36) 
Ox1 
τη 
The solution with the boundary condition, 8n(x — — oo) = 0, has the form 
8n(x) = 8n(-xp)e(x+x")/L" 
(2.5.37) 
where 
8n(-xp) = np(-xp) - n^ 
= npaifFl*1 - 1) 
(2.5.38) 
and L„ = y/Dnrn is the diffusion length for electrons in the p-region. The injection 
condition from (2.5.31) has been used. The total carrier concentrations on the 
p-side for x < —xp are 
np(x) = npo + 8n(x) 
= ipo + npo(e^kaT 
- 1 ) /
x + x ^
L " 
(2.5.39) 
and 
Pp(.x) =Ρρθ + δρ(χ) 
= Ppo + n^{eqWlw 
- 1 ) ^ + ^ » 
(2.5.40) 
where 8p{x) = 8n(x), ppo = Na, and «p0 = nfp/Na. 

64 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
Similarly, in the quasi-neutral region on the JV-side of the diode, x > xN, the 
minority (hole) current density is approximately 
Jp~-qDP 
— 8P(x) 
(2.5.41) 
ox 
and 
ß 
XP 
i f) 
(2.5.42) 
(2.5.43) 
which lead to 
where 
d 0 
8P 
1 d 
8P = 
—Jp 
at 
Tp 
q ox 
8P(x) = 8P(xN)e-^-XN)/L" 
8P(xN) = P(xN) - Pm 
= PN0(e"v^T 
- 1) 
(2.5.44) 
and Lp = y/DpTp is the diffusion length of the holes on the N-side. The total carrier 
concentrations on the N-side of the diode, x > xN, are 
PN{x) = Pm + 8P(x) 
= PN0 + PN0{eqVlk»T - 1 )e-<*-W^ 
(2.5.45) 
NN(x) = Nm + 8N(x) 
= NN0 + PN0{eqVlkBT - \)e-^-x^lLp. 
(2.5.46) 
Knowing the carrier concentration for x < — xp and x > xN, the quasi-Fermi levels 
can be obtained from (2.5.27) and (2.5.28), 
FN(x) - Ecp = Fp- Ecp + kBTin[\ + (β^Ι^τ 
- \)/x+x<>^] 
x < -xp 
(2.5.47) 
where kBT £n (Προ/Ν^) = Fp— Ecp on thep-side has been used. Similarly, 
EVN - Fp(x) = EVN -FN + kBTen[l + (e"v^T 
- !)<,-<*-*)/*.,,] χ > χΝ 
(2.5.48) 
where kBT in (F/vo/^v/v) = EWN — FN has been used. From (2.5.47) and (2.5.48), 
we have 
FN{-xp) = Fp+qV 
= FN 
(2.5.49a) 
Fp(xN) = FN-qV 
= Fp 
(2.5.49b) 
and FN (x -f -oo) -> Fp, Fp(x^ 
+ oo)-^ FN. 

2.5 SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
65 
For the forward bias case, V > 0 , when exp(qV/kBT) ;» 1, the above results 
in (2.5.47) and (2.5.48) can be further simplified and the quasi-Fermi levels are 
plotted in Fig. 2.14a. Similarly, for the reverse bias, exp(<7V/kBT) <C 1, the quasi-
Fermi levels are plotted in Fig. 2.14b. 
2.5.4 
Current Densities and I-V Characteristics 
The current densities are obtained for the minority carriers first. On the p-side, 
J„ = qDn — δη(χ), and on the yV-side, JP ~ — qDP — δΡ(χ). Assuming that there is 
ax 
ox 
no generation or recombination current in the space charge region, that is, Jn and 
JP are constant over the space charge region, the total current density is thus the 
Carrier 
A concentrations 
, 
Space 
j 
\ 
charge \ 
region 
(b) 
Current 
, densities 
sJ= 
JM 
Total current density 
1 
1 
1 
1 
s ^ 
1 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Jp{*N) 
ι Λ 
Λ,Χ-V 
1 
xN 
1 
Figure 2.15 
(a) The carrier concentrations and (b) the current densities as functions of position x in a 
forward biased p-N heterojunction diode using the depletion approximation. 

BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
Carrier concentrations 
(b) 
p-side 
■4M 
^
^ 
Jp(x) 
1 
1 
■
^ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I Current 
densities 
U-xP) 
Jp(XN) 
iV-side 
J 
Figure 2.16 
(a) The carrier concentrations and (b) the current densities as functions of x for a reverse 
biased p-N heterojunction diode using the depletion approximation. 
sum of the two current densities 
J = J„(-xp) + Jp(xN) 
(Dn 
Dp 
= q\-j-npo + —Pm 
](e 
,qV/kBT 
i). 
(2.5.50) 
The total current is / = jA with A the cross-sectional area of the diode. 
/ = /0(e»v/*fc7'-l) 
(Dn 
Dp 
= q\~rnp0 
T~ m i 
(2.5.51a) 
(2.5.51b) 

2.5 
SEMICONDUCTOR p-N AND n-P HETEROJUNCTIONS 
67 
U 
-
Revserse bias current (-/0) 
1 ■ Ί i " '' 
Voltage (V) 
° 
Figure 2.17 The /-V curve of a semiconductor diode. 
Knowing the total current density J, which is a constant across the diode, the majority 
carrier current densities Jp(x) and JN(X) can be obtained from 
Jp(x) = J — Jn(x) 
on the p-side, 
JN(X) = J — Jp(x) on the N-side, 
x<-xP 
X > Xf\/. 
(2.5.52a) 
(2.5.52b) 
The complete current distributions are plotted in Fig. 2.15 for the forward bias case 
and in Fig. 2.16 for the reverse bias case. The well-known diode /-V curve is shown 
in Fig. 2.17. The current increases rapidly with the forward bias voltage, and saturates 
at a small negative current when the bias voltage is negative. 
2.5.5 
Semiconductor n-P Heterojunction 
If the narrow gap semiconductor is doped n-type and the wide gap semiconductor is 
doped P-type, the procedure to find the band diagram is similar to that for the p-N 
heterojunction in the previous sections. We will show a numerical example as follows. 
Example 
An rc-GaAs/P-Alo.sGao.TAs heterojunction is formed at room temper-
ature and a zero bias. The doping concentrations are Nd = 4 x 1016cm 3 in the n 
region and NA = 2 x 1017cm 3 in the P region. The parameters have been given 
in the previous example on a p-N heterojunction. We have: 
j \3/2 
(a) n-side (GaAs) Nc = 2.5 x 10' 
X 
m0300/ 
4.30 x 1017cm"3 
Nd 
Ecn -Fn = -kBT In— = -25.85(-2.3749) = 61.4 meV 
Nc 

68 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
/»-side (Alo.3Gao.7As) JVv = 2.5x 10 
P = 
NA=Nvexp 
FP — EVp = — k^Tln 
= 1C 
(b) The contact potential is 
3/2 
= 1.13 x 10iycm 
104.3 meV. 
m0300J 
Eyp — Fp 
= -25.851 In 
19 
- 3 
NA\ 
f, 
2xl0 1 7 
1.13 xlO19 
V0 = [EGP - AEC - (Ecn - Fn) - (FP - EyP)]/q 
= 1798 - 250.6 - 61.4 - 104.3 = 1381.7 mV. 
(c) The depletion widths are 
2ε„ν0 
qNdNA[NA+-Nd 
1/2 
NA 
2 x 13.1 x 8.854 x 10"14 x 1.3817 
1.6 x 10-19 x 4 x 1016 x 2 x 10 1 7(2x 1 0 1 7 + — x 4 x 1016 
V 
1 2 · 2 
17 
1/2 
x 2 x 10" (cm) 
0.203 μπι 
I 
tu 
1800 
1200 
600 
0 
-600 
1200 
renn 
11-GaAs 
P-
±r 
ABC = 250.6 meVJ 
- 61.4 meV 
^ S 
E # 
en* 
_ 
*Λ 
■J: 
vn 
. 
Λ -
i 
— 
χη 
—H*** 
A 10.3 
t 
G a o . 7 A s 
-
.F, 
1 
EVP 
104.3 meV -
-
1 . . _ _ . 
; 
-4 
-
2
0
2
4 
Position x (μηι) 
Figure 2.18 
Band diagram of an unbiased n-GaAs/P-Alo.sGao^As heterojunction with ND = 4x 10" 
cm - 3 in the n region and NA = 2 x 1017 cm - 3 in the P region. 

2.6 SEMICONDUCTOR n-N HETEROJUNCTIONS 
69 
^ d 
i n 
xP = xn TT- = 1 0 μηι 
JCw = *n + Xp = 6.1 μΙΏ. 
(d) The energy band diagram of the «-GaAs/P-Alo.sGaojAs junction is plotted 
in Fig. 2.18. 
2.6 
SEMICONDUCTOR n-N HETEROJUNCTIONS AND 
METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR JUNCTIONS 
2.6.1 
Semiconductor n-N Heterojunctions 
For an n-N heterojunction, the theory is a bit more involved. With the develop-
ment of high electron mobility transistor (HEMT), also called modulation 
doped field-effect transistor (MODFET), the n-N heterojunction theory is very 
useful for modeling these devices [29]. Depending on the model, the results 
may be different. A qualitative approach is shown in Fig. 2.19. When the two 
crystals with n-type (Nd) and N-type (ND) dopings are brought in contact, the 
charge redistribution produces a space charge region. There will be electrons 
that spill over from the N region to the n region for the alignment of the Fermi 
levels. The charge distribution is 
* * ) = \ 
qNO, 
0<x<xN. 
( 2 A 1 ) 
Note that far away from the junction, n(x —> —oo) —> Nd 
E(x) = { 
j ^ 
(2.6.2) 
qNi>(x — XN)/EN 
0 < X < XN-
We obtain charge neutrality from the boundary condition for normal displacement 
vector component at x = 0, ns = NDXN, where 
o 
„s = I [n(x) - Nd]dx. 
(2.6.3) 
— 00 
Judging from the charge distribution, the electric field, and the potential profile, 
one sees that the band diagram in Fig. 2.19 (Step 5) is very similar to that of 
the p-N heterojunction in Fig. 2.10b. 
Using the fact that the contact potential is given by 
V0 = (FN - Fn)/q = [(Ecn - Fn) + AEC - (ECN - FN)]/q, 
(2.6.4) 

70 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
(a) 
Before contact 
« 
N_ 
F 
±AEC
 
E™ 
F 
(b) 
After contact (VA = 0) 
Step 1) Line up the Fermi levels 
c c n 
F„ 
ECN 
- - F», 
~ ^ A £ V 
Step 2) Space charge distribution 
+qND 
ΘΘ 
ΘΘ 
-q(n(x)-Nd) 
xN 
Step 3) Electric field distribution 
'£(*) 
d 
-fa εΕ(χ) = ρ(χ) 
>x 
-qN^Ef, 
Step 4) Electrostatic potential 
E(x) 
Step 5) Band diagram 
Ev(x) --
-q<l>(x) 
x<0 
-q(j>(x)-AEy 
x>0 
AEC 
qVw 
cov 
* v Q ? $ n ^ _ "J_A£V 
IM» 
Figure 2.19 
A step-by-step illustration for the energy band diagram of an n-N (isotope) hetero-
junction (a) before contact and (b) after contact showing five steps to obtain the steady-state energy 
band diagram. 
define the partition: 
'ON 
Von-
(2.6.5) 
Relating the carrier density n(x) to the conduction band edge potential φ(χ) and 
the electric field, the procedure is to set up the equations for the partitions of the 
contact potential, V0„ and V0N, on the n-side and N-side, respectively. We skip 
the detailed equations and show an example in Fig. 2.20, the energy band diagrams 
for a P-n-N heterojunction. The n region is assumed to be wide enough such that 

2.6 
SEMICONDUCTOR n-N HETEROJUNCTIONS 
71 
(a) 
N 
AEC 
E 
>r 
^ 
Fn 
Evn: , * * v 
kA£c 
AEV 
~FN 
(b) 
Eyp 
ΔΕ, 
W 
ΔΕ„ 
Δ£„ 
Figure 2.20 
Energy band diagrams for a P-n-N heterojunction structure: (a) before contact and (b) after 
contact. Assume thermal equilibrium. 
the two space charge regions near the two junctions do not merge together. If they do, 
the flat portion in the center «-type semiconductor will not exist, and the band diagram 
is further distorted. 
2.6.2 Metal-Semiconductor Junction 
Consider a metal with a work function Φ„, brought in contact with an n-type 
semiconductor with an electron affinity χ. For an ideal contact, the barrier height 
is given by (see Fig. 2.21) 
*ms = ΦΓΠ - X 
(2.6.6) 
and a negative charge distribution builds up at the metal surface with a space charge 
region formed in die semiconductor region. The charge distribution in the semicon-
ductor region is given by 
p(x) = +g(NO - n(x)). 
(2.6.7) 

BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
(a) 
Φ 
'Ml 
wm 
- Vacuum level 
(b) 
f 
Band diagram φ' 
Fm-r 
[fro 
i 
Charge 
distribution 
fPto 
-Fn 
-£ v 
- ~qn(x) 
Electric field 
E(x) 
-►JC 
Potential 
function 
E(0+) 
4tx) 
T I 
0 
Figure 2.21 
(a) The energy band diagram of a metal-semiconductor junction before contact, (b) The 
band diagram, charge distribution, electric field, and potential function after contact. 
From Gauss's law, the electric field satisfies 
dE(x) = gNO ^ 
c(Em.Ecix))/kBT] 
dx 
ε 
(2.6.8) 
where Ecn = Ec(oo). We have 
Ecn - Ec(x) = η[φ(χ) - V0] 
where V0 = <K* —> °°)> with the reference potential φ(0) = 0, and 
άφ(χ) 
E(x) 
dx 
(2.6.9) 
(2.6.10) 

PROBLEMS 
73 
Multiplying (2.6.8) by E(x) on both sides 
E\x) 
qNO 
1 +e' \<Kx)-V0]q/kBT άφ(χ) 
(2.6.11) 
and integrating from 0+ to +oo, we obtain 
7 
2qNO 
kBT 
kBT 
Vn/kKT 
V0- — + ^ e 
q 
q 
(2.6.12) 
The contact potential is given by V0 = [3>ms - (Ec - F„)]/q. The factor exp(— qV0/ 
kBT) in the last expression in (2.6.12) is usually negligible for V0 > 0. 
When the metal semiconductor is forward biased with a voltage V and the barrier 
is reduced to V0 — V, we have 
\E(0+) 
2qND 
Vo - V - — ( 1 - β-«(νο-νο/*ΒΓ) 
Ι2-^(νο-ν-^Τ 
ε 
V 
<l 
(2.6.13) 
If the electron concentration n(x) is assumed to be depleted in a region of width xn 
dE{x) 
qNO 
Then 
and 
0 < x < xn 
ax 
ε 
E(x) = 
qND(x-xn)/e 
E(0+) = 
-qNOxn/B. 
(2.6.14) 
(2.6.15) 
(2.6.16) 
An iterative approach to include the effect of the electron is to use ^Ο-,.) from (2.6.13) 
and obtain 
2e 
kBT 
x"~ \Hr\ 
vo~v — 
V qNO\ 
q 
(2.6.17) 
PROBLEMS 
2.1 Derive the boundary conditions using the integral form of the Maxwell's 
equations for a given charge density ps and current density Js. Check the dimen-
sions of all quantities appearing in the boundary conditions. 

74 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
2.2 Consider an ideal case in which the electrons are distributed in a two-
dimensional space with a surface carrier density ns (1/cm2). 
(a) Derive a two-dimensional density of states and plot it versus the energy E. 
(b) Find the relation between ns and the Fermi level at a given temperature T. 
(c) Repeat part (b) for T= 0. 
2.3 If the electrons are distributed in a "quantum-wire" geometry, that is, an ideal-
ized one-dimensional space with a given "line" carrier density ri( (1/cm), 
(a) derive a one-dimensional density of states and plot it versus the energy E. 
(b) Find the relation between ng and the Fermi level at a given temperature T. 
(c) Repeat (b) for 7 = 0 . 
2.4 Use the inversion formula (2.2.50), and plot η versus u. Compare this curve 
with the curve in Fig. 2.2. What is their relation? 
2.5 Derive Eq. (2.3.1 lb) for the average carrier lifetime τ0. 
2.6 Explain the Auger recombination processes in k space by considering CHCC, 
CHSH, CHLH, and CHHH processes [22]. 
2.7 
Suppose the carrier generation rate in Fig. 2.9 is 
I 
0 
W > S/2. 
(a) Find the excess carrier concentration 8n(y). 
(b) Plot Gn(y) and 8n(y) as a function of y for S = 10 μπι and L„ = 4 μπι. 
2.8 Plot the band diagram for a GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As p-N junction. The GaAs region 
is doped with an acceptor concentration JVa=l x 1018/cm3. The Alo.3Gao.7As 
region is doped with a donor concentration ND = 1 x 1018/cm3. Assume zero 
bias. AEC = 0.67AEg and Δ£ν = 0.33Δ£8, where AEg = 1.247* (eV) is the 
band-gap difference between Al^Gaj.^As and GaAs. Evaluate the Fermi 
levels, the contact potential Vo, and the depletion width. 
2.9 Repeat Problem 2.8 for a reverse bias of - 2 V. 
REFERENCES 
1. J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory, Wiley, New York, 2000. 
2. J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1999. 
3. M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1975. 
4. S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 2007. 
5. S. Selberherr, Analysis and Simulation of Semiconductor Devices, Springer-Verlag, 
New York, 1984. 

REFERENCES 
75 
6. W. L. Engl, H. K. Dirks, and B. Meinerzhagen, "Device modeling," Proc. IEEE 71, 
10-33 (1983). 
7. A. H. Marshak and C. M. Van Vliet, "Electrical current and carrier density in degenerate 
materials with nonuniform band structure," Proc. IEEE 72, 148-164 (1984). 
8. X. Aymerich-Humett, F. Serra-Mestres, and J. Millan, "An analytical approximation for 
the Fermi-Dirac integral F3/2(x)," Solid-State Electron. 24, 981-982 (1981). 
9. D. Bednarczyk and J. Bednarczyk, "The approximation of the Fermi-Dirac integral 
F\/2W 
Phys. Lett. 64A, 409-410 (1978). 
10. J. S. Blakemore, "Approximations for Fermi-Dirac integrals, especially the function 
Fi/2(i7) used to describe electron density in a semiconductor," Solid-State Electron. 25, 
1067-1076(1982). 
11. N. G. Nilsson, "An accurate approximation of the generalized Einstein relation for degen-
erate semiconductors," Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 19, K75-K78 (1973). 
12. T. Y. Chang and A. Izabelle, "Full range analytic approximations for Fermi energy and 
Fermi-Dirac integral F_ 1 / 2 in terms of Fl/2" J. Appl. Phys. 65, 2162-2164 (1989). 
13. R. B. Adler, A. C. Smith, and R. L. Longini, Introduction to Semiconductor Physics, 
Semiconductor Electronics Education Committee, Vol. 1, Wiley, New York, 1964. 
14. R. F. Pierret, Semiconductor Fundamentals, in R. F. Pierret and G. W. Neudeck, Eds., 
Modular Series on Solid State Devices, Vol. 1, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1983. 
15. S. Wang, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Theory and Device Physics, Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989. 
16. J. F. Geisz and D. J. Friedman, "III-N-V semiconductors for solar photovoltaic appli-
cations," Semicond. Sei. Technol. 17, 769-777 (2002). 
17. M. Fukuda, Reliability and Degradation of Semiconductor Lasers and LEDs, Artech 
House, Norwood, MA, 1991. 
18. W. Shockley and W. T. Read, Jr., "Statistics of the recombinations of holes and electrons," 
Phys. Rev. 87, 835-842 (1952). 
19. R. N. Hall, "Electron-hole recombination in germanium," Phys. Rev. 87, 387 (1952). 
20. C. T. Sah, "The equivalent circuit model in solid-state electronics-Part I: The single energy 
level defect centers," Proc. IEEE 55, 654-671 (1967). "Part II: The multiple energy 
level impurity centers," Proc. IEEE 55, 672-684 (1967). "Part HI: Conduction and dis-
placement currents," Solid-State Electron. 13, 1547-1575 (1970). "Equivalent circuit 
models in semiconductor transport for thermal, optical, Auger-impact, and tunnelling 
recombination-generation-trapping processes," Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 7, 541-559 (1971). 
21. C. T. Sah, Fundamentals of Solid-State Electronics, World Scientific, Singapore, 1991. 
22. A. Sugimura, "Band-to-band Auger effect in long wavelength multinary ΙΠ-V alloy semi-
conductor lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18, 352-363 (1982). 
23. H. C. Casey, Jr. and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part A: Fundamental 
Principles, Part B: Materials and Operating Characteristics, Academic Press, Orlando, 
1978. 
24. R. L. Anderson, "Germanium-gallium arsenide heterojunctions," IBM J. July, 283-287 
(1960). 
25. R. L. Anderson, "Experiments on Ge-GaAs heterojunctions," Solid-State Electron. 5, 
341-351 (1962). 

76 
BASIC SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS 
26. W. R. Frensley and H. Kroemer, "Prediction of semiconductor heterojunction discontinu-
ities from bulk band structures," J. Vac. Sei. Technol. 13, 810-815 (1976). 
27. W. A. Harrison, "Elementary theory of heterojunctions," J. Vac. Sei. Technol. 14, 
1016-1021 (1977). 
28. H. Kroemer, "Heterostructure devices: A device physicist looks at interfaces," Surf. Sei. 
132, 543-576 (1983). 
29. R. F. Pierret, "Extension of the approximate two-dimensional electron gas formulation," 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices ED-32, 1279-1287 (1985). 

Basic Quantum Mechanics 
In mis chapter, we present some basic quantum mechanics with the aim that these 
results will be useful in later chapters to understand the physics of optoelectronic 
processes and devices. In quantum mechanics, there are three important potentials, 
which have exact analytical solutions and are presented in most undergraduate 
texts [1, 2] on modern physics or introductory quantum mechanics. These three 
potentials are 
1. A Square Well Potential. This simplest case is usually taught in undergradu-
ate modern physics and will be presented in Section 3.2. Here, we take into 
account the fact that the effective masses inside and outside the quantum well 
are different for a semiconductor quantum well. The solutions for the bound 
states are simple cosine and exponential functions inside and outside the 
quantum well, respectively. 
2. A Harmonic Oscillator. The solutions are Hermite-Gaussian functions [1-3] 
and will be discussed in Section 3.3. A similar situation exists for the electric 
field of an optical waveguide with a parabolic permittivity or gain profile, as the 
solutions to the wave equation with a parabolic dependence on the position are 
also the Hermite-Gaussian functions. 
3. A Hydrogen Atom. The solutions for both the bound states (E < 0) and the 
unbound (continuum) states (E > 0) will be discussed. We use the hydrogen 
atom model to describe an exciton, which is formed by an electron-hole 
pair. The optical absorption process involving the Coulomb interaction 
between the electron and hole is called the excitonic absorption. The excitonic 
absorption spectrum is strongly dependent on the energies and wave functions 
of the exciton bound and continuum states. In bulk semiconductors, the 
electron-hole interaction is a Coulomb potential in a three-dimensional 
space. In quantum-well semiconductors, electrons and holes are confined to 
a quasi-two-dimensional structure; thus, their binding energy is different 
from the three-dimensional results. We summarize in Section 3.4 the main 
results for the hydrogen model in three-dimensional and two-dimensional 
space for both the bound and unbound states [4-8]. These results will be 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
77 

78 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
used in Chapter 14 where we discuss excitonic absorption and quantum-
confined Stark effects (QCSE). 
Because most potentials except the above three do not have exact, analytical 
solutions, we have to use perturbation methods to find their eigenfunctions and 
eigenenergies. We present a conventional time-independent perturbation theory in 
Section 3.5. In Section 3.6, we present the time-dependent perturbation theory and 
derive Fermi's golden rule, which is very important for the understanding of the emis-
sion and absorption of photons. In Appendix 3A, a slightly modified perturbation 
theory, called the Löwdin's method [9], is shown. The Löwdin's method is 
applied to derive the semiconductor band structures such as the Luttinger-Kohn 
Hamiltonian in Chapter 4. 
3.1 SCHRODINGER EQUATION 
The Schrödinger equation in a nonrelativistic quantum mechanical description of a 
single particle is 
ΗΨ(τ, ί) = ίΗ—Ψ(τ;ί) 
(3.1.1) 
dt 
where the Hamiltonian H is 
H=-^-V2 + V(r,t) 
(3.1.2) 
2m 
where the potential energy function V(r, f) is real, h is the Planck constant h divided 
by 2-n\ and m is the mass of the particle. For a free particle in an unbounded space, 
V(r, f) = 0, the solution is simply a plane wave 
Ψ(τ, t) = -J= «*'-«*/» 
(3.1.3) 
where the energy is 
E = %±- 
(3.1.4) 
2m 
and V is the volume of the space. The probability density is defined as 
fir, t) = Ψ*(Γ, ί ) % 0 
(3.1.5) 

3.1 
SCHRÖDINGER EQUATION 
79 
and the probability current density as 
j(r, 0 = — [Ψ* V ^ - Ψ\7Ψ*] 
(3.1.6) 
2/ra 
Here Ψ*(τ,ί)Ψ(τ,ί)ά3τ 
is the probability of finding the particle in a volume 
d3r near the position r at time t. The wave function is normalized such that 
| Ψ * ( Γ , ί)Ψ{τ, t)d3r = 1, that is, the probability of finding the particle in the whole 
space is unity. By substitution, it is straightforward to show that 
V - j + - p = 0 
(3.1.7) 
at 
which is the continuity equation or the conservation of probability density. It is 
analogous to the charge continuity equation in electromagnetics. 
The expectation value of any physical quantity defined by an operator O is 
given by 
(0) = 
Ψ*(τ, ί)ΟΦ(Γ, t)d3r = (Ψ\0\Ψ) 
(3.1.8) 
where the volume of integration is over the whole space. The ket and bra vectors, 
\Ψ) and (Ψ|, are used as short-hand 
notation. In the above real-space 
representation, that is, Ψ = Ψ(τ, ?), the correspondence for the operators is 
h 
Position: rop = r 
Momentum: p 
= — V. 
(3.1.9) 
If V(r, t) is independent of t, the solution Ψ(Γ, t) can always be obtained using the 
separation of variables 
Ψ(τ, f) = Ψ(τ)β'ίΕ'ιη 
(3.1.10) 
and 
2 
^ - V z + V(r) 
2m 
Ψ(Γ) = ΕΨ(Γ) 
(3.1.11) 
which is the so-called time-independent Schrödinger equation. The solution may be 
in terms of quantized energy levels En with corresponding wave functions ^„(r) or a 
continuous spectrum E with corresponding wave functions i/fe(r). In general, any 
solution of the Schrödinger equation may be constructed from the superposition of 
these stationary solutions 
Ψ(Γ, t) = Σαηψη(τ)β-ίΕ»"Η 
+ \αΕψΕ(τ)β-ίΕ"Η dE 
(3.1.12) 

80 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where |α„|2 gives the probability that the particle will be in the nth stationary (bound) 
state φ„(τ, t) with an energy En, and aE satisfies the normalization condition for the 
continuum states. In studying a time-dependent potential problem, very often a per-
turbation approach is used if the time-dependent perturbing potential is small com-
pared with the unperturbed Hamiltonian, and the above expansion in terms of the 
stationary states φ„(τ) or <fe(r), which are solutions to the unperturbed problem, is 
very useful. In this case, a„ (and aE) will be functions of time as the perturbation 
is time-dependent, and |α„(ί)|2 will give the time-dependent probability that the par-
ticle is in state n of the unperturbed problem. 
If we write the Fourier transforms of ψ(τ) and V(r) in the single-particle 
Schrödinger equation (3.1.11), 
j!<k)= [<Kr)e-''kr<i3r 
(3.1.13) 
V(k) = [ V(r)e~ik rd3r 
(3.1.14) 
we then obtain the momentum-space representation of the Schrödinger equation 
fcV ~ 
f d3k' ~ 
. ~ . 
<Kk)+ —-3V(k-k').Kk') = £<Kk) 
(3.1.15) 
J (2irr 
2m 
which becomes an integral equation. This integral equation will be discussed in 
Chapter 14. 
3.2 THE SQUARE WELL 
We consider a square (or rectangular) quantum well with a barrier height V0- In the 
one-dimensional case, the time-independent Schrödinger equation is 
n2 d2 
2„αΨ+ν{ζ) 
φ(ζ) = Εφ(ζ) 
(3.2.1) 
3.2.1 Infinite Barrier Model 
First we assume V0 is infinitely high; thus, the wave function vanishes at the bound-
aries, Fig. 3.1a. The solution to the infinite barrier model satisfying the boundary 
conditions φη(0) = 0 and </>„(L) = 0 is 
Φη{ζ)= VL'KT 2)' 
n= 1,2,3,..., 
(3.2.2) 

3.2 THE SQUARE WELL 
81 
(a) 
(b) 
kxor ky 
Figure 3.1 
(a) A quantum well with a width L and an infinite barrier V0 = °°· 0>) The energy dispersion 
in the kx or ky space using Eq. (3.2.7). 
with corresponding energy and wave number 
K /ηττ\2 
2m \L) 
' 
E«=T-\-r 
L· = — 
z 
L 
(3.2.3) 
that is, the energy En and the wave number kz in the z-direction are quantized. The 
wave function has been normalized J0 |φ„(Ζ)| dz = 1. 
If the origin of the coordinate z = 0 is chosen at the center of the well, V(+z) = 
V(—z), the solution can always be put in terms of even or odd functions by parity con-
sideration, which can be obtained from (3.2.2) by replacing z by (z + 0.5L). The 
parity consideration is useful because the symmetry properties of the system are 
employed; thus, the wave functions have associated symmetry properties. In 
general, if V(z) = V(— z), for any solution φ(ζ) of the Schrödinger equation (3.2.1), 
φ(—ζ) will also be a solution with the same eigenenergy. If we form linear combi-
nations of φ(ζ) and ψ(—z), they will also be solutions. Specifically, 
Φί(.ζ) = -τ=[<Κζ) + <Κ-ζΆ 
Φο(ζ) = ^l<Kz) 
- <K-z)] 
(3.2.4a) 
(3.2.4b) 
where φε(ζ) is an even function and φ0(ζ) is an odd function. 
The complete solution for the potential well V(z) in a three-dimensional space is 
solved from 
1m V2 + V(z) Ψ(χ, y, z) = ΕΨ(χ, y, z). 
(3.2.5) 

82 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The normalized wave function is 
-ikxx+ikyy 
Ψ(χ,γ,ζ) 
= —^-φη(ζ) 
(3.2.6) 
with a corresponding energy 
t,2 
* ^ + (τ7 
(3.2.7) 
2m 
where φη(ζ) is the same as in (3.2.2), and A is the cross-sectional area in the;r-;y plane. 
This energy dispersion diagram E versus kx or ky is plotted in Fig. 3. lb for n = 1 and 2. 
In semiconductors, m should be replaced by the effective mass m* of the carriers. 
Example 
For a GaAs/Al^Ga] ^As quantum-well structure, suppose the GaAs well 
width is 100 A and the aluminum mole fraction x in the barrier region is large such 
that an infinite barrier model is applicable. We have the effective mass of the electrons 
m*e = 0.0665 mo in the well region. The quantized electron subband energies are 
h 
En=2m^ (τ~) = "2£l = Eu 4Eu 
9Eu- ■ 
where 
h2 
/7T\2 
1 
£, = ^— (-) 
= 
f 
^ x 37.6 eV = 56.5 meV. 
2m* VL/ 
(mt/mo)L2 
Therefore, we find the subband energies are 
En = 56.5, 226, 508.5,... (meV). 
Two-dimensional (2D) Density of States The electron concentration in a 
quantum well can be calculated using 
n 
kx 
ky 
where the summation is over all the occupied subbands. Because the electron energy 
is quantized in the kz quantum number, and the dependence on x and y are still plane-
wave like, we convert the summation over kx and ky into integrations 
^—> ^—T 
L I 
U % 
I 
U/Cy 
2, 
I it/VjWIVy 
kx 
k, 
2 
T7 
' 27rktdk, 
m* 
, , 
' dE 
(3.2.9) 
(2ττ)2 
TTh2Lz hi' 

3.2 
THE SQUARE WELL 
83 
where we have used the polar coordinates, 
dkxdky = ktd<lxikt, k] = k2
x+ k2
y, dE = h2k,dkt/m*. 
We can then write the 2D density of states as 
(3.2.10) 
where H(x) is a Heaviside step function H(x) = 1 for x > 0 and H(x) = 0 for x < 0. 
The electron density n is then given by 
■- J 
dEpm(E)f(E). 
(3.2.11) 
The density of states p2o(E) is plotted in Fig. 3.2 as the steplike function with each 
step occurs wherever there is a new subband energy level E\, E2 = 4E\, £3 = 9£Ί, 
and so forth. It is interesting to compare the two-dimensional density of states with 
the three-dimensional density of states (2.2.36) 
1 /2m* 
P 3 D ( £ ) = 2 ^ V h2 
3/2 
VE. 
(3.2.12) 
At E = En from (3.2.3) 
P 3 D ( £ ) 
= : 1 /Zm-WÄWy 2 
27Γ2 V h2 ) 
\ 1m*L2 
, Tfh L? 
(3.2.13) 
t kP(£) 
p3D(£) 
/ 
y / 
s' 
* 
1 
<^ΡΙΌ(Ε) 
1 
■ 1 
—►F 
0 
£, 
£ 2 = 4£, 
£3 = 9 ^ 
Figure 3.2 
The electron density of states faoiE) (solid line) for a two-dimensional 
quantum-well 
structure is compared with the three-dimensional density of states ρ^ο(Ε) (dashed curve). 

84 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which is the same as P2D(£ = En). The three-dimensional density of states p3u(E) is 
shown as the dashed curve in Fig. 3.2 with a smooth \[E behavior above the conduc-
tion band edge, whereas the two-dimensional ρ?ο{Ε) shows a sharp step-like behavior 
above each subband edge. 
Example 
As a numerical example, we calculate the electron density of states for a 
bulk GaAs semiconductor at an energy 0.1 eV above the conduction band edge 
1 /2/η*λ3,/2 
p3D(£ - Ec = 0.1 eV) = — ί - ^ J 
(E - £c)1/2 = 3.69 x 1019(cm-3eV-'). 
For a quantum well with Lz= 100 A, we estimate the density of states of the first step 
(with £, = 56.5 meV) 
ρ2Ό(Ε - £,) = —^— = 2.78 x lO'Vm^eV- 1). 
Tfh Lz 
We can also estimate the carrier concentration with an energy spread of kBT-
0.026 eV at 300K and obtain 
n ~ 2.78 x 1019 x 0.026 = 7.2 x 1017 cm"3. 
One-dimensional (ID) Density of States Similar to (3.2.10), the electron concen-
tration in a ID quantum wire along the z direction can be obtained from 
η = ΐΈΈΚΕϊ 
(3.2.14) 
nx, ny 
kz 
where the electron energy E is quantized in both the x and y directions 
h2k2
7 
E = En +En H 
^ 
"* 
y 
2m* 
h 
(nxTT\2 
'*-2m*UJ' 
% 
2m* ( $ · 
and nx, ny = 1, 2, 3 , . . . , while kz is a continuous variable. Using 
00 
i 
00 
2 γ ^ γ ^ 
2 ^-^ f dkz 
1 
2m* ^-^ 
f 
dE 

3.2 
THE SQUARE WELL 
the ID density of states P\D(E) is 
85 
PID( £) 
1 
2m* Σ 
TrLxLy y h2 „tX VE ~ E"> - E"> 
, 
E>Enx 
(3.2.15) 
3.2.2 
Finite Barrier Model 
For a finite barrier quantum well as shown in Fig. 3.3, we have 
Viz) 
f Vo, 
\z\=L/2 
\z\ < L/2. 
We solve the Schrödinger equation 
h d 1 d 
2 dz m* dz 
Viz) cKz) = E<Kz) 
(3.2.16) 
(3.2.17) 
where m* equals mw in the well and mb in the barrier region. We consider the bound-
state solutions, which have energies in the range between 0 and VQ-
Even solutions 
For the even wave functions, we have a solution of the form 
; ] e-«(|z|-^/2) 
\ z \ = -
<ttz)={ 
2. 
(3.2.18) 
C2 coskz 
z 
< ■ 
Figure 3.3 
A quantum well with a width L and a finite barrier height VO- The energy levels for n = 1 and 
n = 2 and their corresponding wave functions are shown. 

86 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
k = ylm^E/ti 
a = 
^2mb(V0-E)/h. 
(3.2.19a) 
(3.2.19b) 
Using boundary conditions in which the wave function φ and its first derivative 
divided by the effective mass (1/ηι*)(άφ/άζ) are continuous at the interface 
between the barrier and the well, that is, 
L+ 
and 
we obtain 
Φ 
mbdz 
V 2 
Φ 
mwdz 
\2 
(3.2.20a) 
(3.2.20b) 
C\ = C2 cosk 
a 
k 
. 
L 
— C\ = — C2 smk —. 
nib 
mw 
2 
(3.2.21) 
Eliminating C\ and C2, we obtain the eigenequation or the quantization condition 
(3.2.22) 
ntbk 
, L 
a = 
tank—. 
in™ 
2 
The eigenenergy E can be found from the above equation by substituting k and a 
from (3.2.19a) and (3.2.19b) into (3.2.22). 
Odd Solutions 
Similarly for odd wave functions, we have solutions of the form 
L 
φ(ζ) = { C2 sin kz 
z> 
_C]e+a(z+L2) 
z
< 
2 
L 
(3.2.23) 
The boundary conditions (3.2.20) give 
C\ = C2sin^; 
aC\ 
k 
L 
= —C2COSK—. 
Wb 
m w 
2 
(3.2.24) 

3.2 THE SQUARE WELL 
87 
Thus, the eigenequation is given by 
mbk 
L 
a = 
cot k — 
mw 
2 
(3.2.25) 
which determines the eigenenergy E for the odd wave function again by using k and a 
in (3.2.19a) and (3.2.19b). In general, the solutions for the quantized eigenenergies 
can be obtained by finding (aL/2) and (kL/2) directly from a graphical approach 
because from (3.2.19a) and (3.2.19b): 
and 
ot~. 
mb 
^k-tonk-
mw 2 
2 
L\ 
2wwVo / Ά 
even solution 
L 
mb L 
L 
a — = 
k — cot k — 
2 
mw 2 
2 
odd solution. 
(3.2.26) 
(3.2.27a) 
(3.2.27b) 
The above equations can be solved by plotting them on the (aL/2) versus (kL/2) 
plane as shown in Fig. 3.4. If mw = mb, Eq. (3.2.26) is a circle with a radius 
y/2mv/Vo(L/2h). 
If m w#w b, we define a' = ayjmw/mb, 
and rewrite 
,L 
m^\x^k\ 
^k-cotk-
(3.2.28a) 
(3.2.28b) 
,L 
- /mb , L. 
, L 
m„ * 2 c o t 
2 
Radius = 
\i2m^(L/2h) 
Figure 3.4 A graphical solution for the decaying constant a and wave number k of a finite quantum well. 
Here we define ol — a.\Jm^jmb to account for the different effective masses in the well and in the barrier. 
The label n = 0 refers to the ground (or the first bound) state, n = 1 refers to the first excited (or the second 
bound) state, etc. 

88 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
On the a'L/2 versus kL/2 plane, Eq. (3.2.26) is still a circle with the same radius 
\/2mw Vo (L/2h). The solutions to οί and k are obtained from the intersection 
points between the circle (3.2.26) and either the tangent curve (3.2.28a) or the cotan-
gent curve (3.2.28b), as shown in Fig. 3.4. If the radius of the circle is in the range 
(N - 1)| <yj2m^(^\ 
< 
tf| 
(3.2.29) 
there are N solutions. After solving the eigenequations for a and k, we obtain the 
quantized energy E. 
The bound state solution (E < V0) is obtained by using the normalization condition 
Γ 
2 
\φ(ζ)\ dz = 1 to determine the last unknown coefficient: 
J—00 
\/2 
C2 = 
. 
(3.2.30) 
If mw = mb, we have C2 = y/2/(L + 2/a). The length L + (2/a) is the well width 
plus twice the penetration depth (1/a) on each side of the well. The normalization 
factor is very similar to that of the infinite well (3.2.2) except that we have an effective 
well width Le = L+ (2/a). For odd solutions in (3.2.23) we find 
C2= 
, 
(3.2.31) 
mb 
L 
— cos^fc — 
Again C2 reduces to the expression y/2/(L + 2/a) when mb = mw. 
Alternatively, an effective well width Leff can be defined by using the ground state 
eigenenergy E obtained from the solution of the eigenequation (3.2.28a) and setting it 
equal to the ground state energy (n = 1) of an infinite well 
h2 
ίπ\2 
(3.2.32) 
2mw \LeffJ 
The appropriate wave functions are then 
Φη(ζ) = \ / r - s i n ( ^ z > ) 
(3.2.33) 
V ^eff 
V-eff 
/ 
where the origin is set at the left boundary of the infinite well. 
Example 
Consider a GaAs/Al^Gai -xAs quantum well shown in Fig. 3.5. Assume 
the following parameters: 
m* = (0.0665 + 0.0835*) m0 
< h = (°· 3 4 + °·42*) ™o 
m^ = (0.094 + 0.043*) m 
Eg(x) = 1.424 + 1.247* (eV) 
(0 < * < 0.45, room temperature). 

3.2 THE SQUARE WELL 
89 
A l j G a ^ s 
GaAs 
EJx) 
AlxGa^^s 
Cl 
ΔΕ. 
Eg= 1.424 eV 
-HH1 
LH1 
ΔΕ, 
Figure 3.5 
A GaAs/Al,Gai -x As quantum-well structure showing the band gaps and the interband 
transition energies. 
AEg(x) = 1.247* (eV), AEC ■■ 
electron mass. 
0.67Δ£„, and Δ£ν = 0.33Δ£„, where m0 is the free 
(a) Consider the aluminum mole fraction x — 0.3 in the barrier regions (x = 0 in 
the well region) and the well width L^ = 100 A. How many bound states are 
there in the conduction band? How many bound heavy-hole and light-hole 
subbands are there? 
(b) Find the lowest bound state energies for the conduction subband (Cl), the 
heavy-hole (HH1) and the light-hole (LH1) subbands for a 100 A GaAs 
quantum well in part (a). What are the C1-HH1 and C1-LH1 transition 
energies? 
(c) Assume that we define an effective well width Leff using an infinite barrier 
model such that its ground state energy is the same as the energy of the first 
conduction subband EC\ in (b). What is Leff? If we repeat the same procedure 
for the HH1 and the LH1 subbands, what are Leff? 
Solutions 
We tabulate the physical parameters as follows. 
« h h 
mh, 
Well 
Barrier (x = 0.3) 
0.0665 m0 
0.34 m0 
0.094 mo 
1.424 eV 
0.0916 mo 
0.466 mo 
0.107 mo 
1.798 eV 
K = 100 A, AEC = 0.67, AEg = 0.2506 eV, Δ£ν = 0.1235 eV. 

90 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(a) The number of bound states N is determined by (3.2.29) where the barrier 
height VQ is AEC for electrons and Δ£ν for holes, respectively. 
For electrons: 
y/2m^ÄE~c( — \ =3.30 < N~ 
N = 3 bound states 
For heavy holes: 
v
/27nj^Ä£^( — ) =5.25 <N^ 
N = 4 bound 
For light holes: 
y/2m*ehAEv (— j = 2.76 < Ν^ 
Ν = 2 bound 
states 
states. 
/7(L 
/ /CL\y 
(b) The eigenenergy E is found by searching for the root in a — —- £ tan 
m* 
V 2 
where k and a are given by (3.2.19a) and (3.2.19b), respectively. For 
electrons, iri^ = 0.0665 m0, mjlj = 0.0916 m0, and V0 = 250.6 meV, the first 
subband energy is 
EC\ = 30.7 meV. 
Similarly, £ HHI = 7.4 meV and £LHi = 20.6 meV. The transition energies are 
£CI-HHI = £g + EC\ + Emu 
= 1462 
meV 
£CI-LHI = £g + £ci + £LHI = 1475 
meV. 
(c) The energy for an infinite barrier model is E\ = ir2h /(2/n Leff) 
jfih2 
ForC1' ^ = V^Pä = 1 3 6 A· 
For HH1, 
Leg = W 
, 
= 122 A. 
V 2mj;h£HHi 
For LH1, 
Leff = J - — - 
= 139.6 A. 
V 2m|h£LHi 
3.3 THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR 
If an electron is in a parabolic potential of the form V(z) = f z2, as shown in Fig. 3.6, 
the time-independent Schrödinger equation in one dimension is 

3.3 THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR 
91 
K 
i 
Potential Energy 
' W ~, ~2Z 
£[ = ψιω 
*-z 
Figure 3.6 
A parabolic quantum well with its quantized energy levels and wave functions. 
If we define 
and change the variable from z to ξ 
ξ= 
αζ 
Equation (3.3.1) becomes 
ΓΛ2 
2E 
άξ1 ' \M> 
<Kt) = 0. 
The solutions are the Hermite-Gaussian functions 
Φη(ξ) = 
1/2 
Ηη(ξ)β-^2 
(3.3.2) 
(3.3.3) 
(3.3.4) 
(3.3.5) 
κ^/ττ2ττη\ 
where Ηη(ξ) are the Hermite polynomials satisfying the differential equation 
(3.3.6) 
$-
24
+2π)//"
(ί)=ο 
(3.3.7) 
and n is related to the energy E by 
E= [η + ^Ηω 
n = 0, 1, 2, 3,... 
(3.3.8) 

92 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The Hermite polynomials can also be obtained from the generating function 
n=0 
or 
Η„(ξ) 
dtn> 
,-<2+2ri „ - » " * * * ■ 
The first few Hermite polynomials are 
# o ( f ) = l 
Ηχ(ξ) = 2ξ 
Η2(ξ)=-2 
+ 4ξ2 
Η3(ξ) = 
-12ξ+8ξ3 
ΗΛ{ξ)=\2-4%ξ2 
+ \β£. 
(3.3.9) 
(3.3.10) 
(3.3.11) 
Another elegant way [3] to find the solutions for the harmonic oscillator is to use the 
matrix approach by defining the annihilation operator 
ma> 
p 
2« 
yjlmti 6 
and the creation operator 
ma) z — i-
2h 
y/2mhw' 
Note the relation 
zp—pz = ih 
which can be proved using p = (h/i)(d/dz), 
and 
h 
9 
/ 
h 
9 
< 
M 
* 
I 
zp - pz = z—^- ψ - —^-(ζψ) 
= ιηψ 
ι oz 
ι dz 
for any function ψ(ζ). Therefore, we find 
(3.3.12) 
(3.3.13) 
(3.3.14) 
, 
mw , 
p 
i 
2» 
2m« ω 
2« 
1 (p2 
mw2 , \ 
1 
hw \2m 
2 
(3.3.15) 

3.3 THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR 
93 
The Hamiltonian (3.3.1) can be rewritten in terms of a+a 
= ha>(a+a + ^\. 
(3.3.16) 
Because the last term hw/2 is a constant, the problem of solving the Schrödinger 
equation 
Ηφη=Εηφη 
(3.3.17) 
is the same as finding the eigenvector and the eigenvalue of the operator a+a. 
Defining 
N = a+a 
(3.3.18) 
and noting that the commutator [ , ] 
[a,a+] = aa+ ~ «+« = ^ {(pz - zp) - (zp - pz)} = 1 
(3.3.19) 
from (3.3.12) and (3.3.13), we find 
Na = a+aa = (aa+ - \)a = aN-a 
(3.3.20) 
Na+ = a+aa+ = a+(a+a + 1) = a+(N + 1). 
(3.3.21) 
For any eigenstate of H or N, say φη = \n), we have 
(n\N\n) = {n\a+a\n) = (ψ\ψ) > 0 
(3.3.22) 
as the wave function | ψ) = a \n) has a norm (ψ\ ψ) that is always nonnegative. Let n be 
the eigenvalue of the operator N with the corresponding eigenvector |n), /V|«) = n\n). 
We have 
Na\n) = (aN - a)\n) = (n - l)a\n). 
(3.3.23) 
Thus a\n) is an eigenstate of the operator N with eigenvalue n — 1. Assume that the 
eigenfunctions are normalized for all n 
(n\n) = 1. 
(3.3.24) 
Then 
n = (n\a+a\n) = ((n\a+)(a\n)). 
(3.3.25) 

94 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Because (a\n)) is an eigenstate of the operator N with eigenvalue n — 1 from (3.3.23) 
and its magnitude squared is n from (3.3.25), we have 
a\n) = y/n\n — 1) 
(3.3.26) 
where the normalization condition (n — \\n— 1) = 1 has been used. Repeating the 
above procedure, we have 
a2\n) = y/na\n — 1} = \fn\/n — 1 \n — 2). 
(3.3.27) 
One finds the lowest state will be |0) with its eigenvalue n = 0 because of the 
nonnegative condition (3.3.22). Similarly, using (3.3.21), we find 
a+\n) = Vn + 1 \n + 1). 
(3.3.28) 
In general, the nth eigenstate can be obtained from the ground state |0) by the 
creation operator 
W = ^ | 0 ) 
with 
En 
n + -)hu), 
« = 0,1,2,3,... 
(3.3.29) 
(3.3.30) 
The ground state wave function can also be obtained using the fact that 
a\0) = 0. 
Therefore, 
0 = (z|«|0) 
h 
d 
2ma)dz 0 
h id 
mw 
i , , , 
(- 
+ 
~ζ)φο(ζ). 
2/ηω \dz 
h 
The solution to the above first-order differential equation is 
Φο(ζ) = ( ^ , / 4 « W / < W 
(3.3.31) 
(3.3.32) 
which has been normalized. Knowing that φ0(ζ) = (z\0), all the other eigenfunctions 
can be created sequentially using the creation operator in (3.3.28). 

3.4 THE HYDROGEN ATOM AND EXCITON IN 2D AND 3D 
95 
3.4 THE HYDROGEN ATOM AND EXCITON IN 2D AND 3D 
In this section, we summarize the major results of the energies and wave functions for 
the hydrogen atom model with both bound (E < 0) and continuum (E > 0) state sol-
utions [4-8]. The hydrogen atom is a two-particle system for the positive nucleus 
(with a mass m\) at a position η and an electron (with mass m2) at a position r2. 
The two-particle system is described by a wave function ψ(ΐ\, r2, t), which is a sol-
ution from the Hamiltonian 
2 
2 
H=^- 
+ ^+V(jri-r2) 
(3.4.1) 
2m i 
2w2 
where p! = {h/i)V\ and p 2 = (ft/i')V2, and V, refers to the gradient operator with 
respect to 17 (1 = 1, 2). A general solution is to transform from η and r2 coordinates 
to the center-of-mass coordinate R, 
R = m ' r ' + O T 2 r 2 
(3.4.2a) 
m\ + m-i 
and the difference coordinate r, 
r = r , - r 2 . 
(3.4.2b) 
The complete solution is of the form 
<Mr,,r2) = ^ < K r ) 
(3.4.3) 
where Ψ(Γ) satisfies 
h2 
P-
n -v? 
' 
ψ(τ) = Εψ(τ) 
(3.4.4) 
2mr
 
r 
Airer 
where mr is the reduced effective mass, \/mT = 1/m, + l/m2. 
3.4.1 
3D Solutions 
In three-dimensional space, the eigenfunctions can be expressed as 
,,.,,.ϊ = / Rm (r) Yim (θ, Φ): bound-states (E < 0) 
{REi(r)Yim(e, 
φ): 
continuum-states (E > 0) 
l ' " 
; 
where the radial functions Rni(r) and REt(r) can be found in Refs. 4-8 and 10. The 
first few spherical harmonics K;m(0, φ) are given as follows: 
1 = 0 (s orbit) 
Yoo = -== 
(3.4.6) 
V4TT 

96 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
I = \ (p orbits) 
1Ίο(β, Φ) = \/^-cos Θ = J ~ 
- \Z) 
V 47Γ 
V 47ΓΓ 
K1±1(0, </»)= + 
7Γ 
,-,ί, 
_ / 3 x + iy 
(3.4.7a) 
+ 
^±>n 
(3.4.7b) 
For bound state solutions, the energy levels are quantized as 
E„ = --^Ry 
(n = 1, 2, 3,...) 
(3.4.8) 
The magnitude, Ry/n2, is called the binding energy, where the Rydberg energy for 
the hydrogen atom is 
Ry = 
mre 
h 
1 
2(4ττε)2δ2 
^rnra\ 
(3.4.9) 
and the Bohr radius a0 is 
a0 
ΑττεΗ 
e2mr 
(3.4.10) 
The wavefunction at the origin is 
l<A„oo(r = 0 ) | 2 = 
iranit 
3„3· 
(3.4.11) 
For continuum state solutions, the energy £ is a continuous variable and the wave 
function at the origin is given by 
ΙΨΕΟΟΟΓ = 0)| 2 
Rya\ATT 
e 
ir/(kao) 
sinh (-— 
\ka0 
(3.4.12) 
A . 2 
where E=h k /2mr. The expression in the above square brackets is called the 
Sommerfeld (or Coulomb) enhancement factor for a 3D hydrogen atom. 

3.5 TIME-INDEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 
97 
3.4.2 
2D Solutions 
The solutions for the two-dimensional hydrogen atom problem are given by 
Rnm(r) 
ρ'"ΐφ 
277 
Λτηφ 
bound-states (E < 0) 
REm(r)—^^, 
continuum-states (E > 0). 
Λ/277 
ψ(τ) 
The eigenenergies for the bound states are quantized 
E„ = -
(n= 1,2,3,...). 
We have 
-4/?y, E2 
qRy> 
£ 3 
4 
2 5 * -
(3.4.13) 
(3.4.14) 
(3.4.15) 
It is noted that the binding energy for the Is states \E\ | is four times that in the three-
dimensional case. This enhancement of the binding energy will be very useful in 
understanding the excitonic effects in semiconductor quantum wells and the obser-
vation of the excitonic optical absorption spectra, which will be investigated in 
Chapter 14. The wavefunction at the origin is 
Ko(r = 0)|2 
™i \ n - 2 
(n= 1,2, 3,... ). 
(3.4.16) 
For continuum states, the energy E is a continuous variable, and the wave function at 
the origin is 
l«feo(r = 0)|2 
1 
Ryal4v 
„n/(ka0) 
cosh ( — 1 
\kaoJ. 
(3.4.17) 
where E = h k2/2mr. The expression inside the square bracket is the Sommerfeld 
enhancement factor. 
3.5 
TIME-INDEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 
3.5.1 
Perturbation Method 
In most practical physical systems, the Schrödinger equations do not have exact or 
analytical solutions. It is always convenient to find the solutions using the 

98 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
perturbation method [11] when the problem of interest can be separated into two 
parts: one part consists of an "unperturbed" Hamiltonian with known solutions, 
//(0); the other part consists of a small perturbing potential, H', 
H = Hm+H'. 
(3.5.1) 
The unperturbed wave functions φ^ and eigenvalues £^0) are assumed known 
ΗΦ)φΦ) 
= ^ ( O ) 
( 3 5 2 ) 
In order to find the solutions for the total Hamiltonian 
Ηψ = Εψ 
(3.5.3) 
it is convenient to introduce a perturbation parameter λ (set λ = 1 later) 
H = Hm + λΗ'. 
(3.5.4) 
We look for the solutions of the form 
E = £<0) + λ£(1) + λ2ΕΡ + ■ ■ ■ 
(3.5.5a) 
ι/,= (//°> + λι//1) + λ2ι//2)+ ··· 
(3.5.5b) 
Substituting the above expressions for H, E, and ψ into the Schrödinger equation, we 
find, to each order in λ, 
Zeroth order 
#(<V°> = ^ 0 ' ^ 
(3.5.6) 
First order 
Η^ψ^ + H' ^ 
= &>ψ> + 
tf1^ 
(3.5.7) 
Second order Η^ψ2) + H1^ = £«V 2 ) 4- tf'V" + £(2)<//0). 
(3.5.8) 
Zeroth-Order Solutions Thus, it is clearly seen that the zeroth-order solutions are 
the unperturbed solutions 
€> = Φ? 
(3.5.9a) 
£<0) = Ef\ 
(3.5.9b) 
First-Order Solutions The first-order wave function i//1' may be expanded in 
terms of a linear combination of the unperturbed solutions 
m 
Thus 
(//(0) _ φ β ) 
= £<ΐ)φ(0) _ Η,φ®) 
{35U) 

3.5 TIME-INDEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 
99 
Multiplying the above equation by φ^ 
and integrating over space, using 
<«2?W> = $» 
(3-5-12) 
we obtain 
and 
where 
£<■> = //' 
(3.5.13a) 
« ^ π ι 
[im*n 
<3-5-13b> 
Η'ηαι = \φ™Ή'φ^τ. 
(3.5.14) 
To the first order in perturbation, we need to normalize the wave function 
or 
i +<>*+<>+Σ*Μ* = L 
( 3·
5·
1 5 ) 
m 
Thus we have a^ = 0 to the first order in perturbation. The result is therefore 
Ψη = Φ? + Σ Τ Π 
C 
(3"5-16a) 
En = ^ 
+ H'nn. 
(3.5.16b) 
Second-Order Solutions 
Similarly, the second-order wave function i//2) can be 
expanded in terms of the zero-order solutions 
*£° = Σ β £ ^ ) 
(3·5·17) 
m 
we find 
and 
„(2) _ V ^ 
HmkHkn 
HmnHnn 
, „ 
n 
r , Rh-, 
m""fe(4o)-^o))(^o)-4o)) (^-^r 
( 
} 

100 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
To the second-order correction, the wave function may be normalized 
[(V + Σ<Μ + Σ « ' ) (V + Σ « » + E«0)V3 r = i. 
Neglecting terms of third and higher orders, we obtain 
1 
JJ) 
■V|a ( 1 )| 
(3.5.19) 
(3.5.20) 
The normalized wave function ψη and its eigenenergy En, to the second order in 
perturbation, are given by 
H' 
φ = <m + y* 
"JSI 
ώ(ϋ) + ν Σ 
4#n 
H'mkH'kn 
i(E™-E%>)(E™-E*>) 
HmnHnn 
E n = ^ + H'nn + J2 
Φ™-
\H' 
\H' 
2(£f-£i„0)) 
|2 
r€ 
.(0) 
Ί F<0> _ Ρ<°)' 
(3.5.21a) 
(3.5.21b) 
Example 
(a) When an infinite quantum well has an applied electric field F in the z-direction 
(Fig. 3.7), the Hamiltonian can be written as 
H = H0 + eFz 
(3.5.22) 
where H0 describes an electron in the infinite quantum well without the elec-
tric field. Treating the term eFz as a perturbation, show that the energy shift 
due to the applied electric field, E — Ef\ can be written as 
AE = E- £l0) = C, ir2 {eFLf 
m*e2F2L4 
(3.5.23) 
where E\ ' and £^0) are the energies of the ground state and the nth state of the 
infinite quantum well without an applied electric field. Find a general 
expression for C„. All energies are measured from the center of the well. 

3.5 TIME-INDEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 
101 
?(0) 
~(0) 
i 
-z 
L 
i 
_ 
0 
L 
2 
i 
^S* 
>z 
0 
Figure 3.7 
An infinite quantum well without an applied field (left diagram) and with an applied field 
(right diagram) where the potential due to the applied field eFz is treated as a perturbation. 
(b) Evaluate C„ for n — 1, 2, and 3 numerically by keeping the first two nonzero 
terms in the summation over the index m. Show that Cx is negative whereas C2 
and C3 are positive. 
(c) Compare numerically C„, n = 1, 2, 3, with those in part (b), where Cn is 
given by 
C„ = (n 27r 2-15)/(24nV). 
(3.5.24) 
Solutions 
(a) We treat H' = eFz as a perturbation from H0. We write down the unperturbed 
wave functions and eigenvalues from the infinite barrier model. 
Zeroth-order Solution 
H0uf\z) 
2m* dz2 
2 sin 
uf\z) = 
^uf\z) 
L 
ηπ 
L\Z 
+ 2 
£l0) 
2m*L2' 
(3.5.25) 
First-order Perturbation 
L/2 
Kn = ("i°V*K0)} = eF [ uf{z)z uf\z)dz = 0. 
(3.5.26) 
-L/2 

102 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Therefore, the first-order correction in the energy vanishes because of the 
symmetry of the original quantum-well potential with well-defined even and 
odd parities of the wave functions. 
Second-order Perturbation: The energy to second-order perturbation is given 
by (3.5.21b). We need to evaluate H'nm, n Φ m 
run 
\"n 
I 
I m I 
\ 
n 
,(0) eF\zV 
^)-eF^(u«y») 
= 2eFL i
t sin(n 
o 
7rt) sin(m7rt) dt 
where we have changed the variable from z to t, t = [z + (L/2)]/L. Write 
2 sin(nTTi) sin(mTrt) = cos [(« — m)irt] — cos [(n + m)in\ 
and use 
, 
f(-DM-i 
t cos (Mirt) dt = < 
We obtain 
run 
_2 x-ir 
(Mvf 
1 
2 
1 
(-1)" 
for M φ 0 
for M = 0. 
(n — m) 
{n + mf 
4nm 
eFl 
[ ( _ ! ) « - _ 1] 
ir 
(n2 - m2Y 
(n φ m). 
The perturbation to second order gives 
(3.5.27) 
E = E™ + 
H'+Y 
\Γ1„„ 
τηφ 
_ £(0) | c 
^(eFLf 
» 
" 2 
£<°> 
where we use £<ϋ) - E®> = (n2 - m2)£*0) and 
Cn = 32n 2y^[(-l)"- m-l] 2/n 2 
m?i„ 
v» — m ) 
y> [(-!)" 
(3.5.28) 
(3.5.29) 
The above results show that the energy shifts depend quadratically on the 
applied electric field, which is an important phenomenon when we study the 
quantum-confined Stark effects in Chapter 14. 

3.5 TIME-INDEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 
103 
(b) If we keep only the first two nonvanishing terms in the above summation for 
C„, we obtain 
32 
7TU 
4 x 2 2 
4 x 4 2 
32 x2· 
( 1 - 2 2 ) 5 
( l 2 - 4 2 ) 5 
~ 4 x l 2 
4 χ 3 2 Ί 
„ 
32 x 32 
C3 = 
-,— x 
7TU 
( 4 - l ) s 
( 4 - 9 ) 5 
4 x 22 
4 x 42 
+ -
( 9 _ 4)5 
( 9 _ 
1 6 )5 
-2.194 x 10~3 
6.578 x 10" 
3.931 x 10" 
We see that E\ decreases with increasing field F as C\ < 0 and both E2 and E3 
increase slightly with increasing field F. 
(c) The above Cn in part (a) can be summed up to an analytical expression 
[12-14] 
rPir1-15 
cn = 
„ , 
Λ 
Λ 
or 
C, 
24n4 ir 
-2.194 x 10"3, C2 = 6.544 x 10"4, and 
3.899 x 10" 
which are close to those in (b). These results using the second-order pertur-
bation theory agree very well with those obtained from variational methods 
[14-17]. 
3.5.2 Matrix Formulation 
Alternatively, the eigenvalue problem 
Ηφ = [Ηφ) +Η')ψ= 
Εψ 
(3.5.30) 
can be solved directly by letting 
φ=Υ^α^ 
(3.5.31) 
where {<£„,} are the eigenfunctions of the unperturbed Hamiltonian, 
(3.5.32) 
The second subscript n in a is dropped for convenience. H e r e ^ ) , m = 
\,2,...,N, 
may also be degenerate wave functions. A direct substitution of (3.5.31) into (3.5.30), 
and taking the inner product with respect to φ[\ k = l,...,N, 
gives 
^ 
{Hkm - ES^dn 
= 0 
(3.5.33) 

104 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
if {φ^} form an orthonormal set. If {φ„\ m= 1,2,... ,7V} are not orthonormal to 
each other, 
«WH"*» 
(3-5.34) 
then, the above eigenequation becomes 
Σ (Hhn ~ ENkm)am = 0. 
(3.5.35) 
m 
The eigenequations (3.5.33) or (3.5.35) can be solved by letting 
detltfto, - £ « U = 0 
(3·5·36) 
for (3.5.33), or 
aeX\Htm-ENha\=0 
(3.5.37) 
for (3.5.35). The above procedure is equivalent to diagonalizing the matrix Hkm in 
(3.5.33) or simultaneously diagonalizing Hkm and N^m in (3.5.35) (this is possible 
because N is also Hermitian). Finally, one finds the eigenvalues for E and the eigen-
vector am. The wave function is obtained from (3.5.31), which should be normalized. 
3.6 
TIME-DEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 
Consider the Schrödinger equation 
Ηφ(τ,ί)=-~φ(τ,ί) 
(3.6.1) 
ι at 
where the Hamiltonian H consists of an unperturbed part H0, which is time-
independent, and a small perturbation //'(r, t), which depends on time 
H = H0+H'(r,t). 
(3.6.2) 
The solution to the unperturbed part is assumed known 
Η0φη(τ,ΐ)=-^φη(Γ,ί) 
(3.6.3) 
φη(Γ,ί) = φη(τ)β-ίΕ^. 
(3.6.4) 
The time-dependent perturbation is assumed to have the form 
f H'(r)e~iwt + H'+(r)e+iwl 
t > 0 
H'(r,t)=l"(T)e 
^" {r)e
 
f
r|JJ 
(3.6.5) 

3.6 TIME-DEPENDENT PERTURBATION THEORY 
105 
To find the solution ij/(r, t) to the time-dependent Schrödinger equation, we expand 
the wave function in terms of the unperturbed solutions 
«K r, t) = Σ an{t)<j>n{r)e~iE"<lh 
(3.6.6) 
where \an(i)\ gives the probability that the electron is in the state n at time t. 
Substituting the expansion for ψ into the Schrödinger equation and using (3.6.3), 
we obtain 
^
^
W
^
* 
= - ^ Σ " ' ^ t)an{t)<t,n(r)e-iE»'lh■ 
(3.6.7) 
Taking the inner product with the wave function φ%,(τ), and using the orthonormal 
property, J"uf3r<^(r)<£„(r) = 8mn, we find 
dam(t) 
dt 
■^aniW'nßy"™' 
(3-6.8) 
where 
* O 0 = 
(m\H\r,t)\n) 
= 
|Φ;(Γ)//'(Γ,ΟΦ„(ΓΜ 3Γ 
= H'mne-u*+H'ZaJ'« 
(3.6.9) 
wmn = {Em-En)/h 
(3.6.10) 
and the matrix element is defined as 
H'mn = \ ΦΙ(τ)Η'{τ)φη{τ)£τ. 
(3.6.11) 
Introducing the perturbation parameter λ (set λ = 1 later) 
H = H0 + KH'(T,t) 
(3.6.12) 
and letting 
fl»(0 = 40) + λα1υ(0 + λ242)(ί) + ■ · · 
(3.6.13) 

106 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
we obtain 
dcB 
m 
dt 
dam 
m 
dt 
da^ 
n 
dt ίΣ^'ω^ω^'· 
(3.6.14a) 
(3.6.14b) 
(3.6.14c) 
Thus, the zeroth-order solutions for (3.6.14a) are constant. Let the electron be at the 
state i initially 
af\t = 0)=l; 
<40)(ί) = 0, 
ηφΐ. 
We have the zeroth-order solution 
*!0)(0 = i; 
(3.6.15) 
(3.6.16) 
e%\t) = 0, 
τηφί. 
Therefore, the electron stays at the state i in the absence of any perturbation. The first-
order solution is obtained from (3.6.14b) 
dam 
dt 
h uuty' 
r [Η':βΚω-^ω)' + Η'+βί(ω·*+ω),1 
(3.6.17) 
Suppose we are interested in a final state m=f, 
the above equation can be solved 
directly by integration 
4υω 
1 H' 
ei(u>fi-u>)t _ j 
βί(,ωΓ,+ω)ί _ 
j 
(tifi 
+ H'i 
(Ofi 
(3.6.18) 
If we consider the photon energy to be near resonance, either ω ~ ωβ or ω ~ — ωβ, we 
find the dominant terms: 
af\t) 
»'fi 
2 
it 
„+
2^2* 
sinz - (wft - ω) 
4 H'J 
sin - (wfi + ω) 
2 
+ 
n 
, 2 
. 
., 
(3.6.19) 
(ωβ - ώ) 
h2 
(ωβ + ω)2 
where the cross-term has been dropped because it is small compared with either of the 
above two terms. When the interaction time is long enough, using 

APPENDIX 3A: LÖWDIN'S RENORMALIZATION METHOD 
107 
(a) 
Ef=h(üf 
(b) 
E—ho): 
Ηω Λ Α > 
AA> Ä < a 
Ε,= Ηο): 
Ef=tt<Of 
Figure 3.8 
Diagrams showing the two processes in Fermi's golden rule for electron-photon interaction: 
(a) stimulated absorption and (b) stimulated emission of a photon in a two-level system. 
we find 
Λ) 
2ττΐ 
"ß 
8(ωβ - ω) 
2πί 
. 2 "'ft S(a)fi + ω). 
(3.6.21) 
The transition rate is given by 
Wif = dt 
2π 
4"ω 
H' 
8{Ef - Ei - ha>) + 
2TT "7 S(Ef - Ei + Ηω) 
(3.6.22) 
where the property δφώ) = 8{ω)/Η has been used. The first term corresponds with 
the absorption of a photon by an electron, as Ef= Et + Ηω, whereas the second 
corresponds with the emission of a photon, as Ef— Et — Ηω. These processes are 
illustrated in Fig. 3.8 for a two-level system. 
In summary, we have Fermi's golden rule: For a time-harmonic perturbation, 
turned on at t = 0, 
//'(r, 0 = H'(r)e~ 
H'+{r)e+i,ot, 
t > 0. 
(3.6.23) 
The transition rate of an electron from an initial state i with energy £, to a final state/ 
with energy Ef is given by 
Wif 
2π 
Y 
»'fi 
8{Ef 
hw) + 
2-7Γ 
»'ft 8{Ef - Ei + hw). 
(3.6.24) 
APPENDIX 3A: LOWDIN'S RENORMALIZATION METHOD 
A useful method on the perturbation theory is Löwdin's perturbation method [9]. It 
may be necessary to divide the eigenfunctions and energies into two classes, A and B. 
Suppose we are mainly interested in the states in class A, and we look for a perturbation 
formula for class A with the influence from the other states denoted as class B. 

108 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We start with the eigenequation (3.5.33) assuming that the unperturbed states are 
orthonormalized. Equation (3.5.33) may be rewritten as 
A 
B 
(E - Hmm)am = Σ Hmnan + ^ Hmaaa 
(3A. 1) 
ηφιη 
αφτη 
or 
A 
H 
B 
H 
Σ
πηιη 
, \~~^ 
nma 
,~ A ,-... 
n#m 
"""" 
οφιη^ 
n
m
m 
where the first sum on the right-hand side is over the states in class A only, whereas 
the second sum is over the states in class B. Because we are interested in the coeffi-
cients am for m in class A, we may eliminate those in class B by an iteration procedure 
and obtain 
am = ^UAm"Z"mn8mnan 
(3A.3) 
and 
u: 
ST^ nmaH, 
A _ „ 
| ST 
ma 
"" I V 
Πη,αΠαβΠβη 
(-ΧΚ Λ\ 
^E-Haa 
„$-t,iE-Haa)(E-Hee) 
αφτη 
αφβ 
Or, equivalently, we solve the eigenvalue problems for a„, (n G A) 
A 
Σ ψίη ~ ESm„) an = 0, 
m G A 
(3A.5) 
n 
and 
ay = ZZUAyn~Hfynan, 
y G ß . 
(3A.6) 
n
 
ß 
"YY 
When the coefficients an belonging to class A are determined from the eigenequation 
(3A.5), the coefficients ay in class B can be found from (3A.6). A necessary condition 
for the expansion of (3A.4) to be convergent is 
\Hma\ < \E - Hm\, 
m<=A, α(ΞΒ. 
(3Α.7) 
In practice, to the second order in perturbation, we may replace E by EA in (3A.4), 
where EA is an average energy of states in class A, and truncate the series (3A.4) at 
the second-order term. For example, if the class A consists of only a single 

APPENDIX 3A: LOWDIN'S RENORMALIZATION METHOD 
109 
nondegenerate state n, then the class B consists of the rest. Equation (3A.5) gives only 
one equation 
E=Ut 
Hnoflan 
ST~^ 
HnaHaßHßn 
4=ίΕ-Ηαα 
AiJE 
- H„„) E - HRR) 
αφβ 
If we separate H into //(0) and a perturbation H' 
H = Hm + H' 
(3A.9) 
we obtain, to the second order in H', 
where is*0' = Hnn has been used. 
If, however, the states in class A are degenerate, the diagonal elements are exactly 
or almost the same 
Hnn = EA 
(3A.11) 
with differences of the first and higher orders. We have 
'~E~A 
νΑ™ = Η,ηη + ΣΙΕ'η1Η
ΙΓ- 
0ΑΛ2) 
Solving the eigenequation using U^n above by letting 
d e t | i / ^ - £ S m n | = 0 , 
(3A.13) 
the eigenvalues for E and eigenvectors for an are thus obtained, and the wave func-
tions are given by 
ψ=Υ/αηφ^ 
(3Α.14) 
where an for n £ class B are obtained from (3A.6). The above wave function can be 
normalized directly by dividing the above expression by ( Σ,αηΦ^ ΣαηΦΐ0) )> ΟΓ 
ΈαηΦ? 
ψ = - 
=-. 
(3A.15) 
ΣΚΙ 2 

110 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
PROBLEMS 
3.1 
Consider an Ino.53Gao.47As/InP quantum well. Assume the following 
parameters at 300K: 
In0.53Gao 47As region 
InP region 
m* = 0.041 m0 
m* = 0.077 m0 
m^h = 0.50 mo 
"ijj, = 0.60 mo 
m^, = 0.0503 mo 
m^ = 0.12 mo 
£g = 0.75eV 
£g=1.344eV 
where m0 is the free electron mass. 
The band edge discontinuity is AEC = O^OA/Sg, and AEV = 0.60A£g. 
(a) Consider a well width Lw = 100 A. How many bound states are there in 
the conduction band? How many bound heavy-hole and light-hole 
subbands are there? 
(b) Find the lowest bound state energies for the conduction subband (Cl), the 
heavy-hole (HH1) and the light-hole (LH1) subbands in part (a). What are 
the C1-HH1 and C1-LH1 transition energies? 
(c) Assume that we define an effective well width Z,eff using an infinite barrier 
model such that its ground state energy is the same as the energy of the 
first conduction subband EC\ in (b). What is Leff? If we repeat the same 
procedure for the HH1 subband, what is Leff7 
3.2 
In the infinite barrier model, the dispersion relation for the electron subband is 
given by Eq. (3.2.7). 
(a) Plot the dispersion relations E versus kt = Jk\ + k^ for n = 1,2, and 3 
on the same chart. Plot the corresponding wave functions φ\{ζ), φι{ζ), 
and φζ{ζ) with k, = 0. 
(b) Derive the electron density of states pe(E) versus the energy E and plot 
pe(E) versus E. 
(c) Assume that there are ns electrons per unit area in the quantum wells at 
T = 0. Find an expression for the Fermi-level position in terms of ns. 
3.3 Calculate the Fermi level for the electrons in a GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As quantum 
well described in the example in Section 3.2 with a surface electron concen-
tration «s = 1 x 1012cm-2 at Γ=0Κ. How many subbands are occupied 
by electrons? 
3.4 
(a) Find an analytical expression relating the surface electron concentration ns 
(1/cm2) to the Fermi level at a finite temperature T in a quantum well 
based on the infinite barrier model. 
(b) What is the carrier concentration at the ith subband? 
3.5 
If a finite barrier model is used, what is the electron density of states function 
pe(E) in Problem 3.2. Plot pe(E) versus the energy E. 

REFERENCES 
111 
3.6 
Consider a graded quantum-well structure with a parabolic band edge profile 
along the growth (z) axis in real space, Ec(z) = Kz2/2. 
(a) What are the general dispersion relations of the conduction subbands: E = 
(b) What is the density of states of the electrons in the conduction band pe(£)? 
Plot pe(E) versus the energy E. 
3.7 
Show that the wave function in (3.3.32) is the solution of the differential 
equation (3.3.31) for the ground state of the harmonic oscillator problem. 
3.8 
An exciton consisting of an electron with an effective mass w* and a hole with 
an effective mass rri^ can be described using a hydrogen model. 
(a) Calculate the Rydberg energy Ry for a GaAs semiconductor. Assume that 
ε = 12.5ε0; the other parameters are given in the numerical example in 
Section 3.2. 
(b) Calculate the Is bound state energy for GaAs if the electron-hole pair is 
restricted in a pure two-dimensional space. 
3-9 
(a) Plot the continuum state wave function at the origin \φεοο (r = 0)|2 versus 
the energy E for the three-dimensional hydrogen model. 
(b) Plot the continuum state wave function at the origin |ι/Ή) (r = 0)|2 versus 
the energy E for the two-dimensional hydrogen model. 
3.10 From the perturbation results in the example of Section 3.5, calculate the 
energy shift at an applied field of 100kV/cm using the effective well 
widths Left — 
(a) 136 A for electrons in Cl subband, 
(b) 122 Ä for holes in HH1 subband, and 
(c) 139.6 A for holes in LH1 subband in a GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As quantum well. 
3.11 Derive Fermi's golden rule and discuss the regime of validity for applying 
this rule. 
3.12 
Discuss the differences between Löwdin's perturbation method in Appendix 
3A and the conventional perturbation method in Section 3.5. 
REFERENCES 
1. A. Goswami, Quantum Mechanics, Wm. C. Brown Publishers, Dubuque, Iowa, 1992. 
2. R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 
Quantum Mechanics, Vol. ΙΠ, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1965. 
3. R. P. Feynman, Statistical Mechanics, A Set of Lectures, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, 
CA, 1972, Chapter 6. 
4. For both bound and continuum state solutions in the three-dimensional case see 
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, 3rd ed., Pergamon Press, 

112 
BASIC QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Oxford, 1977, p. 117; and H. A. Bethe and E. E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics of One -
and Two-Electron Atoms, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1957. 
5. For an n-dimensional space, n > 2, see M. Bander and C. Itzykson, "Group theory and the 
hydrogen atom (I) and (Π)," Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 330-345 (1966) and 38, 346-358 
(1966). 
6. C. Y. P. Chao and S. L. Chuang, "Analytical and numerical solutions for a two-
dimensional exciton in momentum space," Phys. Rev. B 43, 6530-6543 (1991). 
7. E. Menzbacher, Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1970. 
8. H. Haug and S. W. Koch, Quantum Theory of the Optical and Electronic Properties of 
Semiconductors, World Scientific, Singapore, 1990. 
9. P. Löwdin, "A note on the quantum-mechanical perturbation theory," J. Chem. Phys. 19, 
1396-1401 (1951). 
10. S. L. Chuang, Physics of Optoelectronic Devices, 1st ed., Wiley, New York, 1995, 
Table 3.1. 
H . A . Yariv, Quantum Electronics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1989. 
12. A. Lukes, G. A. Ringwood, and B. Suprapto, "A particle in a box in the presence of an 
electric field and applications to disordered systems," Physica 84A, 421-434 (1976). 
13. F. M. Fernandez and E. A. Castro, "Hypervirial-perturbational treatment of a particle in a 
box in the presence of an electric field," Physica 111A, 334-342 (1982). 
14. M. Matsuura and T. Kamizato, "Subbands and excitons in a quantum well in an electric 
field," Phys. Rev. B 33, 8385-8389 (1986). 
15. G. Bastard, E. E. Mendez, L. L. Chang, and L. Esaki, "Variational calculations on a 
quantum well in an electric field," Phys. Rev. B 28, 3241-3245 (1983). 
16. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Variational calculations of subbands in a quantum well with 
uniform electric field: Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization approach," Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 
1450-1452(1986). 
17. S. Nojima, "Electric field dependence of the exciton binding energy in GaAs/Al^Ga! _^As 
quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 37, 9087-9088 (1988). 

4 
Theory of Electronic Band Structures 
in Semiconductors 
To understand the optical properties of semiconductors, such as absorption or gain 
due to electronic transitions in the presence of an incident optical wave, we have 
to know the electronic band structure including the energy band and the correspond-
ing wave function. Knowing the initial and final states of the electrons, we may cal-
culate the optical absorption using Fermi's golden rule derived in Section 3.6. In this 
chapter, we discuss the theory of the band structures. For optical devices, most semi-
conductors have direct band gaps, and many physical phenomena near the band edges 
are of great interest. We will focus on the conduction and valence band structures near 
the band edges, where the k · p method is extremely useful. 
4.1 
THE BLOCH THEOREM AND THE k-p METHOD 
FOR SIMPLE BANDS 
For a periodic potential, the electronic band structure and the wave function can be 
derived from the Hamiltonian, which satisfies the symmetry of the semiconductor 
crystals. The general theory follows the Bloch theorem [1], which will be discussed 
in this section. Numerical methods to find the band structures and the wave functions 
include the tight binding, the pseudopotential, the orthogonalized plane wave, the 
augmented plane wave, the Green's function, and the cellular methods. Many texts 
on solid-state physics have detailed discussions on these methods [1,2]. Our interest 
here is near the band edges of direct band-gap semiconductors, where the wave vector 
k deviates by a small amount from a vector k0 where a local minimum or maximum 
occurs. The k · p method was introduced by Bardeen [3] and Seitz [4]. The method 
has also been applied by many researchers to semiconductors [5-10]. Here we will 
discuss Kane's model [7, 8], which takes into account the spin-orbit interaction, 
and Luttinger-Kohn's models [9] for degenerate bands. These models are very 
popular in studying bulk and quantum-well semiconductors and have been used 
during the past three decades. They are much easier to apply than most other numeri-
cal methods. For a general discussion, see Refs. 11-14. 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
113 

114 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
For an electron in a periodic potential 
V(r) = V(r + R) 
(4.1.1) 
where R = nx st\ + n2 a2 + «3 a3, and ai, a2, a3 are the lattice vectors, and ri\,n2, and 
n3 are integers, the electron wave function satisfies the Schrödinger equation 
ΗΨ(Γ) 
— V2 + V(r) 
2m0 
Ψ(Γ) = £(k)Y(r). 
(4.1.2) 
The Hamiltonian is invariant under translation by the lattice vectors, r —> r + R. If 
Ψ(Γ) describes an electron moving in the crystal, </<r + R) will also be a solution 
to (4.1.2). Thus, ψ(Γ + R) will differ from φ(τ) at most by a constant. This constant 
must have a unity magnitude; otherwise, the wave function may grow to infinity if we 
repeat the translation R indefinitely. The general solution of the above equation is 
given by 
<A„k(r) = e*-r
Mnk(r) 
(4.1.3a) 
where 
M„k(r + R) = M„k(r) 
(4.1.3b) 
is a periodic function. This result is the Bloch theorem. The wave function (/'„k(r) is 
usually called the Bloch function. The energy is given by 
E = £„(k). 
Here n refers to the band and k the wave vector of the electron. A full description of 
the band structure requires numerical methods [1, 2]. An example of the GaAs band 
structure calculated [15] by the pseudopotential method is shown in Fig. 4.1a, which 
represents the general energy bands along different k directions. Our interest will 
focus near the direct band gap (Γ valley) between the valence-band edges and the 
conduction-band edge as shown in Fig. 4.1b, where the energy dispersions for a 
small k vector will be considered. 
The k· p method is a very useful technique to analyze the band structure near a 
particular point k0, especially when it is near an extremum of the band structure. 
Here we consider that the extremum occurs at the zone center where k0 = 0. This 
is a very useful case for III-V direct band-gap semiconductors. 
Consider the general Schrödinger equation for an electron wave function i/^r) in 
the nth band with a wave vector k, 
l~ 
+ ν(τ)\ψΛ(τ) = Ε„(ΜψΛ(τ). 
(4.1.4) 

4.1 THE BLOCH THEOREM AND THE k p METHOD FOR SIMPLE BANDS 
115 
A 
Γ 
ύ 
X 
U,K 
Wave vector k 
Figure 4.1 (a) GaAs band structure calculated by the pseudopotential method. (Reprinted with per-
mission from [151 © 1976 American Physical Society.) (b) The band structure near the band edges of 
the direct band gap showing the conduction (C), heavy-hole (HH), light-hole (LH), and spin-orbit (SO) 
split-off bands. 
When written in terms of w„k(r), it becomes 
^— + 
—k-p+V(r)}unk(r) 
IrtiQ 
mo 
)\u„ 
£„(k) -
h2k2 
2mo "nk(r). 
(4.1.5) 
The above equation can be expanded near a particular point k0 of interest in the band 
structure. When k0 = 0, the above equation is expanded near £„(0), 
H0-\ 
k-pVwnk(r) 
mo 
En(k) - h2k2 
2mo 
««k(r) 
(4.1.6) 
where 
Ho=f-+V(r) 
#o"no(r) = £'„(0)Μ„Ο(Γ). 
(4.1.7a) 
(4.1.7b) 

116 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
4.1.1 
The k.p Theory for a Single Band 
If the band structure of interest is near a single band such as the band edge of a 
conduction band, Fig. 4.2a, and the coupling to other bands is negligible, the pertur-
bation theory and Löwdin's method, as discussed in Appendix 3A, give the same 
results. Here the particular band of interest, labeled as n, is called class A, and 
class B will consist of the rest of the bands, n' φ η. The time-independent pertur-
bation theory, Eq. (3.5.21b) in Section 3.5, gives the energy to second order in 
perturbation: 
£„(k) = £„(0) + h2k2 
k-Pn 
tl ,Σ 
0 „Vn 
|k-P« 
2m0 
mo 
and the wave function to the first order in perturbation, (3.5.16a): 
h 
k-p„,„ 
«nk(r) = K„o(r) + V 
(· 
= Σ an>un>0(r) 
"n'0(r) 
where the momentum matrix elements are defined as 
M*0(r) pM„'0(r) d3r 
unit cell 
and «„k(r)'s are normalized as 
u*n0(r) w„/0(r) d3r = δηη,. 
(4.1.8) 
(4.1.9a) 
(4.1.9b) 
(4.1.10) 
(4.1.11) 
unit cell 
Ec(*) = £c(0) + 
*- k 
2m* 
(b) 
Ec(0) = E, 
£v(0) = 0 
->~k 
Figure 4.2 
(a) A single-band model in the k · p theory, (b) The two-band model in the k · p theory. 

4.1 THE BLOCH THEOREM AND THE k p METHOD FOR SIMPLE BANDS 
117 
If k0 is at an extremum of £„(k), £„(k) must depend quadratically on k near k0 and 
p„„ = 0. That is why we need to go to second-order perturbation theory for the 
energy correction and only the first-order correction is needed for the wave function. 
Because we set ko to 0, we have 
£„(k) - £„(0) = Σ Daßkakß = \ Σ (A) k"kß 
α,β 
Ζ α,β \ m 
'aß 
α,β 
.2 
D pß 
h 
g 
, _ * _ V - 
Ραηη'Ρη·η+Ρηη'Ραη·η 
2m "ß 2ml fe
 £«<°) -
 £"'(°> 
h2n 
2 \m* 
(4.1.12) 
(4.1.13) 
'aß 
where a, ß = x, y, and z. It should be noted that the Daß matrix in the quadratic form 
has been defined to be symmetric. The matrix Dal} is the inverse effective mass in 
matrix form multiplied by h j2. 
4.1.2 The k · p Theory for Two-Band (or Nondegenerate 
Multibands) Model 
If only two (or multi-) strongly interacting nondegenerate bands are considered, we 
call them class A, as shown in Fig. 4.2b. To solve (4.1.6), we assume 
w«k(r) = ^ a „ ' ( k ) Μ„Ό(Γ). 
(4.1.14) 
Substituting the above expression into (4.1.6) for unk(r), and multiplying by un0(r) 
and integrating over a unit cell, we have 
Σ 
E„(0) 
ft2*2' 
2mo 
m0 
-k.p„„, }a„> =£„(k)a„ 
(4.1.15) 
where the orthogonality relation Jw*0i<„O<i3r = δ„„/ has been used. For two coupled 
bands, labeled by n and n', the above equation can be solved from the determinantal 
equation 
h2k2 
E„(0) + - 
E 
2OTQ 
mo k'P„ n 
— k · pm. 
mo 
h2k2 
EA0) + - 
E 
2mo 
= 0. 
(4.1.16) 
The standard procedure is to find the eigenvalue E with the corresponding eigen-
vector. The two eigenvalues for (4.1.16) can also be compared with those obtained 
from a direct perturbation theory (see Problem 4.3). 

118 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
4.2 
KANE'S MODEL FOR BAND STRUCTURE: THE k.p METHOD 
WITH THE SPIN-ORBIT INTERACTION 
In Kane's model for direct band semiconductors, the spin-orbit interaction is taken 
into account [7, 8]. Four bands—the conduction, the heavy-hole, the light-hole, and 
the spin-orbit split-off bands—are considered, which have double degeneracy with 
their spin counterparts, Fig. 4.3a. 
4.2.1 
The Schrödinger Equation for the Function u„k(r) 
Consider the Hamiltonian near k0 = 0, 
h 
H = Hn 
Arn^c2 σ·VV 
x p 
(4.2.1a) 
2m0 
(4.2.1b) 
where the second term in (4.2.1a) accounts for the spin-orbit interaction and cris the 
Pauli spin matrix with components 
σν = 
0 1 
1 
0 
σν = 0 
- ι 
i 
0 
σ, = 
(4.2.2) 
(a) 
E„ = -A 
Class A 
Class« 
Figure 4.3 (a) The k · p method in Kane's model: only a conduction band, a heavy-hole, a light-hole, 
and a spin-orbit split-off band with double degeneracy are considered. All other higher and lower 
bands are discarded, (b) Luttinger-Kohn's model: the heavy-hole, light-hole, and spin split-off bands in 
double degeneracy are of interest and are called class A. All other bands are denoted as class B. The 
effects of bands in class B on those in class A are taken into account in this model. 

4.2 
KANE'S MODEL FOR BAND STRUCTURE 
119 
which, when operating on the spins 
; -
give, by simple matrix product of (4.2.2) and (4.2.3), 
From the original Schrödinger equation for the Bloch function, 
(4.2.3) 
(4.2.4) 
[2m0 
V(r) 
Arrive2 [VVx p ] - < r l <Λ*0") = £n(k)iA„k(r) 
(4.2.5) 
the Schrödinger equation for the cell periodic function unk(r) is obtained 
,2 
Ϊ 
2mo 
mo 
4/n,1c/ 
ft ft 
[ W x p]· σ + ^ ^ W 
x k· σ Sw„k(r) 
Ό1-
4WQC2 
^««kW 
(4.2.6) 
ft2*2 
where £" = £„(k) — ^ - . The last term on the left-hand side is a k-dependent spin-
2nto 
orbit interaction, which is small compared with the other terms because the crystal 
momentum ftk is very small compared with the atomic momentum p in the far 
interior of the atom where most of the spin-orbit interaction occurs. Thus, only 
the first four terms on the left-hand side are considered 
Hunk(r)~ 
[H0 + — k-p + -~T^VVxp-a)unk(r) 
= E'unk(r). 
(4.2.7) 
4.2.2 
Basis Functions and the Hamiltonian Matrix 
We look for the eigenvalue E' with corresponding eigenfunction 
"«k(r) = ^ < V 
" « Ό ( Γ ) . 
ri 
The band edge functions w„0(r) are 
Conduction band: \S\), \S\.) with corresponding eigenenergy Es 
Valence band: |Xf>, l^t). |Zt)> ΡΦ> l^)» \ZV) w i t h eigenenergy Ev 

120 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where the wave functions in each band are degenerate with respect to H0. // 0|^t) = 
Es\Sf), H0\S±) = Es\Si), //0|Xt) = £p|*t>, H0\Yf)= Ep\Y^), H0\Z\) = EV\Z\), 
and so forth. It is convenient to choose the basis functions 
and 
\iS\), 
l«t). 
iY 
V2 
X + iY 
t),|z;>. 
I).|zt>. 
X + iY 
X-iY 
V2 
where the conduction-band wave function is the ί-state wave function and the 
valence-band basis functions are taken from the the p-state wave functions of 
a hydrogen atom model, which are the spherical harmonics Υχ0 = \Z), and 
Y\+\ = +—p(X + iY). The first few spherical harmonics Yem(9, ψ) are 
V2 
£ = 0(s orbit): 
Υω = 
l=\(p 
orbits): Υί0(θ, φ) = 
Υ\±ΛΘ,φ) = 
1 
4π 
3~ 
47Γ cos θ = 
3_ζ 
ΑΊΤΓ 
8ΤΓ sin θ 
β±ίφ 
\Ζ) 
— Γϊ~ χ + iy 
The reason for this choice is that the electron wave functions arep-like near the top of 
the valence band and s-like near the bottom of the conduction band, which are con-
tributed by the outermost valence electrons, say 4s2 and 4pl electrons of the valence-
Hi (Ga) atoms and 4s2 and 4p3 electrons of the valence-V (As) atoms when they form 
the GaAs zinc-blende crystal. The first four basis functions are respectively degene-
rate with the last four basis functions. The 8 x 8 interaction matrix becomes 
where, assuming k = kz, 
H 
Es 
0 
0 
H 
0 
0 
H 
0 
kP 
0 
Δ 
, _ _ 
0 
£ „ - - 
V2A/3 
kP 
ν^Δ/3 
£ρ 
0 
* P + 3 , 
(4.2.8) 

4.2 
KANE'S MODEL FOR BAND STRUCTURE 
121 
and the Kane's parameter P and the spin-orbit split-off energy Δ are defined as 
P=-i—(S\pz\Z) 
mo 
3hi 
Arrive2 
dV_ 
dx' 
dv 
(4.2.9) 
(4.2.10) 
4.2.3 
Solutions for the Eigenvalues and the Eigenfunctions 
of the Hamiltonian Matrix 
Define the reference energy to be Ep = — Δ/3, and define Es = Eg. The Hamiltonian 
in (4.2.8) becomes 
H 
£g 
0 
kP 
0 
0 
2Δ 
~~3~ 
ν^Δ/3 
0 
kP 
0 
V2A/3 
0 
~4 ° 
0 
0 
(4.2.11) 
The determinantal equation det|H — £"I| = 0 gives four eigenvalues for E'. We can 
see that the last band in (4.2.11) is decoupled from the first three bands. 
(1) E' = 0 (i.e., band-edge energy is zero), 
and 
(2) E'(E' - £g)(£' + Δ) - ^Ρ2 (Ε' + ?Δ J = 0. 
(4.2.12a) 
(4.2.12b) 
The second equation gives three roots. Because k is very small, we expect that the 
roots of Eq. (4.2.12b) will be very close to ß = Eg, E1 = 0, and E! = — A, the 
three band edges. 
(i) Let £" = £„ + ε(£2) where ε <C Δ and E„. We find from (4.2.12b) 
klPl 
E„ + 2Δ' 
Es(Eg + Δ) 
(4.2.13) 
(ii) Let E1 = 0 + e(k2). Equation (4.2.12b) gives 
2k2P2 
ε = 
—■ 3£B 
(4.2.14) 

122 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
I.2N 
(iii) Let Ef = - Δ + s(kz). We find 
k2P2 
3(£g + Δ) 
(4.2.15) 
h2k2 
Because E = En(k) 
, we obtain four eigenvalues from (4.2.12a) and (4.2.13)-
(4.2.15). They are, starting from the highest energy level, 
(4.2.13) 
n = c 
2m0 
nh
2 klpV* + 2i 
EJE„ + A) 
(4.2.12a) 
n = hh 
Ehh(k) 
(4.2.14) 
n = £h 
Eeh(k) 
(4.2.15) 
n = so 
£S0(Ä:) 
h2k2 
Into 
h2k2 
2k2P2 
2mo 
3Eg 
h2k2 
2 p 2 
klP-
2m0 
3(£„ + Δ) 
(4.2.16a) 
(4.2.16b) 
(4.2.16c) 
(4.2.16d) 
These results are not complete because the effects of higher bands have not been 
included, and they will be considered when we discuss the Luttinger-Kohn 
model. Note that the above result gives an incorrect effective mass for the heavy-
hole band. 
The eigenfunctions can be obtained from (4.2.11) for the first 4 x 4 matrix, 
Φ 
hh,a 
X + iY 
7Γ 
hh band 
(4.2.17a) 
Φη,α = an\iSi) + bn 
X-iY 
V2 
t)+c„|Z4,) 
n = c,£h, so 
(4.2.17b) 
and the second 4x4 matrix 
Φ\ύ,,β = 
X-iY 
V2 
Φη,β = an\iSf) 
+bn 
1-) 
hh band 
(X + iY) 
V2 
(4.2.18a) 
| ) + c „ | Z t ) 
« = c, £h, so. 
(4.2.18b) 

4.2 
KANE'S MODEL FOR BAND STRUCTURE 
123 
The eigenvectors column [an, bn, cn] are obtained by substituting each eigenvalue into 
the eigenequation 
0 
kP 
0 
V5 
kP 
ψ-κ ν-ή 
3 
" 
an 
Cn 
= 0 
(4.2.19) 
and then normalizing such that (a2 + b^ + c2,)1^2 = 1. 
The results in the limit k2 —> 0 give 
n = c 
α ~ 1 , ί » ~ 0 , c ~ 0 
i 
h 
n = (h 
a ~ 0, b = —r=, c = \ -
n = so 
a ~ 0, b 
; c 
(4.2.20) 
4.2.4 
Summary of the Eigenenergies and Corresponding 
Band-Edge Basis Functions 
We summarized the results below and in Fig. 4.4. The commonly used parabolic band 
models for the energy dispersions are also redefined in the parentheses. 
^hh 
E, 
1,X\ 
|!,--L\ 
2 
2 /> I 2 
2 / 
Figure 4.4 The band-edge energies Es, 0,0, and — Δ for the conduction, heavy-hole, light-hole, and spin 
split-off bands with their corresponding band-edge Bloch functions. Note that the dispersion relation E-k 
for the heavy-hole band E^ should curve down and should follow the result of the Luttinger-Kohn model. 

124 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Conduction Band 
Φοα = \iSD 
Φφ = l'5t)· 
h2k2 
k2P2 (3£g + 2Δ) 
2m~o^ 
3 Eg(Eg + A) 
= E„ 
2m*. , 
(4.2.21) 
Valence Band 
Heavy Hole 
Ehh(k) 
<f>hh,a 
ΦϊΛ,,β 
hh2 
2n% 
- 1 
should be 
V2 
1 
|(X + ,y)f) E 
\(X - iY)i) = 
3 3 
2' 2 
3 
2' 
(4.2.22) 
Light Hole 
2r>2 
E*m = 
h2k2 
2k2P 
2ntQ 
3Eg 
ΦΛ,α=^\(Χ-ίΥ)1) 
\\ΖΪ) 
3 
2' 
ΦΟΦ = - ^ l(X + ι Ύ ) +> + v \ z t ) Ξ 
1 
~ 2 
3 1 
2' 2 
(4.2.23) 
Spin-orbit Split-off Band 
A 
h2k2 
k2P2 
( 
2m 0 
3 ( £ g + Δ ) V 
φ^α = ^\{Χ-ίΥ)\)-^\Ζ\) 
= 
Φ*0,β = :^\(Χ + ϊΥ)1)+^\ΖΪ) 
= 
1 -
1 
2' 
1 
2' 
ft2*2 
2 w Js*o 
T> 
"»· 
(4.2.24) 

4.2 
KANE'S MODEL FOR BAND STRUCTURE 
125 
The Kane's parameter P can also be related to the effective mass of the electron 
m* using 
^ c \ O 
LLS 
2., 
k2P2[Esl+^A 
+ 
Kk2 
" - V~B ' 3 
2ra0 
EJEg + Δ) 
h2k2 
2m* 
(4.2.25) 
Pl= 
1 
me*\ ft£g(ffg + A) 
m^2mt(Ei +
 24 
(4.2.26) 
Sometimes, the Ä k2/2m0 term is ignored, as m* ~ 0.067m0 ^ mo f°r GaAs; there-
fore, the term m*t/rriQ in (4.2.26) is ignored. 
We note that these wave functions in (4.2.21)-(4.2.24) are eigenvectors of the 
Hamiltonian 
hk2 
h 
h 
H = H0+-— 
+ —k-p 
+ —r^a-VVxp 
(4.2.27) 
2mo 
mo 
4OTQC 2 
with eigenenergies E = Eg, 0,0, — Δ as k —> 0 for the conduction, heavy-hole, light-
hole, and spin split-off bands, respectively. 
4.2.5 
General Coordinate Direction 
If k is not along the z-direction, 
k = ksm ßcostpx -\-ksm θύηφγ 
+kcos6 z 
(4.2.28) 
the following transformations can be used to find the basis functions in the general 
coordinate system 
Y" 
.v. 
~X'~ 
r 
Z' 
= 
/ 
ß 
( e_/*/2cos-2 
\-e-W2sm? 
= 
cos Θ cos φ 
—sin φ 
sin Θ cos φ 
ß \ 
£>''*/2sin- ) 
2 ß 
e"^2cos- , 
2 / 
"t" 
A. 
cos Θ sin <£ — sin β 
cos$ 
0 
sin Θ sin φ 
c os( ? 
"X 
y 
z 
(4.2.29) 
(4.2.30) 
The spherically symmetrical function maintains its symmetry, S(r') = 5(r) as r' = r 
because the length scale is preserved in a unitary transformation. The above 
transformation will be useful in Chapter 9 when we discuss optical matrix elements 
for quantum wells. 

126 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
4.3 
LUTTINGER-KOHN MODEL: THE k · p METHOD 
FOR DEGENERATE BANDS 
Suppose we are mainly interested in the six valence bands (the heavy-hole, light-hole, 
and spin split-off bands, all doubly degenerate) and ignore the coupling to the two 
degenerate conduction bands with both spins. It is convenient to use Löwdin's per-
turbation method in Appendix 3 A and treat the six valence bands as in class A and put 
the rest of the bands in class B, Fig. 4.3b. Note that Luttinger-Kohn's model can also 
be generalized to include both conduction bands in class A, especially for narrow 
band-gap semiconductors [9-13]. 
4.3.1 
The Hamiltonian and the Basis Functions 
Write the total Hamiltonian in (4.2.6) for Hk(r) (dropping the band index n for 
convenience) 
//Hk(r) = £(k)Mk(r) 
(4.3.1a) 
h2k2 
h 
2mo Arn^c2 
H = H0+—- 
+ — y r V V x p - f f + Z/' 
(4.3.1b) 
where 
P2 
H0=^+V(r) 
(4.3.1c) 
2mo 
H' = — k - Π 
(4.3.Id) 
m0 
where 
n = p + - ^ a x V V . 
(4.3.1e) 
4moCl 
Note again that the last term in (4.2.6) is much smaller than the fourth term because 
hk<^p= 
\(uk\p\uk)\~ h/a, because the electron velocity in the atomic orbit is much 
larger than the velocity of the wave packet with the wave vectors in the vicinity of 
M=0)[11]. 
We expand the function 
A 
B 
«k(r) = Σ a/(k)«/0(r) + ^ 
ay(k)uy0(r) 
(4.3.2) 
/ 
Ύ 

4.3 LUTTINGER-KOHN MODEL: THE k - p METHOD FOR DEGENERATE BANDS 
127 
where / is in class A and y is in class B. Or specifically, we have in class A 
K ] 0(r) = 
"2o(r) = 
K3o(r) = 
«4θ(Γ) = 
«50(r) = 
"6o(r) = 
3 
2' 
3 
2' 
3 
2' 
3 
2' 
1 
2' 
1 
2' 
0=^|(x + iW) 
I)=^|<X + i W ) + V||Zt) 
zl) = -L| ( x_ i m ) + ^||zW 
^ ) = ^l<x~.m> 
i)=-L|(x + ,-w) + -L|zt> 
^) = ^|(x-(W)-^|zw 
(4.3.3) 
from (4.2.22)-(4.2.24). At k = 0, the above band-edge functions satisfy 
where 
//(k = 0)iije(r) = £y(0)«je(r) 
Ej(0) = Ep + Δ/3 = 0 
for j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 
£;(0) = Ep - 2Δ/3 = - Δ 
for j = 5, 6, 
(4.3.4) 
(4.3.5a) 
(4.3.5b) 
as we set Ep = — Δ/3. The above band-edge energies and basis functions are also 
shown in Fig. 4.4. 
4.3.2 
Solution of the Hamiltonian Using Löwdin's Perturbation Method 
The Löwdin's method is that we only need to solve the eigenequation 
£(t4-l%)a/(k) = 0 
(4.3.6) 
instead of 
Σ {Hff - E8ff)afQs) = 0 
(4.3.7) 

128 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where 
B 
u 
u 
B 
H' 
H' 
lijyrlyf 
Έ "V " i v " v ? 
< * = * + Σ ^ = * + Σ 
y*iJ 
Hjf = 
(ujo\H\uf0) 
Ej(0) 
ft2*2' 
2mo 
^jjEo-Ey 
Sff 
(j,j'<EA) 
(4.3.8a) 
(4.3.8b) 
H'jy=(uA— 
k-U\uyo) 
= Y]— 
Pa
jy 
(j<EA,y(£A) 
(4.3.8c) 
where we note that FL/ = 0 for j , f E. A, and Π"γ ~ pj for j E.A and γ ί A. 
Because y φ j , adding the unperturbed part to the perturbed part in H'jy does not 
affect the results (i.e., HJy = H'jy). We thus obtain 
υ% = Ej(0) 
h2k2 
2m0 
i2 
B 
kakßp°j'■ pry 
m0y?jj> 
a,ß 
ß o 
Zy 
Let t/4 = Djji. We obtain the matrix of the form Djj 
(4.3.9) 
α,β 
(4.3.10) 
where the expression of D°-f is defined as 
n"? 
** />? a 
, 
S^PlyPyf+PjyPy/ 
D* =2^{δ^ 
+ Σ, 
miE0-Ey) 
(4.3.11) 
which is similar to (4.1.13), the single band case (where j=f 
= the single band 
index ri). Here we have generalized (4.1.13) to include the degenerate bands. 
Explicit Expression for the Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian Matrix Dg To 
write out the matrix elements Dj/ in (4.3.10) explicitly, we define 
h 
k T-^ PxyPyx 
2m0 
m% t—* E0 - Ey 
2m0 
τηΙ^-Έο- 
Ey 
yx 
h2 Λ / Χ + ^ , 
C° = ~~2 / / 
^xyfyy 
' 
fxyfyy 
EQ — Ey 
(4.3.12a) 
(4.3.12b) 
(4.3.12c) 

4.3 LUTTINGER-KOHN MODEL: THE k · p METHOD FOR DEGENERATE BANDS 
129 
and define the band structure (or Luttinger-Kohn) parameters j \ , j2, and -y3 as 
ti 
1 
2/MO 
3 
£ 
i 
- 2 ^ γ 2 
= 6 ( Λ ο " β θ ) 
(4.3.13) 
2mo 
6 
We obtain the Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian U^ = D, denoted as HLK, in the basis 
functions given by (4.3.3) 
P + Q 
-S 
R 
0 
-S/V2 
V2R 
-S+ 
P-Q 
0 
R 
-V2Q 
Λ/3/IS 
LK_ 
R+ 
0 
P-Q 
S 
y/3/2S+ 
V2Q 
0 
R+ 
S+ 
P + Q 
-V2R+ 
-S+/V2 
-S+/V2 
-V2Q+ 
y/3/2S 
-V2R 
Ρ + Δ 
0 
V2R+ 
y/3/2S+ 
s/2Q+ 
-S/y/2 
0 
P + A 
H 
(4.3.14) 
h27i 
h2 
S = 
-V3(kx-iky)kz 
rriQ 
(4.3.15) 
where the superscript "+" means Hermitian conjugate. 
4.3.3 
Summary 
In summary, for the valence hole subbands, we only have to solve for the eigenvalue 
equation 
YiHfafQL) 
= Ea]QL) 
(4.3.16) 
/=· 
or for the eigenvalue E and the corresponding eigenvector column \a\, a2,..., 
a6], 
where the matrix elements Ηψ = £,·(0)δ^/ + ^D°fkakß 
are given in (4.3.14). 
α,β 

130 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
The wave function t/f„k(r) satisfying 
p
2 
ti 
2 wo 
4/MQCZ 
iA„k(r) = Enk <^k(r) 
(4.3.17) 
is then given by 
</'«k(r) = e''k"rM«k(r) 
unk(r) = ^ 
o,(k) ufi(r) 
(4.3.18) 
y=i 
and 
£«k — £· 
4.4 THE EFFECTIVE MASS THEORY FOR A SINGLE 
BAND AND DEGENERATE BANDS 
In this section, we summarize the effective mass theory [9] for both a single band and 
degenerate bands in semiconductors. 
4.4.1 
The Effective Mass Theory for a Single Band 
The most important conclusion of the effective mass theory (EMT) for a single band 
is as follows. If the energy dispersion relation for a single band n near ko (assuming at 
the origin 0) is given by 
£„(k) = £„(0) + V^-f-^ N) k„kp 
α,β 
L \ m y aß 
(4.4.1) 
for the Hamiltonian H0 with a periodic potential V(r) 
H0=^—+V(r) 
2OTO 
tfoi/'nkW = En(k)>pnk(r), 
(4.4.2) 
(4.4.3) 
then the solution for the Schrödinger equation with a perturbation i/(r) such as an 
impurity potential or a quantum-well potential 
[Ho + i/(r)] <#r) = EilKr) 
(4.4.4) 

4.4 THE EFFECTIVE MASS THEORY 
131 
(a) 
A periodic crystal potential V(r) 
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o 
Ίηηηηηηηη 
(b) 
A periodic crystal potential V(r) with an impurity potential C/(r) 
O
O
O
0
O
O
O
O 
(c) 
An impurity potential t/(r) 
._ 
„ _ - 
l/(r) 
Figure 4.5 
Illustrations of (a) the periodic potential V(r), (b) the sum of the periodic potential V(r) and 
the impurity potential C/(r), and (c) only the impurity potential t/(r) for the effective mass theory. 
is obtainable by solving 
for the envelope function F(r) and the energy E. The wave function is 
approximated by 
<Kr) = F(r)Mnk0(r). 
(4.4.6) 
The most important result is that the periodic potential V(r) determines the energy 
bands and the effective masses, (l/m*)ai3, and the effective mass Eq. (4.4.5) contains 
only the extra perturbation potential t/(r), as the effective masses already take into 
account the periodic potential, Fig. 4.5. The perturbation potential can also be a 
quantum-well potential, as in a semiconductor heterostructure such as GaAs/ 
AljGa] -jAs quantum wells. 
4.4.2 
The Effective Mass Theory for Degenerate Bands 
In Section 4.3, we discuss the k · p method for degenerate bands such as the heavy-
hole, light-hole, and the spin split-off bands of semiconductors. The effective 

132 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
mass theory for a perturbation potential i/(r) for degenerate bands is stated as follows 
[9,11]: 
If the dispersion relation of a set of degenerate bands satisfying 
ΗψΛ(τ) = £(k)^„k(r) 
P2 
2mo 
Hs( 
4/WQC 2 VV x ρ· σ 
is given by 
6 
α,β 
(4.4.7a) 
(4.4.7b) 
(4.4.7c) 
a/(k) = E(k)aj(k) 
(4.4.8) 
then the solution i/<r) for the semiconductors in the presence of a perturbation t/(r), 
[H + t/(r)]#r) = Εφ(τ) 
(4.4.9) 
is given by 
where Fj(r) satisfies 
6 Σ ^^+5ο?(-'έ)(-
EFj(r). 
1 ^ + ϋ { Τ ) δ « 
F/(r) 
(4.4.10) 
(4.4.11) 
4.5 
STRAIN EFFECTS ON BAND STRUCTURES 
Strained-layer superlattices [16, 17] have been of great interest since the early 1980s. 
It has been demonstrated that it is possible to vary important material properties: 
lattice constant, band gap, and perpendicular transport using ternary strained-layer 
superlattices. Applications of the strained-layer superlattices or quantum wells to 
long-wavelength photodetectors [17] and semiconductor lasers [18] have been pro-
posed and later demonstrated. For example, strained quantum-well lasers have been 
shown to exhibit superior performance compared with that for conventional diode 
lasers [19, 20] in many aspects, which will be discussed later in Chapter 10. 
Detailed discussions on the semiconductor growth and the physics of strained-layer 
quantum wells can be found in Ref. 20. 

4.5 
STRAIN EFFECTS ON BAND STRUCTURES 
133 
When a crystal is under a uniform deformation, it may preserve the periodic 
property such that the Bloch theorem may still be applicable. The modulating part 
of the Bloch function remains periodic with a period equal to that of the new elemen-
tary cell because the elementary cell is also deformed. In this section, we derive 
the Pikus-Bir Hamiltonian [21, 22] for strained semiconductors and discuss their 
band structures. 
4.5.1 
The Pikus-Bir Hamiltonian for a Strained Semiconductor 
Suppose near the band extremum ko = 0 of a semiconductor, we have 
[H0 + V0(rMnku(r) = £n(k0)^nko(r) 
(4.5.1) 
with the Bloch function iAnko(r) = e'k^runk0(r), where Vo(r) is a periodic potential 
in the undeformed crystal. Here we present a simple picture for the strain analysis 
[23-25]. As shown in Fig. 4.6, the unit vectors x, y, (and z) (for simplicity, assuming 
they are basis vectors, too) in the undeformed crystal are related to x1, y', (and z!) in 
the uniformly deformed crystal by 
x' = (1 + Bja)x + e^y + exzz 
y' = ByXX + (1 + Syy)y + ByzZ 
z' = ε^χ + s^y + (1 + ε^ζ. 
(4.5.2) 
Obviously x', y', and z' are not unit vectors anymore. We assume a homogeneous 
strain and ε,-, = ε,·,·. We can define six strain components as 
e\ 
^2 
r.yy 
e4 =x'-y' = ε™ + εν 
^5 
y'-z' = eyz 
^zy 
e-i 
=£z. 
(4.5.3) 
(a) 
Unstrained lattice 
(b) 
Strained lattice 
Undeformed crystal 
Deformed crystal 
Figure 4.6 
(a) Position vector r for atom A in an unstrained lattice, (b) Position vector r' for atom A in a 
strained lattice. 

134 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
keeping only the linear terms in strain. To label a position A (or atom A) in the unde-
formed crystal, we have 
r = xx + yy + zz = (x, y, z). 
(4.5.4a) 
The same atom in the deformed crystal can be labeled either as 
r' = x*! + yy' + zz' 
(4.5.4b) 
using the new basis vectors x', y', and z', or labeled as 
r' = χ'χ + y'y + z'z = (x', / , z') 
(4.5.4c) 
in the original bases in the undeformed crystal. An example is shown in Fig. 4.6. We 
have r = x + y = (1, 1, 0) in the undeformed crystal and r/ = x ' + y ' in the 
deformed crystal. We can also see that the change of the volume in the linear 
strain regime becomes 
V + 8V 
— - — = x'-y'xz'=1+(ε]ίΧ 
+ εγγ + εζζ). 
(4.5.5) 
The quantity ε^ + eyy + ε^ is the trace of the matrix ε, or Tr(e), which is exactly the 
fractional change of the volume 8V/V of the crystal under uniform deformation 
8V/V = Bxx + Eyy + Bzz. 
(4.5.6) 
Major Results for the Pikus-Bir Hamiltonian for a Strained Semiconductor 
Using the above relations (4.5.2)-(4.5.6) between the deformed coordinates and 
the undeformed coordinates, the Hamiltonian for a strained semiconductor can be 
derived. Here we summarize the major conclusions. In the unstrained semiconductor, 
the full 6x6 Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian is given by (4.3.10) 
Djj, = Hf = Ej(0) 8jf + Σ Df 
k«kß 
(4·5·7) 
α,β 
and its full matrix form is shown in (4.3.14) and (4.3.15) explicitly in terms of the 
expressions P, Q, R, and S. 
The strained Hamiltonian introduces extra terms denoted by 
(He)jf = Σ°Ϊ 
ε"β 
(4·5·8> 
cß 
due to the linear strain. We, therefore, use the correspondences between D°f in H^f 
and D°jf in (Ηε)^, we find 
kakß —> εαβ. 
(4.5.9) 

4.5 
STRAIN EFFECTS ON BAND STRUCTURES 
135 
Conduction Band (Isotropie Case) 
We replace the prefactor with the inverse 
effective mass by the conduction deformation potential 
h2 
— : < 
> a c 
(4.5.10) 
2m* 
and replace the wave vector components by strain components using (4.5.9). We 
obtain the conduction band edge dispersion 
h2 
E(k) = Ec(0) + — (*J + *£ + *?) + flc(e» + Syy + e a). 
(4.5.11) 
We note that the inverse effective mass tensor is diagonal (a = ß) in the principal 
axis system. 
For Valence Band 
< 
>■ D A 
1tJ\ 
2/n0 
fill 
D„ 
b 
< 
> 
2mo 
3 
2 
h273 
D1,, 
i 
< >· 
(4.5.12) 
2m0 
3 
2V3' 
Therefore, Pk, Qk, Rk, and 5* can be added to their corresponding strain counterparts 
Ρε, Qe, RE, and 5E, of which the explicit expressions are shown in (4.5.13) in Section 
4.5.2. The energy parameters ac, av, b, and d are called the deformation potentials for 
the valence bands and they are tabulated in Appendix C for a few important semicon-
ductors. The strained Hamiltonian has been used extensively in the study of the strain 
effects [26-38] on the band structures of semiconductors. 
4.5.2 
Band Structures Without the Spin-Orbit Split-Off 
Band Coupling 
Next we illustrate how the strain modifies the valence-band structures, including the 
band-edge energies and the effective masses, which are among the most important 
parameters characterizing any semiconductor materials. For most III-V semiconduc-
tors, the split-off bands are several hundred millielectron volts below the heavy-hole 
and light-hole bands. Because the energy range of interest is only several tens of 
millielectron volts, it is usual to assume that the split-off bands can be ignored. 
The band structures of the heavy-hole and light-hole bands are approximately 

136 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
described by the 4x4 Hamiltonian [37, 38] 
3 + ß 
-s+ 
R+ 
0 
-s 
P-Q 
0 
R+ 
R 
0 
P-Q 
s+ 
0 
" 
R 
S 
P-Q] 
M 
iy> 
II-
li-
H 
P = Pk + Pe 
Q = Qk + QE 
R = Rk + RB 
S = Sk+ SB 
η2Ύ\ 
Pk = ^r~ 
2/Mo 
R - - * L 
2wo 
{k2
x + 
k2
y+kf), 
-^J2{k2
x-ki) 
Sk = 
Vl(kx - i ky)kz 
mo 
rE = 
@ν\£χχ i &yy ~r &zz) 
R_V3t> 
ε 
Ί 
\ßxx 
^yy) 
ιο,Β^ 
tfrl 
2wio 
2kl) 
Qe 
(4.5.13a) 
(4.5.13b) 
(4.5.13c) 
(4.5.13d) 
The above Hamiltonian H is written for an arbitrary strain. For simplicity, we restrict 
ourselves to the special case of a biaxial strain, namely, 
(4.5.14) 
Thus 
R* 
0 
which essentially covers two of the most important strained systems: (i) a strained-
layer semiconductor pseudomorphically grown on a (OOl)-oriented substrate and 
(ii) a bulk semiconductor under an external uniaxial stress along the z-direction. 
For the case of the lattice-mismatched strain, we obtain 
Orr 
Sv 
a0-a 
a 
2C 12 
(4.5.15a) 
(4.5.15b) 
where a0 and a are the lattice constants of the substrate and the layer material, Fig. 4.7, 
and C\\ and C12 are the elastic stiffness constants. Equations (4.5.15a) and (4.5.15b) 
can be derived by using the fact that in the plane of the heteroj unction, the layered 

4.5 
STRAIN EFFECTS ON BAND STRUCTURES 
137 
(a) 
Unstrained 
O 
O 
· 
o 
o 
o 
4» 
O 
O 
i» 
< 
o 
< 
> 
o 
P 
IP 
t 
o 
(b) 
Strained (biaxial tension) 
tension 
< 
> 
Substrate 
<) 
O 
O 
IP 
IP 
IP 
IP 
IP 
IP 
4» 
<P 
O 
T U 
Figure 4.7 
An epilayer material with a lattice constant a to be grown on a substrate with a lattice constant 
OQ. (a) unstrained and (b) strained. 
material is strained such that the lattice constant along the plane of the layer is equal to 
a0. Therefore, ε^ 
(a0 — a) I a. Because the stress tensor is related to strain by 
the elastic stiffness tensor with elements Cy, 
TEC 
Tyy 
Tzz 
Txy 
Tyz 
Tzx 
CM 
Cn 
Cn 
0 
0 
0 
C,2 
C n 
Cl2 
0 
0 
0 
C,2 
Cn 
c„ 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
C44 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
C44 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
C44 
&XX 
Eyy 
ε^ 
0 
0 
0 
(4.5.16) 
We find Tq, = Tzy = τ^ = 0. There should also be no stress in the z-direction: 
0 = T^ = Ci2(exx + Byy) + Cns^. 
Therefore, εζ: 
2C 12 ε^. For the case of an external uniaxial stress T along the z 
axis, Tzz = T and τ„ = τνν = 0, we find 
Cj| + C\\C\2 ~ 2Ci-12 
C22 
(4.5.17) 
C n + C11C12 — 2C12 
The results and conclusions presented here can be generalized to other crystal 
orientations or stress directions. As an example, we discuss one of the most important 

138 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
systems: strained In^^Ga^As on InP. High-quality and highly strained samples of 
this system have already been grown and widely studied for optoelectronics appli-
cations. All of the material parameters used are listed in Appendix C on page 
802-804. The parameters for In^^Ga^As are taken as the linear interpolation of 
those of In As and GaAs, except that for the energy gap, /^(Ini-^Ga^As) = 
0.324 + OJx + OAx2. We have 
a(x) = «(In^Ga^As) = 5.6533x + 6.0584(1 - x) 
(4.5.18a) 
00 — o(x) 
a(x) 
a0 = 5.8688A. 
(4.5.18b) 
At x = 0.468 ~ 0.47, a(0.468) = a0 and the strain is zero. Ino.53Gao.47As is lattice 
matched to InP. When x > 0.468, the gallium mole fraction is increased; therefore, 
the lattice constant is decreased and the Ini_xGa^As will be under biaxial tension, 
Fig. 4.7. Here biaxial tension means that the lattice in the parallel (x-y) plane will 
experience a tensile strain with a simultaneous compressive strain along the growth 
(z) direction. On the other hand, if x < 0.468, we have a(x) > a0, and we will have 
the case of biaxial compression. 
At the zone center, k = 0, we have only PE and Qe appearing in the diagonal terms 
of the matrix (4.5.13) nonvanishing. Therefore, we obtain the band-edge energies of 
the heavy-hole and light-hole bands 
£tm(k = 0) = -PB -QE= 
αν(εχϊ + Byy + ezz) + -(ε« + s w - 2e^) 
(4.5.19a) 
£LH(k = 0) = - P . + β ε = «ν(ε« + Byy + ββ) --(e„ 
+ nyy- 2εα). 
(4.5.19b) 
b 
2< 
On the other hand, the conduction band edge energy of the electron is given by 
£c(k = 0) = E% + ac(£xc + Syy + εΏ). 
(4.5.20) 
Note that both the conduction and valence band energies are defined to be positive for 
the upward direction of the energy. The net energy transitions will be 
£c-HH(k = 0) = £g + α^ε^ + ε„ + εα) + PB + QB 
b 
2 
Eg + α(ε„ + eyy + εα) ~ - (ε„ + ε^ - Ιε^) 
(4.5.21 a) 
for the conduction to heavy-hole band, and 
£c-LH(k = 0) = £g + ac(e« + επ + ε 0) + Ρε - Qe 
Eg + flfe* + ε„ + εα) + -(ε„ + s w - 2ε^) 
(4.5.21b) 

4.5 
STRAIN EFFECTS ON BAND STRUCTURES 
139 
for the conduction to the light-hole band, where Eg is the band gap of the unstrained 
semiconductor, and 
a = ac-aw 
(4.5.22) 
is the hydrostatic deformation potential. Sometimes the hydrostatic and shear defor-
mation energies, SEhy and SEsh, are defined, respectively, as 
8Ehy = -aie^ + eyy + ε^) 
(4.5.23) 
and 
1 o 
* 
-SEsh = Qe = - -
8Esh = QS = --{BXX 
+ eyy - 2ßzz). 
(4.5.24) 
The effective band gaps are given by 
£C-HH =ES- 
5Ehy + - SEsh 
(4.5.25a) 
£C-LH = £g - 8Ehy - X- 8Esh. 
(4.5.25b) 
For the Hamiltonian in Eq. (4.5.13), the valence-band structure of a bulk semi-
conductor is determined by the algebraic equation 
det [Hij(k) - 8yE] = 0 
(4.5.26) 
where k is now interpreted as a real vector, and the envelope functions are simply 
taken as plane waves. For the 4x4 Hamiltonian, the solutions of Eq. (4.5.26) 
are simply 
£HH(k) = -Pe -Pk- 
sgn(ßE)^/(ß£ + Qkf + \Rk\2+\Sk\2 
(4.5.27a) 
£LH(k) = -Pe -Pk + sgn(QB)^/(QB + Qkf + |/?*|2+|S*|2 
(4.5.27b) 
for the heavy holes and light holes, respectively. Each of the solutions is doubly 
degenerate. Note that it is important to include the sign factor sgn(ße) (= +1 for 
QR > 0 and = -1 for QB < 0) in front of the square root, because QB can be either 
negative (compressive strain) or positive (tensile strain) whereas the square root is 
conventionally taken as positive. As k approaches zero, the band-edge energies 
of the heavy hole and light hole in (4.5.19) should be recovered. Note that for 

140 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
die unstrained case, 
E(k) = -Pk ± ^/|ßt| 2+|Ä t| 2+|S t 
= Ak2 ± JB2k4 
+ C2 (k2
x k] + k2
y k\ + k\ kA 
(4.5.27c) 
gives the heavy-hole and light-hole dispersion relations. 
The dispersion relations for the heavy-hole band EHH(K) and the light-hole band 
£LH(10 versus the crystal growth direction kz and the parallel direction kx can be 
obtained analytically from (4.5.27a) and (4.5.27b), respectively. Along die parallel 
plane, for example, the kx direction (ky = kz = 0), we have for Qe < 0 (compression) 
and kx is finite 
£ΗΗ(**) = 
-Pe 
n (4.5.27a) and 
£LH(*X) = -Ps 
-
ftJ\ 
2mo 
1 
f 
1 
\ 2 
/ 2 
\ 2 
T 1/ 2 
2mo kt-
Qe 
2 
\ 2 
h 72A. 
/ 2 
\ 2 
'ft "M 
2WQ 
2mt) 
1/2 
(4.5.28a) 
(4.5.28b) 
for the light hole from (4.5.27b). 
In the case of tension (β ε > 0), we have 
Emi(kx) 
ElMiK) = ~Pe 
Η2Ύ\ 
2WQ 
2m() 
Qe 
fill 
2mo * 
+3 W \ 2 
. 2m0 j 
kx 
ηΐ/2 
Qe + 
2 
\2 
/ 2 
\2 
1 '/ 2 
2m, o 
2/n0 
(4.5.29a) 
(4.5.29b) 
Again, at jfc, = 0, £ HH(0) + Ρε = - β ε < 0, and £LH(0) + Ρε = + β ε > 0, which 
agree with (4.5.19). Along the kz direction, we obtain for both compression and 
tension, 
Em(kz) = -Pe 
Ew(.kz) = -Pe 
W*-2**-fi· 
2mo ( r i - 2 % ) ^ + ß e. 
(4.5.30a) 
(4.5.30b) 

4.5 
STRAIN EFFECTS ON BAND STRUCTURES 
141 
The results of the valence-band structure for £HH and £LH versus kx and kz for both 
compression and tension are shown in Fig. 4.8, for Ga^In^^As grown on InP sub-
strate. We can see clearly that the heavy-hole band has a lighter effective mass 
than does the light-hole band in the kx direction near kx = 0 for the compression 
case (Qe < 0). The heavy hole still keeps its feature of a heavy effective mass 
along the kz direction, and it is above the light-hole band at k = 0 for the compression 
case. On the other hand, the light-hole band is above the heavy-hole band in the case 
of tension (x > 0.468). 
For a finite and fixed strain, the small-fc expansion of the above dispersion relation 
can be written as 
£HH(k) « -/>, - Qe 
7i)kf + (γ, - 2y2)k2
z] 
( * - 0 ) 
(4.5.31a) 
(a) 
Compression 
a(x) > a0 
(b) 
No strain 
"» 
"0 
(C) 
Tension 
a(x) < a„ 
α(χ)=αΛ 
r — i 
1 
p—ZL· 
1 
«0 
\-mSEhy] 
£gW-ÄEhv + i 
- 2 / 3 <5E, 
Eg(x)-SEhyC 
C.XH 
——"" " 
EM 
IL^JO.*. 
x< 0.468 
x = 0.468 
JC> 0.468 
Figure 4.8 The energy-band structure in the momentum space for a bulk Gajln] -jAs material under (a) 
biaxial compression, (b) lattice-matched condition, and (c) biaxial tension for different Ga mole fractions x. 
The heavy-hole band is above the light-hole band, and its effective mass in the transverse plane (the kx or ky 
direction) is lighter than that of the light-hole band in the compressive strain case in (a). The light-hole band 
shifts above the heavy-hole band in the case of tension in (c). (Reprinted with permission from [371 © 1991 
American Physical Society.) 

142 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
£LH(k) 
-Pe + Qs 
/ ,2 \ 
. 2wi o> 
I [(Ύι " Ji)^ + (7i + 2y2)k2
z] 
(k - 0) 
(4.5.31b) 
where the transverse wave vector has a magnitude k, = Jk2
x+k2
y. From (4.5.31), we 
immediately obtain the band-edge energies 
£HH(0) 
£LH(0) 
-PE ~ Qe 
-PE + QE 
(4.5.32a) 
(4.5.32b) 
and the effective masses parallel (|| or i) or perpendicular (_Lor z) to the x—y plane 
™hh 
mo 
mo 
1 
m\ 
J\ ~ 2Ύι 
1 
hh 
mo 
1 
J\ +Ύ2 
m (h 
1 
(4.5.33) 
γ, + 2γ2 
mo 
γ, - γ2 
These are the well-known results [26] when the coupling to the spin-orbit split-off 
band is neglected. 
4.5.3 
Band Structures of Strained Semiconductors with Spin-Orbit 
Split-Off Bands Coupling 
If the coupling with the spin-orbit split-off bands is taken into account [38], the 6 x 6 
Hamiltonian (4.3.14) with the additional strain terms defined in (4.5.13) has to be 
used. For the band edge at k = 0, the Hamiltonian H is simplified to 
= 0) = -
~PB + Qs 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
PE-QE 
0 
0 
-V2Qe 
0 
0 
0 
PE-QE 
0 
0 
V2QE 
0 
0 
0 
PE + QE 
0 
0 
0 
-V2QS 
0 
0 
Λ, + Δ 
0 
0 
0 
V2Qe 
0 
0 
PE+A 
(4.5.34) 
Clearly, the heavy-hole bands are decoupled from the rest of bands, whereas the light-
hole bands (||, +i)) are coupled with the split-off bands (||, ij^through the 
strain-dependent off-diagonal terms. This coupling would be totally unaccounted for 
in the 4x4 approximation. For Ini xGaxAs on InP, the transition energies from the 
heavy-hole and the light-hole bands to the conduction band with and without the 
SO coupling are shown [38] in Fig. 4.9. The comparison evidently demonstrates 
how important it is to include the spin-orbit split-off bands, because the error in 

4.5 
STRAIN EFFECTS ON BAND STRUCTURES 
143 
1 6 0 0 
1400 " 
> 
1200 h 
gB 1000 h 
a 
<D c o 
800 
c 
6 0 0 
400 
200 
Eg(GaAs)j, 
unstrained 
C-HH 
C-LH 
C-LH (SO) 
-
; Cg(lnAs) 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
x 
Figure 4.9 The energy band gap of a bulk In^Ga^As versus the Ga mole fraction x. The dotted-dashed 
curve: unstrained Ιηι-^Ga^As; the solid curves: transition energies from the conduction band (C) to the 
heavy-hole (HH) and light-hole (LH) bands for a bulk Inj_j.Gaj.As pseudomorphically grown on InP; 
the dashed curve: the conduction to light-hole transition energy calculated without the spin-orbit (SO) 
split-off band coupling. (Reprinted with permission from [381 © 1992 American Physical Society.) 
the light-hole energies could be as large as several tens of millielectron volts. 
The error is comparable with the heavy-hole and light-hole energy splits and is 
certainly too large to be ignored. As a consequence of the coupling, the eigenvectors 
corresponding to the energy £(0) (= £LH(0) or £SO(0)), determined by 
±y/2Q. 
±V2QE 
-PE-A 
^3/2,11/21 
^3/2,±l/2 
^1/2, ±1/2 
£(0) 
^3/2, ±1/2 
P\/2,±\/2 
+ \F 1/2, ± 1/21 
(4.5.35a) 
(4.5.35b) 
are not a pure light-hole state or a pure split-off state, but an admixture of the light-
hole state and the split-off state. The band-edge energies can be readily solved from 
(4.5.34) or (4.5.35a), 
£HH(0) = -Pe 
-
£LH(0) = -Pe 
+ 
(QE - Δ + Λ/ Δ2 + 2Δβε + 9Ql 
(4.5.36a) 
(4.5.36b) 
£so(0) = -Pe + UQ. ~ Δ - Λ/Δ2 + 2AQe + 9(A. 
(4.5.36c) 

144 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
If the split-off bands are included in the 6x6 Hamiltonian, the E-k relation deter-
mined by (4.5.26) becomes a sixth-order polynomial of E, which apparently can be 
decomposed into two identical cubic polynomials because of the symmetry property 
of the Hamiltonian. However, an attempt to expand and factor directly the determi-
nantal equation is tedious. The details are given in Ref. 38. 
4.6 
ELECTRONIC STATES IN AN ARBITRARY 
ONE-DIMENSIONAL POTENTIAL 
In this section, we show how the Schrödinger equation for a one-dimensional poten-
tial profile with an arbitrary shape can be solved using a propagation-matrix approach, 
which is similar to that used in electromagnetic wave reflection or guidance in a 
multilayered medium [39,40]. An arbitrary profile, V(z), can always be approximated 
by a piecewise step profile as shown in Fig. 4.10 as long as the original potential 
profile does not have singularities. 
4.6.1 
Derivation of the Propagation Matrix Equation and Its 
Solution for the Eigenvalues 
For a Schrödinger equation of the form 
h d 
1 d 
2 dzm(z)dz 
we find that in the region I, ze -1 < z < Ze. 
ψ(ζ) + ν(ζ)ψ(ζ) = Εψ(ζ) 
2mg dz2 <Mz) + νιΨιϋζ) = Εψ((ζ) 
(4.6.1) 
(4.6.2) 
-'η 
Vx 
1 * * 1 * 
v2 
* * 2 > v3 
A, 
Bt 
i 
V 4 
vl 
* - / ! < * 
AM 
Bt+\ 
vN 
* 
*■ 
vN+1 
zo 
Z3 
Z4 
Z<_i 
Z( 
ZM 
ΖΛΓ_Ι 
ZN 
Figure 4.10 
An arbitrary potential profile is subdivided into a stepwise potential. 

4.6 ELECTRONIC STATES IN AN ARBITRARY ONE-DIMENSIONAL POTENTIAL 
145 
where V(z) = V( and m{z) = me in region £. The solution can be written in the form 
Ψι(ζ) = Aeeikt(z-Z,) + Bie-ikl(z-u) 
for ze-\ < z < Ze 
(4.6.3) 
where the wavenumber in region I is 
h 
ilmt 
h 
(4.6.4) 
Matching the boundary conditions in which ψ(ζ) and {\/ιη{ζ))άφ{ζ)/άζ are conti-
nuous at z = Ze, we find 
Ae+Be= 
AMeik"lUt-Zn,) 
+ 
Be+ie-iklu(z'-zi+' 
(4.6.5a) 
— (At - Be) = ^[Ae+ieik'"(zt-zt") 
- ÄM.ie~*i,,fa~*,,)]· 
(4.6.5b) 
me 
me+i 
Define 
ea+\) 
meke •+\ 
me+\ke 
(4.6.6) 
and ze+\ — ze = he+\ is the thickness of the region I + 1. 
We can express Al+\ and Be+\ in terms of Ae and Be in a matrix form 
where we have defined a forward-propagation matrix 
Ae+\ 
Be+\ 
Ae 
Be 
1 
?(t+i)e 
(1 + P(e+myk"l>"" 
(1 - J W ) « * " * " ' 
(1 - Ρ(/+ιχ)β-*"'*"' 
(1 + Λ Μ - Ι Χ ) * - * " * " ' 
The relation can propagate from layer to layer 
F(N+iyv FiV(w-i) 
Λν+ι 
MO Ao 
Bo 
(4.6.7a) 
(4.6.7b) 
(4.6.8) 
For bound state solutions, we have E < V0 and VN+l. Therefore, 
&o = 'αο 
ao = \ -^τ(γο 
-E) 
K/V+l — ί«Λί+1 
O/V+l 
2mN+i 
I—2~(VV+i 
-E). 
(4.6.9a) 
(4.6.9b) 
The solutions in region 0 and region N + 1 must be decaying solutions of the forms 
ψ0(ζ) = Β0β+αο(ζ-Ζο) 
(4.6.10a) 

146 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
and 
ΦΝ+ΛΖ) - 
AN+ie -<*«+l(2-Z«n) 
(4.6.10b) 
that is, A0 = 0 and BN+l = 0. Note the last position ZN+\ is introduced for the use of 
the propagation matrix and it is arbitrary. 
We write the product of the matrices 
"(N+\)N ■ 
'10 
/i i 
fn 
fn 
fii 
and, therefore, 
For nontrivial solutions, we must have the eigenequation satisfied, 
fn(E) = 0 
AN+\ 
0 
= 
/n 
fn 
fix 
hi 
' 0 " 
(4.6.11) 
(4.6.12) 
(4.6.13) 
as B0 cannot be zero (otherwise, all field amplitudes are zero). Solving the eigenequa-
tion (4.6.13), we obtain the eigenvalues E. In practice, fii(E) is a complex function 
and the eigenvalues, E, are real. Therefore, a convenient method to find the eigen-
values is to search for the minima of |/22(£)| (or logio |/22(£)|) m the range of 
energy given by the lowest and highest energies of the potential profile V(z). 
4.6.2 Self-Consistent Solution for a Modulation-Doped Quantum Well 
Consider a quantum-well structure with a built-in potential 
w 
v£(z) 
(AE, 
I 0 
|z| > Av/2 
\z\ < 
K/2 
Δ£ ν 
\ζ\ > Lw/2 
0 
\z\ < U / 2 
and a doping profile ND(z) and NA(z). The Schrödinger equation 
f{z) = £e(0)/(Z> 
2w* dz2 
+h2 d2 
2m*hdz2' 
Ve(z) 
Vh(z) g(z) = £h(0) g(z) 
(4.6.14a) 
(4.6.14b) 
(4.6.15a) 
(4.6.15b) 

4.6 ELECTRONIC STATES IN AN ARBITRARY ONE-DIMENSIONAL POTENTIAL 
147 
where 
Ve(z) = V&(z) + \e\Fz + Vu(z) 
(4.6.16a) 
Vh(z) = Vb
hj(z) + \e\Fz + VH(z). 
(4.6.16b) 
And the Hartree potential energy VH(Z) is related to the electrostatic potential φ(ζ) 
Vu(z) =-\β\φ(ζ). 
(4.6.17) 
Note that we define Vbi(z) as in (4.6.14b) such that all energies are measured upward. 
Therefore, the same expressions for the field-induced potential and the Hartree poten-
tial are used in (4.6.16a) and (4.6.16b) without any sign change. Here F is the exter-
nally applied field (= 0 here), φ(ζ) is the electrostatic potential and it satisfies Gauss's 
law or Poisson's equation 
V · (εΕ) = p(z). 
(4.6.18) 
For a one-dimensional problem, we have the electric field 
E = z E(z) 
and E(z) =--£. 
(4.6.19) 
oz 
Therefore, 
-[εΕ(ζ)] 
= ftz) 
(4.6.20) 
oz 
' e - ^ ) = - p ( z ) . 
(4.6.21) 
or 
dz\ 
dzj 
The charge distribution is given by 
piz) = \e\[p(z) - n(z) + N+(z) - N^(z)] 
(4.6.22) 
where N£(z) and N^(z) are the ionized donor and acceptor concentrations, respect-
ively. The electron and hole concentrations, n(z) and p(z), are related to the wave 
functions of the nth conduction subband and the /nth valence subband by 
« ω = Σ ΐ / η ω | 2 Μ , 8 
(4.6.23a) 
n 
P(z) = Σ 
la-ωΐ 2^« 
(4.6.23b) 

148 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where the sums over n and m are only over the (lowest few) occupied subbands. Here 
the surface electron concentration in the nth conduction subband is 
j + 
e(Fc-Een(0))/kBT 
(4.6.24a) 
The surface hole concentration in the mth valence subband is 
ksTm* 
7Γ« 
ίΐη 
] _|_ 
/E^W-F^/ICBT 
(4.6.24b) 
where Fc = Fv = EF in a modulation-doped sample without any external injection of 
carriers. The parabolic energy dispersion relations 
Een{kt) = Een(0) 
Ehm(kt) = Ehm(0) 
tik\ 
2m* 
tikf 
2mt 
(4.6.25a) 
(4.6.25b) 
have been used in the summation over the two-dimensional wave vector k in the x—y 
plane. The Fermi level is obtained from the charge neutrality condition: 
L/2 
-L/2 
(4.6.26a) 
or 
N+LD + Σρ™= 
NÄL* + ΣΝ™-
(4.6.26b) 
4.6.3 yV-type Modulation-Doped Quantum Well 
For an n-type modulation-doped quantum well, Fig. 4.11, we have ΝΑ — 0 
and p(z) ~ 0. We only have to solve for the electron wave function f(z) and the 
electrostatic potential φ{ζ) self-consistently. The electric field E(z) is obtained by 
integration 
z 
E(z)=\ 
| 
fKz')dz' + E(-L/2). 
(4.6.27) 
-L/2 

4.6 
ELECTRONIC STATES IN AN ARBITRARY ONE-DIMENSIONAL POTENTIAL 
149 
(a) 
Vgife) 
©© 
ΘΘ 
g© 
-L 
2 
i 
; -
t 
ΔΕο 
♦ 
us. 
2 
©© 
Θ© 
©©, 
7^ 
2 
(b) 
(c) 
+\e\NO 
P(z) 
+\e\ND 
<-> 
2 \ 0 f 
V—^ 
-M m\2N. 
£c(z) = V(z) = VH(z) + V&fe) 
<-> 
2 
- > ■ z 
Λζ) 
ΔΕ„ 
Figure 4.11 (a) The built-in potential, (b) the charge density, and (c) the screened electron potential 
energy profile of an n-type modulation doped quantum well. 
For a symmetrically doped quantum well without any external bias, we have 
E(— L/2) = 0 by a symmetry consideration. Because VH(z) = — \ε\φ{ζ), we have 
dVH(z) 
dz 
= +\e\E(z) 
(4.6.28a) 
or 
V»(z) = \e\ 
E(z')dz' + VH(0). 
(4.6.28b) 
-L/2 
Here VH(0) can be chosen to be zero as it is only a reference potential energy. 
Example We consider an n-type modulation-doped quantum well with doping 
widths L D/2= 10Ä at both ends (see Fig. 4.11), and ND = 4xl0 1 8cm 
3 in a 
GaAs/Alo.3Gao.7As quantum-well structure. The surface carrier concentration in a 

150 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
(a) 300 
250 
£· 
a 2oo 
jg 
150 
I 
100 
j? 
50 
c 
ω 
o 
- 5 0 
-100 
- 5 0 
0 
50 
100 
Position (Ä) 
(b) 
0.15 
0.10 
I 
0.05 
§ 
0.00 
ä 
-0.05 
-0.10 
-0.15 
-100 
- 5 0 
0 
50 
100 
Position (Ä) 
Figure 4.12 (a) Self-consistent potential profile (solid curve) Ve(z) and the built-in potential profile 
(dashed) V£(z) for a GaAs/Alo.^Gao.vAs quantum well with modulation dopings within 10 A at both 
ends of the profile - 100 Ä < z < - 9 0 Ä and 90 Ä < z < 100 Ä. The two solid horizontal lines represent 
the energy levels E, and E2 of the self-consistent potential, (b) The corresponding wave functions f,(z) and 
/2(z) of the self-consistent potential in (a). 
period is A^LD = 8 x 1011 cm 2. The conduction band edge discontinuity A.EC is 
251 meV and the built-in potential profile V£(z) is shown as the dashed line in 
Fig. 4.12a. The final conduction band potential profile Ve(z) = νξ^ζ) + VH(Z) after 
solving the Schrödinger equation and the Poisson's equation self-consistently is 
shown as the solid curves together with the corresponding eigenenergies of the 
lowest two states, Ελ and E2, plotted as two horizontal solid lines. The wave functions 
fi(z) and/2(z) for the self-consistent potential Ve(z) are plotted in Fig. 4.12b. We can 
see that the effects of the charge distribution with positively ionized donors at the two 
ends and negative electrons in the wells create a net electric field pointing inward 
toward the center of the quantum well. Therefore, the band bending is curved 
upward as the slope of the potential energy profile gives the electric field and its direc-
tion. More examples of the modulation-doped potentials with an externally applied 
electric field F and their applications to intersubband photodetectors and resonant 
tunneling diodes can be found in Refs. 41^13. 
. . . . 
--STTT" 
-
r 
-
-
. . . . 
E,=154 
me V 
ΕΛ = 
69.5ΏΜ\ 
I 
. J ^ S ^ 
-: 
-
-
: 
• 
.
.
.
. 
1 
.
.
.
. 
1 
.
.
.
. 
· 

4.6 ELECTRONIC STATES IN AN ARBITRARY ONE-DIMENSIONAL POTENTIAL 
151 
(a) 
(b) 
(C) 
2 
Vfc(z) 
-eiVA 
-K 
i-w 
ΘΘ 
ΘΘ 
ΘΘ 
1 
t 
ΔΕν 
1 
ΘΟ 
ΘΘ 
θ θ 
-eAf. 
£ νω = V&z) 
+ VH(z) 
* ( ζ ) 
^ ~ - 
£ν(ζ) 
Figure 4.13 
Same as Fig. 4.11 except for p-type. 
4.6.4 P-type Modulation-Doped Quantum Well 
For the hole distribution, Fig. 4.13, it is also possible to take into consideration both 
the heavy-hole and the light-hole dispersion relations 
P(z)= 
Σ 
\gm(z)\2Pm 
(4.6.29a) 
m=ü\, hh 
kBT 
ms — 
2 
irfi 
m—hh 
^E
l n(
1 + e ( £ t a"
£ f ) A B r) 
m=fli 
(4.6.29b) 
4.6.5 
Populations by Both Electrons and Holes 
In a laser structure, both electrons and holes are injected by an external electric 
or optical pumping. Two quasi-Fermi levels, Fc and Fv, can be used to describe 

152 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
n(z) and p(z), respectively. One usually uses the injection current density to find 
Ns, then 
n 
is used to determine Fc. The charge neutrality condition 
Ps + lN+(z)dz = NS+ 
\N^(z)dz 
is used to determine Ps. Then Fv is determined from 
(4.6.30) 
(4.6.31) 
(4.6.32) 
4.7 
KRONIG-PENNEY MODEL FOR A SUPERLATTICE 
In this section, we apply the propagation matrix approach discussed in Section 4.6 to 
study a one-dimensional periodic potential problem [44]. The results are the Kronig-
Penney model for a superlattice structure [45-48]. 
The superlattice structure is shown in Fig. 4.14. Each period (or cell) consists 
of one barrier region with a width b and a well region with a width w. The period 
is L = b + w. The potential within a period 0 < z < L is given by 
V(z) 
(Vo, 
0 
\ 0 , 
b 
<z<b 
<z<b+w 
and V(z + nL) = V(z) for any integer n. 
(4.7.1) 
V(z) 
"<b 
0 •*b*-*w>* 
Dx 
B, 
B2 
V0 
V0 
-«Period 1-
L = w + b 
2L 
-•«-Period 2-> 
> z 
3L 
Figure 4.14 
A periodic potential (Kronig-Penney model) consists of one barrier region with a thickness 
b and a quantum-well region with a width w. The period is L = w + b. 

4.7 
KRONIG-PENNEY MODEL FOR A SUPERLATTICE 
153 
4.7.1 
Derivation of the Propagation Matrix 
The wave function in the period n is given by the plane wave solution of the wave 
equation 
Aneik(z-nL) 
+ 
gne-ik(z-nL) 
nL — w < z < nL 
Ψη(ζ) 
Cneih[z-b-(n-\)L] 
+ 
Dne-ikb[z-b-(n-\)L] 
(n - l)L < Z < (ll - 1)L + b 
(4.7.2) 
2m 
h 
V Ä 
V ft 
More specifically, we write 
2-^(E-Vo). 
(4.7.3) 
A0 eikz + B0 e~ikz 
0(Z) = { C\ eiMz-b) + Di «-*»<*-*) 
Ax e
ik^L) 
+Bi 
e~ik^b) 
-w<z<0 
0<z<b 
b<z<L. 
(4.7.4) 
Using the boundary conditions in which ψ(ζ) and (l/m(z))(di[i/dz) are continuous at 
z = 0, we find the matrix equation for the coefficients of the wave functions in region 
0 and the barrier b 
Dx 
■b0 A0 
Bo 
where 
I'M) 
60 
(1+/>«,)<** 
(l-P^e^ 
(\-Pbo)e-ik"b 
(\+Pb0)e-ik*b 
m\,k 
mho 
(4.7.5a) 
(4.7.5b) 
(4.7.5c) 
Similarly, the boundary conditions at z = b give the matrix equation for region 1 and 
the barrier b 
Αχ 
B\ 
F,„ 
1 
'lb 
C, 
Dx 
(1 + Pib)eikw 
(1 - Pib)eikw 
(l-Pib)e-ikw 
(\+Pib)e-ikw 
where 
Define 
mkh 
lb 
mbk 
P = Plb = mkh/(mbk) = 
l/PM. 
(4.7.6a) 
(4.7.6b) 
(4.7.6c) 
(4.7.7) 

154 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
We have the transition matrix for one period consisting of one well and one barrier 
A, 
= T 
where 
T = FlbFbo 
and the matrix elements are given by 
A0 
Bo 
in 
hi 
h\ 
hi 
in =e' ikw cosk\,b + - / ' + - ) sink^b 
hi = e' ,ikw ■ I p 
h\ = e 
hi = e 
-ikw 
-ikw 
i 
sin kbb 
Γ 
sin ^b^ 
cos k\,b — - ( P + — ) sin kbb 
Note that the determinant of the T matrix is unity 
det|T] = 1. 
If we continue the relation (4.7.8a) to the nth period, we find 
B„ 
<yrt A0 
Bo 
(4.7.8a) 
(4.7.8b) 
(4.7.8c) 
(4.7.9) 
(4.7.10) 
4.7.2 Solutions for the Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors 
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the 2 x 2 matrix T are solutions of the determi-
nantal equation 
(4.7.11) 
= 0. 
(4.7.12) 
We obtain a second-order polynomial equation for the eigenvalue t 
i2 — (in +i22)i + detT = 0. 
(4.7.13) 
T 
Άο 
ßo. 
det 
= t 
Άο 
ßo. 
t\\ — t 
t\2 
h\ 
hi -1 

4.7 
KRONIG-PENNEY MODEL FOR A SUPERLATTICE 
155 
Because det |T| = 1, we obtain two roots. 
m ± vm 
'ill +^22^ 
-1. 
(4.7.14) 
If |(in + i22)/2| > 1, t+ and i_ are real and either lim \f+ I —> oo or lim |rt_ I —> oo. 
In that case, the condition in which the wave function (i.e., \An\ and \Bn\) must remain 
finite as n —> +oo is violated. Hence, the eigenvalue £ must satisfy the condition that 
t\ i + h2 
cos fcw cos k\,b — - ( /* Λ— ) sin kw sin k^b < 1. 
(4.7.15) 
The two eigenvalues can be written in the forms 
t+=eiqL 
and 
t_ = e - ' ^ 
(4.7.16) 
as |r+| = 1 and ί+ί_ = 1. That is, the determinantal equation can be written as 
or 
and 
(t - t+){t - f_) = 0 
t+ + t- — t\\ + ?22 
t+t- =det|T| = 1. 
We conclude that the eigenequation is 
cos qL = cos kw cos k\,b — — I P H— I sin kw sin £b£ 
with the two eigenvectors 
(4.7.17a) 
(4.7.17b) 
(4.7.17c) 
(4.7.18) 
Bt 
and 
Bn 
corresponding to eigenvalues, e'qL and e ,qL, respectively. The eigenfunctions can be 
obtained from (i) the ratio Aj/fiJ following the eigenequation (4.7.11) and the nor-
L 
malization condition J" \ψ(ζ)\ dz~ 1, 
o 
?12 
SL - t22 
A + 
B+ 
e'iL-tu\ 
t2\ 
(4.7.19) 
and (ii) the ratio A0 /B0 for exp(— iqL) with q —► —q and the normalization condition. 

156 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
For bound state solutions, E < V0, kb is purely imaginary 
kb = iab, 
ab = \ —,-(Vo - E). 
V % 
(4.7.20) 
The determinantal equation is given by 
cos qL = cos kw cosh abb + — [ η 
1 sin kw sinh abb 
2 \ 
Vj 
(4.7.21) 
where η is defined in the following equation when P is purely imaginary 
m^b _ .mab _ . 
mbk 
mbk 
(4.7.22) 
In summary, the Kronig-Penney model for a superlattice can be obtained from 
solving the determinantal equation 
cos qL =f(E) 
where the eigenequation is defined as 
(4.7.23a) 
f(E) = < 
cos kw cosh abb + -[ η 
1 sin kw sinh abb 
0 < E < Vo 
2 V 
VJ 
cos kw cos kbb — — I P + — 1 sin kw sin kbb 
VQ < E. 
(4.7.23b) 
3 
e 
o 
3 
1 
3 
cr 
S o 
u 
so 
a -i 
-2 -
•1 
w=100A: 
:l 
b = 20Ä " 
; 
; 
' ■■■■' ■· ■■· 
I . . . . 
i 
i 
; 
-3 
0 
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 
Energy (meV) 
Figure 4.15 
A plot of the eigenequation/(£) (=cos qL) from Eq. (4.7.23b) versus the energy E. Only the 
miniband ranges such that — 1 </(£) < 1 are acceptable solutions. The plot is for the conduction mini-
bands of a GaAs/Al0 3Gao.7As superlattice with a well width w = 100 A and a barrier width b = 20 A. 
The barrier height is 250.6 meV. 

4.7 
KRONIG-PENNEY MODEL FOR A SUPERLATTICE 
157 
(a) 500 
400 
> 
| 
300 
I? 200 
100 
0 
c 
w 
V " 
: 
N. 
- C3 
^~* 
: C2 
JcT~——~-
| I H I | M I I | ' < < T f « 
* « r» « *-■-
-
-j 
■; 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Barrier width (A) 
(b) loo 
> 
1 
1) 
c 
ω 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Barrier width (A) 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Barrier width (A) 
70 
80 
70 
80 
Figure 4.16 The minibands of a GaAs/Alo.3Gao.7As superlattice with a well width w = 100 A are 
plotted versus the barrier width b. We show (a) the conduction minibands, (b) the heavy-hole mimbands, 
and (c) the light-hole minibands. 
A method to find the solution E is to plot/(£) versus E > 0. The region of £ such that 
the condition \f(E)\ < 1 is satisfied will be acceptable. The quantum number q is 
obtained from 
qL = cos 
/ ( £ ) 
(4.7.24) 

158 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where f(E) is real. For a given E in the acceptable region (or called miniband), the 
solution q is used to find the eigenfunction from the ratio Aj/ßJ (or AQ /BQ) and 
the normalization condition of the wave function. 
Example of a GaAs/ Al0 jGao^As Superlattice We consider a GaAs/ Al^Ga! xAs 
superlattice with x = 0.3, a well width w = 100 A, and the barrier width b = 20 A. 
The barrier height V0 = 0.2506 eV is obtained from the conduction band discontinu-
ity V0 = A£c = 0.67 AEg(x), AEg(x) = 1.247* (eV). We see in Fig. 4.15 that there are 
two minibands corresponding to the bound states (E < V0) of the superlattice with 
\f(E)\ < 1- The vertical axis is f(E), and the horizontal axis is the electron energy 
E in millielectron volts. Because cosh abb > 1 at kw = Νπ, where N is an integer, 
we obtain f(E) = cosh abb > 1 at k = Νπ/w. Therefore, k = Νπ/w always occurs 
either in the forbidden miniband gap or at the edge of the miniband. 
In Fig. 4.16(a), we plot the energy spectrum for the electron minibands for a super-
lattice with a well width w = 100 A and the barrier width b varying from 1A to 80 A. 
We see that the width of the miniband energy decreases as the barrier width is 
increased because the coupling among wells becomes weaker for a thicker barrier. 
The heavy-hole and light-hole minibands for the same GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As superlat-
tice are shown in Fig. 4.16(b) and Fig. 4.16(c), respectively. We use ΔΕν = 0.33 AEg, 
and mlh = mo/(y, - 2y2), m^, = wo/(y, + 2y2), where y, = 6.85, and y2 = 2.10 
for GaAs, yi = 3.45, and y2 = 0.68 for AlAs. For ΑΙ,-Gai -xAs, we use yi(x) = 
3.45A: + 6.85(1 — x) and y2(x) = 0.68JC + 2.10(1 — x). More discussions on semi-
conductor superlattices using the Kronig-Penny model can be found in Refs. 44-50. 
The above formulation can be extended to any periodic potential with each period 
consisting of an arbitrary profile. The procedure is to discretize each period with 
the periodic boundary condition at the two ends and solve the problem using the 
finite difference method or the propagation matrix method. 
4.8 BAND STRUCTURES OF SEMICONDUCTOR 
QUANTUM WELLS 
In Section 4.4, we have discussed the effective mass theory for a single band and 
degenerate bands. In this section, we study the calculation of the band structures of 
semiconductor quantum wells. Many papers [51-67] on the recent development of 
the effective mass theory or the k · p theory for quantum-well structures have been 
published. Theoretical methods such as the tight-binding [68] and the bond-orbital 
models [69, 70] have also been introduced. Here we focus on the k · p method of 
the Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian together with the strain terms of Pikus and Bir, 
as discussed in Sections 4.4 and 4.5. 
4.8.1 
Conduction Band 
The effective mass theory for the conduction band is obtained from the disper-
sion relation 

4.8 
BAND STRUCTURES OF SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM WELLS 
159 
where the effective mass of the electron in the conduction band is m* = ra£ in the 
barrier region and m* = rri^ in the quantum well. In the presence of the quantum-
well potential, 
V(z) 
V„(=A£c) 
\z\>U/2 
0 
\z\ < K/2 
(4.8.2) 
where the energies are all measured from the conduction-band edge. The effective 
mass Eq. (4.4.5) for a single band is 
h2 d 
1 d 
h2 
2dzm{z)dz 
2m(z) 
V(z) φ(τ) = Εφ{Γ) 
(4.8.3) 
where 
1 d 
m(z) dz appears inside d/dz to ensure that the probability current density 
iziz) ■ m(z) 
is continuous at the heterojunction. 
In general, the wave function ψ (r) can be written in the form 
„*,.r 
φ(τ) 
VÄ 
Ψ(ζ) 
(4.8.4) 
and 
~2~d~z 
i a 
m(z) dz Ψ(ζ) + V(z) ψ(ζ) = 
E{kt) 
tik] 
2m(z) 
\Ψ(ζ). 
(4.8.5) 
The eigenvalue and the eigenfunction are obtained from the above equation, follow-
ing the procedures discussed in Chapter 3. Here, we ignore the kt dependence of ψ(ζ). 
Equation (4.8.5) is usually solved at k, = 0 for the nth subband energy £„(0) with a 
wavefunction ψ(ζ) =/„(z). Then we have En(k,) = En(0) 
h2k* 
2m* 
4.8.2 
Valence Band 
Band-Edge Energy 
For a given quantum-well potential, 
Vh(z) 
0 
|z| < W 2 
-Δ£ ν 
|ζ| > Lw/2 
(4.8.6) 

160 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
let us find the band-edge energy at kf = 0 first. The Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian 
(4.3.14) or (4.5.13) is diagonal for kx = ky = 0 
Em(kz) = 
-^{yx-2y2)% 
Ew(kz)=--—(y,+272)k2
z. 
2m0 
Define 
(4.8.7a) 
(4.8.7b) 
m0 
«hh 
la> 
J\ ~ 2Ύ2 
mo 
J\ + 2γ2' 
(4.8.8a) 
(4.8.8b) 
Because the parameters yx and y2 in the well are different from those in the barrier 
regions, we solve 
h d 
1 d 
2 dzm\m)dz 
Vh(z) g(.m)(z) = Eg(m){z) 
(4.8.9) 
where (m) = (hhm) or (ihrti). Therefore, the band-edge energies for the hhm or ihm 
subbands can all be found from the equation identical to that for the parabolic band 
model. We only have to use the appropriate effective masses (4.8.8a) and (4.8.8b) in 
the corresponding regions. 
Example 
As an example, we consider a GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As quantum well as 
shown in Fig. 4.17a. The energies for the electron subbands, Fig. 4.17b, and for 
the heavy-hole and light-hole subbands, Fig. 4.17c, are plotted versus the well 
width L^. We can see that the magnitude of all energy levels decrease with an increas-
ing well width. 
Valence Subbands Dispersion Relations The effective mass equation for four 
degenerate valence bands (two heavy-hole and two light-hole bands) follows Eq. 
(4.4.11) for a quantum-well potential Vh(z) given by (4.8.6) 
H LK 
K-xi 
^ ν » 
^ζ 
-<|;) + vh(z)i • 
[ F il 
F2 
F3 
F4 
= E 
[Fil 
F2 
Fi 
Fi 
(4.8.10) 

4.8 
BAND STRUCTURES OF SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM WELLS 
161 
(a) 
"h, 
mb 
£ C 2 -
ECi-
T 
AEC 
I 
EM 
2 
£HH1" 
£LH1 
K 
y o 
■K-
AEV 
■- > z 
ALGaj.jAs 
GaAs 
Al^Ga^^As 
(b) 
£ 
§ 
3 
(c) 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
0 
-20 
' \ 
■ 
\ 
; 
7 
. 
. 
1 
. 
. 
cüN 
. 
. 
1 
. 
C 3 ^ 
C ^ 
• 
■ 
C5 
: 
s; 
50 
100 
150 
Well width (A) 
200 
50 
100 
150 
Well width (Ä) 
200 
Figure 4.17 
(a) Quantum-well profiles for the conduction and valence bands of a GaAs/ALGa] _^As 
system, (b) Conduction subband energies, Ecl, EC2,..., 
and (c) valence subband energies £HHI> 
EHH2, 
and £LHi, ELH2 · ■ · versus the well width L„. 

162 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
,LK 
where H 
is from the first 4 x 4 portion of (4.3.14) or (4.5.13), and the envelope 
functions F\, F2, F3, and F4 can be written in the vector form 
eikx+ikyy 
F k(r) 
^i 
g3ß(kx, ky, z) 
F2 
= 
g\/i(kx, 
ky, z) 
F?, 
g-i/2(kx, 
ky, z) 
F4\ 
[g-3/2(kx, ky, z) 
The wavefunction in component form is expressed as 
VÄ · 
<Ak(r) = F, 
3 3 
2' 2 + F2 
3 1 
2 ' 2 + F3 
3 
1 
2' ~2 
eikxx+ik,y 
^ ^ 
/- 
l^gv(kx,ky,z) ;>v 
where v = 3/2, 1/2, - 1 / 2 , and - 3 / 2 . Denote 
k, = xkx + yky. 
We write 
H L K|k„ kz 
'dz 
Vh(z)l 
= ^(k,) 
g 3/ 2(k„ z) 
gl/2(kt, Z) 
g-\/2(k„ z) 
_£-3/2(k„Z) 
g3/2(kr, z) 
gi / 2(k„ z) 
g_i / 2(k (, z) 
g_3/2(k„z)_ 
(4.8.11) 
(4.8.12) 
(4.8.13) 
(4.8.14) 
Theoretically, a model for a quantum well with infinite barriers has been used, and 
many of the results can be expressed in analytical forms [60, 63, 64, 71]. 
4.8.3 Direct Experimental Measurements of the Subband Dispersions 
Experimentally, low-temperature magnetoluminescent measurement [72], resonant 
magnetotunneling spectroscopy [73], and photoluminescent measurements of hot 
electrons recombining at neutral acceptors [74, 75] have been used to map out the 
hole subband dispersion curves. In Fig. 4.18, we show the experimental results 
(data points) of Ref. 75 compared with the theoretical calculations (solid curves 
[100] direction and dashed curves [110] direction). The well width L^,, the aluminum 
mole fraction x in the barriers, and thep-type doping concentration NA in the wells are 
(a) K = 33 A, x = 0.325, NA = 101* 
75 A, JC = 0.32, NA ■■ 
cm 3, (c) Lv 
cnT3; (b) K = 51 A, x = 0.315, NA = 1018 
2 x 1018 cm 3; and (d) L„ = 98 A, x = 0.38, 
WA 
3 x 10 7 cm ". Each well is Be-doped in the central 10 A except for the 98 A 
wells (doped in the center 35 A) at the above-indicated concentration NA. It is 

4.8 
BAND STRUCTURES OF SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM WELLS 
163 
(a) -40 
> 
E 
>. 
c 
Ϊ (c) 
0 
o 
0.04 
0.12 
0.16 
0 
0.04 
Wave vector {π/α, a = 5.65 A) 
0.12 
0.16 
Figure 4.18 
Experimental data (dots) and theoretical calculations (solid curves: wave vector along [100] 
direction; dashed curves: wave vector along f 1101 direction) for the hole subband energies of GaAs/ 
AljXJai-jAs quantum wells for (a) 33 A quantum wells with x = 0.325 in the barriers, (b) 51 Ä quantum 
wells with x = 0.315 in the barriers, (c) 75 A quantum wells with x = 0.32, and (d) 98 Ä quantum wells 
with x = 0.38. The horizontal axis is the wave vector normalized by π/α, where a = 5.65 A is the lattice 
constant of GaAs. (Reprinted with permission from [75] © 1994 Elsevier: Surface Science.) 
noted that these nonparabolic subband dispersion curves exhibit the valence band 
mixing behavior in quantum wells. 
We can see that the coupling between the heavy-hole HH1 and the light LH1 sub-
bands leads to warping (or nonparabolicity) of the band structure. These valence band 

164 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
mixing effects cause the wave function to exhibit both the heavy-hole and the light-
hole characteristics. Here the labeling of HH and LH is according to their wave 
functions at kx = ky = 0, as ||, ± | ) are assigned to that of the heavy hole, and 
||, ± j ) are assigned to that of the light hole. 
4.8.4 
Block Diagonalization of the Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian 
In this section, we consider a transformation that block diagonahzes the 4x4 
Hamiltonian (4.5.13), which includes the strain effects. Define the phases 9R and 
6S of R and S by 
R = \R\e'e 
S = \S\e· ,ifc 
(4.8.15) 
The 4x4 Hamiltonian in (4.5.13) can be transformed to two 2x2 Hamiltonians H 
and//L 
H = UHLKU+ 
P + Q 
R+ 
0 
0 
R 
P-Q 
0 
0 
0 
0 
P-Q 
R+ 
0 
0 
R 
P + Q 
10 
|2> 
|3> 
|4> 
(4.8.16) 
where 
R=\R\- 
i\S\ 
R 
= \R\ + i\S\ 
and the transformation between the old bases 
bases is 
(4.8.17) 
- , v \ i v = ± - , ± - ) a n d t h e new 
where 
|1) = a 3 3 
2' 2 
|2) = -p 
3 
3 
2' ~2 
3 1 v 
„ 
-r~2)+ß 
3 
1 
2' " 2 
|3) = ß 
|4>=α 
3 1 
2' 2 
3 3 
2' 2 
3 
_1 
2' ~2 
3 
3 
2' ~2 
1 
Yfe+g« I ^ 
a = — e ' \ 
2 
^ 4 ; 
V2 
ß = T2* 
1 
; ( ö + f ) 
(4.8.18) 
(4.8.19a) 
(4.8.19b) 

4.8 
BAND STRUCTURES OF SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM WELLS 
165 
and the transformation matrix is 
U 
a* 
0 
0 
a* 
0 
-ß 
ß 
0 
0 
jß* 
ß* 
0 
—a 
0 
0 
a 
(4.8.20) 
For special cases such as an external stress T || [100], [001], [110], εχζ = syz = 0, 0S is 
independent of kz. Therefore, the Hamiltonian can be applied to the quantum-well 
problem directly; kz —> -id/dz 
becomes an operator in (4.8.20), which is difficult 
to treat in general. When eyz = εχζ = 0, kz is canceled in (4.8.20) and both 6R and 
0S are independent of kz. 
For the case in which an external stress T is applied along the [110] direction or the 
case in which strain is caused by the lattice-mismatch accommodated elastic strain 
— £yy Φ S S , 
Sxy 
SXZ 
EyZ 
U 
we have 
θ8 = 
-φ 
(4.8.21) 
(4.8.22) 
where φ = tan 
\ky/kx). 
4.8.5 
Axial Approximation for the Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian 
If we approximate in the Rk term 
Rk 
h2V3 
2m0 
h2V3 
2mo 
^^{kX 
- ikyf +^^(kX 
+ iky)2 
y(kx - iky)2 
(4.8.23) 
where y = (γ2 + T3)/2 and using 
fyj; 
i/vy 
·ν(ί· 
(4.8.24) 
we find that the energy subband dispersion relation is independent of the angle 
φ because 
R=\R\- 
i\S\ = t ^ y k] -ϊφ^ΐνΐ 
ktkz 
2/WQ 
2mo 
(4.8.25) 
and the Hamiltonian depends only on the magnitude of the vector k(. This is called 
the axial approximation. Note that in this approximation, we assume y2 — y3 in the 

166 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Ric term only, whereas we still use γ2 and γ3 in the other terms. We obtain 
θκ = π-2φ 
(4.8.26a) 
and 
1 
i(M 2£) 
V2 
β= 
e
l\i-A). 
V2 
(4.8.26b) 
(4.8.26c) 
4.8.6 
Numerical Approach for the Solutions of the Upper 
2x2 Hamiltonian 
Let us look at the upper 2x2 Hamiltonian in (4.8.16). The wave function for the hole 
subbands can be written generally as 
^(k„ 
r) = t^L 
[gm(kt3 φ ) + g(2\kt, 
z)|2>] 
gm(k„ z) 
.g(2)(k„z). 
ö*,-r, 
VÄ 
lF2 
This wave function satisfies the Hamiltonian equation 
P + Q ~ Vh(z) 
R 
P-Q- 
Vh(z) 
R+ 
gm(kt, z) 
gm(k„ z) 
■ E(kt) gm(kt,z) 
gi2)(k„ z) 
(4.8.27) 
(4.8.28) 
where P, Q, and R are all differential operators and can be obtained from (4.8.25) with 
kz replaced by —id/dz. These wave functions gw and g(2) depend on the magnitude 
of the wave vector k, and position z and are independent of the direction of the wave 
vector (or the angle φ) 
^ε + 2m0 [*> 
dz2 
2m0 
R 
2mo Jk2 
h^V3k4 
m0 
dz 
- + 
h\ß_ 
2 
h2y3 r- 
d 
R = - — y k t - \ 
y/3kt — . 
2mo 
m0 
dz 
4) 
(4.8.29) 
The built-in quantum-well potential for the holes Vh(z) has been incorporated into 
the diagonal terms of the Hamiltonian. Because Vh(z) is a stepwise potential, bound-
ary conditions between the well and the barrier interface have to be used properly. 

4.8 
BAND STRUCTURES OF SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM WELLS 
167 
The basic idea is that the envelope function and the probability current density across 
the heterojunction should be continuous. Therefore, to ensure the Hermitian property 
of H, we have to write all operators of the form 
A{z) dz2 
and 
as 
d 
d 
dz 
dz 
(4.8.30a) 
B(z)^ 
as 
dz 
dz 
dz 
(4.8.30b) 
Equation (4.8.28) can be solved using a propagation-matrix method [37], which 
is very efficient, or using a finite-difference method [76]. The solution to the 
Schrödinger equation in matrix form (4.8.28) will be a set of subband energies 
£(k,) = £"(k,) 
where the subband index m refers to HH1, HH2,... and LH1, LH2,... subbands. 
The superscript "U" refers to the upper Hamiltonian. 
4.8.7 
Solutions for the Lower 2 x 2 Hamiltonian 
Similar procedures hold for the lower 2x2 Hamiltonian of (4.8.16). The wave 
function is 
JK · T, 
4,L{kt, r) = —=- [gV(k„ Z)|3) + gw(kh z)|4>] 
VÄ 
g°\k„ z) 
g(4)(kh z) 
Jk, ■ r, 
VÄ 
F3 
FA 
(4.8.31) 
which satisfies the Hamiltonian equation 
P-Q- 
Vh(z) 
R 
P + Q- Vh(z) 
~R+ 
g0)(kr, Z) 
g(4\kt, z) = EL(k,) gi3\k„ z) 
g(4\kt, z) 
(4.8.32) 
The solution will be a set of dispersion curves labeled as m in E^k,). For a symmetri-
cal potential, we find that E]^(kt) of the lower Hamiltonian is degenerate with that of 
the upper Hamiltonian E^(k,) for each subband m. The wave functions g^(kt, z) and 
g(4)(fct, z) can also be related to g^2\kt, z) and gm(kt, z), respectively, if we change 
z —► —z. 
Example 
The valence subband structures for a GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As quantum 
well with L w= 100Ä and LW = 50A are plotted in Fig. 4.19a and Fig. 4.19b, 

168 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
(a) 
c 
cd 
£ 
3 
1/5 
-20 
-40 
-60 
-80 
-100 
-ion 
r ■■ ■ ■ 1 - T - T - i -
.^N. 
LHl^ 
\HH2 
■
r 
^
v 
HH3 
'-
■ 
| 
1 l ~ I - | I T ~ I -
100 A well 
\HH1 
\
\ 
> \ 
Vw 
" 
N. 
\ . 
1 ■ i i 1 iS. i 
(b) 
Or-
0.00 
0.02 
0.04 0.06 
V(2*/e) 
0.08 
-120 0.00 0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
V(2w/e) 
0.08 
Figure 4.19 
The valence subbands for (a) a 100 A and (b) a 50 Ä GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As quantum well for k, in 
the plane of the quantum well under the axial approximation. The vertical axis is the hole subband energy and 
the horizontal axis is the in-plane wave vector k, normalized by (2π/α), where a = 5.6533 A is the lattice 
constant of GaAs. These results in (a) and (b) can be compared with the experimental data for similar 
GaAs quantum-well structures in Fig. 4.18d and Fig. 4.18b, respectively. 
respectively. The horizontal wave vector k, is normalized by 2π/α, where a = 5.6533 
A is the lattice constant of GaAs. These subband dispersions can also be compared 
with the experimental data for similar GaAs quantum well structures with p-type 
dopings in Fig. 4.18d and Fig. 4.18b, respectively. The axial approximation gives 
very good results for a small k„ and the results are exactly the same as those using 
the original 4x4 Hamiltonian at kt = 0. This approximation is attractive because 
the φ dependence in the kx-ky plane can be taken into account analytically in the 
basis functions, and the valence subband energies are independent of φ. These 
wave functions can be applied to study optical absorption and gain in quantum-
well structures. 
4.9 BAND STRUCTURES OF STRAINED SEMICONDUCTOR 
QUANTUM WELLS 
For a strained quantum well, the conduction-band edge is given by 
EQ{k = 0) = acTr(e) = ^ ( ε « + ε„ + ε^) 
(4.9.1) 
where εΓ 
α0 
-, and εζ 
L-12 
-2 —— Βχχ. Here a0 is the lattice constant of the 
« 
C n 
substrate, and a is the lattice constant of the quantum well. The energy is measured 
from the conduction-band edge of an unstrained quantum well, as shown in Fig. 4.20. 
We assume that the barriers are lattice matched to the substrate; therefore, their strains 

4.9 
BAND STRUCTURES OF STRAINED SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM WELLS 
169 
(a) 
(b) 
(C) 
t 
I 
Ec(z) 
IT 
£c(z) 
ΡΓ 
ΔΕ, 
ΕΛΖ) 
i -
ΓΚε) 
£lffl(0) = - P e - ß e z 5 ; 
£LH(0) = - P e + ß e & 
■Li α,ΓΚε) = -P e 
£v(z) — 
-fi e±-
1" 
£Uz) · 
rav7V<£) 
£LH(0) = - P £ + ß £ 
-£νω 
Figure 4.20 Band-edge profile for (a) a compressive strained, (b) an unstrained, and (c) a tensile strained 
quantum well. 
are zero. For an unstrained quantum well, we have tiie potential energy for the elec-
tron given by 
£?ω 
0 
\z\ < Lw/2 
AEC 
\z\ > Lw/2. 
(4.9.2) 
For example, Eg (Ini ^Ga^As) = 0.324 + 0.7* + 0.4JC for an unstrained Inj -^Ga^As 
compound, and £g(InP) = 1.344 eV at room temperature 
A£g = 1.344 - £g(Im_,GaxAs) 
a(x) = xa(GaAs) + (1 — .x)a(InAs). 
(4.9.3) 
From previous experimental data, we take 
AEC = 0.4A£g(jt) 
Δ£ν = 0.6Δ£·„(Λ:). 
(4.9.4) 
At x = 0.468, In! ^Ga^As is lattice matched to the InP substrate. Strain exists when 
x φ 0.468. 
(4.9.5) 
4.9.1 
Subband Energies in a Strained Quantum Well 
The conduction band edge energy for a strained quantum well is given by 
P ( Λ _ / <k.(ßxX + Byy + Ba) 
\z\ < 
L„/2 
"ΛΖ) 
- \ 
AEC 
\z\ > Lw/2. 
Similarly, the valence band edge energy for the unstrained quantum well is defined as 
Vh(z) = ^ ) = { _ A ° £ v 
Μξ^Ι 
(4.9.6) 

170 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
The valence band edge energies for the strained quantum well are obtained 
from £ΉΗ(0) and LLH(0) in (4.5.36) ignoring the coupling with the spin-orbit 
split-off band 
f -Pe ~ Qs 
\Z\ < Lw/2 
£™<H -A* u>un 
<497a) 
{ 
-Δ£ ν 
\z\ > Lw/2 
where 
PB = -α ν(ε^ + επ + ε^) 
(4.9.8a) 
-b . 
2~ 
Ö« = — (e„ + eyy - 2Bzz). 
(4.9.8b) 
The subband edge energies can all be obtained from a simple quantum-well model 
using the band-edge effective masses 
(4.9.9a) 
' < 
\z\ < Lw/2 
ml 
\z\ > Lw/2 
/ «oAriw - 2?2w) 
kl < iw/2 
^hh = 4 
, 
, , 
, 
(4.9.9b) 
hh 
I «o/(yib - 2y2b) 
k l > W 2 
mZ 
= f «o/(y,w + 2y2w) kl < W 2 
* 
I m0/(ylb + 2γ2„) 
\z\ > Lw/2 
where the subscripts "w" and "b" in the effective mass parameters designate the well 
and the barrier region, respectively. 
If the spin-orbit split-off band coupling effect is included, we find that the band-
edge energies for heavy hole ΕΚΗ(ζ) and mhh are not affected, but 
LLH(Z)=< 
"·2\Τ 
- ' ν ^ + 2 Δ & + ^ ) 
I ^ W 2 
( 4 A 1 0 ) 
and 
|z| > Lw/2 
mz _ f »»ο/ίΤι* + 2/+ y2w) 
|z| < Lw/2 
, , o i n 
01 " I mo/(?ib + 2y2b) 
kl > ί - / 2 
( ^ 
U 
where/+ is defined in Ref. 38. 

4.9 
BAND STRUCTURES OF STRAINED SEMICONDUCTOR QUANTUM WELLS 
171 
4.9.2 
Valence Subband Energy Dispersions in a Strained Quantum Weil 
Using H from (4.5.13), we can solve the valence subband energies and eigenfunc-
tions using (4.8.14) 
H Mb = -i dz 
+ Vh(z)I 
g3/2(kt, z) 
glßQk, Z) 
g_i/2(kt, z) 
g_3/2(kt, z) 
= £(kt) 
g3/2(kt, z) 
£1/2*1, z) 
g_i/2(kt, z) 
^_3/2(kt, z) 
(4.9.12) 
where Vh(z) is given by the unstrained (built-in) potential E%(z) from (4.9.6), and the 
band edge shifts due to -Pe and ± QE have all been included in H for \z\ < L^/2, 
and both PB and Qe are zero for \z\ > L^/2. 
Example: An In! _^Ga^As/Ini _^Ga^ASj,Pi -y Quantum Well Again, a convenient 
way to find the valence subband energies and eigenfunctions is to use the block-
diagonalized Hamiltonians (4.8.28) and (4.8.32), which simplify the numerical 
calculations by a significant amount. As a numerical example [37], we plot in 
Fig. 4.21 the energy dispersion curves for the valence subbands of an In^^Ga^As 
(a) 
- 5 0 
-100 
^ 1 + 1 1 
HH2 
• ^ L H I 
x = 0.37 
(c) 
o 
(b) 
-20 
-40 ■ 
-80 
-100 
0.02 
0.04 
k. 
0.06 
«·—.^HH1 
LH1 
r V ^ HH2 
^ v 
, 
x = 0.468 
-
^""""""»S^ 
^ " " " - « v ^ ^ 
· 
- 8 0 
(d) 
8 
ω 
0.06 
0 
20 
-4 0 
κη 
': 
LH1 
. 
ϊ — « ^ H H 1 
'. 
HH2 
: _ _ , 
X 
1 ■ ' ' 
' 
»0.60 ; 
V 
. 
: 
: 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
Figure 4.21 
The valence subband dispersions of an In, -/ja,As grown on In, ^Ga^As^P, -y quaternary 
barriers (with a band gap of 1.3 μπι) lattice matched to InP substrate, (a) x = 0.37 (biaxial compression), 
(b) x = 0.468 (unstrained), (c) x = 0.55 (small tension), and (d) x = 0.60 (large tension). Here the wave 
vector along [100] direction kx is normalized by 2π/α, where a = 5.6533 A is the lattice constant of 
GaAs. (Reprinted with permission from [371 © 1991 American Physical Society.) 

172 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
quantum well grown on an Inj-^Ga^As^Pi-y substrate with a band-gap wavelength 
1.3 μπι lattice matched to an InP substrate. The gallium mode fraction x is varied: 
(a) x = 0.37 (biaxial compression), (b) x = 0.468 (unstrained), (c) x = 0.55 (small 
tension), and (d) x = 0.60 (large tension). These band structures will be useful to 
investigate the strain effects on the effective mass, the density of states, optical 
gain, and absorption in quantum wells. We will discuss these effects and their appli-
cations further in Chapters 9 and 10. 
PROBLEMS 
4.1 
Derive Eqs. (4.1.6) and (4.1.7) for the wave function unk(r) in the k · p theory 
using (4.1.4) for t/f„k(r). 
4.2 Derive Eq. (4.1.8) using the perturbation theory. 
4.3 Consider the two-band model, one is the conduction band (n = c) and the 
other is the heavy hole in the valence band (n! = v). We have k0 = 0 for a 
direct band-gap material, En = Ec, and En> = Ev. Show that Eq. (4.1.16) 
gives two eigenvalues 
£ ^ + 4 ^ | k - p c 
g 
«o 
1/2 
where Ev = 0, Ec = E% = the energy gap. 
Check if the energies using the perturbation theory are the same as those 
obtained by the Taylor-series expansion of the expressions assuming that 
the (k · PcV) term is small. 
4.4 Derive the full matrix in (4.2.8) for Kane's model. 
4.5 
(a) Show that the eigenvector for (4.2.19) can be written as 
kP[E'n + 2^\ IN 
αη=(Ε>η-Ε£)(Ε>η+ψ)/Ν 
where N is obtained from the normalization condition 
a
2„+t>
2
n + c2
n = \. 
(b) Show that in the limit k = 0, the above eigenvectors lead to Eqs. (4.2.21 )-
(4.2.24). 

PROBLEMS 
173 
4.6 
Derive Eq. (4.2.26) for Kane's parameter P. 
4.7 
Tabulate all the band-edge energies and their corresponding wave 
functions for the conduction, heavy-hole, light-hole, and spin-orbit split-off 
bands. 
4.8 
Derive the Hamiltonian Eq. (4.3.1a)-(4.3.1e) for «k(r) using (4.2.5). 
4.9 
Using the definition for D"f in (4.3.11)-(4.3.13), show that the matrix 
representation of the Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian //LK is given by Eqs. 
(4.3.14) and (4.3.15). 
4.10 
Summarize the effects of the strain on the conduction-band edge and the 
valence-band edges from the results in Section 4.5. 
4.11 
Calculate the strains (ε^, Byy, ε^), Ρε, QB, and the band-edge shifts for 
Ini ^Ga^As quantum-well layers grown in InP substrate with (a) jc = 0.37 
and (b) x = 0.57. 
4.12 
Calculate the band-edge effective masses using (4.5.33) for Problem 4.11. 
Compare the values of the structure of part (a) with those in part (b). 
4.13 
Show that the eigenvalues for the matrix H(k = 0) in (4.5.34) are given by 
(4.5.36a)-(4.5.36c). 
4.14 Calculate the band-edge energies with spin-orbit coupling effects using 
(4.5.36a)-(4.5.36c) and compare with those using (4.5.19) without the 
spin-orbit coupling effects for the Ini-^Ga^As/InP system with (a) x = 
0.37, (b) x = 0.47, and (c) x = 0.57. 
4.15 
Show that the eigenvalues of the matrix (4.5.13) are given by Eqs. (4.5.27a) 
and (4.5.27b). 
4.16 
Derive the propagation matrix (4.6.7) from the boundary conditions. 
4.17 
Discuss in the infinite barrier model (i.e., V0 = °° and VN+i = °°X (a) 
how to modify the boundary conditions in the propagation matrix method 
and (b) how to find the eigenenergy E and its corresponding wave function. 
4.18 
Summarize the procedures for solving (a) an «-type and (b) a p-type modu-
lation-doped quantum well self-consistently. 
4.19 
Discuss qualitatively how Fig. 4.13 should be modified if the donor profile 
is within 20 A at the center of the quantum well, that is, ΝΌ(ζ) = ΝΌ for 
\z\ < 20 A and ND(z) = 0, otherwise. 
4.20 
Derive Eqs. (4.7.23a) and (4.7.23b) in the Kronig-Penney model. 
4-21 
(a) Discuss the procedure for determining the number of bands that can be 
considered as "bound states" of the superlattice from Fig. 4.15. 
(b) What happens if the barrier height VQ falls within a miniband of Fig. 4.15? 

174 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
4.22 
Compare the miniband energies of the GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As superlattice in 
Fig. 4.16 with those calculated for a single isolated quantum well with the 
same well width w = 100 A from Chapter 3. 
4.23 
(a) Using the band-edge discontinuity rules discussed in Appendix A at the 
end of the text, design an In^^Ga^As/InP heterojunction such that 
AEC = 0.3 eV. Assume that strain only occurs in the Inj-^Ga^As layer 
because the substrate InP is thick. 
(b) Calculate AEV, Eg(li\i-xGaxAs), PB, QF, and so forth, for part (a). 
4.24 Comment on the results from the subband energies in Figs. 4.17b and 4.17c. 
4.25 
Check the subband energies at the band edges (k, = 0) in Fig. 4.18. Comment 
on the discrepancies if there are any. 
4.26 
Derive the block-diagonalized Hamiltonian (4.8.16) using the axial approxi-
mation and the basis transformation (4.8.18). 
4.27 
(a) Find the eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors for the 2x2 
Hamiltonian H u in (4.8.16) in the plane-wave representation. 
P 
H 
8' 
8' 
H u 
R+ Q 
R 
P-Q 
(b) Repeat (a) for 
HL 
P-Q 
R 
P + Q 
R+ 
4.28 
(a) Express the wave function Ψυ(1ί„ r) in (4.8.27), which is in the bases 
|1) and |2), in the original basis ||, §), |§, j), ||, — \) and ||, —|). 
(b) Express the bases ||, v) (v = 3/2, 1/2, - 1 / 2 , -3/2) in terms of the 
bases |1), |2), |3), and |4). 
4.29 Label all the energies in Fig. 4.20a-c for Inj-^Ga^As/InP quantum wells with 
(a) x = 0.37, (b) x = 0.47, and (c) x = 0.57. 
4.30 Calculate the first quantized subband energies for the electron, heavy-hole, 
and light-hole subbands in Problem 4.29. 
REFERENCES 
1. N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
New York, 1976. 
2. F. Bassani and G. Pastori Parravicini, Electronic States and Optical Transitions in Solids, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1975. 

REFERENCES 
175 
3. J. Bardeen, "An improved calculation of the energies of metallic Li and Na," J. Chem. 
Phys. 6, 367-371 (1938). 
4. F. Seitz, The Modern Theory of Solids, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1940, p. 352. 
5. W. Shockley, "Energy band structures in semiconductors," Phys. Rev. 78, 173-174 
(1950). 
6. G. Dresselhaus, A. F. Kip, and C. Kittel, "Cyclotron resonance of electrons and holes in 
silicon and germanium crystals," Phys. Rev. 98, 368-384 (1955). 
7. E. O. Kane, "Band structure of indium antimonide," J. Phys. Chem. Solids 1, 249-261 
(1957). 
8. E. O. Kane, "The k-p method," Chapter 3, Vol. 1 in Semiconductors and Semimetals, 
edited by R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Academic Press, New York, 1966. 
9. J. M. Luttingerand W. Kohn, "Motion of electrons and holes in perturbed periodic fields," 
Phys. Rev. 97, 869-883 (1955). 
10. J. M. Luttinger, "Quantum theory of cyclotron resonance in semiconductors: General 
theory," Phys. Rev. 102, 1030-1041 (1956). 
11. I. M. Tsidilkovski, Band Structure of Semiconductors, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1982. 
12. B. R. Nag, Electron Transport in Compound Semiconductors, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
1980. 
13. C. R. Pidgeon, "Free carrier optical properties of semiconductors," Chapter 5, Vol. 2 in 
Handbook on Semiconductors, edited by M. Balkanski, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 
New York, 1980. 
14. For some recent discussions on the effective-mass theory, see M. G. Burt, "The justifica-
tion for applying the effective-mass approximation to microstructures," J. Phys. Condens. 
Matter 4, 6651 -6690 (1992); M. G. Burt, "An exact formulation of the envelope function 
method for the determination of electronic states in semiconductor microstructures," 
Semicond. Sei. Technol. 3, 739-753 (1988); M. G. Burt, "The evaluation of the matrix 
element for interband optical transitions in quantum wells using envelope functions," 
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 5, 4091-4098 (1993). 
15. J. R. Chelikowsky and M. L. Cohen, "Nonlocal pseudopotential calculations for the 
electronic structure of eleven diamond and zinc-blende semiconductors," Phys. Rev. B 
14, 556-582 (1976). 
16. G. C. Osbourn, "In^Gai-^As-In^Gai-^As strained-layer superlattices: A proposal for 
useful, new electronic materials," Phys. Rev. B 27, 5126-5128 (1983). 
17. G. C. Osbourn, "InAsSb strained-layer superlattices for long wavelength detector appli-
cations," 7. Vac. Sei. Technol. B2, 176-178 (1984). 
18. E. Yablonovitch, "Band structure engineering of semiconductor lasers for optical com-
munications," J. Lightwave Technol. 6, 1292-1299 (1988). 
19. T. P. Pearsall, Vol. Ed., "Strained-layer superlattices: Physics," Vol. 32 in R. K. Willardson 
and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1990. 
20. P. S. Zory, Quantum Well Lasers, Academic Press, New York, 1993. 
21. G. E. Pikus and G. L. Bir, "Effects of deformation on the hole energy spectrum of germa-
nium and silicon," Sov. Phys. Solid State 1, 1502-1517 (1960). 
22. G. L. Bir and G. E. Pikus, Symmetry and Strain-Induced Effects in Semiconductors, Wiley, 
New York, 1974. 

176 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
23. R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Chapter 
39, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1964. 
24. J. F. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1985. 
25. K. Seeger, Semiconductor Physics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982. 
26. J. C. Hensel and G. Feher, "Cyclotron resonance experiments in uniaxially stressed silicon: 
Valence band inverse mass parameters and deformation potentials," Phys. Rev. 129, 
1041-1062(1963). 
27. H. Hasegawa, "Theory of cyclotron resonance in strained silicon crystals," Phys. Rev. 129, 
1029-1040(1963). 
28. A. Gavini and M. Cardona, "Modulated piezoreflectance in semiconductors," Phys. Rev. B 
1, 672-682 (1970). 
29. L. D. Laude, F. H. Pollak, and M. Cardona, "Effects of uniaxial stress on the indirect 
exciton spectrum of silicon," Phys. Rev. B 3, 2623-2636 (1971). 
30. K. Suzuki and J. C. Hensel, "Quantum resonances in the valence bands of germanium. I. 
Theoretical considerations," Phys. Rev. B 9, 4184-4218 (1974). 
31. J. C. Hensel and K. Suzuki, "Quantum resonances in the valence bands of germanium. Π. 
Cyclotron resonances in uniaxially stressed crystals," Phys. Rev. B 9, 4219-4257 (1974). 
32. M. Chandrasekhar and F. H. Pollak, "Effects of uniaxial stress on the electro-reflectance 
spectrum of Ge and GaAs," Phys. Rev. B 15, 2127-2144 (1977). 
33. D. E. Aspnes and M. Cardona, "Strain dependence of effective masses in tetrahedral semi-
conductors," Phys. Rev. B 17, 726-740 (1978). 
34. H. Mathieu, P. Merle, E. I. Ameziane, B. Archilla, J. Camassel, and G. Poiblaud, 
"Deformation potentials of the direct and indirect absorption edges of GaP," Phys. Rev. 
B 19, 2209-2223 (1979). 
35. D. L. Smith and C. Mailhiot, "Theory of semiconductor superlattice electronic structure," 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 173-234 (1990). 
36. D. L. Smith and C. Mailhiot, "Strained-layer semiconductor superlattices," Crit. Rev. Solid 
State Mater. Sei. 16, 131-160 (1990). 
37. S. L. Chuang, "Efficient band-structure calculations of strained quantum wells using a two-
by-two Hamiltonian," Phys. Rev. B 43, 9649-9661 (1991). (Note that a, in this paper 
should be taken as -a v to compare with data in the literature.) 
38. C. Y. P. Chao and S. L. Chuang, "Spin-orbit-coupling effects on the valence-band struc-
ture of strained semiconductor quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 46, 4110-4122 (1992). 
39. J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory, Wiley, New York, 1990. 
40. P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Layered Media, Wiley, New York, 1988. 
41. E. J. Roan and S. L. Chuang, "Linear and nonlinear intersubband electroabsorptions in a 
modulation-doped quantum well," J. Appl. Phys. 69, 3249-3260 (1991). 
42. K. T. Kim, S. S. Lee, and S. L. Chuang, "Inter-miniband optical absorption in a modu-
lation-doped AlxGa!_xAs/GaAs superlattice," J. Appl. Phys. 69, 6617-6624 (1991). 
43. F. Stern and S. Das Sarma, "Electron energy levels in GaAs-Ga^^AljAs heterojunctions," 
Phys. Rev. B 30, 840-848 (1984). 
44. E. Merzbacher, Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1970. 
45. C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th ed., Wiley, New York, 2005. 

REFERENCES 
177 
46. G. Bastard, "Superlattice band structure in the envelope-function approximation," Phys. 
Rev. B 24, 5693-5697 (1981). 
47. G. Bastard and J. A. Brum, "Electronic states in semiconductor heterostructures," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electronics QE-22, 1625-1644 (1986). 
48. G. Bastard, Wave Mechanics Applied to Semiconductor Heterostructures, Halsted Press, 
Wiley, New York, 1988. 
49. K. H. Yoo, L. R. Ram-Mohan, and D. F. Nelson, "Effect of nonparabolicity in GaAs/ 
Gai_xAlxAs semiconductor quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 39, 12808-12813 (1989). 
50. D. Mukherji and B. R. Nag, "Band structure of semiconductor superlattices," Phys. Rev. B 
12, 4338-4345 (1975). 
51. C. Wetzel, B. K. Meyer, and P. Omling, "Electron effective mass in direct-band-gap 
GaAs, ^Ρ, alloys," Phys. Rev. B 47, 15588-15592 (1993). 
52. C. Hermann and C. Weisbuch, "k-p perturbation theory in ΙΠ-V compounds and alloys: a 
«examination," Phys. Rev. B 15, 823-833 (1977). 
53. W. Zawadzki, P. Pfeffer, and H. Sigg, "Five-level k-p model for conduction electrons in 
GaAs. Description of cyclotron resonance experiments," Solid State Commun. 53, 
777-782 (1985). 
54. D. A. Broido and L. J. Sham, "Effective masses of holes at GaAs-AlGaAs heterojunc-
tions," Phys. Rev. B 31, 888-892 (1985); and 31, 6831 (1985). 
55. A. Twardowski and C. Hermann, "Variational calculation of polarization of quantum-well 
photoluminescence," Phys. Rev. B 35, 8144-8153 (1987). 
56. R. Eppenga, M. F. H. Schuurmans, and S. Colak, "New k-p theory for GaAs/Gai-^Al^ 
As-type quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 36, 1554-1564 (1987). 
57. M. Altarelli, "Band structure, impurities and excitons in superlattices," pp. 12-37, in 
Proceedings 
of Les 
Houches 
Winterschool Semiconductor 
Superlattices 
and 
Heterojunctions, edited by G. Allan, G. Bastard, N. Boccara, M. Lannoo, and M. Voos, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986. 
58. D. L. Smith and C. Mailhiot, "k-p theory of semiconductor superlattice electronic 
structure. I. Formal results," Phys. Rev. B 33, 8345-8359 (1986). 
59. C. Mailhiot and D. L. Smith, "k-p theory of semiconductor superlattice electronic 
structure. Π. Application to Ga^Jn^As-Ali ^In^As [100] superlattices," Phys. Rev. B 
33, 8360-8372 (1986). 
60. L. C. Andreani, A. Pasquarello, and F. Bassani, "Hole subbands in strained GaAs-
Gaj-jAl^As quantum wells: Exact solution of the effective-mass equation," Phys. Rev. 
B 36, 5887-5894 (1987). 
61. L. R. Ram-Mohan, K. H. Yoo, and R. L. Aggarwal, 'Transfer-matrix algorithm for the 
calculation of the band structure of semiconductor superlattices," Phys. Rev. B 38, 
6151-6159(1988). 
62. G. Y. Wu, T. C. McGill, C. Mailhiot, and D. L. Smith, "k-p theory of semiconductor 
superlattice electronic structure in an applied magnetic field," Phys. Rev. B 39, 
6060-6070 (1989). 
63. B. K. Ridley, "The in-plane effective mass in strained-layer quantum wells," J. Appl. Phys. 
68, 4667-4673 (1990). 
64. I. Suemune, "Band-edge hole mass in strained-quantum-well structures," Phys. Rev. B 43, 
14099-14106(1991). 

178 
THEORY OF ELECTRONIC BAND STRUCTURES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
65. M. Silver, W. Batty, A. Ghiti, and E. P. O'Reilly, "Strain-induced valence-subband split-
ting in m-V semiconductors," Phys. Rev. B 46, 6781-6788 (1992). 
66. T. Manku and A. Nathan, "Valence energy-band structure for strained group-IV semicon-
ductors," J. Appl. Phys. 73, 1205-1213 (1993). 
67. D. Munzar, "Heavy hole-light hole splitting in GaAs/AlAs superlattices," Phys. Stat. Sol. 
(b) 175, 395-401 (1993). 
68. J. N. Schulman and Y. C. Chang, "Band mixing in semiconductor superlattices," Phys. 
Rev. B 31, 2056-2068 (1985). 
69. Y. C. Chang, "Bond-orbital models for superlattices," Phys. Rev. B 37, 8215-8222 
(1988). 
70. M. P. Houng, Y. C. Chang, and W. I. Wang, "Orientation dependence of valence-subband 
structures in GaAs-Gai-xAlxAs quantum-well structures," J. Appl. Phys. 64, 4609-4613 
(1988). 
71. S.S. Nedorezov, "Space quantization in semiconductor films," Soviet Phys. Solid State 12, 
1814-1819(1971). 
72. E. D. Jones, S. K. Lyo, I. J. Fritz, J. F. Klem, J. E. Schirber, C. P. Tigges, and 
T. J. Drummond, "Determination of energy-band dispersion curves in strained-layer 
structures," Appl. Phys. Lett. 54, 2227-2229 (1989). 
73. R. K. Hayden, L. Eaves, M. Henini, T. Takamasu, N. Miura, and U. Ekenberg, 
"Investigating the cubic anisotropy of the confined hole subbands of an AlAs/GaAs/ 
AlAs quantum well using resonant magnetotunneling spectroscopy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
61, 84-86 (1992). 
74. J. A. Kash, M. Zachau, and M. A. Tischer, "Anisotropie valence bands in quantum wells: 
Quantitative comparison of theory and experiment," Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2260-2263 
(1992). 
75. J. A. Kash, M. Zachau, M. A. Tischlet, and U. Ekenberg, "Optical measurements of 
warped valence bands in quantum wells," Surf. Sei. 305, 251-255 (1994). 
76. D. Ahn, S. L. Chuang, and Y. C. Chang, "Valence-band mixing effects on the gain and the 
refractive index change of quantum-well lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 64, 4056-4064 (1988). 

Part Π 
Propagation of Light 


5 
Electromagnetics and Light Propagation 
In this chapter, we discuss a few important results using electromagnetic theory. 
First, the time-harmonic fields and the duality principle, which will be useful in 
studying the propagation of light in waveguides and laser cavities, will be presented 
in Section 5.1. The duality principle allows us to obtain the solutions for plane wave 
reflection and guidance for the transverse magnetic (TM) polarization of light once 
we obtain the solutions for the transverse electric (TE) polarization. We then present 
Poynting's theorem and the reciprocity theorem in Section 5.2, followed by plane 
wave solutions in homogenous media in Section 5.3. We then consider the simplest 
case, isotropic media, in Section 5.4. The complex permittivity functions for res-
onant dielectric media and conducting media are presented in Section 5.5. Plane 
wave reflection from a planar surface and a multilayered medium is then investigated 
in Sections 5.6 to 5.8, which include matrix optics, a convenient tool to investigate 
forward and backward propagation plane waves. An important case of plane wave 
reflection from a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) is presented in Section 5.9. 
DBR structures provide extremely high reflectivity and are used in vertical-cavity 
surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) as well as microcavity lasers. In Appendix 5A, 
we discuss me Kramers-Kronig relations, which relate the real part and imaginary 
part of a permittivity function to each other. These relations are useful in optical 
materials because if the absorption coefficients of the semiconductors are measured, 
the real parts of the refractive indices are calculated based on the Kramers-Kronig 
relation or vice versa. 
5.1 
TIME-HARMONIC FIELDS AND DUALITY PRINCIPLE 
5.1.1 
Time-Harmonic Fields 
Very often, the excitation sources described by real functions J(r, t) and p(r, t) 
depend on time sinusoidally. We may write the source terms as 
J(r,i) = Re[J(r, ω) «"**] 
(5.1.1) 
p(r,f) = Re [p(r,W) <;-"■"] 
(5.1.2) 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
181 

182 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
where J(r, ω) and p(r, ω) are called phasors, which are complex quantities. Similar 
expressions apply for the fields E, H, B, and D, where Re[ ] means the real part of the 
function in the bracket. For example, an electric field in the time domain of the form 
E(r, t) = xExcot((ot — φχ) + yEyCos(wt — <f>y) + z£zcos(a>i — φζ) 
(5.1.3a) 
can be expressed in terms of the phasor E(r, ω) or simply E(r) 
E(r, i) = Re[E(r, ω)<Γ,ωί] 
(5.1.3b) 
E(r, ω) = χΕχβίφ> + yEye>*> + zEze^. 
(5.1.3c) 
We then obtain Maxwell's equations in the frequency domain, noting d/dt —> — ίω, 
V x E(r) = ιωΒ(Γ) 
(5.1.4a) 
V x H(r) = J(r) - iwD(r) 
(5.1.4b) 
V-D(r) = p(r) 
(5.1.4c) 
V-B(r) = 0 
(5.1.4d) 
where all quantities E, H, B, D, p, and J are in phasor representations and their depen-
dencies on the angular frequency ω are implicitly assumed. 
The relation of the displacement vector D(r, t) to the electric field E(r, f) is 
t 
D(r, t) = e0E(r, t) + P(r, t) = ε0Ε(τ, t) + ε0 f *<r, t - i')E(r, iyti 
(5.1.5) 
or 
I 
D(r, 0 = 
[ e(r, / - i')E(r, t')dt' 
(5.1.6) 
— 00 
where P is the polarization density (C/m2) and χ the susceptibility. In the frequency 
domain, we have 
D(r, ω) = ε(Γ, co)E(r, ω) 
(5.1.7) 
ε(Γ, ω) = β0(1 + X(r, ω)). 
(5.1.8) 
Outside of the source region, we find 
ν χ Ε = ίωμΗ 
(5.1.9a) 
V x H = - i w e E 
(5.1.9b) 
ν · ε Ε = 0 
(5.1.9c) 
ν·μ,Η = 0. 
(5.1.9d) 

5.2 
POYNTING'S THEOREM AND RECIPROCITY RELATIONS 
183 
5.1.2 
Duality Principle in Electromagnetics 
There is certain symmetry among Maxwell's equations [1]. If we make the following 
changes, 
E ^ H 
H ^ - E 
μ^ε 
ε^μ, 
(5.1.10) 
Maxwell's equations stay unchanged. Thus for a given solution (E, H) in a medium 
(μ, ε), we have a corresponding solution (H, -E) in a medium (ε, μ). This is the 
duality principle [1]. Because the boundary conditions in which the tangential com-
ponents of the electric and magnetic fields are continuous across the dielectric inter-
faces and stay the same in both media, we have a dual situation such that the 
simultaneous replacements in (5.1.10) give the solutions to Maxwell's equations as 
well. If including both electric and magnetic sources, we write 
(5.1.11) 
V x E = ίωμΆ - M 
V x H = -ϊωεΕ + J 
V-eE = pe 
ν · μ Η = ρΜ. 
make the following identification, 
E - » H 
H - > - E 
J ^ M 
μ - > ε 
ε-> μ 
pe -> (^ 
M ^ 
PM~> 
- J 
-ft 
(5.1.12) 
we find that Maxwell's equations (5.1.11) are invariant. As an application, if we know 
the solutions (E, H) to the original Maxwell's equations in a medium (μ, ε) due to the 
electric sources pe and J, we can obtain the "dual" set of solutions due to the magnetic 
sources PM and M, in a medium (ε, μ) with "dual" boundary conditions (e.g., tangen-
tial magnetic fields are continuous vs. tangential electric fields continuous in the orig-
inal problem with electric sources). Applications of (5.1.10) will be discussed in 
Chapters 6 and 7, where we discuss plane wave reflection and the optical waveguide 
theory for both the TE and TM polarizations. The idea is that once we obtain the field 
solutions for the TE polarization in a dielectric waveguide from Maxwell's equations, 
we can use the duality principle to write down the TM solutions simply by inspection. 
5.2 POYNTING'S THEOREM AND RECIPROCITY RELATIONS 
5.2.1 
Poynting's Theorem 
The power conservation is a very useful law [1-3]. From Maxwell's equations in the 
time domain, 
V x E = - — B 
(5.2.1) 
at 
V X H = J + | D . 
(5.2.2) 
at 

184 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
Dot-multiplying (5.2.1) by H and (5.2.2) by E, and taking the difference, we obtain 
d 
ÖD 
V - ( E x H ) = - H - - B - E - - - E - J 
(5.2.3) 
at 
at 
where ν · ( Ε χ Η ) = Η · V x E - E · V x H h a s been used. Define the Poynting 
vector as 
S = E x H 
(5.2.4) 
which gives the energy flux density (W/m2). For an isotropic medium, D = εΕ and 
B = μ,Η, the electric and magnetic energy densities are 
H> e=^E-E 
(5.2.5) 
w m = | H - H . 
Therefore, Poynting's theorem in the time domain is simply 
V S = - ~ ( w e + w m ) - E - J . 
(5.2.6) 
at 
The theorem simply states the power flow, or the divergence of the power density S, 
is given by the decreasing rate of the total electric and magnetic energy density plus 
the power generated by the current source, — E · J. If integrating over a volume 
V enclosed by a surface S, we obtain Poynting's theorem in the form 
ExH-dS 
= - j l 
il(we + wm)dV- 
ί 
i E - J J V 
(5.2.7) 
S 
V 
V 
that is, the power flow out of the surface S equals the decreasing rate of the 
stored electric and magnetic energies plus the power supplied by the source, 
-JlfE-J^. 
A complex Poynting's theorem can also be derived from Maxwell's equations in 
frequency domain 
V ( E x H*) = -ϊω(]-Έ. · D* - ^Β · H*) - ^E · J*. 
(5.2.8) 
If J = Jd + Jf where Jd accounts for dissipation (e.g., Jd = σΕ in a conductor), we 
then have 
^ ■( E x H ' ) + i | ( E · D* - B · H*) + ^E · J* = ^ E · Jf*. 
(5.2.9) 

5.2 
POYNTING'S THEOREM AND RECIPROCITY RELATIONS 
185 
V x E(1) 
V x H 0 ) 
V x E(2) 
V x H(2) 
dt 
= J ( . ) + | D ( D 
at 
-ί,«
1' 
= 
J ( 2 ) + | D ( 2 ) 
at 
where the right-hand side is the time-averaged power supplied by the source Jf and 
the terms on the left-hand side are the time-averaged power flux, the difference in 
the electric and magnetic stored energy density, and the time-average dissipated 
power, respectively. 
5.2.2 
Reciprocity Relations 
Consider two sources J ( l ) and J(2) producing two sets of fields in the same medium 
described by D = εΕ and B = μ,Η, 
(5.2.10a) 
(5.2.10b) 
(5.2.11a) 
(5.2.11b) 
If we take H(2) · (5.2.10a) - E(1) · (5.2.1 lb) and subtract from H(1) · (5.2.1 la) - E ( 2 ) · 
(5.2.10b), we find 
V · (E<'> x H<2> - E(2) x H(,)) = -E ( 1 ) · J(2) + E(2) · J(1>. 
(5.2.12) 
Integrating over an infinite volume and using the divergence theorem, we obtain 
|(E ( 1 ) x H(2) - E(2) x H<'>) · dS = [E<2> · JmdV - Ι Έ ^ · 3(2)dV. 
(5.2.13) 
S 
V 
V 
Using the property in which the surface integral on the left-hand side goes to zero as 
the radius of the surface goes to infinity, we obtain 
[ E<2) · }mdV = [ E(1) · J(2)dV. 
(5.2.14) 
Because the two sources Ji and J2 are distributed over finite regions, such as those of 
two dipoles, the volume integrals are only over the regions of the two sources V] and 
V2, respectively. The reciprocity relation (5.2.14) states that the electric field E<2) 
(generated by J<2)) evaluated at the other source J(1) is equal to E(1) (generated by 
J(1)) evaluated at J(2). On the other hand, if we choose a finite surface S enclosing 
a volume V outside of the source regions, then we have 
I E(D x H(2). dS 
= oE(2) χ H(i). dS 
(5.2.15) 
which is another form of reciprocity relation [4, 5]. 

186 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
5.3 PLANE WAVE SOLUTIONS FOR MAXWELL'S EQUATIONS 
IN HOMOGENEOUS MEDIA 
We shall investigate solutions to Maxwell's equations in regions where J = p = 0. 
Maxwell's equations for a harmonic field become 
V x E = i<uB 
(5.3.1a) 
V x H = -io>D 
(5.3.1b) 
V - B = 0 
(5.3.1c) 
V - D = 0. 
(5.3.Id) 
We also assume that the media are homogeneous; therefore, we have plane wave 
solutions of the form exp(/k · r). Because all complex field vectors E, H, B, and D 
have the same spatial dependence, exp(/k · r), we obtain the basic relations for plane 
waves propagating in source-free homogeneous media, using Ve* r —»ik e* r 
k x E = ωΒ 
(5.3.2a) 
k x H = -ωΌ 
(5.3.2b) 
k · B = 0 
(5.3.2c) 
k · D = 0. 
(5.3.2d) 
We see that the wave vector k is always perpendicular to B and D from (5.3.2c) and 
(5.3.2d). But we cannot say that k is always perpendicular to H or E unless the 
media are isotropic. In isotropic media, D = εΕ and B = μ,Η. Therefore, D and B 
are parallel to E and H, respectively. Otherwise, the media are called anisotropic. 
Thus, the time-averaged Poynting vector, which is given by (l/2)Re(E x H*), does 
not necessarily point in the direction of k in an anisotropic medium. In other words, 
the direction of power flow of a plane wave may not always be in the direction of 
the wave vector k. 
In Section 5.4 and in Chapter 6, we discuss how characteristic polarizations and 
propagation constants in a given medium are obtained. A characteristic mode or 
normal mode is defined as a wave with a polarization, which does not change 
while propagating in the homogeneous medium. This polarization is called the 
characteristic polarization of the medium. 
5.4 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ISOTROPIC MEDIA 
In isotropic media, the constitutive relations are simply 
D = eE 
(5.4.1) 
B = μΗ. 
(5.4.2) 

5.4 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ISOTROPIC MEDIA 
187 
Thus, D is always parallel to E, and B is parallel to H. Any polarization direction of E 
can be a characteristic polarization of the isotropic medium. Equations (5.3.2a)-
(5.3.2d) become 
k x E = ωμΗ 
(5.4.3a) 
k x H = -ωεΕ 
(5.4.3b) 
k · H = 0 
(5.4.3c) 
k · E = 0. 
(5.4.3d) 
These are the equations satisfied by plane waves in isotropic media. One sees 
clearly that 
(a) k is perpendicular to both E and H. 
(b) k x E points in the direction of H, and k x H points in the direction of — E. 
Thus, the three vectors E, H, and k are perpendicular to each other and they form a 
right-hand coordinate system. 
Let us take the cross-product of (5.4.3a) by k from the left-hand side, 
k x (k x E) = ω/Ak x H. 
(5.4.4) 
The left-hand side can be simplified using the vector identity 
k x (k x E) = (k · E)k - k2E 
= -k2E 
(5.4.5) 
where we have made use of (5.4.3d). We obtain 
-I^E = ω/tk x H 
= ωμ,(-ωεΕ) 
(5.4.6) 
using (5.4.3b). The result is simply 
(k2 - ω2με)Ε = 0. 
(5.4.7) 
The solutions to the above equation are either a trivial solution E = 0 (no field, which 
is not of interest), or 
k2 = ω2με, 
(5.4.8) 
which is the dispersion relation in an isotropic medium. We obtain the propagation 
constant k = ω^/με. If we define the refractive index n = -^/με/μ^εο, where μο = 
4ττ x 10"7H/m, and ε0 = 8.854 x 10"12F/m ~ l0"9/(36ir) F/m, we have 
k = —n 
c 

188 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
and c = l/y/JZ^eö = 3 x 108 m/s is the speed of light in free space. Let us define the 
unit vectors e, h, and k such that 
E = eE 
H = hH 
kk. 
(5.4.9) 
Substituting (5.4.9) into (5.4.3a), we obtain 
kk x eE = ωμϊιΗ. 
(5.4.10) 
Or simply, k x e is in the direction of h. Because k, e, and h are all unit vectors and 
k is perpendicular to e, (5.4.10) leads to 
k x e 
Using k = Wy/fZi, we have 
■ηΗ 
kE = ωμΗ. 
Ύ]= 
y/μ/ε 
(5.4.11) 
(5.4.12) 
where η is called the characteristic impedance of the medium. We conclude, as shown 
in Fig. 5.1, that 
(a) The three unit vectors e, h, and ic construct a right-hand rectangular coordinate 
system. 
(b) The magnitude of the electric field is equal to the magnitude of the magnetic 
field multiplied by the characteristic impedance of the medium η. 
(c) The time-averaged Poynting's power density (W/m2) is 
S = ^ R e E x H * 
2 
2η 
2 1 ' 
(5.4.13) 
D = eE 
-»· k = fck 
k= ω^Ιβε =ψη 
Ε=ηΗ 
η-- if 
Figure 5.1 
In isotropic media, D = εΕ, B = μΗ. The three vectors E, H, and k, or D, B, and k, form a 
right-handed rectangular coordinate system. 

5.5 WAVE PROPAGATION IN LOSSY MEDIA 
189 
5.5 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN LOSSY MEDIA: LORENTZ 
OSCILLATOR MODEL AND METAL PLASMA 
5.5.1 
Propagation Constant and Optical Refractive Index in Semiconductors 
In most semiconductors, μ, = μ^, and the permittivity function is complex, 
ε(ω) = ε'(ω) + ίε"(ω) 
(5.5.1) 
where the real and imaginary parts of the permittivity function satisfy the Kramers -
Kronig relations (Appendix 5A). The complex propagation constant k = k! + ik" can 
be written in terms of the complex refractive index η(ω) = η(ω) + ίκ(ώ) 
£(ω) = ω^/μ^εο [ε'τ(ω) + ίε"(ω)] 
ω 
= —(/!+ IK) 
1/2 
(5.5.2) 
where we have used the real and the imaginary parts of the relative permittivity 
ε[(ω) = ε'(ω)/ε0, 
ε?(ω) = ε"(ω)/ε0. 
(5.5.3) 
The real and the imaginary parts of the refractive index η(ω) and κ(ω) can be 
expressed as 
^ = 
ε[(ω) + ^εΐ(ω) 
+ ef (ω) 
-ε[(ω) + ^ε?{ώ) + ε'?{<») 
(5.5.4a) 
(5.5.4b) 
Experimental data for n and κ of GaAs and InP semiconductors as a function of 
optical energy and wavelength are tabulated and plotted in Appendix B at the end 
of the book. The imaginary part of the complex propagation constant is half of the 
intensity absorption coefficient a. 
where 
and 
£(ω) = -n + i- = k' + ik" 
c 
2 
ω 
2π 
k = —n = — n 
c 
λ 
(5.5.5) 
(5.5.6a) 
ω 
4·7Γ 
α(ω) = 2k" = 2 - κ(ω) = — κ(ω) 
c 
λ 
(5.5.6b) 

190 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
where λ is the wavelength in free space. For a plane wave propagating in the 
+z-direction with a polarization along x, the electric field behaves as follows: 
2-77-
E = x E0 e z = x £OexPI ' — nz 
z 
H = y — e 
=y 
exp 
i—-nz--z 
τη 
η0 
\ 
λ 
2 
(5.5.7a) 
(5.5.7b) 
where η0 = y//x0/so = 1207Γ is the characteristic impedance of the free space. The 
time-averaged Poynting vector for the optical power density is 
S = l R e [ E x H * ] = z - ^ - | £ 0 | 2 e -
2 
2TJ0 
(5.5.8) 
which decays exponentially as the wave propagates farther along the z-direction with 
a decay constant determined by the absorption coefficient. 
5.5.2 
Lorentz Dipole Model 
In a resonant dielectric medium such as a collection of resonant atoms in the presence 
of a driving electromagnetic field E(t), we can model each resonant atom as a classic 
harmonic oscillator, Fig. 5.2. The equation of motion is determined by the reduced 
mass for a free electron with mass m0 bound to a nucleus with mass M [6-8] 
1 
1 
mo 
1 
M' 
(5.5.9) 
Figure 5.2 
A classic dipole oscillator model for an electron bound to a positive nucleus. The resonant 
frequency ωο = \/k/m, 
is characterized by the restoring spring constant k and the reduced mass m,. 

5.5 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN LOSSY MEDIA 
191 
Usually, M 2> m0, therefore, mr« ntQ. The equation of motion for the displacement 
of the electron with a unit charge — q from its equilibrium position is governed by 
d2x 
dx 
m° ~dfi + m°y~dt +kx= 
_<?£(0 
(5.5.10) 
where y is a damping factor and k is the spring constant. For a time harmonic optical 
electromagnetic field, E(t) = E0e~,a", the dipole moment of the electron — q and the 
positive nucleus +q is given by 
-qx(t) 
q2E{t) 
mo(—ω2 - ίγω + a%) 
(5.5.11) 
where a resonant frequency ωο = y/kjmö has been defined. The polarization density 
P due to N atoms or electron-nucleus pairs per unit volume (1/cm3) is 
P = Np = 
Nq2E(t) 
/ποί-ω2 - ί'γω + ω^) 
(5.5.12) 
The displacement vector D is given by 
D = e0E + Pb+P 
l + * b + 
E0 
Nq2 
m0eo(wj5 — ω2 — iyo) 
(5.5.13) 
where we have included the background contribution to the polarization density 
Pb = εο,Υί,ίί· We obtain the permittivity function for the resonant dielectric 
medium or an atomic gas: 
ε(ω) = β0[1 +Xb+X(ü))] 
Nq2 
Α<ω) 
/η 0ε 0 {οί^ — ω2 — ίγω) 
(ω^ — ώ2 — ίγω) 
(5.5.14a) 
(5.5.14b) 
where 
Clip 
Nq2 
moso 
(5.5.15) 
is the plasma frequency. Separating the real and imaginary parts, χ= χ' + ίχ", 
x'(<») 
x'Xoi) 
(ofa2 - ω2) 
(ω2-ώί)2 
+ {Ύω)2 
ω2γω 
(ω2 - ω2)2 + (γω) ,2 ' 
(5.5.16a) 
(5.5.16b) 

192 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
The relative permittivity or dielectric function is given by 
εΓ(ω) = 
= εΓ(ω) + ιετ (ω) 
ε0 
= 1 + At, + *'(*>) + ίχ"(ω) 
(5.5.17a) 
e'r(a>)=\+xb+x'(a>) 
(5.5.17b) 
βΓ"(ω) = *"(ω)· 
(5.5.17c) 
We denote the static (dc) value of the permittivity at zero frequency, 
Xs=xi0) 
= -^ 
(5.5.18a) 
ε8 = er(0) = 1 + xb + Xo. 
(5.5.18b) 
The other limit as ω approaches infinity is ^(°°) = 0» that is, the medium polarization 
simply cannot respond to the fast varying driving electromagnetic field, and the 
dielectric constant in the high-frequency limit is given by the background value: 
Sco = £r(oo) = 1 + Xb. 
(5.5.19) 
Figure 5.3 plots the real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility χ. The imaginary 
part peaks at the resonant frequency ωο as expected, with a full-width at half 
maximum of y. The plasma resonance is also given as 
The real part has a zero crossing at the resonant frequency and is positive for frequency 
below resonance and is negative for frequency above resonance. The complex 
propagation constant is 
k = (Oy/fZ^s = ω^μ0[εύ 
+ ε0χ(ω)] 
«wy^{i+g-lY'+ *>"]} 
= M b + *οΔη + i | 
(5.5.21) 
where «b = \/eb/eo is the background refractive index. 
Here the approximation is valid only if the second term is much smaller than the 
first background permittivity. Otherwise, (5.5.4a) and (5.5.4b) have to be used. We 
have then, 
An = 
χ' = the change in refractive index 
(5.5.22a) 
2nb 

5.5 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN LOSSY MEDIA 
(a) 
„ , 
ω2(α>1-ω2) 
(b) 
ω\γω 
X (ω) = (ωΙ-ω2)2+(γω)2 
>(o 
> co 
Figure 5.3 
Plots for (a) the real part χ'(ω) and (b) the imaginary part χ "(ω) of the susceptibility function 
X (ω) for a resonant dielectric medium with a single resonant frequency ωο and a damping factor y, which 
determines the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the imaginary part. 
and the "intensity" absorption coefficient a = 2Im(/c) is 
a = — x . 
nb 
(5.5.22b) 
The total refractive index is, therefore, 
η(ω) = nb + Δη(ω) = nb + —- χ'(ω). 
2nb 
(5.5.22c) 
5.5.3 
Conducting Media 
The conductivity of a metal is described by the relation between the current density 
and the electric field: J = σΕ 
V x H = -ί'ωεΕ + J 
= — «'ωεΕ + σΕ 
<
β+ί3 E. 
(5.5.23) 

194 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
Therefore, we define the complex permittivity as 
ε(ω) = β + / - . 
(5.5.24) 
ω 
The complex propagation constant is 
k = wJ^(e + i^) « J ^ ( l 
+ 0 
(5.5.25) 
when the frequency is low such that σ / ω ε > 1. The distance when the electromag-
netic field decays by e~l is call the skin depth, δ, which is 
ωμ0σ 
(5.5.26) 
Drude Model for ac Conductivity [6] At high frequency, especially near optical 
frequency, the conductivity is not a constant. A simple model, called the Drude model 
for the free electrons, has been very useful. The model for free carrier conductivity is 
similar to that of the Lorentz oscillator model for bound electrons except that there is 
no restoring force, as if we set the resonant frequency ωο to zero in (5.5.10)-(5.5.14) 
d\ 
mo — + m0y\= 
-qE. 
(5.5.27) 
at 
Another way of understanding the physical process is that the momentum of the elec-
tron changes due to the scattering process and the above equation is written as 
^ = _ P _ ^ E 
(5.5.28) 
at 
τ 
where T (= l/γ) is the momentum lifetime, the average time the electron changes its 
momentum due to scattering processes in the conductor. In the presence of a time-
harmonic electromagnetic field, the solution for the velocity can be obtained, and 
the current density due to the flow of N electrons per unit volume is given by 
J = -M/v = —— 
-Ε = σ(ω)Ε 
(5.5.29) 
m0(y - ιω) 
where we obtain the ac conductivity: 
σ(ω) = — 
— = — 
^— = 
— . 
(5.5.30) 
mo(y — ιω) 
mo(l — ιωτ) 
1 — ιωτ 

5.5 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN LOSSY MEDIA 
195 
The dc conductivity σ0 is given by 
Να2τ 
σ0 = -^— 
(5.5.31a) 
m0 
σ(ω) 
WpEo 
ε(ω) = Soo + i 
= ε«> 
, 
(5.5.31b) 
ω 
or + ιωγ 
Nq2 
ωί=—!—. 
(5.5.31c) 
p 
m0e0 
The background ε«, is used when we include the contributions due to other polariz-
ation contributions. Otherwise, it is given by the free space value. We have the 
complex permittivity for metals: 
, , 
σ0τ 
σ0 
ε(ω) = εοο - — 
^ Τ + 
ι^Γ,—ΟΓΎ\ 
1 + ω ζτ ζ 
ω(1 + οττ1) 
ω?τ2 
ω?τ 
= εοο - ε0
 
F
 2 , + ;ε0
 
ν , , . 
(5.5.32) 
1 + Ο/ΤΖ 
α»(1 + Ο/Τ Ζ) 
Typical values [9] for gold are eoa = 9.84 ε 0,ω ρ= 11.27 x 10 1 5(l/s),andy= 1/τ = 
2.0 x 1014 (1/s). For silver, 8^ = 4.785 ε0, ωρ= 14.385 x 1015 (1/s), and γ = 
7.95 x 1013 (1/s). Figure 5.4a and Fig. 5.4b show the plots of the real and imaginary 
parts of silver (Ag) and gold (Au) over the range from visible to near infrared 
calculated using various models (with more fitting terms than the above simple 
expressions) and compare with experimental data [10-16]. For optical wavelengths, 
the real part of the permittivity is negative. Metal plasma has been used recently for 
surface plasma waveguides and near-field enhancement applications [10-17]. 
Doped Semiconductors 
The complex permittivity of a doped semiconductor is 
very similar to that of the metal at near optical frequency, except that the effective 
mass of the electrons for the n-type doped semiconductors or the holes for the 
p-type doped semiconductors have to be used. In addition, the background permitti-
vity at optical frequency εορ to account for polarization due to other processes beyond 
the free carrier contributions has to be added [6] 
ε(ω) = εορ - m*(w2 + ϊγω) 
ώ2 + ίγω 
ρ ~ m*s0 
= βο Ρ- „, F , . 
(5.5.33) 
ω2=^-. 
(5.5.34) 
When both electrons and holes are present, the free carrier plasma contributions due 
to both are added. 

196 
(a) 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
Wavelength (μηι) 
οοοΊ 
100: 
101 
1-i 
0.1-
10 
s ^ > 
D^jBy 
D 
o 
■*■ o 
Dold and Mecke 
Winsemius et al. 
Leveque et al. 
- LD model 
-BB model 
%^'X 
£<2 
1 
Ag 
Λ. % 
I 
I 
' 
0.1 
(b) 
1 
hv (eV) 
Wavelength (μηι) 
1 
1000·; 
100·! 
; 
10·= 
; * 
1·. 
0.1-
o 
Dold and Mecke 
Λ iheye 
LD model 
^ \ _ 
„„-y 
εα 
^ - ^ 
Au 
ΛΔΑΔΔά 
1 
% 
/
■ 
0.2 
1 
hv (eV) 
Figure 5.4 
(a) Real ε'(ω) and imaginary ε"(ω) parts of the optical dielectric function of Ag: solid curves, 
values that we calculated using the Brendel-Bormann (BB) model [111; dashed curves, the Lorentz-Drude 
(LD) model. Also shown are the selected experimental data points from Dold and Mecke [121, Winsemius 
et al. [131, and Leveque et al. [14]. (b) Real and imaginary parts of the optical dielectric function of Au: solid 
curves, values that we calculated using the BB model; dashed curves, the LD model. Also shown are selected 
experimental data points from Dold and Mecke [12] and Theye [15]. (Reprinted with permissions from [10] 
© 1998 Optical Society of America.) 

5.6 
PLANE WAVE REFLECTION FROM A SURFACE 
197 
5.6 
PLANE WAVE REFLECTION FROM A SURFACE 
In this section, we first discuss plane wave reflection from a single planar interface 
between two dielectric media [1, 3]. We then present a propagation-matrix approach 
to plane wave reflection from a multiple layered medium. 
5.6.1 
TE Polarization 
Consider a plane wave incident on a planar boundary as shown in Fig. 5.5a with the 
electric field given by 
Ei = yEy = yE0e-ikl'x+ik"z 
(5.6.1) 
and the magnetic field given by 
1 
Hi 
= ιωμχ 
- 1 
-V xEi 
ωμ, 
(kux + 
klxz)E0e-ik"x+ik^ 
where the components of the wave vector satisfy the dispersion relation 
ku + k2\z = ο2μ]ει 
= k%n2. 
(5.6.2) 
(5.6.3) 
Here &o = ω^/μ^εο = ω/c is the wave number in free space, and ti\ = 
Λ[/μίε\/μ0εο 
is the refractive index of the material. Usually, μ\ = μο for dielectric materials. 
The reflected fields are given by 
Er = yrE0eik**x+ikHz 
(5.6.4a) 
Hr = — {-k\x 
+ k\xz)r E0eik>'x+ik"z 
(5.6.4b) 
ωμ,, 
(a) 
Hi 
>v 
i"l«l 
ft>«2 
> 
\ 
&I 
y 
>■ X 
Er, 
Λ/ 
H, 
H, 
Figure 5.5 
(a) Plane wave reflection from a planar surface, (b) The phase-matching diagram for plane 
wave reflection and transmission. 

198 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
The transmitted fields are 
E, = ytE0e-ik2*x+ik*z 
(5.6.5a) 
H, = — (k2zx + k2^ytE0e-a^x+ik^ 
(5.6.5b) 
ωμ2 
where 
k\x + k\z = ω2μαε2 = k^n\ 
(5.6.6) 
and «2 = V'&2&i!μοεο· Matching the boundary conditions in which the tangential 
electric field (Ey) is continuous at x = 0, 
E0eiki* + r E0eik<tz = tEQjh* 
(5.6.7) 
for all z, we obtain 
ku = k\z = k2z 
(5.6.8) 
\+r 
= t. 
(5.6.9) 
Equation (5.6.8) is Snell's law or the phase-matching condition, Fig. 5.5b, 
k\ sin ft = k\ sin θτ = fo sin 0t 
(5.6.10) 
or 
ft = ft 
«i sin 0j = «2 sin 0t, 
(5.6.11) 
where &,· = ω^/μ^ε} = Ä^n,·, i = 1,2. The other boundary condition in which the 
tangential magnetic field (Hz) is continuous leads to 
l - r = ^
( 
(5.6.12) 
Solving (5.6.9) and (5.6.12) for r and i, we obtain the reflection coefficient 
j _ ,Vi k^ 
Va k\J 
"i c o s ft _ "2 cos 0t 
— 
— — 
(5.6.13) 
and the transmission coefficient 
, , μ*ι kzx\ 
n\ cosöj +«2 cos 0t 
' = 
7 ^ ^ = 
2W'COSÖi 
„ 
(5.6.14) 
/ Ml «2* \ 
«1 COS 0j + n 2 COS 0t 
μ,2 Α:1Λ 

5.6 
PLANE WAVE REFLECTION FROM A SURFACE 
199 
for the electric field. The fraction of the power reflected from its boundary is given by 
the reflectivity R 
R 
lRe(Er x H*r)x 
iRe(Ei x H,*), 
x=0 
The transmissivity is given by 
4 R e ( E t x H * ) , 
iRe(Ei x H*), 
x=0 
(5.6.15) 
(5.6.16) 
Power conservation requires R + T=\, 
which can also be checked by substituting 
(5.6.13) and (5.6.14) into (5.6.15) and (5.6.16). 
Total Internal Reflection 
We note that when k\ > k2, the total internal reflection 
occurs at an angle of incidence larger than the critical angle 0C, given by the condition 
when 0t = 90° 
k\ sin 0C = k2 
n2 
or 0C = sin 
| — . When Θ, > 0C, klz = k\ sin Θ, > k2, we have 
^Τχ — <h. 
^ΐζ ~ 
2 
U 
^ 
(5.6.17) 
(5.6.18) 
Thus, kix is purely imaginary, k^ = ia2, ac2 > 0, and the field is decaying along the 
—jt-direction, 
Ey = 
tE0ea2X+ik^z. 
The reflection coefficient becomes 
1 - i Ml «2 
-ΐ2ψ,; 
\ + i 
Ml " 2 
Vak\x 
where 
(5.6.19) 
(5.6.20a) 
φη = tan" 
μα^χ 
(5.6.20b) 
It is clear that if 0; > 0C, total internal reflection occurs; the transmissivity is zero 
since k-^ is purely imaginary, and the reflectivity is unity, \r\ = |e~'2*12| = 1. 
However, the reflected field experiences an optical phase shift of an amount 
—2φλ2. This angle is called the Goos-Hänchen phase shift. 

200 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
Special Case for Normal Incidence 
At normal incidence, 0; = 0°, kix = k-1 = 
krfii and k\x = k\ = kQti\. We find the reflection and transmission coefficients for 
the field are, respectively, 
r12 = 
■ 
in = 
; 
(5.6.21) 
Π\ + «2 
n\ + «2 
At an optical energy below the band gap of most semiconductors, the absorption is 
usually small or negligible. Above the band gap, the optical absorption is important. 
When a plane wave is normally incident from the air to a semiconductor surface, the 
reflectivity of the power is 
R 
no — n 
riQ + n 
( " - ^ 
+ ": 
(5.6.22) 
(n + l)2 + K2 
which takes into account the absorption effect when the refractive index n is complex 
and «o of the air is 1. 
Numerical Example 
For InP material, the dispersive effects of the real and the 
imaginary parts η(ω) and κ(ω) are given in Appendix B at the end of the text as a 
function of the photon energy ha> or the free-space wavelength A. At an energy 
hw = 2.0 eV (λ = 0.62 μπι), which is close to that of a HeNe laser wavelength, we 
have n = 3.549, and κ = 0.317. The absorption coefficient is 
4TT 
A-ir 
a = — κ = 
x 0.317 = 6.43 x ΙΟ^πΓ 1. 
λ 
0.62 μπι 
The reflectivity for the reflected power from the semiconductor is 
^ ( 3 . 5 4 9 - l ) 2
 + 0 . 3 1 7 2
= 0 3 i 4 
(3.549 +1) 2 + 0.3172 
5.6.2 
TM Polarization 
The result of TM polarization can be obtained by the duality principle using the 
exchange of the physical quantities in Section 5.6.1. The results are 
H| = y Hy = y H0e~ik"x+ik^ 
(5.6.23a) 
Hr = y riM H0e+ikuX+ik^ 
(5.6.23b) 
H, = 5*™ H0e-ik*x+ik*z 
(5.6.23c) 

5.6 
PLANE WAVE REFLECTION FROM A SURFACE 
201 
where k2z
 = ^u and 
1 + 
^ε2 kij 
n2 cos 0i - «, cos 0t 
^TM = 
7 — T \ = 
^""i 
~Ξ 
(5.6.24a) 
f ε\ Κ2χ\ 
«2 cos 0j + n\ cos 0t 
2«2 COS öi 
,,- ^ „ ., , 
iTM = 
τ~ΐ-\ 
= 
Έ~Γ~ 
ä ■ 
(5.6.24b) 
' ε\Κ2χ\ 
n2 cos 0; + «i cos 0t 
E2 ^U 
Brewster Angle 
For two dielectric media, the reflection coefficient for the TM 
polarized light vanishes when e2k\x = ε^2χ, which means 
n2 cos 0j = ti\ cos 0t. 
(5.6.25a) 
Snell's law requires that 
«i sin θ\ = n2 sin 0t 
(5.6.25b) 
The above two equations are satisfied if θ\ + 0, = 90°. This angle of incidence θ{ at 
which the reflection vanishes is called the Brewster angle 0B 
0B = tan"'(n2/"i)· 
(5.6.26) 
Unlike the critical angle, 0C = sin~'(n2/ni)» which requires n2< ti\, the Brewster 
angle exists for wave transmission in either direction from medium 1 to 2 or 2 to 1. 
For total internal reflection, k^ = ia2, and ΓΓΜ = e~'2^2 where 
J.TM _ 
t „ „ - l / £ l f 2 
Κε2 k\x 
0™ = t a n - 1 ( ^ ^ ) . 
(5.6.27) 
The magnetic field experiences a Goos-Hänchen phase shift of an amount —2φ™ 
when the angle of incidence is larger than the critical angle 0C. 
Example 
Consider InP (n = 3.16) and air interface. We plot the reflectivity of 
power for TE and TM polarizations for plane wave reflection (a) from air to InP 
surface, and (b) from InP toward the air interface in Fig. 5.6a and Fig. 5.6b, respect-
ively. For case (a), there is no total internal reflection. The reflectivity of the TE polari-
zation is always larger than that of the TM polarization. The Brewster angle occurs at 
72.4°. For case (b), total internal reflection occurs at 18.4°, beyond which both TE and 
TM polarized lights have a unity reflectivity. The Brewster angle occurs at 17.6°. 
5.6.3 
Concept of Impedance for Plane Wave Propagation 
In free space, the ratio of the transverse electric and magnetic fields for a plane wave is 
simply η0 = Λ^μ^/εο = 1207τΩ. For a plane wave incident obliquely onto a surface 

202 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
(a) 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
Incident from air to InP 
(b) 
TM 
—
. 
■
'
. 
0 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Incident Angle Θ (degree) 
90 
oi 
fr 
.8; 
o 
C 
Pi 
S 
o 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
07 
06 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
Incident from InP to air 
TM 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Incident Angle 0 (degree) 
Figure 5.6 
(a) The power reflectivities of TE and TM polarized light from air (no = 1) to a semiconduc-
tor (InP, n = 3.16) interface are plotted versus the angle of incidence. The reflectivity of the TM polarized 
light is generally smaller than that of the TE polarized light and vanishes at the Brewster angle, ΘΒ = 
tan"1(«/n0) = 72.4°. (b) When the wave is incident from InP semiconductor into the air interface, 
total internal reflection occurs 
Uur'(n 0/n)= 17.6°. 
at 0C 
(n0/n) = 18.4°, and Brewster angle occurs at 
at JC = 0 between medium 1 and 2, we define an impedance for the TE polarized light 
with Ej = yEy as 
V\ 
ωμ,, 
m i 
^o 
—Hz 
k\x 
y ει cos Θ] 
n\ cos θ\ 
(5.6.28) 
Using (5.6.1) and (5.6.2), we can define rj2 for the transmitted wave similarly. 
The reflection coefficient for the TE polarization is 
r\2 
hi 
1 — (τ7ι/τ?2) = 
V2~V] 
1+(V\/V2) 
Th + 17i 
(5.6.29) 
(5.6.30) 
172 + 171 
For lossless case and the region of no total internal reflection (i.e., η\ and η2 are real), 
r,2 + ti2t2\ = 1. 
(5.6.31) 
5.7 MATRIX OPTICS 
For plane wave reflection from surfaces or a multilayered medium, the matrix 
approach for forward and backward propagation of plane waves becomes a useful 
tool. Here we present a simple formulation for the TE polarized wave or Ey com-
ponent. For TM polarization, we can use the duality principle to obtain similar 
results for the transverse magnetic field Hy. 

5.7 
MATRIX OPTICS 
203 
Medium 1 
Medium 2 
> z 
Figure 5.7 
Schematics for the incoming and outgoing field amplitudes at a dielectric interface between 
medium 1 and medium 2 for the construction of the transition matrix. 
Transmission at an Interface 
The incident and reflected electric field Ey in 
medium 1 can be written as, Fig. 5.7, 
(A,e -ik\xx 
ikuX\Jklzz 
Bxe'K"x)el 
(5.7.1) 
We write similar expressions for Ey in medium 2 with both upward and downward 
components 
-ikixX 
(A2e-'K2*X + B2e'K2'x)e' 
fk2xX\Jk2zz 
(5.7.2) 
where k2z = k\z due to phase matching. Matching the boundary conditions that 
tangential components Ey and Hz = (1/ίωμ)(θΕγ/Θχ) 
are continuous at x = 0, we 
obtain two equations relating the four field amplitudes 
A,+Bi 
=A2+B2 
-*±(Α]-Βι) 
= 
-^(Α2-Β2). 
ωμ] 
ωμ2 
We can recognize that the plane wave impedance 
ωμ, 
Vi 
%ix 
i= 1,2 
for TE polarization. Note the definition 
12 
μ-2 kix 
v2' 
The field amplitudes are related by a 2 x 2 matrix 
(5.7.3a) 
(5.7.3b) 
(5.7.4) 
(5.7.5) 
Ai 
ßi 
= M A2 
B2 
(5.7.6) 

204 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
where 
M 
l+Pn 
1 - P\2 
\-P\2 
1+/Ί2 
1 
t\2 
1 
ri2 
r\i 
1 
T12, 
(5.7.7) 
which defines a 2 x 2 transition matrix T12 from medium 1 into medium 2 interface. 
Alternatively, the relations for the incoming wave amplitudes A\ and B2 toward the 
interface and the outgoing wave amplitudes A2 and B\ can be written in terms of a 
scattering matrix S. 
(5.7.8a) 
(5.7.8b) 
~B\' 
Ai. 
s = 
= s 
ßl. 
>12 
h\ ' 
[t\2 
Γ2\\ 
Propagation over a Uniform Layer of Dielectric Medium 
If we consider the 
plane wave at x = 0 as 
(Ae-** + BelK*xy 
,ikx*\JkzZ 
(5.7.9) 
when the wave is expressed at a uniform layer of a dielectric medium with a thickness 
h, Fig. 5.8, we have (at x = — h) 
E = [A'e-ikAx+h) 
+ B'eikAx+h)]eik'z, 
(5.7.10) 
x = 0 
x = -h 
B' 
A' 
Figure 5.8 
Propagation of plane waves over a uniform dielectric layer of thickness h. 

5.7 
MATRIX OPTICS 
205 
we can see that the field amplitudes are related by a propagation matrix P as below: 
0 
e-ikj, 
0 
Jkxh 
(5.7.11) 
Combination of an Interface Transition Plus a Uniform Layer Propagation 
M = T12P2 = 
-ikixh 
0 
\+Pn 
\-P\i 
Ι - / Ί 2 
I+P12 
(1 + Piz)«?-*2** (1 - 
Pn)eik*h 
(1 - Pn)e-ik2*h 
(\+Pn)eik2'h 
0 
«fat* 
(5.7.12) 
Power Normalized Formulation 
Because the impedance TJS differs from medium 
1 to medium 2, the scattering matrix in (5.7.8b) is not symmetric, namely ί12 Φ t2\. 
Very often, the field amplitude can be redefined to account for the difference 
in impedance 
Ey = a\ \/2T)\ 
e -ik\xx+ik\zz 
such that the incident power along -x-direction is 
i2 
1 
a, 
That is, we redefine 
Then, 
A2 
'2·ηλαχ, 
/2η2^α2, 
B2 
/2η, bx 
/2r}2b2. 
bx 
.«2. = s 
s = 
L 
t 
0 
M. 
r12 
t 
t 
r2\ 
v^ Vi 
r\2 
Vi +V2 
V2-Vi 
Vi + Vx 
We can see the matrix has the property 
S12 = S21 
which follows the reciprocity relation. Power conservation requires 
b2\ 
\ai\2 - 
\b]\2= 
\a2\2 
\b2'2 
(5.7.13a) 
(5.7.13b) 
(5.7.14) 
(5.7.15) 
(5.7.16) 
(5.7.17) 
(5.7.18) 
(5.7.19) 
(5.7.20) 

206 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
which means |αι| + I&2I = \a2\ + \b\\ > 
S+S = I 
or S is unitary. Here I is a unity matrix. 
5,*, S11 + S2*j1S21 = 1 
^1*1 S12 + 52*1 ^22 = 0 
5*2 S] 1 + S 2 2 5 2 1 = 0 
Si*2 5)2 + 5j2 522 = 1 · 
The M-matrix becomes 
(5.7.21) 
~αΓ 
UlJ 
IV 
= M 
, 
1 
[ = 
-
t 
~a2 
[bi\ 
1 
r\2 
nil 
1 J 
, yv\V2 
Vi + Vi 
(5.7.22) 
(5.7.23a) 
(5.7.23b) 
(5.7.23c) 
5.8 PROPAGATION MATRIX APPROACH FOR PLANE WAVE 
REFLECTION FROM A MULTILAYERED MEDIUM 
If the medium is inhomogeneous along the ^-direction ε = ε(χ) and μ = μ(χ), we can 
discretize the permittivity and permeability and use the propagation matrix method. 
We use 
μι = μ{χι) 
et = e{xt) for -de-ι >x> 
-de 
as shown in Fig. 5.9. For a TE polarized incident wave 
Ej = yE0e-ik,"x+ik<*z 
(5.8.1) 
we have the reflected wave 
Er = yrEoeikO'x+ih*z. 
(5.8.2) 
In the £th layer, xt-1 > x > xt, the electric field is given by Ee = yE^ where 
-ikb(x+di) 
1 d „, 
Efy = [Aee-,Kb{x+ai> 
+ Bee 
H[ 
,iktAx+dt)~\ gikezZ 
ίωμ( dx 
y 
ωμ( [Aee -iku(x+di) 
Bte[ ik/Ax+dehg'hzZ 
(5.8.3) 

5.8 
PROPAGATION MATRIX APPROACH FOR PLANE WAVE REFLECTION 
207 
x~ 0 
x2 = -d-2 
" 
JC^ = 
- f ^ 
> 
Region 0 
*1 
V l 
Λ*+1 
1 
2 
/-l 
* 
*+l 
N 
f = JV4 
^ 
1 
* 
\ 
X 
*rEQ 
«) 
ft 
ft 
<k> 
ει 
«2 
N*< /-< 
^+l Λ+, 
Ht 
VM 
ε< 
e<+l 
^ 
A 
tk 
£t 
" w + , _ w 
AN+l = tE0 
Figure 5.9 
A plane wave with TE polarization E = y, Ey = y, E0 e~'ta-x+ita'z is incident on a multilayered 
medium. 
and k(x = JαΡ-μ(ει — k,QZ, k(z = koz for all t. The boundary conditions in which Ey 
and Hz are continuous at x = —de lead to 
Ae + Be = Ae+xe~ik""^-di+d'") 
+ 
BMeik(M^~dt+dM) 
Ae-Be 
= ^ + ' * [A^e-^nxi-de+dnO 
_ ^ g i W C - r f r h f r u ) ] . 
( 5 
8 4 ) 
Again, similar to the propagation method in a one-dimensional potential in the 
Schrödinger equation, we define 
W+D 
fJ-e+^tx 
and the thickness of the region I + 1 
he+\ = de+\ — de-
We have 
(5.8.5) 
(5.8.6) 
At 
Be 
B t(l+\) Ae+i 
Be+\ 
(5.8.7a) 

208 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
where the backward-propagation matrix B^+i) is defined as 
B «M-n 
(l+/V+i)K"'*,"lx,'!" 
(1 - 
Pm+x))e-ik«^h» 
( 1 + % , ) ) ^ " * 
MfM-DMM-l) 
(5.8.7b) 
which is simply the product of an interface transmission matrix T^e+i) followed by a 
uniform layer propagation matrix, P^+i, in medium £ + 1 , as shown in (5.7.12). 
Alternatively, we can define a forward-propagation matrix F^ +,^ 
Ηί+\)ΐ 
Αί+\ 
(\+P{e+l)e)eik<'"»>"" 
(1 - 
P(M)de-^^ht^ 
v(.e+i)t B, 
(1 -/ν+ιχ)<*",>Λ" 
(\+P(M)de-ik^h,n 
(5.8.8a) 
(5.8.8b) 
Note that Py+w = W + D -
The amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves are related to those amplitudes 
in the transmitted region N + 1 by 
~E0-
rE0 
= B01B12B23 
~bu 
bn 
bl\ 
^22. 
B/v(/v+i) 
~tE0 
. 0 . 
A-N+\ 
.BN+\ 
. 
(5.8.9) 
where BN+i = 0 as there is no incident wave from the bottom region in Fig. 5.9. We 
obtain the transmission coefficient of the multilayered medium 
t = 
1 
and the reflection coefficient of the multilayered medium 
bi\ 
r = 
b7<-
The electric field in the transmitted region is given by 
£ 
— (£ 
e-'k(N\t)x(x-dHtl)e'kHtnzZ_ 
(5.8.10) 
(5.8.11) 
(5.8.12) 
Because we use dN as the bottom boundary, the last region N + I can be chosen such 
that /*Λ/+Ι = CIN+\ — dfj = Q for convenience. It means that the field will be measured 
with dN+1 = dN. 

5.8 
PROPAGATION MATRIX APPROACH FOR PLANE WAVE REFLECTION 
209 
k 
d 
• 
X 
\ f 
\ 
/ 
r 
W<) 
A*i«i 
*o 
*1 
\ 
^ ^ 2 
^2 
Figure 5.10 
A plane wave reflection from a dielectric slab with a thickness d. 
As an example, we consider a dielectric slab with a thickness d as 
Fig. 5.10. The backward-propagation matrices B0i and Bi2 are 
B 01 
B 12 
(\ + Pm)e-ik**d 
( 1 -
(\-Pm)e~ik^d 
( H 
(1+P, 2) 
( Ι - Λ 2 ) 
( Ι - Λ 2 ) 
( Ι + Λ 2 ) 
Po.)e*W 
shown in 
(5.8.13) 
(5.8.14) 
We calculate the matrix product BoiB12, then the transmission coefficient, 
1 
4g*i. 
.*!,</ 
toxhie 
ik\xd 
(1 + Poi)(l + Λ2ΧΙ + ΓοιΓ,ζβ0*'^] 
and the reflection coefficient 
1 + r0iri2e' ilkud 
where 
&21 
bu 
rt(i+\) 
ilkud 
m + n 2 e' 
1 +r0ir12e,'2*i*<i 
<V+D 
1 
W+l) 
(5.8.15) 
(5.8.16) 
(5.8.17) 
is the reflection coefficient of a planar surface between medium I and medium I + 1. 
Note that ri(e+n = -r(M)e 
as Pe(M) = 
\/Ρ{Μ)ί. 
For TM polarization, we use the duality principle again: exchange E —► H, H —> 
—E, μι —> ε^, and ε^ —> μ^. 
Example 
In Fig. 5.11, we plot the power reflectivity of a slab of InP semiconductor 
assuming a refractive index of n = 3.16 near the wavelength of 1.55 μπι. We can see 
the multiple Fabry-Perot interferences with maxima and minima of the reflectivity 
determined by 2k\d= 2rmror 2k\d= (2m + \)π, respectively. In other words, the 
reflectivity vanishes at r0i + rl2 exp(i2kid) = 0, which gives the conditions for the 
wavelengths for minimum or maximum reflectivity. 

210 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
1.550 
1.552 
1.554 
1.556 
Λθ(μτη) 
1.558 
1.560 
Figure 5.11 
Power reflectivity (/?) and transmissivity (T) of a slab of InP semiconductor with a refractive 
index n = 3.16 near 1.55 μπι wavelength. The dispersion of the refractive index is ignored. 
5.9 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERIODIC MEDIA 
5.9.1 
Dispersion Diagram and Stop Bands 
When the dielectric medium is periodic, the concept of dispersion relation similar to 
that of band structure of semiconductor crystals exists. There are "stop bands" similar 
to those of forbidden band gaps in semiconductors. For a simple one-dimensional 
periodic structure with a period Λ, 
er(jc) = ε(χ + Λ) = ^ 
speip V 
(5.9.1) 
p——oo 
where ερ is the ptii component of the Fourier series expansion. The wave solution 
(e.g., TE polarization) E = y Ey(x) has the form 
Ey(x) = eikxuk(x) = 
J2EneikX+i"^1 
(5.9.2) 
where uk(x) is a periodic function, uk(x + Λ) = uk(x). The wave equation 
Θ2 
ω2 
dx2 
-ετ(χ) Ey(x) = 0. 
(5.9.3) 
Let g = 2·π-/Λ as the grating wave number. The wave equation can be written in terms 
of the Fourier series expansion 
J2 (k + ng)2Eneiik+ng)x + ^- Σ Σ 
BpEne^+i0l+p)gx 
= 0. 
(5.9.4) 

5.9 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERIODIC MEDIA 
211 
Multiplying the above by e ,(k+mg)x and integrating x over a period Λ, we retain the 
rath component of Em 
2 
°° 
- ( * + mg)2Em + °^Σ 
sPEm~P = °· 
( 5 · 9 · 5 ) 
The above equations for different m become a set of linearly coupled equations, 
which require numerical solution of the determinantal equation with truncation by 
keeping a finite number of m. If we separate the Em term in the summation from 
the rest of p φ 0 
E- = ^2 Σ 
—Em-P 
(5.9.6) 
c
 
P*o(k + 
mg)2-^nl 
where no = ε0 or the dc term is used. If E0 is the dominant term (i.e., E0 elkx), the 
rest are 
2 
Em ~ ~ 
^ 
^E0, 
m Φ 0. 
(5.9.7) 
{k + mgY - -^η^ 
On the other hand, strong coupling between various Em components occurs near 
ω 
k + mg=±-n0, 
m = 0, ±1, ±2, ... 
(5.9.8) 
c 
The set of curves on the ω-k diagram indicate various Fourier series components or 
"Floquet" modes with wave vector given by 
ω 
(k + mg)x = + — nnx, 
(5.9.9) 
c 
Fig. 5.12a. For example, the dispersion curve 
ω 
k = -nn 
(5.9.10) 
c 
for the En el 
mode will be coupled to another mode 
k-g=--nn 
(5.9.11) 
c 
or the E-\e,(-k~g)x mode with ω-k relation given above, Fig. 5.12b. The resonance 
occurs near the intercept of two lines at the "Bragg" wave number 
kB=- 
= — n 0 = - r . 
(5.9.12) 
2 
c 
A 

212 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
Figure 5.12 
(a) The dispersion diagrams of the Floquet modes, where the intercepts of positive and 
negative traveling waves form stop bands, (b) An expansion near the stop band formed between the Oth 
order and —1 order Floquet mode. 
We can write the dominant terms near the Bragg wavelength by keeping the m = 0 
and m = — 1 terms in the coupled equations 
-~>2 9 
A 
ft»2 
-nl-k2 
£ 0 + - e i £ _ 1 = 0 
(5.9.13a) 
-ε_,£Ό 
ω -nl-{k-g)2 
£_, = 0. 
(5.9.13b) 
For nontrivial solutions, the determinant vanishes 
{-ΑΑ\(-Α-*-8Ϋ - * ί = ο 
(5.9.14) 

5.9 WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERIODIC MEDIA 
213 
2 
where we have defined k2 = ^ y/B\E~\- 
To understand the stop band behavior near 
the Bragg wavelength, we further approximate 
f—«oj -k2 = (-n0 + k) (-n0 - k) 
^g("n0-k) 
(^noj-(k-g)2~g 
-n0 + (k- g) 
The determinantal equation is reduced to 
(-n0 
-k 
-n0 + (k-g) 4 = 0 
g2 
which allows for the solution for k 
The stop band occurs near, Fig. 5.12b, 
ω 
α>Β 
- n 0 
«o 
c 
c 
< k2 
Wg y/s\S-\ 
ωβ y/εχε-ι 
or 
ω — ωβ < 
g 
cL 
g 
2nn 
H 
Δω 
~2~' 
(5.9.15a) 
(5.9.15b) 
(5.9.16) 
(5.9.17) 
(5.9.18) 
(5.9.19) 
5.9.2 
Plane Wave Reflection from a Distributed-Bragg Reflector 
Distributed-Bragg reflectors (DBRs) play an important role in optical filters and 
mirrors, which are used in vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) and 
microcavity lasers [18]. In this section, we apply the transition matrix or propagation 
matrix approach, which allows for numerical calculation of the DBR structure. A 
typical design requires a structure consisting of (2N + 1) layers of alternating high 
and low refractive indices nx and n2, with the layer thicknesses h\ and h2 close to 
a quarter of the resonant (Bragg) wavelength in each layer, Fig. 5.13. For example, 
if we choose the Bragg resonant wavelength as λΒ, 
Ari\ 
In general, we can define the phase factors 
h2 = 
4«2' 
= k\h 
2TT 
1"1 
-n\h\, 
φ2= kih2 
2TT 
«2^2 
(5.9.20) 

214 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
Period 1 
Period 2 
1 
2 
3 = 1 
4 = 2 
«1 
Λ[ = Ag/4n] 
. 1 
Π2 
/&2 = Xg/4n2 
1 ' 
n2 
^4 = ^2 
2ΛΓ-1 
2N 
2N+1 
"l 
,, 
Λ2Λί-1= Α1 
"2 
h2N = h2 
" 1 
. , 
Λ2Λί+1 = Λ 1 
Periods 
f 
n, 
A, —> set arbitrary 
or zero 
Figure 5.13 
A distributed-Bragg reflector (DBR) structure consisting of (2N + 1) layers of alternating 
quarter-wavelength high and low index materials. 
for arbitrary thicknesses h\ and h2. The propagate matrix gives the relation 
A0 
Bo 
= Boi(Bi2B23)(B34B45) ■ ■ · (B(2/v-l)2wB2/V(2/V+l))B(2AM-1)/ 
N 
Γ^° 
= B Q I M Β(2Λί+1); 
tA0 
0 
(5.9.21) 
where M is the product of two matrices for one period of nx and n2 layers 
M = B12B 
12»21 
A B 
C D 
and the matrix elements are 
(5.9.22) 
4η\Π2 
Λη\Π2 
B 
nL_?±\ei<i>,ie-i<h_ei>h) 
An\n2 
2 
2 
4«i«2 
1 
e-'0.(e'<*2 _e-i<h-) 
= B* 
4«i«2 
4ni«2 
(5.9.23) 

5.9 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERIODIC MEDIA 
A, B, C, and D satisfy the property 
AD-BC= 
1, 
215 
(5.9.24) 
that is, the matrix M is unimodular. In addition, the above structure gives the property 
that A = D* and B = C*. Therefore, 
| A | 2 - | C | 2 = 1 
(5.9.25) 
The Mh power of the unimodular matrix can be written in terms of the Chebychev 
polynomials U^x) 
ΜΛ 
A 
DIN 
Γ 
AB 
m\\ 
nt\2 
C 
D\ 
[m2\ 
m22 
A UN-1 (x) - UN-2(x) 
BUN-1 (x) 
CUN_t(x) 
θυΝ.λ{χ) 
- UN-2(x) 
(5.9.26) 
where x = (A + D)/2, and the Chebychev polynomials satisfy the recurrence 
relation, 
UN+i(x) = 2xUN(x) - UN_t(x), 
(5.9.27) 
with U0(x) = 1, U\(x) = 2x, U2(x) — 4x — 1, etc., and 
Ufa) = 0 if i < 0. 
(5.9.28) 
Another form of writing U^x) is 
UN(x) 
sin(N+ 1)0 
sin Θ 
where 
x = cos Θ = (A + D)/2. 
(5.9.29) 
(5.9.30) 
When \{A + D)/2\ > 1, the solution for Θ becomes complex 
Θ = rrnr + ia 
sinh(W+ \)a 
UN{x) = ± 
sinha 
(5.9.31) 
(5.9.32) 

216 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
where + signs refer to 
sin {mir + ia) = cos trnri sinh a 
= (— \)mi sinh a = ± i sinh a 
sin [(N + \)(mTT+ia)] = (-l)m(/v+1)isinh [(N + \)a] 
= ±i sinh [(W+l)«] 
(5.9.33) 
which depends on m = even or odd, and (N + \)m is even or odd. Note that 
Boi = 1 
1+ —)β_,'ψ| 
1 
le· 
«o/ 
V 
«o/ 
(5.9.34) 
is just a propagation matrix for a uniform layer. B(2/v+i)< is 
B, (2ΛΤ+1)/ 
1 + ^ 
«1 
n, 
1 - — 
"1 
1 - ^ 
«1 
n, 
1+ — 
«1 
(5.9.35) 
If we consider n0 = nx and n, = ti\, which implies matched index layers for region 0 
and t to «!, we have B(2jv+i)/ = a unity matrix. Therefore, 
β~ίφ' 
0 
0 
β''*' 
Ίηη 
Wi2~ 
m2\ 
m21 
«ι,ιΓ^ι 
ηΐι2β'ίφι 
ηι2Χείφ< 
m ne^ _ 
~ t~ 
.0. 
(5.9.36) 
The reflection coefficient for the (2N + 1) layer structure (when n0 = n\ and n, — n\) 
is, therefore, 
wi 1 
Ai//v-i(x) - UN-2(x) 
and 
(5.9.37) 
tN = 
έ 
mu 
>Φ\ 
The magnitude of \rN\2 is 
\rN\ 
CUN.x{x) 
AUN-\{x)- 
UN-2(x) 
(5.9.38) 
(5.9.39) 

5.9 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERIODIC MEDIA 
217 
Using the fact that \A\2 = \C\2 + 1 and some algebraic manipulation, we can write 
|rN|2 as 
\rN\ 
sin0 
sinjVÖ 
(5.9.40) 
or inside the stop band Θ = rrnr + ia. 
\rN\ 
\c\2 
sinh a 
sinh Na 
(5.9.41) 
It is noted that when N = \, 
(5.9.42) 
Therefore, 
Ä, 
1 
1-Ä, 
(5.9.43) 
The magnitude of \C\2 is related to the power reflectivity of a single period, R\ 
\r\Y. For (2N + 1) layers, the power reflectivity becomes 
\rN\2= 
( sinh a 
I sinh (Na) 
(5.9.44) 
As N approaches a large number, (sinh α/sinh (Na))2 —► exp(—2(N — 1 )a) —> zero. 
Therefore \rN\2 —> unity in the stop band. Figure 5.14a plots the power reflectivity 
spectrum |r;y|2 as a function of frequency ω near the stop band. In Fig. 5.14b, we 
plot the phase ΘΝ of rN = \rN\eie" from (5.9.37). 
Special Case Right at Resonance λ = λΒ 
At exact resonance wavelength, φλ = 
kxh\ = TT/2 and φ^ = k2h2 = π/2. The matrix M can be simplified as 
M = B,2B 
12«21 
«]_ 
«2 
^ 1 _ ^ 2 
«2 
«1 
"2 
fl\ 
Π\ 
«2 
«I 
"2 
.«2 
«1 
12 
n l -
(5.9.45) 

218 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
(a) 1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
CM 
^ 0 . 4 
0.2 
"=20 
Γ 
Λ 
„1=3.52 
I 
j 
f)2 = 2.95 
Λ/\Λ 
λΒ = 0.98 μιη 
\ΛΛ 
0.8 
(b) 
0 
■σ 
CO 
i . 
-π 
-2π 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
ω/ωΒ 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.1 
1.2 
-2π 
1.2 
Figure 5.14 
(a) The power reflectivity of a DBR structure \rN\ is plotted as a function of wavelength 
near the stop band wavelength, (b) The phase of the reflection coefficient rN. The parameters are «i = 
3.52, n2 = 2.95, AB = 0.98 μπι, ht = AB/(4n,) = 69.60 nm, and h2 = AB/(4n2) = 83.05 nm. 
M " can be evaluated using the simple identity 
(-i) A 
2N 
a + b a — b 
a — b a + b 
aV-b» 
aX + b» 
(5.9.46) 
which can be proved easily by induction, that is, it is true when N= I. Assume 
the above form is valid at n = N (as it is true at N = 1), then prove that it is true 
when n — N+ 1. We then find 
B Q I M Β(2Λί+ΐ)ί 
au 
an 
L «21 
«22 
(5.9.47) 

5.9 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN PERIODIC MEDIA 
219 
where the matrix elements are 
«11 
an 
«21 
«22 
2 
V «o 
(-if 
"1 
2 
(-if 
2 
(-if 
V 
"o 
«i 
(_ / ) (_ α"^ί + 
^ 
i a 
«o 
,/v 
rti , bN 
nt 
«1 
(5.9.48) 
2 
V «o 
«l, 
We obtain the reflection coefficient at resonance wavelength 
b" 
rN 
" l 
bf( 
fn2 
\n\ 
'nt\ 
x2/V 
J 
+ 
- ( 
\ 
aN( 
' n] 
JlQltt ) 
J 
2N 
n0n, 
(5.9.49) 
The above expressions for the reflection of the electric field at resonance Bragg wave-
length λΒ has many important applications. Notice that as N —> oo, we have 
rN 
+ 1 
if ri2> Π] 
— 1 
if «2 < «l · 
(5.9.50) 
The DBR layers work as a perfect magnetic or electric conductor depending on 
n2> n\ or rii<n\. 
In addition, the reflection coefficient vanishes for the index 
matched structure, that is, 
rN = 0 
if 
IN 
n0n, 
(5.9.51) 
which is the condition for perfect transmission. In Fig. 5.15, we plot \rN\ as a func-
tion of the number of periods Νίοτηχ (GaAs) = 3.52 and n2 (AlAs) = 2.95 at AB = 
0.98 μΐϋ [18] assuming n0 = nt= ηλ (GaAs) = 3.52 
2N 
1 
rN 
{ηι/πχ) 
(η2/ηι)2Ν 
+ 1 
(5.9.52) 

220 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
Figure 5.15 
The power reflectivity at resonant wavelength as a function of the number of periods, N, 
which gives a total of 2JV + 1 quarter-wavelength layers. The parameters are nt = 3.52, n2 = 2.95, and 
the resonant wavelength is 0.98 μηι. 
We can see the power reflectivity \rN\ approaches unity quickly as N is above 10 for 
n2jnx = 2.95/3.52 = 0.838 
IN 
vm 
1 - 4 
1 - 4 
«2 
«1 
"2 
IN 
if n\ > ni and N —> oo 
if «i < «2 and N —> co. 
(5.9.53) 
APPENDIX 5A: KRAMERS-KRONIG RELATIONS 
The induced electric polarization P in a material is due to the response of the medium 
to an electric field E (ignoring the spatial dependence on r): 
= 
e0\ 
Pft) = e0 
χ(ί-τ)Ε(τ)άτ 
ε0 
Λ<τ)Ε(ί - τ)άτ. 
(5A.1) 
The integration over τ is from -co to t in the first expression as the response P(i) at 
time t comes from the excitation field before t. In other words, the function χ(τ) has 
the property that 
χ(τ) = 0 
for T < 0, 
(5A.2) 
that is, the system is causal. Because 
D(i) = e0E(f) + Ρ(ί), 
(5Α.3) 

APPENDIX 5A: KRAMERS-KRONIG RELATIONS 
221 
we find in the frequency domain 
Ό(ω) = ε(ω)Ε(ω) 
by taking the Fourier transform of (5A.3) where 
ε(ω) = ε0 1 + 
Χ(τ)ειωτατ 
o 
Because χ(τ) is a real function (it is in the time domain), we see that 
ε(—ω) = ε*(ω). 
If we write ε(ω) in terms of its real and imaginary parts, 
ε(ω) = ε'(ω) + ϊε"(ώ) 
we find that 
ε'(-ω) = ε'(ω) 
ε"(-ω) = -ε"(ω) 
(5Α.4) 
(5Α.5) 
(5Α.6) 
(5Α.7) 
(5Α.8) 
(5Α.9) 
that is, the real part of ε(ω) is an even function, and the imaginary part is an odd func-
tion of ω. Another physical property of ε(ω) is that, in the high-frequency limit, ε(ω) 
tends to ε0, because the polarization processes P(r), which are responsible for χ, 
cannot occur when the field changes sufficiently rapidly [4] 
e(oo) -> ε0. 
Define an integral / in the complex ω' plane, 
2 777 
εο 
d 
άω' 
(5A.10) 
(5A.11) 
where the closed contour C is shown in Fig. 5.16. It is in the upper ω'-plane. The 
function ε(ω) is analytic in the upper-half plane, as when ω' = ωΛ + ίω,, the inte-
grand in (5A.5) includes an exponentially decreasing factor e~°"T when ω7 > 0. 
Because the function χ(τ) is finite (for a physical process) throughout 0 < τ < oo, 
the integral in (5A.5) converges. 
Because the function ε(ω') — ε0 is analytic in the upper ω'-plane, the closed 
contour does not have any poles; therefore, the integral / vanishes using Cauchy's 
theorem. By breaking the contour into three parts, (i) on the real axis, —R < ω' < 
ω — 8, ω + 8 < ω' < R, (ii) along the infinitesimally small semicircle near ω with 
a radius 8, and (iii) along the big semicircle with a large radius R, we find that the 
contribution due to part (iii) is zero as R —> oo. Therefore, as 8 —> 0, the integration 

222 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
A Im ω' = ω, 
I ω' plane 
-fc-Re<ö' = o>R 
Figure 5.16 The integration contour on the upper-half ω' plane for the derivation of the Kramers-Kronig 
relations. 
along part (i) is the principle value (denoted by P) of the integration along the real 
axis from —oo to +00, and we obtain 
1 
2m 
6»Χ.' , ! 
f ^ ' ) - ^ . . / 
ί ^ ^ ' + l f 
J 
ω — ω 
2m J (xJ — ω άω' = 0. 
(5A.12) 
The second integral equals — | [ε(ω) — εη], which can be evaluated simply by a 
change of variable from ω' to θ, ω' — ω = δβ'θ at a constant radius 8. We find 
ε(ω) - ε0 
f ε(ω') - ε0 
i 
J 
a/ — ω άω'. 
We separate (5A. 13) into the real and imaginary parts and find 
00 
β'(„)_β0=ΐι» 
l^-dj 
π 
J or — ω 
(5A.13) 
(5A.14) 
", Λ 
' o f 
ε' ( ω / ) ~ ε° ^ ' 
ε (ω) = 
P 
αω . 
ττ 
J 
ω — ω 
(5A.15) 
The above results are the Kramers-Kronig relations, which relate the real and the 
imaginary parts of ε(ω) to each other. If we make use of the even property of the 
real part ε'(ω) and the odd property of the imaginary part ε"(ω), we obtain alternatively 
ε'(ω) - ε0 = ^Ρ ί 
I 
00 
•I 
2ο[ω'ε"(ω')αω, 
ö / 2 - ω 2 
ε (ω) = 
P I —^ 
—αω. 
IT 
J uf1 — ω2 
o 
(5A.16) 
(5A.17) 

PROBLEMS 
223 
Similar relations between the real part and imaginary part of the complex refractive 
index, Λ(ώ) = η{ώ) + ίκ(ω) exist 
00 
f doJ κ(ώ) 
η(ώ) - 1 = P \ 
j ^ - 
(5A.18) 
J 
7Γ ω — ω 
— CO 
00 
Γ άω' η(ω') -
J 
7Γ 
ft/ 
— i 
Κ(ω) = -Ρ | ^ ^ L ^ . 
(5A.19) 
ω 
PROBLEMS 
5.1 
Check the duality principle using (5.1.12). 
5.2 
For a laser light with a power 1 mW propagating in a GaAs semiconductor 
(n = 3.5) waveguide with a cross section 10 μιτι x 1 μιτι, find (a) the power 
density if we assume the intensity is uniform with the waveguide cross 
section, (b) the electric field strength and the magnetic field strength assuming 
it is a uniform plane wave. 
5.3 
Derive (5.5.4a) and (5.5.4b). 
5.4 
Plot the real and imaginary parts of the relative permittivity using (5.5.32) for 
gold and check with Fig. 5.4. 
5.5 
(a) A plane wave is reflected between the free space and a bulk GaAs semi-
conductor with a refractive index assumed to be n = 3.5. Calculate the 
reflection and the transmission coefficients of the field, r and i, at 
normal incidence. 
(b) Repeat part (a) if the wave is incident from the GaAs region onto the 
GaAs/air interface at normal incidence. 
(c) For oblique incidence in part (b), find the critical angle and the Brewster 
angle. 
5.6 
For a plane wave incident from an InP region (n = 3.16 and free space wave-
length A = 1.55 μπι) to air with an angle of incidence Θ, = 15°, calculate (a) 
the reflection and the transmission coefficients, r and t, of the optical field for 
both TE and TM polarizations, and (b) the reflectivity R and the transmissivity 
T for both polarizations. 
5.7 
Calculate the Goos-Hänchen phase shifts for an angle of incidence Θ, — 45° 
between an InP/air interface for both TE and TM polarizations (n = 3.16 and 
λ = 1.55 μιτι). 
5.8 
(a) Calculate the reflection and transmission coefficients, r and t, for a plane 
wave normally incident on a slab of GaAs sample with a thickness d = 
10 μηπ and a refractive index n = 3.5 at a wavelength λ = 1 μιτι. 
(b) Find the power reflectivity and transmissivity in part (a). 

224 
ELECTROMAGNETICS AND LIGHT PROPAGATION 
5.9 
(a) Derive the M matrix for a slab structure of refractive index n2 sandwiched 
by medium ti\ on both sides. M — T12P2T21. 
(b) Using the result in (a), derive the reflection and transmission coefficient 
through the slab. 
5.10 
Derive the 5 matrix in (5.7.15)-(5.7.18). 
5.11 
Simplify (5.9.23) for a DBR structure at resonant wavelength and show that 
the results agree with (5.9.45). 
5.12 
Prove (5.9.26) by induction. Hint: Check N = 1 is true. Assume (5.9.26) is 
true for N. Then show it is true for N + 1. 
5.13 
Plot \rN\2 for a DBR structure with N = 8 as a function of ω near Bragg frequency 
(or Bragg wavelength λΒ = 1.55 μπι, ωβ = 2m?/λΒ). Assume n \ = 3.5, n2 = 3.2, 
h\ = λΒ/4/ΐ|, and h2 = λΒ/4η2. Also, n0 = n, = n\. 
5.14 
Derive (5.9.40) from (5.9.39). 
5.15 
Prove (5.9.46) by induction. 
5.16 
Plot |ov|2 as a function of N for n, (GaAs) = 3.52, n2 (Al0.2 Gao.g As) = 3.39 
at a resonant wavelength of λΒ = 0.98 μιη. 
REFERENCES 
1. J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory, Wiley, New York, 2000. 
2. J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1999. 
3. L. C. Shen and J. A. Kong, Applied Electromagnetism, Brooks/Cole Engineering 
Division, Monterey, CA, 1983. 
4. L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, and L. P. Pitaevskii, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, 
2nd ed., Pergamon Press, New York, 1984. 
5. H. A. Haus, Waves and Fields in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1984. 
6. M. Fox, Optical Properties of Solids, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2002. 
7. A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Photonics—Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, 6th ed., 
Oxford University Press, New York, 2007. 
8. B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 
2007. 
9. E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants, Academic Press, Orlando, 1985. 
10. A. D. Rakic. A. B. Djurisic, J. M. Elazar, and M. L. Majewski, "Optical properties of met-
allic films for vertical-cavity optoelectronic devices," Appl. Optics. 37, 5271-5283, 
(1998). 
U.R. Brendel and D. Bormann, "An infrared dielectric function model for amorphous solids," 
J. Appl. Phys. 71, 1-6 (1992). 
12. B. Dold and R. Mecke, "Optische eigenschaften von cdelmctallen, übergangsmetallen und 
deren legierungen im infrarot (1. Teil)," Optik 22, 435-446 (1965). 

REFERENCES 
225 
13. P. Winsemius, H. P. Langkeek, and F. F. van Kampen, "Structure dependence of the 
optical properties of Cu, Ag and Au," Physica 79B, 529-546 (1975). 
14. G. Leveque, C. G. Olson, and D. W. Lynch, "Reflectance spectra and dielectric functions 
of Ag in the region of interband transitions," Phys. Rev. B 27, 4654-4660 (1983). 
15. M. L. Theye, "Investigation of the optical properties of Au by means of thin semitrans-
parent films," Phys. Rev. B 2, 3060-3078 (1970). 
16. P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, "Optical constants of the Nobel Metals," Phys. Rev. B 6, 
4370-4379(1972). 
17. C. Oubre and P. Nordlander, "Optical properties of metallodielectric nanostructures 
calculated using the finite difference time domain method," J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 
17740-17747(2004). 
18. L. A. Coldren and E. R. Hegblom, "Fundamental issues in VCSEL design," Chapter 2 in 
Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers, C. W. Wilmsen, H. Temkin, and L. A. Coldren, 
eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1999. 


Light Propagation in Anisotropie Media 
and Radiation 
The propagation of light is an extremely interesting topic because many common 
phenomena such as refraction of light, polarization properties of light, and scattering 
of light can be observed every day. The Rayleigh scattering of light by water mole-
cules has been used to explain why the sky is blue in the daytime and red in the 
evening. In Section 6.1, we discuss some basic properties of the propagation of elec-
tromagnetic waves in uniaxial media [1, 2]. We then present light propagation in 
gyrotropic media and the magnetooptic effects [3,4] in Section 6.2. The phenomenon 
of Faraday rotation and its application to optical isolators are discussed. In Section 
6.3, we present the general solutions to Maxwell's equations for a given current 
density J and a charge density p, which satisfy the continuity equation. We discuss 
the gauge transformation including the Lorentz gauge and the Coulomb gauge; the 
latter will be used in the Hamiltonian to account for the interaction between the elec-
trons and the photon field in semiconductors in Chapter 9. The radiation of the 
electromagnetic field is presented in Section 6.4 with the aim that the far-field 
pattern from a diode laser and laser arrays [5] will be derived once we know the 
laser mode on the facet of the laser cavity. 
6.1 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN UNIAXIAL MEDIA 
Consider the case of a uniaxial medium [1,2] described by 
D = e-E 
~ε 
0 
0 
ε = 
0 ε 
0 
0 
0 
εζ 
Β = μΗ 
(6.1.1a) 
(6.1.1b) 
(6.1.2) 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright (c) 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
227 

228 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
in the principal coordinate system, which means that the coordinate system has been 
chosen such that the permittivity matrix ε has been diagonahzed. Two of the three 
diagonal values are equal in a uniaxial medium. The medium is positive uniaxial if 
εζ> ε and negative uniaxial if εζ < ε. The z axis is called the optical axis. 
6.1.1 
Field Solutions 
Because the medium described by (6.1.1) and (6.1.2) is invariant under any rotation 
around the z axis, we can always choose the plane containing the wave vector k and 
the z axis to be the x-z plane, that is, 
k = xkx +zkz 
kx = k sin Θ, kz = k cos Θ 
without loss of generality, as shown in Fig. 6.1. In Table 6.1, we summarize the forms 
of vectors and dyadics and their corresponding matrix representations. 
Using (5.3.2a) and (5.3.2b) for plane wave solutions to Maxwell's equations, 
we have 
k x (k x E) = k x ωΒ 
= ω/ik x H 
= -ω2με· 
Ε 
(6.1.3a) 
(6.1.3b) 
(6.1.3c) 
and the matrix representation (see Table 6.1) for the cross-product, kx, we have 
-L 
0 
kx 
0 
-kx 
0 
2 ΓΜ 
Ey 
-ω2μ 
ε 
0 
0 
0 
ε 
0 
0 
0 
ε7 
(6.1.4) 
k, = k cos Θ 
k = xkx + ikz 
= xk sin θ+ik cos6 
► 
JC 
kx = k sin Θ 
Figure 6.1 
The wave vector k in the x-z plane. 

6.1 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN UNIAXIAL MEDIA 
229 
Table 6.1 
Representations of Vectors, Dyadics, and Their Corresponding 
Matrix Forms 
Vectors and Dyadics 
Matrices 
a = axx + ayy + azz 
a · b = axbx + ayby + a:bz 
(a-b)(c-d) = a - ( b c ) - d 
where 
be = bxcxxx + bxcyxy + bxczxz 
+ bycxyx + bycyyy + byczyz 
+ bzcxzx + bzCyiy + bzczzz 
k x E 
x 
y 
z 
KX 
Ky 
KZ 
= x(kyEz — kzEy) 
+ 
y(kzEx-kxEz) 
+ z(kxEy - kyEx) 
zx 
(kxx + kzz) x 
a'b 
(a'bXc'd) = a'(bc')d 
bc' = 
[CXCyCZ] 
= 
b 
b 
b 
kxE = 
= 
zx = 
(kxx + l 
xcx 
b 
yCx 
b 
zcx 
b 
xCy 
yCy 
ZCy 
bxcz 
bycz 
bzcz 
0 
- * . 
ky' 
kz 
0 
-kx 
~ky 
kX 
0 
\KytLz 
KZtLy) 
Kr-z^x 
ΚχΕ'ζ) 
\KXC,y 
KyC,X) 
"0 
- 1 
0' 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
hi )x -
' 0 
kz 
0 
Ex~ 
Ey 
β ι . 
-kz 
0 
kx 
0 
-kx 
0 
The left-hand side of (6.1.4) is 
-*? 
0 
KXKZ 
0 
-k2
x-k] 
0 
tCxKz 
0 
-*? 
The matrix equation (6.1.4) can be written as 
*z
2 
ω2μυε 
0 
k2
x + k1 - αΐμε 
κχΚζ 
"'Χ'^'Ζ 
k1 — ω2μεζ 
(6.1.5) 

230 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
To have nontrivial solutions for the electric field, we require that the determinant 
of the matrix in the above equation be zero. That is, 
(k2 + k\ - ω2με) [(k2
z - ω2με) (ΐξ - ω2μεζ) - k2 k2] = 0. 
(6.1.6) 
There are two possible solutions. 
Solution 1 Ordinary Waves 
k2+k2-ü>2ße 
= 0. 
(6.1.7) 
If (6.1.7) is true, we find from (6.1.5), which contains three algebraic equations, that 
Ey can be arbitrary except zero (for nontrivial solution) 
(6.1.8a) 
and 
Ex = Ez=0. 
(6.1.8b) 
That is, if the electric field is polarized only in the y direction, the wave vector 
must satisfy the dispersion relation given by (6.1.7). The solutions of the fields are, 
therefore, 
E=5>£0e'k"r 
(6.1.9a) 
H = — k x E = — (-xkz + zkJEoe'*·* 
(6.1.9b) 
ωμ 
ωμ 
B = μΗ = - (-xkz + zkx)E0eik-r 
(6.1.9c) 
ω 
D = ε · E = yEE0e^T. 
(6.1.9d) 
We can see that for an electric field polarized in the y direction, it will propagate with 
a wave number k = ωΛ/μΈ and its polarization remains _y-polarized. Therefore, this 
polarization (6.1.9a) is a characteristic polarization of the uniaxial medium. 
Solution 2 
Extraordinary Waves 
k2 
k2 
-Γ- 
+ -τ-=1 
(6-1.10) 
ατμεζ 
ατμε 
which is obtained by setting the square bracket in (6.1.6) to zero. If (6.1.10) is true, 
we find immediately from (6.1.5) that 
Ey = 0 (because k2 + k2 - ω2με # 0 
if (6.1.10) is true) 
(6.1.11) 

6.1 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN UNIAXIAL MEDIA 
231 
and 
(k2 - ω2με)Εχ - kxkzEz = 0. 
Using (6.1.10) and (6.1.12a), we obtain 
( - ; < ■) 
*^X 
ΚΧΚΖΕ.Ζ 
— 
" 
or simply 
which is the same as 
kxeEx + kzezEz — 0 
k · D = 0. 
(6.1.12a) 
(6.1.12b) 
(6.1.12c) 
(6.1.12d) 
The complete solutions of the fields obeying (6.1.11) and (6.1.12c) are given by 
E = xEx + zEz = (x - 
z^\EMeikT 
H = — k x E = — 
ωμ 
ωμ 
x 
y 
z 
kx 
0 
kz 
Er 
0 E7 
y-rEae*·* 
k7 
B = 
nH=yÜ^EMe*-< 
D = ε · E = χεΕχ + ζεζΕζ 
(6.1.13a) 
(6.1.13b) 
(6.1.13c) 
(6.1.13d) 
The polarization of the electric field given by Eq. (6.1.13a) is another characteristic 
polarization of the uniaxial medium because it is a characteristic mode of the 
medium from the fact that the fields (6.1.13a)—(6.1.13d) satisfy all of Maxwell's 
equations. This wave propagates with a wave vector determined by Eq. (6.1.10). 
We note again that 
k-D = 0 
k-B = 0 
k.H = 0as(B//H) 
k-E Φ 0! 
(6.1.14a) 
(6.1.14b) 
(6.1.14c) 
(6.1.14d) 
Thus the wave vector k is not perpendicular to the electric field E. The complex 
Poynting vector, ExH*, is therefore not in the direction of k. The solutions of the 
fields (6.1.13a)—(6.1.13d) are called extraordinary waves. The dispersion relation 
of the extraordinary waves is given by Eq. (6.1.10). On the other hand, the solutions 
of the fields (6.1.9a)-(6.1.9d), for which the wave vector k is perpendicular to E, H, 

232 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
(a) 
n 
i— 
<" 
ωνμε 
=-rn 
k = xkx + £fcz 
xk sin Θ + zk cos Θ 
-*, 
/ 
(O 
ωφιε 
=—η 
(b) 
k « H = 0 
k«B = 0 
k = xkx + zkz 
xk sin Θ + zk cos 0 
k ' D = 0 
k - E * 0 
Figure 6.2 
A summary of the k vector and the field vectors for (a) ordinary waves and (b) extraordinary 
waves. 
D, and B, are called ordinary waves. The complex Poynting vector points in the direc-
tion of k. The ordinary waves behave the same as those in isotropic media with a per-
mittivity ε. A summary of results of the ordinary and extraordinary waves is shown 
in Fig. 6.2. 
6.1.2 k Surfaces 
We may plot the dispersion relations such as (6.1.7) and (6.1.10) in the k-space. For 
the ordinary waves in case (a), Eq. (6.1.7) is a circle with a radius ωΛ/με in the kx-kz 
plane. For the extraordinary waves in case (b), Eq. (6.1.10) is an ellipse in the kx-kz 
plane. We summarize the results as follows. 
(a) Ordinary wave surface: 
k^-\-k\ = ω2με 
(Ε must be polarized in the y direction). 
(6.1.15) 

6.1 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN UNIAXIAL MEDIA 
233 
In other words, E must be polarized in the direction perpendicular to the plane 
containing both the optical axis and the wave vector k for ordinary waves. The 
wave number k = ω^/με = a>n0/c and the refractive index n0 — 
Λι/με/μ0εο. 
(b) Extraordinary wave surface: 
+ -
αΡ-μεζ 
uP-με — 1 (E must lie on the x—z plane). 
(6.1.16) 
Here ωΛι/μεζ — wne/c. The extraordinary wave surface has two principal axes 
given by ω/ι,,/c and <one/c. The electric field E must be polarized in the plane 
containing both the optical axis and the wave vector k. The results are shown 
in Fig. 6.2 and Fig. 6.3. 
Remember we have made use of the symmetry of the media with respect to the z axis 
(the optical axis). The plane containing the optical axis and the wave vector k is 
chosen to be the x-z plane. If we allow the wave vector k to rotate around the z 
axis, we would expect that: 
(a) The ordinary waves will have the electric field perpendicular to the wave 
vector k and the optical axis, and the dispersion relation is a spherical 
surface in the k-space 
Ιξ+Ιξ+ k\ = ω2με. 
(6.1.17) 
(b) The extraordinary waves will have the electric field polarized in the plane con-
taining the optical axis and the wave vector k. The dispersion relation is given 
λ-surfaces for εζ > ε 
λ-surface for the 
ordinary wave 
*z 
i 
(optical axis) 
1 
ω\/με J 
ω^μέ=^η0 
kk 
I 
(0 
, a>Jßez =—ne 
/t-surface for the 
extraordinary wave 
Figure 6.3 
A plot of the k surfaces for the ordinary wave and the extraordinary wave of a uniaxial 
medium. 

234 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
by an ellipsoid in the k-space 
k2 
k? 
k2 
*' 
+-?- 
+ -!^=\, 
(6.1.18) 
ώιμεζ 
ω2μεζ 
αΡ-με 
which is a result of rotating the ellipse of (6.1.16) around the optical axis. 
Special Cases 
(1) If the wave propagates perpendicularly to the optical axis, for example, k =xk, 
ky = kz = 0, we have from (6.1.9a) and (6.1.13a) either 
E = yE0eik'r = yE0eik°x 
k0 = wJJLe 
(ordinary waves) 
(6.1.19) 
or 
E = z£o£*'r = zEoe,k,x 
ke = ω^μεζ 
(extraordinary waves). 
(6.1.20) 
Note that when kz = 0, one finds Ex = 0 from (6.1.12c), and (6.1.13a) should 
reduce to (6.1.20). 
(2) If the wave propagates parallel to the optical axis, that is, k =zk, kx — ky = 0, 
we have from (6.1.9a) and (6.1.13a) again 
E = yE0e,k"z 
(for E polarized in the y direction) 
(6.1.21) 
and 
E = xE0eiU 
(for E polarized in the x-z plane). 
(6.1.22) 
Both electric fields propagate with the same wave number k0 = ω^/με and 
both are perpendicular to the direction of propagation! The ordinary wave 
and the extraordinary wave become degenerate (both are ordinary waves now). 
(3) In general, the wave propagates in a direction with an angle Θ to the optical 
axis. We have the dispersion relation 
k2 = k2 sin2 0 + k2 cos2 θ = ω2με 
(6.1.23) 
for the ordinary waves. The phase velocity 
ω _ 
1 
k 
Λ/με 
vP=T 
= ^= 
(6.1.24) 
is independent of the angle Θ for ordinary waves (remember that the polari-
zation of the electric field is perpendicular to k and the optical axis). For 

6.1 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN UNIAXIAL MEDIA 
235 
the extraordinary waves, for which E is on the χ—ζ plane, we have 
k2 /sin2 Θ cos2 θ\ 
ω2 
/sin2 Θ cos2 θ\ _ 
\ μεζ 
με 
) 
1. 
The phase velocity is 
_ w _ / s i n 2 0 
cos 20\' / 2_ 
l 
Λ 
p 
~k 
\ μεζ 
με ) 
^/με \ε 
which depends on the angle of propagation. 
\'/2 
-sin20 + cos20 
(6.1.25) 
(6.1.26) 
6.1.3 
Index Ellipsoid 
For a given permittivity matrix ε, we define an impermeability matrix K as its inverse 
An index ellipsoid is defined as 
K = ε 
3 
εο 2_^ Kijx'xj 
(6.1.27) 
(6.1.28) 
where Ky are the elements of the matrix K, and x\ = x,x2 = y, *3 = z. In the principal 
axis system such that ε is diagonalized 
ε = ε0 
K 
0 
0 
0 
n] 
0 
0 
0 
n2 
(6.1.29) 
the index ellipsoid Eq. (6.1.28) becomes 
x2 
y2 
z2 
, 
K 
ny 
nz 
(6.1.30) 
which is plotted in Fig. 6.4. If nx = ny = n„ (ordinary refractive index) and nz = ne 
(extraordinary refractive index) in a uniaxial medium as described by (6.1.1), we have 
I 
f 
z2 
1. 
(6.1.31) 
It should be noted that the index ellipsoid is directly defined from the inverse of the 
permittivity function, and it contains information about the refractive indices of the 
characteristic polarizations. On the other hand, the k surfaces depend on the polariz-
ation and the direction of wave propagation. For a uniaxial medium, there are two 
^-surfaces: one for the ordinary wave and the other for the extraordinary wave, 
with only one index ellipsoid to define the medium. 

236 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
Index ellipsoid 
„2 
Figure 6.4 
An index ellipsoid in the principal axis system for which the permittivity matrix is 
diagonalized. 
6.1.4 
Applications 
Quarter-Wave Plate (QWP) 
Based on the special case in (6.1.19) and (6.1.20), we 
assume a plane wave incident from the free space to a slab of uniaxial medium with 
ε = 
ε 
0 
0 
0 
ε 
0 
0 
0 
ε7 
(6.1.32) 
Consider an incident electric field from free space given by 
= tyTi+lin) 
E0e' ikx 
(6.1.33) 
which is linearly polarized and k = ω^/μ^εο is the propagation constant in free 
space, Fig. 6.5. We also assume that the permeability of the uniaxial medium μ is 
the same as that of the free space μο· The electric field makes an angle of 45° with 
the v and z axes. After passing through the uniaxial medium, the electric field will 
be (ignoring the reflections at the boundaries) 
yV2 
\[2 
(6.1.34) 
because the y component of the electric field will be an ordinary wave and it propagates 
with a wavenumber ko = ω^/με, and the z component of the electric field will be an 
extraordinary wave with a wavenumber kg = ω^μεζ. 
If we choose the thickness d 
such that the phase difference between the two components of the electric field to be 
90° or multiplied by an odd integer (assuming εζ > ε), 
(*e - K)d = ■ 
7Γ 37Γ 
(2/1+1)77 etc. (nan integer), 
(6.1.35) 

6.1 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN UNIAXIAL MEDIA 
237 
k = xk 
Figure 6.5 
A plane wave E incident on a uniaxial medium with a thickness d. The electric field vector 
makes an angle of 45° with the two principal (y and z) axes. 
we obtain 
E=[y + 
ze^-^]^e^d 
v 2 
= (y±iz)^eik»d 
for (^ - kjd = 
π 
2' 
3π 
T' 
which becomes circularly polarized at the output end x 
2ir 
ω 
Ke = — = 
ne 
Ae 
C 
2π 
a 
£ O = T - = 
-
Ao 
c 
I 
5π 
7TT 
T' 
= </. 
9π 
Ύ' 
IITT 
~2~ 
Using 
and defining 
Ad 
\ne - n0 
where A is the wavelength in free space (ω/c = 2ττ/λ), we have 
Ad 3A</ 5Ad 
a = —, - ^ , 
—r-,... 
(6.1.36) 
(6.1.37a) 
(6.1.37b) 
(6.1.37c) 
(6.1.38) 
Thus the plate, which can transform an incident linearly polarized wave into a circularly 
polarized wave, is called a quarter-wave plate. Note that the value kd is neither the 
wavelength in the free space nor the wavelength in the uniaxial medium (it corresponds 

238 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
with 27Tdivided by the difference in the two wave numbers k,. and k„). In many crystals 
such as lithium niobate (LiNb03) or KDP (KH2P04), the refractive indices have the 
property ne < n„. Some crystals such as quartz (Si02), ne > n0. The velocities of the 
two characteristic polarizations c/ne and c/na are not equal. The axis along which 
the polarization propagates faster is called the fast axis and the other axis is called 
the slow axis. 
Polaroid 
If we have a uniaxial medium given by 
ε = 
ε 
0 
0 
ε 
0 
0 
0 
0 ε, + i σ7 
(6.1.39) 
we see that for an incident wave propagating in the x direction, if the electric field 
is polarized in the y direction, it will propagate through with a propagation constant 
&o = ω^/με, which is real. However, if E is polarized in the z direction, it will 
propagate with a complex propagation constant 
ke = ω.μ(εζ 
+ i—) 9* ω.ϊμ— 
for — » εζ 
(6.1.40) 
V V 
ω/ 
ν 
ω 
ω 
and the wave will be attenuated significantly in the medium. Thus, if the thickness of 
the plate is large enough, an incident field with an arbitrary polarization will have its z 
component attenuated when passing through the plate. The transmitted field will be 
essentially polarized in the y direction only, which is linearly polarized. 
Example 
An experimental setup for an absorber of laser light uses a polaroid, a 
quarter-wave plate, and a mirror as shown in Fig. 6.6. For an incident light with 
Polaroid 
Quarter-wave plate 
Mirror 
Figure 6.6 
An experimental setup with a polaroid, a quarter-wave plate (QWP), and a mirror for com-
plete absorption of the light incident from the left side. 

6.2 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN GYROTROPIC MEDIA: MAGNETOOPTIC EFFECTS 
239 
an optical field Ein randomly polarized and propagating along the z direction, the 
transmitted field E, after passing through the polaroid is linearly polarized along 
the direction of the passing axis, which makes 45° with the x and y axes 
m 
E0e,Kz. 
The wave Ei also makes 45° with the fast and slow axes of the quarter-wave plate. 
The transmitted field at z = d is 
E 2 = x - ^ e x p ( « 7 « r r f ) + ^ e x p ( « - n i r f ) 
= (x + ye^)^P(i^nfd) 
where |r(ns
 — nt)d = π/2 for a quarter-wave plate. The reflected wave from the 
mirror is 
E3 = -(Jc + y*/2)-^=exp(i"iifrf)exp(-i*oZ) 
propagating in the — z direction. Upon impinging on the quarter-wave plate at z = d, 
the x component of the electric field propagates with a propagation constant <onf/c, 
and the y component propagates with a propagation constant wns/c again with an 
additional phase difference of ττ/2 
E4 = -(x + ye,7T) —f=exp(i — nf2d) 
exp(-ikoz). 
Therefore, E 4 is linearly polarized in the direction (x — y), which is along the absorb-
ing axis of the polaroid. The final output light Eou, = 0 because E 4 is absorbed by the 
Polaroid. 
This setup actually works as a light absorber that can be used to absorb laser light 
to avoid stray light reflections in the laboratory. 
6.2 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN GYROTROPIC MEDIA: 
MAGNETOOPTIC EFFECTS 
In this section, we present a general formulation to find the electromagnetic fields 
with the characteristic polarizations of gyrotropic media [1,3, 4]. The magnetooptic 
effects are then investigated. 

240 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
The constitutive relations for gyrotropic media are given by [1] 
D = ε · Ε 
ε = 
ε 
ieg 
0 
-/eg 
ε 
0 
0 
0 
ε7 
Β = μΗ. 
(6.2.1a) 
(6.2.1b) 
(6.2.2) 
One example is a plasma with an externally applied dc magnetic field B0 in the 
z direction, of which the parameters are: 
ε = ε0 
ε„ = ε0 
εζ = ε0 
ω„ 
ω ρ
2ω ς 
ω(α>2 — ω2) 
,..2' 
1 
where 
is the cyclotron frequency, and 
wc = qBo/m 
ojp = 
(6.2.3a) 
(6.2.3b) 
(6.2.3c) 
(6.2.4) 
(6.2.5) 
is the plasma frequency for a carrier density N. Here m = rriQ is the free electron mass. 
For the carrier effects in semiconductors, the effective mass of the carriers (electrons 
and holes) should be used. 
Note the geometry of the medium considered is rotation-invariant around the z 
axis. Thus, we may consider the propagation wave vector k to be in the x-z plane 
without loss of generality 
k — xkx + zkz. 
We repeat the Maxwell equations for plane-wave solutions here: 
k x Ε = ωΒ 
k x H = -ωΌ 
k-B = 0 
k-D = 0. 
(6.2.6) 
(6.2.7a) 
(6.2.7b) 
(6.2.7c) 
(6.2.7d) 

6.2 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN GYROTROPIC MEDIA: MAGNETOOPTIC EFFECTS 
241 
Using (6.2.7a), (6.2.7b), and (6.2.2), we obtain 
k x (k x E) = ωμ-k x H = —ω2με · Ε. 
Or equivalently, the above vector equation can be written in a matrix representation 
following Table 6.1: 
0 
0 
kz 
0 
kx 
0 " 
-kx 
0 
2 ~EX~ 
Ey 
_EZ_ 
= —ωμ 
ε 
-ies 
0 
/eg 
ε 
0 
0 " 
0 
ε ζ _ 
'Ε' 
Ey 
Ez 
(6.2.8) 
We carry out the square of the matrix on the left-hand side and move to the right 
to obtain: 
k2 — ω2με 
-ιωτμε% 
ιω με& 
k1. + k\ — ω2με 
lcxkz 
0 
-kxkz 
k2. — ω2μεζ 
= 0. 
(6.2.9) 
The dispersion relation is obtained by setting the determinant of the matrix to zero for 
nontrivial solutions for the electric field. We obtain after some algebra 
(kl + k2 - ω2με)(-ω2με^ 
- ω2μεζ£ + ω4μ2εεζ) - ω4μ2ε2^2 - ω2μεζ) = 0 
gv-x 
(6.2.10) 
Rewrite the wave vector k in terms of the angle Θ with respect to the z axis, 
k = xkx + zkz = xk sin θ+zk cos Θ 
and define the constants 
K = ω^/με 
(6.2.11a) 
Κζ = ω^/μ~ε~ζ 
(6.2.11b) 
Kg = ω^/με&. 
(6.2.11c) 
Equation (6.2.10) reduces to 
k*(K2 sinz Θ + K[cos2 Θ) - k2[(K* - /φsin z Θ + KLK\cos2 θ + ΚλΚζ
ζ] 
+ (K4 - KpK2 = o 
(6.2.12) 
which has the form 
k4A-k2B 
+ C-=0. 
The solution k is easily obtained from 

242 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
where 
A = Kl sin2 θ + K2 cos2 θ 
Β=(κΛ 
- ΚΛλ sin2 θ + Κ2Κ2(\ + cos2 θ) 
c = (Α:4 - KfjK2. 
Using (6.2.9) again, we have 
r£ 2cos 20-A: 2 
iKl 
k2 - K2 
-iKl 
-^ 2 sin0 cos« 
—k2 sin flcos Θ 
0 
0 
-k2 sin Θ - K2 
= 0 
(6.2.14) 
where k is given by the two possible roots in (6.2.13). Because the above determi-
nant of the matrix is zero, Eq. (6.2.14) contains three algebraic equations, which are 
linearly dependent. Using the second and the third equations in (6.2.14), we find 
(6.2.15a) 
(6.2.15b) 
Ex 
k2 - K2 
Ey 
-iKj 
Ex 
k2 sin2 Θ -~*l 
Ez 
k2 sin 0cos Θ 
where two possible values of k2 are given by the roots in (6.2.13). 
Special Cases 
Case (1): 0 = 0 . The wave is propagating parallel to the magnetic field. Equation 
(6.2.14) becomes 
-k2-K2 
*l 
0 
-iKl 
k2-K2 
0 
0 
0 
-K;2-
~EX~ 
Ey 
Ez 
= 0. 
We have 
and 
Ez = 0, as K2 Φ 0 
{k2-K2)2-K\=V>. 
We obtain two roots for k2, 
k\ =K2 ±K2 = ω2μ(ε ± eB). 
(6.2.16) 
(6.2.17) 
(6.2.18) 
(6.2.19) 

6.2 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN GYROTROPIC MEDIA: MAGNETOOPTIC EFFECTS 
243 
Substituting the above roots back into (6.2.16), we find 
Ey 
k2-K2 
±K2 
_ 
τχ = ~^Γ = Ίκι=+ι 
iOTk = ω^ ( ε ±^· 
(6.2.20) 
Combining (6.2.17) and (6.2.20), we see that if the wave is propagating parallel to 
the magnetic field, the wave will be circularly polarized. Let us assume that the 
wave is propagating in the +z direction; we have either 
(a) 
—i, k = ω^/μ(ε + ε$) 
(6.2.21) 
the wave is left-hand circularly polarized (LHCP), or 
(b) 
— = +/', k = ω^/μ(ε - eg) 
(6.2.22) 
Ex 
the wave is right-hand circularly polarized (RHCP). 
Case (2): Θ = —. The wave is propagating perpendicularly to the magnetic field. 
Equation (6.2.14) becomes 
r-κ2 
-iKl 
iKl 
k2 - K2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Ki 
0. 
(6.2.23) 
Possible nontrivial solutions for the electric field will be 
(a) 
K2 Ez Φ 0. 
(6.2.24) 
If k = K2 is true, we find that Ex = 0, Ey = 0 from the first two equations 
in (6.2.23). Therefore, we obtain that the characteristic polarization is linear 
polarization in the z direction, E = zEz and the propagation constant is 
k = Kz = ω^/μεζ. 
(b) -Kz(kz - Kz) -Κΐ=0, 
which leads to 
*2 = Λ Γ 2 - ^ 
K2' 
(6.2.25) 
If (6.2.25) is true, then k2 φ K2, Ez = 0, and 
(6.2.26) 
The wave is generally elliptically polarized in the x—y plane with a propa-
gation constant k = 
(κ4 — Κ*λ/Κ2. The wave vector is always on the 

244 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
x—y plane as Θ ■ π Furthermore, if ε„ = 0, the medium becomes uniaxial. 
Equations (6.2.24) to (6.2.26) show that either the electric field is polarized 
in the z direction and k2 = K2 or polarized in the y direction [as Ex = 
0, Ez = 0 from (6.2.26)] and r = /T. Both waves are linearly polarized 
propagating with different velocities. This birefringence is called the 
Cotton-Mouton effect. 
Faraday Rotation 
Let us consider a slab of gyrotropic medium with a dc magnetic 
field applied in the +z direction and the wave propagated parallel to the dc magnetic 
field. This is the special case (1) 0 = 0 discussed before, and the two characteristic 
polarizations are left- and right-hand circularly polarized with corresponding propa-
gation constants given by Eqs. (6.2.21) and (6.2.22). 
Consider an incident plane wave as shown in Fig. 6.7 with 
E = xE0e' ,ikz 
(6.2.27) 
Upon striking the interface at z = 0, the wave will break up into two circularly polar-
ized waves: 
E = {x-iy) — e 
^>+z + (jc + #)^y-z. 
(6.2.28) 
These two circularly polarized waves propagate with two different wave numbers, k+ 
and k . As discussed before, k+ = ω^/μ(ε ± eg). At z = d, we have 
XEo{ 
2 
J +^°( 
2 
)■ 
(6.2.29) 
E = xE0eib 
n 
k = & 
H 
Figure 6.7 
A linearly polarized plane wave E incident on a gyrotropic medium experiences Faraday 
rotation after passing through the medium at z = d. 

6.2 
WAVE PROPAGATION IN GYROTROPIC MEDIA: MAGNETOOPTIC EFFECTS 
245 
Thus, we have the ratio of the y component to the x component of the electric field 
Ey 
e'^d-e
ikd 
Ex ~ 
' e'k+d + eikd 
Uk+-k.)d-\ 
— tan 
~ 
L 
2 
(6.2.30) 
which is a real number. Thus the electric field at z = d is again linearly polarized 
making an angle 
ep = (k+-k-)d 
( 6 2 3 1 ) 
with the x axis. We conclude that the incident linearly polarized wave (in the x direc-
tion) is rotated by an angle θγ at x = d, which is called the Faraday rotation. 
Because 
the 
Faraday 
angle 
0p depends 
on 
the difference 
between 
k+ = ω^/μ(ε + eg) and /r_ = ω^μ(ε — eg), the carrier density n and the effective 
mass of the electrons can be measured from the magnetooptic effects using the 
Faraday rotation as discussed above. Another setup is called the Voigt configuration 
for which the propagation direction is perpendicular to the direction of the applied dc 
magnetic field zB0. The incident wave is chosen to be linearly polarized at an angle of 
45° with respect to the static magnetic field. The transmitted wave does not experi-
ence a rotation; it becomes elliptically polarized, however. The phase angle or the 
amount of ellipticity is determined by the difference of the propagation constants 
of the two characteristic polarizations, which is related to the plasma frequency ωρ 
and the cyclotron frequency cuc. For more discussions on the magnetooptic effects 
and their measurements in semiconductors, see Ref. 3. 
Optical Isolator 
An important optical component is an optical isolator, which 
allows light to transmit in only one direction. Figure 6.8 shows the configuration 
using two polarizers making 45° with each other and a Faraday rotator. Incident 
light propagating along the z direction becomes linearly polarized along the x direc-
tion after passing through polarizer 1 with x as the passing axis. The ^-polarized light 
is rotated 45° by the Faraday rotator and becomes aligned with the passing axis with 
polarizer 2. Therefore, light is transmitted in the +z direction. On the other hand, if 
the light is incident from the right side and propagates along the -z direction, it 
becomes polarized along 45° with respect to the x axis after passing through polarizer 
2. The light polarization is further rotated by 45° after passing through the Faraday 
rotator and becomes polarized along the y direction, which aligns with the absorbing 
axis of polarizer 1. Therefore, this light is absorbed. Thin film materials such as 
yttrium iron garnet (YIG) and terbium gallium garnet (TGG) have been used in a 
permanent magnetic field to make compact optical isolators. 

246 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
Incident 
light 
Wave propogates 
in -z direction 
Absorbed by 
polarized 1 
(No output) 
Polarizer 2 
y 
Polarizer 1 
y (Absorbing axis) 
Figure 6.8 
An optical isolator consists of a Faraday rotator between two polarizers (1 and 2), which make 
45° with respect to each other. The light propagating along the +z direction is transmitted, whereas the light 
propagating along the -z direction is absorbed by polarizer 1. 
6.3 GENERAL SOLUTIONS TO MAXWELL'S EQUATIONS 
AND GAUGE TRANSFORMATIONS 
In this section, we study the general solutions [1] to Maxwell's equations, 
V x E = - - B 
dt 
(6.3.1) 
V x H = J + - D 
dt 
V-D = p 
V-B = 0 
(6.3.2) 
(6.3.3) 
(6.3.4) 
where the source terms p and J satisfy the continuity equation 
V.J + - p = 0. 
Because 
(6.3.5) 
V. (V x A) = 0 
(6.3.6) 

6.3 SOLUTIONS TO MAXWELL'S EQUATIONS AND GAUGE TRANSFORMATIONS 247 
for any vector A, we can write B in the form 
B = V x A. 
(6.3.7) 
However, this equation does not uniquely specify A. If we add V£ to A, where ξ is an 
arbitrary function, we find that 
A = A + νξ 
(6.3.8) 
still satisfies V x A' = B. From the fundamental theorem of vector analysis, to 
uniquely define a vector A, we have to specify both its curl and its divergence. 
Substituting (6.3.7) into (6.3.1), we obtain 
V X / E + ^ A J = 0 . 
(6.3.9) 
Because V x ( - V</>) = 0 for any function φ, we may write 
E = --A-V</>. 
(6.3.10) 
dt 
Assume an isotropic homogeneous medium, 
D = eE 
(6.3.11) 
Β = μΗ. 
(6.3.12) 
Substituting the expressions for B and E from (6.3.7) and (6.3.10) into (6.3.2), 
we find 
Γν2Α-^ — Α\-ν(ν.Α + με^\=-μ3 
(6.3.13) 
where the vector identity 
Vx V x A = V(V-A)-V2A 
(6.3.14) 
has been used. Gauss's law for the electric field (6.3.3) gives 
ν 2ψ + - ( ν · Α ) = - - . 
(6.3.15) 
dt 
ε 
Thus, generally speaking, we should find the solutions for the scalar potential φ and 
the vector potential A from (6.3.13) and (6.3.15) in terms of the sources p and J. We 
still have to choose a gauge to uniquely specify the potentials φ and A. For any φ and 
A satisfying (6.3.7) and (6.3.10), the following gauge transformations 
A' = A + V£ 
(6.3.16) 
φ' = φ-^ξ 
(6.3.17) 

248 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
also satisfy (6.3.7) and (6.3.10) where ξ is an arbitrary function. Thus, we have to 
specify V· A. There are two common ways to specify V· A, called the Lorentz 
gauge and the Coulomb gauge. 
(1) Lorentz Gauge. In the Lorentz gauge, we choose 
ν·Α = -με-?-. 
(6.3.18) 
at 
We then have 
ν2Α-με—,Χ = -μ5 
(6.3.19) 
dt2 
O2 
ν2φ-με-,φ=-^. 
(6.3.20) 
That is, the vector and scalar potentials satisfy the wave equations with 
sources J and p, respectively. The solutions can be written generally as 
, ο ^ ί ί ^ ^ 
A(r,/) = -P 
n 
7, " 
<6·3·21) 
4-TTJ 
|r-r" 
1 f^p(r^-^) 
;J i r - r ' 
«fcr, 0 = ^
| 
v ,_ _„ 
(6.3.22) 
where the time delay due to propagation, |r — r'|/c, appears explicitly in the 
arguments of the source terms. 
(2) Coulomb Gauge [2]. In the Coulomb gauge, we choose 
V-A = 0. 
(6.3.23) 
Therefore, 
ν 2 φ = - - 
(6.3.24) 
ε 
which is Poisson's equation. The solution is 
*.„ 
■ \ψ^>. 
(6.3.25, 
4πε. Γ - Γ ' 
The solution for A has to be found from (6.3.13) and (6.3.23). For an optical 
3 
field, p = 0, we also find φ = 0 and E = — — A. 
dt 

6.4 
RADIATION AND THE FAR-FIELD PATTERN 
249 
6.4 
RADIATION AND THE FAR-FIELD PATTERN 
6.4.1 
General Expressions for Radiation Fields 
We write (6.3.19) and (6.3.20) in the Lorentz gauge (V·A =-με8φ/8ΐ) 
in the 
frequency domain 
V2A(r) + ω2μεΑ(Γ) = -μ J(r) 
ν2ψ(Γ) + ω2μεφ(Γ) = 
(Kr) 
We find 
and 
■*"-'''J(r') j 3 , 
. . . 
μ [e^-^Μχ')^ 
4TTJ 
|r — r'| 
1 \eik*-r'\f*x') 
3 , 
ψ(Γ) = - — 
— 
π—^ r 
47reJ 
|r — r'| 
where k = ω^/με. From the charge continuity equation, we have 
P(r) = - V . j ( r ) . 
ίω 
The electric field in the time domain is given by 
E = 
A - ν φ 
dt 
and in the frequency domain is 
E(r) = iwA(r) - V<£(r) 
= /ωμίο(Γ, r ' ) . J ( r V 3 r ' 
where a dyadic Green's function has been defined 
r') - [l 
G ( r , r ' ) = | I + - ^ V V 
^ Ι Γ - Γ Ί 
4 Τ Γ | Γ - Γ Ί 
and I is a unity matrix. 
I = 
1 0 
0 
0 
1 0 
0 
0 1 
= χχ + γγ + ζζ = ΪΓ+θθ 
+ φφ. 
(6.4.1) 
(6.4.2) 
(6.4.3) 
(6.4.4) 
(6.4.5) 
(6.4.6) 
(6.4.7) 
(6.4.8) 

250 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
In deriving Eqs. (6.4.7)-(6.4.8), we have used 
i g ( r - r ' ) V ' . J ( r V r ' = ί V'. (gJ)</V - ί V'g(r - r')· J(r')d 3r' 
= V. [ s ( r - r ' ) J ( r V V . 
The term J V'· (g])d3r' — §gj · dS' — 0 because the surface integral at infinity 
should vanish assuming there is no source at infinity and g(r — r') —> 0 as r' 
approaches infinity. 
The magnetic field is given by 
H = 
V x E(r) 
ίωμ 
= ν χ | δ , (r, r') · J(r')</r'. 
(6.4.9) 
Suppose we consider an equivalent magnetic current source M and an equivalent 
magnetic charge density PM, 
V x E = ϊωμΗ - M 
V x H = -ϊωεΕ 
V.eE = 0 
V./xH = pM 
(6.4.10) 
V.M-ίωρν, = 0 . 
(6.4.11) 
We can find equivalently from the duality principle H(r) and E(r) in terms of M(r) 
H(r) = ίωε ίδ(Γ, r') · M(rV 3r' 
(6.4.12) 
E(r) = - V x ίο(Γ, Γ') . M(r')i/3r'. 
(6.4.13) 
Thus, in the presence of both electric and magnetic sources, J and M, we use the 
superposition principle and add the solutions (6.4.7) and (6.4.13) for the electric 
field, and similarly add Eqs. (6.4.9) and (6.4.12) for the magnetic field [1]. 
6.4.2 
Far-Field Approximation 
In many cases of radiation of the fields, for example, if the source distribution is over 
a finite region and the observation point r is far away from the source, we may 
approximate 
|r — r'| ~ r - r - r ' 
(6.4.14) 

6.4 
RADIATION AND THE FAR-FIELD PATTERN 
251 
where r is a unit vector along the r direction as shown in Fig. 6.9. The distance 
r· r' is the projection of r' on r and the distance |r — r'| is approximately the differ-
ence between the length r and r · r'. With this approximation, we further approximate 
Jk\r-r'\ 
Jkr 
^ 
-ft. r' 
ΑΤΤ\Τ — r'l 
4777" 
(6.4.15) 
where k = kr is along the direction of observation. We only keep the term r · r' in the 
phase factor because any small variation in r1 comparable with wavelength causes 
a big change in the phase of e~'k'T but a negligible change in the denominator of 
(6.4.15), as r is very large in the far-field region. We consider radiation into the 
free space, k = ko = ω^/μ^εο. Therefore, 
Jkr 
G(.r,r')^\\-?t]?-e-ik-r' 
I 
i4vr 
V x G(r, r') ~ ikr x G(r, r'). 
(6.4.16a) 
(6.4.16b) 
As an example, for a semiconductor laser as shown in Fig. 6.10, if the aperture field at 
the output facet of the laser is given by EA(r'), we may use an equivalent source by 
simply taking [1] 
J(r') = 0, 
and the magnetic current source is a current sheet with 
Ms(r') = -2n x EA(r') = -2z x EA(r') 
where ή is a unit normal to the aperture surface. Using 
ϊχ(]-ϊϊ).Μ 
= ϊχ (θΜθ +φΜφ\ = r x M, 
(6.4.17) 
(6.4.18) 
Observation 
point 
Source aperture 
Figure 6.9 
Far-field approximation |r - r'|~ r - r. r', where r is a unit vector along the direction of r. 
The length |r - r'| is approximately r subtracted by the distance of the projection of r' on r. 

252 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
Output 
facet (z = 0) 
Far-field plane 
Figure 6.10 The coordinates for calculating the far-field pattern at position r = (r, θ, φ) from an aperture 
field ΕΛ(χ', y') at the laser output facet plane z = 0. The angle θ± is measured from the z axis along the x 
direction, and ÖB is measured from the z axis toward the y direction. 
we find J(r') = 0, (6.4.13) in the far field becomes a Fourier transform of the 
source field: 
E(r) = | — l-ik'r x i</3rVk""M(r')}. 
(6.4.19) 
We then integrate over the surface of the aperture to find the radiation field, 
ikeikr. 
JAJ*-ΰι*τ'\m 
/-'\ 
E(r) = — 
r x 
dx'dy'e-"" 
Ms(r'). 
Aperture 
(6.4.20) 
The radiated power density is 
P = -1-|E(r)|2 
2η 
(6.4.21) 
where 7} = y/fj^jeö = 377il in free space, and 
r = sin Θ cos φ x + sin Θ sin φ y + cos θ ζ 
(6.4.22) 
is a unit vector along the direction of observation r, which is the same as the direction 
of wave propagation in the far field k. If we consider the aperture field to be due to a 

6.4 
RADIATION AND THE FAR-FIELD PATTERN 
253 
TE mode in the active region of the semiconductor laser 
EA = yEA(x, y), 
then the magnetic current sheet is 
Ms = —2/j x EA = 2xEA(x, y)-
Consider two cases. 
(6.4.23) 
(6.4.24) 
(1) 0X measurement. If the far-field pattern is measured along the x direction in 
the far-field plane, φ = 0 (or φ = π), and θ = θ±, we obtain 
r = sin θ±χ + cos θ±ζ 
r' = χ'χ,+y'y 
as z ' = 0 on the aperture 
(6.4.25) 
(6.4.26) 
-ikeikr
 Λ 
E(r) = — 
rx 
Awr 
D 
w 
-D 
-w 
The optical power intensity pattern is 
2x [ dx' [ dy'e-ikuneiX'EA(x',y'). 
(6.4.27) 
Ρ(θ±) oc cos2 0± 
D 
W 
[ dx' ί dy'e-^^^'E^x^y') 
-D 
-W 
(6.4.28) 
where the extra factor cos θ± is necessary due to the polarization of the aper-
ture field. 
(2) 0|| measurement. If the far-field pattern is measured along the y direction in the 
far-field plane, φ = π/2, and θ = θρ we obtain 
r — sin 0||>> + cos θ\\ζ 
D 
w 
—ikeikr 
f 
f 
E(r) = — 
(cos0_Ly-sin0±z) 
dx' 
dy'e 
-D 
-W 
and the radiation power intensity pattern is 
D 
w 
(6.4.29) 
-Wnflli'£AU',y') 
(6.4.30) 
P(0±)oc 1 *' I
dy>t 
-D 
-W 
-ifcsinfliy' EA{x',y') 
(6.4.31) 
The above results for the far-field patterns have useful applications for study-
ing the beam divergence for a single-element semiconductor laser and coupled 
laser arrays. A simple scalar formulation can be found in Ref. 5, where 
numerical results for various diode lasers are shown. 

254 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
PROBLEMS 
6.1 
(a) Find the time-averaged Poynting's vector for the ordinary wave and the 
extraordinary wave using the electric and magnetic fields derived in 
Section 6.1. Is the Poynting's vector pointing in the direction of k in 
each case? 
(b) Show that the Poynting's vector always points in a direction per-
pendicular to the k surface at the point (kx, kz) for the ordinary and the 
extraordinary waves. 
6.2 
Consider a LiNb03 crystal with the ordinary and extraordinary refractive 
indices, na = 2.297 and ne = 2.208. Write down the dispersion relations for 
the ordinary waves and the extraordinary waves. 
6.3 
For a LiNb03 crystal with the permittivity matrix given by 
(< 
0 
0 \ 
ε = ε01 0 
nl 
0 I 
where n0 = 2.297 and ne = 2.209, 
\ 0 
0 
n\j 
(a) Find the two characteristic polarizations with corresponding propagation 
constants for a wave propagating in the y direction. 
(b) If a plane wave propagates in +z direction, what are the possible charac-
teristic polarizations? 
6.4 
In Problem 6.3, if a plane wave propagates in a direction k = k (x sin Θ + 
z cos Θ) on the x-z plane, find the explicit expressions of the fields E, H, 
D, and B for (a) the ordinary wave and (b) the extraordinary wave. 
6.5 
(a) Calculate the thickness Ad/4 for a quarter-wave-plate for a LiNb03 
assuming n„ = 2.297, ne = 2.208 at a wavelength λ = 0.633 μιτι. 
(b) Repeat part (a) for a KDP crystal with n0 = 1.5074, ne = 1.4669 at the 
same wavelength. 
6.6 
If we replace the mirror by a polaroid in Fig. 6.6 with the passing axis per-
pendicular to that of the entrance polaroid, find the optical transmitted field 
passing through this new polaroid. 
6.7 
A quartz (Si02) crystal is a uniaxial medium described by two refractive 
indices, n„ = 1.544 and ne = 1.553, at a free space wavelength of 0.589 μιη. 
Draw a diagram when answering the following questions. You may assume 
that all transmission coefficients at the crystal surfaces are unity (i.e., ignore 
reflections) in this problem. 
(a) Calculate the possible thicknesses of a quarter-wave plate. 
(b) If the incident electric field onto a quartz quarter-wave plate is left-hand 
circularly polarized, what is the polarization of the transmitted field 

PROBLEMS 
255 
after passing through the quarter-wave plate (QWP) (Label your own 
slow and fast axes and show your derivations.) What about an incident 
right-hand circularly polarized wave? Draw a figure with labeled coordi-
nates for the incident wave, the QWP, and the transmitted wave, and their 
polarization directions. 
(c) A half-wave plate (HWP) has the property that the two components along 
the slow and fast axes of an incident linearly polarized wave have a phase 
difference of 180° (or π radians) after passing through the plate. Find the 
possible thickness(es) of a half-wave plate at a free-space wavelength of 
0.589 μπι using a quartz crystal. If a linearly polarized wave has its elec-
tric field vector at a 45° angle with respect to the slow and the fast axes of 
the half-wave plate, what is the polarization of the transmitted wave? 
Draw a figure to illustrate your answer. 
6.8 
Two polaroid analyzers are arranged with their passing axes perpendicular to 
each other and a quarter-wave-plate is inserted between them. Initially, the 
fast axis is assumed to be aligned with the passing axis of the entrance polar-
oid. Find the optical transmission power intensity for an incident randomly 
polarized light as a function of the rotation angle Θ between the fast axis 
and the passing axis of the entrance polaroid. Plot the transmission power 
versus Θ. 
6.9 
Derive the two eigenvalues for the propagation constants in (6.2.21) and 
(6.2.22) and their corresponding polarizations (LHCP and RHCP) of the 
optical electric fields. 
6.10 
Examine Faraday rotation when the optical field propagates along the —z 
direction while the applied dc magnetic field is along the +z direction. 
Show that the angle of rotation remains the same as (6.2.31), not negative 
of that value. The medium is nonreciprocal. 
6·11 
(a) Take the Fourier transforms of A(r, t) and $(r, t) with respect to time in 
(6.3.21) and (6.3.22) and express A(r, ω) and $(r, ω) in terms of J(r, ω) 
and p(r, ω). 
(b) Take the Fourier transforms of A(r, /) and φ(τ, t) with respect to both the 
spatial and time variables r and t and express A(k, ω) and $(k, ω) in 
terms of J(k, ω) and p(k, ω). 
6.12 
Find the far-field radiation patterns Ρ(θ±) and Ρ(θκ) in Fig. 6.10 assuming a 
uniform aperture field £A(*> y) = Eo for \x\ < D and \y\ < W, and EA(x, y) = 
0 otherwise. 
6.13 
If the aperture field is a Gaussian function in both the x- and _y-directions, 
2 
/ 
\ 2" 
EA(x, y) « £D exp 
W 
W 
in Fig. 6.10, find the far-field radiation 
patterns Ρ(θ±) and Ρ(θ^). 

256 
LIGHT PROPAGATION IN ANISOTROPIC MEDIA AND RADIATION 
REFERENCES 
1. J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory, EMW Publishing, Cambridge, MA, 2000. 
2. M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics: Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation, 
Interference and Diffraction of Light, 7th ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, 1999. 
3. K. C. Yeh and C. H. Liu, Theory of Ionospheric Waves, Academic Press, New York, 1972. 
4. K. Seeger, Semiconductor Physics—An Introduction, 9th ed., Springer, Berlin, 2004. 
5. H. C. Casey, Jr., and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part A: Fundamental 
Principles, Academic Press, Orlando, 1978. 

7 
Optical Waveguide Theory 
This chapter covers topics on optical dielectric waveguide theory that will be useful for 
studying heterojunction semiconductor lasers. We will present the fundamental results 
in Section 7.1 for transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) modes in a 
symmetric dielectric waveguide including the propagation constant, the optical field 
pattern, the optical confinement factor, and the cutoff conditions. We then discuss an 
asymmetric dielectric waveguide in Section 7.2. A ray optics approach is shown in 
Section 7.3 that explains the waveguide behavior. More practical structures, such as rec-
tangular dielectric guides used in index-guidance diode lasers, are then discussed using 
an approximate Marcatili's method in Section 7.4 and the effective index method in 
Section 7.5. The results for a laser cavity with gain and loss in the media are derived 
to obtain the lasing conditions of a Fabry-Perot semiconductor laser cavity in 
Section 7.6. We then investigate surface plasmon waveguides in Section 7.7. 
Reference books on general waveguide theory can be found in Refs. 1-4 if the 
readers are interested in more extensive treatment of the subject. 
7.1 SYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
The dielectric slab waveguide theory is very important because it provides almost all 
of the basic principles for general dielectric waveguides and the guidelines for more 
complicated cross sections such as the optical fibers. Let us consider a slab waveguide 
as shown in Fig. 7.1 with the width w much larger than the thickness d, and the field 
dependence on y is negligible (d/dy = 0). From the wave equation 
(V2 + «>VOE = 0 
(7.1.1) 
we shall find the solutions for the fields everywhere. 
We assume that the waveguide is symmetric; that is, the permittivity and the 
permeability are ε and μ, respectively, for |JC| > d/2, and et and μι for \x\ < d/2. 
The origin has been chosen to be at the center of the guide because the waveguide 
is symmetric; therefore, we have even mode and odd mode solutions. We separate 
the solutions of the fields into two classes, TE polarization and TM polarization. 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright (f) 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
257 

258 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
V _ ^ 
με 
d 
T* 
d/2 
—>z 
0 
1 
με 
y 
/^dll\ 
Figure 7.1 
A simplified heterojunction diode laser structure for the waveguide analysis. 
Here, a waveguide mode or a normal mode is defined as the wave solution to 
Maxwell's equations with all of the boundary conditions satisfied; the transverse 
spatial profile and its polarization remain unchanged while propagating down 
the waveguide. 
7.1.1 
Derivations of Electric Fields and Guidance Conditions for 
TE Polarization 
For TE polarization, the electric field has only an Ey component: E = yEy 
d2 
ö2 
ϋ*+Έ? + 
ωμ* yy=o 
(7.1.2a) 
where 
H 
ίωμ,, 
. d 
x ikzEY + z — £, 
*z^y 
dx 
(7.1.2b) 
(μ-i = μ\ inside and μ\ = μ outside the guide). 
TE Even Modes 
We obtain the guided mode solutions by examining wave 
equation (7.1.2), which has solutions of the form [expO'^z), exp(— ikzz)] x 
[exp(il^jc), exp(—ik^), or cosfc^jc, s i n ^ ] . Because the guide is translationally 
invariant along the z direction, we choose exp(ikzz) for a guided mode propagating 
in the +z direction. We then choose the standing-wave solution cos fa or sin fa 
inside the waveguide and exp(—ax) or exp(+ax) outside the waveguide because 
the wave is a guided mode solution. 
With the above observations, the electric field for the even modes can be written in 
the form 
Coe-<*(U\-d/2) 
Ί cos fa 
\x\ > d/2 
\x\ < d/2 
a A3) 

7.1 
SYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
259 
Figure 7.2 
(a) The electric field profiles of the TE even modes, (b) The electric field profiles of the TE 
odd modes. 
as shown in Fig. 7.2a, where kx, kz, and a satisfy 
kx+k2 
= ω2μλε 
ιει 
-a2+k2
z 
ω2με 
(7.1.4a) 
(7.1.4b) 
which are obtained by substituting (7.1.3) into the wave equation (7.1.2). Matching 
the boundary conditions in which Ey and Hz are continuous at x = d/2 and 
x = -d/2, we obtain 
Co = C\ cos 
k H) 
- C 0 = Ci— sinlfc,-
μ 
μ, 
V 2 
(7.1.5a) 
(7.1.5b) 
Note that the permeability is μ,, for |JC| < d/2. Eliminating C0 and Cu from (7.1.5a) 
and (7.1.5b), we find the transcendental equation or the guidance condition 
a = — kx tan k, — . 
(7.1.6) 
The above guidance condition also shows that in order for Ey of the form (7.1.3) to 
be a guided mode solution, the standing-wave pattern along the transverse JC direction 
or the amount of oscillations (determined by kj4) has to match the decay constant a 
outside the guide. An interesting limit is to consider that the decay rate a is 
infinitely large, Ey will be zero outside the guide, and Eq. (7.1.6) gives kxd/2 = 
TT/2, 3TT/2, ... or kxd — rmT, which is the same as the guidance condition for a 
metallic waveguide, of which the tangential electric field vanishes at the surfaces 
of the perfectly conducting waveguide. 

260 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
TE Odd Modes The electric field can be written in the form 
{
C0e-*x-dl2) 
x > d/2 
C,sin*,jc 
\x\<d/2 
(7.1.7) 
-C0ea{x+d^ 
x < -d/2 
as shown in Fig. 7.2b. Matching the tangential field components Ey and Hz at x = d/2 
and eliminating C0 and C\, we obtain 
a=--^kxcot(kx^\. 
(7.1.8) 
7.1.2 
Graphical Solution for the Guidance Conditions 
To find the propagation constant kz of the guided mode, we have to solve for kx, 
kz, and a from Eqs. (7.1.4a), (7.1.4b), (7.1.6), and (7.1.8). Define X = kx% and 
Y' — αψ We rewrite the eigenequations in the following forms 
Y= < 
μ, 
— Xt&nX, 
TE even modes 
μ, 
(7.1.9a) 
- — X cotX, 
TE odd modes
 
( 7 · ' 9 b ) 
Mi 
and subtract (7.1.4b) from (7.1.4a) to eliminate kz, and multiply by (d/2)2 
where 
X2 + Y2=R2 
(7.1.10) 
(d\ 
( d\ f~7 ~ 
R = ω^/Α,ε, - με{ - I = I ko~ J \Jn\ - n2. 
(7.1.11) 
: solutions for a and kx can be obtained from a 
: ( α ^ ) versus (kxw) plane [4, 5]. Equation 
lius R in Fig. 7.3, and the two transcendental 
We have two unknowns kx and a. The solutions for a and kx can be obtained from a 
graphical approach by looking at the 
(7.1.10) appears as a circle with a radius /?'in Fig. 
equations (7.1.9a) and (7.1.9b) are also plotted on the same plane. Their interceptions 
give the solutions for ( « ^ ) and ( ^ 9 ) · Here the refractive index inside the guide 
rt 1 = \/μ^ε\/ϊμ^εο) 
and outside n = \Jμε/'(μ^εο) 
have been used and k® = 
Wy/ßQBo = ω/c is the free-space wave number. Given the waveguide dimension d, 
we find the propagation constant kz from either (7.1.4a) or (7.1.4b) after kx or a 
is determined. 

7.1 
SYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
261 
* (4) 
R = kf,j-(n2
l-n2)m 
>M·) 
Figure 7.3 
A graphical solution for the eigenequations to determine ad/2 and kxd/2 for the even modes, 
TEo, TE2, and so forth, and the odd modes, TEi, TE3, and so forth. 
7.1.3 
Cutoff Condition 
7Γ 
It is clear from the graph that the cutoff condition occurs at R = m — (and X = 0) for 
the TEm mode, that is, 
*°2V n' 
~n 
2 - m - , 
m = 0,1,2,. 
2 
(7.1.12) 
Thus the TEo mode has no cutoff frequency. (Note: here we assume that the refractive 
indices are independent of the frequency. In semiconductors, the frequency-
dependent refractive indices should be used.) For 
!f <k»2\ln2\ 
-n2<(m+\) 
(7.1.13) 
there are (m + 1) guided TE modes in the dielectric slab. 
For a single mode operation, the condition ko — Jn2 — n2 < — is required. This 
puts a limit on ω, d, and n] — n2. For example, given the wavelength λο in free 
space and the waveguide dimension d, 
ηΔ 
< (V2)2 
ko: 
(^ί 
(7.1.14) 
If «1 is almost equal to n such as the case in an Al^Gai -^As/GaAs/Al^Gai ^As 
waveguide, we have 
An < 1 /Ao 
8M, 
(7.1.15) 

262 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
using n2 — n2 ~ 2«ιΔη. For example, at n\ ~ 3.6, we have Δη < 0.035 at λο = d. 
Single mode operation is achieved with a small difference in the refractive index 
An < 0.035. 
7.1.4 
Low-Frequency and High-Frequency Limits 
1. In the low-frequency limit, the waveguide modes can be cut off. At cutoff, 
ko- Jn2 — n2 = m—, and a = 0, as can be seen from the graphical solution. (The 
cutoff condition can be achieved by reducing the frequency, or d, or n2 — n2.) We 
d 
7Γ 
find kx- = m—, and from (7.1.4b) 
kz = ω^/με = ωη/c 
(7.1.16) 
because a = 0. Therefore, the propagation constant of the guided mode kz approaches 
the propagation constant ωη/c outside the waveguide. This is expected because the 
decaying constant a = 0 at cutoff, which means that the waveguide mode does 
not decay outside the guide. Almost all of the mode power propagates outside the 
guide; therefore, the velocity of the mode will equal the speed of light outside the 
guide, Fig. 7.4b. 
2. In the high-frequency limit, R —* oo. The graphical solution in Fig. 7.3 
shows that I k 
(m+ 1)TT 
Λ 
d 
and 
a — 
2 
V 2 
oo for the TEm mode. Because m is 
(b) 
Low ω 
(c) 
High ω 
Figure 7.4 
(a) The dispersion curves of (he TEm modes, (b) The field profile in the low-frequency limit. 
(c) The field profile in the high-frequency limit. 

7.1 
SYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
263 
a fixed mode number, we find that I ot 
R —> oo, as can also be seen from the 
graphical solution. Therefore, 
k2 = ω2μιε\ 
— k2 
ω μ,,ει 
(7.1.17) 
or kz — ω^/μ,,ει = <ort\/c. The propagation constant kz approaches that in the 
waveguide because the mode decays rapidly outside the guide (a —+ oo). Most of 
the power is guided inside the waveguide, Fig. 7.4c. 
7.1.5 
Propagation Constant kz and the Effective Index nett 
From Eqs. (7.1.16) and (7.1.17), we see that the propagation constant kz starts from 
ω^ίμε at cutoff and increases to ω^/μ,,ει as the frequency goes to infinity. The 
dispersion curves kz versus ω^/μ^εο are plotted in Fig. 7.4a. An effective index for 
the guided mode is defined as 
"eff 
*b' 
(7.1.18) 
Again we have the lower bound 
ω^/με/kQ = n and the upper bound 
ω^/μ,ει/fco = n\ at the low- and high-frequency limits, and the dispersion curves in 
Fig. 7.4a map to a set of effective index curves as shown in Fig. 7.5a. Very often 
a normalized propagation parameter 
ß 
k* — ω2με 
ω1μίε\ — α?-με 
'eff 
(7.1.19) 
(b) β 
0) 
c 
Figure 7.5 
(a) The effective index /icfr = kjko of the TE„ modes versus the free-space wave number 
*o. (b) The normalized propagation parameter β versus the normalized parameter V number for the 
TE_ modes. 

264 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
is plotted versus the V number or normalized frequency 
V = kod{n\ - n2),/2 
(7.1.20) 
as shown in Fig. 7.5b, showing a set of universal curves for the lowest three 
TE modes. 
The above discussions assume that n and n\ are independent of the frequency. In 
semiconductors, the dispersion effect of the refractive index near the band edge can 
be significant. It is important to know the refractive index at the operation wavelength 
π(λ). The effective index neff(\) still falls between η(λ) < neff (λ) < «ι(λ) when the 
material dispersion is taken into account. 
7.1.6 
Refractive Index of Al^Gai-^As System 
The refractive index of this system and of many III-V materials [6-18] below the 
direct band gap can be approximately given by the form 
η(ω) ~ 
^/ε'(ω)/ε0 
where ε'(ω) is the real part of the permittivity function, and the imaginary 
is negligible for optical energy below the band gap [12, 13, 15]: 
(7.1.21) 
part ε"(ω) 
8'(«)/eo~AW/(y) + 
EJx) 
£g(x) + A(JC)J 
3/2 
f(y) 
1/2 
\2-(l+y)l"-{\-y) 
vl/2 
f(yso)>+B(x) 
(7.1.22a) 
y = hw/Eg(x) 
y%0 = hw/[Eg(x) + Δ(χ)] 
(7.1.22b) 
Here Eg(x) is the band-gap energy and Δ(χ) is the spin-orbit splitting energy. 
For Al^Gai ^As ternaries below the band gap, the parameters as functions of the 
aluminum mole fraction x are 
Eg(x) = 1.424 + 1.266* + 0.26.*2 (eV) 
A(JC) = 0.34 - 0.5.x (eV) 
Λ(χ) = 6.64+16.92* 
B(x) = 9.20 - 9.22*. 
(7.1.23) 
These results have been compared with experimental data with very good agreement 
as shown in Fig. 7.6a [11 ] for the real part ει(ω) = ε'(ω)/ε0 below the band gap. The 
refractive index η(ώ) below the band gap is plotted in Fig. 7.6b. In Fig. 7.6c, we show 
the refractive index above and below the band gap for Al^Gai ^As with various 

7.1 
SYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
265 
'. i 
I 
i 
I 
i 
I 
i—I—i—I—i—J 
1.2 
IS 
1.4 
1.5 
1.β 
1.7 
Ι.β 
Energy, hv (eV) 
Figure 7.6 
(a) The real part of the relative permittivity function ει(ω) = ε'(ω)/εο versus the photon 
energy Τιω (eV) for Gai _^AIrAs alloy. Solid lines are calculated using (7.1.22) and (7.1.23). The circles 
are experimental data. After [11] (() 1983 American Institute of Physics. (Reprint with permission.) (b) 
The theoretical refractive index η(ω) ~ ^/ε'(ω)/ε0 below the band gap calculated using (7.1.21)-
(7.1.23). (c) Experimental data for the refractive index of Al,Gai_TAs as a function of photon energy 
hv. The top dashed curve is the refractive index of a high-purity GaAs, and the top solid curve is that of 
a silicon-doped p-type GaAs with p = 2x 10l8cm \ After [14] © '974 American Institute of 
Physics. (Reprint with permission.) 
aluminum mole fraction x. For comparison, the refractive index of a high-purity GaAs 
is shown as the top dashed curve and that of a p-type doped GaAs is shown as the top 
solid curve. We can see the features near the band gap of the A^Gai *As alloys. 
More data and theoretical fits on GaAs, Al^Gai ^As, Ini-^Ga^AsyPi-y, InP, and 
other material systems are documented in Refs. 9-19. It is noted that the refractive 
index is generally dispersive near or above the band gap with a fast variation near 
various interband transition energies. It also depends slightly on the doping concen-
tration of the semiconductors, the temperature, and the strain. Above the band gap, 
both the real and the imaginary parts of the permittivity function are important, 
and Eqs. (5.5.4a) and (5.5.4b) in Chapter 5 should be used to relate ε'(ω) and 
ε"(ω) to the complex refractive index n + i κ. 

266 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
7.1.7 
Normalization Constant for the Optical Mode 
The undetermined coefficient Ct is determined by the normalization condition in 
which the total guided power is assumed to be unity. That is 
2 
[ (E x H* )-zdx=\. 
For TE modes we have 
(7.1.24) 
Hx 
ωμ 
oo 
ωμ 
(7.1.25) 
where the permeability is μ., inside the guide and μ outside the guide. We find the 
normalization coefficient C\ to be 
4ωμ 
K\d 
1/2 
(for μ = μ,,) 
(7.1.26) 
for both TE even and odd modes. The above coefficient can be derived using the 
expressions for Ey and the eigenequations (7.1.9a) and (7.1.9b) for the even and 
odd modes, respectively. 
7.1.8 
Optical Confinement Factor Γ 
An important quantity, called the optical confinement factor, is defined as the fraction 
of power guided in the waveguide. 
j 
i 
J inside 
Re(ExH*)-z<£t 
1 
Re(ExH*)-z<ü: 
(7.1.27) 
I total 
Using the expression in (7.1.3), we find 
'μι\ 
f 2\ 
cos2(kxd/2) 
Γ = 1 + 
1 + 
(1 +sinM/MX 
μ)\αά) 
μΛ Λ2_\ 
sin2(M/2) 
μ) \ad) (1 - s i n M / M X 
Even modes 
Odd modes. 
(7.1.28a) 
(7.1.28b) 

7.1 
SYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
267 
It is obvious that Γ < 1 for dielectric waveguides. As the waveguide dimension 
becomes smaller d —» 0, or k^i -+ 0, we find that for the fundamental TEQ mode 
J- = ^XtanX 
~ - ^ X 2 < X < 1 
2 
μ, 
μι 
and 
r - 2 - i i f « f | 
^ 
2
^ 
(*,f) -
2
^ 
f f e f j («?-« 2), 
(7.1.29) 
which gives an estimation of the confinement factor for a single mode in the weakly 
guidance limit. 
7.1.9 
TM Modes H =yHy 
For TM polarization, we may obtain the results by the duality principle: replacing the 
field solutions E and H of the TE modes by H and —E, respectively, μ by ε, and ε by 
μ as discussed in Section 5.1. We obtain 
xikzHy — i-^-Hy \,(ε\=ε\ 
inside, ε, = ε outside the guide). 
(7.1.30) 
ι'ωεί \ 
dx 
The field expressions for Hy has the same forms as (7.1.3) and (7.1.7) for the even and 
odd modes, respectively, except that the coefficients C0 and C\ have to be found by 
matching the boundary conditions and the normalization condition of the guided 
power along the z direction. 
The eigenequations from matching the boundary conditions are 
a- = — I kx- ) tanl kx- | 
TM even modes 
(7.1.31a) 
2 
ει \ 
2/ 
V 2/ 
J- = -—Ux^j 
cotHfc^] 
TM odd modes. 
(7.1.31b) 
These two guidance conditions can also be obtained from duality principle by 
changing μ and μ\ in TE mode to ε and ει for TM modes. The optical confinement 
factors for the TM modes can be similarly obtained from (7.1.28a) and (7.1.28b). 
For dielectric materials, μ = μ\ = μο, we can replace all factors containing μ/μ\ 
by 1 in the guidance conditions for TE modes and ε/ει by n2/n] in the expressions 
for the eigenequations and the optical confinement factors for both TE and TM 
polarizations. In Fig. 7.7, we plot the optical confinement factor Γ for the TE 
(solid curves) and TM (dashed curves) modes. All optical confinement factors start 
from zero at cutoff and approach unity at the high-frequency limit. 

268 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
1.0 
Figure 7.7 
Optical confinement factors for the TE,„ (solid curves) and the TMm (dashed curves) modes. 
7.2 ASYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
7.2.1 
TE Polarization, E = yEy 
If the dielectric constant in the substrate ε2 is different from that of ε in the top 
medium, or μ^φ μ, the structure becomes asymmetric (Fig. 7.8). In this case, the 
field solutions cannot be either even or odd modes. The general solution can be 
put in the form 
£v = eik--z 
' C0 e-1" 
x>0 
C\ cos(k\xx + φ) 
—d < x < 0 
C2 e"2(x+d) 
x<-d 
(7.2.1) 
Again, the transverse mode profile is decays away from the guide with 
different decay constants a and a2 in region 0 and region 2, respectively. The 
JC = 
0 
0 
με 
1 
Mi^i 
■--d 
-> z 
2 
μ2ε2 
Figure 7.8 
An asymmetric dielectric slab waveguide. 

7.2 
ASYMMETRIC DIELECTRIC SLAB WAVEGUIDES 
269 
standing-wave solution inside the guide is written as C\ cos{k\xx + φ), which is 
equivalent to A cos klxx + B sin klxx. We choose this form because it is easier to 
match the boundary conditions later and the phase angle φ is also related to the 
Goos-Hänchen phase shift (discussed in Section 5.6) when total internal reflection 
occurs. Because Ey satisfies the wave equation in each region, we obtain 
-a2 + k1 = ω2με 
klx + kz — ω μ,,ει 
-aj +k2 = ω2μ2ε2. 
(7.2.2a) 
(7.2.2b) 
(7.2.2c) 
Matching the boundary conditions in which Ey and Hz = (1/ϊωμ)δΕγ/δχ 
are 
continuous at x = 0 and x= -d, we obtain four equations relating C0, C\, C2, 
and φ. We then eliminate C0, C b and C2 and obtain 
M , 
a = —Ki^tan φ 
Mi 
«2 
. ^ 2 
Ml 
fcutan(-fe,^+^). 
(7.2.3a) 
(7.2.3b) 
Eliminating φ, we obtain the eigenequation or the guidance condition for the 
TEm mode: 
k\xd = tan 
μχα 
tan 
1 / Ml «2 
If μ = μλ = μ2, the above equation can be simplified to 
(a + a2)k\x 
mir (m = 0,1,2,...). 
(7.2.4) 
tan k\xd 
k2
x — aa2 
(7.2.5) 
After solving for a, a2, k\x, and kz from (7.2.2) and (7.2.4), the complete electric field 
can be obtained from the normalization condition for the guided power along the 
z direction. We obtain 
cos φ e ax 
x > 0 
Ey = C\ e'"zZ ^ cos (klxx + φ) 
-d < x < 0 
cos (-kXxd + φ)εαϊ(χ+ά) 
x<-d 
(7.2.6) 
where C\ 
4ωμ. 
kz[d + -1 
1 
1/2 
if μ = μχ = μ2; otherwise, it can be cast in a 
a 
a2, 
more complicated analytical expression. 

270 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
Cutoff Condition For the wave to be guided, ει has to be larger than both ε2 and ε. 
Let us assume that ε2 > ε (μ. = μ^ = μ^). When reducing the frequency until 
kz = ω^μ^εζ = &ο"2, the decay constant in region 2, a2, will vanish before a 
does. Thus, at cutoff 
k\xd = tan 
Mi" 
ßklx 
rmr 
for the TEm mode at a2 = 0, and kz = kon2. We also have 
(7.2.7) 
a = Jk2 — αϊμε = &ov/n2 — n2 
k\x 
Ico^Jn2 - n 
(7.2.8a) 
(7.2.8b) 
at cutoff. The cutoff frequency is determined from 
My «? - n\ tan -ii Mi V«! 
μ^η\ 
- n\ 
rmr 
(7.2.9) 
where ko = ω^/μ0εο = ω/c. The dispersion curves for the TEm modes are plotted in 
Fig. 7.9. They start from the cutoff condition kz = kom and approach the upper limit 
kz—+ fcrjrti when the frequency is increased. Note that if n\ > n2 S> n, then 
We obtain 
(*/k\x — Jn\ — n2 I Jn\ — n\ » 1 . 
koddn2 — η\ = [ i 
= I m + - \ττ 
(7.2.10) 
*z = *0»l 
kz = ω %[με - ktfi 
* 
ko=eoiJ^' 
Figure 7.9 The dispersion relations for an asymmetric dielectric waveguide. 

7.3 
RAY OPTICS APPROACH TO WAVEGUIDE PROBLEMS 
271 
Figure 7.10 (a) An asymmetric waveguide with ε, > ε 2 > ε and a thickness d. (b) A symmetric wave-
guide with a thickness 2d. The cutoff condition for the TE„ mode in (a) is equivalent to that of the TE(2m+1 > 
mode in (b). 
which is equivalent to the cutoff condition of the TE(2m+i) mode in a symmetric 
waveguide with a 2d thickness. This can be easily understood from a comparison 
of the two electric field profiles in Fig. 7.10a and Fig. 7.10b. Because the decaying 
constant a in region ε decays very fast in Fig. 7.10a, its field profile looks very 
much like half of the field profile of Fig. 7.10b. 
7.2.2 
TM Polarization H = yHy 
We can easily obtain the solutions for the TM polarization using the duality principle. 
The field has the same form as (7.2.6), except that the constant C} is different from 
that in (7.2.6) and can be derived from the normalization condition or duality prin-
ciple, noting that ε φ ε\ φ ε2. The guidance condition is obtained from (7.2.4) after 
replacing μ% by ev We find 
kwd 
tan 
B\a 
eku 
tan 
ei«2 
siku 
(7.2.11) 
for the TMm mode. 
7.3 
RAY OPTICS APPROACH TO WAVEGUIDE PROBLEMS 
An efficient method to find the eigenequation for the dielectric slab waveguide 
problem is to use the ray optics picture. We know from Section 5.3 that when a 
plane wave is incident on a planar dielectric boundary with an angle of incidence 
Θ larger than the critical angle, the reflection coefficient r12 has a Goos-Hänchen 
phase shift —2φ\2· 

272 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
/*2e2 
2 
Figure 7.11 A ray optics picture for a guided mode in a slab waveguide. 
For a mode to be guided, the total field after reflecting back and forth (from point A 
to B) by the two boundaries should repeat itself, Fig. 7.11, 
(r,2 eik>"d)rw eikl'd = 1 
(7.3.1) 
where the phase 2kixd accounts for the round-trip optical path delay along the 
x direction. 
The above condition is also called the transverse resonance condition. In terms of 
the Goos-Hänchen phase shifts, we obtain 
e-i2<i>n-i2<i>l0+i2klxd 
_ 
j 
where for TE modes 
Φ12 = tan 
Φιο = tan 
l / > l « 2 
Therefore, we find 
M i 
2k\xd — 2φη — 2φλϋ = 2rmr. 
(7.3.2) 
(7.3.3a) 
(7.3.3b) 
(7.3.4) 
The total phase delay (noting that the Goos-Hänchen phase shifts are negative 
—2φϊ2 - 2φι0, or advance phase shifts) should be an even multiple of IT. Equation 
(7.3.4) gives the guidance condition for the TEm mode: 
k\xd = tan i / ^ i « 2 
tan 
| —— | + rrnr. 
(7.3.5) 
If μα = μ and ε2 = ε (i.e., the slab waveguide is symmetric), we have φχζ = Φ\ο and 
kud = rrnr + 2φιο 
(7.3.6) 

7.4 RECTANGULAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 
which leads to 
273 
tanf&u-
if m is even 
u 
~ ~~ ΤΓ7Ϊ 
if m is odd 
(7.3.7) 
a = < 
μ &|, tani 
kix-
m = even 
— 
fcucot(fc1x-) 
m = odd 
(7.3.8a) 
(7.3.8b) 
which are the same as (7.1.9a) and (7.1.9b), as expected. 
7.4 
RECTANGULAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 
The rectangular dielectric waveguide theory is very useful because most waveguides 
have finite dimensions in both the JC and y directions. There are two possible classes of 
modes. The analyses are approximate here, assuming w > d, as shown in Fig. 7.12. 
The method we use here is sometimes called Marcatili's method for rectangular 
dielectric waveguides [20, 21]. These modes are 
1. HEpq modes or £[ +1)(9+1) modes: Hx and Ey are the dominant components. 
2. EHpq modes or Ex
( +1)( +1) modes: Ex and Hy are the dominant components. 
In general, we have — = ikz, and Maxwell's equations in the following forms 
oz 
will be used as the starting equations in the later analysis for both HEpq 
-w -
"5 
> 
t 
"4 
d 
<x 
"3 
»1 
«2 
—► 
Figure 7.12 
A rectangular dielectric waveguide. 

274 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
modes and EHpq modi 
H = — 
V x E 
ϊωμ 
1 
ϊωμ ' & ' 
E = 
' 
V x H 
-ι'ωε 
1 
—ίωε * ( ! " ■-
^s: 
- ikzHy 
)+y 
+ y( 
Ι^ζΕχ 
ikzHx -
dx 
_^H 
dx 
d 
d 
d 
d 
Z[dxH>-dyH> 
^TE* + ~QEy + ikzEz = ° 
dx 
x 
dy 
Hx + —Hy + ikzHz = 0. 
(7.4.1) 
(7.4.2) 
(7.4.3) 
(7.4.4) 
Here we have assumed that the permittivity is a constant in each region. 
7.4.1 HEM Modes (or Ε^ρ+ι^+ι-, Modes) 
We start with the HEpq modes. The large components are Hx and Ey. The other 
components Ex, Ez, Hy, and Hz are assumed to be small. In principle, we can 
assume Hy ~ 0, and express Ex, Ey, Ez, and Hz in terms of Hx using Maxwell's 
equations. These are called the HEpq modes or E? modes. Alternatively, we can 
also assume Ex ~ 0, and express Ez, Hx, Hy, and Hz in terms of Ey. Because these 
are all approximate solutions, they have to be compared with the exact solutions 
[22, 23]. We find that both approximations give essentially the same transcendental 
equations with minor differences. We simply call these modes HEpq modes, 
where p labels the number of nodes for a wave function in the x direction and q 
for the y direction. The solution procedure is 
(i) Solve the wave equation for Hx everywhere 
J?+$-* + ^ i " ' = 0-
(ii) 
H7 
]_d_ 
-ik, dx Hx. 
(7.4.5) 
(7.4.6) 

7.4 
RECTANGULAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 
275 
(iii) 
Ez — -.— -χ-Ηχ· 
icoeoy 
(7.4.7) 
(iv) 
Because Hy = 0, we obtain Ex 
•1 d -H, 
Add 
ϊωε dy 
wskz dx dy Hx. 
(7.4.8) 
(v) 
<we/c7 
— (ikzHx--^-Hz) 
= - L -
-ιωε \ 
ox 
I 
ωεκ, 
d2 
-ω2με "Try \ΗΧ. 
-K 
dx1 Hx 
(7.4.9) 
Once Hx is found, all other components (except that Hy -
terms of Hx using Eqs. (7.4.6)-(7.4.9). 
The expression for Hx can be written approximately as 
0) can be expressed in 
Hx 
„ikzZ 
' C\ cos{kxx + φχ) cos{kyy + φγ) 
Region 1 
C2 cos(fc^ + φχ) e-a^-w) 
Region 2 
C3 e-"^-^ 
cos(kyy + φγ) 
Region 3 
C4 COS^JC + φχ) e"** 
Region 4 
C5 ea5X cos(kyy + φν) 
Region 5 
(7.4.10) 
where k2 
ω2μ\Β\, 
k2 — a\+k2 
= ω2μ^ε2, and so forth, which are 
obtained by substituting the field expressions (7.4.10) into the wave equation 
(7.4.5) using the material parameters μ,λ and Sj for region i. The choice of the 
standing-wave solutions cos{kx + φχ) or decaying solutions is made simply by 
inspecting Fig. 7.12 and keeping in mind that we are looking for the guided mode 
solution. The same x dependence is used for regions 1 and 2 because both regions 
share the same boundary at y = w, and the phase matching condition or Snell' s 
law requires the same dependence on the spatial variable x. Similar rules apply to 
the field expressions in other regions. 
Boundary Conditions To derive the guidance conditions and the relations 
between the field coefficients C\ ... C5, we match the boundary conditions. 
(i) At x = 0 and x — d, Hz and Ey are continuous. The other boundary condition 
for Ez continuous is ignored because Ez is small. We obtain relations 
between the coefficients C\, C$, C5, and the phase φχ. 

276 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
Eliminating Ci, C3, and C5 and then eliminating φχ, we find 
kxd = ρπ + tan ' 
ε3[ω1μιε] 
-tf)a3 
8 1 ^ ^ 3 8 3 
-kyjkx 
+ tan -1 ε 5ίω 2μ,ε! - k^Ja5 
ε\(αϊμ^ 
- kj\kx 
(7.4.11a) 
The above formula can be further simplified for ky <C ky, fc3, and k5: 
kxd = ρπ + tan 
μλ α3 
.M3 kx. 
tan 
Mi «5 
P-sh 
(7.4.11b) 
(ii) At y = 0 and y = w, match Hx and £z. (The other conditions that Hz and Ex are 
continuous give identical results as Hx and £ζ.) We obtain the relations between 
C], C2, C4, as well as φτ By eliminating these coefficients and φν, we find 
kyw = qir + tan - 1 ε\α2 
ε2 ky + tan 
ε\<Χ4 
(7.4.12) 
The two guidance conditions can also be seen from the ray optics approach. An 
intuitive way to understand the approximate boundary conditions is that for (i) 
at x = 0 and x = d, the optical power density of interest is its x component 
bouncing back and forth between the two interfaces at x — 0 and d. We 
need therefore Ey, Hz and Hy, Ez. However, Hy ~ 0. We only need Ey and 
Hz and drop Ez because it is small. For boundary conditions (ii) at y = 0 and 
w, we use only Hz and Ex, or Hx and Ez for the y component of the optical 
power density. Both pairs give the same results because Hy is not of concern. 
7.4.2 EHpq Modes (or E^, + mq+1) 
Modes) 
For the EHpq mode, the dominant field components are Ex and Hy. We can 
assume that Hx~0 
and Hy have exactly the same form as in (7.4.10). Expressing 
all other components in terms of Hy only, we then match the boundary conditions. 
We use 
H7 
Er = 
-ikz dy 
1 
Hy, 
ωε^ 
ω με + dx2 
1 
d 
-ϊωε dx 
Hy, 
Hy, 
ωελζ dy dx 
y 
(7.4.13) 

7.4 
RECTANGULAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 
277 
which are derivable from Eqs. (7.4. l)-(7.4.4). The following guidance conditions are 
found after matching the boundary conditions, 
kyW 
ηττ+ tan 
kxd — ρπ + tan 
—— + tan 
—— 
\ ε3 kxJ 
\ε5 kxJ 
ε 2(ω 2μ,ε, - 
k*)a2 
ει (ω2μ,2ε2 - k%)ky 
tan -1 ε 4(ω 2μ,ει - &2)α4 
ει (ω2μ,4ε4 — k~)ky 
(7.4.14) 
(7.4.15) 
where (7.4.22) can be further simplified for kx <C k\, k2, and k4: 
kyw = qir + tan 
/Vl«2 
+ tan" -1 /Ml«4 
\Μ·4^ 
(7.4.16) 
Alternatively, we may assume that Ey ~ 0 and £Λ is of the form (7.4.10), and then 
express all the other components in terms of the Ex component using Maxwell's 
equations. These results will give almost the same eigenequations and mode patterns. 
fi = (<*/*) (A?-*§)L 
Figure 7.13 
(a) Normalized propagation parameter β versus the normalized frequency B = (d/iT)(k\ -
<$)1/2ofa rectangular waveguide with an aspect ratio w/d = 2. The refractive index in the guide is n, = 1.5 
and outside is n0 = 1 · Here the width w is along the v direction and the thickness d is along the x direction. 
After f231 © 1989 published by VSP, The Netherlands. (Reprinted with permission from Brill.) 

278 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
Intensity patterns 
HBoo <£?,) 
HE02 (£fj) 
«Ell (£») 
HE,,« EHn 
Figure 7.13 (b) Plots of the transverse field components E™ and H™ for the lowest nine modes for a 
rectangular waveguide in (a). Note the duality relation between the transverse electric field of the HEpq 
mode and the transverse magnetic field of the EHpq mode. After [23] © 1989 published by VSP, The 
Netherlands. (Reprinted with permission from Brill.) (c) The schematic intensity patterns for the modes 
in part (b). Because the intensity patterns of the HEpq mode are almost indistinguishable from those of 
the EHpq mode, we only show one set of patterns here. 
Example We consider a rectangular waveguide with an aspect ratio w/d = 2, the 
refractive index of the waveguide n\ is 1.5, and the background medium is free 
space n 0 = l - We plot on Fig. 7.13a, after Ref. 23, the normalized propagation 
constant ß versus a normalized frequency B = V/TT, 
■*? 
k2 
■k2 
'eff 
(7.4.17) 

7.5 THE EFFECTIVE INDEX METHOD 
279 
and 
B = VlTT={d/TT){k\ - Ä^)1/2 
(7.4.18) 
where the V number is defined the same as that of a slab waveguide with a 
thickness d, 
V = k0d(n2
l-nl)^2. 
(7.4.19) 
The corresponding transverse electric and magnetic field patterns inside the dielectric 
waveguide are also plotted in Fig. 7.13b. Note the dual relations between the trans-
verse electric field E™ of the HEpq mode and the transverse magnetic field H™ 
of the EHpq mode. We can see that the field patterns provide the information on 
the intensity variations of the Ex, Ey, Hx, and Hy components of the waveguide 
modes, Fig. 7.13c. The intensity pattern of the HEpq mode is almost indistinguishable 
from that of the EHpq mode. Therefore, only one set of intensity patterns is shown. 
These mode patterns should be interesting to compare with those of the metallic 
waveguides [24], These results in Fig. 7.13a have been compared with those of 
Goell [22] with good agreement. 
The original labels of the modes in Ref. 23 are slightly different. In Fig. 7.13a and 
Fig. 7.13b, we use our convention for the HEpq(= £L+1)( +1)) modes and the EHpq 
(= JSL+ixq+\)) modes, and the coordinate system is shown in Fig. 7.12, where the 
vertical axis is the x axis and the horizontal axis is the y axis. This coordinate 
system is chosen such that when the width w —> oo, the results here approach those 
of the slab waveguides discussed in Sections 7.1-7.3 using the same coordinate 
system. Our convention is the same as those for Marcatili [20] and Goell [22] 
using the £1 + 1 ) ( +1) and £L+1)( +1) modes except that our aspect ratio is w/d > 1 
where w is the width along the y direction instead of the x direction. 
7.5 THE EFFECTIVE INDEX METHOD 
The effective index method is a very useful technique to find the propagation 
constant of a dielectric waveguide. As an example, assume that we are interested 
in the solutions for a rectangular dielectric waveguide as in Section 7.4. Consider 
first the Ey, +1)( +1) modes for which Ey is the dominant component (Fig. 7.14a). 
Step 1. We solve first a slab waveguide problem with refractive index n\ inside and 
n3, n5 outside the waveguide, Fig. 7.14b. The eigenequation for the Ey component 
will be that of the TE modes of a slab guide discussed in Section 7.1 because Ey is 
parallel to the boundaries 
kud = tan-1 [^-^ 
+tan~' [^-^ 
) + ρττ 
(7.5.1) 

280 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
(a) 
> 
"8 
"4 
0 
"9 
K.JC 
"3 
>k 
d 
"1 
J , 
"5 
»7 
"2 
"6 
*> 
(b) 
i) 
2l_ 
"4 
«9 
ii) 
"3 
"5 
iii) 
^ 
" 2 
«6 
(C) 
* "cffCy) 
"eff,4 
"eff.l 
"eff,2 
"eff,4 
"eff.l 
"eff,2 
Figure 7.14 
(a) A rectangular dielectric waveguide to be solved using the effective index method, (b) 
Solve the slab waveguide problem at each fixed y and obtain an effective index profile nefl(y). (c) Solve 
the slab waveguide problem with the effective index profile nerr(y). 
where ax is the decaying constant (outside the waveguide) and μ-, is the per-
meability in the ith region. From the solutions of the slab waveguide problem, 
we obtain the propagation constant, therefore, the effective index «eff,i- Fory > w 
ory < 0, similar equations hold, if n2 > n6, n7, and n4 > ns, ng. Otherwise, approxi-
mations have to be made by assuming neff 2 — n2 and neffi4 ~ n4 when the fields in 
regions 6, 7, 8, and 9 are negligible. 
Step 2. We then solve the slab waveguide problem as shown in Fig. 7.14c, 
and obtain 
tan 
1 j^effj 
a-2 
«eff,2 hy 
tan 
eeff,i «4 
£eff,4 k\y 
+ qTT 
(7.5.2) 

7.6 
WAVE GUIDANCE IN A LOSSY OR GAIN MEDIUM 
281 
where seff,i = n\ni εο. Note that the Ey component is perpendicular to the slab 
boundaries; therefore, we should use the guidance condition for the TM modes 
of the slab waveguide problem. In step 1, for each y, we find a modal distribution 
as a function of x. This field distribution will also vary as v changes. Thus we 
call this function F(x, v). In step 2, the solution for the modal distribution will 
be a function of only v, called G(y). Thus the total electric field Ey can be 
written as 
Ey(x,y)~F{x,y)G{y). 
(7.5.3) 
It is interesting to compare the two eigenequations (7.5.1) and (7.5.2) obtained 
here with those derived in Section 7.4, Eqs. (7.4.1 lb) and (7.4.12). The difference 
is that the effective permittivities appear in (7.5.2) in the effective index method 
whereas the material permittivities are used in (7.4.12) in the previous approximate 
Marcatili's method. When comparing the propagation constants with the numeri-
cal approach from the full-wave analysis, the results of both Marcatili's method in 
Section 7.4 and the effective index method agree very well with those of the 
numerical method, generally speaking. The effective index method usually has 
a better agreement with the numerical method especially near cutoff. 
The effective index method has also been applied [25,26] to the analysis of diode 
lasers with lateral variations in thickness of the active region or in the complex 
permittivity. The resultant analytical formulas in many cases are extremely 
helpful in understanding the semiconductor laser operation characteristics. 
7.6 
WAVE GUIDANCE IN A LOSSY OR GAIN MEDIUM 
When the permittivity is complex, 
e = e' + ie", 
(7.6.1) 
that is, the medium is lossy (ε" > 0) or it has gain (ε" < 0), and the propagation 
constant becomes 
/ 
ω 
k = ω\/ μ{ε' + is") =—(n + ίκ) 
c 
= k' + ik". 
(7.6.2) 
For a waveguide that may contain gain in the active region and loss in the passive 
region, the propagation constant is generally complex. A typical analysis is based on 
the perturbation theory or a variational method. Consider a dielectric slab waveguide 
that has complex permittivities everywhere, as shown in Fig. 7.15 
J e( + ie'[ inside 
£W - \ ε ' 
+ ig" 
outside. 

282 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
ε 
fcl 
+ ie" 
+ ie" 
> U 
v. 
r y 
ε + ie 
Figure 7.15 
A lossy (gain) waveguide structure. 
Inside the guide, 
k\ = o>yV(e'i + ie") ~ ωΛ/με'( 
1 + i—L j 
k\ - i .g 
(7.6.3) 
where k[ = ω^/με\ = kotii, and g = —k\ ~~- is the gain coefficient, if ε" < 0. 
Outside the waveguide, we have 
' 
k = ωΛ/μ(ε' 
+ ίε") ^ ωλ/μ~ε'{\ 
+ΐγη) 
k' + i-
(7.6.4) 
where a = k! —- is the decaying constant of the absorption coefficient for the optical 
ε 
intensity. Suppose we try to solve the TE mode 
E = y Ey = y φ(χΥΚζ 
dx2 — k + ω με(χ) φ(χ) = 0. 
(7.6.5) 
(7.6.6) 
A simple method is to use the variational approach 
d2 
J—oo 
W l - r j + ω με(χ) φ(χ) dx 
ΛθΟ 
J — 00 
(7.6.7) 
(χ)φ(χ) dx 
When we write the permittivity as the sum of a lossless part ε( '(x) and a part due 
to gain or loss Δε(χ), we obtain 
ε^(Χ)=\ή 
imid^ 
1 ε 
outside 
e W " \ ie" c 
inside 
outside 
(7.6.8) 

7.6 
WAVE GUIDANCE IN A LOSSY OR GAIN MEDIUM 
283 
where Δε(χ) is considered a perturbation. The unperturbed solution for ε(0\χ) has 
been discussed previously, and the solution φ{0\χ) is just that of a lossless slab 
waveguide. Note that 
SL.-kf 
+ a?ve«>\x) φ^{χ) = 0. 
(7.6.9) 
If we approximate the trial function φ(χ) in the variational expression (7.6.7) by the 
unperturbed solution φ(0\χ), we obtain 
k1 = kff + ίω2με'1 Γ + ΐω2με" (1 - Γ) 
(7.6.10) 
where 
Γοο|Φ(0)ω|2^ 
(7.6.11) 
is the optical confinement factor. 
When ε', is close to ε', the propagation constant can be written in the form 
*:~*f-;rf + i(i-r) 
(7.6.12) 
which is obtained by taking the square roots of both sides of (7.6.10) and using the 
binomial expansion assuming that the imaginary part is small compared with the 
real part, and &<0) is close to k1 and k\. When applying (7.6.12) to a laser cavity as 
shown in Fig. 7.16, we have the wave bouncing back and forth in a round-trip of 
distance 2L 
eikz2L 
r2 
= 
, 
(7.6.13) 
Figure 7.16 A semiconductor laser cavity with a net gain g in the active region and an absorption 
coefficient a outside the active region. The cavity length is L and the reflectivity is R at both ends. 

284 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
where r is the reflection coefficient of the electric field. The reflectivity R is related to 
r by R = \r\2. Ignoring the small imaginary part of r, which is a good approximation 
formost cases, we have 
e.2k?>L ergL-0-DaLR 
= 
h 
(y_g 
j 4 ) 
J2k 
Thus 
2 kf )L = 2rmr 
m = an integer 
(7.6.15) 
which determines the longitudinal mode spectrum of the semiconductor laser, and 
Γ£ = ( 1 - Γ ) α + ^-1η^ 
(7.6.16) 
which determines the threshold gain condition. Here Tg is the modal gain of the 
dielectric waveguide, and k^ ~— ne, where ne is the effective index. Equation 
z 
c 
(7.6.15) gives 
ω 
— neL = mir. 
(7.6.17) 
c 
The frequency spectrum is 
fm = m-^-. 
(7.6.18) 
2neL 
If we ignore the frequency dependence of ne, the Fabry-Perot frequency spacing is 
Af = ^ - - F S R 
(7.6.19) 
which is called the free spectral range (FSR) of the Fabry-Perot spectrum. 
Alternatively, we write in terms of the free-space wavelength λ: 
λ 
L = m — 
(7.6.20) 
2ne 
which means that the cavity length L is an integer multiple of half-wavelength in 
the semiconductor cavity. The spacing between two nearby Fabry-Perot modes 
(Am= 1) is 
λ2 
Δλ = —— 
(7.6.21a) 
2ngL 
dne 
ng=ne-\-^ 
(7.6.21b) 

7.7 
SURFACE PLASMON WAVEGUIDES 
285 
•I 
3 s 
©Ja 
V U 
B a u 
lü. 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
Λ 
T 
ii 
f! 
■ ♦ * 
ί ' 
1 
* . 
T · 
ϊ ϊ 
. 
· ; 
1 
1 
1 
1 
.—■ 
$ 
* 1 
" 
' | 
■ 
· 
: f 1 
M 
\ 
j i 
♦ 
\\\ 
ft Λ f 
fWUU 
L - i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
. 
1 
1 
. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
ι 
! 
·-·■ 
* ΐ \ '■ 
I 
i 
I 
■ 
I 
' 
1.487 
1.488 
1.489 
1.490 
Wavelength (μηι) 
1.491 
Figure 7.17 
Amplified spontaneous emission spectrum of a 320-μπι semiconductor laser cavity at room 
temperature below threshold. The injection current is / = 8 mA. (Above the laser threshold current, /Λ = 
13.5 mA, lasing starts.) 
where the dispersion effect (dne/d\^0) 
is taken into account and ng is the 
group index of the guided mode, which accounts for the dispersion of the effective 
index ne(\). 
In Fig. 7.17, we show the amplified spontaneous emission spectrum of a 
InGaAsP/InGaAsP strained quantum-well laser at 300K. The cavity length L is 
370 μπι. The threshold current is 7th = 13.5 mA at this temperature. Using ne ~ 
3.395 and [10, 16] dnjdk 
~-0.264 (μιτιΓ1 near λ = 1.49 μηι, we obtain the 
wavelength spacing Δλ ~ 7.9 A, which agrees with the spacing shown in the figure. 
7.7 
SURFACE PLASMON WAVEGUIDES 
In recent years, surface plasmon waveguides, or plasmonics, has become an intensive 
subject of research. The main idea is to develop waveguide structures of small dimen-
sions of subwavelength scales at optical frequencies. From Section 5.5, we understand 
that metals behave like plasma at optical frequencies. If the optical frequency o> is less 
than the plasma frequency ωρ, the permittivity 
ρ(ω) = ε 0(ΐ -o>j;/ft>2j 
(7.7.1) 
becomes negative, and the wave is strongly attenuated in the metal. If ω > ωρ, the 
permittivity ε(ω) becomes positive. At ω = ωρ, ε(ω) = 0, and the propagation 
constant k = ω^με(ω) vanishes (i.e., the electromagnetic wave does not propagate 
any mode). The medium response gives 
0 = D = ερ(ω)Ε = ε0Ε + P 
P = -ε 0Ε, 
(7.7.2) 

286 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
that is, the induced polarization density is exactly opposite of that of the electric 
field, —ε0Ε. 
7.7.1 
Surface Plasmon Mode of a Single Interface 
Consider a single interface between a dielectric medium and a plasma medium [27], 
Fig. 7.18. We seek the possible guided mode near the surface such that the mode 
decays in both +x and — x direction away from the surface and is guided along the 
z direction. Such a mode exists and it is TM polarized. The solution is given by, 
using the boundary condition that Hy is continuous at the interface, 
H = yHy 
; ( e~°"X 
x>0 
x<0 
(7.7.3) 
where the wave equation in each region gives 
·*? = ω μ 0ει 
-α 2 + kz = ω 
μ0ερ(ω). 
(7.7.4a) 
(7.7.4b) 
The electric field is obtained from the Maxwell's equations, E = (V x H)/(— ίωε) 
E 
ιωει 
1 
- (axz + xikz)H0e~a'x+ik'z, 
x>0 
(-a2z + xikz)H0eaiX+ik*z 
x<0. 
(7.7.5) 
Dielectric ε{ > 0 
Plasma 
y 
%((») = ε„ 
„.2 
H = y H , TM polarization 
Figure 7.18 The magnetic field profile for the surface plasmon mode in a single dielectric-plasma inter-
face. It is TM polarized and propagates along the z direction. 

7.7 
SURFACE PLASMON WAVEGUIDES 
287 
The tangential E or Ez component is continuous. We have 
«i_ 
«2 
(7.7.6) 
Therefore, we obtain the solutions for au a2, and kz in terms of ει and ερ: 
« 1 = 
&>4 
« 2 = <*M 
"Μοεΐ 
ει 
-^-ϋερ 
ει 
/μ-οειερ 
ει 
(7.7.7a) 
(7.7.7b) 
(7.7.7c) 
Real solutions for «i, α^ and fcz exist for ερ < —ει < 0. The Poynting' vector or 
power density flow along the z direction is given by 
P = -Re(E x H*) 
z< 
( k. 
2(OB\ 
^-IZ/olV2"", 
^>0 
2ωεΓ \H0\2e2a2X, 
x<0. 
(7.7.8) 
7.7.2 
Surface Plasmon Modes in a Metallic Slab 
In a thin metallic slab surrounded by a symmetric dielectric (ε j > 0) on both sides, 
we have even and odd modes, similar to those of a symmetric dielectric waveguide 
[28]. By the same token, we can have a thin air (or dielectric) layer sandwiched 
between two metals and we look for the guided mode in such a waveguide. 
Below we consider a thin metallic slab, and the optical frequency ω is below the 
plasma frequency of the metal such that ερ < 0. 
TM Even Modes (Fig. 7.19a) 
U = ye' iKz 
C0e-a'(x-i), 
C] cosh (Xix, 
Cnea'(x+2), 
x> 
\x\ < 
(7.7.9) 
x<-i 

288 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
Η,(χ)<*ϊ 
(b) 
* 
\ 
6 l 
\ 
Hy (x)e'V 
x = d/2 
\ ^ 
6_f ΰΛ 
0, 
Plasma^^ 
Figure 7.19 The magnetic field profile of a guided (a) even mode and (b) odd mode in a plasma wave-
guide using a thin plasma layer surrounded by dielectrics on top and below. The modes are TM polarized 
and propagate along the z direction. 
where the wave equation in each region gives 
—a2 4- k2 = ω2μ.ει 
-(£+£ 
= CO2 
μερ. 
(7.7.10a) 
(7.7.10b) 
We then use the boundary conditions in which tangential electric field, Ez = 
(—l/ί'ωε) (dHy/dx), and magnetic field Hy are continuous at x= ±d/2. We find 
Co = C\ cosh a.2 -, 
«l n 
„ «2 . . 
d 
Co = C\—sinh a2~. 
ει 
ερ 
2 
(7.7.11a) 
(7.7.11b) 
Taking the ratio of the above two equations to eliminate C0 and C\, we find the 
guidance condition for the TM even mode 
«i = 
a2tanh c*2-
ερ 
2 
(7.7.12) 
which should be solved together with 
a\ ~ a\ = ω2/*ο(ει - ερ)· 
(7.7.13) 

7.7 
SURFACE PLASMON WAVEGUIDES 
289 
TM Odd Modes (Fig. 7.19b) 
The procedure is similar to that of the even modes. 
We summarize the results below: 
H = y e*zC, { 
smha2-e 
"' 
2 
sinh a-ix, 
H). 
-sinh a 2 - e a ' H D , 
2 
«1 
— a2 coth a2 -. 
Sn 
2 
x> 
\x\<-
x< 
2 
d 
(7.7.14) 
(7.7.15) 
Solution Procedure 
If we define 
d 
Λ 
d 
X = a2 - 
and 
Y = ax -
we can write (7.7.12), (7.7.13), and (7.7.15) as 
(7.7.16) 
-^■X 
tanh X 
even modes 
ερ 
-P-X 
coth X 
odd modes 
(7.7.17a) 
(7.7.17b) 
XL - Yl = /?2 
(7.7.18) 
where 
R = ω^/^εχ 
- ε ρ ) - . 
(7.7.19) 
0.8 
0.6 
y 0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
- i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 -
—I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
τ—ρ 
0.0 
Figure 7.20 A graphic method to find the solutions for the even and odd eigenmodes of a lossless plasma 
waveguide. The intercepts between the curve, Y = VX2 — R2, and the two eigenequations or so-called 
guidance conditions give the solutions for (X, Y) for the even and odd modes. We assume 
ep = — 14.8ε0, ε, = 2.89ε0, d = 0.02 μηι, and the wavelength is 0.62 μπι. 

290 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
(b) 0.8 
0.4 
3 
m. o.o 
-0.4 
Ex 
1 
^ 
Imag(£z) 
1.10 
-0.05 
0.00 
Distance (um) 
-0.8 
0.05 
0.10 
-0.10 
-0.05 
0.00 
0.05 
Distance (um) 
0.10 
Figure 7.21 The field profiles for (a) the even mode and (b) the odd mode of a silver layer waveguide. 
The thin silver has a thickness of 0.02 μπι. We have assumed that the loss is negligible for the plots. The 
field amplitudes are normalized to the amplitudes in vacuum. 
The intercepts between (7.7.18) with (7.7.17a) or (7.7.17b) give the solutions for 
a\djl 
and a2d/2 of the even or odd modes, respectively. Figure 7.20 shows a 
graphical method by plotting the three equations on the X — Y plane for a thin 
silver planar layer as a plasmon waveguide (with the approximation that the imagin-
ary part of the permittivity is negligible, and the real part is ερ = — 14.8ε0 for silver at 
a wavelength of 0.62 μπι [28]) surrounded by a dielectric material with ει = 2.89ε0 
on both sides. Figure 7.21a shows the field profiles of Hy, Ex, and imaginary part of Ez 
(as Ez is purely imaginary) for the even mode. Figure 7.21b shows the field profiles 
for the odd mode. The even or odd symmetry of the wave functions are clear. 
PROBLEMS 
7.1 Consider a Ga^Iri] ^As waveguide with a thickness d confined between two 
InP regions, where the gallium mole fraction x is 0.47, as shown in Fig. 7.22. 
(a) If the free-space wavelength λ0 is 1.65 μηι, what is the photon energy 
(in eV)? 
(b) Find the maximum thickness d0 (in μπι) so that only the TE0 mode 
is guided at the wavelength λ0 given in part (a). Assume that the 
waveguide loss is negligible at this wavelength. 
I D P 
i 
G a ^ . j A s 
l 
d 
«, = 3.56 
InP 
n = 3.16 
Figure 7.22 
Diagram for Problem 7.1. 

PROBLEMS 
291 
(c) If the thickness d of the waveguide is 0.3 μπι, find the following 
parameters approximately (in l/μιη) for the TEo mode using the 
graphical approach in the text, (i) the decay constant a in the InP 
regions, (ii) kx, and (iii) kz in the waveguide. 
(d) Calculate the optical confinement factor for the TEo mode in part (c). 
7.2 
Repeat Problems 7.1(b) and 7.1(c) for the TM polarization. Are the answers 
the same as those for the TE polarization? 
7.3 Calculate the Goos-Hänchen phase shifts for the TEo ar>d TMo guided modes 
in Problem 7.1(c). 
7.4 
Show that for a symmetric dielectric waveguide with the V-number 
V ■ k^ddri2 — n2 
approaching zero, the propagation constant kz of the TE0 mode can be 
written as 
kz = kon + CoV . 
Find the expression for C0. (Hint: Start with the guidance condition and the 
dispersion relation for V —> 0.) 
7.5 
Consider a symmetric slab waveguide with a thickness d (Fig. 7.23a) and a 
symmetric quantum well with a well width d (Fig. 7.23b). Consider the 
guided TE even modes for the optical waveguide and the general even 
bound states for the heterojunction quantum-well structure. Summarize in a 
table an exact one-to-one correspondence of the wave functions, material para-
meters, eigenequations (guidance conditions), propagation constants, and 
decay constants for the two physical problems above. 
7.6 
Consider a symmetric optical slab waveguide with a refractive index of 3.5 
inside the guide and a refractive index of 3.2 outside the guide; the waveguide 
dimension is 2 μπι, and assume the magnetic permeability is the same 
everywhere. 
(a) 
(b) 
μ.ε ΜΛ 
-<*-» 
β,ε 
"1 
■d-
Figure 7.23 (a), (b) Diagram for Problem 7.5. 

292 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
n = 3.2 
Figure 7.24 Diagram for Problem 7.6. 
(a) For a light with a wavelength of 1.5 μπι in free space, find the number of 
guided TE modes in this waveguide. 
(b) Using the ray optics approach, find the angle 0m of the guided TEm mode 
bouncing back and forth between the two boundaries of the waveguide, 
Fig. 7.24. 
(c) [Independent of parts (a) and (b).] Find the cutoff wavelength km of the 
TEm mode. Evaluate the decay constant a outside the waveguide and 
the propagation constant kz at the cutoff condition. 
7.7 (a) Plot the refractive index n versus the optical energy h(o using Eqs. (7.1.21) 
to (7.1.23) for x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3. 
(b) Design a GaAs/Alj-Gai^As waveguide using the above results such that 
only the fundamental TEQ mode can be guided at a wavelength λ0 near the 
GaAs band-gap wavelength at room temperature. Ignore the absorption 
effects for simplicity. Specify the possible parameters such as the alumi-
num mole fraction x and the waveguide thickness d. 
7.8 (a) Derive the normalization constant ϋλ for the electric field of the TE mode 
in an asymmetric dielectric slab waveguide. 
(b) Repeat (a) for the magnetic field of the TM mode. 
7.9 (a) Find the analytical expressions for kx, kz, and a in a symmetric waveguide 
for the TEm mode at the cutoff condition. 
(b) Repeat (a) for the TMm mode. 
7.10 (a) Find the analytical expressions for kx, kz, a, and a2 in an asymmetric 
waveguide for the TEm mode at the cutoff condition. 
(b) Repeat (a) for the TMm mode. 
7.11 
For an Ino.53Gao.47As/InP dielectric waveguide with a cross section (2 μπι χ 
1 μηι), find the propagation constant of the lowest HE^ (or Ey
u) mode. 
You may use the graph in Fig. 7.13 assuming «, = 3.56 and n = 3.16 at a 
wavelength λ0 = 1.65 μηπ. What is the effective index of this mode? 
7.12 
Repeat Problem 7.11 using the effective index method. Check the accuracy of 
the result compared with that of the numerical solution from Fig. 7.13. 
7.13 
List all of the assumptions made in order to derive the threshold condition 
Tg = {\-Y)a 
+ 
\\n\. 
L 
K 

REFERENCES 
293 
π = 3.5 
as = 10 cm-1 
« = 5 cm-1 
as = 10 cm-1 
< 
500 μσι 
> 
Figure 7.25 Diagram for Problem 7.15. 
7.14 
Show that if the reflectivities from the two end facets of a Fabry-Perot cavity 
are different, /?] φ R2, the threshold condition is given by 
Γ^ =
 ( 1-
Γ ) α +έ
1 η(^)-
7.15 
Consider a laser structure shown in Fig. 7.25 with losses described by the 
absorption coefficient as = 10 cm~' in the substrates and a = 5 cm ' in the 
active region. The reflectivity R is 0.3 at both ends, and the waveguide 
length is 500 μηχ Assume, for simplicity, that the propagation constant of 
the guided mode is approximately — n, where n = 3.5. 
(a) What is the threshold gain g^ of the structure if the optical confinement 
factor of the guided mode is 0.9? 
(b) What is the longitudinal mode spectrum of this laser structure? Calculate 
the frequency spacing Δ/ and the wavelength spacing Δλ of two nearby 
longitudinal modes at λ0 ~ 0.8 μπι and ignore the dispersion effect for 
simplicity. 
7.16 
(a) Findtne expression for the guided power density for the even mode of the 
plasma waveguide in each region of the waveguide. Comment on the signs 
of the power densities. 
(b) Integrate over the transverse (x) direction and find the expressions for the 
power guided inside and outside the waveguide. 
REFERENCES 
1. D. Marcuse, Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides, Academic Press, New York, 1974. 
2. A. W. Snyder and J. D. Love, Optical Waveguide Theory, Chapman and Hall, London, 
1983. 
3. A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Photonics-Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, 6th ed., 
Oxford University Press, New York, 2007. 
4. H. C. Casey, Jr., and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part A: Fundamental 
Principles, Academic Press, Orlando, 1978. 
5. J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory, EMW, Cambridge, MA, 2000. 
6. M. A. Afromowitz, "Refractive index of Ga] _xAlxAs," Solid State Commun. 15, 59-63 
(1974). 

294 
OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE THEORY 
7. J. P. van der Ziel, M. Ilegems, and R. M. Mikulyak, "Optical birefringence of thin 
GaAs-AlAs multilayer films," Appl. Phys. Lett. 28, 735-737 (1976). 
8. J. P. van der Ziel and A. C. Gossard, "Absorption, refractive index, and birefringence of 
AlAs-GaAs monolayers," J. Appl. Phys. 48, 3018-3023 (1977). 
9. J. S. Blakemore, "Semiconducting and other major properties of gallium arsenide," 
J. Appl. Phys. 53, R123-R181 (1982). 
10. S. Adachi, "Refractive indices of ΓΠ-V compounds: key properties of InGaAsP relevant to 
device designa," J. Appl. Phys. 53, 5863-5869 (1982). 
U . S . Adachi and K. Oe, "Internal strain and photoelastic effects in Ga^jAl^As/GaAs and 
In^Ga^As^P,^ /InP crystals," J. Appl. Phys. 54, 6620-6627 (1983). 
12. S. Adachi, "GaAs, AlAs, and Gai xAlxAs: material parameters for use in research and 
device applications," J. Appl. Phys. 58, R1-R29 (1985). 
13. S. Adachi, "Optical properties of ALGa^As alloys," Phys. Rev. B 38, 12345-12352 
(1988). 
14. H. C. Casey, Jr., D. D. Sell, and M. B. Panish, "Refractive index of Al^Ga! _^As between 
1.2 and 1.8 eV," Appl. Phys. Lett. 24, 63-65 (1974). 
15. M. Amiotti and G. Landgren, "Ellipsometric determination of thickness and refractive 
index at 1.3, 1.55 and 1.7 μπι for In(1_^Ga^As>,P(i->,) films on InP," J. Appl. Phys. 73, 
2965-2971 (1993). 
16. S. Adachi, Physical Properties of III-V Semiconductor Compounds, Wiley, New York, 
1992. 
17. S. Adachi, Properties of Indium Phosphide, INSPEC, The Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
London and New York, 1991. 
18. K. H. Hellwege, Ed., Landolt-Börnstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in 
Science and Technology, New Series, Group ΓΠ 17a, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982; 
Groups ΠΙ-V 22a, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986. 
19. O. Madelung, Ed., Semiconductors, Group IV Elements and 111- V Compounds, in Data in 
Science and Technology, P. Poerschke, Ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. 
20. E. A. J. Marcatili, "Dielectric rectangular waveguide and directional coupler for integrated 
optics," Bell Syst. Tech. J. 48, 2071-2102 (1969). 
21. E. A. J. Marcatili, "Slab-coupled waveguides," Bell Syst. Tech. J. 53, 645-674 (1974). 
22. J. E. Goell, "A circular-harmonic computer analysis of rectangular dielectric waveguide," 
Bell Syst. Tech. J. 48, 2133-2160 (1969). 
23. W. C. Chew, "Analysis of optical and millimeter wave dielectric waveguide," 
J. Electromagnetic 
Waves Appl. 3, 359-377 (1989). 
24. C. S. Lee, S. W. Lee, and S. L. Chuang, "Plot of modal field distribution in rectangular and 
circular waveguides," IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. MTT-33, 271-274 (1985). 
25. W. Streifer, R. D. Burnham, and D. R. Scifres, "Analysis of diode lasers with lateral spatial 
variations in thickness," Appl. Phys. Lett. 37, 121-123 (1980). 
26. J. Buus, "The effective index method and its application to semiconductor lasers," IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. QE-18, 1083-1089 (1982). 
27. C. Kittel, Solid State Physics, Chapter 14, 8th ed., Wiley, New York, 2005. 
28. G. Winter, S. Wedge, and W. L. Barnes, "Can lasing at visible wavelengths be achieved 
using the low-loss long-range surface plasmon-polariton mode?" New J. Phys. 8, 125 
(2006). 

8 
Coupled-Mode Theory 
In this chapter, we discuss in Section 8.1 how a light can be coupled into and out of a 
waveguide, then how it can be coupled between two parallel waveguides or coupled 
within the same waveguide with a distributed feedback (DFB) coupling. We present 
the coupled-mode theory for wave propagation in parallel waveguides in Section 8.2 
An analogy of this coupling between two propagation modes in dielectric waveguides 
is a coupled double-pendulum system or a coupled two-resonator (inductor-capacitor 
or LC) system. The coupling of two resonators leads to energy transfer between the 
resonators at a frequency determined by half of the beat frequency of the two system 
modes: the in-phase mode and the out-of-phase mode. For coupling of propagation 
modes between the two parallel waveguides, a beat length can also be defined, 
which is twice the minimum distance required for the exchange of the guided 
power between the waveguides. Many interesting physical systems exhibit the 
phenomena of the coupling of modes, which can be understood from a simple 
model of two coupled pendulums. We apply the coupled-mode theory to optical 
switches (Section 8.3) and optical ring resonators with applications as optical add 
and drop filters (Section 8.4). We then investigate in Section 8.5 the counter-propa-
gation waves coupled in a distributed feedback structure under the same framework of 
coupled-mode theory. 
8.1 
WAVEGUIDE COUPLERS 
We discuss transverse couplers, prism couplers, and grating couplers and point out 
the significance of the phase-matching condition in this section [1-3]. 
8.1.1 
Transverse Couplers 
Direct Focusing 
As shown in Fig. 8.la, a lens is used to focus and shape the beam 
profile so that it is matched to the modal distribution in the waveguide. The coupling 
efficiency depends on the overlap integral between the field profile of the incident 
wave and the modal profile of the guided mode in the thin film. This configuration 
can achieve nearly 100% efficiency. However, it may not be suitable for general 
integrated optics applications because of the nonplanar configuration. 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
295 

296 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 8.1 
(a) Direct focusing, (b) End-butt coupling. 
End-Butt Coupling 
As shown in Fig. 8.1b, the efficiency of an end-butt coupling 
can be controlled by the gap width t, the waveguide dimension d, and refractive 
indices of the waveguide and the substrate, ng and ns, respectively. 
8.1.2 
Prism Couplers 
For a mode of a waveguide with a refractive index n\ inside (and n0 outside) the guide, 
the propagation constant ß along the z direction has to satisfy the conditions, Äf/i0
 < 
ß < kotit and kons < ß < Λο"ι> where fco = 2ττ/λο is the wave number and λο is the 
wavelength in free space. For an incident plane wave from region 0, its horizontal 
wavenumber is kz = &o"o sin0, < Icon® for any real incident angle 0,-. Thus, the wave 
cannot be phase matched to the guided mode because fer^o < ß> Fig· 8.2b. The 
(b) 
"*, 
Ao"o 
ß. 
(c) 
Radius 
*0"p 
■ k, 
Radius 
= V i 
Figure 8.2 
(a) A prism coupler, (b) The phase-matching diagram for a guided mode with a propagation 
constant ß > £ο"ο· (c) The phase-matching diagram for an incident wave from the prism region and 
coupling to the guided mode with fco"pSin θρ = β. 

8.1 
WAVEGUIDE COUPLERS 
297 
excitation of the guided mode is very weak. However, using a prism above 
the waveguide with a small gap (assuming np > n0 and np > ns), Fig. 8.2a, the 
phase-matching condition can be satisfied: fco«p sin θρ = ß, Fig. 8.2c. This angle of 
incidence θρ will be larger than the critical angle for the interface between the prism 
and region 0, 
sin 
i (n0 
(8.1.1) 
because ß > kon0. Therefore, the transmitted wave in the gap region is an evanescent 
type and can be resonantly coupled to the guided mode. In general, for a particular TEm 
mode with a propagation constant ßm, we can choose θρ such that 
fco«p sin öp = βηι 
(8.1.2) 
Other important parameters are the incident beam profile, coupling length, and 
gap dimension. 
8.1.3 
Grating Couplers 
Consider first a plane wave incident on a periodic grating that is assumed to be 
a perfect conductor with the surface profile described by x — h(z) with a period 
Λ, as shown in Fig. 8.3, 
E,· = y E0 
e-ik*>x+ik«>z 
kxo = k cos 0,· 
&zo = k sin 0,·. 
(8.1.3) 
The reflected wave is Es = yER(x, z). Because the boundary condition requires 
that the tangential electric field vanish at the conductor surface, the reflected wave 
E, 
(m) 
μ. ε 
,—.. 
—N 
Perfect conductor or 
a dielectric medium (ßt, e{) 
1 
ö, 
\x 
ER 
Cm) 
sx = Hz) 
Η-ΊΓ -1 
Figure 8.3 
A plane wave E, with the polarization along the v direction is incident on a grating surface 
with a profile x = h(z) and a period Λ. 

298 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
on the surface of the grating should satisfy 
ER(X = h(z), z) = -E0 e-ikMh(z)+ik*>z 
CO 
= £0e**z 5 Z Ame^mz 
(8.1.4a) 
m=—oo 
Λ 
Am = i f <fe[ - e - ' ^ " « ] e - . > Z 
( 8 ! 4 b ) 
0 
where we have made use of the Fourier series expansion because e~'k's>h^ is a 
periodic function with a period Λ. In the region above the grating, ER(x, z) satisfies 
the wave equation and should have solutions of the form expiik^x + ikzz) as long 
as k\ + k\ = ω2με. Therefore, we see that a general solution for ER(x, z) will be 
oo 
ER(x,z) = E0 J2 Rmeik™x+ik^ 
(8.1.5) 
m=—oo 
where the horizontal wave numbers are 
2-n-
Km =k$ + m— 
(8.1.6) 
and their corresponding vertical components can be obtained from the dispersion 
relation 
Km = \]«ϊμε ~ k2
zm- 
(8-1.7) 
The horizontal wave number k^ for a particular m differs from its nearby value by 
2-JT/A. We can generalize the above discussions to the case of a penetrable dielectric 
grating. A phase-matching diagram is shown in Fig. 8.4. These plane waves for the 
reflected and transmitted fields are called the space harmonics. It can be seen that 
for a particular m such that k^ > ω^/με, the ^-component kxm becomes purely ima-
ginary; and we choose the imaginary part of kxm to be positive such that it decays away 
from the surface. In the transmission 
region with a refractive index 
n\ = ^/μ,,ει/(μ0εο)> the transmitted wave vectors k'm will have the same horizontal 
wave numbers kzm as those of the reflected waves (8.1.6), 
2ττ 
Km = Km = Kß + m^- 
(8.1.8b) 
k'xm = \l^^^-Klzm. 
(8.1.8c) 

8.1 
WAVEGUIDE COUPLERS 
299 
k-»W«->i 
2π 2π 2π 
Λ Λ Λ 
Figure 8.4 Phase-matching diagram for a plane wave (a) reflection and (b) both reflection and trans-
mission from a grating structure with a period Λ. 
For a general theory to find the reflection and transmission coefficients of the space 
harmonics, see Refs. 4 and 5. 
Phase-Matching Condition for Grating Couplers 
A dielectric grating can 
therefore be used as a waveguide input or output coupler as shown in Fig. 8.5. 
Input coupler 
Output coupler 
2TT 
Figure 8.5 
(a) A grating coupler, (b) Phase-matching diagram for β = h,n0 sin 0, + —. (c) Grating input 
and output couplers. 

300 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
Suppose we have a dielectric slab waveguide with a propagation constant ß for 
the fundamental TEQ mode. If the incident angle 0, and the grating period Λ are 
chosen such that 
£o«o sin Θ,; + m — = ß 
(8.1.9) 
for a particular integer m, the incident wave will be coupled to the guided TEo mode, 
Fig. 8.5b. The coupling strength depends on the incident beam profile and its 
distance D from the edge of the grating as shown in Fig. 8.5a. If D is too long, 
the incident power coupled into the waveguide with the grating section can leak 
back the power to the incident region. If D is too short, half of the beam profile 
will be reflected from the planar interface in the section z > 0, and the coupling 
into the guided mode in the region z > 0 will be small. We can use the grating 
as an output coupler based on the reciprocity concept. The guided wave in the 
center waveguide section in Fig. 8.5c can radiate back into region 0 in the right 
grating section while propagating along the waveguide. The exit angle can be deter-
mined using (8.1.9). 
8.2 
COUPLED OPTICAL WAVEGUIDES 
8.2.1 
General Formulation of Coupled-Mode Theory 
The coupled-mode theory [6-32] is also very useful to understand the coupling 
mechanisms in parallel waveguides as shown in Fig. 8.6. The guidance is along 
the z direction. Waveguides a and b can be two rectangular or slab dielectric 
guides. For a guided mode in the +z direction in a single waveguide a, the electric 
and magnetic fields in the frequency domain can be expressed as 
E(x, v, z) = E(a\x, y) a(z) 
(8.2.1 a) 
H(x, y, z) = H(a\x, v)a(z) 
(8.2. lb) 
a(z) = a0eiß"z 
(8.2.1c) 
Figure 8.6 Two coupled optical waveguides a and b. 

8.2 
COUPLED OPTICAL WAVEGUIDES 
301 
where E(a)(x,y) and H(a)(x,y) are the modal distributions in the x — y plane, which 
satisfy the normalization condition 
I 
/ΌΟ pOO 
-Re 
E(a)(jc, y) x H(a)*(jt, y)· z dxdy = 1. 
(8.2.2) 
^ 
J —00 J—00 
Note that the time conversion exp( — ϊωί) in Maxwell's equations has been adopted. 
We also see that 
~a(z) = ißa a(z). 
(8.2.3) 
dz 
The total guided power for the fields in (8.2.1) and (8.2.2) is 
i 
ί·00 
ί>00 
P = -Re 
E(x, y, z) x H*(x, y,z)· z dxdy = \a(z)\2. 
(8.2.4) 
■^ 
J —00 J —00 
If the mode is guided in the — z direction, then a(z) = ας, exp(—ißaz) 
~a(z)^-ißaa(z) 
(8.2.5) 
dz 
and the Poynting vector E x H* will be in the — z direction. If we define the power to 
be the +z component of the guided power, we obtain 
P=-\a(z)\2 
(8.2.6) 
for the guided power in the — z direction for (8.2.5). 
Consider two parallel waveguides, a and b, for which the total field solutions can 
be written as linear combinations of the individual waveguide modes 
K(x, y, z) = a(z) E(a)(jc, y) + b(z) E(b)(x, y) 
H(x, y, z) = a{z) H(a)(x, y) + b(z) Hw(x, y). 
(8.2.7) 
The amplitudes a(z) and b(z) satisfy 
d 
dz 
d 
, a = ißaa + iKab b 
dz 
(8.2.8) 
b = iKba a + ißb b 
dz 

302 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
where Kab and Kba are the coupling coefficients. The expressions for Kab and Kba are 
discussed in Appendix 8A. The total guided power is 
1 
f00 f°° 
P = -Re 
E(x,y,z)xH*(x,y,z)-zdxdy 
^ 
J — 00 J—00 
= sa\a(z)\2 + sb\b(z)\2 +Re[a(z)b*(z)Cba + b(z)a*(z)Cab] 
where the cross-overlap integrals 
i 
i»0O 
J « 0 0 
Cpq=-\ 
E^(x,y)xH^*(x,y)-zdxdy 
^ J —00 J—OO 
(8.2.9) 
(8.2.10) 
and sa, sb = +1 for propagation in the +z direction and —1 for propagation in the — z 
direction. 
If we assume that the coupling of the two waveguide modes is very weak so that 
the cross-overlap integrals Cab and Cba are negligible, the total power is then 
P = 
sa\a(z)\2+sb\b(z)\2. 
If the system is lossless, power conservation requires 
dP 
dz = 0. 
(8.2.11) 
(8.2.12) 
Substituting (8.2.11) into (8.2.12) and using the coupled-mode equations, we find 
Kab = K*ba 
if sasb > 0 (co-directional coupling) 
(8.2.13a) 
Kab = ~K*ba if sasb < 0 (contra-directional coupling). 
(8.2.13b) 
The coupled-mode equations can be expressed in a matrix form 
where 
d^ 
dz 
M 
m 
ßa 
Kab 
Kba 
ßb 
(8.2.14a) 
(8.2.14b) 
8.2.2 
Eigenstate Solutions 
The solution can be obtained by substituting 
"α(ζ)1 = M n 
b(z) 
B 
„<7k 
(8.2.15) 

8.2 
COUPLED OPTICAL WAVEGUIDES 
303 
into (8.2.14). We find 
(M - ßl) 
where / is an identity matrix, or equivalently, 
ßa-ß 
Kab 
Kba 
ßb ~ ß 
0. 
For nontrivial solutions to (8.2.16), the determinant must vanish: 
det|M - ßl\ = (ßa - ß)(ßb -ß)- 
KabKha = 0. 
There are two eigenvalues for ß: 
where 
q=^A2 
+ KabKba 
A = 
ßa-ßb 
(8.2.16) 
(8.2.17) 
(8.2.18) 
(8.2.19) 
(8.2.20) 
For co-directional coupling, Kba = K„b, q is real for a lossless system. As an example, 
we assume for co-directional coupling that 
ßa - βα(ω) 
ßb - 
ßb(<o). 
The βα(ω) and )36(ω) versus ω curves are shown as dashed lines in Fig. 8.7a. Both 
curves have positive slopes and intercept each other at (ωο, jß0). The eigensolutions 
ß+ and ß_ are the solid curves. At ω = ωο> βα
 = ßi» <J — \Kab\(=K), the splitting 
(ß+ - ß ) is IK. Because 
Kab 
ß-ßb 
B 
ß-ßa 
Kba 
(8.2.21) 
we find if Kab > 0, 
(l)for/3 = /3+ 
— = 
and 
K ab 
_A + q 
-A + q~ 
Kba 
(2) for ß = ß_ 
K, ab 
A-q 
B-
-A-q 
> 0 
< 0 . 
(8.2.22) 
(8.2.23) 
^ba 

304 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
Codirectional coupling 
*-<a 
Contradirectional coupling 
Figure 8.7 
The dispersion curves β+ and /3_ for (a) co-directional coupling and (b) contra-directional 
coupling. 
Furthermore, if the two guides have the same propagation constants, ßa = ßh, we find 
(for real Kah and co-directional coupling) 
B+ 
A-
1 
for ß = ß+ 
-1 
ΐοτβ = β_ 
(8.2.24) 
(8.2.25) 
We thus have two possible system modes, the β+ (in-phase) mode and the β~ 
(out-of-phase) mode, which are plotted in Fig. 8.8. 
For contra-directional coupling, q = JΔ2 - \Kab\2, q can be purely imaginary if 
ßa-ßb 
< \κ, 
ab 
ß+ (in-phase) mode 
ß_ (out-of-phase) mode 
Figure 8.8 
A simple sketch of the two system modes: the ß+ (in-phase) mode and the /3_ (out-of-phase) 
mode. 

8.2 
COUPLED OPTICAL WAVEGUIDES 
305 
The propagation constants ß+ and ß 
are complex in the region, Fig. 8.7b, 
ßa-ßb 
< \κΛ\. 
The imaginary parts Im)3+ and Im/3 
are shown as the dashed semicircles. We 
also see that a stop band exists with its bandwidth Δω determined by 
/Τ-/3ΐω) 
= 
|Αβ*|· 
8.2.3 
General Solution of the Coupled Waveguides 
After finding the eigenvectors V] and V2, where 
vi = 
v2 
Kab 
q-A 
Kab 
-q-A 
or 
q + A 
. Kba 
-q + A 
Kba 
for β+ = & L ± Ä + q 
(8.2.26a) 
for ß_ = ^ L ± Ä _ q^ 
(8.2.26b) 
the solution for a(z) and b(z) given the initial condition a(0) and b(0) can be obtained 
in the same way as (8.2.19). It can also be derived using the eigenmatrix V where its 
columns consist of the two eigenvectors of the matrix M 
V = 
vi 
· 
v2 
(8.2.27) 
The general solution is 
a{z) 
b(z) 
,Ψ,ζ 
o 
0 
eifs 
Λ-1 
e(0)' 
b(0) 
(8.2.28) 
The derivation is straightforward. The general solution is a linear combination of the 
eigensolutions 
~α(ζΥ 
Mz). 
= V 
Kab 
.q-A_ 
-eiß,z 
0 
eiß'z 
0 
eiß z 
+ C2 
~C\~ 
.Cl. 
Kab 
.-q-A_ 
(8.2.29) 
Therefore, at z = 0, we find 
"e(0)" 
b(0) 
(8.2.30) 

306 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
Substituting (8.2.30) into (8.2.29), we obtain the solution (8.2.28). The solutions can 
also be expressed in terms of a matrix S(z) and the initial conditions: 
where 
a(z) 
Hz) = S(z) «(0) 
b(0) 
(8.2.31) 
eiß,z 
0 
0 
e'f> *. 
v - i 
Δ . 
cos qz + i — sin qz 
.Kba . 
ι 
sin qz 
■ Kab ■ 
i 
sin qz 
Δ . 
cos qz — i — sin qz 
<? 
J<t>z 
(8.2.32) 
where 
Φ = ßa+ßb 
If at z = 0, the optical power is incident only in waveguide 1, (α(0) = 1, b(0) = 0), 
we find 
\b{zf 
Kba sin2qz. 
(8.2.33) 
Therefore, at qz= π/2, 3-77/2,..., (2n + l)7r/2 (n = an integer), the power transfer 
from guide a to guide b is maximum. Because 
Kba 
\Kba\ 
Δ2 + | Μ 2 < 1 
(8.2.34) 
for βα Φ ßb, the power transfer is never complete, Fig. 8.9a. The minimum distance, 
^B — π/q, at which the output power reappears in the same guide as the input, is 
called a beat length. If ßa= ßb, we have q = |/Cafc|, and the solutions are 
a(z) = cos Kzeißz 
b(z) = isin Kzeißz 
(8.2.35) 
where K = Kab = Kba, ß = ßa = ßb have been used. Complete power transfer occurs 
for synchronous coupling, Fig. 8.9b. For Ki = (2n + 1 )7r/2, complete power transfer 
occurs. It is called a cross state <g>. For Ki = ηττ, there is no power transfer from guide 
a to guide b. It is called a parallel state Θ · 
The above theory has been improved [18-32] taking into consideration effects 
such as the modes in separate guides are not orthogonal to each other, and additional 

8.3 
APPLICATIONS OF OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE COUPLERS 
307 
(a) Asynchronous coupling 
ßa * ßi, 
Ια(0)Ι2 = 1 
%ι***?τ-
iiK0)P=o 
* ■ 
ζ 
(b) Synchronous coupling 
βα = ßb 
Ια(0)|2=1 
I 
a. 
I6(0)l2=0 
*■ z 
Figure 8.9 
Guided powers \a(z)\2 and \b(z)\2 versus the coupling distance z: (a) asynchronous coupling 
ßa ^ ßb- Φ) synchronous coupling βα = βι,-
terms may affect the parameters used in the coupled-mode theory, although the form 
of the coupled-mode equations remains the same. Experimental results on directional 
couplers and three coupled waveguides [24, 33-38], extension to anisotropic wave-
guides [39-41], and optical tunable filters [42^4-5] have been reported. 
8.3 APPLICATIONS OF OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE COUPLERS 
In this section, we discuss some applications of the coupled waveguide theory, which 
include optical waveguide switch and the Δ/3 coupler. 
8.3.1 
Optical Waveguide Switch 
Consider a directional coupler with an incident light into waveguide a as shown in 
Fig. 8.10. Assume a(0) = 1. The output power from waveguide b is 
IW 
A2 + K2 nn2(ql). 
(8.3.1) 

308 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
Ια(0)1 
! V/////y«y///A 
Υ////////////ΑΛ 
z=0 
z=t 
Figure 8.10 An optical waveguide switch. 
No power is transferred to waveguide b at the exit if 
qt = ηττ, n = 1, 2, 3,... 
We can plot Ai and Kl in the plane to represent this state, called the parallel state © 
because all input power into guide aatz = I exits from the same waveguide. In other 
words, the equations 
(Ai)2 + (Kif = (mrf 
1,2,3, 
(8.3.2) 
represent a set of circles on the K£ versus Ai plane, as shown in the switching 
diagram, Fig. 8.11. On the other hand, complete power transfer can only occur if 
Δ2 = 0, and Ki = (2m + 1)ττ/2, where m = 0, 1,2, 
It is called a cross state (g> 
when the total power is transferred from one waveguide to the other. These cross 
states are represented by only discrete points labeled as ® on the vertical (Kt) axis. 
**M 
Figure 8.11 A switching diagram for an optical waveguide switch. The parallel states Θ are represented 
by the solid curves and the cross states ® are discrete points on the Kl axis. The horizontal dashed line 
shows a switching from a cross state ® toward the parallel state ©. 

8.3 
APPLICATIONS OF OPTICAL WAVEGUIDE COUPLERS 
309 
Using the electrooptical effects, which will be discussed further in Chapter 13, the 
refractive indices in the waveguides can be changed by an applied voltage bias. The 
refractive index difference between two waveguides, or the mismatch factor Δ = 
(ßa — ßb)/2, can be tuned by the voltage. Therefore, we can switch the directional 
coupler from a cross state at Ki — π/2 (and Δ = 0) to a parallel state shown as the 
horizontal dashed line in Fig. 8.11. 
8.3.2 
The Δ/3 Coupler 
It is difficult to achieve switching in the design of a single-section waveguide coupler 
because the coupling coefficient is a function of the spacing and the material 
parameters; these parameters are harder to adjust in the fabrication processes. It is 
generally easier to control coupling by an applied voltage to change Δ/3 = ßa — ßh. 
A two-section waveguide coupler has been proposed [46] to achieve switching 
with more flexibility, as shown in Fig. 8.12. The amplitudes a(z) and b(z) for a 
coupled waveguide configuration as shown in the first half section of Fig. 8.12 are 
related to the initial conditions by 
a(z) 
b(z) 
S(z;ßa,ßb) a(0) 
HO) 
(8.3.3) 
where S(z;ßa,ßb) 
is given in (8.2.32) and we keep the order ßa and ßh in the 
arguments of the S matrix 
Δ = ßa-ßb 
(8.3.4) 
The output mode amplitudes at the exit, z = £, are obtained by the product of two 
matrices because of the cascade connection 
«(£) 
b(£) 
s ( | ; ßb, ßa) sß-, ßa, ßb 
fl(0) 
b(0) 
(8.3.5) 
a(0) V 
b(0)7\ 
z = 0 
ßa 
ßa 
Vk«n 
k 
l 
z = i 
Figure 8.12 A Aß coupler with two sections where the propagation constants ßa and ßb exchange 
positions because of the change in the applied voltages. 

310 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
If KX2 ~ Kzl = K, a(0) = 1, and b(0) = 0, we find 
a(£) = 
2q£ ( A'-K\^2 
cos Y + 
2 
S m ?ö 
,, Λ 
2K . q£( 
qt 
.Δ . q£\ 
b(£) = ι — sin— cos 
h i —sm— |e" 
q 
2 \ 
2 
q 
2 
The full power transfer (cross state) occurs when a(£) = 0, or 
cot' 
2q£ 
_K2-A2 
K2 + A 
2 ■ 
,Kl 
(8.3.6a) 
(8.3.6b) 
(8.3.7) 
For example, if Δ = 0, we find q = K, and cot2 '-^ = 1. Therefore, K£ = π/2, 2>ττ/2, 
5TT/2, and so forth. No power transfer (parallel state) occurs if \b(£)\2 = 0. This can 
happen if either 
qt 
Case 1: 
sin — = 0 
2 
(8.3.8) 
„ 
„ 
2q£ 
Az . 2q£ 
Case 2: 
cosz ^- + -^ sin2 ^ 
0. 
2 ' q2~"~ 2 
For case \, q£ = 2mir, or 
(A£? + (K£f = (2mvf, 
(8.3.9) 
(8.3.10) 
π 
2π 
Ίπ 
4π 
Figure 8.13 
Switching diagram for a Δ/3 coupler. 

8.4 
OPTICAL RING RESONATORS AND ADD-DROP FILTERS 
311 
which are circles in the Kl versus Δί plane for m = a nonzero integer. For case 2, it is 
possibly satisfied only when Δ = 0, and cos(K£/2) = 0, that is, K£ = (2m + 1)ττ, 
m = an integer. A plot of the switching diagram is shown in Fig. 8.13. The switching 
diagram shows the degree of freedom to switch from a parallel state © to a cross state 
<g> or vice versa. 
The theory for coupled waveguides has also been extended to gain media [47,48], 
coupled fiber Fabry-Perot resonators [49, 50], laser amplifiers [51, 52], and 
coupled laser arrays [53-55]. In Chapter 11, we will discuss coupled semiconductor 
laser arrays, and the coupled-mode theory will be applied to investigate the super-
mode behaviors. 
8.4 
OPTICAL RING RESONATORS AND ADD-DROP FILTERS 
Optical ring resonators [56-76] have been under intensive research recently because 
of their applications to a variety of devices such as optical add-drop filters, modu-
lation, switching, and dispersion compensation devices. In addition, when gain is 
added into the resonators, wavelength selective amplification, oscillation, and 
lasing become possible [59, 62, 63]. 
8.4.1 
Formulation of the Waveguide-Ring Resonator System 
The simplest design is to couple the light between a straight waveguide and a ring reso-
nator. We consider a dielectric waveguide coupled to a circular ring resonator as shown 
in Fig. 8.14. The coupling is assumed to occur near the proximity of the ring edge and 
the straight waveguide. If the coupling is considered lossless, the input and output 
waves can be described simply by the solutions from the coupled-mode equations in 
the previous section for a two-port input and output structure 
= 
t 
IK 
* ** 
IK 
t 
(8.4.1) 
«1 
Figure 8.14 
A straight waveguide (single bus) coupled to a ring resonator. 

312 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
where, see Eq. (8.2.32), 
tf + KK* = 1 
(8.4.2) 
and the common propagation common phase factor ειφζ has been ignored. In addition, 
we have the circulation condition of the traveling wave in the ring resonator 
a2 = b2 aew, 
(8.4.3) 
a = e'aLl2, 
e = -neffL 
(8.4.4) 
c 
where a is the amplitude after wave attenuation over a ring distance of L, and a/2 is 
the field attenuation coefficient. The angle Θ is the phase delay due to the propagation 
around the ring of distance L with an effective index neff. Solving the above equations 
for bx in terms of a\, we obtain 
(8.4.5) 
T = h.
2 
bx 
t - aew 
a\ 
1 - atew 
|i|2 + |a| 2-2a|i|cos(0--ft) 
, 
(8.4.6) 
1 + \at\ -2a|i|cos(0 - θ,) 
where t = \t\ exp(i'0;) has been used. The power transmission spectrum has dips at 
resonance frequencies determined by: 
e-et 
= 2mTT = —J-neffL-el=--^-et 
(8.4.7) 
c 
FSR 
where FSR is the free spectral range or the frequency spacing between two nearby 
modes in the frequency spectrum and is determined by the total length of the ring 
resonator and the effective index of its guided mode 
FSR = - ^ - . 
(8.4.8) 
nef(L 
Near resonance fm = mc/n^L, we can write the angle as 
e-et 
= 2mTT+2Tr(f-fm)-^—. 
(8.4.9) 
c 
Figure 8.15 shows a plot of the transmission spectrum as a function of the angle for a 
loss parameter a = 0.8. At resonance, the transmission magnitude is given by 
T = M^t2_ 
(8.4.10) 
(1-α|ί|) 2 

8.4 OPTICAL RING RESONATORS AND ADD-DROP FILTERS 
313 
a = |i| = 0.8 Critical coupling 
2rrm 
(2m + 1 )π 
(2m + 2)π 
Angle (radian) 
Figure 8.15 
Transmission spectrum of a single bus coupled to a ring resonator. 
Figure 8.16 shows a plot of the transmission T at resonance as a function of the 
loss parameter a. It vanishes at a = |i| and becomes unity at a = 1. We have a few 
conditions for the transmission spectrum shown in Fig. 8.17: 
1. Critical coupling occurs if a = \t\. Under critical coupling, the transmission 
T vanishes at resonance frequencies. Because b\ = ta\ + ϊκα2, it implies that 
completely destructive interference between the directly transmitted field ta\ 
and the internal field in the ring coupled into the output waveguide ίκα2\ 
that is, they cancel each other. 
2. Undercoupling occurs if a < \t\. The transmission spectrum does not vanish 
at resonance. A smaller amplitude a means a larger attenuation loss in the 
resonator propagation, hence, the spectral dip appears broader than that of 
critical coupling. 
1.5 -
c o 
(O 
CO 
Έ 
1 
in c 
CO 
\~ 
0.5 
I 
■ 
■ 
■ 
I 
■ 
' 
' 
l 
■ 
■ 
■ I 
^ - ^ ^ " ' • ^ - • ^ . l
f ] =
0 ·
9 
Ϊ 
/ 
it h 
Ss. , . . . ■ 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
Loss factor a 
1.2 
Figure 8.16 The transmission power as a function of the ring loss factor a for two different values of |f| in 
the coupling matrix. 

314 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
1.5 
o 
CO 
0.5 
/ r 
a= 1.1 (large gain) 
a = 1.02 (small gain) 
\ 
V. a = 1 (transparency) 
^ y ,XS— 
-1 
0 
1 
Angle (radian) 
Figure 8.17 The transmission spectrum near resonance for various values of the loss factor a from 
undercoupling a < \t\ = 0.8, critical coupling a = \t\, overcoupling a = 0.9 (>|r|), transparency a = 1, 
and gain a > 1. 
3. Overcoupling occurs if a > \t\. The transmission spectrum shows a sharper dip 
when a increases, yet it does not vanish at resonance. Further increase of a 
increases the transmission at resonance. 
4. At a = 1, meaning no attenuation in the resonator at all, transparency occurs. 
The transmission spectrum becomes unity for all angles Θ. 
5. When a > 1, meaning that gain is introduced into the resonator so the ampli-
tude a is larger than unity, the transmission spectrum is larger than unity and 
peaks at resonant frequency. Lasing action occurs when a = l/|i| because T 
approaches infinity. 
8.4.2 
Optical Add-Drop Filter 
Figure 8.18 shows a simple configuration consisting of two straight waveguides 
coupled by a ring resonator, a so-called double-bus ring resonator. The fundamental 
Input 
a, 
^, jq 
b. 
Output 
► 
--. 
?r 
► 
(Through) 
1 
(Drop) 
Output 
■< — ! 
<h\ 
~~~-**T^*~*~' 
f2, 
K2 
; 
— 
(Add) 
| 
ί
 d2 = ° 
Figure 8.18 
A double-bus ring resonator as an optical add-drop filter. 

8.4 OPTICAL RING RESONATORS AND ADD-DROP FILTERS 
315 
equations governing the configuration are a straightforward generalization of the 
formulation in Section 8.4.1. Using (8.4.1) with 
h 
ΪΚ*. 
IK) 
t* 
a2 = 
c\a'l2eiel\ 
ικΧ 
IK2 
d\\ 
dx 
d2 
a2 
b2a 1/2 
ΪΘ/2 
(8.4.11a) 
(8.4.11b) 
(8.4.11c) 
2mn 
{2m + 1 )π 
(2m + 2)π 
Angle (radian) 
(b) 
1 
2mn 
(2m + 1 )π 
(2m + 2)π 
Angle (radian) 
2mn 
(2m + 1 )π 
(2m + 2)π 
Angle (radian) 
Figure 8.19 The power spectrum of the through port (7Ί) and the drop port (T2) for three loss factors 
(a) a = 0.8, (b) a = 0.9, and (c) a = 0.99. The dashed line is the sum of Tt and 72, showing the largest 
loss occurs at resonances due to attenuation loss in the ring. 

316 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
and d2 = 0 (because there is no incident wave from the d2 port), we obtain 
at*2ew 
1 at\ t\eie 
(8.4.12) 
The results for the transmission in the b\ port are simply replacing a by t\a in Section 
8.4.1 because of the extra transmission factor in the additional coupling junction 
between the ring and the second waveguide 
T\ = 
l*i | + \at2\2 ~ 2a\t\h\ cos(fl - 0,, - 0,2) 
1 + |aiii2|2-2a|iii2|cos(0- 6h - θ,2) 
(8.4.13) 
The output in the c2 port of the second waveguide is given by 
T,= 
-κ2κ\α'Ι2είθΙ2 
1 - atp^e'1 
(1 - M2)0 - Μ2)α 
(8.4.14) 
1 + |αί!/2| -2a|i,i 2|cos(0- θ,, - θ,2) 
The transmissions T\ and T2 are plotted as a function of the angle (Θ— 6U — θ,2) near 
resonances, Fig. 8.19. The total power T= T\ + T2 of the two output ports is 
also plotted for (a) small a = 0.8 (large loss), (b) medium a = 0.9, and (c) large 
a = 0.99 (small loss). 
8.4.3 
Coupled-Ring Optical Waveguide (CROW) Structure 
Figure 8.20 shows a generalization of the multiple coupled ring resonators [57] in a 
double-bus configuration [68, 69]. It consists of a sequence of coupled high-Q reso-
nators, which form a new type of waveguide behavior coupling the light from one 
resonator to another. The transmission and reflection of such a sequence of resonators 
can be engineered by controlling the coupling factor κ as well as the resonance 
Input 
Figure 8.20 
A double-bus coupled periodic ring structure, which functions as a broad band filter. 

8.4 
OPTICAL RING RESONATORS AND ADD-DROP FILTERS 
317 
frequency. A photonic band gap type of dispersion forms when we cascade a periodic 
ring structure 
.c". 
= 
t 
ΪΚ 
IK 
t 
an 
dn 
which can be rewritten as 
d„ 
1 
IK 
- 1 
t 
-t 
1 
Using the relations for half a loop that 
an+\ = cn 
e'e/2y/ä 
dn = bn+] 
ew'2Va 
(8.4.15) 
(8.4.16) 
(8.4.17a) 
(8.4.17b) 
where one loop of phase delay is Θ and amplitude attenuation is a, the recurrence 
relation is 
v ^ e'fl/2 
0 
o 
' .- iff/2 
Cn 
A 
B 
C 
D 
an 
Vbn 
(8.4.18) 
where 
ΪΚ 
t 
B = b/^ em 
(8.4.19) 
IKy/a 
-ifl/2j 
D 
: 
iKs/a 
-ifl/2 
Note AD — BC = 1 even in the presence of loss, a φ 1. Cascading N times, we have 
an+\ 
ΜΛ 
(8.4.20) 
where [77] 
ΜΛ 
A 
B~\ 
\m\\ 
m\i 
C 
Dj 
\_m2i ni22_ 
A UN-1 (x) - UN-2(x) 
BUN-, (x) 
Ct/W_i (JC) 
DUN-x(x) 
- 
UN-2(x) 
(8.4.21) 

318 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
where U(x) is the Chebyshev polynomial and x = (A + D)/2 (see page 215). The 
output at the double-bus CROW structure is 
C„+i " 
.dn+\ . 
1 
IK 
1 
ΪΚ 
- 1 
t' 
.-t 
i. 
~an+\ 
.bn+\. 
' -mu 
+ tm2\ 
—tm\\ + m2\ 
-mu + tm22' 
-tmn 
+ m22. 
a\~ 
UJ 
(8.4.22) 
where dn+\ = 0 because there is not input from the dn+\ port. The reflection and 
transmission coefficient is 
fDB 
tDB — 
b^_ tmu - m2\ _ t[AUN_\(x) - t/w_2(-t)] - CUN_\{x) 
a\ 
m22 — tm\2 
DUN-\(X) — UN-2(X) — tBU^-iix) 
cn+\ 
ίκ 
ίκ 
a\ 
m22 - tm\2 
DUN-\{x) - UN-2(x) - tBUN-\{x) 
(8.4.23) 
(8.4.24) 
The zeros of the reflection give the conditions for the reflection minima 
tA-C 
= tUN-2(x)/UN-i(x). 
(8.4.25) 
The poles give the oscillation conditions 
D-tB= 
UN-2(x)/UN-i(x). 
(8.4.26) 
When N = 1, we have 
tA - C = 0 
(8.4.27) 
which has the solution θ = 2ηνπ. The oscillation condition is given by 
D = tB or 
e=2miT 
and 
t=l/y/ä. 
(8.4.28) 
Periodic Ring Resonators For lossless structure a = 1, the Bloch theorem for a 
periodic structure allows for 
an+\ 
— e 
iß\ 
(8.4.29) 
where Λ = Lb is the Bragg period. We expect 
A 
B 
C 
D 
an 
b„ = q bn 
(8.4.30) 

8.4 OPTICAL RING RESONATORS AND ADD-DROP FILTERS 
319 
where the eigenvalue equation 
(A - q)(D -q)-BC 
= 0 
leads to two possible eigenvalues 
tl=i« + » ± , / i ü ± ^ - i 
where 
q+ + q- = A + D 
q+q-=AD-BC=\. 
Therefore, q± = e±ll3A are the two possible eigenvalues, which satisfy 
! , _ , _ , 
a . 
A+D 
sin(0/2) 
2 
2 
κ 
(8.4.31) 
(8.4.32) 
(8.4.33) 
(8.4.34) 
The dispersion relation between the propagation constant β and the frequency ω or 
Θ = — neff^ is given by 
c 
cos /3Λ = 
sin(0/2) 
which has real solutions for jSA that are only 
sin(0/2) 
|cos/3A| 
< 1. 
The centers of the pass bands occur near 
θ = 2ιηιτ, m = 0, ± 1 , + 2 , . . . 
(8.4.35) 
(8.4.36) 
(8.4.37) 
4π-
θ 2ΛΓ-
— > » · · ί · - · < ^ / ■' #ν 
wmmMmmmmmm 
_Μ 
/8Λ 
2" 
Figure 8.21 The dispersion diagram for the double-bus periodic ring structure. 

320 
(a) 
Input 
C 
— - w l — 
1 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
(C) 
Output 
Figure 8.22 
(a) A double-bus double-ring architecture, (b) A two-wavelength drop filter, (c) A single-bus 
periodic ring structure as a broad band filter or slow light device. 
Figure 8.23 
Scanning electron micrograph of resonantly enhanced optical delay lines based on photonic-
wire waveguides, (a) Detailed view of a cleaved coupling section of a bent waveguide bus and a resonator. 
(b) Optical delay line consisting of several ring resonators in an all-pass filter (APE7) configuration in a 
cascade. Each ring is side coupled to a common waveguide bus. The gap between the ring resonator 
and the bus is about 200 nm. (c) Optical delay line consisting of several ring resonators in a CROW 
configuration. Each ring is coupled to its nearest neighbor with a gap of about 200 nm. (Adapted by 
permission from [73] © 2007 Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Publishing Group.) 

8.4 OPTICAL RING RESONATORS AND ADD-DROP FILTERS 
321 
On the other hand, stop band occurs when 
sin(0/2) > 1. 
(8.4.38) 
The centers of stop bands occur near 
0=(2m+l)7r 
(8.4.39) 
when 
θ = ΊΓ, 5TT, 977-,..., {An + 1)77-, sin(0/2) = +1 
/3Λ = 7Γ + iaA 
(8.4.40) 
, 
, . ., 
sin0/2 
, 
4 
sin0/2 
, „ , , , , 
cos(77- + iaA) = 
or 
coshaA = 
—. 
(8.4.41) 
(a) 
Έ 
o ω . 
5-
·& 
2. 
c 
o 
to 
a> 
as 
% 
,520 
1,530 
1,540 
1,550 
1,560 
1,570 
1,580 
Wavelength (nm) 
K") 
m 
2, 
c o 
(0 
CO 
fc 
r: 
cfl 
XJ 
N 
ε 
o 
0-
- 5 -
-10 
- 1 5 -
- 2 0 -
- 2 5 -
3dBBW V ! 
Ins 
1 ring 
56 rings 
-1.5 
1.0 
-0.5 
0.0 
0.5 
Wavelength detuning (nm) 
1.0 
1.5 
Figure 8.24 
(a) Propagation loss (dark curve) and bending loss (light curve) measured in photonic wire 
waveguide, (b) The measured (light curves) and calculated (dark and smooth curves) tiansmission spectrum 
for a single ring resonator (top curves) and for 56 rings (bottom curves). The broader transmission band-
width using 56 rings is clearly shown. (Adapted by permission from [73] © 2007 MacmiUan Publishers 
Ltd: Nature Publishing Group.) 

322 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
Near Θ = 3ττ, Ίπ, 11 π,... {An + 3)π, sin(0/2) = - 1 
βΑ = 2mTT ± iaA 
(8.4.42) 
sin(0/2) 
,„ , ,„N 
cosh ah = 
-t-±. 
(8.4.43) 
K 
A schematic plot of the dispersion relation between θ{=ωη^/ε) 
versus βΑ is 
shown in Fig. 8.21. The solid curves are the βΑ or the real part of the propagation 
constant, and the dashed curves are for the imaginary parts αΛ in the stop bands 
when βΑ = 2mir + iaA. 
Figure 8.22a shows a double-ring double-bus configuration with the output as 
shown. Figure 8.22b shows an optical filter design for an input with two wavelengths 
and the drop of each wavelength at two separate horizontal straight waveguides. 
Figure 8.22c shows a single-bus periodic ring design for engineering the dispersion 
or group delay. Such a structure has been demonstrated on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 
submicrometer photonic wire waveguides shown in the scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) images in Fig. 8.23 [73]. The design uses coupled resonators to a curved 
waveguide bus for slow light or optical delay line applications. Figure 8.24a and 
Fig. 8.24b show the measured losses and the transmission spectra of 1 ring and 56 
rings [73]. We can see a broader bandwidth when 56 rings are used. Delay of 
more than 10 bits at 20Gb/s is reported using these structures. 
8.5 DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK (DFB) STRUCTURES 
Consider a two-dimensional corrugated waveguide or a DFB structure [78-86] as 
shown in Fig. 8.25. The permittivity function e(x, z) can be written as the sum of 
an unperturbed slab waveguide e(0)(;c) and a perturbed periodic part Δε(χ, ζ) 
e(jc, z) = ε(0)(χ) + Αε(χ, ζ). 
(8.5.1) 
( a ) 
E 
(l>) 
Cl 
x \ 
~ 
b(z) 
fl(z) 
'Z 
»! 
(C) 
Δε = 0 
/ Δ ε = ε 2 - ε , 
Δε = 0 
Δ ε = ε , - ε 2 
Δε=0 
Figure 8.25 
(a) A corrugated waveguide with a permittivity function ε(χ, ζ) can be written as the sum of 
(b) an unperturbed part s<0)(r), which describes a uniform slab waveguide, and (c) a perturbed part Δε = 
ε2 — ε, or Δε = ε, — ε2 in the corrugation regions. 

8.5 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK (DFB) STRUCTURES 
323 
For the unperturbed slab waveguide ε(0)(^), assume that the fundamental TEo 
mode with a forward (or backward) propagation constant β0 (or — jß0) is of interest. 
The amplitude for the forward propagating mode is Aoe'ßoZ and backward propagating 
mode is Boe~'P°z. Because ε(χ, z) is periodic in z, we may write the Fourier 
series expansion 
Αε(χ, ζ) = ε0 ^ 
Aep{x)eip Az 
(8.5.2) 
where Λ is the period. For a lossless structure, Αε(χ, ζ) is real; therefore, 
Δε!(χ) = Αε-Ρ(χ). 
(8.5.3) 
8.5.1 
Derivations of the Coupled-Mode Equations 
From Maxwell's equations, we write the wave equation for TE polarization 
E = y Ey(x, z), 
d2 
d2
 
2 
ω), ■ 
-2 + W2 + u>W°\X) 
Ey = — ω μΔε(χ, ζ) Ey 
(8.5.4) 
(8.5.5) 
for a time-harmonic field with an e~,a" dependence. We expand the solution Ey 
in terms of the unperturbed fundamental TE0 waveguide mode traveling in +z 
and — z directions 
Ey{x, z) = [A0(z) e^z + ßo(z) 
e^E^(x) 
(8.5.6) 
where we assume A0(z) and B0(z) are slowly varying functions of z due to the 
distributed-feedback effect. Ey°\x) is the transverse modal distribution of the TEQ 
mode satisfying 
d2 
d2 
1 
dx2 
dz2 
ω2μεφ)(χ) 
Ef\x) e±iß«z = 0 
(8.5.7) 
which has been solved in the waveguide problem in Chapter 7. We substitute the 
expression (8.5.6) into the wave equation (8.5.5) and ignore the second-order 
derivatives of A0(z) and B0(z) because they are slowly varying functions. We find 
(liß^e^-liß^e-^EfXx) 
= -ω2με0 ^ 
Δ ε ρ « ^ ζ 4 0 ) ( χ ) [A0(z)eiß"z + Äofe)^^0'] 
(8.5.8) 

324 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
If we multiply both sides of (8.5.8) by -H^*(x) 
= {β0/2ωμ)Ε^*(χ\ 
which is 
the —x component of the magnetic field of the guided TEQ mode, and make use of 
the normalization condition of the guided power along the z direction, 
2ωμ 
oo 
j |4
0)c x) dx = 1, 
(8.5.9) 
we can eliminate the E®\x) on the left-hand side of (8.5.8). We then focus on the 
coupling of the forward propagating mode e'P°z to the backward propagating mode 
e-iß0z+ip^z s o m a t _ß^ _|_ (2π/Λ.)ρ is close to β0, for a particular p = I. Assuming 
the couplings to the other modes are negligible, we then have 
dA0(z) 
dz 
iKabB0(z) e -i2(j3o-
where 
(8.5.10) 
Kab = Τ ε ° 
&ee(x) Ef\x) dx. 
(8.5.11) 
A phase-matching diagram is shown in Fig. 8.26, where we consider the first-order 
grating £ = + 1 such that /30= — β0 + 2ττ/Α and A0(z) is coupled to B0(z) by 
(8.5.10). Equation (8.5.11) defines the coupling coefficient for TEQ mode in a corru-
gated waveguide. Extensive research work has been done on both TE and TM mode 
coupling coefficients in distributed feedback structures and applications to DFB 
lasers [80-86]. If we focus on the backward propagating mode e~lßoz on the 
left-hand side with phase matching to the term ^+Άζ-'^^/Λζ) ο η the right-hand side 
Figure 8.26 
Phase-matching diagram for a forward propagating mode with a propagation constant 
ßo coupling to a backward propagating mode with a propagation constant /3_0 (= - ßo) in the negative 
z direction, ßo = - ßo + Qir/A) is the phase-matching condition for the z components of the propagation 
wave vectors. The difference Δ/3 = β — (ττ/Α) is the detuning parameter. 

8.5 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK (DFB) STRUCTURES 
325 
of (8.5.8), we obtain the second coupled-mode equation 
where 
dBpjz) 
dz 
iKbaAoiz) e a{ßa-%z 
Kba = — -7 εο 
Ae_/(JC) EfXx) dx. 
(8.5.12) 
(8.5.13) 
We also see that the condition for contra-directional coupling in a lossless coupler 
Kba = -Kb 
(8-5-14) 
is satisfied because Δε| = Δε_^. As shown in Fig. 8.26, the forward propagation 
amplitude A0(z) is coupled to the backward propagation amplitude B0iz) by 
(8.5.12). Therefore, the phase-matching condition requires —/30 —/30
 — (2ττ/Λ). 
Define 
Αβ = β0- 
βΒ, 
βΒ = 
77 
Λ 
Aiz) = Aoiz) eiAßz 
Biz) = B0iz) «"**. 
We obtain the well-known coupled-mode equations for DFB structures 
d 
dz 
Aiz) 
Biz) 
Δ/3 
Kab 
Kha 
-Δ/3 
Aiz) 
Biz) 
(8.5.15) 
(8.5.16) 
(8.5.17) 
The above coupled-mode equation in matrix form for the two new unknowns Aiz) and 
Biz) is very useful because the 2x2 matrix contains constant elements, which are 
independent of the variable z. Equations (8.5.10) and (8.5.12) contain z-dependent 
coefficients, and their solutions are less obvious. The transformation (8.5.16) helps 
simplify the algebraic equations. 
Example: Index Grating If the refractive index in the waveguide is given by 
n = «o + Δη(ζ) 
for |JC| < d/2 (inside the guide) 
(8.5.18) 
where n0 is the background index of the guide, we find that 
n2 ~ nl + 2n0 Δη(ζ) 
(8.5.19) 
where «o enters the unperturbed waveguide permittivity function εφ\χ), and we have 
ignore the second-order terms (Δη)2. We find 
Asix, z) = 2η0Δη(ζ)ε0 
for \x\ < d/2 (inside the guide). 
(8.5.20) 

326 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
Because An{z) is periodic, it can be decomposed into the Fourier series 
00 
j 
An(z) = Σ 
Anp ei,rfz. 
(8.5.21) 
Therefore, 
Δερ = 2«o Anp 
for \x\ < d/2, 
and 
Δερ = 0 for ]JC| > d/2 
Kah = °^ 
| 
Aep(.X)\Ef\x)2 
— 
LLZpW\ILy-
dx 
\Α<ί 
= - ^ - ( 2 Λ Ο Δ Λ + 0 — — I 
~ Γ^οΔ«+ι 
(8.5.22) 
where ko = ω^/Α0εο, and β0 = &o«o have been used, and Γ is exactly the optical 
confinement factor because we assume the index grating is dependent on z inside 
the guide. Similarly, 
Kba ~ -Γ^Δη_, 
(8.5.23) 
and we have kept p = +1 or -1 for the first-order grating. 
For an index phase grating with a magnitude An and phase φ, 
(2-π 
An(z) = An cos I — z + φ 
= An+\ e'~*z + An-] e~'^z 
An ,,„ 
Λ 
An 
Δη+, = — e"?, 
Δη_ι = — e"v. 
(8.5.24) 
The coupling coefficients are 
« * = Γ ^ γ ί " 
(8.5.25a) 
An 
Ύ 
Kba = -rfco — e-* = -K*ab 
(8.5.25b) 
In other words, the coupling coefficients can be put in very simple forms and they 
satisfy the relation Kba = ~K*h because the index grating is lossless. 

8.5 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK (DFB) STRUCTURES 
327 
8.5.2 
Eigenstate Solutions of the Coupled-Mode Equations 
We follow a similar procedure as before for coupling in two parallel waveguides by 
assuming the eigensolution of the form 
A(z) 
B(z) 
The eigenequations become 
Δ/3 - q 
Kab 
Kba 
-Δ/3 - q 
„>qz 
0. 
Solving the eigenequation 
(Aß-q)(-Aß-q)-KbaKab 
= 0 
for nontrivial solutions, we obtain the two eigenvalues 
(8.5.26) 
(8.5.27) 
(8.5.28) 
q± = ±\]{Aßf 
+ KabK^a = ±q. 
(8.5.29) 
In the original expression for the electric field (8.5.6), we keep only the forward and 
backward propagating TEQ mode 
-i/Vis-iOV 
Ey{x, z) = [A0(z) e w + B0(z) 
e~'^]E^(x) 
= [A(z) eiß"z + B{z) 
e-iß"z]Ef\x). 
(8.5.30) 
We can see that the propagation constant for the forward propagating mode is 
dominated by A(z) e'ßeZ or ßB ± q, and the propagation constant for the backward 
propagating mode B(z) e~lßeZ is dominated by — ßB + q. In other words, we are 
looking at the coupling between the two counter-propagating TEQ modes 
ßa = 0ο(ω) 
ßb = -ß0(a>) + -2π 
(8.5.31) 
where β0(ω) — wneff/c is the propagation constant of the TEQ mode. The two system 
propagation constants are 
^^itoUui. 
7Γ 
(8.5.32) 

328 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
As ω is far away from the Bragg frequency at β0(ωο) = —«eff = τ". w e n a v e 
ßa = Α)(ω) 
ft = -β0(ω) 
277 
(8.5.33) 
For a lossless system, ÄTfca = — K*h. We have KabKba = -\Kf. 
Then 
j8± = ft, ± ^/(Δβ)2 - |*|2. 
(8.5.34) 
For |Δβ| = ft» - ~r < |tf|, we have 
0 ±=J ±* V^l2-!^!2 
(8.5.35a) 
(b) 
, 
π 
Λ 
^ 
\ 
; 
A(») 
S(a>) 
V 
x 
\ 
\ 
X ,"— / 
A 
/ \ 
/ 
X 7 
\ 
/ 1 \ 
/ 
1 \ k 
X 
! -Α(«) + χ 
kA 
Figure 8.27 
(a) The dispersion curves for the contra-directional coupling of modes in a periodic wave-
guide structure, (b) The enlarged portion of the intersection region. 

8.5 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK (DFB) STRUCTURES 
329 
which gives 
Re(/3±) 
Λ 
Im(/3 ±)=±J|i:| 2-|A)3| 2. 
(8.5.35b) 
(8.5.35c) 
In Fig. 8.27, we plot the dispersion relations for I = 1. We see that the stop band 
occurs at the vicinity of the frequency (OQ. 
For the two eigenvalues + q, their corresponding eigenvectors are determined by 
(1) 
and 
(2) 
<7+ 
Kab 
" B+ 
-Aß + q 
K, 
-q, 
ab 
Aß + q 
Kba 
Δ/8- 9 
B- 
-Aß - q 
Kba 
The general solution can be written as 
(8.5.36a) 
(8.5.36b) 
A(z) 
B(z) 
C\ 
Kab 
q-Aß 
+ C2 
Kab 
-q-Aß 
(8.5.37) 
8.5.3 
Reflection and Transmission of a DFB Structure 
For an incident wave A(0) from the left side of the distributed feedback structure at 
z =0, as shown in Fig. 8.28, we may find the general solution using the fact that 
at z = L, B(L) = 0 because there is no incident wave from the right-hand side. 
Therefore, 
and 
Kabici + c2) = A(0) 
(8.5.38) 
(-Δ/3 + q) eiqLcx - (Aß + q) e-iqLc2 = B(L) = 0. 
(8.5.39) 
P-njn_nj~ij~i_n_n_n_r] 
Incident -*-A(0) 
—i*-A(L) Transmitted 
Reflected -
•fl(0) 
B(L) = 0 
—►z 
z = 0 
z=L 
Figure 8.28 
A periodic corrugated waveguide structure with an incident wave at z = 0. A(0) is the 
field amplitude of the incident wave, and B(0) is the field amplitude of the reflected wave. A(L) is 
the field amplitude of the transmitted wave, and B(L) = 0 because we assume no wave is incident from 
the right-hand side. 

330 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
Solving for cx and c2 in terms of A(0) and substituting into (8.5.37), we obtain the 
reflection coefficient ß(0)/A(0) and the transmission coefficient A(L)/A(0). 
Matrix Method We can solve generally the wave propagation problem for the 
DFB laser structure using a matrix formulation, similar to what we have done 
for the parallel coupled waveguides. We write the general solution (8.5.37) in a 
matrix form 
Mz) 
B(z) = V 
0 
0 
(8.5.40) 
where the matrix V contains the two eigenvectors in its two columns 
Kab 
Kab 
Aß i -q - Aß 
(8.5.41) 
Solving C\ and c2 in terms of the inverse V 
, A(0) and .6(0), we have 
F(z) 
A(z) 
B(z) 
A(0) 
B(0) 
where the "forward" propagation matrix is 
F(z) 
e">z 
0 
cos qz + i -£- sin qz 
.Kba . 
i~-smqz 
.Kab . 
i -—- sin qz 
.Aß . 
cos qz — i -jf- sin qz 
(8.5.42) 
(8.5.43) 
which is almost identical to (8.2.32) of the coupled parallel waveguides, except for a 
phase factor exp(i^z) therein. Given an incident wave A(0) at z = 0, and no incident 
wave from the other end at z — L, B{L) = 0, we have 
ML) 
B(L) 
= F(L) A(0) 
B(0) 
(8.5.44) 
which can be solved easily for the reflection coefficient of the field 
B(0) 
F21(L) 
-iKbaunqL 
Γ(0): A(0) 
FniL) 
<i cos qL — iAß sin qL 
(8.5.45) 

8.5 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK (DFB) STRUCTURES 
331 
and the transmission coefficient 
A(L) 
Fi2F2] 
1 
A(0) 
F22 
F22(z = L) 
= 
, * 
■ , · 
(8.5.46) 
q cos qL — ιΑβ sin qL 
Within the stop band, q = iS, we use cos qL = cosh SL and sin qL = i sinh SL. If we 
look for A(z) and B{z) at an arbitrary position z, we use (8.5.42) and (8.5.45), 
A(z) = Fn(z) A(0) + Fn(z) B(0) 
F2l(z = L) 
F\\(z)-F\2(z)-
F22(z = L) 
S cosh S(z -L) + iAß sinh S(z - L) 
A(0) 
' A(0) 
(8.5.47) 
S cosh SL-iAß 
sinh SL 
B^ = vJK^u^^A^ 
<
8·
5·
48> 
S cosh SL - i Aß sinh S£ 
The reflection coefficient at z = 0, using Ä"afc = K, Kba — — K*, 
Γ ( 0 ) = Α = 
^ S i n ^ L 
(8549) 
^ ; 
A(0) 
S cosh SL-iA/3 sinh SL' 
v 
; 
The transmission coefficient is 
t=A-^ 
= 
* 
. 
(8.5.50) 
A(0) 
Δ/3 sinh SL + iS cosh SL 
At Δ/3 = 0, S = |A"| 
|Γ(0)| = tanh|/sX|, 
(8.5.51) 
which approaches 1 if \KL\ is large enough. Also, when |Δ/3| > \K\,S becomes purely 
imaginary and |Γ(0)|2 vanishes when sm2yJ(AßL)2 - \KL\2 = 0, or \Aß/K\ = 
y/\ +{rnr/\K\L)2. A plot of the reflectivity |Γ(0)|2 versus Αβ/\Κ\ for three different 
values of \K\L (i.e., three lengths of DFB reflectors) is shown in Fig. 8.29. We see that 
if \K\L increases, the reflectivity for small AßC increases. When \S\ —> 0, \Aß\ —+ \K\, 
ma\T(0)\2^\KL\2/(\KL\2 
+ \). 

332 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
|Γ(0)Γ 
-4.0 
-3.0 
-2.0 
-1.0 
0.0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
Aß/m 
Figure 8.29 
A plot of the reflectivity |Γ(0)|2 versus the ratio Δβ/\Κ\ for three different values of | K\L. For 
a large value of \K\L, the bandwidth for Δ/3 is about 2|AT|. 
APPENDIX 8A: COUPLING COEFFICIENTS FOR PARALLEL 
WAVEGUIDES 
The coupling coefficients between two parallel waveguides p and q can be written as 
[27-29] 
K„ = | f f Αε^\χ, v)[E<p) · E<«> - E<" · Ε^] dxdy 
(8A. 1) 
Ae(<?)(jc, y) = ε(χ, y) - ε(φ(χ, y) 
(8A.2) 
where ε(χ, y) is the permittivity distribution for the two waveguides, e(a)(jc, v) means 
only waveguide a exists, and ε^(χ, y) means only waveguide b exists, Fig. 8.30. 
(a) 
ke("Xx,y) 
(b) 
e<i>\x,y) 
■+-X 
(c) 
ke(x,y) 
-+-X 
Figure 8.30 Three different permittivity functions of interest for applications in deriving the improved 
coupled-mode theory using the reciprocity theorem, (a) Only waveguide a exists in the whole space. 
(b) Only waveguide b exists in the whole space, (c) Both waveguides a and b exist. 

APPENDIX 8B: IMPROVED COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
333 
The difference Αε^\χ, y) between the two permittivity functions indicate that 
Aeiq\x, y) is zero in most part of space, therefore, the integral in (8A.1) is over a 
finite region. In addition, for TE modes in a slab waveguide, Ez is zero. Equation 
(8A.1) is the product of the TEo mode E$*\x) of guide a and E^\x) of guide b 
integrated over the layer thickness of guide a or guide b for Kab and Kba, respectively. 
APPENDIX 8B: IMPROVED COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
A detailed formulation of the improved coupled-mode theory is shown in Refs. 18-32. 
The major results are that we have the same form in the coupled-mode equations 
d 
— a(z) = iya a(z) + ikab b(z) 
(8B. 1 a) 
dz 
^-b(z) = ikba a(z) + iyb b(z) 
(8B.lb) 
dz 
where the coefficients ya, yb, kab, and kba are all defined in [27, 28]. The transverse 
fields have been assumed to be 
E, = a(z) E?\x, y) + b(z) Ef\x, y) 
(8B.2a) 
H, = a(z) H<a)(jc, y) + Hz) H?\x, y) 
(8B.2b) 
and as all the transverse field components are all real for a lossless system, we find 
Ja, Jb, kab, and kba to be real. Power conservation leads to 
A 
A \ 
f00 
f°° 
0 = -P(Z) 
= - - R e 
Ε,χΗ,'-ζ dxdy 
dz 
dz2 
J_ooJ-oo 
= — Re[aa* + ab*Cba + ba*Cab + bb*] 
dz 
= 4- [aa* + (ab* + ba*) C + bb*] 
dz 
= ab*i(yaC - ybC + kba - kab) + ba*i(ybC - yaC + kab - kba). 
(8B.3) 
Here the overlap integrals Cab and Cba have been defined in (8.2.10). C= (Cab + 
Cba)/2. Because both a and b are arbitrary, we conclude that the coefficients in 
front of ab* and ba* must vanish. Therefore, 
kab ~ kba = (ya ~ Jb)C 
(8B.4) 

334 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
What is important is that when the overlap coefficient C is not small, the total guided 
power should be given by 
P(z) = \a\2 + \b\2 
(ab* + ba*)C 
(8B.5) 
where the last two terms due to the cross powers between E(o> and H w or E(i,) and 
H(a) are not negligible anymore. The two coupling coefficients, kab and kha, are not 
equal to each other when ya is not equal to yb or C is not negligible. 
PROBLEMS 
8.1 
A TE light (A = 0.8 μπι) is normally incident on a prism from air as shown 
in Fig. 8.31. The waveguide width d is chosen such that the light can be 
resonantly coupled into the waveguide along the z direction (i.e., the phase-
matching condition is satisfied). 
(a) Find the propagation constant kz of the incident light. 
(b) Find the Goos-Hänchen phase shifts for the guided mode for both the 
air/waveguide and substrate/waveguide interfaces. 
(c) From the ray optics picture, determine the width d from the propagation 
constant kz obtained in (a). 
8.2 
Consider an lnP/In0.53Gao.47As/InP dielectric waveguide with a dimension 
d = 0.3 μπι. The wavelength in free space λ0 is 1.65 μ,ηι. The refractive 
indices are nx (In0 53Gao.47As) = 3.56 and n = 3.16. The propagation constant 
for the TEo mode is found to be β = 12.7 (μηι)-1. 
(a) If a grating coupler is designed using the same materials, Fig. 8.32, so that 
the first-order space harmonic mode (m = 1) is coupled to the TE0 mode 
at 0, = 45°, find the grating period Λ. 
(b) Repeat part (a) for m = 2. Draw a phase-matching diagram to show all of 
the propagating (nonevanescent) space harmonics (also called Floquet 
modes) in the InP region for this case and show their reflection angles 
measured from the x axis. 
TE light 
pnsm 
e = 60',np = 3.8 
n„ = 3.6, na =1, n. 
Air 
->- Hg 
Waveguide 
ns 
Substrate 
Figure 8.31 Diagram for Problem 8.1. 
-•3.0 

PROBLEMS 
335 
Figure 8.32 
Diagram for Problem 8.2. 
(c) Consider a grating output coupler shown in Fig. 8.32. If the output coupler 
is designed so that there is one and only one Floquet mode propagating 
in the x direction (this configuration also has applications for surface-
emitting diode lasers), what should the period Λ2 be? 
8.3 
(a) Describe how a Aß coupler works. What are its advantages compared 
with a single-section directional coupler. 
(b) Show the switching diagram (Ki vs. At) with detailed illustration. 
(c) Consider an input with a(0) = 1, b(0) = 0, A£ = π/2, and K£ = π, where 
£ is the total length of the Aß coupler. Find the output powers, 
\a{£)\2 and \b(£)\2. 
8.4 
Consider a three-parallel-waveguide coupler shown in Fig. 8.33. Using die 
coupled-mode theory, the electric field of the three-guide coupler can be 
written as 
EQc, z): y[ax{z)E^\x) 
■a2(z)£fOc)- a3(z)£fW] 
AX 
I 
»i(01 
«2(0)L 
a3(0)L 
z = 0 
z = / 
Figure 8.33 
Diagram for Problem 8.4. 

336 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
where Ε^\χ) describes the x dependence of the TEo mode of waveguide j 
(j= 1, 2, 3) in the absence of the other two guides. The coupled-mode 
equation can be written as 
d 
dz 
a\ 
« 2 
a?, 
= 
l 
β 
K 
0 
K 
β 
K 
0 
K 
β 
a\ 
Ü2 
03 
where the coupling between guides 1 and 3 has been neglected because they 
are far apart. 
(a) Find the three eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors of the 
three-waveguide coupler. 
(b) Sketch approximately the mode profiles of the three eigenmodes as a func-
tion of x. 
(c) Given the initial values αι(0), α2(0), and a3(0), find a\(z), a2(z), and a3(z) 
in terms of their initial values. Put your results in a matrix form. 
8.5 
The coupled-mode equations for N identical equally spaced waveguides, 
assuming only adjacent waveguide coupling, can be written as 
dz A(z) = iMA(z) 
where 
A(z): 
a2 
aN 
M = 
ß 
K 
K 
ß 
K 
K 
ß 
K 
0 
K 
ß_ 
(a) Show that the general solutions for the normalized eigenvectors and their 
eigenvalues for an arbitrary N are 
where 
A<*(z) 
ße = ß + 2Kcos 
eißtZ 
ί=\,2,...,Ν 
£ττ 
Ν+ 1 -sin 
Ν+ 1 
Ν+ 1 
k=\,2,...,N. 
The order of ße is chosen such that /3, > β2 > j83 ■ · · > β, 

PROBLEMS 
Hint: 
det 
2 cos 0 
1 
1 
2cos0 
1 
1 
2cos0 
1 
1 
2cos0 
sin [(#+1)0] 
sin0 
where N is the dimension of the matrix. 
(b) Find the eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors for N = 4, and 
plot the transverse field profile E(x) = Y2l=lciiEi(x) for all four 
eigenvalues. 
8·6 
(a) Sketch qualitatively the dispersion relation βα of the TE0 mode versus 
ω for a single slab waveguide in Fig. 8.34a with a fixed refractive index 
na at two different thicknesses (da < db). Explain your sketch of β 
versus ω curves using the graphical solution for a(<i/2)versus kx(d/2). 
(b) Consider the two coupled slab waveguides, Fig. 8.34b. With na > nb, 
derive a condition between da and db such that the dispersion curves 
βα(ω) and /3<,(ω) intercept at a frequency ωο· 
(c) Describe how the above result can be used in the design of a direction 
coupler as an optical wavelength filter. 
8.7 
Plot the transmission spectrum (8.4.6) for a ring resonator with (a) a = 0.6, 
\t\ = 0.6, and (b) a = 0.9, |i| = 0.9. 
8.8 
Prove the matrix property for MN in (8.4.21) by induction. 
8.9 
Plot the dispersion relation (8.4.35) between βΑ and 0. Check the stop bands 
and pass bands. 
(a) 
«s 
(b) 
" s 
da 
na>nb 
"b 
Figure 8.34 
(a)(b) Diagram for Problem 8.6. 

338 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
8.10 
If we have index grating An(z) = An cos (^z), where An = 0.2, calculate the 
coupling coefficients Kab and Kba for λο = 1 55 μηι. Assume the optical con-
finement factor of the guided TE0 mode is 0.5. Calculate \KabL\ for a cavity 
length L = 500 μιη of a DFB laser. 
8.11 Derive the propagation matrix F as shown in (8.5.43). When the wavelength is 
within the stop band, find the expression for F if q = iS = iy\K\ 
— (Aß)2. 
8.12 
Consider a distributed feedback structure as shown in Fig. 8.35a, where 
Αε(χ, ζ) = < 
ε - ε, 
if - n < x < 0 and 0 < z < -
ε ι - ε 
if 0 < x < n 
and 
— < z < Λ 
and Αε(χ, ζ) is periodic in z, Fig. 8.35b. 
(a) Find the Fourier series expansion of Ae(x, z), that is, Αερ(χ), where 
00 
/ 
9 
\ 
Αε(χ, ζ) = ε0 ^ 
Δερ(χ) exp ί ϊητΡΖ) 
D~— OO 
\ 
/ 
(b) Evaluate the coupling coefficient Kab and Kba for the TEQ mode. Assume 
that the first orders p = ±1 provide the coupling. 
(c) Let K = Kab = —K*ba. Consider an incident wave from z = 0 with an 
amplitude A(0). Derive the general expressions for ß(0) and A(i). 
(d) Plot the reflectivity |ß(0)/A(0)|2 versus \Αβ/Κ\ for Kl = 4. 
(a) A* 
l-+Mt) 
z=0 
I ε 
z = / 
(b)x, 
h-
0 
-h 
ti£(x, 
Ä 
z) 
WM 
A 
Ki 
Figure 8.35 
(a)(b) Diagram for Problem 8.12. 

REFERENCES 
339 
x = 0-
x=-d-
AX 
| 
■AAA/NAAr 
B(0) 
r*A(.t) 
-*-Z 
I 
Z=0 
z=/=NA 
Figure 8.36 Diagram for Problem 8.13. 
8.13 
Consider a distributed feedback structure as shown in Fig. 8.36 where the 
height function is 
h(z) 
-ho + ho(z - nA) — 
nA < z < nA + — 
ho-h0(z-nA--j- 
nA + 
-<z<(n+l)A 
0 
n = 0,1,2,...,N- 
1 
z>l, 
z<0. 
Let the unperturbed ε(0)(χ) be ε(0) = 
ει 
— d < x < 0 
ε 
otherwise. 
Repeat Problem 8.12(a)-(d) for this sawtooth grating structure. 
8.14 
(a) Write down the expression for the coupling coefficient K for two identical 
parallel waveguides. Consider only the TE0 mode. Discuss qualitatively 
all possible ways and trade-offs to increase the coupling coefficient. 
(b) Repeat (a) for the coupling coefficient K for a distributed feedback 
structure. 
(c) Compare the coupling coefficients in (a) and (b). What are their 
similarities and differences? 
8.15 
(a) Calculate the coupling coefficient (8.5.25) for an index phase grating with 
An = 0.1, zero phase (φ = 0), and the confinement factor is 1 for a semi-
conductor background index n0 = 3.16 at 1.55-μιη wavelength. 
(b) Plot the reflectivity of the power |Γ(0)| 
in (8.5.45) as a function of 
detuning Aß for a cavity length L = 10 μιη. You should allow the argu-
ment qL to be complex to cover the detuning range both inside and 
outside the stop band. 
REFERENCES 
1. R. G. Hunsperger, Integrated Optics: Theory and Technology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
1984. 
2. T. Tamir, Integrated Optics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979. 

340 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
3. T. Tamir, Guided Wave Optoelectronics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990. 
4. J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic Wave Theory, EMW, Cambridge, MA, 2000. 
5. S. L. Chuang and J. A. Kong, "Wave scattering and guidance by dielectric 
waveguides with periodic surfaces," J. Opt. Soc. Am. 73, 669-679 (1983); Addendum 
73, 1823-1824(1983). 
6. H. A. Haus, Waves and Fields in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1984. 
7. S. L. Chuang and B. Do, "Electron states in two coupled quantum wells—a strong 
coupling of modes approach," J. Appl. Phys. 62, 1290-1297 (1987). 
8. A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Photonics—Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, 6th 
Edition, Oxford University Press, New York, USA, 2007. 
9. A. Yariv, "Coupled-mode theory for guided-wave optics," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
QE-9, 919-933 (1973). 
10. H. F. Taylor and A. Yariv, "Guided wave optics," Proc. IEEE 62, 1044-1060 (1974). 
H . H . Nishihara, M. Haruna, and T. Suhara, Optical Integrated Circuits, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1989. 
12. E. Marom, O. G. Ramer, and S. Ruschin, "Relation between normal-mode and coupled-
mode analyses of parallel waveguides," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-20, 1311-1319 
(1984). 
13. J. E. Watson, M. A. Milbrodt, and T. C. Rice, "A polarization-independent 1x16 guided-
wave optical switch integrated on lithium niobate," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 
1717-1721 (1986). 
14. L. A. Molter-Orr and H. A. Haus, "N x N coupled waveguide switch," Opt. Lett. 9, 
466-467 (1984). 
15. N. Kishi, E. Yamashita, and K. Atsuki, "Modal and coupling field analysis of optical fibers 
with circularly distributed multiple cores and a central core," /. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 
991-996(1986). 
16. D. B. Mortimore and J. W. Arkwright, "Theory and fabrication of wavelength flattened 
1 x N single-mode couplers," Appl. Opt. 29, 1814-1818 (1990). 
17. Y. Suematsu and K. Kishino, "Coupling coefficient in strongly coupled dielectric wave-
guides," Radio Science 12, 587-592 (1977). 
18. A. Hardy and W. Streifer, "Coupled mode theory of parallel waveguides," J. Lightwave 
Technol. LT-3, 1135-1146(1985). 
19. A. Hardy and W. Streifer, "Coupled mode solutions of multiwaveguide systems," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-22, 528-534 (1986). 
20. J. R. Qian and W. P. Huang, "Coupled-mode theory for LP modes," J. Lightwave Technol. 
LT-4, 619-625 (1986). 
21. J. R. Qian and W. P. Huang, "LP modes and ideal modes on optical fibers," J. Lightwave 
Technol. LT-4, 626-630 (1986). 
22. D. Marcuse, "Directional couplers made of nonidentical asymmetric slabs. Part I: synchro-
nous couplers," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-5, 113-118 (1987). 
23. E. A. J. Marcatili, "Improved coupled-mode equations for dielectric guides," IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 988-993 (1986). 
24. E. A. J. Marcatili, L. L. Buhl, and R. C. Alferness, "Experimental verification of the 
improved coupled-mode equations," Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 1692-1693 (1986). 

REFERENCES 
341 
25. W. Streifer, M. Osinski, and A. Hardy, "Reformation of the coupled-mode theory of 
multiwaveguide systems," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-5, 1-4 (1987). 
26. H. A. Haus, W. P. Huang, S. Kawakami, and N. A. Whitaker, "Coupled-mode theory of 
optical waveguides," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-5, 16-23 (1987). 
27. S. L. Chuang, "A coupled-mode formulation by reciprocity and a variational principle," 
J. Lightwave Technol. LT-5, 5-15 (1987). 
28. S. L. Chuang, "A coupled-mode theory for multiwaveguide systems satisfying the 
reciprocity theorem and power conservation," /. Lightwave Technol. LT-5, 174-183 
(1987). 
29. S. L. Chuang, "Application of the strongly coupled-mode theory to integrated optical 
devices," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 499-509 (1987). 
30. A. Ankiewicz, A. W. Snyder, and X. H. Zheng, "Coupling between parallel optical fiber 
cores-critical examination," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 1317-1323 (1986). 
31. A. W. Snyder, A. Ankiewicz, and A. Altintas, "Fundamental error of recent coupled mode 
formulations," Electron. Lett. 23, 1097-1098 (1987). 
32. H. C. Chang, "Coupled-mode equations for dielectric waveguides based on projection and 
partition modal amplitudes," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 1929-1937 (1987). 
33. J. P. Donnelly, N. L. DeMeo, Jr., and G. A. Ferrante, "Three-guide optical couplers in 
GaAs," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-1, 417-424 (1983). 
34. K. L. Chen and S. Wang, "Cross-talk problems in optical directional couplers," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 44, 166-168 (1984). 
35. J. P. Donnelly, N. L. DeMeo, Jr., G. A. Ferrante, K. B. Nichols, and F. J. O'Donnell, 
"Optical guided-wave gallium arsenide monolithic interferometer," Appl. Phys. Lett. 45, 
360-362 (1984). 
36. K. L. Chen and S. Wang, "The cross talk in three-waveguide optical directional couplers," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 1039-1041 (1986). 
37. L. McCaughan and S. K. Korotky, "Three-electrode Ti:LiNb03 Optical switch," 
J. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 1324-1327 (1986). 
38. J. P. Donnelly, "Limitations on power-transfer efficiency in three-guide optical couplers," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 610-616 (1986). 
39. D. Marcuse, "Coupled-mode theory for anisotropic optical waveguides," Bell Syst. Tech. J. 
54, 985-995 (1975). 
40. A. Hardy, W. Streifer, and M. Osinski, "Coupled-mode equations for multimode 
waveguide systems in isotropic or anisotropic media," Opt. Lett. 11, 742-744 (1986). 
41. L. Tsang and S. L. Chuang, "Coupled GaAs multiple-quantum-well channel waveguides 
including quadratic electrooptic effect," J. Lightwave Technol. and IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 6, 832-836 (1988). 
42. R. C. Alferness and R. V. Schmidt, "Tunable optical waveguide directional coupler filter," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 33, 161-163 (1978). 
43. R. C. Alferness and J. J. Veselka, "Tunable Ti:LiNb03 waveguide filter for long-
wavelength ( λ = 1.3-1.6 μ,πι) multiplexing/demultiplexing," Tech. Dig. Conf. Lasers 
Electro-optics (Anaheim, CA), 230-231 (1984). 
44. B. Broberg, B. S. Lindgren, M. G. Öberg, and H. Jiang, "A novel integrated opticswave-
length filter in InGaAsP-InP," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 196-203 (1986). 

342 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
45. B. Broberg and S. Lindgren, "Refractive index of In^^Ga^ASyP) _y layers and InP in the 
transparent wavelength region," J. Appl. Phys. 55, 3376-3381 (1984). 
46. H. Kogelnik and R. V. Schmidt, "Switched directional couplers with alternating Δ/8," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-12, 396-401 (1976). 
47. C. J. Setterlind and L. Thylen, "Directional coupler switches with optical gain," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-22, 595-602 (1986). 
48. G. H. B. Thompson, "Analysis of optical directional couplers that include gain or loss and 
their application to semiconductor slab dielectric guides," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 
1678-1693(1986). 
49. P. Urquhart, 'Transversely coupled fiber Fabry-Perot resonator: theory," Appl. Opt. 26, 
456-463 (1987). 
50. M. Brierley and P. Urquhart, "Transversely coupled fiber Fabry-Perot resonators: perform-
ance characteristics," Appl. Opt. 26, 4841-4845 (1987). 
51. M. J. Adams, "Theory of twin-guide Fabry-Perot laser amplifiers," IEE Proc. 136, 
287-292 (1989). 
52. M. J. Adams, D. A. H. Mace, J. Singh, and M. A. Fisher, "Optical switching in the 
twin-guide Fabry-Perot laser amplifier," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 1764-1771 
(1990). 
53. W. J. Fader and G. E. Palma, "Normal modes of N coupled lasers," Opt. Lett. 10,381-383 
(1985). 
54. E. Kapon, J. Katz, and A. Yariv, "Supermode analysis of phase-locked arrays of 
semiconductor lasers," Opt. Lett. 10, 125-127 (1984); "Erratum," Opt. Lett. 9, 318 
(1984). 
55. A. Hardy and W. Streifer, "Analysis of phased-array diode lasers," Opt. Lett. 10, 335-337 
(1985). 
56. B. E. Little, S. T. Chu, H. A. Haus, J. S. Foresi, and J.-P. Laine, "Microring resonator 
channel dropping filter," J. Lightwave Technol. 15, 998-1005 (1997). 
57. A. Yariv, Y. Xu, R. K. Lee, and A. Scherer, "Coupled-resonator optical waveguide: a 
proposal and analysis," Opt. Lett. 24, 711 -713 (1999). 
58. M. Cai and K. Vahala, "Highly efficient optical power transfer to whispering- gallery-
modes by use of a symmetrical dual-coupling configuration," Opt. Lett. 25, 260-262 
(2000). 
59. A. Yariv, "Universal relations for coupling of optical power between microresonators and 
dielectric waveguides," Electron. Lett. 361, 321-322 (2000). 
60. M. Cai, O. Painter, K. J. Vahala, and P. C. Sercel, "Fiber-coupled microsphere laser," 
Opt. Lett. 25, 1430-1432 (2000). 
61. Y. Xu, Y. Li, R. K. Lee, and A. Yariv, "Scattering-theory analysis of waveguide-resonator 
coupling," Phys. Rev. E 62, 7389-7404 (2000). 
62. J. M. Choi, R. K. Lee, and A. Yariv, "Control of critical coupling in a ring resonator-fiber 
configuration: application to wavelength-selective switching, modulation, amplification, 
and oscillation," Opt. Lett. 26, 12361-238 (2001). 
63. A. Yariv, "Critical coupling and its control in optical waveguide-ring resonator systems," 
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 4, 483-485 (2002). 
64. K. J. Vahala, "Optical microcavities," Nature 424, 839-846 (2003). 

REFERENCES 
343 
65. C. J. Kaalund, "Critically coupled ring resonator for add-drop filtering," Opt. Comm. 237, 
357-362 (2004). 
66. V. M. Menon, W. Tong, and S. R. Forrest, "Control of quality factor and critical coupling 
in microring resonators through integration of a semiconductor optical amplifier," IEEE 
Photon Technol Lett. 16, 1343-1345 (2004). 
67. W. M. J. Green, R. K. Lee, G. A. DeRose, A. Scherer, and A. Yariv, "Hybrid InGaAsP-InP 
Mach-Zehnder racetrack resonator for thermooptic switching and coupling control," 
Opt. Express 13, 1651-1659 (2005). 
68. Y. M. Landobasa, S. Darmawan, and M. K. Chin, "Matrix analysis of 2-D micro-resonator 
lattice optical filters," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 41, 1410-1418 (2005). 
69. S. Darmawan and M. K. Chin, "Critical coupling, oscillation, reflection, and transmission 
in optical waveguide ring resonator systems," J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 23, 834-841 (2006). 
70. M. C. Lee and M. C. Wu, "Tunable coupling regimes of silicon microdisk resonators using 
MEMS actuators," Optics Express 14, 4703-4712 (2006). 
71. S. I. Bozhevolnyi, V. S. Volkov, E. Devaux, J.-Y. Laluet, and T. W. Ebbesen, 
"Channel plasmon sub-wavelength waveguide components including interferometers 
and ring resonators," Nature 440, 508-511 (2006). 
72. M. Hossein-Zadeh and K. J. Vahala, "Free ultra-high-Q microtoroid: a tool for designing 
photonic devices," Opt. Express 15, 166-175 (2007). 
73. F. Xia, L. Sekaric, and Y. A. Vlasov, "Ultracompact optical buffers on a silicon chip," 
Nature Photonics 1, 65-71 (2007). 
74. E. Parra and J. Lowell, "Toward applications of slow light technology," Opt. Photon. News 
18,41-45 (2007). 
75. D. X. Xu, A. Densmore, P. Waldron, J. Lapointe, E. Post, A. Deläge, S. Janz, P. Cheben, 
J. H. Schmid, and B. Lamontagne, "High bandwidth SOI photonic wire ring resonators 
using MMI couplers," Opt. Express 15, 3149-3155 (2007). 
76. Q. Xu, P. Dong, and M. Lipson, "Breaking the delay-bandwidth limit in a photonic 
structure," Nature 3, 406-410 (2007). 
77. A. A. Tovar and L. W. Casperson, "Generalized Sylvester theorems for periodic appli-
cations in matrix optics," J. Opt. Soc. Am. A. 12, 578-590 (1995). 
78. H. Kogelnik, "Coupled wave theory for thick hologram gratings," Bell Syst. Tech. J. 48, 
2909-2947 (1969). 
79. W. S. C. Chang, "Periodic structures and their application in integrated optics," IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. MTT-21, 775-785 (1973). 
80. W. Streifer, D. R. Scifres, and R. D. Burnham, "Coupling coefficients for distributed feed-
back single- and double-heterostructure diode lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-11, 
867-873 (1975). 
81. W. Streifer, D. R. Scifres, and R. D. Burnham, "TM-mode coupling coefficients in 
guided-wave distributed feedback lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-12, 74-78 
(1976). 
82. P. H. H. Hsieh and C. G. Fonstad, "Coupling coefficient calculations for lead-tin telluride 
distributed feedback lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-13, 17-23 (1977). 
83. Y. Yamamoto, T. Kamiya, and H. Yanai, "Improved coupled mode analysis of corrugated 
waveguides and lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-14, 245-258 (1978). 

344 
COUPLED-MODE THEORY 
84. Y. Yamamoto, T. Kamiya, and H. 114Yanai, "Improved coupled mode analysis of 
corrugated waveguides and lasers-Π: TM mode," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-14, 
620-624 (1978). 
85. S. H. Kim and C. G. Fonstad, "Tunable narrow-band thin-film waveguide grating filters," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-15, 1405-1408 (1979). 
86. E. Kapon, A. Hardy, and A. Katzir, "TE and TM coupling coefficients in distributed 
feedback double-heterostructure PbSnTe lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-17, 
391-397(1981). 

Part ΠΙ 
Generation of Light 


9 
Optical Processes in Semiconductors 
The quantum theory of light has been an intriguing subject since 1900 when Planck 
[1] proposed the idea of quantization of electromagnetic energy. In this theory, the 
light or electromagnetic wave with an oscillating frequency ω is quantized into indi-
visible packets of energy ha>. In 1905, Einstein [2] proposed that the photoelectric 
effect could be explained using a corpuscle concept of the electromagnetic radiation. 
With the invention of lasers, the quantum theory of light also plays an important role 
in our understanding of many optical and electronic processes in materials such as 
semiconductors. Rigorous in-depth treatments of the quantum theory of light can 
be found in Refs. 3 and 4. 
In this chapter, we study optical transitions, absorptions, and gains in semiconduc-
tors. In Section 9.1, we start with Fermi's golden rule using the time-dependent per-
turbation theory derived in Section 3.6. We discuss in Section 9.2 the Einstein A and 
B coefficients for spontaneous and stimulated emissions and show how they can be 
calculated quantum mechanically. We then discuss in Sections 9.3-9.6 the optical 
processes in semiconductor bulk, quantum-well (QW), quantum-wire (QWR), and 
quantum-dot (QD) structures. The bulk optical matrix elements are derived based 
on Kane's model for the semiconductor conduction- and valence-band structures. 
Intersubband transitions in quantum wells are presented in Section 9.7. For semicon-
ductor quantum wells, valence-band mixing effects play an important role in the 
optical gain of a quantum-well laser. We show in Section 9.8 how these heavy-
hole and light-hole band mixing effects can be taken into account in the modeling 
of interband optical gain spectrum in quantum-well structures. 
9.1 
OPTICAL TRANSITIONS USING FERMI'S GOLDEN RULE 
Consider a semiconductor illuminated by light. The interaction between the photons and 
the electrons in the semiconductor can be described by the Hamiltonian [5] 
H=-—(p-eA)2 
+ V(r) 
(9.1.1) 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
347 

348 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where mo is the free electron mass, e = —\e\ for electrons, A is the vector potential 
accounting for the presence of the electromagnetic field, and V(r) is the periodic crystal 
potential. The above Hamiltonian can be understood because taking the partial derivatives 
of H with respect to the JC, y, and z components of the momentum variable p and the 
position vector r will lead to the classic equation of motion described by the Lorentz 
force equation [5] in the presence of an electric and a magnetic field (see Problem 9.1). 
9.1.1 
The Electron-Photon Interaction Hamiltonian 
The Hamiltonian can be expanded into 
p
2 
e 
e2A2 
H=f-+V(r)- 
— (P.A + A.p) + - — 
2nto 
2/Wo 
zwo 
~ / / 0 + / / ' 
(9.1.2) 
where Ho is the unperturbed Hamiltonian and H' is considered as a perturbation due 
to light 
P2 
H0=^+V(r) 
(9.1.3) 
/ / ' ~ - — A · p, 
(9.1.4) 
m0 
and the Coulomb gauge (discussed in Section 6.3) 
V - A = 0 
(9.1.5) 
has been used such that p · A = A · p, noting that p = (h/i)V. 
The last term e2A2/2mn 
is much smaller than the terms linear in A because |eA| <c |p| for most practical optical 
field intensities. This can be checked using p ~ M ~ hir/a, 
and a ~ 5 A is the lattice 
constant. Assuming the vector potential for the optical electric field of the form 
A = eAo cos(fc0p · r — ωί) 
An 
An 
(9.1-6) 
2 
2 
where k o p is the wave vector, ω is the optical angular frequency, and e is a unit vector 
in the direction of the optical electric field, we have 
dA 
E(r, t) = -—= 
-ea)A0 sin(kop· r - ωΐ) 
(9.1.7) 
at 
H(r, t) = — V x A = 
kOD x M0sin(koP· r - ωί) 
(9.1.8) 
μ, 
μ 

9.1 
OPTICAL TRANSITIONS USING FERMI'S GOLDEN RULE 
349 
where we have used the fact that the scalar potential φ vanishes (p = 0) for the optical 
field, and μ = μ^, the permeability of the free space. The Poynting vector for the 
power intensity (W/cm2) is given by 
P(r, 0 = E(r, i) x H(r, t) = kk^ - ^ sin2(koP · r - at) 
(9.1.9) 
which is pointing along the direction of wave propagation k„p. The time average of the 
Poynting flux is simply 
/ > = | < P ( r , i ) ) | = ^ * o p 
ωΑ2, 
nrCBQdP-A^ 
(9.1.10) 
noting that the time average of the sin ( · ) function is j . Here nr is the refractive index of 
the material, and c is the speed of light in free space. The interaction Hamiltonian H'(r, t) 
can be written as 
H'(r,t) = 
A ( r , i ) - P 
Wo 
= H'(r)e-ia" 
+ 
H'+(r)e 
where 
n'(r) = — 2 
έ.ρ. 
2mo 
The superscript"+" means the Hermitian adjoint operator. 
(9.1.11) 
(9.1.12) 
9.1.2 
Transition Rate due to Electron-Photon Interaction 
The transition rate for the absorption of a photon (Fig. 9.1a) assuming an electron is 
initially at state a is given by Fermi's golden rule and has been derived in Section 3.6 
using the time-dependent perturbation theory 
Wabs = ^\(b\H'(r)\a)\2S(Eb 
- Ea - ha>) 
n 
(9.1.13) 
(a) 
Absorption 
(b) 
-Final 
Eb ~ 
state 
-Initial 
£ 
state 
Emission 
Initial 
state 
-ΛΛ/*- n<° 
Final 
state 
Figure 9.1 (a) The absorption and (b) the emission of a photon with the corresponding electron 
transitions. 

350 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where Eb > Ea has been assumed. The total upward transition rate per unit volume 
(s ' cm 3) in the crystal taking into account the probability that state a is occupied 
and state b is empty is 
Ra^b = ^ Σ Έ γ Ma? %E>> ~E-- 
Αω>/«(1 -A) 
(9-1.14) 
where we sum over the initial and final states and assume that the Fermi -Dirac 
distribution fa is the probability that the state a is occupied. A similar expression 
holds for/fo with Ea replaced by Eh, and (1 — fb) is the probability that the state b 
is empty. The prefactor 2 takes into account the sum over spins, and the matrix 
element H'ba is given by 
H'ba a (b\H'(r)\a) = ^ΨΙ(τ)Η'(τ)Ψα(τ)α3Γ. 
(9.1.15) 
Similarly, the transition rate for the emission of a photon (Fig. 9.1b) if an electron is 
initially at state b is 
We™ = — \(a\H'+(r)\b)\2 8(Ea - Eb + hoi). 
(9.1.16) 
n 
The downward transition rate per unit volume (s 
cm-3) is 
Ä*-» = ΰ Σ Σ τ Κ ! 2 ^ -Bb + ΛωίΛ(1 -fa)- 
(9-1.17) 
k„ 
kfc 
Using the even property of the delta function, δ(-χ) = δ(χ), and \H'ba\ = \H'^\, the 
net upward transition rate per unit volume can be written as 
R — Ra^b — Rb-^a 
= \ Σ Έ T\H'ba I2 δ(£» - Ea ~ M « , -/»)■ 
(9.1.1 8) 
K. 
k* 
9.1.3 Optical Absorption Coefficient 
The absorption coefficient a (1/cm) in the crystal is the fraction of photons absorbed 
per unit distance: 
Number of photons absorbed per second per unit volume 
a^—^ 
Z 
T^~- 
1—Z 
J~ 
: 
· 
(9.1.19) 
Number of injected photons per second per unit area 
The injected number of photons per second per unit area is the optical intensity 
P (W/cm2) divided by the energy of a photon Λω; therefore, 
R 
Ηω 
α{Ηω) = TJtT = 7 
ΙΪΪΪΤΛΚ- 
{9Λ20) 

9.1 
OPTICAL TRANSITIONS USING FERMI'S GOLDEN RULE 
351 
Using the dipole (long wavelength) approximation that A(r) = Ae**"'r ~ A, we find 
that the matrix elements can be written in terms of the momentum matrix element 
"Ί» = ~^A' (*|ρ|Ω> = - ^
έ ·
ρ " - 
(9-L21) 
The absorption coefficient (9.1.20) becomes 
a(ha>) = Ο0^ΣΥ)β 
· pfa|2fi(£ft-£e-M(/e-/i.) 
(9.1.22a) 
2 
Tre 
C0 = 
j - . 
(9.1.22b) 
nrceomQ&) 
We can see that the factors containing AQ are canceled because the linear optical 
absorption coefficient is independent of the optical intensity. 
The Hamiltonian can also be written in terms of the optical dipole moment 
H'ba = -(b\er · E|o) = -ßba· 
Ε 
(9.1.23) 
H.ba = e{b\r\a)=erba. 
(9.1.24) 
The above form can be derived using first the property: 
p = m0 ^ r = ^ (r//0 - Η0τ) 
(9.1.25) 
at 
in 
which can be proved first by writing out the x component of (9.1.25) and checking 
both sides that they are identical, followed by proving the y and z component by 
the same token (see Problem 9.3) 
»L = < b — A(r) · p 
m0 
-^A-(b\rH0-Hor\a) 
= -eiE"ih 
^ ^ 
' ( % | α ) ^ ~μ»° ' E 
( 9" L 2 6 ) 
where we have used HQ\Ü) = Ea\a), (b\Ho = (b\Eb, Eb — Ea ~ ηω, andE = ίωΑ 
for the first term in A(r, t) with exp(— ίωί) dependence. 
In terms of the dipole moment, we write the absorption coefficient as 
a(ha>) = — 1 5 2 Σ ) έ · »baffXEb -Ea- 
hw)(fa -fb). 
(9.1.27) 
When the scattering relaxation is included, the delta function may be replaced by a 
Lorentzian function with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) or linewidth 2γ 
8{Eb -Ea- 
ha>) -^ L(Eb -Ea- 
λω) = — 
y / ? 
- 
(9.1.28) 
(Eb -Ea- 
ηώγ + γ2 

352 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where a factor π has been included such that the area under the Lorentzian and delta 
function is properly normalized 
L(Eb — Ea — tiu>) d(h(o) = 1. 
(9.1.29) 
9.1.4 
Real and Imaginary Parts of the Permittivity Function 
The absorption coefficient a is related to the imaginary part of the permittivity 
function by 
a = 2 Im ω^/μ(ε\ + iej) — 2 Im 
«r 
1 
. «2 
2ε i 
ω ε2 
n rc8o 
(9.1.30) 
assuming that |ε2 | -C fi|. Here a factor of 2 accounts for the fact that a refers to 
the absorption coefficient of the optical intensity, not the electric field. We obtain 
the imaginary part of the permittivity function 
ε2(ω) = 
α(ηω) 
ω 
ττβ 
m0 
hiV/ΈΈ 
I2' Pba\2S(Eb 'Ea- 
h<0)(fa -fb). 
(9.1.31) 
In semiconductors, the conduction- and valence-band structures determine the 
energy-momentum relations Eb = E(kb) and Ea = E(ka), respectively. An important 
part of calculating the absorption coefficient is to find the band structures and the 
wave functions. The optical matrix element nj,a is calculated from the wave functions 
based on the parabolic band model. We would usually start from bulk semiconductors 
for which the band structures are known. Then we use the k· p perturbation method 
and the effective mass theory near the band edges, as discussed in Chapter 4, to study 
the optical processes near the band edges of bulk and quantum-well semiconductor 
structures. Using the Kramers-Kronig relation derived in Appendix 5A, we obtain 
the real part of the permittivity function from the imaginary part: 
ε,(ω) = ε0 + 2e2h 2 v-^ ^^.^ 
l2 
(fa -fb) 
m, o 
(Eb - Ea)[(Eb - Ea)z - (ha,)2] 
(9.1.32) 
If instead, Eq. (9.1.27) with the dipole moment matrix is used, similar expressions 
for ει(ω) and ε2(ω) can be derived. In practice, linewidth broadening has to be 
considered to compare the theoretical absorption spectrum with experimental data. 
We replace the delta function in (9.1.31) by a Lorentzian function using (9.1.28). 

9.2 
SPONTANEOUS AND STIMULATED EMISSIONS 
353 
9.2 
SPONTANEOUS AND STIMULATED EMISSIONS 
In Section 9.1, we presented a quantum-mechanical derivation for optical absorption 
of semiconductors in the presence of a monochromatic electromagnetic field using 
Fermi's golden rule. Here we discuss the spontaneous and stimulated emissions in 
semiconductors and derive the relations between the spontaneous emission, stimu-
lated emission, and absorption spectra [4, 6-8]. 
First we consider a discrete two-level system in the presence of an electromagnetic 
field with a broad spectrum (Fig. 9.2a). The total transition rate per unit volume 
(s~' cm~3) is given by 
/?, 
1 x—v 2π , , , 
V 
δ(Ε2 — E\ - ft<i>*)2/iph 
(9.2.1) 
where H'i2 is the matrix element of the interaction Hamiltonian due to the electromag-
netic field, hwk is the energy of a photon with a wave vector k, 
1 
WP h
 
ehm/kBT 
_ 
l 
(9.2.2) 
is the number of photons per state following the Bose-Einstein statistics for identical 
particles (photons), and a factor of 2 accounts for two polarization states for each k 
vector. The photon field can be described by a plane wave for simplicity as 
„/k· r 
ikxx+ikyy+ikzz 
(9.2.3) 
9.2.1 Density of States for Photons 
To define the density of states for the photon field, we use the periodic boundary con-
ditions that the wave function should be periodic in the x, v, and z directions with a 
(a) 
Empty 
iu*AI\r 
Occupied 
kx = U*,ky = n&-,kz = r& 
Figure 9.2 
(a) A photon incident on a discrete two-level system where level 1 is occupied and level 2 is 
empty, (b) The A-space diagram for the density of photon states. A dot represents one state with two poss-
ible polarizations. 

354 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
period L. Therefore, 
„27Γ 
2π 
2*77-
— , ky = m —, 
and kz = n —— 
kx = t — , ky = m — , and kz = n —. 
(9.2.4) 
The volume of a state in the fc-space is therefore {lir/Lf, Fig. 9.2b. Using the dis-
persion relation for the photon 
wk = kc/nr 
(9.2.5) 
where c/nr is the speed of light in the medium with a refractive index nr, we can 
change the sum over the k vector to an integral. 
Let us look at the integral using the number of states with a differential volume in 
the it-space d^k/ilir/LY 
= k2 dk dfl/(2n/LY, 
dfi is the differential solid angle, 
2 v ^ 
(k2dkdü, 
^ £ 2 i > = 17 Έ ^ ι ~Ei-Ek) 
= 2 — — 5 - 8(E2 - Ex - Ek) 
(9.2.6) 
V^ 
J (2wy 
where V is the volume of the space, 
ftJcc 
Ek =hwk= 
(9.2.7) 
«r 
is the photon energy, and the integration over the solid angle is 4ττ. We find 
87777? £■-?, 
n? E}x 
N{£K 
) = 
u3 3 
= ^ - T T · 
(9·2·8) 
which is the number of states with photon energy E2\ per unit volume per energy 
interval, cr 
two levels. 
interval, cm 3(eV) ', and E2\= E2 — Ex is the energy spacing between the 
9.2.2 
Stimulated and Spontaneous Emissions: Einstein's 
A and B Coefficients 
Define 
27Γ, 
, ,2 
B]2= 
— \H[2\ 
(9.2.9) 
n 
as the transition rate per incident photon within an energy interval, (eV/s). We obtain 
the upward transition rate per unit volume (s ' cm 3) for a broad spectrum or inco-
herent light (black body radiation) 
Rl2 = Bl2S(E2]) 
(9.2.10) 

9.2 
SPONTANEOUS AND STIMULATED EMISSIONS 
355 
where 
S{E2X) = N(E2i)nph 
(9.2.11) 
is the number of photons per unit volume per energy interval with a dimension of 
1 
cm"3(eV)_1,and 
«ph = 
eE2i/kBT _ J 
(9.2.12) 
is the average number of photons per state at an optical energy E2i. 
If we take into account the occupation probabilities of level 1 and level 2 using 
Fermi-Dirac distributions,/! and/2, respectively, the expression for R\2 is slightly 
modified, Fig. 9.3, 
Äi2(= rn{E)dE) = ^ΣΒ]2 
δ(Ε2 - Ελ - M02n p h./,(1 
-f2) 
= Äl2/ld-/2)S(£2l) 
(9.2.13) 
where rX2(E)dE means that the upward transition rate per unit volume has been 
integrated for a light with a spectral width dE near E= E2\- r]2(E) is the number 
of 1 —> 2 transitions per second per unit volume per energy interval (s ' cm 
eV ). 
Similarly, a stimulated emission rate per unit volume can be given 
flsnm = ^{E)dE 
= B2lMl 
-fl)S(E2l). 
(9.2.14) 
The spontaneous emission rate per unit volume is independent of the photon density 
and is given by 
R2
Pr = rs
2fD(E)dE = 
A2yf2(\-f1). 
(9.2.15) 
At thermal equilibrium, there is only one Fermi level; therefore F\ = F2. We balance 
the total downward transition rate with the upward transition rate 
Rv 
m 
R?r 
v21 
(9.2.16) 
hco 
spon 
«21 
— Ei 
Figure 9.3 Schematic diagram for the stimulated absorption rate Rl2, stimulated emission rate Λ?™, and 
the spontaneous emission rate /Jfi°n in the presence of two levels with quasi-Fermi levels, F, and F2, 
respectively. 

356 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
or 
βΐ2/ι(1 -f2)S(E20 = B2Xf2(\ -f\)S{E2X) + A2lf2(\ - / , ) . 
(9.2.17) 
We obtain 
BneE,Z-B2rN{E2x)^f^-
 
( 9·
2·
1 8 ) 
By comparing the left- and right-hand sides of (9.2.18), we find 
Bn=B2l 
(9.2.19) 
and 
A·?, 
...„ . 
n 3£? 
— -N{t2\)- 
3 
ö21 
772Ä C3 
^(£•21) = ~rTT3^7· 
(9.2.20) 
The ratio of the stimulated and spontaneous emission rate is, therefore 
R2
lr 
B2iS(E2l)f2(l - / , ) 
RT 
A21/2(l - / , ) 
which is the number of photons per state, (9.2.12). 
Ph 
(9.2.21) 
9.2.3 
Derivation of the Optical Gain and Spontaneous 
Emission Spectrum 
The net absorption rate per unit volume within a spectral width dE is 
*£ = rt(E2X)dE 
= Ä12/1O -fi)S(E2l) 
- £21/2(1 -/,)5(£21) 
= Bu(fi-f2)S(E2])- 
(9.2.22) 
Therefore, the absorption spectrum within a spectral width d£ can be written as 
>tt(E2i)dE 
a(E2\)dE = 
LBl2(fi -fi). 
(9.2.23) 
>n 
_n, 
c 
The ratio of the spontaneous emission spectrum and the absorption spectrum is 
r 2r(£2i) = A21/2(l-/1) 
«(£21) 
^12 (A-fi) 

9.2 
SPONTANEOUS AND STIMULATED EMISSIONS 
357 
,'n2 E2 
spon,^ λ _ I " r ^21 
or 
and ΔΕ = F2 - F{ is the quasi-Fermi level separation. 
If we consider the net upward transition for a monochromatic light (a single 
photon with E = Ηω) instead of a light spectrum, we use r^(E), 
that is, the net 
upward transition rate per unit volume per energy interval from (9.2.22) with nph = 1, 
r^(E)dE = ß12(/, ~f2)N(E). 
(9.2.26a) 
We change 1 jdE to a delta function for a pair of discrete states E2 and E\, 
rf£(E) = N(E)Bl28{E2 - £, - E){fx -f2). 
(9.2.26b) 
This has to be summed over all initial states 1 (using ka as the quantum number) and 
final states 2 (using kb) for all the electron wave vectors, 
r^(E = Ηω) = 2 N(E) J^ ] T BabS(Eb - Ea - ha>)(fa - fb). 
(9.2.27) 
k„ kfc 
Similarly from (9.2.23) 
οφο) = ^ 2 ^ ^ Ä a f c 6 ( £ f c -Ea- HiüXfa -fb) 
(9.2.28) 
C 
k„ k,, 
where 
2 
2TT 
Bab = Bba — "Γ" ( ^ I - ^ - P I « ) 
(9.2.29) 
for each incident photon with an energy hw. Therefore, we have the time-averaged 
power density P from the Poynting vector in Eq. (9.1.10), which is the optical intensity 
of a photon in a volume V propagating at a velocity c/nT 
P = ft/l = "
i
^
. 
(9.2.30) 
nrV 
2 
Therefore, we obtain 
, 
2ft 1 
A2
0=-2 
(9.2.31) 
2we2A2 
2 
ττ-e
2 
2 1 
, Q 1„, 
4 
= ΪΚ|ί·ρ^«0|ί·ρ^'
 
( 9 ·
2 3 2 ) 
which is proportional to the optical matrix element. By substituting Bab = Bba in 
(9.2.32) into (9.2.28), we obtain the identical result as (9.1.22) for the absorption 
coefficient. Similarly, the spontaneous emission rate per unit volume per unit energy 

358 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
interval (s ' c m 
3 eV ') is given by 
»2, .2 
r^n(ha>) = {3^Λθ>^Σ 
Σ 
Ιέ · Pba\2^E„ -Ea- 
hw)fb{\ -fa) 
(9.2.33) 
and the net stimulated emission rate per unit volume per energy interval is given by 
rstim(fto>) 
2 2 
iP-hc2 ^ Ι Έ Έ Ι
έ · ρ * « ι
2 δ ^ -
£« - M C A -/«)· 
<
9·
2·
34) 
When α{Ηω) becomes negative, we have gain in the medium: 
g(ha)) = —a(h(i>). 
We can also write from (9.2.25) 
g(tia>) 
r*üm(hw) 
η]οϊ ) \ 
-,[AK>-<F2-F,)1/*, *y .spon (ha>) 
2,2 
g(ha>) 
"(M = ( 
[AuMFj-F,)!/*, ΒΛ^οη(Ηω). 
(9.2.35) 
(9.2.36) 
(9.2.37) 
(9.2.38) 
The spontaneous emission spectrum rspon(/iio) and the gain spectrum g(hui) are plotted 
in Fig. 9.4 [9-14]. The emission spectrum is always a positive quantity, whereas the 
gain changes a sign to become absorption when the optical energy is larger than the 
quasi-Fermi level separation [8] Fi-F\. 
Similar expressions as Eqs. (9.2.33) and 
(9.2.36) have been compared with experimental data with general good agreement 
[9-13]. Note that the spontaneous emission power intensity per unit volume per 
energy interval is ft<iwspon(ft<u). Some effects of the optical matrix elements [14] due 
to doping effects or conduction band non-parabolicity [9] have been discussed. The 
l k Spontaneous and gain spectra 
sp°n(£) 
*-E = hm 
Figure 9.4 The spontaneous emission spectrum rspon(feo) and the gain spectrum gifua) are plotted. 
The gain changes to absorption (negative) when the optical energy φω) is larger than the quasi-Fermi 
level separation, F2- F,. 

9.2 
SPONTANEOUS AND STIMULATED EMISSIONS 
359 
crossing point F2 - Fx in the gain spectrum serves as a good way to estimate the carrier 
density in a laser diode or a light-emitting diode in addition to matching both the gain 
and the spontaneous emission spectra. More details on the gain spectrum and the popu-
lation inversion condition, hco < F2 — F\, will be discussed in Sections 9.3 and 9.4. 
Figure 9.5a shows the measured spontaneous emission spectrum as a function 
of the injection current from the side (window light) of a semiconductor laser near 
1.55 μηι wavelength [12]. Using the fundamental relation [9-14] between the gain 
and the spontaneous emission spectrum (9.2.36), we can extract the gain from each 
curve in Fig. 9.5a, and the resultant gain spectrum is shown as the dashed curve at 
each bias current. In this approach, the quasi-Fermi level separation is taken as an 
input, \F=F2 
- F\, which can be measured independently (see Section 10.1). 
Another approach, called the Hakki-Paoli method [7, 15], is to directly measure 
the amplified spontaneous emission spectrum from the end facet of the laser at 
each bias and then extract the optical gain at each wavelength from the peaks and 
valleys of the Fabry-Perot spectrum. The results of the net modal gain, 
Tgiho)) — a,·, are shown as the solid curves in Fig. 9.5b [10-13]. We can see the 
agreement between the two methods is very good. The net modal gain includes the 
(a) 
6 x 10" 
l»l2mA .. 
."4x10^1· 
9mA 
'35 
Ü2X10-1 
O o 
e 
I oxio0 
1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 
Wavelength (nm) 
1500 
1550 
1600 
Wavelength (nm) 
1650 
Figure 9.5 
(a) Measured spontaneous emission (SE) spectra from the side of a semiconductor laser at 
bias currents of 5, 7, 9, and 12 mA below threshold, (b) The optical gain spectra obtained using the funda-
mental relation by transforming the spontaneous emission spectra in part (a) to gain (dashed curves). The 
gain spectra agree well with those measured from the Hakki-Paoli method (solid curves) extracted directly 
from the measured amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) spectra. (Reprinted with permission from [12] 
© 1999 IEEE.) 

360 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
optical confinement factor and is shifted downward by the intrinsic absorption. By 
drawing a horizontal line at — a,·, we can also check the quasi-Fermi level separation, 
AF=F2-Fi, 
from the gain spectrum measured from the Hakki-Paoli method. 
More details are discussed in Section 10.1. 
9.3 INTERBAND ABSORPTION AND GAIN OF BULK 
SEMICONDUCTORS 
For interband transitions between the valence band and conduction band of a semi-
conductor, we have to evaluate the optical matrix element 
«L 
-M(r) 
m0 
(9.3.1) 
9.3.1 
Evaluation of the Interband Optical Matrix Element and 
the k-Selection Rule 
The vector potential for the optical field is 
A(r) = Ae*<*>-r=— 
e'K^r. 
2 
(9.3.2) 
The Bloch functions for electrons in the valence band Ea and the conduction band Eh 
are, respectively, 
ψα(Γ) = Μν(Γ)-
JK-r 
^ 
t/^(r) = ac(r)-
»*c-r 
y/V 
(9.3.3a) 
(9.3.3b) 
where Kv(r) and wc(r) are the periodic parts of the Bloch functions, and the remainders 
are the envelope functions (plane waves) for a free electron. The momentum matrix 
element is derived from 
H' = 
1ba 
eA 
2mo °-e. J <#***·'ρψ^Γ 
2OTQ 
J 
C (r)e -ike. Tgikop. r 
Vwv(r) ) e!k"·r + ÄkvMv(r)e,k'·r 
V 

9.3 
INTERBAND ABSORPTION AND GAIN OF BULK SEMICONDUCTORS 
361 
eAo „ f Λ, ,h _ 
, dsr f 
-2^
e-J<
(r)7
VMv(r)DrJ' 
Ω 
V 
h „ 
, .d3r f ,v_k^t 
i t , J 3 r 
ei(-kc+kop+kv).ri 
I"" 
2 ^ < , B » ^ ^
 
( 9 3 ·
4 ) 
i —\7u..rr">-
A „ 
d3r 
(r)^-VMv(r)-— 
(9.3.5) 
where we noted that [w*(r)yVMv(r)] and [w*(r) Mv(r)] are periodic functions with the 
period of a unit cell, whereas the envelope functions are slowly varying functions 
over a unit cell. Therefore, the integral over d3r can be separated into the product 
of two integrals, one over the unit cell Ω for the periodic part, and the other over 
the slowly varying part. In another words, we use the approximation: 
| i i # r ) y V«v(r) F(r)d3r ~ jV(ry 3r J w*(r)| V M v ( r ) ~ 
(9.3.6) 
v 
v 
n 
where F(r) is slowly varying over a unit cell, and we have used the periodic property 
of the Bloch periodic functions 
«:(r)-VH»(r) = ^ C G e i G , r 
(9.3.7) 
1 
G 
where the vectors G's are the reciprocal lattice vectors. Because F(r) is slowly 
varying over a unit cell, we may approximate F(r + R) ~ F(R) and put it outside 
of the integral over a unit cell. Here the Rs are the lattice vectors, and exp[/ G · 
R] = 1. Ω is the volume of a unit cell. Note that the orthogonal property 
[ u*cuwd3r = 0, 
j - [ w*M3r = ~ [ w>vi/3r = 1. 
(9.3.8) 
From the matrix element (9.3.4), we see that the momentum conservation 
ftkc = ftkv + 
ftkop 
(9.3.9) 
is obeyed. The electron at the final state has its crystal momentum hkc equal to its 
initial momentum ftkv plus the photon momentum ftkop. Because kop ~ 2π/λ0, and 
the magnitudes kc, fev are of the order 2π/α0, where a0 is the lattice constant of the 
semiconductors, which is typically of the order 5.5 A and is much smaller than XQ, 
we may ignore kop and obtain 
"^-Sr
P-^
 
( 9·
3·
1 0 ) 

362 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
which is the k-selection rule or vertical transition in the interband optical transitions 
of the band structure. Notice that the interband momentum matrix element, PeV, 
depends only on the periodic parts (wc and wv) of the Bloch functions and is derived 
from the original optical momentum matrix element ρ^Ω, which, on the other hand, 
depends on the full wave functions (i.e., including the envelope functions). 
9.3.2 
Optical Absorption Spectrum 
Using the k-selection rule in the matrix element (9.3.10), we find that the absorption 
coefficient (9.1.22) for a bulk semiconductor is 
a(ha>) = Co^Σ 
\e· Pcv\2S(EC - Ey - hw)(fv - / c ) 
(9.3.11) 
k 
where the Fermi-Dirac distributions for the electrons in the valence band and in the 
conduction band are, respectively, 
/v(k) = 1 + g(£v(k)_Fv)ABr> 
/c(k) = l + e(Ec(k)_Fi:)/kBT 
(9.3.12) 
and Fv, Fc are the quasi-Fermi levels, which are dependent on the level of carrier 
injection and doping concentration. We use k to represent both kc and kv. In the 
case of thermal equilibrium, Fv = Fc = EF. We assume that the semiconductor is 
undoped, the valence band is completely occupied, and the conduction band is 
empty,/v = 1 and/c = 0. We further assume that the matrix element \e · pcv|2 is inde-
pendent of k and denote the absorption spectrum at thermal equilibrium 
a0(hco) = C0|e- pcv|2 I " Η τ δ Ι Ε% + ^ Τ - ηω I 
(9.3.13) 
where we have used the reduced effective mass m*, 
fcV 
h2k2 
c " 
6 + 2m* 
£v " 2ml 
1 
1 
1 
— = —Λ^- 
(9·3·14) 
m* 
m*t ml 
Here all energies are measured from the top of the valence band. Therefore, both Ec 
and Fc contain the band-gap energy Eg. Let 
h2k2 
X = Ea + E-hw 
E = 
. 
(9.3.15) 
2m* 

9.3 
INTERBAND ABSORPTION AND GAIN OF BULK SEMICONDUCTORS 
363 
We find, by a change of variables, the integration can be carried out with the contri-
bution at X = 0, and Ε—Ηω - E„ 
αφω) = C0\e· ρον|2ρΓ(^ω ~ £g) 
1 /2m; 
Λ ( Λ ω - £ 8 ) - 2 ΐ Γ η Λ 2 
3/2 
(Ηω-Ε&γΙ2. 
(9.3.16a) 
(9.3.16b) 
Therefore, the absorption coefficient depends on the momentum matrix element and 
the joint (or reduced) density of states. The absorption spectrum is plotted in 
Fig. 9.6. We can see the dominant square-root behavior of the optical energy 
above the band gap, (tuo- £g)1//2, representing the joint density of states. Below 
the band-gap energy Eg, the absorption does not occur because the photons see a 
forbidden band gap. 
9.3.3 
Optical Gain Spectrum 
Under current injection or optical pumping, there will be both electrons and holes in 
semiconductors. Let us assume that a quasi-equilibrium state has been reached such 
that we have two quasi-Fermi levels, Fc and Fy, for the electrons and holes, respect-
ively. Carrying out the integration as (9.3.13)-(9.3.16), we obtain 
a(hw) = a0(ha>)[fv(ko) -fc(ko)] 
(9.3.17a) 
where 
ßy(AtB_£g). 
Ao=t/=?(**>-£«)· 
(9.3.17b) 
We note that α{%ω) becomes negative if fv(k) - fc(k) < 0, which leads to 
e(,Ec-F<)/kBT 
< 
e(Ey-Fw)/kBT 
hV 
(b) 
οψιω) 
■ hco 
Figure 9.6 
(a) Optical absorption in a direct-band-gap semiconductor, (b) The absorption spectrum due 
to the interband transition. 

364 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
or 
Fc-Fy> 
£c - £v = Ηω. 
(9.3.18) 
The population inversion condition is satisfied if (9.3.18) holds and the absorption 
becomes negative, or equivalently, there is gain in the medium. The above condition 
(9.3.18) is called the Bernard-Duraffourg inversion condition [16]. Plots of a(hw) 
and (/v - /c) are illustrated [17] in Fig. 9.7. We can see that gain exists in the 
optical spectral region Eg < Ηω < Fc - Fv. The gain spectrum is determined by 
the absorption spectrum a0(ha>) of the semiconductors without optical excitations 
multiplied by the Fermi-Dirac inversion factor, (/v - /c), which accounts for the 
population inversion probability. This factor, fv - /„ has a lower limit —1 at small 
optical energies and has a zero crossing at the quasi-Fermi level separation 
energy, Fc - Fv, then approaches +1 at large energies, as shown in Fig. 9.7. The 
increasing absorption coefficient with increasing energy ϊιω and the decreasing mag-
nitude of |/v —fc\ (dashed line) give a peak gain, which depends on the temperature 
and the effective masses of the electrons and holes near the band edges. 
Figure 9.7 
(a) Optical transitions between conduction band and valence band in the E-k diagram, (b) The 
Fermi-Dirac distributions/v(£) and/c(E). (c) The absorption spectrum a(ho). Note that it is negative for 
Eg < h» < Fc - Fv, where gain exists. 

9.4 
INTERBAND ABSORPTION AND GAIN IN A QUANTUM WELL 
365 
9.4 INTERBAND ABSORPTION AND GAIN IN 
A QUANTUM WELL 
In this section, we consider the interband absorption and gain in a quantum well 
ignoring the excitonic effects due to the Coulomb interaction between electrons 
and holes. The excitonic effects will be considered in Chapter 14. The interband 
absorption or gain can be calculated from (9.1.22) analytically if scattering relaxation 
is not considered. 
9.4.1 
Interband Optical Matrix Element of a Quantum Well 
Within a two-band model, the Bloch wave functions can be described by 
ψα(ν) = ιιν(Γ)€^8ηι(ζ) 
(9.4.1) 
VA 
for a hole wave function in the heavy-hole or a light-hole subband m, and 
ψ„(τ) = Μ(,(τ)β^-φη(ζ) 
(9.4.2) 
for an electron in the conduction subband n. The momentum matrix pba is given by 
Pba = {Ψο\Ρ\Φα) 
where 
ren 
lhm 
/ 
I I 
\ A 
ten 
( 9 A 3 a) 
(IIC|P|KV) \ , k [ 
lhm 
dz φ"η{ζ)8„{ζ) 
(9.4.3b) 
is the overlap integral of the conduction- and valence-band envelope functions. The 
k-selection rule in the plane of the quantum well is still satisfied. The polarization-
dependent matrix element pcv = (HC|P]HV) is discussed in Section 9.5. Here we 
have to take into account the quantizations of the electron and hole energies Ea 
and Eb 
h2k2 
Ea = Ehm-~^ 
(9.4.4a) 
2m* 
E„ = Eg +Em+ 
ξ Α . 
(9.4.4b) 
2m*. 

366 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Note that Ehm < 0 and 
where 
Eb — Ea = E^m + Et, 
Et — Kk\ 
2m* 
■ Eg + Een — Ehn 
(9.4.5a) 
(9.4.5b) 
is the band edge transition energy (k, = 0). The summations over the quantum 
numbers ka and kb become summations over (k/, m) and (kt, n). Because kt = k/ 
in the matrix element (9.4.3a), we find 
« ( M = Co Σ 
I C | 2 | E Ιέ ' Pcv|2S(£fm + Et - Λω) (fv
m - £ ) . 
(9.4.6) 
n,m 
k, 
9.4.2 Joint Density of States and Optical Absorption Spectrum 
We use the two-dimensional joint (or reduced) density of states ρ^Ό, 
00 
00 
d2k, 
(2TT) 2 
1 
TTL? f kt dkt = I 
rf£tPr2D 
(9.4.7a) 
Tfh L, 
(9.4.7b) 
where A is the area of the cross section, ALZ = V, Lz is an effective period of the 
quantum wells, and V is a volume of a period. The delta function gives the contri-
bution at Ehm + Et — hü), and the absorption edges occur at Ηω = Elm. For an 
unpumped semiconductor, /v
m = 1 and f" = 0, we have the absorption spectrum at 
thermal equilibrium a0(hw) 
αο(Αω) = Co V \^m\\e 
· pcv|2p2Dtf(fco> - £ £ ) . 
1 / , Vhm 
n,m 
(9.4.8) 
Because the integration of the delta function gives the step function, shown as H or 
the Heaviside step function, H(x) — 1 for x > 0, and 0 for x < 0. For a symmetric 
quantum well, we find f^m = 8nm using an infinite well model, and the absorption 
spectrum is 
a0(ho)) = C 0|e-p c 
m: 
ifh 
L, 
Tfh L, 
ml 
Tfh L7 
for E%\ <haj< 
Ef2 
for Ef2 < hco < Eg 
for Eg < hü) < Efä 
(9.4.9) 
, etc. 

9.4 
INTERBAND ABSORPTION AND GAIN IN A QUANTUM WELL 
367 
which has a spectrum given by the joint density of states of a two-dimensional struc-
ture. A plot of the above function is shown in Fig. 9.8. 
With carrier injection, the Fermi-Dirac population inversion factor,/™ -f?, has to be 
included, and we obtain the absorption spectrum in the presence of carrier injection 
a(hw) = a0(ha>)[f?(Et = fuo - ££,) -/ c"(£ t = ha> - £ » )]. 
(9.4.10) 
The above gain process can also be understood from Fig. 9.9 and the following analysis 
for carrier populations in quantum wells. 
9.4.3 
Determination of the Quasi-Fermi Levels 
For a given injected electron density n, which is usually determined by the injection 
current and the background doping, Fig. 9.9a, the quasi-Fermi level F c for the elec-
trons can be determined using 
oo 
n = Σ 
N" = Έ f plD(E¥c
n(E)dE 
occupied 
0 
subbands 
Nn=nc\M+e(F<-E™)lk»A 
mtkBT 
«c = 
2 
Trh Lz 
where Nn is the electron density in the nth conduction subband. The carrier concen-
tration is just the area below the function plD(E)fc(E) 
in the top figure of Fig. 9.9b. 
Similarly, the quasi-Fermi level for the holes, Fv, can be determined from 
P = N + N-_N+ = Y^Pm 
m 
oo 
= Σ ^ Σ f 1 -/Γ*)] = Σ f dEtPh(Et)MEt) 
(9.4.12a) 
m 
kt
 
m 
n 
i 
Kh2Lz 
1 a4h(o)l(C0 \έ · pcvl2) 
/ 
/ 
/ 
EB { 
/ 
, 
.— 
^ ^ 
1 
£g+£ei~£hi 
Ε^Ε,χ-Εγα 
Figure 9.8 The stepwise absorption spectrum for a quantum-well structure. 
(9.4.11a) 
(9.4.11b) 
(9.4.11c) 

368 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
pc(E)fc(E) 
Α(£)(1 
-ME)) 
Figure 9.9 (a) Population inversion in a quantum well such that Fc - Fy>tw>E!, 
+ Eet -£ h|.HereF cis 
measured from the valence-band edge where the energy level is chosen to be zero, (b) The products of the 
density of states and the occupation probability for electrons in the conduction band pc(E)fc(E) and holes 
in the valence band Ph(E)fh(E) = pt,(E) (1 -/V(E)) are plotted versus the energy E in the vertical scale. 
Pm=nv\nU 
+ e^-^ABT-j 
_ mlkBT 
Tfh L· 
(9.4.12b) 
(9.4.12c) 
Again, the hole concentration is just the area below the function ph(Zs)/h(£) in the 
bottom figure of Fig. 9.9b. 
9.4.4 
Summary of the Gain Spectrum 
We can write the gain spectrum from (9.4.9) and (9.4.11). Summarizing the 
expressions for the gain spectrum: 
1. Zero linewidth 
g ( M = C0J2K\2\e 
· Pcv|2[/e"(£t = hco-EZ) 
-/ v
m(£, = Λω - ££,)] 
Xf?H(ha>-EZ). 
2. Linewidth broadening (FWHM = 2γ) 
(9.4.13) 
g(h<o) = Q 
oo 
Elcl2U.p2 
n.m 
J 
2°'έ·Ρον|2 
γ/π 
[EZ + Et- hwf + γ2 
x [fc
n(Et) -/™(£t)] 
(9.4.14) 

9.4 
INTERBAND ABSORPTION AND GAIN IN A QUANTUM WELL 
369 
where 
ire γ- 
Ρτ 
,2D 
Tfh L, 
C = j dz<t>n(z)gm(z) 
— 00 
fc
n(Et) = 
f?m 
1 + exp[(£g + Een + -+% - Fc)/kBT] 
ml 
1 + exp[(£hm --^Et- 
Fv)/kBT] 
mt 
(9.4.15) 
(9.4.16) 
(9.4.17a) 
(9.4.17b) 
The proper momentum matrix elements |e · pcv| for bulk and quantum wells are 
discussed in Section 9.5. It is important to note that the momentum matrix element 
is isotropic for bulk cubic semiconductors and it is polarization-dependent for 
(a) 
+2 
+1-
Normalized gain 
- ^ Without broadening 
sv<— With broadening 
1(0). 
/\VK«>) 
<!(0). 
~hco 
Fr-F. 
-fc-f, 
(b) 
+2 
+1 
-1 
Normalized gain 
F„-Fv 
Without 
broadening 
With 
broadening 
Λω 
Figure 9.10 The gain spectra with (dashed curves) and without (solid) scattering broadenings for a 
quantum well with transition involving (a) a single electron and hole subband pair and (b) two electron 
and two hole subbands. The gain is normalized by the peak coefficient of the first step given by the coeffi-
cient in Eq. (9.4.13). 

370 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
quantum well semiconductors. Theory and experiments on polarization-dependent 
gain in quantum well structures based on Kane's model [18] have been investigated 
[19-25]. It is noted that the momentum matrix \e · pcv|2 should be used with care [21] 
because various missing factors exist in the literature. 
9.4.5 
Theoretical Gain Spectrum and Comparison with Experiments 
The gain spectra using (9.4.13) for a zero linewidth and using (9.4.14) for a finite line-
width are plotted in Fig. 9.10a and Fig. 9.10b for transitions between a pair of 
(a) GolnAs/lnP MQWH /_T = 7.0nm Γ=185Κ 
300 
200 
'ζ 
t00 
u 
- 1 0 0 
0.80 
0.85 
0.90 
Energy / eV 
(b) GalnAs/lnP MQWH ^=19ηιτι Γ=100Κ 
400-
3 0 0 -
200-
E 
-? !00-
c 
0-
-100-
0.75 
o7m 
0.85 
Energy / eV 
Figure 9.11 Theoretical and experimental modal gain spectra Fg for both the TE and TM polarizations of 
an Ino.53Gao.47As/InP multiple-quantum-well laser (a) with a well width 70 A at T= 185 K. The sheet 
carrier density is estimated to be 1.48 x 1012cm~2; (b) with a well width 190 A at T= 100K and the 
sheet carrier density 2.27 x 1012cm"2. The second electron and hole subbands are occupied, and they 
contribute to the second peak at the high-energy end. (Reprinted with permission from Ref. [241, © 
1989 IEEE.) 

9.5 
INTERBAND MOMENTUM MATRIX ELEMENTS 
371 
electron and hole subbands and between two pairs of electron and hole subbands. 
Experimental data for quantum-well lasers have been shown to compare very well 
with the above theory based on the parabolic band model [24, 25], as can be seen 
from Fig. 9.11a and Fig. 9.11b. Improvement by the valence-band mixing will be 
discussed in Section 9.8. The materials are In0 53Gao.47As quantum wells lattice-
matched to InP barriers and substrate. We can see at a small carrier concentration, 
in Fig. 9.11a, that only n = 1 electron and hole subbands contributed to the gain. 
The gain for TE polarization is larger than that of the TM polarization 
because most of the holes occupy the heavy-hole subband. At a higher carrier con-
centration in a quantum well with a larger well width in Fig. 9.11b, the second 
electron and hole subbands are occupied and features like double steps appear in 
the TE gain spectrum. 
9.5 
INTERBAND MOMENTUM MATRIX ELEMENTS OF 
BULK AND QUANTUM-WELL SEMICONDUCTORS 
In a bulk semiconductor, the optical matrix element is usually isotropic. However, in 
a quantum-well or superlattice structure, the optical matrix element will depend on 
the polarization of the optical electromagnetic field [19]. In Kane's model [18] for 
the semiconductor band structures near the band edges, as discussed in Section 
4.2, the electron wave vector is originally assumed to be in the z direction. The 
wave functions at the band edges have also been obtained as ||, + | ) for heavy 
holes, ||, ±5) for light holes, and \\, + | ) for spin split-off holes. If the 
electron wave vector k has a general direction specified by (k, θ, φ) in spherical 
coordinates, 
k = ksm 0cos</> x + A: sin 0sin φ y + kcos θζ, 
(9.5.1) 
the band-edge wave functions need be expressed in the general coordinate system, 
and they are listed in Appendix 9A. The band-edge momentum matrix elements 
will be averaged over the solid angle for the bulk semiconductors. For quantum 
wells, the angular average is taken over the x-y plane of quantum wells if the 
growth axis is the z axis. 
9.5.1 
Momentum Matrix Element of a Bulk Semiconductor 
For a bulk semiconductor, we take the average of the momentum matrix element 
with respect to the solid angle du,. For example, the momentum matrix element 
for TE polarization (e = x) due to the transitions from the conduction band 
with spin up (iS ΐ'| to both heavy-hole bands, ||, |) 
and ||,— | ) , 
is 
\{iS f\px\l, 
j / l 2 + \(iS Y\Px\j, -\}'\2 
(one of the two transitions is zero). Here 
the superscript prime (') means that the new z axis is set along the k direction. The 

372 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
average over the solid angle is as follows, 
|έ· Pcvl2 = (|έ · Mc_hh|2) = ^ 
| 
| 
\χ.Μ^\2ήηθάθάφ 
β=Οφ=0 
2π 
= — 
sin θ άθ 
d(f){cos2e cos2<£ + sin20) P; 
2 
0 
0 
1 
3 
P
2
X = Ml 
(9.5.2) 
where 
= 1P2 = üiLpi = Λϋ2 _ Λ fflo£g(£g + Δ) 
Ml = '-P\ = ^P2 
= ( ^ - 1 ) " y g ^ g ; 7 
(9.5.3) 
is the bulk momentum matrix element (squared). The above expression (9.5.3) from 
Kane's model may underestimate the momentum matrix element. In practice, an 
energy parameter Ep for the matrix element is denned, 
E
p = ^ 
(9.5.4a) 
h 
Ml=^Ep 
(9.5.4b) 
where Ev is taken from experimental data and is tabulated in Table C.2 in Appendix C 
at the end of the book. Notice that the above result (9.5.2) is the same for the other 
spin in the conduction band. If we take e = y or z, and average over the solid angle, 
we still obtain Ml because the bulk crystal is isotropic. We could also take the spin-
down component, (iS l'\px\^, \) \ + (iS i'\px\^, — ^) 
, and average over the solid 
angle and obtain Ml as expected. Therefore, a factor of 2 is usually used in the inter-
band transitions when we calculate the optical absorption or gain. 
9.5.2 
Momentum Matrix Elements of Quantum Wells 
Next, we consider quantum-well structures. The optical matrix elements will become 
polarization dependent. The theory and experimental data on the polarization-
dependent gain have been discussed in Refs. 19-23 based on the parabolic band 
model. Improvement of the optical matrix element using the valence-band mixing 
model in quantum wells is discussed in Section 9.8. 
TE Polarization 
Let e = x; that is, the optical field is polarized along the x 
(or y) direction. The optical dipole matrix element is averaged over the azimuthal 

9.5 
INTERBAND MOMENTUM MATRIX ELEMENTS 
373 
angle φ in the plane of quantum wells. We obtain for (iS f'|, 
• M c _ h h | 2 ) = ^ - 
\άφ\χ·Μ^ 
\e · Pc 
c-hh| 
0 
2TT 
1 f 
P2 
— 
d(j>(cos2e cos2<f> + sin2<£) — 
2π J 
2 
o 
„2/>\.*2 
= -(l+cos z0)M£ 
(9.5.5) 
and the same matrix element is obtained for the other spin (iS 4-'|in the conduction 
band. Similarly, for the sum of transitions of an electron with spin j . ' from the con-
duction band to both light-hole bands, we find 
iS 4/ \px 
3 \_V 
2' 2 
iS I' \px\ 
1\' 
2 
1 
1 
-sin20(cos20) + -cos2ö(cos2<£) + -(sin2<£) 
2' 
2 
sin20 + -(cos 20+l) Afi 
5 _ 3 
4 ~ 4 cos20 Λ/, b· 
(9.5.6) 
The above result is the same for both spins (iS 4/| and («5 t'l· Note that a sum 
rule exists, 
\e · Mr_hh|2) + (\e ■ Mc„a\2) 
= 2M£, 
(9.5.7) 
which is independent of the angle 0. 
TM Polarization 
Let e = z 
(\e · Me 
Ζ7Γ 
Z'M, c-hh| 
-sin^Mi 
(9.5.8) 

374 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
(|e · Mt._a,|: 
2ir 
0 
, , ,3 1 
-^sin20 + ^cos20 
1 
■ 2 . 
2 
6 S m 0 + 3 
l+3cos 20 
2 
Ö 
M b · 
«I' |Λ 2' 
(9.5.9) 
The sum of (9.5.8) and (9.5.9) for e = z is still 2M\. The above results (9.5.8) and 
(9.5.9) are the same for both spins in the conduction band. The angular factor 
cos20 can be related to the electron or hole wave vectors by 
cos20 = 
en + 2ml 
(9.5.10) 
for the electron wave vector k = p &t + z km, with Een = h k2
n/2m*e or 
cos20: 
\Ehm\ 
\Ehm\ 
2k} 
2mt 
(9.5.11) 
for the hole wave vector k = p kt + z km, with £/,„ 
fik2 
-s-5?. Note that the hole 
2ml 
energy Ehm is defined to be negative so all of the energies are measured upward. 
An alternative approximation is 
cos20n, 
\Ejm 
Een + \Ehm\ + h2k2 
2m* 
(9.5.12) 
where the reduced effective mass mr defined by 
1 
m* 
1 
1 
= ^: + — 
ml 
m 
(9.5.13) 
has been used. The results of the momentum matrix elements are summarized in 
Table 9.1. It is noted at the subband edges, where kt = 0, that 

9.6 QUANTUM DOTS AND QUANTUM WIRES 
375 
Table 9.1 Summary of the Momentum Matrix Elements in Parabolic Band 
Model (|e.pcv|2= |έ·Μ|2) 
Bulk 
\χ · Pcvl
2= \y · Pcvl
2= |z · Pcvl
2= Ml = —EP 
Quantum Well 
ΤΈ Polarization (e = x or y) 
TM Polarization (e = z) 
\e · Mc.„hh|2) = I (1 + cos2e)M2 
(\e . M ^ 2 ) = ^sin20Mb
2 
4
V 
' ° 
V 
/ 2 
|e.Mc_a,|2 
'5 3 
2 " 
- — -cos Θ 
4 4 
M2 
(|έ · Mt.-ft|2) = - (1 + 3cos26)M2 
Conservation 
Rule 
\x · Mc_„|2\ + (\y ■ MC_A|2\ + (\z · Μ,._Λ|2\ = 3M2, (h = hh or £h). 
|e · Mc^hh|2) + (\e ■ Μ,._«,|2) = 2Μξ 
(a) for TE polarization, the matrix elements are 
,2\ 
=lM2 
|Jc.M c_ h h| 2). _ = - M b
2 
(9.5.14a) 
't,=o 
2 " b 
and (b) for TM polarization, the matrix elements are 
jJc.Mc_fl,|2\ 
=\MI 
(9.5.14b) 
,z.M c_ h h| 2> 
= 0 
(9.5.15a) 
2 \ 
τ»/»2 
\z-Mc^) 
=2Μξ. 
(9.5.15b) 
These matrix elements are useful to study the excitonic absorptions in quantum wells 
and they will be used in Chapter 14 where we discuss electroabsorption modulators 
using quantum-confined Stark effects. 
9.6 QUANTUM DOTS AND QUANTUM WIRES 
The theory developed in Sections 9.3 and 9.4 can be easily extended to quantum dots 
[26-54] and quantum wires [55-57]. Since the early theories of quantum-dot lasers 
[26-28] and the predictions of low threshold current density, low chirp, and high 
differential gain, progress on the experiments has been impressive, leading to the 

376 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
first electrical injection quantum dot lasers [29, 30]. It is remarkable that even though 
quantum dots suffer from inhomogeneous broadening, which results in the broaden-
ing of the gain spectrum and the reduction of the gain peak, quantum-dot lasers have 
demonstrated low threshold current density and high temperature stability [30,32,34]. 
In this section, we discuss the elementary model for quantum dots and quantum wires. 
We will discuss quantum-dot and quantum-wire lasers in Section 10.5. 
9.6.1 
Quantum Dots 
We first assume that the dots are uniformly distributed in order to have a simple 
picture of the dot density and density of states, Fig. 9.12. We have an average of 
one dot per volume of V = LxLyLz, whereas each dot takes a size a x b x c along 
the x, y, and z directions. We then have the 3D and 2D (areal) dot densities for 
ease of counting the dots and carrier density: 
N™ =- 
= 
LxLy^ 
iV?D = 
'"dot 
1 
UU 
(9.6.1) 
The fill factor is defined as 
F3D = abc 
72D 
ab 
LXLy 
(9.6.2) 
LxLyLz 
For electrons in the conduction subband, labeled by (mn£), we have the wave function 
<ACU, y , z) 
Λ/8 
. /ιηπ 
sin I 
x 
Jabc 
V- a 
)sin(^7) sin l — z )«c(r) 
(9.6.3) 
A single layer of 
quantum dots 
Figure 9.12 
Schematics of a layer of quantum dots distributed uniformly in a simplified model for 
counting the number of the quantum dots and the density of states. A three-dimensional (3D) and two-
dimensional (2D) fill factor can be defined. 

9.6 QUANTUM DOTS AND QUANTUM WIRES 
377 
in a quantum dot, and wc(r) is the Bloch periodic part of the conduction-band wave 
function. We have assumed an infinite barrier potential for the quantum dot. The cor-
responding conduction-band energy is 
ET* = Ec0 + h 
2m*. 
/mir\2 
/ηπ\2 
(ίττ 
(ν)+(τ) 
(9.6.4) 
where Ec0 is the conduction-band edge (= Eg for an unstrained semiconductor in a 
simplified model). The electron density n is related to the dot density and how the 
states of each dot are occupied: 
" = νΣ^£) = <2Σ/^Γ") 
Ν2Ό 
> ;vdot 
c 
tn.nl Σ-
(9.6.5) 
where Fc is the quasi-Fermi level for the conduction band. Similarly, the valence-
band wave function and corresponding energy is 
\/8 
. fm'TT \ 
. (Wir \ 
. (1'ir 
ψν(χ, y, z) — , 
sin 
x sin —— y sin — z 
wv(r) 
(9.6.6) 
Jabc 
\ a 
I 
\ b 
I 
V c 
ι'η'έ' 
-■vO 
2 « h 
m'W 
/n'W 
fi'ir 
(9.6.7) 
which is measured from the valence-band edge, £vo ( = 0 for unstrained sample). A 
similar equation as (9.6.5) holds for the hole density with the quasi-Fermi level in the 
valence band. 
The interband momentum matrix element is 
(i/jc\e · p|(/0 ~ (uc\e · p\uv)δ^,δηη>db 
(9.6.8) 
which can be derived using p = (h/i)V 
and the fact that (MC|MV) = 0 and 
(uc\e · p|«v) = e · Pcv which is related to the bulk momentum matrix element or 
Ep matrix parameter. The interband absorption spectrum a{haj) is given by 
a(h<o) = Ο , - ^ Σ 
|<</# · ρ\Ψν)\2δ(Ε™( - E?"'f - fto>)(/v -fc) 
mn£ m'n' 
2Nm 
^
^
Σ 
I* ' P c v l ' ^ r ' " ET' 
- M ( / v 
-fc). 
(9.6.9) 

378 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
The interband transition energies occur at 
pimnl) 
pimnt) 
nimnl) _ 
c1 
2mt (ν)+(τ) 
(9.6.10) 
where N^t is the number of quantum dots per unit area (#/cm2) and Lz is the thick-
ness of the layer containing the dots. When there is no carrier injection, fv = 1 and 
fc = 0, the absorption spectrum is 
2/V2D 
αο(Αω) = C o — ^ J ^ \e · Pcv|2L (£&"<> - 
ftco) 
(9.6.11a) 
γ/7Γ 
L(£ - hoi) 
(E - ha>f + y2 
(9.6.11b) 
where we have replaced the delta function by a Lorentzian lineshape function 
with a full width at half maximum 2γ to account for homogeneous broadening 
caused by carrier scattering processes. In the presence of carrier injection, we 
insert/v and/c, 
a(ha>) C o ^ E Ιέ · PcvfM^ - H (Λ -fc)· 
(9.6.12) 
Inhomogeneous Broadening 
When inhomogeneous broadening due to the size 
variation of quantum dots is taken into account, the above formula is replaced by 
"=2τ*Σί dEG(E)fc(E) 
(9.6.13) 
where G(E) is a Gaussian function given by 
G(E) 
λ 
- (£-£™')2/2<7-t? 
27r<rc 
(9.6.14) 
which has a mean value centered at E™"e and a full width at half maximum (FWHM) 
equal to 2\/2 In 2ac ~ 2.35crc. A similar expression holds between the hole concen-
tration p and/v, which determines the quasi-Fermi level Fv. If the effect of inhomo-
geneous broadening is taken into account, the absorption/gain expression requires 
an integral 
(•00 
a{hw) = Co Σ \ 
άΕ\1 · Pc,\2D(E)L(E - Λω)(/ν -fc) 
(9.6.15) 
m n f JO 

9.6 QUANTUM DOTS AND QUANTUM WIRES 
where 
1 
D(E) 
2Ν2Ό 
z i vdot 
-(£-E™*)2/2o-2 
σ} + σ. 
Ιττσ 
2 
379 
(9.6.16a) 
(9.6.16b) 
which accounts for inhomogeneous broadening effects on the electron and hole 
energies. 
Example: Absorption and Gain of a Quantum-Dot Structure 
Figure 9.13a 
shows the absorption spectrum of a uniform quantum dot sample at various injection 
carrier densities (n = p) when we consider only the homogenous broadening. The 
parameters are a = fe = 200 A, c = 50 A, N?° 
5 x 10!0 cm"2, Lz = 50 A = c, 
and 2γ = 30 meV. The other parameters are m* = 0.023m0, m^ = 0.40mo, 
(a) 1500 
E 
1000 
.o 
r 
500 
1 
o 
-500 
O -1000 -
-1500 
1.05 
" NM=5x10'°(cm-2) 
/ \ 
/ / \ 
— ~ z ~ ~ ~ ^ 
j 
n = p=0.5Ndolv 
, 
n = p=0"-~" 
„ 
n=p=2NM 
,n=p=1.SNM 
\n=p=1Naa 
^~~-Ct^~ 
/ 
/ 
-
(b) 
500 
0 -
-500 
NM=5x10m(cnr*) 
_ ^ - n = p=2/v4! 
π = ρ=1.8ΝΜ 
η=Ρ=1.5ΝΑ 
n = p=1.3/Vdot v 
n=p=0 
^ 
1.10 
1.15 
Photon energy (eV) 
(C) 1500 
1000 
1.20 
1.05 
1.10 
1.15 
Photon energy (eV) 
i - 
500 
Waoi= 5 x 1 0 1 0( c m" 2) 
n=p=2/Vdol 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
Photon energy (eV) 
1.20 
Figure 9.13 
Optical absorption and gain spectra of a quantum-dot structure for (a) only homogeneous 
broadening with a FWHM of 2 γ = 30 meV; (b) and (c) both homogenous and inhomogeneous broaden-
ings with increasing carrier density from low (b) to high (c) values. We assume the following parameters: 
Ndoi = 5 x 10'°cm~ 2, Lx = Ly = 200 A, Lz = 50 Ä, and the full width at half maximum of the homo-
geneous broadening is 2y -
(b) and (c). 
: 30 meV for (a). An inhomogeneous broadening width of 50 meV is used in 

380 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Eg = 0.354 eV, Ep = 22.2 eV, nr = 3.51. Figure 9.13b shows the plot of the optical 
gain spectrum at various injection carrier densities when we include the inhomo-
geneous broadening with a linewidth (FWHM) (i.e., 2v/2Tn2ac) = 50meV. We 
have erc = 21.2 meV, σν = 1.2 meV, and σ = 21.25 meV. We can see that the 
quasi-Fermi level separation (or the transparency energy between the gain and 
absorption) has a blue shift due to band filling as the carrier density is increased. 
This blue shift is similar to that in a quantum well or bulk semiconductor. Further 
increase of carrier density is shown in Fig. 9.13c. 
Figure 9.14 [53] shows an example of the layered structure grown by mole-
cular epitaxy from NanoSemiconductor GmbH in Germany [42, 52]. There are 
10 layers of quantum dots, and the dot density is about 5.0xl0 1 0cm - 2 per 
dot layer. The sample has a /Mype doping of 5.0xl017cm~3 in the GaAs 
barrier of each period. By modeling the dots as microdisks, the electron and 
hole subband energies can be calculated, and then the optical gain spectrum at 
various carrier density. Figure 9.15a shows the energy band profile and 
subband energy levels [53]. Figure 9.15b shows the calculated optical gain spec-
trum and comparison with the measured data, with the 2D electron density per 
dot layer as the input parameter at each bias current. The comparison allows 
for the extraction of the carrier density. The intrinsic loss appears to be small 
(5 cm-1). The ionized acceptor concentration is taken as 3.0 x 10 ncm - 2 per 
dot layer in the model. 
Metal 
10 layers . 
P-doped GaAs (400 nm) P = 2.0E19 
Digital Graded P-doped AlGaAs (20nm) P = 3.0£18 
P-doped AIo.35Gao.55As (lOOOnm) P = 1.0E18 
P-doped Al 0 3 5Ga 0 6 5As (500 nm) P = 5.QE\1 
GaAs(9nm) P = 5.0£17 
P-doped GaAs (lOnm) P = 5.0E17 
GaAs(14nm) 
I n 0 . 1 5 G a 0 . 8 5 A s ( 5 n m > 
GaAs Barrier (33 nm) 
N-doped Al0 35Ga0.65As (500 nm) Λ/=5.0£Ί7 
N-doped Al035Ga0.65As (lOOOnm) /V = 3.0E18 
Digital Graded N-doped AlGaAs (20nm) ΛΓ=3.0Ε18 
N-doped GaAs Buffer (500nm) Ar=3.0£18 
N-doped GaAs substrate 
Metal 
Figure 9.14 
A schematics of a quantum-dot layered structure. (Reprinted with permission from [531, 
CS 2006 IEEE.) 

9.6 QUANTUM DOTS AND QUANTUM WIRES 
381 
(a) 
£■£=1.0906 
Δ£ 
£ s 
ΛΕ 
E* = -0.3335 
(b) 
2 0 
10 
T o 
g 
f-10 
"ce 
a> 
•S - 2 0 
ε _3o 
Φ 
Z - 4 0 
- 5 0 
GaAs barrier 
c = 0.55 ev 
= 0.524 ev 
v = 0.35 ev 
InGaAs QW 
F 
1 
(\£.ΊΛ 
C* 
1 ΠΛ/ΛΛ r, 
£ C 3 — 1.U4U1 e 
eV 
V 
EC2 = 0.9749 ev 
F 
n eoo/i a 
■"Ci — *J.oyy4 e V 
E% = 0.354 eV 
InAsQD 
. £ ? = 0 
E™. - - 0 0801 « v 
IT 
f\ f\QQ 
*%H2 — -"t^.tJoo 4 e V 
£HH3 =-0.0971 eV 
ir 
— _fi 1 
^HHWL- - 0· 1 869 eV 
1 
1 
» 
' 
1 
' 
· 
o 
l=10mA 
° 
l=15mA 
^^^^^. 
» 
I = 20 mA 
^ f ^ T ^ ^ ^ i 
- v I = 25 mA 
ff 
J^^jSSKi^^^^^Z. 
o l=30rriA ^^Xjr^^^JSBBeMij 
^m^^^M 
jF 
* S ^ 
B b ^ ^ a h . 
a^^ "■—""■ "2"=3·2 * 10'0 c m ^ 
;/ 
°Tp!ir r^ 
· - · n,„ = 6.2x1010 cm-2 -
F* 
t5 
p 
2Ü 
# 
_ . 
n20 = 7.3x10™ cm-2 
— - - a,D = 8.3 x 10">cnrr2 -
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
■ 
1 
1 
1 
1200 
1230 
1260 
1290 
1320 
Wavelength (nm) 
1350 
Figure 9.15 (a) Calculated energy levels of a quantum dot modeled as a disk, (b) The measured (solid) 
and calculated (dashed) optical gain spectra at various (surface) electron density per quantum-dot layer are 
plotted. (Reprinted with permission from [53] © 2006 IEEE.) 
9.6.2 
Quantum Wires 
We consider a quantum wire [55-58] of a cross section a x b, Fig. 9.16. The areal 
density of the wires in the x—y cross section is 
M* 
1 
LXLy 
(9.6.17) 

382 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Figure 9.16 
Schematics of a quantum-wire structure. The wire density in the x-y plane is defined as 
I l(LxLf) and the wire cross section is a x b. The z axis is assumed to be the axis of the wire. 
The fill factor is 
The length of wire is L 3> a, b. 
ab 
LxLy 
- 
. (mir \ . (πττ \ 1 
ik 
Φα = ~^sm\^x) 
sm\~b~y) 
~ff e 
"c(r) 
ab 
mir 
\ . ίη'ττ 
\ 
a j 
in{~yy)7L 
ab 
Φ\ = ~r^=smi ~~x I sini ~r~y 
eik';zuv(r) 
where 
2 
r 
Ε?&)=ΕΛ+±; 
^^=^-L· 
{^i<ii^ 
ηί'π\ 
{η'π\ 
ι Λ 
The electron density is given by the occupation of the wire states: 
(9.6.18) 
(9.6.19a) 
(9.6.19b) 
(9.6.20a) 
(9.6.20b) 
m,n,kz 
m,n 
oo 
= 
Nwt^dEpl
e
O(E)fc(E) 
f dk 
fflfciE) 
(9.6.21a) 

9.6 QUANTUM DOTS AND QUANTUM WIRES 
383 
Similar expression holds for the hole density in the valence band. At zero tempera-
ture, the Fermi function is 1 for energy below the quasi-Fermi level, Fc, and 
(9.6.21) can be integrated analytically: 
n = Nw 
Y,y/K=^ 
V " 
m,n 
The interband matrix element is 
(Ψο\ϊ · Pl<M = ("c|e · 
v\uy)8mml8nn,8k^. 
(9.6.22) 
(9.6.23) 
The absorption coefficient for a wire density of Nwr (number of wires per 
cross-sectional area perpendicular to the wire direction) is then 
00 
a(hco) = C0NmjJ2 
f Ä 
\e · Pcv|2 «(*?"(**) - <"(**))</* ~/c) 
LJ m,n J 
\T) 
— 00 
= Q Nm £ \e ■ ρον\2
Ρ1°(Ηω - ££»>)</„ -/ c) 
where the one-dimensional joint density of states is 
AD(hw-E£) 
E„ + 2m* CTKT)2 
(9.6.24a) 
(9.6.24b) 
(9.6.24c) 
(a) 
! 
1 
-Nwr=1x1012(cm"2) 
- n = p = 0 
-
- L. 
E12= E21 
E22 
-
v 
(b) 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
Photon energy (eV) 
2.0 
Nwr = 1x1012(cnT2) 
n = p=3x1018(crrr5) 
0 
i 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
Photon energy (eV) 
2.0 
Figure 9.17 
Schematics of (a) the optical absorption spectrum and (b) gain spectrum of a GaAs 
quantum-wire structure. We assume that a = b = 100 A, the wire density is Nm = 1 x 1012 cm~2. The 
parameters used are ml = 0.065m<,, mh* = 0.34m,,, E = 1.424eV. We obtain E'cl = 1.5588 eV. In (b), 
we assume a carrier density of » = p = 3.0x 10 
cm 3 and obtain Fc — E" = 0.1258eV, Fv — 
E"= 
- 0.0253 ev. 

384 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
The above simplified model neglects the homogeneous and inhomogeneous 
broadenings of quantum wire states in the optical transitions. If all of those broad-
enings are taken into account, the ID density of states will be broadened and the 
absorption or gain spectrum will be broadened as well. In Fig. 9.17, we plot a sche-
matic diagram for (a) the optical absorption and (b) gain spectrum of a layer of 
GaAs quantum wires using (9.6.24), with the linewidth broadenings ignored. The 
major features are the ID density of states, which behaves like a l/^hw 
— E™" 
above each subband edge, and the presence of gain when population inversion 
is achieved. 
9.7 
INTERSUBBAND ABSORPTION 
In an n-doped quantum-well structure, intersubband absorption is of interest 
because of its applications to far-infrared photodetectors [59-61], for example. In 
this section, we study the infrared absorption [62] due to intersubband transitions 
in the conduction band of a quantum-well structure with modulation doping. We 
assume that the doping is not large enough so that screening or many-body effects 
due to the electron-electron Coulomb interaction [63] can be ignored. The far-
infrared photodetector applications using intersubband transitions will be discussed 
in Section 15.5. 
9.7.1 
Intersubband Dipole Moment 
Consider the intersubband transition between the ground state 
φα(τ)= 
M c ( r ) ^ 4 > , ( z ) 
(9.7.1) 
and the first excited state 
eK ■ P 
4>b{r) = ttc<(r)^=- <k(z) 
(9.7.2) 
where the transverse wave vectors kt = kxx + kyy, k[ = k'Jc + kfy and the position 
vector p = xx + yy in the quantum-well plane have been used, Fig. 9.18. The 
optical dipole moment is given by 
v-ba = («fekrl«^> 
e'K · P 
e'kt · P 
~ («elite-) 
(—=Γφ2\ετ\—7Γφι 
^ Λ ν & Ν Φ ι ) ? 
(9·7·3) 

9.7 
INTERSUBBAND ABSORPTION 
Figure 9.18 
(a) A simple quantum well with a small doping concentration, (b) A modulation-doped 
quantum well with a significant amount of screening due to a large doping concentration, (c) The 
subband energy diagram in the k, space. A direct vertical transition occurs because of the k-selection 
rule in the plane of quantum wells. 
which has only a z component, where we have used the orthonormal conditions 
{φ2\φ\) = 0, and (uc\uc>) ~ 1. 
The dipole moment is z-polarized because the x and y components of the intersub-
band dipole moment in (9.7.3) are zero. Therefore, we obtain nonzero absorption 
coefficient a(fuo) only for e = z (TM polarization). 
9.7.2 
Intersubband Absorption Spectrum 
The energies of the initial state and the final states are, respectively, 
2ml 
Eb=E2 
+ hkf 
2m* 
(9.7.4) 
as shown in Fig. 9.18c 
α(ΐιω) = nrceoJ V ΈΈ 
\e-Vba\ 
Ύ 
k, 
k! T1 (Eb -Ea- 
hw)1 
;(fa-fb) 
- U < V (E2 - EX - Ηωγ + yi V Σ & /*> 
nrce0J (E2 - E 
^2il2r 
hoS)2 + y2 
k, 
(Ni -N2) 
(9.7.5) 

386 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
where 
M2, = (φ2\βζ\φλ) = I φ2{ζ) ez φλ{ζ) dz 
(9.7.6) 
is the intersubband dipole moment and Nt is the number of electrons per unit volume 
in the ith subband, which has been derived in (9.4.1 lb) 
m^J_r 
iEF_Ei)/kBT 
Trh2L· L 
TrttLz 
(9.7.7) 
In the low-temperature limit such that (£F
 — £;) ^> kBT, we obtain 
m* 
Ni = —^-{Er,-Ei) 
(9.7.8) 
irhLz 
and for occupations of the first two levels, 
ω λ 
1^2, | 2γ 
a(ha>) = 
' ~ " ' 
- — § - (E2 - Et). 
(9.7.9) 
\nTce0J (E2 -Εχ- 
Ηω)ζ + γ2 \π1ϊ 
lLJ 
An integrated absorbance is given by 
00 
A = f a(hv)d(hw) ~ ( - ^ - ) \μη\2π{Νχ 
- N2) 
(9.7.10) 
J 
yirceo/ 
o 
where we have replaced the integration limits (0, oo) by (— oo, oo) for the Lorentzian 
function in (9.7.5), and hcoji = E2 — E\ has been used. 
Example 
Let us estimate the peak absorption coefficient in an n-type doped GaAs 
quantum well using an infinite barrier model with a well width Lz = 100 A. The first 
two subband energies and wave functions are (m* = 0.0665 mo) 
56.5 meV, 
φλ(ζ) = \/—sinl — z 
1ml\Lj 
\j Lz 
\LZ 
E2 = 4£, = 226 meV, 
φ2(ζ) = «/— sin l-^z 
L, 
\L, 
The intersubband dipole moment is 
\h.\ = e I Φ2{ζ)ζφ\{ζ)άζ = 
-7^-ieLz 
16 
9 ^ 
o 
= -18eA = -2.88xl0" 1 8 
Cm. 

9.7 
INTERSUBBAND ABSORPTION 
387 
U8. 
If the carrier concentration N is 1 x 10 cm "', we can assume that only the first 
subband is occupied and check if the second subband population N2 is indeed 
small. We calculate 
EF - £, = kBT[exp(NLz/Ns) 
- 1] = 78meV 
where 
Ns="V*L 
= 7.19x10" cm-2. 
Λ 1 5 . 
We can check that N2 = (Ns/Lz) In {1 + exp[(£> - E2)/kBT]} = 2.4 x 10'- cm 
<C N. If N2 is not negligible, we have to use N^ + N2 = N to determine the Fermi 
level EF assuming that the first two subbands are occupied. 
The peak absorption coefficient occurs at Ηω « E2 — Et = 170 meV. The peak 
wavelength is λ « 1.24/0.170 = 7.3 μπι. Assume that the linewidth is 2γ = 
30 meV and the refractive index nT = 3.3. We find 
^peak 
\th.\ I 
nrce0 
y 
-(Ν\-Ν2)π 
1.015 x 104cm" 
In principle, the peak absorption coefficient increases with the doping concentration N. 
However, if the concentration is too high, the screening, band bending, and many-body 
effects will be important as they affect the energy levels, therefore, the peak absorption 
wavelength. The occupation of the second level N2 will also decrease the absorption. 
Example 
We consider GaAs/Al0.3Gao.7As superlattice structures as shown in 
Fig. 9.19 with a well width W and a barrier width b. The absorption spectrum is 
(a) Bound-to-bound transition 
C2 
(b) Bound-to-continuum miniband transitions 
Figure 9.19 
(a) Intersubband bound-to-bound transition in a superlattice. (b) Intersubband bound-to-
continuum transitions in a superlattice. 

388 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
shown in Fig. 9.20a for a structure with W= b = 100 A and in Fig. 9.20b for W = 
100 Ä and b = 20 A. As the barrier width b is reduced from 100 A to 20 A, the inter-
miniband width is broadened because of the strong coupling of well states. We assume a 
surface concentration of M, = 2 x 10ucnT 
T = 77K, and a linewidth 2γ = 15 meV. 
2 0 
(b) 1000 
2 0 
(c) 
«. ISO -
'S loo -
•5 so 
80 
140 
Photon energy (meV) 
2 0 0 
Bound-to-bound transition 
80 
140 
Photon energy (meV) 
200 
< 
Bound-to· 
j "^ 
i 
^W 
/ 
\ 
/ 
X 
/ 
* 
I 
*· 
/ 
/A 
;< ·. 
■^ 
/ / 
v ' 
\ 
; . 
1 ' ' " ' 1 ' 
'>'"«"" 
continuum transition ' 
-C1-C2 
C1-C3 " 
C1-C4 
· 
d e s 
C1-C6 
. 
C1-C7 
' 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
Photon energy (meV) 
Figure 9.20 The absorption coefficients for intersubband bound-to-bound transition in a superlattice for 
(a) W= b = 100 A (thick barriers, small miniband widths) and (b) W= 100 A, b= 20 A (thin barriers, 
large miniband widths), (c) The absorption coefficient of the intersubband bound-to-continuum miniband 
transitions is shown for W = 40 A and b = 300 A. 

9.7 
INTERSUBBAND ABSORPTION 
389 
If we reduce the well width Wto 40 A, the intersubband transitions will occur from 
the bound to the continuum minibands. The resultant absorption spectrum is a 
broader spectrum with a longer energy tail at the high-energy side, as shown 
in Fig. 9.20c. Here we use the same Ns = 2 x 10" cm~2 and a linewidth 2γ = 
40 meV. The broad spectrum is contributed by a larger y as well as the transitions 
to multiple minibands. 
9.7.3 Experimental Results 
In Fig. 9.21, we show the experimental data for five different samples by Levine et al. 
[60]. The material parameters are listed as follows: 
Sample 
Well Width (A) 
Barrier Width (Ä) 
x 
JVD(10l8/cm3) 
A 
B 
C 
E 
F 
40 
40 
60 
50 
50 
500 
500 
500 
500 
50 
500 
0.26 
0.25 
0.15 
0.26 
0.30 
0.26 
1 
1.6 
0.5 
0.42 
0.42 
(a) 
Samples A, B, C 
Sample E 
Sample F 
T= 300 K 
8 
10 
12 
Wavelength λ (μιτι) 
Figure 9.21 
(a) Energy band profiles for samples A, B, C, E, and F. (b) Absorption coefficients for the 
five samples in (a). Note that the absorption coefficients of samples A, B, C (left vertical scale) are smaller 
than those of samples E and F using the right scale. (Reprinted with permission from [601, copyright © 
1993 American Institute of Physics.) 

390 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Samples A, B, and C were designed for the bound-to-continuum transition. Sample E 
was designed for bound-to-bound state transition and F for bound-to-quasibound 
state transition. The bound-to-bound transition (sample) E has a large peak absorption 
spectrum with a narrow linewidth. Sample F has a narrower spectrum than those of 
the bound-to-continuum transitions in samples A, B, and C. These samples result in 
different responsivities because the carrier collection by the electrodes also play an 
important role. For example, the responsivity of sample F is larger than that of 
sample E because the electrons arriving at the final (quasi-bound) state can easily 
be collected compared with those in the final bound state of sample E. 
9.7.4 
Intersubband Quantum Cascade Laser 
Intersubband lasers using a structure as shown in Fig. 9.22 as a period were demon-
strated [64] in 1994. The laser structure was grown with the Al0 4gIn0^As/Gao 47 
In0.53As heterojunctions lattice matched to InP substrate by molecular beam 
epitaxy (MBE). There are 25 periods of the active undoped regions, with graded 
regions consisting of an AlInAs/GalnAs superlattice with a constant period shorter 
than the electron thermal de Broglie wavelength. Electrons are injected through the 
45 A AlInAs barrier into the £3 energy level of the active region as shown in 
Fig. 9.22. The reduced spatial overlap of the E3 and E2 wave functions and the 
strong coupling to the E\ level in an adjacent well ensure a population inversion 
between these states. The laser operates between the E3 and E2 levels with an 
energy difference E3 — E2 « 295 meV or an operation wavelength « 4.2 μιη. The 
applied bias field is around 100kV/cm, and the band diagram is as shown in 
Fig. 9.22, where the graded region is near flat-band condition. The estimated tunnel-
ing time into the first trapezoidal barrier is around 0.2 ps. Therefore, the filling of the 
state £3 is very efficient, and the intersubband optical-phonon-limited relaxation time 
45Ä 8Ä 35Ä35Ä30Ä28Ä30Ä 
- * - 
Active region 
— — »■■< Digitally -*-
graded alloy 
Figure 9.22 
A period of a quantum cascade laser [64] using intersubband transition between £3 and 
E2. The barriers are Alo.4gIno.52As and the wells are In0 47Gao.53As materials. The calculated values are 
£3 - E2 = 295 meV and E2 - Ey = 30 meV. 

9.8 GAIN SPECTRUM IN A QUANTUM-WELL LASER 
391 
T32 is estimated to be around 4.3 ps at this bias field with a reduced overlap integral. 
Because τ32 is relatively long, the population inversion can be achieved because the 
lower state empties with a fast relaxation time (around 0.6 ps) due to the adjacent 28 Ä 
GalnAs well with E\ state. The relaxation between the E2 and Ελ states is very fast 
because the energy separation is equal or close to an optical phonon energy so that 
scattering occurs with essentially zero momentum transfer. Finally, the tunneling 
out of the last 30 A barrier is extremely fast (smaller than 0.5 ps). The laser emits 
photons at a wavelength of 4.2 μπι with a peak power above 8 mW in pulsed oper-
ation. The operation temperature was as high as 88K in 1994. Since then, significant 
progress above room temperature operation has been made [65]. We will discuss type 
I quantum-cascade lasers in more detail in Section 11.4. 
9.8 
GAIN SPECTRUM IN A QUANTUM-WELL LASER 
WITH VALENCE-BAND MIXING EFFECTS 
In Section 9.4, we presented a simplified model for the interband gain of a quantum-
well laser based on the parabolic band structures. In quantum wells, valence-band 
mixing effects between the heavy-hole and light-hole subbands are important, and 
the subband structures can be highly non-parabolic, especially for strained 
quantum wells as discussed in Sections 4.8 and 4.9. In this section, we present a 
general theory for the gain spectrum in quantum wells taking into account the 
valence-band mixing effects [66-70]. The theory is applicable to both strained and 
unstrained quantum-well lasers. 
9.8.1 
General Formulation for the Gain Spectrum with Valence 
Band Mixing 
Our starting equation follows (9.1.22) for the absorption spectrum with the delta 
function replaced by a Lorentzian function (9.1.28) to account for scattering 
broadenings, 
2 
ΊΤΡ 
C0= 
— 
(9.8.1b) 
nrceo m^w 
where the quantum numbers are \a) = |k<„ σ) for initial states in the valence band 
and \b) = |kfc, η) for final states in the conduction band. The summations over the 
spins of the initial (hole) states σ and the final (electron) states η have been written 
out explicitly instead of a simple factor of 2. Here η = f, or 4- for the conduction 
band, and σ is more complicated. For the formulation using the block-diagonalized 
Hamiltonian (see Section 4.8), σ — U for the upper Hamiltonian with an eigenfunction 

392 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
in the mth subband denoted by 
^ ( k t , r) = ^ 
[gWfc, z)|l> + £\h, 
z)|2>] 
(9.8.2) 
and σ= L for the lower Hamiltonian with an eigenfunction in the /nth subband 
denoted by 
^ ( k „ r) = ^ 
[gO>(fe, z)|3) + £»(fet, z)|4)]. 
(9.8.3) 
The nth conduction subband wave function is denoted by 
^ ( k [ , r) = ?-jL 4>„(z)\Sv) 
V = t or ; . 
(9.8.4) 
Here |5η)(= uc(r)) denotes the spherically symmetric wave function of the Bloch peri-
odic part of the electron state. We have to label the quantum number k,, by (kt, m) for 
the mth subband, where m refers to the quantum number for the z-dependent wave func-
tions. We label k^ as (k(, n) for the nth conduction subband. 
The matrix element contains a kt-selection rule when we take the inner product, 
kt = k(. Therefore, we can write 
«»»> = C<4E Σ Σ Ιέ · pil' 
/ Γ ^ 
2 (fr -/c") 
(9-8.5) 
where 
EZiK) = Een(kd - E'T
m(kx) + Eg 
(9.8.6) 
is the energy difference between the nth electron subband and the mth hole subband 
at kt. Here 
hk2 
Een(kt) = Een(0) + —± 
(9.8.7) 
2m* 
is taken to be parabolic in the conduction subband. The non-parabolic valence 
subband structures are described by E^(kt) obtained from the upper (σ = U) or the 
lower (σ = L) Hamiltonian. 

9.8 GAIN SPECTRUM IN A QUANTUM-WELL LASER 
393 
9.8.2 
Evaluation of the Momentum Matrix Elements 
The momentum matrix element is defined as 
\*·ρζ\2 = 
\(*?\ί·ρ\η) 
(9.8.8) 
with the factor δ^ k< dropped. Here we list the definitions of the old and new basis 
functions and their transformation relations, which have been discussed in Chapter 4. 
Old Bases 
New Bases 
3 3\ 
2' 2 / 
- . - ) = 
2 2 / 
2' 2 / 
3 - 3 \ 
2' Ύ/ ~ 
= -^|(X + ilOt> 
-7=6
l(X + 
iYU)+T6 
= ^ | ( X - i T ) t ) + ^ 
~ | ( x - i y ) l > . 
|zt> 
|z;) 
|2) = - / r 
|3> = 0* 
|4> 
3 3 
2' 2 
3 - 3 
2' 2 
3 1 
2' 2 + /3 
3 
- 1 
2' ~T 
3 1 
2' 2 
3 3 
2' 2 
3 -1_' 
2' T" 
3 - 3 
2' 2 
1 
, Ύ Μ ^ 
V5 
1 
0 = - ^ ^ . 
V2 
(9.8.9a) 
(9.8.9b) 
The matrix element \e · p ^ | can be found as shown in the following example. For 
*-p£|2 = IWl*l*Z>l 
TE polarization (e = x or >>) and 77 = ΐ , σ = £/, we obtain 
i2 
^^K^Ig^X^tiftin + ^k^XstiÄiz)!2 

394 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Α*ΙΡΙΛΜΙ^{<Ψ.Ι02 
(9.8.10) 
where we have used the following relations. 
Spin ΐ 
(S\\Px\\)=-j=(S\px\)C) 
(S\\px\2)=-fj=(S\Px\X) 
(S\\px\2,)=^=(S\Px\X) 
{S \\px\A) 
=^{S\px\X) 
Spin 4-
V2 {s\Px\x) 
(Si\px\2)=^=(S\px\X) 
(S±\Px\3) 
V6 
a" 
(S\P*\X) 
{Si\px\4)=—(S\Px\X) 
(st|ft|i>=o 
<St|Pz|2> 
ß*(S\Pz\Z) 
(St\Pz\3) 
= 
^/-ß*{S\Pz\Z) 
( S t | P z K ) = 0 . 
(5 4 - | Λ | 1 > = 0 
<S4.|p,|2> = /3A/-<S|pz|Z) 
<5|| Λ|3)=|8 λ/-<5| Λ|Ζ> 
(s;|Pz|4) = o. 
(9.8.11a) 
(9.8.11b) 
Using the axial approximation, the band structures are isotropic in the kx — ky 
plane; we, therefore, write 
oo 
2ir 
1 j* ktdkt I* άφ 
2ττ' 
OO 
ΖΤΓ 
^-^ 
1 f ktdkt f . 
(9.8.12) 
0 
0 
The term containing the cos 2φ factor in (9.8.10) will not contribute to αφώ) because 
its integration over φ vanishes. Let us pull out the factor |(5|ρ*|Χ)|2 in the matrix 

9.8 
GAIN SPECTRUM IN A QUANTUM-WELL LASER 
395 
element, where 
\{S\Px\X)f=3Ml="£pi=^Ep 
n 
L 
(9.8.13) 
is defined in terms of the Kane parameter P or an energy parameter Ep. The 
expression for αφω) can be cast in the form 
a(hw) = C0-^2Y^ 
σ 
n,m 
~2^ 
™( t} 
γ/π 
[E^w-hw] 
+r i/r-f") 
(9-8-14) 
Here a factor of 2 for sum over η is explicitly shown, as we find the final expression 
|2 . 
for the magnitude squared \e · p ^ | is independent of η. 
(a) TE polarization: e = x 
*C(*t) = - W»)2+\W2)7 
{Φη\^)2 + {Φη\^Ϋ 
Ml 
Mi 
a=U 
a=L. 
(9.8.15) 
(b) TM polarization: e = z 
MZnih) = (Φη\€) Ml 
= WZfMl 
σ= U 
(9.8.16) 
9.8.3 
Final Expression for the Gain Spectrum and Numerical Examples 
The optical gain is obtained from the negative of the absorption function g(hw)-
-a(hai). Therefore, we have 
g(o>) 
ώ 
σ 
n,m «r 
(ku 
γ/ττ 
fe(*t)-H +^ 
if"-fr) 
(9-8-17) 
Notice that the form (9.8.17) or (9.8.14) is similar to (9.4.8) using the parabolic band 
model. For a symmetric quantum well without an applied electric field, we find that 
the two valence bands with σ = U and σ = L are degenerate. The matrix elements 
turn out to be the same for σ = U and L. Therefore, the sum over σ can be replaced 
by a factor 2, and only g<p and g^ have to be calculated with the corresponding 
energy dispersion relation E^ikt). 

396 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
0 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
0.04 
0.05 
0.06 
Parallel wave vector (1/A) 
( u ) 
0 1 
' ■ i ■ | 
i ■ i ■ { < i i i i i i i i i i i i ■ i ■ ■ i i 
0 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
0.04 
0.05 
0.06 
Parallel wave vector (1/Ä) 
Figure 9.23 
(a) The average of the square of the momentum matrix normalized by the bulk matrix element 
for TE and TM polarizations for the transition between the first conduction subband (C1) and the first heavy-
hole subband (HH1) or the first light-hole subband (LH1). (b) The valence subband structures of the 
Ino^Gao^As/Inj-^GajAsi-yPv quantum well (L^ = 60 A) lattice-matched to an InP substrate. 
In Fig. 9.23a, we plot the matrix elements 2M{kt)/Ml using Eqs. (9.8.15) and 
(9.8.16) for the TE polarization and the TM polarization for the first conduction 
band to the first heavy-hole subband (Cl-HHl) and to the first light-hole subband 
(C1-LH1) transitions in a mo^Gao^As/IrM-^Ga^Asi-yPy quantum well lattice-
matched to InP substrate with a well width of 60 Ä. The factor of 2 here accounts 
for sum over σ of the hole spins in the valence band (not in the conduction band). 
The conduction band spin degeneracy of a factor of 2 is always included in the 
density of states. The barrier Ini j-Ga^Asi-^Py has a band-gap wavelength of 
1.3 μπι and its parameters can be obtained from Table C.2 in Appendix C. The 

9.8 GAIN SPECTRUM IN A QUANTUM-WELL LASER 
397 
(a) 7001 
' ■ 
i . ■ . | ■ i ■ 
■ 
750 
800 
850 
900 
950 
Photon energy (meV) 
(b) 700 L ■ ■ ■ < 
750 
800 
850 
900 
950 
Photon energy (meV) 
Figure 9.24 The linear gain versus the photon energy for (a) TE and (b) TM polarization at two different 
carrier concentrations. 
valence subband structures are plotted in Fig. 9.23b with HH1 as the top valence 
subband. The non-parabolic behavior is clearly seen. 
The gain spectra for both TE and TM polarizations are plotted in Fig. 9.24a and 
Fig. 9.24b for two carrier concentrations n. The surface carrier concentration is 
ns = nLz, and the gain coefficient in a period of a total width Lj = Lz + Lh is 
proportional to 1/Lr instead of \/Lz in (9.8.17). Here Lb is the thickness of the 
barrier. We can see that for a given carrier density, the TE gain coefficient is 
larger than that of the TM gain coefficient because the holes will occupy the 
lowest subband, which is heavy hole in nature, and the conduction-to-heavy hole 
dipole matrix is mostly TE polarized as can be seen from Fig. 9.23a. Theoretical 
gain model taking into account the valence-band mixing and strain effects 
has compared very well with experimental data measured by the Hakki-Paoli 
method [10-13]. 

398 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
9.8.4 
Spontaneous Emission Spectrum and Radiative Current Density 
Comparing (9.2.33) with (9.8.17), the spontaneous emission rate per unit volume per 
unit energy interval (s 1cm~3eV~1) taking into account valence-band-mixing 
effects in quantum wells can be written as 
00 
Σ Σ [ ^ » ) ?
 
γ / % 
/"0-/Γ) (9.8.18) 
o 
which is similar to g(wi) except for the prefactor in the parenthesis and the Fermi-
Dirac occupation factors f" (1 -JT"). The total spontaneous emission rate per unit 
volume (s ' cm"3) is to sum up the average of three polarizations (2 x TE + 
TM)/3 and then integrate over the emission spectrum to obtain 
oo 
**spon — I ' 
v (h(o)d(ho). 
(9.8.19) 
o 
A radiative current density (A/cm2) for a semiconductor laser is defined as 
yrad = qd Rsp 
(9.8.20) 
where q = \.6x\019C 
is a unit charge, and d is the thickness of the active region 
where an injection current provides the electrons and holes for radiative recombination. 
APPENDIX 9A: COORDINATE TRANSFORMATION OF THE BASIS 
FUNCTIONS AND THE MOMENTUM MATRIX ELEMENTS 
If the electron wave vector k has a general direction specified by (fc, θ, φ) in spherical 
coordinates, 
k = £sin0cos(^>.x:-|-&sin Θsin φ y + k cos Θ ζ, 
(9.Α.1) 
we find the band-edge wave functions are as follows, using the coordinate transforma-
tions for the spatial variables, X, Y, and Z, in (4.2.30) and keeping the spins in their 
primed coordinates. 
Conduction Band 
Heavy-Hole Band 
3 
3 \ ' 
-1 
\iS ir'} and 
\iS |'>. 
(9.A.2) 
r 2/-V2lix' + 
iY')Y) 
= —= |(cos 0cos φ — ism φ)Χ + (cos 0sin φ + icos φ)Υ — sin 0Z)|t') 
A/2 

APPENDIX 9A: COORDINATE TRANSFORMATION OF THE BASIS FUNCTIONS 
399 
3 
3 \ ' 
1 
r 
2/-V2lix'-iY'n,) 
= —= |(cos 0cos φ + /sin φ)Χ + (cos 0sin φ — /cos φ)Υ — sin 0Z)|4-'}. 
(9.A.3) 
Light-Hole Band 
\-^ = T*vx' + iY'n') + 
&Y) 
= -η= |(cos 0cos φ — /sin φ)Χ + (cos 0sin φ + /cos φ)Υ — sin 0Z)|4/) 
v6 
+ y d sin 0cos φ X + sin 0sin φ Y + cos 0 Z)\f) 
= —;=|(cos 0cos</> + /sin<£)X + (cos 0sin φ — icos φ)Υ — sin 0Z)|t') 
v6 
+ ^-|sin0cos</>X + sin0sin$K + cos0Z)|V)· 
(9.A.4) 
Spin-Orbit Split-Off Band 
li)''TiVX' 
+ 'fn') + Ti^ 
I 
Λ.Ι\ 
= —= |(cos 0cos φ — /sin φ)Χ + (cos 0sin φ + /cos φ)Υ — sin 0Z)|4-') 
v 3 
+ — |sin 0cos φX + sin 0sin φ Y + cos 0 Z)|t'} 
v3 
7 I /\ 
= —^= |(cos 0cos φ + isin ψ)Χ + (cos 0sin φ — /cos φ)Υ — sin 0Z)|f') 
v3 
- —j= |sin 0cos φ X + sin 0sin φ r + cos 0 Z) 11'). 
(9.A.5) 
v3 
We keep the primes in 14-') and |f') for spins in the new coordinate system for ease of 
calculations of the dipole matrix elements, as will be seen later. 

400 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
Consider a quantum-well structure with the growth axis along the z direction. In 
general [19], the z axis for the p-state functions does not have to coincide with the z 
axis for the quantum-well structures. However, when averaged over the angle in the 
plane of the quantum well, it is found that the same matrix elements for both polarizations 
give the same results as those obtained assuming that both z axes coincide with each other. 
To calculate the optical momentum matrix element 
M = (MC|P|"V) =p c v 
h d 
i dx uv ) +y{ u, 
h_d_ 
i dy 
Uy 
z( uc 
h d 
i dz 
(9.A.6) 
with polarization dependence, we evaluate e-M for e = x or y for TE polarization, and 
e = z for TM polarization. Here uc is \iS f') or \iS 4·') and wv can be whh or Up^. 
Define the Kane parameter P and a momentum matrix parameter Px as 
P = 
—(iS\pz\Z)=—Px 
m0 
m0 
Px = (iS\px\X) = (iS\py\Y) = (iS\pz\Z). 
(9.A.7) 
Then for conduction to heavy-hole transitions, we obtain IVt-.hh as 
3 
3 \ ' 
iS ΐ' |p| - , -) 
= —[(cos 0cos φ — isin φ) χ 
+ (cos 0sin φ + /cos φ) y - sin Θ z\Px/V2 
3 
3 \ ' 
(cos Θsin φ — /cos φ) y — sin Θ z]Px/V2 
«t'|Pl|.-|)' = o 
«I'IP||. |)' = o. 
For conduction to light-hole transitions, JV^-a are 
(9.A.8) 
at'lPlj. ä 
(sin Θ cos φ x + sin Θ sin φ y + cos Θ z)Px 
3 
1\' 
fl 
/ 5 | ' | p | - , 
—-) 
= d-(ύηθοοζφ 
x + sin θ$ϊηφ)> +cosO z)Px 
3 
1\' 
1 
i'5 t'|Plö> 
— ö ) =—7=[(cos0cos</» + i'sin</»)it 
+ (cos Θ sin φ — i cos φ) y — sin Θ z]Px 

PROBLEMS 
401 
3 
1\' 
- 1 
iS 4-' |p| - , - ) = —-F= [(cos öcos φ — i sin φ) x 
2 
2/ 
^ 6 
+ (cos 0sin φ + icos φ) y — sin Θ ζ\Ρχ. 
(9.Α.9) 
PROBLEMS 
9.1 
In classic physics, the equation of motion for a charge e in the presence of an 
electric field E and a magnetic flux density B is described by the Lorenz force 
equation 
d 
— p = F = e(E + v xB) 
at 
where p = mv. The magnetic flux density B and the electric field in classic 
electromagnetics are expressed in terms of the vector and scalar potentials 
(see Chapter 6) 
<9A 
B = V x A 
and E = - V 0 - — . 
Show that using the Hamiltonian in the presence of the electromagnetic field 
Η=^-(ρ-βΑ)2+εφ 
2m 
and the equations for the Hamiltonian 
d 
_dH 
d 
_ _dH_ 
dt ' 
dpi 
dt ' 
dri 
lead to the classic Lorenz force equation. If we choose Coulomb gauge, we 
have V · A = 0, and φ is zero because p = 0 for the optical field. The periodic 
potential V(r) is the background static potential that is not coupled to the 
vector potential A for the optical field and is added to the Hamiltonian for 
completeness. Therefore, 
H = ^(p-eA)2 
+ V(r). 
2m 
9.2 (a) For a semiconductor laser operating at 0.8 μπι with an optical output 
power of 10 mW coming from a 20 μπι χ 1 μιη cross-sectional area, esti-
mate the electric field strength E0 using P = ωΑο&οΡ/2μ = £ο ητ/2μοε, 
where nT = 3.4. Calculate kop and AQ. 

402 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
(b) Repeat (a) for 1.55-μπι laser wavelength for the same power. Assume the 
other parameters are unchanged. 
9.3 To prove (9.1.25), we start by proving the x component of the equation: 
d 
m0 
mo —x = — (xtto - HQX). 
at 
in 
The procedure is to apply the right-hand side of the above equation on the 
wave function Ψ satisfying, Η0Ψ = ΕΨ. Show that 
^(xffo - Ηοχ)Ψ = - | - Ψ = ρχΨ. 
in 
ι ox 
Then use px = niodx/dt. 
9.4 
Derive the relation (9.2.36) between the spontaneous emission rate per unit 
volume per unit energy interval rspon (δω) and the gain coefficient g(ha)). 
Check the units on both sides of (9.2.36). 
9.5 
Derive the Bernard-Duraffourg population inversion condition. 
9.6 (a) Find the quasi-Fermi levels Fc and Fv for the bulk structure at zero temp-
erature in terms of the injection carrier densities n and p, respectively. 
(b) Derive an expression for the gain spectrum g(hwi) at T= OK. 
9.7 
Use the material parameters in Appendix C (page 803) for GaAs materials, 
except that the band gap at zero temperature is assumed to be 1.522eV. 
Neglect the light-hole band for simplicity. 
(a) Find the numerical values for the quasi-Fermi levels for the electrons and 
holes in a bulk semiconductor in the presence of carrier injection at zero 
temperature assuming n = p = 5 x 1018 cm~3. 
(b) Calculate and plot the gain spectrum for part (a). 
9.8 
Repeat Problem 9.7 for a quantum-well structure with an effective well width 
120 A. Assume an infinite well model and a constant momentum matrix for 
simplicity. Label the major transition energies in your plots. 
9.9 The E—k relations of a semiconductor material with a non-parabolicity 
conduction band can be described as 
Conduction band: 
Valence band: 
h2B 
fcvW_ 
2m* Uü 
Κ0+Κ0] 
1 

PROBLEMS 
403 
where ko and ß are positive material parameters describing the non-
parabolicity. 
(a) Derive an expression for the interband absorption spectrum a(h(o) for 
a bulk structure at zero temperature. Assume a constant momentum 
matrix. 
(b) Plot the absorption spectrum a(ha>) versus the normalized energy 
φω - Eg)/(ikl/2m*) 
for (i) β = 0 and (ii) β = 0.1 m*/m* where m* is 
the reduced effective mass. 
9.10 
Consider a GaAs quantum well with an effective well width L= 100Ä 
(assuming an infinite well model). The electron and hole energies are 
Ehmik) 
where k2 — k1 + k2 m* = 0.0665 mo, mj, = 0.34 mo. The other parameters 
are £ g = 1.424 eV; m0 = 9.1xl0" 3 1 
kg; h = 1.0546 x 10 3 4J· s = 
0.6582 x 10~15eVs;(7= 1.60218 x 10"19 C; nr = 3.68; and ε0 = 8.854 x 
10~12F/m. 
(a) Calculate the subband energies, Een(0) and Ehm(0), for the first two 
electron subbands and hole subbands, respectively. 
(b) Using the normalized wave functions and the subband energies of the first 
two electron and hole subbands, calculate the absorption spectrum due to 
the interband transitions within the infinite well model. Assume the 
matrix element \e · pfcv|2 is a constant. (The overlap integrals between the 
electron wave functions /„(z) and the hole wave functions gm{z) are 
assumed to satisfy the relation J/„(z) gm(z) dz = 1 if« = m, and 0 if« φ m.) 
(c) Assume that \e · p c v| 2 — mo£p/6, and Ep = 25.7 eV for GaAs. Calculate 
the magnitudes of the absorption coefficients (1/cm) for part (b) at (i) 
ha> = 1.43 eV, (ii) Ηω = 1.55 eV, and (iii) ho = 1.75 eV. 
9.11 
(a) Estimate the constants C0 = ire2/(η^εοη^,ω), 
the momentum matrix 
element \e · ptv|2 = 1.5M2, = 1.5(moEp/6), the reduced density of states 
p2D = m$/(Trh2Lz), and the absorption coefficient (TE polarization) 
a0(h<o) for a GaAs quantum well with an effective well width Lz = 100 A 
near the absorption edge. 
(b) Repeat (a) for an Ino.53Gao.47As quantum well with Lz = 100 A near the 
absorption edge. iS,
g(Ino.53Ga0.47As) = 0.75 eV. 
9.12 
(a) Plot the optical matrix elements for both TE and TM polarizations (see 
Table 9.1) versus the transverse wave number &, for a GaAs quantum 
well with an effective well width Lz = 100 A. 
Kk2 
Ehm(0) - iik2 
2rt 

404 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
(b) Compare the optical matrix elements in (a) with those of another GaAs 
quantum well with a smaller effective well width Lz — 40 A. 
9.13 
If a Gaussian lineshape function is used in the expressions for optical absorp-
tions, what is the complete expression for the Gaussian function to replace the 
delta function 
δ\Ε0-Εν-Ηω)Ί 
9.14 
Assume an infinite barrier height model for a quantum well structure with 
an effective well width L^= 100 Ä. The well is doped p-type with a doping 
concentration of NA = 2.0 x 1018/cm3 and Γ=300Κ. Consider only one 
conduction and one heavy-hole subband. Assume ml = 0.067m0, and 
mih = 0.34w0. (a) Calculate the quantized electron and hole subband energies. 
(b) If we know the injected electron density, n = 1.0 x 1018 cm 3, calculate the 
quasi-Fermi levels for electrons and holes, respectively. Hint: Use charge 
neutrality condition for holes, (c) Calculate and plot the optical gain spectrum 
(no linewidth broadening), (d) Compare the above gain spectrum and peak 
value with those of an undoped quantum well (Λ^ = 0) at the same electron 
concentration n—p. Comment on the effects of p-type doping. 
9.15 
Consider a semiconductor laser structure with the active region consisting of 
one quantum well layer and one quantum dot layer. You can assume that 
the well width and the quantum dot height are both 80 A so we can 
compare the gain coefficient per well width (or per quantum-dot layer thick-
ness). Assume that the ground state transition energy is the same for both 
the well and the dots and that the active regions are GaAs for both cases 
(for simplicity because the dots are usually InAs). 
(a) What is the absorption coefficient aQw of the QW layer at the ground state 
transition energy using a step-like density of states (ignoring the linewidth 
broadening for simplicity)? 
(b) What is the required quantum dot density (#/area) such that the absorption 
coefficient agD of the QD layer at the ground state transition energy is the 
same magnitude as that in part (a) if we assume that a Lorentzian line-
shape with a full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of 30 meV is used? 
You can assume that the optical matrix elements and the prefactors 
such as refractive index (or C0 in the text) are the same for both QW 
and QD. 
9.16 
Compare the interband and the intersubband absorption coefficients in a semi-
conductor quantum-well structure. Discuss the optical matrix elements, the 
density of states, and the absorption spectra. 
9.17 
(a) To calculate the intersubband absorption in the n-type modulation-doped 
GaAs/Alo 3Gao.7As quantum well with a well width of 100 A, we use the 
following procedures: 
(i) The ground-state energy E\ for the first conduction subband for a 
finite barrier model can be calculated numerically. We can then define an 

REFERENCES 
405 
effective well width Leff such that 
2m* V^eff 
Find Leff for this GaAs/Alo.3Gao.7As quantum-well structure. 
(ii) 
Using the infinite well model with an effective well width Leff from 
part (i), calculate the second subband energy E2 and the intersub-
band dipole moment 
M2\ = \e\ φλ{ζ) ζφ2{ζ)άζ 
where the integration is over the width Leff. 
(iii) Calculate the absorption coefficient a for a doping density ND = 
3 x 10 1 7cm^ 3 assuming that only the first subband is occupied. 
Assume that the refractive nr = 3.6, T= 77K, and the linewidth is 
30meV. 
(b) Repeat part (a) for an Ino.53Gao.47As/InP quantum-well structure with a 
well width of 100 A and the same doping density. Use the parameters 
such as band gaps and the electron effective masses from the Table C.3 
(page 804) on the Physical Properties of InGaAs alloys in Appendix C. 
Assume 
AEC = 40%A£g. 
Compare 
the results with 
the 
GaAs/ 
Alo.3Gao.7As system and comment on the differences. 
REFERENCES 
1. M. Planck, Verh. dt. Phys. Ges. 2, 202 and 237 (1900). 
2. A. Einstein, Ann. d. Phys. 17, 132 (1905). 
3. W. Heitler, The Quantum Theory of Radiation, Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK, 1954. 
4. R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, 3rd ed., Clarendon, Oxford, UK, 2000. 
5. H. Haken, Light, vol. 1: Waves, Photons, Atoms, p. 204, Chapter 7, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam, 1986. 
6. G. H. B. Thompson, Physics of Semiconductor Laser Devices, Chapter 2, Wiley, 
New York, 1980. 
7. H. C. Casey, Jr., and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part A: Fundamental 
Principles, Chapter 3, Academic Press, Orlando, 1978. 
8. G. Lasher and F. Stern, "Spontaneous and stimulated recombination radiation in semicon-
ductors," Phys. Rev. 133, A553-A563 (1964). 
9. S. L. Chuang, J. O'Gorman, and A. F. J. Levi, "Amplified spontaneous emission and 
carrier pinning in laser diodes," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 29, 1631-1639 (1993). 
10. C. S. Chang, S. L. Chuang, J. Minch, Y. K. Chen, and T. Tanbun-Ek, "Amplified spon-
taneous emission spectroscopy in strained quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Selected 
Topics Quantum Electron., Special issue on Applied Optical Diagnostics of 
Semiconductors 1, 1100-1107 (1995). 

406 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
11. W. Fang, M. Hattendorf, S. L. Chuang, J. Minch, C. S. Chang, C. G. Bethea, and 
Y. K. Chen, "Analysis of temperature sensitivity in semiconductor lasers using gain 
and spontaneous emission measurements," Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 796-798 (1997). 
12. J. Minch, S. H. Park, and S. L. Chuang, "Theory and experiment of InGaAsP and 
InGaAlAs long-wavelength strained quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
35,771-782(1999). 
13. T. Keating, S. H. Park, J. Minch, X. Jin, S. L. Chuang, and T. Tanbun-Ek, "Optical gain 
measurements based on fundamental properties and comparison with many-body theory," 
J. Appl. Phys. 86, 2945-2952 (1999). 
14. H. C. Casey, Jr., and F. Stern, "Concentration-dependent absorption and spontaneous 
emission of heavily doped GaAs," J. Appl. Phys. 47, 631-643 (1976). 
15. B. W. Hakki and T. L. Paoli, "Gain spectra in GaAs double heterostructure injection 
lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 46, 1299-1306 (1975). 
16. M. G. A. Bernard and G. Duraffourg, "Laser conditions in semiconductors," Phys. Stat. 
Sol. 1, 699-703 (1961). 
17. A. Yariv, Quantum Electronics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1989. 
18. E. O. Kane, "Band structure of indium antimonide," J. Phys. Chem. Solids 1, 249-261 
(1957). 
19. M. Yamanishi and I. Suemune, "Comment on polarization dependent momentum matrix 
elements in quantum well lasers," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 23, L35-L36 (1984). 
20. M. Asada, A. Kameyama, and Y. Suematsu, "Gain and intervalence band absorption in 
quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-20, 745-753 (1984). 
21. R. H. Yan, S. W. Corzine, L. A. Coldren, and I. Suemune, "Corrections to the expression 
for gain in GaAs," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 213-216 (1990). 
22. H. Kobayashi, H. Iwamura, T. Saku, and K. Otsuka, "Polarization-dependent gain-current 
relationship in GaAs-AlGaAs MQW laser diodes," Electron. Lett. 19, 166-168 (1983). 
23. M. Yamada, S. Ogita, M. Yamagishi, K. Tabata, N. Nakaya, M. Asada, and Y. Suematsu, 
"Polarization-dependent gain in GaAs/AlGaAs multi-quantum-well lasers: Theory and 
experiment," Appl. Phys. Lett. 45, 324-325 (1984). 
24. E. Zielinski, F. Keppler, S. Hausser, M. H. Pilkuhn, R. Sauer, and W. T. Tsang, "Optical 
gain and loss processes in GalnAs/InP MQW laser structures," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 25, 1407-1416 (1989). 
25. E. Zielinski, H. Schweizer, S. Hausser, R. Stuber, M. H. Pilkuhn, and G. Weimann, 
"Systematics of laser operation in GaAs/AlGaAs multiquantum well heterostructures," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 969-976 (1987). 
26. Y. Arakawa and H. Sakaki, "Multidimensional quantum well laser and temperature depen-
dence of its threshold current," Appl. Phys. Lett., 40, 939-941 (1982). 
27. Y. Arakawa and A. Yariv, "Theory of gain, modulation response, and spectral linewidth in 
AlGaAs quantum well lasers," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 1666-1674 (1985). 
28. M. Asada, Y. Miyamoto, and Y. Suamatsu, "Gain and threshold of three-dimensional 
quantum-box lasers," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 1915-1921 (1986). 
29. D. Bimberg, N. Kirstaedter, N. N. Ledenstov, Zh. I. Alferov, P. S. Kop'ev, and 
V. M. Ustinov, "InGaAs-GaAs quantum dot lasers," IEEE J. Sei. Top. Quantum 
Electron. 3, 196-205 (1997). 

REFERENCES 
407 
30. N. Kirstaedter, N. N. Ledentsov, M. Grundmann, D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, 
S. S. Rumimov, M. V. Maximov, P. S. Kop'ev, Zh. I. Alferov, U. Richter, P. Werner, 
U. Gösele, and J. Heydenreich, "Low threshold, large to injection laser emission from 
(InGa)As quantum dots," Electron. Lett. 30, 1416-1417 (1994). 
31. M. Grundmann, O. Stier, and D. Bimberg, "InAs/GaAs pyramidal quantum dots: strain 
distribution, optical phonons, and electronic structure," Phys. Rev. B 52, 11969-11981 
(1995). 
32. H. Shoji, K. Mukai, N. Ohtsuka, M. Sugawara, T. Uchida, and H. Ishikawa, "Lasing at 
three-dimensionally quantum-confined sublevel of self-organized In/sub 0.5/Ga/sub 
0.5/As quantum dots by current injection," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett, 7, 1385-1387 
(1995). 
33. M. Sugawara, "Theory of spontaneous-emission lifetime of Wannier excitons in meso-
scopic semiconductor quantum disks," Phys. Rev. B 51, 10743-10754 (1995). 
34. N. Kirstaedter, O. G. Schmidt, N. N. Ledentsov, D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, 
A. Y. Egorov, A. E. Zhukov, M. V. Maximov, P. S. Kopev, and Z. I. Alferov, "Gain 
and differential gain of single layer InAs/GaAs quantum dot injection lasers," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 69, 1226-1228 (1996). 
35. M. Grundmann, N. N. Ledentsov, O. Stier, J. Bohrer, D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, 
P. S. Kop'ev, and Zh. I. Alferov, "Nature of optical transitions in self-organized InAs/ 
GaAs quantum dots," Phys. Rev. B 53, R10511 (1996). 
36. N. N. Ledentsov, V. A. Shchukin, M. Grundmann, N. Kirstaedter, J. Bohrer, O. Schmidt, 
D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, A. Yu. Egorov, A. E. Zhukov, P. S. Kop'ev, S. V. Zaitsev, 
N. Yu. Gordeev, Zh. I. Alferov, A. I. Borovkov, A. O. Kosogov, S. S. Ruvimov, 
P. Werner, U. Gösele, and J. Heydenreich, "Direct formation of vertically coupled 
quantum dots in Stranski-Krastanow growth," Phys. Rev. B 54, 8743-8750 (1996). 
37. M. Grundmann and D. Bimberg, "Formation of quantum dots in twofold cleaved edge 
overgrowth," Phys. Rev. B 55, 4054-4056 (1997). 
38. M. Grundmann and D. Bimberg, "Theory of random population for quantum dots," Phys. 
Rev. B 55, 9740-9745 (1997). 
39. L. V. Asryan and R. A. Suris, "Inhomogeneous line broadening and the threshold current 
density of a semiconductor quantum dot laser," Semicond. Sei. Technol., 11, 554-567 
(1996). 
40. L. V. Sryan, and R. A. Suris, "Charge neutrality violation in quantum-dot lasers," IEEE J. 
Sei. Topics Quantum Electron. 3, 148-157 (1997). 
41. L. V. Asryan and R. A. Suris, "Temperature dependence of the threshold current density of 
a quantum dot laser," IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 34, 841-850 (1998). 
42. V. M. Ustinov, N. A. Maleev, A. E. Zhukov, A. R. Kovsh, A. Yu. Egorov, A. V. Lunev, 
B. V. Volovik, I. L. Krestnikov, Yu. G. Musikhin, N. A. Bert, P. S. Kop'ev, Zh. I. Alferov, 
N. N. Ledentsov, and D. Bimberg, "InAs/InGaAs quantum dot structures on GaAs 
substrates emitting at 1.3 μιτι," Appl. Phys. Lett, 74, 2815-2817 (1999). 
43. M. Sugawara, K. Mukai, and Y. Nakata, "Light emission spectra of columnar-shaped 
self-assembled InGaAs/GaAs quantum-dot lasers: Effect of homogeneous broadening 
of the optical gain on lasing characteristics," Appl. Phys. Lett., 74, 561-1563 (1999). 
44. A. Sakamoto and M. Sugawara, "Theoretical calculation of lasing spectra of quantum-dot 
lasers: effect of homogeneous broadening of optical gain," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 
12, 107-109(2000). 

408 
OPTICAL PROCESSES IN SEMICONDUCTORS 
45. A. Stintz, G. T. Liu, H. Li, L. F. Lester, and K. J. Malloy, "Low-threshold current density 
1.3 μπι InAs quantum-dot lasers with the dots-in-a-well (DWELL) structure," IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett. 12, 591-593 (2000). 
46. D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann, and N. N. Ledentsov, Quantum Dot Heterostructures, Wiley, 
New York, 2001. 
47. D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann, N. N. Ledentsov, M. H. Mao, Ch. Ribbat, R. Sellin, 
V. M. Ustinov, A. E. Zhukov, Zh. I. Alferov, and J. A. Lott, "Novel infrared quantum 
dot lasers: theory and reality," Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 224, 787 (2001). 
48. N. N. Ledendsov, "Long-wavelength quantum-dot lasers on GaAs substrate: from media to 
device concepts," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 8, 1015 (2002). 
49. M. Sugawara, H. Ebe, N. Hatori, M. Ishida, Y. Arakawa, T. Akiyama, K. Otsubo, and 
Y. Nakata, "Theory of optical signal amplification and processing by quantum-dot semi-
conductor optical amplifires," Phys. Rev. B 69, 235332-1 to 235332-39 (2004). 
50. K. Mukai, Y. Nakata, K. Ohtsubo, M. Sugawara, N. Yokoyama, and H. Ishikawa, "1.3-μηη 
CW lasing of InGaAs-GaAs quantum dots at room temperature with a threshold current of 
8 mA," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 11, 1205-1207 (1999). 
51. A. Fiore, U. Oesterle, R. R Stanley, R. Houdre, F. Lelarge, M. Ilegems, R Born, 
W. Langbein, D. Birkedal, J. M. Hvam, M. Cantoni, and F. Bobard, "Structural and elec-
trooptical characteristics of quantum dots emitting at 1.3 μπι on gallium arsenide," IEEEJ. 
Quantum Electron. 37, 1050-1058 (2001). 
52. S. S. Mikhrin, A. R. Kovsh, I. L. Krestnikov, A. V. Kozhukhov, D. A. Livshits, 
N. N. Ledentsov, Y. M. Shernyakov, I. I. Novikov, M. V. Maximov, V. M. Ustinov, 
and Z. I. Alferov, "High power temperature insensitive 1.3 μπι InAs/InGaAs/GaAs 
quantum dot lasers," Semicond. Sei. Technol., 20, 340-342 (2005). 
53. J. Kim and S. L. Chuang, "Theoretical and experimental study of optical gain, refractive 
index change, and linewidth enhancement factor of p-doped quantum-dot lasers" IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron., 42, 942-952 (2006). 
54. J. Kim and S. L. Chuang, "Small signal cross-gain modulation of quantum-dot semicon-
ductor optical amplifiers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., 18, 2538-2540 (2006). 
55. E. Kapon, D. M. Hwang, and R. Bhat, "Stimulated emission in semiconductor quantum 
wire heterostructures," Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 430-433 (1989). 
56. A. Chavez-Pirson, H. Ando, H. Saito, and H. Kanbe, "Polarization properties of a vertical 
cavity surface emitting laser using a fractional layer superlattice gain medium," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 62, 3082-3084 (1993). 
57. H. Ando, S. Nojima, and H. Kanbe, "Band-edge optical-absorption spectra of gaas 
quantum wires calculated by multiband effective-mass theory," J. Appl. Phys. 74, 
6383-6390 (1993). 
58. T. Kojima, S. Tanaka, H. Yasumoto, S. Tamura, and S. Arai, "Evaluation of optical gain 
properties of GalnAsP/InP compressively strained quantum-wire lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 
38, 6327-6334 (1999). 
59. L. C. West and S. J. Eglash, "First observation of an extremely large dipole infrared tran-
sition within the conduction band of a GaAs quantum well," Appl. Phys. Lett. 46, 
1156-1158(1983). 
60. For a review, see B. F. Levine, "Quantum-well infrared photodetectors," J. Appl. Phys. 74, 
R1-R81 (1993). 

REFERENCES 
409 
61. M. O. Manasreh, Ed., Semiconductor Quantum Wells and Superlattices for Long-
Wavelength Infrared Detectors, Artech House, Norwood, 1993. 
62. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Calculation of linear and nonlinear intersubband optical 
absorption in a quantum well model with an applied electric field," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-23, 2196-2204 (1987). 
63. S. L. Chuang, M. S. C. Luo, S. Schmitt-Rink, and A. Pinczuk, "Many-body effects on 
intersubband transitions in semiconductor quantum-well structures," Phys. Rev. B 46, 
1897-1899(1992). 
64. J. Faist, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, C. Sirtori, A. L. Hutchinoson, and A. Y. Cho, "Quantum 
cascade laser," Science 264, 553-556 (1994). 
65. F. Capasso, R. Paiella, R. Martini, R. Colombelli, C. Gmachl, T. L. Myers, 
M. S. Taubman, R. M. Williams, C. G. Bethea, K. Unterrainer, H. Y. Hwang, 
D. L. Sivco, A. Y. Cho, A. M. Sergent, H. C. Liu, and E. A. Whittaker, "Quantum 
cascade lasers: Ultrahigh-speed operation, optical wireless communication, narrow line-
width, and far-infrared emission," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 511-532 (2002). 
66. D. Ahn, S. L. Chuang, and Y. C. Chang, "Valence band mixing effects on the gain and the 
refractive index change of the quantum well laser," J. Appl. Phys. 64, 4056-4064 (1988). 
67. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Optical gain in a strained-layer quantum-well laser," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 24, 2400-2407 (1988). 
68. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Optical gain and gain suppression of quantum-well lasers with 
valence band mixing," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 13-24 (1990). 
69. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "The theory of strained-layer quantum-well lasers with bandgap 
renormalization," IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 30, 350-365 (1994). 
70. C. S. Chang and S. L. Chuang, "Modeling of strained quantum-well lasers with spin-orbit 
coupling," IEEE J. Selected Topics Quantum Electron., Special issue on Semiconductor 
Lasers 1, 218-229 (1995). 


10 
Fundamentals of Semiconductor Lasers 
Semiconductor lasers are important optoelectronic devices for optical communication 
systems. For a historical account of the inventions and development of semiconductor 
lasers, see Refs. 1-3. The first semiconductor lasers were fabricated in 1962 using 
homojunctions [4-7]. These lasers had high threshold current density (e.g., 19,000 
A/cm2) and operated at cryogenic temperatures. The estimated current density [2] 
for room temperature operation would be 50,000 A/cm2. The concept of heterojunc-
tion semiconductor lasers was realized in 1969-1970, with a low threshold current 
density (1600 A/cm2) operating at room temperature [8-11]. These double-hetero-
structure diode lasers provide both carrier and optical confinements, which 
improve the efficiency for stimulated emission, and make applications to optical 
communication systems practical as transmitters. 
In the 1970s, the concept of quantum-well structures for semiconductor lasers was 
proposed and realized experimentally [12-15]. The first single and multiple quantum-
well lasers were grown successfully by liquid phase epitaxy (LPE) [13, 14] by 
Holonyak's group at the University of Illinois in 1977, although the metal-organic 
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) [15] and molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) 
[16] are commonly used in recent years. The threshold current density was reduced 
[16] to about 500 A/cm2. The reduction of the confinement region for the 
electron-hole pairs to a tiny volume in the quantum-well region improves the laser 
performance significantly. The quantum-well structures provide a wavelength 
tunability by varying the well width and the barrier height. These devices are also 
excellent practical examples for textbook problems on basic quantum mechanics 
(i.e., particle in a box model). 
In the late 1980s, strained quantum-well lasers were proposed to improve the laser 
performance [17, 18]. Superior diode lasers using strained quantum wells reduced 
[19] the threshold current density to 65 A/cm2 at room temperature. Further reduction 
in threshold current density using strain effects has been possible [20]. An interesting 
note is that the threshold current density of semiconductor lasers was improved by 
approximately one order of magnitude smaller per decade since their invention in 
1962. The improvements resulted from the development of novel ideas and a realiz-
able technology such as LPE, MBE, or MOCVD [21]. 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
411 

412 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
In the 1990s, research on strained quantum-well lasers continued with remarkable 
progress toward high-performance diode lasers. Quantum-wire semiconductor lasers 
have been realized. The potential improvement using quantum-wire and quantum-dot 
semiconductor lasers has been under investigation both theoretically and experimen-
tally [22-25]. Novel structures such as surface-emitting lasers [26-28] and microdisk 
lasers [29, 30] have also been realized. The microdisk lasers using a small disk with a 
radius R of the order 10 μιη and a thickness of 0.6 μπι show interesting resonator 
physics with whispering-gallery mode lasing characteristics. Many of these structures 
also make research on the cavity quantum electrodynamics practical [31]. 
In this chapter, we study the basic semiconductor lasers and their physical prin-
ciples. Various important designs and their models will be discussed. Because the 
research on semiconductor lasers and technology is so rapid, these physical principles 
and theoretical models will provide a good tool to design diode lasers with the desired 
characteristics or to set up a foundation to design novel laser structures with superior 
performance. 
10.1 DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
10.1.1 
Energy Band Diagram and Carrier Injection 
Let us first consider a P-inP/p-lrii 
xGaxAs\-yPy/N-lnP 
double-heterojunction [32, 
33] structure. Before the formation of the heterojunctions, the energy band diagram 
is shown schematically in Fig. 10.1a, where the energy levels are all measured 
from the vacuum level. At thermal equilibrium, Fig. 10.1b, the Fermi level is a con-
stant across the three regions. The band diagram still contains the features of the bulk 
properties in the regions away from the heterojunctions, assuming that the central 
region is wide enough. The built-in potentials are determined by the Fermi levels 
(EFP -EVP)-AEy-(E{p-Evp) 
(10.1.1) 
(Efp -Eyp) + ΔΖ?v - (£RV - EyN) 
(10.1.2) 
where 
-E\p = Evp — EvN- 
(10.1.3) 
With an applied voltage V, the injection current is /, and the current density is 
7 = ~ 
(10.1.4) 
wL 
where w is the width of the active region in the lateral direction and L is the cavity 
length of the diode laser. The carrier concentration in the active region is determined 
by the rate equation 
dn(t) 
J(t) 
= Vi^j~ 
R(n) - vgg(n)S(t) 
(10.1.5) 
-«vF 
-WZ-" 
= Epp -
= Efp -
- Efp 
-
- EpM -
AEV 
- (EFP 
= (Efp 
= fcyp 
dt 
qd 

10.1 DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
413 
(a) 
Γ 
Xp 
Γ " " 1 
XP 
H w 
5üv 
' Vacuum 
level 
Ρ-ΙηΡ 
[Δ£ ν 
p-In GaAs P 
ΛΜη Ρ 
(b) 
AEC I 
N 
(C) 
FNW 
■
^ 
-I Δ£ ν 
N 
fPW 
Figure 10.1 Energy band diagram for a /MnP/p-InGaAsP/iV-InP double-heterojunction structure 
(a) before contact, (b) after contact at thermal equilibrium (V = 0), and (c) under a forward bias (V> 0). 
where the first term on the right-hand side accounts for carrier injection into the active 
region with a thickness d. The unit charge q is 1.6 x 10~19 C. The collection effi-
ciency of carriers into the active region is Ί]Χ, which is the percentage of electrons 
and holes transporting into the active region after surviving the carrier losses due 
to recombination outside the active regions or carrier over flow into the other side 
of the p-n junction. The second term, R(n), accounts for the carrier recombinations 

414 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
due to both radiative (spontaneous emission) and nonradiative processes. We have 
ignored the carrier diffusion, which is important for gain-guided structures and 
will be addressed in Section 10.2. The last term is the carrier loss due to stimulated 
emission process when the laser cavity has a photon density S(t), which is the number 
of photons per unit volume. These photons encounter a gain of g(n) (1/cm) while 
propagating with the group velocity vg of light, vg = c/n&, where ng is the group 
index, and c is the speed of light in free space. 
The recombination rate is given by 
R(n) = An + Bn2 + Cn3 = - 
(10.1.6) 
T 
T(„) = (A + Bn + Cn2y] 
(10.1.7) 
where the first term in (10.1.6) is due to the nonradiative recombination of carriers 
with defects or monocarrier type recombination, Bn2 is due to the spontaneous radia-
tive recombination by electron-hole pairs (Bnp), and Cn3 accounts for nonradiative 
Auger recombination processes. We have assumed that n ~ p in the active region 
(i.e., the doping concentration in the active region is small). Otherwise, we use 
Bnp instead of Bn2, and Cn2p or Cnp2 depending on the type of Auger processes. 
B may depend on the carrier concentration, B ~ BQ — B\n. 
At steady state below threshold, the carrier concentration n is determined by the 
injection current density J because the photon density is negligible 
J 
n 
Vi-j = ~- 
(10.1.8) 
qd 
T 
Often, the carrier lifetime τ is taken as an input parameter, and we determine n 
approximately by n = -q^Jr/qd. On the other hand, if we estimate the coefficients 
A, B, and C for the laser structure from experimental data or theoretical models, 
we can extract more accurate J-n relation using (10.1.6). Knowing n in the active 
region, the quasi-Fermi level Fn in the active region is determined by 
n = NcFl/2((FB-Ec)/kBT) 
(10.1.9a) 
m:kuT\ 3/2 
#c = 2 -S-JL·. 
(10.1.9b) 
V 2πη 
) 
and the hole concentration in the active region is determined by the charge neutrality 
condition 
n+NA 
=ρ + ΝΌ, 
(10.1.10) 
where N& 
and N& are the ionized acceptor and donor concentrations, respectively. 
The quasi-Fermi level in the active region for the holes is then determined by 
P = NvFy2((Ev-Fp)/kBT) 
(10.1.11a) 
"
v=K^)
3/V-
/2+<
3/2)· 
(iai-nb) 

10.1 
DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
415 
g(.n) = g'(n - n,T) 
Figure 10.2 (a) The gain spectrum for different carrier densities, n2 > n\\ (b) the peak gain versus the 
carrier density n. 
From the electron and hole concentrations, n and p, or the quasi-Fermi levels, Fn and 
Fp, we can calculate the gain directly using the band structure. Typically, a linear 
relation for the peak gain coefficient versus the carrier density such as 
g(n) = g'(n - Mtr) 
(10.1.12) 
for a bulk semiconductor laser is obtained over a region of carrier concentration, 
where g' is the differential gain, dg/dn, and nlt is a transparency concentration 
when the gain is zero, Fig. 10.2a and 10.2b. For quantum-well lasers, an empirical 
formula using a logarithmic dependence for the gain versus carrier density or gain 
versus injection current density is usually used. This will be discussed further in 
Sections 10.3 and 10.4. 
10.1.2 Threshold Condition 
The threshold gain is determined by (7.6.16), that is, when the modal gain equals the 
sum of the intrinsic loss and the mirror transmission loss 
I>tt 
1 
2L"R\R2 
ln-
(10.1.13) 
(10.1.14) 
where Γ is the optical confinement factor, and at is the intrinsic loss due to mostly 
free carrier absorption of the waveguide materials and scattering loss caused by the 
waveguide wall roughness. The mirror loss am accounts for the transmissions 
(outputs) at the two end mirrors (facets). With an increase in the injection current 
density J, the gain increases due to the increase of the carrier concentration n. 
When the threshold condition is reached, the carrier concentration n is pinned at 
the threshold value nlh because the gain is pinned at the threshold value: 
gth = («i + «πι)/Γ; therefore, ηΛ = «a· + (<*i + «m)/(IY). 
i?i-^ = fi("th) 
qd 
Ant + && + C14. 
(10.1.15) 

416 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
10.1.3 Light Power Output: Back-of-Envelope Derivation 
Below the threshold condition, the output light consists mainly of spontaneous and 
amplified spontaneous emission, and its magnitude is governed by Bn2. A further 
increase in the injection current density J above threshold leads to the light emission 
of photons (S) through the stimulated emission process 
iji — = (Ana, + Bnl + Cnl) + wsgtbS 
(10.1.16) 
because the carrier density is pinned at ηΛ, which is caused by gain pinning at gtb. 
Therefore, the photon density is simply taken from the difference of (10.1.15) 
and (10.1.16): 
s = 
l_Z^L. 
dO.j.17) 
^v gg t h 
The photon lifetime τρ is related to the threshold gain 
- = vg(«i + am) = Vglgth, 
(10.1.18) 
which accounts for the loss rate of the photons in the laser cavity due to absorptions 
and transmissions. The photons have a mean lifetime as they disappear from the 
cavity by either absorption or escape via transmission through the mirrors. We obtain 
l=vLl^r. 
(10.1.19) 
Tp 
qd 
The light output intensity Fout versus the injection current (L-I curve) is deter-
mined by 
( Energy of ^ ( Photon ^ ( Effective volume of ^ ( Escape rate ^ 
Pout 
= 
i \ / Effective volume of λ / Escape rate λ 
' / \ 
the optical mode / \ of photons / 
\ a photon / \ density 
= ho)S (wLdop) (vgam) 
(10.1.20) 
where vg am is the escape rate of photons. Here w is the width and dop is the effective 
thickness of the optical mode (dop = d/T), and / = wLJ. We obtain a simple 
relation for the light output power versus the injection current (i.e., the well-known 
L-I curve): 
Pom = Th— 
""* 
(/-/th)· 
(10.1.21) 
q a\ + am 

10.1 DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
417 
The external differential quantum efficiency ηε is denned as 
dPoM/dI 
a, 
Ηω/q 
' am + at 
Ml//?) 
Vi aiL + la (I/R)' 
The inverse of the external differential quantum efficiency is 
(10.1.22a) 
^ e 
^i 
1 + 
<x\L 
ln(l//?) 
(10.1.22b) 
A plot of η"1 versus the cavity length L shows a linear relationship with the intercept 
T/i-1 at L = 0, as shown in Fig. 10.3. 
In real devices, leakage current exists. The effect of leakage current /L can be taken 
into account in 
l = IA+Ih 
= JwL + IL 
(10.1.23) 
where /A is the current injected into the active region. Therefore, /th is modified to be 
Ah = Jth wL + Ih 
_qnth(wLd) 
T?iTe(nth) 
(10.1.24) 
The leakage current /L may also be increased with an increase in /. Very often, the 
threshold current density as a function of temperature is described by an empirical 
,-l Inverse external 
i 
quantum efficiency 
„~1 
nc
l = Vil 1 + 
OjL 
*(±)J 
^ L 
Cavity length 
Figure 10.3 A plot of the inverse external quantum efficiency 1 / η ε versus the laser cavity length L. The 
intercept with the vertical axis gives the inverse intrinsic quantum efficiency l/ijj. 

418 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
formula using a characteristic temperature T0 over a temperature range near a chosen 
temperature Ta. 
Ith(T) = Const, x eTlT° = Iüi{Ta)e(J'T")lT(l. 
(10.1.25) 
A large characteristic temperature is desirable since it implies that the threshold 
current does not change much with temperature. The output optical power Pout 
versus the injection current / relation can be modified to be 
/Out = V\ — 
" m 
(/ - Ah - A/L) 
(10.1.26) 
q «Π, + «i 
where A/L accounts for any additional increase in the leakage current [34-36] due to 
the increase of /. A typical output power versus injection current relation is shown in 
Fig. 10.4. Below the threshold injection current, the output light intensity is negli-
gibly small. Above threshold, the output power is linearly increasing until saturation 
effects occur. 
There are three possible reasons for saturation [33]. 
(i) The leakage current increases with the injection current / (i.e., A/L φ 0). 
(ii) The threshold current /th may also depend on the injection current / due to 
junction heating. The raise in temperature reduces the recombination lifetime 
Te. For example, the Auger recombination rate increases when the temperature 
is raised. 
(iii) The intrinsic absorption α; increases with an increase in the injection 
current /. 
The output power versus the injection current becomes a nonlinear dependence when 
saturation occurs. 
Ah 
Figure 10.4 A typical diode laser output power versus injection current density relation (L-I curve). 

10.1 
DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
419 
10.1.4 Light-Emitting Diode versus Laser Diode: The Role of Spontaneous 
Emission versus Amplified Spontaneous Emission 
In Chapter 9, we discuss the spontaneous emission rspon(hw) from a forward biased 
p-n junction diode. The typical spontaneous emission spectrum is commonly used in 
light-emitting diodes (LEDs). The band gap of semiconductors is chosen such that 
LEDs in the visible region and the infrared region can be designed with a high 
quantum efficiency. For a simple planar structure such as shown [37-39] in 
Fig. 10.5, the light emission from the top surface of the cladding layer due to a spon-
taneously emitted photon will be limited by a cone angle of 20c, where 0C is the criti-
cal angle between the p-type semiconductor and the air. Light with an angle of 
emission outside of this cone angle will be reflected back to the semiconductor 
region. Therefore, the geometric design such as a hemispherical lens or parabolic 
lens above the p-n junction diode has been used to optimize the light emission. 
Other important considerations for visible LEDs include the responsivity of human 
eyes. Infrared LEDs for applications in optical communication are designed such 
that efficient coupling into optical fibers can be achieved, as shown in Fig. 10.6, 
with a surface emitter configuration [40]. The double-heterojunction AlGaAs/ 
GaAs structure also provides the carrier confinement to increase the efficiency [41]. 
Active region 
N 
V////////////S///////////^^^^^ 
Figure 10.5 (a) Schematic diagram of a planar LED device to show the effect of total internal refraction. 
(b) The semiconductor hemisphere geometry for LED operation. 
Light 
Ϋ//////////Ά 
Optical 
fiber 
'//////////A— 
Metal contact 
n-GaAs 
/ 
N- AlGaAs 
p-GaAs 
v//////////M///^T 
P- AlGaAs 
Contact 
p+GaAs contact 
Figure 10.6 AlGaAs surface-emitting LED with an attached fiber to couple light output to an 
optical fiber. 

420 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
For a laser diode, the cavity design and the amplified spontaneous emission will be 
important for the formation of laser modes. To understand the physics of the laser 
diode versus light-emitting diode operation, we consider an LED that is designed 
to have the same Fabry-Perot structure as an laser diode (LD) except that its two 
ends are antireflection coated. If we measure the spontaneous emission power spec-
trum from the top or bottom of the diode, called the window light Lw, it will be a 
broad spectrum determined by the spontaneous emission rate per unit volume 
r^P°n(hw), Fig. 10.7a [42, 43], 
Lw(hw) = hco rspon(ftw) wdL 
(10.1.27) 
where w is the width, d is the thickness, and L is the cavity length of the index-guided 
structure. The facet light spectrum Lp{hw), taken from a facet of the LED, is the 
amplified spontaneous emission spectrum [42-45] 
LF{h<a) = Ηω f 
rspon(hw)eG"(ha,)z dz wd 
Jz=0 
ho> rspon(ftw) 
eG„(ha>)L _ 
1 
G„(ho>) wd 
(10.1.28) 
(a) Light Emitting Diode 
Window Light Lw 
Antireflection Coatings 
(b) Laser Diode 
^ 
Cleaved Facets 
Figure 10.7 
(a) The spontaneous emission (SE) coming out of the side (window light Lw) versus the 
amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) coming out from the facet (facet light Lf) in an LED structure. 
(b) A laser diode with the output power coming from both facets. 

10.1 DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
421 
2 
1 
0 
_ 
- 1 
to 
~ -2 
c 
* 
- 3 
- 4 
- 5 
- 6 
800 
900 
1000 
1100 
1200 
1300 
Photon energy, fim (meV) 
Figure 10.8 Measured spontaneous emission spectrum obtained by collecting photons through a window 
(W) in the substrate Lw and the amplified spontaneous emission spectrum obtained by collecting photons 
from the facet (F) LF of an LED. (Reprinted with permission from [421 © 1993 American Institute of 
Physics.) 
where GJtiai) = Yg — a, is the net modal gain (including all the losses due to 
absorptions and scatterings in the device). Note that at the transparency wavelength, 
Gn(hw) = 0 and L^hoi) = Ly^hw) when no amplification by the gain action exists. 
With enough carrier injection such that G„ > 0, we see that the photon density in 
the spectral region where gituo) is positive will experience amplification whereas 
that outside the positive gain region will experience absorption. Because the gain 
spectrum is narrower than that of the spontaneous emission spectrum [46], the 
facet light will be narrower than that of the window light. These results [42] are 
shown in Fig. 10.8. As a matter of fact, a comparison of these two spectra has 
been used to extract the gain spectrum of a laser diode structure. By measuring the 
two spectra L^ticS) and Lytfwi) at the same current injection level, we can obtain 
the gain spectrum. Furthermore, if we take the logarithmic function of the ratio of 
the two spectra, In [L/=<^ft))/LVv(Äw)], it will be close to that of the gain spectrum 
because it is proportional to In [(eG,,L — 1)/G„] ~ (Tg — a\)L if the overall gain 
(GnL^> 1) is large enough [43]. By fitting the gain spectrum with a theoretical 
gain model, we can extract the carrier density n at a given injection current / [43]. 
The carrier density versus the injection current / is a monotonically increasing 
function of /, as shown in Fig. 10.9a at 25°C and Fig. 10.9b at 55°C. For laser 
diodes, the carrier density is pinned at the threshold value when the injection 
current is increased beyond threshold. 
LED 
T = 25°C 
I - 50 mA 
J 
I 
I 
L 

422 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
'T"i"»"i'T"i i i i | i iT'T'i'i i i i i i f i ί y f r i ' r 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Current i(mA) 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Current / (mA) 
Figure 10.9 Carrier density versus injection current plotted for both LED and LD at (a) T = 25°C and (b) 
T— 55°C. The solid curves are just visual guides. (Reprinted with permission from [43] © 1993 IEEE.) 
10.1.5 Amplified Spontaneous Emission and Optical Gain Measurements 
When the laser diode is biased with a forward voltage, current injection provides 
electron-hole pairs into the active region. With enough electron and hole densities, 
electron-hole recombination (the radiative process) can provide spontaneous emis-
sion. The spontaneously emitted photons propagating in the population inverted 
medium cause stimulated emission. It means that the absorption will be reduced 
due to the presence of gain caused by the amplified spontaneous emission process. 
As the injection current increases, gain increases. When the gain balances the back-
ground absorption loss, we have the "material" transparent condition at which the 

10.1 DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
423 
current density is called the transparent current density. Further increase of the current 
increases gain until it reaches the threshold condition, at which the gain is equal 
to the background absorption plus the mirror transmission loss (or laser output) of 
the cavity. 
Consider an optical field £sp(A) due to the spontaneous emission of photons by 
electron-hole radiative recombinations in a Fabry-Perot cavity. When the optical 
field propagates toward the minor facets with optical field reflection coefficients rx 
and r2 on each facet, we can write down the multiple reflections of the optical 
field as 
?ASE(A) = £Sp(A)[l + rxr2eakL + 
(nr2eakLf 
= , EspW
i2kL- 
(10.1-29) 
1 — r\r2elzliL 
The complex propagation constant has a real and imaginary part 
jt = j f - i ^ L = ^ n e - i § L 
(10.1.30a) 
2 
λ 
2 
Gn = Tg — «j = The net modal gain. 
(10.1.30b) 
The measured ASE power spectrum is proportional to |£ASE(A)| 
(10.1.31) 
/(A) 
where the 
The ASE 
= |£ASE(A)|2 
amplitude A 
A = 
spectrum has 
: 
|£sp(A)|2 
\\-rxr2eakLf 
is 
^RiR2 eG"L, 
maxima at 
k'L = ηιττ, 
R\ --
^max 
|£sp(A)|2 
(1 -A) 2+4AshV 
= N 2 , 
Ri = \r2\ 
|^5ρ(Λιηαχ)| 
'(k'L) 
I2· 
(1-A) 
and minima at 
|2 
(10.1.32) 
(10.1.33a) 
k'L={m+l-y, / » = ^ . 
(10.1.33b) 
If we take the ratio between two nearby peak and valley of the ASE spectrum, 
/max 
(1 +Af 
/min 
( 1 - A > ,2 
(10.1.34a) 

424 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
we obtain 
\ * max/ 'rr 
V 'max/'min + ' 
We solve for the net modal gain from (10.1.32) 
„ 
1 , V/max/^min — 1 . 1 , 
1 
G„ = - I n 
, 
1-—In-— 
The above gain is the net modal gain of the optical modes 
Tg{X) - <*j = ßr + «m 
,-, 
1 , 
V Mnax/'min 
1 
or = - l n - v 
(10.1.34b) 
(10.1.35) 
(10.1.36a) 
(10.1.36b) 
The procedure to extract the optical gain in the Hakki-Paoli method is as follows: 
1. Measure the ASE spectrum /(A) as a function of wavelength. For example, 
we consider a multiple quantum-well sample as shown in Fig. 10.10 [47]. 
The measured ASE spectrum at room temperature is shown in Fig. 10.11a. 
We can see clear Fabry- Perot interference spectrum in expanded scale in 
Fig. 10.11b. 
2. Find the magnitudes /max(A) and /mjn(A) of two nearby maximum and 
minimum near the mth longitudinal mode Am, and take the ratio. 
3. The net optical gain Gn(A) spectrum is given by Eq. (10.1.36), where the mirror 
loss is usually calculated from the mirror reflectivity and the measured cavity 
length L. Alternatively, the cavity length can also be extracted from the 
spacing of the two nearby peaks if we know the effective index ne. 
/j-InP 
2 x 10,s cm"3 spacer 
Eg = 135 eV 
InGaAsP/InGaAsP 
InGaAsP 
well/barrier 
InGaAsP 
spacer 
L = 7Wk 
I 
U = 700 A 
Le = 78Ä 
£.W=105Ä 
Figure 10.10 The band-edge profiles of conduction and valence bands for the InGaAsP strained QW 
laser structure. The PL wavelength of the slightly tensile-strained InGaAsP well region is 1.485 μιτι. 
The lattice-matched InP barrier has a band-gap wavelength of 1.28 μηι. (Reprinted with permission 
from [471 © 1995 IEEE.) 

10.1 
DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
0.16 
425 
0.12 
| 
0.08 (· 
35 
0.04 
0.00 
"'ΐ''»'"»"^" ι 
I = 6mA 
1420 
1440 
1460 
1480 
1500 
1520 
Wavelength (nm) 
1540 
1560 
1580 
(b) 
o.io 
Ä 
0.08 · 
it 
0.06 
< 
0.04 
S 
0.02 : 
0.00 
I 
ft 
r * 
f 1 
* * 1 
| 
» 
! '. 1 
ί 
; t 
X 
* 
Jt 
V -/ 
6 mA 
/ 
8 mA 
J 
*· 
* ; 
f\ 
♦ t M 
f ί / 
I 
• 
if 
1 
* 
ti 
6 
* 
&. 
' 
* * 
0 δ 
' * I 
* 
l 
f 5 
* 
* 
A 
*^Z^ 
* 
ß 
■ 
■ 
, 
1 
* 
t 
* 
\ 
* 
■ 
ISQO.O 
1S00.S 
1501.0 
1501.5 
1502.0 
Wavelength (nm) 
150Z5 
1503.0 
Figure 10.11 (a) Amplified spontaneous emission spectrum (ASE) from an InGaAsP strained quantum-
well laser biased at a current below threshold. The InGaAsP well is slightly tensile strained with a PL wave-
length of 1.485 μπι. The barriers are InGaAsP lattice-matched to InP with a band-gap wavelength of 1.28 
μπι. (b) An expanded wavelength scale of (a) with the addition of a higher current (8 mA), showing the 
increase of the peak-to-valley ratio and the blue shift of peak wavelengths with increasing current. 
(Reprinted with permission from [47] © 1995 IEEE.) 
4. Below the band edge (long wavelength side), the material gain is negligible and 
Tg — a\ approaches the intrinsic absorption -a,, Fig. 10.12 [48]. As we increase 
current to the threshold condition, /max//mi„ —► oo, and the peak gain occurs at 
the threshold gain value 
Tg* 
(10.1.37) 

426 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
~ 
E 
c 
(0 
15 
■σ 
o 
E 
20 
10 
0 
-10 
-20 
-30 
^M) 
1500 
1550 
1600 
1650 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 10.12 Measured net modal gain spectrum for TE (solid) and TM (dotted) polarizations based on 
the Hakki-Paoli method. The TE-polarized gain spectrum (dashed) obtained by the transformation from 
the spontaneous emission (SE) spectrum for Fig. 10.13 is also shown for comparison. (Reprinted with 
permission from [48] © 1999 American Institute of Physics.) 
The top curve on Fig. 10.12 shows the threshold condition. In other words, the data 
from the expression 
ß r + am = r > - a i 
(10.1.38) 
covers the range from — a, at the long wavelength limit to +am at the peak gain near 
threshold current. 
Figure 10.12 shows the experimental measured optical gain spectra for both TE 
and TM polarizations [48]. An unstrained quantum-well laser is chosen such that 
both TE and TM emission light have enough powers for our measurement. The 
cavity length is about 638 μιη, and one of the facets is coated with high reflectivity 
(0.85). The mirror loss is 11.4 cm -'. We obtain the intrinsic loss a{ = 22 to 24 cm ' 
below the band edge. The threshold gain rgth = a, + am is about 36 cm '. If we 
draw a horizontal line on the plot at the value of the intrinsic loss level, — al7 we 
find the intercept with the gain curve at the quasi-Fermi level separation AF — Fn-
Fp on the short wavelength side, which is also the intercept of the TE and TM polar-
ized gain. Therefore, a measurement of the TE and TM polarized gain spectra allows 
for the determination of the quasi-Fermi level separation. Alternatively, we can 
measure the spontaneous emission (SE) spectrum, Fig. 10.13, and fit the gain spec-
trum by the fundamental relation (9.2.36) using AF as the input fitting parameter. The 
result is shown as the dashed curves in Fig. 10.12, and the agreement between the SE 
transformation method and the Hakki-Paoli method looks very good. The third 
method to measure the quasi-Fermi level separation is to apply a small signal ac 
modulated optical beam with a wavelength near the quasi-Fermi level separation 
energy, and measure the small ac signal of induced voltage of the semiconductor 
test laser by tuning its applied injection current. When the induced voltage 
changes a sign because of the crossing between gain and absorption, we obtain the 
transparency energy, which is exactly AF. The results of the above three methods 
for measuring the quasi-Fermi level separation are shown in Fig. 10.14a and the 
• 
I 
' 
■ 
■ 
■ 
I 

10.1 
DOUBLE-HETEROJUNCTION SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
427 
t h 
nT 1 I 
6 
4 
2 
o 
1 = 
1250 
— i — ■— i — 
11.7 mA 
10 mA^. 
8 m A v 
6 mA,y 
1350 
'■' 7 
' 
1 
i—l 
i—l 
■ 
1 
1 
^^^Cf 
"*™^*^v 
7^^^ 
^^A 
ΛΎ*^ 
^ ^ k 
1450 
1550 
16 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 10.13 The measured spontaneous emission (SE) spectra from the side of the semiconductor laser 
using an optical fiber. The laser is temperature controlled and biased at a current from 6 mA to threshold. 
(Reprinted with permission from [481 © 1999 American Institute of Physics.) 
(a) 
> 
E. 
U. 
< 
820 
810 
800 
8* 
A 
A 
A 
t 
I 
8 
A 
A 
A 
x SE-Fit method 
o TE-TM crossing 
* Electrical method 
. · 
1 
i 
1 
■— 
-g-
10 
Current (mA) 
(b) 
30 
_ 
28 
JL 26 
to 
_g 
24 
22 
20 
8 
9 
Current (mA) 
10 
11 
12 
o 
. 
X 
■
!
■
! 
x SE-transform 
o TE-TM crossing 
X 
o 
x 
o 
< 
1 
i 
1 
I 
1 
■ 
1 
■ 
X 
o' 
-
■ 
12 
Figure 10.14 (a) The quasi-Fermi level separation and (b) the intrinsic absorption loss of a test laser. The 
experimental data were obtained from the intercepts of TE and TM polarized gain spectra (circles) and from 
the spontaneous emission transformation method (crosses). In (a), the results based on an electrical method 
(triangles) are also shown, which are obtained by measuring the induced ac voltage in the presence of an 
external pump laser with an ac modulation, and its wavelength is tuned across the quasi-Fermi level sep-
aration of the test laser. (Reprinted with permission from [48] © 1999 American Institute of Physics.) 

428 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
agreement seems very good. The measured intrinsic loss as a function of the bias 
current is also shown in Fig. 10.14b [48], indicating there is a slight dependence 
on the carrier density, most likely due to free carrier absorption. 
10.2 GAIN-GUIDED AND INDEX-GUIDED SEMICONDUCTOR 
LASERS 
In this section, we study both gain-guided and index-guided semiconductor lasers. 
The difference is in the lateral confinements of the optical mode and the carriers. 
The index-guided semiconductor lasers have been demonstrated to have superior 
performance than that of the gain-guided geometry. However, the gain-guided 
structures are still used because of their ease of fabrication. They are investigated 
here because many interesting physical processes including carrier injection and 
diffusion, optical gain, and spatial carrier profiles can be extracted from these 
structures. 
10.2.1 
Stripe-Geometry Gain-Guided Semiconductor Lasers 
A stripe-geometry gain-guided semiconductor laser [34, 38, 49-57] is shown in 
Fig. 10.15, where the metal contact is the stripe with a width S defined by processing 
procedure. The injected current J spreads along the lateral (i.e., v) direction. 
Therefore, the carrier density n distributes along the v direction determined by the 
current spreading and the lateral diffusion. The effective width of the carrier 
density distribution and the gain profile along the lateral direction are therefore 
wider than the stripe width S. This gain inhomogeneity along the y direction 
Figure 10.15 (a) A stripe-geometry gain-guided semiconductor laser; (b) cross section; (c) distribution of 
the current density J(y)\ and (d) the carrier density profile n(y). 

10.2 GAIN-GUIDED AND INDEX-GUIDED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
429 
provides the guiding mechanism for the optical mode confinement in the lateral 
direction. An associated effect is the antiguidance due to the reduction in the 
refractive index variation induced by the gain profile. In this section, we study an 
approximate analysis method to model the gain-guided stripe-geometry semicon-
ductor laser. 
Analysis of the Optical Modal Profile and Complex Propagation Constant 
We consider the TE mode with index guidance in the x direction, perpendicular 
to the p-n junction plane, and with gain guidance along the y direction, which is 
transverse to the propagation direction. The optical electric field is approximated by 
E ~ y Ey{x, y,z)^y 
F(x) G( y) eik*z 
(10.2.1) 
under scalar approximation, where Ey(x, y, z) satisfies the wave equation 
V2 Ey + ω2 με(χ, y)Ey = 0 
(10.2.2) 
where a parabolic permittivity profile in the active layer is assumed because of the 
carrier diffusion along the y direction and its resultant gain profile 
ί
ε\ 
χ> 
d/2 
ε2(0) - a2y2 
\x\ < d/2 
(10.2.3) 
S\ 
x < —d/2. 
Our goal is to find the electric field profile F(x)G(y) and the complex 
propagation constant kz for the inhomogeneous permittivity profile (10.2.3). 
Based on a perturbation method, the optical field is given by the Hermite-
Gaussian functions 
Ey(x, y, z) = Ef\x) Hn ((Μ),/2 (^J^J 
e ' ^ ) 
^
* 
(10.2.4) 
where Γ is the optical confinement factor, Ey°\x) is the unperturbed electric field 
profile, and Hn is a Hermite polynomial, see (3.3.11), which is a typical solution 
of wave equations with a parabolic spatial profile. The complex propagation con-
stant of the gain-guided laser, kz, is 
k2
z = β] - (ω2μα2Γγ/2(2η 
+ 1) 
(10.2.5) 

430 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Λ 
/ 
1 
/ 
1 
\ 
\ 
/ 
s 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
y 
—
/ 
yS 
r 
Figure 10.16 The constant phase front of a gain-guided mode is a cylindrical parabolic surface [51]. 
for the nth lateral mode. Using binomial expansion in (10.2.5), we have for n = 0 
^ / 3 z - * f ( - f - 
00.2.6) 
Because a = ar + i a, is a complex number, the constant phase front is determined by 
Ez - M i 
«0 
constant 
(10.2.7) 
which is a cylindrical parabolic surface (Fig. 10.16), where kT is the real part of kz, 
which is close to ßz. 
Current Spreading and Carrier Density Profile If we ignore the current spread-
ing outside of the stripe region so that J(y) = 0 for \y\ > 5/2, the carrier density 
profile n(y) (=δη) is given by (2.4.17) in Chapter 2. Because the spontaneous 
emission spectrum depends on the local carrier density n(y), a measurement of the 
emission profile as a function of y will determine the density profile. Therefore, 
the carrier density profile can be mapped out from the spontaneous emission intensity 
profile, and the results agree very well [50, 54] with the theoretical curve calculated 
using (2.4.17), as shown in Fig. 10.17. 
o Theoretical fit 
5 
0 
Position (prn) 
10 
IS 
Figure 10.17 Theoretical plot of the carrier density profile n(y) in a gain-guided semiconductor laser 
measured by the spontaneous emission intensity. The theoretical model assumes a stripe width S = 11.7 μπι 
and a diffusion length L„ — 3.6 μηι. (Reprinted with permission from [54] © 1977 IEEE.) 

10.2 GAIN-GUIDED AND INDEX-GUIDED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
431 
10.2.2 Index-Guided Semiconductor Lasers 
In the gain-guided semiconductor lasers [33, 58, 59], the carrier spreading along the 
lateral direction degrades the laser performance, such as a high threshold current 
density and a low differential quantum efficiency. To improve the laser performance, 
index-guided structures have been used such that a better optical confinement, therefore 
an improved stimulated emission process, can occur in the active region. One example 
is a ridge waveguide laser with a weakly index-guided structure, as shown in 
Fig. 10.18a. Another example is an etched-mesa buried heterostructure with improved 
optical and carrier confinements in the active region, as shown in Fig. 10.18b. 
For a ridge waveguide laser, an effective index profile nefi(y) along the lateral y 
direction can be obtained using the effective index method by solving the slab wave-
guide problem at a fixed cross section defined by a constant y. The guidance condition 
and the optical field pattern are then obtained from the waveguide theory for the index 
profile neff(y), following the procedures described [60] in Section 7.5. The effective 
index method can also be applied to a rectangular dielectric waveguide structure as the 
active region of the etched-mesa buried-heterostructure laser. Once we find the optical 
electric field for the fundamental TE mode (or higher-order TE modes) from (7.5.3), 
E = y Ey(x, y)~y 
F(x, y) G(y). 
We obtain the optical confinement factor using the definition 
1 
Γ = II 
'active region 9 Re(E x H*) · z dxdy 
^SZ{Ke(ExH*)-zdxdy 
(10.2.8) 
(10.2.9) 
Analytical expressions for the slab waveguide geometry have been derived in Chapter 7. 
Here we may use 
^Re(E x H*) ■ 2 ~ ^Re(- EyH*x) = ~ ^ - 
(10.2.10) 
(a) 
PMnGaAsP 
P-InP 
dielectric 
/V-InP 
Λί-ΙηΡ 
Substrate 
__ InGaAsP 
- InGaAsP 
active layer 
x 
(b) 
u 
/MnGaAsP 
1 
P-InP 
-i— 
InGaAsP 
active region 
W-InP 
n-InP 
Substrate 
wAV/////;;j//sM///A/s/s////vm>a 
Figure 10.18 (a) A ridge waveguide laser for index guidance Γ33,581. (b) An etched-mesa buried-hetero-
structure index-guided laser [59]. 

432 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Because Α^/ωμ is a constant for a given mode, we can simply use 
r = SUe\Ey^y)\2dxdy 
^ T ^ 
( l 0 2 U ) 
Γ^ΓοοΙ^Α^Ι dxdy 
which is approximated by the product of the two optical confinement factors along the x 
direction (with a slab geometry in the effective index method) and along the y direction 
when the field is approximately given by 
Ey ~ F(x) G(y). 
(10.2.12) 
It is a good approximation for a strongly index-guided structure, and F(x, v) ~ F(x) if the 
geometry along the y direction is uniform such that the first part of the wave function 
F(x, y) in the effective index method described in Section 7.5 can be assumed to be inde-
pendent of y. Index-guided semiconductor lasers have been shown to exhibit excellent 
performance including the fundamental mode operation, low threshold, high quantum 
efficiency, and low temperature sensitivity [33]. 
10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
Quantum-well (QW) structures [12-16, 61], as shown in Fig. 10.19, have been used 
as the active layer of semiconductor laser diodes with reduced threshold current den-
sities compared with those for conventional double-heterostructure (DH) semicon-
ductor diode lasers. Research on quantum-well physics and semiconductor lasers 
has been of great interest recently. For a brief history, see Ref. 3. Various designs 
such as single quantum well (SQW), multiple quantum well (MQW), and graded-
index separate-confinement heterostructures (GRINSCH) have been used for semi-
conductor lasers [21]. As we have seen in Chapter 9, quantum-well structures 
show quantized subbands and step-like densities of states. The density of states for 
a quasi-two-dimensional structure has been used to reduce threshold current 
density and improve temperature stability. Energy quantization provides another 
degree of freedom to tune the lasing wavelength by varying the well width and the 
barrier height. Scaling laws for quantum-well lasers and quantum-wire lasers show 
significant reduction of threshold current in reduced dimensions [24]. 
10.3.1 
A Simplified Gain Model 
The simplest model we will consider is the gain spectrum based on (9.4.13) for a 
finite temperature, assuming a zero scattering linewidth [62, 63] 
8(ηω) = ^28^υ0\Ει=Ηω-ΕΖ)-/Τ(Ει^ω-ΕΖ)]Η(Ηω-ΕΖ) 
(10.3.1a) 
where 
gmax = C0|e-M|2|d2prD-Co|e-M|2PrD5„m 
(10.3.1b) 
C
0 = — ^ 
P 2 D = ^ P 
(10.3.1c) 

10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
(a) 
Single-Quantum-Well Separate-
Confinement Heterostructure 
JL 
(b) Multiple-Quantum-Well Separate-
Confinement Heterostructure 
"UlTLTLT 
JirLTLTL 
£v 
(c) 
Graded-Index Separate-Confinement 
Heterostructure (GRINSCH) 
£v 
Figure 10.19 
Band-gap profiles for (a) single-quantum-well, (b) multiple-quantum-well, and (c) graded-
index separate-confinement heterostructure (GRINSCH) semiconductor lasers. 
p^D is the reduced joint density of states. The overlap integral between the nth con-
duction subband and the mth hole subband is usually very close to unity for n = m, 
and it vanishes if n φ m because of the even-odd parity consideration. The 
polarization-dependent momentum matrix element is listed in Table 9.1 for conduc-
tion to heavy-hole and light-hole band transitions. The occupation factors for the 
electrons in the nth conduction subband and the electrons in the mth hole 
subband are 
fc
n(Et=hw-EZ)-
f:{Et=fuo-EZ)-
1 
1 
+e[E,nHm'r/m'cXfm,-EZ)-Fc]/kBT 
1 
1 
+e[Ekm-(m>lml)(fu*-EZ)-Fv}lkaT' 
(10.3.2a) 
(10.3.2b) 

434 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
£ f 
—E... 
-Fe 
— 
z 
-Eex- ~m 
'^Ηω 
(b) 
pjmjjB 
A,(£)/h(£) 
= 1 -Λ(£) 
Figure 10.20 (a) Population inversion in a quantum-well structure, where Eg + Fc - Fv > ha> > Ee, -
£hi + Eg- (b) The product of the conduction band density of states pe(£) and the Fermi-Dirac occupation 
probability fc(E) for the calculation of the electron density n is plotted versus the energy E in the vertical 
scale. Similarly, f>h(E)fh(E) = ph(.E) f 1 - /V(E)] is plotted versus E for the energy (E < 0) in the valence 
band. Assume that the temperature T is OK. 
Gain occurs when f?>f™, that is, the population inversion is achieved, Fig. 10.20. 
It also leads to Eg + Fc — Fv> Ηω, where Fc and Fv are the quasi-Fermi levels for 
electrons and holes, measured from the conduction and valence band edges, res-
pectively. Only those electrons and holes satisfying the ^-selection rule contribute 
significantly to the gain process. 
10.3.2 Determination of Electron and Hole quasi-Fermi Levels 
The quasi-Fermi levels Fc and Fv are determined by the carrier concentrations n and 
p, which satisfy the charge neutrality condition 
n + WA =p + N+ 
dE pe(E)fc(E), 
p=\ 
dEph(E)[\-fv 
0 
J-oo 
(10.3.3) 
(£)] 
Pe(£) 
mi 
irh Lz „=1 
J2H(E-Een) 
(10.3.4) 
ph{E)^^rlf-YjH(Ehm-E) 
Tfh Lz 
m=\ 
where H(x) is the Heaviside step function, H(x) = 1 if x > 0, and H(x) = 0 if x < 0. 
In Fig. 10.21aandFig. 10.21b, we plot the products Pe(E)fc(E) and p^E) [1 -/ v(£)] 
versus the energy E for T = OK and 300K, respectively. The areas below these func-
tions give the carrier concentrations n and p. 

10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
435 
(a) Γ=ΟΚ 
Z 
Ph/h(£) 
pmm 
/Occupied 
/ § § 
V 
valence 
V 9 9 
o o o 
o o o 
o o 
£ 
valence 
^go|__Aiwi 
X 
band 
/ / g o o f 
V 
(by 
/ o o i 
•V electrons) ' / o o 
/ • 
y o o 
'/////////$ 
~ 
- ■/ V 7tfc2Lz 
Figure 10.21 The functions of the products pe(E)/c(£) and ph(£)/h(£) = ph(£) fl - /v(£)l versus the 
electron energy £ for the calculations of the carrier concentrations n and p, respectively, for (a) T = OK 
and (b) Γ = 300K. The area under pe(£) /c(£) is the electron concentration, and the area under ph(£) 
ME) is the hole concentration. 
10.3.3 Zero-Temperature Gain Spectrum 
To understand the gain spectrum, let us consider the gain at T = OK. Remember 
that the model here is oversimplified because it does not include the effects of scat-
terings or inhomogeneous broadenings such as those due to well-width fluctuations 
and the electron-hole Coulomb interactions. Our model here is to show the sim-
plest picture for population inversion for the optical gain process. At T = OK, 
the Fermi-Dirac distributions are step functions. For the electrons in the conduc-
tion subband, we have 
ME) {i 
E<FC 
E> Fc. 
(10.3.5) 
The electron concentration is simply the area under the function pe(E) fc(E), which 
is plotted versus E in Fig. 10.22d 
irh L. J2 
(Fc-Een). 
(10.3.6) 
'2 
n occupied 
subbands 

436 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) g(h(0)lgm 
I I 
+2 
+1 
-1 
-2 
T=0K 
Gain 
JESfcO) V 
£g + F c - F v 
Absorption 
-So 
Figure 10.22 An illustration of optical gain of a quantum well at T = OK. (a) Normalized gain spectrum, 
(b) the energy profile in real space, (c) the energy dispersion in k space, and (d) the Fermi-Dirac function 
versus the energy for the electrons in the conduction band and in the valence band. 
For a single (ground state) subband case, 
« = — f - ( F c - ^ i ) 
(10.3.7) 
the location of the quasi-Fermi level is linearly proportional to the carrier concen-
tration at zero temperature. Similar results hold for holes 
■nh LT 
(10.3.8) 
For unstrained quantum wells, the topmost subband is a heavy-hole subband. The 
hole effective mass in the plane of the quantum well m^ is usually smaller than 
its value in the bulk semiconductors because of its coupling to the light-hole 

10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
437 
subbands. However, m\ is larger than m\ for most unstrained quantum wells. We 
find that for n= p, 
m*h(Ehl - Fv) = m*e(Fc - £ei) 
(10.3.9) 
which means that the areas under the function pe(E) fc(E), and pu(E) fv(E) should 
be equal. Because ηΐ^ > m*e, we find Ehl - Fv < Fc — Eei. That is, the quasi-Fermi 
level Fv is closer to the hole subband edge than the separation of Fn and £cl. 
The transparency optical energy occurs at Ηω = Fc — Fv, where fc— / v = 0. As a 
matter of fact, fc = 1 and fv = 0 for hw < Eg + Fc — Fv, and fc = 0, /v = 1 for 
%ω > E& + Fc — Fv. The gain spectrum is a simple rectangular window, as 
shown in Fig. 10.22a 
[ gmax 
££', < ÄW < -Eg + Fc - Fv 
g(h(o) = i _gmax ^- Η(Ηω _ Een^ 
otherwise. 
(10.3.10) 
I. 
n—m 
For the optical energy between the el-hi transition band edge and the quasi-
Fermi level separation Eg + Fc — Fv, the photons experience gain. Otherwise, 
they experience absorption with a spectrum similar to that of an unpumped 
quantum well with a stepwise shape. The only modification is near the band 
edge. The occupations of states by electrons and holes in the quantum well are 
shown in Fig. 10.22b in real space and in Fig. 10.22c in fc-space showing the 
^-selection rule. The Fermi-Dirac distributions for electrons in the conduction 
band/c(£) and for electrons in the valence band/v(£) are shown in Fig. 10.22d, 
where Ef,(k) — Ea{k) = Τιω has to be satisfied from the ^-selection rule and the 
energy conservation condition, which leads to the population inversion factor 
fc(Eb) -f\(Ea). 
We see that for Eg + Eel - EM < hco < Eg + Fc - Fv, fc(Eh) = 1 
and/v(£a) = 0, therefore, gain occurs. Otherwise, fc = 0 and/v = 1, and absorption 
occurs as shown in Fig. 10.22a. 
10.3.4 Finite-Temperature Gain Spectrum 
At a finite temperature, the gain spectrum looks like that shown in Fig. 10.23a. 
The Fermi-Dirac distribution will deviate from a sharp step function and is 
equal to 1/2 at the quasi-Fermi level. The electron concentration is the area 
below the function pe(E) fc(E) as shown in Fig. 10.21b, which can be obtained 
analytically (9.4.11) 
y^wcln 
n=\ 
l+e(Fc-Ee„)/k»T 
(103.11a) 
where the prefactor 
nc = ^
^ 
(10.3.11b) 
Tfh L-

FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
g(hm)/g, 
n 
Γ=300Κ 
-2 + 
Figure 10.23 An idealized gain spectrum of a quantum well at T — 300K assuming a zero linewidth. 
(a) Normalized gain spectrum; (b) the potential energy profile in real space; (c) the parabolic band structure 
in k space; and (d) the Fermi -Dirac distributions (horizontal scales) versus energy E (vertical scale). 
is a characteristic concentration at finite temperature T. Similarly, the hole concen-
tration is 
p = 2_] nv In 
where 
m=\ 
\+e> {E^-F^lkßT 
(10.3.12a) 
ith L7 
(10.3.12b) 
which can account for heavy-hole and light-hole subbands where m accounts for all hole 
subbands. The gain spectrum is given by Eq. (10.3.1a) and is plotted in 
Fig. 10.23a for illustration. It starts with a peak value at the transition edge 
hco = £jj)(0) = Eg + £ei — EM, where Et = 0 and decreases to zero at Eg + Fc — Fv, 

10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
439 
then becomes absorption at higher optical energies. The sharp rise in gain near the 
band edge compared with the soft increase in a bulk (3D) semiconductor is due to the 
step-like density of states in 2D versus the slow increase of the square-root (\/E) 
density of states in 3D. For a single subband pair, n = cl and m = hi, we have the 
gain spectrum 
g(ha>) = gmax [/c(£, = Λω - ££|(0)) -/ V(E, = ftoi - ££i(0))] 
(10.3.13) 
where gmax is given in (10.3.1b). The peak gain occurs at Et = 0, or ΐιω = ££|(0) 
gP=gm*s[fc{ha> = Ee
h\)-fv(hü> = Ee
h\)] 
(10.3.14a) 
where 
/ c ( ^ = ^',) = i + c ( £ c ) _ w 
(10.3.14b) 
M^ = K\) = ]+e{EU)/kBT- 
(10.3.14c) 
10.3.5 Peak Gain Coefficient versus the Carrier Density 
As shown in Fig. 10.24, the gain increases when we increase the carrier density. If 
only one conduction and one valence subband are occupied, we obtain 
MEt = 0) ~ 1 - e-"/"° 
/ v(£ = 0) ~ *->/'*. 
(10.3.15) 
g(*<o)/g, 
t 
E 
— 
"2 
^^\^r 
Increasing n 
M(°) / \ \ 
Figure 10.24 Normalized gain spectrum at two different injection levels (n2 > n{). 

440 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The above expressions are approximately true if we redefine [62] 
„c „?V*Lj2e{E'l-E-)'k'T 
(10.3.16a) 
irh Lz „=l 
and a similar equation for holes 
rtv ~ "h^L^^-E^/^T 
(10.3.16b) 
^ 
^z m=\ 
Therefore, a simplified formula for the peak gain gp as a function of the electron con-
centration n is given by 
8P = gmax [l - β-"!"* - e~»^]. 
(10.3.17) 
Because nv/nc = wij^/m* = R is the ratio of the hole and electron effective mass for a 
single subband occupation, we have 
gP = gn 
I _ e-™/"c _ e-n/(««c) 
(10.3.18) 
which can be plotted as a function of n. The transparency carrier density occurs at 
gP = 0, 
e-na/nc 
+ e-nu/(Rnc) 
= j 
(10.3.19) 
If R = 1, we find ntr = ncln2. We can also plot /c ~ 1 — e~nl"c and /v ~ e~nlKy versus 
the carrier concentration n; the intersection point gives the transparency density ntr, 
which corresponds with gp = 0 as shown in Fig. 10.25. The peak gain gp versus 
the carrier density n is plotted in Fig. 10.26. The analytical formula for the differential 
gain, dgp{ri)/dn, can be derived from (10.3.18) [62, 64]. 
We can also calculate the peak gain directly versus the current density J, taking 
into account the nonradiative Auger recombination, the leakage current, and the 
radiative recombination. The process is first assuming a carrier concentration n; we 
then calculate the peak gain and 
yrad = qLz RsP(n) 
(10.3.20a) 
Aug = qU. /?Aug(n) 
(10.3.20b) 
and the leakage current J|eak from the expressions in Section 10.1; then, J = Jma + 
7Aug + Jleak. Here the spontaneous emission rate per unit volume Rsp(n) 

10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
S 0.5 
Figure 10.25 A plot of the occupation probability of electrons in the conduction band/c ~ 1 — e~"ln< 
and that of electrons in the valence band /v =ί ίΤ"/"» (or the probability of holes in the valence band 
/h = 1 — /v). The interception point where fc = / v gives the transparent carrier density nu. 
(s ' cm 3) can be calculated using the formulation with the valence-band mixings 
discussed in Chapter 9 or simply using the simplified model [65, 66] 
RsJn) ~ Bn. 
(10.3.21a) 
Similarly, 
RAug(n) ~ Cn3 
(10.3.21b) 
which can also be calculated directly using the interaction Hamiltonians for Auger 
processes (i.e., carrier interactions via the Coulomb potential). The finite scattering 
1.5 
ε 
60 
=3 0.5 
1 
■ 
• 
. 
"tr/nc 
> 
1 f 
1 W 
I 
T 
1 
1 
1 
1 -
omax 
^^^ 
8p ~ o m a u c — Jv) 
1 
1 
...1. 
1 
1— 
- -
-
' 
3 
4 
n/n, 
Figure 10.26 Peak gain coefficient gv normalized by the maximum gain gmax is plotted as a function of 
the carrier density n (normalized by the characteristic concentration nc). 

442 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
linewidth can also be taken into account [67-71] by convolving the zero linewidth 
gain spectrum g(h(u) in (10.3.13) with a Lorentzian function L(hw) as in (9.4.14). 
The procedure will lead to a peak gain versus the current density relation, gp = 
gp(J). A common empirical formula is a logarithmic relation [72-76] 
J 
8P(J) = go 1 +ln-
Jo 
(10.3.22) 
We see that if J oc nß, where ß can be between 2 and 3 for a certain range of current 
density, the above relation leads to 
gp 
=g0 
which is also a logarithmic relation 
1+jSln — 
«o 
goß 1 
, n 
- + l n -
ß 
no. 
(10.3.23) 
10.3.6 Scaling Laws for MQW Lasers 
For a quantum-well laser lasing from only the first quantized electron and hole sub-
bands, we use the empirical logarithmic formula for the peak gain-current density 
relation (10.3.23) for the rest of the discussions in this chapter 
go In Jo 
1 
(10.3.24) 
where yw and gw are the injected current density and the peak gain coefficient of a 
single quantum-well structure. Such a relation is plotted in Fig. 10.27a. The transpar-
ency current density occurs at J^ = J^e"'. 
For an MQW structure with nw quantum wells and a cavity length L, the required 
modal gain Gth at threshold condition is 
nv/Tv/gv/ = a - -Lln-L 
2L 
RXR2 
(10.3.25) 
where a is the internal optical loss, Tw is the optical confinement factor per well, and 
R\ and R2 are the optical power reflection coefficients at both facets. We should note 
that gw is a "material gain" for the quantum-well region assuming that all of the 
electron-photon interactions occur in the well region and gw oc 1/LZ in the gain 
model. The optical confinement factor Tw for a single well takes into account the 
optical modal distribution, and only that fraction of the photons inside the well experi-
ences gain. For a separate-confinement structure as in Fig. 10.19a and Fig. 10.19b, we 
can calculate the optical confinement factor Γορ for the optical waveguide part, ignor-
ing the well region first, then use 
op w, 
(10.3.26) 
mode 

10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
(a) 
443 
go 
1 
1 
1 
Sw = So[In(Vo)+ll 
^^-^" 
... _1 
" w = 1 
-
V" 
o w J w 
Figure 10.27 (a) Gain (gw) versus injection current density (Jw) relation for a single-quantum-well struc-
ture; (b) gain («wgw) versus injection current density (η,νΛν) relation for a multiple-quantum-well structure 
with «w wells. 
where Γορ takes into account the refractive index difference of the large optical wave-
guide for optical confinement and LJ Wmode accounts for the carrier confinement and 
stimulated emission. The modal gain for a single quantum well should be 
G = Twgw 
= rwftnax[/c(Afi> = ££l(0)) -fv(hw 
= £«1(0))] 
(10.3.27) 
where, using gmax from (10.3.1b), 
rw£n 
z 
Γ 
!>max 
7j7 
<?max* op 
^ mode 
C0\e ■ M ch 
,2 K 
Γορ 
irh 
"mode 
(10.3.28) 
which is also the maximum achievable gain for a single quantum well. For «w 
quantum wells, the modal gain is approximately «wrwgw. The threshold current 
density Jth for the MQW structure is then 
Ί] J m — WwAv 
(10.3.29) 

444 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
where 17 is the injection quantum efficiency or the percentage of the injection current 
that gets captured by the quantum wells. Therefore, we can also plot the material gain 
(nwgw) versus the injection current density («„7«,) using (10.3.24) [72-78] 
^w£w 
"wgO 1η|^φ)+1 
(10.3.30) 
assuming the well-to-well coupling can be ignored for simplicity. This relation is 
plotted in Fig. 10.27b for n w = l , 2, 3, and 4. For nw = 1, as shown in 
Fig. 10.27a, the intersection with the horizontal axis is Jv/ = Jue{ 
and gw = 0. 
When Jw = J0, we have gw= g0. For nw = 2, we find that 2gw = 0 occurs at 
(2JW) = 2J0e '; therefore, the horizontal intersection is shifted to the right by a 
factor of 2. At 27w = 2J0, we obtain the vertical axis (2gw) = (2g0), which is twice 
that for nw= 1. Therefore, the gain-current density curve for nw = 2 starts at 
twice the transparency current density of that for nw = 1 and increases by a factor 
of 2 faster than that for nw = 1. We obtain the threshold current density by [72-
76] substituting (10.3.24) into (10.3.30) 
■Ah 
nwJo 
exp 
exp 
- 1 
1 
'-in- 
l 
If we take the logarithmic function of Jth, we see 
In 7th = In nwJo 
^
^ 
+ ^ - 1 
where we define an optimum cavity length 
= 1 
1 
^-opt 
In 
2 (nwr„g0) 
\R\Ri 
1 
- 1 
(10.3.31) 
(10.3.32) 
(10.3.33) 
Therefore, In Jth varies linearly with 1 jL. Such a dependence has been plotted for 
various numbers of quantum wells as shown in Fig. 10.28a. 
For real device measurements, the threshold current /th (= J^wL) is measured, 
where w is the width of the stripe. We have 
/th 
wLnwJo exp 
1 
η\νΓνν£θ 
1 , 
1 
a-l 
In -
2L 
RXR2 
(10.3.34) 
The above expression for /Λ contains a prefactor increasing linearly with L and an 
argument in the exponential function that decreases with L, resulting in a 
minimum of the threshold current occurring at L = Lopt as shown in Fig. 10.28b. 

10.3 QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
> L 
''Opt 
Figure 10.28 (a) Theoretical curves for the logarithm of the threshold current density, Ι η ^ ) using 
(10.3.32), versus the inverse cavity length for lasers with 1, 2, and 3 quantum wells, (b) A plot of the 
threshold current /Λ versus the cavity length L for nw = 1 using (10.3.34). 
The minimum threshold current, /t
min, is then given by 
/mm 
_^_ 
'th 
— 
-
1 / WJQ 
In 
2 Wr wgo/ 
\R1R2 exp nwrwgoj 
(10.3.35) 
If we assume that the loss coefficient a and other parameters such as Tw, J0, TJ, and 
go are independent of the number of wells, we find an optimum number of wells, nopl, 
such that Zu, in (10.3.34) is minimized, {dl^/dn^ = 0) 
^opt 
IwgO a + 
1 In 
1 
2L 
\RiR2 
(10.3.36) 
Comparison with Experimental Data [73] The above simple relations between 
the threshold current density Jth and the cavity length L or the number of quantum 
wells nw have been demonstrated experimentally. In Fig. 10.29, we show the experi-
mental data [73] for (a) broad area contact and (b) ridge waveguide GaAs/ 
Alo.22Gao.7gAs separate confinement heterostructure (SCH) quantum-well lasers. 

446 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
E 
to c 
Φ 
•D 
Έ 
P 
ϋ 
I 
800 
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 
1000 500 
200 
[|TT t | 1 
, 
GaAs(7 nmJ/AlQ^Gao^As (5 nm) 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
-i-*nR-1(ciTr1) 
*-c 
0 
Stripe width ~ 4 μπι 
_ _ _ _ 
n-GaAs 
i 
1 
i 
I 
' ■ 
' 
t— 
ί 
— 
0 100200300400500600700800900 
Cavity length^m) 
Figure 10.29 Experimental results showing (a) the linear behavior of the ln(y,j,) versus the inverse cavity 
length 1 /L following (10.3.32) for lasers with 1, 2, and 3 quantum wells; and (b) the threshold current 1Λ as 
a function of the cavity length L. A minimum value of the threshold current exists at an optimum cavity 
length Lop, based on (10.3.34) and (10.3.45). (Reprinted with permission from [731 © 1988 IEEE.) 
The undoped GaAs quantum wells are 70 A in width and the Alo.22Gao.7sAs barriers 
are 50 A wide. The linear relation between ln(Jth) and the inverse cavity length 1 /L is 
clearly shown in Fig. 10.29a for three numbers of quantum wells, nw =1, 2, and 3. 
The threshold current /„, is also shown to have a minimum at an optimum cavity 
length in Fig. 10.29b, in agreement with the analytical relations (10.3.34) and 
(10.3.35). The stripe widths are 4.0 μπι, 4.5 μπι, and 3.5 (im for nw = 1, 2, and 3, 
respectively in Fig. 10.29b. 
10.4 STRAINED QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
In recent years, strain effects in semiconductors have been proposed and explored 
intensively for optoelectronic device applications [79, 80]. The tunability of strained 
materials makes them attractive for designing semiconductor lasers, electrooptic 
modulators, and photodetectors operating at a desired wavelength. The concept of 
band structure engineering [17, 18, 81] is further explored in strained semiconduc-
tors beyond the previous applications using quantum wells by controlling the well 
width and the barrier height. Using strained material systems such as In^Ga* 
As/InP, In^Ga^As/In^/ia^As, 
yPy, and In, ^Ga^As/GaAs quantum wells, a 
wide tunable range of wavelength is possible. Furthermore, the band structure 
including the band gap, the effective masses, and therefore the density of states 
can be engineered. It has been proposed that by using a compressively strained 
quantum-well structure, semiconductor lasers with a lower threshold current 
density can be achieved because of the reduced in-plane heavy-hole effective 
mass [17, 18, 81]. A reduced threshold carrier density also reduces the non-radiative 

10.4 STRAINED QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
447 
Auger recombination, one of the limiting factors for long-wavelength (1.55 μπι) 
semiconductor lasers. 
Experimentally, high-performance strained quantum-well lasers [82, 83], such as 
low-threshold current density [19, 20, 84-89], high-power output [90-93], and high-
temperature operation [94-97], have been demonstrated with remarkable results. 
Theoretical models using both simplified parabolic band structures and realistic 
band structures of strained quantum wells have also been used to investigate the 
optical gains in these semiconductor lasers [98-105]. 
To understand the strained quantum-well systems, we will use the Ini-^Ga^As/ 
InP materials as an illustration. The ternary Ini-^Ga^As alloy has a lattice constant 
a{x), which is a linear interpolation of the lattice constants of GaAs and InAs, 
a(GaAs), and a(InAs) 
a(x) = x a(GaAs) + (1 — JC) a(InAs) 
= 5.6533x + 6.0584(1 - x). 
(10.4.1) 
The lattice constant of the InP substrate ÖO is 5.8688 A. When a thin lnj _^GaxAs layer 
is grown on the InP substrate, at x ~ 0.468 ~ 0.47, the lattice constant of 
Ino.53Gao.47As is the same as that of InP. It is the lattice-matched condition. 
If a(x) > a0 (i.e., x < 0.47), an elastic strain occurs that will be compressive in the 
plane of the layer resulting in a tensile strain in the direction perpendicular to the 
interface. We call this case biaxial compression or just compressive strain. 
Similarly, if a(x) < a0(InP) (i.e., x > 0.47), the strain in the plane of the layer is 
tensile and there is a compressive strain in the perpendicular direction. We usually 
call this case biaxial tension, or tensile strain. Theoretical work [106, 107] shows 
that beyond a critical layer thickness, large densities of misfit dislocations are 
formed to accommodate the strain. Therefore, the strained layer dimension is 
always kept below the critical thickness for optoelectronic material applications. 
10.4.1 The Influence of the Effective Mass on Gain and Transparency 
Carrier Density 
A band structure calculation shows that the effective mass of the heavy-hole band 
along the parallel plane of a quantum well has a reduction in its effective mass due 
to its coupling to the light hold band. Therefore, the density of states of the heavy-
hole subband is reduced. This helps to reduce the transparency carrier density 
required for population inversion as shown in Fig. 10.30a and Fig. 10.30b. 
The Bernard-Duraffourg population inversion condition [108] requires the separ-
ation of the quasi-Fermi levels Fc — Fv + E% > Τιω > Eg + Eei — EM (=£|ff). 
For conventional semiconductors, the heavy-hole effective mass is always several 
times that of the electron in the conduction band. The quasi-Fermi level of the hole is 
usually above the valence-band edge instead of being below the band edge, and the con-
duction band degenerates easily with electron population. Because a large separation of 
the quasi-Fermi levels Fc — Fv + Eg> £*ff (the effective band gap of the quantum 
well) is required, an ideal situation will be a symmetric band structure configuration 
such that m\ = ml as shown in Fig. 10.30b. The population inversion condition 

448 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) ml>m% 
■ Eel 
Ecl 
■E. 
E. 
ml 
π*2^ pe(£ycw 
A\-Fv 
F ¥ · -
(b) m*h = ml 
Ph 
Pk/v 
-Ph(£yv(£) 
πδ2Ζ,, 
pe(E)fc(E) 
PkiEffJE) 
Figure 10.30 Population inversion in a quantum-well structure with (a) mj > m* and (b) mj = m* 
Fc — Fw + Eg = Eff can then be satisfied easily at a smaller carrier density as shown. If 
we take the simplified model for the peak gain [62, 64] from the previous section, 
gp(n) = gmaxC/c - / v ) 
— £maxv 
e-n/nc 
_ 
e-n/Rn^ 
(10.4.2) 
where R = m\jm\ is the ratio of the heavy hole and the conduction-band electron 
effective mass. We plot in Fig. 10.31a fc = 1 — e~"/"c and /v = e~nlRnc versus the 
carrier concentration n for two values of R. We see that the intersection pointy. = / v 
determines the transparency density n,r, at which the peak gain is zero. This transparency 
density ntT is reduced when the mass rate is reduced from R = 5 to R = 1. The peak gain 
is also plotted in Fig. 10.31b for R = 1 and/? = 5. We note that while the transparency 
density na is smaller at R = 1, the maximum achievable gain also saturates at a smaller 
value when n increases because gmax is proportional to the joint density of states, which 
is proportional to the reduced effective mass m* = m*m*,/(ra* + m*,) = m*Ä/(Ä + 1). 
If m\ = m*&, we have m* = ml/2. If m\ = 5m*, we have m* = 5w*/6. 

10.4 STRAINED QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
(a) 
1 
449 
Figure 10.31 (a) Occupation probabilities fc = 1 — «"/"» and /, = e-"/WO are plotted versus the 
normalized 
carrier concentration 
n/nc 
for two heavy-hole-to-electron 
effective 
mass ratios 
R (= my m*) = 5 and R = 1. (b) Peak gain coefficient normalized by the maximum gain gmax versus 
the normalized carrier density n/nc for R = 5 and R = 1. 
10.4.2 Strain Effects on the Band-Edge Energies 
For Inj ^Ga^As quantum-well layers grown on InP substrate, we have the in-plane 
strain [109, 110] 
a0 — a(x) 
a0 
(10.4.3) 
where a0 is the lattice constant of InP. For a compressive strain, a(x) > a0, therefore, 
the in-plane strain ε is negative. On the other hand, the in-plane strain ε is positive for 
a tensile strain because a(x) < a0. The strain in the perpendicular direction is 
ε± = ε^ = -2- 
ε = 
~2ρ^ε 
1 — σ 
e n 
(10.4.4) 
where σ is Poisson's ratio and Ci i, C]2 are the elastic stiffness constants. For most of 
the ΙΠ-V compound semiconductors, σ ~ 1/3 or C12 — 0.5 Cti. 

450 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The band gap of an unstrained Ini-^Ga^As at 300K is given by 
Ee(x) = 0.324 + 0.7x + OAx2 (eV). 
(10.4.5) 
For a strained Inj-^Ga^As layer, the conduction band edge is shifted by 
8EC = ac(f=« + ε»> + εΏ) = 2ac ( 1 - —— | ε 
(10.4.6) 
and the valence subbands are shifted by 
S£HH = -PB ~ Ö«, 
8EhU = -PE + QE 
( 
Cl2 
PB = -avis*, + Eyy + εΏ) = -2αν 
1 -
CnJ 
(10·4·7) 
b 
2{ 
Qe = -^(εχχ 
+ ε„,-2εζζ) 
= -b\ 1 +2^^—]ε. 
Therefore, we have the new band edges 
Ec = E&{x) + SEC 
EHU = 8Em = -Pe - Qe 
(10.4.8) 
£LH = S£LH = -Ps + Qe. 
The effective band gaps are 
£C-HH = £g(x) + 8EC - S£HH = Ee(x) + 8EC + PE + QE 
= Es(x) + 2a(\ -^ß\e-b(\ 
+ 2 ~ ^ ] ε 
(10.4.9a) 
£C-LH = E%(x) + 8EC - S£LH = Es(x) + SEC + PE - QE 
= Eg{x) + 2a(\ -^±\B 
+ b(\+2^\e 
(10.4.9b) 
where the hydrostatic deformation potential a(eV) has been defined. 
a = ac — av. 
As can be seen from Table 10.1, we have ac < 0 and av > 0, using our definitions 
in this section. Therefore, we have the energy shift for compressive strain (with the 
notation for the trace of the strain matrix Tr(e) = (ε» + επ + εα), 
SEC = acTr(f) > 0, 
avTr(I) < 0, 
b (1 + 2 — ) ε > 0, 

10.4 STRAINED QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
451 
Table 10.1 
Physical Quantities of a Strained Semiconductor [109,110] 
Physical Quantity 
Compressive 
Tension 
. ap - a(x) 
«Jo 
In-plane strain ε = ε π = ι 
e_L = -2S"-c 
M2 
Conduction-band deformation potential ac(eV) 
Valence-band deformation potential av(eV) 
a = ac — av(eV) 
Shear deformation potential b(eV) 
0£S C = 
ClcKBxx + Syy -\- Ex) 
' ε 
= 
@v\Sxx 1 Syy T &zz) 
(JE = ~ 2 \exx ' eyy ~ 
^εζζ) 
Heavy-hole band-edge shift (eV) 
Light-hole band-edge shift (eV) 
Effective band gaps (eV) 
Negative 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Negative 
SEUH = 
5£LH = 
£c-HH = 
£c-LH = 
-P, 
Ps 
Negative 
Positive 
Negative 
Negative 
-e* 
+ Qe 
Ee(x) + 8EC + P„, 
Eg(x) + SEC + PE 
Positive 
Negative 
Negative 
Negative 
Positive 
+ QE 
-Q, 
that is, the conduction-band edge is shifted upward by an amount SEC, the valence-
band edge is shifted downward by the magnitude of ανΎτ(ε), then split upward by 
b(\ +2^Αε 
for the heavy hole and downward by b(\ +2^Αε 
for the light 
hole, as shown in Fig. 10.32. For tensile strain, the in-plane strain ε is positive 
because a(x) is smaller than the lattice constant of the substrate a0. Therefore, the 
directions of the band-edge shifts are opposite to those of the compressive strain. 
(a) Compressive strain 
5 £ ™> 0 
™ 
SE, H<0 
(b) No strain 
a(x) = a0 
5Er>0 
Eg(x) 
3LL-*T. 
_ί8*Χ _ 
(c) Tensile strain 
a(x) < a0 
δΕ,<0 
SELH>0 
+Q* 
SElm<0 
Figure 1032 Conduction and valence band edges for semiconductors under (a) a compressive 
strain, (b) no strain, and (c) a tensile strain. The function Eg(jr) is the band gap of the unstrained 
Ιη,-jGa^As alloy. For example, Eg(x) = 0.324 + 0.7x + 0.4x2 eV at 300K. The bandf 
shifts are SEC = 2aJ\ - °^)ε, SEHH = -P* - Qs, SEL„ = -P. + Qe, where />„ = -2a, (l 
Qr = —b(\ + 2 & 2 ) ε , and the in-plane strain e = [a0 - a(x)]/a0. a(x) is the lattice constant of the 
unstrained Ini-jGajAs alloy, and a0 is that of the substrate, which is also the in-plane lattice constant of 
the strained In. -XrsuAs lattice. 
-e>-

452 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
10.4.3 Band Structure of a Strained Quantum WeU 
For a quantum-well structure such as an In, ^Ga^As layer sandwiched between InP 
barriers, the band structures are shown in Fig. 10.33 for (a) a compressive strain (x < 
0.468), (b) no strain (x = 0.468), and (c) a tensile strain (JC > 0.468). The left-hand 
side shows the quantum-well band structures in real space versus position along 
the growth (z) direction. The right-hand side shows the quantized subband disper-
sions in momentum space along the parallel (kx) direction in the plane of the layer. 
These dispersion curves show the modification of the effective masses or the densities 
of states due to both the quantization and strain effects. More precise valence band 
structures can be found in Section 4.9. 
(a) A quantum well under 
a compressive strain 
EM 
£HH(0) 
£LH(0) 
(b) An unstrained quantum well 
EM 
£HH(0) = £ L H ( 0 ) 
(c) A quantum well under 
a tensile strain 
EM 
*-z 
'LH(O) 
n(0) 
C2 
Cl 
HH2 
Figure 10.33 Band edge profiles in real space along the growth (z) direction and the quantized subband 
dispersions in k space along the kx direction (perpendicular to the growth direction) for a quantum well with 
(a) a compressive strain, (b) no strain, and (c) a tensile strain. 

10.4 STRAINED QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
453 
Example: Gain Spectrum of a Strained Quantum Well 
Using the formulation 
for the gain spectrum in a strained quantum well, we plot in Fig. 10.34 the gain 
spectrum for light with a TE (Jc or y) or TM (z) polarization for the three 
cases in Fig. 10.33. We consider an Ini-^Ga^As quantum-well system with 
(a) 700 
~ 600 
E 
S 500 
c 400 
4) 
.a 300 
* 
8 200 
o 
•S 100 
° 0 
1 — r — t — i 
1 — r -
/ 
TE 
* / 
'„ 
-100 
Compressive j 
TM 
750 
800 
850 
900 
Photon energy (eV) 
950 
750 
800 
850 
900 
Photon energy (eV) 
950 
-100 
Tensile 
750 
800 
850 
900 
Photon energy (eV) 
950 
Figure 10.34 Gain spectra for both TE and TM polarizations of (a) a compressive strain (x = 0.41, well 
width = 45 Ä), (b) an unstrained (x = 0.47, Lz = 60 Ä), and (c) a tensile strain (x = 0.53, and Lz = 115 A) 
In^Ga^As/In^Ga^As,-^ (barrier band-gap wavelength Ab = 1.3 μπι) quantum-well laser. These 
material gain coefficients were calculated for the same period L,· — 200 A and surface carrier concentration 
n. = nL, = 3 x 1012 cnT2 in all three structures. 

454 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Ini -.tGa^Asi -yPy barriers (band-gap wavelength \b= 1.3 μιτι) lattice-matched to InP 
substrate. Electronic and optical properties of similar quantum-well structures have 
been shown in Fig. 4.21a-d, Fig. 9.23, and Fig. 9.24. As shown in Fig. 10.34a, com-
pressive strain (quantum well gallium mole fraction x = 0.41, well width = 45 A), 
and Fig. 10.34b, lattice-matched case (x — 0.47, Lz = 60 A), the gain of the TE polar-
ization is always larger than that of the TM polarization, because the top valence 
subband for these two cases is always heavy hole in nature, and the optical matrix 
element for C1-HH1 transition prefers TE polarization. The injected holes populate 
mostly the ground (HH1) subband. On the other hand, Fig. 10.34c shows that the 
TM polarization may be dominant for the tensile strain case (x = 0.53, and Lz = 
115 A). The well widths are chosen such that all the lowest band edge transition 
wavelengths are close to 1.55 μπι. The gains were calculated for the same total 
width Li = Lz + Lb = 200 A in a unit period, where Lb is the barrier width. The 
same surface carrier concentration ns = nLz = 3 x 1012/cm2 is used in all three 
structures. 
If we recall the parabolic band model in Chapter 9, the band edge (k, = 0) momentum 
matrix elements are 
TE Polarization 
\x · Mc_hh|2 = \y ■ Mc_hh|2 = -Ml 
(10.4.10a) 
|*-Mc_ft|2 = |5;-Mc_a|2= ^Μξ. 
(10.4.10b) 
TM Polarization 
Iz-Mc-hhl^O 
(10.4.10c) 
|MVIc_ft|2 = 2Ai2 
(10.4.10d) 
where Mb is the optical momentum matrix element of the bulk semiconductor, which 
is related to the energy parameter Ep for the matrix element by M2 = m0Ep/6, and Ep 
is usually tabulated in databooks (see Appendix C). In practice, the matrix elements 
depend on the transverse wave vector k, and are very close to the above values at the 
band edge where k, = 0, then vary as kt increases, as shown in Fig. 10.35, using the 
valence-band mixing model in Section 9.8 and ignoring the spin-orbit split-off band. 
Laser actions with the above polarization characteristics, TE for compressive strain 
and lattice-matched quantum-well lasers and TM for tensile strain quantum-well 
lasers, have been reported [111]. These phenomena also agree with those in conven-
tional externally stressed or thermally stressed diode lasers [112, 113]. 
In Fig. 10.36, we plot the optical modal gain versus the surface carrier concen-
tration ns = nLz, where Lz is the well width, for three cases: (a) compressive, (b) 
lattice matched, and (c) tensile strain. For long-wavelength semiconductors, the 
well width Lz has to be adjusted such that lasing action at 1.55 μιη can be achieved. 

10.4 STRAINED QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
455 
0 
0.02 
0.04 
0.06 
0.08 
0.01 
k,(k) 
Figure 10.35 
Normalized momentum matrix element 2\M„m{k,)\?/Ml versus the transverse k, vector 
using (9.8.15) and (9.8.16) in Chapter 9 for compressive (dots), unstrained (solid squares), and tensile 
(solid triangles) strained quantum-well lasers. Here Mnm refers to n = C1, and m = the top valence 
subband (HH1 for compressive and unstrained and LH1 for tensile case). 
The design usually requires Lz (compressive) < Lz (lattice-matched) < Lz (tensile). 
As discussed in Section 10.3, it is the modal gain Fg that is important in determining 
the threshold condition, and 
Tgoc 
"mode 
(10.4.11) 
where Lz will cancel with the factor (1/LZ) in g. Therefore, it is more useful to 
compare the modal gain Fg for three different strains if the well width Lz varies. 
We see that the compressive strain quantum-well laser has the smallest transparency 
carrier density at which g = 0. However, it also saturates faster than the other two 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 -
0 
1
2 
3 
4 
ns (x 10l2/cm2) 
Figure 10.36 Modal gain coefficient versus the surface carrier concentration for compressive strain 
(dots), unstrained (squares), and tensile strain (triangles) In^^GajAs/Ini-j-GajAsi-yPy quantum-well 
lasers with the band-edge transition wavelengths near 1.55 μιτι. The solid curves with dots and squares 
are TE polarization, and the dashed curve with triangles is TM polarization. 
1 ■ ' ■ 1 ' ' ' ■ 1 
_ 
Compressive^ 
/A 
/ Jr * 
■ . . . fS.f. 
. . . 
Tensile , A 
Unstrained 
. 
.
.
. 
1 
.
.
.
. 

456 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
ns (x 10,2/cm2) 
Figure 10.37 Radiative current density yrad(A/cm2) versus the surface carrier concentration ns(l/cm2) 
for compressive strain (dots), unstrained (squares), and tensile strain (triangles) quantum-well lasers. 
cases. On the other hand, the tensile strain case (TM polarization) has a larger trans-
parency current density, yet it increases faster implying a larger differential gain. 
We can also plot the radiative current density 
•/rad = <?^z ^sp(«) 
= 
^ z 
rspon(hw)d(hw) 
(10.4.12) 
where the well width factor Lz is canceled because rspo"(fiw) oc \/Lz from (9.8.18), 
and yrad(«s) is a two-dimension current density with a dimension (A/cm2). A 
common approximation is 
Rsp(n) = Bn2 = ΒΊξ 
(10.4.13) 
where ns= nLz and B' = B/L2. Therefore 
•/rad = 
qBsns 
(10.4.14) 
with B% = B/Lz. A plot of 7,^ versus ns for three different strain conditions is shown 
in Fig. 10.37 for comparison using (10.4.12) with the full valence-band mixing 
model. We see that the quadratic dependence (10.4.14) is a very good approximation. 
10.4.4 Gain-Current Density (G-J) Relation 
The peak optical gain can also be plotted versus the radiative current density yrad 
directly for three strains, as shown in Fig. 10.38. We see that the compressive 
strain case has the lowest transparency current density and its gain saturates faster 
as the current density is increased. In real devices, the injected current density has 
other losses such as nonradiative Auger recombination and intervalence band 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
457 
50 
"B 40 
30 
o 
S io 
. . . . . . . 
„ 
-
-Compressive 
AO 
/ * _ • 
"
'
I 
1 
Tensile 
„ -J 
*~~^\^*— 
M^^ 
Unstrained 
. 
1 1 . 
· 
. 
1 1 
30 
60 
•Jrad (A/cm1) 
90 
120 
Figure 10.38 Modal gain G = Tg versus the radiative current density Jrad(A/cm2) for compressive strain 
(dots), unstrained (squares), and tensile strain (triangles) quantum-well lasers. The solid curves are TE 
polarization, and the dashed curve is TM polarization. 
absorptions, which have to be added to the horizontal axis to obtain the true G-J 
relation. If these loss current densities are less sensitive to strains, we would expect 
the threshold gain G^ = rg,h to determine the threshold current density by the 
intersection of the G-J curve with a horizontal line G = Gth- We see that for a 
small Gth, the compressive strain laser will have the smallest threshold current 
density. On the other hand, if Gth is large, the tensile strain laser may have the smal-
lest threshold current density. These G-J curves provide good design rules for 
strained quantum-well lasers. 
An empirical G-J relation using the logarithmic dependence 
G = nwrwgw = «wrwgo In nw7o 
(10.4.15) 
as discussed in Section 10.3, has also been used to study strained quantum-well lasers 
with very good agreement with experimental data [75, 76, 114]. The major equations 
are the same as those discussed in Section 10.3 and will not be repeated here. The 
same analysis using (10.3.29)-(10.3.36) has been applied to study strained 
quantum-well lasers. 
Advanced issues such as Auger recombination rates [115-118], the temperature 
sensitivity [119], and high-speed carrier transport and capture in strained quantum 
wells [120, 121] are under intensive investigation. Many-body effects [122, 123] 
due to carrier-carrier Coulomb interactions on the gain spectrum have been investi-
gated. Many of these require more theoretical and experimental work to fully under-
stand the physics of strained quantum-well lasers. 
10.5 
STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
As pointed out by Alferov [124], the history of semiconductor lasers can be seen from 
the evolution of the reduction of the threshold current density, Fig. 10.39. The 

458 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
10* 
10« 
f 10» 
I 
10 
U.3kA/cm2 
\(1968> " 
Impact of double 
'hcterostructures 
900A/cm2 
(1970) 
Impact of SPSLQW 
Impact of 
quantum wells' 
Impact of 
quantum dots 
■WA/cm* > λ 
(1988) 
> 
I9Ä/CIU2 
(2000) 
1960 65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 2000 
Years 
Figure 10.39 Evolution of the threshold current of semiconductor lasers. (Reprinted with permission 
from [1241 © 2000 IEEE.) 
realization of semiconductor lasers using homojunction to double-heterojunctions, 
quantum wells, followed by strained quantum wells, and then quantum dots (QDs), 
indicate a reduction of threshold current density. Figure 10.40 shows the density of 
states of a bulk semiconductor (3D), a quantum well (2D), a quantum wire (ID), 
and quantum dots (0D) [125-127]. The discrete nature of quantum dots leads to 
many advantages of quantum-dot lasers: they are expected to have low threshold 
current density, a large characteristic temperature, high differential gain, low chirp, 
and a high modulation speed. Figure 10.41 shows the predicted threshold current 
density as a function of temperature [124], indicating a temperature-stable threshold 
current for quantum dot lasers [124-126]. 
3D Bulk Semiconductor 
Density of States 
2DQi 
/ 
antum W 
/ 
/ 
ell 
/ 
y 
r 
-»· Energy 
ID Quantum Wire 
Ik 
0D Quantum Dot 
ILL 
Energy 
Energy 
Energy 
Figure 10.40 Density of states for 3D bulk, 2D quantum well, ID quantum wire, and 0D quantum dot 
structures. 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
459 
1.5 
hf 
3 to 
•a 
0.5 
i 
-VT) 
(T\ 
(a) T0=104°C 
(b) r 0-285°C 
(c) T0-481°C 
(d) Γ0- eo«c 
_1 
I 
I 
I 
l_ 
-«0 
-40 
-20 
0 
20 
Temperature (°Q 
40 
60 
Figure 10.41 
Normalized temperature dependence of the threshold current for various double-hetero-
junction-structure (DHS) lasers, (a) Bulk; (b) with quantum wells (QWs); (c) with quantum wires 
(QWRs); (d) with quantum dots (QDs). (Reprinted with permission from [1241 © 2000 IEEE.) 
10.5.1 Quantum Dot Structures 
One breakthrough in crystal growth is the realization of semiconductor quantum dots 
[124-139], which confine electrons and holes in a three-dimensional structure. The 
quantization of electron energy in all three directions makes the energy levels discrete 
instead of continuous. Therefore, applications to devices such as quantum-dot semi-
conductor lasers similar to gas lasers with a discrete density of states become a reality. 
A layer of material that has a lattice constant different from that of the substrate may 
transform spontaneously to an array of three-dimensional islands after the height of 
the deposited material has reached some critical thickness. The evolution of an 
initially two-dimensional growth into a three-dimensional corrugated growth front 
has been observed in many systems. Actually, Stranski and Krastanow (SK) [128] 
initially proposed the possibility of island formation on an initially flat heteroepitaxial 
surface for the growth of lattice-matched ionic crystals that have different charges. 
It was then discovered that the growth of islands relaxed by misfit dislocations 
in strained heteroepitaxy is possible. The formation of coherent or defect-free 
islands as a result of the SK growth of strained heterostructures becomes an important 
method of growing quantum dots. 
In the SK growth mode, a strained layer forms up to a thickness of a few atomic 
monolayers. The increasing strain energy of the layer relaxes partially by the 
spontaneous formation of islands on the top of this wetting layer. This spontaneous 
formation during the epitaxial growth of two highly lattice-mismatched semiconduc-
tors leads to dense arrays of dots. For example, InAs islands grown on GaAs surface 

460 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Formed islands of QDs 
Wetting layer 
Siibsf-ate 
Figure 10.42 The formation of InAs islands during crystal growth. 
has been studied with efficient photoluminescence from InAs islands covered by 
GaAs. Research has identified that 3D islands are formed in appropriate growth con-
ditions caused by the strain-induced renormalization of the surface energy of the QD 
facets [136], Fig. 10.42. Repulsive interaction of the islands via the substrate allows 
for lateral ordering. For a strained epilayer with small interface energy, the initial 
growth may occur layer by layer, but a thicker layer has larger strain energy and 
can lower its energy by forming isolated islands in which strain is relaxed. Thus, 
the SK growth mode occurs. It was believed initially that islands formed in the SK 
growth are dislocated. However, further experiments have demonstrated the formation 
of three-dimensional coherently strained islands. If strained InGaAs islands are 
covered with a thin GaAs layer, InGaAs islands in a second sheet can be formed 
on top of the dots in the first sheet, resulting in 3D ordered arrays of QDs, where 
vertical coupling of dots is also possible [131]. The size and the shape of the 
InAs islands can be changed by using InGaAs or InGaAlAs and by changing 
the deposition mode. 
i 
_ . — , — . — , — - . — — -
buffer layer, substrate 
AlA&'GaAs 
SL 
InAsQDs 
InGaAs 
QW 
s. 
IoAs 
^ wetting 
layer 
J 
st 
8 
ε 
D D 
InAs 
InGaAs 
GaAs 
AlAs 
Figure 10.43 Schematic of the structure that contains InAs quantum-dot array in an external InGaAs 
quantum well on GaAs(lOO). (Reprinted with permission from (Ί331 © 1999 American Institute of 
Physics.) 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
461 
Figure 10.43 shows [133] an example of self-organized InAs quantum dots 
inserted in InGaAs quantum well grown on a GaAs substrate by molecular-beam 
epitaxy. Room temperature photoluminescence spectrum shows that QD emission 
wavelength is controllable from 1.1 to 1.3 μπι by varying the composition of 
In^Gai-^As quantum-well matrix from x = 0 (1.1 μιη for GaAs matrix) to x = 0.3 
(1.3 μηι). Figure 10.44a [133] shows the plan-view bright-field TEM image along 
[100] direction and Fig. 11.44b the cross-section image under dark-field (200) con-
dition for the InAs QD array in a 10-nm Inn.12Gao.88 As quantum well. InAs-rich clus-
ters in the region of smaller InAs content are seen in both observation views. The 
surface density of the islands is estimated as (3-4) x 1010 cm - 2. The dots have a 
typical lateral size of about 20 nm and a height of 5-6 nm. These sizes are larger 
than those of the InAs islands formed in a GaAs matrix. Because both the QD and 
QW materials are lattice mismatched to the GaAs substrate, there is a risk of 
plastic strain relaxation. Nevertheless, no misfit dislocations are revealed by TEM 
due to the choice of the QW width and the InAs mole fraction in the QW [133]. 
The sample with the QD structure embedded in a vertical optical microcavity 
shows a Photoluminescence (PL) emission of 1.33 μηι [133]. 
Figure 10.44 (a) Plan-view of the bright-field TEM image along the [1001 zone, and (b) the image of the 
cross section under dark-field (200) condition for the structure containing InAs QD array in a 10-nm 
Ino.^Gao.ssAs QW. (Reprinted with permission from [1331 © 1999 American Institute of Physics.) 

462 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
10.5.2 Spontaneous Emission, Gain, and Lasing Spectrum 
In Chapter 9, we discussed the absorption and gain of quantum-dot lasers [140-146]. 
The filling of states of quantum dots is complicated by the inhomogeneous size dis-
tribution and the density of dots or the distance between nearby dots [141]. When the 
inhomogeneous broadening is reduced, clear observation of ground-state and excited-
state emission peaks or absorption peaks are observable [141-146]. For example, 
Fig. 10.45a [141] shows the net modal absorption of a quantum-dot sample (dots 
in a well, or DWELL [139]) showing clear absorption peaks at the ground state 
and excited state when there is no current injection. In the presence of increasing 
current, population inversion occurs and a clear gain peak occurs at the ground 
state or the excited state at a higher current of 200 mA. Analysis of the gain spectrum 
seems to indicate two quasi-Fermi levels for the ground and excited state. The com-
petition of homogenous broadening and inhomogeneous broadening also leads to 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
Photon energy (eV) 
1.3 
(b) 
-20 
1 -40 
-60 
0.9 
200 mA 
100 mA 
20 mA 
Abs 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
Photon energy (eV) 
1.3 
Figure 10.45 
(a) The net modal absorption of the three-layer dots-in-well (DWELL) waveguide structure 
for TE-polarized light. The vertical line indicates the transition energy of the well. The horizontal dashed 
lines indicate the waveguide loss and the peak absorptions due to the ground and excited states. The solid 
line is the fitting of the calculated absorption spectrum to the experimental data, (b) The net modal TE gain 
spectra for pulsed currents per segment from 20 to 200 mA. (Reprinted with permission from [141] © 2004 
IEEE.) 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
463 
interesting lasing spectrum at low and high temperatures [143]. Figure 10.46a-f 
[142] shows the evolution of the ground state lasing at low current (10 mA) to 
simultaneous ground and excited state lasing at 20 mA, then excited state lasing at 
25 mA. A model taking into account the homogenous and inhomogeneous broaden-
ings explains the experimental data very well. The light output power is shown in 
Fig. 10.47 [142]. The regions of lasing from only the ground state, both states, and 
1100 1150 1200 1250 1300 1SS0 14Λ» 
Wavelength (nm) 
f -20 
*»30 
-40 
-50 
-60 
-TO 
-80 
10 mA 
4ii 
. 
*
■
' 
295 K 
I v 
V 
1100 11» 1200 1W0 1300 1350 1400 
Wavelength (nm) 
-70 
1109 1150 1200 1250 1300 13S0 1*00 
Wavelength (nm) 
295 K 
-TO 
1100 11S0 18» 12SO 1300 13SO 1400 
Wavelength (nm) 
~HO0 11S0 1200 1250 1300 13S0 1 4 » 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 10.46 Optical emission spectra of the laser at (a) 2.4, (b) 5, (c) 10, (d) 15, (e) 20, and (f) 25 mA. 
(Reprinted with permission from [142] © 2005 American Institute of Physics.) 

464 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
0.8 
! 
* 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
' - 
t 
' 
- " r - 
· 
| 
Orouod 
! 
· . — 
Calcinated 
; 
" 
Measured 
· • 
; · 
j r 
■ i. . 11 I n . 
ι 
-
• Gfound 1 ExcMd / 
; ExaMd \ 
S^t 
< 
'' ^"^ 
: · >
/ ; 
! 
! 
* 
295 K 
15 * 
15 "c 
10 I 
10 
15 
20 
Current (mA) 
30 
Figure 10.47 Output power and the homogeneous broadening of the ground-state transition (solid 
circles) versus the injection current at 295K. The solid curve is the measurement, and the dashed curve 
is the calculation. The range of current for only the ground-state lasing, both the ground-state and 
excited-state lasings, and only the excited-state lasing is shown, with the perpendicular dashed lines as 
boundaries. (Reprinted with permission from [142] © 2005 American Institute of Physics.) 
only the excited state are marked. The homogenous linewidth, which is used to model 
the lasing spectrum, is also shown as the right vertical axis. 
10.5.3 
High-Speed Modulation: /»-Doping and Tunneling Injection 
/»-Type Doping [147-162] A few major improvements in quantum-dot lasers 
result from the p-type doping, tunneling injection, and submonolayer growth (for a 
recent review, see [137]. p-type doping was suggested as early as 1988 [127] to 
improve the gain property of quantum-dot lasers. A simple way to understand the 
advantage of p-type doing is that the heavy-hole subband energy levels are close 
to each other due to their heavier effective mass than that of the electrons in the con-
duction band. Therefore, the holes spread out thermally into various subbands instead 
of filling the ground state completely first, whereas electrons tend to occupy the 
ground state better because the excited state of the conduction subband (C2) is 
further away from the ground state (Cl). It implies that the number of interband tran-
sitions such as C1-HH1 is reduced because not all holes occupy the ground state 
(HH1) for an undoped quantum dot sample. The holes that spread out to HH2 
subband do not recombine effectively with those electrons of the Cl subband. 
Although this is an oversimplified picture, theoretical models and experimental 
data seem to confirm several advantages of p-type doping. Experimental results 
have indeed shown that the p-doped 1.3-μπι QD lasers have substantially improved 
performance for short cavity lengths, indicating an increase in the ground state gain 
and exhibit excellent temperature insensitivity [147-149]. Further experimental data 
[149] on spontaneous and laser emission of p-doped and undoped QD heterostruc-
tures indeed show that the ground-state spontaneous emission of the carbon-doped 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
465 
sample is larger than that of the excited state when compared with those of an 
undoped QD sample. The differential gain is increased, but not the modulation band-
width. It appears that other mechanisms such as the electron transport through the dot 
wetting layer caused by the nonlasing QDs of the active ensemble may substantially 
reduce the modulation bandwidth. 
High-power and temperature-insensitive quantum-dot lasers with p-type doping 
have been reported. Continuous-wave high output power (5W) of GaAs-based 
Standard" QD structure 
W = 100 μηι, L = 1900 urn " 
CW, 15°C 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Drive current (/), A 
60 
50 
40 & 
10 
(b) 
CM 
| 
^ 10000 
3 
1 
S 
1000 r 
100 
" 
40 
60 
80 
100 120 140 
Temperature, °C 
Figure 10.48 (a) Optical output power, Pou (solid circles), bias voltage, V (solid squares), and conversion 
efficiency (triangles), as functions of drive current for a 100 μπι wide and 1900 μιη long stripe undoped 
quantum-dot laser CW operation at 15°C. Lasing spectra at different currents are shown, (b) Temperature depen-
dences of threshold current density and differential efficiency for undoped (solid) and two p-doped (half open 
and open) quantum-dot lasers. (Reprinted with permission from [150] © 2005 IOP Publishing Ltd.) 

466 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
broad-area (100 μιη) QD lasers at 1.3 μπι with a wall plug efficiency of 56% have 
been demonstrated. Figure 10.48a shows the experimental results of the L-I 
and I-V 
curves [150]. The wall plug conversion efficiency is also shown. 
Figure 10.48b shows the threshold current densities of two p-doped QD structures 
(open and half-open symbols) with that of an undoped QD sample. The threshold 
of the p-doped sample is higher than that of the undoped sample, yet the characteristic 
temperature is 650K, showing an almost insensitive threshold behavior. 
Experimental analysis has been performed on the gain, radiative and nonradiative 
components as a function of temperature for 50^m-wide, 2000-μπι-1οη§ oxide-
striped lasers for undoped and p-doped samples, and for ΙΟΟΟ-μηι-long and 
p-doped sample [151]. In Fig. 10.49a, we show the peak modal gain versus transpar-
ency minus transition energy at 300K for the undoped (crosses) and p-doped 
(squares) samples [151]. The gain of the p-doped sample is indeed higher than that 
(a) 16 
(b) 
-0.01 
0.03 
0.07 
0.11 
Transparency - transition energy (eV) 
0.15 
o 250 
z 
240 
280 
320 
360 
Temperature (K) 
Figure 10.49 (a) Peak modal gain versus transparency minus transition energy at 300K for the undoped 
(crosses) and p-doped (squares) samples, (b) Nonradiative current density as a function of temperature for 
the doped sample at a fixed modal gain of 8 cm~' (solid line, squares) and at fixed transparency energy 
minus transition energy (dashed line, circles) of 0.085 eV. (Reprinted with permission from [1511 © 
2007 IEEE.) 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
467 
of the undoped sample. Figure 10.49b shows the nonradiative current density as a 
function of temperature for the doped sample at a fixed modal gain of 8 cm ' 
(solid lines, squares) and at fixed transparency energy minus transition energy 
(dashed lines, circles) of 0.085 eV. It shows that the nonradiative current density as 
a function of temperature decreases for the p-doped sample in a temperature range 
240K to 300K. 
Figure 10.50a and Fig. 10.50b [152] show a comparison of the optical gain and 
differential gain of a p-doped (solid) and an undoped (dashed) QD laser, indicating 
clearly that the improvement of the p-type doping. The improvement in differential 
gain also leads to the reduction of the linewidth enhancement factor as indicated 
by Fig. 10.51 [152]. The horizontal axis is the surface electron density per QD 
layer [152]. The theory has also been used to fit the measured optical gain spectrum 
and the linewidth enhancement factor of the p-doped quantum-dot laser with a good 
agreement, as shown in Fig. 9.15 in Chapter 9. 
(a) 
f 
i 
■i 
a» 
» 
* 
a> 
a. 
(b) 
—* 
fe 
o 
<3 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
5 
4 
— r „ . 
...,.,., 
1 
'■■■? 
p-doped QD fV laser 
"■' undoped QD hV teer 
— 
p-doped QD FP laser 
« - - undoped QD FP laser 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Surface electron density (1010 cm"2) 
Figure 10.50 The dependence of (a) the peak modal gain and (b) the differential peak modal gain on the 
injection surface electron density per QD layer for the p-doped (solid) and undoped (dashed) QD FP lasers. 
(Reprinted with permission from [1521 © 2006 IEEE.) 

468 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
p-doped QD FP laser 
- - - undoped QD FP laser 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 10.51 Calculated LEF spectra of the p-doped (solid) and the undoped (dashed) QD FP laser near 
the threshold. (Reprinted with permission from [152] © 2006 IEEE.) 
Tunneling Injection [154-162] Tunneling injection such as the quantum-well 
(QW) coupled quantum-dot structures provides advantages such as better carrier col-
lection of carriers by quantum wells and subsequent tunneling injection into quantum 
dots. The process reduces the threshold current density and avoids the hot carrier 
effects, which will increase the direct modulation bandwidth. Figure 10.52a shows 
the energy-diagram schematic of an InP QD-coupled-QW laser [159]. The auxiliary 
QWs serve as collectors of carriers, which tunnel to QDs for radiative recombination. 
Tensile strained QWs contribute to strong TM light (with considerable TE 
component), whereas compressively strained QDs emit TE polarized light. Using a 
polarization-resolved ASE spectra at very low injection (0.01 mA), Fig. 10.52b, we 
can probe the QD ground state and the excited state contribution to the TE-polarized 
emission. The QW tensile strain produces strong TM emission from the wells 
together with a TE emission from the QD-coupled-QW states. The evolution of 
the polarization-resolved ASE spectrum (in the logarithmic scale) for the QD-QW 
laser with tensile-strained QWs at three bias currents is shown in Fig. 10.52c. 
As the current increases, the TE spectrum shifts to the emission of QD-coupled-
QW states. The TM emission spectrum from the QW is clear and increases uniformly 
at the shorter-wavelength side of the coupled QD-QW TE emission. 
Low linewidth enhancement factor has also been measured from a tunneling injec-
tion QD laser. In Fig. 10.53a, we show the energy diagram of an InAs QW-QD laser 
[158]. The auxiliary QWs serve as the collectors of electron and holes that tunnel into 
QDs for the stimulated recombination. Figure 10.53b shows the measured linewidth 
enhancement factor spectra of an InAs tunneling-injection QD laser. Pulse measure-
ment at low duty cycle below 2% is needed to avoid the thermal effect. The linewidth 
enhancement factor is as low as 0.15 near the threshold (23.5 mA). 
High-speed performance of a p-doped tunneling-injection QD laser has been 
demonstrated [161]. Figure 10.54a [161] shows the energy-band diagram in the 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
469 
(a) in, 
" V S A I M G I W 
InPQD 
Tensile QWs (60 Ä each) 
Compressive 
ing^Gag^P 
3.75 H U 
-0.1 mATE 
-1.0 mATE 
-2.0 mATE 
640 
660 
680 
700 
Wavelength (nm) 
600 
620 
640 
660 
680 
700 
720 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 10.52 (a) Energy diagram schematic of an InP QD-coupled-QW laser. The auxiliary QWs serve 
as collectors of carriers, which tunnel into QDs for the radiative recombination. Tensile strained QWs con-
tribute to strong TM-polarized light (with considerable TE component), whereas compressively strained 
QDs emit TE-polarized light, (b) Polarization-resolved ASE spectra at very low injection (0.01 mA) for 
a QD-QW laser with two tensile strained QWs coupled to a QD layer. The QD ground-state and the 
excited-state transitions contribute to TE emission. The QW tensile strain produces strong TM emission 
from the wells together with a TE emission from the QD-coupled-QW states, (c) Evolution of the polariz-
ation-resolved ASE spectrum (in the logarithmic scale) for the QD-QW laser with tensile-strained QWs at 
three bias currents. As the current increases, TE spectrum shifts to QD-coupled-QW-state emission. The 
TM emission spectrum from the QW is clear and increases uniformly at the shorter wavelength side of 
the coupled QD-QW TE emission. (Reprinted with permission from [1591 © 2005 IEEE.) 
active region of 1.3-μπι p-doped tunneling-injection QD lasers, which illustrates the 
phonon-assisted tunneling from the injector layer into the first excited state of QDs. 
The tunneling into the quantum dot state avoids the hot-carrier effect. Figure 10.54b 
shows the room temperature PL spectrum of the heterostructure, showing distinct 
peaks from the dot ground and excited states and the injector layer state. The modu-
lation frequency response of the /»-doped tunneling injection QD laser is shown in 
Fig. 10.55a [161], with its resonance frequency plotted as a function of the square 
root of (/ — /a,) in Fig. 10.55b. The QD laser shows a bandwidth of about 25 GHz 

FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
GaAs 1100 A 
GaAs 
5Ä 
p-AL.Ga.,_xAs 
Cladding 
I i-h± 
GaAs 1100 A 
Q W 140 A 
bidjjGajjAs 
n-AlxGa1_)rAs 
Cladding 
Electron 
Tunneling 
«Wi 
(Laser > 
^ _ _ Hole U+U 
L 
Tunnelina 
< 
QW 70 A ln0 „6a,, „As 
!:.'■'.'.,·; Stimulated recombination 
(Laser Action) 
Tunneling InAs QDs 
(b) 
1 I 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
-1 
- 2 
t—>—I—· 
i 
· 
i 
■ 
17.5-18.5 mA 
• 
18.5-19.5 mA 
* 
19.5-20.5 mA 
T 
20.5-21.5 mA 
' ■ 
■ ■_ 
■ ■ , 
- 2 3 . 5 m A : 
" * * " ■■ 
■ ■ 
- _ ■- * - ■ 
■"■■ 
e » * · ^ 
A/IA^MMULAAA* 
1046 1048 1050 1052 1054 1056 1058 1060 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 10.53 (a) Energy diagram of an InAs QW-QD tunneling injection laser. The auxiliary QWs serve 
as collectors of electron and holes that tunnel into a QD for the stimulated recombination, (b) Linewidth 
enhancement factor as a function of wavelength at various injection currents obtained for the InAs QW-
QD tunneling injection laser. Near threshold, the linewidth enhancement factor goes to almost zero 
(0.15). (Reprinted with permission from [1581 © 2003 American Institute of Physics.) 
direct modulation. Carrier dynamics and high-speed modulation of quantum-dot 
devices remain an intriguing subject of research [163-173]. 
10.5.4 Quantum-Dot Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers 
Quantum-dot semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs) [174-182] are of great interest 
due to the ultrafast (picosecond) gain recovery in the saturation region, which is 
demonstrated from pump-probe experiments [178, 179]. High bit-rate (>40Gb/s) 
and all-optical signal processing functions for multiple wavelengths have been pre-
dicted and demonstrated. The expected high performance of QD SOAs is due to 
the following physical properties, as pointed out in Refs. 176 and 177. First, gain sat-
uration occurs primarily due to the spectral hole burning even under the light pulse 

10.5 STRAINED QUANTUM-DOT LASERS 
471 
8λβ«Α· 
(b) 
0.2 
3 0.15 l· 
a! 0.05 
T = 300K 
FWHM-30 meV 
Excited State 
Injector 
\ 
1000 
1200 
1400 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 10.54 (a) The energy band diagram in the active region of l .3-μπι p-doped tunneling-injection 
QD lasers, which illustrates the phonon-assisted tunneling from the injector layer into the first excited 
state, (b) The room temperature PL spectrum of the heterostructure, which shows distinct peaks from 
the dot ground and excited states and the injector layer states. (Reprinted with permission from [1611 © 
2005 IOP Publishing Ltd.) 
with a peak power of 0-20 dBm commonly used in optical data transmission. This is 
due to the low and discrete density of states of QDs. The response time of gain 
saturation is 100 fs to 1 ps, which is enough for a giga-bit per second (Gb/s) to 
sub-tera-bit per second (Tb/s) optical transmission system. In addition, the so-called 
pattern effect is negligible, owing to the compensation of the spectral hole by the car-
riers relaxing from the excited states, including the states of the wetting layer, or the 
reservoir states. Second, the spatial isolation of dots prevents the transfer of carriers 
among dots, leading to a negligible cross-talk between different wavelength channels 
under gain saturation, when the channels are separated by more than the homo-
geneous linewidth of the single-dot gain, which is about 10-20 meV at 300K 
[180]. Third, when the channels are within the linewidth of the homogeneously 
broadened spectral hole, the interaction between two different wavelength channels 
via spatially isolated and energetically nonresonant quantum dots through the spectral 
hole causes the ultrafast cross-gain modulation, which generates switching functions 
like the wavelength conversion [181]. These features all provide a striking contrast to 

472 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
I 
I 
10 
0 
-10 
-20 
-30 
10 
10 mA/ 
18 mA 
mA 
Γ=28βΚ 
/ = 200 Mm 
10" 
10' 
Frequency (GHz) 
(b) 20 
dg/dn = 3x10"14cm2 
10 
(WL),e(mA,e) 
Figure 10.55 (a) Modulation response of a p-doped tunneling injection QD laser, (b) Resonance 
frequency versus the square root of (/— /Λ). (Reprinted with permission from [1611 © 2005 IOP 
Publishing Ltd.) 
the bulk or quantum-well SOAs. High performance of QD SOAs for signal proces-
sing of 40Gb/s or even 160Gb/s have been reported. We refer the readers to 
comprehensive papers in Refs. 174-177 and 182. 
PROBLEMS 
10.1 Plot the energy band diagram for a P-A\Q3Gao,7M/i-G&As/N-Al0 
3Gao.7As 
double heterojunction under zero bias with the active GaAs layer thickness 
d= 1 μπι. Assume that NA — lxlO l 8cm 
3 in the P-region and ΝΌ = 
1 x 10l8cm~3 in the N-region. Use the depletion approximation. 
10.2 Plot the energy band diagram for a P-InP/i-InGaAsP/N-rnP double 
heterostructure under zero bias with the active layer d — 1 μιη using the 
depletion approximation. Assume that NA = 1 x 10l8cm~3 in the F-region 

PROBLEMS 
473 
and ΝΌ = 1 χ 1018cm"3 in the N-region. The active InGaAsP layer has a 
band-gap energy of 1.0 eV and is lattice matched to InP. Assume that the 
band edge discontinuity AEC/AEV is 60/40. 
10.3 A semiconductor laser operating at 1.55 μπι has an internal quantum effi-
ciency T/j = 0.75, intrinsic absorption coefficient aj = 8cm~\ and the 
mirror reflectivity R = 0.3 on both facets. 
(a) Plot the inverse external quantum efficiency 1/ηβ versus the cavity 
length L. 
(b) Assuming that the threshold current is 3.5 mA at L = 500 |xm, plot the 
optical output power versus the injection current /. Label the slope of 
the curve. 
(c) Repeat (b) for /Λ = 4 mA and L = 1000 μηι. 
10.4 If the mirror reflectivities are R^ and R2 at the two ends of the semiconductor 
laser facets, the threshold condition is given by 
rs t h = ai + 2 Z l n ^ - . 
(a) Find the expressions for the optical output powers, P\ and P2, from facets 
1 and 2. 
(b) Plot P\ versus Rx for 0.1 < Ri < 1.0 and P2 versus R2 for 0.1 < R2 < 
1.0. You may assume that a\ = 10 cm - 1 and L = 500 μιη. 
(c) Compare P, with P2 if /?, = 0.3 and R2 = 0.5. 
10.5 Plot n(y) using (2.4.18) and show that it agrees with the experimental data 
in Fig. 10.17. 
10.6 Describe the mode patterns \Ey(x, y)\ 
of the lowest four modes using 
(10.2.4) for a gain-guided semiconductor laser. Note the Hermite 
polynomials: H0(u)=\, 
Hi(u) = 2u, and H2(u) = — 2 + Au2, H3(u) = 
-12w + 8w3. 
10.7 
(a) Explain the physical reasons why In 7Λ of a quantum-well laser increases 
linearly with the inverse cavity length 1 jL as shown in Fig. 10.28a. What 
determines the slope of the line? 
(b) How do you find the cavity length L such that the threshold current /Λ is 
minimized? What are the factors determining this minimum threshold 
current? 
(c) Find typical numerical values of some quantum-well lasers and replot 
Fig. 10.28a and Fig. 10.28b. 
10.8 Plot the gain spectrum using (10.3.13) for a 100 Ä GaAs/Alo.3Gao.7As 
quantum-well laser assuming a parabolic band model and an infinite 
barrier approximation to calculate the subband energies and wave functions. 
What is the maximum gain coefficient gmax? 

474 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
10.9 
(a) Calculate the parameters nc and nv for a 100 A GaAs/AlojGao.vAs 
quantum-well laser at T = 300K. Assume single subband occupation. 
(b) Find the transparency carrier density ntr for part (a). 
10.10 
Discuss how the number of quantum wells can be optimized to minimize the 
threshold current density at a given threshold gain value using Fig. 10.27. 
10.11 
Calculate the conduction, heavy-hole and light-hole band-edge energies for 
In,_;tGa;CAs/Ino.52Al048As quantum-well structures where In 0 5 2Al 0 4 8As is 
lattice-matched to the InP substrate, assuming the gallium mole fraction (a) 
x = 0.37, (b) x = 0.47, and (c) x = 0.57 in the well region. Use the physical 
parameters in Appendix C (pages 803-804). 
10.12 
Discuss the advantages of compressively strained and tensile strained 
quantum-well lasers based on the effective mass, the density of states, and 
the optical momentum matrix elements. 
10.13 
Compare the normalized optical momentum matrix element in Fig. 10.35 
with the analytical results in Table 9.1 in Section 9.5 using a parabolic 
band model. 
10.14 
Discuss the potential advantages of p-doping in quantum-dot lasers. 
REFERENCES 
1. IEEE J. Quantum Electron., special issue on Semiconductor Lasers, guest editor, 
P. D. Dapkus, QE-23, June 1987. See the Historical Section, pp. 651-692. It includes 
the reminiscent accounts on the invention of semiconductor lasers by R. N. Hall, 
M. I. Nathan, N. Holonyak, Jr., and R. H. Rediker. It also contains the previously unpub-
lished notes of J. von Neumann, written in 1953, which outlined remarkably his ideas on 
"the photon-disequilibrium-amplification scheme." 
2. H. C. Casey, Jr. and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part A: Fundamental 
Principles, Academic Press, New York, 1978. 
3. C. H. Henry, "The origin of quantum wells and the quantum well lasers," Chapter 1 in 
Quantum Well Lasers, P. S. Zory, Jr., Ed. Academic Press, New York, 1993. 
4. R. N. Hall, G. E. Fenner, J. D. Kingsley, T. J. Soltys, and R. O. Carlson, "Coherent light 
emission from GaAs junctions," Phys. Rev. Lett. 9, 366-368 (1962). 
5. M. I. Nathan, W. P. Dumke, G. Burns, F. H. Dill, Jr., and G. Lasher, "Stimulated emission 
of radiation from GaAs p-n junctions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 1, 62-64 (1962). 
6. N. Holonyak, Jr., and S. F. Bevacqua, "Coherent (visible) light emission from 
Ga(As,_^PJ junctions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 1, 82-83 (1962). 
7. T. M. Quist, R. H. Rediker, R. J. Keyes, W. E. Krag, B. Lax, A. L. McWhorter, and 
H. J. Zeiger, "Semiconductor maser of GaAs," Appl. Phys. Lett. 1, 91-92 (1962). 
8. H. Kroemer, "A proposed class of heterojunction injection lasers," Proc. IEEE 51, 
1782-1783(1963). 

REFERENCES 
475 
9. H. Kressel and H. Nelson, "Close confinement gallium arsenide p-n junction lasers with 
reduced optical loss at room temperature," RCA Review 30, 106-113 (1969). 
10. Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, E. L. Portnoi, and M. K. Trukan, "AlAs-GaAs heterojunc-
tion injection lasers with a low room-temperature threshold," Sov. Phys. Semicond. 3, 
1107-1110(1970). 
11. I. Hayashi, M. B. Panish, P. W. Foy, and S. Sumski, "Junction lasers which operate 
continuously at room temperature," Appl. Phys. Lett. 17, 109-111 (1970). 
12. R. Dingle, W. Wiegmann, and C. H. Henry, "Quantum states of confined carriers in very 
thin Al^Ga, ^As-GAs-A^Ga, -*As heterostructures," Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 827-830 
(1974). 
13. E. A. Rezek, H. Shichijo, B. A. Vojak, and N. Holonyak, Jr., "Confined-carrier lumines-
cence of a thin Ini_xGAxP|_zAsz well (x - 0.13, z - 0.29; ~400 A) in an InP p-n junc-
tions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 31, 534-536 (1977). E. A. Rezek, N. Holonyak, Jr., B. A. Vojak, 
G. E. Stillman, J. A. Rossi, D. L. Keune, and J. D. Fairing, "LPE In! -^GA^Pj -jASjn (x -
0.12, z - 0.26) DH laser with multiple thin-layer (<500 A) active region," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 31, 288-290 (1977). E. A. Rezek, N. Holonyak, Jr., B. A. Vojak, and 
H. Shichijo, "Single and multiple thin layer (Lz<400 A) In^^GA^P^jAsj-InP hetero-
structure light emitters and lasers (A- 1.1 μπι, 77Κ)," J. Appl. Phys. 49, 69-74 (1978). 
14. N. Holonyak, Jr., R. M. Kolbas, R. D. Dupuis, and P. D. Dapkus, "Quantum-well hetero-
structure lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-16, 170-186 (1980). 
15. R. D. Dupuis, P. D. Dapkus, N. Holonyak, Jr., E. A. Rezek, and R. Chin, "Room-
temperature laser operation of quantum-well Gai -^ALAs-GaAs laser diodes grown by 
metalorganic chemical vapor deposition," Appl. Phys. Lett. 32, 295-297 (1978). 
16. W. T. Tsang, "A graded-index waveguide separate-confinement laser with very low 
threshold and a narrow Gaussian beam," Appl. Phys. Lett. 39, 134-137 (1981). 
17. E. Yablonovitch and E. O. Kane, "Reduction of lasing threshold current density by the 
lowering of valence band effective mass," /. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 504 (1986); 
Erratum LT-4, 961 (1986). 
18. A. R. Adams, "Band-structure engineering for low-threshold high-efficiency semicon-
ductor lasers," Electron. Lett. 22, 249-250 (1986). 
19. H. K. Choi and C. A. Wang, "InGaAs/AlGaAs strained quantum well diode lasers with 
extremely low threshold current density and high efficiency," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57, 
321-323(1990). 
20. R. L. Williams, M. Dion, F. Chatenoud, and K. Dzurko, "Extremely low threshold current 
strained InGaAs/AlGaAs lasers by molecular beam epitaxy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 
1816-1818(1991). 
21. W. T. Tsang, volume editor, Lightwave Communications Technology, in R. K. WiUardson 
and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, vol. 22, Part A-E, Academic 
Press, New York, 1985. 
22. Y. Arakawa and A. Yariv, "Quantum well lasers—gain, spectra, dynamics," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-22, 1887-1899 (1986). 
23. E. Kapon, "Quantum wire lasers," Proc. IEEE &0, 398-410 (1992). 
24. A. Yariv, "Scaling laws and minimum threshold currents for quantum-confined semicon-
ductor lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 53, 1033-1035 (1988). 

476 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
25. W. Wegscheider, L. N. Pfeiffer, M. M. Dignam, A. Pinczuk, K. W. West, S. L. McCall, 
and R. Hull, "Lasing from excitons in quantum wires," Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4071-4074 
(1993). 
26. K. Iga, S. Ishkawa, S. Ohkouchi, and T. Nishimura, "Room temperature pulsed oscillation 
of GaAlAs/GaAs surface emitting junction laser," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 
315-320 (1985). 
27. S. W. Corzine, R. S. Geels, R. H. Yan, J. W. Scott, L. A. Coldren, and P. L. Gourley, 
"Efficient, narrow-linewidth distributed-Bragg-reflector surface-emitting laser with 
periodic gain," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 1, 321-323 (1989). 
28. G. A. Evans and J. M. Hammer, Eds., Surface Emitting Semiconductor Lasers and 
Arrays, Academic Press, San Diego, 1993. 
29. S. L. McCall, A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. J. Pearton, and R. A. Logan, "Whispering-
gallery mode microdisk lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 289-291 (1992). 
30. A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. L. McCall, T. Tanbun-Ek, D. L. Coblentz, and 
S. J. Pearton, "Room temperature operation of microdisc lasers with submilliamp 
threshold current," Electron. Lett. 28, 1010-1011 (1992). 
31. Y. Yamamoto and R. E. Slusher, "Optical processes in microcavities," Physics Today 46, 
66-73 (1993). 
32. M. Yano, H. Imai, and M. Takusagawa, "Analysis of electrical, threshold, and tempera-
ture characteristics of InGaAsP/InP double-heterojunction lasers," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-17, 1954-1963 (1981). 
33. G. P. Agrawal and N. K. Dutta, Long-Wavelength Semiconductor Lasers, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, San Diego, 1986. 
34. H. C. Casey, Jr. and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Part B: Materials and 
Operating Characteristics, Academic Press, San Diego, 1978. 
35. A. R. Goodwin, J. R. Peters, M. Pion, G. H. B. Thomson, and J. E. A. Whiteway, 
"Threshold temperature characteristics of double heterostructure Gai -^Al^As lasers," J. 
Appl. Phys. 46, 3126-3131 (1975). 
36. P. J. Anthony, J. R. Pawlik, V. Swaminathan, and W. T. Tsang, "Reduced threshold 
current temperature dependence in double heterostructure lasers due to separate p-n 
and heterojunctions," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-19, 1030-1034 (1983). 
37. C. J. Nuese and J. I. Pankove, "Light-emitting diodes-LEDs," Chapter 2 in J. I. Pankov, 
Ed., Display Devices, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980. 
38. S. M. Sze and K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 
2007. 
39. J. Wilson and J. F. B. Hawkes, Optoelectronics: An Introduction, Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1983. 
40. C. A. Burrus and B. I. Miller, "Small-area, double heterostructure aluminum-gallium 
arsenide electroluminescent diode sources for optical-fiber transmission lines," Opt. 
Commun. 4, 307-309 (1971). 
41. M. Ettenberg, H. Kressel, and J. P. Wittke, "Very high radiance edge-emitting LED," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron QE-12, 360-364 (1976). 
42. J. O'Gorman, S. L. Chuang, and A. F. J. Levi, "Carrier pinning by mode fluctuations in 
laser diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 1454-1456 (1993). 

REFERENCES 
477 
43. S. L. Chuang, J. O'Gorman, and A. F. J. Levi, "Amplified spontaneous emission and 
carrier pinning in laser diodes," IEEE J. Quantum Electron., special issue on 
Semiconductor Lasers 29, 1631-1639 (1993). 
44. B. Zee, "Broadening mechanism in semiconductor (GaAs) lasers: limitations to single 
mode power emission," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-14, 727-736 (1978). 
45. B. W. Hakki and T. L. Paoli, "Gain spectra in GaAs double-heterostructure injection 
lasers," /. Appl. Phys. 46, 1299-1306 (1975). 
46. G. Lasher and F. Stern, "Spontaneous and stimulated recombination radiation in semicon-
ductors," Phys. Rev. 133, A553-A563 (1964). 
47. C. S. Chang, S. L. Chuang, J. R. Minch, W. W. Fang, Y. K. Chen, and T. Tanbun-Ek, 
"Amplified spontaneous emission spectroscopy in strained quantum-well lasers," IEEE 
J. Set. Top. Quantum Electron. 1, 1106-1107 (1995). 
48. T. Keating, S. H. Park, J. Minch, X. Jin, S. L. Chuang, and T. Tanbun-Ek, "Optical gain 
measurements based on fundamental properties and comparison with many-body 
theory," J. Appl. Phys. 86, 2945-2952 (1999). 
49. H. Yonezu, I. Sakuma, K. Kobayashi, T. Kamejima, M. Ueno, and Y. Nannichi, "A 
GaAs-AlxGai_xAs double heterostructure planar stripe laser," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 12, 
1585-1592(1973). 
50. B. W. Hakki, "Carrier and gain spatial profiles in GaAs stripe geometry lasers," J. Appl. 
Phys. 44, 5021-5029 (1973). 
51. D. D. Cook and F. R. Nash, "Gain-induced guiding and astigmatic output beam of GaAs 
lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 46, 1660-1672 (1975). 
52. N. Chinone, "Nonlinearity in power-output-current characteristics of stripe-geometry 
injection lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 48, 3237-3243 (1977). 
53. W. T. Tsang, "The effects of lateral current spreading, carrier out-diffusion, and optical 
mode losses on the threshold current density of GaAs-Al^Gai-^As stripe-geometry 
DH lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 49, 1031-1044 (1978). 
54. T. L. Paoli, "Waveguiding in a stripe-geometry junction laser," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-13, 662-668 (1977). 
55. W. Streifer, D. R. Scifres, and R. D. Burnham, "Analysis of gain-induced waveguiding in 
stripe-geometry diode lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-14, 418-427 (1978). 
56. W. B. Joyce, "Current-crowded carrier confinement in double-heterostructure lasers," 
J. Appl. Phys. 51, 2394-2401 (1980). 
57. W. Streifer, R. D. Burnham, and D. R. Scifres, "An analytic study of (GaAl)As gain 
guided lasers at threshold," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18, 856-864 (1982). 
58. I. P. Kaminow, L. W. Stulz, J. S. Ko, A. G. Dentai, R. E. Nahory, J. C. DeWinter, and 
R. L. Hartman, "Low-threshold InGaAsP ridge waveguide lasers at 1.3 u,m," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-19, 1312-1319 (1983). 
59. H. Hirao, M. S. Tsuji, K. Mizuishi, A. Doi, and M. Nakamura, "Long wavelength 
InGaAsP/InP lasers for optical fiber communication systems," J. Opt. Commun. 
1, 10-14(1980). 
60. H. Kawaguchi and T. Kawakami, "Transverse-mode control in an injection laser by a 
strip-loaded waveguide," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-13, 556-560 (1977). 
61. M. Asada, A. Kameyama, and Y. Suematsu, "Gain and intervalence band absorption in 
quantum well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 20, 745-753 (1984). 

478 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
62. K. J. Vahala and C. E. Zah, "Effect of doping on the optical gain and the spontaneous 
noise enhancement factor in quantum well amplifiers and lasers studied by simple 
analytical expressions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 52, 1945-1947 (1988). 
63. K. Y. Lau, "Ultralow threshold quantum well lasers," Ch. 4, and "Dynamics of quantum 
well lasers," Chapter 5, in Quantum Well Lasers, P. S. Zory, Jr., Ed., Academic Press, San 
Diego (1993). 
64. A. Ghiti, M. Silver, and E. P. O'Reilly, "Low threshold current and high differential gain 
in ideal tensile- and compressive-strained quantum-well lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 71, 
4626-4628 (1992). 
65. M. Asada and Y. Suematsu, "The effects of loss and nonradiative recombination on the 
temperature dependence of threshold current in 1.5-1.6 μιη GalnAsP/InP lasers," IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. QE-19, 917-923 (1983). 
66. B. Sermage, D. S. Chemla, D. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho, "Comparison of Auger recombina-
tion in GalnAs-AlInAs multiple quantum well structure and in bulk GalnAs," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-22, 774-780 (1986). 
67. M. Asada, "Intraband relaxation time in quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 25, 2019-2026 (1989). 
68. E. Zielinski, H. Schweizer, S. Hausser, R. Stuber, M. H. Pilkuhn, and G. Weimann, 
"Systematics of laser operation in GaAs/AlGaAs multiquantum well heterostructures," 
IEEE]. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 966-976 (1987). 
69. E. Zielinski, F. Keppler, K. Streubel, F. Scholz, R. Sauer, and W. T. Tsang, "Optical gain 
in strain-free and strained layer GaJn^^As/InP superlattices," Superlattices and 
Microstructures 5, 555-559 (1989). 
70. P. Blood, S. Colak, and A. I. Kucharska, "Influence of broadening and high-injection effects 
on GaAs-AlGaAs quantum well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 24,1593-1604(1988). 
71. A. I. Kucharska and D. J. Robbins, "Lifetime broadening in GaAs-AlGaAs quantum well 
lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 443-448 (1990). 
72. P. W. A. Mcllroy, A. Kurobe, and Y. Uematsu, "Analysis and application of theoretical 
gain curves to the design of multi-quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
QE-21, 1958-1963 (1985). 
73. A. Kurobe, H. Furuyama, S. Naritsuka, N. Sugiyama, Y. Kokubun, and M. Nakamura, 
"Effects of well number, cavity length, and facet reflectivity on the reduction of threshold 
current of GaAs/AlGsAs multiquantum well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-24, 
635-640 (1988). 
74. M. Rosenzweig, M. Möhrle, H. Düser, and H. Venghaus, "Threshold-current analysis of 
InGaAs-InGaAsP multiquantum well separate-confinement lasers," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 27, 1804-1811 (1991). 
75. J. S. Osinski, K. M. Dzurko, S. G. Hummel, and P. D. Dapkus, "Optimization of stripe 
width for low-threshold operation of quantum well laser diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 
2487-2489 (1990). 
76. J. S. Osinski, Y. Zou, P. Grodzinski, A. Mathur, and P. D. Dapkus, "Low-threshold-
current-density 1.5 μ,πι lasers using compressively strained InGaAsP quantum wells," 
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 4, 10-13 (1992). 
77. A. Yariv, Quantum Electronics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1989. 

REFERENCES 
479 
78. M. Yamada, K. Tabata, S. Ogita, and M. Yamagishi, "Calculation of lasing gain and 
threshold current in GaAs-AlGaAs multi-quantum-well lasers," Trans. IECE Japan 
E68, 102-108(1985). 
79. G. C. Osbourn, "In^Gaj-^As-In^Gai _yAs strained-layer superlattices: a proposal for 
useful, new electronic materials," Phys. Rev. B 27, 5126-5128 (1983). 
80. T. P. Pearsall, Vol. Ed., Strained Layer Superlattices: Physics, vol. 32, 1990; and Strained 
Layer Superlattices: Materials Science and Technology, vol. 33, 1991, in R. K. Willardson 
and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductor and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York. 
81. E. Yablonovitch and E. O. Kane, "Band structure engineering of semiconductor lasers for 
optical communications," J. Lightwave Technol. 6, 1292-1299 (1988). 
82. P. J. A. Thijs, L. F. Tiemeijer, P. I. Kuindersma, J. J. M. Binsma, and T. Van Dongen, 
"High-performance 1.5 μπι wavelength InGaAs-InGaAsP strained quantum well lasers 
and amplifiers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27, 1426-1439 (1991). 
83. C. E. Zah, R. Bhat, F. J. Favire, Jr., S. G. Menocal, N. C. Andreadakis, K. W. Cheung, 
D. M. D. Hwang, M. A. Koza, and T. P. Lee, "Low-threshold 1.5 μπι compressive-
strained multiple- and single-quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27, 
1440-1450(1991). 
84. K. J. Beernink, P. K. York, and J. J. Coleman, "Dependence of threshold current density 
on quantum well composition for strained-layer InGaAs-GaAs lasers by metalorganic 
chemical vapor deposition," Appl. Phys. Lett. 55, 2585-2587 (1989). 
85. T. Tanbun-Ek, R. A. Logan, H. Temkin, S. N. G. Chu, N. A. Olsson, A. M. Sergent, and 
K. W. Wecht, "Growth and characterization of continuously graded index separate con-
finement heterostructure (GRIN-SCH) InGaAs-InP long wavelength strained layer 
quantum-well lasers by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 26, 1323-1327 (1990). 
86. C. E. Zah, R. Bhat, K. W. Cheung, N. C. Andreadakis, F. J. Favire, S. G. Menocal, 
E. Yablonovitch, D. M. Hwang, M. Koza, T. J. Gmitter, and T. P. Lee, "Low-threshold 
(< 92 A/cm2) 1.6 μηι strained-layer single-quantum-well laser diodes optically pumped 
by a 0.8 μηι laser diode," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57, 1608-1609 (1990). 
87. H. Temkin, N. K. Dutta, T. Tanbun-Ek, R. A. Logan, and A. M. Sergent, "InGaAs/InP 
quantum well lasers with sub-mA threshold current," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57,1610-1612 (1990). 
88. W. T. Tsang, M. C. Wu, T. Tanbun-Ek, R. A. Logan, S. N. G. Chu, and A. M. Sergent, 
"Low threshold and high power output 1.5 μηπ InGaAs/InGaAsP separate confinement 
multiple quantum well laser grown by chemical beam epitaxy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57, 
2065-2067 (1990). 
89. A. Kasukawa, R. Bhat, C. E. Zah, M. A. Koza, and T. P. Lee, "Very low threshold current 
density 1.5 μπι GalnAs/AlGalnAs graded-index separate-confinement-heterostructure 
strained quantum well laser diodes grown by organometallic chemical vapor deposition," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 2486-2488 (1991). 
90. T. Tanbun-Ek, R. A. Logan, N. A. Olsson, H. Temkin, A. M. Sergent, and K. W. Wecht, 
"High power output 1.48-1.51 μπι continuously graded index separate confinement 
strained quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57, 224-226 (1990). 
91. M. Joma, H. Horikawa, Y. Matsui, and T. Kamijoh, "High-power 1.48 μπι multiple 
quantum well lasers with strained quaternary wells entirely grown by metalorganic 
vapor phase epitaxy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 2220-2222 (1991). 

480 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
92. A. Moser, A. Oosenbrug, E. E. Latta, Th. Forster, and M. Gasser, "High-power operation 
of strained InGaAs/AlGaAs single quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 
2642-2644(1991). 
93. H. K. Choi, C. A. Wang, D. F. Kolesar, R. L. Aggarwal, and J. N. Walpole, "High-power, 
high-temperature operation of AlInGaAs-AlGaAs strained single-quantum-well diode 
lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 3, 857-859 (1991). 
94. H. Temkin, T. Tanbun-Ek, R. A. Logan, D. A. Cebula, and A. M. Sergent, "High temp-
erature operation of lattice matched and strained InGaAs-InP quantum well lasers," IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett. 3, 100-102 (1991). 
95. P. L. Derry, R. J. Fu, C. S. Hong, E. Y. Chan, and L. Figueroa, "Analysis of the high 
temperature characteristics of InGaAs-AlGaAs strained quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 28, 2698-2705 (1992). 
96. H. Temkin, D. Coblentz, R. A. Logan, J. P. van der Ziel, T. Tanbun-Ek, R. D. Yadvish, 
and A. M. Sergent, "High temperature characteristics of InGaAsP/InP laser structures," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 2402-2404 (1993). 
97. H. Nobuhara, K. Tanaka, T. Yamamoto, T. Machida, T. Fujii, and K. Wakao, "High-
temperature operation of InGaAs/InGaAsP compressive-strained QW lasers with low 
threshold currents," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 5, 961-962 (1993). 
98. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Optical gain in a strained-layer quantum-well laser," IEEEJ. 
Quantum Electron. 24, 2400-2406 (1988). 
99. T. C. Chong and C. G. Fonstad, "Theoretical gain of strained-layer semiconductor lasers 
in the large strain regime," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 25, 171-178 (1989). 
100. E. P. O'Reilly and A. R. Adams, "Band-structure engineering in strained semiconductor 
lasers," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 30, 366-379 (1994). 
101. S. W. Corzine, R. H. Yan, and L. A. Coldren, 'Theoretical gain in strained InGaAs/ 
AlGaAs quantum wells including valence-band mixing effects," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57, 
2835-2837 (1990). 
102. N. K. Dutta, J. Lopata, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho, "Temperature dependence of 
threshold of strained quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 1125-1127 (1991). 
103. I. Suemune, "Theoretical study of differential gain in strained quantum well structures," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 27, 1149-1159 (1991). 
104. E. P. O'Reilly, G. Jones, A. Ghiti, and A. R. Adams, "Improved performance due to 
suppression of spontaneous emission in tensile-strain semiconductor lasers," Electron. 
Lett. 27, 1417-1419 (1991). 
105. L. F. Lester, S. D. Offsey, B. K. Ridley, W. J. Schaff, B. A. Foreman, and L. F. Eastman, 
"Comparison of the theoretical and experimental differential gain in strained layer 
InGaAs/GaAs quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 1162-1164 (1991). 
106. J. W. Matthews and A. E. Blakeslee, "Defects in epitaxial multilayers," J. Crystal Growth 
27, 118(1974). 
107. R. People and J. C. Bean, "Calculation of critical layer thickness versus lattice mismatch 
for Ge^Si!_x/Si strained-layer heterostructures," Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 322-324 (1985); 
Erratum, Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 229 (1986). 
108. M. G. A. Bernard and G. Duraffourg, "Laser conditions in semiconductors," Phys. Stat. 
Sol. 1, 699-703 (1961). 

REFERENCES 
481 
109. S. L. Chuang, "Efficient band-structure calculations of strained quantum wells," Phys. 
Rev. B 43, 9649-9661 (1991). 
110. C. Y. P. Chao and S. L. Chuang, "Spin-orbit-coupling effects on the valence-band struc-
ture of strained semiconductor quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 46, 4110-4122 (1992). 
111. T. Tanbun-Ek, N. A. Olsson, R. A. Logan, K. W. Wecht, and A. M. Sergent, 
"Measurements of the polarization dependent of the gain of strained multiple quantum 
well InGaAs-InP lasers," IEEE Photon Technol. Lett. 3, 103-105 (1991). 
112. N. B. Patel, J. E. Ripper, and P. Brosson, "Behavior of threshold current and polarization 
of stimulated emission of GaAs injection lasers under uniaxial stress," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-9, 338-341 (1973). 
113. J. M. Liu and Y. C. Chen, "Digital optical signal processing with polarization-bistable 
semiconductor lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 298-306 (1985). 
114. J. S. Osinski, P. Grodzinski, Y. Zou, and P. D. Dapkus, "Threshold current analysis of 
compressive strain (0-1.8%) in low-threshold, long-wavelength quantum well lasers," 
IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 29, 1576-1585 (1993). 
115. Y. Zou, J. S. Osinski, P. Grodzinski, P. D. Dapkus, W. Rideout, W. F. Sharfin, and 
F. D. Crawford, "Effect of Auger recombination and differential gain on the temperature 
sensitivity of 1.5 μπι quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 175-177 (1993). 
116. G. Fuchs, C. Schiedel, A. Hangleiter, V. Harle, and F. Scholz, "Auger recombination in 
strained and unstrained InGaAs/InGaAsP multiple quantum-well lasers," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 62, 396-398 (1993). 
117. M. C. Wang, K. Kash, C. E. Zah, R. Bhat, and S. L. Chuang, "Measurement of nonra-
diative Auger and radiative recombination rates in strained-layer quantum-well 
systems," Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 166-168 (1993). 
118. Y. Zou, J. S. Osinski, P. Grodzinski, P. D. Dapkus, W. C. Rideout, W. F. Sharfin, and 
F. D. Crawford, "Experimental study of Auger recombination, gain and temperature 
sensitivity of 1.5 μπι compressively strained semiconductor lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
62, 175-177 (1993). 
119. J. O'Gorman, A. F. J. Levi, T. Tanbun-Ek, D. L. Coblentz, and R. A. Logan, 
"Temperature dependence of long wavelength semiconductor lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
60, 1058-1060(1992). 
120. D. Morris, B. Deveaud, A. Regreny, and P. Auvray, "Electron and hole capture in 
multiple-quantum-well structures," Phys. Rev. B 47, 6819-6822 (1993). 
121. R. Nagarajan, T. Fukushima, M. Ishikawa, J. E. Bowers, R. S. Geels, and L. A. Coldren, 
"Transport limits in high-speed quantum-well lasers: experiment and theory," IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett. 4, 121-123 (1992). 
122. S. Schmitt-Rink, C. Ell, and H. Haug, "Many-body effects in the absorption, gain, and 
luminescence spectra of semiconductor quantum-well structures," Phys. Rev. B 33, 
1183-1189(1986). 
123. M. F. Pereira, Jr., S. W. Koch, and W. W. Chow, "Many-body effects in the gain spectra 
of strained quantum wells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 2941-2943 (1991). 
124. Z. Alferov, "Double heterostructure lasers: early days and future perspectives," IEEE J. 
Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 6, 832-840 (2000). 
125. Y. Arakawa and H. Sakaki, "Multidimensional quantum well laser and temperature 
dependence of its threshold current," Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 939-941 (1982). 

482 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
126. M. Asada, Y. Miyamoto, and Y Suamatsu, "Gain and threshold of three-dimensional 
quantum-box lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 1915-1921 (1986). 
127. T. Takahashi and Y. Arakawa, "Theoretical analysis of gain and dynamic properties of 
quantum-well box lasers," Optoelectron. Devices. Technol. 3, 155-162 (1988). 
128. Ivan N. Stranski and L. Von Krastanow, "Theory of orientation separation of ionic crys-
tals," Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, Math.-naturw. Klasse, Abt. lib 146, 797-810, (1938). 
129. N. Kirstaedter, N. N. Ledentsov, M. Grundmann, D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, 
S. S. Rumimov, M. V. Maximov, P. S. Kop'ev, Zh. I. Alferov, U. Richter, P. Werner, 
U. Gösele, and J. Heydenreich, "Low threshold, large T0 injection laser emission from 
(InGa)As quantum dots," Electron. Lett. 30, 1416-1417 (1994). 
130. N. Kirstaedter, O. G. Schmidt, N. N. Ledentsov, D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, 
A. Y. Egorov, A. E. Zhukov, M. V. Maximov, P. S. Kopev, and Z. I. Alferov, "Gain 
and differential gain of single layer InAs/GaAs quantum dot injection lasers," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 69, 1226-1228 (1996). 
131. N. N. Ledentsov, V. A. Shchukin, M. Grundmann, N. Kirstaedter, J. Bohrer, 0. Schmidt, 
D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, A. Yu. Egorov, A. E. Zhukov, P. S. Kop'ev, S. V. Zaitsev, 
N. Yu. Gordeev, Zh. I. Alferov, A. I. Borovkov, A. O. Kosogov, S. S. Ruvimov, 
P. Werner, U. Gösele, and J. Heydenreich, "Direct formation of vertically coupled 
quantum dots in Stranski-Krastanow growth," Phys. Rev. B 54, 8743-8750 (1996). 
132. D. Bimberg, N. Kirstaedter, N. N. Ledentsov, Zh. I. Alferov, P. S. Kop'ev, and 
V. M. Ustinov, "InGaAs-GaAs quantum-dot lasers," IEEE J. Sei. Top. Quantum 
Electron. 3, 196-205 (1997). 
133. V. M. Ustinov, N. A. Maleev, A. E. Zhukov, A. R. Kovsh, A. Yu. Egorov, A. V. Lunev, 
B. V. Volovik, I. L. Krestnikov, Yu. G. Musikhin, N. A. Bert, P. S. Kop'ev, 
Zh. I. Alferov, N. N. Ledentsov, and D. Bimberg, "InAs/InGaAs quantum dot structures 
on GaAs substrates emitting at 1.3 μπι," Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 2815-2817 (1999). 
134. D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann, and N. N. Ledentsov, Quantum Dot Heterostructures, 
Wiley, New York, 2001. 
135. D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann, N. N. Ledentsov, M. H. Mao, Ch. Ribbat, R. Sellin, 
V. M. Ustinov, A. E. Zhukov, Zh. I. Alferov, and J. A. Lott, "Novel infrared quantum 
dot Lasers: theory and reality," Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 224, 787 (2001). 
136. V. P. Evtikhiev, A. M. Boiko, I. V. Kudryashov, A. K. Kryganovskii, R. A. Suris, 
A. N. Titkov, and V. E. Tokranov, "Control of density, size and size uniformity of 
MBE-grown InAs quantum dots by means of substrate misorientation," Semicond. Sei. 
Technol. 17, 545-550 (2002). 
137. N. N. Ledendsov, "Long-wavelength quantum-dot lasers on GaAs substrate: From media 
to device concepts," IEEE J. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 8, 1015 (2002). 
138. N. N. Ledentsov, F. Hopfer, D. Bimberg, "High-speed quantum-dot vertical-cavity 
surface-emitting lasers," Proc. IEEE 95, 1741-1756 (2007). 
139. A. Stintz, G. Liu, H. Li, L. Lester, and K. Malloy, "Low-threshold current density 1.3-μιτι 
InAs quantum-dot lasers with the dots-in-a-well (DWELL) structure," IEEE Photonics 
Technol. Lett. 12, 591-593 (2000). 
140. A. Fiore, U. Oesterle, R. P. Stanley, R. Houdre, F. Lelarge, M. Ilegems, P. Borri, 
W. Langbein, D. Birkedal, J. M. Hvam, M. Cantoni, and F. Bobard, "Structural and elec-
trooptical characteristics of quantum dots emitting at 1.3 μπι on gallium arsenide," IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. 37, 1050-1058 (2001). 

REFERENCES 
483 
141. S. Osbome, P. Blood, P. Smowton, J. Lutti, Y. C. Xin, A. Stintz, D. Huffaker, and 
L. F. Lester, "State filling in InAs quantum-dot laser structures," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 40, 1639-1645 (2004). 
142. M. Sugawara, N. Hatori, H. Ebe, M. Ishida, Y. Arakawa, T. Akiyama, K. Otsubo, and 
Y. Nakata, "Modeling room-temperature lasing spectra of 1.3-μπι self-assembled 
InAs/GaAs quantum-dot lasers: Homogeneous broadening of optical gain under 
current injection," J. Appl. Phys. 97, 043523 (2005). 
143. M. Sugawara, K. Mukai, and Y. Nakata, "Light emission spectra of columnar-shaped 
self-assembled InGaAs/GaAs quantum-dot lasers: Effect of homogeneous broadening 
of the optical gain on lasing characteristics," Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 1561-1563 (1999). 
144. A. Capua, L. Rozenfeld, V. Mikhelashvili, G. Eisenstein, M. Kuntz, M. Laemmlin, and 
D. Bimberg, "Direct correlation between a highly damped modulation response and ultra 
low relative intensity noise in an InAs/GaAs quantum dot laser," Opt. Express 15, 
5388-5393 (2007). 
145. A. Sakamoto and M. Sugawara, "Theoretical calculation of lasing spectra of quantum-dot 
lasers: Effect on homogeneous broadening of optical gain," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 
12, 107-109(2000). 
146. A. Markus, J. X. Chen, C. Paranthoen, A. Fiore, C. Platz, and O. Gauthier-Lafaye, 
"Simultaneous two-state lasing in quantum-dot lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 
1818-1820(2003). 
147. O. B. Shchekin and D. G. Deppe, "1.3 μπι InAs quantum dot laser with T0 = 161K from 
0 to 80°C," Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3277 (2002). 
148. D. G. Deppe, H. Huang, and O. B. Shchekin, "Modulation characteristics of quantum-dot 
lasers: the influence of p-type doping and the electronic density of states on obtaining 
high speed," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 1587-1593 (2002). 
149. D. G. Deppe, S. Freisein, H. Huang, and S. Lipson, "Electron transport due to inhomo-
geneous broadening and its potential impact on modulation speed in p-doped quantum 
dot lasers," J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 38, 2119-2125 (2005). 
150. S. S. Mikhrin, A. R. Kovsh, I. L. Krestnikov, A. V. Kozhukhov, D. A. Livshits, 
N. N. Ledentsov, Y. M. Shemyakov, I. I. Novikov, M. V. Maximov, V. M. Ustinov, 
and Z. I. Alferov, "High power temperature-insensitive 1.3 μπι InAs/InGaAs/GaAs 
quantum dot lasers," Semicond. Sei. Technol. 20, 340-342 (2005). 
151. P. M. Smowton, I. C. Sandall, D. J. Mowbray, H. Y. Liu, and Mark Hopkinson, 
'Temperature-dependent gain and threshold in P-doped quantum dot lasers," IEEE J. 
Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 13, 1261-1266 (2007). 
152. J. Kim and S. L. Chuang, "Theoretical and experimental study of optical gain, refractive 
index change, and linewidth enhancement factor of p-doped quantum-dot lasers," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 42, 942-952 (2006). 
153. S. Fathpour, Z. Mi, and P. Bhattacharya, "Small-signal modulation characteristics of 
p-doped 1.1- and 1.3-μπι quantum-dot lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 17, 
2250-2252 (2005). 
154. T. Chung, G. Walter, and N. Holonyak, Jr., "Coupled strained-Layer InGaAs quantum-
well improvement of an InAs quantum dot AlGaAs-GaAs-InAs heterostructure Laser," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 4500-4502 (2001). 
155. L. V. Asryan and S. Luryi, "Tunneling-injection quantum-dot laser: ultrahigh temperature 
stability," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 37, 905-910 (2001). 

484 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
156. G. Walter, T. Chung, and N. Holonyak, Jr., "High-gain coupled InGaAs quantum well 
InAs quantum dot AlGaAs-GaAs-InGaAs-InAs heterostructure diode laser operation," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 1126 (2002). 
157. G. Walter, T. Chung, and N. Holonyak, Jr., "Coupled-stripe quantum-well-assisted 
AlGaAs-GaAs-InGaAs-InAs quantum-dot laser," Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3045 (2002). 
158. P. K. Kondratko, S. L. Chuang, G. Walter, T. Chung, and N. Holonyak, "Observations of 
near-zero linewidth enhancement factor in a quantum-well coupled quantum-dot laser," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 4818-4820 (2003). 
159. P. K. Kondratko, S. L. Chuang, G. Walter, N. Holonyak, R. D. Heller, X. B. Zhang, and 
R. D. Dupuis, "Gain narrowing and output behavior of InP-InGaAlP tunneling injection 
quantum-dot-well laser," IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 17, 938-940 (2005). 
160. J. Kim, P. K. Kondratko, S. L. Chuang, G. Walter, N. Holonyak, R. D. Heller, X. 
B. Zhang, and R. D. Dupuis, "Tunneling injection quantum-dot lasers with polariz-
ation-dependent photon-mediated carrier redistribution and gain narrowing." IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 41, 1369-1379 (2005). 
161. S. Fathpour, Z. Mi, and P. Bhattacharya, "High-speed quantum dot lasers," J. Phys. D 
Appl. Phys. 38, 2103-2111 (2005). 
162. Z. Mi and P. Bhattacharya, "Analysis of the linewidth-enhancement factor of long-wave-
length tunnel-injection quantum-dot lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 43, 363-369 
(2007). 
163. A. Martinez, A. Lemaitre, K. Merghem, L. Ferlazzo, C. Dupuis, A. Ramdane, 
J.-G. Provost, B. Dagens, O. Le Gouezigou, and O. Gauthier-Lafaye, "Static and 
dynamic measurements of the alpha-factor of five-quantum-dot-layer single-mode 
lasers emitting at 1.3 mm on GaAs," Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 211115 (2005). 
164. M. Ishida, M. Sugawara, T. Yamamoto, N. Hatori, H. Ebe, Y. Nakata, and Y. Arakawa, 
"Theoretical study on high-speed modulation of Fabry-Perot and distributed-feedback 
quantum-dot lasers: K-factor-limited bandwidth and 10Gbit/s eye diagrams," J. Appl. 
Phys. 101,013108(2007). 
165. P. Borri, W. Langbein, J. M. Hvam, F. Heinrichsdorff, M.-H. Mao, and D. Bimberg, 
"Ultrafast gain dynamics in InAs/InGaAs quantum dot amplifiers," IEEE Photon. 
Technol. Lett. 12, 594-596 (2000). 
166. A. Markus, J. X. Chen, O. Gauthier-Lafaye, J.-G. Provost, C. Paranthoen, and A. Fiore, 
"Impact of intraband relaxation on the performance of a quantum-dot laser," IEEE J. Sei. 
Top. Quantum Electron. 9, 1308-1314 (2003). 
167. H. Su, L. Zhang, R. Wang, T. C. Newell, A. L. Gray, and L. F. Lester, "Linewidth study 
of InAs-InGaAs quantum dot distributed feedback lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 
16, 2206-2208 (2004). 
168. H. Su, L. Zhang, A. L. Gray, R. Wang, T. C. Newell, K. Malloy, and L. F. Lester, "High 
external feedback resistance of laterally loss-coupled distributed feedback quantum dot 
semiconductor lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 15, 1504-1506 (2003). 
169. M. Ishida, N. Hatori, T. Akiyama, K. Otsubo, Y. Nakata, H. Ebe, M. Sugawara, 
and Y. Arakawa, "Photon lifetime dependence of modulation efficiency and K factor 
in 1.3 μπι self-assembled InAs/GaAs quantum-dot lasers: Impact of capture time 
and maximum modal gain on modulation bandwidth," Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 
4145-4147 (2004). 

REFERENCES 
485 
170. S. Schneider, P. Borri, W. Langbein, U. Woggon, R. L. Sellin, D. Ouyang, and 
D. Bimberg, "Linewidth enhancement factor in InGaAs quantum-dot lasers," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 40, 1423-1429 (2004). 
171. A. Martinez, A. Lemaitre, K. Merghem, L. Ferlazzo, D. Dupuis, A. Ramdane, 
J.-G. Provost, B. Dagens, O. L. Gouezigou, and O. Gauthier-Lafaye, "Static and 
dynamic measurements of the α-factor of five quantum-dot-layer single-mode lasers 
emitting at 1.3 μπι on GaAs," Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 211115 (2005). 
172. J. J. Berry, Martin J. Stevens, R. P. Mirin, and K. L. Silverman, "High-resolution spectral 
hole burning in InGaAs-GaAs quantum dots," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 061114 (2006). 
173. A. Capua, L. Rozenfeld, V. Mikhelashvili, G. Eisenstein, M. Kuntz, M. Laemmlin, and 
D. Bimberg, "Direct correlation between a highly damped modulation response and ultra 
low relative intensity noise in an InAs/GaAs quantum dot laser," Opt. Express 15, 
5388-5393 (2007). 
174. T. Akiyama, H. Kuwatsuka, T. Simoyama, Y. Nakata, K. Mukai, M. Sugawara, O. Wada, 
and H. Ishikawa, "Nonlinear gain dynamics in quantum-dot optical amplifiers and its 
application to optical communication devices," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 37, 
1059-1065 (2001). 
175. T. Akiyama, H. Kuwatsuka, N. Hatori, Y. Nakata, H. Ebe, and M. Sugawara, "Pattern-
effect-free semiconductor optical amplifier achieved by using quantum dots," Electron. 
Lett. 38, 1139-1140(2002). 
176. M. Sugawara, T. Akiyama, N. Hatori, Y. Nakata, H. Ebe, and H. Ishikawa, "Quantum-dot 
semiconductor optical amplifiers for high-bit-rate signal processing up to 160 Gbs~' and 
a new scheme of 3R regenerators," Meas. Sei. Technol. 13, 1683-1691 (2002). 
177. M. Sugawara, N. Hatori, M. Ishida, H. Ebe, Y. Arakawa, T. Akiyama, K. Otsubo, 
T. Yamamoto, and Y. Nakata, "Recent progress in self-assembled quantum-dot optical 
devices for optical telecommunication: temperature-insensitive lOGbs"' directly modu-
lated lasers and 40Gbs~' signal-regenerative amplifiers," J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 38, 
2126-2134(2005). 
178. S. Dommers, V. V. Temnov, U. Woggon, J. Gomis, J. Martinez-Pastor, M. Laemmlin, 
and D. Bimberg, "Complete ground state gain recovery after ultrashort double pulses 
in quantum dot based semiconductor optical amplifier," Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 033508 
(2007). 
179. T. Vallaitis, C. Koos, R. Bonk, W. Freude, M. Laemmlin, C. Meuer, D. Bimberg, and 
J. Leuthold, "Slow and fast dynamics of gain and phase in a quantum dot semiconductor 
optical amplifier," Opt. Express 16, 170-178 (2008). 
180. R. Alizon, D. Hadass, V. Mikhelashvili, G. Eisenstein, R. Schwertberger, A. Somers, J. 
P. Reithmaier, A. Forchel, M. Calligaro, S. Bansropun, and M. Krakowski, "Multiple 
wavelength amplification in a wide band high power 1550-nm quantum dash optical 
amplifier," Electron. Lett. 40, 760-761 (2004). 
181. T. Akiyama, N. Hatori, Y. Nakata, H. Ebe, and M. Sugawara, "Pattern-effect-free ampli-
fication and cross-gain modulation achieved by using ultrafast gain nonlinearity in 
quantum-dot semiconductor optical amplifiers," Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 238, 301-304 
(2003). 
182. T. Akiyama, M. Sugawara, and Y. Arakawa, "Quantum-dot semiconductor optical ampli-
fiers," Proc. IEEE 95, 1757-1766 (2007). 


11 
Advanced Semiconductor Lasers 
11.1 DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
In Fabry-Perot type semiconductor lasers, there are many longitudinal modes within 
the gain spectrum, which is generally broad. Although there are some side-mode 
suppressions in continuous wave (cw) operation of the semiconductor lasers above 
threshold, the powers of the side modes increase rapidly when the laser diode is 
pulsed at high bit rates. In optical communication systems with common chromatic 
dispersion in optical fibers, these undesirable side-mode power partitions limit the 
bandwidth of the information transmission rate. Therefore, mode selectivity provided 
by periodic structures such as distributed feedback lasers or distributed Bragg reflec-
tors are attractive for applications for single longitudinal mode operation of diode 
lasers. In Section 8.5, we have discussed distributed feedback (DFB) structures and 
studied the electric field and the reflection coefficient. The reflection coefficient 
depends on the coupling coefficient K and the detuning δ of the propagation constant 
β from the Bragg wave number ίττ/Α, where i refers to the order of the grating mode 
used in the DFB process. We can see that the periodic structures provide an optical 
frequency selection property. 
The basic concepts of the DFB lasers were presented by Kogelnik and Shank [1,2] 
in 1971, and they demonstrated the idea by using dyed gelatin on a glass substrate. 
Optical pumping of semiconductor DFB laser was reported by Nakamura et al. [3] 
in 1973. Electrical injection of a GaAs/AlGaAs single-heterojunction DFB laser 
was achieved by Scifres et al. [4] in 1974; and the cw operation at room temperature 
by Casey et al. [5] and Nakamura et al. [6] in 1975. The DFB laser is the most useful 
telecommunication source as it has been widely used in commercial long-distance 
optical communication systems near 1.55 μηι wavelength. 
11.1.1 
Fundamental Formulation for DFB Lasers 
A schematic diagram of a distributed feedback (DFB) semiconductor laser [7-12] 
is illustrated in Fig. 11.1, where a grating above the active region provides 
the optical distributed feedback coupling. Using the coupled-mode theory in 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
487 

488 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
P 
^ / \ / V \ A y \ / V V \ A | * - D F B structure 
Active region 
N 
\,mMmw*/w///s///;»/;/7Z?7777//A 
Figure 11.1 A schematic diagram for a distributed feedback (DFB) semiconductor laser, where a 
periodic grating structure near the active region provides the optical distributed feedback process. 
Section 8.5, we summarize the results for the optical electric field in a distributed 
feedback structure 
Eyix) = Aiz)eiß»z Uix) + B(z)e'ißB! Uix) 
(11.1.1) 
where Uix) = E^E°\x) is the mode pattern of the TEQ mode. /3B = Ιιτ/Α. is the Bragg 
wave vector for the fth order grating. The amplitudes A(z) and B(z) of the forward and 
backward propagating waves satisfy the coupled-mode equation (8.5.17) 
d 
~dz 
Aiz) 
Biz) 
Δβ 
Kab 
Kba 
-Δ/3 
Aiz) 
Biz) 
(11.1.2) 
Index Gratings If the index grating inside the waveguide is 
Δ«(ζ) = Δη cos ( — z + φ 
(11.1.3) 
we obtain the coupling coefficients (see Section 8.5) 
Kab = ΓΑοΔη+, = Κβίψ 
Kha = -Γ^Δη_! = 
-Ke-* 
(11.1.4a) 
(11.1.4b) 
where K = Γ^ο Δη/2 is the magnitude (real), and Kba = -K*b. The phase of the 
grating depends on the choice of the period with respect to the coordinates and the 
facet of the DFB laser. It can be chosen as zero if the period is set appropriately. 
For lossless index grating, stop band exists when |Δβ| < \K\, because 
q = ^(Aßf 
+ KabKba = \/iAß? 
- \K\\ 
(11.1.5) 
and the wave propagation becomes highly attenuated within the stop band. For a DFB 
laser with gain, we use the detuning parameter δ = β0 — /3B, where β0 is the 

11.1 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
489 
propagation constant of the guided fundamental (TEQ) mode 
.gn 
where 
Aß=8-i 
gn = 
Tg-a 
(11.1.6) 
(11.1.7a) 
is the net modal gain of the guided mode, Γ is the optical confinement factor, and a is 
the loss coefficient in the guide a, and in the substrate as 
a = Γα; + (1 — Γ)α8. 
(11.1.7b) 
Matrix Formulation for DFB Structures The general solution to the coupled-
mode equations is expressed as the sum of the two eigenmodes 
Aiz)' 
Biz) = 
B+ eiqz + A~ 
B~ 
where 
and 
B+ 
Aß-q 
Kba 
A+ 
-Kab 
Aß + q 
ZT 
Aß + q 
Kha 
A-
for the e+iqz eigenmode 
for the e iqz eigenmode. 
We can define the DFB "reflection" coefficient for the " + " eigenmode 
B+ 
Kba 
and the " —" eigenmode 
rviq) 
rmiq) 
' A+ 
Aß + q 
-K ab 
B- 
Aß + q 
We can write the general solution (11.1.8) as [8, 11] 
Aiz) 
Biz) 
1 
em + B~ 
1 
-iqz 
By setting z = 0, we find 
Ά(0)" 
BiO) = 
1 
'•m 
rp 
1 
"Λ+" 
B~ 
(11.1.8) 
(11.1.9a) 
(11.1.9b) 
(11.1.10a) 
(11.1.10b) 
(11.1.11) 
(11.1.12) 

490 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The general solution can be written as 
ML) 
B{L) 
F\\ 
F\2 
where 
1 - rprm 
p'1L 
_ rVrm 
€ 
-iqL 
)· 
F 
F2i=T-!*—(e*L-e-u'L), 
1 - rprm 
12 : 
22 : 
1 - rprm 
A(0) 
B(0) 
JiL. 
-iqL\ 
■
(
" 
" Λ Ί ' Ί Τ Ι £ 
1 - rprm 
L)-
We note the property that the determinant of the F matrix is unity. 
FuFi2 —F\2F2\ = 1. 
11.1.2 Reflection and Transmission Through a DFB Structure 
(11.1.13a) 
(11.1.13b) 
(11.1.14) 
Assume that the DFB structure is sandwiched between two uniform waveguides. 
There are no sharp transitions at z = 0 and z = L·, Fig. 11.2a. If mere is no incident 
wave at z = L, that is, B(L) = 0, we can obtain the reflection coefficient 
Γ(0) = A(0) 
F22 
-rP(e' 
iqL 
-iqL\ 
-rvrm eliL + e~">L. 
(11.1.15) 
(b) 
z = 0 
Air 
-*■ A(0) 
· - B(0) 
z = 0 
DFB structure 
z = L 
A(L) 
B(L) 
Air 
-B<e-iÄ(z-« 
z = L 
Figure 11.2 (a) A DFB structure sandwiched between two waveguides on each side, (b) A DFB structure 
with two reflecting facets at two ends. 

11.1 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
491 
The transmission coefficient is 
T = A(L) 
A(0) 
1 
e-iqL 
2 
1 
^22 
2 
rprm 
~r\ ,r m e'<?L 
(11.1.16) 
We note that, for index grating, 
qh 
.gnt 
(KL·)2 
(11.1.17) 
Figure 11.3 shows the transmission coefficient (11.1.16) for a uniform grating as a 
function of detuning 8L for various gain coefficients, G = gnL = 0, 0.2, and 0.4, 
assuming KL = 2. We assume that the uniform grating has zero reflection at two 
ends (R\ = R2 = 0). The transmission spectrum is symmetrical with two peaks on 
both sides of the zero detuning, indicating two degenerate (longitudinal) modes of 
the DFB structure toward lasing condition. The lasing condition occurs when the 
denominator of the transmission coefficient vanishes 
J2qL = 0. 
(11.1.18) 
The above lasing condition will be explored later for index- and gain-coupled 
gratings. 
2.0 
1.5 
Uniform grating (Ä, = R2 = 0) 
1.0 -
0.5 
0.0 
1 
| 
1 
| 
1 
A 
\ 
/ Λ 1 
*-^ 
·-· ^ 
.' M 
" ' ^ 
/ *> il 
A 
Ά 
■ 
ill 
il 
"\ 
li' 
I
.
I
, 
1 
' 
G = 0 
Λ 
G = 0.2 · 
1 \ 
-^G = 0.4 
1 / \ \J 
KL = 2 
-10 
0 
Detuning 
10 
Figure 11.3 The transmission spectrum as a function of detuning SL using Eq. (11.1.16) for a uniform 
grating with zero reflections at the two ends (/?i = R2 = 0) for various gain-length products, G = g„L = 0, 
0.2, and 0.4, assuming KL = 2. 

492 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
11.1.3 
DFB Structure with Two End Facets 
The reflection and transmission of a DFB laser structure with two end facets, 
Fig. 11.2b, can be formulated using a propagation matrix approach similar to that 
in Section 5.7. Noting that the electric field for the forward and backward propagation 
components are A(z)e,ßBZ and B{z)e~,ßBZ, 
where jßB = ir/Λ is the Bragg vector 
parameter, we have 
1 
f21 
1 
1 
r2\ 
>21 1 
1 
r2\ 
r2\ 
1 
1 
A(L)eiß»L 
B{L)e-'^L 
0 
e~ißBL 
Ft] F\2 
F2\ F22. 
«in m\2 
m.2\ nt22 
B0 
1 
- r 2 
-r 2 
1 
A(0) 
Z?(0) 
eiß*L 
Q 
0 
e-iß*L. 
F\\ 
F\2 
Fi\ F22 
The transmission coefficient is 
T = 
m\\tn22-m\2m2\ 
m22 
1 r, 
ri 
1 
Ao 
J Lß0 
(11.1.19) 
(11.1.20a) 
where 
m22 = ~r [-r2eißBL(nFu+Fl2) 
+ e ^ V i F 2 i + F22)}. 
'1*2 
Lasing condition occurs at 
m22 = 0. 
(11.1.20b) 
(11.1.21) 
Lasing Condition 
The boundary conditions at two sharp ends of the DFB 
structure are 
1. Atz = 0, Λ(0) = r,Ä(0), therefore 
(1 - nrp)A+ + (rm - n)B~ = 0. 
2. Atz = L, Β{1)β-^1 
= Γ2Α{ϋ)ε^1, 
thus 
(h - rp) ei2"LA+ - (1 - f2rm)B- 
= 0 
(11.1.22a) 
(11.1.22b) 
where r2 = r2ellß*L. For nontrivial solutions of A+ and B , we must have the deter-
minantal equation satisfied 
(1 - r,r p)(l - r2rm) + (r2 - rp)(rm - r,)e' ilqL 
0 
(11.1.23) 

11.1 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
493 
or 
^)V^-^)^ = , 
(1U-24) 
1 -nrp(q)J \\ 
-f2rm(q) 
It can be shown that the above Eq. (11.1.23) is identical to (11.1.21) in that the 
denominator w22 of the transmission coefficient in (11.1.20a) vanishes. 
For lossless index grating, 
q^^S-i^j 
-\K\2 
(11.1.25) 
where K = Kab has been used, and the effect of gain is introduced through the term gn 
in the detuning δβ. The eigenequation (11.1.24) should be solved numerically, 
in general, for the threshold gain g and the lasing mode spectrum (or detuning), 
δ^β0- 
ββ. 
Case 1: If there is no distributed feedback structure, K = 0, rm = rp = 0, we 
recover the eigenequation for the Fabry-Perot lasers, 
rxr2eaßL=l 
(11.1.26) 
where q -» δ - ign/2 and q + βΒ = βΊΕα - ign/2. 
Case 2: If there are no sharp boundaries at z = 0 and z = L such that rx = r2 = 0, 
we have simply 
rm(q)rp(q)ea"L = \ 
(11.1.27) 
which is identical to the condition (11.1.18) in that the denominator of the 
transmission (11.1.16) vanishes. Therefore, rp(q) and rm(q) simply act as reflec-
tion coefficients for the forward and backward propagating waves. 
Index Grating 
Equation (11.1.27) is simplified to 
1. 
(11.1.28) 
Noting that q2 -= (Δ/3)2 -
iq+m2 
\κγ, we have 
q = iAß tan qL. 
(11.1.29) 
The above result is the same as the condition that the denominator of the transmission 
coefficient of the DFB structure (8.5.49) vanishes because q = iS. To analyze the 
solutions for the oscillation condition, we write 
AßL = -iqL cot (qL) 
(11.1.30) 

494 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
which can be written as 
2 
/ / 
_ 
r\2 
,SnA _ 
:.!(*, 
:8"L\ 
, ^ Λ 2 „ „ , . U, 
;?"M_ 
(r,V 
8L - i^-\ 
= -iW ί SL - ί ^ - 1 - {KLY cot W I 8L - i°-^-\ - (KL)'. 
(11.1.31) 
The above equation has to be solved for (8L, gnL) simultaneously for each given KL. 
In the high gain (weak coupling) limit, gnL 3> KL, we have q ~ Δ/3; therefore, 
(11.1.28) becomes 
K2
e
a*fiL = (2Aß)2. 
(11.1.32) 
We compare the magnitude and the phase of the above equation. We obtain [7, 11] 
K2eg"L = g2
n + 4& 
(11.1.33a) 
and 
SL= (m-^W+tan-'l·— V 
(11.1.33b) 
Once the threshold gain gn is obtained from (11.1.33a) for a given K and δ, the 
threshold current density can be estimated from the model for the gain-current 
(g-J) relation for a given semiconductor laser structure such as an active double-
heterostructure or a quantum-well structure. 
Figure 11.4a and Fig. 11.4b show the transmission spectra (11.1.20) as a function 
of detuning for various cases: (a) symmetrical reflectivities: R^ = R2 = 0.3, and the 
gain-length product: G = g„L = 0, 0.2, and 0.4. (b) Asymmetrical coatings: R\ = 
0.3, #2 = 0.4 (dashed), and /?,=0.1, R2 = 0.9 (solid), while G = 0.4 is fixed. 
We can see the side mode suppression ratio increases as R2 is much larger than 
R\. In these plots, we have assumed that /3BL = 2m7r for a symmetrical DFB 
structure with an exact integral number of periods. We can see that case (a) with a 
symmetric reflection geometry (R\ = R2) produces two lasing modes, whereas case 
(b) /f) φ R2 selects only one lasing mode near one side of the stop band. For 
index coupled DFB lasers, two lasing modes tend to exist on two sides of the stop 
band, unless there is an asymmetry due to different coatings (R\ φ R2) or phase vari-
ations at the two end facets. In Fig. 11.4c, we show a typical amplified spontaneous 
emission spectrum measured from a DFB laser at various bias current below or near 
threshold. The emission has a peak near one side of the stop band and increases with 
increasing current. 
In Fig. 11.5a and Fig. 11.5b [ 12] we show a comparison of the measured (dashed) 
amplified spontaneous emission spectra of two DFB lasers with theoretical results 

11.1 
DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
495 
(b) 
14 
12 
10 
-Ä, = 0.3S2 = 0.4 
-Ä, = 0.1 S2 = 0.9 
G = 0.4 
-10 
0 
Detuning 
1521 
1524 
1527 
1530 
Wavelength (nm) 
1533 
1536 
Figure 11.4 (a) The transmission spectrum as a function of detuning SL using Eq. (11.1.20) for a 
uniform grating with symmetrical end facet reflectivities (/?, — R2 = 0.3) for various values of gain-
length product, G = gnL = 0, 0.2, and 0.4, assuming AX = 2. (b) Same as (a) except for asymmetrical 
coatings: R, = 0.3, R2 = 0.4 (dashed), and Ä, =0.1, R2 = 0.9 (solid), while the value G = 0.4 is 
fixed, (c) The experimental measured amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) spectra from 5 mA to 
near threshold in logarithmic scale (dBm). 

496 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
3 
W 
< 
Below threshold 
Theory 
-—-Experiment 
Laser A 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
> 
CO I 
i 
0.2 
1.538 
1.54 
1.542 
1.544 
1.546 
1.548 
Wavelength (μτη) 
(b) 
4 ,-r^-r-r-, 
T-^~,~^-, 
_ ~ r - _ T 
1 
—Theory 
—Experiment 
LaserB 
0.8 
1.538 
1.54 
1.542 
1.544 
Wavelength (μτη) 
1.546 
1.548 
Figure 11.5 The theoretically calculated (solid) and measured (dashed) ASE spectrum for two lasers. 
Both laser A and laser B are biased at 4.8 mA below (the same) threshold current of 6 mA at 25°. Laser 
A lases on the shorter wavelength side of the stop band, and Laser B lases on the longer wavelength 
sides. The parameters used in the model are as follows, (a) For laser A: /?, = 0.9, ψι = 210°, R2 = 
0.01, </>2 = 350o, the refractive index = 3.6935, Bragg wavelength = 1.5439 μιτι, KL = 1.5, and the 
cavity length L = 360 μπι. (b) For laser B: R, = 0.9, φχ = 320°, R2 = 0.01, <fe = 180°, the refractive 
index = 3.700, Bragg wavelength = 1.5425 μπι, KL =1.2, 
and the cavity length Ζ,= 360μπι. 
(Reprinted with permission from [12] © 1997 IEEE.) 
(solid) using the matrix approach. Both laser A and laser B are biased at 4.8 mA below 
(the same) threshold current of 6 mA at 25°. Their side-mode suppression ratios (SMSR) 
are larger than 50 dB above threshold. Laser A lases on the shorter wavelength side of 
the stop band and laser B on the longer wavelength sides. The parameters for laser A 
in Fig. 11.5a are Rx=0.9, its phase ψ,=210°, tf2 = 0.01, <fc = 350°, the refractive 
index = 3.6935, Bragg wavelength = 1.5439 μιτι, KL = 1.5, and the cavity length 
L= 360 μιτι. Note we have defined: r\ =RxJ2e^ r2 = R2 e"k. For laser B, the par-
ameters are /?, = 0.9, φχ = 320°, R2 = 0.01, <fo = 180°, the refractive index = 3.700, 
Bragg wavelength = 1.5425 μιη, KL = 1.2, and the cavity length L = 360 μιτι. The 
effects of spatial hole burning on the lasing spectra such as the wavelength shift are 
also reported in Ref. 12. 

11.1 DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
497 
11.1.4 Gain Coupled DFB Laser 
The gain coefficient in an active DFB medium contains two parts, 
g(z)=gn+Ag(z), 
(11.1.34) 
where gn enters the propagation constant of the guided mode as the net modal gain 
Δ / 3 = δ - φ 
g„=rg-ai 
(11.1.35) 
where Γ is the optical confinement factor, g is the material gain coefficient, and α; is 
the intrinsic absorption loss. The gain grating is described by [8, 13, 14] 
/27J-
Ag(z) = Ag cos I — z + ψί 
e"pe 
e'-xz + -^e-'n 
e"'Xz· 
(11.1.36) 
= (^βίψλ e'Xz + (^e-'fi λ 
~ 
Because Ag enters the change in refractive index through the imaginary part of the 
complex refractive index as 
we find 
2^, ) 
Δη+, e'Xz + Δη_! e~1^, 
(11.1.37) 
Kab = rk0An+] = -iKge^, 
(11.1.38a) 
Kba = -Γ&οΔ«_, = +iK6e-'* [=K*ab) 
(11.1.38b) 
where Kg = TAg/4 is real. We note immediately that 
q = ^{Aßf + KabKba 
= yJ(Aß)2 + \Kab\2 
(11.1.39) 
which does not have a stop band anymore because Kba = +K*b. 

498 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
For a gain grating with anti-reflection (AR) coating at two ends, Eq. (11.1.27) 
simplifies to 
\κ I2 
aqL = 1. 
(11.1.40a) 
In the high-gain limit, we simplify the magnitude and phase conditions as 
l\^L 
= £η+4δ2 
(11.1.40b) 
and 
8L = mir+tm^(—\ 
(11.1.40c) 
The above Eq. (11.1.40c) shows that a lasing mode exists at zero detuning for 
m = 0 (i.e., the lasing occurs at the middle of the stop band for gain-coupled DFB 
lasers). 
In reality, it is difficult to make purely gain-coupled DFB lasers without index 
grating. When both index and gain gratings exist, the coupling coefficients, Kab 
and Kba, can be obtained by superposition from (11.1.4) and (11.1.38) 
Kab ^Κ-ίΚ^, 
(11.1.41a) 
Kba = -K + iKge-^. 
(11.1.41 b) 
Here, for simplicity, we have taken the phase of the index grating as zero. Therefore, 
the phase of the gain grating should be the phase difference between the gain and 
index grating. Complex coupled or partially gain-coupled DFB lasers at 1.3-μπι 
and 1.55-μιη wavelengths have been demonstrated using strained-layer multiple 
quantum-well (MQW) structures [15-19]. The 1.55-μπι InGaAsP-InP gain-
coupled DFB lasers use a strain-layer MQW active grating for a mixed index and 
gain coupling. Very good performance such as high single-mode yield (>90%) and 
high side mode suppression ratio (>55dB) at 1.55 μπι or high power (50 mW) 
and high-speed modulation (>18 GHz) at 1.3 μπι have been reported as well as theor-
etical analysis [15-19]. 
11.1.5 
Phase-Shifted DFB Laser 
Phase-shifted DFB lasers have been proposed and realized for single-mode operation 
right at the Bragg wavelength [20-22]. In Fig. 11.6 we plot the schematics of a 
λ/4-shifted DFB laser structure. The insertion of a phase shift section of Λ/2 = 
A/(4ne) in the center of the grating causes an extra phase shift of π/2 for each 
wave passing through or a round-trip of ττ. The whole λ/4-shifted DFB structure 

11.1 DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
499 
λ/4 - shifted DFB Laser 
I 
I 
i^y^v^Vk/V^cA 
Η-Λ 
z = 0 
L 
Z=2 
Z = L 
Figure 11.6 Schematic diagram of a quarter-wavelength phase-shifted distributed-feedback semiconduc-
tor laser. 
can be considered as the cascade of two index gratings with the second grating shifted 
by π from the first grating. 
Section 1: φ = 0 in K = \K\ β'φ. rm (φ = 0) and rp(<p = 0) should be used in 
the first matrix, /^(«P = 0). 
Section 2: φ = ττ in K = \K\ β'φ. rm (φ = if) and rp((p = if) should be used in the 
second matrix, Ρψ(φ = π). 
Theoretically, we multiply two F matrices in the cascade structure 
where 
A(L)j 
B(L)\ 
Ί r = 
r l l k> 
K 
F(2) 
. 2 1 
ΓίΊι 
. ^ 2 1 
A(L) 
A(0) 
C<2) 
r 1 2 
C<2) 
r 2 2 . 
r\2 
F(2) 
r 2 2 . 
^ 1 2 ] 
^ 2 2 ] 
2 
1 
f2: 
|"A(L/2)1 
[B{L/2)\ 
r l l 
r12 
pit) 
F ( D 
_r21 
r22 . 
ΓΑ(0)1 
[B(0)\ 
2 
ΓΑ(0)1 
[B(0)\ 
F22 = F™{<p = tfFniV = °) + *22 (<P = ^ ' ( « P = 0). 
(11.1.42) 
(11.1.43a) 
(11.1.43b) 
Figure 11.7 plots the transmission coefficient (11.1.43) as a function of detuning 8L 
for various values of gains, G = gnL = 0, 0.2, and 0.5, assuming KL = 2. The trans-
mission has a peak at zero detuning (8L = 0) or center of the stop band. 

500 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
λ/4-Phase-shift grating 
2.5 
2.0 
I 1.5 
1.0 - -
0.5 
0.0 
1 
■ 
y 
1 
\ 
1 
1; 
1/ 
1/ 
(i 
\ 
V 
A 
in 
A 
r 
K 
A 
1 
\1 
ll 
il 
A 
111 
A 
A 
1 
' 
G = 0 
G = 0.2 
G = 0.4 
/ ' 
N-
/' ' 
"* ^ 
Jf KL = 2 
-10 
0 
Detuning 
10 
Figure 11.7 Transmission spectra of a quarter-wavelength phase-shifted DFB laser for three gain-length 
products: G = gnL = 0, 0.2, and 0.4, and KL is fixed at 2.0. 
11.1.6 Distributed Bragg Reflector (DBR) Semiconductor Laser 
Note that the reflection coefficient for a DBR structure with a finite length L is 
obtained from (11.1.12) 
m 
= 
r p A + + B -
A(0) 
A+ + rmB~ 
(11.1.44) 
Noting that B{L) = 0, we have B~ = -rpA+ 
ei2qL, or 
Γ(0) = rp(l - 
e^L) 
1 - 
rmrpei2iL 
-K* sinh SL 
AßsinhSL + iScoshSL 
(11.1.45a) 
(11.1.45b) 
for q = iS in a passive lossless structure. The last expression (11.1.45b) is the same as 
that derived in Eq. (8.5.49). We can see that, in general, Γ(0) is a complex quantity, 
Γ(0) = \Γ(0)\είφ. In Fig. 11.8, we show a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) semicon-
ductor laser [23, 24]. The frequency selectivity is provided by the reflection coeffi-
cients r\ and r2 at both ends, and the active region is the same as a Fabry-Perot 
edge-emitting laser. As a matter of fact, a DBR laser is just a Fabry-Perot laser 
with a mirror reflectivity varying with the wavelength. The lasing threshold occurs 
at the wavelength for which the overall reflectivity is a maximum. The analysis is 
very similar to that of a Fabry-Perot laser except that rx and r2 are complex 
numbers and are wavelength dependent. 

11.1 DISTRIBUTED FEEDBACK LASERS 
501 
DBR 
region 
Pump region 
DBR 
region 
P 
Active region 
N 
- N ^ / X ^ 
^1 
■ V 
Z=0 
z=L 
Figure 11.8 Schematic diagram of a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) semiconductor laser. 
The lasing condition occurs at 
r\r2e ßßL 
1 
(11.1.46) 
where r\ is the reflection coefficient of the electric field looking into the left DBR 
reflector (with a length L\) at z = 0, and r2 is that looking into the right DBR reflector 
at z = L. The complex propagation constant is 
ß = A) " i Tg-a 
(11.1.47) 
Note that 
We obtain 
r, = R\'2e>* 
— »'/Vfc 
r2 =R 
2ß0L + φ| + φ2 = 2tmr. 
(11.1.48) 
(11.1.49) 
(11.1.50) 
The reflection coefficient for a DBR region with a length L, has been obtained in 
(11.1.45). It should be noted that for an abrupt junction between the active region 
and the DBR region, the reflection coefficient τλ (and r2) has to be multiplied by 
an effective coupling coefficient C0 (with |C0| < 1) to account for the imperfect 
power transmission across the junction (i.e., η —> C0r\), and the threshold condition 
(11.1.49) becomes [23] 
Tgth = oc 
1 -ln-
1 
2L 
/?]/?2C0 
4 ' 
(11.1.51) 

502 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
From the threshold gain above, the threshold current density J^ is then obtainable 
from the gain-current model for a given diode laser structure. 
Stable single-mode operation of semiconductor lasers using DFB and DBR struc-
tures has been achieved. The temperature stability of these structures has also been 
demonstrated. In a conventional Fabry-Perot semiconductor laser, the lasing wave-
length as a function of temperature is dominated by the temperature coefficient of 
the peak gain wavelength dXp/dT, which is approximately 0.5 nm/degree for long-
wavelength InGaAsP/InP double-heterostructure lasers [23]. On the other hand, 
for DBR and DFB lasers, the lasing wavelength is dominated by the temperature 
coefficient of the refractive index, dn/dT, which is approximately 0.1 nm/degree. 
A stable fixed-mode operation of a DBR or DFB laser over a wide range of tempera-
ture (> 100 degrees) has been achieved [23]. 
11.2 VERTICAL CAVITY SURFACE-EMITTING LASERS 
In previous chapters, we have discussed semiconductor lasers with emission from the 
two end facets of the horizontal cavity, so-called edge emitters. Surface-emitting 
semiconductor lasers [25-27] are attractive for many advantages such as vertical 
emission from the top or bottom of substrate, ease of coupling to optical fibers due 
to circular geometry, direct wafer scale probing, and ultralow threshold operation 
due to the small cavity volume. The fabrication process also eliminates the need of 
wafer lapping, device cleaving and dicing, facet coating, and wire bonding, which 
are required for edge emitters. Because of their short cavity lengths, the surface-
emitting lasers have inherent single-frequency operation. In addition, the fabrication 
of two-dimensional laser arrays is possible. Therefore, vertical cavity surface-emitting 
lasers (VCSELs) have potential applications for optical interconnects, optical 
communication, and optical processing. VCSELs [28-34] have been developed 
with performances comparable with those of conventional Fabry-Perot edge-
emitting diode lasers. A few schematic diagrams are shown in Fig. 11.9a-c. The 
basic idea is the light bounces upward and downward within an optical cavity 
where active layers such as quantum wells are placed near the peak of the longitudinal 
standing wave pattern. The light output is orthogonal to the plane of the wafers. 
Front and back surface-emitting lasers are illustrated. This change in the direction 
of laser emission drastically changes the design, fabrication scalability, and array 
configurability of semiconductor lasers. 
Historically, although the concept of surface emission from a semiconductor laser 
dates back to 1965 when Melngailis [35] reported on a vertical cavity structure fol-
lowed later by various reports of different groups on the grating surface emission 
[36, 37] or 45°-corner turning mirrors etched into the device [38], major work on 
VCSELs was proposed [25, 39] by Iga in 1977, and the first pulsed lasing operation 
of a InGaAsP/InP surface-emitting laser at 77K was demonstrated [28] by his group 
in 1979. A patent, which contains major features of current VCSEL structures, was 
filed in 1979 by Burnham et al. [40] and awarded in 1982. Room temperature 

11.2 VERTICAL CAVITY SURFACE-EMITTING LASERS 
503 
(a) 
Light output 
Figure 11.9 (a) Schematic diagram of a surface emitting laser [281. (b) Front and (c) back surface-emitting 
lasers using etching through the active region. (Reprinted with permission from [301 © 1991 IEEE.) 
pulsed operation [29] and cw operation [41] of a GaAs/AlGaAs surface-emitting 
laser was realized in 1983 and 1988, respectively. With the advance in crystal 
growth technologies, low threshold, room temperature cw operation of VCSELs 
was demonstrated by Jewell et al. at Bell Lab in 1989 [30, 42], which triggered 
rapid progress in the following years. After the pioneering work of oxidation 
process of Holonyak's group at the University of Illinois in 1990 [43, 44], various 
processes using selectively oxidized VCSELs [45-50] were developed with signifi-
cantly improved laser performance due to the carrier and optical confinements pro-
vided by the oxide aperture. Figure 11.10 shows an example of a double-aperture 
oxidized VCSEL. More recently, many improvements with significant progress on 
the performances of the VCSELs have been demonstrated. 

504 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Oxide VCSEL 
p-contact 
n-contact 
Current injection aperture 
Lateral optical mode profile 
— Oxide aperture 
*— Active region 
Figure 11.10 An oxide VCSEL with top and bottom oxide apertures near the active region. 
11.2.1 
Lasing Condition 
The lasing condition of a VCSEL is simply that the round-trip resonance 
condition of a vertical Fabry-Perot cavity, Fig. 11.11, similar to that of a DBR 
semiconductor laser 
rir2eafiL 
= 1 
with a complex propagation constant 
ß = ßc + i(a-rg)/2 
(11.2.1a) 
(11.2.1b) 
Optical 
cavity 
L 
Optical transverse 
mode profile 
Figure 11.11 
Schematic diagram for the round-trip propagation condition for the lasing oscillation of a 
mode in a VCSEL cavity. 

11.2 VERTICAL CAVITY SURFACE-EMITTING LASERS 
505 
in the optical cavity, and rj and r2 are the complex reflection coefficients of the elec-
tric field for the DBR mirrors at the top and bottom of the vertical cavity, 
r{ = |r, |e'*'', r2 = \r2\eiVl. Recall from (5.9.49) that the reflection coefficient of the 
field of a DBR with (2N + 1) quarter-wavelength layers is given by 
\2/V 
(Uli 
- 1 -^ι 
\n\) 
\n0nt 
m 
2N 
+ n0nt 
(11.2.2) 
which approaches +1 when //approaches infinity if n\ < n2, and — 1 if n\ > n2; where 
ri\ is the refractive index of the first layer and n2 is that of the second layer. It implies that 
the mirror transmission loss can be reduced to almost zero, therefore, the threshold gain 
can be reduced when we use enough pairs N in the DBR layers. 
For lasing oscillation condition, we have the phase condition and the threshold 
condition. 
Phase Condition 
ψλ+ψ2 + 2ßcL = Irmr. 
(11.2.3) 
The reflection coefficient looking into a DBR can have a phase of 0 (or τή depending 
on the order of quarter-wavelength layers in low-high (or high-low) refractive index. 
Case 1: If φ, = φ2 = 0(n\ < n2), L = m—. The standing wave pattern will have 
2n 
a peak at the first interface of the top and bottom DBR as ψλ = φ2 = 0 
(constructive interference between the incident and reflected waves). The short-
est cavity length is A/2ft or half wavelength, which will have a zero crossing at the 
center of the cavity, Fig. 11.12a. The next cavity size is λ/η or one 
wavelength, which will have a maximum at the center of the cavity, Fig. 11.12b. 
Case 2: If φγ = ψ2 = ττ (ηΊ > η2), L = (m — 1)—. The standing wave pattern 
2n 
will have a zero at the first interface of the top and bottom DBR as ψ\ = 
φ2= ττ (destructive interference between the incident and reflected waves). 
The shortest cavity length is λ/2η or half wavelength, which will have a 
maximum at the center of the cavity, Fig. 11.13a. The next cavity size is k/n 
or one wavelength, which will have a zero at the center of the cavity, 
Fig. 11.13b. Figure 11.14 shows the standing wave pattern of a VCSEL struc-
ture with one-wavelength cavity. The optical intensity profile has a peak at the 
center of the cavity and has nulls or peaks across the DBR quarter-wavelength 
layers. The intensity becomes very small near the top exit surface due to the 
high reflectivity of the top DBR. 
Threshold Condition The threshold gain is given by 
Γ8=
α+τΑ^2)
 
(ΐι-
2·
4) 

506 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
(b) 
Optical 
cavity 
Ψ\"Ψι = 
'W/////////A 
t*'"* 
W//J///A 
Peak -X* 
'··-. 
W//////M 
Ψ////////Μ. 
= 0(n,<n 2) 
W///////^^ 
"1 
«Ä»2 
""··-., 
«i 
^
^ 
Peak ' 
i 
«1 
'MW^ 
..·■' 
ni 
ψ/////////^ 
Top 
f DBR 
JL 
2n_ 
Bottom 
DBR 
ίί«Μ^^««2 
" " " - · . , 
" ι 
'mmmymm* 
Peak \
^ 
Optical 
cavity 
Peak ^
^ 
'·... 
"l 
y 
L = 
«1 
Ψ///////}/Μ/Μ////^ 
...-"· 
-
Ψ////Μ//ΜΨ///////Δ^ 
Top 
DBR 
Bottom 
DBR 
Figure 11.12 The longitudinal standing wave pattern of two optical cavity lengths: (a) half-wavelength 
(null at the center of the cavity) and (b) one wavelength (peak at the center). Both assume n\ < «2 (there-
fore, <pi = ψ2 = 0). 
(a) 
φχ = 
φι=π{ηχ>η2) 
, Bottom 
DBR 
Figure 11.13 The longitudinal standing wave pattern of two optical cavity lengths: (a) half-wavelength 
(peak at the center of the cavity) and (b) one wavelength (null at the center of the cavity). Both assume 
«i > n2 (therefore, ψ\= ψι = if). 

11.2 VERTICAL CAVITY SURFACE-EMITTING LASERS 
Top DBR 
QW active region 
Optical cavity J 
Bottom DBR 
Figure 11.14 The longitudinal standing wave pattern of a VCSEL cavity including the top and bottom 
DBR regions. 
using /?] = |ri| and R2 = |r2| . Here the optical confinement factor Γ accounts for 
both the longitudinal and transverse confinements 
*Ζ
Γ< 
(11.2.5) 
where d = active layer thickness, L = cavity length, y = 2 if the thin active layer is 
placed at the maximum of the standing wave, and y = 1 for a thick active layer. The 
factor d/L accounts for the longitudinal optical confinement, and Γ( is the transverse 
optical confinement factor, which accounts for the overlap between the transverse 
optical intensity profile with the gain profile, Fig. 11.11. The symbol a accounts 
for the optical absorptions a{ within an effective length (Leff) of the top and 
bottom DBRs, plus any diffraction loss ad due to the mode mismatches when the 
laser mode propagates to the reflecting mirrors. This diffraction loss depends on 
the size of the diameter of the active region and the locations of the mirrors. We 
then write aL as 
aL = 2ajLeff + adLcav( = Loss parameter). 
(11.2.6) 
We can estimate the number of DBR layers needed using a simple threshold analysis. 
We assume, /?i = R2, Tt = 1, y = 2, and ignore the absorption loss. We have Idg^ = 
ln(l//f). The active layer thickness d= «WLZ, where nw is the number of quantum 

508 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
wells and Lz is the thickness of one well. Take gth = 500 cm ' and Lz= 100 A. We 
have 
^ 
_ 
g-2n wiv.«th 
_ 
( e-om 
= 0.999, nw = 1 
e-o.oo2 = 0.998, „w = 2 
e-o.oo3 = o 9 9 7 i „w = 
3 
(11.2.7) 
Consider n^GaAs) = 3.52, n2(AlAs) = 2.95 at λο = 0.98 μηι, and assume n0 = nt = 
rti(GaAs) = 3.52. For a single well, we require \rN\2 = 0.999, which leads to N = 23 
periods based on (11.2.2). Similarly, we require N = 21 if we use two quantum wells 
and yV = 20 for three quantum wells. 
11.2.2 Carrier Injection and Optical Profile: Gain Guidance 
Depending on the fabrication processes and the structures of the surface-emitting 
lasers, the current distribution, the carrier density profile, and the optical mode 
pattern vary. Buried heterojunction structure with the active region surrounded by 
insulator regions shown in Fig. 11.9b and an air-post structure (Fig. 11.9c) have 
been used to confine the current injection. Figure 11.15a shows an ion-implanted 
VCSEL, where the ion-implanted regions act as insulators and the injected current 
(a) 
(b) 
■ 
^M 
p* contact 
p-type DBR 
Ion-implanted 
— 
region 
Active layer 
,j t , / i /-7-Λ 
\ y 
\j * j r > 7-7-
'■ n-type DBR 
J(r) 
' ^0 
Figure 11.15 (a) Schematic diagram of a gain-guided surface-emitting laser with ion-plantation regions, 
(b) current density, (c) carrier density, and (d) fundamental optical mode profile. (Reprinted with 
permission from [511 © 1990 American Institute of Physics.) 

11.2 VERTICAL CAVITY SURFACE-EMITTING LASERS 
509 
into the active layer has a distribution as shown in Fig. 11.15b. The guidance of the 
surface-emitting laser in the transverse direction is the same as that for the gain-
guided stripe geometry diode laser, except that here the injection profile has a circular 
cross section instead of a long stripe geometry, and the light propagation is along the 
vertical direction instead of the parallel direction to the active layer. The carrier 
density profile, Fig. 11.15c, can be solved from the diffusion equation given the 
current density profile. The fundamental optical mode pattern is shown in 
Fig. 11.15d once the gain profile is obtained, for example, 
g(r) ~ g'(n(r) - ntr) 
(11.2.8a) 
for bulk lasers, where g1 is the differential gain and nu is the transparency carrier 
density. For quantum-well lasers, one may use 
g(r)~g0[lr\(n(r)/n0)+\] 
(11.2.8b) 
where g0 and n0 are constant parameters. Approximate analytic formulas can be 
found in Ref. 51. 
For the surface-emitting laser such as in Fig. 11.9b and Fig. 11.9c, the device 
has been etched all the way through the active region to provide lateral carrier 
t 
1 
10μπι 
Near field distance 
Figure 11.16 The cw near-field patterns of a 15^m-square VCSEL emitting (a) a TEMoo (fundamental) 
mode with a full width at half maximum of 7.8 μπι at a small current above threshold, (b) a TEM0i and (c) a 
ΤΕΜ,ο mode at higher currents, and (d) both TEMoo and TEMn modes at even higher currents. The mode 
pattern in (d) is spectrally resolved to show the near-field image in (e), where the TEMoo and TEM! i modes 
are clearly separated due to their wavelength differences shown in Fig. 11.17. (Reprinted with permission 
from [321 © 1991 IEEE.) 

510 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
confinement. The top structure has a cylindrical semiconductor region with air as the 
outside region. The interface scattering and diffraction losses also provide a certain 
degree of mode selectivity, and the fundamental (EHu, HEU, or TEMQO) mode of 
a rectangular or cylindrical waveguide is considered to be very important. 
In the following, we show the experimental results from Ref. 32. In Fig. 11.16, 
we show the near-field patterns of a 15^m-square VCSEL with a structure (using 
a shallow implant range of about 1 μιη with a proton dosage of 3 x 1015/cm2 at 
lOOkeV) at various current injection levels above threshold. At a small injection 
current above threshold condition, the fundamental TEMoo mode (or called EHQO 
mode in Chapter 7) lases with a full width at half maximum of 7.8 μηι as shown 
in Fig. 11.16a and its lasing wavelength is 9500.85 A as shown in the emission spec-
trum in Fig. 11.17a. As the current increases, the lasing mode changes to a TEM0| 
« 
c 
Φ 
9520 
-H1ÄK 
Wavelength (A) 
Figure 11.17 The lasing spectra at different current injection levels corresponding with those in 
Fig. 11.16a-d. The lasing wavelengths are (a) 9500.85 Ä, (b) 9505.90 Ä, and (c) 9517.40 A. In (d), the 
two lasing wavelengths for the TEMQO and TEMn modes are 9516.92 Ä and 9523.80 Ä, respectively. 
(Reprinted with permission from [32] © 1991 IEEE.) 

11.2 VERTICAL CAVITY SURFACE-EMITTING LASERS 
511 
mode shown in Fig. 11.16b with a lasing wavelength 9505.90 A shown in Fig. 11.17b, 
and then shifts to a TEM10 lasing mode at 9517.40 A shown in Fig. 11.16c and in 
Fig. 11.17c for over a small range of current. At an even higher current level, both 
the TEMoo and TEMU modes läse with the total near-field pattern shown in 
Fig. 11.16d, and their emission wavelengths are 9516.92 A and 9523.80 A, respec-
tively, as shown in Fig. 11.17d. The mode pattern in Fig. 11.16d can be spectrally 
resolved due to the wavelength difference of the two modes and is shown in 
Fig. 11.16e, where the TEMoo and TEMn modes are clearly separated in the 
near-field image. 
The red shift of the lasing wavelength is caused by the junction heating as the 
injection current increases. The narrow linewidths of the lasing spectra also indicate 
that the laser emits a single transverse mode as the wavelength separations between 
two adjacent transverse modes are around 1 to 2 A for the gain guided VCSELs. 
11.2.3 Oxide-VCSELs: Index Confinement 
Wet oxidation of AlGaAs [43] has been employed in the fabrication of edge-emitting 
lasers [44] and VCSELs [45-50]. Lateral confinement by oxide-apertures forms aper-
tures for current flow into the active region of the optical cavity. In addition, the lower 
refractive index of the oxide regions provides lateral index confinement of the optical 
mode. Oxide-confined VCSELs have exhibited high power conversion efficiency and 
low threshold current density and voltage [45-50]. Figure 11.10 shows a double-
aperture oxide-confined VCSEL, which has several advantages [50]. The structure 
is monolithic, and the low resistance designs using parabolic heterointerface 
grading and C-doping for the p-type DBR can be exploited for current conduction 
into the active region. The current apertures near the optical cavity eliminate sidewall 
nonradiative recombination in etched air-post VCSELs and minimize lateral current 
spreading to outside the laser cavity. Furthermore, the lower refractive index of the 
oxide layers provides index guidance as well as efficient current flow and heat extrac-
tion. Therefore, the enhanced carrier and optical confinements produce reduced 
threshold current and voltage. 
11.2.4 Temperature Dependence and Junction Heating 
It should be noted that the junction heating is important in VCSELs. A simplified 
model to account for the temperature rise due to the injected current from a circular 
disk above an infinite substrate is [33] 
^!Ct = PlV~J0pt 
(Π.2.9) 
where P,v is the total input electric power (the current-voltage product), Popt is 
the optical light output, σ is the thermal conductivity of the semiconductor 
(=0.45 W/cm °C for GaAs), and S is the disk radius. 

512 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
8580 ·< 
200 
250 
300 
Heat-sink temperature (K) 
350 
Figure 11.18 Theoretically calculated threshold current density (left axis) and emission wavelength 
(right axis) as a function of temperature from T= 200K to 350K. (Reprinted with permission from f521 
© 1997 American Institute of Physics.) 
Figure 11.18 shows the dependence of the threshold current density and the emis-
sion wavelength as a function of the heat-sink temperature, based on a theoretical 
model [52]. The results agree with the experimental observations [53, 54]. For 
GaAs, the gain peak wavelength increases linearly at about 2.7 Ä/K; whereas for a 
GaAs/AlGaAs VCSEL studied here, the mode wavelength increases at only 
0.6 Ä/K, and the threshold current decreases first from 200K to 250K, then increases 
at higher temperatures beyond 250K. Figure 11.19 shows a simple explanation based 
on the interaction between the gain and the cavity resonance mode (wavelength). For 
temperature smaller than a minimum threshold temperature, the gain peak wavelength 
is shorter than the cavity resonance wavelength, and the gain is low at the resonance 
wavelength. As temperature increases toward the minimum threshold current temp-
erature, the gain peak wavelength moves close to the cavity resonance wavelength. 
Thus the threshold current is reduced because the gain at cavity resonance increases. 
As temperature increases further, the gain peak wavelength shifts toward the longer 
wavelength side and the gain at the resonance decreases. Therefore, the threshold 
current increases with temperature. 
11.2.5 Optical Output and Differential Quantum Efficiency 
The optical output power is [43] 
' o u t — 
V = 
^ o p t 
-ηυ-ι±(ΐ, rjct)] 
(11.2.10) 
(11.2.11) 
where TJ depends on two factors: (1) the injection efficiency η, accounting for the 
fraction of injected carriers contributing to the emission process (some of the carriers 

11.2 VERTICAL CAVITY SURFACE-EMITTING LASERS 
513 
> 
ω 
rr 
CO 
CO 
T<Tn 
T=Tn 
T>Tn 
Wavelength 
Figure 11.19 Schematic of the interaction between the gain spectrum (dark curves) and the reflectivity 
spectrum (light) as temperature changes. The dip in the reflectivity spectrum indicates the Bragg wave-
length, which increases at 0.6 A/K, while the gain peak wavelength increases at a higher rate 2.7 A/K. 
At a certain temperature (250K in this example), the cavity or emission wavelength aligns with the gain 
peak, which results in the minimum threshold current density in Fig. 11.18. (Reprinted with permission 
from [521 © 1997 American Institute of Physics.) 

514 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
can recombine in the undoped confinement regions where the carriers do not interact 
with the optical field) and (2) the optical efficiency i7opt accounting for the fraction of 
generated photons that are transmitted out of the cavity 
A = 2ajLeff + a<iL 
Tr = In R\Ri 
/opt 
A 
+ 
Tf-
(Π.2.12) 
(11.2.13) 
Here the absorbance A accounts for the absorption loss in the top and bottom DBR 
regions with an effective penetration length Leff plus the diffraction loss (adL) in the 
DBRs or oxide apertures. L is the cavity length of the active layer. Tr accounts for the 
top and bottom mirror transmission loss. The factor ηορ, is similar to that of the exter-
nal quantum efficiency used in the Fabry-Perot lasers in Section 10.1. Note that the 
threshold current depends on the injection current as well as on the junction tempera-
ture 7]ct. Models for the laser output taking into account the temperature heating have 
also been developed in Refs. 55-58. 
The power conversion efficiency is given by 
% 
= 
■ 
VI 
(11.2.14) 
where V is the bias voltage and / the bias current. The differential quantum efficiency 
is then current-dependent 
VeAO 
q dPou 
ΐιω dl 
7 / 1 
dlth 
dl 
(11.2.15) 
It 
a 
f 
%xt(I) = slope 
Increasing 
temperature 
Injection current 
Figure 11.20 A plot of the light output of a surface-emitting laser versus the injection current for differ-
ent temperatures. The slope at a particular current level / is the differential quantum efficiency, which can be 
negative at a high current level or a high temperature. 

11.3 MICROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
515 
We see that 7]ext(I) can be negative if -— > 1. The light output Pout versus the 
injection current / will have a negative slope in this case, as shown in Fig. 11.20. 
Experimental data showing the negative external quantum efficiency can be found 
in Refs. 33, 34, and 55. For an update on progress on VCSEL research, we refer to 
Refs. 59 and 60. 
11.3 MICROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
What is the smallest laser you can make? 
Ultrasmail semiconductor lasers have attracted research interest because they have 
many advantages: 
1. Small lasers require low power consumption. 
2. Suitability for potential large-scale integration. 
3. Possible thresholdless laser operation due to efficient coupling of spontaneous 
emission into a single lasing mode. 
Conceptually, the smallest optical cavity is a half wavelength in each direction, so 
we have the smallest cavity with a volume (λ/2η)3 for a material with a refractive 
index n. The idea of spontaneous emission control using a cavity was proposed by 
Purcell in 1946 [61]. A microcavity with a well-defined optical mode or a high-
quality (Q) cavity allows for the control of the spontaneous emission coupling into 
the cavity mode. Early experiments using metal cavities to investigate cavity-
enhanced single atom spontaneous emission or inhibited spontaneous emission 
were reported in the 1970s [62-64]. Proposals using photonic crystal structures for 
controlling the spontaneous emission were published in 1987 [65-67], and some 
experimental confirmations were reported [68, 69]. With the successful demon-
stration of VCSELs [28-30, 70], spontaneous emission control in VCSEL cavities 
has been demonstrated [71, 72]. Microdisk lasers with submilliampere threshold cur-
rents operating at room temperature were demonstrated [73-76] in 1992. These lasers 
operate in the whispering gallery modes. Research on photonic crystals continued to 
grow in the 1990s [77]. Optical pumping [78-82] as well as electrical injection [83, 
84] of photonic crystal lasers were subsequently realized in 1999 and 2004, respect-
ively. Microcavity structures and lasers are extremely interesting for the study of 
exciton-photon interaction or cavity quantum electrodynamics [85, 86]. By placing 
quantum dots in a microcavity, single photon sources have also been under intensive 
research for applications related to quantum information processing and secure 
optical communications. Single photon sources are expected to emit one photon at a 
time, instead of multiple photons in a Poisson distribution. The quality of such a 
source is evaluated based on its high efficiency, small multiphoton probability, and 
quantum indistiguishability [87-90]. 
The major idea is to confine the photons into an ultrasmall and high-Q cavity, 
where the optical gain materials are placed. Engineering the Q factor and the mode 

516 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
volume V is useful for making a low-threshold nanolaser or for the study of cavity 
quantum electrodynamics. The challenges are [83, 84, 91]: 
• How to realize a high-<2 cavity with minimal losses due to absorption, surface 
roughness, and modal leakage? 
• How to provide current injection into the gain region of the microcavity? 
• How to reduce the thermal effects due to the large current density into an 
ultrasmall area or volume? 
11.3.1 
Structures of Microcavity Lasers 
(a) Microdisk Lasers, Fig. 11.21a [73-76,91,92]: The cavity is a dielectric disk 
where the gain region such as a quantum well structure is placed in the center 
layer of the microdisk region. The optical modes are the so-called whispering 
gallery modes traveling around the perimeter of the disk, and the mode con-
finement is based on total internal reflection from the microdisk walls. The 
active region is supported by upper and lower pedestals. By current injection 
(a) 
Active region 
(b) 
Active region 
Active region 
Figure 11.21 Schematics of (a) a microdisk laser, (b) a ring laser, and (c) a mesa-type laser, where the 
shaded layer denotes the active region for electron-hole recombination. 

11.3 M1CROCAV1TY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
517 
from the contact, the carriers diffuse to the edge of the disk, where the stimulated 
emission or optical gain occurs because the whispery gallery modes travel 
around the perimeter of the disk. Similar structures to the microdisk lasers are 
the ring laser, Fig. 11.21b, and the mesa-type of lasers, Fig. 11.21c. The 
modes are essentially guided around the perimeter or the ring waveguide. 
Figure 11.22 shows an example of a whispering gallery mode of a microdisk 
laser [74]. 
(b) Photonic Crystal Lasers [78-84, 91, 93-95]: Figure 11.23a shows a sche-
matic diagram of the free-standing slab structure for current injection, and 
Fig. 11.23b shows the layered parameters of the designed wafer. The photonic 
crystal is constructed by a periodic arrangement of refractive index variation, 
such as air holes in semiconductors, which form a photonic band gap. In semi-
conductor photonic crystals, the electronic transition spectrum in the photonic 
band gap is inhibited, and the spontaneous emission rate is reduced. Photonic 
defects such as missing air holes in an otherwise periodic arrangement of air 
holes in a semiconductor layer produce resonant optical modes with fields 
localized near the defects, and the resonant frequencies locate within the 
photonic band gap. One-dimensional and 2D photonic crystals have been 
fabricated, whereas a 3D photonic crystal is more difficult to implement. 
Usually, a spontaneous coupling factor ß is defined as the coupling efficiency 
of the spontaneous emission energy into the resonant mode. Two-dimensional 
photonic crystals or the photonic band structures are designed by solving the 
Figure 11.22 A whispering gallery mode of a microdisk laser. (Reprinted with permission from [741 © 
1992 American Institute of Physics.) 

518 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Metal contact 
(b) 
n-i-p 
slab 
Material 
n-InP 
n-1.24QlhGaAiP 
<-l.24QraGaA«P 
1.3©Q(-0.5%)mGaAsP 
1.65Q (+0.894) InGaAsP 
13OQ(-0.5%)InG.AsP 
M.24QhGaAaP 
;>-1.24QlnGaA»P 
/7-IBP 
p-InGaAi 
p-BuflerlnP 
Thickness 
0.1 urn 
600 A 
200 A 
115 A 
70A 
115 A 
200 A 
600 A 
1.0 μιη 
0.1 μιη 
0.3 um 
Doping (cm3) 
-1.1x10'· 
-2.7x10" 
Undoped 
Barrier 
Well 
Banier 
Undoped 
- 3 x 1 0 » 
~ 1.5X10" 
-5x10'» 
-1x10'* 
Remark 
Capping layer, removed 
Delta doping 
6 pain, Xc - 1.55 um 
Sacrificial layer (post) 
Etch-stop layer 
/>-InP substrate 
Figure 11.23 (a) Schematic diagram of a photonic crystal laser, which consists of a free-standing slab 
with a single-defect photonic crystal pattern with a small post near the center, (b) The designed layered 
parameters of the sample wafer. (Reprinted with permission from [841 © 2005 IEEE.) 
Maxwell wave equation for the eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors 
by taking into account the periodic refractive index pattern. Optical modes 
of a photonic crystal with defects can also be solved using the finite-difference 
time-domain method (FDTD) method or the finite-element method (FEM), 
which are discrete modes if they are localized when the resonant frequencies 
fall into the photonic band gap. More details will be discussed later in this 
subsection. 
(c) Micropillar or Micropost Cavities, Fig. 11.24 [87-90, 96]: The vertical 
cavity is essentially the same as a VCSEL structure, and the lateral dimension 
is a cylinder of a radius a or diameter D = 2a. Current injection is through the 
top and bottom DBRs. The transverse optical modes are similar to those of the 
optical fiber modes, H E ^ or EHmn modes, of the cylindrical geometry. An 
extremely high-Q cavity with a very small mode volume of the order (λ/η)3 
can be realized. For example, when the diameter D of a micropillar cavity 
consisting of a top and bottom GaAs/AlAs DBR mirror is decreased from 
2μπι to 0.5 μηι, the mode volume of the fundamental mode HE n drops 

11.3 MICROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
519 
Top DBR 
Optical cavity '' 
Bottom DBR 
«,'jymm.ti.,, 
QW 
Substrat· 
Figure 11.24 A micropillar or micropost optical cavity with the top and bottom distributed-Bragg reflec-
tors (DBRs). The structure is essentially the same as that of a VCSEL, except for its diameter D. 
from 19.2(λ/ηγ to 2(A/n)3 while the Q factor drops by only a factor of 2 from 
11,500 to 5000, where n is the refractive index in the cavity [87, 90]. 
(d) Nanolasers [97]: Figure 11.25 shows a nanolaser that has essentially a small 
microcylinder coated with gold metal on the top and side walls. The laser light 
emission is from the bottom substrate. The metal serves as confinement of 
the optical waveguide, and the active region is a layer of bulk semiconductor 
(a disk) in the middle of the optical circular waveguide. This laser has an 
ultrasmall threshold of 6 μΑ at a temperature of 77K. 
11.3.2 Purcell Factor and Spontaneous Emission Factor 
The Purcell factor predicts the enhancement of spontaneous emission rate into a 
resonant cavity mode compared with that of an unbound medium. Consider a 
single localized radiation dipole, which is weakly coupled to the field. It is placed 
in (i) a uniform lossless medium with a volume V (free space modes), Fig. 11.26a, 
or (ii) in a cavity with a volume Vc with a single mode, Fig. 11.26b. The ratio of 
the spontaneous emission rate of a single cavity mode to that of the free space 
modes is called the Purcell factor. We show the basic derivation of the Purcell 
factor as follows. 
If the emission linewidth of the dipole radiation is much narrower than that of the 
cavity resonance modes, we can consider that the dipole sees a continuum of modes 
and calculate the spontaneous emission rate based on Fermi's golden rule. The 

520 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
500 nm 
(b) 
Figure 11.25 
(a) A nanolaser structure and (b) its cross section seen from the top. The laser active cavity 
has an insulator layer protection followed by gold coating surrounding the side wall of the cylindrical geo-
metry. The laser light is emitted toward the bottom and exits from the substrate. (Adapted by permission 
from [971 © 2007 Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics.) 
(a) 
+<? 
Figure 11.26 (a) A radiating dipole (emitter) such as that due to an electron-hole pair radiative recom-
bination in free space or an unbounded medium with a refractive index n. (b) A radiating dipole radiating in 
a microcavity with a cavity volume Vc, where the majority of the optical intensity is confined. 

11.3 
MICROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
521 
transition rate from an initial state \i} to a final state |/) due to an optical dipole μ at 
position re in the volume V is given by 
^ = ^ρ(Αω)Κ/|μ·Ε(Γβ)|ΐ)|2 
(11.3.1) 
where the photon density of states ρφω) (1/eV) is the number of modes per energy 
interval (eV) at the emitter frequency ω in a volume V. We have 
Pfree(^) = ^
V 
(11.3.2) 
for the "free-space" mode density. The optical electric field is 
E(r, f) = E(r, w)e~iu" + E*(r, w)e" 
E(r, ω) = i£maxf(r) 
(11.3.3) 
where the amplitude Emax is the maximum of the electric field and |f(rmax)| = 1 at the 
location of the field maximum. £max and f(r) satisfy the normalization condition, 
which requires that the time-averaged storage (electric and magnetic) energy for a 
single photon of energy Ηω equals 
2ε0 f n2(r)|E(r, ω ) | 2 Λ = 
fto>. 
(11.3.4) 
Jv 
We note that the time-averaged electrical energy density, e0«2(r)|E(r, ω)| , is equal 
to that of the magnetic energy. For a plane wave in a volume V, we have 
hW 
f(r) = eeikr. 
(11.3.5) 
2e0n2V 
For a microcavity, the optical modes E(r) are not plane waves anymore, and an effec-
tive volume Vef{ is defined. First, we define nmax = n(rmax), where rmax is the location 
of the electrical field at its maximum 
J vn 2(r)|E(r)|Vr 
Jvn2(r)|f(r)[2^r 
Veff = 
n^~& 
= 
~# 
· 
( 
} 
max max 
max 
Note that the definition of Veff is only for convenience, and the position rmax of the 
maximum electric field (not the refractive index) is chosen to define £max and nmax 
V2e0«maxVeff 

522 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
For a microcavity, the spontaneous emission rate is changed in at least three ways. 
1. The spectral density of modes; 
2. The amplitude of the vacuum field; 
3. The orientation of the field with respect to the dipole direction. 
Consider a microcavity with a single mode: 
wc = Resonance cavity frequency, 
Δω = The full width at half maximum (FWHM or full linewidth) of the optical 
mode spectral density. 
The quality factor Q is defined as 
fa>c (Energy stored in the cavity) _ a>c 
Power dissipation per cycle 
Δω 
The mode density seen by the dipole emitter is a Lorentzian function, Fig. 11.27, 
(ΑΔω)/(2ττ) 
(Ηω - Αω0)2+(ΑΔω/2)2 
which satisfies the normalization condition 
(11.3.9a) 
pcm{ha>)d(ti<a)= 1. 
(11.3.9b) 
Note at the peak of the cavity mode frequency 
2 
2β 
Pcav(ftwc) = 7ΓΑΔω 
π1ϊω0 
(11.3.10) 
(ΑΔω)/2π 
Figure 11.27 A plot of the photon density spectrum or cavity mode spectrum as a function of the photon 
energy Ηω near the cavity resonance ftcoc. The full width at half maximum is %\ω. 

11.3 
MICROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
523 
The spontaneous emission rate in a "free-space" of volume V is, after taking into 
account a factor of 1 /3 for the dipole strength for averaging over x, y, and z directions, 
^ = ^ f r e e(*<Ä| 2 
Tfree 
« 
3 
ft ^ v ~ ' 
3 
2ε0η2ν 
Ίττ ω2η3 |μ| hw 
h Tp-tic3 3 2εο«2 
The spontaneous emission rate in a microcavity is 
pcav(M(V-E(re)|2 
(11.3.11) 
where the factor 
1 
T"cav 
2TT 
2-7Γ 
2|ir/_ \|2 
2|μΠΕ(Γ.)1 ^2 
Pcav^w)1? 
7^ 
^max 
(11.3.12) 
max 
|μ·Ε(Γ,)| 2 
η 2 = - — = 
/ - = cos20 
(11.3.13) 
|μ|2|Ε(Γ,)|2 
accounts for the relative angle between the optical dipole vector and the modal elec-
trical field direction. The ratio of the microcavity spontaneous emission rate to that of 
the "free-space" is thus 
rfree 
37i2hc3 
, |E(re)|2 
n2
 
2 
max 
3 ^2 
it,\,./1\2 
ΙΒΎ- \fi 
η2 
(11.3.14) 
o 3 KcaW'«v 
2 
1/ „2 
" ^ " 
ßmax 
Keff«m 
3β 
/ λ λ 3 η2 
{ΗΑω/2)ζ 
|E(re)| 
4772Veff W "Lx (&ω - αωε)2+(δΔω/2)2 £; 
■2 
max 
where we have taken the expression near the cavity resonance Q = ω€/Δω ~ ω/Δω. 
If the emitting dipole satisfies the following conditions, 
1. The dipole is placed at the maximum electrical intensity position, 
2. The dipole direction is aligned with the field direction, and 
3. The dipole emits photons at the resonance of the cavity, hta = ft<wc, 
we have the famous Purcell factor (assume «max = n for simplicity) 

524 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
where the wavelength λ = Ac at the cavity resonance wavelength, wc/c = 2ir/\c. For 
a microcavity with a volume Vc, we can set Veff = Vc for convenience, when the 
modal confinement in the cavity is close to unity. 
Increasing the Q/Veff ratio can potentially reduce the laser threshold if other non-
radiative losses remain constant because the spontaneous emission coupling into the 
lasing mode is increased. The spontaneous emission coupling factor is defined as: 
Sponatneous emission power coupled into a single mode 
Sponatneous emission power coupled into all modes 
It is approximated as [98] 
ß = ~/h- 
(11.3.17) 
Increasing the Purcell factor Fp will increase the spontaneous emission coupling into 
the lasing (cavity) mode. The fraction of the spontaneous emission into all other 
modes (1-/3) is one of the fundamental losses in a laser cavity. By reducing 
(1 — β) or increasing β, we can reduce the laser threshold. 
Figure 11.28 shows the measured photoluminescence lifetime due to emission from 
quantum dot when it is placed on-resonance or off-resonance with the fundamental 
mode of a micropillar (VCSEL-type) cavity (inset of Fig. 11.28) [86]. When 
the quantum dot or quantum box (QB) emission is in resonance with the cavity 
fundamental mode, the photoluminescence (PL) lifetime is as short as 0.25 ns, 
which is five times shorter than the lifetime when a reference quantum dot is 
placed in a GaAs matrix (1.3 ns). On the other hand, the off-resonance QD emission 
0 
1000 
2000 
3000 
Time (ps) 
Figure 11.28 The measured photoluminescence (PL) lifetime due to emission from a quantum dot when 
it is on-resonance (0.25 ns) or off-resonance (1.05 ns) with the fundamental mode of the micropillar cavity. 
The insert shows a micropillar laser cavity. (Reprinted with permission from [861 © 1999 IEEE.) 

11.3 MICROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
525 
PL lifetime (1.05 ns) due to the quantum dot emission coupling into the leaky mode is 
close to the reference quantum dot's lifetime (1.3 ns). 
11.3.3 Two-dimensional Photonic Crystal Lasers 
Figure 11.29 shows the band structure of a free-standing slab of a square-lattice photo-
nic crystal for both TE-like and TM-like polarizations. The radius of the air hole is 
0.35a and the slab thickness is 0.40a, where a is the lattice constant. The two 
dotted horizontal lines represent the resonant frequency positions of the whispering 
gallery mode (WGM) and the dipole mode when a single defect (i.e., one missing 
air hole) is present. The electrical field intensity patterns of the WGM and dipole 
mode are shown in Fig. 11.30a and Fig. 11.30b, respectively. The C4V symmetry of 
the square lattice allows the creation of two nondegenerate modes and one doubly 
degenerate mode, among which a quadrupole-shaped nondegenerate mode and a 
dipole-shaped degenerate mode have been observed experimentally and confirmed 
theoretically by FDTD simulations. The nondegenerate mode in Fig. 11.30a has the 
characteristics of the WGM with the azimuthal mode number of 2 (i.e., exp(i'm(p), 
m = 2). The resonant mode in Fig. 11.30b is a dipole mode polarized along the 
x direction. (The other degenerate dipole mode is polarized along the y direction.) 
Figure 11.29 The band structure of a free-standing square lattice photonic crystal for both TE-like and 
TM-like polarizations. The two dotted horizontal lines represent the resonant frequency values of two 
optical modes, the whispering gallery mode (WGM) and the dipole-like mode, when a single defect 
(one missing hole) is present in an otherwise periodic square lattice in a two-dimensional slab structure. 
(Reprinted with permission from [93] © 2003 American Institute of Physics.) 

526 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 11.30 The optical mode patterns of (a) the whispering gallery mode (WGM) and (b) the dipole-
like mode of a single defect square lattice photonic crystal laser in Fig. 11.23. (Reprinted with permission 
from [931 © 2003 American Institute of Physics.) 
Figure 11.23a shows a schematic diagram of the free-standing slab structure with a 
small central post for current injection. It is designed such that the selected optical 
mode has a central intensity node and Q is therefore not degraded. On the other 
hand, those modes with central antinodes are discarded because they encounter 
unavoidable optical losses through the central post. Figure 11.31 shows the SEM 
picture of the fabricated photonic crystal structure with a single defect (one 
missing air hole) surrounded by chirped air holes in a two-dimensional photonic 
crystal slab. The radius of the air holes varies monotonically from the center: air hole 
radius = 0.28a (region I), 0.35a (region Π), 0.385a (region ΓΠ), 0.4a (region IV), and 
Figure 11.31 
A SEM picture of a single-defect chirped air-holes photonic-crystal laser structure. 
(Reprinted with permission from [841 © 2005 IEEE.) 

11.3 MICROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
527 
0.41a (region V), where a = 510 nm. A FDTD simulation for the fabricated structure 
in Fig. 11.31 allows for the estimation of the quality (g) factor, the modal volume 
(V), and the Purcell factor (Fp) as a function of the post size (normalized to p0), as 
shown in Fig. 11.32a-c. To compare the measured Q with the theoretical value, 
the size of the diamond-like post (p0) is estimated from the SEM image, p0 = 
0.64a x 0.51a in the diagonal directions. In Fig. 11.32a, the Q factor (=3480) at 
the post size = 1.0 p0 agrees well with the experimental value. In addition, Q 
decreases rapidly when the post size becomes larger than p0. On the other hand, 
the electrical and thermal resistances increase with reduced post size. Thus, an optim-
ization of the post size is necessary for a stable laser operation with better optical, 
electrical, and thermal properties. 
11.3.4 Rate Equations and L-I Curve 
The rate equations [99, 100] are commonly used to model the light output power versus 
the injection current (L-l curve) of a microcavity laser. Here we present a simple 
consistent model for the two rate equations, which have the same form for both 
edge emitters and microcavity lasers. The subtle differences will be explained below 
dn 
J 
n 
-n=Vi-j--r-,-R«(n)S 
(11.3.18) 
at 
qd 
T(n) 
— = rRst(n)S - - + TßRsJn) 
(11.3.19) 
dt 
τρ 
where 
n = electron density (cm-3) 
S = photon density (cm 3) 
i7i = injection quantum efficiency 
J = current density (A/cm ) 
q = unit charge (Coulomb) 
d = thickness of the active region (cm) 
τ(η) = carrier lifetime (s) 
TP = photon lifetime (s) 
^st(n) = stimulated emission rate (s~') 
^sp(w) = spontaneous emission rate (s~'cm~3) 
Γ = optical confinement factor 
β — spontaneous emission coupling factor. 
The lifetime r(n) is defined as 
- £ - = An + Rsp(n) + Cn3. 
(11.3.20) 
tin) 
The spontaneous emission rate into all modes, Rsp(n), can be calculated rigorously 
if we know the cavity modes and the density of photon modes for a cavity. 

528 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 6000 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
Post size (p0) 
1.6 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
Post size (p0) 
1.6 
Figure 11.32 Theoretical results based on the FDTD simulation of (a) the quality (g) factor, (b) the 
modal volume (V), and (c) the Purcell factor (Fp) as a function of the post size (normalized to p0) for 
the fabricated photonic crystal laser structure in Fig. 11.31. (Reprinted with permission from [84] (['j 
2005 IEEE.) 

11.3 M1CROCAVITY AND PHOTONIC CRYSTAL LASERS 
529 
For simplicity, it is usually parameterized as 
R,p(n) = yBn2 
(11.3.21) 
which accounts for electron-hole pair radiative recombination. Here a (dimension-
less) field enhancement factor y is added to account for the case when the gain 
region is placed at the peak of the standing wave of the microcavity (such as y = 2 
when the gain is right at the peak of the VCSEL cavity). B is the radiative recombina-
tion coefficient (cm3 s '). The spontaneous and stimulated emission rate can be cal-
culated more rigorously from the expressions in Section 11.3.2 by integrating the 
spontaneous and stimulated emission rates over all the emitting dipoles over the 
active region and taking into account the occupation probability of the initial and 
final states. For spontaneous emission rate per unit active volume (Va) coupling 
into the cavity modes E, we use the photon density of the states of the cavity: 
9-7Γ 9 
f00 
j8/M«) = Ί Γ Τ Γ Σ 
d{fl0>)\<°Ιμ' 
Ε ( Γ ε )Ι^I 2 5 ( £ c ~ Ev ~ hw)fc{X 
-/«)Pcav(>M 
a cv 
JO 
(11.3.22) 
where 2 accounts for the two spins. For coupling into the continuum modes of the 
cavity, the photon density of modes of the continuum pconl(hwi) with corresponding 
electric field mode has to be used, which is usually an unknown or difficult to find 
except for the case of the free space modes: 
(1 - ß)Rsp(n) 
= ψ γ Σ 
f ^(Αω)Κο|μ· Econt(re)|t;)|2S(£c - Ev - ft<u)/c(l -fv)pcont(hio). 
(11.3.23) 
The stimulated emission rate per unit active volume (s_1 cm 3) is 
RAn)S = ψ γ Σ K ^ · E(i-e)|»)|2S(£c -E„- 
hw)(fc -fv)SVefi. 
(11.3.24) 
a c,v 
where the effective volume factor comes from the rate equations and the balance of 
units. For a traveling wave mode, such as that in a Fabry-Perot cavity with a uniform 
gain medium, /?st(n)5 can be simplified if we define the optical energy confinement 
factor and the effective volume as 
2ε0 L n2
a\E(r)\2d3r 
ya 
Γ = 
iv" 
a 
' 
= — 
(11.3.25) 
2s 0J> 2(r)|E(r)|Vr Veff 
Following a similar procedure as in Section 9.3.1 using the Bloch functions in the 
active region (Va), the fc-selection rule, and (9.1.27), we obtain 
Rst(n)S = vgg(n)S 
(11.3.26) 

530 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
1 
„ 
0.1 
I 
If 0-01 
1E-3 
100 
300 
500 
700 900 
Current (uA) 
Figure 11.33 A comparison of the theoretically calculated light output vs. the injection current for three 
values of the spontaneous emission coupling factor ß = 0.1, 0.25, and 0.5. It can be seen that the 0.25 
curve fits the experimental data very well. (Reprinted with permission from [84] © 2005 IEEE.) 
where vg is the group velocity and g(n) is the optical gain coefficient (1/cm) of the 
optical mode at the photon wavelength. The rate equations are similar to those in 
Chapter 10 except for the field enhancement factor for a microcavity, and the stimu-
lated emission rate can be calculated more rigorously for a cavity mode. The gain for 
quantum-well active layers can be approximated by 
g(n) = g0ln(£\ 
(11.3.27) 
where nü = transparent carrier density and g0 is the gain constant at the carrier density 
«o such that «o/ntr = el and g(n0) = go-
In Fig. 11.33, a comparison of the stimulated light output power versus the injec-
tion current (L-I curve) with the measured data is shown [84] for the spontaneous 
coupling factor ß = 0.1, 0.25, and 0.5. It can be shown that ß = 0.25 fits the exper-
imental data very well. The data are for a monopole mode in a photonic crystal laser 
with chirped air holes near the defect, Fig. 11.31. 
11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
Quantum-cascade lasers (QCLs) were realized by a team of researchers at Bell Labs in 
1994 [101]. The theory for light amplification using a superlattice with a bias voltage 
was proposed back in 1971 [102]. The key idea is that the coherent light generation by 
intersubband transitions of only electrons (unipolar processes), instead of electrons 
and holes (bipolar processes), in the energy ladder of a biased superlattice, or called 
photon-assisted tunneling, can be realized. For a historical review, please see the 
review papers by Capasso and others [103-107]. It is interesting to see that a few 
I 
■ 
L 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
531 
researchers at Bell Labs have also demonstrated quantum-well infrared photodetectors 
(QWIPs) (see Chapters 9 and 15), in which the intersubband absorption occurs via the 
bound-to-continuum transitions in GalnAs/AlInAs quantum-well systems. 
The first demonstration of QC lasers used a three-quantum-well active region 
[105]. Figure 11.34 shows various active regions proposed by different groups 
[108] for intersubband optical transitions: they include a single quantum well, two 
quantum wells, three quantum wells, photon-assisted tunneling structures, doped 
superlattice, and chirped superlattice active regions. In a quantum-cascade structure, 
multiple stages are required. Each stage or period usually consists of an injector 
region that is doped, an active region where the radiative transition occurs, and a 
carrier transport region (such as a miniband) into the next stage. The basic ideas 
are the selection of carrier (electron) injected into the excited state of the quantum-
well or biased superlattice, the photon stimulated emission in the active region, 
and the depopulation of the ground-state carriers through tunneling into the next 
stage of the quantum-cascade structure. Therefore, an injected electron, after produ-
cing a photon emission at one stage, is recycled in the next or the following stages, 
resulting in multiple photon emissions. 
3QW 
-Optical phonon 
resonance 
-Tunneling 
2QW It" 
if--* 
-Optical phonon 
resonance 
Superlattice 
l l l l l l i l l l l l 
-Phase space 
1QW 
Diagonal 
- Tunneling + 
non-parabolicity 
Chirped 
superlattice 
-Phase space 
-Tunneling 
Figure 11.34 Various active regions for intersubband lasers proposed in the literature. They are based on 
(clockwise) diagonal photon-assisted tunneling structures, one quantum well, two quantum wells, three 
quantum wells, photon-assisted tunneling, doped superlattices, and chirped superlattices. (Reprinted 
with permission from [108] © 2002 IEEE.) 

532 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The first QC laser was based on the material system GalnAs/AlInAs (AEC ~ 520 
meV) grown on InP with a lasing wavelength of 4.2 μπι [101]. The first cw operation 
at room temperature was reported in 2002 [107] with an output power of 10-20 mW 
at 298 K at a wavelength of 9.1 μιη and showed a maximum cw operation temperature 
of 312K. High power (>100mW) and high temperature (>358K) were reported in 
2007 [106] using the same material system. Other material systems such as GaAs/ 
AlGaAs (AEC ~ 290 meV) on GaAs substrate with a longer lasing wavelength λ at 
9 μ,ιη [109], InAs/AlSb (a large AEC ~ 2.1 eV for Γ-valley) grown on n-InAs sub-
strate with a low-temperature wavelength at 10 μιτι [110] or at 2.95-2.97 μπι from 
low to high temperatures [111], or GalnAs/AlAsSb (a large AEC~ 1.6eV for 
Γ-valley) lattice-matched to InP substrate with a room-temperature short lasing 
wavelength (3.7-3.9 μπι) [112, 113] were realized. Distributed-feedback lasers 
with a tunability of 0.3-1.0nm/K heat-sink temperature or 20-40 nm/A cw 
current were reported [114]. Microfluidic tuning of DFB QC lasers were also realized 
[115]. Novel lasers such as microdisk [116] and photonic-crystal [117] QC lasers 
have also been demonstrated. Although most of the QC lasers were grown by 
MBE, there has been much advancement in metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy 
(MOVPE) growth of quantum-cascade lasers [118-120] with comparable perform-
ance of similar structures. MOVPE is a well-established platform for high-volume 
production of low-cost and reliable semiconductor lasers. The technology allows 
for the deposition of uniform and thick layers at high rates and offers excellent 
stability over long growth runs and short machine down-time. Therefore, MOVPE 
is suitable for the industrial production of QC lasers [118]. 
In this section, we focus on type I QC lasers for mid-IR, far-IR, and THz ranges. 
We discuss the fundamental designs for the active region in Section 11.4.1, rate 
equations and optical gain in Section 11.4.2, waveguide designs in Section 11.4.3, 
and QC laser performance in Section 11.4.4. We then describe THz QC lasers in 
Section 11.4.5. The last section (11.4.6) addresses the type II QC lasers, which are 
based on interband transitions [121], 
11.4.1 
Type I Mid-IR Quantum-Cascade Laser Structures 
There are a few designs for the active region of quantum-cascade lasers. The major 
design considerations are 
• The energy levels and corresponding wave functions. 
• How the carriers are injected (into the excited state) in the presence of bias. 
• The selection of states for radiative transition and their intersubband oscillator 
strength. 
• The depopulation of carriers of the lower energy state of the radiative 
transition. 
• The extraction or tunneling of the carriers from the ground state into the 
injection/relaxation layer of the next stage. 
Below, we focus on three major designs of the active region of QC lasers. 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
533 
Figure 11.35 Schematic diagram for the conduction-band edge and wave functions of two periods of a 
quantum-cascade laser. The design uses a vertical transition in a coupled quantum well active region in the 
presence of a bias field of 70 kV/cm. The radiative transition occurs between level 3 and level 2; and levels 
2 and 1 are separated by one optical phonon energy. Level 3 falls into the minigap of the (right) chirped 
superlattice, and level 1 falls in the miniband for subsequent carrier relaxation or injection into the excited 
state (level 3) of the next stage. The layer sequence of one period of the (Al0 48Ino.:;2As/Gao.47lno.53As) 
alternating lasers in nanometers (nm) from the (thick) injection barrier is (6.8/4.8)(2.8/3.9)(2.7/ 
2.2X2.2/2.1X2.1/2.0) (2.0/1.8)(1.8/1.7)(2.0/1.6X2.2/1.6)(2.4/1.4). The underlined layers are doped 
n-type to 3 x 10l7cm 3. The bottom inset shows the refractive index profile and the corresponding 
optical mode profile. (Reprinted with permission from [Ί221 © 1995 American Institute of Physics.) 
(a) Bound-to-Bound Transition [122-125]: Figure 11.35 (top) shows a design 
where the active region contains a coupled quantum-well structure with three 
major bound states, levels 1, 2, and 3, followed by a graded-gap superlattice 
injection/relaxation region. The radiative transition occurs between level 3 
and level 2, which are discrete bound states, and they have a strong overlap 
integral, so-called vertical transition in real space. (This is an improvement 
over the "diagonal" transition in the first version of QC lasers using three 
quantum wells, where the transition between the higher state n = 3 wave func-
tion centered in the first well closest to the injection barrier, and the n = 2 state 

534 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
wave function is in the middle well; therefore, the overlap integral or the oscil-
lator strength is relatively weaker.) At the threshold bias field (70 kV/cm), the 
ground states of the two 4.8- and 3.9-nm quantum wells are anti-crossed (or 
coupled) with an energy splitting of an optical phonon energy. Therefore, the 
carrier lifetime of level 2 is short (0.6 ps) due to the resonant phonon depopula-
tion [122]. The chirped superlattice is designed such that level 3 of the active 
region is in its minigap in order to suppress the escape of electrons from the 
excited state (level 3) into the continuum states, while allowing for the extraction 
of electrons from the lower state (level 1 of the coupled wells) into the miniband 
for carrier relaxation. Most of the QC layers are undoped with the exception of 
layers 12-18, which are doped to 3 x 1017 cm"3. The injection region or the 
doped layers (12-18) fall in the chirped SL region. 
By inserting an extra quantum well, a double resonance phonon depopula-
tion scheme has also been realized [107, 108, 126] in a four-level system, 
where the radiative transition occurs between level 4 and level 3, while level 
3 and 2 as well as level 2 and 1 are both separated by one phonon energy 
at the biased threshold field. 
(b) Bound-to-Continuum Transition [108, 127, 128], Fig. 11.36: In such a 
design, the radiative transition occurs between an isolated bound state and a 
continuum of miniband, which provides an efficient carrier extraction mech-
anism. This approach provides another solution to maintain a high population 
inversion and low-threshold current density. As shown in Fig. 11.36a [127], 
the active region spans the whole period and consists of a chirped superlattice 
showing a tilted lower miniband, the width of which is a maximum in the 
center and decreases on both sides close to the injection barriers. The upper 
state is created in the first minigap by a small well adjacent to the injection 
barrier, and its wave function has a maximum close to the injection barrier 
and decreases smoothly in the active region. This upper state is well separated 
from the higher states of the superlattice. The computed oscillator strengths 
for various transitions from the upper state into the miniband states are 
shown as the lowest curve in Fig. 11.36b, which gives the general features 
of the luminescence spectrum at 80K and 300K. 
(c) Interminibands Transition [129-131]: Figure 11.37a shows a design of 
interminiband quantum-cascade lasers. The radiative transition occurs 
between two minibands in the chirped superlattices. The bottom few states of 
the miniband 1 are coupled to the miniband 2 of the next stage in the presence 
of a bias voltage near threshold. Compared with the previous designs, which 
require resonant tunneling into a discrete excited state, superlattices offer the 
advantage of wide energy minibands, which can carry large current density 
without tuning into misaligned levels when the applied voltage is increased. 
In earlier designs, the superlattice (SL) active regions are doped in order to mini-
mize electric field penetration, which results in higher optical losses and reduced 
population inversion at high temperature. An improved design by placing 
dopants in the injection/relaxation regions outside the active region has demon-
strated high-power performance at room temperature [131, 132]. 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
535 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
Photon energy (meV) 
Figure 11.36 (a) Schematic diagram for the conduction band of (more than) one stage of a bound-to-
continuum QC laser structure at a bias field of 35 kV/cm. The squared moduli of the wave functions 
are plotted at the corresponding energy levels. The sequence for the alternating layers Alo.4sIno.52As/ 
Gao.47Ino.53As (boldface is for barriers) starting from the injection barrier is 4.0/2.0/0.7/6.0/0.9/5.9/ 
1.0/5.2/1.3/3.8/1.4/3.5/1.5/3.3/1.6/3.1/1.9/3.1/2.3/3.0/2.4/2.9. The underlined regions are doped 
n-type with Si to 3 x 1017 cm-3, (b) Electroluminescence spectrum from the active region at 300K and 
80K, with the bottom curve indicating the calculated oscillator strength of the various transitions from 
the upper (bound) state. (Reprinted with permission from [1271 © 2001 American Institute of Physics.) 
11.4.2 Rate Equations, Optical Gain, and Threshold Current 
We start with the rate equations for a three-level system of the active region, which 
has an injector state from the left and has some mechanism to depopulate the 
lower level. In a QCL, the depopulation of the lower level is based on the transport 
into the injector of the next stage. Figure 11.38 [127] shows a model for the key 
parameters used in the rate equation of a three-level model (as in a bound-to-
bound transition) of a quantum-cascade laser. We assume an injection efficiency 

536 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
Injection 
berrier 
(b) Complete structure 
Injector 
Active SL 
O A I A J 
GttnA· 
OatM 
AUnAa 
ADnAi 
Graded 
(MnAi 
N K H 
e« t x 10*«»"** 
?χ1θ'1ϊ«Γί 
2xl0"«ef* 
2xl01*an"*s 
I >t 
to"m'1 
lxIO r t«β" , 
SxlO 1*«»-' 
2XI0 1 7«»- 3 
AerviSL region 
Qnuled 
GrinAs 
GouW 
2xI0"«m"' 
5x10** a»-3 
1x10"«»-' 
loo A 
5000 A 
300 A 
10000 A 
12000 A 
J00A 
3 WO A 
302 A 
ITS A 
V?« 
302 A 
5000 A 
2 » A 
GMltAs 
AllnA« 
CMnA» 
AllnA» 
CWnA» 
AlInAi 
CUnAi 
AUnAs 
CWnAs 
AllnA* 
GfctoA* 
AlInAj 
GrfnAi 
AllnA· 
2xiol,em-' 
lxicfaa"3 
2xlOl7<im-s 
ϊ*10 ,*«βΓ* 
i»10"«ra-' 
-j^ffr^a-
23 A 
25 A 
23A 
55 A 
22 A 
26 A 
20 A 
26 A 
»A 
2?A 
»A 
29 A 
it A 
35 A 
G»lnAi 
AlinAt 
ClnA» 
AllnA* 
GtSnAs 
AllnA» 
GalnA* 
AllnA* 
GdnAi 
AllnA· 
GtlnA· 
AllnAl 
51 A 
It A 
«A 
ii A 
44 A 
HA 
41 A 
12 A 
31 A 
U A 
35 A 
»A 
Figure 11.37 (a) Conduction-band profile showing two stages of a interminiband quantum-cascade laser 
at a bias of 45 kV/cm. The shaded regions indicate the energy and spatial extension of the manifold of 
miniband-like states. The radiative transition occurs between the edges of the minibands 2 and 1, and 
the wave function moduli are also plotted at the corresponding energy levels, (b) The details of the materials 
compositions, layer thicknesses, and doping concentrations of the complete structure. (Reprinted with 
permission from [129] © 1998 American Institute of Physics.) 
into level i, TJ;, and the lasing transition occurs between levels 3 and 2. The rate 
equations are given as 
dn3 
dt 
dn2 
~dt 
dn\ 
dt 
qd 
T3 
J 
n3 
n-i 
= η 2 —- + — 
μ vsg(n3 - n2)S 
qd 
r32 
T2 
J 
n3 
n2 
n\ 
= V\—, + 
1 
qd 
T31 
T21 
τ\ 
(11.4.1) 
-7- = Γι·8#(η3 - n2)S 
+ ßRsp(n3, n2) 
at 
Tp 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
537 
Injector 
Active 
Figure 11.38 Schematic diagram to illustrate the parameters used in the rate equations. (Reprinted with 
permission from [127] © 2001 American Institute of Physics.) 
where «, are the electron concentrations (1/cm3) in level i, J is the current density 
(A/cm2), d is the thickness (cm) of the active region, and l/τί is the total scattering 
rate for level i (1 /s). Here g is the gain coefficient and is a function of the population 
inversion, «3 — n2. S is the photon density, and τρ is the photon lifetime. Rsp is the 
spontaneous emission rate, and β is the spontaneous emission coupling coefficient. 
Below threshold, the photon density S is negligible. In steady state, we can set 
d/dt = 0, which gives 
«3 = V3, 
«2 = 1?2 
«l = V\ 
J73 
qd 
qd 
qd 
"3T2 
T32 
W3T1 
131 
(11.4.2) 
ηιτ\ 
T21 
The gain spectrum for intersubband transition between levels 3 and 2 is based 
on (9.7.5) 
g(ha>) 
IM32I r 
nrce0 (£3 - E2 - hw)2 -\- γ-
(«3 - «2) 
(11.4.3) 
where nr is the refractive index, μ,32 is the intersubband dipole moment, and y is the 
half width at half maximum (HWHM) or the linewidth. The peak gain for intersub-
band transitions is given as 
ω 
|μ·32ΐ 
nrceo 
(«3 - « 2 ) -
(11.4.4) 

538 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
If we insert (11.4.2) into (11.4.4), we obtain 
(11.4.5) 
ω 
\μ32\ 
J 
öpeak 
η 3τ 3(1 -^Γ") - 172^2 
nrceo 
γ 
qd 
Equation (11.4.5) indicates that, in order to achieve population inversion (gain), we 
want τ}3 r3 to be large, and 7]2T2 and τ2/τ32 to be small. At threshold, the peak gain 
must equal the threshold gain 
gth = — p — 
(11.4.6) 
where «i is the intrinsic loss, am is the mirror loss, and Γ is the optical confinement 
factor. Equations (11.4.5) and (11.4.6) give the threshold current density 
ai + am qdnrce0 
y 
1 
Ah =—ψ, 
0 
T-, 
;—Λ 
· 
(11.4./) 
Γ 
ω 
|M321 
|2 η3τ3(1 - τ2/τ32) - τ/2τ2' 
Figure 11.39a [ 122] shows the measured net modal gain as a function of wavenumber 
of a QC laser with a 1,3-ram cavity length at various bias currents from 40 to 200 mA 
below threshold (230 mA) at a temperature of 15K. The gain spectrum appears 
Lorentzian or Gaussian-like [132, 133]. Figure 11.39b shows the peak net modal 
gain as a function of the injection current density J. The linear relation is quite 
clear. Thermal effects and carrier heating effects have been investigated experimen-
tally [134] and theoretically [135]. A comprehensive model for the rate equations of 
QC lasers and the laser linewidth has been recently developed and compared well 
with experimental data [136]. 
11.4.3 
Optical Waveguides and Modes of Quantum-Cascade Lasers 
Because the intersubband transition is dominated by the z-polarization of the 
quantum-well or superlattice structures, where z is the growth axis of the epilayers, 
the optical waveguide modes are TM polarized. Because metals and doped semicon-
ductors behave like plasma in mid-infrared or terahertz frequencies, surface plasma or 
plasmonics is used as part of the waveguide mechanism. The solution of Maxwell's 
equations for the TM polarization is usually based on finite-difference time-domain 
method (FDTD), finite-element method (FEM), or a simple one-dimensional finite-
difference frequency domain method or propagation matrix method. 
Three types of optical waveguides are used for quantum-cascade lasers: 
1. A conventional dielectric waveguide with a high-index core (consisting of the 
active region) sandwiched between lower-index cladding layers. The optical 
mode has a relatively symmetrical profile, Fig. 11.40a. 
2. A single surface-plasmon waveguide consisting of one metal surface next to the 
core of the dielectric waveguide, Fig. 11,40b. 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
539 
(a) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
I 
» 
I 
| 
I 
T 
0 
1
2 
3 
Current density (kA/cm2) 
Figure 11.39 (a) Net modal gain of a Fabry-Perot quantum-cascade laser of Fig. 11.35 measured by the 
Hakki - Paoli method, (b) The peak modal gain of (a) is plotted as a function of the injection current density. 
(Reprinted with permission from [1221 © 1995 American Institute of Physics.) 
3. A double-surface plasmon (metal-semiconductor-metal) waveguide or a 
double metal claddings. The optical confinement is close to unity, and the 
waveguide structure is essentially the same as a microwave metal waveguide 
with the optical mode decays exponentially into the metal, Fig. 11.40c. 
The metal cladding or surface plasmon waveguides (see Chapter 7) are especially 
useful for wavelength longer than 15 μιη, including the terahertz range. The reason 
is that the metal cladding allows for the realization of a large optical confinement 
factor without growing the relatively thick epitaxial layers. Research at Bell 
Labs on QC lasers has pushed the growth of epitaxial layer thickness close to the 
upper practical limits of modern molecular-beam epitaxy (about ΙΟμηι) using a 

540 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(b) 
-
*m 
• « i s . . ™ 
1QÖEE ; fy 
X. 
• 
-2 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 12 14 16 18 
Distance (μτη) 
-2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 
Distance (μιη) 
2 
4 
6 
Distance (μπι) 
Figure 11.40 Normalized optical intensity profile of the fundamental mode for (a) a conventional dielec-
tric waveguide (the optical confinement factor Γ = 0.63, and the waveguide loss a = 41 c m 1 ) and (b) a 
surface-plasmon waveguide (Γ = 0.88 and a = 41 cm"') designed for a quantum-cascade laser at 24-u.m 
wavelength. The shaded areas indicate the multiple stages of active and injection regions, (c) The optical 
intensity profile for a double-surface plasmon (two metal claddings) waveguide (Γ = 0.98 and a = 37.8 
cnT') designed for a wavelength of 21 μηι. (Reprinted with permission from [1031 © 2002 IEEE.) 
conventional dielectric waveguide. Using a single metal on top of an active region 
with 35 quantum-cascade periods, which supports surface plasmon modes, only 
4^m-thick epitaxial material was grown to realize a QC laser at A = 17 μ,πι, as 
opposed to the 9^m-thick dielectric waveguide used for the same wavelength. 
The much improved confinement factor reduces the threshold substantially and 
increases the optical output power. 
The calculated optical losses for both waveguides in Fig. 11.40a and 11.40b for a 
QC laser at A = 24 μπι are 41 cm '. The optical confinement factor is 0.88 using 
only 6.5 μπι of epitaxial material, as opposed to the prohibitively thick 14 μπι for 
the conventional waveguide with an optical confinement factor of 0.63. The 
double-plasmon waveguide in Fig. 11.40c is designed for a wavelength of 21 μπι. 
The optical confinement factor is 0.98 with a waveguide loss of 37.8 cm' 1. 
For long-wavelength QC lasers using a double-plasmon waveguide with a lasing 
wavelength of 76 μπι from a vertical-transition active region, waveguide loss has 
been measured and the loss is 42 + 20 cm - 1 [137]. 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
541 
The near-field scanning optical microscope (NSOM) imaging of QC lasers with 
wavelengths of 5.3 μπι and 7.0 μπι has also been reported [138]. The measured 
modal patterns and theoretical results seem to agree well. NSOM provides a nice 
optical characterization tool for the optical modes and identifies the features near 
the boundaries of the active regions and cladding regions. 
11.4.4 Performance of Quantum-Cascade Lasers 
Figure 11.41 shows the experimental data of the voltage (I-V) and the light output 
power (L-I) as a function of the injection current for a QC laser using the bound-to-
continuum active region shown in Fig. 11.36. The QC laser was grown by MBE using 
InGaAs/AlGaAs lattice-matched to InP substrate. It consists of 35 periods of active 
layers (Fig. 11.36) embedded in an optical waveguide formed on one side by the InP 
substrate and the other side by an InP top cladding grown by MOCVD. The 
agreement between the calculated oscillator strength and the measured electrolumi-
nescence spectrum (Fig. 11.36) is very good. The QC lasers were mounted junc-
tion-side up onto a copper submount. The cavity length is 3 mm long and the 
width is 28 μηι. The lasing wavelength is 9.1 μιη. The peak optical output power 
is measured with a pulsed current at a duty cycle of 1.5% at various temperatures 
from — 30°C to 150°C. The inset shows the threshold current as a function of the 
temperature, showing a characteristic temperature T0 of 190K. The slope efficiency 
is dP/dl = 200 mW/A at T = 30°C and a maximum power of 700 mW. Peak 
power above 1 W at — 30°C was also reported. 
J(kA/cm2) 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
1.5 
1.0 5 
CD 
I 
a. 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
Current (A) 
Figure 11.41 Peak optical output power versus injection current of a bound-to-continuum QC laser at 
various temperatures. The measurement was performed with a pulsed mode at 1.5% duty cycle. The 
inset shows the temperature dependence of the threshold current with a characteristic temperature of 
190K. (Reprinted with permission from [127] © 2001 American Institute of Physics.) 

542 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
14 __,—,_,—,— r 
Continuous operation 
Cavity. 12 ιβιι x 3 mm 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
Current (A) 
Figure 11.42 The L-l curves of a cw operational QC laser with a 12^m-wide and 3-mm-long cavity. 
The V-/curve is also shown for T= 298K along with the emission spectrum at 0.629 A injection current. 
The peak wavelength is 10.6 μπι. The material system is Al0.48In0 52As/Gao.47lno.53As grown by gas-
source MBE with InP as the upper cladding and cap layer. (Reprinted with permission from [106] © 
2007 American Institute of Physics.) 
Figure 11.42 shows the L-l curves of a high-power (> 100 mW) and high-temp-
erature (358K) QC laser near a wavelength of 10.6 μπι using the Al0 48In0.52As/ 
Gao.47Ino.53As material system [106]. The laser device is 12 μπι wide and 3 mm 
long. The V-I curve is shown for T = 298K along with the emission spectrum at 
0.629 A injection current. At room temperature (298K), the cw output power is 
148 mW with a threshold current density of 0.81 kA/cm2 and a slope efficiency of 
0.717 W/A. The threshold voltage is 10.23 V, and the differential resistance above 
threshold is 10Ω. The maximum output power ranges from 176mW at 288K to 
6 mW at 358K. 
Shorter wavelength (3.7~3.9 μιη) GalnAs/AlAsSb QC lasers [112] using a 
3 QW vertical transition active region show a peak power of 31 mW at 300K 
with a T0 of 170K for temperature range of 220K to 31 OK. Shorter wavelength 
below 3 μηι using InAs/AlSb based on the bound-to-continuum design shows 
a threshold of 3kA/cm2 at 84K and operates up to room temperature [111]. 
11.4.5 Terahertz Quantum-Cascade Lasers 
Terahertz frequencies (l-10THz, photon energy 4-40meV, or wavelength 
300-30μπι) cover the gap between microwave (GHz) and optical (1015Hz) fre-
quencies, and they are among the underdeveloped electromagnetic spectra. They 
have potential applications in areas such as astrophyics, biomedical imaging, bio-
chemical agent detection, remote atmospheric sensing and monitoring, noninvasive 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
543 
inspection of semiconductor wafers and circuits, as well as high-speed and free-space 
communications [139]. Conventional semiconductor devices for GHz and optical 
devices are relatively more well-developed than are those of the terahertz devices. 
The reason is that semiconductor electronic devices such as transistors or milli-
meter-wave devices are limited to below 1 THz due to the transport and parasitic 
RC time constants. Semiconductor photonic devices, such as laser diodes based on 
the quantum electronics or the particle nature of photons, are typically limited by 
the band gap (larger than 10 THz or 40meV). Therefore, 1 to 10 THz frequency 
range presents the opportunities for the monocarrier type of photonic devices such 
as quantum-cascade lasers based on the intersubband transition. Although mid-IR 
quantum-cascade lasers were realized in 1994 [101], it took several years to realize 
the 4.4 THz QC lasers in 2002 [140]. The major challenges are as follows [139]. 
First, because the photon energy (of the order 10-20 meV) in the THz range is 
smaller or comparable with phonon energy, the selective depopulation mechanism 
based on longitudinal optical (LO)-phonon scattering is difficult to implement. 
Second, a low-loss optical waveguide is difficult to make in the THz frequencies. 
The first THz laser was realized in 2002 using a chirped superlattice [140]. The 
optical confinement was based on a double-surface plasmon waveguide grown on 
a semi-insulating (SI) substrate. A THz QC laser based on the bound-to-continuum 
intersubband transition was soon realized with higher powers and operating tempera-
tures [141]. An idea using resonant LO-phonon scattering to selectively depopulate 
the lower radiative level while maintaining a long upper level lifetime was realized 
[142]. Using the double-plasmon waveguide, significant improvements in the per-
formance have been made. Much progress has also been achieved by a few groups 
[143-156] in order to achieve higher power and operation temperature or to lower 
the frequency below 2 THz. For examples, low frequency such as 1.39 THz [152], 
1.6 - 1.8 THz [154], and 1.9 THz [153] have been reported. High power (145 mW 
at 5K) and lasing up to 160K have been demonstrated [156]. 
Figure 11.43a shows the MQW active design from Ref. 149. Figure 11.43b and 
Fig. 11.43c show the optical (THz) waveguide modal profiles (solid) and the real 
part of the dielectric constants for the semi-insulating surface plasmon (SISP) wave-
guide and the double-metal waveguide. The structure was grown by MBE on a semi-
insulating substrate with 178 cascade modules. The cladding and contact layers were 
chosen such that the device could be processed into either a SISP waveguide or a 
double-sided metal waveguide. First, an Alo.5Gao.5As etch-stop layer of 0.3 μπι was 
grown then follow by an 0.8-μΐΏ GaAs contact layer doped at n+ = 2 x 1018 cm 3. 
The device was fabricated into a metal-semiconductor-metal waveguide using 
In-Au metallic wafer bonding as described in Fig. 11.44 [147]. The ridges 
were dry etched using the top Ti/Au (200/4000 A) metallization as a self-aligned 
etch mask. 
The SISP waveguide is formed by sandwiching the 178 QC periods between a 
60-nm upper contact layer (doped n+ = 5 x 1018cm 3) and a bottom 800-nm 
contact layer (n = 2 x 10I8cm~3) on a semi-insulating GaAs substrate [142, 148]. 
A top non-alloyed ohmic contact was made by evaporating Ti/Au layers on low-
temperature-grown GaAs. Wet etching was used to define a 150^m-wide ridge, 

544 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
E = 13.2meV 
z.A m 6.5 nm 
54 
(b) 
1 
2? 
1 
(c) 
' 
Au 
Active 
region 
* 
Au 
13 
12 
11 S 
10 
9 
« 
or 
0 
10 
20 
Distance (μπι) 
0 
5 
10 
Distance (μτη) 
8 
15 
Figure 11.43 (a) Conduction-band profile of a THz quantum-cascade laser structure calculated using a 
self-consistent Schrödinger-Poisson solver with a 72% band edge discontinuity rule. The dotted box indi-
cates the four well module: (from left to right in Angstrom, beginning with the barrier): 54/78/24/65/38/ 
149/30/95. The underlined 149 A well is doped with n = 1.9 x 1016 cm"1. The optical mode profiles 
(solid) and the real part of the complex dielectric constants (dashed) are plotted for (b) Si-surface 
plasmon waveguide and (c) a double-metal-claddings waveguide. (Reprinted with permission from 
[1481 © 2003 American Institute of Physics.) 
and a Ni/Ge/Au alloyed contact was made to the lower contact layer at the bottom of 
the ridge. Because the plasma frequency for the lower contact is above the frequency of 
interest, a waveguide is formed between the top metallic contact and the surface 
plasmon mode associated with the quasi-metallic lower layer. A high-reflectivity 
(HR) coating (Al203/Ti/Au) was evaporated on the cleaved rear facet [148], 
At 3.8 THz, a waveguide loss of aw = 14.2 cm ' and an optical confinement 
factor of Γ= 0.98 were obtained for the metal-semiconductor-metal waveguide. 
On the other hand, aw = 8.2 cm"' and Γ= 0.324 were obtained for the SISP wave-
guide. Drude model (see Chapter 5) with a relaxation time of 0.1, 0.5, and 0.05 ps 
was used for the heavily doped semiconductor, lightly doped semiconductor, and 
gold, respectively. 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
(a) 
GaA» 
545 
t 
Low-temperature bonding 
71 (20 nm) 
Au (1000 nm) 
_ Au (120 rim 
n* GaAs receptor substrate 
« i -In (1200 nm 
*|fc;Pd (25 nm) 
I \ G e (10 nm) 
I (25 nm) 
> (10 nm) 
i 
Pd(25nm) 
(t>) Remove substrate 
and AIGaAs etch stop 
(c) Fabricate ridge structures 
Tl/Au (20/200 nm) 
n* GaAs receptor substrate 
n* GaAs reesp&r substrate 
Figure 11.44 Schematic diagram for the fabrication of the metal-semiconductor-metal waveguide or 
double-metal waveguide for quantum-cascade lasers. (Reprinted with permission from Γ147] © 2003 
American Institute of Physics.) 
The better performance of the metal-semiconductor-metal waveguide THz laser 
is shown in Fig. 11.45 [147]. The laser is a 150^m-wide, 2.74-mm-long Fabry-
Perot ridge lasing up to the heat-sink temperature Tmax = 137K when biased with 
200-ns pulses repeated at 1 kHz. The threshold current density is 625 A/cm2 at 
5K. The voltage versus current (I—V) curve is also shown for a smaller device 
(100 μιη wide and 1.45 mm long). In these devices, lasing occurs up to a peak 
current density of 1400 A/cm2, whereupon the injector subband n= V becomes mis-
aligned with the upper radiative state n = 5, and negative differential resistance was 
observed. The shoulders in the V-I curves at 500 A/cm2 correspond to the para-
sitic current channel. Electrons are not injected into the upper state until the device 
is biased beyond this current level, and lasing begins at a current density slightly 
higher than this parasitic channel. It indicates that the threshold current density is 
still limited by the parasitic channel rather than by the intrinsic gain or loss. 
Increasing the intrainjector barrier thickness seemed to suppress the parasitic 
channel and reduce threshold current density. 
High-power THz lasers using a SISP waveguide at 4.4 THz show a 248 mW peak 
power in pulsed mode, and 138 mW cw power at a heat sink temperature of 10K 
[151]. High-power and high-temperature THz QC lasers based on lens-coupled 
metal-metal waveguides have also been reported. The QC laser at 4.1 THz produced 
145 mW of peak pulsed power at 5K with a wall plug power efficiency of 0.7%, lasing 

546 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Current (A) 
Current density (A/cm2) 
Figure 11.45 (Top) The measured voltage and THz light output power using a double-metal waveguide 
of Fig. 11.43c as a function of the injection current density using 200-ns pulses at 1 kHz repetition rate. The 
L-I curve is from a QC laser of 60-u.m-wide and 2.48-mm-long ridge. The V-I curve is obtained from a 
different device: 100 μπι wide and 1.45 mm long. (Bottom) The lower panel shows the /.-/curve using a 
150^m-wide and 2.74-mm-long ridge, along with its threshold current density versus temperature. The 
current density axis only applies to the 60^m-wide device. (Reprinted with permission from Γ1471 © 
2003 American Institute of Physics.) 
up to a maximum operation temperature of 160K, as shown in Fig. 11.46 [156]. The 
same laser produced 26 mW of peak power using a Winston cone instead of a lens, 
lasing up to 165K. The large increase in output power for the case of lens is attributed 
to an increase of the collection efficiency. 
Theoretical work includes the active-layer design, Monte Carlo simulation to 
account for various carrier scattering mechanisms in order to estimate the carrier 
density in each state, followed by the gain and threshold analyses [157-159]. The 
design of the active region allows for the determination of the energy levels, the cor-
responding wavefunctions, and oscillator strengths. The determination of the carrier 
populations on the energy levels are challenging because various scattering mechan-
isms such as electron-phonon, electron-impurity, and electron-electron scatterings 
play important roles for each injection current or bias voltage. Therefore, Monte Carlo 
simulations provide a solution for estimating the carrier population for a given bias at 
a given lattice temperature. 
Experimentally, DFB lasers in the THz range have been developed [160]. Periodic 
structures have been employed in the waveguide of THz lasers [161] to control 
the lasing properties such as the DFB effect without the back-facet reflection, to 
achieve vertical emission of the radiation with second-order gratings, and to increase 
the facet reflectivity by fabricating passive distributed Bragg reflectors. Real-time 
THz imaging using QC lasers has also been demonstrated [162, 163]. 

11.4 QUANTUM-CASCADE LASERS 
547 
Current density (A/cm2) 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000_,„ 
140 
120 £ 
E 
100 ¥ 
o 
80 
5 
o 
60 
f. 
o 
J£ 
18 
20 
0 
(K2 
0Λ 
0Λ 
θΊΪ 
Γ^ 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
Current (A) 
Figure 11.46 
Light output power of a 4.1 THz double-metal waveguide QC laser at various temperatures 
from 5K to 158K with lens-coupled and Winston cone-coupled designs. The insets show the threshold 
current density versus temperature (top) and typical lasing spectra with lens (bottom). (Reprinted with 
permission from [1561 © 2007 Optical Society of America.) 
11.4.6 Type II Quantum-Cascade Lasers 
Type II quantum-cascade lasers provide an alternative solution for mid-infrared lasers 
because the idea of cascading provides carrier recycling for multiple photon emis-
sions. The multiple stages also allow for the increase of confinement factor. The 
concept of the interband cascade lasers were proposed in 1994 [164] and experimen-
tally demonstrated in 1997 [165]. Theoretical simulations were also published [166, 
167]. The first laser exhibited a lasing wavelength of 3.8 μπι at 80K and operated 
up to 170K. For a review, please see Ref. 121. 
Figure 11.47 shows a schematic diagram [168] to illustrate the physical principles. 
The injected electrons from the left tunnel through the first barrier into the conduction 
band of the InAs quantum well, where the electrons recombine with holes, which 
populate mostly in the nearby GalnSb layer due to the type II band alignment. The 
electron subband energy falls into the band gap of the GalnSb layer to avoid the tun-
neling out of the electrons into the following GalnSb and GaSb layers and force the 
electrons to recombine with the holes in the GalnSb layer. The overlap between the 
electrons and holes in the type II alignment depends on the leakage of the electron 
wave function from the InAs layer into the GalnSb layer and the hole wave function 
from the GalnSb layer into the InAs layer. The electron-hole recombination for stimu-
lated photon emission requires electron transitions into the valence band, followed by 
tunneling through the AlSb barrier into the next GaSb quantum-well hole subband, 
then subsequent tunneling through the AlSb barrier back into the conduction band 
of the next injection/relaxation region consisting of InAs/AlInSb multilayered 
! 
1 
700 
500 
400 
300 
700 
lens 
/ 
nolens 
Winston cone 
0 
25 
50 
75 100 129 150 
Temperatur« (K) 
I = 0.80 A 
1 = 1.12 A i 
.»1.44AJ 
3.8 
4 
4.1 4.2 . 
Freneney OKt) A 

548 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Active «>£<« 
Injection region 
Figure 11.47 
Schematic of a type II interband cascade laser structure. (Reprinted with permission from 
[1681 © 2007 IEEE.) 
structure. Therefore, "electron recycling" allows for an increase of the injection 
quantum efficiency to produce multiple photons depending on the number of 
stages. The difference between type I and type II quantum-cascade lasers are that 
type II cascade lasers require electrons and holes, therefore, interband radiative 
process is involved. The curvature of the energy versus momentum relations for the 
electrons and holes are opposite: upward for electrons and downward for holes. The 
band structures, wave functions, and optical gain model can be found in Ref. 169. 
The selective operating characteristics of interband cascade lasers are briefly sum-
marized. Laser (pulsed) operation with wavelength at 3.6 to 4.3 μπι in a temperature 
range of 78K to 330K has been reported [170, 171]. For 150^m-wide stripes, the 
threshold current densities are as low as 4.8 A/cm2 at 78K (cw) and 1.15kA/cm2 
at room temperature (pulsed). At 78K, the cw wall-plug efficiency for an 11-μη> 
wide ridge with 0.5-mm-long cavity and coated facets is 27%, while the other with 
a 3-mm-long cavity emits a maximum cw power of 200 mW. Devices have a 
maximum cw operating temperature of 269K at λ = 4.05 μπι [171]. Continuous 
wave operation of DFB type Π interband-cascade lasers has also been demonstrated 
[168] with a side-mode suppression ratio >20dB at temperatures up to 26IK near 
3.3 μηι. The electric power consumption (less than 1.1 W) for these DFB lasers is 
relatively low over the entire operating range compared with that for the mid-IR 
DFB type I QC lasers, which allows for cw operation with simple one-stage TE 
coolers at ambient temperature. 
11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
In Chapter 1, we presented a historical development of semiconductor laser diodes 
and LEDs since Holonyak's first red GaAsP devices in 1962 [172, 173]. In the 
visible range, blue semiconductor lasers and LEDs [174] were absent until 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
549 
the 1990s, as shown in Fig. 1.3 in Chapter 1. The major breakthroughs relied on the 
development of GaN-based technologies by Akasaki and Nakamura [175-180], 
although II-VI blue-green lasers have also been demonstrated [181-183] with a 
record of 100 hours cw operation at a wavelength of 530 nm by Sony [184]. II-VI 
lasers and LEDs suffer from defects and recombination-enhanced defect motion 
[185], and therefore, reliability becomes an important issue of research. For a com-
parison of GaN with II-VI blue-green lasers, see Refs. 186 and 187. GaN forms 
in both cubic (zinc-blende) and hexagonal (wurtzite) crystal structures. However, 
we will discuss the wurtzite band structure, which is used in semiconductor lasers. 
Figure 11.48 shows a schematic diagram of a wurtzite crystal [188, 189]. It is a hex-
agonal structure and is similar to that of a zinc-blende crystal grown along the (111) 
direction, except that the atomic layers has a 60° rotation on the ABAB sequence 
versus ABAC sequence of a zinc-blende crystal [190]. 
Figure 11.49 shows a plot of the band-gap energy of nitride-based materials versus 
the lattice constant for wurtzite nitride-based materials. The band gap and lattice par-
ameters are taken from Refs. 191-194, noting that the band gap of InN has been 
found to be close to 0.7 eV [195-197] in 2002 instead of 1.9eV (see Appendix D 
on p. 807). We see that the AlGalnN is a wide band-gap III-V alloy, which 
covers a broad spectrum useful for lasers and photodetectors, but it is difficult to 
find substrates with closely lattice-matched lattice constants. The alloy has been suc-
cessfully prepared on sapphire or SiC substrates by two-stage epitaxial growth of a 
buffer layer followed by GaN. The quality of the GaN grown on sapphire was 
improved by incorporating an A1N buffer layer or GaN buffer layer grown at a low 
temperature (450°C to 600°C). Although P-type GaN has been difficult to achieve, 
the work by Akasaki and Nakamura has made it possible to achieve a p-n junction 
in a GaN material system. With these developments, LEDs were commercialized 
in 1992. Despite the dislocation problem associated with lattice mismatch, 
the LEDs had a long lifetime. However, it was rather difficult to fabricate reliable 
laser diodes because of the high threshold current density of 5-6 kA/cm2, high oper-
ating voltage, and high dislocation density around 108 to 1010cm~2. Continuous 
Figure 11.48 A wurtzite crystal consists of two interpenetrating hexagonal closely packed sublattices 
displaced by 5/8 of the c-axis along the (0001) direction. The dashed lines show the boundary of a unit 
cell. (Reprinted with permission from [188] © 1996 American Physics Society.) 

550 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
8 
7 
6 
5 
>" 
Si, 4 
IX) 
3 
2 
1 
3.0 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
a(A) 
Figure 11.49 A plot of the band-gap energy versus the lattice constant for selective nitride-based 
materials. The triangular areas represent AlInGaN quarternary compounds. The parameters are from 
Appendix D on page 807. SiC substrate has a lattice constant of 3.0806 A (labeled) while sapphire has 
a much larger lattice mismatch (not shown). 
wave room-temperature AlGalnN lasers were first demonstrated in 1996 at Nichia. It 
was reported that ultrathin QWs less than 5 nm helped to decrease threshold current 
densities, and a Mg-doped GaN-AlGaN superlattice cladding layer reduced the 
series resistance. Progress has been rapid [198-212], and GaN-based lasers were 
developed as a light source for optical disk recording, laser printing, and display 
applications. As reviewed in Ref. 201, the advent of the epitaxial lateral overgrowth 
(ELOG) technique and improvements in the quality of GaN substrates have sub-
sequently led to a remarkable reduction in dislocation density to around 105 to 106 
cm" . The reduction of dislocation densities has led to greatly improved reliability 
of GaN lasers and led to the mean time to failure of more than 10,000 hours. 
Impressive performance such as high power with long lifetime (e.g., >500mW at 
445-nm wavelength at room temperature by Nichia; 750 mW AlGalnN blue LDs 
cw operation at 440-450 nm at 35°C over 10,000 hours by Sony) have also been 
reported (see Refs. 202-210 for performances of recent blue laser diodes). 
Continuous wave operation of GaN/InGaN microdisk lasers at 300K [211] and elec-
trical injection of GaN-based VCSELs at 77K [212] have also been demonstrated. 
11.5.1 Band Structure of Wurtzite Crystals 
The wurtzite structure differs from the zinc-blende structure in several aspects [188— 
197, 213-241]. The anisotropic hexagonal structure leads to energy splitting in the 
valence band. First there is a crystal field splitting, which leads to two valence 
band edges 
(X\H0\X) = (Y\H0\Y) = E, + h 
(Z\H0\Z) =EV 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
551 
where Ev is the reference energy in the valence band, and Αχ is called the crystal-field 
splitting energy, which is caused by the anisotropic nature of the hexagonal crystal or 
the z-dependent wave function along the c-axis, while the x-y plane is isotropic. 
Second, the spin-orbit interaction Hso leads to two spin-orbit coupling energies: 
(X\HsojY) 
=-iA2 
(11.5.2) 
(Y\HSOiX\Z) = (z\HS0,y\x) = -iA3. 
We usually take: 
Δ , = Δ „ 
Δ2 = Δ 3=Δ 8 0 
(11.5.3) 
where we have assumed Δ2 = Δ3, which is part of the cubic approximation (see 
Appendix 11 A). The band-edge energies can be described under the following 
consideration. Without the spin-orbit interaction, A2 = Δ3 = 0, we have the top 
two degenerate bands, plus the lower band as the reference level £v 
Ex = E2 = Ev + Δ, = Δι 
(11.5.4) 
E3 = Ev = 0 
where we have set the reference energy Ev to 0. We plot the band edge energies in 
Fig. 11.50a for a positive Δ[. When we include the spin-orbit interaction, the Ex 
and E2 bands split, Fig. 11.50b, and we have 
E] = Δ, + Δ2 
£ 2 = ^ - Λ , 
^ Λ Τ , + 2 Δ ; 
2 
(11.5.5) 
E,=^-j(^y+2il 
(a) 
(b) 
T 
T 
EC = E£ + 
Ai+A2 
I 
I 
I 
£? = Δ,+Δ2 
£§=0 
A^-^fii 
Figure 11.50 The band-edge energies for heavy-hole (HH), light-hole (LH), and crystal-field split-off 
hole (CH) bands: (a) without spin-orbit interaction (Δ2 = Δ3 = 0) and (b) with spin-orbit interaction 
(Δ2 = Δ3 Φ 0) for a GaN wurtzite semiconductor crystal. The corresponding band-edge energies are 
also listed. (Reprinted with permission from [188] © 1996 American Physics Society.) 

552 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The conduction-band edge is given by adding the band gap energy to E] 
Ec=Eg+ 
Δ, 
Δ2. 
(11.5.6) 
The three bands are labeled according to their zone center wave functions. E\ is 
labeled as heavy hole (HH), E2 is light hole (LH), and E3 is called the crystal-field 
split-off hole (CH) band. The HH and LH splitting is caused by the spin-orbit 
interaction. 
The energy splitting, Ex - E2 and Ελ - E3, are measured from the differences 
between the interband optical transition energies, which then determine the 
values of Acr and Aso. A reported experimental value of 22 meV for Acr of GaN is 
commonly used. 
The band structures for GaN and ΑΓΝ are shown in Fig. 11.51 [218] for the 
valence-band energies as a function of kx (=ky) and kz. We can see that the top 
150 '■■■'■ 
0.12 
0.08 
0.04 
0 
0.04 
0.08 
0.12 
<· 
Ml/A) 
1 
kx (1/Ä) 
p. 
(b) 
50 
E ί -50 -
-100 
-150 
,,,,,,,,,,..,..,,,.. 
CH 
S^" 
/ 
HH 
: 
—'y 
Γ ~/^~~ 
LH 
. / . 
1 . . . 1 . . . 
AIN : 
■ 
: 
~ ~ — ■ 
—
—
— 
~"X 
: 
0.12 
0.08 
0.04 
* 
kz(Vk) 
0 
0.04 
0.08 
0.12 
H 
kx (1/Ä) 
*. 
Figure 11.51 The valence band structures for (a) GaN and (b) AIN. The heavy-hole (HH), light-hole 
(LH), and crystal-field split-off hole (CH) band energies are plotted as a function of the wave vector 
along the transverse kx and crystal growth kz direction. (Reprinted with permission from [2181 © 1996 
American Institute of Physics.) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
553 
valence band for GaN is a heavy-hole (HH) band, whereas for A1N it is the crystal-
field split-off hole (CH) band. The reason is that A1N has a negative Δ1; therefore, its 
top valence band is E2, and the valence bands from top to bottom are CH, HH, and 
LH, respectively. The conduction-band energy is Ec= Eg + E2 measured from the 
reference energy £v of A1N. To obtain the band structure near the zone center, we 
find the eigenvalues from the Hamitonian matrix (Appendix 11 A), which can be 
obtained analytically [218]. 
Figure 11.52 shows the interband transition energies of wurtzite and cubic (zinc-
blende) GaN as a function of temperature [241]. The net band-gap is determined by 
Ec - Εχ and it can be compared with the lowest band-edge transition energy (A line) 
of the photoluminescence (PL) or phororeflectance (PR) spectra, with an exciton cor-
rection energy of about 28meV (Ec — E\— 28meV). Similarly, Ec-E2 
and Ec — E3 
with a similar exciton energy correction can be used to compare with the transition 
energies of the B and C lines in the PL or PR spectrum. The exciton energy from 
a cubic GaN is also shown for comparison. 
> 
Φ 
S. 
5Ü 
S> 
Φ 
c Φ c o 
+± 
"o 
X 
LU 
3.54 
3.52 
3.50 
3.48 
3.46 
3.44 
3.42 
3.40 
3.38 
3.36 
1 
' 
1 
· 
A 
W W s 
"aofeaf 
"BubOJ 
_ODQn( 
/ 
h-GaNfeapphire 
Exciton 
PLPeak 
Enegy(PR> 
• 
5,<B) 
Λ 
E*°b a 
— > 
h-GeN 
<*> * 
O 
" * ♦ ♦ « 
>\ 
_ 
-
ra ° a °*^^Y^ 
>°« 
o-GaN 
* 8 
c-Grf*3C-SOSi 
♦ 
EX(PR) 
D 
^(PL) 
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
Erwgy 
F E 0 W 
FE(B> 
FE(A) 
*2 
-
-
■ 
β 
0 
a 
• 
O Λ . 
. 
■o β . 
' β 
-
• 
♦ 
♦ 
♦ 
« -
I 
. 
I 
3.36 
3.34 
3.32 
3.30 
3.28 
3.26 
3.24 
3?? 
S 
>. 
σ> 
Φ 
c 
Φ 
V 
CO 
φ 
Q. 
_ι 
α. 
Si 
σ> 
Φ 
c 
Φ 
C 
ο 
ο 
X 
UJ 
3.20 
3.18 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
Temperature (K) 
Figure 11.52 The photoluminescence (PL) peak energies and excitonic resonance energies obtained 
from the analysis of PL and corresponding photoreflectance (PR) spectra of hexagonal-GaN (left axis) 
and cubic-GaN (right axis) as a function of temperature. Exciton energies are shown by solid symbols 
and PL peak energies by open symbols. (Reprinted with permission from [2411 © 1997 Japanese 
Journal Applied Physics.) 

554 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
11.5.2 Strained Wurtzite Crystals 
The general relation or Hooke's law between the stress τ and strain ε tensors for the 
hexagonal crystal is [214] 
Τχχ 
Tyy 
Tzz 
Tyz 
Tzx 
T*y. 
[C,i 
Cn 
C,3 
0 
0 
0 
CM 
Cu 
Cl3 
0 
0 
0 
C,3 
C,3 
C33 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
C44 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
C44 
0 
0 " 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
J 
&XX 
&yy 
ε κ 
ZByz 
IF 
_^sxy _ 
(11.5.7) 
where Cy's are the elastic stiffness constants. Let us consider a few cases for which 
the strain tensor is diagonal, that is, 
0. 
(11.5.8) 
Case (a): A strained-layer wurtzite crystal pseudomorphically grown along the 
(0001) direction (c-axis) of a sapphire substrate. The diagonal elements are 
a0 
2Ci3 
C33 
(11.5.9) 
where a0 and a are the lattice constants of the substrate and the well-layer 
material, respectively. The last relation in (11.5.9) is obtained from the fact 
that the stress along the z direction is zero on the surface with a normal 
along the z direction: τζζ = 0. 
Case (b): A wurtzite crystal layer under an external biaxial in-plane stress τ Λ = 
τ^ = T and τ^ = 0; we have [236] 
f>XX 
Byy 
^33 
(C„ + C,2)C33 - 2C?3' 
ev=~~Bxx. 
(11.5.10) 
C33 
Case (c): A wurtzite crystal layer under an external uniaxial stress τζζ = Τ along 
the [0001] direction and τ^ = Tyy = 0; we have 
-Cl2 
(Cn 
- Ci2)C33 
C\2 
(Cn + Cn)C33 — 2Cl; 
2C13 
T. 
(11.5.11) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
555 
The band-edge energies can be obtained easily from the three-by-three Hamiltonian 
at k = 0: 
Δ, + Δ2 + λε + θε 
^ A | - ^ S A E - J ( A I - ^ ^ +2Al 
where the strain induced shifts are (Appendix 11 A) 
λε = Οιε^ + D2(exx + ε^), 
θε = D^ 
+ D4(s^ + ew). 
(11.5.13) 
The conduction-band edge has a hydrostatic energy shift, PCB, 
(11.5.14) 
Ec = Eg + Ai + A2+PCE 
For example, the interband transition energy is 
LLC 
£L] — £-g ~r rce 
" ε 
"ε 
= («ez - -DOEZJ + (aci - D2)(e„ + ε^) - D^e^ - £>4(ε« + ε^). 
(11.5.15) 
Figure 11.53a and Fig. 11.53b show the plots of the band edge energy of the conduc-
tion band and HH, LH, and CH band as a function of strain. Figure 11.54 shows the 
A-, B-, and C-line exciton transition energies as a function of the c-axis strain (ε^ = 
(c — c0)/c0) measured and compared with the theoretical formula using Ec — E\, 
Ec — E2, and Ec — £3, minus the exciton correction energy of about 28 meV. 
Because the experimental data provide the total band-gap shift as a function of an 
externally applied pressure, only the total value for the interband deformation poten-
tial, a, is reported. Theoretically, the hydrostatic deformation potentials for interband 
a = dEg/d(\n V) = ac — av, ac (conduction band), av (valence band), and the shear 
deformation potential, b, have been used for zinc-blende structures. For wurtzite 
structure, the parameters D\ and D2 play a similar role to the hydrostatic deformation 
potential, av, and D3 and D4 play a similar role to the shear deformation potential, b, 
of zinc-blende crystals. Because wurtzite is anisotropic, we have 
a)=acz— 
D\ 
a2 = ac, — D2 
(11.5.16) 
for the longitudinal ε^ and transverse ε^ + 8W interband deformation potentials. The 
theoretical results (lines) agree well with the experimental data (symbols) [240]. 

556 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
<a)£ 
§ 
I 
(b) 
3.56 
3.54 
3.52 
3,5 
3.48 
3.46 
3.44 
-0.015 -0.01 -0.005 
Compression 
^ ^ ν ^ Ε 
0 
0.005 
0.01 
0.015 
ε" 
Tension 
Compression 
Tension 
Figure 11.53 The band edges of (a) the conduction band and (b) the HH, LH, and CH bands of a strained 
GaN crystal as a function of the in-plane strain ε^. The reference energy is set at E t of an unstrained GaN 
crystal. (Reprinted with permission from Π891 © 1996 IEEE.) 
For a GaN quantum well sandwiched between two thick (relaxed) Alj:Ga1_xN 
layers, the strain of the GaN well is compressive in nature because the lattice constant 
of the GaN layer before deformation is larger than the lattice constant a0 of the 
Al^Ga] _JM layers. Therefore, ε^ is negative, and the band edge shifts will be positive 
for the conduction band and negative for the top valence bands. 
Valence-Band Dispersions of Strained Wurtzite Crystals Figure 11.55 shows 
the valence-band dispersions of the HH, LH, and CH bands as a function of the 
transverse kx and longitudinal ^ = c(0001) axis wave vector for (a) biaxial com-
pressively strained (ε^ = 0.2%) GaN, (b) unstrained, (c) a small biaxial tensile 
strain (ε^ = —0.09%), and (d) a large tensile strain (ε^ = —0.2%). The difference 
in symmetry between the wurtzite and zinc-blende structures causes some fundamen-
tal differences in their electronic and optical properties. The degeneracy between the 
heavy-hole and light-hole bands at the zone center (Γ point) for the zinc-blende struc-
ture is broken for the wurtzite structure. For a zinc-blende layer grown along the (001) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
557 
3.60 
> 
Φ 
>· 
O) 
h . 
a> 
c 
Φ 
c 
o 
as 
CD 
e 
<o 
* ■* 
c 
o 
o 
X 
UJ 
3.55 
3.50 
3.45 
3.40 
" ' ■1 ' 
■ 
. 
-
* 
. o 
t / 
f 
m l 
' " 
+ 
^Λ 
Φ 
^ ^ T 
2^^ 
¥ 
C(CH) \ 
* 
• 
Δ 
B(LH) 
; 
· · A(HH) ' 
- 0 . 2 
- 0 . 1 
0 
0.1 
c-axis strain εζζ (%) 
0.2 
Figure 11.54 Transition energies of the A-, B-, and C-line excitons as a function of the strain along the 
c-axis. The symbols are experimental data from Ref. 240, and the lines are theoretical results. (Reprinted 
with permission from [2161 © 1998 American Physics Society.) 
direction with a compressive strain, the deformation potentials lift the HH band up 
and reduce its in-plane effective mass. However, for a wurtzite layer grown along 
the c-axis, the compressive strain shifts both the HH and LH bands by almost the 
same amount, and the in-plane effective masses remain almost the same as those 
in the unstrained case. 
11.5.3 Wurtzite Quantum Wells and Polarization Fields [242-259] 
Polarity of the Ga-face and N-face 
For binary AB compound such as the GaN 
wurtzite structure, the sequence of the atomic layers of the constituents A and B 
is reversed along the [0001] and [000Ϊ] directions. The corresponding (0001) 
and (000Ϊ) faces are the A-face and B-face, respectively. For GaN epitaxial 
layers and GaN-based heterostructures grown along a direction normal to the 
{0001} basal plane, the atoms are arranged in bilayers. These bilayers consist 
of two closely spaced hexagonal layers, one formed by cations and the other 
by anions, leading to polar faces. Thus, for GaN, a basal surface should be 
either Ga- or N-faced. By Ga-face, we mean Ga on the top position of the 
{0001} bilayer, corresponding to the [0001] polarity (which is also defined 

558 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
0.12 0.08 0.04 
- 
fcz 
(1/λ) 
0.04 
0.08 
-k, (1/λ) 
0.12 
0.08 
0.04 
kz (1/λ) 
0.04 
0.08 
0.12 
-k, (1A)-
Figure 11.55 Valence-band dispersions of the HH, LH, and CH bands as a function of the transverse 
kx and longitudinal kz = c(000\) axis wave vector for (a) biaxial compressively strained (ε κ = 0.2%) 
GaN, (b) unstrained, (c) a small biaxial tensile strain (ε^ = -0.09%), and (d) a large tensile strain 
(εΗ = -0.2%). (Reprinted with permission from Γ2161 ©1998 American Physics Society.) 
as the +z direction with a vector pointing from a Ga atom to the nearest-
neighbor N atom), as shown in Fig. 11.56a [256]. For an N-face on the top 
of the bilayer, Fig. 11.56b, the axis is [000Ϊ] or the — z direction. Research 
by various groups indicates that PIMBE grown GaN films are of N-face, 
whereas MOCVD grown films are of Ga-face materials [256]. 
Wurtzite crystals have an induced piezoelectric field. For GaN, two polarization 
fields exist. 
(a) The first one is the piezoelectric (PZ) polarization, which is related to the strain 
components by the PZ coefficients: 
ppz 
X 
y 
ppz 
■ z 
0 
0 
0 
0 
e)5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
e15 
0 
0 
ej,\ 
e-$\ 
^33 
0 
0 
0 
(11.5.17) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
(a) 
Ga-face 
(b) 
N-face 
>Ga 
A 
iS 
A N 
559 
Substrate 
Substrate 
Figure 11.56 (a) Ga-faced growth of GaN wurtzite crystal structure on substrate along the [00011 (=z) 
direction and (b) N-faced top layer growth along the [OOOll or -z direction. (Reprinted with permission 
from [2561 © 1999 American Institute of Physics.) 
Using the strain components in (11.5.8) and (11.5.9), we find the induced 
piezoelectric field polarization: 
ppz _ ppz _ 0 
Pf = β3ΐ(ε» + ew) + e^Bz 
= 21 e3i 
-~e33\Exx. 
(11.5.18) 
Because [e3] —633 (C13/C33)] < 0 for the whole range of AlxGai_xN 
compositions, the PZ polarization is negative for tensile strain and positive 
for compressive strain. 
(b) The second is the spontaneous polarization P^ along the growth z-axis. The 
spontaneous polarization for GaN and A1N has been found to be negative, 
meaning that for the Ga-face or Al-face, the spontaneous polarization is point-
ing toward the substrate or the negative z direction, Fig. 11.57a-c [256]. As a 
result, the alignment of the PZ polarization and the spontaneous polarization is 
parallel in the case of tensile strain (Fig. 11.57b) and antiparallel in the case of 
compressive strained top layers (Fig. 11.57c). If the polarity flips a sign from 
the Ga-face to N-face, both the SP and PZ polarizations flip a sign, 
Fig. 11.57d-f. Surface charges may exist in the interface, and the surface 
charge density is determined by 
ps = P(bottom) - .P(top). 
(11.5.19) 
If there is no additional surface charge, the induced electric field is determined 
by the boundary condition at the surface: 
D7 = sF7 
■ff-
psy = 0. 
(11.5.20) 

560 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
(a) 
Ga-face ti 
(d) 
N-face ίι 
(b) 
(c) 
■: T : - - i , : · - ^ - . . ^ 
pSP 
Substrate 
■i f · . « · . * 
Θ 
pSP 
Substrate 
▼ 
A 
Θ 
I/» 8" 
Substrate 
AlGaN 
relaxed 
GaN 
relaxed 
(e) 
AlGaN 
tensile strain 
GaN 
relaxed 
(f) 
GaN 
compresslve 
strain 
AlGaN 
relaxed 
WS'M 
APSP 
Substrate 
| P S P 
Substrate 
A p S P 
pPZ 
r 
Substrate 
Figure 11.57 Spontaneous (SP) and piezoelectric (PZ) polarization and the induced surface charge 
density in Ga-face and N-face strained and relaxed GaN/AIGaN heterostructures. (a)(b)(c) are for 
Ga-faced and (d)(e)(f) are for N-faced surfaces, (a) and (d) are relaxed AlGaN layer on top of relaxed 
GaN. (b) and (e) are tensile strain AlGaN on relaxed GaN. (c) and (f) are compressive strain GaN on 
relaxed AlGaN. (Reprinted with permission from [2561 © '999 American Institute of Physics.) 
We have a total induced piezoelectric and spontaneous polarization field: 
Fz = - y z 
z ' . 
(11.5.21) 
ε 
In the following, we discuss a quantum well structure such as GaN/AIGaN or 
InGaN/GaN quantum wells. We drop the subscript "z" with the understanding 
that all the fields arc along the z-axis and use subscript "w" for well and "b" 
for barrier fields 
P% + P£ 
Ph = Ff + K-
(11.5.22) 
The continuity of the displacement vector (Dz) normal to the surface without 
free carrier surface charge gives 
Dz = ewFw +PW = ebFb + Pb. 
(11.5.23) 
Two simple cases are considered. 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
561 
A Single Quantum Well with Infinite Barriers The fields due to interface 
charges cancel each other in the barriers, therefore, 
Fa = Pb-P* 
(11.5.24) 
A Periodic Superlattice 
The periodic boundary condition implies the net voltage 
drop over one period is zero, which means the line integral of the electric field over 
one period vanishes 
FwLw + F bL b=0. 
(11.5.25) 
Solving for (11.5.23) and (11.5.25), we find the electric field in the well: 
Fw = 
^b^w 
i 6\vM) (Λ, - /·*) 
(11.5.26a) 
(11.5.26b) 
The fields in the well and barrier are opposite in direction. Figure 11.58 shows an 
example of an InGaN/GaN quantum well grown with a Ga-faced top layer. The spon-
taneous polarization fields in the In^Gai_^N region is taken as [228, 259] (see 
Appendix D on page 807 for more interpolation formulas for nitride compounds) 
Ρ*Ρ(χ) = -0.042* - 0.034(1 - x) + 0.03741 - x)(C/m2). 
(11.5.27) 
Substrate 
GaN 
psp 
InxGai_,N 
ppz 
GaN 
psp 
Ga-face 
Conduction band 
E, 
■+z 
Figure 11.58 An InGaN/GaN quantum well grown with Ga-faced top layer and the conduction-band 
profile for a superlattice model. 

562 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The piezoelectric polarization (C/m2) of a biaxial-compressively 
strained 
In^Gai -XN is 
Ppz(x) = 0.148x - 0.0424JC(1 - x)(C/m2). 
(11.5.28) 
The conduction band profile is shown schematically as the bottom curve in 
Fig. 11.58. 
11.5.4 Optical Gain of Strained Wurtzite Quantum-Well Lasers 
To model the band structure of InGaN/GaN and GaN/AlGaN quantum wells, we 
need to solve for the quantized subband energy levels and their corresponding 
wave functions in the conduction and valence bands, as shown in Fig. 11.59. For a 
given carrier density due to current injection, we then solve the Schrödinger and 
Poisson equations self-consistently to account for the carrier screening effects. The 
optical gain spectrum is then calculated. In Fig. 11.59a, we show a self-consistent 
potential profile (solid) with corresponding Cl, HHl, and HH2 subband energy 
levels and wave functions at a carrier density of 2 x 1019/cm3 of a 5-nm GaN/ 
Aln.3Gao.7N quantum well laser [223]. The flat band profile (dashed lines) is also 
shown. At a higher carrier density, Fig. 11.59b, we see that the screened potential 
(a) 
Is 
c 
φ 
0 
0. 
4.6 
4.4 
4.2 
4.0 
3.8 
3.6 
3.4 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-0.2 
-0.4 
( 
ι 
ι ι 
ι 1 ι 
~ W=2.0 
: c i 
_ 
■* 
HH1 
■ 
■ ■ 1 
1 ■ ■ ■ I 
· 
> ■ ■ · ■■ 
x 1 0 1 W 3 
\ 
Flat-band 
Self-consistent 
' 
^yO^ 
'. 
'. HH2 
. 
. 
. 
■ I 
, 
) 
50 
100 
150 
2< 
Length (A) 
* 
x> 
(b) 
3-
Is 
C 
Φ 
0 
a. 
4.6 
4.4 
4? 
4.0 
3.8 
3.6 
3.4 
0.6 
0.4 
0 2 
0.0 
-υ.ϋ 
-0.4 
■ 
W=10.0x1019cm"3 
,^__ 
] 
- 
C1 
I 
-
' 
(0001)-Orientation 
. 
GaN/AI03Ga07N(L2=5nm) 
HH1 
, / ^ τ - , ^ . 
HH2 
i ^ y — Λ 
""-J 
1 
1 
» 
-
-
-
. 
. 
| 
-
-
• 
. 
-
■ 
50 
100 
150 
Length (A) 
200 
Figure 11.59 (a) A self-consistent potential profile (solid) with corresponding Cl, HHl, and HH2 
subband energy levels and wave functions at a carrier density of 2 x 1019 cm 3 of a 5-nm GaN/ 
Alo 3Gao 7N quantum well laser. The flat band profile (dashed lines) is also shown, (b) At a higher carrier 
density, the screened potential profile (solid) approaches that of the flat band condition (dashed) due to the 
carrier screening effect. (Reprinted with permission from [2231 © 1998 American Institute of Physics.) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
(a) 
(b) 
563 
12000 
: Self-consistent (with PZ field) 
: Flat-band (without PZ field) 
■W\N(X10,9crrr,)=-
GaN/A!03Ga07N 
- - L...= 5 nm 
Flat-band 
0.34 0.35 0.36 0.37 0.38 0.39 0.40 
Wavelength (μηι) 
Carrier density (x1019cm 3) 
Figure 11.60 
(a) Optical gain spectrum with (solid) and without (dashed) PZ polarization field 
screening. The PZ field reduces the optical gain by a significant factor, especially when the screening 
due to carriers is not large enough, (b) Peak gain as a function of the carrier density for the PZ polarization 
with self-consistent solution and the flat band case (no PZ field). (Reprinted with permission from [223] © 
1998 American Institute of Physics.) 
profile (solid curves) approaches that of the flat band condition (dashed) due to the 
carrier screening effects. The optical gain spectrum with (solid) and without 
(dashed) PZ polarization field screening is plotted in Fig. 11.60a [223]. The PZ 
field reduces the optical gain by a significant factor, especially when the screening 
due to carriers is not large enough. We plot the peak gain as a function of the 
carrier density in Fig. 11.60b for the PZ polarization with a self-consistent solution 
and the flat band case (no PZ field). 
11.5.5 Blue-Green Lasers and LEDs [175-180, 198-210] 
In Fig. 11.61, we show the blue, green, and yellow laser emission spectra of single 
quantum-well structures from the early data of Nakamura in 1997 [177]. 
Figure 11.62a shows an InGaN MQW laser diode structure and its typical L-I and 
I-V curves (Fig. 11.62b) in 1997 [177]. At that time, the threshold current and 
voltage were high. Over the past decade, impressive performances of blue or violet 
GaN-based lasers and LEDs have been reported. The driving market is because 
GaN-based 400-nm high-power lasers have been developed for application as a 
light source for optical disk recording. A new disk format using these lasers was 
recently proposed [203], which was called "Blu-ray Disc" and supported by 11 com-
panies, including SONY, Matsushita, and Philips. Both the Blu-ray Disc system and 
the DVD recording system require lasers with low relative intensity noise (RIN; 
which is mainly caused by spontaneous emission noise and will be discussed in 

564 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
400 
450 
500 
550 
600 
Wavelength (nm) 
650 
700 
Figure 11.61 Electroluminescence (EL) of blue, green, and yellow single quantum-well LEDs at a 
forward bias of 20 mA. (Reprinted with permission from [1771 © 1997 IEEE.) 
(a) 
p-electrode· 
P-GaN 
p-Ato.08Gao.wN 
p-GaN 
p-Alo.2Gao.8N 
InGaN MQW 
n-GaN 
n-Alo-osGaejiNo·— 
n-InQ.esGao.95Nr 
GaN buffer layer 
Mult-Quantum-Well Structure (MQW) 
p-Ah.eeGao.92N 
p-GaN 
40 
60 
80 
Current (luA) 
Figure 11.62 (a) A schematic diagram for an InGaN MQW laser diode and the band structure, (b) The 
L-I and I-V curve of the laser diode. (Reprinted with permission from [1771 © 1997 IEEE.) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
565 
Chapter 12) of below 125 dB/Hz, a beam profile with low aspect ratio, and reliability 
of greater than 5000 hours. In addition, lasers for use in optical disks capable of 
capacities greater than 50 GB are required to operate at an output power exceeding 
100 mW in order to write information to a dual-layer disk [203]. Therefore, laser 
diodes with low operating current, a stable beam profile, and high reliability are 
necessary to satisfy these requirements. Figure 11.63a and Fig. 11.63b show a sche-
matic diagram of an InGaN-based blue laser diode with the energy band diagram of 
the active layer and the corresponding optical intensity profile [203]. The high barrier 
in the conduction band on the right side of the quantum wells serves as an electron 
blocking layer to avoid electron overflow outside of the active region at high bias 
current. The free carrier absorption in the Mg-doped superlattice plays an important 
(a' 
p-GaN Contacting 
p-AIGaN/GaN SL Cladding 
p-AIGaN E-B 
undoped AIGaN —» 
GalnN Inter-layer 
MQW Active 
n-GaN Guiding 
n-AIGaN Cladding 
ELO-GaN 
L = 600 μιη 
Front: AR 10% 
Rear : H R 9 5 % 
(b) 
Optical field 
r«\g ■ OC abs 
n-AIGaN 
cladding 
undoped 
Mg-doped layer 
layer 
ActiveX <B> 
Figure 11.63 (a) A schematic diagram showing an InGaN-based blue laser diode, (b) The energy band 
diagram of the active layer with corresponding optical intensity profile. The high barrier in the conduction 
band on the right side of the quantum wells serves as an electron blocking layer to avoid electron overflow 
outside of the active region at high bias current. (Reprinted with permission from [2031 © 2003 IEEE.) 

566 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
role. Therefore, the optical confinement factor in that region is one of the important 
design parameters for the laser. In Fig. 11.64a, we show a comparison of the threshold 
current density ln(7th) of blue-violet with red (690 nm) lasers with various cavity 
lengths versus the threshold gain. Figure 11.64b shows the extracted logarithmic 
peak gain per well (1/cm) versus the current density per well (A/cm2) for blue-
violet and red lasers [203] as shown in (10.3.24) of Chapter 10 
g = go In 
Jo 
(11.5.29) 
where the values (g0, J0) = (1614, 1381) for GaN-based blue laser diodes; (881,299) 
for GalnP red (690 nm) laser diodes, and (1500, 105) for GaAs laser diodes. 
(a) 
10 
Blue-Violet. 
- A - * " 
DVD-RW 
">(660nmJ,..--
Red (690 nm) 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
a, + M2L ■ ln{VR-,R2) (cm"1) 
(b) 3000 
2500 
___ 2000 
T 
Ä 
1500 
<3 
1000 
500 
; 
: 
iij. d__Ui!iU..niiii 
y 
.„,!.'..„ 
/ 
. - " I ' " ' " 
" 
'" * 
^<^^ 
yf 
; 
yr 
f 
Blue-Violet 
| 
\ 
• 
. 
. 
. 
. 
1 
. 
. 
. 
. 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
Jstim/well (kA/cnr2) 
Figure 11.64 (a) Comparison of the threshold current density ln(7th) of blue-violet with red (690 nm) 
lasers with various cavity lengths versus the threshold gain, (b) The extracted logarithmic peak gain 
versus the current density for blue-violet and red lasers. (Reprinted with permission from [2031 © 
2003 IEEE.) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
567 
Figure 11.65a and Fig. 11.65b show the L-I curves of two laser diodes with different 
thicknesses d between the MQW active region and the AlGaN current blocking layer, 
indicating a reduction of threshold current, improved slope efficiency (from 1.1 to 1.4 
W/A), and characteristic temperature (Γ0 from 146K to 235K). Figure 11.65c shows 
the measured I-V curves at 20°C to 80°C for the improved device. Figure 11.66 
shows the measured relative intensity noise (RIN) as a function of light output 
power (a) without high-frequency modulation and (b) with a 400-MHz signal 
modulation [203]. 
(a) 
(b) 
120 
f ~ 
■$. 
F 
Φ 
S 
& 
3 
s-
3 
o 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
-
-
-
20°C M 
jfy
 
80°
c 
T0 = 146K 
With double AlGaN 
blocking layers 
2 0 ° C # 
Ml . 
cw 
80°C 
To = 235K 
50 
100 
150 
0 
50 
Current (mA) 
100 
150 
200 
(C) 10 
Pulse 
Width : 0.5 μββε 
Duty: 50% 
50 
100 
Current (mA) 
150 
Figure 11.65 
(a)(b) The L-I curves of two laser diodes with different thicknesses d between the 
MQW active region and the current blocking AlGaN layer, indicating a reduction of threshold 
current, improved slope efficiency (from 1.1 to 1.4 W/A), and characteristic temperature (T0 from 
146K to 235K) from (a) to (b). (c) The measured I-V curves at 20°C to 80°C. (Reprinted with per-
mission from [2031 © 2003 IEEE.) 

568 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
4 
6 
Power (mW) 
Figure 11.66 
Measured relative intensity noise (RIN) as a function of light output power (a) without 
high-frequency modulation and (b) with a 400 MHz signal modulation. (Reprinted with permission from 
Γ203] © 2003 IEEE.) 
Figure 11.67a shows a more recent laser diode grown on a (0001) n-GaN substrate 
[209]. The conduction band profile is shown in Fig. 11.67b. The device has a width of 
12 μπι and a cavity length of 2000 μιη. The laser shows impressive performance at 
440-nm wavelength with a light output power of 1000 mW at 1700 mA at 25°C. 
Aging tests at 750 mW cw operation at 35 °C show a lifetime of more than 10,000 
hours has also been realized. 
11.5.6 
Nonpolar (m-Plane and a-Plane) and Semipolar (r-plane) Devices 
In order to avoid the polarization fields, growth of nitride-based epilayers along non-
polar directions have been intensively researched in the past decade [260-280]. 
(a) 
■y,: 
«y^MSr 
p-electrode 
p-GaN (50 nm) 
AloofiG^-wN/p-GaN 
SLs 
(400 nm) 
p-GaN (65 nm) 
p-Alp lgGao 82N (10 nm) 
<^aO.98m0.02^ ('00 nm) 
Gap.84l"0.l(iN/Ala02Ga0i>|,N MOW 
Gap 9gI%p2N (100 nm) 
n-GaN (120 nm) 
" - A W J O ' O . S M N ( 200 nm ) 
" - A O W ^ S s N ( 2.1 Um) 
n-GaN (4.2 μηι) 
(b) 
£W^SS3iSESSWra£3337^£&3SS 
n-electrode 
AlGaN/p-GaN SLs cladding layer 
p-GaN optical guiding layer 
AlGaN electron blocking layer 
GalnN optical guiding layer 
= ■ 
GalnN/AlGaN MQW 
= ^ 
active layer 
GalnN optical guiding layer 
n-GaN optical guiding layer 
n-AlGaN cladding layer 
Figure 11.67 
(a) Schematics of a laser diode structure grown on (0001) n-GaN substrate and (b) the 
conduction band profile. (Reproduced with permission from [2091 © 
2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA.) 

11.5 GaN-BASED BLUE-GREEN LASERS AND LEDs 
569 
(a) 
Λ z(0001) 
(ABCD)^ 
a-plane 
(4>=0)D 
nZ(0001) 
or c-axis 
(BCEF) 
m-plane 
C {φ = π/6) 
Figure 11.68 (a) A diagram for the a-plane and m-plane of a hexagonal structure. The c-plane is the 
hexagonal facet perpendicular to the c-axis or z(0001) axis, (b) A configuration for the Euler angles for 
rotation of the crystal axis. (Reprinted with permission from [2271 © 2007 IEEE.) 
Nonpolar planes include the a-plane (1120) and m-plane ((ΙθΤθ), which show an 
absence of the polarization field and reduce the energy band profile to the flat band con-
dition (except for the bias field). Semipolar planes such as (lOTT), (1013), (1Ϊ02), and 
(1122) have been investigated [274-277, 280]. Figure 11.68a shows the crystal orien-
tation and the definition of the m-plane and a-plane [227]. Figure 11.68b shows the 
definition of the Euler angles for the coordinate rotation for the different growth i-
axis. The c-plane is perpendicular to the (0001) axis. Crystal growth along semipolar 
planes such as the r-plane has also been reported. In Fig. 11.69a and Fig. 11.69b, we 
show the energy band profile based on a self-consistent Schrödinger-Poisson model 
(a) 
> 
-2-
>. 
S> 
Φ 
c 
LU 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
= 
-3.2 
-3.4 
-3.6 
\ 
K 
■\A 
»· 
1 
3.35 eV 
; 
' h 
I 
. 
1 
■ 
I 
(b) 
-10 -5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
Depth (nm) 
0.2 
0.1 
> °° 
Φ 
ω -3.3 
-3.4 
-3.5 
-
_ y 
-
3.49 eV 
I
.
I
. 
Γ) 
Λ 
• 
^ 
*> 
v 
.
1
.
1 
-10 -5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
Depth (nm) 
Figure 11.69 (a) The energy band profile based on a self-consistent Schrödinger-Poisson model for a 
GaN/Al0^Gao.gN quantum well structure grown on (a) c-plane and (b) m-plane. The m-plane sample 
has a zero polarization field; therefore, it shows a flat band energy profile. (Adapted by permission from 
[2611 © 2000 Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature.) 

570 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
for a GaN/Al0.iGao.9N quantum well structure grown on c-plane and m-plane [261]. 
The m-plane sample has a zero polarization field, therefore, it exhibits a flat band 
energy profile. Figure 11.70 shows the measured effects of the PZ field on the emission 
characteristics of GaN/AlGaN multiple quantum wells [261]. The CL spectra at 5K 
show that the c-plane sample has a red shift due to the field effect (peak at 3.36 eV) 
compared with the peak energy 3.48 eV of the m-plane sample. The inset shows the 
prolonged carrier lifetime of the c-plane sample due to the separation of the electron 
and hole wave functions, as indicated in Fig. 11.69. 
To understand the improvement of the optical gain for samples grown on nonpolar 
planes, we show in Fig. 11.71a the optical gain spectra on the quantum-well plane 
(TE polarization along the x! and / direction) for the a-plane (solid) and m-plane 
(dashed) samples [227]. The c-plane sample (dotted curve) is isotropic on the 
quantum well plane. The structure is an Ino.15Gao.85N/GaN QW with a well width 
of 30 A. The carrier density is 2 x 1013/cm2. The increase of the optical gain for 
the m-plane or a-plane due to the absence of spontaneous and piezoelectric polariz-
ation fields is clear. We plot in Fig. 11.71b the corresponding normalized optical 
momentum matrix elements as a function of the in-plane wave vector for x1 and / 
polarizations, which shows the anisotropic nature on the x! —y' plane. Unlike the 
c-plane (or called x — y plane) on which the optical polarization is isotropic, the 
m-plane and a-plane show the extra anisotropic polarization dependence. 
The first (pulsed) operation of m-plane nitride laser diodes was realized on low 
extended defect bulk m-plane GaN substrates in 2007 [270]. The laser diodes had a 
Figure 11.70 The effects of the PZ field on the emission characteristics of GaN/AlGaN multiple 
quantum wells. The catholuminescence (CL) spectra at 5 K show that the c-plane sample has a red shift 
due to the field effect (peak at 3.36 eV) compared with the peak energy 3.48 eV of the m-plane sample. 
The inset shows the prolonged carrier lifetime of the c-plane sample due to the separation of the electron 
and hole wave functions, as indicated in Fig. 11.69. (Adapted by permission from [2611 © 2000 Macmillan 
Publishers Ltd: Nature.) 

11.6 COUPLED LASER ARRAYS 
571 
In^gGaoggN/GaN ' 
a-plane 
m-plane 
c-plane 
0.45 
Wavelength (μτη) 
0.50 
■ 
I 
. 
. 
L 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
k/l/A) 
Figure 11.71 
(a) The optical gain spectra on the quantum-well plane (TE polarization along they andy1 
direction) for the a-plane (solid) and m-plane (dashed) samples. The c-plane sample (dotted curve) is 
isotropic on the quantum well plane, (b) The corresponding normalized optical momentum matrix elements 
as a function of the in-plane wave vector for jr/ andy polarizations. The structure is an Ino.15Gao.85N/GaN 
QW with a well width of 30 Ä. The surface carrier density is 2 x 1013 cnT2. (Reprinted with permission 
from Γ2271 © 2007 IEEE.) 
threshold current as low as 7.5 kA/cm2. Continuous wave operation of nonpolar 
m-plane growth InGaN/GaN multi-quantum-well structure laser diodes has also 
been demonstrated. Because thin wells (<4nm) are used for c-plane growth to 
reduce the polarization fields, nonpolar plane quantum well growth allows for thick 
quantum wells without Al-containing waveguide cladding layers. For example, in 
2007 an AlGaN-cladding-free m-plane InGaN/GaN laser diode was realized with a 
cw operation of more than 15 hours [271, 273]. The laser diodes structure consists 
of a thick Si-doped n-GaN cladding layer, a five-period InGaN/GaN MQW structure 
using 8-nm InGaN QWs and 8-nm GaN barriers with a 10-nm Mg-doped p-AlGaN 
electron blocking layer, a 750-nm Mg-doped p-GaN cladding layer, and a 20-nm 
highly Mg-doped p++-GaN contact layer. The devices show a peak output power of 
more than 25 mW with a threshold current density of 6.8 kA/cm2 and voltage of 5.6 
V. Intensive research continues in order to demonstrate superior performance than 
that of the c-plane growth MQW lasers and LEDs. 
11.6 COUPLED LASER ARRAYS 
Coherent high-power semiconductor laser arrays [281-294] have been of considerable 
interest recently. Shown in Fig. 11.72a and Fig. 11.72b are two examples of 
gain-guided and buried-ridge semiconductor laser arrays [282, 287]. The concept of 

572 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Metal contact 
Insulating 
proton implant 
Figure 11.72 (a) A schematic diagram for a coupled gain-guided semiconductor laser array [2811. (b) 
Semiconductor buried-ridge laser array [286]. 
coupled laser arrays is very similar to that of the antenna arrays. As the amount of power 
of a single-element semiconductor laser is limited because of its small size in the 
radiation aperture (facet), a coupled array is expected to deliver a higher power with 
a narrower radiation pattern (i.e., a better directivity) if the elements are properly 
excited. The challenging research issues in laser arrays are how to excite the desired 
(fundamental) mode without wasting optical powers to different sidelobes. 
In principle, for a given semiconductor laser array, the optical modes should be 
calculated [291] by solving Maxwell's equations for a given gain and index 
profile, which is determined by the injection and coupling conditions. Here we 
present a supermode analysis for its simplicity and ease of understanding the oper-
ation of laser arrays. The supermode analysis for a coupled laser array follows 
closely the coupled-mode theory [283]. The optical electric field can be written as 
a linear combination of the field of each element, 
K(x,y,z) = 
Y/an(z)Ew(x,y) 
(11.6.1) 

11.6 COUPLED LASER ARRAYS 
573 
where Έ(η\χ, y) refers to the optical electric field in the nth element before the 
coupling effect is taken into account. The coupling effect is included in the coupling 
coefficient K assuming only nearby coupling. 
11.6.1 
Solution of the Coupled-Mode Equations 
The coupled-mode equations for N identical equally spaced waveguides, assuming 
only adjacent waveguide coupling with a coupling coefficient K, can be written as 
dz A(z) = / MA(z) 
(11.6.2) 
where 
A(z) 
a\(z) 
aN(z) 
M 
β 
Κ 
0 
K 
β 
Κ 
K 
β 
Κ 
0 
K 
β 
(11.6.3) 
and β is the propagation constant of the individual waveguide mode. The general 
solutions for the normalized eigenvectors A( \z) and their corresponding eigenvalues 
βι for an arbitrary N are 
ΦΙΎΛ 
_ 
Aw(z) 
a(i) 
JßtZ 
1,2,...,JV 
(11.6.4) 
where 
ßt = ß + 2Kcos 
ίπ 
,Μ 
Λ^+ 1 
ηίπ 
-sin 
Ν + 1 
V Ν + 1 
η=\,2,...,Ν. 
(11.6.5) 
(11.6.6) 
The order of βι is chosen such that ß\ > ß2 > ßi · · ■ > ßN-

574 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
To prove this, we start with the general form (11.6.4) and substitute it into the 
differential Eq. (11.6.2) 
(j8 - ße)/K 
1 
1 
(ß - ße)/K 
l 
1 
08 - 
ßt)/K 
(11.6.7) 
We use the property of the N x A7 determinant, DN (2 cos 0), which is a polynomial of 
order N with an argument 2 cos 0 
0 
1 
(ß-ße)/K 
' a\ ' 
a2 
a-h 
-a-N-
= 
Γ0] 
0 
0 
.0. 
D/v(2cos0) = det 
2 cos 0 
1 
1 
2cos0 
1 
0 
1 
2cos0 
1 
1 
2 cos 0 
sin [(#+1)0] 
sin0 
(11.6.8) 
which obeys the recursion relation 
DN(2x) = 2xDN-\(2x) - DN-2(2x) 
(11.6.9) 
where x = cos 0. This recursion relation can be proved easily using the definition of 
the N x N determinant and expanding it in terms of the two elements in the first row 
(or column). The above recursion relation (11.6.9) is satisfied by the Mh order 
Chebyshev polynomial [295] t/„(cos 0), or 
Dw(2cos0) 
sin(7V+ 1)0 
sin Θ 
We define 
2cos0 = ^ — ^ , 
or 
ße = β - 2K cos Θ. 
K 
(11.6.10) 
(11.6.11) 
The eigenvalue equation can have nontrivial solutions only if the determinant is zero 
sin(W+l)0 
sin Θ 
= 0. 
(11.6.12) 
Therefore, 
OV+l)0 = m77-, 
m = 1,2, 3 , . . . , JV. 
(11.6.13) 

11.6 
COUPLED LASER ARRAYS 
575 
We can choose m — N + 1 -£,£=l,2,...,N, 
such that 
£ 
73-, 
0 = (7Γ - 
θΐ) 
1,2,3,..., 
N 
ße = β + 2K cos 0e, £■ 
(11.6.14) 
and βγ, β2, jß 3,..., and βΝ are in descending order for K > 0. 
The eigenvectors can be obtained by substituting ße into (11.6.7) 
-2<Ji COS θ( + Ü2 = 0 
a„-\ — 2an cos 0^ + an+\ = 0 ra = 2, 3 , . . . , N — 1 
a/v-i — 2ö/v cos fy = 0. 
(11.6.15) 
The above difference equation can be solved assuming the solution an of the form, 
an = rn. Therefore 
— 2 cos i 
r 
0 
(11.6.16) 
or r = exp(+ ίθ(). The general solution ΐοταη is therefore exp(mö^) orexp(— ίηθ^), or 
their linear combinations 
an = Acosn6( +BsmnOe. 
(11.6.17) 
Because a0 = 0, we find A = 0. Therefore, a„ = B sin ηθ(. The amplitude B can be 
N 
2 
found from the normalization condition, J^ \an\ = 1 . Because 
n=l 
N 
^sin2n0£ = Ύ^ 1 — cos 2n0f 
n=l 
n=l 
iV 
1 
"2 
2" 
Λ/+ 1 
-Re Σ^ 
,ίΐηθ? 
(11.6.18) 
where θ( = £π/(Ν + \) has been used, and the normalization constant B = 
y/2/y/N + 1. We conclude that the N eigenvectors with corresponding eigenvalues 
ße are described by (11.6.4)-(11.6.6). 
11.6.2 Far-Field Radiation Pattern 
To calculate the far-field radiation pattern, recall from Chapter 6 that the optical 
electric field under far-field approximation is given by the Fourier transform of the 
aperture field, 
ikr 
E(r): 
—ike' 
4πτ -r x 
ί&'ί/)/e~'' 
M s(r'), 
(11.6.19) 

576 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
where the equivalent magnetic surface current density is related to the aperture 
field by 
Ms = -2n x EA(r') = -21 x ΕΑ(Γ'). 
(11.6.20) 
If EA(rO = y EA (χ', y') for TE modes in the waveguides, we have 
Ms = 2x EA 
r x x = sin 0sin φ( — ζ) + cos 6y. 
Considering the observation point in the y—z plane, (φ = ττ/2), we have 
(11.6.21) 
E(0) oc (-sin θζ + cos 0y) 
dxdy e~'k'rEA(r). 
(11.6.22) 
The aperture field is given by (11.6.1), noting that £<n)(r) = £(1)(r — nd), where £'<1) 
is the optical aperture field of the first element 
EA(r) = 
YiafE^\r-nd). 
n 
Therefore, the far-field radiation pattern is 
|E(0)|2 Σ40*"* 
«d 
\dre-ik-Tl £u,(r) 
Arraypattern 
Unitpattem 
(11.6.23) 
(11.6.24) 
Using k · d = kd sin Θ, the array pattern of the £th supermode, Α£(θ), can be 
obtained from 
AtW = Σ«? 
(i) -inkd sin Θ 
1 
2(N+\) 
1 
N 
N 
Met-kdsmff) 
_ V ^ 
-m(0,+jWsin0) 
Σ 
n=l 
V ^ 
e-in(9H 
n=] 
2(N+\) 
sin %(θ( - kd sin Θ) sin ^ 
+ kd sin 0) 
^ a l " 2 
(-1) 
sin Udg - kd sin 0) 
sin k0^ + fai sin 0) 
. 
(11.6.25) 
In Fig. 11.73a, the magnitudes of the 10 eigenvectors At{9), for I = 1,2,..., 10 of 
a 10-element array are shown (from Ref. 283). Each mode is labeled by £. For each 
eigenmode £, the magnitudes a^P, n= 1, 2,..., 10 are represented by vertical bars. 

11.6 COUPLED LASER ARRAYS 
577 
(a) 
' 
0 
-I 
1 
. i l l l l l h . 
L«1 
I
I
I 
1— 
Q. 
E 
n) 
Φ 
rr 
(b) 
I 
a 
Φ 
ll ll, 
L 4 
πτπ 
"I
1 
ί 
T ■ T""-t" 'Τ " f "I" 
Π 
f S 
T 
1 
I. 
ii 
.1 
L«9 T^T 
"O-O 
O O O O O O O O ' 
L-4 
L-9 
I I I . 
I. 
Ψττ^ 
1··Τ* 
* 
1 . i . . I . . 1 
L·« 
Γ ^ 
αα 
L·» Π " Ι 
1 
ι ' f 
* 
τ 
r - T - r 
, . ι . Ι , Ι 
ΊΊΊ 
Γ 
■Ο Ο Ο 0 Ο Ο 0 Ο 0 Οι 
(.·« 
L·» 
L-» 
-
1
0
-
4
0
9
1
0
-
0
-
4
0
3 
0 
Angle (degrees) 
Angle (degrees) 
Figure 11.73 (a) The magnitudes of the 10 eigenvectors Am(z) for t = 1, 2, 3 , . . . , 10 of a 10-element 
array, (b) The corresponding far-field patterns of the 10 array modes. (Reprinted with permission from 
[282] © 1984 American Institute of Physics.) 

578 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The corresponding far-field patterns are shown in Fig. 11.73b. We can see that for the 
fundamental (£ = 1) and the highest (£= 10) order modes, the amplitudes are not 
uniform throughout the elements. 
To improve the uniformity of the near-field profile, the two outermost waveguides 
are chosen [285] to have a smaller spacing to increase the coupling coefficient by a 
y/2 factor, with all the other guides equally spaced. The lowest and the highest super-
modes have a uniform near-field intensity envelope, and the injected charges will be 
used more efficiently. These supermodes should be relatively stable with increased 
pumping above threshold. Another design is to use a /-junction waveguide [286] 
structure such that all waveguide modes will läse in phase with equal amplitudes. 
Using closely spaced antiguided waveguides [288, 289], a new class of phase-
locked diode laser arrays has been developed. Fundamental array-mode operation 
in a diffraction-limit-beam pattern is obtained up to 200 mW. The out-of-phase 
mode is also shown to läse with 110 mW per uncoated facet. The threshold currents 
of these antiguided arrays have been shown to be in the 270 to 320 mA range with an 
external quantum efficiency near 30% to 35% and cw operation up to 200 mW. As 
pointed out before, the real optical modal profiles in the laser arrays using gain-
guided [289] or antiguided [291-293] structures have to be calculated properly to 
compare with experimental data. The supermode analysis is presented in this 
section only to provide some basic understanding of the laser array characteristics. 
APPENDIX 11A: HAMILTONIAN FOR STRAINED 
WURTZITE CRYSTALS 
We choose the six valence-band wave functions, {m, u2, ■ ■ ■, u6} as [188, 189] 
Ul=-j=\(X + iY)l) 
U2 =-L\(X 
- iY) ft «3 = |ZT> 
u*=-j=\(X-iY)l) 
us = ^λ\(Χ + iY) I) 
U6 = \Zl), 
(11A.1) 
which are the states of interest (class A), and all other states of no interest are called 
class B. Again we use Löwdin's method (see Appendix 3A) and obtain the 6 x 6 
Hamiltonian matrix for the valence bands. The full Hamiltonian can be written as 
[188, 189] 
H 
F 
K 
H 
0 
0 
0 
-K* 
G 
H* 
0 
0 
Δ 
-H* 
H 
λ 
0 
Δ 
0 
0 
0 
0 
F 
-K* 
H* 
0 
0 
Δ 
-K 
G 
-H 
0 
Δ 
0 
H 
-H* 
λ 
Im) 
k) 
l"3) 
\uA) 
\m) 
K) 
(11A.2) 

APPENDIX 11 A: HAMILTONIAN FOR STRAINED WURTZITE CRYSTALS 
579 
where the matrix elements are defined as 
F = A, 
λ+θ 
κ = 
σ = Δ ι - Δ 2 + λ + 0 
h2 
—~A5(kx + ikyY + D5B+ 
2m0 
h2 
H = -—A6kz(kx + iky) + D6ez+ 
2wo 
λ — λ/i + λε 
θ = 0/t + ΘΕ 
K = DlB^ + D2(BXX + Byy) 
es = D3ezz + D4(Bxx + eyy) 
(11A.3) 
B+ = Βχχ X ZlBxy 
Byy 
The strain effects are included by considering the wurtzite crystal symmetry and a 
straightforward addition of corresponding terms: kakß —> εαβ with the deformation 
potentials, D\, D2,... ,D6, at the corresponding positions of A\, A2, ■. ■, A6, which 
play the same roles as the Luttinger-Kohn parameters for zinc-blende crystals. A 
simplification based on the cubic approximation [190] is to make use of the similarity 
between the wurtzite structure and the cubic crystal. If we map the c(0001) axis of 
WZ crystal to the (111) direction (called z'-axis) of ZB crystal and set the x! and / 
axes along the (112) and (110) directions, respectively, in the new coordinate 
system, we can derive the relations 
A\ - A2 = -A 3 = 2A4 
A3+ 4A5 = \/2A6 
Δ2 
Dx-D2 
= -D3 = 2D4 
D3 + 4£>5 = V2D6. 
(11 A4) 
Therefore, only five band-structure parameters such as Αχ, Α2, Α5, Δ\, and Δ2 and 
three deformation potentials are necessary for the calculation of the valence-band 
structures. It has also been found that a seventh coefficient A7 for the linear k 
terms vanishes; therefore, we discard it at the beginning and keep only the quadratic 
terms of k in addition to the band-edge energy terms. 
The band-edge energies of the conduction, heavy-hole (HH), light-hole (LH), and 
crystal-field split-off hole (CH) bands and their corresponding (double fold degener-
ate wavefunctions) at the zone center are given by 
C 
Ec 
uc= \iS T) 
\iS |) 
HH E\ 
Uhh = "i 
"4 
LH 
E2 
«ih = PU2 + que 
<7«3 + pus 
CH 
£3 
uch = qu2 - pu6 
-pu3 + qu5 
(11A.5) 
where we define p and q to include the strain effects 
E2 - λε 
^2Δ 3 

580 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
It is straightforward to show that 
7 
£2 
E2-E3 
£3 
£3 — £2 
(11A.7) 
Note that p + qz = 1. 
As shown in Ref. 218, the 6 x 6 Hamiltonian matrix (11A.2) can be block-
diagonalized to two 3 x 3 matrices by a change of bases. It is then much easier to 
find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a 3 x 3 matrix because the eigenvalue 
equation will have a polynomial of order 3 in the eigenenergy, which has two degen-
erate analytical solutions. The results are then shown in Fig. 11.51 using the band 
structure parameters listed in Appendix D at the end of the book. 
Model for the Quantum-Well Heterojunction 
Consider a wurtzite GaN/ 
AUGa^N quantum-well structure, Fig. 11A.1 [188, 189]. We have to find (1) the 
reference band-edge energies £* in the well and the barrier, and the difference 
between the two values and (2) the conduction band-edge energies £* in the well 
and the barrier. An earlier experimental report shows a value of 0.8 + 0.3 eV for 
the valence-band edge discontinuity between GaN and A1N wurtzite semiconductors. 
Therefore, a band-edge discontinuity ratio of 33% for the valence band and 67% for 
the conduction band has been proposed. The top valence band of GaN is the Ε^ (ΗΗ) 
ALGa. N 
X 
l—X 
f 
AEC 
GaN 
, 1 
Α 1 / ν , Ν 
- -£<0)(GaN) 
Δ£„ 
sfw 
£ g + Ä , + A 2 
-E®\GaK)=0 
5?V· 
■E%'(z) 
"W 
Figure 11A.1 
Band-edge energies of a wurtzite GaN/AlN heterojunction. Δ| is positive for GaN and 
negative for A1N. The band-edge discontinuities Δ£^ and AEj? are labeled for a GaN/AlN heterojunction. 
(Reprinted with permission from [1891 © 1996 IEEE.) 

APPENDIX 1 IB: BAND-EDGE OPTICAL TRANSITION MATRIX ELEMENTS 
581 
band and the top valence band of A1N is the E\ (CH) band. Therefore, the difference 
between the two band edges is £?(GaN) - £^(A1N) = 0.8 + 0.3 eV. Because the 
error (0.3 eV) is much larger than Δ,, Δ2, and Δ3 of both GaN and A1N, we can 
simply assume that Zs^(GaN) - £*(A1N) ~ 0.8 eV and use the interpolation 
formula for the location of E° for the Al^Ga] _XN materials 
^(AUGa.^N) = x£?(AlN) + (1 - x)£?(GaN) + bvx(\ - x ) 
(11A.8) 
where bv accounts for the contribution of the bowing effects of the band-gap discon-
tinuity to the valence band. Because the band gap of the Al^Ga! XN has been found 
from experimental data, 
£g(AUGa,^N) = x£g(AlN) + (1 - x)£g(GaN) - bx(\ - x) 
(11 A.9) 
and a value of 0.98 eV has been reported for the bowing parameter b (=bc + bv), we 
assume that bv = 033b and use a positive sign in front of bv because the band gap is 
related to Ec — Ev. The conduction band edge is then: 
£*(AUGa,^N) = χ£^(Α1Ν) + (1 - x)£^(GaN) - bcx(\ - x). 
(11 A.10) 
The other parameters, Δ,, i = 1, 2, 3, are linearly interpolated from their GaN and 
A1N values. The valence-band quantum-well potential is 
£ θ Μ _ ί 
£?(GaN) 
well 
Δ ν ( ζ ) - \ ^ ( Α 1 , 0 & 1 _ , Ν ) 
barriers 
(HA.ll) 
and a similar assignment for the conduction-band edge profile. Note that the differ-
ence between E% and E^ is Es + A{ +A2. The contributions due to strain and the 
difference in the band-structure parameters and Aj's are taken into account explicitly 
in the remaining Hamiltonians. Again, for convenience, the reference can be set at the 
valence-band edge of the unstrained well value, that is, subtract all energies by 
£*(GaN), which is equivalent to set £^(GaN) = 0 in the above equations, and find 
the energies of all other quantities. 
APPENDIX 11B: BAND-EDGE OPTICAL TRANSITION 
MATRIX ELEMENTS 
The polarization selection rules for the conduction band to the light-hole band are 
different from those of the zinc-blende crystals. For the zinc-blende structure, the 
dominant C-LH transitions are TM polarized (along the growth axis). However, for 
the wurtzite structure, TE polarization is favored for the C-LH transitions. Two 
Kane's parameters, P\ and P2, are related to the interband momentum matrix 

582 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
elements by 
iS 
iS 
h d 
i dz 
h d 
i dx 
m0 
iS h_d_ 
i dy 
mo 
We obtain modified Kane's parameters for wurtzite crystals, 
p = K_ im _ j \(Eg + Δ, + A2)(Eg + 2Δ2) - 2Δ: 
1 
2m0 \n& 
{Eg+2A2) 
p2 = J?_ /mo _ \ Es [{Eg + A! + A2)(£g + 2A2) - 2A^] 
2 
2m0 Vn« 
) 
(Es + A, + A2)(£g + A2) - A2 
which are related to the optical momentum matrix elements 
_2mo 2 
CPZ ~" 
.2 
Γ 1 
ft 
_2mo . 
^Ρ- 1 — 
.2 
rT 
n 
(11B.1) 
(11B.2) 
(11B.3) 
(11B.4) 
(11B.5) 
Using the band-edge wavefunctions with p and q given by (11A.6), we obtain the 
momentum matrix elements at the band edge (&t = 0) including the strain effects 
in Table 11B.1 for the optical transition from the conduction band edge to the 
three valence subband edges (C-HH, C-LH, and C-CH transitions labeled as Elt 
E2, and E3, respectively), when the optical polarization is perpendicular to the 
c-axis (TE polarization) and parallel to the c-axis (TM polarization). We also calcu-
late the energy parameters for the interband optical transition oscillator strengths and 
obtain Epx = 15.7 eV and Epz= 13.9 eV. Notice the sum rules for each polarization in 
Table 11B.1 Polarization-Dependent Interband Optical-Matrix Elements 
Valence Energy 
TM (e || c-axis) 
TE (e ± c-axis) 
£, (HH band) 
E2 (LH band) 
E3 (CH band) 
Sum 
0 
ΛΨ·-) 
•(=M 
2 
pz 
« 0 , 
9 
/no F 
2 
px 
The energy parameters Evx and Epz for the interband transition elements are related 
to Kane's parameters, P\ and P2, in Eq. (11B.5). p and q satisfy p 
+q 
1. 
Ez_ 
E2-
£ 3-A e 
£3 — £2 

11.7 
PROBLEMS 
583 
(a) 
13 
N 
o 
c 
SS 
c υ 
1 
13 
x 
s 
a 
(b) 
"8 
N 
(β 
§ 
C 
υ 
e 
X 
B 
CO 
3 
2.5 
2 
1.5 
1 
0.5 
0 '■■ 
-0.5 
2.5 
2 
1.5 
1 
0.5 
0 
-0.5 
TE (x or y) Polarization : 
C1-HH1 
* C1-LH1 
C1-CH1 v 
..............*,~~.-. 
0.05 
0.1 
0.15 
0.2 
. 
' »■ 
» - ■< ■■ 
· " ■' r 
''■ 
■· 
> 
■ \C1-CH1 
• 
/ 
■- ■* ' 
/ / 
1 
■
.
.
.
.
!
.
. 
, , . . , , , , 
,, , ,, , ,. ........ 
TM (z) Polarization : 
-
C1-HH1 
0.05 
0.1 
0.15 
0.2 
kt (l/A) 
Figure llB.l 
The normalized momentum matrix elements for the first conduction subband to the first 
HH, LH, and CH subband transitions for (a) TE polarization on the quantum-well (x-y) plane and 
(b) TM polarization along the c-axis or z direction for a 26 A GaN/Alo^Ga« 7N quantum well. 
(Reprinted with permission from [1891 © 1996 IEEE.) 
Table llB.l. Figure llB.l shows the normalized momentum matrix elements as a 
function of the in-plane wavevector for the first conduction subband to the first 
HH, LH, and CH subband transitions for (a) TE polarization on the quantum-well 
(x—y) plane and (b) TM polarization along the c-axis or z direction for a 26 A 
GaN/Al0 3Gan 7N quantum well [189]. 
PROBLEMS 
11.1 Show that the lasing condition (11.1.23) is identical to (11.1.21), which 
corresponds with the zero of the denominator of the transmission coefficient 
of the DFB structure. 

584 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
11.2 Derive the oscillation condition (11.1.31) for a DFB laser. Discuss the 
solution for the detuning 8L and the gain gnL. 
11.3 Discuss the coupling coefficients, Kah and Kba in (11.1.41), for a complex 
grating with both index- and gain-grating couplings. Do they satisfy a 
simple relation as that in the lossless condition? Why or why not? 
11.4 Plot the transmission spectrum (11.1.43a) of a phase-shifted DFB laser 
structure as a function of detuning 8L for G = gnL = 0, 0.5, and 1.0 assum-
ing KL= 1.5. 
11.5 
Derive the lasing conditions (11.1.46) to (11.1.50) for a DBR semiconductor 
laser in Fig. 11.8. 
11.6 Compare the threshold condition for a surface-emitting laser with that for a 
DBR semiconductor laser. What are their differences and similarities? 
11.7 Explain why the optical output power versus injection current (L-I) curve of 
a surface-emitting laser has a negative differential quantum efficiency at a 
high injection level. 
11.8 Compare the current density, the carrier concentration, and the optical 
modal profiles of a gain-guided surface emitting laser (Fig. 11.15) with 
those of a gain-guided stripe-geometry semiconductor laser in Section 10.2 
(Fig. 10.15). 
11.9 Derive the Purcell factor (11.3.15) and summarize the assumptions used. 
11.10 Prove (11.3.26) using (11.3.24) and the definition of the gain coefficient. 
11.11 Derive the threshold current density (11.4.7) for a quantum-cascade laser. 
11.12 Compare the physical principles and emission polarizations of type-I QC 
lasers with type-II QC lasers. 
11.13 Discuss the difference between the spontaneous polarization and the piezo-
electric polarization in a GaN film. 
11.14 Derive (11.5.26). 
11.15 Using the coupled-mode equations in Section 11.6 assuming only nearby-
element coupling, write the explicit eigenvalues and eigenvectors for 
(a) three coupled waveguides and (b) four coupled waveguides. Plot the 
modal profiles for the supermodes. 
11.16 Derive the array pattern for the Ah supermode, A^(0), in (11.6.25). 
REFERENCES 
1. H. Kogelnik and C. V. Shank, "Stimulated emission in a periodic structure," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 18, 152-154(1971). 

REFERENCES 
585 
2. H. Kogelnik and C. V. Shank, "Coupled-wave theory of distributed feedback lasers," 
J. Appl. Phys. 43, 2327-2335 (1972). 
3. M. Nakamura, A. Yariv, H. W. Yen, S. Somekh, and H. L. Garvin, "Optically pumped GaAs 
surface laser with corrugation feedback," Appl. Phys. Lett. 22, 515-516 (1973). 
4. D. R. Scifres, R. D. Burnham, and W. Streifer, "Distributed-feedback single heterojunc-
tion GaAs diode laser," Appl. Phys. Lett. 25, 203-205 (1974). 
5. H. C. Casey, Jr., S. Somekh, and M. Ilegems, "Room-temperature operation of low-
threshold separate-confinement heterostructure injection laser with distributed feedback," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 27, 142-144 (1975). 
6. M. Nakamura, A. Aiki, J. Umeda, and A. Yariv, "cw operation of distributed-feedback 
GaAs-GaAlAs diode lasers at temperatures up to 300 K," Appl. Phys. Lett. 27, 
403-405 (1975). 
7. G. P. Agrawal and N. K. Dutta, Long-Wavelength Semiconductor Lasers, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, San Diego, 1986. 
8. N. Chinone and M. Okai, "Distributed feedback semiconductor lasers," in Semiconductor 
Lasers—Past, Present, and Future, G. P. Agrawal, Ed., Chapter 2, AIP Press, New York, 
1995. 
9. G. Morthier and P. Vankwikelberge, Handbook of Distributed Feedback Laser Diodes, 
Artech House, Boston, MA, 1997. 
10. H. Ghafouri-Shiraz and B. S. K. Lo, Distributed Feedback Laser Diodes- Principles and 
Physical Modelling, Wiley, New York, 1996. 
H . A . Yariv, Quantum Electronics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1989. 
12. W. Fang, A. Hsu, S. L. Chuang, T. Tanbun-Ek, and A. K. Sergent, "Measurement and 
modeling of distributed-feedback lasers with spatial hole burning," IEEE J. Sei. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 3, 547-554 (1997). 
13. Y. Luo, Y. Nakano, K. Tada, T. Inoue, H. Hosomatsu, and H. Iwaoka, "Fabrication and 
characteristics of gain-coupled distributed feedback lasers with a corrugated active layer," 
IEEE]. Quantum Electron. 27, 1724-1731 (1991). 
14. K. David, J. Buus, and R. Baets, "Basic analysis of AR-coated partly gain-coupled DFB 
lasers: the standing wave effect," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 28, 427-433 (1992). 
15. G. P. Li, T. Makino, R. Moore, and N. Puetz, "1.55 μπι index/gain coupled DFB lasers 
with strained layer multiquantum-well active grating," Electron. Lett. 28, 1726-1727 
(1992). 
16. G. P. Li, T. Makino, R. Moore, N. Puetz, K. W. Leong, and H. Lu, "Partially gain-
coupled 1.55 μπι strained-layer multiquantum-well DFB lasers," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 29, 1736-1742 (1993). 
17. H. Lu, T. Makino, and G. P. Li, "Dynamic properties of partly gain-coupled 1.55-μπι 
DFB lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 31, 1443-1450 (1995). 
18. H. Lu, C. Blaauw, B. Benyon, G. P. Li, and T. Makino, "High-power and high-speed 
performance of ·1.3-μπι strained MQW gain-coupled DFB lasers," IEEE J. Sei. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 1, 375-381 (1995). 
19. T. Makino, "Threshold condition of DFB semiconductor lasers by the local-normal-mode 
transfer-matrix method: correspondence to the coupled-wave method," IEEE J. 
Lightwave Technol. 12, 2092-2099 (1994). 

586 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
20. H. Haus and C. V. Shank, "Antisymmetric taper of distributed feedback lasers," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-12, 532-539 (1976). 
21. H. A. Haus, Waves and Fields in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1984. 
22. K. Sekartedjo, N. Eda, K. Furuya, Y. Suematsu, F. Koyama, and T. Tanbun-Ek, 
"1.5 μηι phase-shifted DFB lasers for single-mode operation," Electron. Lett. 20, 
80-81 (1984). 
23. Y. Suematsu, K. Kishino, S. Arai, and F. Koyama, "Dynamic single-mode semiconductor 
lasers with a distributed reflector," in Semiconductors and Semimetals, vol. 22, 
R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Chapter 4, Academic Press, San Diego, 1985. 
24. S. Wang, "Design considerations of the DBR injection laser and the waveguiding struc-
ture for integrated optics," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-13, 176-186 (1977). 
25. K. Iga, "Surface-emitting laser- its birth and generation of new optoelectronics fields," 
IEEEJ. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 6, 1201-1215 (2000). 
26. C. Wilmsen, H. Temkin, and L. A. Coldren, Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers: 
Design, Fabrication, Characterization, and Applications, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 1999. 
27. G. A. Evans and J. M. Hammer, Eds., Surface Emitting Semiconductor Lasers and 
Arrays, Academic Press, San Diego, 1993. 
28. H. Soda, K. Iga, C. Kitahara, and Y. Suematsu, "GalnAsP/InP surface emitting injection 
lasers," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 18, 2329-2330 (1979). 
29. K. Iga, S. Ishkawa, S. Ohkouchi, and T. Nishimura, "Room temperature pulsed oscillation 
of GaAlAs/GaAs surface emitting junction laser," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 
315-320(1985). 
30. J. L. Jewell, J. P. Harbison, A. Scherer, Y. H. Lee, and L. T. Florez, "Vertical-cavity 
surface-emitting lasers: design, growth, fabrication, characterization," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 27, 1332-1346 (1991). 
31. R. S. Geels, S. W. Corzine, and L. A. Coldren, "InGaAs vertical-cavity surface-emitting 
lasers," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 27, 1359-1367 (1991). 
32. C. J. Chang-Hasnain, J. P. Harbison, G. Hasnain, A. C. Von Lehmen, L. T. Florez, 
and N. G. Stoffel, "Dynamic, polarization, and transverse mode characteristics of 
vertical cavity surface emitting lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27, 1402-1409 
(1991). 
33. J. W. Scott, R. S. Geels, S. W. Corzine, and L. A. Coldren, "Modeling temperature effects 
and spatial hole burning to optimize vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser performance," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 29, 1295-1308 (1993). 
34. K. Tai, K. F. Huang, C. C. Wu, and J. D. Wynn, "Continuous wave visible InGaP/ 
InGaAlP quantum well surface emitting laser diodes," Electron. Lett. 29, 1314-1316 
(1993). 
35. I. Melngailis, "Longitudinal injection-plasma laser of InSb," Appl. Phys. Lett. 6, 59-60 
(1965). 
36. R. D. Burnham, D. R. Scifres, and W. Streifer, "Single-heterostructure distributed-
feedback GaAs-diode lasers," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-11, 439-449 (1975). 
37. Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreyev, S. A. Gurevich, R. F. Kazarinov, V. R. Larionov, 
M. N. Mizerov, and E. L. Portnoy, "Semiconductor lasers with the light output 

REFERENCES 
587 
through the diffraction grating on the surface of the waveguide layer," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-11, 449-451 (1975). 
38. A. J. Springthorpe, "A novel double-heterostructure p-n junction laser," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
31, 524-525 (1977). 
39. K. Iga and F. Koyama, "Vertical-cavity surface emitting lasers and arrays," in Surface 
Emitting Semiconductor Lasers and Arrays, G. A. Evans and J. M. Hammer, Eds., 
Chapter 3, Academic Press, San Diego, 1993. 
40. R. D. Burnham, D. R. Scifres, and W. Streifer, "Transverse light emitting electrolumines-
cent devices," United State Patent No. 4309670, Jan. 1982 (Filed Sept. 13, 1979). 
41. F. Koyama, S. Kinoshita, and K. Iga, "Room temperature continuous wave lasing charac-
teristics of GaAs vertical cavity surface-emitting laser," Appl. Phys. Lett. 55, 221-222 
(1989). 
42. J. L. Jewell, A. Scherer, S. L. McCall, Y. H. Lee, S. Walker, J. P. Harbison, and 
L. T. Florez, "Low-threshold electrically pumped vertical-cavity surface-emitting micro-
lasers," Electron. Lett. 25, 1123-1124 (1989). 
43. J. M. Dallesasse, N. Holonyak, Jr., A. R. Sugg, T. A. Richard, and N. El-Zein, 
"Hydrolyzation oxidation of AlxGai_xAs-AlAs-GaAs quantum well heterostructures 
and superlattices," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57, 2844-2846 (1990). 
44. J. M. Dallesasse and N. Holonyak, Jr., "Native-oxide stripe-geometry AlxGa!_xAs-GaAs 
quantum well heterostructure lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 394-396 (1991). 
45. D. L. Huffaker, D. G. Deppe, K. Kumar, and T. J. Rogers, "Native-oxide defined ring 
contact for low threshold vertical-cavity lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 65, 97-99 (1994). 
46. K. D. Choquette, R. P. Schneider, Jr., K. L. Lear, and K. M. Geib, "Low threshold 
voltage vertical-cavity lasers fabricated by selective oxidation," Electron. Lett. 30, 
2043-2044 (1994). 
47. M. H. MacDougal, P. D. Dapkus, V. Pudikov, H. Zhao, ad G. M. Yang, "Ultralow 
threshold current vertical-cavity surface emitting lasers with AlAs-oxide-GaAs distribu-
ted Bragg reflectors," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 7, 229-231 (1995). 
48. Y. Hayashi, T. Mukaihara, N. Hatori, N. Ohnoki, A. Matsutani, F. Koyama, and K. Iga, 
"Record low threshold index-guided InGaAs/AlGaAs vertical-cavity surface emitting 
laser with a native oxide confinement structure," Electron. Lett. 31, 560-561 (1995). 
49. K. L. Lear, K. D. Choquette, R. P. Schneider, Jr., S. P. Kilcoyne, and K. M. Geib, 
"Selectively oxidized vertical-cavity surface emitting lasers with 50% power conversion 
efficiency," Electron. Lett. 31, 208-209 (1995). 
50. K. D. Choquette, K. L. Lear, R. P. Schneider, Jr., K. M. Geib, J. J. Figiel, and R. Hull, 
"Fabrication and performance of selectively oxidized vertical-cavity lasers," IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett. 7, 1237-1239 (1995). 
51. N. K. Dutta, "Analysis of current spreading, carrier diffusion, and transverse mode 
guiding in surface emitting lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 68, 1961-1963 (1990). 
52. J. F. Seurin and S. L. Chuang, "Discrete Bessel transform and beam propagation method for 
modeling of vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 82,2007 - 2016 (1997). 
53. B. Tell, K. F. Brown-Goebeler, R. E. Leibenguth, F. M. Baez, and Y. H. Lee, 
'Temperature dependence of GaAs-AlGaAs vertical cavity surface emitting lasers," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 683-685 (1992). 

588 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
54. P. Zhou, B. Lu, J. Cheng, K. J. Malloy, S. Z. Sun, S. D. Hersee, and J. C. Zolper, 
"Vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers with thermally stable electrical characteristics," 
J. Appl. Phys. 77, 2264-2267 (1995). 
55. G. Hasnain, K. Tai, L. Yang, Y. H. Wang, R. J. Fischer, J. D. Wynn, B. Weir, N. K. Dutta, 
and A. Y. Cho, "Performance of gain-guided surface emitting lasers with semiconductor 
distributed Bragg reflectors," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 27, 1377-1385 (1991). 
56. R. Michalzik and K. J. Ebeling, "Modeling and design of proton-implanted ultralow-
threshold vertical-cavity laser diodes," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 29,1963-1974(1993). 
57. W. Nakwaski and M. Osinski, "Thermal analysis of GaAs-AlGaAs etched-well surface-
emitting double-heterostructure lasers with dielectric mirrors," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 29, 1981-1995 (1993). 
58. J. W. Scott, D. B. Young, B. J. Thibeault, M. G. Peters, and L. A. Coldren, "Design of 
index-guided vertical-cavity lasers for low temperature-sensitivity, sub-milliamp 
thresholds, and single-mode operation," IEEE J. Sei Top. Quantum Electron. 1, 
638-647 (1995). 
59. N. N. Ledentsov, F. Hopfer, and D. Bimberg, "High-speed quantum-dot vertical-cavity 
surface-emitting lasers," Proc. IEEE 95, 1741-1756 (2007). 
60. F. Koyama, "Recent advances in surface-emitting lasers," Chapter 4 in Optical Fiber 
Telecommunications V, a:Components, I. P. Kaminow, Kaminow, T. Li, and 
A. E. Willner, eds., Elsevier Science & Technology, 2008. 
61. E. M. Purcell, "Spontaneous emission probabilities at radio frequencies," Phys. Rev. 69, 
681 (1946). 
62. K. H. Drexhage, "Interaction of light with monomolecular dye layers," in Progress in 
Optics, E. Wolf, Ed., vol. 12, 165-232, North-Holland, New York, 1974. 
63. P. Goy, J. M. Raimond, M. Gross, and S. Haroche, "Observation of cavity-enhanced 
single-atom spontaneous emission," Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1903-1909 (1983). 
64. R. G. Hulet, E. S. Hilfer, and D. Kleppner, "Inhibited spontaneous emission by Rydberg 
atom," Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2137-2140 (1985). 
65. E. Yablonovitch, "Inhibited spontaneous emission in solid-state physics and electronics," 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059-2062 (1987). 
66. S. John, "Strong localization of photons in certain disordered dielectric superlattices," 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2486-2489 (1987). 
67. E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, R. D. Meade, A. M. Rappe, K. D. Brommer, and 
J. D. Joannopoulos, "Donor and acceptor modes in photonic band structure," Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 67, 3380-3383 (1991). 
68. F. De Martini, G. Innocenti, G. R. Jacobovitz, and P. Mataloni, "Anomalous spontaneous 
emission time in a microscopic optical cavity," Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2955-2958 (1987). 
69. F. De Martini and G. R. Jacobovitz, "Anomalous spontaneous-stimulated-decay phase 
transition and zero-threshold laser action in a microscopic cavity," Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 
1711-1714(1988). 
70. K. Iga, F. Koyama, and S. Kinoshita, "Surface emitting semiconductor lasers," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 24, 1845-1855 (1988). 
71. Y. Yamamoto, S. Machida, K. Igeta, and Y. Horikoshi, "Enhanced and inhibited spontaneous 
emission of free excitons in GaAs quantum wells in a micro-cavity," Proc. 6th Rochester 
Conf. Quantum Optics., eds. J. H. Eberly, L. Mandel, and E. Wolf, Plenum Press, 1989. 

REFERENCES 
589 
72. Y. Yamamoto, S. Machida, K. Igeta, and G. Bjork, "Controlled spontaneous emission in 
microcavity semiconductor lasers," in Coherence, Amplification and Quantum Effects in 
Semiconductor Lasers, Y. Yamamoto, Ed. Wiley, New York, 1991. 
73. A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. L. McCall, T. Tanbun-Ek, D. L. Coblentz, and 
S. J. Pearton, "Room temperature operation of microdisk lasers with submilliamp 
threshold current," Electron. Lett. 28, 1010-1012 (1992). 
74. S. L. McCall, A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. J. Pearton, and R. A. Logan, "Whispering 
gallery mode microdisk lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 289-291 (1992). 
75. A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. L. McCall, S. J. Pearton, and W. S. Hobson, "Room temp-
erature lasing in Ino.51Gao.49P/Ino.2Gao8 As microcy linder laser diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
62,2021-2023(1993). 
76. A. F. J. Levi, S. L. McCall, S. J. Pearton, and R. A. Logan, "Room temperature operation 
of submicrometer radius disk laser," Electron. Lett. 29, 1666-1667 (1993). 
77. J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade, and J. N. Winn, Photonic Crystals. Princeton 
Universiy Press, Princeton, NJ, 1995. 
78. O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J. D. O'Breien, P. D. Dapkus, and I. Kim, 
"Two-dimensional photonic bandgap defect laser," Science 284, 1819-1821 (1999). 
79. O. Painter, J. Vuckovic, and A. Scherer, "Defect modes of a two-dimensional 
photonic crystal in an optically thin dielectric slab," J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16, 275-285 
(1999). 
80. O. Painter, A. Husain, A. Scherer, J. D. O'Brien, I. Kim, and P. D. Dapkus, "Room 
temperature photonic crystal defect lasers at near-infrared wavelengths in InGaAsP," 
J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 2082-2088 (1999). 
81. J. K. Hwang, H. Y. Ryu, D. S. Song, I. Y. Han, H. K. Park, Y. H. Lee, and D. H. "Room 
temperature triangular-lattice two-dimensional photonic band gap lasers operating at 
1.54 μπι," Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 2982-2984 (2000). 
82. P. T. Lee, J. R. Cao, S. J. Choi, Z. J. Wei, J. D. O'Brein, and P. D. Dapkus, "Operation of 
photonic crystal membrane lasers above room temperature," Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 
3311-3313(2002). 
83. H. G. Park, S. H. Kim, S. H. Kwon, Y. G. Ju, J. K. Yang, J. H. Baek, S. B. Kim, and 
Y. H. Lee, "Electrically driven single-cell photonic crystal laser," Science 305, 
1444-1447(2004). 
84. H. G. Park, S. H. Kim, M. K. Seo, Y. G. Ju, S. B. Kim, and Y. H. Lee, "Characteristics of 
electrically driven two-dimensional photonic crystal lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
41, 1131-1141 (2005). 
85. C. Weisbuch, M. Nishioka, A. Ishikawa, and Y. Arakawa, "Observation of the coupled 
exciton-photon mode splitting in a semiconductor quantum microcavity," Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 69,3314-3317(1992). 
86. J.-M. Gerard and B. Gayral, "Strong Purcell effect for InAs quantum boxes in three-
dimensional solid-state microcavities," J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 2089-2095 (1999). 
87. J. Vuckovic, C. Santori, D. Fattal, M. Pelton, G. S. Solomon, and Y. Yammamoto, 
"Cavity-enhanced single photons from a quantum dot," in Optical Microcavities, 
K. Vahala, Ed., Chapter 4, World Scientific, Singapore, 2004. 
88. J. M. Gerard, B. Sermage, B. Gayral, B. Legrand, E. Costard, and V. Thierry-Mieg, 
"Enhanced spontaneous emission by quantum boxes in a monolithic optical microcav-
ity," Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1110-1113 (1998). 

590 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
89. G. S. Solomon, M. Pelton, and Y. Yamamoto, "Single-mode spontaneous emission from 
a single quantum dot in a three-dimensional microcavity," Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3903 
(2001). 
90. M. Pelton, J. Vuckovic, G. S. Solomon, A. Scherer, and Y. Yamamoto, "Three-dimen-
sionally confined modes in micropost microcavities: quality factors and Purcell 
factors," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 38, 170-177 (2002). 
91. T. Baba, "Photonic crystals and microdisk cavities based on GalnAsP-InP system," IEEE 
J. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 3, 808-830 (1997). 
92. T. Baba and D. Sano, "Low-threshold lasing and Purcell effects in microdisk lasers at 
room temperature," IEEE J. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 9, 1340-1346 (2003). 
93. H. Y. Ryu, S. H. Kim, H. G. Park, and Y. H. Lee, "Characteristics of single defect laser 
modes in a two-dimensional square lattice photonic crystal slab," J. Appl. Phys. 93, 
831-837(2003). 
94. K. Nozaki and T. Baba, "Carrier and photon analyses of photonic microlasers by two-
dimensional rate equations," IEEE J. Set. Areas Commun. 23, 1413-1417, (2005). 
95. J. O'Brien, W. Kuang, J. R. Cao, M. H. Shih, P. T. Lee, M. Bagheri, A. Mock, and 
W. K. Marshall, "Photonic crystal micropcavity lasers," J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 40, 
2671-2682(2007). 
96. A. Scherer, J. L. Jewell, and J. P. Harbison, "Lasing in submicron wide vertical cavity 
microlasers," Opt. Photon. News 2, 9 (1991). 
97. M. T. Hill, Y. S. Oei, B. Smalbrugge, Y. Zhu, T. de Vries, P. J. Van Veldhoven, F. W. M. 
Van Otten, T. J. Eijkemans, J. P. Turkiewicz, H. De Waardt, E. J. Geluk, S. H. Kwon, 
Y. H. Lee, R. Notzel, and M. K. Smit, "Lasing in metallic-coated nanocavities," 
Nature Photon. 1, 589-594 (2007). 
98. J. M. Gerard and B. Gayral, "InAs quantum dots: artificial atoms for solid-state cavity-
quantum electrodynamics," Physica E 9, 131-139 (2001). 
99. H. Yokoyama and S. D. Brorson, "Rate equation analysis of microcavity lasers," J. Appl. 
Phys. 66, 4801-4805 (1989). 
100. G. Björk and Y. Yamamoto, "Analysis of semiconductor microcavity lasers using rate 
equations," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 27, 2386-2396 (1991). 
101. J. Faist, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, C. Sirtori, A. Hutchinson, and A. Y. Cho, "Quantum 
cascade laser," Science, 264, 553-556, (1994). 
102. R. Kazarinov and R. A. Suris, "Amplification of electromagnetic waves in a semiconduc-
tor superlattice," Sov. Phys. Semicond. 5, 707-709 (1971). 
103. F. Capasso, R. Paiella, R. Martini, R. Colombelli, C. Gmachl, T. L. Myers, 
M. S. Taubman, R. M. Williams, C. G. Befhea, K. Unterrainer, H. Y. Hwang, 
D. L. Sivco, A. Y. Cho, A. M. Sergent, H. C. Liu, and E. A. Whittaker, "Quantum 
cascade lasers: Ultrahigh-speed operation, optical wireless communication, narrow line-
width, and far-infrared emission," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 511-532 (2002). 
104. F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y Cho, "Quantum cascade lasers," Phys. 
Today, 55, 34-40 (2002). 
105. F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, R. Paiella, A. Tredicucci, A. L. Hutchinson, D. L. Sivco, 
J. N. Baillargeon, A. Y. Cho, and H. C. Liu, "New frontiers in quantum cascade lasers 
and applications," IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 6, 931-947 (2000). 

REFERENCES 
591 
106. S. Silvken, A. Evans, W. Zhang, and M. Razeghi, "High-power, continuous-operation 
intersubband laser for wavelengths greater than ΙΟμπι," Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 151115 
(2007). 
107. M. Beck, D. Hofstetter, T. Aellen, J. Faist, U. Oesterle, M. Ilegems, E. Gini, and 
H. Melchior, "Continuous wave operation of a mid-infrared semiconductor laser at 
room temperature," Science. 295, 301-305 (2002). 
108. J. Faist, D. Hofstetter, M. Beck, T. Aellen, M. Rochat, and S. Blaser, "Bound-to-
continuum and two-phonon resonance quantum-cascade lasers for high duty cycle, 
high-temperature operation," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 533-546 (2002). 
109. C. Sirtori, H. Page, C. Becker, and V. Ortiz, "GaAs-AlGaAs quantum cascade lasers: 
Physics, technology, and prospects," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 547-558 (2002). 
110. K. Ohtani and H. Ohno, "InAs/AlSb quantum cascade lasers operating at 10 μπι," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 82, 1003-1005 (2003). 
111. J. Devenson, R. Teissier, O. Cathabard, and A. N. Baranov, "InAs/AlSb quantum 
cascade lasers emitting below 3 μηι," Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 111118 (2007). 
112. Q. Yang, C. Manz, W. Brenner, K. Schäuble, Ch. Mann, K. Schwarz, K. Köhler, and 
J. Wagner, "Bound-to-continuum GalnAs-AlAsSb quantum cascade lasers with reduced 
electric injection power density," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 18, 1356-1358 (2006). 
113. Q. Yang, C. Manz, W. Brenner, K. Köhler, and J. Wagner, "Room-temperature short-
wavelength (λ ~ 3.7-3.9 μπι) GalnAs/AlAsSb quantum-cascade lasers," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 88, 121127(2006). 
114. C. Gmachl, A. Straub, R. Colombelli, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, A. M. Sergent, and 
A. Y. Cho, "Single-mode, tunable distributed-feedback and multiple-wavelength 
quantum cascade lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 569-581 (2002). 
115. L. Diehl, B. G. Lee, P. Behroozi, M. Loncar, M. A. Belkin, F. Capasso, T. Aellen, 
D. Hofstetter, M. Beck, and J. Faist, "Microfluidic tuning of distributed feedback 
quantum cascade lasers," Opt. Express, 14, 11660-11667 (2006). 
116. C. Gmachl, J. Faist, F. Capasso, C. Sirtori, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho, "Long-wave-
length (9.5-11.5 μπι) microdisk quantum-cascade lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
33, 1567-1573(1997). 
117. M. Loncar, B. G. Lee, L. Diehl, M. Belkin, F. Capasso, M. Giovannini, J. Faist, and 
E. Gini, "Design and fabrication of photonic crystal quantum cascade lasers for optofiui-
dics," Opt. Express, 15, 4499-4514 (2007). 
118. L. Diehl, D. Bour, S. Corzine, J. Zhu, G. Höfler, M. Loncar, M. Troccoli, and F. Capasso, 
"High-temperature continuous wave operation of strain-balanced quantum cascade lasers 
grown by metal organic vapor-phase epitaxy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 081101 -1 -081101 -3 
(2006). 
119. Z. Liu, D. Wasserman, S. S. Howard, A. J. Hoffman, C. F. Gmachl, X. Wang, T. Tanbun-
Ek, L. Cheng, and F.-S. Choa, "Room-temperature continuous-wave quantum cascade 
lasers grown by MOCVD without lateral regrowth," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 18, 
1347-1349(2006). 
120. J. S. Roberts, R. P. Green, L. R. Wilson, E. A. Zibik, D. G. Revin, J. W. Cockburn, and 
R. J. Airey, "Quantum cascade lasers grown by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 82, 4221-4223 (2003). 
121. R. Q. Yang, J. L. Bradshaw, J. D. Bruno, J. T. Pham, and D. E. Wortman, "Mid-infrared 
type-II interband cascade lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 559-568 (2002). 

592 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
122. J. Faist, F. Capasso, C. Sirtori, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchinson, and A. Y. Cho, 
"Continuous wave operation of a vertical transition quantum cascade laser about T = 
80K," Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 3057-3059 (1995). 
123. C. Sirtori, J. Faist, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchinson, S. N. G. Chu, and 
A. Y. Cho, "Continuous wave operation of midinfrared (7.4-8.6 μιή) quantum 
cascade lasers up to 110K temperature," Appl. Phys. Lett. 68, 1745-1747 (1996). 
124. J. Faist, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchinson, S.-N. G. Chu, and A. Y. Cho, "Short 
wavelength (λ ~ 3.4 μπι) quantum cascade laser based on strained compensated 
InGaAs/AlInAs," Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 680-682 (1998). 
125. C. Gmachl, A. Tredicucci, F. Capasso, A. L. Hutchinson, D. L. Sivco, J. N. Baillargeon, 
and A. Y. Cho, "High-power λ «a 8 μιπ quantum cascade lasers with near optimum per-
formance," Appl. Phys. Lett. 12, 3130-3132 (1998). 
126. T. Aellen, M. Beck, N. Hoyler, M. Giovannini, J. Faist, and E. Gini, "Doping in quantum 
cascade lasers. I. InAlAs-InGaAs/InP midinfrared devices," J. Appl. Phys. 100, 043101 
(2006). 
127. J. Faist, M. Beck, T. Aellen, and E. Gini, "Quantum-cascade lasers based on a bound-to-
continuum transition," Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 147-149 (2001). 
128. R. Maulini, A. Mohan, M. Giovannini, J. Faist, and E. Gini, "External cavity quantum-
cascade laser tunable from 8.2 to 10.4 μηι using a gain element with heterogeneous 
cascade," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 201113 (2006). 
129. A. Tredicucci, F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchinson, and A. Y. Cho, 
"High performance interminiband quantum cascade lasers with graded superlattices," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 2101-2103 (1998). 
130. A. Tredicucci, C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchinson, and A. Y. Cho, 
"Long wavelength superlattice quantum cascade lasers at λ = 17 μιτι," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 74, 638-640 (1999). 
131. A. Tredicucci, F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchinson, A. Y. Cho, J. Faist, 
and G. Scamarcio, "High-power inter-miniband lasing in intrinsic superlattices," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 72, 2388-2390 (1998). 
132. M. Lerttamrab, S. L. Chuang, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, F. Capasso, and A. Y. Cho, 
"Linewidth enhancement factor of a type-I quantum-cascade laser," J. Appl. Phys. 94, 
5426-5428 (2003). 
133. J. Kim, M. Lerttamrab, S. L. Chuang, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, F. Capasso, and A. Y. Cho, 
"Theoretical and experimental study of optical gain and linewidth enhancement factor of 
type-I quantum-cascade lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 40, 1663 -1674 (2004). 
134. M. S. Vitiello, G. Scamarcio, V. Spagnolo, T. Losco, R. P. Green, A. Tredicucci, 
H. E. Beere, and D. A. Ritchie, "Electron-lattice coupling in bound-to-continuum THz 
quantum-cascade lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 241109 (2006). 
135. V. B. Gorfinkel, S. Luryi, and B. Gelmont, 'Theory of gain spectra for quantum cascade 
lasers and temperature dependence of their characteristics at low and moderate carrier 
concentrations," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 32, 1995-2003 (1996). 
136. M. Yamanishi, T. Edamura, K. Fujita, N. Akikusa, and H. Kan, "Theory of the intrinsic 
linewidth of quantum cascade lasers: hidden reason for the narrow linewidth and line-
broadening by thermal photons," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 44, 12-29 (2008). 
137. M. Rochat, M. Beck, J. Faist, and U. Oesterle, "Measurement of far-infrared waveguide loss 
using a multisection single-pass technique," Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 1967-1969 (2001). 

REFERENCES 
593 
138. N. Yu, L. Diehl, E. Cubukcu, C. Pfliigl, D. Bour, S. Corzine, J. Zhu, G. Höfler, 
K. B. Crazier, and F. Capasso, "Near-field imaging of quantum cascade laser transverse 
modes," Opt. Express, 15, 13227-13235 (2007). 
139. B. S. Williams, S. Kumar, and Q. Hu, "Operation of terahertz quantum-cascade lasers at 
164K in pulsed mode and at 117K in continuous-wave mode," Opt. Express, 13, 
3331-3339(2005). 
140. R. Köhler, A. Tredicucci, F. Beltram, H. E. Beere, E. H. Linfield, A. G. Davies, 
D. A. Ritchie, R. C. Iotti, and F. Rossi, "Terahertz semiconductor-heterostructure 
laser," Nature, 417, 156-159 (2002). 
141. M. Rochat, L. Ajili, H. Willenberg, J. Faist, H. Beere, G. Davies, E. Linfield, and 
D. Ritchie, "Low-threshold terahertz quantum-cascade lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 
1381-1383(2002). 
142. B. S. Williams, H. Callebaut, S. Kumar, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "3.4-THz quantum 
cascade laser based on longitudinal-optical-phonon scattering for depopulation," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 82, 1015-1017 (2003). 
143. R. Köhler, A. Tredicucci, F. Beltram, H. E. Beere, E. H. Linfield, A. G. Davies, 
D. A. Ritchie, S. S. Dhillon, and C. Sirtori, "High-performance continuous-wave 
operation of superlattice terahertz quantum-cascade lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 
1518-1520(2003). 
144. S. Barbieri, J. Alton, S. S. Dhillon, H. E. Beere, M. Evans, E. H. Linfield, A. G. Davies, 
D. A. Ritchie, R. Köhler, A. Tredicucci, and F. Beltram, "Continuous-wave operation of 
tehahertz quantum-cascade lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 39, 586-591 (2003). 
145. G. Scalari, L. Ajili, J. Faist, H. Beere, E. Linfield, D. Ritchie, and G. Davies, "Far-infrared 
(λ ~ 87 μπι) bound-to-continuum quantum-cascade lasers operating up to 90K," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 82, 3165-3167 (2003). 
146. H. Callebaut, S. Kumar, B. S. Williams, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "Analysis of transport 
properties of tetrahertz quantum cascade lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 207-209 (2003). 
147. B. S. Williams, S. Kumar, H. Callebaut, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "Terahertz quantum-
cascade laser at λ w 100 μηι using metal waveguide for mode confinement," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 83, 2124-2126 (2003). 
148. B. S. Williams, S. Kumar, H. Callebaut, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "Terahertz quantum-
cascade laser operating up to 137K," Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 5142-5144 (2003). 
149. G. Scalari, N. Hoyler, M. Giovannini, and J. Faist, "Terahertz bound-to-continuum 
quantum-cascade lasers based on optical-phonon scattering extraction," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 86, 181101 (2005). 
150. C. Worrall, J. Alton, M. Houghton, S. Barbieri, H. E. Beere, D. Ritchie, and C. Sirtori, 
"Continuous wave operation of a superlattice quantum cascade laser emitting at 2 THz," 
Opt. Express, 14, 171-181 (2006). 
151. B. S. Willimas, S. Kumar, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "High-power terahertz quantum-
cascade lasers," Electron. Lett. 42, 89-91 (2006). 
152. G. Scalari, C. Walther, J. Faist, H. Beere, and D. Ritchie, "Electrically switchable, two-
color quantum cascade laser emitting at 1.39 and 2.3 THz," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 141102 
(2006). 
153. S. Kumar, B. S. Williams, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "1.9 THz quantum-cascade lasers with 
one-well injector," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 121123 (2006). 

594 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
154. C. Walther, G. Scalari, J. Faist, H. Beere, and D. Ritchie, "Low frequency terahertz 
quantum cascade laser operating from 1.6 to 1.8 THz," Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 231121 
(2006). 
155. Y. Chassagneux, J. Palomo, R. Colombelli, S. Barbieri, S. Dhillon, C. Sirtori, H. Beere, 
J. Alton, and D. Ritchie, "Low threshold THz QC lasers with thin core regions," Electron. 
Lett. 43, 41-42(2007). 
156. A. W. M. Lee, Q. Qin, S. Kumar, B. S. Williams, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "High-power 
and high-temperature THz quantum-cascade lasers based on lens-coupled metal-metal 
waveguides," Opt. Lett. 32, 2840-2842 (2007). 
157. R. Köhler, R. C. Iotti, A. Tredicucci, and F. Rossi, "Design and simulation of terahertz 
quantum cascade lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 3920-3922 (2001). 
158. S.-C. Lee and A. Wacker, 'Theoretical analysis of spectral gain in a terahertz quantum-
cascade laser: Prospects for gain at 1 THz," Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 2506-2508 (2003). 
159. C. Jirauschek, G. Scarpa, P. Lugli, M. S. Vitiello, and G. Scamarcio, "Comparative 
analysis of resonant phonon THz quantum cascade lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 101, 086109 
(2007). 
160. S. Kumar, B. S. Williams, Q. Qin, A. W. M. Lee, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "Surface-emit-
ting distributed feedback terahertz quantum-cascade lasers in metal-metal waveguides," 
Opt. Express, 15, 113-128 (2007). 
161. O. Demichel, L. Mahler, T. Losco, C. Mauro, R. Green, J. Xu, A. Tredicucci, F. Beltram, 
H. E. Beere, D. A. Ritchie, and V. Tamosiflnas, "Surface plasmon photonic structures in 
terahertz quantum cascade lasers," Opt. Express, 14, 5335-5345 (2006). 
162. A. W. M. Lee, Q. Qin, S. Kumar, B. S. Williams, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "Real-time 
terahertz imaging over a standoff distance (>25 meters)," Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 
141125 (2006). 
163. A. W. M. Lee, B. S. Williams, S. Kumar, Q. Hu, and J. L. Reno, "Real-time imaging 
using a 4.2-ΤΉζ quantum cascade laser and a 320 x 240 microbolometer focal-plane 
array," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 18, 1415-1417 (2006). 
164. R. Q. Yang, "Infrared laser based on intersubband transitions in quantum wells," 
Superlattices Microstruc. 77, 77-83 (1995). 
165. C.-H. Lin, R. Q. Yang, D. Zhang, S. J. Murry, S. S. Pei, A. A. Allerma, and S. R. Kurtz, 
'Type-II interband quantum cascade laser at 3.8 (im," Electron. Lett. 33, 598-599 
(1997). 
166. J. R. Meyer, I. Vurgaftman, R. Q. Yang, and L. R. Ram-Mohan, "Type-Π and type-I 
interband cascade lasers," Electron. Lett. 32, 45-46 (1996). 
167. I. Vurgaftman, J. R. Meyer, and L. R. Ram-Mohan, "High-power/low-threshold type-II 
interband cascade mid-IR laser-design and modeling," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 9, 
170-172(1997). 
168. R. Q. Yang, C. J. Hill, K. Mansour, Y. Qiu, A. Soibel, R. E. Müller, and P. M. 
Echternach, "Distributed feedback mid-IR interband cascade lasers at thermoelectric 
cooler temperatures," IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 13, 1074-1078 (2007). 
169. G. Liu and S. L. Chuang, "Modeling of Sb-based type-Π quantum-cascade lasers," Phys. 
Rev. B, 65, 165220 (2002). 
170. C. L. Canedy, W. W. Bewley, M. Kim, C. S. Kim, J. A. Nolde, D. C. Larrabee, 
J. R. Lindle, I. Vurgaftman, and J. R. Meyer, "High-temperature interband cascade 
lasers emitting at λ = 3.6-4.3 μπι," Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 181120 (2007). 

REFERENCES 
595 
171. W. W. Bewley, C. L. Canedy, M. Kim, C. S. Kim, J. A. Nolde, J. R. Lindle, 
I. Vurgaftman, and J. R. Meyer, "Interband cascade laser operating to 269K at λ = 
4.05 (im," Electron. Lett. 43, 39-40 (2007). 
172. N. Holonyak Jr., "Is the light emitting diode (LED) an ultimate lamp?" Am. J. Phys. 68, 
864-866 (2000). 
173. N. Holonyak Jr., "From transistors to lasers and light-emitting diodes," MRS Bull. 30, 
509-517 (2005). 
174. E. F. Schubert, Light-Emitting Diodes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
2003. 
175. I. Akasaki and H. Amano, "Widegap column-Ill nitride semiconductors for UV/blue 
light emitting devices," J. Electrochem. Soc. 141, 2266-2271 (1994). 
176. S. Nakamura, M. Senoh, S. Nagahama, N. Iwasa, T. Yamada, T. Mukai, Y. Sugimoto, 
and H. Kiyoku, "Room-temperature continuous-wave operation of InGaN multi-
quantum-well structure laser diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 4056-4058 (1996). 
177. S. Nakamura, "GaN-based blue/green semiconductor laser," IEEE J. Select. Topics 
Quantum Electron. 3, 435-442 (1997). 
178. S. Nakamura, "RT-CW operation of InGaN multi-quantum-well structure laser diodes," 
Mater. Sei. Eng. B. 50, 277-284 (1997). 
179. S. Nakamura, "Materials issues for InGaN-based lasers," J. Elect. Mater. 27, 160-165 
(1998). 
180. S. Nakamura and G. Fasol, The Blue Laser Diode, Springer, Berlin, 1997. 
181. M. Hasse, J. Qiu, J. DePuydt, and H. Cheng, "Blue-green laser diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
59, 1272-1274,(1991). 
182. H. Jeon, J. Ding, W. Patterson, A. V. Nurmikko, W. Xie, D. C. Grillo, M. Kobayashi, and 
R. L. Gunshor, "Blue-green injection laser diodes in (Zn,Cd)Se/ZnSe quantum wells," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 3619-3621 (1991). 
183. N. Nakamura, S. Itoh, K. Nakano, H. Okuyama, M. Ozawa, A. Ishibashi, M. Ikeda, and 
Y. Mori, "Room temperature continuous operation of blue-green laser diodes," Electron. 
Lett. 29, 1488-1489(1993). 
184. S. Taniguchi, T. Hino, S. Itoh, K. Nakano, N. Nakayama, A. Ishibashi, and M. Ikeda, 
"100 h II-VI blue-green laser diode," Electron. Lett. 32, 552 (1996). 
185. S. L. Chuang, M. Ukita, S. Kijima, S. Taniguchi, and A. Ishibashi, "Universal curves for 
optical power degradation of II-VI light-emitting diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 
1588-1590(1996). 
186. T. Matsuoka, "InGaAIN and II-VI systems for blue-green light emitting devices," Adv. 
Mater. 8, 469-479 (1996). 
187. A. Nurmikko and R. L. Gunshor, "Blue and green semiconductor lasers: a status report," 
Semicond. Sei. Technol. 12, 1337-1347 (1997). 
188. S. L. Chuang, and C. S. Chang, "k.p Method for strained wurtzite semiconductors," Phys. 
Rev B 54, 2491-2504 (1996). 
189. S. L. Chuang, "Optical gain of strained wurtzite GaN quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 32, 1791-1800 (1996). 
190. S. H. Park and S. L. Chuang, "Comparison of zinc-blende and wurtzite GaN semiconduc-
tors with spontaneous polarization and piezoelectric field effects," J. Appl. Phys. 87, 
353-364 (2000). 

596 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
191. I. Vurgaftman, J. R. Meyer, and L. R. Ram-Mohan, "Band parameters for III-V 
compound semiconductors and their alloys," J. Appl. Phys. 89, 5815-5875 (2001). 
192. I. Vurgaftman, and J. R. Meyer, "Band parameters for nitrogen-containing semiconduc-
tors," J. Appl. Phys. 94, 3675-3696 (2003). 
193. K. H. Hellwege, Landolt-Börnstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in 
Science and Technology, New Series, Group ΠΙ, vol. 17a, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 
1982; Physics of Group IV Elements and III-V Compounds, vol. 22a, Springer 
Verlag, Berlin, 1986. 
194. J. H. Edgar, Ed., Properties of Group III Nitrides, INSPEC, ΓΕΕ, London, 1994. 
195. J. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, K. M. Yu, J. W. Ager III, E. E. Haller, H. Lu, W. J. Schaff, 
Y. Saito, Y. Nanishi, "Unusual properties of the fundamental band gap of InN," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 80, 3967-3969 (2002). 
196. J. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, K. M. Yu, J. W. Ager III, E. E. Haller, H. Lu, and W. J. Schaff,, 
"Small bandgap bowing in In!_xGaxN," Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3967-3969 (2002). 
197. J. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, W. Shan, K. M. Yu, J. W. Ager ΙΠ, S. X. Li, E. E. Haller, 
H. Lu, and W. J. Schaff, "Temperature dependence of the fundamental band gap of 
InN," J. Appl. Phys. 94, 4457-4460 (2003). 
198. D. P. Bour, M. Kneissl, L. T. Romano, M. McCluskey, C. G. Van de Walle, B. S. Krusor, 
R. Donaldson, J. Walker, C. Dunnrowicz, and N. M. Johnson, "Characteristics of InGaN/ 
AlGaN multiple quantum well laser diodes," IEEEJ. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 4, 
498-504 (1998). 
199. S. F. Chichibu, A. C. Abare, M. P. Mack, M. S. Minsky, T. Deguchi, D. Cohen, P. Kozodoy, 
S. B. Fleischer, S. Keller, J. S. Speck, J. E. Bowers, E. Hu, U. K. Mishra, L. A. Coldren, 
S. P. DenBaars, K. Wada, T. Sota, and S. Nakamura, "Optical properties of InGaN 
quantum wells," Mater. Sei. Eng. B 59, 298-306 (1999). 
200. S. Nakamura, M. Senoh, S. Nagahama, N. Iwasa, T. Matsushita, and T. Mukai, "Blue 
InGaN-based laser diodes with an emission wavelength of 450 nm," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
76, 22-24 (2000). 
201. N. M. Johnson, A. V. Nurmikko, and S. P. DenBaars, "Blue diode laser," Physics Today. 
33, 31 (2000). 
202. T. Asano, T. Tojyo, T. Mizuno, M. Takeya, S. Ikeda, K. Shibuya, T. Hino, S. Uchida, and 
M. Ikeda, "100-mW kink-free blue-violet laser diodes with low aspect ratio," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 39, 135-140 (2003). 
203. S. Uchida, M. Takeya, S. Ikeda, T. Mizuno, T. Fujimoto, O. Matsumoto, S. Goto, 
T. Tojyo, and M. Ikeda, "Recent progress in high-power blue-violet lasers," IEEE J. 
Sei. Topics Quantum Electron. 9, 1252-1259 (2003). 
204. S. Nagahama, Y. Sugimoto, T. Kozaki, and T. Mukai, "Recent progress of AlInGaN laser 
diodes," Proc. SPIE, 5738, 57-62 (2005). 
205. M. Asif Khan, M. Shatalov, H. P. Maruska, H. M. Wang, and. E. Kuokstis, "ΠΙ-nitride 
UV devices," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 44, 7191-7206 (2005). 
206. T. Kozaki, H. Matsumura, Y. Sugimoto, S. Nagahama, and T. Mukai, "High-power and 
wide wavelength range GaN-baser laser diodes," Proc. SPIE. 6133, 613306-1 (2006). 
207. H. Y. Ryu, K. H. Ha, S. N. Lee, T. Jang, H. K. Kim, J. H. Chae, K. S. Kim, K. K. Choi, 
J. K. Son, H. S. Paek, Y. J. Sung, T. Sakong, O. H. Nam, and Y. J. Park, "Highly stable 
temperature characteristics of InGaN blue laser diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 031122 
(2006). 

REFERENCES 
597 
208. S. N. Lee, S. Y. Cho, H. Y. Ryu, J. K. Son, H. S. Paek, T. Sakong, T. Jang, K. K. Choi, 
K. H. Ha, M. H. Yang, O. H. Nam, Y. Park, and E. Yoon, "High-power GaN-based blue-
violet laser diodes with AlGaN/GaN multiquantum barriers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 
111101 (2006). 
209. M. Ohta, Y. Ohizumi, Y. Hoshina, T. Tanaka, Y. Yabuki, K. Funato, S. Tomiya, S. Goto, and 
M. Dceda, "High-power pure blue laser diodes," Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 206,2068-2072 (2007). 
210. H. Y. Ryu, K. H. Haleem, S. N. Lee, T. Jang, J. K. Son, H. S. Paek, Y. J. Sung, 
H. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, O. H. Nam, Y. J. Park, and J. I. Shim, "High-performance blue 
InGaN laser diodes with single-quantum-well active layers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 
19, 1717-1719(2007). 
211. A. C. Tamboli, E. D. Haberer, R. Sharma, K. H. Lee, S. Nakamura, and E. L. Hu, "Room-
temperature continuous-wave lasing in GaN/InGaN microdisks," Nat. Photonics 1, 
61-64(2007). 
212. T. C. Lu, C. C. Kao, H. C. Kuo, G. S. Huang, S. C. Wang, "CW lasing of current 
injection blue GaN-based vertical cavity surface emitting laser," Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 
141102(2008). 
213. J. F. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals: Their Representation by Tensors and Matrices, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1985. 
214. A. E. H. Love, A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, pp. 151-160, Dover, 
New York, 1944. 
215. M. Suzuki, T. Uenoyama, and A. Yanase, "First-principles calculations of effective-mass 
parameters of A1N and GaN," Phys. Rev. B 52, 8132 (1995). 
216. M. Kumagai, S. L. Chuang, and H. Ando, "Analytical solutions of the block-
diagonalized Hamiltonian for strained wurtzite semiconductors," Phys. Rev. B 57, 
15303-15314(1998). 
217. M. Suzuki and T. Uenoyama, "Reduction of threshold current density of wurtzite GaN/ 
AlGaN quantum well lasers by uniaxial strain in (0001) plane," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 35, 
L953-L955 (1996). 
218. S. L. Chuang, and C. S. Chang, "Effective-mass Hamiltonian for strained wurtzite GaN 
and analytical solutions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 68, 1657-1659 (1996). 
219. A. Niwa, T. Ohtoshi and T. Kuroda, "Tight-binding analysis of the optical matrix element 
in wurtzite- and zincblende-GaN quantum wells," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 35, L599-L601 
(1996). 
220. F. Jain and W. Huang, "Modeling of optical gain in InGaN-AlGaN and InxGa!_xN-
InyGa^yN quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 32, 859-864 (1996). 
221. S. L. Chuang, and C. S. Chang, "A band-structure model of strained quantum-well wurt-
zite semiconductors," Semicond. Sei. Technol. 12, 252-263 (1997). 
222. Y. C. Yeo, T. C. Chong, M. F. Li, and W. J. Fan, "Analysis of optical gain and threshold 
current density of wurtzite InGaN/GaN/AlGaN quantum well lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 84, 
1813-1819(1998). 
223. S. H. Park and S. L. Chuang, "Piezoelectric fields on electrical and optical 
properties of wurtzite GaN/AlGaN quantum-well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 
3103-3105 (1998). 
224. S. H. Park and S. L. Chuang, "Crystal-orientation effects on the piezoelectric field 
and electronic properties of strained wurtzite semiconductors," Phys. Rev. B 59, 
4725-4737 (1999). 

598 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
225. J. Y. Chang and Y. K. Kuo, "Simulation of blue InGaN quantum-well lasers," J. Appl. 
Phys. 93, 4992-4998 (2003). 
226. S. J. Huang, and S. T. Yen, "Improvement in threshold of InGaN/GaN quantum-well 
lasers by p-type modulation doping," J. Appl. Phys. 102, 113103 (2007). 
227. S. H. Park, D. Ahn, and S. L. Chuang, "Electronic and optical properties of a- and 
m-plane wurtzite InGaN-GaN quantum wells," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 43, 
1175-1182(2007). 
228. R. A. Arif, Y. K. Ee, and N. Tansu, "Polarization engineering via staggered InGaN 
quantum wells for radiative efficiency enhancement of light emitting diodes," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 91, 091110 (2007). 
229. R. Dingle, D. D. Sell, S. E. Stokowski, and M. Ilegems, "Absorption, reflectance, and 
luminescence of GaN epitaxial layers," Phys. Rev. B 4, 1211 -1218 (1971). 
230. F. P. Kesamanly, "Gallium nitride: band structure, properties, and potential applications 
(review)," Sov. Phys. Semicond. 8, 147-156 (1974). 
231. N. E. Christensen and I. Gorczyca, "Optical and structural properties of HI-V nitrides 
under pressure," Phys. Rev. B 50, 4397-4415 (1994). 
232. C. Wetzel, T. Takeuchi, S. Yamaguchi, H. Katoh, H. Amano, and I. Akasaki, "Optical 
band gap in Gai_xInxN (0 < x < 0.2) on GaN by photoreflection spectroscopy," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 73, 1994-1996 (1998). 
233. S. J. Hwang, W. Shan, R. J. Hauenstein, J. J. Song, M.-E. Lin, S. Suite, B. N. Sverdlov, 
and H. Morko9, "Photoluminescence of zinc-blende GaN under hydrostatic pressure," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 2928-2930 (1994). 
234. W. Shan, T. J. Schmidt, X. H. Yang, S. J. Hwang, J. J. Song, and B. Goldenberg, 
'Temperature dependence of interband transitions in GaN grown by metalorganic chemi-
cal vapor deposition," Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 985-987 (1995). 
235. W. Shan, T. J. Schmidt, R. J. Hauenstein, J. J. Song, and B. Goldenberg, "Pressure-
dependent photoluminescence study of wurtzite GaN," Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 
3492-3494 (1995). 
236. B. Gil, O. Briot, and R.-L. Aulombard, "Valence-band physics and the optical properties 
of GaN epilayers grown onto sapphire with wurtzite symmetry," Phys. Rev. B 52, 
R17028-R17031 (1995). 
237. S. Chichibu, T. Azuhata, T. Sota, and S. Nakamura, "Excitonic emissions from hexagonal 
GaN epitaxial layers," J. Appl. Phys. 79, 2784-2786 (1996). 
238. K. Kim, W. R. L. Lambrecht, and B. Segall, "Elastic constants and related properties 
of tetrahedrally bonded BN, A1N, GaN, and InN," Phys. Rev. B 53, 16310-16326 
(1996). 
239. K. Kim, W. R. L. Lambrecht, B. Segall, and M. Schilfgaarde, "Effective masses and 
valence-band splittings in GaN and A1N," Phys. Rev. B 56, 7363-7375 (1997). 
240. A. Shikanai, T. Azuhata, T. Sota, S. Chichibu, A. Kuramata, K. Horino, and 
S. Nakamura, "Biaxial strain dependence of exciton resonance energies in wurtzite 
GaN," J. Appl. Phys. 81, 417-424 (1997). 
241. S. Chichbu, H. Okumura, S. Nakamura, G. Feuillet, T. Azuhata, T. Sota, and S. Yoshida, 
"Exciton spectra of cubic and hexagonal GaN epitaxial films," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 36, 
1976-1983(1997). 

REFERENCES 
599 
242. D. L. Smith and C. Mailhiot, "Piezoelectric effects in strained-layer superlattices," 
J. Appl. Phys. 63, 2717-2719 (1988). 
243. A. Bykhovski, B. Gelmont, and M. Shur, "Strain and charge distribution in GaN-AlN-
GaN semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor structure for arbitrary growth orientation," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 63, 2243-2245 (1993). 
244. A. Bykhovski, B. Gelmont, and M. Shur, "The influence of the strain-induced electric 
field on the charge distribution in GaN-AlN-GaN structure," J. Appl. Phys. 74, 
6734-6739 (1993). 
245. A. Bykhovski, B. Gelmont, M. Shur, and A. Khan, "Current-voltage characteristics of 
strained piezoelectric structures," J. Appl. Phys. 77, 1616-1620 (1995). 
246. A. Bykhovski, B. L. Gelmont, and M. S. Shur, "Elastic strain relaxation and piezoeffect 
in GaN-AIN, GaN-AlGaN and GaN-InGaN superlattices," J. Appl. Phys. 81, 6332-6338 
(1997). 
247. T. Takeuchi, S. Sota, M. Katsuragawa, M. Komori, H. Takeuchi, H. Amano, and 
I. Akasaki, "Quantum-confined Stark effect due to piezoelectric fields in GalnN strained 
quantum wells," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 36 (Part 2), L382-L385 (1997). 
248. T. Takeuchi, H. Takeuchi, S. Sota, H. Sakai, H. Amano, and I. Akasaki, "Optical 
properties of strained AlGaN and GalnN on GaN," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 36 (Part 2), 
L177-L179 (1997). 
249. F. Bernardini and V. Fiorentini, "Polarization-based calculation of the dielectric tensor of 
polar crystals," Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3958-3961 (1997). 
250. F. Bernardini, V. Fiorentini, and D. Venderbilt, "Spontaneous polarization and piezoelec-
tric constants of III-V nitrides," Phys. Rev. B 56, R10024-R10027 (1997). 
251. T. Takeuchi, C. Wetzel, S. Yamaguchi, H. Sakai, H. Amano, I. Akasaki, Y. Kaneko, 
S. Nakagawa, Y. Yamaoka, and N. Yamada, "Determination of piezoelectric fields in 
strained GalnN quantum wells using the quantum-confined Stark effect," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 73, 1691-1693(1998). 
252. S. F. Chichibu, A. C. Abare, M. S. Minsky, S. Keller, S. B. Fleichser, J. E. Bowers, 
E. Hu, U. K. Mishra, L. A. Coldren, S. P. DenBarrs, and T. Sota, "Effective band gap 
inhomogeneity and piezoelectric field in InGaN/GaN multiquantum well structures," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 2006-2008 (1998). 
253. H. S. Kim, J. Y. Lin, H. X. Jiang, W. W. Chow, A. Botchkarev, and H. Morkoc, 
"Piezoelectric effects on the optical properties of GaN/AlxGa!_xN multiple quantum 
wells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 3426-3428 (1998). 
254. R. Langer, J. Simon, V. Ortiz, N. T. Pelekanos, A. Barski, R. Andre, and M. Godlewski, 
"Giant electric fields in unstrained GaN single quantum wells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 
3827-3829 (1999). 
255. F. Bernardini and V. Fiorentini, "Macroscopic polarization and band offsets at nitride 
heterojunctions," Phys. Rev. B 57, R9427-R9430 (1998). 
256. O. Ambacher, J. Smart, J. R. Shealy, N. G. Weimann, K. Chu, M. Murphy, W. J. Schaff, 
L. F. Eastman, R. Dimitrov, L. Wittmer, M. Stutzmann, W. Rieger, and J. Hilsenbeck, 
"Two-dimensional electron gases induced by spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization 
charges in N- and Ga-face AlGaNGaN heterostructures," J. Appl. Phys. 85, 3222-3233 
(1999). 
257. O. Ambacher, J. Smart, J. R. Shealy, N. G. Weimann, K. Chu, M. Murphy, W. J. Schaff, 
L. F. Eastman, R. Dimitrov, L. Wittmer, M. Stutzmann, W. Rieger, and J. Hilsenbeck, 

600 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
"Two-dimensional electron gases by spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization charges 
in N- and Ga-face AlGaN/GaN heterostructures," J. Appl. Phys. 85, 3222-3233 (1999). 
258. S. H. Park and S. L. Chuang, "Spontaneous polarization effects in wurtzite GaN/AlGaN 
quantum wells and comparison with experiment," Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 1981-1983 
(2000). 
259. O. Ambacher, J. Majewski, C. Miskys, A. Link, M. Hermann, M. Eickhoff, 
M. Stutzmann, F. Bernardini, V. Fiorentini, V. Tilak, B. Schaff and L. F. Eastman 
"Pyroelectric properties of Al (In) GaN/GaN hetero and quantum well structure," 
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 14, 3399-3434 (2002). 
260. S. Tripathy, R. K. Soni, H. Asahi, K. Iwata, R. Kuroiwa, K. Asami, and S. Gonda, 
"Optical properties of GaN layers grown on C-, A-, R-, and M-plane sapphire substrates 
by gas source molecular beam epitaxy," J. Appl. Phys. 85, 8386-8399 (1999). 
261. P. Waltereit, O. Brandt, A. Trampert, H. T. Grahn, J. Menniger, M. Ramsteiner, 
M. Reiche, and K. H. Ploog, "Nitride semiconductors free of electrostatic fields for effi-
cient white-light-emitting diodes," Nature 406, 865-868 (2000). 
262. P. Waltereit, O. Brandt, M. Ramsteiner, and K. H. Ploog, "M-plane GaN(l I 00): A way 
to evade electrical polarization in nitrides," Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 180, 133 (2000). 
263. S. Ghosh, P. Waltereit, O. Brandt, H. T. Grahn, and K. H. Ploog, "Electronic band 
structure of wurtzite GaN under biaxial strain in the M plane investigated with photo-
reflectance spectroscopy," Phys. Rev. B 65, 075202 (2002). 
264. S. Ghosh, O. Brandt, H. T. Grahn, and K. H. Ploog, "Strained M-plane GaN for the 
realization of polarization-sensitive photodetectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 3380-3382 
(2002). 
265. Y. J. Sun, O. Brandt, U. Jahn, T. Y. Liu, A. Trampert, S. Cronenberg, S. Dhar, and 
K. H. Ploog, "Impact of nucleation conditions on the structural and optical properties 
of M-plane GaN(l I 00) grown on 7-LiA102," /. Appl. Phys. 92, 5714-5719 (2002). 
266. N. F. Gardner, J. C. Kim, J. J. Wierer, Y. C. Shen, and M. R. Krames, "Polarization 
anisotropy in the electroluminescence of m-plane InGaN-GaN multiple-quantum-well 
light-emitting diodes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 111101 (2005). 
267. B. A. Haskell, T. J. Baker, M. B. McLaurin, F. Wu, P. T. Fini, S. P. DenBaars, 
J. S. Speck, and S. Nakamura, "Defect reduction in (1 Ϊ 00) m-plane gallium nitride 
via lateral epitaxial overgrowth by hydride vapor phase epitaxy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 
111917(2005). 
268. K. Okamoto, H. Ohta, S. F. Chichibu, J. Ichihara, and H. Takasu, "Continuous-wave 
operation of m-plane InGaN multiple quantum well laser diodes," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
46, L187-L189 (2007). 
269. A. Chakraborty, B. A. Haskell, S. Keller, J. S. Speck, S. P. DenBaars, S. Nakamura, and 
U. K. Mishra, "Demonstration of nonpolar m-plane InGaN/GaN light-emitting 
diodes on free-standing m-plane GaN substrates," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 44, L173-L175 
(2005). 
270. M. C. Schmidt, K. C. Kim, R. M. Farrell, D. F. Feezell, D. A. Cohen, M. Saito, K. Fujito, 
J. S. Speck, S. P. DenBaars, and S. Nakamura, "Demonstration of nonpolar m-plane 
InGaN/GaN laser diodes," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 46, L190-L191 (2007). 
271. R. M. Farrell, D. F. Feezell, M. C. Schmidt, D. A. Haeger, K. M. Kelchner, K. Iso, 
H. Yamada, M. Saito, K. Fujito, D. A. Cohen, J. S. Speck, S. P. DenBaars, and 

REFERENCES 
601 
S. Nakamura, "Continuous-wave operation of AlGaN-cladding-free nonpolar m-plane 
InGaN/GaN laser diodes," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 46, L761-L763 (2007). 
272. M. C. Schmidt, K. C. Kim, H. Sato, N. Fellows, H. Masui, S. Nakamura, S. P. DenBaars, 
and J. S. Speck, "High power and high external efficiency m-plane InGaN light emitting 
diodes," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 46, L126-L128 (2007). 
273. D. F. Feezell, M. C. Schmidt, R. M. Farrell, K. C. Kim, M. Saito, K. Fujito, D. A. Cohen, 
J. S. Speck, S. P. DenBaars, and S. Nakamura, "AlGaN-cladding-free nonpolar InGaN/ 
GaN laser diodes," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 46, L284-L286 (2007). 
274. A. Tyagi, H. Zhong, R. B. Chung, D. F. Feezell, M. Saito, K. Fujito, J. S. Speck, 
S. P. DenBaars, S. Nakamura, "Semipolar (10ΪΪ) InGaN/GaN laser diodes on bulk 
GaN substrates," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 46, L444-L445 (2007). 
275. F. Wu, M. D. Craven, S. H. Lim, and J. S. Speck, "Polarity determination of a-plane GaN 
on r-plane sapphire and its effects on lateral overgrowth and heteroepitaxy," J. Appl. 
Phys. 94, 942-947 (2003). 
276. A. Chitnis, C. Chen, V. Adivarahan, M. Shatalov, E. Kuokstis, V. Mandavilli, J. Yang, 
and M. A. Khan, "Visible light-emitting diodes using a-plane GaN-InGaN multiple 
quantum wells over r-plane sapphire," Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 3663-3665 (2004). 
277. M. D. Craven, S. H. Lim, F. Wu, J. S. Speck, and S. P. DenBaars, "Structural character-
ization of nonpolar (1120) a-plane GaN thin films grown on (1 Ϊ 02) r-plane sapphire," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 469-471 (2002). 
278. M. D. Craven, P. Waltereit, F. Wu, J. S. Speck, and S. P. DenBaars, "Characterization of 
a-plane GaN/(Al,Ga)N multiple quantum wells grown via metalorganic chemical vapor 
Deposition," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 2 42, L235-L238 (2003). 
279. M. D. Craven, P. Waltereit, J. S. Speck, and S. P. DenBaars, "Well-width dependence of 
photoluminescence emission from a-plane GaN/AlGaN multiple quantum wells," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 84, 496-498 (2004). 
280. H. Sato, A. Tyagi, H. Zhong, N. Fellows, R. B. Chung, M. Saito, K. Fujito, J. S. Speck, 
S. P. Denbaars, S. Nakamura, "High power and high efficiency green light emitting diode 
on free-standing semipolar (1122) bulk GaN substrate," Phys. Stat. Sol. (RRL). 1, 
162-164(2007). 
281. D. R. Scifres, W. Streifer, and R. D. Burnham, "High-power coupled-multiple-stripe 
phase-locked injection laser," Appl. Phys. Lett. 34, 259-261 (1979). 
282. D. R. Scifres, R. D. Burnham, C. Lindström, W. Streifer, and T. L. Paoli, "Phase-locked 
(GaAl)As laser emitting 1.5 W cw per mirror," Appl. Phys. Lett. 42, 645-647 (1983). 
283. J. K. Butler, D. E. Ackley, and D. Botez, "Coupled-mode analysis of phase-
locked injection laser arrays," Appl. Phys. Lett. 44, 293-295, 1984; and Erratum, 44, 
935 (1984). 
284. S. Wang, J. Z. Wilcox, M. Jansen, and J. J. Yang, "In-phase locking in diffraction-
coupled phased-array diode lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 48, 1770-1772 (1986). 
285. W. Streifer, M. Orsinski, D. R. Scifres, D. F. Welch and P. S. Cross, "Phased-array lasers 
with a uniform, stable supermode," Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 1496-1498 (1986). 
286. W. Streifer, P. S. Cross, D. F. Welch, and D. R. Scifres, "Analysis of a Y-junction semi-
conductor laser array," Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 58-60 (1986). 
287. E. Kapon, Z. Rav-Noy, S. Margalit, and A. Yariv, "Phase-locked arrays of buried-ridge 
InP/InGaAsP diode lasers," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 919-925 (1986). 

602 
ADVANCED SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
288. G. R. Hadley, J. P. Hohimer, and A. Owyoung, "High-order (v > 10) eigenmodes in ten-
stripe gain-guided diode laser arrays," Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 684-686 (1986). 
289. W. K. Marshall and J. Katz, "Direct analysis of gain-guided phase-locked semiconductor 
laser arrays," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 827-832 (1986). 
290. I. J. Mawst, D. Botez, T. J. Roth, G. Peterson, and J. J. Yang, "Diffraction-coupled, 
phase-locked arrays of antiguided, quantum-well lasers grown by metalorganic chemical 
vapour deposition," Electron. Lett. 24, 958-959 (1988). 
291. D. Botez, L. Mawst, P. Hayashida, G. Peterson, and T. J. Roth, "High-power, diffraction-
limited-beam operation from phase-locked diode-laser arrays of closely spaced "leaky" 
waveguides (antiguides)," Appl. Phys. Lett. 53, 464-466 (1988). 
292. G. R. Hadley, "Index-guided arrays with a large index step," Opt. Lett. 14, 308-310 (1989). 
293. D. Botez, L. J. Mawst, G. L. Peterson, and T. J. Roth, "Phase-locked arrays of antiguides: 
modal content and discrimination," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 482-495 (1990). 
294. M. Sakamoto, J. G. Endriz, and D. R. Scifres, "120 W CW output power from a mono-
lithic AlGaAs (800 nm) laser diode array mounted on a diamond heat sink," Electron. 
Lett. 28, 197-199(1992). 
295. M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Eds., Handbook of Mathematical Functions, Dover, 
New York, 1972. 

Part IV 
Modulation of Light 


12 
Direct Modulation of Semiconductor Lasers 
For a semiconductor laser, the output power of light intensity PaM increases linearly 
with the injection current above threshold as discussed in Section 10.1, Eq. (10.1.21), 
P«* = Vi 
r — ( / - / * ) ■ 
(12.1.1) 
Therefore, for an injection current with a dc component and a small signal ac modu-
lation, Fig. 12.1, 
I = I0 + i(f), 
(12.1.2) 
we expect the optical output power to have corresponding dc and ac components 
Pout(t) = Po + P(t). 
(12.1.3) 
In this chapter, we study the direct current modulation of diode lasers and some 
intrinsic effects such as relaxation oscillations, modulation speed, and the laser line-
width theory. Our goal is to understand how the laser light output characteristics vary 
as we increase the modulation frequency of the injection current. 
12.1 RATE EQUATIONS AND LINEAR GAIN ANALYSIS 
Assume only one mode is lasing; the rate equations for the carrier density n(t) 
(1/cm3) and the photon density S(t) (1/cm3) can be written as [1-4] 
dn(t) 
J{t) 
n(t) 
-—-=η- 
— 
vgg(n)S(t) 
(12.1.4) 
at 
qd 
T 
^ i ) = rvgg(«)5(i)- — + /3/M") 
02·1·5) 
at 
TP 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
605 

DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
nP(t) = P0+p(f) 
Figure 12.1 For an injection current / = /o + i(t), the optical output power is P(t) = 
(7o, Po) is the bias point for the direct current modulation of the semiconductor laser. 
: Po + pit), where 
where 
n(t) = electron density (cm-3) 
τ/i = injection quantum efficiency 
q = unit charge (1.6 x 10 19 Coulomb) 
T = carrier lifetime (s) 
vg = c/ttg = the group velocity of light (cm/s) 
Γ = optical confinement factor 
^sp(n) = spontaneous emission rate per unit volume (cm-3 s"1) 
S(t) = photon density (cm 3) 
J = injection current density (A/cm2) 
d = thickness of the active region (cm) 
TP = photon lifetime (s) 
g(n) = the gain coefficient (cm ') 
j8 = the spontaneous emission factor. 
In the first rate equation for the carrier density, the first term ^J/qd is the injected 
number of carriers into the active layer per unit volume per second. The recom-
bination rate 
R(n) 
7{n) — An + R%p(n) + Cn 
(12.1.6) 
accounts for the carrier loss due to the radiative recombination from the spontaneous 
emission of photons 
„2 
Rsp(n) = Βη' 
(12.1.7) 
and nonradiative recombinations at defects (An) and the Auger processes (Cn3). The 
time constant τ generally depends on n but is assumed to be a constant for simplicity. 
The term vgg(n)S is the carrier loss due to stimulated emissions. 

12.1 
RATE EQUATIONS AND LINEAR GAIN ANALYSIS 
607 
In the second rate equation for photon density S, the first term Tvgg(n)S(t) is the 
increasing rate of the number of photons per unit volume due to the stimulated emis-
sion. The second term (—S/TP) is the decreasing rate of the photon density due to 
absorptions and transmission through the mirrors of the laser cavity. The photon life-
time in the cavity τρ is determined physically by the rate due to absorption and mirror 
transmission losses: 
vr^(a+bnR)- 
(12-L8) 
In other words, photons disappear from the cavity via absorption processes or trans-
mission out of the two end facets. The last term ßRsp is the fraction of spontaneous 
emission entering the lasing mode, which is generally very small. The ß factor in 
(12.1.5) includes the effect of optical confinement factor Γ. The spontaneous emis-
sion factor ß can be calculated with a simple analytical expression for index-
guided laser modes with a plane phase front [5]. For a gain-guided laser with a 
cylindrical constant phase front, the spontaneous emission is shown to be enhanced 
by another factor [6, 7]. 
Note that the optical confinement factor Γ appears only in (12.1.2). This is because 
the optical mode extends beyond the active region d by a factor d/T. The two 
rate equations ensure that the total photon and carrier numbers (not densities) are 
balanced taking into account difference in the occupied volumes by the carriers 
and photons (d vs. d/Γ). 
12.1.1 Linear Gain Theory 
If we assume the photon density S is not high so that the nonlinear gain saturation 
effect can be ignored, we have a simplified gain model 
g(n) = g(n0) + g'(n(t)-n0) 
(12.1.9) 
where g0 — g(n0), and g' = dg/dn is the differential gain at n = nQ. Assume 
J(t) = J0+j(t) 
n(t) = n0 + An(t) 
(12.1.10) 
S(t) = S0 + s(t) 
where j(t), An(t), and s(t) are small signals compared with their corresponding dc 
values, J0, n0, and S0, respectively. 
dc Solutions The photon density S0 and the carrier density n0 at steady state are 
So = 1
 ßRsp 
(12.1.11a) 
rvggo 
nü = T ( T , i ^ " V g g ° 5 ° ) · 
(12.1.11b) 

608 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
Note that for negligible ßRsp, the inverse photon lifetime is 
- ^ r V g g o 
(12.1.12) 
where go = g^ is pinned at threshold gain value above threshold. 
Small-Signal ac Analysis The small-signal equations are 
~An(t) = -η.^-^®.- 
vg[g'S0An(t) + g0s(t)] 
(12.1.13) 
at 
qd 
T 
^-s(t) = rvglg'S0An(t) + g0s(t)} - — . 
(12.1.14) 
at 
TP 
For a sinusoidal excitation, 
7(f) = Re[;(a))e-'w'] 
(12.1.15) 
the steady-state solution can be obtained by substituting the phasor notations in the 
frequency domain 
Δη(ί) = Re[An(w)e'iw'] 
(12.1.16) 
s(t) = Re[i(a>)e-""'] 
into (12.1.13) and (12.1.14). We find the complex amplitude Δη(ω) for the carrier 
density taking into account (12.1.12) 
Δη(ω)~ 
~"" s(a>) 
(12.1.17) 
Tvgg'^ü 
and the complex magnitude ί(ω) for the photon density 
s(co) _ 
^Fw^g'Sp/igd) 
7'(ω) 
oij: — ω2 — ίγω 
(12.1.18) 
Here we define ωΓ as: 
and a damping factor 
ω ^ Μ ^ 
(12.1.19) 
7~--fv gg'S 0. 
(12.1.20) 
T 

12.1 RATE EQUATIONS AND LINEAR GAIN ANALYSIS 
609 
The relaxation frequency / r is 
1 
/ν.σΛ^ 
(12.1.21) 
which is proportional to V^ö or the square root of the optical output power as it is 
linearly proportional to the photon density S0. 
12.1.2 Small-Signal Modulation Response 
The frequency response function is 
s(a>) 
, 
= \Μ(ώ)\βίφ<-ω) 
(12.1.22a) 
[(wj? - ω2)2 + γ 2« 2] 1' 2 
φ(ω) = tan"' (j^J) 
(12.1.22c) 
or in terms of the normalized response to the dc value 
Μ(ω) 
M(0) 
ω2 
[(ω2 - ω2)2 + y W ] ' / 2 
(12.1.23) 
which has a flat response at low frequencies (low pass) and peaks near ω = ωΓ, then 
rolls off as the frequency increases further. The exact peak position is to find the 
minimum of the denominator in the magnitude of the frequency response 
(12.1.22b). The resultant relaxation frequency peak will occur at a frequency close 
to that in (12.1.19). The 3-dB frequency f3dB (= ω3αΒ/2π) or bandwidth occurs 
when the magnitude of the modulation response is reduced by a factor of y/2. In 
other words, the denominator of (12.1.23) is -\/2ω2, or 
(«3dB - ω?)2 + 4 I B C- + Τρω?) = M 
(12.1 -24) 
for which the only unknown w3dB can be solved. 
Example 
The frequency response for a distributed feedback semiconductor laser [8] 
is shown in Fig. 12.2 for different optical output powers at 5, 10, 15, and 20 mW. The 
peak response occurs at the relaxation oscillation frequency/,, and decreases to —3 dB 
at/3dB compared with the normalized response at low frequencies (0 dB). The band-
width increases as the optical output power P0 increases with a y/Fö dependence 
because P0 is proportional to the photon density S0, as shown in Fig. 12.3. The 
3-dB frequency /3dB versus the square root of the output power y/P~ö are shown 

610 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
3 
6 
9 
12 
15 
18 
FREQUENCY (GHz) 
Figure 12.2 Small-signal frequency response of a distributed feedback laser at different light output 
powers. The submount temperature was 20°C. The peak response determines the relaxation frequency/r, 
and the -3-dB response gives the 3-dB frequency/,dB. (Reprinted with permission from f81 © 1989 
American Institute of Physics.) 
with the relaxation frequency/,.. Because the output power P0 is proportional to / -
/th, the plot/r versus y/I — /th also shows a linear relationship. Therefore,/r can also be 
plotted versus yjl — /th for semiconductor lasers and a linear relationship is shown 
[9]. Improvements of the modulation bandwidth using quantum wells and quantum 
wires or strained quantum wells have been discussed [4, 10, 11]. 
20 
16 
N 
X 
» 1 2 
>-
cj z 
ill 
8 8 
Id 
u. 
4 
0 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Figure 12.3 The relaxation oscillation frequency and the 3-dB bandwidth of the distributed feedback 
laser in Fig. 12.2 are plotted as a function of square root of light output power P. (Reprinted with permission 
from [81 © 1989 American Institute of Physics.) 
fjwe'V^e* 
3dB BANDWIDTH-
-RELAXATION 
OSCILLATION 
FREQUENCY (fr) 

12.2 
HIGH-SPEED MODULATION RESPONSE 
611 
12.2 HIGH-SPEED MODULATION RESPONSE WITH NONLINEAR 
GAIN SATURATION 
12.2.1 
Nonlinear Gain Saturation 
The nonlinear gain model gin, S) at high photon density S can be taken from [12, 13] 
gin, S) 
g("o) + g'(n(t) - no) 
1 + eS(t) 
(12.2.1) 
where g0 = g(n0) and g' = [dg/dn]n=nQ is the differential gain at n0. The factor 1 + 
eS accounts for nonlinear gain saturation, which is important when the photon 
density is large. The factor ε is called the gain suppression coefficient. 
dc Solution The steady-state solution at / = /o is obtained from d/dt = 0 in the 
rate equations 
Λ) 
«o . vggoSb 
V\—, = — + " 
' qd 
T 
1 + eS0 
^ vggo5o 
S0 
Γγ^;—^Γ = 
ßRspino). 
1 -I- eS0 
TP 
(12.2.2) 
(12.2.3) 
If ε φ 0, the general solution for S0 can be found analytically from (12.2.3) (see 
Problem 12.5). Then n0 is obtained from (12.2.2). 
Small Signal ac Analysis 
Using the linearized expression by substituting 
(12.1.10) into (12.2.1), we obtain 
gin, S) 
gino) 
g 
-An(t)--
go 
r es(t). 
\+sS0 
\+eS0 
~~" 
(1+eSo) 
The small signal ac responses Δη(ί) and sit) satisfy the following equations 
(12.2.4) 
d 
dt 
' An{t) 
sit) 
+ 
A 
D 
-C 
B 
Anit)' 
sit) 
= nJit)/qd 
o 
(12.2.5) 
where A, B, C, and D are defined as 
C = 
1
 
| 
Vgg^o 
T 
1 + eS0 
1+ε5ο 
B 
D 
1 
Tvggo 
Tp 
(1 + sSof 
vggQ 
(1 + eS0)2' 
(12.2.6) 

612 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
12.2.2 Sinusoidal Steady-State Solution of the Small-Signal Equations 
The small-signal response in the sinusoidal steady-state can be found from (12.2.5) 
and (12.2.6) by solving for s(w) in terms of j{u>). We replace d/dt by — ϊω and 
obtain two algebraic equations of the form 
(12.2.7) 
—id) + A 
-C 
D 
-ϊω + B 
Δ«(ω) 
s(w) 
ν,ΛωΙ 
0 
Therefore, solving for the small-signal photon density function, we find 
) = 
C7]J(w)/(qd) 
(-ia> + A)(-iü) + B) + CD' 
Define the relaxation frequency as 
ω2 = AB + CD 
vg£% 
, 1 
(12.2.8) 
TP(1 + BSQ) 
T 
Vgg% 
TP(1 + eS0) 
1 
r vgSo 
TP 
(1 + eS0y\ 
(12.2.9a) 
(12.2.9b) 
where the second term in (12.2.9a) is negligible compared with the leading term 
because 
B 
1 
Tvggo 
1_ 
rp 
(1 + ε50)2 
(1 + ε50) 
We define the damping factor 
y = A+B 
_ 1 , Vgg'So 
ε5θ , n^sp 
+ β 
L ' p 
So 
(12.2.10) 
T + ( l + e S 0 ) 
l + _ ? _ ^ . L f l 
^ 
Vgg'' 
+ ß Sod + eS0) 
1 Kf? 
(12.2.11a) 
(12.2.11b) 
where we have ignored the last term in (12.2.1 la) and a K factor (ns) is defined, 
ε 
K = 4ir2 [ TP + -
(12.2.12) 
and ωτ = 2π/τ has been used. The relaxation frequency based on the nonlinear gain 
model has an extra factor (1 + SSQ) in the denominator of the expression: 
ωΓ 
TP(1 + eSo)' 
(12.2.13) 

12.2 HIGH-SPEED MODULATION RESPONSE 
613 
We obtain the frequency response function for semiconductor lasers 
= £0 ^ry/M) = |Μ(ω)|βΐψ(ω) 
]{ω) 
οή — ω1 — ιγω 
Μ(ω) 
Μ(0) 
ωΐ 
.2 , . , 2 ^ ι ' / 2 
[(ω2 - ω2)2 + y W ] 
(12.2.15a) 
<K<ü) = tan~' ,Υ<<>
 7. 
(12.2.15b) 
The 3-dB cutoff frequency occurs when (12.1.24) is satisfied using wr in (12.2.9b) 
and y in (12.2.1 lb). The maximum possible bandwidth occurs when the following 
condition is satisfied, 
2ω2 = γ2 ~ Κ2/?, 
(12.2.16) 
such that the frequency response function is a monotonic decreasing function, 
(12.2.15) oc ω2/(ω4 + ω^) 
. We then have the maximum relaxation frequency 
2TT\/2 
/ r , m a x = — j ~ ■ 
(12.2.17) 
By fitting the frequency response function (12.2.15) to the experimental data, the 
damping factor y can be found together with the relaxation frequency /r. Equation 
(12.2.1 lb) shows that a linear relation holds with a slope K if the damping factor y 
is plotted versus /r
2 and the intercept with the vertical axis gives the inverse carrier 
lifetime 1/τ. 
Example 
Figure 12.4 [14] shows the experimental results for two strained 
quantum-well lasers with (1) a slope K = 0.22 ns for a tensile strain laser with four 
quantum wells, and the maximum bandwidth is/ r m a x = 2-7Γ •Jl/K = 40 GHz, and 
(2) a slope with K = 0.58 ns for a compressive strain laser with four quantum 
wells, and/rmax = 15 GHz. Both lines intercept the vertical axis at 1/τ~ 5 GHz, 
or the carrier lifetime τ at threshold is 0.2 ns for both samples. The difference of 
the slopes of the two laser structures can be explained from the difference in 
the differential gain of over a factor of 2 because f?/Po = 3.6 GHz2/mW for the 
compressive strain laser and f?/Po = 7.7 GHz2/mW for the tensile strain sample. 
Because the damping factor depends on the K factor, relaxation frequency, and the 
inverse carrier lifetime, the experimental data provide very good guidance for the 
design of high-speed semiconductor lasers. The K factor can also be used to deter-
mine the nonlinear gain suppression coefficient ε. Theoretical models and experimen-
tal data on strained and unstrained quantum-well lasers have been presented with 
interesting results [15-51]. The measured nonlinear gain suppression coefficient 

614 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
40 
t " 
£ 
20 
s. 
10 
0 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
ff(GHzz) 
·» 
Figure 12.4 Experimental results showing the linear relation between the damping factor y and fi for 
two quantum-well lasers: γ = Kfi + l/τ. The slope gives the K factor (in ns) and the intercept with the 
vertical (y) axis gives the inverse carrier lifetime, l/τ, at threshold. (Reprinted with permission from 
[14] © 1991 American Institute of Physics.) 
ε ranges from 2 x 10~7 to 13 x 10 7 cm3 for InGaAs or InGaAsP materials in the 
quantum wells [15, 17, 18]. Various physical mechanisms such as the well-barrier 
hole burning effects [20], carrier heating and spectral hole burning [21-24], carrier 
transport [25-33], and carrier capture by and escape from quantum wells [35-39] 
and circuit parasitic [40] have been investigated and are shown to affect by varying 
degrees the high-speed modulation of semiconductor quantum-well lasers. The 
major sources of carrier heating in semiconductor lasers are injection heating, stimu-
lated recombination heating, and free carrier heating. These changes in the carrier 
temperature will be reflected in the changes in gain. An increase of a few degrees 
will result in a decrease in gain of several percent, which appears in the rate equations 
as a nonlinear gain suppression coefficient. Spectral hole burning theory also predicts 
an increase in the nonlinear gain suppression coefficient with increasing carrier temp-
erature. We will investigate the carrier transport, capture, and escape in quantum-well 
lasers in the next section. 
12.3 TRANSPORT EFFECTS ON QUANTUM-WELL LASERS: 
ELECTRICAL VERSUS OPTICAL MODULATION 
In the previous section, we discuss the modulation response of a semiconductor laser 
using two coupled rate equations governing the carrier and photon densities. The 
carrier diffusion, capture, and escape times are usually used to characterize the 
carrier transport processes [25-33], which give a parasitic-like roll-off and are indis-
tinguishable from parasitic effects. Parasitic effects come from the bias circuit and 
the shunting of modulation current around the active layer, which will cause a low-
frequency roll-off of modulation response. In quantum well (QW) lasers, the carrier 
transport effect is an important limit for the modulation bandwidth of multiple 
• 4 MOW tensile strain 
rC = 0.22,/„ax-40 GHz 
o 4 MQW compressive strain 
K = 0.58, fmax -15 GHz 

12.3 TRANSPORT EFFECTS ON QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
615 
quantum-well (MQW) lasers. In general, when the number of wells increases, the 
modulation bandwidth of the device initially increases, but it is ultimately saturated 
by the carrier transport effect. This saturation effect was observed in gain-coupled 
InGaAsP distributed feedback (DFB) lasers with more than eight QWs [41]. 
In this section, the high-speed modulation response of a QW DFB laser operating 
at 1.55 μπι is investigated for two types of modulation [32, 33]: electrical [25-30] 
and optical [42-45]. Electrical modulation is performed by applying a microwave 
signal directly on the injection current of the test laser. Optical modulation is per-
formed by injecting light from a second pump laser operating at 1.3 μπι that itself 
is being directly modulated electrically, so that the injected light is absorbed in the 
QWs of the 1.55-μπι test laser. Both sets of responses are compared with theory in 
order to extract the values of the fundamental parameters that determine as well as 
limit the modulation bandwidth. Optical injection at this wavelength eliminates 
circuit parasitic and carrier transport effects, and the intrinsic laser response can be 
directly measured [42-^-5]. 
A schematic of high-speed modulation by electrical injection and optical injection 
is shown in Fig. 12.5 [32]. We model the carrier transport (diffusion, capture, and 
emission) in such a laser structure and study its effects on the small-signal modula-
tion with electrical injection and optical injection. Our objective is to calculate the 
Electrical injection 
Electron 
Electrical injection 
Figure 12.5 Energy band diagram for the model of the rate equations for electrical and optical modulation. 
The quantum-well (test) laser operates at 1.55 μπι. For electrical modulation, the carriers have to transport 
and get captured by the quantum well(s). For optical injection, we choose the external pump laser operating 
at 1.3 |im such that carriers are generated (or modulated) in the quantum well(s) when the pump laser is 
externally modulated by a microwave signal. (Reprinted with permission from [321 © 1999 IEEE.) 

616 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
small-signal frequency response of the test laser for optical modulation from the 
pump laser and use the same rate equations with a different source term to derive 
the electrical modulation response of the test laser. 
Electrical Injection 
For electrical microwave modulation, the electrons are 
injected from the outer edge of the left separate-confinement-heterostructure (SCH) 
region and the holes from the outer edge of the right SCH region. The injected car-
riers diffuse through the SCH region and are captured into the QWs before recombin-
ing via the stimulated emission process. The transport effects can be modeled by 
taking into account the carrier density in the SCH region, the carrier density in the 
well region, and the photon density separately. Coupling of the carrier density in 
the barrier states above the QWs to the carrier density in the QWs is modeled by 
two terms representing carrier capture and escape into or from the wells, respectively. 
In this case, three rate equations are needed. The source term enters through the injec-
tion current in electrical modulation. The model considers carrier injection from the 
outer edges of the SCH region, diffusion across the SCH region, and the subsequent 
capture and emission of carriers by the QW. 
Optical Injection 
For optical injection using an external pump laser, the pump 
photon density acts as the source term. Because the optical energy of the pump 
laser determines whether the photons are absorbed in the well or in the barriers, 
we choose the pump wavelength to be longer than the band-gap wavelength of the 
barriers and shorter than the band-edge wavelength of the wells so that absorption 
occurs only in the wells. Compared with electrical modulation, optical modulation 
with an optical energy in the absorption range of the QW directly produces 
photon-generated carriers inside the test laser's active region via the injection of a 
modulated laser beam through one of the test laser's mirror facets. Therefore, the 
majority of carriers transporting through the SCH region is not required for lasing 
action, although the coupling between SCH and QW states still exists for optical 
modulation. In this way, optical modulation removes the severe low-frequency roll-
off due to the transport and parasitic effects and helps to clarify the intrinsic response. 
The rate equations for both electrical and optical injections are written as 
dNb(t) 
/(f) 
Nb(t) 
iVb(r) , iVw(i)Vw 
_
_ 
— — =n,-r, 
+ 
7j- 
(12.3.1) 
at 
qVb 
rb 
Tbw 
TwbVb 
<Ww(0 
Nb(t)Vb 
Ww(0 Nw(t) 
g(7Vw) „
Λ , 
— T — = 
7i 
vg 
Wf.S(t) 
+ vgapSp(t) 
(12.3.2) 
at 
7wVw
 
Tw 
7\vb 
1 + eS(t) 
at 
1 + sS(t) 
TP 
where q is the electron unit charge, giN^) is the optical gain at the carrier concen-
tration Ny, in the bound states of the wells, Nb is the carrier density in the barrier 
(continuum) states including the SCH and active layers, S is the photon density of 

12.3 TRANSPORT EFFECTS ON QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
617 
the test laser, ε is the nonlinear gain suppression coefficient, Γ is the optical confine-
ment factor, TP is the photon lifetime, Tjj is the injection efficiency, /(f) is the injection 
electrical current, Vb is the volume of the SCH and active region, Vw is the volume of 
the well region, η, is the carrier recombination lifetime in the barrier region, TW is the 
carrier recombination lifetime in the well, Tbw is the effective carrier diffusion across 
the SCH region and capture time by the wells, and Twb is the thermionic emission and 
carrier diffusion time from the well to the barrier states. The last term in (12.3.2) is a 
source term that represents the photon generation due to optical pumping at the wave-
length (1.3 μπι) where the optically injected photons are absorbed in the well regions. 
Sp is the pump photon density, and ap is the absorption at the pump wavelength. This 
model is often referred to as the reservoir model [28] and is equivalent to models that 
incorporate additional effects such as diffusive transport [44]. The spontaneous emis-
sion term has been ignored in (12.3.3) for above-threshold operation. Assuming a 
small-signal optical injection due to the external pump laser 
Sp(t) = Spo + Re[sp(o))e-iü"] 
(12.3.4) 
where the test laser is biased at a dc current above threshold. The responses for the 
photon density and the carrier densities in the barrier and well are 
S(t) = S0 + Re[5(w)e-,ft"] 
(12.3.5) 
Nb(t) = Nb0 + Re[«b(a>)e-'w] 
(12.3.6) 
Nw(t) = Nw0 + Re[nw(W)e-,ü"]. 
(12.3.7) 
The linear portion of the optical gain is written as: 
g(Nw) = g(Nw0) + g'(Nw(t) - Nv0) 
(12.3.8) 
where g1 is the differential gain of the test laser, and NM is steady-state carrier density 
in the QW. The nonlinear gain suppression effect has been included explicitly in 
the rate equations. Substituting (12.3.4)-(12.3.8) into (12.3.1)-(12.3.3), the steady-
state quantities can be obtained by setting the time-derivative terms to zero. Then, 
the small-signal equations for the time-dependent terms are obtained similar to 
those in (12.2.5). The set of small-signal equations can be solved to give a relation-
ship between the test laser signal and the pump signal. The optical modulation 
response, Μ(ω) = ί(ω)/ίρ(ω), can be written in a normalized form 
Μ(ω) 
M(0) ft)2 — ω2 — ϊωγ 
where the major parameters are 
,2 
(Optical modulation) 
(12.3.9) 
ft>, 
<yJ/X>So(l+_L-) 
(,2.3.10) 
TP(1 + ε5Ό) V 
vg£ W 

618 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
_L + (yBg7x)Sof1+^jQ) 
( 1 2 3 1 1 ) 
^ = 1 + ! ^ . 
(12.3.12) 
Twb 
For a small-signal electrical injection, 
/(i) = 70 + Re[i(<w)e-,'<ui] 
(12.3.13) 
with no external pump, Sp(t) = 0. The resulting modulation response is given by 
[9, 21] Μ(ω) = ί(ω)/?'(ω), which can be written in the form 
Μ(ω) 
ω2 
—— = 
± 
, 
(Electrical modulation) 
(12.3.14) 
M(0) 
(1 — i(tiTbw)(ft^ — ar — iwy) 
where 7^w is a constant that contributes to low-frequency roll-off. The roll-off in 
the modulation response derived above is equivalent to the roll-off caused by a 
simple electrical parasitic, such as a capacitance in parallel to the device. 
However, in real devices, the effective capacitance may be bias-dependent 
because the device capacitance is related to the storage of charge in the 
forward-biased junction. If the transport effect dominates, the roll-off frequency 
of the transport effect is 1/(2πη,«,). In this case, we can measure the carrier diffu-
sion and capture time of the QW. Because the stimulated emission occurs in the 
QWs, the carrier lifetime in the SCH or barrier region is usually very long, so 
we set Tbw/Tb <C 1 in deriving (12.3.14). 
The modulation responses for the optical and electrical injection modulations 
are (12.3.9) and (12.3.14), respectively. The comparison of the two modulations is 
clear. The relaxation frequency ω,. and damping factor y for both cases are the same. 
The transport factor χ = 1 + Tbw/Twb has also been introduced to the equations. The 
only difference between the two responses is that optical injection has no low 
frequency roll-off, which corresponds to transport effects. There would also be a 
difference when the number of wells is varied. Thus, optical modulation gives an 
intrinsic modulation response of a laser because the injected pump light is chosen 
such that the pump light is absorbed only in the well region. For optical injection, 
the carriers are injected directly into the QW region, which removes the requirement 
of carrier transport from the SCH region to the QW region before lasing. In other 
words, optical injection removes the low-frequency roll-off caused by carriers trans-
porting through SCH region. However, the SCH and QW regions are still coupled 
together. There are always carriers being captured by and escaping from the QWs. 
The rate of capture and escape will influence the modulation response intrinsically. 
Therefore, because of the SCH structure, carrier diffusion capture-escape still 
affects the optical modulation response, which comes in through the χ factor. 
Thus, the effective differential gain is reduced by a factor of χ for the same photon 
density. This reduction is present even in the absence of low-frequency roll-off in 

12.3 TRANSPORT EFFECTS ON QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
619 
the optical injection, which results in the reduction of the resonance frequency. The 
effective carrier recombination lifetime in the well is also increased by a factor of χ, 
and the nonlinear gain suppression coefficient remains unchanged. Another import-
ant factor in high-speed modulation is the K factor, which is the slope of the damping 
factor versus relaxation frequency squared 
1 
i 
y-- 
+ Kf? 
T 
K = 4TT21 
v g £ * . 
(12.3.15) 
(12.3.16) 
The K factor is usually used to determine the maximum possible modulation band-
width /max = 2vy/2/K. 
A small K factor means a large laser bandwidth. Even if 
we use optical injection modulation, the carrier capture and escape processes still 
increase the K factor and limit the maximum modulation. The above parameters 
characterize the intrinsic modulation response of semiconductor lasers. 
The high-speed modulation response of a buried heterostructure MQW DFB laser 
was measured. The active region consists of 7 InGaAsP (— 1.6% compressive strain) 
quantum wells with a well width of 70 A and a photoluminescence (PL) wavelength 
of 1.5564 μ,ηι. The barriers are 100 A InGaAsP lattice-matched to InP with a PL 
wavelength peak at 1.255 μηι. Therefore, the pump light at 1.3 μπι will be absorbed 
in the QWs. More details are described in Ref. 32. A schematic diagram of the modu-
lation response experiments is shown in Fig. 12.6. The laser is held at constant temp-
erature and measurements were made from 20°C to 40°C at a 5°C interval. In the 
electrical modulation experiments, shown as path A in Fig. 12.6, the HP 8510 
network analyzer provides a small microwave signal (0 dBm) at frequencies swept 
from 45 MHz to 10 GHz, which is coupled to the test laser electrodes through a 
bias-T and a high-speed probe. The laser light is coupled to a fiber using a lensed 
Porti 
HP 8510 
Network analyzer 
Port 2 
DC 
Path A: Electrical Injection 
(To Electrodes of the Test Laser) 
I 
RF Amplifer 
p v 
| 
PUMP 
\_/ 
LASER 
iU 
Bias 
Tee 
TEST 
LASER 
Optical Fiber 
Optical 
Isolator 
Path B: Optical Injection 
(To a Facet of the Test Laser) 
ηβ Ωί£ 
Optical 
Isolator Photo 
Detector 
Figure 12.6 Schematic diagram of electrical and optical modulation experiment. The test laser is a 
quantum-well laser operating at 1.55 μπι wavelength. Path A is for electrical injection with a microwave 
modulation. Path B is for optical injection with a microwave modulation using a 1.3-μπι wavelength 
pump laser. (Reprinted with permission from [321 © 1999 IEEE.) 

620 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
fiber-optical interface and travels through an optical isolator before being measured 
by a high-speed (29 GHz) photodetector. The small signal response is increased by 
an 18-dB-gain RF amplifier before entering the network analyzer, which measures 
the magnitude of the modulation response. The data are averaged to reduce noise. 
The optical response measurements shown as path B in Fig. 12.6 are similar to elec-
trical modulation experiments, except that a 1.3-μπι pump laser with a wide band-
width is modulated electrically, and its modulated optical output is injected into 
the test DFB laser facet. The modulation of the pump laser is recorded at a fixed 
bias and stored for the calibration of the optical response of the 1.55-μπι test laser. 
The pump light is completely absorbed in the test laser, so the light coupled out of 
the test laser does not require additional filtering of the pump light. 
The electrical and optical modulation responses are first compared at a fixed temp-
erature of 20°C. Figure 12.7 shows the least-square fits of the measured modulation 
responses using the theory derived above for electrical and optical injections. The fits 
are used to extract the differential gain and nonlinear gain suppression factor. By 
comparing the two responses, the roll-off frequency can be obtained more accurately. 
Both modulation responses show clearly that the relaxation peaks increase in fre-
quency as the dc bias is increased. The modulation responses due to optical injection 
exhibit a slower roll-off at high frequencies, which indicates the absence of low-
frequency pole on the optical response. Also, the peak of the optical pump response 
is generally higher than that of the electrical, and the differences between the two 
responses increase with increasing current. For 35-mA current injection, electrical 
modulation has a clear roll-off. The roll-off frequency is 3.52 GHz at this temperature 
(20°C). The experimental data [32] also show that the roll-off frequency is relatively 
independent of the current bias in the temperature range 20°C to 40°C. 
In Fig. 12.8a, the relaxation frequency squared is plotted versus optical power. The 
slope of the linear fit will be used later to extract the differential gain. The damping 
factor is calculated using extracted parameters from the modulation responses and is 
plotted in Fig. 12.8b. The slope of the linear fit at large relaxation frequency is the K 
0 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
Frequency (GHz) 
Figure 12.7 Comparison of the modulation responses of the electrical and optical injection. The solid 
(optical modulation) and dashed (electrical modulation) curves are theoretical results and the symbols 
are experimental data. (Reprinted with permission from [32] © 1999 IEEE.) 

12.3 TRANSPORT EFFECTS ON QUANTUM-WELL LASERS 
621 
(a) 
10 
>» 
φ N 
8 
3 
X 
fS 6 
S"§ 
4 
Φ „ 
0 
— i 
' 
1 
' 
1 
■ 
1 
■ 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Relaxation frequency squared f? (GHz2) 
Figure 12.8 (a) The relaxation frequency squared versus optical output power of the test laser at 20°C. 
The solid line is the theoretical result, and the symbols are experimental data extracted from the modulation 
responses, (b) The damping factor versus the relaxation frequency squared. The dashed line is the theoreti-
cal curve (ignoring the spontaneous emission coupling), and its slope determines K. (Reprinted with 
permission from [321 © 1999 IEEE.) 
factor. The deviation at the low-frequency end between the data and the linear dashed 
line is due to the negligence of the spontaneous emission term. If we include the 
spontaneous emission factor, the damping factor should have an additional term 
that can be neglected at high photon density (corresponding to a large relaxation 
frequency). The complete set of extracted parameters at 20°C is listed in Ref. 32. 
The differential gain and nonlinear gain suppression coefficient are within the 
values typically found in the literature. More experimental data on high-speed modu-
lation of strained and unstrained quantum well lasers using InGaAsP and InAlGaAs 
materials and their dependence on temperature are reported in Ref. 46. When the 
external pump laser wavelength is tuned in the gain region of the test laser, the 
optical modulation becomes a cross-gain modulation [47], and enhancement of 
the modulation bandwidth has also been observed and analyzed theoretically. In 
addition, injection locking [52, 53] occurs when the detuning wavelength is very 
close to the test laser wavelength. A further increase of the modulation bandwidth 
by a significant factor has been realized [54-57] under injection locking condition. 
For example, a bandwidth of 66 GHz of a vertical cavity surface-emitting laser 
(VCSEL) at 1.55-μπι wavelength using a cascaded injection locking approach has 
been realized [57]. 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
Optical power (mW) 
(·» 
<n 
o <n 
C5 
>-
o 
o 
.2 
c 
n, 
f-co 
8 
I 
6 
.S 
4 
i 
2 
1 
Ü 
D 

622 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
A direct modulation response at 40 Gb/s bandwidth using a 1.3-μπι DFB ridge-
waveguide laser has been reported [48]. The device has a short cavity length of 
100 μηι using a MQW InAlGaAs active layer, which has a high differential gain. 
The laser operates at 60°C under a 40 Gb/s direct modulation. 
12.4 SEMICONDUCTOR LASER SPECTRAL LINEWIDTH 
AND THE LINEWIDTH ENHANCEMENT FACTOR 
The spectral properties of semiconductor lasers have been investigated since the early 
1980s. Experiments by Fleming and Mooradian [58] showed that the laser spectral 
linewidth has a Lorentzian shape and the linewidth is inversely proportional to the 
optical output power. However, the magnitude of the linewidth was much larger 
than they had expected based on the conventional formula from the Townes-
Schawlow theory [59]. A model proposed by Henry [60, 61], which has the same 
form as that derived by Haken in 1963 [62, 63], explained the phenomena by 
noting that the semiconductor laser is similar to a detuned oscillator, and there is a 
spectrum linewidth enhancement by a factor (1 + α^) due to the coupling between 
the amplitude and phase fluctuations of the optical field. A more formal derivation 
was given by Vahala and Yariv [64]. In this section, we present the model of 
Henry. The linewidth of a semiconductor laser with an output power Pout and a 
mirror transmission loss am at a photon energy hw is 
Δ ν = 
g m sp(l+a2
e) 
(12.4.1) 
oTTfout 
where vg is the group velocity, Rsp is the spontaneous emission rate (1/s), and the 
linewidth enhancement factor ae is defined as: 
dn'/dn 
Airdn' /dn 
dn"/dn 
λ dg/dn 
Here n' and n" are the real and imaginary parts of the refractive index due to the 
carrier injection into the active region, and n is the carrier density, dg/dn is the differ-
ential gain of the semiconductor laser at the lasing wavelength λ. 
12.4.1 Basic Equations for the Optical Intensity and Phase 
in the Presence of Spontaneous Emission 
Consider an optical field E(z, t) given by 
E(Z, t) = E(t)eikz-iu" 
(12.4.3a) 
E{t) = ^/W)eim 
(12.4.3b) 

12.4 SEMICONDUCTOR LASER SPECTRAL LINEWIDTH 
623 
E(t) 
T 
AE 
. 8 
£(») = 
+ ΔΕ 
--4Üf)e 
m 
>■ Re E(t) 
Figure 12.9 A plot on the complex optical electric field domain [60] E(t) = \fUJ)e'^>) showing its magni-
tude y/Ht) and phase φ can be changed by a spontaneous emission of a photon (magnitude is one because the 
intensity / has been normalized to represent the photon number in the cavity) with a phase change Αφ'. 
where I(t) represents the intensity and φ(ί) the phase of laser field. We assume that the 
optical intensity I(t) = E(t)E*(t) has been normalized such that it represents the 
average number of photons in the laser cavity. The time-dependent magnitude E(t) 
is a complex phasor assuming its time variation is much slower than the optical 
frequency ω. The phasor E(t) is plotted in the complex plane as a vector with a 
magnitude y/Hfj and a phase φ(ί) as shown in Fig. 12.9. The basic assumption is 
that a random spontaneous emission alters E(t) by AE, which adds a unit magnitude 
(one photon) and a phase Θ, which is random 
AE = 
e^e\ 
There are two contributions to the phase change Αφ, 
Αφ = Αφ' + Αφ" 
(12.4.4) 
(12.4.5) 
where Αφ' is due to the out-of-phase component of AE and Αφ" is due to the inten-
sity change, which is coupled to the phase change. To obtain the first contribution 
Αφ', we note from Fig. 12.9, that \/ΪΑφ' ~ sin Θ or 
Αφ' = sin Θ 
~7f 
(12.4.6) 
To obtain the second contribution Αφ" due to the intensity change, we start from the 
wave equation 
dz1 E(z, t) 
c*dfi ετΕ(ζ, t) 
(12.4.7) 

624 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
where c is speed of light in free space and εΓ is the relative permittivity εΓ = ε/ε0 
of the semiconductor. We obtain 
2ϊω 
dE(t) 
(ω2 
, \ 
— ^-±1=-^-^-^) 
(12.4.8) 
neglecting the second-order derivative (f'E^/dt2 
because E(t) is a slowly varying 
function. We can also express εΓ in terms of the complex refractive index 
y/ετ = ri + in" (or n + ίκ) 
(12.4.9) 
and the real and imaginary parts of the propagation constants give 
k = -ri 
l-{g-a) 
= --n" 
(12.4.10) 
c 
2 
c 
where g is the gain coefficient and a is the absorption coefficient of the optical 
intensity. At threshold, the gain is balanced by the absorption, g = a, n" = 0, and 
εΓ is real. A change in carrier density n will cause ri and n" to deviate from the 
threshold values 
εΓ = (ri + An' + iAri'f ~ ri2 + 2iriAn"(l - iae) 
(12.4.11) 
where we have defined a linewidth enhancement factor ae as the ratio of the change in 
the real part of the refractive index to the change in the imaginary part 
An' 
a e = ^ . 
(12.4.12) 
Therefore 
dE 
ωΑη" 
dt 
ri 
e - a 
( l - / a e ) £ ( 0 
:vg(l -iae)E(t) 
(12.4.13) 
where the group velocity vg = c/ri has been used, and we ignore the dispersion 
effect for simplicity. If we include the effect of the medium dispersion, (12.4.8) 
has to be modified [60], and the result for (12.4.13) still holds with the group velocity 
given by vg = c/(ri + ωδη'/da>), which is derived using k = ωη'/c and vg = 
\/(dk/dcS). 
Substituting E(t) = ^/I(f)eim 
into (12.4.13) and separating the real 
and imaginary parts, we find 
\dl 
g — a 
- 
vg/(r) 
(12.4.14a) 
2dt 
2 
άφ 
g — a 
dt ~ 2 v„ae. 
(12.4.14b) 

12.4 SEMICONDUCTOR LASER SPECTRAL LINEWIDTH 
625 
Therefore, we obtain 
do 
ou dl 
i=-Yijt- 
(12A15) 
Initially at t = 0, 7(0) = / + Δ/, and at t = oo, the relaxation oscillations die out, 
/(oo) = /, we obtain 
Αφ" =^-Α1 = ψ{\ +2V7cos0) 
(12.4.16) 
which can be derived from the three sides of the triangle in Fig. 12.9. The total phase 
change is then 
Αφ = Αφ' + Αφ" = ^ A / + - F(sin0+a ecos0). 
(12.4.17) 
2/ 
\/l 
The ensemble average of the spontaneous emission events at a time duration t is 
contributed from the constant term (ae/2I) multiplied by the total number of the 
events, Rspt, 
( Δ φ ) = ^ / ν 
(12.4.18) 
as (sin Θ) = (cos Θ) — 0. Here Rsp is the spontaneous emission rate (1/s). Equation 
(12.4.18) gives an angular frequency shift 
d_ 
Λ 1 _ τ ' 
21' 
Δω = - ( Δ ψ ) = ^ / ν 
(12.4.19) 
The total phase fluctuation for Rspt spontaneous events gives the variance 
Ί 
(Αφ2) = ( -( sin Θ + ae cos Θ)2 
^ 
' 
(12.4.20) 
d+«e), /icn\t . 
2/ 
pl ' 
We put an absolute value for |i| because (Αφ2) is a positive quantity. Therefore, we 
found the mean (Αφ) and its variance ((Αφ)2) or (Αφ2) as above. 

626 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
12.4.2 Power Spectrum and Semiconductor Laser Spectral Linewidth 
The power spectrum of the laser is the Fourier transform of the correlation function 
W(a>) = 
dteiaX{E*(t)E(0)) 
J—00 
|»00 
dteiu*([I(t)l(0)Y/2e-itim) 
(12.4.21) 
J—00 
/•OO 
~ 1(0) 
dtj*{e-**®) 
J —OO 
where the small intensity fluctuation is neglected and the amplitude function for 
the field E(t) = [/(f)] 
e"^" has been used, which does not include the central 
frequency of the laser, that is, ω in (12.4.2), and 
A<Ht) = <Kt) - ψ(θ). 
Because the spontaneous emission events are random, the phase φ should have a 
Gaussian probability distribution function, Ρ(Αφ) = a Gaussian function. The 
ensemble average for a Gaussian distribution is [61, 65] 
( β-ίΔ*ω) = 
ά(Αφ)Ρ(Αφ)β~Άφ 
= β"ϊ<Δψ2>. 
(12.4.22) 
J —00 
Using the result for the variance (Αφ2) in (12.4.20), we can define a coherence time as 
^ = ^ 0 + « e ) 
(12.4.23) 
such that (Αφ2)/2= 
\t\/tc. The power spectrum (12.4.21) gives a Lorentzian 
function 
W(a>)~I(0) 
2 t \ 2 
(12.4.24) 
with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 
Αω = ^ = ^{\+οξ) 
(12.4.25) 
or 
Δν = - ^ ( 1 + α * ) . 
(12.4.26) 
477Ϊ 

12.4 SEMICONDUCTOR LASER SPECTRAL LINEWIDTH 
627 
The number of photons / in the laser cavity (the photon density multiplied by the 
volume) is related to the optical output power by 
PoUt = ~(Iti<o)Vi.am 
(12.4.27) 
where ΙΗω is the total photon energy and vgam is the escaping rate of the photon out 
of the cavity with a length L where the mirror transmission loss is 
a m =Z l nGe) 
(12.4.28) 
and R is the mirror reflectivity at both ends. We find 
Δν = (Av)ST(l + οξ) 
(12.4.29a) 
(AV)ST = 
g
g
p
 
P 
(12.4.29b) 
where (Av)ST is the Schawlow-Townes limit of the laser linewidth. The expression 
(12.4.29a) is commonly used to explain the spectral linewidth of semiconductor 
lasers. It indicates a reduction of linewidth with increasing optical power and a broad-
ening factor determined by (1 + οζ). The spontaneous emission rate (1 /s) is related to 
the gain coefficient g (cm ') by a dimensionless spontaneous emission factor nsp 
Rsp = vggnsp 
(12.4.30) 
where 
and AF = Fn — Fp is the separation of the quasi-Fermi levels between the electron 
and the hole. Here the photon number and the spontaneous emission rate are 
defined using the effective volume of the optical mode. 
12.4.3 Linewidth Enhancement Factor in Semiconductor Lasers 
Experimental data [66] for the laser linewidth, which depends on the optical output 
power with an inverse law, are shown in Fig. 12.10. The surprisingly large line-
width measured in this set of data was explained by Henry [60] using the correction 
factor (1 + «g), where ae ~ 5. More measurements have been done for various 
semiconductor lasers including index-guided double-heterostructure, unstrained 
and strained quantum-well lasers, with reduced linewidth enhancement factor 
[67, 68]. 
In a semiconductor laser, the injected carrier-induced refractive index change is 
associated with the change in the gain. The linewidth enhancement factor ae in 
(12.4.2) can be directly expressed in terms of the ratio of the differential change of 

628 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
I 
200 
160 
120 
80 
40 
-
-
-
• 
1 
' 
i 
1 
i 
1 
' 
1 
' 
1 
I 
Slope = 74.7 
Jf 
-
273K 
/ 
1 
1 
1 
Slope = 36.7 
195K 
j : 
^^"^ 
-
Slope = 9.28 
77K y 
1 
1 
1 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
Inverse power (mW-1) 
2.5 
Figure 12.10 Semiconductor laser linewidth versus inverse power at three temperatures exhibiting the 
linear behavior. The magnitude of the large linewidth was explained [60] using the correction factor 
1 + erf. with a, ~ 5 at room temperature. (Reprinted with permission from [661 © 1982 American 
Institute of Physics.) 
the refractive index per injected carrier and the differential gain. The linewidth 
enhancement factor varies from about 1.5 to 10 and is dependent on the lasing wave-
length. Experimental data of ae for two strained quantum-well lasers are shown in 
Fig. 12.11. The high-speed modulation characteristics of these lasers have been 
described in Fig. 12.4. 
12 
10 
I » 
c 
Φ i I 
c 
-J 
• 4 MQW tensile strain 
(Ino.sQao.rAs) 
o 4 MQW compressive 
strain (ln0 8Ga0^ As) 
-
-
*-^ü&* 
***** l ί 
·/ 
o 
°/° 
/ 0 
f 
1400 
1450 
1500 
1550 
Wavelength (nm) —*~ 
1600 
Figure 12.11 The linewidth enhancement factor ae versus wavelength of two types of strained MQW 
lasers. The lasing wavelength is indicated by the arrows. (Reprinted with permission from [14] © 1991 
American Institute of Physics.) 

12.5 RELATIVE INTENSITY NOISE SPECTRUM 
629 
The dependence of <xe on the loss or the Fermi levels of semiconductor lasers has 
also been shown to be important [69]. For strained quantum wells, a theoretical analy-
sis [70] shows that ae can be reduced to about 1.1 using tensile strains with TM polar-
ization of semiconductor quantum-well lasers. Similar behavior to the spectral 
broadening in semiconductor lasers also occurs in an intensity modulator using the 
electroabsorption effects [71-73]. This is because a phase modulation due to the 
change in the refractive index is associated with the change in the absorption coeffi-
cient. More recent measurements on strained quantum-well lasers [74] and quantum-
dot lasers [75-78] have been reported. Quantum-dot lasers have extremely low chirp 
(close to zero). An approach to measure the linewidth enhancement factor based on 
the injection method has been demonstrated [79]. Measurements of the linewidth 
enhancement factors of type I and type II quantum-cascade lasers in 4 μπι or 8 μηι 
indicate low chirp as well [80-82]. The type I quantum-cascade lasers have a sym-
metrical (Lorentzian or Gaussian) lineshape near the gain peak, therefore, the refrac-
tive index change with increasing current near the peak gain wavelength is small 
(almost zero) due to the Kramers-Kronig relations. Thus the linewidth enhancement 
factor is small. Care should be taken such as using a pulsed measurement at low duty 
cycle to avoid the refractive index change caused by thermal effects [81]. 
12.5 RELATIVE INTENSITY NOISE SPECTRUM 
In this section, we discuss the theory for the relative intensity noise (RIN) spectrum. 
The laser output light contains random fluctuations in intensity, phase, and frequency 
even when the laser is biased at a constant current without any current fluctuation. 
There are two major noise mechanisms. The dominant noise is due to spontaneous 
emission and the second is the electron-hole recombination or shot noise. Because 
spontaneous emission occurs at an extremely rapid rate, the intensity and phase of 
the laser exhibit fluctuations over a timescale as short as 100 ps. Light intensity fluc-
tuation affects the signal to noise ratio (SNR), and the phase fluctuations lead to spec-
tral linewidth broadening, as we have discussed in Section 12.4. The relative intensity 
noise is defined as [83, 84] 
RIN = ' F ( f ' 
(12.5.1) 
where P0 is the mean intensity of the laser output power and (8P(t)2) is mean squared 
power fluctuation. The rate equation (12.2.5) derived for the small-signal modulation 
can be applied by considering the noise sources as small fluctuations of the carrier 
density and photon density, Fn{t) and Fs(f), respectively. 
d 
dt 
8n{t) 
8s(t) + 
A 
D 
-C 
B 
8n(t) 
8s(t) = 
Fn(t) 
Fs(t)_ 
(12.5.2) 

630 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
The solution in the Fourier frequency domain is written as: 
-iw + A 
D 
-C 
-ΐω + B 
δη(ώ) 
ds(u)) 
Fn{w) 
Fs(w) 
We can define the normalized frequency response as 
Μ(ω) _ αξ 
Η(ω) 
M(0) 
Δ 
where we have used the determinant 
Δ = -ίω + Α 
D 
-C 
-ϊω + B 
2 
2 
= &>r — ω — ιγω. 
(12.5.3) 
(12.5.4) 
(12.5.5) 
The solutions for the carrier density and photon density fluctuations are 
δη(ω) = - V [(-"o + B)Fn(<») ~ DFs(w)] 
(12.5.6) 
5ϊ(ω) = ^φ-[{-ίω 
+ A)Fs(a>) + CFn(a>)]. 
(12.5.7) 
The source fluctuations are random and their expectation values are related by 
(FtwWjito)) = ~ | 
(Fi(w)^J))dJ. 
Using the Fourier transform of the power fluctuation 
1 Γ°° 
(8P(t)) = — 
SP(w)e-°"dw 
and the spectral density function 
{δΡ(ω)δΡ*(ώ)} = Ξ8ρ(ω)2ττδ(ω - ω') 
we obtain the spectral density function [83] 
(12.5.8) 
(12.5.9) 
(12.5.10) 
<»«·>-£ 
S8p{J)\B{J)\2dJ 
1 f°° 
5φ(ω)— 
\Β(ω')\2άω' 
5δρ(ω)2Δ/ 
(12.5.11) 
where a narrow band pass filter Β(ω') ~ 1 near ω' = ω with a bandwidth of Δ/ is 
used. There is a factor of 2 because the spectral density function is an even function 

12.5 RELATIVE INTENSITY NOISE SPECTRUM 
631 
N 
I 
m 
z 
DC 
-110 
-120 ■ 
-130 
-140 
-150 
-160 
0 
0.83 mW 
Shot noise 
10 
Frequency (GHz) 
15 
20 
Figure 12.12 The relative intensity noise (RIN) spectrum as two bias currents above threshold. The 
symbols are experimental data and the solid curves are the theoretical fits. The shot noise background is 
also shown as the dashed line. (Reprinted with permission from [86] © 1992 IEEE.) 
of the frequency. The RIN spectrum is thus given by 
RIN _ 2SSp(a>) 
Δ/ 
pi 
r0 
(12.5.12) 
Further derivations for the spectral density using (12.5.6) and (12.5.7) lead to [83, 85] 
^δρ(ω) = 
RIN 
~w~ 
- hwPo 
2ha> 
= ~P~o~[ 
9 |//(ω)Γ 
( Ω , + α 2 ω 2 ) ^ ^ - + 1 
(a\ + α2ω ) 
2,\Η(ω)\ζ 
+ 1 
(12.5.13) 
(12.5.14) 
Typically, the last term (one) in the square bracket of (12.5.14) is much smaller than 
the leading two terms, and is thus negligible [85]. The expression requires essentially 
four parameters: α,, α2, ωΓ, and y, which can be extracted by fitting the experimental 
RIN spectrum at various bias current above threshold. Figure 12.12 shows an 
example of the RIN spectrum at two bias currents (symbols: experimental data; 
solid curves: theory) [86]. The extracted relaxation frequency from the peak of the 
RIN spectrum shows a linear dependence on the square root of the optical power 
output. The damping factor y also shows a linear dependence on the squared 
relaxation frequency with the slope determined by the K factor. The RIN character-
istics of a semiconductor laser under the injection locking condition shows a 
reduction in the RIN noise floor as well as an increase of the relaxation frequency 
controllable by the injection laser power and detuning [87]. 

632 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
PROBLEMS 
12.1 (a) Calculate the photon lifetime for a semiconductor laser assuming the 
following parameters: aj = 10cm ', refractive index = 3.2, and the cavity 
length L = 200 μπι. (b) If we increase the intrinsic absorption coefficient 
to 20 cm-1, what is the photon lifetime? (c) What if we increase the cavity 
length to 400 μηι while keeping a, = 10 c m ' ? 
12.2 Find (a) the dc solutions for S0 and n0 and (b) the ac solutions for s(t) and n(t) 
in the linear gain theory. 
12.3 Discuss how one may improve the relaxation frequency/,, of a semiconductor 
laser. 
12.4 Derive an expression for the 3-dB angular frequency o)3dB for the small-signal 
frequency response of a semiconductor laser using the linear gain theory. 
12.5 Find the dc solutions for S0 and n0 in the nonlinear gain theory for the fre-
quency response of a semiconductor laser. 
12.6 Derive the small-signal ac solutions for s(i) and n(t) in the nonlinear gain 
theory. 
12.7 Discuss the effect of decreasing the damping factor y. 
12.8 Plot the frequency response curve when the condition 2ω2 = y2 is satisfied. 
12.9 Derive the linear relation between the damping factor y and the relaxation 
frequency squared/2 in (12.2.11b). How would the parameters, K, and the 
inverse carrier lifetime affect the bandwidth of the frequency response? 
12.10 Discuss the high-speed optical modulation vs. electrical modulation in terms 
of the physics of carrier transport, theoretical modulation response, and the 
experimental setup. 
12.11 Derive (12.4.13) and (12.4.14) taking into account the material dispersion. 
12.12 Derive (12.4.22) for a Gaussian distribution function Ρ(Αφ). 
12.13 Describe the factors determining the spectral linewidth of a semiconductor 
laser. How may one decrease the semiconductor laser linewidth in terms of 
the device parameters such as laser length, the laser threshold, and the 
power? How can one reduce the linewidth enhancement factor? 
REFERENCES 
1. T. Ikegami and Y. Suematsu, "Resonance-like characteristics of the direct modulation of a 
junction laser," Proc. IEEE 55, 122-123 (1967). 
2. A. Yariv, Quantum Electronics, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 1989. 

REFERENCES 
633 
3. K. Lau and A. Yariv, "High-frequency current modulation of semiconductor lasers," in 
W. T. Tsang, volume editor, Lightwave Communications Technology, vol. 22, Part B, 
Chapter 2, in R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, 
Academic Press, New York, 1985. 
4. K. Y. Lau, "Ultralow threshold quantum well lasers," Chapter 4, and "Dynamics of 
quantum well lasers," Chapter 5, in P. S. Zory, Jr., Ed., Quantum Well Lasers, 
Academic Press, San Diego, 1993. 
5. T. P. Lee, C. A. Burrus, J. A. Copeland, A. G. Dentai, and D. Marcuse, "Short-cavity 
InGaAsP injection lasers: Dependence of mode spectra and single-longitudinal-mode 
power on cavity length," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18, 1101 -1112 (1982). 
6. K. Petermann, "Calculated spontaneous emission factor for double-heterostructure injec-
tion lasers with gain-induced waveguiding," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-15, 
566-570 (1979). 
7. W. Streifer, D. R. Scifres, and R. D. Burnham, "Spontaneous emission factor of narrow-
strip gain-guided diode lasers," Electron. Lett. 17, 933 (1981). 
8. N. K. Dutta, S. J. Wang, A. B. Piccirilli, R. F. Karlicek, Jr., R. L. Brown, M. Washington, 
U. K. Chakrabarti, and A. Gnauck, "Wide-bandwidth and high-power InGaAsP distributed 
feedback lasers," J. Appl. Phys. 66, 4640-4644 (1989). 
9. K. Uomi, M. Aoki, T. Tsuchiya, and A. Takai, "Dependence of high-speed properties on 
the number of quantum wells in 1.55 μιη InGaAs-InGaAsP MQW λ/4-shifted DFB 
lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 29, 355-360 (1993). 
10. Y. Arakawa, K. Vahala, A. Yariv and K. Lau, "Enhanced modulation bandwidth of 
GaAlAs double heterostructure lasers in high magnetic fields: Dynamic response with 
quantum wire effects," Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 1142-1144 (1985). 
11. Y. Arakawa and A. Yariv, "Quantum well lasers- gain, spectra, dynamics," IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 1887-1899 (1986). 
12. R. Olshansky, P. Hill, V. Lanzisera, and W. Powazinik, "Frequency response of 1.3 μ,πι 
InGaAsP high speed semiconductor lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 
1410-1418(1987). 
13. R. Olshansky, P. Hill, V. Lanzisera, and W. Powazinik, "Universal relationship between 
resonant frequency and damping rate of 1.3 μιη InGaAsP semiconductor lasers," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 50, 653-655 (1987). 
14. L. F. Tiemeijer, P. J. A. Thijs, P. J. de Waard, J. J. M. Binsma, and T. V. Dongen, 
"Dependence of polarization, gain, linewidth enhancement factor, and K factor on the 
sign of the strain of InGaAs/InP strained-layer multiquantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 58,2738-2740(1991). 
15. T. Fukushima, J. E. Bowers, R. A. Logan, T. Tanbun-Ek, and H. Temkin, "Effect of strain 
on the resonant frequency and damping factor in InGaAs/InP multiple quantum well 
lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 1244-1246 (1991). 
16. S. D. Offsey, W. J. Schaff, L. F. Lester, L. F. Eastman, and S. K. McKernan, "Strained-
layer InGaAs-GaAs-AlGaAs lasers grown by molecular beam epitaxy for high-speed 
modulation," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27, 1455-1462 (1991). 
17. H. Yasaka, K. Takahata, N. Yamamoto and M. Naganuma, "Gain saturation coefficients of 
strained-layer multiple quantum-well distributed feedback lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. 
Lett. 3, 879-882 (1991). 

634 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
18. J. Zhou, N. Park, J. W. Dawson, K. Vahala, M. A. Newkirk, U. Koren, and B. I. Miller, 
"Highly nondegenerate four-wave mixing and gain nonlinearity in a strained multiple-
quantum-well optical amplifier," Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 2301-2303 (1993). 
19. S. R. Chinn, "Measurement of nonlinear gain suppression and four-wave mixing in 
quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 1673-1675 (1991). 
20. W. Rideout, W. F. Sharfin, E. S. Koteles, M. O. Vassell, and B. Elman, "Well-barrier hole 
burning in quantum well lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 3, 784-786 (1991). 
21. A. Uskov, J. Mork, and J. Mark, "Theory of short-pulse gain saturation in semiconductor 
laser amplifiers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 4, 443-446 (1992). 
22. M. Grupen and K. Hess, "Severe gain suppression due to dynamic carrier heating in 
quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 808-810 (1997). 
23. M. P. Kesler and E. P. Ippen, "Subpicosecond gain dynamics in GaAlAs laser diodes," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 51, 1765-1767 (1987). 
24. Y. Matsui, H. Murai, S. Arahira, Y. Ogawa, and A. Suzuki, "Enhanced modulation band-
width for strain-compensated InGaAlAs-InGaAsP MQW lasers," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 34, 1970-1978 (1998). 
25. R. Nagarajan, T. Fukushima, S. W. Corzine, and J. E. Bowers, "Effects of carrier transport 
on high-speed quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 1835-1837 (1991). 
26. R. Nagarajan, T. Fukushima, M. Ishikawa, J. E. Bowers, R. S. Geels, and L. A. Coldren, 
"Transport limits in high-speed quantum-well lasers: experiment and theory," Photon. 
Technol. Lett. 4, 121-123 (1992). 
27. R. Nagarajan, M. Ishikawa, and J. E. Bowers, "Effect of carrier transport on relative 
intensity noise and critique of K factor predictions of modulation response," Electron. 
Lett. 28, 845-848 (1992). 
28. R. Nagarajan, M. Ishikawa, T. Fukushima, R. Geels, and J. Bowers, "High speed quantum-
well lasers and carrier transport effects," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 28,1990-2008(1992). 
29. M. Ishikawa, R. Nagarajan, T. Fukushima, J. Wasserbauer, and J. Bowers, "Long wave-
length high-speed semiconductor laser with carrier transport effects," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 28, 2230-2241 (1992). 
30. R. Nagarajan and J. E. Bowers, "Effects of carrier transport on injection efficiency 
and wavelength chirping in quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 29, 
1601-1608(1993). 
31. A. P. Wright, B. Garrett, G. H. B. Thompson, and J. E. A. Whiteaway, "Influence of carrier 
transport on wavelength chirp of InGaAs/InGaAsP MQW lasers," Electron. Lett. 28, 
1911-1913(1992). 
32. T. Keating, X. Jin, S. L. Chuang, and K. Hess, "Temperature dependence of electrical and 
optical modulation responses of quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 35, 
1526-1534(1999). 
33. X. Jin and S. L. Chuang, "Microwave modulation of a quantum-well laser with and 
without external optical injection," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 13, 648-650 (2001). 
34. E. Meland, R. Holmstrom, J. Schlafer, R. B. Lauer, and W. Powazinik, "Extremely high-
frequency (24 GHz) InGaAsP diode lasers with excellent modulation efficiency," 
Electron. Lett. 26, 1827-1829 (1990). 
35. P. W. M. Blom, J. E. M. Haverkort, P. J. van Hall, and J. H. Wolter, "Carrier-carrier scat-
tering induced capture in quantum-well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 1490-1492 (1993). 

REFERENCES 
635 
36. D. Morris, B. Deveaud, A. Regreny, and P. Auvray, "Electron and hole capture in multiple-
quantum-well structures," Phys. Rev. B 47, 6819-6822 (1993). 
37. S. C. Kan, D. Vassilovski, T. C. Wu, and K. Y. Lau, "On effects of carrier diffusion and 
quantum capture in high speed modulation of quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 
752-754 (1992). 
38. S. C. Kan, D. Vassilovski, T. C. Wu, and K. Y. Lau, "Quantum capture limited modulation 
bandwidth of quantum well, wire, and dot lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 2307-2309 
(1993). 
39. D. Klotzkin, K. Kamath, and P. Bhattacharya, "Quantum capture times at room tempera-
ture in high-speed InGaAs-GaAs self-organized quantum-dot lasers," IEEE Photon. 
Technol. Lett. 9, 1301-1303 (1997). 
40. R. Olshansky, P. Hill, V. Lanzisera, and W. Powazink, "Frequency response of 1.3 μιη 
InGaAsP high speed semiconductor lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 
1410-1418 (1987). 
41. H. Lu, C. Blaauw, B. Benyon, G. P. Li, and T. Makino, "High-power and high-speed 
performance of 1.3-μιτι strained MQW gain-coupled DFB lasers," IEEE J. Sei. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 1, 375-381 (1995). 
42. C. B. Su, J. Eom, C. H. Lange, C. B. Kim, R. B. Lauer, W. C. Rideout, and J. S. LaCourse, 
"Characterization of the dynamics of semiconductor lasers using optical modulation," 
IEEE]. Quantum Electron. 28, 118-127 (1992). 
43. K. J. Vahala and M. A. Newkirk, "Parasitic-free modulation of semiconductor lasers," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 25, 1393-1398 (1989). 
44. N. Tessler, M. Margalit, R. Ben Michael, M. Orenstein, and G. Eisenstein, "Modulation of 
quantum well lasers by short optical excitation: energy and spatial dependent effects," 
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 7, 23-25 (1995). 
45. D. Vassilovski, T. C. Wu, S. Kan, K. Y. Lau, and C. E. Zah, "Unambiguous determination 
of quantum capture, carrier diffusion, and intrinsic effect in quantum-well laser dynamics 
using wavelength-selective optical modulation," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 7, 706-708 
(1995). 
46. G. Liu and S. L. Chuang, "High-speed modulation of long-wavelength In^^Ga^As^P!-^ 
and In^j-^Ga^AlyAs strained quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 37, 
1283-1291 (2001). 
47. X. Jin, T. Keating, and S. L. Chuang, "Small signal cross-gain modulation in semiconduc-
tors," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. 36, 1485-1492 (2000). 
48. K. Nakahara, T. Tsuchiya, T. Kitatani, K. Shinoda, T. Taniguchi, T. Kikawa, M. Aoki, and 
M. Mukaikubo, "40-Gb/s direct modulation with high extinction ratio operation of 
1.3-μπι InGaAlAs multiquantum well ridge waveguide distributed feedback lasers," 
Photon. Technol. Lett. 19, 1436-1438 (2007). 
49. C. E. Zah, R. Bhat, B. N. Pathak, F. Favire, W. Lin, M. C. Wang, N. C. Andreadakis, 
D. M. Hwang, M. A. Koza, T. P. Lee, Z. Wang, D. Darby, D. Flanders, and J. J. Hsieh, 
"High-performance uncooled 1.3-μπι AlGalnAs/InP strained-layer quantum-well laser 
for subscriber loop applications," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 30, 511-523 (1994). 
50. S. Kakimoto and H. Watanabe, "Threshold current, differential gain, and relaxation reson-
ance frequency of 1.55-μιη bulk and MQW DFB lasers diodes," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 34, 1231-1239 (1998). 

636 
DIRECT MODULATION OF SEMICONDUCTOR LASERS 
51. S. J. Sweeney, A. F. Philips, A. R. Adams, E. P. O'Reilly, and P. J. A. Thijs, "The effect of 
temperature dependent processes on the performance of 1.5-μπι compressively strained 
InGaAs(P) MQW semiconductor diode lasers," IEEE Photon. Technot. Lett. 10, 
1076-1078(1998). 
52. R. Lang, "Injection locking properties of a semiconductor laser," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 18, 976-983 (1982). 
53. T. B. Simpson and J. M. Liu, "Enhanced modulation bandwidth in injection-locked semi-
conductor lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 9, 1322-1324 (1997). 
54. X. J. Meng, T. Chau, and M. C. Wu, "Experimental demonstration of modulation band-
width enhancement in distributed-feedback lasers with external light injection," 
Electron. Lett. 34, 2031-2032 (1998). 
55. X. Jin and S. L Chuang, "Bandwidth enhancement of Fabry-Perot quantum-well lasers by 
injection-locking," Solid State Electron. 50, 1141-1149 (2006). 
56. L. Chrostowski, X. Zhao, and C. J. Chang-Hasnain, "Microwave performance of optically 
injection-locked VCSELs," IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techniq. 54, 788 (2006). 
57. X. Zhao, D. Parekh, E. K. Lau, H. K. Sung, M. C. Wu, W. Hofmann, M. C. Amann, and 
C. J. Chang-Hasnain, "Novel cascaded injection-locked 1.55-μηι VCSELs with 66 GHz 
modulation bandwidth," Optics Express 15, 14810-14816 (2007). 
58. M. W. Fleming and A. Mooradian, "Fundamental line broadening of single-mode 
(GaAl)As diode lasers,"/!^/. Phys. Lett. 38, 511 (1981). 
59. A. L. Schawlow and C. H. Townes, "Infrared and optical masers," Phys. Rev. 112, 
1940-1949(1958). 
60. C. H. Henry, 'Theory of the linewidth of semiconductor lasers," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-18, 259-264 (1982). 
61. C. H. Henry, "Spectral properties of semiconductor lasers," Chapter 3, in W. T. Tsang, 
Vol. Ed., Lightwave Communications Technology, vol. 22 Part B, in R. K. Willardson 
and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1985. 
62. E. Haken and H. Haken, "Zur theorie des halbleiter lasers," Z. Phys. 176,421-428 (1963). 
63. H. Haug and H. Haken, "Theory of noise in semiconductor laser emission," Z. Phys. 204, 
262-275 (1967). 
64. K. Vahala and A. Yariv, "Semiclassical theory of semiconductor lasers- Part I," IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. QE-19, 1096-1101 (1983). 
65. M. Lax, "Classical noise. V. Noise in self-sustained oscillators," Phys. Rev. 160, 290-307 
(1967). 
66. D. Welford and A. Mooradian, "Output power and temperature dependence of the linewidth 
of single-frequency cw (GaAl)As diode lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 865-867 (1982). 
67. Y. Asai, J. Ohya, and M. Ogura, "Spectral linewidth and resonant frequency characteristics of 
InGaAsP/InP multiquantum well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 25, 662-667 (1989). 
68. N. K. Dutta, H. Temkin, T. Tanbun-Ek, and R. Logan, "Linewidth enhancement factor for 
InGaAs/InP strained quantum well lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 57, 1390-1391 (1990). 
69. Y. Arakawa and A. Yariv, "Fermi energy dependence of linewidth enhancement factor of 
GaAlAs buried heterostructure lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 905-907 (1985). 
70. Y. Huang, S. Arai, and K. Komori, "Theoretical linewidth enhancement factor of Gai-Jta^As/ 
GalnAsP/InP strained-quantum-well structures," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 5, 142-145 
(1993). 

REFERENCES 
637 
71. F. Koyama and K. Iga, "Frequency chirping of external modulation and its reduction," 
Electron. Lett. 21, 1065-1066 (1985). 
72. Y. Noda, M. Suzuki, Y. Kushiro, and S. Akiba, "High-speed electroabsorption modulator 
with strip-loaded GalnAsP planar waveguide," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-4, 1445-1453 
(1986). 
73. T. H. Wood, "Multiple quantum well (MQW) waveguide modulators," J. Lightwave 
Technol. 6, 743-757 (1988). 
74. C. S. Chang, S. L. Chuang, J. Minch, Y. K. Chen, and T. Tanbun-Ek, "Amplified spon-
taneous emission spectroscopy in strained quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Sei. Topics 
Quantum Electron. 1, 1100-1107 (1995). 
75. P. Kondratko, S. L. Chuang, G. Walter, T. Chung, and N. Holonyak, Jr., "Observation of 
near-zero linewidth enhancement factor in a quantum-well coupled quantum-dot laser," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 4818-4820 (2003). 
76. J. Kim, H. Su, S. Minin, and S. L. Chuang, "Comparison of linewidth enhancement factor 
between p-doped and undoped quantum-dot lasers," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 18, 
1022-1024(2006). 
77. J. Kim and S. L. Chuang, "Theoretical and experimental study of optical gain, refractive 
index change, and linewidth enhancement factor of p-doped quantum-dot lasers," IEEE 
J. Quantum Electron. 42, 942-952 (2006). 
78. H. Su, L. Zhang, R. Wang, T. C. Newell, A. L. Gray, and L. F. Lester, "Linewidth study of 
InAs-InGaAs quantum dot distributed-feedback lasers," Photon. Technol. Lett. 16, 
2206-2208 (2004). 
79. G. Liu, X. Jin, and S. L. Chuang, "Novel techniques for measurement of linewidth 
enhancement factors of strained QW lasers using injection locking," IEEE Photon. 
Tech. Lett. 13, 430-432 (2001). 
80. M. Lerttamrab, S. L. Chuang, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, F. Capasso, and A. Y. Cho, 
"Linewidth enhancement factor of a type-I quantum-cascade laser," J. Appl. Phys. 94, 
5426-5428 (2003). 
81. J. Kim, M. Lerttamrab, S. L. Chuang, C. Gmachl, D. L. Sivco, F. Capasso, and A. Y. Cho, 
"Theoretical and experimental study of linewidth enhancement factor of type-I quantum 
cascade lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 40, 1663-1674 (2004). 
82. M. Lerttamrab, S. L. Chuang, R. Q. Yang, and C. J. Hill, "Linewidth enhancement factor 
of a type-II interband-cascade laser," J. Appl. Phys. 96, 3568-3570 (2004). 
83. L. A. Coldren and S. Corzine, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits, Wiley, 
New York, 1995. 
84. G. P. Agrawal, Lightwave Technology—Components and Devices, Wiley, New York, 
2004. 
85. Y. Yamamoto and N. Imoto, "Internal and external field fluctuations of a laser oscillator— 
Part I: quantum mechanical Langevin treatment," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 22, 
2032-2042 (1986). 
86. M. C. Tatham, I. F. Lealman, C. P. Seltzer, L. D. Westbrook, and D. M. Cooper, 
"Resonance frequency, damping, and differential gain in 1.5 μηι multiple quantum-well 
lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 28, 408-414 (1992). 
87. X. Jin and S. L. Chuang, "Relative intensive noise characteristics of injection-locked 
semiconductor lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 1250-1252 (2000). 


13 
Electrooptic and Acoustooptic Modulators 
In this chapter, we discuss electrooptic effects and modulators. The bulk electrooptic 
effects are discussed first, and their applications as amplitude and phase modulators 
are presented. These devices using waveguide structures are then shown. The basic 
idea is that the optical refractive index of electrooptic materials, such as LiNb03, 
KH2P04, or GaAs, and ZnS semiconductors, can be changed by an applied electric 
field. Therefore, an incident optical field propagating through the crystal with a proper 
polarization experiences efficient electrooptic effects. The transmitted field changes 
in either phase or polarization, which can be used in the designs of phase modulators 
as well as amplitude modulators. We then discuss scattering of light by sound and 
present a coupled-mode analysis of acoustooptic modulators. 
13.1 ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS AND AMPLITUDE MODULATORS 
To understand the electrooptic effects [1, 2], we consider a crystal described by the 
constitutive relation associating the displacement vector D to the electric field E by 
a permittivity tensor ε, 
D = e E 
C-JCX 
°jry 
°xz 
Syx 
Syy 
&yz 
(13.1.1) 
and the permeability is μο· Let us define the inverse of the permittivity tensor ε as K. 
Κ = ε-'. 
(13.1.2) 
The index ellipsoid of the crystal is described by 
3 
sp y ^ KyXjXj = 1 
(13.1.3) 
where X\ — x, X2 — y^ and Xj, = z for convenience. For most crystals, the permittivity 
matrix ε is symmetric due to the symmetry property of the structure. Therefore, ε can 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
639 

640 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
be diagonalized as 
εχ 
0 
0 
0 
By 
0 
0 
0 
εζ 
(13.1.4) 
The coordinate system in which ε is diagonalized is called the principal system. 
In this system, ε0Κ is a diagonal matrix with the diagonal elements equal to the 
reciprocals of the squared refractive indices of the three characteristic polarizations 
along the principal axes 
ε0Κ = ε0 
1/β, 
0 
0 
0 
1/β, 
0 
0 
0 
1/εζ 
U4 
o 
0 
0 
0 
\/n\ 
0 
0 
(13.1.5) 
and the index ellipsoid (13.1.3) is 
\ &X 
&V 
&7 
where n,- = y/εϊ/εο, i = x, y, and z. 
n2 
n2 
y 
z 
(13.1.6) 
13.1.1 
Electrooptic Effects 
In a linear electrooptic material, the index ellipsoid is changed in the presence of an 
applied electric field F, and Ky becomes Ky + ΑΚ^, where the change ΔΑ^ is linearly 
proportional to the electric field 
soAKij = y^ rijkFk. 
(13.1.7) 
k=\ 
The linear electrooptic effect is also called the Pockels effect, after Friedrich Pockels 
[3] (1865-1913), who described it in 1893. These rijk coefficients are also called the 
Pockels coefficients or electrooptic coefficients. 
Equation (13.1.7) can also be generalized to include the quadratic electrooptic 
effects, which are usually smaller than the linear effects, 
soAKij = Σ 
rmFk + Σ 
süuFkFi. 
(13.1.8) 
k=\ 
k,l=\ 
However, for materials with centrosymmetry, the index ellipsoid function must be an 
even function of the applied electric field because it must remain invariant upon the 
sign reversal of the electric field. Therefore, riJk vanishes, and the quadratic electro-
optic effects dominate. The quadratic electrooptic effect is also called the Kerr 
effect [3], after John Kerr (1824-1907), who discovered the effect in 1875. 

13.1 
ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS AND AMPLITUDE MODULATORS 
641 
In this chapter, we focus on linear electrooptical effects. From the symmetry 
property of the crystal, the following matrix correspondence is defined, so-called 
the engineering notation: 
12 
22 
13" 
23 
33 
<r-> 
" 1 6 
5 
2 4 
3 
(13.1.9) 
that is, we have (//')<->/= 1, 2,..., 6, and rijk = rlk. For example, the matrix elements 
(23) = (32) = 4, (13) = (31) = 5, and (12) = (21) = 6. Note that r,k is a 6 x 3 
matrix, and Eq. (13.1.7) can be rewritten as 
εο 
ΑΚι' 
AK2 
AK3 
AK4 
AK5 
AK6 
= 
r\\ 
rn 
>"31 
741 
751 
. r61 
r\2 
r22 
rs2 
rti 
rn~ 
?23 
^33 
^43 
rs3 
r 6 3 . 
Γ c " 
1 
X 
L' z . 
(13.1.10) 
We interchange Fx = Fu Fy = Fi, and Fz = F3 for convenience. Depending on the 
symmetry of the crystal, many of the matrix elements rIk may vanish. We usually 
refer to some databook [4] or reference tables [5-8] for the crystal symmetry and 
nonvanishing rtk values. A few important electrooptic materials are shown in 
Table 13.1 for illustration purposes. 
Example 
The potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KDP or KH2P04) crystal is uniax-
ial in the absence of an applied field 
εο 7 , Kijxixj 
~ 
n 
x2 . y2 
i,;=l 
(13.1.11) 
where nx = ny = nQ, and nz = ne. With an applied field, we have rlk = 0 except for r63 
and r4, = r52. Note thatxi 
Equation (13.1.10) gives 
■ x,x2= y, XT, = z, and use the mapping table in (13.1.9). 
εο 
ΔΑ:," 
AK2 
ΑΚ3 
ΑΚ4 
ΑΚ5 
ΑΚ6 
' 0 
0 
0 
ηι 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
>52 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
^63 
Fy 
= 
Lx ζ J 
0 
0 
0 
r4\Fx 
rsiFy 
. r^Fz _ 
(13.1.12) 

642 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
TABLE 13.1 A Few Electrooptic Materials with Their Parameters [1, 4, 6, 9] 
Point-Group 
Symmetry 
3m 
32 
42m 
42m 
42m 
42m 
43m 
43m 
43m 
Material 
LiNb0 3 
Quartz 
(Si02) 
KH 2P0 4 
(KDP) 
NH4H2PO4 
(ADP) 
KD2PO4 
(KD'P) 
GaAs 
InP 
ZnSe 
/3-ZnS 
Refractive 
Τ|^(1ί»γ 
wn 
2.297 
1.544 
1.5115 
1.5074 
1.5266 
1.5220 
1.5079 
3.60 
3.42 
3.34 
3.29 
3.20 
2.60 
2.36 
nc 
2.208 
1.553 
1.4698 
1.4669 
1.4808 
1.4773 
1.4683 
= 
« 0 
= 
Wo 
= 
Wo 
= 
"o 
= 
« o 
= w0 
= 
Wo 
Wavelength, 
λο(μπι) 
0.633 
0.589 
0.546 
0.633 
0.546 
0.633 
0.546 
0.9 
1.0 
10.6 
1.06 
1.35 
0.633 
0.6 
Nonzero Electrooptic 
Coefficients 
(10~ l 2m/V) 
r\3 — rTi — 8.6, Γ33 = 30.8 
^42 = r5{ = 28, r22 = 3.4 
Π2 = r6\ — ~r2l 
r4l = - r 5 2 = 0.2 
r62 = r2\ - ~rn 
= 0 . 9 3 
Γ41 = & = 8.77, Γ ω = 10.3 
r41 = r52 = 8, r63 = 11 
»4i = ^52 = 23.76, r63 = 8.56 
'41 = ^52 = 23.41, 
»to = 7.828 
r4] = r52 = 8.8, r63 = 26.8 
r41 = r52 = r63 = 1.1 
r4i = ^52 = 'to = 1-5 
»41 = '52 = '63 = 1-6 
?41 = >52 = '"63=1 -45 
r41 = r52 = r63 = 1.3 
»41 = r52 = r63 = 2.0 
r4\ = r52 = r63 = 2.1 
Therefore, ε0ΔΑΓ4 = r4\Fx, ε0ΔΚ5 = r52Fy, and ε0ΔΚ6 = r6iFz 
ε0 Σ 
Δ-KijXiXj = 2r4iFxyz + 2r52Fyxz + 2r63Fzxy 
(13.1.13) 
where a factor of 2 accounts for the symmetry of the matrix elements. Therefore, the 
new index ellipsoid 
ε0 Σ 
(Ky + AKijfoxj = 1 
'.y=i 
(13.1.14) 
becomes 
X2 
y2
 i z2 
2 ■" -9" + -, + 2r4iFxyz + 2r52Fyxz + 2r63Fzxy = 1. 
< < 
nl 
(13.1.15) 
In general, the above index ellipsoid may not have the principal axes along the x, y, or z 
directions any more, as will be shown in the following examples. 

13.1 
ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS AND AMPLITUDE MODULATORS 
643 
13.1.2 Longitudinal Amplitude Modulator 
Consider the setup as in Fig. 13.1 with the applied electric field along the propagation 
direction (z) of light F = zFz. The index ellipsoid is 
x2 
y2 
z2 
, 
, 2 + 2r63Fzxy= 1. 
(13.1.16) 
ni 
ni 
ni 
The above equation shows that the principal axes along the x and y directions are 
rotated because of the cross term, 2r6iFzxy. We have to find the new principal 
optical axes such that the index ellipsoid can be described by a diagonal (K + 
AK)ij matrix. A coordinate rotation of 45° on the x-y plane gives 
Substituting (13.1.17) into (13.1.16), we find 
(13.1.17) 
1 
r&Fz 
■y-[ä+raF< 
1. 
(13.1.18) 
We may rewrite the index ellipsoid as 
x!2 
y'2 
2 
' 
2 
' 
9 
K 
np ni 
(13.1.19) 
Polaroid 
+ V(i)-
Figure 13.1 A longitudinal amplitude modulator in which an applied electric field is biased along the 
direction of optical wave propagation. 

644 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
where 
nx> 
An 
(1 
= nx< 
n0 
An 
- nlr63Fz)^ 
" ;I" ' 2 ' 
- ny = nlr63Fz. 
ny '. - n0 
An 
2 
(13.1.20) 
We note that in the new coordinate system (x'-y'-z), the matrices (K + ΔΛΤ),·, and e,y 
are diagonalized 
(13.1.21) 
ε0(Κ + ΔΚ) = Π/4 
0 
0 
0 
1/4 
0 
0 " 
0 
\/nl\ 
ε = 
Βχ> 
0 
0 
0 
By· 
0 
0" 
0 
εζ_ 
where ε^ = η^,εο, ey> = η,ε^ 
and εζ = η^ε^. The incident optical field, after 
passing through the polarizer, can be expressed as 
»z _ fx' + y 
E = xE(,e' 
V2 
E0e' ikz 
(13.1.22) 
where k = ω/c = 2ττ/λο, and Ao is the wavelength in free space. Upon hitting the 
surface at z = 0, the wave is decomposed into two orthonormal polarizations along 
the xf and y' directions; each satisfies all of the Maxwell's equations independently 
because each is a characteristic polarization of the crystal. The propagation constants 
of the x'- and _y'-polarized components are knxi and kny, respectively. Neglecting the 
reflections at the surfaces z = 0 and z = I, the optical field inside the crystal can be 
written as 
K=(x'eikn''z+y'eikn>'z)^. 
%/2 
(13.1.23) 
The transmitted field passing through the second polaroid at z = £ is the y component 
of E in (13.1.23), or (y ■ E) using 
X = x-y 
y 
x + y 
V2 
' 
V2 
Ey = ( _ ^ + eikn^ *k 
= (-isin^)eÄ""f£o 
where the angle is defined as 
= y («*' - ny) =~An 
= —n3
0r63Fz. 
(13.1.24) 
(13.1.25) 
(13.1.26) 

13.1 ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS AND AMPLITUDE MODULATORS 
645 
The transmitted power intensity divided by the incident power intensity is pro-
portional to 
T = Pt 
\Eo\ 
sin2 φ(ί). 
(13.1.27) 
Noting that Fz(t)i = V(t) is the applied voltage, we define Vm the voltage yield-
ing a phase difference of ττ between the two characteristic polarizations, that 
is, klin^ — ny) = -π, 
V„ = 
■77 
λο 
kn3
0r63 
2nlr63 
(13.1.28) 
and obtain 
W 
2 V„ 
(13.1.29) 
By varying V(t), the output light intensity is modulated. To obtain a linear 
response, V(/) has to be biased at a dc voltage = V„/2 (so φ = π/4) where the 
transmission factor is 50% as shown in Fig. 13.2, that is, 
V(t) = -— + v0 sin (Omt 
(13.1.30) 
P . / ^ s i n ^ 
Figure 13.2 Transmission of a light intensity in a longitudinal amplitude electrooptical modulator. The 
applied voltage V(f) is biased at a dc value V„/2. 

646 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
and the transmission factor is 
_, 
. ■) I 7Γ 
UVQ . 
T = sinz ( — + —-sin wmi 
TWQ 
■ 
sin I 
sinci>mi 
(13.1.31) 
1 +-—sinw mi 
y ir 
We see that for a small input signal πν0 <C Vm and the bias at the 50% point, V„/ 
2, a linear response can be achieved. However, because V^ is typically very large, 
a better way is to add a quarter-wave-plate between the electrooptic crystal and the 
output polaroid, with the two principal axes of the plate along the x1 and / direc-
tions such that an extra phase difference of ττ/2 is introduced between the x! and yf 
components of (13.1.23) 
E = 
(Ve^e^+y'e^A^ 
V2 
Pi 
7/TT 
kAn£\ 
. 2 / T T 
TT-V(i) 
(13.1.32) 
(13.1.33) 
In this case, the modulation voltage is V(t) = v0 sin a>mt instead of (13.1.30). No dc 
bias is necessary. 
13.1.3 Transverse Amplitude Modulator 
A transverse amplitude modulator is shown in Fig. 13.3 in which the applied field is 
biased in a direction perpendicular to the propagation direction of light. The incident 
Passing 
axis 
Polaroid 
/ = 0 
Polaroid 
y=( 
Figure 13.3 A transverse amplitude modulator. The bias field zFz is perpendicular to the direction of 
light wave propagation. 

13.1 ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS AND AMPLITUDE MODULATORS 
647 
optical electric field after passing through the polaroid is 
E, = P^W V 
(13.1.34) 
propagating in free space. Note that the direction of propagation has been chosen to 
be along they' direction of the electrooptic crystal, which makes an angle of 45° with 
the principal x and y axes of the unbiased crystal. After passing through the crystal, 
the x1 and z components gain different phases at y' = i 
E2 = (x'eikn'e + zeik"<e) ^=. 
(13.1.35) 
V2 
Here, we still use LiNb03 crystal in our analysis. The transmitted field through the 
second polaroid with the passing axis given by (— it' + z)/y/2 is 
E, = E2- ( ^ ι ^ ) 
= {-<?knA + eikn'e)^. 
(13.1.36) 
Define 
hi 
k£ 
k£ 
Φ = ^τ(ηχ> -Me) = y("o -«e) + - A « 
(13.1.37) 
where An = n\r(ßFz. We obtain the transmission factor 
^ = ^ - = Sir2 
Pi 
\Eo\ 
2 
ύηζφ. 
(13.1.38) 
Here the time-dependent field Fz(t) modulates the phase φ(ί), which determines the 
output light intensity as a function of time. Because Fz(t) = V(t)/d, where d is the 
thickness of the crystal, we can define a half-wave voltage Vw as the voltage required 
to introduce an extra phase shift of ττ 
2ir fd\ 
= _^λο_ 
The factor d/l can be chosen to be small; therefore, the half-wave voltage V„ is 
reduced compared with that for a longitudinal amplitude modulator. We write 
4> = y ( « o - « e ) + f ^ . 
(13.1.40) 

648 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
A linear response is obtainable if we choose 
kf 
ΊΓ 
y ( « o - « e ) = 4 
(13.1.41) 
and the input signal V(t) = v0 sin wmr is small, v0 <C VV The transmission factor is 
the same as (13.1.33) and is similar to Fig. 13.2. 
13.2 PHASE MODULATORS 
13.2.1 Optical Phase Modulation 
Consider an incident optical field propagating along the z direction and passing 
through the polaroid as shown in Fig. 13.4. 
E = ^E0eikz. 
(13.2.1) 
Because the polaroid has been aligned such that the passing axis is along one of the 
characteristic polarizations of the electrooptic crystal, x1, the transmitted field at z = I 
is simply 
E, = x'E0eikn^ = 
x'Eoe^e'^2. 
Therefore, if we modulate the applied electric field as 
Fz(t) = F0 sin ω,,,ί 
we find 
(13.2.2) 
(13.2.3) 
E, 
=xlE0eiknJeiSύnu>m, 
(13.2.4) 
Passing 
Axis «, 
Polaroid 
Figure 13.4 A longitudinal phase modulator with an applied electric field zFz{t) along the propagation 
direction of optical field E. 

13.2 PHASE MODULATORS 
649 
where 
δ= 
° " 
· 
(13.2.5) 
The electric field in the time domain is 
E,(£ i) = Re[E,e-'w] 
-, 
„ 
(13.2.6) 
= x E0 cos (kn0t + δ sin wmt — ωί). 
The phase of the output optical field is modulated by the factor Ssin wmi. If we use the 
mathematical identity [10] 
00 
e,ScoS<*> = 
J2 Jm(8)ei""t>ein"T/2 
(13.2.7) 
or, equivalently, 
oo 
eiSsin0= γ^ 
7m(5y'm*. 
(13.2.8) 
m=—oo 
Equation (13.2.6) can also be written as 
Et(£, t) = 
Re[^E0ei(knJ-wl)eiSs[n^'] 
00 
= Re[x'El}ei(kn°e-'ü') ^ Jm(S)eimo>™'] 
m=—oo 
00 
= X'EQ 2_] Jm(S)cos [fcn0^ — (ω — mwm)t\. 
(13.2.9) 
The output optical field contains, in addition to the fundamental frequency ω with 
an amplitude J0(S)E0, various sidebands with frequencies, ω + wm, ω + 2<vm, 
and so forth, with corresponding amplitudes +Ji(8)E0, J2(S)E0,.... 
Note that 
J-m(S) = (-\)mJm{8). 
If the magnitude δ ~ 2.4048, the root of the zeroth-order 
Bessel function, JQ(S) = 0, all of the power in the fundamental frequency ω is trans-
ferred to the nonzero-order harmonics. 
Example 
LiNb03 has a 3m point-group symmetry and its r//t matrix has nonzero 
elements [1, 11]: r12 = -r22, r23 = r13, r33, r42 = r5l, r6l = -r22 from Table 13.1 
and their r-values at a wavelength λ0 = 0.633 μηι are 
r13 = 8.6 x 10"12 m/V, 
r33 = 30.8 x 10"12 m/V 
r22 = 3.4 x 10_12m/V, 
r5i = 28.0 x 10_12m/V. 

650 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
The refractive indices of LiNb03 have a uniaxial form 
nx = ny = na — 2.297 
and nz= ne = 2.208. 
For an applied electric field F = x Fx + y Fy + z Fz, the new index ellipsoid is derived 
as follows: 
eo 
ΔΚΓ 
AK2 
AK3 
AK4 
AK5 
AK6_ 
- o 
0 
0 
0 
rs\ 
.r6\ 
rn 
r22 
0 
r42 
0 
0 
r\i~ 
r23 
*"33 
0 
0 
0 . 
'Fx 
Fy 
fz. 
= 
'rnFy + n3Fz 
ruFy + r23Fz 
r^Fz 
rAlFy 
rsiFx 
rt,\Fx 
(13.2.10) 
x2 
■r\2Fy + ruFz 
+y 
2 + r22Fy + r23Fz + zf . , 
+ 2r42Fyyz + 2r5]Fxxz + 2r6]Fxxy = 1. 
^ 3 3 ^ 
(13.2.11) 
Because r33 is the largest coefficient, an applied electric field along the z direction will 
be most efficient for the electrooptic control. Therefore, for Fx = Fy = 0, the index 
ellipsoid is given by 
x2 Q r + r13Fz) + v2 ( 1 + r23F^j + z2 ( 1 + r33Fz^j = 1 
(13.2.12) 
which is of the form 
x2 
y2 
nl 
ny 
n\ 
where the new refractive indices are 
1 3 
nx = ny ~ n0 
--nlri3Fz 
1 , 
"z —ne 
-~n„r33Fz. 
(13.2.13) 
(13.2.14a) 
(13.2.14b) 
13.2.2 X-cut LiNb03 Crystal 
For an X-cut LiNb03 crystal, as shown in Fig. 13.5a, two electrodes are placed sym-
metrically on both sides of the waveguides such that the bias field F = zFz is along 
the z direction, and the index ellipsoid is described by (13.2.13). An incident optical 
electric field with TE polarization will transmit as 
E = zE0eikn'y\y=e = 
zE0eikn'ee-ilcn>^e/2. 
(13.2.15a) 

13.2 PHASE MODULATORS 
651 
(a) 
X-cut LiNb03 phase modulator 
-F3: 
z< 
' 
nv 
• ■._;-- -<__...y_y f 
Transmitted 
light 
(b) 
Z-cut LiNb03 phase modulator 
z 
z 
r—n 
* - » ' , , , C 
.,-v * 
i^V*-* Transmitted 
light 
Figure 13.5 Electrooptic phase modulator using (a) an X-cut LiNb03 substrate, where the electrodes are 
placed symmetrically on both sides of the waveguide, such that the bias field is along the z direction; and (b) 
a Z-cut LiNb03 substrate, where one electrode is placed directly above the waveguide such that the bias 
field in the waveguide is along the positive (or negative) z direction for the most efficient phase modulation, 
as r33 is the largest electrooptic coefficient. 
Similarly, for TM polarization, 
E = xEQelkn>yLe = 
xE0eiknJe'ikn>"F^2. 
(13.2.15b) 
Therefore, TE polarization should be used for most efficient phase modulation 
as r33 > r,3. 
13.2.3 Z-cut LiNb03 Crystal 
For a Z-cut LiNb03 crystal as shown in Fig. 13.5b, the electrodes are placed such that 
the waveguide is below one of the two electrodes where the field is perpendicular to 
the Z-cut surface and F = zF3. The optical transmission field will be 
E = xE0eiknJe-ikn°r»F^2 
(TE polarization) 
(13.2.16a) 
and 
E 
zE0eikn'ee~ikn,'r33Fz^2 
(TM polarization). 
(13.2.16b) 

652 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
In this case, TM polarization is preferred for most efficient phase modulation. For 
more discussions on the polarization and electrode designs, including the TE and 
TM polarization conversions, see Refs. 11-16. 
13.3 ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS IN WAVEGUIDE DEVICES 
In Chapter 8, we discussed optical directional couplers using parallel waveguides. 
Here we discuss briefly the applications of electrooptic effects in waveguide struc-
tures. We have discussed KDP and LiNb03 as examples for electrooptic amplitude 
and phase modulators. Some of these materials such as LiNb03 as electrooptic crys-
tals have been used in many commercial devices. Here, we will discuss GaAs as an 
example for electrooptic waveguide devices. For integrated optoelectronics, semicon-
ductor materials, especially III-V compounds, are attractive because many active and 
passive components, such as semiconductor lasers, photodetectors, and field effect 
transistors, are made of these compound semiconductors. However, considerable 
research work is still necessary for integrating passive and active devices with 
desired operation characteristics. 
Example 
GaAs at 10.6 μπι wavelength. n0 = 3.34, r41 = r52 = r63 = 1.6 x 10" '2 
m/V. All other r components are zero. For a biased field F = xFx + yFy + zFz, the 
new index ellipsoid is, following (13.1.12)—(13.1.15), 
2 
2 
2 
X~i + ^2 + \ + lr^Fxyz 
+ 2r6$Fyxz + 2r63Fzxy = 1. 
(13.3.1) 
"o 
no 
K 
If we choose Fx = FY = 0, F = zFz, we then have 
x2 
y2 
-^ + ^ + 2r63Fzxy + ~=l. 
(13.3.2) 
Z2 
This is similar to that of the KDP materials, except that the crystal in the absence 
of field is isotropic, or ne = na. Again a rotation of 45° in the x-y 
plane 
gives x = (x1 + / ) / \ / 2 , y = (-x' + y')/y/l, 
yp. 
yi 
z 
p^ 
n*· 
«2 
where 
An 
An 
2 
/2 
+ — + -,= 
I 
(13.3.3) 
η ^ ~ η 0 + — , ny ~ n 0 - — - , Δη = n„r63Fz. 
(13.3.4) 
The previous analysis for longitudinal amplitude modulators for LiNb03 is appli-
cable to GaAs materials. 

13.3 ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS IN WAVEGUIDE DEVICES 
(a) 
A Mach-Zehnder interferometric waveguide modulator 
653 
Λ„=1 
7<^%mMK 
/ W \ A - > * out 
Electrooptic crystal 
(b) 
A directional coupler modulator 
Λ„=1 
ΛΛΛ,—>P. 
(C) 
A Δ/3-ph ase-reversal directional coupler 
, ^ ^ > P f c 
Figure 13.6 Waveguide electrooptic devices with electrode designs, (a) A Mach-Zehnder interfero-
metric modulator, (b) a directional coupler modulator, and (c) a Δ/3-phase-reversal directional coupler. 
In the following examples, we consider (a) a Mach-Zehnder interferometric 
waveguide modulator, (b) a directional coupler modulator, and (c) a Δ/3-phase-
reversal directional coupler, as shown in Fig. 13.6 [11-17]. The input power Pm is 
taken as 1 in each case. The electrodes are designed such that the applied electric 
field is along the z-direction F = + zFz and the bias fields in two waveguides 
are opposite in signs. Therefore, the difference between the two propagation 
factors is approximately 
Aß~k [n0 + 
An 
k\ n 
An 
~2 
kn3
0r63 
V(t) 
(13.3.5) 
where an effective width d is defined for the electric field (Fz ~ V(t)/d). The import-
ant point is that Δ/3 °c V(t). We will study the transmission characteristics of these 
devices as a function of the detuning factor Aßi. 

654 
ELECTROOPT1C AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
13.3.1 Mach-Zehnder Interferometric Waveguide Modulator 
As shown in Fig. 13.6a, a single waveguide is branched into two arms for a dis-
tance I and combined again into one arm as the output waveguide. The waveguide 
dimension can be chosen to guide the fundamental mode only. With a proper 
choice of the polarization of the incident wave and the electrode design, the trans-
mitted intensity is 
> 
•J + eißbe\ 
= c o s
2 Ψ) 
(13.3.6) 
where the output intensity is normalized such that the peak transmission factor is 1 
for perfect power transmission. One way to understand this transmission behavior is 
that if the guided modes are in phase at the exit of the Y junction, Fig. 13.7, they 
add up constructively and transmit with the maximum power. If they are out of 
phase by 180°, they will cancel each other. Another way to look at this is, if 
they add up to a first-order mode, it will leak out over a very short distance 
because the waveguide is designed to guide the fundamental mode only, resulting 
in a destructive output. A plot of the output power Pout versus the mismatch Δβ£ is 
shown in Fig. 13.8. The interferometric behavior is clearly seen. 
Broadband Ti-diffused LiNb03 electrooptic modulators with a traveling-wave 
electrode using X-cut and Z-cut crystal facets have been fabricated with 
T 
Guided mode 
T 
Constructive 
output 
T 
Leakage 
Destructive 
output 
Figure 13.7 An illustration of the Y-junction constructive and destructive outputs in a Mach-Zehnder 
interferometric waveguide modulator. 

13.3 ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS IN WAVEGUIDE DEVICES 
655 
-2 
-
1
0 
1
2 
Αβ(/π 
Figure 13.8 The output power from a Mach-Zehnder interferometric waveguide modulator as a function 
of the mismatch factor Δβί (normalized by π). 
impressive performance for telecommunications at 10Gb/s or 40Gb/s [18-23]. 
For an overview, we refer to Ref. 21. LiNb03 has been an important material of 
choice for the fabrication of electrooptic modulators due to its combination of 
high electrooptic coefficients and high optical transparency in the near-infrared 
wavelengths used for telecommunications [21]. It has a high Curie temperature 
(1100°C to 1180°C) making it practical for fabrication of low-loss optical 
waveguides through interdiffusion of metals such as titanium. LiNb03 is also 
thermally, chemically, and mechanically stable and is compatible with conven-
tional integrated-circuit processing technology. LiNb03 waveguides have 
been traditionally fabricated by interdiffusion of Ti at temperatures near 
1000°C. An alternative method is through the annealed proton exchange 
(APE) process, which is a low-temperature process (120°C to 250°C) whereby 
Li ions from the LiNb03 wafer are exchanged with protons from an acid 
bath. Proton exchange can only be applied to X- and Z-cut wafers; the acid 
chemically etches Y-cut wafers. Exchanged layers exhibit an increase of the 
extraordinary refractive index; the ordinary index is left virtually undisturbed 
or even reduced. As a result, the waveguides are polarization dependent. The 
APE process is followed by a high-temperature annealing, which stabilizes 
the index. RF electrodes using gold are fabricated either directly on the 
surface of the LiNb03 wafer or on an optically transparent buffer layer to 
reduce optical loss due to metal loading and provide a means for optical/RF 
velocity matching. 
Figure 13.9a shows a schematic diagram of a Mach-Zehnder optical modulator 
using coplanar waveguide (CPW) electrodes [19]. Two types of traveling-wave elec-
trodes are commonly used: the coplanar waveguide electrodes, Fig. 13.9b, or asym-
metric coplanar strip-line (A-CPS) electrodes, Fig. 13.9c [19]. The bandwidth is 
limited by the velocity mismatch between microwave and optic wave in the 
devices, which is caused by the high dielectric constant of LiNb03 itself. Various 
modulator structures have been used to reduce the velocity mismatch or the drive 

656 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPT1C MODULATORS 
ETCHED REGIONS 
CPW 
ELECTRODES 
SiOa 
BUFFER LAYER 
Tl-DIFFUSED WAVEGUIDE 
(b) 
6 W 6 
tm 
tb 
tr 
(c) 
A-CPS 
6/^ELECTW»eS 
7} 
Figure 13.9 (a) Schematic diagram for a Mach-Zehnder interferometric optical waveguide modulator 
with coplanar waveguide (CPW) electrodes, (b) Cross-sectional view of the CPW electrodes, and (c) 
cross-sectional view of asymmetric planar strip-line (A-CPS) electrodes for ridge-type optical waveguide 
modulators. (Reprinted with permission from (Ί9] © 1995 IEEE.) 
voltage: structures with a shielding plane on the CPW electrodes, structures using a 
thicker A-CPS or CPW electrode, ridge-type modulators [18-20] with an etched Z-
cut LiNb03 substrate between the center and ground electrodes or with a thicker Si02 
buffer layer and CPW electrodes, and structures using X-cut crystal with two-step 
back slots without a buffer layer [22, 23]. 

13.3 ELECTROOPTIC EFFECTS IN WAVEGUIDE DEVICES 
657 
13.3.2 Directional Coupler Modulator 
For an incident optical beam into waveguide a in a directional coupler modulator, the 
output power is 
and 
ΡΒ = 
\Κ*)\2=]-ψ-&ίη\Φέ) 
1/2 
Tjf — (f)-S 
(13.3.7a) 
(13.3.7b) 
Pa = Pin-Pb 
= l - \b(£)\2 
(13.3.8) 
where the input power is assumed to be 1. Because Aß ~ ßa — ßb = kn^r^V/d, we 
plot the output power Pa versus Aßt. Suppose we design the modulator with a length I 
such that Pa = 0, and Pb = 1, at Aß = 0 (i.e., Κί = ττ/2). In order to switch to Pa = 1, 
and Pb = 0, we require at least Αβί = \/37τ·, assuming the field-induced change in the 
refractive index affects the coupling coefficient negligibly. (Otherwise, we can calculate 
the field-dependent K and still use the expressions for Pa and Pb in (13.3.7) and (13.3.8) 
to find the output powers.) To switch from a cross state to a parallel state, the applied 
voltage has to be large enough such that Αβί = y/Ίητ is satisfied. A plot of Pa versus 
Αβί for Κί = ττ/2 is shown as the thick solid curve in Fig. 13.10. We also plot Pa 
versus Αβί for KI — π, and Kg — 3π/2. We see that complete switching from the 
(8) (cross) state to the Θ (parallel) state is possible (for Κί = π/2 or 3ττ/2). For 
Kg = IT, where we start with the parallel state at Aßt = 0, it is impossible to switch 
to the ® state simply by changing Αβί alone. This fact can also be checked with the 
switching diagram in Fig. 8.11. 
Figure 13.10 The output power from waveguide a as a function of Δ/3/ for Ki = ττ/2, ττ, and 3ir/2 for a 
directional coupler modulator. 

658 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
13.3.3 Δβ-Phase-Reversal Directional Coupler 
The Δ/3-phase-reversal directional coupler [11-17] is shown in Fig. 13.6c, and its 
analysis can be found in Section 8.6. The switching diagram is shown in 
Fig. 8.13. Suppose we start with the parallel state at Kl = π, Al = 0, where Δ = 
(ßa - ft.)/2· Tte output power is 
Wf 
2ΙΨΙ\ 
ψ2 
sin 
ψ£ 
(13.3.9) 
We plot Pa versus Aßl as the solid curve in Fig. 13.11 for Kl = -π and also for 
Kl = 7T/2 (dashed curve) for comparison. 
13.4 SCATTERING OF LIGHT BY SOUND: RAMAN-NATH AND 
BRAGG DIFFRACTIONS 
The refractive index of a medium can be modulated by a mechanical strain produced 
by an acoustic wave; this is called the acoustooptic effect. A sound wave creates a 
sinusoidal perturbation of the density, or strain or pressure of the material. The 
induced change in refractive index can be described as 
An(r, t) = An cos (ks · r — w5t) 
(13.4.1) 
with ω8 = the angular frequency, ks = the wave vector, ks = 2<n-/As, As — wave-
length, and vs = <*>s/ks is the velocity of sound in the medium. 
a? 
I
0·
5 
I 
^
\ 
• 
' 
L 
' 
'
/ 
V 
Κί =πΙ2 / 
V / 
\ \ 
/ 
\ \ 
/ 
\ \ 
/ 
\ * 
/ 
\ * 
/ 
\ \ / 
\ V 
\/v, 
\ 
Κί=π 
// 
l 
* 
/ 
\ 
* / 
\ 
* / 
\ 
' / 
\ 
' / 
\ 
/ / 
\ / 
/ 
\* 
/ 
^ r\ y, 
/'N 
■ 
' 
1 
-
4
-
3
-
2
-
1
0
1
2
3
4 
Αβί/π 
Figure 13.11 The output power Pa of a Δ/3-phase-reversal directional coupler as a function of \βί for 
Ki = ir/2 and ir. 

13.4 SCATTERING OF LIGHT BY SOUND 
659 
13.4.1 
Raman-Nath Diffraction 
Assume that the length of the interaction between the light and the acoustic wave i is 
small [9] 
(13.4.2) 
where k = 2π/λ.0, λ0 is the optical wavelength in free space, and n is the refractive 
index. This is called the Raman-Nath regime of diffraction (Fig. 13.12). In this 
case, the thin region in which the acoustic wave propagates acts like a phase 
grating, and the diffracted lights can go to many different directions determined by 
the generalized Snell's law for a grating 
kn sin 9m 
2TT 
m — , 
m = an integer 
-l / 
Λο 
sin 
m 
(13.4.3) 
A simple analysis of the diffraction efficiency for this case is to consider a j-polarized 
light at x = I 
where 
Ey(x = I, z, t) = E0e' Akn(z,t)i-tot] 
(13.4.4) 
n(z, t) = n + An cos (fcsz — wst). 
(13.4.5) 
Incident 
light 
n + An 
Radius = kn 
Thin 
Figure 13.12 Raman-Nath diffraction. The interaction length £ is short and the thin region acts like an 
optical phase grating with the period equal to the acoustic wavelength As. 

660 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPT1C MODULATORS 
We then write the field at x = I using the mathematical identity [10] in (13.2.7) 
00 
eiSco^= γ^ rjjfiy"1* 
(13.4.6) 
m=—oo 
and set 
S = kAnl 
(13.4.7) 
φ = Κζ-ω*ί. 
(13.4.8) 
The electric field atx = £ then becomes 
00 
Ey(x = i, z, t) = E0eiM Σ 
imJm(kAne)eimk>ze-K'ü+ma'*)'. 
(13.4.9) 
m=-°o 
Because for x > £, the electric field has to satisfy the wave equation in the medium 
described by the refractive index n, we should have the solution of the form 
00 
Ey(x>e,z,t)= 
Σ 
Eme*-t*-e)+uwe-i<+.t 
(13.4.10) 
where 
ω™ = ω + /ηω, 
\zm 
— "«vs 
mL 
( ^ « ) 2 - ^ 
(13.4.11) 
and 
Em = E0eikneimJm(kAnt). 
(13.4.12) 
We note that α)8<ω; therefore, wm ~ ω, and 
*** = y(^n) 
-(^s)2- 
(13.4.13) 
The diffraction angle of the mth order is therefore 
km = knsin 0m ~ mk^ 
(13.4.14) 
The diffraction angles are given by (13.4.3). 
13.4.2 Bragg Diffraction 
When the interaction length λ between the optical and acoustic waves is long com-
pared with kn/kl, we have the Bragg diffraction. In this case, the incident kj 
vector has to come from a particular direction satisfying the Bragg condition 
2/cnsin0=/fcs 
(13.4.15) 

13.5 COUPLED-MODE ANALYSIS 
661 
2fcnsin 0=ks 
I is long 
Figure 13.13 Bragg diffraction. When the interaction length I is long, only one particular angle of inci-
dence with one diffracted beam satisfying the Bragg condition 2kn sin 6 = ks will be observed. The path 
AO + OB — K/n for constructive interference. Therefore, 2AS sin θ = λ/η. 
where Θ is the angle of incidence, which is also the angle of diffraction. There is only 
one diffracted beam determined by the above Bragg condition (Fig. 13.13). The 
analysis of the Bragg diffraction will be presented in Section 13.5. 
13.5 
COUPLED-MODE ANALYSIS FOR BRAGG ACOUSTOOPTIC 
WAVE COUPLERS 
The analysis for Bragg diffraction can be based on the coupled-mode theory [1,2]. 
We start with Maxwell's equations 
V x E = 
d_ 
dt 
μΆ 
V X H = | D 
at 
where the displacement vector is 
D = e0n2(r, f)E 
and the refractive index variation is 
n(r, t) = n + An(r, t) 
An(r, /) = A«cos(ks· r - wsi)-
(13.5.1) 
(13.5.2) 
(13.5.3) 
Here the background refractive index n and the amplitude of variation An are inde-
pendent of the position and t. 
Consider a TE polarized wave E = y Ey{x, z, t) and assume that both the acoustic 
wave and the optical wave propagate in the x-z plane (r = xx + zz)- This solution 
satisfies the Gauss law because 
V- D = — [ε0η2(χ, z, t)Ey{x, z, 01 = 0. 
oy 
(13.5.4) 

662 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
The wave equation is derived from (13.5.1) and (13.5.2) 
d2 
V x V x E = -μ,,εοττ^ [/Τ + 2nAn(r, f)]E 
(13.5.5) 
We assume the incident electric field to be 
Ej(r, 0 = y^Ei(r)ei(K-T-'°·0 
+ c.c. 
(13.5.7) 
and the diffracted electric field 
Ed(r, t) = y-Ea(T)em-T-mt) 
+ c.c. 
(13.5.8) 
The variation of the refractive index can be put in the form 
An(r, f) = ^V^-r-ω,ο + Δ" -«k..r-*o. 
(13.5.9) 
Then 
V2Ei =y- [-k2E + 2/ki-V£i + V2£i]e,'(ki-r-<üii) + c.c. 
* ή (-kfEi + 2*^)^-") 
+ c.c. 
(13.5.10) 
-y-^ 
+ ^
y 
where the second derivative of Et has been ignored because we assume the amplitude 
£j(r) is slowly varying compared with the exp(/kj-r) dependence and r, is now along 
the direction of k;. A similar expression holds for V2Ed. The term containing the 
product of An(r, ί)Ε will give rise to four terms 
An(r, r)£j = ^£j(r)[e''<k'+k'>r-''(<üi+<üs)' + ^-Κϊτ-κω,-ω.*] 
+ c χ 
(13.5.11) 
and a similar expression holds for A«(r, f)Ed. Noting that the total electric 
field E = Ej + Ed, we compare the terms of the same spatial and time variations 
and find 
kd = ki+k s 
wd = Wj + &>s 
(13.5.12) 
or 
ltd = kj — ks 
ωά = Wj - ws. 
(13.5.13) 
These results are illustrated in Fig. 13.14a and Fig. 13.14b. Equation (13.5.12) 
shows the conservations of momentum and energy for a photon with initial 
wave vector kj absorbing a phonon with a wave vector ks resulting in a final 
photon state with momentum ftkd = hk, + 7iks and energy ΫιωΛ — ha*, + Ηω%. 

13.5 COUPLED-MODE ANALYSIS 
663 
mi = coi-ms 
Figure 13.14 The diagrams for the diffraction of light by sound: (a) kd = k, + ks, a>d = Wj + ω8, and (b) 
kd = k( — ks, iod = (4 — a>s. 
Similarly, (13.5.13) corresponds to the emission of a phonon from the incident 
photon. 
Here h is the reduced Planck constant. Also noting that k\ = — n , 
c 
and kd = — n , we find from (13.5.6) and (13.5.10) 
c 
ikj · V/s, = ik\ dn 
2c2 AnEa(r). 
Because η is along the direction of k i ; and rd is along the direction of kj, we take r 
along the x direction, and 
We obtain 
r, cos Θ = x, 
dEi 
dx 
dEi 
rj cos Θ = x. 
ίΚ-,άΕά 
K,d = -z 
τ. 
dx 
2c cos Θ 
—— = iKd\E{ 
Κά\ = 
. 
ax 
2c cos Θ 
Because ω8·^ω·„ ω^ we have ωά ~ ω, = ω and Kdi ~ A^id = K 
a>An 
2c cos Θ 
(13.5.14) 
(13.5.15a) 
(13.5.15b) 
(13.5.16) 
The solutions for the coupled-mode equation given the initial conditions £i(0) and 
Ed(0) are 
E\{x) = £j(0) cos Kx + iEd(0) sin Kx 
Ed(x) = Ei(0) cos Kx + iEi(0) sin Kx. 
If initially, Ed(0) = 0, the field amplitudes are 
E[(x) = Ei(0) cos Kx 
Ed(x) = iE\(Q) sin Kx. 
(13.5.17) 
(13.5.18) 

664 
ELECTROOPT1C AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
π/(2Κ) 
Position (*) 
πΙΚ 
Figure 13.15 The coupling of energies between the incident and diffracted optical waves in an acous-
tooptic medium in which a sound wave propagates. 
The energy |£ί(0)|2 is coupled to |£d(.x;)|2 and backward during the interaction as the 
optical waves propagate along the x direction, as shown in Fig. 13.15. We can write 
that the diffraction efficiency at a length I is 
=· = sin / i t 
|£i(0)|2 
(13.5.19) 
PROBLEMS 
13.1 Calculate and compare the voltage parameter Vv = Ao/(2n„r63) for the 
materials and wavelengths with the nonzero r63 coefficients in Table 13.1. 
13.2 Show from Maxwell's equations that for a permittivity tensor in the principal 
axis system, 
BX 
0 
0 
0 
εν 
0 
0 
0 
e7 
(a) a plane wave polarized along the principal axis x and propagating along 
the z direction, E = xE0e'ßz, the propagation constant is β = ω^/με^; 
(b) a plane wave of the form E = yE0e'?z will have a propagation constant 
β = 
ω^μεν. 
13.3 For a longitudinal amplitude modulator as shown in Fig. 13.1, 
(a) if the bias voltage is V(t) = (0.5 + 0.1 sin w^V^ 
plot the output light 
intensity as a function of time. 
(b) Repeat part (a) if V(t) = 0.5 νπ sin u>mt. 

13.6 
PROBLEMS 
665 
13.4 Modify (sketch) the design of optical setup in Fig. 13.1 by adding a quarter-
wave plate such that the transfer function (13.1.33) can be realized with a 
linear response and the bias voltage V(i) will not require a dc bias voltage. 
13.5 
For the transverse modulator shown in Fig. 13.3, plot the transmission factor 
PjP\ versus time assuming that 
— (n0 — ne) = — and 
V(t) = 0.1 νπ sin c^t. 
13.6 A quarter-wave plate is added immediately after the first polaroid in the trans-
verse amplitude modulator in Fig. 13.3, and the electrooptical material is 
GaAs («e = n0 = 3.42) assuming the wavelength A0 is 1.0 μπι. The electric 
field E| is circularly polarized 
before impinging on the GaAs crystal. 
(a) Find the electric field E2 at / = I in Fig. 13.3. 
(b) Find the transmitted field Et after passing the exit polaroid. 
(c) Obtain the transmission factor Pt/P\ and plot it versus time for V(t) = 
(V„/4) sin wmt. 
13.7 Consider a transverse electrooptic modulator as shown in Fig. 13.16. The 
incident electric field is randomly polarized, and only half of its power 
passes through the polaroid. The crystal is a KDP with an ac electric field 
applied in the z direction, and the refractive index ellipsoid is described by 
n0 on the x - y plane and ne along the z axis before the ac field is applied. 
(a) Find the expressions for the optical electric fields E] and E2. 
(b) Find the expressions for the electric fields E3 and E4 after reflecting from 
the perfect mirror. 
(c) Assume that the applied ac electric field across the modulator in this 
problem is Fz(t) = Fz0 cos ωί. Find the ratio of the output optical inten-
sity to the incident optical intensity as a function of time. Use a graphical 
z 
Applied field 
Figure 13.16 
Diagram for Problem 13.7. 

666 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
approach to illustrate your solution assuming that 
kl, 
tr 
ktv\ 
„ . 
77 
— (n0 - ne) = - 
-γ r63Fzf>e = - . 
(d) If we have a dc applied field, Fz = E0, find the value E0 such that the 
incident light Pin is completely absorbed by the system. 
13.8 
(a) For a GaAs transverse modulator, derive the index ellipsoid for 
¥ = Fxx + Fyy + Fzl 
(b) If F is along the (111) direction, that is, 
F = -~(x + y + z)F0, 
design a transverse modulator and calculate the voltage parameter V„. 
13.9 Discuss the design of a phase modulator using GaAs compared with that for 
LiNb03 used in the text. 
13.10 For a GaAs phase modulator, compare the longitudinal configuration in 
Fig. 13.4 versus a possible transverse configuration such that the direction 
of the applied electric field F is perpendicular to the direction of the 
optical wave propagation. 
13.11 Derive (13.3.5) and (13.3.6), and explain how a Mach-Zehnder interfero-
meter can be designed to function as a modulator. How do you achieve the 
best extinction ratio (or on-off ratio)? 
13.12 
(a) Check the output power Pa in Fig. 13.10 using (13.3.8) for Kl = π/2. 
(b) Plot Pa versus (Aßl/π) for Kl = 2π. 
13.13 Plot the output power Pa versus Δβ£/ π for a Δ/3-phase-reversal coupler using 
(13.3.9) for ΚΙ = 3π/2. 
13.14 Derive (13.4.9)-(13.4.12). 
13.15 
Derive the coupled-mode equations in (13.5.15a) and (13.5.15b). 
REFERENCES 
1. A. Yariv, Optical Electronics, 3rd ed., Holt-Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1985. 
2. H. A. Haus, Waves and Fields in Optoelectronics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1984. 
3. B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, Wiley, New York, 1991. 

REFERENCES 
667 
4. S. Adachi, Physical Properties of Ill-V Semiconductor Compounds, Wiley, New York, 
1992. 
5. K. H. Hellwege, Ed., Landolt-Börnstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in 
Science and Technology, New Series, Group ΙΠ 17a, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982; 
Groups ΙΠ-V 22a, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986. 
6. K. Tada and N. Suzuki, "Linear electrooptical properties of InP," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 19, 
2295-2296 (1980); and N. Suzuki and K. Tada, "Electrooptic properties and Raman scat-
tering in InP," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 23, 291-295 (1984). 
7. S. Adachi and K. Oe, "Linear electro-optic effects in zincblende-type semiconductors: 
key properties of InGaAsP relevant to device design," J. Appl. Phys. 56, 74-80 (1984); 
and "Quadratic electrooptic (Kerr) effects in zincblende-type semiconductors: Key proper-
ties of InGaAsP relevant to device design," J. Appl. Phys. 56, 1499-1504 (1984). 
8. S. Adachi, Properties of Indium Phosphide, INSPEC, The Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
London and New York, 1991. 
9. A. K. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 1989. 
10. M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Eds., Handbook of Mathematical Functions with 
Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, Chapter 9, Dover, New York, 1972. 
11. S. Thaniyavarn, "Optical modulation: electrooptical Devices," Chapter 4 in K. Chang, Ed., 
Handbook of Microwave and Optical Components, vol. 4 of Fiber and Electro-Optical 
Components, Wiley, New York, 1991. 
12. H. Nishihara, M. Haruna, and T. Suhara, Optical Integrated Circuits, McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1989. 
13. T. Tamir, Ed., Guided-Wave Optoelectronics, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990. 
14. R. C. Alferness, "Guided-wave devices for optical communication," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-17, 946-959 (1981). 
15. O. G. Ramer, "Integrated optic electrooptic modulator electrode analysis," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-18, 386-392 (1982). 
16. D. Marcuse, "Optimal electrode design for integrated optics modulators," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-18, 393-398 (1982). 
17. H. Kogelnik and R. V. Schmidt, "Switched directional couplers with alternating Aß," 
IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-12, 396-401 (1976). 
18. K. Noguchi, O. Mitomi, H. Miyazawa, and S. Seki, "A broadband Ti:LiNb03 optical 
modulator with a ridge structure," J. Lightwave Technol. 13, 1164-1168 (1995). 
19. O. Mitomi, K. Noguchi, and H. Miyazawa, "Design of ultra-broadband LiNb03 
optical modulators with ridge structure," IEEE Trans. Microwave The. Techn. 43, 
2203-2207 (1995). 
20. O. Mitomi, K. Noguchi, and H. Miyazawa, "Broadband and low driving-voltage LiNb03 
optical modulators," IEE Proc. Optoelectron. 145, 360-364 (1998). 
21. E. L. Wooten, K. M. Kissa, A. Yi-Yan, E. J. Murphy, D. A. Lafaw, P. F. Hallemeier, 
D. Maack, D. V. Attanasio, D. J. Fritz, G. J. McBrien, and D. E. Bossi, "A review of 
lithium niobate modulators for fiber-opticcommunications systems," IEEE J. Sei. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 6, 69-82 (2000). 

668 
ELECTROOPTIC AND ACOUSTOOPTIC MODULATORS 
22. J. Kondo, A. Kondo, K. Aoki, S. Takatsuji, O. Mitomi, M. Imaeda, Y. Kozuka, and 
M. Minakata, "High-speed and low-driving-voltage X-cut LiNb03 optical modulator 
with two step backside slot," Electron. Lett. 38, 472-473 (2002). 
23. J. Kondo, A. Kondo, K. Aoki, M. Imaeda, T. Mori, Y. Mizuno, S. Takatsuji, Y. Kozuka, 
O. Mitomi, and M. Minakata, "40-Gb/s X-cut LiNb03 optical modulator with two-step 
back-slot structure," J. Lightwave Technol. 20, 2110-2114 (2002). 

14 
Electroabsorption Modulators 
Electroabsorption (EA) effects near the semiconductor band edges have been an 
interesting research subject for many years. These include the interband photon-
assisted tunneling or Franz-Keldysh effects [1-3] and the exciton absorption 
effects [4-9]. With the recent development of research in semiconductor quantum-
well structures, optical absorptions in quantum wells have been shown to exhibit a 
drastic change by an applied electric field [10-13]. Whereas previous excitonic 
electroabsorptions in bulk semiconductors were mostly observed at low temperatures, 
sharp excitonic absorption spectra in quantum wells have been observed at room 
temperature. This so-called quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE) [11, 12] shows 
a significant amount of change of the absorption coefficient with an applied 
voltage bias because of the enhanced exciton binding energy in a quasi-two-
dimensional structure using quantum wells. The quantum-well barriers confine 
both the electrons and holes within the wells; therefore, the exciton binding energy 
is increased and the exciton is more difficult to ionize. The analytic solutions for 
pure two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) hydrogen models in 
Chapter 3 show that the exciton binding energy of the \s ground state is four times 
larger in the 2D case than that in the 3D case [14]. The sharp excitonic absorption 
spectrum with a small scattering linewidth shows the possibility of a big change of 
the absorption coefficient by an applied voltage bias. The change in the absorption 
coefficient can be as large as 104 cm ' in GaAs/Al^Gai _^As quantum wells 
[10-13]. Interesting quantum-well electroabsorption modulators at room temperature 
have been undergoing intensive research recently. 
In this chapter, we will discuss the theory for electroabsorptions with and without 
excitonic effects. We first present the effective mass theory for a two-particle system: 
an electron-hole pair in Section 14.1. The general formulation for the optical absorp-
tion due to an electron-hole pair is presented. We show that a change of 
variables from the electron and hole position coordinates re and rh to their difference 
coordinates r = re — rh and their center-of-mass coordinates R leads to possible 
analytical solutions [4, 5, 8, 9] when the interaction potential is due to (1) an electric 
field only, which leads to electroabsorption effects in which a light is incident, or 
(2) the Coulomb interaction between the electron and the hole, which gives the 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
669 

670 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
excitonic absorption when a light is incident, or (3) both an electric field bias and the 
exciton effects. 
Case 1 is the Franz-Keldysh effect and will be discussed in Section 14.2. The 
exciton effect, case 2, will then be presented in Section 14.3. Both have analytical 
solutions for direct band-gap semiconductors near the absorption edge. Case 3 in a 
quantum well, which will be presented in Section 14.4, is the quantum-confined 
Stark effect. The general solutions will be obtained using two methods: one is 
based on a numerical solution of the Schrödinger equation in the momentum space 
for an electron-hole pair confined in a quantum well with an applied electric field 
[15]. The other is based on a variational method [11, 12], which is commonly 
used in the literature because of its relative simplicity and accuracy especially for 
the bound state energy of the Is excitons. Device applications including quantum-
well electroabsorption modulators [16, 17] and integrated EA modulator-lasers 
(EMLs) will be presented in Sections 14.5 and 14.6, respectively, followed by self-
electrooptic effect devices (SEEDs) [18-20] in Section 14.7. 
14.1 
GENERAL FORMULATION FOR OPTICAL ABSORPTION 
DUE TO AN ELECTRON-HOLE PAIR 
In Chapter 9, we derive the general formula for absorption coefficient in SI units, 
a(h<o) = CQ-Σ 
\(f\e**-re 
· p|/)|2ß(£/ - £,■ - Αω)[/(£,-) -/(£/)] 
(14.1.1a) 
US 
ττβ2 
C0 = 
2- 
(14.1.1b) 
nrceo/WQ<w 
where e is the polarization of the optical electric field, and p is the momentum 
operator. The absorption coefficient depends on the initial state \i) with corresponding 
energy £, and the final state \f) with energy Ef. The summation over the initial and 
final states taking into account the Fermi occupation factor f(E) of these states gives 
the overall absorption spectrum. We also note that the delta function accounts for the 
energy conservation, and the matrix element in (14.1.1a) takes into account the 
momentum conservation automatically, as has been discussed in Chapter 9, where 
no interaction between the electrons and holes is considered.The general theory for 
the solution of a two-particle system such as an electron-hole pair is derived in 
Appendix 14A. The key idea is that, when the interaction Hamiltonian depends on 
the distance between the two particles (i.e., the vector difference between the two 
interacting particles), the two-particle wavefunction can be expressed in terms of 
the product of two parts: a center-of-mass coordinate part, which behaves like a 
plane wave, and a difference-coordinate part, which depends on the interaction 
type, such as an electric field or a Coulomb potential. 

14.1 
GENERAL FORMULATION FOR OPTICAL ABSORPTION 
671 
14.1.1 Absorption Formula 
The absorption spectrum depends on the wavefunction in the difference coordinate of 
the two-particle system at the origin due to the ^-selection rule and the integration 
over the density of states. The absorption coefficient (14.1.1) can be simplified as 
(see Appendix 14A) 
o ( M = A02 ^ 
|ψη(0)|2δ(£„ + Eg - Ηω) 
C0|«· Pc 
2 = 77-g2|e· p c v | 2 
nrc 
8QWJQW 
(14.1.2a) 
(14.1.2b) 
where n corresponds to the discrete and continuum states of φ{τ) satisfying the effec-
tive mass equation in the difference coordinate system, (14A.17), 
h 
o 2 
- ~ — v 
2m* 
Three potentials will be considered: 
Free Electrons and Holes 
V(r) <ftr) = Εφ(τ). 
(14.1.3) 
V(r) = 0. 
(14.1.4) 
An Applied Electric Field 
V(r) = e¥- r. 
(14.1.5) 
Coulomb Interaction (Exciton Effect) 
V(r) = -
47τεςΓ 
(14.1.6) 
The equation for a Coulomb potential is the Schrödinger equation for a hydrogen 
atom and its solutions for both bound and continuum states have been presented 
in Chapter 3. 
14.1.2 Physical Interpretation of 2|ψ„(0)|2: Density of States 
Consider the case of a free electron and a free hole without Coulomb interaction, that 
is, V(r) = 0 in (14.1.3). We use an energy E measured from the band gap Eg. In the 

672 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
discrete picture, we have the plane wave solution (free carrier) 
„ikxx+ikyy+ikzZ 
Φ„(Γ) = 6 ^ 
(14-1.7) 
with a corresponding energy spectrum 
Ε^2ηξ 
( 1 4- L 8 ) 
277 
2TT 
2TT 
where the quantum numbers n = (nx, ny, nz), kx = nx — , ky = ny — , kz = nz—, 
and the normalization rule 
\φ*η(τ)φη(ν)ά\ 
= δηη, 
(14.1.9) 
has been used. We check φη(0) = \j\fV and 
■βλζ 
1 
/fe 2t2 
lY |φ„(0)|2δ(£„ - E) = 2 
\-^-\-&(^--Λ 
■^ 
J(27r)3/VV' \2m*r 
) 
which is the three-dimensional reduced density of states, where the sum over the 
discrete quantum number has been replaced by integration over the continuum 
fc-space as in (14.1.10). 
14.1.3 Optical Absorption Spectrum for Interband Free 
Electron-Hole Transitions 
The optical absorption is given by integrating (14.1.2a) over the energy 
a(hw) = A0p™(hw - Eg) 
(14.1.11a) 
1 /2m* V^2 
p ? D ( Ä W - £ g ) = — i ^ M 
v/fc W-£ g 
(14.1.11b) 
which gives the absorption coefficient due to a free electron and hole. The momentum 
matrix element of a bulk semiconductor is 
\e-pJ2=Ml=^-Ep 
(14.1.12) 
where the energy parameter Ep (in electron volt) for the matrix element is tabulated in 
the Appendix C in page 803. 

14.2 FRANZ-KELDYSH EFFECT: PHOTON-ASSISTED TUNNELING 
673 
14.2 FRANZ-KELDYSH EFFECT: PHOTON-ASSISTED TUNNELING 
The Franz-Keldysh effect [1-3, 21-26] refers to optical absorption near the semi-
conductor band gap. In the presence of a uniform electric field, the energy band 
profile tilts along the direction of the electric field, Fig. 14.1a. A photon with 
energy slightly below the band gap can be absorbed because of the tunneling 
effect. The wave function for the conduction-band electron can penetrate through 
the band gap; so does the hole wave function. Therefore, an absorption tail below 
the band gap exists. The absorption spectrum above the band edge shows an oscil-
latory behavior as a function of the photon energy due to the wave nature of the elec-
tron and hole wave functions in the presence of the biased electric field (Fig. 14. lb). 
Let us consider the case of a uniform applied electric field, V(r) = eF · r. The 
Schrödinger equation for the wave function $(r) in the difference coordinate 
system (14A.17) is 
- - — V 2 + e F - r 
2ml 
cKr) = ΕήΑτ). 
(14.2.1) 
(a) 
(b) 
2,5 ΓΤΎ"Τ-Ί—| t ΙΊ'"ί ]·ΐ"τ,Τ"Ί'^>Τ,ΤΤ'Τ"]'"Τ"Ί ΤΤ"|'"ΗΊΊ | ί"Τ" ΐ I J I I 1 
2.0 
s 
/- 
v 
si" 
Λ « 
■*J-^ 
~ | M il5 
— 
f « * 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.0 
ί I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I J I 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
(hw-Eg)/neF 
Figure 14.1 (a) Franz-Keldysh effect or photon-assisted absorption in a bulk semiconductor with a 
uniform electric field bias, (b) Absorption spectrum for a finite field F Φ 0 (solid curve). The dashed 
line is the free electron and hole absorption spectrum without an applied electric field (F = 0). 

674 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
Assume that the applied field is in the z direction, F = zF. Because the potential 
energy eFz is independent of x and y, the wave function is plane-wave like in the 
x—y plane, and it can be written in the form 
eikj,x+ikfy 
<«r) = 
7=—<ftz) 
VA 
where the z-dependent wave function φ(ζ) satisfies 
-h2 d2 
■ + eFz <Kz) = Εζφ(ζ). 
2m* dz2 
The total energy E is related to Ez for the z-dependent wave function 
2m -.(*+$ 
(14.2.2) 
(14.2.3) 
(14.2.4) 
14.2.1 
Solution of the Schrödinger Equation for a Uniform Electric Field 
The solution of the Schrödinger Eq. (14.2.3) with a uniform field can be obtained by a 
change of variable 
2mr*ef\1/3 
ΊΓ) 
,z 
eF 
Therefore, 
ά2φ(Ζ) 
dZ2 
Ζφ(Ζ) = 0. 
(14.2.5) 
(14.2.6) 
The Airy functions [27] Ai(Z) or Bi(Z) are the solutions. Because the wave function 
has to decay as z approaches +oo (because of the potential +eFz), the Airy function 
Ai(Z) has to be chosen. The energy spectrum is continuous because the potential is 
not bounded as z—» — oo. Therefore, the (real) wave function satisfying the 
normalization condition 
άζφΕ.(ζ)φΕίζ) 
= δ(Εζ1 - Ez2) 
(14.2.7) 
for a continuum spectrum is 
ΦΕ,(Ζ) 
(eF) 1/6 Ai 
2m*eF\ 1/3 
eF 
(14.2.8) 

14.2 FRANZ-KELDYSH EFFECT: PHOTON-ASSISTED TUNNELING 
675 
To prove that φΕζ(ζ) satisfies the normalization condition, we use the integral 
representation [27] of the Airy function 
oo 
Ai(f)= f ^ e ' M ) . 
(14.2.9) 
J 27Γ 
Therefore, 
Ai(i - a\) Ai(i - a2)dt 
— 00 
—<x 
00 -i 
OO 
00 
OO 
Kt-aOk+ik* /3 ei(t-a2)k'+ikA/3 
-00 
—00 
—00 
fffc e-/(ai-«2)* 
2TT 
> 
= δ ( α ι - α 2 ) 
(14.2.10) 
where the identity 
00 
dteKk+k')t = 2 π ^ + k') 
(14.2.11) 
— OO 
has been used. Using 
2m*reF\U3 
/ 2 W > F V / 3 E7 
and 
'
=
1
-
^
-
1 
* 
<* . 
., 
■ 
eF 
2m* V 1 / 3 
in (14.2.10), we obtain the normalization condition (14.2.7). 
14.2.2 Summation of the Density of States and Absorption Spectrum 
Because the quantum number is determined by (k„ ky, Ez) as described above in the 
wave function (14.2.2) and the corresponding energy spectrum (14.2.4), the sum over 
all the states n for the absorption spectrum in (14.1.2a) has to be replaced by the sum 

676 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
over all the quantum numbers 
dE7 
kx 
ky 
where the sum over the energy Ez is an integral because Ez is a continuous spectrum 
and a delta function normalized rule (14.2.7) has been adopted. Therefore, 
a(ha>) = A02^2 
\dEz\<Kr = 0)\28 — 
(k2 + k2) +Ez + Eg-ha> 
(14.2.12) 
kxk, J 
I- * 
where A0 is given by (14.1.2b). Because 
2 v ^ 
f d2 kt 
m* f , 
- V = 2 
« = _ i _ 
dfii 
14.2.13) 
Afjf 
J(2TT)2 
rfj 
where £t = ^2 (^2- + &2) /2m* = f^k2/2m*, 
we carry out the integration over Et with 
the delta function and obtain the expression for the absorption coefficient 
hoi~Es 
a(h(o) = A0 —f=r 
dEzUE(z = 0)\ 
hat—Eo 
-£I 
dE- 2m\ 2/3 
^ fc2 ; 
(eF)'/3 Ai2 
2m* 
1/3 
(-£J 
(14.2.14) 
Let 
'h2e2F2^ß 
heF = ( -^~r) 
τ= -Ez/(heF) 
η = (Es - ha>)/h0F. 
(14.2.15) 
We find the absorption coefficient 
αφω) 
An (2m* 
f2m*\V2 
r— f 
2-n- V h2 , 
Ao /2m^ 3 / 2 
2ΤΓΙ h2 
heF 
άτΡά\τ) 
v 
9F[-VAi2(V) 
+ Aia(ij)] 
(14.2.16) 
where Αί'(η) is the divative of Αί(η) with respect to η. 

14.3 EXCITON EFFECT 
677 
It is interesting to show that in the limit when F —► 0, we have 
lim 
Ai2(T)dT 
\fh~c 
for ha> > Eg as expected, because 
a(M^aö(M=Ao^fö 
*\3/2 
<-) >ß ω — E„ 
(14.2.17) 
Notice that the prefactor A0 depends on the bulk momentum-matrix element 
|έ " Pcvl = M%, which can be determined experimentally [24] by fitting the measured 
absorption spectrum with the above theoretical results with F = 0 and F φ 0. The 
Franz-Keldysh absorption spectrum (14.2.16) is plotted in Fig. 14.1b (solid curve) 
schematically and compared with the zero-field spectrum (dashed curve) using 
(14.2.17). It shows the Franz-Keldysh oscillation phenomena in the absorption 
spectrum above the band gap and the exponentially decaying behavior below the 
band gap. 
14.3 EXCITON EFFECT 
When we consider the Coulomb interaction between the electron and the hole 
V(r) 
(14.3.1) 
477esr 
the wave function <£(r) satisfies the Schrödinger equation for the hydrogen atom 
2m* 
V(r) φ(τ) = E<Hr). 
(14.3.2) 
The solutions <Mr) for both the three-dimensional (3D) and the two-dimensional (2D) 
cases have been studied in Section 3.4 or in the first edition of this book [4-15]. 
14.3.1 
Three-dimensional Exciton 
We use the general formula (14.1.2) for the absorption coefficient, where the sum-
mation over n includes both the bound and continuum states of the solution to 
(14.3.2) with the Coulomb potential. The wave functions φη{τ) should be normalized 
properly for both bound and continuum states as discussed in Sections 14.1 and 14.2, 
Appendix 14A, and Section 3.4 [4, 5]. For bound state contributions, we have the 

678 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
oscillator strength 
1 
Airs h2 
\Φη(°)\ = —Γ^Γ» 
αο = 
...Λ 
= the exciton Bohr radius 
(14.3.3a) 
I - r , 
αο — ——γ-
παΐ,η0 
m*eA 
and the exciton binding energy 
E„ 
R, 
m*e4 
—- 
R — 
12' 
y 
2δ2(4ττε8): = the exciton Rydberg energy. 
(14.3.3b) 
Therefore, 
aB(ha>) = A o y ^ 
n=\ 
L 
0 
77ΪΙη«3 δ( Αω — £, 
8 " n 2 
°° 
1 
( 
\ \ 
(14.3.4) 
where 
ε = (ho) - 
Eg)/Ry 
(14.3.5) 
is a normalized energy measured from the band gap Eg. 
For the continuum-state contributions, we obtain 
ac(hw) 
OO 
A0\ 
0TrlJE/Ry 
dE-
- 8(%ω — E„ — E) 
0 
2irRyal 
sinh 
77 
^ 0 
r 
2
Ä
^ 
\yUQ 
(7r/y/i)e· 
(14.3.6) 
where the first bracket is Α0ρ^Ό(Ε — Ηω — Es), and the second bracket is called the 
Sommerfeld enhancement factor for the 3D case [4-9, 28] 
^ 3 D ( « ) 
= sinh(7r/-v/e) 
2v/y/e 
1 _ e-2ir/^/i 
' 
(14.3.7) 

14.3 EXCITON EFFECT 
679 
As ε —* oo, we find 
ac(hü)) 
— 
Ao 
liP-Ryal yß 
o^l^ß 
A0 
ΙΊΡ-R. y"o 
■ (y/ε + τή 
(14.3.8) 
which approaches the 3D joint density-of-states in an interband transition without the 
exciton effects, \f(hw — Eg)/Ry, 
plus a constant π. As ε —> 0, 
Ao 
ac(hu>) 
iTf-Ryül 
(277) 
(14.3.9) 
which gives a finite value in contrast to the vanishing result of the interband absorp-
tion at hco = Eg. 
The total absorption due to both the bound and continuum states is given by 
a(h(o) 
2τΡ-Rya^ 
. 
v ^ 1 _ fhw — E„ 
1 λ 
„ 
(hta — £„ 
flv 
/?v 
R, 
(14.3.10) 
If we include the finite linewidth due to scatterings by replacing the delta function by 
a Lorentzian function, δ (χ) = (γ/π)/(χ2 
+ γ 2), where γ is the half-linewidth nor-
malized by Rydberg if x is a normalized energy, we find 
a(hü)) 
A0 
2ir2Ryal 
4Σ 
γ/η3 
e + - r + r 
■de' 
yS3O(e')^ 
7Γ (ε — ε')2 + J' 
(14.3.11) 
14.3.2 
Two-dimensional Exciton 
The absorption spectrum for a two-dimensional structure with exciton effects [14, 29] 
can also be obtained using (14.1.2). For bound state contributions, we have 
\Φη(0)\2 
1 
En = 
Rv 
and obtain 
(14.3.12) 
αΒ{Ηώ) = A 0 ^ -
n=\ R^akiri n 
\yUQ 
ε + -
n — VI 
(14.3.13) 

680 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
where ε = (Ηω — Eg)/Ry again. The continuum-state contributions give 
ac{tio>) = AQ dE 
~ 8{E + Eg — hoi) 
J 
2irRya% 
o 
* 
m 
7Γ tl 
where the two-dimensional Sommerfeld enhancement factor is 
1 _|_ g-277/ν/ε " 
The total absorption is the sum of aB(hw) and adhw) 
a{ha>) = 
iTTRyOQ 
( 
1 
ε + -
1 
- v v 
+ S2O(e) 
VJ 
(14.3.14) 
(14.3.15) 
(14.3.16) 
Notice that without the Sommerfeld enhancement factor, Ξ2τ>(ε) is set to 1 and 
a.f(ha>) = Αο/(2πΚγαΙ). If we include the finite linewidth effect, we have 
a{ha>) 
Ao 
2nRyal «Σ 
ε + -
n~2 
w 
00 
(de' 
γΞ2Ό(ε') 
J 7Γ (e' - ε)2 + r2 
(14.3.17) 
The above results for both 2D and 3D excitons are summarized in Table 14.1. The 
absorption spectra for a finite linewidth and zero linewidth are plotted in 
Fig. 14.2a-d for comparison. 
14.3.3 Experimental Results for 3D and Quasi-2D Excitons 
Experimentally, the linewidth y is always finite and increases with temperature. For 
example, in Fig. 14.3a, we show the absorption spectra [30] of a bulk (3D) GaAs at 
four different temperatures, T= 2IK, 90K, 186K, and 294K. We can see that the 

14.3 EXCITON EFFECT 
681 
Table 14.1 Absorption Coefficients due to Exciton Bound and Continuum States 
n. 
j? \IB 
A 
7 r e 2|e-Pcv| 2 
h2 
(Αττε, 
ε = φω - Eg)/Ry, 
A0 = 
, , 
a0 
nT c eg d)m\ 
Ό 
m* V e 
2Ä2(4ir6s)2 
Bound States 
Continuum States 
Two-dimensional exciton: 
Zero Hnewidth 
*Σ 
^^(n-gRy 
V 
(n-U 
δ\ε + -
Finite Hnewidth 
^ Λ 
2 
l 
γ/π 
ε + 
Three-dimensional exciton: 
Zero Hnewidth 
Finite Hnewidth 
2 
\ 
l 
γ/π 
ΑοΣ 
^ V ^ i X M ^ + J^+y2 
+Ύ2 
A0 
2vRyal 
S2D(B) ■ 
S2D(e) 
l +εχρ(-2ττ/νε) 
2ΤΓ RyÜQ J 
άε' 
γ52Ρ(β') 
7Γ (ε' - ε) 2 + γ 2 
2TT2Ryal 
ST,O(B) -■ 
\/ε 53D(e) 
2-π/^/ε 
7 _ ε-2^ΙΦ-
2ττ2 
Αυ 
Trfe' γ ν ^ ^ ρ ( ε ' ) 
Rya3
0 J T7 (ε' - ε)2 + γ2 
exciton hnewidth is broadened with an increasing temperature. The absorption 
edge has a red shift because the GaAs band gap decreases with increasing 
temperature [31] 
τ·2 
Eg(T) = £g(0) - ^—^ 
(eV) 
(14.3.18) 
where £g(0) = 1.519eV, a = 5.405 x 10 4 e V / K and b = 204K. For comparison, 
we show the exciton absorption spectra [32] of an Ino.53Gao.47As/Ino.52Alo.4gAs 
(lattice-matched to InP substrate) quantum-well structure at different temperatures 
in Fig. 14.3b. The quantum-well structure has a quasi-two-dimensional character 
because the electron and hole wave functions are confined in the z direction with a 

682 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
(a) 2D(r= 
a(hca) 
0) 
With exciton 
^ 
effect 
2s 
/ 
tu"*. 
Without exciton effect 
Ηω 
(b) 2D(y*0) 
A α(Τιω) 
*Ήω 
(c) 3D(r=0) 
A a(hm) 
(d) 3D(y#0) 
♦ a(ha>) 
With exciton 
"^effect 
/Without exciton effect 
->Τιω 
Figure 14.2 Absoφtion spectra for a two-dimensional (2D) exciton with (a) a zero linewidth and (b) a 
finite linewidth, and a three-dimensional (3D) exciton with (c) a zero linewidth, and (d) a finite linewidth. 
finite well width instead of being restricted to the x—y plane as in the "pure" 2D case. 
It is expected that the binding energy of the Is exciton in the quasi-2D structure will 
be between the 3D value (—Ry) and 2D value (=4Ry). Furthermore, we also see the 
splitting of the heavy-hole (HH) exciton and light-hole (LH) exciton in a quasi-2D 
structure, whereas we do not observe the HH and LH exciton splittings in a bulk 
GaAs sample because of the degeneracy of the HH and LH bands at the zone 
center of the valence-band structure. The energies and absorption spectra of the 
HH and LH excitons will be further investigated in Section 14.4. 
The insert of Fig. 14.3b shows the measured (squares) half width at half maximum 
(HWHM) of the first heavy-hole absorption line as a function of temperature. The 
solid line is a fit to the expression 
y(=HWHM) = Γ0 
ph 
(14.3.19) 
where Γο = 2.3 meV accounts for the inhomogeneous broadenings such as scatter-
ings by interface roughness and alloy fluctuations, and the second term represents 
the homogeneous broadening due to InGaAs longitudinal optical (LO) phonon scat-
terings with ftcüLO = 35 meV and rph =15.3 meV. 

14.4 QUANTUM CONFINED STARK EFFECT (QCSE) 
683 
(a) 
s 
"2 
a" 
1.2 -
1.1 -
1 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
1.42 
1.44 
1.46 
1.48 
1.5 
1.52 
Photon energy (eV) 
1.54 
1.56 
0.70 
0.80 
0.90 
1.00 
1.10 
Energy (eV) 
1.20 
1.30 
Figure 14.3 (a) Band-edge absorption spectra of a bulk GaAs sample at Γ=294Κ (circles), 186K 
(squares), 90K (triangles), and 21K (dots). (Reprinted with permission from [30] © 1962 American 
Physical Society.) (b) Absorption spectra of an lno.53Gao.47As/Ino.52Alo.48As quantum-well sample at 
Γ = 300Κ (solid curve), 100K (dashed curve), and 12K (dotted curve). The insert shows the half width 
at half maximum (HWHM) of the first absorption peak as a function of temperature. (Squares are measured 
data, curve is calculated.) (Reprinted with permission from [32] © 1988 IEEE.) 
14.4 QUANTUM CONFINED STARK EFFECT (QCSE) 
In this section, we consider the exciton absorption in a quantum-well structure in the 
presence of a uniform applied electric field [11 -13, 15]. The effective mass equation, 
similar to (14A.4), can be written as [12] 
He — Hh + Eg — 
47res|re - r h | Φ(Γ6, rh) = £<D(re, rh) 
(14.4.1) 

684 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
(a) 
F = 0 
(b) 
F>0 
Figure 14.4 Quantum-well energy subbands and wave functions (a) in the absence of an applied electric 
field and (b) in the presence of an applied electric field. 
where 
He = 
2m, 
h2 
-Ve
2 + Ve(re) 
~Hb = 
-
^ 
Vh(rh) 
(14.4.2a) 
(14.4.2b) 
The electron potential Ve(re) or the hole potential Vh(rh) may also include the effect 
of the electric field |e|F· re or — |e|F· rh in addition to the quantum confinement 
potentials. The interaction between the electron and the hole is due to the 
Coulomb potential. 
Let us assume that the quantum well is grown along the z axis and the uniform 
electric field is also applied along the z direction, the electron and hole potential 
can be written as (Fig. 14.4) 
and 
Ve(re) = ye(Ze) 
Vh(r„) = Vh(Zh). 
(14.4.3a) 
(14.4.3b) 
For solution of the electron-hole effective-mass equation with excitonic effects, 
please see Appendix 14B for details [15, 33-35]. 
14.4.1 
Optical Absorption Spectrum with Exciton Effects in Quantum Wells 
Without the Coulomb interaction, the electron subbands are determined by 
the Hamiltonian He, and we denote the electron subbands by n = Cl, C2, C3, and 
so forth. Similarly, the hole subbands are determined by Hh and the subband levels 
are m = HHl, HH2, and so forth, for heavy holes and LHl, LH2, and so forth, for 
light holes. The solution to the eigenvalue Eq. (14B.16) is a set of exciton binding 
energies and corresponding eigenfunctions for Is, 2s, 3s as well as continuum 
states. We denote the quantum number for the exciton state as x, which includes 

14.4 QUANTUM CONFINED STARK EFFECT (QCSE) 
685 
both bound and continuum states. The absorption coefficient for a quantum-well 
structure can be obtained by substituting the matrix element {f\e· p|i) into (14.1.1) 
2 
x(ha>) = C0^Σ VÄΣ <t>L(P = 0)e · Pcv/, 
_ 
ττβ2 
<--0 = 
δ(Εχ — hw) 
(14.4.4) 
nrcsowwQ 
where the exciton transition energy is 
Ex = Ee
h"m + Eex 
(14.4.5a) 
and the band edge transition energy is 
EZ=Eg+Een-Ehm. 
(14.4.5b) 
The exciton binding energy Eex is a discretized set of Is, 2s, 3s,... states and conti-
nuum-state energies. Assuming that there is no mixing between different subbands, 
consider only the pair n= C\ and m = HH1, for example. We may drop the sum-
mation over nm and treat each pair of n and m independently. This assumption is 
valid only if the subband energy difference is much larger than the exciton 
binding energy. The absorption coefficient becomes 
a(ha>) = C0jJ2 
WnmiP = 0)|2|έ · pcv|2|/«m|2S(£, - hw). 
(14.4.6) 
Exciton Discrete (Is) State Contribution 
For the Is state, we use the variational 
approach and find 
a(hco) = Co 7 ( - - 2 ) \e · pcv\%m\Z~ 
'J 
^2 , ,., 
(14.4.7) 
where λ is the variational parameter of the trial function, see (14B.23) in Appendix 
14B, and a finite linewidth (2γ) has been assumed and the delta function replaced by a 
Lorentzian function, and x= Is state. The matrix element |e«pcv|2 is obtained [15, 
36] from (9.5.14)-(9.5.15) in Section 9.5. 
For TE Polarization (e—x ory) 
(I 
Heavy-hole exciton 
|έ·ρ ο ν| 2=Λί 2 
. 
(14.4.8) 
I i 
Light-hole exciton. 

686 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
For TM Polarization (e = z) 
12 , , 2 i ° 
Heavy-hole exciton 
e-pcv\2=MU2 
T ; _ u ; u „ , 
: _ 
(14.4.9) 
Light-hole exciton 
where M2, is the bulk matrix element discussed in Chapter 9 
b l 
6m*e(Eg + 2A/3)J 
6 
p 
Exciton Continuum-State Contributions 
For continuum-state contributions, the 
wave function \φχ (p = 0)|2 gives a Sommerfeld enhancement factor [13-15]. 
Noting that the sum over the states x becomes the sum over a continuum distribution 
of states kx and ky, 
kx 
k, 
and Eex —> trkf/(2m*) = Et, we obtain the absorption coefficient due to the conti-
nuum states 
00 
ac(ha>) = C0^%Ml\lnm\2 
\d£tM(£t)|^(0)|2- 
? ^ 
, , 
(14.4.12) 
77rL 
J 
(£* - hw) + γ 
where £Λ = Ee£m + £t and |</>*(0)| is usually approximated by the Sommerfeld 
enhancement factor for a 2D exciton 
where 1 < s0 < 2. For a pure 2D exciton, s0 — 2, and ICOQ = ^Et/Ry. 
The matrix-
element M(Et) is defined [15, 37, 38] as |e · pcv|2 = M(Et)Ml, which has been 
derived in Section 9.5 and is tabulated in Table 9.1 
[ |(1 + cos2 enm) 
Heavy-hole exciton 
TE polarization 
M(Et)=\fc 
„ _ . . , T \ 
. · , / 
·._ 
(14.4.14) 
4V 
|(5 — 3 cos2 6nm) 
Light-hole exciton 
Heavy-hole exciton 
TM polarization 
M(Et) = { 
2 
. 
(14.4.15) 
|(1 + 3 cosz 0„m) Light-hole exciton 

14.4 QUANTUM CONFINED STARK EFFECT (QCSE) 
687 
where cos2 6nm ~ (Een + \Ehm\)/(Een + |£Am| + Et). The heavy-hole exciton contri-
bution to the TM polarization is taken to be zero instead of (3/2) sin2 0nm because 
a rigorous valence-band mixing model shows that the heavy-hole exciton has a neg-
ligible contribution to the TM case [39-43]. Note that ko = \/a0 and 
< 
= fco 
77 h2 
2TTRV 
(14.4.16) 
Total Absorption Spectrum 
The complete absorption spectrum can be written as 
the sum of the bound-state and continuum-state contributions [15] 
a((o) = 
C0^M2\Inm\2^R-
4 Σ 
Af(0)|ao<F(0)|: 
Ryy 
(Ex - Ϋιωγ+ψ 
+ |^Μ(Ε ()|φ*(0)| 2 
(Ε'ι 
hm 
Et - hwf + γ2 
(14.4.17) 
Let us look at the band-edge transition energy E^m 
(14.4.18) 
for the electron subband n and the hole subband m in the presence of an applied elec-
tric field. Note that the subband energies are measured from the band edges at the 
center of the quantum well (positive for electrons and negative for holes). 
14.4.2 Perturbation Method 
A simple second-order perturbation theory shows [44] that (see the example in 
Section 3.5 and its references) 
. * „ 2 Ε · 2 / 4 
En = £<ϋ> + 
Cnm*elFlL^ln 
C = ^ V |1 
-(-\)"~m\2m2n2 
77' ηιφη 
η2π2 - 15 
(n2 — w2) 
24n4 
7Γ* 
(14.4.19) 
in an infinite quantum-well model assuming an effective well width Leff. Therefore, 
the band edge transition energy for the first conduction and the first heavy-hole 

688 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
subband is determined by 
£J1(F) = E?h\(F = 0) + C, (m; + 
n^yF^/h 
(14.4.20) 
where C\ = — 2.19 x 10 3. As an example, for a GaAs/Alj-Gai-^As quantum well 
with an effective well width of 100 A, the above change in the transition energy is 
Εζ\ (F) - Εζ\ (F = 0) = -11.8 meV at F = 100 kV/cm assuming m* = 0.0665 m0 
and m^h = 0.34 mo. The exciton binding energy EeK also depends on the electric 
field strength. In general, the band-edge shift due to the electric field is quite clear 
and appears stronger than the binding energy change with the electric field. 
Variational methods instead of the above perturbation method for the band edge ener-
gies have also been used [44-47]. 
14.4.3 Exciton Absorption Spectrum and Comparison 
with Experimental Data 
Theoretical absorption spectrum for a single pair of transition from the first conduc-
tion subband to the first heavy-hole subband is shown in Fig. 14.5, where the discrete 
Is bound state Ex = Els contributes as a Lorentzian spectrum, and the step-like 
density of states enhanced by the Sommerfeld factor contributes as the high 
energy tail. 
With an applied electric field, the quantum confined Stark effects can be measured 
from the shift of the peak absorption coefficient as a function of the applied electric 
field. Figure 14.6 shows the polarization-dependent optical absorption spectra for (a) 
TE and (b) TM polarizations [17, 48] with estimated electric fields [13]. Theoretical 
results using the parabolic band model [15] presented in this section and using a 
valence-band mixing model [43] have been used to successfully match these 
>hca 
Figure 14.5 
Exciton absorption spectrum of a quantum-well structure in the absence of an applied 
electric field. The contributions due to the discrete and continuum states are shown separately as 
dashed lines. 

14.4 QUANTUM CONFINED STARK EFFECT (QCSE) 
689 
Figure 14.6 Experimental absorption spectra of a GaAs/Al03 Ga^As quantum-well waveguide 
modulator as a function of field: (a) TE polarization for (i) OkV/cm, (ii) 60kV/cm, (iii) 100kV/ 
cm, (iv) 150kV/cm. (b) TM polarization for (i) OkV/cm, (ii) 60kV/cm, (iii) 11 OkV/cm, (iv) 150 
kV/cm, and (v) 200kV/cm. (Reprinted with permission from [48] © 1985 American Institute of 
Physics.) 
experimental data, as shown in Fig. 14.7. To understand these data, we make the 
following observations: 
1. The exciton absorption peak energy depends on the band-edge transition 
energy E%\(F), which shifts quadratically as a function of the field, minus 
the amount of the li state exciton binding energy E\s, which is about 8 meV 
for the heavy hole exciton. The transition energies of the heavy-hole and 
light-hole exciton peaks versus the applied electric field are shown in 
Fig. 14.8. The binding energy for a bulk (3D) GaAs Ry is about 4.2 meV 
and is 4/?y ~ 16.8 meV for a pure 2D exciton. A quasi-two-dimensional 
quantum-well structure gives a binding energy corresponding to an effective 
dimension between 2D and 3D. Therefore, the binding energy of the 
quantum well is somewhere between 2D and 3D. 
As a matter of fact, because the hydrogen atom equation in an a-dimensional 
space has analytical solutions for an integer a such as 2 and 3, the idea is to 

690 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
1 
c 
o 
1 
1 4 2 0 
1 4 4 0 
1 4 6 0 
1 4 8 0 
Photon energy (meV) 
isoo 
Figure 14.7 Theoretically calculated absorption spectra for the quantum-well waveguide modulator with 
experimental data shown in Fig. 14.6 (a) TE polarization and (b) TM polarization. (Reprinted with per-
mission from [431 © 1993 American Physics Society.) 
extend the general result for a given a using the concept of analytical continu-
ation. Using this approach, the oscillator strength for the bound and continuum 
states can be obtained using the analytical formulas once the effective dimen-
sion is determined. The effective dimension can be extracted by comparing the 
binding energy calculated variationally as discussed in this section with the 
analytical formula for binding energy [49]. 
2. The TE oscillator strength for the heavy-hole exciton is approximately 
three times that of the light-hole exciton. However, because the light-hole 
exciton transition energy is already in the continuum states of the heavy-hole 
transition, the spectrum would not show a 3 :1 ratio. 
3. The TM polarization spectra show that it is the light-hole exciton transition 
that is dominant for this polarization as a result of the optical momentum 
matrix-selection rule. 
4. At a fixed optical energy Ηω of the incident light, the absorption coefficient can 
change drastically especially when hco is near an exciton peak absorption 
energy. This enhanced change of the absorption by an applied voltage will 
be further discussed in the next section on interband electroabsorption 
modulators. 

14.5 ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATOR 
691 
1480 
1470 
1460 
> 
| 1450 
>-
(3 
OC 1440 
UJ z 
UJ 
1430 
1420 
1 4 1 0 L-J I l_i I 1 I I I I l_J 1 I I 1 L_J I 1 
-30 
0 
30 
60 
90 
120 
150 
180 
FIELD 
(kV/cm) 
Figure 14.8 Comparison of experimental and theoretically calculated HH and LH exciton energies 
versus the electric field obtained from the peak energies in Fig. 14.6 and Fig. 14.7. (Reprinted with per-
mission from [43] © 1993 American Physics Society.) 
14.5 ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATOR 
The electroabsorption modulators can be designed [10, 50-56] using a waveguide 
configuration and a transverse transmission (or reflection) configuration, as shown 
in Figs. 14.9a and b, respectively. Suppose the operating optical energy hcoo 
is chosen near the exciton peak when a voltage V is applied, Fig. 14.9c. The 
transmission coefficient is proportional to 
T(V) = e'a(V)L. 
(14.5.1) 
For the waveguide modulator, a(V) is the absorption coefficient of the waveguide 
region multiplied by the optical confinement factor Γ, and L is the total length of the 
guide for the waveguide modulator. For the transverse transmission modulator, a(V) 
is the average absorption coefficient of the multiple-quantum-well region, and L is the 
total thickness of the multiple quantum well (MQW) region. The couplings or reflec-
tions at the facets are ignored here for convenience. The on/off ratio (or contrast ratio) 
^on/off is defined as (Fig. 14.9d) 
I ' ' I ' ' I ' ' I ' ' I ' ' I 
8—-*. 
; 
· 
HH (exp.) 
1 
O LH (exp.) 
: 
+ 
HH (theory) 
x LH (theory) 
^ / o f f = P ° U t ( V o n = 0 ) = ^ 
04.5.2a) 
°n/off 
/>ou.(Voff = V) 
T(V) 

692 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
(C) 
fa(Äiö) 
a(V) 
a(0) 
>hco 
(b) 
ritrrrfi 
VW0 
U 
= ItV) /»„, 
(d) 
X'> 
- > ? 
A>ut(V) 
P<JV) 
->» 
Figure 14.9 (a) A waveguide electroabsorption modulator, (b) A transverse transmission electroabsorp-
tion modulator, (c) The absorption coefficient α(7ιω) of a quantum-well modulator at two different bias 
voltages, V and 0, for example, (d) With a bias voltage V(t) across the modulator, the transmitted optical 
power (solid square wave) is modulated. Dashed line is the input power Pin. 
or in decibels 
Äon/off(dB)=101og 
T(Vm = 0) 
io; T(Voff = V) 
4.343[a(V) - a(0)]L. 
(14.5.2b) 
Therefore, in principle, the magnitude of the extinction ratio or the on/off ratio can be 
made as large as possible by increasing the cavity length L. However, we note that the 
insertion loss L.„ is defined as 
Mn 
foutiO) = 1 - 7X0) = 1 
-a(0)£ 
(14.5.3) 
at the transmission (on) state. Because a(0) is always finite, a large cavity length L 
will decrease the transmissivity 7(0) exponentially. We may achieve an infinite 
on/off ratio using an infinitely long cavity but obtain no light transmission even 
for the on-state. If 7(0) —» 0, the insertion loss approaches 100%. Naturally, this is 
not desirable and an optimum design, which maximizes the extinction ratio and mini-
mizes the insertion loss, is necessary. Note that Von is set to zero here only for illus-
tration purposes. For high-speed switching, it is usually not chosen to be zero. 

14.6 INTEGRATED ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATOR-LASER (EML) 
693 
Another useful figure of merit in the design of the electroabsorption modulator is 
the change in absorption coefficient per unit applied voltage. 
Aa 
a(Voff) - a(Von) 
AV 
AV 
(M.3.«) 
where the change in voltage AV = |Von — Voff|. This occurs because the on/off ratio 
per unit applied voltage is 
^on/off = 
(«(V) - a(0))L 
AV 
AV 
Act 
= 4.343— 
(14.5.5) 
where the electric field across the multiple-quantum-well region is approximately 
given by F = V/L, if the built-in voltage Vbi is ignored. (Otherwise AF = (V — 
Vbi)/L has to be used.) For more discussions on the figure of merits such as Aa/ 
(AF)2, C(AV)2, and the optimization of the contrast ratio, drive voltage, bandwidth, 
and total insertion loss, see Ref. 56. An important limiting factor in the high-speed 
response is the time constant for the holes be to be swept out of the quantum 
wells. A detailed analysis with experimental results on the carrier swept out and 
the barrier design have been reported [57]. 
EA modulators operating at 40 Gb/s with low driving voltage have been realized 
using ideas including strained InGaAs/InAlAs MQWs. Optimization of the design 
and demonstration of 40 Gb/s modulators and their EA modulation characteristics 
have been reported in Refs. 58-63. QCSE using Ge/SiGe quantum wells on 
silicon substrate has also been demonstrated with electroabsorption effects as large 
as III-V [64]. The Ge layers are compressively strained whereas the SiGe layers 
are tensile strained. The design is such the compressive and tensile strains are 
balanced in each quantum well pair so no strain energy is accumulated. 
14.6 INTEGRATED ELECTROABSORPTION 
MODULATOR-LASER (EML) 
The integrated electroabsorption modulator-laser (EML) is probably the first practical 
optoelectronic integrated circuit (OEIC) component, which was produced in large 
volume as the dominant source for dense-wavelength division multiplexing 
(DWDM) communications systems. The basic idea and the simplest design is to inte-
grate a DFB laser with an EA modulator, creating an EML, which is used as a laser 
transmitter. The DFB laser is cw biased above threshold, and the high-speed modu-
lated data such as 2.5 Gb/s, 10 Gb/s, or 40 Gb/s electrical signals are applied to the 
EA modulator at a reverse biased voltage. The laser can be a DFB laser [65-68], a 
DBR laser [69], a λ/4-shifted DFB laser [70], or a sample-grating tunable DBR 

694 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
laser [71]. For DWDM applications, tunable lasers play an important role. For example, 
a tunable sample-grating DBR laser with an integrated EA modulator covering 51 chan-
nels at 100 GHz spacing over a 40-nm tuning range has been reported [71]. A fully 
functional 2.5 Gb/s EA modulator integrated with tunable DBR laser transmitter 
over 20 channels on a 50 GHz grid meeting all long-haul transmission requirements 
for stability, chirp, power, and linewidth has been demonstrated as well [72]. In 
recent years, integration of 40 channels of InP-transmitter photonic integrated circuit 
at 40 Gb/s each channel with an aggregate data rate of 1.6 Tbit/s has been realized 
[73-76]. Figure 14.10 shows the scaling of InP-based transmitter chips used in tele-
communications network from LED through EML to recent 40 x 40 Gb/s photonic 
integrated circuits. Figure 14.1 la shows a schematic diagram of the 40-channel trans-
mitter photonic integrated-circuit architecture with 240 device elements on a single 
chip. Figure 14.11 b shows the measured output optical spectrum of the 40 wavelengths. 
Each channel consists of a tunable DFB laser with a back facet power monitor, an EA 
modulator, a power flattening element (PFE), and front power monitor. The PFE is used 
to level the output power from the individual channels. The 40 channels are then com-
bined using the arrayed waveguide grating (AWG) multiplexer. 
In this section, we discuss the essential ideas and the physical principles of the 
EML devices. The major reason for using the external EA modulator is that the 
chirp of an EA modulator is much smaller than that of a directly modulated laser. 
In an EA modulator, the linewidth enhancement factor or the chirp is related to the 
change of the real (η') and imaginary («") parts of the refractive index due to a 
reverse biased voltage (V): 
dn'/dV _ ATrdn'/dV 
dri'/dV ~ T da/dV ' 
(14.6.1) 
1000 
100 : 
2 
10 · 
Scaling of INP-based 
transmitter chips utilized 
in telecommunications networks 
Development device 
φ 40x40 Gb/s 
LED 
DWDM 
Transmitter PIC <> 10 x 10 Gb/s 
Tunable EML 
withSOA 
EML 
Δ 
DML 
OO 
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000 
Year 
2010 
2020 
Figure 14.10 A plot of the scaling of photonic integrated transmitter chips in terms of the number of 
functions per chip. (Reprinted with permission from [76] © 2007 IEEE.) 

14.6 INTEGRATED ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATOR-LASER (EML) 
695 
40 x 40 Gbifs 
1.550 
1.555 
1.560 
1.565 
λ(μιη) 
Figure 14.11 
(a) An architecture for a 40-channel transmitter photonic integrated circuit, (b) The 
measured normalized optical output spectrum of the 40 wavelengths. (Reprinted with permission from 
[741 © 2006 Institute of Engineering and Technology: Electron. Lett.) 
Because the modulator is reverse-biased, the carrier density is quite small except for 
carrier generation due to absorption of the optical signal. In the case of a directly 
modulated laser, the device is under forward bias and the carrier density is very 
high. The chirp parameter of a forward biased semiconductor laser is typically 2 to 
5 for strained quantum-well lasers and even higher for bulk semiconductor diode 
lasers. This chirp causes significant broadening of the laser linewidth, resulting in 
a significant dispersion for long haul optical communication. Direct laser modulation 
results in multiple-angstrom wavelength chirp; therefore, external modulation using 
an EA modulator or LiNb03 electrooptical modulator is preferred. The ae parameter 
of an EA modulator is much smaller than unity (0.2-0.8), which leads to the wave-
length chirp smaller than 0.2 A [77, 78]. An integrated EA modulator with a DFB 
laser is especially attractive due to the ability to perform monolithic integration 

696 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
OFB li 
SIDE VIEW 
L 
HR 
| iiiiHiiiiiimiHiiiiiiiiiiiiu | 
| 
| AR 
Figure 14.12 A schematic diagram of an integrated electroabsorption modulator-laser (EML). 
DFB laser 
Isolation 
Modulator 
and mass production. This EML was the first practical photonic integrated circuit 
component with a large-volume production. 
Figure 14.12 shows a schematic of an integrated EML [79]. The DFB laser is 
forward biased at a cw operation current far above threshold, whereas the EA modu-
lator is reverse biased with an additional high-speed data signal (such as 10Gb/s 
data) applied. A few key design criteria are as follows [66, 80-82]: 
(a) The DFB laser section operates with a photon energy below the band edge of 
the modulator section with a detuning wavelength (between the laser wave-
length and the modulator band-edge wavelength) of the order varying from 
40 nm to 80 nm for optimized performance. Considerations of extinction 
ratio, insertion loss when the modulator is in the ON state, and chirp of the 
modulator are important factors. 
(b) The DFB laser section has a high reflection (HR) coating; the modulator 
section has an antireflection (AR) coating; and the laser section is isolated 
electrically from the modulator section. 
(c) The optical transmission from the laser to the modulator waveguide should be 
maximized. The cross-talk between the laser and modulator due to reflection 
from the exit facet of the modulator should be minimized. 
A few integration techniques [83] have been used for the integration of a DFB (or 
DBR) laser and an EA modulator: the selective-area growth (SAG) [66, 67, 84], the 
butt-joint technology [68, 85], the stacked-layer technology [86-88], the quantum-
well interdiffusion [89], and the identical-layer design [83, 90, 91]. Below we 
discuss some of these techniques. 
1. Selective-Area Growth (SAG): The key idea is to use MOCVD selective-area 
growth for the multiple quantum well growth in the active regions with a single 
growth step over a masked substrate. This method is based on the variation of 
the band gap of MQW materials in the same plane on a masked substrate. 
Source material that does not nucleate on the dielectric masked areas is depos-
ited nearby, inducing a local increase in growth rate. Epitaxial band-gap energy 
shifts are hence mainly controlled by the geometry of the lithographically 
defined dielectric pattern. This method is most popular due to its processing 

14.6 INTEGRATED ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATOR-LASER (EML) 
697 
simplicity as a planar technology and its high performance due to the 
precise control of the wavelength shift and the smooth taper-like optical 
transition between two waveguides. A potential drawback is the difficulty of 
independent optimization of each device in terms of a precise strain or 
composition adjustment. 
Figure 14.13a shows a structure of an integrated EA modulator with a DFB 
laser based on the selective-area growth technique [66]. It consists of a separate-
confinement-heterojunction (SCH)-MQW structure using InGaAs/InGaAsP 
(a) 
HR coating 
DFB-LD 
EA-Modulator 
z 
k JL 
AR coating ' 
InGaAsP guide layer 
InGaAs/InGaAsP 
MQW structure 
Fe-doped InP 
n-InP sub. 
Grating 
DFB Laser 
Isolation Groove 
Modulator 
Sl-lnP 
MQW Active Layer 
Butt-joint 
p-lnP 
MQW Absorption Layer 
n-lnP 
Figure 14.13 (a) A structure of an integrated EA modulator with a DFB laser based on the selective-area 
growth technique. The materials are InGaAs quantum wells with InGaAsP barriers with slightly different 
compositions and well widths in the laser and modulator sections. (Reprinted with permission from [661 © 
1993 IEEE.) (b) An integrated EA modulator-DFB laser based on a butt-joint technology. The modulator 
section may have different number of quantum wells from that of the laser section in this approach. 
(Reprinted with permission from [68] © 1997 IEEE.) 

698 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
with slightly different thicknesses and materials compositions. The band edges 
of the modulator and laser sections are characterized by photoluminescence 
(PL) and they are 1.49 and 1.565 μιη, respectively, which are controlled by 
the SAG mask dimensions. The fabrication process [66] based on the SAG 
is summarized in Figs. 14.14a-d. 
(a) Wafer preparation: Initially, a first-order grating was partially etched in the 
laser section on a (100) rc-InP substrate. Then an 0.15^m-thick «-InGaAsP 
(Ag = 1.15 μπι) lower optical waveguide layer and a 10-nm-thick n-InP cap 
layer were grown on the partially corrugated substrate. A SAG mask made 
of a 0.2^m-thick Si02 mask is formed, which consists of a pair of 15-μη> 
wide Si02 strips with a 10- μπι gap between the strips only in the laser 
section, and no mask for the modulator section. 
(b) Selective-area growth of the MQW layers by MOC VD on the patterned wafer: 
On the patterned wafer, successive MOCVD-SAG growth was performed to 
grow an InGaAs/InGaAsP MQW structure (with five wells), an InGaAsP 
upper optical waveguide layer (Ag = 1.15 μπι), a /?-InP cladding layer, and 
an InGaAsP cap layer. The growth conditions for the wells were adjusted to 
produce tensile strain (0.3%) in the modulator section in the unmasked area. 
This produces a wider well to enhance the QCSE and for a better crystal 
quality in the laser section. The Si02 mask is designed such that the PL wave-
lengths are 1.49 μπι and 1.565 μηι for the modulator and laser section, 
respectively. The transition region between the laser and modulator section 
was found to be less than 50 μπι, corresponding roughly with the length of 
the vapor phase diffusion in the MOCVD growth conditions. 
(c) Buried-heterostructure (BH) processing or growth: After SAG, the wafer was 
processed into a planar BH structure with a 3.5^m-thick semi-insulating (SI) 
layer doped by 1.5 x 1017cm 3 Fe. To reduce the parasitic capacitance 
further, an 0.3^m-thick «-InP hole blocking layer was introduced between 
the SI and p-InP cladding layers. 
(d) Electrical isolation etching and electrode formation: The p-InP layer is 
etched partially for electrical isolation between the laser and modulator. 
The resultant isolation resistance is typically lOkil. The modulator is 
AR coated (R = 0.2%) and the laser section is HR coated (/? = 90%). 
2. Butt-Coupling Technology: This method involves a multiple epitaxy growth 
of distinct active layers for the laser and modulator and allows for independent 
design of the active layers of the two devices. It consists of the growing the 
laser active layers on the whole wafer, followed by selective etching and sub-
sequent regrowth of the modulator layers. A regrowth of the p-InP confining 
layer is finally performed. Figure 14.13b is based on a butt-joint technology 
[68], which has the advantage of allowing for optimization of the modulator 
and laser structures independently. The numbers of the quantum wells in the 
laser and modulator sections can be chosen differently, for example. The fab-
rication starts with the growth of six pairs of InGaAsP MQWs on an «-type 
(100) InP substrate as the active layer of the DFB laser by MOVPE. The 

14.6 INTEGRATED ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATOR-LASER (EML) 
699 
(a) 
Wafer preparation 
SI02 mask _ i ^ V Grating 
(b) 
Selective area MOCVD 
InGaAs/InGaAsP 
MQW layer 
(c) 
BH growth 
n-InP 
Fe-InP 
«») Isolation etching & 
electrode formation 
HR coating 
AR coating 
Figure 14.14 The fabrication process based on the selective-area growth, (a) Wafer preparation using an 
0.2-u.m-thick Si02 mask, which consists of a pair of 15^m-wide Si02 strips with ΙΟ-μηι-gap between the 
strips formed only in the laser section, and no mask for the modulator section, (b) Selective-area growth of 
the MQW layers by MOCVD on the patterned wafer, (c) Buried-heterostructure (BH) processing or growth. 
(d) Electrical isolation etching and electrode formation. The modulator is AR coated (Ä = 0.2%) and the 
laser section is HR coated (R = 90%). (Reprinted with permission from [661 © 1993 IEEE.) 

700 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
wells were 6.7-nm-thick InGaAsP with compressive strain and the barriers 
were 15.1-nm-thick InGaAsP (1.25-μπι PL wavelength). The MQW active 
layer was then etched down to the substrate except in the DFB laser section. 
Next, an additional InGaAsP MQW structure, with a 9.7-nm-thick InGaAsP 
well and a 5-nm-thick InGaAsP barrier (in 8 or 14 pairs), was selectively 
grown as the absorption layer of the modulator. The well was compressively 
strained by 0.5%, and the barrier was tensile strained to compensate for the 
total strain of the MQW. A butt-joint configuration is thus formed between 
the modulator and the DFB laser section. After a corrugation grating is 
formed in the DFB laser section, a p-type InP cladding layer and p-type 
contact layer were successively grown. The epitaxial layers including the 
MQW active and the MQW absorption layers were formed in a 2^m-wide 
high-mesa ridge waveguide structure by a dry etching technique. The modu-
lator and laser were buried in Fe-doped InP to reduce electric capacitance 
and to form the surface plane. An isolation groove was formed between the 
laser and modulator, followed by electrode formation. The devices were 
cleaved into a chip, in which the modulator is from 90 to 250 μιη long, and 
the laser is 450 μηι long. The facets were coated with an AR film for the modu-
lator and a HR film for the DFB laser facet. Finally, the EML is packaged into a 
compact module with a single-mode fiber (SMF) pigtail for measurement. 
3. Double Stack Approach: In this method, two MQW active layers are stacked 
on top of each other in one growth step, separated by a thin InP space layer. 
Selective wet chemical etching allows the localized removal of the top 
(laser) active layer, followed by a regrowth of p-type cladding and contact 
layers after waveguide processing. 
4. Identical Active Layer Approach: This method is simple because it uses the 
same active layers for both devices. The design requires a positive detuning 
(i.e., longer wavelength) of the DFB laser Bragg wavelength relative to that 
of the exciton peak wavelength of the modulator absorption spectrum. The 
amount of detuning such as 40 nm for example is achievable owing to the 
broad gain spectrum of the laser as well as the sharp excitonic absorption spec-
trum of the modulator with the current MOVPE growth. 
5. Quantum-Well Interdiffusion: This method uses quantum well intermixing 
by selective interdiffusion. After the growth of a single MQW stack, selective 
interdiffusion between the well and barrier material is induced, resulting in a 
blue shift of the absorption edge, which depends on the optical functions to 
be integrated. The research issues include the reproducibility, compatibility 
with a regrowth step, and ability to achieve a specific modulator structure for 
optimized performance. 
Figure 14.15 shows an example of the laser emission spectrum of another 
EML, where the DFB laser is biased at a constant current and the EA modulator 
is biased at 0, — 1, and — 2 volts. We can see the reduction of the output power 

14.6 INTEGRATED ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATOR-LASER (EML) 
701 
ov 
; 
,-\ V 
-. 
-2V 1 
1542 
1544 
1546 
1548 
1550 
1552 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 14.15 The laser emission spectrum of an EML, where the DFB laser is biased at a constant current 
and the electroabsorption modulator is biased at 0, - 1, and - 2 volts. (Reprinted with permission from [751 
© 1997 SPIE.) 
with increasing reverse bias voltage due to the increase of the absorption via 
QCSE. For a theoretical model of an EML, the propagation matrix approach as 
we described in Section 11.1 for DFB lasers has been applied [79, 92, 93]. 
The effects on the dynamic chirp have also been investigated in Refs. 77, 78, 
81, 82. The light output power of the lasing mode from the EML of 
Fig. 14.13a is shown in Fig. 14.16a for various reverse biased voltages of the 
EA modulator. The reduction of the light output power with increasing reverse 
bias is again clear. Figure 14.16b shows the transmission or output power of 
the EML at three bias currents (20, 50, and 80 mA) of the DFB laser as a function 
of the EA modulator bias voltage. The modulation bandwidth or frequency 
response of the EA modulator at three bias currents of the DFB laser is shown 
in Fig. 14.16c. The design gives a 3-dB bandwidth of about 14 GHz. High band-
width of 40 Gb/s or above has been realized in the past years. The bandwidth is 
limited mostly by the RC time constant of the modulator. One important effect is 
the hole pileup in the valence band of the quantum wells of the EA modulator 
section when the electron-hole pairs are generated due to the absorption of 
the DFB laser light by the modulator quantum wells. If the escape rate of the 
holes is too slow when the modulator is under high-speed modulation, the 
response of the modulator will be damped because the absorption of the modu-
lator is reduced due to Pauli blocking caused by the hole pileup. Therefore, the 
design of the quantum wells to reduce the band edge discontinuity of the valence 
(heavy hole) band can be employed to reduce hole pileup. Different materials 
systems such as InGaAs/InAlAs [94], InAlGaAs/InAlGaAs [95] and InGaAs/ 
InGaAsP [66], InGaAsP/InGaAsP [68] quantum well/barrier have been investi-
gated and compared for EML applications near 1.55-μπι telecommunication 
applications. Wide-bandwidth (larger than 50 GHz) using a traveling wave elec-
trode EA modulator integrated DFB laser to overcome the RC-induced bandwidth 

702 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
(a) »s 
& 
i 
I 
8 
5 
V; Modutalioe voltage 
/.LU =5β0μπι 
/ « , » = 2 ί Ι μ Β 
/ 
jT 
wmmMmSJL, 
- 
1 
V=tt\/ 
S 
~*Sjr 
' 
- Ι Λ ν ^ * 
-'ϋ--" 
-ΙΛΥ 
t 
(b) io 
25 
5· 
75 
LD drive current (mA) 
100 
- 1 
- 2 
- 3 
Applied voltage (V) 
(c) 
/L*-40mA 
14.1GHz 
0 
5 
M 
15 
Frequency (GHz) 
Figure 14.16 
(a) The light output power of an EML (Fig. 14.13a) versus the bias current of the laser(L-/ 
curve) under various reverse biased voltages of the EA modulator, (b) The transmission or output power of 
EML at three bias currents of the DFB laser as a function of the EA modulator bias voltage, (c) The modu-
lation bandwidth or frequency response of the EA modulator at three bias currents of the DFB laser. 
(Reprinted with permission from [66] © 1993 IEEE.) 
limitation has also been demonstrated [96]. Optimal design without the traveling 
wave electrode to achieve 40Gb/s bandwidth is also possible [97]. 
14.7 SELF-ELECTROOPTIC EFFECT DEVICES (SEEDs) 
Using the quantum confined Stark effects, interesting optical switch devices such as 
the self-electrooptic effect devices (SEEDs) [18-20, 50-56] have been demon-
strated. These devices show optical bistability and consist of a multiquantum-well 
p-i-n diode structure with different possible loads, such as a resistor (R-SEED), a con-
stant current source, or another p-i-n multiple-quantum-well diode (Symmetric or 

14.7 SELF-ELECTROOPTIC EFFECT DEVICES (SEEDs) 
703 
(a) 
?„ 'R 
Incident 
light 
v o O ; 
~y 
~N~ 
Output 
Vo=V+Ä/R 
light 
■Ρο„,=πν)Λ„ 
/R = Pi„5(V0 + /D(V) 
(d) 
»/»„,, = 7TWi 
Figure 14.17 (a) A circuit diagram for a self-electrooptic effect device with a resistor load (R-SEED) in 
the presence of an incident laser light at the input P,n. (b) A graphical solution for the photocurrent response 
/R = S(V) Pin + ID(V) and the load line V0 = V + RIR. (c) The transmission T(V) of the laser light passing 
through the MQW p-i-n diode is plotted as a function of the voltage drop V across the diode, (d) The switch 
diagram for the optical output power versus the optical input power with the arrows showing the path of 
switching. 
S-SEED). In this section, we discuss basic physical principles of a R-SEED. As 
shown in Fig. 14.17a, the circuit equation is given by Kirchoff's voltage law 
V + RlR 
(14.7.1) 
where V is the voltage drop across the diode. The reverse bias voltage V and the 
reversed current /R are defined as shown in Fig. 14.17a. For an incident laser light 
with a power Pin, the current /R is the sum of the photocurrent S(V) Pin and the 
dark current /D (V) 
k = P«,S(V) + ID(V) 
(14.7.2) 
where S(V) is the responsivity of the diode and is defined as 
S(V) = 
q
^ 
(14.7.3) 
where 
aL 
„-aL\ 
A ~ (1 - Rp){\ - e""· + /?„<TaL) 
(14.7.4) 

704 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
is the absorbance, that is, the fraction of absorbed power for a unit incident power, 
assuming a single path absorption. The absorbance can be derived noting that the 
reflectivity at the front surface Rp, plus the transmission after passing through the sub-
strate (1 - Rp) (1 - Rn)e~aL, plus the absorbance A, must equal 1. At steady state, the 
voltage drop across the multiple-quantum-well diode V and the current /R is deter-
mined by the simultaneous solutions of the above two equations. A graphical illus-
tration of these two equations is plotted in Fig. 14.17b, where the intersection 
points stand for the possible solutions for /R and V. 
As can be seen from Fig. 14.17b, when the optical input power Pin is increased, the 
photocurrent is increased, in general, and the number of intersection points varies. For 
an optical power equal to P-m,i, we have two intersection points A and E with corre-
sponding voltages VA and VE. Therefore, there are two possible output states: Pout = 
T(VA) Pi„,i, which is higher in output power and fout = T(VE) Pmj, which is lower in 
output power because of the transmissivity T(VA) > T(VE), Fig. 14.17c. Once we 
increase the optical input power to Ρ^2, we find that there are three intersection 
points, B, D, and F, with corresponding voltages VB, VD, and VF. Therefore, the 
optical output powers through the diode are given by three possible values, Pout = 
T(VB) Pma > T(VD) Λη,2 > T{VF) Piny2. Increasing the optical input power to Pin3, 
we have only two intersection points C and G with corresponding voltages Vc and 
Vc. Therefore, we obtain the output powers POM = T(VC) Pm,3 > T(VG) Λη,3· 
The switching curve and the directions are shown in Fig. 14.17d. At a small input 
power, Pin < Ριη<\, the optical transmission power Pout = T(V) Pm is monotonically 
increasing with the input power Pjn, as the photocurrent is small for a small incident 
optical power. Therefore, most of the reverse bias voltage is across the diode and V is 
close to V0 (VA < V < V0). In this range of voltage, the transmission coefficient is 
rather flat or monotonic. As the input optical power exceeds P-m,\, Pm<2 and Pi„,3, 
photocurrent will appear in the circuit, and the voltage drop across the diode will 
drop from Vc to VG, where the transmission will drop from a high value T(VC) to 
a low value T{VG). After Pin > Pjn,3, the output power starts to increase again 
because Pout = T(V) Pm increases as Pin increases. This switch sequence is therefore 
A^B->C^G 
-^H. 
In the reverse direction, if we switch down the optical input power from a large 
value of Pin at H, it will go through H —>G—>F—>E^>A—>0, because at point 
E the voltage has to switch from VE to VA as we decrease the input power Pin < 
Pmj. Therefore, the optical output power will switch from a low state £ to a high 
state A due to the large transmission coefficient T(VA) > T(VE). 
Symmetric self-electrooptic effect devices (S-SEEDs) [53] using another p-i-n 
multiple-quantum-well diode as the load, and field-effect transistor self-electrooptic 
effect devices (F-SEEDs) [20] have also been demonstrated to show interesting 
physics and applications. For example, the S-SEED can act as a differential logic 
gate capable of NOR, OR, NAND, and AND functions. These devices made by max-
imizing the ratio of the absorption coefficients in the high and low states while mini-
mizing the change in electric field can give nearly optimum performance [53]. From 
the /-V curve of a SEED, Fig. 14.17a and Fig. 14.17b, we see that negative differ-
ential conductivity exists. A SEED oscillator [19,52] can also be designed by a series 

APPENDIX 14A: TWO-PARTICLE WAVE FUNCTION 
705 
connection of a SEED and an LC resonator circuit and the SEED is optically pumped 
to produce a negative electric conductance in the photocurrent response. For example, 
oscillators with oscillation frequencies from 8.5 to 110 MHz have been demonstrated 
[52]. For the 8.5 MHz oscillator, frequency tuning by changing the bias voltage of the 
SEED has a tuning rate 16.7 kHz/V. This frequency tuning is caused by the change 
in the capacitance in the depletion layer of the SEED with the voltage change. The 
capacitance can also be changed optically by changing the optical power coupled 
to the SEED. 
APPENDIX 14A: TWO-PARTICLE WAVE FUNCTION AND THE 
EFFECTIVE MASS EQUATION 
To describe an electron-hole pair state, the two-particle wave function Ψ (re, rh) for 
an electron at position re and a hole at position rh can be expressed as a linear com-
bination of the direct product of the single (uncorrelated) electron and hole Bloch 
functions, Ψε,ι^ίΧε) and Ψν,-ι^ΐΉΧ respectively. 
*(re, rh) = Σ Σ A(ke, kh)^c>ke(re)Y; _kh(rh) 
(14A.1) 
ke 
k|, 
where A(k<., kh) represents the amplitude function. Note that the Bloch functions 
^ckcCfe) a nd Ψν,-ΐί„(Τΐι) contain both the slowly varying plane-wavelike envelope 
and fast-varying Bloch periodic functions. In the effective mass approximation for 
electron and hole pairs, an envelope function <P(re, rh) is defined as the inverse 
Fourier transform of the amplitude function A(ke, kh) 
^ ^ 
A 
· rc e * h ■ rh 
Φ(Γβ, rh) = V V A(ke, k h)—= 
— 
(14A.2) 
K kh 
V V VV 
which is the plane-wave expansion of the two-particle wave function. The Fourier 
transform of the wave function Φ(Γ£, rh) is 
A(ke, kh) = L 3r e Jd3rhO(re, rh)^ 
" 
. 
(14A.3) 
The major difference between Ψ and Φ in (14A.1) and (14A.2) is the basis functions 
used in their expansions. In the envelope function Φ for the electron-hole pair states, 
the fast-varying Bloch periodic parts uc(r) and uv(r), which behave like \iS) and 
If, ±5} or | | , +i), have been dropped from the basis functions and only the 
plane-wave parts are kept. The envelope wave function Φ(Γ6, rh) satisfies the effective 
mass equation 
[E. + £c(-/Ve) - £»(- iVh) + V(re, r h)^(r e, rh) = E4>(re, rh) 
(14A.4) 

706 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
(a) Real space 
Electron 
-lei 
r, 
(b) Momentum space 
mt + ml 
Hole m\ 
k = (mj;ke - m*kh)/(m£ + mj) 
Figure 14A.1 (a) An illustration for the electron position vector re, the hole position vector rh, the 
difference coordinate vector r = Γ4 — η,, and the center-of-mass coordinate vector R = (m*rc + mjri,)/ 
(m* + mj). (b) The relations between the wave vectors, ke, kh, k, and K, in the Fourier transform space. 
where we have replaced ke in the dispersion relation Ec = i^k,,) by the differential oper-
ator — iVe for the re variables, and kh in Ev = Zsv(kh) by — /Vh for the rh variables. Using 
the parabolic model, we have isc(ke) = h2k2/2ml and Ev(kh) = —tfk^/lrn^. 
The interaction potential V(re, rh) may be of the form 
(1) 
V(re, rh) = eF · (re - rh). 
(14A.5) 
It is the potential energy of a free electron and a free hole in the presence of a uniform 
electric field F. This will lead to the Franz-Keldysh effect [1-3] for the optical 
absorption, as discussed in Section 14.2. The interaction potential can also be of 
the form 
e2 
(2) 
V(re, rh) = - 
: 
. 
(14A.6) 
47res|re - r h | 
It is the Coulomb interaction between an electron at re and a hole at rh, where es is the 
permittivity of the semiconductor. This potential leads to the exciton effect [4-9] in 
the optical absorption, which is discussed in Section 14.3. 
Solution of the Two-Particle Effective-Mass Equation 
In general, for V(re, rh) = 
V(re — rh), which depends only on the difference between the electron and hole 

APPENDIX 14A: TWO-PARTICLE WAVE FUNCTION 
707 
position vectors, we may change the variables into the difference coordinate and the 
center-of-mass coordinate system, r and R, respectively, as shown in Fig. 14A.la 
r = re - rh 
R = (m* re + m* rh)/M 
(14A.7) 
where M = m* + m*,. The corresponding Fourier transform variables of r and R in 
the momentum space are, Fig. 14A.lb, 
k = (ιηζ ke — m* kh)/M 
and 
K = ke + kh 
respectively, which can also be checked using 
k· r + K· R = ke· re + kh· rh. 
We can also express the above relations as 
(14A.8) 
(14A.9) 
r.=R-
m„ 
M 
ml 
μ_ϋ Γ 
M 
K + k 
rh = R 
M 
kh 
M K - k 
From the corresponding differential operators 
(14A.10) 
(14A.11) 
-i'Ve 
kh : 
-iVr 
K 
-i'Vh 
-/VR 
(14A.12) 
we obtain 
~*~ 
~ 2M + 2m* 
2m* 
2m* 
h
2 
~ 
tf 
-
2ml 
e 
2mt 
h 
2M 
R 
2m* 
r 
(14A.13a) 
(14A.13b) 
Here m* is the reduced effective mass, defined by 
1 
m* 
1 
1 
— 
j 
^ 
ml 
ml 
(14A.14) 
Therefore, the effective mass equation (14A.4) becomes 
ft1 
, 
ft2 
, 
■ —V 2, 
V2 + V(r) - (E - E„) 
2M 
R 
2 m * * ' 
%' Φ(R, r) = 0. 
(14A.15) 

708 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
The solution to the above equation can then be obtained using the method of the 
separation of variables, noting that the R dependence is a simple free particle wave 
function, 
„ i K R 
Φ(Κ, r) 
W 
<Kr) 
(14A.16) 
where </>(r) satisfies 
2m: -V* + V(r)-E' ψ(Γ) = 0 
(14A.17) 
and the energy E' is 
E' 
=E-Ee 
2M ' 
(14A.18) 
Define the Fourier transform pair as 
<Kr) = ^ a ( k ) ^ 
α{Κ) = \<?τφ(χ)ε—^. 
(14A.19) 
We find 
JK- R 
Φ(Γ6, rh) = Φ(Κ, r) = —=- V 
fl(k) 
eik- (rc-rh) 
(14A.20) 
Optical Matrix Element of the Two-Particle Transition Picture The optical 
matrix element between the ground state (all electrons are in the valence band) and 
the final state (the electron-hole pair state) is described by [4, 5, 13] 
{f\e^re 
· p|i) = ^ ^ A * ( k e , kh)(c, ke\eik°>-re · p|v, - kh) 
Σ ^Α*(1^, 
kh)e · PcvikeJÖ^+k,,,,^ 
kc 
kh 
^ A * ( k , -k)e-p c v(k) 
(14A.21) 
where the long wavelength (or dipole) approximation koP ~ 0 has been used. 
Therefore, the k selection rule 
kg + kh = kop ~ 0 
(14A.22) 

APPENDIX 14B: SOLUTION OF THE ELECTRON-HOLE 
709 
has been adopted. Comparing (14A.20) with the definition in (14A.2), and using K = 
ke + kh ~ 0, we find that the matrix element is 
(f\e'^-Te 
· p|/) ~ e · p c v^A*(k, - k ) = e · P c v ^ a * ( k ) 
e · 
ρ^ννφ*(0) 
(14A.23) 
where we have assumed that e · ptv is independent of k. The absorption spectrum is 
given by substituting the matrix element (14A.23) into (14.1.1), and we obtain 
(14.1.2) in the text. 
APPENDIX 14B: SOLUTION OF THE ELECTRON-HOLE 
EFFECTIVE-MASS EQUATION WITH EXCITONIC EFFECTS 
Using the transformations for the difference coordinate and the center-of-mass 
coordinate systems for the x and y components, 
P = Pe-Ph 
Rr = « 
Pe + mh Ph)/M 
(14B.1) 
where M = m*e+m^, and p = xx + yy, we obtain after following similar 
procedures as in (14A.7) to (14A.15) 
_ ^ V 2 _ - * ! _ v 2 - — ^ - - - ^ - ^ 
2M 
R' 
2m* P 2m*dz2
e 
2mj;3z2 + 
+ Vh(Zh) 
4ττε8 re - rh 
- (E - E.) Φ(Γ6, rh) = 0. 
(14B.2) 
Because the dependence on Rf comes from only the leading kinetic energy term, the 
solution can be written as [33] 
Φ(Γ6, rh) 
Λ'Κ, · R, 
VÄ 
F(p, Ze, Zh) 
(14B.3) 
where the exciton envelop function F(p, ze, Zh) satisfies 
— 
Wl + 
H^-H^) 
E-E„-
tfKf 
2M 
47res|re - rh| 
^(P, Ze, Zh) = 0. 
(14B.4) 

710 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
The center of mass of the electron-hole pair is thus moving freely with a kinetic 
energy t?Kf/(2M). Here, identical relations to (14A.7) to (14A.11) for the parallel 
components of the real-space and momentum-space vectors exist, for example, 
Kr = ket + kht 
k, = (m* ke, - ηζ kht)/M. 
(14B.5) 
Note that 
fc2 d2 
ti2 d2 
H(Ze) = ~ ^ T 3 3 + Vefc) 
" # (Zh) = ~ —*~T2 + ^(Zh) 
(14B.6) 
which are simply one-dimensional Schrödinger equations for a particle in-a-box 
model. Let us consider 
//fe]/n(Ze) = Ee„MZe) 
//(Zh)gm(Zh) = E^g^Zh) 
(14B.7) 
where/„(ze) and gm{z\d are the free-electron and the free-hole wave functions in the 
absence of any interactions. With the Coulomb interaction term, the solution F(p, 
Ze, Zh) is more complicated. However, using the completeness properties of the 
solutions {/„(Ze)} and {gm(Zh)}, we can expand the exciton envelop function 
as [12, 15, 19] 
F(P, Ze, Zh) = Σ 
J2 
<l>*m<P)MZc) 8m{Zh). 
(14B.8) 
n 
m 
The Fourier transform pairs for the p dependence can be written as 
v ^ 
e ' v p 
0nm(P) = 2 ^ 
Gnm(K)—7= 
k, 
vA 
GWB(kf)= U2p^nm(p)—ητ~. 
The envelope function F(p, ze, Zh) becomes 
F(P, Ze, Zh) = J2J2Gnm(kt)e-^f-fn(ze) 
gm(zh). 
(14B.10) 
nm 
k, 
V A 
The complete envelope function is obtained from (14B.3), noting that all possible Kf 
can be included 
*-^ *-^ t - ^ 
eiK·'R' 
<?*''p 
Φ(Γε, Fh) = £ , J2 22 G„m(k,)^= 
-TjfniZe) gm(Zh) 
K, k, nm 
V A 
V A 
= Σ Σ Σ ί ί « » * ' > — 7 j 
7--/n(Z,) gm(Zh)· 
(14B.11) 
k« kht nm 
vA 
VA 
Comparing (14B.10) and (14B.11) with (14A.1) and (14A.2), we find that the 
e-'K ■ p 
(14B.9) 

APPENDIX 14B: SOLUTION OF THE ELECTRON-HOLE 
711 
original electron-hole pair state can be written as [8, 9, 15, 34] 
*(re, rh) = Σ 
Σ 
Gnmikt) 
W r « ) ^ - k j r h ) 
(14B.12a) 
kan kh,m 
(//nket(re) = i - ^ l / . f e ) Mc(re) 
(14B.12b) 
«Λη-^ίΠι) = 
-^— gm(Zh) «v(rh). 
(14B.12c) 
Optical Matrix Element for Excitonic Transitions in a Quantum Well The 
optical matrix element is obtained using |J) = |ground state), |/) = \Ψ(Γε, rh)), and 
</l* · PIO = Σ Σ Σ ^ Μ ω ^ · pi*»-*.«) 
nm 
kct 
kht 
= Σ Σ Σ 
G*nm^t)e · Pcv I„m 8^+k^O 
nm K, k, 
= Σ 
Σ 
G«m(kt)e ' Pcv lnm 
nm k, 
Σ [^ O P = °> 
€ * PCv 'm 
(14B.13) 
where lnm = $"<„/„ (z)gm(z)dz, and pcv = (wc(r)|p|Mv(r)). The above matrix element 
can be expressed alternatively in terms of F(p, ze, Zh) 
</|έ·ρ|*> = 
dzF*(p = 0, z, z)VÄe · pc 
(14B.14) 
Noting that K, = ket + kht = 0 from (14B.13), we substitute the expression (14B.8) 
for F(p, Ze, zh) into (14B.4), and obtain 
Σ 
h2 
e2 
— Z-— V + Eenf — Ehm> — 
: 
-
Im* 
p 
47T-8s|re-rh| 
X/„'fa)gm'(Zh)</w(P) = 0. 
(E - £g) 
(14B.15) 
Multiplying the above equation by/„*(ze) and gm(zh) and integrating over ze and zh, 
we obtain 
2m: V2
p-Vnm(p) 
Φηη(Ρ)= Eex<£nm(P) 
(14B.16) 

712 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
where 
Vnm(p) 
= Σ 
dzJ^iZeVniZe) 
dZhg*m(Zh)gm'(Zh 
„lml 
J 
J 
dZelfniZe)]2 
dZh\gm(Zh)\' 
I 
47765!^ + 
| Z e - Z h | 2 j 
1/2 
4πε„ (? + \Ze - Z h | 
1/2 
(14B.17) 
^ex — *-· 
V^g ~r *^en 
*^hm)' 
(14B.18) 
Above, we have ignored coupling among different subbands so that only n' = n and 
m' = m are taken into account in (14B.17). The wave function </>„m(p) satisfies the 
normalization condition in a two-dimensional space 
00 
Jj2p|^m(p)|2 = |27rpdp|</,nm(p)|2 
(14B.19) 
This was derived using 
L 2r ejrf 3r h^(r e,r h)| 2 = l 
(14B.20) 
and trr e άότ^ = d2R, dlp dze dzh', therefore, 
ld2p Idze |* h|f(p,z e,z h)| 2 = 1. 
(14B.21) 
Variational Method for Exciton Problem Two different methods are commonly 
used to find the solution for the exciton Eq. (14B.16). The most common approach is 
a variational method, which is very useful to find the bound state solution. Noting that 
the Is state solution of φ(ρ) behaves like e'fl"® or e~p^2ao), the following variational 
form is assumed in the variational approach [12] 
£ex(A) 
Φ 2mr
 
p 
V{p) Φ 
{Φ\Φ) 
(14B.22) 
where 
¥»)■■ 
2 1 ,-PM 
(14B.23) 

APPENDIX 14B: SOLUTION OF THE ELECTRON-HOLE 
713 
which satisfies the normalization condition (φ\φ) = 1 in (14B.19). We find 
00 
h
2 
e2 
4 
£ex(A) = 
l <fee|/„fe)|
2 
2mrX 
4ττε8 λ 
— 00 
00 
00 
x \ dzh\gm(zh)\2 \pdp- 
- ^ . 
(14Β.24) 
It is convenient to write in terms of the normalized parameters 
an 
ΑπεΛ2 
β = ^ 
a0 = — ^ V 
(14B.25) 
λ 
m*ez 
and the normalized exciton binding energy 
e - = f W * , 
R
y
=
ä
^ 
(14B.26) 
00 
OO 
£ex = ß2 - 4/3 [ <fee[/;(Ze)|2 ί <fehkm(zh)|2G(2/3|ze - zh|MO 
(14B.27) 
where the function G(x) is defined as an integral 
GOO 
dtr7
te 
'
, 
(14B.28) 
[t2 +X2]1'2 
which is a smooth monotonic function and can be approximated [55] analytically. It 
has the properties that G(0) = 1 and G(oo) = 0. Typically, for a quantum-well 
problem, \ze - zh| is finite and the argument in G{x) is over a finite range. The pure 
two-dimensional limit can be obtained by ignoring the z-dependence and using 
G(0)=1, 
seK = ß2-4ß. 
(14B.29) 
Thus we find the minimum at ß = 2 and eex = —4 as expected for a pure 2D exciton 
binding energy. 
Momentum-Space Solution for the Exciton Problem Alternatively, the real 
space exciton differential Eq. (14B.16) can also be written in terms of the momentum 
space integral equation [15, 35]. A direct numerical solution of the above equation 
has been discussed in Ref. 15. 

714 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
PROBLEMS 
14.1 Following the derivations in Eq. (14.1.2), show that the physical interpret-
ation of 2|φ„(0)|2 gives the reduced density of states for (a) a one-dimen-
sional and (b) a two-dimensional case. 
14.2 Derive Eq. (14A.13). 
14.3 Plot the Franz-Keldysh absorption spectrum for GaAs with an applied field 
F = 100 kV/cm at T = 300K. 
14.4 Compare the oscillator strengths and the exciton binding energies of the 
bound states of the 2D and 3D excitons. 
14.5 Compare the absorption spectra of the continuum-state contributions of the 
2D and 3D excitons. 
14.6 (a) Show that for interband absorption in a pure two-dimensional structure 
without exciton effects, the absorption spectrum taking into account 
the finite linewidth broadening is given by 
00 
^^ 
A° 
\de> 
y 
α(ηω) = 
w 
, 
2itRya\ J ir{ef- 
ε)2 + y2 
o 
where 
ε = (ho — Eg)/Ry. 
(b) Carry out the integration analytically and plot the absorption spectrum 
a(ha)). 
14.7 Derive Eq. (14B. 14). 
14.8 Show that G(x) defined in Eq. (14B.28) gives G(0) = 1 and G(oo) = 0. 
14.9 Use the perturbation result (14.4.20) for the band-edge transition energy 
E^\(F) to compare with the data shown in Fig. 14.6. Estimate the exciton 
binding energies for the heavy-hole and light-hole excitons separately. 
Discuss the accuracy of this simple method. 
14.10 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of the waveguide modulator 
versus the transverse transmission modulator. 
14.11 Discuss the physics and operation principles of a SEED. 
REFERENCES 
1. W. Franz, "Einfluss eines elektrichen Feldes auf eine optische Absorptionskante," 
Z. Naturforsch. 13a, 484-489 (1958). 

REFERENCES 
715 
2. L. V. Keldysh, 'The effect of a strong electric field on the optical properties of insulating 
crystals," Soviet Phys. JETP 34, 788-790 (1958). 
3. K. Tharmalingam, "Optical absorption in the presence of a uniform field," Phys. Rev. 130, 
2204-2206 (1963). 
4. R. J. Elliot, "Intensity of optical absorption by excitons," Phys. Rev. 108, 1384-1389 
(1957). 
5. R. J. Elliot, Theory of Excitons: I, in Polarons and Excitons, Scottish Universities' 
Summer School, C. G. Kuper and G. D. Whitfield, Eds., Plenum Press, New York, 
pp. 269-293, 1962. 
6. R. S. Knox, "Theory of Excitons," in Solid State Physics, Suppl. 5, Academic Press, 
New York, 1963. 
7. J. D. Dow and D. Redfield, "Electroabsorption in semiconductors: the excitonic absorption 
edge," Phys. Rev. B 1, 3358-3371 (1970). 
8. E. J. Johnson, "Absorption near the fundamental edge," Chapter 6 in R. K. Williardson 
and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, vol. 3, Academic Press, 
New York, pp. 153-258, 1967. 
9. J. O. Dimmock, "Introduction to the theory of exciton states in semiconductors," Chapter 7 
in R. K. Williardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, vol. 3, 
Academic Press, New York, pp. 259-319, 1967. 
10. T. H. Wood, C. A. Burrus, D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, A. C. Gossard, and 
W. Wiegmann, "High-speed optical modulation with GaAs/GaAlAs quantum wells in a 
p -i-n diode structure," Appl. Phys. Lett. 44, 16-18 (1984). 
11. D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, T. H. Wood, 
and C. A. Burrus, "Band-edge electroabsorption in quantum well structures: the quantum-
confined Stark effect," Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2173-2176 (1984). 
12. D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, T. H. Wood, 
and C. A. Burrus, "Electric field dependence of optical absorption near the band gap of 
quantum well structures," Phys. Rev. B 32, 1043-1060 (1985). 
13. S. Schmitt-Rink, D. S. Chemla, and D. A. B. Miller, "Linear and nonlinear optical prop-
erties of semiconductor quantum wells," Adv. Phys. 38, 89-188 (1989). 
14. M. Shinada and S. Sugano, "Interband optical transitions in extremely anisotropic semi-
conductors. I. Bound and unbound exciton absorption," J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 21, 
1936-1946(1966). 
15. S. L. Chuang, S. Schmitt-Rink, D. A. B. Miller, and D. S. Chemla, "Exciton Green's-func-
tion approach to optical absorption in a quantum well with an applied electric field," Phys. 
Rev. B 43, 1500-1509 (1991). 
16. T. H. Wood, "Multiple quantum well (MQW) waveguide modulators," J. Lightwave 
Technol. 6, 743-757 (1988). 
17. D. A. B. Miller, J. S. Weiner, and D. S. Chemla, "Electric-field dependence of linear 
optical properties in quantum well structures: waveguide electroabsorption and sum 
rules," IEEEJ. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 1816-1830 (1986). 
18. D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, T. H. Wood, 
and C. A. Burrus, "Novel hybrid optically bistable switch: The quantum well self-electro-
optic effect device," Appl. Phys. Lett. 45, 13-15 (1984). 

716 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
19. D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, T. H. Wood, C. A. Burrus, A. C. Gossard, and 
W. Wiegmann, "The quantum well self-electrooptic effect device: Optoelectronic Instabil-
ity and oscillation, and self-linearized modulation," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 
1462-1476(1985). 
20. D. A. B. Miller, M. D. Feuer, T. Y. Chang, S. C. Shunk, J. E. Henry, D. J. Burrows, and 
D. S. Chemla, "Field-effect transistor self-electrooptic effect device: integrated photodiode, 
quantum well modulator and transistor," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 1, 62-64 (1989). 
21. D. E. Aspnes, "Electric-field effects on the dielectric constant of solids," Phys. Rev. 153, 
972-982 (1967). 
22. D. E. Aspnes and N. Bottka, "Electric-field effects on the dielectric function of semicon-
ductors and insulators," in R. K. Williardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and 
Semimetals, vol. 9: Modulation Techniques, Academic Press, New York, pp. 457-543, 
1972. 
23. M. Cardona, Modulation Spectroscopy, in Solid State Physics, Suppl. 11, Academic, 
New York, pp. 165-275, 1969. 
24. B. R. Bennett and R. A. Soref, "Electrorefraction and electroabsorption in InP, GaAs, 
GaSb, InAs, and InSb," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 2159-2166 (1987). 
25. D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, and S. Schmitt-Rink, "Relation between electroabsorption 
in bulk semiconductors and in quantum wells: the quantum-confined Franz-Keldysh 
effect," Phys. Rev. B 33, 6976-6982 (1986). 
26. H. Shen and F. H. Pollak, "Generalized Franz-Keldysh theory of electromodulation," Phys. 
Rev. B 42, 7097-7102 (1990). 
27. M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions, Chapter 10, 
Dover, New York, 1972. 
28. F. Bassani and G. Pastori Parravicini, Electronic States and Optical Transitions in Solids, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1975. 
29. C. Y. P. Chao and S. L. Chuang, "Analytical and numerical solutions for a two-dimen-
sional exciton in momentum space," Phys. Rev. B 43, 6530-6543 (1991). 
30. M. D. Sturge, "Optical absorption of gallium arsenide between 0.6 and 2.75 eV," Phys. 
Rev. 127, 768-773 (1962). 
31. J. S. Blakemore, "Semiconducting and other major properties of gallium arsenide," 
J. Appl. Phys. 53, R123-R181 (1982). 
32. G. Livescu, D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, M. Ramaswamy, T. Y. Chang, N. Sauer, 
A. C. Gossard, and J. H. English, "Free carrier and many-body effects in absorption 
spectra of modulation-doped quantum wells," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 24, 
1677-1689(1988). 
33. G. Bastard and J. A. Brum, "Electronic states in semiconductor heterostructures," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. QE-22, 1625-1644 (1986). 
34. G. D. Sanders and Y. C. Chang, 'Theory of photoabsorption in modulation-doped semi-
conductor quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 35, 1300-1315 (1987). 
35. R. Zimmermann, "On the dynamic Stark effect of excitons, the low field limit," Phys. Stat. 
Sol. (b) 146, 545-554 (1988). 
36. Y. Kan, H. Nagai, M. Yamanishi, and I. Suemune, "Field effects on the refractive index 
and absorption coefficient in AlGaAs quantum well structures and their feasibility for elec-
trooptic device applications," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-23, 2167-2180 (1987). 

REFERENCES 
717 
37. M. Yamanishi and I. Suemune, "Comment on polarization dependent momentum matrix 
elements in quantum well lasers," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 23, L35-L36 (1984). 
38. M. Asada, A. Kameyama, and Y. Suematsu, "Gain and intervalence band absorption in 
quantum-well lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-20, 745-753 (1984). 
39. B. Zhu and K. Huang, "Effect of valence-band hybridization on the exciton spectra in 
GaAs-Gai_xAlxAs quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 36, 8102-8108 (1987). 
40. G. E. W. Bauer and T. Ando, "Exciton mixing in quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 38, 
6015-6030 (1988). 
41. H. Chu and Y. C. Chang, "Theory of Une shapes of exciton resonances in semiconductor 
superlattices," Phys. Rev. B 39, 10861-10871 (1989). 
42. L. C. Andreani and A. Pasquarello, "Accurate theory of excitons in GaAs-Ga^^Al^As 
quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 42, 8928-8938 (1990). 
43. C. Y. P. Chao and S. L. Chuang, "Momentum-space solution of exciton excited states and 
heavy-hole-light-hole mixing in quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 48, 8210-8221 (1993). 
44. M. Matsuura and T. Kamizato, "Subbands and excitons in a quantum well in an electric 
field," Phys. Rev. B 33, 8385-8389 (1986). 
45. G. Bastard, E. E. Mendez, L. L. Chang, and L. Esaki, "Variational calculations on a 
quantum well in an electric field," Phys. Rev. B 28, 3241-3245 (1983). 
46. S. Nojima, "Electric field dependence of the exciton binding energy in GaAs/Al^Gai 
xAs 
quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 37, 9087-9088 (1988). 
47. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Variational calculations of subbands in a quantum well with 
uniform electric field: Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization approach," Appl. Phys. Lett. 49, 
1450-1452(1986). 
48. J. S. Weiner, D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, C. A. Burrus, T. H. Wood, 
A. C. Gossard, and W. Wiegmann, "Strong polarization-sensitive electroabsorption in 
GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well waveguides," Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 1148-1150 (1985). 
49. P. Lefebvre, P. Christel, and H. Mathieu, "Unified formulation of excitonic absorption 
spectra of semiconductor quantum wells, superlattices and quantum wires," Phys. Rev. 
B4S, 17308-17315(1993). 
50. H. S. Cho and P. R. Prucnal, "Effect of parameter variations on the performance of GaAs/ 
AlGaAs multiple-quantum-well electroabsorption modulators," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 25, 1682-1690 (1989). 
51. G. Lengyel, K. W. Jelley, and R. W. H. Engelmann, "A semi-empirical model for electro-
absorption in GaAs/AlGaAs multiple quantum well modulator structures," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 26, 296-304 (1990). 
52. C. R. Giles, T. H. Wood, and C. A. Burrus, "Quantum-well SEED optical oscillators," 
IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 512-518 (1990). 
53. A. L. Lentine, D. A. B. Miller, L. M. F. Chirovsky, and L. A. D'Asaro, "Optimization of 
absorption in symmetric self-electrooptic effect devices: a system perspective," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 27, 2431-2439 (1991). 
54. P. J. Mares and S. L. Chuang, "Comparison between theory and experiment for InGaAs/ 
InP self-electrooptic effect devices," Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 1924-1926 (1992). 
55. P. J. Mares and S. L. Chuang, "Modeling of self-electrooptic-effect devices," J. Appl. 
Phys. 74, 1388-1397 (1993). 

718 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
56. M. K. Chin and W. S. C. Chang, "Theoretical design optimization of multiple-quantum-
well electroabsorption waveguide modulators," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 29, 
2476-2488 (1993). 
57. A. M. Fox, D. A. B. Miller, G. Livescu, J. E. Cunningham, and W. Y. Jan, "Quantum well 
carrier sweep out: relation to electroabsorption and exciton saturation," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. 27, 2281-2295 (1991). 
58. T. Ido, H. Sano, D. J. Moss, S. Tanaka, and A. Takai, "Strained InGaAs/InAlAs MQW 
electroabsorption modulators with large bandwidth and low driving voltage," IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett. 6, 1207-1209 (1994). 
59. T. Ido, S. Tanaka, M. Suzuki, M. Koizumi, H. Sano, and H. Inoue, "Ultra-high-speed mul-
tiple-quantum-well electro-absorption optical modulators with integrated waveguides," 
IEEEJ. Lightwave Technol. 14, 2026-2034 (1996). 
60. T. Ido, H. Sano, S. Tanaka, D. J. Moss, and H. Inoue, "Performance of strained InGaAs/ 
InAlAs multiple-quantum-well electroabsorption modulators," IEEE J. Lightwave 
Technol. 14, 2324-2331 (1996). 
61. D. G. Moodie, M. J. Harlow, M. J. Guy, S. D. Perrin, C. W. Ford, and M. J. Robertson, 
"Discrete electroabsorption modulators with enhanced modulation depth," IEEE J. 
Lightwave Technol. 14, 2035-2043 (1996). 
62. B. Mason et al., "40-Gb/s tandem electroabsorption modulator," IEEE Photon. Technol. 
Lett. 14, 27-29 (2002). 
63. H. Fukano, T. Yamanaka, and M. Tamura, "Design and fabrication of low-driving-voltage 
electroabsorption modulators operating at 40Gb/s," IEEE J. Lightwave Technol. 25, 
1961-1969(2007). 
64. Y. H. Kuo, "Quantum-confined Stark effects in Ge/SiGe quantum wells on Si for optical 
modulators," IEEEJ. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 12, 1503-1513 (2006). 
65. Y. Kawamura, K. Wakita, Y. Itaya, Y. Yoshikuni, and H. Asahi, "Monolithic integration of 
InGaAs/InP DFB lasers and InGaAs/InAlAs MQW optical modulators," Electron. Lett. 
22, 242-243 (1986). 
66. M. Aoki, M. Suzuki, H. Sano, T. Kawano, T. Ido, T. Taniwatari, K. Uomi, and A. Takai, 
"InGaAs/InGaAsP MQW electroabsorption-modulator integrated with a DFB laser fabri-
cated by band-gap energy control selective area MOCVD," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 29, 
2088-2096 (1993). 
67. M. Aoki, M. Takahashi, M. Suzuki, H. Sano, K. Uomi, T. Kawano, and A. Takai, "High-
extinction-ratio MQW electroabsorption-modulator integrated DFB laser fabricated by in-
plane bandgap energy control technique," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 4, 580-582 
(1992). 
68. H. Takeuchi, K. Tsuzuki, K. Sato, M. Yamamoto, Y. Itaya, A. Sano, M. Yoneyama, and 
T. Otsuji, "Very high speed light source module up to 40 Gb/s containing an MQW elec-
troabsorption-modulator integrated with a DFB laser," IEEE J. Sei. Top. Quantum 
Electron. 3, 336-343 (1997). 
69. T. Tanbun-Ek, Y. K. Chen, J. A. Grenko, E. K. Byrne, J. E. Johnson, R. A. Logan, A. Tate, 
A. M. Sergent, K. W. Wecht, P. F. Scriortino, Jr., and S. N. G. Chu, "Integrated DFB-DBR 
laser modulator grown by selective area metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy growth tech-
nique," J. Crystal Growth 145, 902-906 (1994). 

REFERENCES 
719 
70. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka, H. Taga, S. Yamamoto, and Y. Matsushima, "λ/4-shifted DFB 
laser/electroabsorption modulator integrated light source for multigigabit transmission," 
IEEE Trans. Lightwave Technol. 10, 90-95 (1992). 
71. B. Mason, G. A. Fish, S. P. DenBaars, and L. A. Coidren, "Widely tunable sampled 
grating DBR laser with integrated electroabsorption modulator," IEEE Photon. Technol. 
Lett. 11, 638-640 (1999). 
72. J. E. Johnson et al., "Fully stabilized electroabsorption-modulated tunable DBR lasertrans-
mitter for long-haul optical communications," J. Set. Top. Quantum Electron. 7, 168-177 
(2001). 
73. R. Nagarajan et al., "400 Gbit/s (10 channel x 40 Gbit/s) DWDM photonic integrated cir-
cuits," Electron. Lett. 41, 347-349 (2005). 
74. R. Nagarajan, M. Kato, J. Pleumeekers, P. Evans, D. Lambert, A. Chen, V. Dominic, 
A. Mathur, P. Chavarkar, M. Missey, A. Dentai, S. Hurtt, J. Back, R. Muthiah, 
S. Murthy, R. Salvatore, S. Grubb, C. Joyner, J. Rossi, R. Schneider, M. Ziari, F. Kish, 
and D. Welch, "Single-chip 40-channel InP transmitter photonic integrated circuit 
capable of aggregate data rate of 1.6 Tbit/s," Electron. Lett. 42, 771-773 (2006). 
75. D. F. Welch, F. A. Kish, R. Nagarajan, C. H. Joyner, R. P. Schneider, Jr., V. G. Dominic, 
M. L. Mitchell, S. G. Grubb, T.-K. Chiang, D. D. Perkins, and A. C. Nilsson, "The realiz-
ation of large-scale photonic integrated circuits and the associated impact on fiber-optic 
communication systems," J. Lightwave Technol. 24, 4674-4683 (2006). 
76. D. F. Welch et al., "Large-scale InP photonic integrated circuits: enabling efficient scaling 
of optical transport networks," IEEE J. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 13, 22-31 (2007). 
77. L. M. Zhang and J. E. Carroll, "Semiconductor 1.55 urn laser source with Gigabit/second 
integrated electroabsorptive modulator," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 30, 2573-2577 
(1994). 
78. Y. Kim, H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Han, T. W. Oh, and J. Jeong, "Chirp characteristics of 10-Gb/s 
electroabsorption modulator integrated DFB lasers," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 36, 
900-908 (2000). 
79. W. Fang, S. L. Chuang, T. Tanbun-Ek, and Y. K. Chen, "Modeling and experiment of 1.55 
μπι integrated electrabsorption modulator with distributed-feedback lasers," Proc. SPIE, 
vol. 3006, Photonics West, Optoelectronics'97 Symposium, 1997. 
80. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka, S. Akiba, and Y. Kushiro, "Electrical and optical interactions 
between integrated InGaAsP/InPDFB lasers and electroabsorption modulators," 
J. Lightwave Technol. 6, 779-785 (1988). 
81. M. Aoki, S. Takashima, Y. Fujiwara, and S. Aoki, "New transmission simulation of EA-
modulator integrated DFB-lasers considering the facet reflection-induced chirp," IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett. 9, 380-382 (1997). 
82. R. A. Salvatore, R.T. Sahara, M. A. Bock, and I. Libenzon, "Electroabsorption modulated 
laser for long transmission spans," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 464-476 (2002). 
83. A. Ramdane, F. Devaux, N. Souli, D. Delprat, and A. Ougazzaden, "Monolithic inte-
gration of multiple-quantum-well lasers and modulators for high-speed transmission," 
IEEE J. Sei. Top. Quantum Electron. 2, 326-335 (1996). 
84. D. Delprat, A. Ramdane, L. Silvestre, A. Ougazzaden, F. Delorme, and S. Slempkes, "20-
Gb/s integrated DBR laser-EA modulator by selective area growth for 1.55-/spl mu/m 
WDM applications," J. Lightwave Technol. 9, 898-900 (1997). 

720 
ELECTROABSORPTION MODULATORS 
85. H. Soda, K. Nakai, and H. Ishikawa, "Frequency response of an optical intensity modu-
lated monolithically integrated with a DFB laser," Proc. 14th Eur. Conf. Optical 
Communication (ECOC'88), pp. 227-230, 1988. 
86. K. Wakita, K. Sato, I. Kotaka, M. Yamamoto, and T. Kataoka, "20 Gbit/s 1.55 urn strained 
InGaAsP MQW modulator integrated DFB laser module," Electron. Lett. 4, 302-303 
(1994). 
87. B. Stegmueller, E. Baur, and M. Kicherer, "15-GHz modulation performance of integrated 
DFB laser diode EA modulator with identical multiple-quantum-well double-stack active 
layer," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 14, 1647-1649 (2002). 
88. B. Stegmueller and C. Hanke, "Integrated 1.3um DFB laser electroabsorption modulator 
based on identical MQW double-stack active layer with 25-GHz modulation perform-
ance," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 15, 1029-1031 (2003). 
89. A. Ramdane, P. Krauz, E.V.K. Rao, A. Hamoudi, A. Ougazzaden, D. Robein, 
A. Gloukhian, and M. Carre, "Monolithic integration of InGaAsP-InP strained-layer dis-
tributed feedback laser and external modulator by selective quantum-well interdiffusion," 
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 7, 1016-1018 (1995). 
90. A. Ramdane, A. Ougazzaden, F. Devaux, F. Delorme, M. Schneider, and J. Landreau, 
"Very simple approach for high performance DFB laser-electroabsorption modulator 
monolithic integration," Electron. Lett. 30, 1980-1981 (1994). 
91. M. Le Pallec, C. Kazmierski, E. Vergnol, S. Perrin, J. G. Provost, P. Doussiere, G. Glastre, 
D. Carpentier, and S. Fahre, "New integrated buried laser-ridge modulator with identical 
active layer," IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 15, 362-364 (2003). 
92. W. Fang, A. Hsu, S. L. Chuang, T. Tanbun-Ek, and A. M. Sergent, "Measurement and 
modeling of distributed-feedback lasers with spatial hole burning," IEEE J. Sei. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 3, 547-554 (1997). 
93. A. Hsu, S. L. Chuang, W. Fang, L. Adams, G. Nykolak, and T. Tanbun-Ek, "A wave-
length-tunable curved waveguide DFB laser with integrated modulator," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 35, 961-969 (1999). 
94. T. Ido, H. Sano, S. Tanaka, D. J. Moss, and H. Inoue, "Performance of strained InGaAs/ 
InAlAs multiple-quantum-well electroabsorption modulators," J. Lightwave Technol. 14, 
2324-2331 (1996). 
95. K. Nakahara, T. Tsuchiya, T. Kitatani, K. Shinoda, T. Taniguchi, T. Kikawa, M. Aoki, and 
M. Mukaikubo, "40-Gb/s direct modulation with high extinction ratio operation of 1.3-um 
InGaAlAs multiquantum well ridge waveguide distributed feedback lasers," IEEE Photon. 
Technol. Lett. 19, 1436-1438 (2007). 
96. A. Akage, K. Kawano, S. Oku, R. Iga, H. Okamoto, Y. Miyamoto, and H. Takeuchi, 
"Wide bandwidth of over 50 GHz traveling wave electrode electroabsorption modulator 
integrated DFB laser," Electron. Lett. 37, 299-300 (2001). 
97. H. Kawanishi, Y. Yamauchi, N. Mineo, Y. Shibuya, H. Mural, K. Yamada, and H. Wada, 
"EAM-integrated DFB laser modules with more than 40-GHz bandwidth," IEEE Photon. 
Technol. Lett. 13, 954-956 (2001). 

Part V 
Detection of Light and Solar Cells 


15 
Photodetectors and Solar Cells 
Photodetectors play important roles in optical communication systems. The major 
physical mechanism of photodetectors is the absorption of photons, which 
changes the electric properties of the electronic system such as the generation of a 
photocurrent in a photoconductor or a photovoltage in a photovoltaic detector. The 
performance of a photodetector depends on the optical absorption process, the 
carrier transport, and the interaction with the circuit system. Similar physical 
processes exist in solar cells made of semiconductor p-n junctions, which play an 
important role in conversion of solar radiation into electrical energy. 
For intrinsic optical absorptions, such as interband processes in a direct 
semiconductor, the general theory for the absorption spectrum has been presented 
in Chapter 9. The interband absorption creates electron-hole pairs. The carrier 
transport of these electrons and holes after generation depends on the design of the 
photodetectors. In this chapter, we study photoconductors, photodiodes using p-n 
junctions and p-i-n structures, avalanche photodiodes, and intersubband quantum-
well photodetectors. Our focus is on the understanding of the physical processes of 
the carrier generation and transport. We derive the relation between the optical 
power and the photocurrents. Some important noises in these photodetectors are 
also discussed. More extensive treatment of photodetectors can be found in 
Refs. 1-5. Finally, we discuss photovoltaic solar cells based on p-n junctions, includ-
ing quantum-well solar cells and multijunction solar cells. 
15.1 
PHOTOCONDUCTORS 
15.1.1 
Photoconductivity 
Consider a uniform p-type semiconductor with a uniform optical illumination. The 
total electron and hole carrier concentrations, n and p, deviate from their thermal 
equilibrium values, n0 and p0, due to the optical excitation 
η = ηο + δη 
ρ—ρο + 8ρ 
(15.1.1) 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
723 

724 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
where the excess electron and hole concentrations are equal δη = δρ because each 
absorbed photon breaks a bond and creates an electron-hole pair. Because p0 3> «o 
in an extrinsic p-type semiconductor, the net recombination rate (2.3.6) can be 
reduced to 
R„ 
δη 
(15.1.2) 
where the low level injection condition (i.e., δη, δρ <c ρ0) has been assumed. Thus the 
excess electron concentration satisfies the rate equation 
d_ 
dt δη = Go(t) 
δη 
(15.1.3) 
where G0 is the net optical generation rate. For a uniform semiconductor with a dc 
voltage bias V, as shown in Fig. 15.1, the electron and hole current densities are 
given only by the drift components because there is no diffusion current due to the 
absence of spatial dependence (d/dx = 0). The total current density is 
J =Jn+Jp 
= q{^nn + μρρ)Ε = σΕ 
(15.1.4) 
where the conductivity is 
σ = ς(μ„η + μρ). 
(15.1.5) 
The photoconductivity Δσ is defined as the difference between the conductivity when 
there is an optical injection and the dark conductivity σ0 =ς(μ„ηο + μρρο) 
Δσ = ς(μβη + μβρ) = η(μη + μρ)δη. 
(15.1.6) 
Light hv 
A = wd 
Figure 15.1 A simple photoconductor with an external bias voltage V. The optically generated electrons 
and holes transport in opposite directions in the presence of the bias field. 

15.1 PHOTOCONDUCTORS 
725 
15.1.2 Photocurrent Responses in the Time Domain 
Case 1. A Constant Light Intensity 
If G0 is independent of time, d/dt = 0 at 
steady state, we obtain 
Sn = G0rn. 
(15.1.7) 
The total current / is the current density J multiplied by the cross-sectional area A = 
wd. The photocurrent Δ/ is defined as the difference between the total current in the 
presence of optical excitation and the dark current /0 = σ0 AV/l 
V 
V 
V 
M = ΔσΑ - = <7(μ,„ + μρ)8ηΑ- 
~ qßnG0TnA - 
(15.1.8) 
where the electric field E = V/£, with I being the length of the sample and μη » 
μρ, 
have been used. The above expression can also be expressed in terms of the transit 
time of the electrons 
£ 
t 
I2 
r, = run =- 
= — 
= — 
(15.1.9) 
Vn 
μ„Ε 
μην 
such that 
\l = q(G0£A) — . 
(15.1.10) 
The above expression has a good physical interpretation. The term G0IA is the total 
number of electron-hole pairs created per second in the sample with a volume IA. 
The ratio τ„/τ, gives the photoconductive gain, which is determined by how fast 
the electrons can transit across the electrodes and contribute to the photocurrent in 
the circuit before they can recombine with holes. If we include both electron and 
hole contributions: 
7 = 7- + 7- = ίΛ. + Μ,)|· 
( « . L I D 
>t 
Tt,n 
Tt,p 
<-
As shown in Fig. 15.1, when an electron-hole pair is created, the photocurrent 
will be small if the electron and the hole immediately recombine before they can 
be collected by the electrodes (i.e., if the recombination lifetime τ„ is much shorter 
than the transit time). On the other hand, when the transit time τ, is short, a significant 
amount of photogenerated electrons will be able to reach the left electrode before 
they recombine with holes in the semiconductor. To preserve charge neutrality in 
the semiconductor, the left electrode will provide the same number of holes at the 
same rate as the electrons reaching that electrode per second, resulting in the 
photoconductor current measured by the external circuit. For example, τη/τ,= 
10 
is equivalent to having 10 round-trips taken by the electron before it disappears 
through the recombination in the photoconductor. 

726 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
The optical generation rate is equal to the number of injected photons per second, or 
photon flux (-Popt//iv) per unit volume (£wd) multiplied by the quantum efficiency 77 
G0 = VPf^ 
(15.1.12) 
iwd 
where w is the width, d is the depth of the sample (wd = A), Popl is the optical power 
(watt) of the injected light, and 17 is the quantum efficiency or the fraction of photons 
creating electron-hole pairs. If the surface reflections and the finite thickness of 
the detector are considered, the quantum efficiency 17 is just the intrinsic quantum 
efficiency η„ i.e., the number of electron-hole pairs generated by each absorbed 
photon, multiplied by the absorbance 
r,= 7tl(l-RKl-e-ad) 
(15.1.13) 
where R is the optical reflectivity between the air and semiconductor and a is the 
absorption coefficient of the optical intensity. The injected primary photocurrent 
/ph is defined as 
/ph = i w ^ . 
(15.1.14) 
The photocurrent is 
*opt fn 
. fn 
Μ=νΐ-^- 
= Ιφ-. 
05.1.15) 
nv T, 
r T, 
Again the photoconductive gain is given by 
£ = ^ . 
(15.1.16) 
'ph 
T, 
If there are more electrons traveling across the electrodes before recombining with the 
holes, there will be more photocurrent appearing in the external circuit. The current 
responsivity /?A (A/W) is the photocurrent response per unit optical incident power 
RK = -— =17- 
(15.1.17) 
Fopt 
hv T, 
and depends on the operation wavelength λ. 
Case 2. Transient Response If the constant light illumination is switched off at 
t = 0, that is, G0(i) = G0, t < 0, and 0 for t > 0, the response for t > 0 satisfies 
9 0 
8n(t) 
jr8n(t) = 
- . 
(15.1.18) 
at 
τ„ 

15.1 
PHOTOCONDUCTORS 
The solution for the excess carrier density is 
8n(t) = 8n(0)e-'/T" 
= 
G0Tne-"T" 
and the photocurrent response obtained from (15.1.8) is 
fAV^ 
-,/r. 
727 
to(t) = wfioTn[ 
— 
)e-"T·. 
(15.1.19a) 
(15.1.19b) 
The result is shown in Fig. 15.2a. The decay time constant is the minority carrier 
recombination lifetime τ„. 
Impulse Response 
If the light injection is an impulse function, 
Go(t) = go8(t), 
then, 
(15.1.20) 
at 
r„ 
(15.1.21) 
(a) 
A G0(i) 
Sn(t) 
GnT„ 
^ ο τ 
GoV H 
(b) 
, ι&ΐ(ί) 
«0 
v«o« 
G0(t) = G0(l + m cos mi) 
-V - 7 - - G0T„ 
Figure 15.2 The generation rate G0(i) and the photogenerated excess electron concentration δη(ί) for 
(a) switch-off, (b) impulse response, and (c) sinusoidal steady-state response of a photoconductor. 

728 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Integrating the above equation from t = 0 to 0 + gives 
8n(0+) - Sn(0_) = go-
Assuming that initially δη(0_) = 0 (i.e., the semiconductor is at thermal equilibrium 
before t = 0), we obtain 
Snit) = g0e~//T" 
for t > 0. 
This result is plotted in Fig. 15.2b. 
(15.1.22) 
Case 3. Sinusoidal Steady-State Response 
If the optical intensity is modulated 
by a sinusoidal microwave signal such that 
Ga{t) = G0 cos ωί = Re[G0e'la"] 
(15.1.23) 
where Re means the real part of the quantity, the sinusoidal steady-state response can 
be found by the phasor notation 
We have 
Snit) = Re[5n(w)e-,ft"]. 
d 0 , , 
Snit) 
— on(f) = Go cos cot 
. 
at 
τ„ 
(15.1.24) 
(15.1.25) 
The solution for δη(ω) using (15.1.23) - (15.1.25) is 
GQT„ 
Thus 
δη(ω) 
Snit) = Re 
1 — ίωτη 
GOT„ 
1 — ίωτ, 
GQT„ 
cos (ωί — φ) 
(15.1.26) 
(15.1.27) 
where φ = tan '(ωτ„) is the phase delay in the ac response. 
On the other hand, if the optical intensity or the optical generation rate consists of a 
dc and an ac component, Fig. 15.2c, 
Pit) — Popt(l + m cos ωί) 
Go(i) = Go(l + mcoswi) 
(15.1.28) 
(15.1.29) 

15.1 
PHOTOCONDUCTORS 
729 
where m is the modulation index, the photocurrent response using (15.1.15) gives 
m 
Kt) = /p 1 + v/TT^rl 
cos (ωί — φ) 
h = W 
*opt τη 
hv T, 
(15.1.30a) 
(15.1.30b) 
In other words, for a root-mean-square (rms) optical power, we replace the cosine 
function in (15.1.28) by 1/V5, 
mP, opt 
V2 
the rms photocurrent signal is 
*P = 
(IV-
sV 
hv \T,J y/l +uP-fin 
(15.1.31) 
(15.1.32) 
15.1.3 Noises in Photoconductors 
In this subsection, we present some fundamental concepts including the spectral 
density function for noises in photodetectors [6]. Important noises such as 
generation-recombination or shot and thermal noise are discussed. 
Spectral Density Function S(/) 
The signal such as the photocurrent in the time 
domain i(t) of the photoconductor is related to its Fourier transform /(/) in the 
frequency domain by 
Kt) = j Kf)e-n^df 
—oo 
00 
/(/) = I i(t)ei2^dt 
The average power P over a time duration T is 
T/2 
=i 
j i\t)dt=j I \Kf)\ df 
-T/2 
Jl«"(/)lV = js(/)# 
0 
0 
(15.1.33a) 
(15.1.33b) 
(15.1.34) 

730 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
where we have used 
r/2 
lim 
[ ea*f-f)'dt=d(f-f) 
(15.1.35) 
r^oo J 
-r/2 
and defined the spectral density function S(f) as 
S{f) = ^\i{ff- 
(15.1.36) 
Shot Noise For a sequence of events such as collection of charges within a time 
interval T, say 
N, 
i(t) = Y2h(t-ti), 
0<t<T 
(15.1.37) 
where Nt = total number of events within time T, we obtain the Fourier transform 
Kf) = J2h(f)ei277fti. 
(15.1.38) 
The ensemble average of \i(f)\2 is 
(i«'(/)i
2) = ( IM/)I
2 I M + Σ Σ
 βχρ [ί'27Γ/(ί^ -ii)]}) 
= \h(ff{Nt) 
= (N)T\h(f)\2 
(15.1.39) 
where (N) = (N,)/T is the average number of events occurring per second. The 
random distributions of r, and tj give the cancellation in the second term in 
(15.1.39) when i φ j . The spectral density function is 
Sif) = ^(\Kf)\2) 
= 2{N)\h(f)\2. 
(15.1.40) 
Now we consider an injected electron between two capacitor plates with a separation 
I. The current is 
h(t) = ~v(t) 
0<t<rt 
(15.1.41) 
where v(t) is the instantaneous velocity of the electron and r, is the transit time. 
The average current (/) is related to the average number of electron injections per 
second (N) by 
(I)=q(N). 
(15.1.42) 

15.1 
PHOTOCONDUCTORS 
731 
The Fourier transform of h(t) reduces to 
Kf) 
-Mty27#dt· 
qdx{t) 
? - ä - * = * 
05-1.43) 
assuming the frequency is low enough such that fr, -C 1. The spectral density 
function is 
S(f) = 2(N)\h(f)\2= 
2(N)q2 = 2q(I). 
(15.1.44) 
The power of this shot noise within a frequency interval between / and 
f+Af 
associated with the current is denoted by 
(i2
s(f)) = S(f)Af = 2q(I)Af. 
(15.1.45) 
Generation-Recombination Noise In a photoconductor, the photogenerated 
carriers have a finite lifetime τ, which is a random variable with a mean value (τ) 
denoted as τ„ for the electrons. The photocurrent due to one injected electron is 
f qv/£ 
0 < t < T 
h(t)={ 
(15.1.46) 
^ 0 
otherwise. 
Here we use v as the mean drift velocity and rt = i/v as the mean transit time. The 
Fourier transform of h(t) is 
Kf) = ^ i ^ l ^ - i 
o 
\2 
T, 
T, V 
ί2·π/ 
\hiff = f1) 
7z^7-2 (2 - e~a^ - ea^). 
(15.1.47) 
If we assume that the probability function of the random variable τ obeys Poisson 
statistics 
ρ(τ) = — <TT/T" 
(15.1.48) 
00 
with an average (τ) = J" τ/?(τ) dr = τ„, we find 
o 
W)\ 
\h{ffp{r)dr 
= 
2 g ( T"/ T' } 
(15.1.49) 
1 W ' ^ 
1+(2ττ·/τ„)2 
Because the average photocurrent with the photoconductive gain τ„/τ, due to (N) 
injected (primary) electrons per second is 
Ip = (I) = (N)q^ 
(15.1.50) 

732 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
the spectral density function due to (N) injected electrons per second is obtained from 
(15.1.40), (15.1.49), and (15.1.50) 
S(f) = 2(N)(\h(f)\2)=^^2. 
(15.1.51) 
The generation-recombination noise current is, therefore, 
(ilR)=S(fW 
= 4qIpiTn/T'W
2. 
(15.1.52) 
Thermal Noise (also Johnson Noise or Nyquist Noise) In a photodetector, the 
random thermal motion of charge carriers contribute to a thermal noise current [6-8]. 
In other words, the thermal noise of a resistor R results in a random electric current 
i(t) that is characterized by a power spectral density at temperature T 
*w=iU/ff>-i· 
(15-L53) 
This thermal noise current adds to the photocurrent signal ip(t) and affects the clarity 
of the detected signals. At low frequency hf <C kBT, w e have 
S ( / ) ~ 1 M . 
(15.1.54) 
The thermal noise is described by 
4 
s( r\dt ~ -
<£>= j s ( / ) d r ~ ^ 4 f 
(15.1.55) 
0 
where the bandwidth Δ/of the circuit is assumed to be much smaller than kBT/h. 
Signal-to-Noise Ratio The power signal-to-noise ratio is therefore [8] 
(S/AW = TtrL·-, = 
r W { ^ ' h V \ ^ - 
(15-1.56) 
<*> + <&> 
8 Δ / [ ΐ + ^ ( ΐ + ^ ) ] 
Noise-Equivalent Power (NEP) The noise-equivalent power is defined as the 
power that corresponds to the incident rms optical power {pm^ = m Popt/V2) 
required such that the signal-to-noise ratio is one in a bandwidth of 1 Hz. 

15.1 
PHOTOCONDUCTORS 
733 
Detectivity (D*) The detectivity is defined as 
fXbf 
D* = NEP cm (Hzy'VW 
(15.1.57) 
where A is the detector cross-sectional area in cm2. More discussions on photo-
conductive detectors such as Hg^Cdj-^Te can be found in Ref. 9. 
15.1.4 n-i-p-i Superlattice Photoconductor 
Recently, modulation doping in semiconductors has been introduced for novel device 
applications. An interesting example is a GaAs doping superlattice used as a photo-
conductor. For an extensive review of the compositional and doping superlattices, see 
(a) Charge density p(x) 
+qND 
+qNO 
+qND 
-«"A 
^"A 
(b) Electric field E(x) 
(c) Energy band diagram 
Figure 15.3 (a) The charge density profile due to ionized donors and acceptors in an n-i-p-i doping 
superlattice using the depletion approximation, (b) The electric field profile due to the charge distribution 
in (a). Notice that the electric field is alternating between positive and negative directions, (c) The energy 
band diagram of the n-i-p-i superlattice. The photogenerated electron-hole pairs are separated in real space 
because of the band profiles. 

734 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Refs. 10 and 11. Here we consider a GaAs doped periodically n-type and p-type sep-
arated by intrinsic regions as shown in Fig. 15.3a. The electric field profile E{x) can 
be obtained noting that dE(x)/dx = ρ(χ)/ε, where p(x) = +qNO in the «-doped 
regions, -qNA in the /j-doped regions, and zero in the intrinsic regions. Therefore 
E(x) is either a linear profile with a positive slope qNO/e in n-regions or a negative 
slope -qNA/e 
in p-regions or a zero slope in the intrinsic regions, Fig. 15.3b. The 
potential profiles for the conduction band edge 
X 
Ec(x) = -q<p(x) = q f E(x')dx' 
(15.1.58) 
— 00 
is the integral of the electric field profile and is shown in Fig. 15.3c. 
For an incident light with energy above the band gap, the photogenerated carriers 
fall to the band edge and drift or diffuse to the valleys of each band as shown in 
Fig. 15.3c. The electrons are separated from the holes in real space, resulting in a 
long recombination lifetime τ„. This enhancement of lifetime has been found to be 
many orders of magnitude larger than the bulk carrier lifetime. Because the photocur-
rent response is proportional to G0T„, an extremely large responsivity using the n-i-p-i 
superlattice as a photoconductor can be designed. 
15.2 p-n JUNCTION PHOTODIODES 
Consider a p-n junction photodiode [12-15] as shown in Fig. 15.4. The charge 
distribution p(x), the electric field E(x), and the potential energy profile under 
the depletion approximation have been discussed in Chapter 2. Here we investigate 
the photocurrent response if the diode is illuminated by a uniform light intensity, 
described by a generation rate G(x, t), which is the number of electron-hole pairs 
created per unit time per unit volume. 
15.2.1 I-V Curve and Photocurrent 
Let us focus first on the n-side of the diode. The charge continuity equation is given 
by (2.4.2) 
-~- = G(x, t) 
— „ 
at 
TP 
q ox 
G(x, t)--^---—Jp(x) 
(15.2.1) 
where pn = pn0 + 8pn is the total hole concentration in the n-region, pn0 is the hole 
concentration in the absence of any electric or optical injection, and 8pn is the 
excess hole concentration due to the external injections. The minority (hole) 
current density in the quasi-neutral region (x > xn) is dominated by the diffusion 
component [12-14], as discussed in Chapter 2 
Jp(x)~-qDp^. 
(15.2.2) 

15.2 p-n JUNCTION PHOTODIODES 
(a) A p-n junction photodiode 
735 
/ / y / 
V<0 
—I 11H-
Charge density 
i 
~XP 
-(/NA I 
^ p(x 
+ 
+ 
X 
) 
+qNO 
n 
(c) Electric field 
E{x) 
Figure 15.4 (a) A p-n junction diode under the illumination of a uniform light, (b) The charge 
distribution pix) under depletion approximation, (c) The electric field E(x) obtained from Gauss's law. 
Because pn0 is independent of x and t, we have at steady state if G(x, t) = G0 is 
independent of x and t, 
r, 92 
8pn 
(15.2.3) 
The above equation can be solved by summing the homogeneous and particular 
solutions 
8Pn(x) = c,«-**-*^ + c2e{x-x")lL" + G0TP 
(15.2.4) 
where Lp = y/DpTp is the diffusion length for holes. The particular solution is due to 
the optical generation. If the n-region is very long, we can set c2 = 0; otherwise, 

736 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
8pn(x —* oo) —s· +00, which is unphysical. We expect as x—>+oo, 8pn(x) will 
approach G0TP = total photogenerated holes. At x = xn, the hole concentration is 
pinned by the voltage bias V with the exponential dependence 
Pn(x = xn)=pnoe"v^T 
(15.2.5) 
if the Boltzmann statistics are assumed. Therefore, we obtain 
8pn(xn)=pn<i(e"v^T 
- 1 ) 
(15.2.6) 
and 
8p«{x) = [pn0(e?v/keT - 1) - GOTP] β-«*-*>/^ + Gor,,. 
(15.2.7) 
The hole current density Jp(x) is 
•/pW - 
-Φρ^δρ^χ) 
= q^- [Pn0{e"v^T 
- 1) - G0T>] e-<*-*>/^. 
(15.2.8) 
We obtain Jp{x) at the boundary of the depletion region xn as 
JP{Xn) = q^-pM{Jvlk*T 
- 1) - ?G0Lp 
(15.2.9) 
where the first term is due only to the voltage bias, and the last term is due to optical 
generation. We see that only the portion of the photogenerated holes within a 
diffusion length Lp away from the depletion boundary can diffuse (and survive) to 
the depletion region and be swept across the depletion region by the electric field 
and collected as the photocurrent by the external circuits. This means that the majority 
carriers on the p-side have to supply this current immediately. A dual approach for the 
electron current density at x = — xp gives 
Jn(-xp) = q^npaifpl**7 
- 1) - qG0Ln. 
(15.2.10) 
The total current / is the sum of Jp(xn) and J„(—xp) multiplied by the cross-sectional 
area of the diode A 
I = A[Jp(xn) + Jn(-xp)] 
= I0(e"v^T-\)-Iph 
(15.2.11) 

15.2 p-n JUNCTION PHOTODIODES 
Gn = 0 
I0(e"v/V-l)~qAG0(Lp 
+ Ln) 
With light 
Figure 15.5 The /— V curves of a photodiode with and without illumination of light. 
where 
qA D„ -Ρηθ 
+η-ηρο 
/ph = qAG0(Lp + Ln). 
(15.2.12a) 
(15.2.12b) 
/o is the diode reverse current. /ph is the photocurrent of the diode (in the negative 
direction of the polarity), which is the generation of the electron-hole pairs in the 
volume defined by A{LP + Ln). The / - V curves of a photodiode with and without 
the illumination of light are plotted in Fig. 15.5. When G0 = 0, the diode reverse 
current -/ 0 is the dark current, which is usually very small compared with the 
photocurrent Iph under a reverse bias condition. Therefore, the photocurrent is 
proportional to the generation rate G0, which is proportional to the incident 
optical power Popt. 
The problems with the p-n junction photodiodes are 
1. Optical absorption within the diffusion lengths Lp and Ln is very small (i.e., 
over narrow regions of Lp and Ln near the depletion region). Because Lp and 
Ln are very small, the contributions of the photocurrents are not effective. 
2. The diffusion process is slow, which results in a slow photoresponse if the 
optical intensity varies with time. 
3. The junction capacitance Cy is simply eA/xw, where xw is the total depletion 
width derived in Eq. (2.5.25) simplified for a homojunction diode with ερ = 
εΝ = ε 
C, 
qe 
ΝΌΝΑ 
2(V0-V)NO+NA, 
1/2 
(15.2.13) 
which can slow down the response by the RCj time delay. For example, if 
A = (1mm)2, e= 11.7ε0, ΝΌ= 1015cm"3 <C NA for a / - n photodiode, 
and - V = 10 V » V0, we obtain C, ~ 30pF and the 3-dB cutoff frequency 
fc = \/(2TTRCJ) 
= 100 MHz for R = 50 Ω. 

738 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
15.2.2 R0A Product 
A useful figure of merit for the p-n junction photodiodes is the R0A product [15]. 
Because the photodiode is operated at zero-bias voltage in many direct detection 
applications, the differential resistance at zero-bias voltage R0 multiplied by the 
junction area A is commonly used 
, 
1 dl 
W
) 
=AdV v=o 
dJ_ 
dV 
(15.2.14) 
Thus far, we have derived the dark current /0 contributed by the diffusion processes in 
this section. Using (15.2.11) and (15.2.12), we obtain 
, 
q2 (DD 
Dn 
q2n2 (Dp 
Dn 
^ + -
kBT \NOLp 
NhLn 
■■rixßpiiS + ^l?) 
05.2.15) 
kBT\NO 
where we have used the relations pn0 = η2/ΝΌ, η^ = nj/NA, and the Einstein 
relations Dp/μρ = Dn/μη = k^T/q. The first term in (15.2.15) is the contribution 
to \/{RQA) 
from the diffusion current on the n-side of the photodiode, and the 
second term is from the diffusion current on the p-side. There can also be other 
contributions to R0A products such as the generation-recombination current in the 
space-charge region, the surface leakage current, and the interband tunneling 
current, which depend on the material properties, device geometry, and surface 
conditions. 
15.2.3 
Current Responsivity and Detectivity 
For a root-mean-square photon flux density Φ(λ) (= the number of incident photons 
per second per unit area) of monochromatic radiation at a wavelength λ, 
Φ(λ) = - ^ - 
(15.2.16) 
hvA 
where A is the photodetector illumination area, and Ρλ is the root-mean-square 
input optical power at a wavelength λ, fA = p,™ = mPopt/y/2, we can write the 
rms photocurrent 
ip = qr^(\)A 
= q ^ 
(15.2.17) 

15.2 p-n JUNCTION PHOTODIODES 
739 
and η is the quantum efficiency of the photodiode including the effects of the intrinsic 
quantum efficiency, the reflection, and the absorption depth (15.1.13). The current 
responsivity is therefore 
(15.2.18) 
Px 
The signal-to-noise ratio S/W (current) is 
S _ 
ip 
hv 
RxPx 
N y/<® JW) 
The detectivity for the above S/N is defined as 
(15.2.19) 
£>* = RkV^±f 
c m (Hz)V2/w. 
(15.2.20) 
For a photodiode at thermal equilibrium (i.e., no externally applied voltage and no 
illumination of light), the thermal noise depends on the zero bias resistance R0 
using (15.1.56) 
(ξ)=4-*^Α/. 
(15.2.21) 
When not in thermal equilibrium, the / - V curve is 
/(V) = I0(^v/kBT - 1) - /Ph 
(15.2.22a) 
V = qv<i>BA 
(15.2.22b) 
where ΦΒ is the photon flux density due to the background radiation. The mean-
squared shot noise current has contributions from three additive terms [15]: (1) a 
forward current that depends on voltage, /0 e\p(qV/kBT), 
(2) a reverse diode satur-
ation current, and (3) the background radiation-induced photocurrent. Because 
these shot noise currents fluctuate independently, the total mean-squared shot noise 
current is 
(ξ) = 2q\l0e"v^TAf 
+ I0Af + /PhAf 
(15.2.23) 
At an operation voltage V = 0, R0' = (dI/dV)v=0 
= qI0/kßT and (15.2.23) can be 
written as 
<0 = (
^ + 2*V&BA)4/\ 
(15.2.24) 

740 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
The detectivity at zero bias voltage is then obtained from (15.2.20) 
1 
*-© 
4£?Ι+¥Λ 
1/2· 
(15.2.25) 
For a thermally limited case (i.e., when the thermal noise is dominant over the back-
ground radiation induced signal and other noises), we have 
which relates the R0A product to the thermally limited detectivity. If the photodiode is 
background radiation limited, which means that the background radiation-induced 
photocurrent is dominant, we have 
w™=l)l*k
 
(,5·
2·
27) 
which is the detectivity of the background limited infrared photodetector (BLIP). 
15.3 p-i-n PHOTODIODES 
To enhance the responsivity of the photodiode, an intrinsic region used as the major 
absorption layer is added, Fig. 15.6a. For a light injected from the p+-side with an 
optical power intensity /opt (W/cm2), the generation rate of electron-hole pairs is [8] 
G(x) = T7j(l - R) Φ(λ)αε-αχ 
(15.3.1a) 
φ(λ) = % ^ = ^ 
(15.3.1b) 
hv 
hv 
where Φ(λ) is the photon flux density (i.e., the number of photons injected per unit 
area per second) and /opt is the incident optical power Popt divided by the area A. Here 
Tji is the intrinsic quantum efficiency for the probability of creating an electron-hole 
pair for each incident photon, and α(λ) is the absorption coefficient (1/cm) of the 
semiconductors. Note that the total injected number of photoelectrons per unit area 
per second is 
So = 
G(x)dx = T7i(l - Λ)Φ(λ). 
(15.3.2) 
The energy band profiles for the p-i-n diode can be obtained graphically based on the 
well-known depletion approximation as shown in Fig. 15.6b-e for the charge density 
p(x), the electric field E(x), the potential φ(χ), and the band diagram. 

15.3 p-i-n PHOTODIODES 
741 
V<0 
(a) d ^ 
Optical/J-^ 
P 
power 
x = 0 
x= W 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
* P W 
0 
-qNA 
X 
^E(x) = I p(jc) <ίχ7ε 
I I 
+qND 
XL 
w 
- <G(x) - Optical generation rate 
^ 
-*x 
, <K*) =J/CO dx' 
1 1 
1 J 
'"' 
0 
, 1 
- ^ ! 
IV 
£c(;t) = -q<t>(x) + Const. 
E,(x) = Ec(x)-Eg 
G^nJ^-Ryhv 
*x 
Figure 15.6 (a) A p-i-n photodiode under optical illumination from the p+-side, (b) the charge density 
p(x) under depletion approximation, (c) the static electric field profile E(x), (d) the electrostatic potential 
φ(χ), (e) the conduction and valence band edge profiles, and (f) the optical generation rate G(x). 
At steady state, the total photocurrent density consists of both a drift and a 
diffusion component 
J=Jar+Jm- 
(15.3.3) 
Considering the p+-region to be of negligible thickness, we look at the contribution 
in the intrinsic region 0 < x < W 
w 
Jdr = -q ί G(x)dx = -qS0{\ - e~aW) = -<7τ?Φ(λ) 
(15.3.4a) 
aW\ 
T,= T ? i ( l - / ? ) ( l - e - a " ' ) 
(15.3.4b) 
where the minus sign of the drift current density accounts for the fact that the drift 
current flows in the -x direction, and η is the quantum efficiency including 
the effects of surface reflectivity R and finite thickness of the absorption layer W. 

742 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
The above expression also shows that an increase of W^$> l/a enhances the 
photocurrent because of the increasing amount of absorption. 
For x > W, the analysis is similar to that of the p-n junction diode; the hole 
(minority) current density on the n-side is due only to diffusion 
Jm~-qDp 
— Pn{x) 
(15.3.5) 
dPn 
8Pn 
Id 
-=- = G(x) 
— „ 
at 
T„ 
q ax 
0 = -^ 
= G(x) 
" - zirM*)· 
(15.3.6) 
Therefore, we solve 
ξ-δΡη-^δΡη 
= -±- G(x). 
(15.3.7) 
dx2 
Lj 
Dp 
The solution for SP„(x) consists of the homogeneous solution and the particular 
solution 
8Pn(x) = Ae-^-Wlh 
+ Be(x~w)IL- + Ce -". 
(15.3.8) 
We set B = 0 because 8Pn(x —► oo) should be finite assuming that the n-region is 
much thicker than the hole diffusion length. Otherwise, an additional boundary 
condition at the finite end of the «-region has to be added for a finite thickness, 
which will be considered in Section 15.6. The particular solution is obtained by 
substituting Ce'"* into (15.3.7) 
Dp 1 - a2Lj 
(15.3.9) 
The coefficient A is then determined by the boundary condition 
8Pn(W) = Pn0(e"v^T 
- l) ~ -/>„(, 
(15.3.10) 
which is pinned by the reverse bias voltage, and we find 
A = -Pno ~ Ce~aW. 
(15.3.11) 
Thus, the solution for the excess hole concentration in the n-side is 
8Pn(x) = -(PM + Ce~aW) e-{x-W)lL- + Ce^. 
(15.3.12) 

15.3 p-i-n PHOTODIODES 
743 
The hole current density on the n-side is 
Jam = -qDp — Pn(x)\x=w 
aLr 
D„ 
qDpa[\ 
Ce-aw-q-^Pn0 
SouL, 
1 + aL„ 
Dn 
Ψ „-aW 
, p 
"P 
— " 
+ 
fi-
nO-
(15.3.13) 
The total current density is 
J = J(k+ Jd\f( (at x = W) 
„-aW 
= -q So 
The quantum efficiency is 
J/q 
Φ(λ)" 
1 -
7] 
1 +aLD 
TJiO-/?) 1 
qP, 
Dn 
ηθ' 
1+aL, 
(15.3.14) 
(15.3.15) 
neglecting the contribution of the last term (dark current) in (15.3.14). Note that if 
W —► oo, the current density is dominated by 
-?5ο = -*τ7ί(1-Α)Φ(λ) 
(15.3.16) 
as expected. Long-wavelength p-i-n photodiodes for high-speed receiver applications 
are of great interest for optical communication systems. For high-sensitivity optical 
receivers, photodiodes with a small junction area around a few tens of micrometers 
in diameter and a low doping depletion region of a few micrometers are desired 
[16]. At low doping, the center absorption region can be depleted at a small bias 
voltage and reduce the tunneling leakage current. Most of the long-wavelength 
photodetectors use Ino.47Gao.53As grown on an InP substrate as the absorption 
region. The leakage current in InGaAs p-i-n diodes is dominated by the interband 
tunneling at high reverse-bias voltages and generation-recombination processes at 
low voltages [17, 18]. Hybrid p-i-n/FET receivers have been assembled for high-
speed photoreceivers, which offer better sensitivity than other p-i-n photodiode 
receivers [16, 19]. Ultra-broadband p-i-n photodetectors have also been shown to 
have a great potential for high-speed applications [20] with an impulse response in 
the picosecond scale. 

744 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
15.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 
To enhance the photocurrent response, some built-in multiplication processes may be 
used such that more photocurrents can be extracted in the external circuits at a given 
optical illumination. Ideally, we would have a single-carrier-type photomultiplier; 
the carrier concentration will grow if impact ionization occurs in a region with a 
large electric field. In semiconductors, both electrons and holes can impact ionize 
more electron-hole pairs as shown in Fig. 15.7a. A schematic diagram for an ava-
lanche diode is shown in Fig. 15.7b. A feedback process occurs because electrons 
and holes travel in opposite directions. Let us define 
an = the electron ionization coefficient (1/cm) 
= the number of electron-hole pairs 
generated per unit distance per incident electron. 
ßp = the hole ionization coefficient (1/cm) 
= the number of electron-hole pairs 
generated per unit distance per incident hole. 
In general an φ βρ for most semiconductors. They are functions of the applied 
electric field E with an exponential dependence: 
an(E) = a„e-c"/£ 
and 
ßp(E) = ß0e~c>-/E 
where the constants a0, ß0, C„, and Cp depend on the materials. For a general 
overview of the fundamentals of avalanche photodiodes, see Refs. 21-23. 
n -Multiplication 
Electron injection 
Hole injection 
Figure 15.7 (a) The energy band diagram for an avalanche photodiode with the electron and hole ioniza-
tion coefficients an and ßp. The electron and hole injections are given by 7„(0) and JP(W). (b) A schematic 
diagram for an avalanche photodiode. 

15.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 
745 
15.4.1 
Ideal Avalanche Photodiode: Single-Carrier-Type 
Capable of Ionizing Collisions 
We now consider the simplified case in which only electrons cause impact ionization 
[22]. Suppose we have an incident current density Jn(x) at a plane located at position 
x, Fig. 15.8a. Over an incremental distance Ax, the total generated electron-hole 
pairs is αηΔχ multiplied by Jn(x) because anAx is the number of ionized electrons 
per incident electron per second in a distance Ax. Therefore, the current density 
Jn(x + Ax) is the sum of the incident (or primary) current density and the ionized 
(or secondary) current density 
Jn(x + Ax) = Jn(x) + anAxJn(x) 
(15.4.1) 
^-Jn(x) = anJ„(x). 
(15.4.2) 
ax 
Its solution is 
Jn(x) = Jn{0)e^aMW. 
(15.4.3) 
In general, an = an(x) is not a constant because the electric field E(x) may not be 
uniform. The multiplication factor Mn for the electrons is defined as 
Mn=
JJE> 
= e\:<*^. 
(15.4.4) 
y„(0) 
For a uniform an, we have 
Jn(x) = Jn(Q)ea- 
M„ = ea°w. 
(15.4.5) 
Here the multiplication factor is finite because W is a finite width. 
A similar procedure for holes propagating in the -x direction as shown in 
Fig. 15.8b leads to 
- ^Jpix) = ßpJP(x) 
(15.4.6) 
(a) Electron impact ionizations only 
(b) Hole impact ionizations only 
J„(x) J„(x + Ax) 
Jp(x-Ax) 
Jp(x) 
<-o 
<-o 
*r-9 
i-9 
<-0 
4-0 
1 
1 
Ι < - Δ Λ Γ - * Ι 
I 
I 
x 
x + Ax 
x-Ax 
x 
Figure 15.8 Schematic diagrams for only (a) electron and (b) hole impact ionizations. 

746 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
and its solution is 
Jp(x) = Jp(W)e^ 
ßpix>W. 
(15.4.7) 
The hole multiplication ratio is defined as 
M 
Jp<VL = eS>^. 
(15.4.8) 
P JP(W) 
For the special case in which ßp is independent of the position x, we have 
Jp(x) = J p{W)eßp(W~x) 
Mp = eßrw. 
(15.4.9) 
15.4.2 Both Electron and Hole Capable of Impact Ionization 
Let us write the complete coupled equations when both electrons and holes cause 
impact ionizations in the presence of optical generation 
—Jn(x) = an(x)Jn(x) + ßp(x)Jp{x) + qG{x) 
(15.4.10a) 
- £jp(x) 
= *„{x)Jn(x) + ßp(x)Jp(x) + qG(x). 
(15.4.10b) 
Note that each impact ionization process creates an electron-hole pair, as does the 
optical generation rate G(x) per unit volume. The above two equations lead to 
~(jn(x) + Jp(x))=0 
(15.4.11) 
or the total current density 
J = Jn(x) + Jp(x) — constant, 
which is independent of the position, as it should be as this is a one-dimensional 
problem. Any current passing through a surface at x has to be the same at steady 
state. The two coupled first-order differential equations can be solved using one of 
the two variables, for example, Jn(x), 
^Jn(x) - [an(x) - ßp(x)]Jn{x) = ßpJ + qG(x) 
(15.4.12) 
where J is independent of x and is determined later by the boundary conditions. 
Noting that the first-order differential equation 
^-y(x)+p(x) 
y(x) = Q(x) 
(15.4.13) 
ax 

15.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 
has a solution of the form 
J <&/ο(*>Λ° 
+ y(xb) 
747 
y(x) 
exp I J p{xf)dxl I 
(15.4.14) 
we obtain by setting all initial conditions at x0 = 0: 
Jn(x) = e^x) \j ί ßp(x')e-^dx' 
+ q\X G(x')e-^)dx' 
+ Jn (0) 
where 
<Kx) = Γ [«„(*') - 
ßp(x')]dx'. 
Jo 
(15.4.15) 
(15.4.16) 
We then match the boundary conditions at x = W. Suppose Jn(0) and Jp{W) are given; 
we find Jn(x = W) from (15.4.15) and use 
Jn(W) = J-Jp(W) 
(15.4.17) 
(15.4.18) 
<p(W) - qtf) = J [«„(*") - 
ßp(x")]dx". 
J is found as 
. 
1 
J = 
1 - ß 
y»(H0 + J„(0)e*"° + 9 
W 
pW 
^ . , ^ ^ - ^ ' ^ ' ά χ ' 
Β^Γαχ'βΛχ'^^-^'^'. 
Jo 
Then, we have Jn(x) from (15.4.15). The hole current density is 
Jp(x) = 
J-Jn{x). 
(15.4.19) 
(15.4.20) 
(15.4.21) 
Alternatively, we can start with (15.4.10b) using Jp as the variable and find 
f <fcW*V + qGtf)] e% t-^-WW 
+ Jp(W) 
Jp(x) = ** 
-^ 
(15.4.22) 
exp 
[«„(/) - 
ßJx'^dx1 

748 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
and obtain another expression for J using the boundary condition at x = 0, Jp(0) ■■ 
J-Jn(0) 
Λ (0) + Jp(W)e-^w) 
+ q 
G(x')e~l» ^ W V f t . t f W ^ 
( 1 5 A 2 3 ) 
Jo 
A= 
dx'a„(x')e-)° 
{a^y 
Jo 
1 -A 
")-ßM')W 
(15.4.24) 
Let us consider three special cases with only electron injection at x = 0, or hole 
injection at x = W, or optical injection G(x) at a position x. 
Case 1. Only Electron Injection at x = 0 (JP(W) = 0 and G(x) = 0): The 
electron multiplication ratio is obtained from (15.4.19) 
Mn = 
J 
e«^ 
Λ(0) 
1 - B 
(15.4.25) 
An alternative form, if we start with Jp(x) from the beginning and find J in (15.4.23), 
M„ = Λ(0) 
(15.4.26) 
Case 2. Only Hole Injection at x = W (7„(0) = 0 and G(x) = 0): The hole 
multiplication ratio is, using (15.4.23), 
M„ 
J 
e-«w> 
(15.4.27) 
p 
Jp(W) 
1 - A 
which is also a dual form of (15.4.25). A dual form of (15.4.26) is 
M"=7^wr^-B- 
(15A28) 
A simple case is, if we consider an = βρ = constant, and G(x) = 0, we find 
Jn(x) = Jßpx + Jn(0). 
(15.4.29) 

15.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 
749 
1 Current densities 
T 
J (x) 
JpW 
J°W 
Jn(x) 
T_ 
J = Jn(x) + JJx) 
Figure 15.9 The electron and hole current densities, Jn(x) and Jp(x), and the total current density J as a 
function of position x for a special case a„ = ßp = constant, and the only injections are determined by the 
values J„(0) and JP(W). 
Using Jn(W) = J - JP(W), we find 
U0) + JP(W) 
\-ßpW 
(15.4.30) 
The results of Jn(x) and Jp(x) are plotted in Fig. 15.9. 
Case 3. Only Optical Injection 
G(JO = G0 δψ - x), (Λ(0) = 0, JP(W) = 0): We 
find that the total current density from (15.4.19) and the multiplication rate depends 
on the position of the optical injection x 
M{x) 
qGQ 
I A S [anCxf)-ßp(^)W 
1 -B 
(15.4.31) 
We can also check two special optical injection positions x = 0 and x = W. We find 
and 
M(x = 0) = M„ 
M(x = W) = Mp 
(15.4.32) 
(15.4.33) 
which are the same expressions as in (15.4.26) and (15.4.28), as expected. 
By controlling the electron injection in the p-region or the hole injection in the n-
region, the multiplication factors Mn(V) and Mp(V) as a function of the reverse biased 
voltage V can be determined [24-31]. They usually increase very slowly at a low 
reverse bias and show an exponentially increasing behavior above a certain large 
bias voltage, as shown in Fig. 15.10. These reverse bias voltages can be of the 
order 30 or 40 V. Once Mn and Mp are measured, an and ßp are found 
from (15.4.25) to (15.4.28). If both an and ßp are independent of the position x, 
the integrations can be carried out analytically. We can express an and ßp in terms 

750 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
1 
Reverse bias voltage V 
Figure 15.10 Multiplication factors for the electron and hole injections, M„ and Mp, respectively, are 
plotted as a function of the reverse bias voltage. 
of M„ and M„ 
ßp 
Mn 
Mn-
' Mp 
- 1 
-MP 
- 1 
1 . (Mr 
-In 
W 
\M, 
Mn-AfnJ 
W 
1 , (M, 
In 
M, 
(15.4.34) 
(15.4.35) 
From the above discussions, we see that in order to determine the impact ionization 
coefficients from the multiplication of photocurrent, proper experimental conditions 
[24-26] have to be met such as: (1) M„(V) and MP(V) for pure electron injection 
and pure hole injection, respectively, have to be measured in the same diode, but not 
in complementary p+-n and n+-p devices; (2) the primary injected photocurrent 
(without multiplication) must be determined accurately as a function of bias voltage; 
(3) the electric field should be slowly varying in space and uniform in the active 
region. The dependence of the electric field on the position and bias voltage must be 
accurately known. It is not easy to meet all of these conditions without approximations. 
Experimental data for Si [27], GaAs [24, 25, 28], InP [26, 29, 30], InGaAs, and 
InGaAsP have been reported. We list some results below: 
GaAs [25]: 
InP [26]: 
an = 1.899 x 10V(575x,°5/£>182(l/cm) 
ßp = 2.215 x 10V(657*lo5^175(l/cm) 
1. 240 kV/cm < E < 380 kV/cm, N = 1.2 x 1015 cm 
a„ = 1.12xl0V 3 1 1 x l° 6/ £(l/cm) 
/3p = 4.76xl0V 2 5 5 x l° 6/ £(l/cm) 

15.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 
751 
2. 360kV/cm < E < 560 kV/cm, N = 3.0 x 1016cirT3 
an = 2.93 x 10V2f>4xl06/£(l/cm) 
^ = 1.62xl0V 2 1 , x ,° 6/ £(l/cm) 
3. 530 kV/cm < £ < 770 kV/cm, N= 1.2 x 10l7cirT3 
a„ = 2.32xl0V 7 1 6 x l 0"/ £ 2(l/cm) 
)8p = 2.48xl0V 6- 2 3 x l 0"/ £ 2(l/cm) 
a„=5.55xl0V- 3 1 0 x ,° 6/ £)(l/cm) 
ßp = 1.98 x 10V-2'29xl°6/£>(l/cm) 
0.92 eV) [30]: 
an = 3.37 x 10V-2-29xl°6/£)(l/cm) 
ßp = 2.94 x 10ν-2-40χ106/£)(1/οιη) 
In0.53Gao.47As [30]: 
«„ = 2.27x 10V-113x,°6/£)(l/cm) 
βρ = 3.95 x 106e(-'-45xl0<,/£)(l/cm) 
The electric field E is in V/cm in the above expressions. For strained In0.2Ga0.sAs 
and Ino.15Gao.63Alo.22As channels embedded in Alo.3Gao.7As material, the an and 
βρ values have been found to be higher in Ino.2Gao.8As channels and lower in the 
Ino.15Gao.63Alo.22As channels compared with the unstrained GaAs channels using 
hole injection in a lateral p-i-n diode configuration [31]. 
For an rms optical power (15.1.31) 
P
m
a = ^ 
(15.4.36) 
where m is the microwave modulation depth in (15.1.30) and Papt is the optical input 
power. The multiplied rms photocurrent response is 
ip = ΐνη^Μ 
(15.4.37) 
where M = Mn for the electron multiplication and M = Mp for the hole 
multiplication. 
InP [30]: 
InGaAsP (E. 

752 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Excess Noise Because the multiplication processes are random, an excess-noise 
factor can be denned for the multiplication factor M, which is treated as a random 
variable, 
F(M) = 
(M2)/(M)2 
(15.4.38) 
where () means ensemble average. It has been shown that these excess-noise factors 
[32,33] can be written in terms of the ratio of the impact ionization coefficients an/ßp 
p _ Pp i»j, \ i / 1 
_rp 
0Ln 
\ 
an}\ 
(M„) 
''-%™+['-%){>-ik, 
electron injection 
(15.4.39) 
hole injection. 
(15.4.40) 
Note that if no avalanche multiplications exist, (Af„), (Mp), F„, and Fp are all 
equal to unity. In Fig. 15.11, we plot Fn versus (M„) for various ß„/an = k ratios. 
We see the increase of the excess-noise factor F„ with increasing ßp/an 
for electron 
injection. The physical reason for this is that, in the case of electron injection from 
the p+-region in Fig. 15.7, the secondary electron-hole pairs also cause impact 
ionizations. The holes propagate in the opposite direction to that of the electrons. 
Therefore, if ßp/an 
is increased, the back-propagating holes will create more 
impact ionization currents. The measured amplified current at the end electrodes 
will have more fluctuating signals because these secondary or higher-order impact 
1000 F 
o 
o 
a 
o 
X 
PQ 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
Multiplication factor Mn or M 
Figure 15.11 The excess-noise factor F versus the multiplication factor (M) for different values of the 
ratio of the electron and hole ionization coefficients. For electron injection k = ßp/a„ and for hole injection 
anlßP = 1 /k should be used in the ratio. 

15.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 
753 
ionization processes will contain more random characteristics. For hole injection, 1 jk 
should be used in the same diagram. The multiplication or gain noise is given by 
<&> = 2q(M)Ip F{M)Ip. 
(15.4.41) 
The mean-squared shot-noise current after multiplication is generalized from the shot 
noise in (15.1.45) by multiplying the factor (M2) 
(if) = 2q(IP + /B + 
ID)(M2)B 
= 2<7(/P + /B + h){M)2FB 
(15.4.42) 
where IP is the average steady-state photocurrent (15.1.30b), /B is the background 
current, and /D is the dark current [34-36], and B = Δ/ is the bandwidth. The 
thermal noise is 
(4)=lMß 
(15.4.43) 
where l//?eq= l/Rj+ 
1//?L+ l//?i accounts for the junction resistance Ry the 
external load resistance /?L, and the input resistance R{ of the following amplifier 
of the photodiode. 
For the modulation depth m = l , the signal-to-noise ratio (power) for the 
avalanche diode is [8, 21] 
1 ' " " — ' ' 
K'"^)
2<M>2 
N 
('s) + <«τ> 
Mh 
+ h+ h) (M)2FB + 4kBT 
B/R^' 
(15.4.44) 
Because F(M) > 1 and is a monotonically increasing function of the average multi-
plication ratio (M), the above signal-to-noise ratio can be optimized at a particular 
value of (M). 
High-speed detections using avalanche photodiodes and their time dependence or 
frequency response have been investigated [37^0]. ForM0 > an/ßP, the frequency-
dependent multiplication factor is 
Μ(ώ) = 
. 
M° 
(15.4.45) 
y/l + (Μ0ωτ,)2 
where τ, is an effective transit time through the avalanche region. The effects of the 
avalanche build-up time have also been reported [39]. 

754 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
15.4.3 Separate Absorption and Multiplication Avalanche 
Photodiode (SAM APD) [29, 30, 41, 42] 
Various contributions to the dark current of an APD have been investigated, which 
include the generation-recombination via midgap traps in the depletion region, 
tunneling of the carriers across the band gap, and a surface leakage current across 
the p-n junction in InGaAs APD, for example. When the reverse bias is above a 
certain value before the breakdown voltage VB, it has been found that the tunneling 
current is dominant, unless the doping density ND in the absorption region can be 
reduced below a certain value in which the tunneling current can be reduced to be 
smaller than the generation-recombination current. A separate absorption and 
multiplication structure has been proposed [41] to reduce the tunneling current. 
The geometry is shown in Fig. 15.12a, where a low-field InGaAs region is used as 
(a) SAM APD 
Incident 
^ 
light 
-Λ/1/b-
Multiplication 
region 
Absorption 
region 
V<0~™ 
p+-InP 
n-InP 
n-InGaAs 
n+-InP 
■" Incident 
light 
I^L 
(b) Charge distribution 
A 
PW 
+qNm 
+qN0\ 
-*NA 
+qND2 
->-* 
(c) Electric field profile E = x E(x) 
E(x) 
*-x 
- Small bias 
Large bias 
Figure 15.12 (a) A schematic diagram for a separate absorption and multiplication avalanche photodiode 
(SAM APD), where the absorption occurs at the narrow band gap InGaAs region and the photogenerated 
carriers are swept into the InP multiplication region where the electric field is larger, (b) Charge density 
profile under a large reverse bias, (c) The electric field profile under a large (solid lines) or small 
(dashed lines) reverse bias. 

15.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 
755 
the absorption region and the photogenerated carriers are swept into the high-field InP 
binary region where avalanche multiplications occur [16]. Because the InP layer has a 
larger band gap than that of the InGaAs absorption region, the tunneling current can 
be reduced. The electric field profile E = xE(x) can be obtained using the charge 
density profile p{x) based on the depletion approximation at a large reverse bias 
voltage because deE(x)/dx = p(x), Fig. 15.12b. Because ε is slightly different in 
InGaAs and InP layers, a slight discontinuity in E(x) occurs at the InGaAs/InP 
interface, Fig. 15.12c. 
15.4.4 Multiple-Quantum-Well APD 
Heterostructure avalanche photodiodes have been fabricated for high-speed low 
dark current operations [41^43] since the late 1970s. Research on quantum-
well photodiodes was started in the early 1980s. A plot of the excess factor F 
shows that the excess noise factor is minimized if ßp/an 
-C 1 using electron injection 
or an/ßp <C 1 for hole injection. In those limits, an ideal single-carrier-type multi-
plication process will dominate, and the excess noise caused by the feedback 
process of the impact ionization caused by the secondary electrons or holes in 
the opposite direction can be minimized. Ideas using multiple-quantum-well 
(MQW) structures for APD applications have been proposed and explored both theor-
etically and experimentally [44—52]. For example, consider GaAs/Alj-Gai _^As 
MQW structures as the impact ionization region for electron injection (Fig. 15.13). 
Because AEC/AEV ~ 2 : 1 (A£c ~ 0.67AEg, Δ£ν ~ 0.33A£g), the electrons coming 
from the left barrier region will gain a larger kinetic energy AEC when entering the 
barrier region than that of the holes traveling in the opposite direction. Therefore, 
the electron impact ionization coefficient an will be enhanced compared with βρ. 
We expect αη/βρ»1. 
The excess noise factor is expected to be minimized. 
Measurements of the effective ionization coefficients an and βρ show an enhance-
ment of αη/βρ from 2 in a bulk GaAs to about 8 in a GaAs/Al^Gai-jAs multiple-
quantum-well structure [45, 46] and Mn = 10 at an electric field E= 250kV/cm. 
It has also been reported [47] that this ratio αη/βρ varies (not monotonically) with 
Figure 15.13 A multiple-quantum-well avalanche photodiode using GaAs/Al/jai -^As with the property 
that the ratio of the impact ionization coefficients α„/βρ is much larger than 1 as A£c is larger than Δ£ν. 

756 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
the aluminum mole fraction x. At higher values of x (>0.45) above the onset of 
indirect electron transitions, the noise is increased. 
Intersubband Avalanche Photomultiplier 
Avalanche photomultipliers using 
an intersubband type (bound-to-continuum state transition) in an n-type doped or 
p-type doped multiple-quantum-well structure have also been proposed and investi-
gated both theoretically [50, 51] and experimentally [52-54]. The idea is to introduce 
electrons in the quantum-well regions by doping the wells n-type. Incident photo-
generated carriers will "impact ionize" those carriers confined in the wells and 
kick them out of the wells contributing to the avalanche multiplication current. 
Because it is a single-carrier type of photomultiplication, the excess noise is expected 
to be minimized. Experimental results on this intersubband avalanche multiplication 
have been reported [52-54]. 
15.5 INTERSUBBAND QUANTUM-WELL PHOTODETECTORS 
In Section 9.7, we discussed intersubband absorption in a quantum-well structure. In 
order to provide carriers for the intersubband transitions, donors for «-type electronic 
transitions have to be introduced in the quantum wells (or barriers) to provide free 
electrons that will be confined in the well regions at steady state without a bias 
voltage. When an incident infrared radiation illuminates the QW detector, electrons 
may absorb the photon energy and jump to a higher energy subband and be collected 
by the electrodes with an applied voltage. Theory and experiments on intersubband 
absorption and quantum-well infrared photodetectors (QWIPs) [55-87] have been 
investigated for long wavelength applications, which may be competitive with 
HgCdTe detectors. The advantages include the mature GaAs growth and processing 
technologies for high uniformity and reproducibility. For an extensive review of the 
subject, see Refs. 86 and 87 and the references therein. 
15.5.1 Intersubband Optical Absorption 
For n-type multiple-quantum-well photodetectors, the optical matrix selection rule 
shows that the optical polarization must have a component along the growth (z) 
axis (i.e., TM polarized as discussed in Section 9.7). For TE polarized light, the 
absorption is expected to be small. However, for p-type doped quantum-well photo-
diodes, the valence-band mixing effects due to the heavy-hole and light-hole states 
show that the x- and _y-polarized light can have as large an absorption coefficient 
as the z-polarized light [87-90]. Therefore, a normal incidence geometry is possible 
for p-type QWIP. 
Here we discuss mostly n-type QWIPs because of their potential for 3- to 5-μπι 
and 8- to 12-μπι photodetector applications. In Fig. 15.14, we show two examples 
using (a) a 45°-coupled QWIP and (b) a two-dimensional grating-coupled QWIP. 
These designs provide the necessary polarization selection rule such that the infrared 
radiation has a component along the growth direction of the multiple-quantum-well 

15.5 INTERSUBBAND QUANTUM-WELL PHOTODETECTORS 
757 
(a) 45°-Edge-coupled QWIP 
(b) Grating-coupled QWIP 
Multiple quantum-well 
absorption region 
<<?'. TTT 
hv 
Incident radiation 
n+ contact 
AlAs 
reflector 
-Thick 
GaAs 
substrate 
Figure 15.14 Schematic diagrams of (a) a 45°-edge-coupled quantum-well infrared photodetector 
(QWIP) and (b) a two-dimensional grating-coupled QWIP. The growth axis of the quantum well layers 
is defined as the z axis. Light polarized along the x-y plane is not absorbed due to the dipole selection 
rule of the intersubband transition. 
absorption region. The theory in Section 9.7 shows that the absorption spectrum is a 
Lorentzian function 
a(htü) — ao 
γ/ττ 
(En - hwf + γ2 
(15.5.1) 
where the intersubband energy E2\ = E2 - E\ is the subband spacing in a simple 
single-particle model as presented in Section 9.6. If the Coulomb interactions and 
screening effects are included, E2l will have a slight shift due to the many-body 
effects [91-94]. The measured absorption spectrum [87] for a bound-to-bound 
transition is shown in Fig. 15.15 as a Lorentzian shape expected from the theory. 
Note that the absorption a0 is dependent on |(φ2|ζ|ίΊ)Ι ! therefore, a rotation of 
the polarization as a function of the polarization angle φ measured from the TM 
polarized wave incident at a fixed angle of incidence set at the Brewster angle 
0B = 73° shows the polarization dependence [95, 96] in Fig. 15.16 oc cos2 φ, 
as expected from the theory. At φ = 90°, the incident light is polarized along 
the TE direction (i.e., the polarization of the incident radiation is perpendicular to 
the plane of incidence; therefore, it is parallel to the quantum-well plane of the 
QWIP), and no absorption occurs for this polarization. 
15.5.2 Photoconductive Gain in Quantum Wells 
For a bound-to-bound state transition as shown in Fig. 15.17a, the photoexcited 
electrons in the E2 level have to get out of the well either by tunneling or thermionic 
emission (or by other phonon or impurity scattering processes). It is therefore desir-
able to design the E2 level to be close to the barrier energy such that the absorption 
oscillator strength (i.e., the intersubband dipole moment) and the escape probability 
can be optimized. 
For a bound-to-continuum state transition, Fig. 15.17b, the electrons have a greater 
probability to transport into the barrier region and be collected by the electrode and 

758 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
2000 
1800 
1600 
1400 
1200 
PHOTON ENERGY v (cm- 1) 
1000 
800 
Figure 15.15 
Measured QWIP absorption spectrum for a multipass waveguide geometry. (Reprinted 
with permission from [87] © 1993 American Institute of Physics.) 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
POLARIZER ANGLE <5>(DEG) 
90 
Figure 15.16 
Experimental results for the polarization selection rule showing the peak absorption versus 
the polarization angle φ where φ = 0° is TM polarization and φ = 90° is TE polarization, all at an angle of 
incidence ΘΒ = 73°, the Brewster angle. (Reprinted with permission from [951 © 1987 American Institute 
of Physics.) 

15.5 INTERSUBBAND QUANTUM-WELL PHOTODETECTORS 
759 
(a) 
^.Thermionic emission 
SrsAc^Tunneling 
Xi-Pc«, 
Figure 15.17 (a) Bound-to-bound state transition and (b) bound-to-continuum state transition in a biased 
quantum-well infrared photodetector (QWIP). The well width L„ in (b) is designed to be small enough such 
that only one bound state exists in the quantum well and the second level E2 is pushed into the continuum. 
contribute to the photocurrent, although the intersubband dipole matrix element 
between the ground state wave function and the highly oscillatory continuum-state 
wave function may be smaller. For a simplified analysis [87, 97, 98], we look at 
Fig. 15.17b, where pc is treated as an effective capture probability for an incident 
current /p for both the case (a) bound-to-bound and case (b) bound-to-continuum 
transitions. We obtain pcIp as the fraction of incident current captured by the well 
and (1 - pc)Ip as the remaining current transmitted to the next period. The incident 
infrared radiation creates a photocurrent ip 
iP = ? η * φ Α 
(15.5.2) 
where Φ is the photon flux density (number of photons per second per unit area), A is 
the area of the photon illumination, and TJW is the net quantum efficiency of a single 
well including the effect of the escape probability from the well. 
From current continuity, we have 
Therefore, 
The total net photocurrent is 
Ip = 0 -Pc)IP + ip-
ip = Pc'p ■ 
/p = qrf&Ag 
(15.5.3) 
(15.5.4) 
(15.5.5) 
where g is defined to be the overall photoconductive gain and η is the overall 
quantum efficiency of the MQW photodetector consisting of Nw quantum wells. 
We have 17 ~ NWT/W if η -C 1 as η is proportional to the absorbance of the structure. 
From (15.5.2) to (15.5.5), we find 
Pc V 
1 
PcN» 
(15.5.6) 

760 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
which gives the value for gain. The capture probability pc is found to decrease almost 
exponentially with the applied voltage [87]. 
15.5.3 Dark Current 
A simple model for the bias-dependent dark current /D [87, 99, 100] is to take the 
"effective" number of electrons n*(V), which tunnel out of the well or are thermally 
excited out of the well into the continuum states, multiplied by the average transport 
velocity v(V), the cross-sectional area of the detector A, and the electron charge q 
/D(V) = qn*(V)v(V)A 
(15.5.7) 
where 
00 
n*(V) = -jjjs- J/(E)7X£, V)dE 
(15.5.8) 
El 
where EP is the Fermi level measured from the conduction band edge (same as the 
first subband level E\) and Lp is the length of a period. T(E, V) is the tunneling 
probability through the triangular barrier with a bias voltage V. The velocity is 
μΡ 
(15.5.10) 
where μ is the electron mobility, F is the average field determined by the bias voltage 
V and the overall MQW width, and vs is the saturation drift velocity. 
The above simplified model has been used to explain the dark current of experi-
mental data with a very good agreement, as shown in Fig. 15.18 for a 10.7-μιτι 
QWIP [99]. An even more simplified model [100, 101] assumes 
T T O H J ;
 
E
E < Z 
<
15·
5·»> 
where £B is the barrier height on the right-hand side of the quantum well. We obtain 
n. =ng*Te-iEc-Ep)/*BT 
(15.5.12) 
7TB2Lp 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
BIAS VOLTAGE, VbW) 
Figure 15.18 Dark currents from measured (solid curves) and calculated (dashed) data as a function of 
the bias voltage at various temperatures for a QWIP with a cutoff wavelength 10.7 μηι. (Reprinted with 
permission from [99] © 1990 American Institute of Physics.) 
where Ec = EB - Ex is the spectral cut-off energy. The dark current becomes 
(15.5.13) 
and the Fermi level EF is determined from 
fc-**!^).-*-*"" 
ΝΌ 
1+e' XEf-Eri/keT 
(15.5.14) 
Because ID/T oc e-(.Ec-Er)/kBT^ p i o t t m g ln(ID/T) 
versus (Ec - EF) should give a 
slope of - \/kBT, and the result of EC — EF can also be compared with the optically 
measured spectral cutoff energy Ec. This simple model has been reported to agree 
with experimental observations [87, 99, 102]. 
15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
Solar energy is one of the most important sources of power supply. The major idea is 
to develop clean-energy resources as an alternative to fossil fuels and stop air pol-
lution resulting from the mass consumption of fossil fuels and maintain the ecological 
cycles of the biosystems on the earth [103]. Historically, the Industrial Revolution 
was initiated by the invention of the steam engine by James Watt in 1765. From 

762 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
an observation of the relation of the industrial development in the following centuries 
and the form of energy resources, from solid (coal) to liquid (oil) to gases (LNG, 
LPG), the important driving forces are the mass consumption of energy due to 
mass production technology, transportation, and storage. The resultant environmental 
load becomes a significant issue. The pollutant emission factors for electricity 
generation on the unit of carbon equivalent gram per kWh are 322.8 for coal, 
258.5 for oil, and 178.0 for LNG, respectively [103]. As is well-known, electrical 
energy is the most convenient form of energy in modern civilization. As a result, 
direct conversion of solar radiation to electricity by photovoltaic solar cells plays 
an important role in the development of clean and renewable energy technologies 
for civilization in the 21st century. 
In this section, we investigate the fundamentals of solar cells with a focus on the 
basic physics of p-n junctions and recent research on UI-V compound semiconduc-
tors related to photonics. The reader is referred to books such as Refs. 103-107 for a 
more detailed treatment on the many materials, technologies, and system designs. 
15.6.1 Solar Radiation and Basic Device Parameters 
Solar radiation follows the Planck radiation spectrum from the surface of the sun with 
a source temperature of about 5800K plus modification due to various factors such as 
absorption by the atmosphere. Figure 15.19a and Fig. 15.19b show the solar radiation 
spectrum for various conditions [108, 109]. The illumination is given in AMX 
(air mass X) where 
X = -^-z 
(15.6.1) 
COS0 
and Θ is the angle between the zenith and the position of the sun under terrestrial con-
ditions. Air mass zero (ΑΜ0) is the solar irradiation above the earth's atmosphere. 
The accepted standard for ΑΜ0 is 135.3 mW/cm2 or 1.353 kW/m2, which is 
known as the solar constant. Air mass one (AM 1) is when the sun is directly overhead 
and about 70% of the sunlight incident on the earth's atmosphere reaches the earth's 
surface on a clear day [108] (another 7% reaches the ground after scattering). The 
rest is absorbed or backscattered. AM2 is when the sun is at 60° from the zenith. 
AM1.5 is when the sun is at 48.19° from the zenith. 
Ideal Conversion Efficiency 
The current versus the bias voltage of a p-n junc-
tion in the presence of light illumination is the same as what we have derived for a 
photodiode, 
/ = /o(e i V /* B 7'-l)-/p l l. 
(15.6.2) 
Figure 15.20 shows the current-voltage curve with and without the optical 
illumination. 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
Reference Spectra Compared 
37°-Tiit Hemispherical Irradiance 
SMARTS (proposed spectrum) 
a 
G159 (normalized spectrum) 
Direct Normal Irradiance 
- SMARTS (proposed spectrum) 
G159 (standard spectrum) 
300 
500 
700 
900 
1100 
1300 
Wavelength (nm) 
1700 
1900 
Figure 15.19 (a) The solar radiation spectrum for various conditions. Air mass zero (AMO) is the solar 
irradiation above the earth's atmosphere (= 135.3 mW/cm2, also known as solar constant). It follows close 
to the black body radiation of a 5800K source from the sun's surface. (Reprinted with permission from 
[1091 © 1980 American Institute of Physics.) (b) The solar radiation spectrum as a function of wavelength. 
(Reprinted with permission from [1081 © 2002 Elsevier: Pergamon.) 

764 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
A /=/ 0(e*V"*Br-l) 
/ = / 0 ( ^ ^ _ 1 ) _ / p h 
Figure 15.20 The current-voltage curves of a p-n junction solar cell with and without optical 
illumination. 
Open circuit voltage is 
V« 
1 
U 
(15.6.3) 
Short-circuit current / = —L· 
'ph-
(15.6.4) 
The maximum power output occurs at an operation point M on the / - V curve such 
that lmVm is a maximum, which is delivered to a properly matched load resistance 
R. The operation point M can be obtained by finding the maximum value of the 
output electrical power: 
P = IV = [I0(eivlyk«T - 1) - /ph]V 
(15.6.5) 
which is simply obtained by setting the derivative of the above power with respect to 
the voltage to zero (see Problem 15.12). The fill factor (FF) or the curve factor (CF) is 
defined as the ratio 
FF 
^ O C ' S i 
(15.6.6) 
The ideal conversion efficiency [107, 110] is 
VmI„ 
opt 
*OC*fH FF 
(15.6.7) 
opt 
where Fopt is the incident optical power (W) on the solar cell surface. 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
765 
15.6.2 p-n Junction Solar Cells and Spectral Response [103-107] 
Figure 15.21a shows the schematics of an n-on-p solar cell, where the solar light 
illumination is from the top surface with an antireflection coating to improve 
photon collection, and the electrode fingers are for current collection. The theory 
of the spectral response of the photocurrent is discussed below. Figure 15.21b 
shows a one-dimensional model for the analysis of the p-n junction: Wn is the thick-
ness of the n-region; Wp is that of the p-region; the total depletion width is JCW = xp + 
xn. The figure also indicates one diffusion length of the minority carrier (Lp and Ln) on 
each side of the depletion region. The boundaries at the two edges of the depletion 
region are xy = W„—xn and Xj+xw= 
Wn+ xp. Figure 15.21c shows the generation 
rate of electron-hole pairs as a function of the optical penetration distance into 
the semiconductor p-n junction. The generation rate of electron-hole pairs is 
Light 
Electrode 
finger" 
Bus bar for 
current collection 
Anti-Reflection 
coating 
— n-region 
— p-region 
Metal back 
contact 
(c) 
GW 
(b) 
- v+ 
Hill· 
^ P 
. 1 . * w 
l·. =—·+* 
x = 0 
Wn-xn 
WnWn + xp 
Wp+Wn 
(=*i) 
(=H) 
(cD 
qV>0 
Figure 15.21 (a) Schematics of an n-on-p solar cell, (b) A one-dimensional model for the analysis of 
the p-n junction, the depletion width xw = xp + xn, and one diffusion length of the minority carrier 
on each side of the depletion region. W„ is the thickness of the n-region and Wp is that of the p-region. 
We define the boundary at each side of the depletion region using xs = W„ — xn and xt + JCW = W„ + xp. 
(c) The generation rate of electron-hole pairs, G(x), as a function of the optical penetration distance into 
the p-n junction, (d) The energy band diagram and the quasi-Fermi levels for a small forward bias voltage. 

766 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
proportional to the optical intensity profile in the device 
G(x, A) = G0 e-aWx 
Go = ijj[l - Λ(λ)]Φ(λ)ο(λ) 
(15.6.8) 
where α(λ) is the absorption spectrum, Φ(λ) = /opt/ftft> is the optical flux density for 
an incident optical power intensity /opt (W/cm2), and η, is the intrinsic quantum effi-
ciency to account for the average number (100% maximum) of electron-hole pairs 
generated per incident photon. Figure 15.21d shows the energy band diagram and 
the quasi-Fermi levels for a small forward bias voltage (defined as positive for the 
/7-electrode). To obtain the / - V curve of a p-n junction solar cell, the key steps are 
essentially the same as those for photodiodes. 
1. Find the minority carrier density in the quasi-neutral region of the n and p 
region in the presence of optical illumination with an incident photon flux 
(optical intensity) at a given wavelength λ for the given generation rate G(x, 
A). The major equations are the diffusion equations in the presence of carrier 
generation. The carrier densities or current densities have to satisfy the required 
boundary conditions. 
2. Calculate the minority current density at the edge of the depletion region, 
that is, Jp(\) at x = x-s (= Wn—xn) on the n-side, and ./„(A) at x = Xj + xw 
the p-side, where xw is the depletion width. 
3. Calculate the contribution due to the drift current density due to optical gener-
ation in the depletion region J^W 
PXj+Xw 
ydr(A) = q 
Goe'^dx 
= <7Τ7;[1 - R(X) ]Φ(λ>-^(1 - c_aaw)· 
(15.6.9) 
4. The total current density for an incident photon flux at a given wavelength is 
7(A) = JPW + y„(A) + JdrW. 
(15.6.10) 
5. The spectral response is defined as 
6. The total photocurrent is obtained by integrating the product of the transmitted 
photon flux into the solar cell and the spectral response to the maximum 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
767 
wavelength Am 
JPt, = q\ 
[1 - Α(λ) ]Φ(λ)5κ(λ) dk. 
(15.6.12) 
Jo 
Below, we carry out the procedures for step 1 and 2 first for the «-side, then 
for the p-side by a similar procedure. In the quasi-neutral region of the n-side, 
0 < x < Xj (= Wn - xn) 
^8pn--^8Pn 
= -±-G(x,\). 
(15.6.13) 
The solution for the excess minority (hole) concentration is 
8pn(x) = Acoshr*^p*ij +Bsinh(^-^\ 
+ Ce'™ 
(15.6.14a) 
C = n
G°T> 
(15.6.14b) 
(1 - alLp 
where C comes from the particular solution due to the inhomogeneous source 
term. The two constants, A and B, are determined by the two boundary conditions. 
1. At x = Xj, the excess carrier density vanishes, that is, 
Spnixj) = Pno(egV/kBT - 1)(= 0, at V - 0). 
(15.6.15) 
The above boundary condition determines 
A^-Ce-""!. 
(15.6.16) 
2. At x = 0, the hole current density (flowing into the surface) satisfies the surface 
recombination current density, — Jp(0) = qSp8p„(0), which gives 
d_ 
' dx 
DP 17. 8P" 
= Sp8pn(0). 
(15.6.17) 
'p 
x=0 
The above boundary condition then determines B. The final current density Jp(\) 
is given by the hole current density at the edge of the depletion region, Jp(x = x-5), 
which is 
d 
JPW = 
~qDP7x8p" 
(15.6.18) 

768 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Similarly, in the quasi-neutral region of the p-side, x} + xw < x < Wp + Wn = H 
.„ - 72 «.„ - --i^Gix, 
A). 
(15.6.19) 
The solution for the excess minority (electron) concentration is 
8np(x) = A' cosh ( * " · % " * " ) + B' sinh ίχ-χ^~χΑ 
+ c<e-°* 
(i5.6.20a) 
C' = n
G°T" 
(15.6.20b) 
(1 - 
alLß 
The two constants, A1 and B', are determined by the two boundary conditions. 
1. At x = Xj + *w, the excess carrier density is given by the condition 
Snpixj +xw) = np0(eiv/kBT 
- 1)(=0 at V = 0). 
(15.6.21) 
We obtain 
A' = - c V ^ + H 
(15.6.22) 
2. At x = Wp + Wn = H, the electron current density flowing into the surface 
satisfies the surface recombination current density: J„(H) = (—q)S„8np(H), 
which leads to 
Dn - j - δη„ 
ax 
= -SnSnp(H). 
(15.6.23) 
x=H 
The above boundary condition on the current density determines B'. The final elec-
tron current density Jn(\) is given by its value at the edge of the depletion region, 
J„{x = Xj + xw), which is 
Λ(λ) = qDn — 8np 
d 
' dx 
(15.6.24) 
X=Xj+Xw 
Following the above procedures, the total photocurrent in the presence of the broad 
solar light radiation is to integrate the spectral response with the transmitted photon 
flux in (15.6.12) for a given bias voltage V. Therefore, the general /-V curve of a 
p-n junction solar cell can be obtained. 
Back-Surface Field Solar Cells By adding a heavily doped p+-layer between the 
collecting metal contact and the p-region, Fig. 15.22a, a back surface field [104, 107] 
exists and improves the short-circuit current and the open-circuit voltage. 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
769 
(a) Back surface field (BSF) solar cell 
front contact 
(c) Collection 
probability 
Figure 15.22 (a) A back surface field sol 
efficiency of each region of a solar cell wi 
ar cell, (b) The energy band diagram, (c) A plot of the collection 
th and without a back surface field. 
Figure 15.22b shows the energy band diagram and Fig. 15.22c shows a simple plot of 
the collection efficiency of each region. The analysis is similar to the above and that 
of Section 15.2 based on the depletion approximation. The BSF cell helps confine the 
electrons more in the p-region due to the extra p+-barrier and is similar to a cell of a 
larger width with a small surface electron recombination velocity. The photocurrent is 
therefore enhanced. The open circuit voltage is increased due to the extra barrier 
caused by />+-doping, the increased short-circuit current, and the reduced (electron) 
surface recombination current. 
I-V 
Curves and Equivalent Circuit Figures 15.23a and 15.23b show the 
equivalent circuit of a solar cell and the / - V curve in the presence of shunt (Rsh) 
and series (i?s) resistances. An ideal solar cell assumes that the shunt resistance is 
infinity and the series resistance is zero, and the conversion efficiency has a larger 
maximum value than otherwise. When either the shunt resistance is not infinity or 
the series resistance is not zero, the I-V curve is shifted toward the origin and 

770 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
(a) Equilibrium Circuit 
Rs 
I 
heo 
- ' V W 
■ΛΛ/V—*-o-
(|)Iphils[e^.^-l]kh 
V|RL 
I=Io[>(V-W-l]-Iph+ 
(b) I - V Curve 
R.. 
Figure 15.23 (a) The equivalent circuit of a solar cell, (b) The / - V curve in the presence of shunt (Rsh) and 
series (Rs) resistances. In an ideal solar cell, the shunt resistance is infinity and the series resistance is zero. 
conversion efficiency is reduced, as shown in Fig. 15.23b 
/ = /o[e*v-«.)/T**r _ i] _ / + 
V ~ //?s 
Rs] 
(15.6.25) 
15.6.3 Quantum-Well and Multifunction Solar Cells 
Quantum-Well Solar Cells By placing multiple quantum wells [111-121] in the 
intrinsic region of a p-i-n structure, it is possible to realize solar cells with improved 
quantum efficiency, Fig. 15.24. It is important to maintain the built-in field across 
Figure 15.24 A multiple quantum-well (MQW) solar cell in a P-I-N structure. The intrinsic region con-
tains many quantum wells for enhanced absorption. 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
771 
50 
40 
CO 
20 
10 
0 
- 
/ 
/ / / 
:/1 _ 
/'"'" 
*~~- !\ 
/ 
| \ \ 
~'\ 
A - ^ ^ - T · " ; · · ' ; " " ) " . 
ι 
. 
. 
±-J 
— Theory 
— p-region 
—/-region 
n-region 
— Experiment 
■ . ■ ι ■ ■ ^ ■ 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
Wavelength (nm) 
900 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
Wavelength (nm) 
900 
Figure 15.25 (a) The spectral response of a p-i-n quantum-well solar cell with contributions from the p, i, 
and n regions separately and comparison with experimental data, (b) The comparison of three samples with 
difference only in the intrinsic region: all three samples have the same total thickness in the intrinsic layer 
except that sample G947 has a bulk uniform AlGaAs; sample G949 contains a single quantum well repla-
cing an equivalent thickness of AlGaAs; and sample G946 has 30 quantum wells. (Reprinted with per-
mission from fill] © 1993 American Institute of Physics.) 
the MQW region such that the photogenerated carriers in the quantum wells can 
escape to the barriers and get collected by the p-n junction at room temperature. 
There is some voltage loss. Figure 15.25a shows the theoretical spectral response 
of a P-i-N quantum well solar cell with contributions from the P, I, and N regions 
respectively and compares that with experimental data [111]. Figure 15.25b shows 
the comparison of three samples with differences only in the intrinsic region: all 
three samples have the same total thickness in the intrinsic layer except that the refer-
ence sample (G947) has a bulk AlGaAs (no quantum wells); sample G949 contains a 
single quantum well replacing an equivalent thickness of AlGaAs; and sample G946 
has 30 quantum wells. It is interesting to see the increase in the absorption spectrum 
in the quantum well region due to 1 and 30 quantum wells below the band edge of the 
reference sample (with only the barrier AlGaAs material without any quantum well). 
Theoretical analyses on the improvement in spectral absorption, open circuit voltage, 
short-circuit current, and conversion efficiency have been investigated and debated 
intensively since the early 1990s. A critical review on the issue of the enhancement 
of photovoltaic conversion efficiency has been reported [121]. 
Multijunction Solar Cells In recent years, terrestrial concentrator multijunction 
III-V solar cells have shown remarkable performance in conversion efficiency 
[122-128]. Conversion efficiencies beyond 40% has been realized using metamorphic 
GalnP/GalnAs/Ge multijunction solar cells [127, 128]. As a result, there is a 
resurgence of research in multijunction cells and commercial interest in concentrator 
III-V photovoltaics. New materials [129] incorporating nitride (III-N-V) have poten-
tial applications in next-generation multijunction solar cells because these materials 

PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
(a) Energy Band Diagram 
Figure 15.26 (a) The schematics for the electron-hole generation rate as a function of optical depth into 
the multijunction solar cell from the top wide band gap into the bottom narrow band gap region, (b) The 
generation rate of electron-hole pairs is proportional to the optical intensity, which decays as a function of 
position x. (c) The absorption spectra of the three band gaps. 
can be lattice-matched to substrates such as Si, Ge, and GaAs, with band gaps that are 
complementary to those of other III-V compound semiconductors. The absorption 
spectra of some of these materials have been shown in Chapter 2, Fig. 2.4. Poor 
minority carrier transport in UJ-N-V materials is a critical research issue. 
Figure 15.26a shows the schematic for the electron-hole generation rate as a 
function of optical depth into the multijunction solar cell from the top wide band 
gap into the bottom narrow band gap region. Figure 15.26b shows the generation 
rate per unit volume of the electron-hole pairs, which is proportional to the 
optical intensity that decays into the solar cell depth. The absorption spectra of all 
three band gaps are illustrated in Fig. 15.26c. The absorption of the solar radiation 
spectrum by different band gap layers allows for the conversion of more photons 
into electron and hole pairs. Carrier transport and collection become important 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
773 
T 
1 
Γ 
ENERGY (eV) 
Figure 15.27 
A graphical method to illustrate the improvement of conversion efficiency with increasing 
number of junctions. The insert shows the energy band profile of a three-junction solar cell. (Reprinted with 
permission from [1091 © 1980 American Institute of Physics.) 
issues. Thus the tunneling junction between different cells plays a significant role in 
the device design. Figure 15.27 shows a graphical method [109] to extract the 
efficiency of multijunction solar cells and indicates improvement as the number of 
junctions increases. 
Figure 15.28a and Fig. 15.28b [128] show a three-junction solar cell using (a) 
lattice-matched (LM) and (b) metamorphic (MM) GalnP/GalnAs/Ge three-junction 
solar cells, respectively. These solar cells show high conversion efficiencies (from 
30% to 40.7%). Figure 15.28c shows the efficiency, open-circuit voltage (VocX and 
filling factor (FF) of high performance MM and LM three-junction solar cells as a 
function of incident intensity [128]. Figure 15.29a shows the semiconductor 
layered structure of a four-junction (Al)GaInP/AlGa(In)As/Ga(In)As/Ge terrestrial 
concentration solar cell. Figure 15.29b shows the quantum efficiency as a function 
of photon energy [128]. The contribution of each cell, as determined by its band 
gap, is clearly seen. 

774 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
(a) 
GalnP top cell 
Wide-bandgap 
tunnel junction 
Ga(In) As 
middle cell 
Tunnel junction 
Buffer region 
Ge bottom cell 
(b) 
/ 
/KS. 
/ ^ C o n t a 
«+-GaInAs *t 
/ 
'/A 
*&%? 
Ju 
Lattice-matched (LM) 
Lattice-mismatched 
or metamorphic (MM) 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
Concentration (suns) 
(1 sun = 0.100 W/cm2) 
~*~ MM, 40.7% max 
-*- LM, 40.1% max 
- · - MM, high concentration 
Figure 15.28 A three-junction solar cell using (a) lattice-matched (LM) and (b) metamorphic (MM) 
GalnP/GalnAs/Ge three-junction solar cells, respectively, (c) The efficiency, V«., and FF of high-
performance MM and LM three-junction solar cells as a function of incident intensity. (Reprinted with 
permission from [1281 © 2007 Hindawi Publishing Corporation.) 

15.6 SOLAR CELLS 
(ΑΙΚφΦο^ΙΙ^Υ 
Widc-i 
tumid luncticin — 
AlGa(In)A>ccll2 
1.6 eV 
-Wide-£„ tunnel junction— 
Ga(In)As cell 3 
1.4 eV 
(b) 100 
90 
80 
fc 70 
6-
g 60 
I 50 
3 
a 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
^am. 
.ΙΙΛΛΙ^ 
ϊ·ρ i » 
/ / 
1 
H 
. Λ 
f \ 
y**^ 
\ 
·■ 
\ 
J
^ 
\ 
jf 
\ 
f #V 
1 / \ ^ 
<>\f 
\ ^ 
1 , }\i 
h ^ ^ ^ 
0.5 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
Photonenergy (eV) 
3.5 
GalnPsubcelll (topcell) 
1.86 eV 
AlGaInAssubcell2 
1.62 eV 
GalnAssubcelB 
1.38 eV 
Gesubcell4 
0.7 eV 
Figure 15.29 (a) The semiconductor layered structure of a four-junction (Al)GalnP/AlGa(In)As/ 
Ga(In)As/Ge terrestrial concentration solar cell, (b) The quantum efficiency of a four-junction solar cell 
as a function of photon energy. (Reprinted with permission from [128] © 2007 Hindawi Publishing 
Corporation.) 

776 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Quantum-Dot Solar Cells More recently, quantum dots such as colloidal PbSe 
and PbS quantum dots [130, 131] have also been used for solar cell applications 
with impressive performance. Very efficient multiple exciton generation (MEG) for 
single photon absorption in these dots has been reported. An impact ionization 
process is used to explain the intrinsic quantum yield of 300% or, equivalently, 
three electron-hole pairs are generated per absorbed incident photon. The research 
appears to be attractive for novel applications of quantum dots to solar cells with 
improved conversion efficiency. 
PROBLEMS 
15.1 Consider a photoconductor (Fig. 15.1) that is an extrinsic semiconductor bar 
with a thickness d = 0.1 mm, a width w = 1 mm, a length i = 4 mm, and an 
acceptor doping concentration 10 5cm 
. Assume that the electron mobility 
μη = 3000 cm2 V ' s_1 ( » μρ) and the applied voltage V= 4 V. 
(a) If the photoconductor is illuminated by a uniform steady light such that 
the optical generation rate of electrons is G„, find an expression for the 
photocurrent /ph = / - I0, where 70 is the dark current and / is the current 
when there is illumination of light. Find a numerical value for /ph if 
G„ = 1016cm 3 s"1 and τ„ = 10"3 s. 
(b) 
If the photoconductor is illuminated by a uniform light with a sinusoi-
dal time variation, that is, Gn(t) = g cos ωί, show that the photocurrent 
is given by the form 
i(t) = 
/, 
P , .cos(aa - ψ). 
What are /p and φ in terms of g and τ„? What determines the 3-dB 
cutoff frequency in the frequency response of the photocurrent? 
(c) If the light has a dc (steady) and an ac component as may be used in 
optical communication, Gn(t) = G0(l + mcos ωί), find an expression 
for the photocurrent using the results from parts (a) and (b). 
15.2 Explain the physical meaning of the photoconductive gain τη/τ, and why it 
can be much larger than 1. 
15.3 Derive Eqs. (15.1.30a) and (15.1.30b). 
15.4 Derive the junction capacitance Cj for a heterojunction using the depletion 
approximation in Section 2.5 for a p-N junction. 
15.5 Derive the R0A product in Eq. (15.2.15). 
15.6 Replot Fig. 15.6a-e for &p+-n~-n+ 
photodiode, where a superscript " + " 
means heavy doping concentration and a superscript"-" means light doping 
concentration. 

PROBLEMS 
777 
15.7 
Derive Eqs. (15.4.23) and (15.4.25). 
15.8 An avalanche photodiode with the electron and hole ionization coefficients 
an and ßp is assumed to have a uniform field in the impact ionization 
region such that an and ßp are independent of the position x. The electron 
and hole injections are given by J„(0) and JP(W), and the generation rate 
due to optical injection is G(x). 
(a) Write the two equations for the electron and hole current densities 
and solve for the hole current density as a function of x in terms of 
the injection conditions J„(0) and JP(W). Find the total current 
density J. 
(b) We assume that the electric field in the avalanche region is uniform 
such that a„ and ßp are independent of the position x. 
(i) If G(x) = 0 for all x, and Jn(0) = 0, find the multiplication factor 
for holes, Mp, defined by Mp — jjws-
(ii) On the other hand, if G{x) = 0 for all x, Jp(W) = 0, find the 
multiplication factor for electrons by M„ = yL·. 
(c) Using the results in (b) for Mn and Mp, show that an and ßp can be 
derived as expressed in (15.4.34) and (15.4.35) once Mn and Mp are 
measured. 
15.9 Discuss the physics for the excess noise factor F(M) = (M2)/(M)2. HOW 
can this excess noise be minimized? 
15.10 Derive Eqs. (15.5.12) and (15.5.13). 
15.11 Discuss the polarization selection rule for an n-type doped quantum-well 
infrared detector using intersubband transitions. Why are the configurations 
such as a 45°-edge-coupled structure or a grating-coupled structure used 
in the designs of these intersubband photodetectors? 
15.12 Using the I-V curve of a solar cell, find the optimal power conversion 
point M. 
15.13 (a) Find the minority current densities at the edge of the depletion region, 
Jp(x = Xj) in the presence of optical generation and zero voltage bias 
(V=0) following the procedures in (15.6.18). (b) Repeat part (a) for 
Jn(x = Xj + W) using (15.6.24). (c) Find the total current (15.6.10) using 
parts (a), (b), and (15.6.9). 
15.14 The dark current of a p-n junction solar cell in the absence of optical 
illumination, G = 0, can be obtained by following the same steps 1 and 2 
in Section 15.6. The same boundary conditions (15.6.15), (15.6.17), 
(15.6.21), and (15.6.23) can be used, except that V is not necessarily zero. 
Find the dark current using the above procedure. 
15.15 Find the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current for the four cases in 
Fig. 15.23b. 

778 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
REFERENCES 
1. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Vol. 5, Infrared 
Detectors, Academic Press, New York, 1970. 
2. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Vol. 12, 
Infrared Detectors II, Academic Press, New York, 1977. 
3. A. Rogalski, Ed., Selected Papers on Semiconductor Infrared Detectors, SPIE Milestone 
Series, Vol. MS66, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, Bellingham, WA, 1992. 
4. W. T. Tsang, Volume Editor, Part D, Photodetectors, in Vol. 22, Lightwave 
Communications Technology, R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors 
and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1985. 
5. J. D. Vincent, Fundamentals of Infrared Detector Operation and Testing, Wiley, 
New York, 1990. 
6. A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Photonics—Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, 6th 
ed., Oxford University Press, New York, 2007. 
7. B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 
2007. 
8. S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 2007. 
9. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Vol. 18, 
Mercury Cadmium Telluride, Academic Press, New York, 1981. 
10. G. H. Döhler, "Doping superlattices (n-i-p-i crystals)," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
QE-22, 1682-1695(1986). 
11. R. A. Street, G. H. Döhler, J. N. Miller, and P. P. Ruden, "Luminescence of n-i-p-i 
heterostructures," Phys. Rev. B 33, 7043-7046 (1986). 
12. P. E. Gray, D. DeWitt, A. R. Boothroyd, and J. F. Gibbons, Physical Electronics and 
Circuit Models of Transistors, Vol. 2 in Semiconductor Electronics Education 
Committee Books, Wiley, New York, 1964. 
13. G. W. Neudeck, The PN Junction Diode, Vol. 2 in Modular Series on Solid State 
Devices, G. W. Neudeck and R. F. Pierret, Eds., Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1983. 
14. B. G. Streetman and S. Banerjee, Solid State Electronic Devices, 6th ed., Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005. 
15. M. B. Reine, A. K. Sood, and T. J. Tredwell, "Photovoltaic infrared detectors," Vol. 18, 
Mercury Cadmium Telluride, in R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors 
and Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1981. 
16. M. Brain and T. P. Lee, "Optical receivers for lightwave communication systems," 
J. Lightwave Technol. LT-3, 1281-1300 (1985). 
17. S. R. Forrest, R. F. Leheny, R. E. Nahory, and M. A. Pollack, "Ino.53Gao.47As photo-
diodes with dark current limited by generation-recombination and tunneling," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 37, 322-325 (1980). 
18. S. R. Forrest, "Performance of In^Ga! ^As^P] -y photodiodes with dark current limited 
by diffusion, generation-recombination and tunneling," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 
QE-717, 217-226 (1981). 
19. M. C. Brain, "Comparison of available detectors for digital optical fiber systems for the 
1.2-1.55 μπι wavelength range," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18, 219-224 (1982). 

REFERENCES 
779 
20. J. E. Bowers and C. A. Burrus, Jr., "Ultrawide-band long-wavelength p-i-n photodetec-
tors," J. Lightwave Technol. LT-5, 1339-1350 (1987). 
21. G. E. Stillman and C. M. Wolfe, "Avalanche photodiodes," pp. 291-393, Infrared 
Detectors II, Vol. 12 in R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and 
Semimetals, Academic Press, New York, 1977. 
22. P. P. Webb, R. J. Mclntyre, and J. Conradi, "Properties of avalanche photodiodes," RCA 
Review 35, 234-278 (1974). 
23. T. P. Lee and T. Li, "Photodetectors," pp. 593-626 in S. E. Miller and A. G. Chynoweth, 
Eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications, Academic, New York, 1979. 
24. G. E. Stillman, "Impact ionization coefficients in InGaAs," pp. 76-83 in P. Bhattacharya, 
Ed., Properties of Lattice-Matched and Strained Indium Gallium Arsenide, INSPEC, the 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, London, UK, 1993. 
25. G. E. Bulman, V. M. Robbins, K. F. Brennan, K. Hess, and G. E. Stillman, "Experimental 
determination of impact ionization coefficients in (100) GaAs," IEEE Electron Device 
Lett. 4, 181-185(1983). 
26. L. W. Cook, G. E. Bulman, and G. E. Stillman, "Electron and hole impact ionization 
coefficients in InP determined by photomultiplication measurements," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
40, 589-591 (1982). 
27. M. H. Woods, W. C. Johnson, and M. A. Lampert, "Use of a Schottky barrier to measure 
impact ionization coefficients in semiconductors," Solid State Electron. 16, 381-394 
(1973). 
28. H. Ando and H. Kanbe, "Ionization coefficient measurement in GaAs by using multipli-
cation noise characteristics," Solid State Electron. 24, 629-634 (1981). 
29. F. Osaka, T. Mikawa, and T. Kaneda, "Impact ionization coefficients of electrons and 
holes in (lOO)-oriented Ga] -Jn^ASyP] _·>,," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 
1326-1338(1985). 
30. F. Osaka and T. Mikawa, "Excess noise design of InP/GalnAsP/GalnAs avalanche 
photodiodes," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-22, 471-478 (1986). 
31. Y. C. Chen and P. K. Bhattacharya, "Impact ionization coefficients for electrons and 
holes in strained Ino.2Gao.8As and Ino.15Gao.63Alo.22As channels embedded in 
Alo.3Gao.7As," J. Appl. Phys. 73, 465-467 (1993). 
32. R. J. Mclntyre, "Multiplication noise in uniform avalanche diodes," IEEE Trans. 
Electron. Devices ED-13, 164-168 (1966). 
33. R. J. Mclntyre, "The distribution of gains in uniformly multiplying avalanche photo-
diodes," IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices ED-19, 703-712 (1972). 
34. H. Ando, H. Kanbe, M. Ito, and T. Kaneda, "Tunneling current in InGaAs and optimum 
design for InGaAs/InP avalanche photodiode," Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 19, L277-L280 
(1980). 
35. S. R. Forrest, O. K. Kim, and R. G. Smith, "Analysis of the dark current and photo-
response of Ino.53Gao.47As/InP avalanche photodiodes," Solid State Electron. 26, 
951-968(1983). 
36. F. Capasso, A. Y. Cho, and P. W. Foy, "Low-dark-current low-voltage 1.3-1.6 μπι ava-
lanche photodiode with high-low electric field profile and separate absorption and mul-
tiplication regions by molecular beam epitaxy," Electron. Lett. 20, 635-637 (1984). 

780 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
37. C. A. Lee, R. L. Batdorf, W. Wiegmann, and G. Kaminsky, "Time dependence of ava-
lanche processes in silicon," J. Appl. Phys. 38, 2787-2796 (1967). 
38. R. B. Emmons, "Avalanche-photodiode frequency response," J. Appl. Phys. 38, 
3705-3714 (1967). 
39. H. Ando and H. Kanbe, "Effect of avalanche build-up time on avalanche photodiode 
sensitivity," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-21, 251-255 (1985). 
40. G. Kahraman, B. E. A. Saleh, W. L. Sargeant, and M. C. Teich, "Time and frequency 
response of avalanche photodiodes with arbitrary structure," IEEE Trans. Electron. 
Devices 39, 553-560 (1992). 
41. K. Nishida, K. Taguchi, and Y. Matsumoto, "InGaAsP heterostructure avalanche photo-
diodes with high avalanche gain," Appl. Phys. Lett. 35, 251-252 (1979). 
42. N. Susa, H. Nakagome, O. Mikami, H. Ando, and H. Kanbe, "New InGaAs/InP ava-
lanche photodiode structure for the 1 -1.6 μπι wavelength region," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-16, 864-870 (1980). 
43. G. E. Stillman, V. M. Robbins, and N. Tabatabaie, "III-V compound semiconductor 
devices: optical detectors," IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices ED-31, 1643-1655 (1984). 
44. R. Chin, N. Holonyak, Jr., G. E. Stillman, J. Y. Tang, and K. Hess, "Impact ionization in 
multilayered heterojunction structures," Electron. Lett. 16, 467-469 (1980). 
45. F. Capasso, W. T. Tsang, A. L. Hutchinson, and G. F. Williams, "Enhancement of elec-
tron impact ionization in a superlattice: a new avalanche photodiode with a large ioniz-
ation rate ratio," Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 38-40 (1982). 
46. F. Capasso, W. T. Tsang, and G. F. Williams, "Staircase solid-state photomultipliers and 
avalanche photodiodes with enhanced ionization rates ratio," IEEE Trans. Electron. 
Devices ED-30, 381 -390 (1983). 
47. T. Kagawa, H. Iwamura, and O. Mikami, "Dependence of the GaAs/AlGaAs superlattice 
ionization rate on Al content," Appl. Phys. Lett. 54, 33-35 (1989). 
48. T. Tanoue and H. Sakaki, "A new method to control impact ionization rate ratio by spatial 
separation of avalanching carriers in multilayered heterostructures," Appl. Phys. Lett. 41, 
67-70 (1982). 
49. K. Brennan, "Theory of electron and hole impact ionization in quantum well and staircase 
superlattice avalanche photodiode structures," IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices ED-32, 
2197-2205 (1985). 
50. S. L. Chuang and K. Hess, "Impact ionization across the conduction band 
edge discontinuity of quantum-well heterostructures," J. Appl. Phys. 59, 2885-2894 
(1986). 
51. S. L. Chuang and K. Hess, "Tunneling-assisted impact ionization for a superlattice," 
J. Appl. Phys. 61, 1510-1515 (1987). 
52. F. Capasso, J. Allam, A. Y. Cho, K. Mohammed, R. J. Malik, A. L. Hutchinson, and 
D. Sivco, "New avalanche multiplication phenomenon in quantum well superlattices: 
Evidence of impact ionization across the band-edge discontinuity," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
48, 1294-1296(1986). 
53. M. Toivonen, M. Jalonen, A. Salokatve, and M. Pessa, "Unipolar avalanche multipli-
cation phenomenon in multiquantum well structures," Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 
1664-1666(1993). 

REFERENCES 
781 
54. B. F. Levine, K. K. Choi, C. G. Bethea, J. Walker, and R. J. Malik, "Quantum well 
avalanche multiplication initiated by 10 μπι intersubband absorption and photoexcited 
tunneling," Appl. Phys. Lett. 51, 934-936 (1987). 
55. A. Kamgar, P. Kneschaurek, G. Dorda, and J. F. Koch, "Resonance spectroscopy 
of electronic levels in a surface accumulation layer," Phys. Rev. Lett. 3/2, 1251-1254 
(1974). 
56. S. J. Allen, Jr., D. C. Tsui, and B. Vinter, "On the absorption of infrared radiation by 
electrons in semiconductor inversion layers," Solid State Commun. 20, 425-428 (1976). 
57. L. L. Chang, L. Esaki, and G. A. Sai-Halasz, "Infrared optical devices of layered struc-
ture," IBM Tech. Disclosure Bull. 20, 2019-2020 (1977). 
58. L. Esaki and H. Sakaki, "New photoconductor," IBM Tech. Disc. Bull. 20, 2456 (1977). 
59. T. Ando, A. B. Fowler, and F. Stern, "Electronic properties of two-dimensional systems," 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 54, 437-672 (1982). 
60. L. C. Chiu, J. S. Smith, S. Margalit, A. Yariv, and A. Y. Cho, "Application of internal 
photoemission from quantum-well and heterojunction superlattices to infrared photode-
tectors," Infrared Phys. 23, 93-97 (1983). 
61. D. D. Coon and R. P. G. Karunasiri, "New mode of IR detection using quantum wells," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 45, 649-651 (1984). 
62. L. C. West and S. J. Eglash, "First observation of an extremely large-dipole infrared 
transition within the conduction band of a GaAs quantum well," Appl. Phys. Lett. 46, 
1156-1158(1985). 
63. A. Harwit and J. S. Harris, Jr., "Observation of Stark shifts in quantum well intersubband 
transitions," Appl. Phys. Lett. 50, 685-687 (1987). 
64. D. Ahn and S. L. Chuang, "Calculation of linear and nonlinear intersubband optical 
absorption in a quantum well model with an applied electric field," IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron. QE-23, 2196-2204 (1987). 
65. E. J. Roan and S. L. Chuang, "Linear and nonlinear intersubband electroabsorptions in a 
modulation-doped quantum well," J. Appl. Phys. 69, 3249-3260 (1991). 
66. K. Bajema, R. Merlin, F. Y. Juang, S. C. Hong, J. Singh, and P. K. Bhattacharya, "Stark 
effect in GaAs-ALXjai -xAs quantum wells: Light scattering by intersubband transitions," 
Phys. Rev. B 36, 1300-1302 (1987). 
67. K. K. Choi, B. F. Levine, C. G. Bethea, J. Walker, and R. J. Malik, "Multiple quantum 
well 10 μπι GaAs/Al^Gai -jAs infrared detector with improved responsivity," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 50, 1814-1816 (1987). 
68. M. Nakayama, H. Kuwahara, H. Kato, and K. Kubota, "Intersubband transitions in 
GaAs-AlxGai-xAs modulation-doped superlattices," Appl. Phys. Lett. 51, 1741-1743 
(1987). 
69. A. D. Wieck, J. C. Maan, U. Merkt, J. P. Kotthaus, K. Ploog, and G. Weimann, 
"Intersubband energies in GaAs-Gaj-^Al^As heterojunctions," Phys. Rev. B 35, 
4145-4148 (1987). 
70. M. Zachau, "Electronic eigenstates and intersubband transitions in doped heterostructure 
superlattices," Semicond. Sei. Technol. 3, 879-885 (1988). 
71. Z. Dconic, V. Milanovic, and D. Tjapkin, "Bound-free intraband absorption in GaAs— 
AL/jai-jAs semiconductor quantum wells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 54, 247-249 (1989). 

782 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
72. X. Zhou, P. K. Bhattacharya, G. Hugo, S. C. Hong, and E. Gulari, "Intersubband absorp-
tion in strained InGaAs/AlGaAs (0 < x < 0.15) multiquantum wells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
54, 855-856 (1989). 
73. J. D. Ralston, M. Ramsteiner, B. Dischler, M. Maier, G. Brandt, P. Koidl, and D. J. As, 
"Intersubband transitions in partially interdiffused GaAs/AlGaAs multiple quantum-well 
structures," Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 2195-2199 (1991). 
74. F. H. Julien, P. Vagos, J. M. Lourtioz, and D. D. Yang, "Novel all-optical 10 μπι wave-
guide modulator based on intersubband absorption in GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wells," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 2645-2647 (1991). 
75. E. Rosencher, E. Martinet, F. Luc, Ph. Bois, and E. Bockenhoff, "Discrepancies between 
photocurrent and absorption spectroscopies in intersubband photoionization from GaAs/ 
AlGaAs multiquantum wells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 3255-3257 (1991). 
76. K. K. Choi, L. Fotiadis, M. Taysing-Lara, and W. Chang, "Infrared absorption and 
photoconductive gain of quantum well infrared photodetectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 
592-594 (1992). 
77. L. S. Yu, Y. H. Wang, and S. S. Li, "Low dark current step-bound-to-miniband transition 
InGaAs/GaAs/AlGaAs multiquantum-well infrared detector," Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 
992-994 (1992). 
78. W. Chen and T. G. Andersson, "Intersubband transitions for differently shaped quantum 
wells under an applied electric field," Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 1591-1593 (1992). 
79. H. C. Liu, "Noise gain and operating temperature of quantum well infrared photodetec-
tors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 2703-2705 (1992). 
80. H. C. Liu, "Dependence of absorption spectrum and responsivity on the upper state posi-
tion in quantum well intersubband photodetectors," J. Appl. Phys. 73, 3062-3067 
(1993). 
81. J. P. Peng, Y. M. Mu, and X. C. Shen, "Performance of the multiquantum well infrared 
photodetector," J. Appl. Phys. 74, 1421-1425 (1993). 
82. M. Helm, W. Hilber, T. Fromherz, F. M. Peeters, K. Alavi, and R. N. Pathak, "Infrared 
absorption in superlattices: a probe of the miniband dispersion and the structure of the 
impurity band," Phys. Rev. B 48, 1601-1606 (1993). 
83. R. P. G. Karunasiri, J. S. Park, and K. L. Wang, "Si^^Ge^/Si multiple quantum well 
infrared detector," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 2588-2590 (1991). 
84. E. Rosencher, B. Vinter, and B. Levine, Eds., Intersubband Transitions in Quantum 
Wells, Sept. 9-14, Cargese, France, Plenum, New York, 1992. 
85. H. C. Liu, B. F. Levine, and J. Y. Andersson, Eds., Quantum Well Intersubband 
Transition Physics and Devices, Plenum, New York, 1994. 
86. M. O. Manasreh, Ed., Semiconductor Quantum Wells and Superlattices for Long-
Wavelength Infrared Detectors, Artech House, Norwood, MA, 1993. 
87. B. F. Levine, "Quantum-well infrared photodetectors," J. Appl. Phys. 74, R1-R81 
(1993). 
88. Y. C. Chang and R. B. James, "Saturation of intersubband transitions in p-type semicon-
ductor quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 39, 12672-12681 (1989). 
89. B. F. Levine, S. D. Gunapala, J. M. Kuo, S. S. Pei, and S. Hui, "Normal incidence hole 
intersubband absorption long wavelength GaAs/Al^Ga] _^As quantum well infrared 
photodetectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 1864-1866 (1991). 

REFERENCES 
783 
90. P. Man and D. S. Pan, "Analysis of normal-incident absorption in p-type quantum-well 
infrared photodetectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 2799-2801 (1992). 
91. K. M. S. V. Bandara, D. D. Coon, Byungsung O, Y. F. Lin, and M. H. Francombe, 
"Exchange interactions in quantum well subbands," Appl. Phys. Lett. 53, 1931-1933 
(1988). 
92. M. O. Manasreh, F. Szmulowicz, T. Vaughan, K. R. Evans, C. E. Stutz, and 
D. W. Fischer, "Origin of the blueshift in the intersubband infrared absorption in 
GaAs/Alo 3Gao.7As multiple quantum wells," Phys. Rev. B 43, 9996-9999 (1991). 
93. J. W. Choe, Byungsung O, K. M. S. V. Bandara, and D. D. Coon, "Exchange interaction 
effects in quantum well infrared detectors and absorbers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 
1679-1681 (1990). 
94. S. L. Chuang, M. S. C. Luo, S. Schmitt-Rink, and A. Pinczuk, "Many-body effects on 
intersubband transitions in semiconductor quantum-well structures," Phys. Rev. B 46, 
1897-1900(1992). 
95. B. F. Levine, R. J. Malik, J. Walker, K. K. Choi, C. G. Bethea, D. A. Kleinman, and 
J. M. Vandenberg, "Strong 8.2 μπι infrared intersubband absorption in doped GaAs/ 
AlAs quantum well waveguides," Appl. Phys. Lett. 50, 273-275 (1987). 
96. J. Y. Andersson and G. Landgren, "Intersubband transitions in single AlGaAs/GaAs 
quantum wells studied by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy," J. Appl. Phys. 64, 
4123-4127 (1988). 
97. H. C. Liu, "Photoconductive gain mechanism of quantum-well intersubband infrared 
detectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 1507-1509 (1992). 
98. B. F. Levine, A. Zussman, S. D. Gunapala, M. T. Asom, J. M. Kuo, and W. S. Hobson, 
"Photoexcited escape probability, optical gain, and noise in quantum well infrared photo-
detectors," J. Appl. Phys. 72, 4429-4443 (1992). 
99. B. F. Levine, C. G. Bethea, G. Hasnain, V. O. Shen, E. Pelve, R. R. Abbott, and 
S. J. Hsieh, "High sensitivity low dark current 10 μιη GaAs quantum well infrared photo-
detectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 851-853 (1990). 
100. M. A. Kinch and A. Yariv, "Performance limitations of GaAs/AlGaAs infrared superlat-
tices," Appl. Phys. Lett. 55, 2093-2095 (1989). 
101. S. D. Gunapala, B. F. Levine, L. Pfeiffer, and K. West, "Dependence of the performance 
of GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well infrared photodetectors on doping and bias," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 69,6517-6520(1991). 
102. B. F. Levine, A. Zussman, J. M. Kuo, and J. de Jong, "19 μπι cutoff long-wavelength 
GaAs/Al,.Gai _xAs quantum-well infrared photodetectors," Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 
5130-5135 (1992). 
103. Y. Hamakawa, Ed., Thin-Film Solar Cells—Next Generation Photovoltaics and Its 
Applications, Chapter 1, Springer, Berlin, 2004. 
104. C. Hu and R. M. White, Solar Cells: From Basic to Advanced Systems, McGraw Hill, 
1983. 
105. S. J. Fonash, Solar Cell Device Physics, Academic Press, New York, 1981. 
106. M. A. Green, Solar Cells—Operating Principles, Technology, and System Applications, 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982. 
107. S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 2007. 

784 
PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
108. C. A. Gueymard, D. Myers, and K. Emery, "Proposed reference irradiance spectra for 
solar energy systems testing," Solar Energy 73, 443-467 (2003). 
109. C. H. Henry, "Limiting efficiencies of ideal single and multiple energy gap terrestrial 
solar cells," J. Appl. Phys. 51, 4494-4500 (1980). 
110. E. Bücher, "Solar cell materials and their basic parameters," Appl. Phys. 17, 1 -25 (1978). 
111. M. Paxma, J. Nelson, B. Braun, J. Connolly, K. W. J. Barnham, C. T. Foxon, and 
J. S. Roberts, "Modeling the spectral response of the quantum well solar cell," J. Appl. 
Phys. 74, 614-621 (1993). 
112. G. L. Araujo and A. Marti, "Electroluminescence coupling in multiple quantum well 
diodes and solar cells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 894-895 (1995). 
113. N. G. Anderson, "Ideal theory of quantum well solar cells," J. Appl. Phys. 78, 
1850-1861 (1995). 
114. N. G. Anderson and S. J. Wojtczuk, "Open-circuit voltage characteristics of InP-based 
quantum well solar cells," J. Appl. Phys. 79, 1973-1978 (1996). 
115. K. Barnham, J. Connolly, P. Griffin, G. Haarpaintner, J. Nelson, E. Tsui, A. Zachariou, 
J. Osborne, C. Button, G. Hill, M. Hopkinson, M. Pate, J. Roberts, and T. Foxon, 
"Voltage enhancement in quantum well solar cells," J. Appl. Phys. 80, 1201-1206 
(1996). 
116. J. Nelson, J. Barnes, N. Ekins-Daukes, B. Kluftinger, E. Tsui, K. Barnham, C. T. Foxon, 
T. Cheng, and J. S. Roberts, "Observation of suppressed radiative recombination in single 
quantum well p-i-n photodiodes," J. Appl. Phys. 82, 6240-6246 (1997). 
117. B. Kluftinger, K. Barnham, J. Nelson, T. Fozon, and T. Cheng, "Temperature-dependent 
study of the quasi-Fermi level separation in double quantum well P-I-N structures," 
Microelectron. Eng. 51-52, 265-274 (2000). 
118. K. W. J. Barnham, I. Ballard, J. P. Connolly, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, B. G. Kluftinger, 
J. Nelson, and C. Rohr, "Quantum well solar cells," Physica E 14, 27-36 (2002). 
119. A. C. Varonides, "Thermionic escape of net photogenerated carriers and current densities 
from illuminated lightly doped single quantum wells," Physica E 14, 142-149 (2002). 
120. J. Nelson, I. Ballard, K. Barnham, J. P. Connolly, J. S. Roberts, and M. Pate, "Effect 
of quantum well location on the single quantum well p-i-n photodiode dark currents," 
J. Appl. Phys. 86, 5898-5905 (1999). 
121. N. G. Anderson, "On quantum well solar cell efficiencies," Physica E 14, 126-131 
(2002). 
122. J. M. Olson, S. R. Kurtz, A. E. Kibbler, and P. Faine, "A 27.3% efficient Gao.5rn0.5P/ 
GaAs tandem solar cell," Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 623-625 (1990). 
123. S. R. Kurtz, A. A. Allerman, E. D. Jones, J. M. Gee, and J. J. Banas, "InGaAsN solar 
cells with 1.0 eV band gap, lattice matched to GaAs," Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 729-731 
(1999). 
124. M. Yamaguchi, "III-V compound multi-junction solar cells: present and future,". Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 75, 261-269 (2003). 
125. J. M. Roman, "State-of-the-art of ΙΠ-V solar cell fabrication technologies, device designs 
and applications," Advanced Photovoltaic Cell Design, EN548, 1 -8 (2004). 
126. M. A. Green, K. Emery, D. L. King, S. Igari, and W. Warta, "Solar cell efficiency tables 
(version 24)," Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl. 12 365-372 (2004). 

REFERENCES 
785 
127. R. R. King, D. C. Law, K. M. Edmondson, C. M. Fetzer, G. S. Kinsey, H. Yoon, 
R. A. Sherif, and N. H. Karam, "40% efficient metamorphic GalnP/GalnAs/Ge multi-
junction solar cells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 183516 (2007). 
128. R. R. King, D. C. Law, K. M. Edmondson, C. M. Fetzer, G. S. Kinsey, H. Yoon, 
D. D. Krut, J. H. Ermer, R. A. Sherif, and N. H. Karam, "Advances in high-efficiency 
ΠΙ-V multijunction solar cells," Advances in OptoElectronics, Vol. 2007, Article ID 
29523, 8 pages. Doi: 10.1155/2007/79523. 
129. J. F. Geisz and D. J. Friedman, "HJ-N-V semiconductors for solar photovoltaic appli-
cations," Semicond. Sei. Technol. 17, 769-777 (2002). 
130. R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev, 
and A. L. Efros, "High efficient multiple exciton generation in colloidal PbSe and PbS 
quantum dots," Nano Lett. 5, 865-871 (2005). 
131. R. D. Schaller, V. M. Agranovich, and V. I. Klimov, "High efficiency carrier multipli-
cation through direct photogeneration of multi-excitons via virtual single-exciton 
states," Nature Phys. 1, 189-194 (2005). 


Appendix A 
Semiconductor Heterojunction Band Lineups 
in the Model-Solid Theory 
Semiconductor heterojunctions and superlattices have been under intensive 
investigation both theoretically and experimentally in the past three decades. There 
are tremendous potential device applications using heterojunctions. In this appendix, 
we discuss a simplified model to determine the energy band lineups of semiconductor 
heterojunctions based on the model-solid theory [1-4]. The goal is to develop a 
reliable model to predict band offsets for a wide variety of heterojunctions without 
the need for difficult calculations such as in the local-density-functional theory or 
ab initio pseudopotential method. The relation of the model-solid theory to the 
fully self-consistent first-principles calculations can be found in Refs. 2 and 3. 
The major idea is to set up an absolute reference energy level. All calculated ener-
gies can then be put on an absolute energy scale, allowing us to derive band lineups. 
In the model-solid theory, an average energy over the three uppermost valence bands 
(the heavy-hole, the light-hole, and the spin-orbit split-off bands) £Vjav is obtained 
from theory and it is referred to as the absolute energy level. The values of ΕνΛν 
for different semiconductors are usually tabulated [1] (Table C.2 in Appendix C) 
so that no calculations for these values are necessary. These results have to be com-
pared with those of the first-principle calculations whenever possible to justify the 
model. An estimate of the maximum possible error is about 0.1 eV. It should be 
noted that band offsets should be checked with experimental data such as those in 
Refs. 5-19. The model-solid theory provides a simple method for estimating the 
band offsets for materials, especially ternary compounds with varying compositions 
for which experimental data may not be always available. 
UNSTRAINED SEMICONDUCTORS 
If the materials A and B have the same lattice constants, we may have an ideal 
heterojunction and there is no strain in the semiconductors. For this case, the 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
787 

788 
APPENDIX A 
heavy-hole and light-hole band edges (£HH and £ LH) are degenerate at the zone 
center, and their energy position is denoted as Ev 
£ v — £-v,av 
(A.l) 
where Δ is the spin-orbit splitting energy, and the spin-orbit split-off band edge 
energy Eso is 
£so — Ev — Δ — Ey 
2Δ 
(A.2) 
The conduction-band edge is obtained by adding the band-gap energy Eg to Ev 
t-JQ. 
~ 
*-*\ 
I 
Α-'β 
(A.3) 
Note that in the model-solid theory, the spin-orbit splitting energy Δ and the 
band-gap energy £g are taken from experimental results. The only input provided 
by the model-solid theory is the tabulated £Vj av value. This Ev av value is essentially 
the same as the p-state energy Ep in Fig. 4.3a. 
With the above results, the band lineups between materials A and B are shown in 
Fig. A. 1. We have 
Δ£„ = Et - E* 
Material A 
Δ£„ 
_MaterialB_ _ 
A b s o l u t c 
zero energy 
AEC 
:3_ 
E" 
- iJL _ _ 
Figure A.l 
Band lineups in the model-solid theory. Ev av in each material region is obtained from the 
model-solid theory and is tabulated in Appendix C. The band-gap energy £g and the spin-orbit splitting 
Δ of each material are taken from experimental results. 

APPENDIX A 
789 
and the band-edge discontinuities are 
AEC=E?-E», 
AEC + AEW = AE&. 
AEV = E* --EA 
(A.4) 
(A.5) 
The partition ratios of the band-edge discontinuities, Qc = AEC/AE% and Qv = AEV/ 
AEg, are obtained from this theory and can also be compared with experimental data. 
STRAINED SEMICONDUCTORS 
If a material A with a lattice constant a is grown on a substrate with a lattice constant 
a0 along the z direction, we have 
ÜQ — a 
(A.6a) 
and 
C\2 
ex = -2-—SJOC. 
(A.6b) 
The band-edge shifts are 
A£v,av = αν(ε^ + επ + ε κ) = -PE 
(A.7a) 
AEC = adeja + Syy + ε^) = Pc. 
(A.7b) 
The position of the average energy of the valence bands Evav under strain is shifted 
from its unstrained position £^av in (A.l) by —Ρε. 
£v,av = < a v - PB. 
(A.8) 
We thus have the center of the valence-band edge energy 
£v = < a v + | = £ ? - / V 
(A.9) 
The heavy-hole, light-hole, and spin-orbit split-off band edges are 
Em=E°v-PE-QE 
(A.10) 
Ew = %-Pe-± 
+ ^ + Ι[Δ 2 + 2Δβ ε+9β2] 1 / 2 
(A.11) 
£so = £? - Ρε -1 + f - \ [Δ2 + 2Δβ. + 9Ql] U\ 
(A.12) 
The conduction band edge is shifted by Pc given by (A.7b) 
Ec = E°v + Eg(x) + Pc. 
(A.13) 

790 
APPENDIX A 
Note that in the limit of a large spin-orbit split-off energy Δ »\Q e\, we can ignore 
the coupling of the spin-orbit split-off band and 
EiM*>E?v-Pe + Qe 
(A. 14a) 
£ s o « E° - PE - A. 
(A. 14b) 
For a ternary alloy such as A^Bi-^C with a lattice constant a(x) 
a(x) = jca(AC) + (1 - x)a(BC) 
(A. 15) 
which is a linear interpolation of the lattice constants, a(AC) and a(BC), of the binary 
compound semiconductors, we use the following formula to calculate an energy 
level E( = E%m for example): 
£(AxBi_,C) = xE(AC) + (1 - x)E(BC) + 3x(\ - 
x)[-av(AC) 
+ av(BC)] — 
(A. 16) 
ao 
where the last term accounts for a strain contribution to the ternary alloy, and Δα = 
Ö(AC) — a(BC) is the difference between the lattice constants of two compounds AC 
and BC. Once £^av is determined, the band-edge energies for the strained ternary 
compound can be calculated following (A.6)-(A.13). 
Many theoretical parameters for the electronic and optical properties such as those 
listed in Table C.2 in Appendix C can be found in the data books compiled by various 
groups such as Refs. 20-23, review papers such as Refs. 24-27, and research papers 
such as Refs. 28-37. 
Example. GaAs/AlAs Heterojunction 
GaAs and AlAs have almost the same 
lattice constants. Therefore, the heterojunction has a negligible strain. We see from 
Table C.2 in Appendix C, 
£v,av(GaAs) = -6.92 eV, A(GaAs) = 0.34 eV, Eg(GaAs) = 1.52eV 
£v,av(AlAs) = -7.49 eV, A(AlAs) = 0.28 eV, £^ir(AlAs) = 3.13eV. 
Therefore, 
£v(GaAs) = 
£v(AlAs) = 
Δ£ν = 
0.34 
-6.92 + — - = -6.81 eV 
-7.49 + ^ - = -7.40 eV 
-6.81+7.40 = 0.59 eV. 
Also, the band-gap discontinuity is AEg = 1.61 eV, and the valence-band discontinu-
ity ratio is AEv/AEg = 0.37. 

APPENDIX A 
791 
Example. Ino.53Gao.47As/InP Heterojunction 
«(GaAs) = 5.6533 Ä, a(InAs) = 6.0584 Ä, a(InP) = 5.8688 Ä 
^v,av(Ini-xGa^As) = XEV^(GSLAS) 
+ (l-jc)£Viav(InAs) 
+ 3JC(1 — x)[—av(GaAs) + av(InAs)] — 
a 
Aa = 5.6533 - 6.0584 = -0.4051 A 
a(lr\]_xGaxAs) = Jca(GaAs) + (1 -.x)a(InAs) 
A(In!_^Ga^As) «jtA(GaAs) + (1 - ;c)A(InAs). 
For x = 0.47, In0 _53Gao.47As is lattice matched to InP. Therefore, we do not have the 
strain terms (PB = 0, Qe = 0). We obtain 
Ev,av(Ino.53Gao.47As) = -6.779 eV, 
Δ = 0.361 eV. 
Using £v>av(InP) = -7.04eV and £v(InP) = -7.003 eV, we find AEV = 0.344 eV. 
From room temperature data for the band gap, £g(In0.53Gao.47As) = 0.73 eV, 
£g(InP) = 1.35 eV, and AES = 0.62 eV, we obtain the ratio AEv/AEg = 0.55 = 55%. 
Some Experimental Reports on Band-Edge Discontinuities 
There has been a 
considerable amount of experimental data on band offsets, mostly on unstrained 
systems. For strained semiconductors, the band offsets are complicated by the defor-
mation potentials, which also shift the conduction- and valence-band edges. 
Therefore, fewer data are available for strained heterojunctions. 
1. GaAs/AljGa] -^As system: 
£g(GaAs) = 1.424 eV (300K) 
£g(AUGai_xAs) = 1.424 + 1.247xeV (300K) 
AEg(x) = 1.247* eV 
AEC = 0.67 AEg, 
Δ£ν = 0.33 AEg 
(AEC = 0.69 AEg, Δ£ν =■ 0.31 A£g; Ref. 11). 
2. Ino.53Gao.47As/InP (~0K) [18]: 
£g(InP)= 1.423 eV 
£g(In0.53Gao.47As) = 0.811 eV 
AEg = 0.612 eV 
AEC = 0.252 eV = 0.41 AE„, AEV = 0.360 eV = 0.59 AE„. 

792 
APPENDIX A 
3. In0.52Alo.48As/InP (~0K) [18]: 
£g(InP)= 1.423 eV 
£g(Ino.52Alo.48As)= 1.511 eV 
AEg = 0.088 eV 
AEC = 0.252 eV 
2.86 AEg, Δ£ν = -0.164 eV (type Π). 
The above results for Ino.53Gao.47As/InP/Ino.52Alo.48As band offsets and 
their transitivity relations can be illustrated [18] in Fig. A.2. The transitivity 
relations give AEC = 0.504 eV = 0.72 AEg and AEV = 0.196 eV = 0.28 AEg 
for an Ino.53Gao.47As/Ino.52Alo.48As heterojunction. 
4. Inj-^Ga^AsyPi-y/InP lattice-matched system [22]: For In^^Ga^As^P^j, 
quaternary semiconductor lattice matched to InP substrate, 
0.1896? 
0.4176-0.0125? 
figfliM-jGajAsyPi-y) = 1.35 - 0.775? + 0.149?2 eV 
AEg(y) = 0.775? - 0.149?2 eV 
AEy(y) = 0.502? - 0.152?2 eV 
AEc(y) = AEg(y) - AEv(y) = 0.273? + 0.003?2 eV 
where Δ£ν(?) was determined experimentally. 
Some reports on strained In^Gaj _xAs/InP, In^Ga^^As/Ino^Alo^As, InGaAs/ 
InGaAsP, and In^Gai ^.As/GaAs can be found in Refs. 7-9, 14, 15, and 19. 
0.252 eV 
0.360 eV 
0.252 eV 
0.811 eV 
1.423 eV 
KsäGao^As 
InP 
1.511 eV 
0.504 eV 
0.811cV 
0.196 eV 
*k 0.164 eV 
""oaAlMgAs 
InfcsjGao^As 
Figure A.2 
Band offsets and transivity of In053GaO47As/InP (AEC = 0.41 ΔΕΒ, ΔΕν = 0.59 Δ£8) and 
Ino.52Alo.4sAs/lnP (A£c = 0.252 eV = 2.86 ΔΕε > ΔΕ6 = 0.088 eV) at low temperatures (OK) [181. 

APPENDIX A 
793 
REFERENCES 
1. C G . Van de Walle, "Band lineups and deformation potentials in the model-solid theory," 
Pftys. Rev. B 39, 1871-1883 (1989). 
2. C. G. Van de Walle and R. M. Martin, 'Theoretical calculations of semiconductor hetero-
juntion discontinuities," J. Vac. Sei. Technol. B 4, 1055-1059 (1986). 
3. C. G. Van de Walle and R. M. Martin, "Theoretical study of band offsets at semiconductor 
interfaces," Phys. Rev. B 35, 8154-8165 (1987). 
4. C. G. Van de Walle, K. Shahzad, and D. J. Olego, "Strained-layer interfaces between II-
VI compound semiconductors," J. Vac. Sei. Technol. B 6, 1350-1353 (1988). 
5. R. People, K. W. Wecht, K. Alavi, and A. Y. Cho, "Measurement of the conduction-band 
discontinuity of molecular beam epitaxial grown Ino^Alo 48As /Ino^Gao^As, N-n 
heterojunction by C-V profiling," Appl. Phys. Lett. 43, 118-120 (1983). 
6. R. C. Miller, A. C. Gossard, D. A. Kleinman, and O. Munteanu, "Parabolic quantum wells 
with the GaAs-Al^Ga, _^As system," Phys. Rev. B 29, 3740-3743 (1984). 
7. R. People, "Effects of coherency strain on the band gap of pseudomorphic In^Ga] _xAs on 
(001) InP," Appl. Phys. Lett. 50, 1604-1606 (1987). 
8. R. People, "Band alignments for pseudomorphic InP/In^Ga! -^As heterostructures for 
growth on (001) InP," J. Appl. Phys. 62, 2551-2553 (1987). 
9. G. Ji, D. Huang, U. K. Reddy, T. S. Henderson, R. Houdre, and H. Morkoc, "Optical 
investigation of highly strained InGaAs-GaAs multiple quantum wells," J. Appl. Phys. 
62, 3366-3373 (1987). 
10. C. D. Lee and S. R. Forrest, "Effects of lattice mismatch on In^Ga! -jAs/InP heterojunc-
tions," App/. Phys. Lett. 57, 469-471 (1990). 
11. L. Hrivnäk, "Determination of Γ electron and light hole effective masses in Al^Ga] -jAs 
on the basis of energy gaps, band-gap offsets, and energy levels in Al^Gai _jAs/GaAs 
quantum wells," Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 2425-2427 (1990). 
12. B. R. Nag and S. Mukhopadhyay, "Band offset in InP/Gao.47ln0.53As heterostructures," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 1056-1058 (1991). 
13. M. S. Hybertsen, "Band offset transitivity at the InGaAs/InAlAs/InP(001) heterointer-
faces,"App/. Phys. Lett. 58, 1759-1761 (1991). 
14. B. Jogai, "Valence-band offset in strained GaAs-In^Gai _xAs superlattices," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 59, 1329-1331 (1991). 
15. J. H. Huang, T. Y. Chang, and B. Lalevic, "Measurement of the conduction-band discon-
tinuity in pseudomorphic In^Gai _xAs/In0.52Al0.48As heterostructures," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
60, 733-735 (1992). 
16. S. Tiwari and D. J. Frank, "Empirical fit to band discontinuities and barrier heights in ΓΠ-
V alloy systems," Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 630-632 (1992). 
17. R. F. Kopf, M. H. Herman, M. L. Schnoes, A. P. Perley, G. Livescu, and M. Ohring, "Band 
offset determination in analog graded parabolic and triangular quantum wells of GaAs/ 
AlGaAs and GalnAs/AlInAs," J. Appl. Phys. 71, 5004-5011 (1992). 
18. J. Bohrer, A. Krost, T. Wolf, and D. Bimberg, "Band offsets and transitivity of 
In/ia^As/Ini-jALAs/InP heterostructures," Phys. Rev. B. 47, 6439-6443 (1993). 

794 
APPENDIX A 
19. M. Nido, K. Naniwae, T. Terakado, and A. Suzuki, "Band-gap discontinuity control for 
InGaAs/InGaAsP multiquantum-well structures by tensile-strained barriers," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 62, 2716-2718 (1993). 
20. K. H. Hellwege, Ed., Landolt-Bömstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in 
Science and Technology, New Series, Group ΙΉ 17a, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982; 
Groups HI-V 22a, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986. 
21. For a brief version of the data book in Ref. 20, see: O. Madelung, Ed., Semiconductors, 
Group IV Elements and III-V Compounds, in R. Poerschke, Ed., Data in Science and 
Technology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. 
22. S. Adachi, Physical Properties of III-V Semiconductor Compounds, Wiley, New York, 
1992. 
23. S. Adachi, Properties of Indium Phosphide, JJNSPEC, The Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
London and New York, 1991. 
24. J. S. Blakemore, "Semiconducting and other major properties of gallium arsenide," 
/. Appl. Phys. 53, R123-R181 (1982). 
25. S. Adachi, "Material parameters of In^Ga^^As^Pi-y and related binaries," J. Appl. Phys. 
53, 8775-8792 (1982). 
26. S. Adachi and K. Oe, "Internal strain and photoelastic effects in Gaj -^Al^As/GaAs and 
In^Ga^^As^Pj-^, /InP crystals," J. Appl. Phys. 54, 6620-6627 (1983). 
27. S. Adachi, "GaAs, AlAs, and Ga^^Al^As: material parameters for use in research and 
device applications," J. Appl. Phys. 58, R1-R28 (1985). 
28. P. Lawaetz, "Valence-band parameters in cubic semiconductors," Phys. Rev. B. 4, 
3460-3467 (1971). 
29. R. E. Nahory, M. A. Pollack, and W. D. Johnston, Jr., "Band gap versus composition and 
demonstration of Vegard's law for In^^Ga^AsyPi-j, lattice matched to InP," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 33, 659-661 (1978). 
30. K. Alavi and R. L. Aggarwal, "Interband magnetoabsorption of Ino.53GAo.47As," Phys. 
Rev. B 21, 1311-1315 (1980). 
31. A. Raymond, J. L. Robert, and C. Bernard, "The electron effective mass in heavily doped 
GaAs," J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 12, 2289-2293 (1979). 
32. L. G. Shantharama, A. R. Adams, C. N. Ahmad and R. J. Nicholas, "The k-p interaction in 
InP and GaAs from the band-gap dependence of the effective mass," J. Phys. C Solid State 
Phys. 17, 4429-4442 (1984). 
33. W. Stolz, J. C. Maan, M. Altarelli, L. Tapfer, and K. Ploog, "Absorption spectroscopy on 
Gao.47Ino.53As/Alo.48lno.52As multi-quantum-well hetero-structures. I. Excitonic tran-
sitions," Phys. Rev. B 36, 4301 -4309 (1987). 
34. W. Stolz, J. C. Maan, M. Altarelli, L. Tapfer, and K. Ploog, "Absorption spectroscopy on 
Gao.47Ino.53As/Alo.48lno.52As multi-quantum-well hetero-structures. II. Subband struc-
ture," Phys. Rev. B 36, 4310-4315 (1987). 
35. L. W. Molenkamp, R. Eppenga, G. W. 't Hooft, P. Dawson, C. T. Foxon, and K. J. Moore, 
"Determination of valence-band effective-mass anisotropy in GaAs quantum wells by 
optical spectroscopy," Phys. Rev. B 38, 4314-4317 (1988). 

APPENDIX A 
795 
36. D. Gershoni and H. Temkin, "Optical properties of III-V strained-layer quantum 
wells," J. Luminescence 44, 381-398 (1989). 
37. R. Sauer, S. Nilsson, P. Roentgen, W. Heuberger, V. Graf, A. Hangleiter, and R. Spycher, 
"Optical study of extended-molecular-layer flat islands in lattice-matched Ino.53Gao.47As/ 
InP and In053Gao.47As/InI_;l:GaxAs),P1_j, quantum wells grown by low-pressure metal-
organic vapor-phase epitaxy with different interruption cycles," Phys. Rev. B 46, 
9525-9537 (1992). 


Appendix B 
Optical Constants of GaAs and InP 
Table B.l 
Optical Constants of GaAs 
Absorption Coeff., 
Optical Energy, 
Wavelength, 
Refractive 
Extinction 
a = 4πκ/λ 
%ω (eV) 
λ (μηι) 
Index,« 
Coeff., κ 
(104cm~') 
References* 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.35 
1.4 
1.42 
1.425 
1.43 
1.435 
1.44 
1.45 
1.47 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
2.0 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4797 
2.0664 
1.7712 
1.5498 
1.3776 
1.2399 
1.1271 
1.0332 
0.9537 
0.9184 
0.8856 
0.8731 
0.8701 
0.8670 
0.8640 
0.8610 
0.8551 
0.8434 
0.8266 
0.7749 
0.7293 
0.6888 
0.6526 
0.6199 
0.5904 
0.5636 
0.5391 
3.3240 
3.3378 
3.3543 
3.3737 
3.3965 
3.4232 
3.4546 
3.4920 
3.5388 
3.5690 
3.6140 
3.666 
3.700 
3.742 
3.785 
3.826 
3.878 
3.940 
4.013 
4.100 
0.0017 
0.0271 
0.0554 
0.0572 
0.0557 
0.0568 
0.0612 
0.0664 
0.080 
0.091 
0.112 
0.151 
0.179 
0.211 
0.240 
0.276 
0.320 
0.0240 
0.3900 
0.8001 
0.8290 
0.8101 
0.8290 
0.8994 
0.9893 
1.216 
1.476 
1.930 
2.755 
3.447 
4.277 
5.108 
6.154 
7.460 
a,b 
a, c 
a, d 
(Continued) 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
797 

798 
APPENDIX B 
Table B.l 
Continued 
Absorption Coeff., 
Optical Energy, 
Wavelength, 
Refractive 
Extinction 
a = 
Λττκ/λ 
Αω(βΥ) 
λ(μπι) 
Index,« 
Coeff., κ 
(104cm 
') 
References* 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
0.5166 
4.205 
0.371 
0.4959 
4.333 
0.441 
0.4769 
4.492 
0.539 
9.025 
11.174 
14.204 
•References are indicated on the first row for items in rows that follow. 
"E. D. Palik, "Gallium arsenide (GaAs)," pp. 429-443 in E. D. Palik, Ed„ Handbook of Optical Constants 
of Solids, Academic, New York, 1985. 
''A. N. Pikhtin and A. D. Yas'kov, "Dispersion of the refractive index of semiconductors with diamond and 
zinc-blende structures," Sov. Phys. Semicond. 12, 622 (1978). 
'Ή. C. Casey, D. D. Sell, and K. W. Wecht, "Concentration dependence of the absorption coefficient for n-
and p-type GaAs between 1.3 and 1.6 eV," J. Appl. Phys. 46, 250 (1975). 
dD. E. Aspnes and A. A. Studna, "Dielectric functions and optical parameters of Si, Ge, GaP, GaAs, GaSb, 
InP, InAs, and InSb from 1.5 to 6.0 eV," Phys. Rev. B 27, 985 (1983). 
The refractive index n, the extinction coefficient κ, and the absorption coefficient 
of GaAs as a function of photon energy are plotted in Fig. B.l. 
(a) 5.5 
5.0 
4.5 
n 
4.0 
3.5 
3.0 
: GaAs ί 
'■ 
: 
\ 
1 ^ Ι -
ο 0 < 
Γ 
—•-•yir-oon=__, 
; o o o ° ? 
J 
!..<*> 
1 
o 
j , 
1 Oo 
« < 
6 
o 
> ° 
i 
· 
• 
...._ 
i.Z _ 
. . . . 
i . . . 
. 
2.5 
2.0 
1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Photon energy (eV) 
0.0 
3.0 
(b) 
20 
'a 
16 
u 
15 12 
% 
* 
& 
Θ I 4 
. 
t i 
· 
t ·.· 
: GaAs j 
i 
T- ■■»—i—| 
- 
-4 
. . . . ! . . . / ' 
' " ■" ■» 
' 
■ 
1 " 1 - ■»—■·—■ 
1 
1 
W—V-
m • 
: · 
_l 
* 
* 
• 
• 
k 
: 
• 
- 
- 
- 
■ 
» 
- 
- 
- 
- 
i 
- 
- 
-
■ 
»
■
« 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Photon energy (eV) 
3.0 
Figure B.l 
(a) Real and imaginary parts, n and κ, of the complex refractive index, and (b) the absorption 
coefficient of GaAs versus photon energy. 

APPENDIX B 
Table B.2 
Optical Constants of InP 
Optical 
Energy, 
hw (eV) 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
1.25 
1.272 
1.301 
1.326 
1.333 
1.340 
1.345 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
2.0 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
Wavelength, 
λ (μπι) 
2.0664 
1.7712 
1.5498 
1.3776 
1.2399 
1.1271 
1.0332 
0.9919 
0.975 
0.953 
0.935 
0.930 
0.925 
0.9218 
0.8266 
0.7749 
0.7293 
0.6888 
0.6526 
0.6199 
0.5904 
0.5636 
0.5391 
0.5166 
0.4959 
Refractive 
Index, n 
3.129 
3.146 
3.167 
3.191 
3.22 
3.254 
3.297 
3.324 
3.346 
3.362 
3.385 
3.390 
3.396 
3.399 
3.456 
3.467 
3.476 
3.492 
3.517 
3.549 
3.585 
3.629 
3.682 
3.745 
3.818 
Extinction 
Coeff., K 
0.0000113 
0.000281 
0.0059 
0.0109 
0.0355 
0.0571 
0.203 
0.218 
0.242 
0.270 
0.293 
0.317 
0.347 
0.380 
0.416 
0.457 
0.511 
Absorption 
Coeff., 
a = Απκ/λ 
(104cnr') 
0.0001456 
0.003705 
0.07930 
0.1473 
0.4822 
0.7791 
3.086 
3.535 
4.170 
4.926 
5.739 
6.426 
7.386 
8.473 
9.697 
11.117 
12.948 
References* 
a, b 
a, c, d 
a, b, d 
a, c, d 
a, e 
•References are indicated on the first row for items in rows that follow. 
Ό . J. Glembocki and H. Piller, "Indium Phosphide (InP)," pp. 429-443 in E. D. Palik, Ed., Handbook of 
Optical Constants of Solids, Academic Press, New York, 1985. 
hA. N. Pikhtin and A. D. Yas'kov, "Dispersion of the refractive index of semiconductors with diamond and 
zinc-blende structures," Sov. Phys. Semicond. 12, 622 (1978). 
'G. D. Pettit and W. J. Turner, "Optical Constant," J. Appl. Phys. 36, 2081 (1965). 
dB. O. Seraphin and H. E. Bennett, "Refractive index of InP," pp. 499-543 in R. K. Willardson and A. C. 
Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, vol. 3, Academic Press, New York, 1967. 
"D. E. Aspnes and A. A. Studna, "Dielectric functions and optical parameters of Si, Ge, GaP, GaAs, GaSb, 
InP, InAs, and InSb from 1.5 to 6.0 eV," Phys. Rev. B 27, 985 (1983). 

800 
APPENDIX B 
(a) 4.4 
4.2 
4 . · 
3.8 
3.6 
3.4 
3.2 
ft 
3.0 
■ 
■ ■ ■ 
: InP 
l 
; 
; 
- „ j g p p O i 
r '■» ■ ■' » 
1. 
j 
.?...: 
1 
! 
° 
• 
: 
O 
_ 
' 
. · ! 
i.. _o 
i 
" 
Ä « 
V W 
■ 
J 
. . · ? 
k..«L_.* 
i 
, 
_ 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Photon energy (eV) 
(b) 
20 
ε 
16 
12 --
5 » 
t 
P 
Λ 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Photon energy (eV) 
1.4 
1.2 
1.· 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
3.0 
: 
InP 
j 
| 
· 
i 
ί 
1 · 
; 
i 
i 
* 
■ 
j 
· 
': 
· 
: 
\ 
· 
\ 
• 
: · 
: 
I
!
.
?
!
-
3.0 
Figure B.2 
(a) Real and imaginary parts, n and κ, of the complex refractive index, and (b) the absorption 
coefficient of InP versus photon energy. 
The refractive index n, the extinction coefficient κ, and the absorption coefficient 
of InP as a function of photon energy are plotted in Fig. B.2. 

Appendix C 
Electronic Properties of Si, Ge, and a Few 
Binary, Ternary, and Quaternary Compounds 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
801 

00 
o 
to 
Table C.l Important Physical Properties" 
Physical Properties 
Band gap, Eg (eV) 
OK 
300K 
Dielectric constant, es (F/m) 
Effective mass (m*/mo) 
Electrons 
(Longitudinal m*e/mo) 
(Transverse m*/mn) 
Holes 
(Heavy, mj^/mo) 
(Light, m^/mo) 
Intrinsic carrier concentration 
«i (cm-3) at 300K 
Lattice constant (A) 
Minority carrier lifetime(s) 
at 300K 
Mobility (cm2 V"1 s"1) at 300K 
Electron 
Hole 
Si 
(Indirect) 
1.170 
1.124 
11.9βο 
0.9163 
0.1905 
0.537 
0.153 
1.02 x 1010 
5.43102 
2.5 x 10"3 
1450 
370 
Ge 
(Indirect) 
0.744 
0.664 
16.28ο 
1.59 
0.0823 
0.284 
0.043 
2.33 x 1013 
5.6579 
10~3 
3900 
1800 
GaAs 
(Direct) 
1.519 
1.424 
13.1e0 
0.0665 
0.5 
0.087 
2.1 x 106 
5.6533 
~10" 8 
9200 
400 
InAs 
(Direct) 
0.42 
0.354 
15.15e0 
0.023 
0.4 
0.026 
1.3 x 1015 
6.0584 
2 x 104 to 
3.3 x 104 
100 - 450 
InP 
(Direct) 
1.424 
1.344 
12.56e0 
0.077 
0.6 
0.12 
1.2 x 108 
5.8688 
5370 
150 
GaP 
(Indirect) 
2.350 
2.272 
ΙΙ.ΙΙεο 
0.254 
4.8 
0.67 
0.17 
5.4505 
160 
135 
Ό . Madelung, Ed., Semiconductors, Group TV Elements and HI-V Compounds, in R. Poerschke, Ed., Data in Science and Technology, Springer, Berlin, 1991. 
'S. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 1982. 

APPENDIX C 
803 
Table C.2 
Important Band Structure Parameters for GaAs, 
AlAs, InAs, InP, and GaP"' 
Materials 
GaAs 
AlAs 
InAs 
InP 
GaP 
Parameters 
a 0(Ä) 
Eg (eV) 
OK 
300K 
A(eV) 
^v,av V^* ) 
Optical matrix 
Parameter Ep (eV) 
Deformation Potentials (e 
ac (eV) 
av (eV) 
a = ac - av (eV) 
MeV) 
d(eV) 
C„ (10 ndyne/cm 2) 
0,2(10''dyne/cm 2) 
C44(10 ndyne/cm 2) 
Effective Masses 
m*/mo 
mlJm 
mhh,z/'«o = 1/(Τι - 2 Τ 2 ) 
mkz/mo = VOi +2γ2) 
Τι 
Ύ2 
73 
'Indirect band gap, Ee(X) value. 
"C. G. Van de Walle, "Band lineups and deformation potentials in the model-solid theory," Phys. Rev. B 
39, 1871-1883(1989). 
*P. Lawaetz, "Valence-band parameters in cubic semiconductors," Phys. Rev. B 4, 3460-3467 (1971). 
'S. Adachi, "GaAs, AlAs, and Ga^AI^As: material parameters for use in research and device appli-
cations," J. Appl. Phys. 58, R1-R28 (1985). 
dO. Madelung, Ed., Semiconductors, Group TV Elements and ///-V Compounds, in R. Poerschke, Ed. in 
Chief, Data in Science and Technology, Springer, Berlin, 1991. 
eK. H. Hellwege, Ed., Landolt-Börnstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and 
Technology, New Series, Group III 17a, Springer, Berlin, 1982; Groups III-V 22a, Springer, Berlin, 1986. 
fL. G. Shantharama, A. R. Adams, C. N. Ahmad, and R. J. Nicholas, "The k · p interaction in InP and GaAs 
from the band-gap dependence of the effective mass," J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 17,4429-4442(1984). 
5.6533 
1.519 
1.424 
0.34 
- 6 . 9 2 
25.7 
(25.0)f 
-7.17 
1.16 
- 8 . 3 3 
- 1 . 7 
- 4 . 5 5 
11.879 
5.376 
5.94 
0.067 
0.50 
0.087 
0.333 
0.094 
6.8 (6.85) 
1.9(2.1) 
2.73 (2.9) 
5.6600 
3.13 
2.229* 
3.03 
2.168** 
0.28 
- 7 . 4 9 
21.1 
- 5 . 6 4 
2.47 
- 8 . 1 1 
- 1 . 5 
- 3 . 4 
12.5 
5.34 
5.42 
0.15 
0.79 
0.15 
0.478 
0.208 
3.45 
0.68 
1.29 
6.0584 
0.42 
0.354 
0.38 
-6.67 
22.2 
- 5 . 0 8 
1.00 
- 6 . 0 8 
- 1 . 8 
- 3 . 6 
8.329 
4.526 
3.96 
0.023 
0.40 
0.026 
0.263 
0.027 
20.4 
8.3 
9.1 
5.8688 
1.424 
1.344 
0.11 
- 7 . 0 4 
20.7 
(16.7)7 
- 5 . 0 4 
1.27 
- 6 . 3 1 
- 1 . 7 
- 5 . 6 
10.11 
5.61 
4.56 
0.077 
0.60 
0.12 
0.606 
0.121 
4.95 
1.65 
2.35 
5.4505 
2.90 
2.35* 
2.78 
2.27" 
0.08 
- 7 . 4 0 
22.2 
- 7 . 1 4 
1.70 
- 8 . 8 3 
- 1 . 8 
- 4 . 5 
14.05 
6.203 
7.033 
0.25 
0.67 
0.17 
0.326 
0.199 
4.05 
0.49 
1.25 

804 
APPENDIX C 
Table C.3 
Important Band Structure Parameters for AI^Gai^As, Ini^Ga*As, 
AlxIni χΑβ, GaxIni-xAs^Pi-y and Ini j^Al^Ga,, As Compounds" _ / 
General Interpolation Formula for Ternary Compound Parameters PCIiLJÜ! _XV) 
P(A*B i _,C) = JCP(AC) + (1 - *)P(BC) 
Ref. 
Al^Ga, _^As 
Eg(T) - 1.424 + 1.247* (eV) 
at 300K 
for * < 0.4 
a 
1.519+1.447*-0.15*2 (eV) at OK 
for x < 0.4 
b 
m*Jmo = 0.067 + 0.083* 
a 
mhh/mo = 0-50 + 0.29* (denisty of states mass) 
Interpol. 
m*jm0 = 0.087 + 0.063* 
/ 
m*Jm 
= 0.15 + 0.09* 
a 
γ,(*) = *y,(AlAs) + (1 — *)y,(GaAs) (for calculating transport masses) 
Interpol. 
Ini-jGajAs 
£g(H = 0.36 + 0.505* + 0.555*2 (eV) at 300K 
c 
0.324 + 0.7* + 0.4*2 (eV) 
at 300K 
a 
0.422 + 0.7* + 0.4*2 (eV) 
at 2K 
m*e/m0 = 0.025(1 - *) + 0.071* - 0.0163*(1 - x) 
or 
l/m*(*) = */m*(GaAs) + (1 - *)/m*(InAs) 
Ino.53Gao.47AS 
Eg(T) = 0.813 (eV) at 2K 
0.75 (eV) 
at 300K 
m* /mo = 0.041 
mlJm 
= 0.465 
//[001] 
0.56 
//[HO] 
m^/mo = 0.0503 
AUni-^As 
Eg(T) = 0.36 + 2.35* + 0.24*2 (eV) 
0.357 + 2.29* (eV) 
0.447 + 2.22* (eV) 
Alo.4sIno.52As 
Eg(T) = 1.508 (eV) at 4K 
1.450 (eV) 
at 300K 
m*Jm0 = 0.075 
mhh/mo = °· 4 1 
m^/m® = 0.096 
at 300K 
at 300K 
at4K 
for 0.44 < * < 0.54 
for 0.44 < * < 0.54 
a 
d 
(Continued) 

APPENDIX C 
Table C.3 
Continued 
General Interpolation Formula for Quaternary Compound Parameters ΡίΊΙΓ,ΠΙ, -^V^ V] _y): 
P(A,B,-jCßi- y) = xy P(AC) + (1 -x)(l 
-y) P(BD) + (1 -x)y P(BC) + *(1 -y) 
P(AD) 
Ref. 
GaJni-^As^Pi-^ 
Eg{x, y) = 1.35 + 0.668* - 1.068? + 0.758*2 + 0 . 0 7 8 / 
- 0.069xy - 0322x2y 
+ 0.03xy2 (eV) 
at 300K 
"' 
8 
ηζ(χ, y)/m0 = 0.08 - 0.116y + 0.026* - 0.059xy + (0.064 - 
0.02y)x2 
+ (0.06 + 0.032*)/ 
a(x, y) = 5.8688 - 0.4176* + 0.1896y + 0.0125*y (A) 
Lattice-matched to InP: 
* = 0.1894/(0.4184-0.013>>) 
a, g 
Eg(y) = 1.35 - 0.775>> + 0 . 1 4 9 / (eV) 
at 298K 
1.425 - 0.7668y + 0.149/ (eV) 
at 4.2K 
m*/mo = 0.080-0.039}' 
e 
mhh/mU = ° - 4 6 
m^/mo 
= 0.12 - 0.099>> + 0.030/ 
m*m/mo = 0.21 - O.Oly - 0 . 0 5 / 
General Interpolation Formula for Quaternary Compound Parameters Ρ(ΠΙ| —^—yllLcIII^ V) 
P(A, _,_ v B x C p ) = (1 - x - y) P(AD) + x P(BD) + y P(CD) + x(l - y) P(AD) 
Ref. 
In,_x_yAlxGavAs 
Eg(x, y) = 0.36 + 2.093* + 0.629>> + 0.577*2 + 0.436/ 
+ 1.013*y - 2.0*y(l - x - y) (eV) 
at 300K 
°' 
g 
Latticed-matched to InP: 
(In0.52Alo.48)z(ino.53Gao.47)i-zAs 
x = 0.48z 
0.983* + y = 0.468 
Eg(z) = 0.76 + 0.49z + 0.20z2 (eV) 
at 300K 
m*/m0 = 0.0427+0.0328z 
"K. H. Hellwege, Ed., Landolt-Börnstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and 
Technology, New Series, Group III 17a, Springer, Berlin, 1982; Groups III-V 22a, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986. 
*M. El Allai, C. B. Sorensen, E. Veje, and P. Tidemand-Petersson, "Experimental determination of the 
GaAs and Gai^Al^As band-gap energy dependence on temperature and aluminum mole fraction in 
the direct band-gap region," Phys. Rev. B 48, 4398-4404 (1993). 
'S. Adachi, "Material parameters of In,Ga, _xAsvP, „■>, and related binaries," J. Appl. Phys. 53, 8775-8792 
(1982). 
rfW. Stolz, J. C. Maan, M. Altarelli, L. Tapfer, and K. Ploog, "Absorption spectroscopy on Gao.47lno.53As/ 
M0 48ln0.52As multi-quantum-well hetero-structures. II. Subband structure," Phys. Rev. B 36, 4310-
4315 (1987). 
"S. Adachi, Physical Properties of 111-V Semiconductor Compounds, Wiley, New York, 1992. 
4j. C. Casey, Jr., and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers Part A: Fundamental Principles, Academic 
Press, Orlando, 1978. 
"O. Madelung, Semiconductors-Group TV Elements and Ill-V Compounds, in Data in Science and 
Technology, R. Poerschke, Editor in Chief, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. 


Appendix D 
Parameters for InN, GaN, A1N, and Their 
Ternary Compounds 
Table D.l 
Recommended Band Structure Parameters for Wurtzite Nitride Binaries" 
Parameters 
ö ( Ä ) a t r = 3 0 0 K 
c ( Ä ) a t r = 3 0 0 K 
£ g ( e V ) a t 7 = 0 K 
a t 7 = 3 0 0 K 
a (meV/K) 
0 ( K ) 
Δ„ (eV) 
Aso (eV) 
m^/m0 
m^/nto 
A, 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
A6 
ΑΊ (eV Ä) 
ax (eV) 
«2 (eV) 
Di (eV) 
D2 (eV) 
O3 (eV) 
D 4 (eV) 
O5 (eV) 
D6 (eV) 
C„(GPa) 
C12 (GPa) 
C,3 (GPa) 
GaN 
3.189 
5.185 
3.510 
3.44 
0.909 
830 
0.010 
0.017 
0.20 
0.20 
-7.21 
- 0 . 4 4 
6.68 
- 3 . 4 6 
- 3 . 4 0 
- 4 . 9 0 
0.0937 
- 4 . 9 
- 1 1 . 3 
- 3 . 7 
4.5 
8.2 
- 4 . 1 
- 4 . 0 
- 5 . 5 
390 
145 
106 
A1N 
3.112 
4.982 
6.25 
6.16 
1.799 
1462 
-0.169 
0.019 
0.32 
0.30 
- 3 . 8 6 
- 0 . 2 5 
3.58 
- 1 . 3 2 
-1.47 
- 1 . 6 4 
0 
- 3 . 4 
- 1 1 . 8 
-17.1 
7.9 
8.8 
- 3 . 9 
- 3 . 4 
- 3 . 4 
396 
137 
108 
InN 
3.545 
5.703 
0.69* 
0.64 
0.41* 
454* 
0.040 
0.005 
0.07 
0.07 
-8.21 
- 0 . 6 8 
7.57 
- 5 . 2 3 
-5.11 
- 5 . 9 6 
0 
- 3 . 5 
- 3 . 5 
- 3 . 7 
4.5 
8.2 
- 4 . 1 
- 4 . 0 
- 5 . 5 
223 
115 
92 
(Continued) 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By Shun Lien Chuang 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
807 

808 
APPENDIX D 
Table D.l 
Continued 
Parameters 
GaN 
A1N 
InN 
C33 (GPa) 
398 
373 
224 
C44(GPa) 
105 
116 
48 
i/, 3(pm/V) 
- 1 . 6 
- 2 . 1 
- 3 . 5 
i/ 3 3(pm/V) 
3.1 
5.4 
7.6 
i/, 5(pm/V) 
3.1 
3.6 
5.5 
P s p(C/m 2) 
-0.034 
-0.090 
-0.042 
Note:E%(T) = 
Eg(0)-f^ß 
Source: This table (except for InN bandgap parameters, as noted from Ref. b) is reproduced with per-
mission from 
"I. Vurgaftman and J. R. Meyer, "Band parameters for nitrogen-containing semiconductors," J. Appl. Phys. 
94, 3675-3696 (2003). (© 2003 American Institute of Physics.) 
hi. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, W. Shan, K. M. Yu, J. W. Ager III, S. X. Li, E. E. Haller, H. Lu, and W. J. Schaff, 
'Temperature dependence of the fundamental band gap of InP," J. Appl. Phys. 94, 4457-4460 (2003). 
Table D.2 
Band Gap of I n ^ G a ^ N , Al^Ga^^N, and ΑΙ^Ιη,.^Ν 
General Interpolation Formula for Ternary Compound Parameters P: 
Ρ(Α,Β, 
XC) = xP(AC) + (1 - JC)P(BC) 
Except Band-Gap Energy: 
P(A^B i -XC) = xP(AC) + (1 - x)P(BC) - bx( 1 - x) 
In^Ga, -XN 
Eg(x) = x£g(InN) + (1 -x)£g(GaN) - 1.4x(l - x) (eV) 
Psp(;t) = [-0.042* - 0.034(1 -x) 
+ 0.03741 - x)] C/m 2 
P^oa, ,N/I„NW = [-0.113(1 -x) 
- 0.0276x(l - x ) ] C / m 2 
P^Ga, ,Ν/CHNW = C°- 1 4 8* - 0.0424x(l - x)] C/m 2 
P^Ga, ,N/AIN<*) = [0.182JC - 0.026(1 - x) - 0.0456x(l - x ) ] C / m 2 
£g(x) = x£g(AIN) + (l-jc)£g(GaN) - 0.7x(l - x)(eV) 
PSP(x) = [-0.090X - 0.034(1 - x) + 0.021x(l - x)] C/m 2 
ΡΑΙΟ 3, ,N/taN = [ - ° · 2 8 * - 0.113(1 - x) + 0.42x(l - x)] C/m 2 
PAlaa, ,N/GaN = [~0.0525x + 0.0282x(l - x ) ] C / m 2 
PAlGa, ,N/AIN = [0-026(1 - x) - 0.0248x(l - x ) ] C / m 2 
(Continued) 

APPENDIX D 
Table D.2 
Continued 
Α1χΙηι_,Ν 
E g « = x£g(AIN) + (1 -^EgCInN) - 2.541 - x) (eV) 
PSP(x) = [-0.090X - 0.042(1 - x) + 0.070x(l - x)] C/m 2 
PAII„, , N / W W = [-0.28*+ 0.104*0 - * ) ] C / m 2 
ΡΑΙΙΠ, ,Ν/GaNW = [^0.0525* + 0.148(1 -x) 
+ 0.0938*(1 - x)] C/m 2 
ΡΑΙΙΠ, ,N/AIN = [0-182(1 - x ) + 0.092*0 - * ) ] C / m 2 
Sources: I. Vurgaftman and J. R. Meyer, "Band parameters for nitrogen-
containing semiconductors," J. Appl. Phys. 94, 3675-3696 (2003). O. Ambacher, 
J. Majewski, C. Miskys, A. Link, M. Hermann, M. Eickhoff, M. Stutzmann, 
F. Bernardini, V. Fiorentini, V. Tilak, B. Schaff, and L. F. Eastman, "Pyroelectric 
properties of Al(In)GaN/GaN hetero- and quantum well structures," J. Phys. 
Condens. Matter 14, 3399-3434 (2002). 


Index 
Absorbance, 386, 726 
Absorption, 351 
bulk, 362 
coefficient, 351 
due to interband free electron-hole 
transition, 672 
exciton effect, 683 
formula for an electron-hole pair, 671 
in the presence of a uniform electric field, 
673-677 
interband, 360, 365 
intersubband, 384 
of a photon, 4 
quantum dots, 378, 379 
quantum well, 367 
quantum wire, 383 
quantum-confined Stark effect, 683-691 
spectrum, 42 
Acoustooptic: 
effects, 568 
modulators, 639, 658, 661 
wave couplers, 661 
Add-drop filter, 314 
Air mass (AM), 762, 763 
Airy function, 674 
Alloy road, 5 
Ampere's law, 28, 31 
Anisotropie media, 227 
Attenuation: 
in optical fiber, 11 
Auger: 
generation-recombination processes, 44-46 
recombination, 44—46 
Avalanche photodiode (APD), 744 
multiple-quantum-well, 755 
separate absorption and multiplication 
(SAM), 754 
Axial approximation, 165 
Physics of Photonic Devices, Second Edition. By 
Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Band diagram, 1, 3 
for n-N junction, 70 
for n-P junction, 68 
for p-N junction, 54, 61 
for P-n-N junction, 71 
Band-edge: 
basis functions, 123, 124, 127 
discontinuity, 11,12 
energy for strained semiconductors, 138 
profile for quantum well, 161 
profile for strained quantum well, 169 
Band gap, 
versus lattice constant, 12 
Band lineups, 787 
Band structure, 113 
for strained semiconductors, 132-144 
Kane's model, 118 
Luttinger-Kohn's model, 126 
of bulk semiconductors, 123 
of quantum wells, 158-168 
of strained quantum wells, 168-172 
strain effects on, 132-144 
Basis functions: 
band-edge, 123, 124, 127 
coordinate transformation, 398 
Beat length, 306 
Bernard-Duraffourg inversion condition, 
364 
Binding energy: 
for 2D exciton solutions, 97 
for 3D exciton solutions, 96 
Bloch: 
function, 114 
theorem, 113 
Block diagonalization of the Luttinger-
Kohn Hamiltonian, 164 
Bohr radius, 96 
Boltzmann statistics, 33 
i Lien Chuang 
811 

812 
INDEX 
Bonding diagram, 1, 3 
Bound-state solutions: 
for hydrogen atom, 96, 97 
for square well, 80, 85 
Boundary conditions: 
for a perfect conductor, 30 
for Maxwell's equations, 29 
for ohmic contacts, 38 
for two dielectric media, 30 
Bragg acoustooptic wave coupler, 661 
Bragg diffraction, 660 
Brewster angle, 201 
Capture: 
cross section, 43 
electron, 43, 45 
hole, 43, 45 
Carrier transport equations, 32 
Cavity: 
effective volume, 521 
Fabry-Perot, 7, 423 
micro, 515 
micropillar, 518 
micropost, 518 
mode density, 522 
photonic crystal, 517 
quality factor (β), 522 
spontaneous emission, 529 
spontaneous emission coupling, 524, 5: 
stimulated emission, 529 
Center-of-mass coordinate, 95 
Characteristic concentration, 437, 438 
Characteristic temperature (Γ0), 418, 465 
Charge density, 28, 31 
surface, 29 
Charge neutrality condition, 414 
Chebyshev polynomial, 215 
Coherence time, 501 
Concentration: 
electron (n), 35, 414 
hole (p), 35, 414 
Conducting media, 193 
Conductivity, 193 
ac, 194 
dc, 195 
Constitutive relation, 28 
Contact potential: 
p-N junction, 56 
n-P junction, 68 
Continuity equation, 31 
current, 32 
for electrons, 31, 32 
for holes, 31, 32 
probability density, 79 
Continuum states, for hydrogen atom, 96 
Contrast ratio, 691 
Cotton -Mouton effect, 244 
Coulomb interaction, 671, 706 
Coupled-mode: 
applications of, 307-311 
equations, 302, 573 
improved theory, 333 
theory, 295, 300 
Coupled-mode theory: 
for Bragg diffraction, 661 
for DFB structure, 573 
for parallel waveguides, 295, 300, 333 
Coupler: 
Δ/3, 309 
directional, 307 
grating, 297, 334, 335 
prism, 296 
transverse, 295 
waveguide, 307 
Coupled optical waveguides, 300 
general solutions for, 305 
Coupled resonators, 295 
Coupled-ring optical waveguide 
(CROW), 316 
Coupling: 
asynchronous, 307 
co-directional, 302, 304 
coefficient, 302 
contra-directional, 302, 304 
critical, 313 
in-plane, 304 
over-, 314 
out-of-phase, 304 
under-, 313 
synchronous, 306, 307 
Coupling coefficient, 302 
gain-coupled DFB, 
index-grating DFB, 326 
parallel waveguides, 332 
Critical angle, 199,271,419 
Current density, 28, 65 
conduction, 30 
displacement, 27, 30 

INDEX 
813 
electron, 31, 63-67 
hole, 31, 63-67 
injection, 414, 606, 607 
surface, 29 
Cutoff condition, 261, 270 
Cutoff frequency, 261, 270 
Cyclotron frequency, 240 
Damping factor, 608, 612-614 
Dark current, 737, 761 
Defect, 43 
density, 43 
recombination at, 43 
Deformation potential, 135, 136 
conduction band, 135 
hydrostatic, 139 
shear, 139 
valence band, 135 
Δ/3-phase-reversal directional coupler, 658 
Dense-wavelength division multiplexing 
(DWDM), 693 
Density of states, 33, 34, 458, 671 
conduction band, 34, 35 
for photons, 353 
joint, 363, 366 
one-dimensional, 84 
three-dimensional, 34, 35 
two-dimensional quantum well, 82-84 
valence band, 
Depletion: 
approximation, 53-59, 58, 59-67, 734, 
735,740,741,754,765 
width, 56, 58, 60, 68 
Detectivity, 733, 740 
background limited infrared 
photodetector (BLIP), 740 
Dielectric waveguides: 
rectangular, 273 
slab, 257, 268 
Diffraction: 
Bragg, 660 
Raman-Nath, 659 
Diffusion: 
coefficient, 32 
length, 52 
Dipole approximation, 351 
Dipole moment, 351 
intersubband, 384 
optical, 351 
Dispersion: 
diagram for periodic media, 210-213 
energy, 81 
for coupled modes, 304 
for double-bus periodic ring structure, 
319 
for DFB structure, 328-329 
for waveguide, 262, 263, 270 
optical fiber, 10, 11 
subband, 162, 163, 168, 171 
Displacement: 
current density, 27 
vector, 27, 191 
Distributed Bragg reflector (DBR), 
213, 500 
reflection coefficient, 216 
reflection coefficient at resonance 
wavelength, 219 
Distributed feedback (DFB): 
coupled-mode equations, 325, 488 
matrix formulation, 488 
structures, 322 
reflection and transmission, 329, 490 
Distributed feedback (DFB) 
lasers, 487 
amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) 
spectrum, 496 
gain-coupled, 497 
gain-grating, 497 
index-grating, 488, 493 
lasing condition, 491, 492 
phase-shifted, 498 
Drude model, 194 
Duality principle, 183 
Dyadic Green's function, 249 
Effective index, 263 
method, 279 
Effective mass, 
for a single band, 116, 117, 130 
parallel and perpendicular, 142 
reduced, 95 
theory for a single band, 130 
theory for degenerate bands, 131 
Effective mass equation: 
electron-hole with exciton effect, 709 
in the difference coordinate, 671 
two-particle, 705 
Effective well width, 88, 110 

814 
Einstein's A and B coefficients, 354 
Einstein relation, 32 
Elastic stiffness constants, 137, 554 
Electroabsorption modulators, 669 
Electron-hole pair, 670 
absorption, 670 
Electronic properties: 
of binary, ternary, and quaternary 
compounds, 801 -809 
of Si, Ge, 802 
Electrooptic: 
coefficients, 640, 642 
effects, 639, 670 
linear effect, 640 
modulators, 639 
quadratic effect, 640 
Electrostatic potential, 30 
Emission: 
amplified spontaneous, 7, 422 
electron, 43, 45 
hole, 43, 45 
spontaneous, 6, 41, 354-358 
stimulated, 6, 47, 354-358 
EML (integrated electroabsorption 
modulator-laser), 670, 693 
Engineering notation, 641 
Equivalent source, 251 
Exciton, 677 
binding energy, 678-683, 684-691 
bound and continuum states, 
677-697 
effect, 671 
heavy-hole and light-hole, 682, 683, 
688-691 
three-dimensional, 677-683 
two-dimensional, 677-683 
Extraordinary wave, 230-235 
Fabry-Perot: 
cavity, 7, 423 
interface, 209 
mode, 284 
resonance condition, 6, 7 
resonator, 6, 7 
spectrum, 7, 284 
Faraday rotation, 244 
Faraday's law, 28 
Far-field: 
approximation, 250 
pattern, 253, 575 
INDEX 
Fermi-Dirac: 
distribution, 33, 34 
integral, 35, 36 
Fermi level: 
determination of, 36 
inversion formula for, 38 
quasi-, 33 
Fermi's golden rule, 107 
Field effect: 
in a quantum well, 13, 100-103 
in bulk semiconductors, 
Filter: 
optical add-drop, 314 
all-pass, 320 
Floquet modes, 211 
Franz-Keldysh effect, 669, 673 
Free-spectral range (FSR), 284 
Gain: 
differential, 415 
differential modal, 467 
in a quantum-well laser, 432-446 
interband, 365 
linear, 605 
measurement of, 422-427 
modal, 442, 443, 455-457 
net modal, 421, 423, 424 
nonlinear, 611 
peak, 439, 440 
saturation, 611 
threshold, 7 
Gain-coupled DFB laser, 497 
Gain-guided semiconductor 
lasers, 428 
Gain spectrum: 
bulk semiconductor, 363 
quantum dot, 379 
quantum well, 365-371, 436, 438 
quantum wire, 383 
relation to spontaneous emission 
spectrum, 358 
with valence-band mixing, 391 
Gallium-nitride (GaN), 548 
band gap, 553 
band structure, 550-552 
blue-green lasers, 548, 563 
crystal structure, 549, 559 
exciton, 553 
LEDs, 548, 563 
photoluminescence spectrum, 553 

INDEX 
Gauge: 
Coulomb, 248 
Lorentz, 248 
transformation, 246 
Gauss's law, 28 
Generation: 
carrier, 40, 51 
impact ionization, 47 
in semiconductors, 40-53 
nonradiative, 42 
radiative, 40 
rate, 40 
Generation rate: 
optical, 726, 740, 766 
thermal, 40, 46 
Goos-Hänchen phase shift, 199, 201, 
271,272 
Grating: 
coupler, 297, 334 
gain, 497 
index, 325 
Guidance condition, 260, 267, 272 
Gyrotropic media, 239 
Hakki-Paoli method, 424 
Hamiltonian: 
electron-photon interaction, 348 
Luttinger-Kohn, 128, 129, 164 
Pikus-Bir, 133-136 
Strained wurtzite crystal, 578 
Harmonic oscillator, 77 
Heaviside step function, 83, 366 
Hermite-Gaussian functions, 91 
Hermite polynomials, 92 
Hermitian adjoint, 349 
Heterojunction, 9, 787 
band lineups, 787 
double, 10,412 
energy band diagram, 54, 61, 68, 70, 71 
n-N, 69-71 
n-P, 67-69 
p-N, 53-67 
P-n-N, 70, 71 
semiconductor laser, 10 
Heterostructure: 
separate confinement (SCH), 14 
Homogenous media, 186 
Hydrogen atom, 77 
2D solution, 97 
3D solution, 95 
815 
Bohr radius, 96 
bound state solution, 96 
continuum state solutions, 96 
Rydberg energy for, 96 
Impact Ionization, 47 
coefficients, 48 
Impedance: 
for plane wave, 201, 202 
characteristic, 188 
Imref function, 33 
Index ellipsoid, 235 
Index-guided semiconductors, 431 
Integrated electroabsorption 
modulator-laser (EML), 
670, 693 
Interband: 
absorption, 360, 365 
electroabsorption modulator, 691 
gain in bulk, 363 
Interdiffusion, quantum well, 700 
Interferometric waveguide 
modulator, 654 
Intersubband: 
absorption, 384, 756 
avalanche photomultiplier, 756 
dipole moment, 384 
quantum-cascade lasers, 390 
quantum-well photodetectors, 756 
Intrinsic carrier concentration, 33 
Intrinsic energy level, 33, 37 
Ionization coefficient: 
electron, 48, 744 
hole, 48, 744 
Isolator: 
optical, 245 
Isotropie media, 186 
Junction heating, 511 
Junctions: 
capacitance, 737 
metal-semiconductor, 71 
n-N, 69-71 
n-P, 67-69 
p-N, 53-67 
P-n-N, 70, 71 
/f factor, 612, 619 
k-selection rule, 362 
in quantum well, 365 

816 
INDEX 
k surfaces: 
extraordinary wave, 233 
ordinary wave, 233 
Kane's model, 118-125 
Kane's parameter P, 121, 125 
Kerr effect, 640 
k-p method, 113 
for degenerate bands, 126-130 
for single band, 116 
for two bands, 117 
with the spin-orbit interaction, 118 
Kramers-Kronig relations, 220-223 
Kronig-Penney model, 152 
Laser arrays, coupled, 571 
Laser oscillation conditions, 491 -493 
Lattice constant: 
of ternary compound, 10 
Leakage current, 418 
Lifetime: 
carrier, 414 
carrier recombination, 415, 725-727 
photon, 416 
Light-emitting diode, 5 
Light output power, 416 
LiNb03: 
X-cut, 650 
Z-cut, 651 
Linewidth: 
broadening, 352 
enhancement factor, 468, 470, 622, 627 
Schawlow-Townes limit, 627 
spectral, 622-627 
Lorentz force equation, 401 
Lorentz dipole model, 190 
Lorentzian function, 351, 352 
Lossy media, 189-196 
conducting media, 193 
doped semiconductors, 195 
Drude model, 194 
Lorentz dipole model, 190 
Löwdin's method, 107 
Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian, 128, 129 
Luttinger-Kohn model, 126 
Luttinger parameters (γ1; y2, y^), 129 
Mach-Zehnder interferometric waveguide 
modulator, 654 
Magnetooptic effects, 239 
Marcatili's method, 273 
Matrix elements, 105, 351, 357, 372 
Matrix optics, 202 
Matrix representation: 
for cross-product, 228, 229 
Maxwell's equations, 27, 28, 182 
in frequency domain, 182 
general solution to, 246-250 
Metal-semiconductor junction, 71 
Metallic slab: 
surface plasmon modes, 287-290 
Microcavity lasers, 515, 516 
Microdisk lasers, 516 
Micropillar, 518 
Micropost, 518 
Mid-IR quantum-cascade lasers, 532 
Miniband, 157, 158 
Mobility, 32 
Model-solid theory, 787 
Modes: 
EHpq, 273, 276 
HEpq, 273, 274 
transverse electric (TE), 257-268 
transverse magnetic (TM), 267, 268, 271, 
286, 287 
Modulation: 
bandwidth, 3 dB, 609 
direct, 605 
electrical, 618 
external, 695 
of semiconductor lasers, 605 
optical, 617 
rate equation, 527, 536, 605, 616 
response, 472 
Modulation-doped quantum well, 
146-151 
Modulation (frequency) response, 609, 613, 
617,618 
Modulators, 639 
acoustooptic, 639, 658, 661 
amplitude, 643, 646 
directional coupler, 657 
electroabsorption, 669, 691 
electrooptic, 639 
longitudinal amplitude, 643 
phase, 648 
quantum-well, 691-693 
transverse amplitude, 646 
waveguide, 654 

INDEX 
Momentum (or optical) matrix elements, 
351,398 
of a bulk semiconductor, 361, 372 
of quantum wells, 372-375 
with valence-band mixing, 393-396 
Momentum-space representation, 80 
Multiplication factor, 745, 746, 748-752, 
753 
Noise, 729 
equivalent power (NEP), 732 
excess, 752 
generation-recombination, 731 
in photoconductors, 729 
multiplication (or gain), 753 
shot, 730, 753 
thermal (Johnson or Nyquist), 
732, 753 
Nonpolar devices, planes, 568-571 
Open circuit voltage, 764 
Operator, 79 
annihilation, 92 
creation, 92 
Optical axis, 228 
Optical confinement factor, 266-268, 283, 
527, 606 
for index-guided laser, 431 
for quantum wells, 442, 443 
for VCSEL, 507 
Optical constants of GaAs and InP, 
797-800 
Optical matrix element, 360, 803 
for excitonic transitions, 711 
for two-particle transition picture, 708 
interband in bulk, 361, 362 
interband in quantum well, 365 
Optical processes in semiconductors, 347 
Optical transitions using Fermi's golden 
rule, 347 
Ordinary wave, 230-235 
Periodic table, 2 
Permeability tensor, 28 
Permittivity, 189 
conducting media, 193, 194 
doped semiconductors, 195 
Drude model, 194, 195 
for uniaxial media, 
817 
Lorentz dipole model, 190 
tensor, 28 
Perturbation method, 97, 687 
Löwdin's, 107 
Perturbation theory: 
time-dependent, 104 
time-independent, 97 
Phase-matching conduction, 198 
for grating coupler, 299 
Phase-matching diagram, 
for plane wave reflection and 
transmission, 197, 296, 
for grating coupler, 298, 299 
for DFB structure, 324 
Phase-shifted DFB laser, 498 
Phasor, 182 
Photoconductive gain, 50, 725 
in quantum wells, 757 
Photoconductivity, 49, 723 
Photoconductor, 723 
n-i-p-i superlattice, 733 
noises in, 729 
Photocurrent, 49 
for photoconductor, 725 
for photodiode, 737, 742 
for quantum well infrared 
photodetectors, 759 
response, 725 
Photodetectors, 723 
intersubband, 756 
quantum well infrared, 756 
Photodiodes: 
avalanche, 744 
p-i-n, 740 
p-n junction, 734 
Photon: 
flux, 50 
Photo-assisted tunneling, 673 
Photon lifetime, 416, 527, 537, 606, 
607, 617 
Photonic crystal lasers, 515 
Pikus-Bir Hamiltonian, 133-136 
with spin-orbit coupling, 142 
without spin-orbit coupling, 135-142 
Plane wave: 
reflection from a multilayered 
medium, 206 
reflection from a surface, 197 
solutions for Maxwell's equations, 186 

818 
INDEX 
Plasma, 189 
doped semiconductors, 195 
frequency, 191 
metal, 189 
resonance, 192 
susceptibility function, 191 -193 
Pockels effect, 640 
Poisson's equation, 30, 31, 147 
Poisson's ratio, 449 
Polar planes, devices, 568-571 
Polarization: 
density, 182, 191 
piezoelectric, 558-563, 568-571 
spontaneous, 559-563, 568-571 
Polarization of light: 
circular, 237 
linear, 236 
transverse electric (TE) plane wave, 197 
transverse magnetic (TM) plane 
wave, 200 
Polaroid, 238 
Potential: 
electrostatic, 30 
contact, 56, 58 
Poynting vector, 184 
Poynting's theorem, 183 
Probability current density, 79 
Propagation: 
constant, 187, 189, 192 
in gyrotropic media, 239 
in isotropic media, 186 
in lossy media, 189 
in periodic media, 210 
in uniaxial media, 227 
Propagation matrix: 
backward, 208 
in electromagnetics, 206 
forward, 145, 153, 208 
for a one-dimensional potential, 144 
for a periodic potential or superlattice, 
152-158 
Purcell factor, 519, 523 
Quality (ß) factor, 522 
Quantum-cascade (QC) lasers, 390, 530 
bound-to-bound transition, 533 
bound-to-continuum transition, 534 
interminibands transition, 534 
L-I curve, 541 
mid-IR, 532 
modes, 538 
optical gain, 537 
optical waveguide, 538 
performance, 541 
rate equations, 535 
terahertz (THz), 542 
threshold current density, 538 
type-I, 532 
type-II, 547 
Quantum confined Stark effects 
(QCSE), 669 
Quantum dot, 376 
absorption, 377-381 
density of states, 458 
gain, 377-381,462 
growth, 459, 460 
lasers, 457 
p-type doping, 464 
tunneling injection, 468 
Quantum efficiency: 
collection (intrinsic), 413, 417 
differential, 417 
external, 401 
for photoconductor, 726 
for p-i-n photodiode, 741, 743 
intrinsic, 46, 47, 50, 726, 766 
Quantum mechanics, 77 
Schrödinger equation, 83 
square well, 77, 80 
Quantum well, 80-82, 85-90 
density of states for, 82-84 
even solutions, 85 
finite barrier model, 85 
infinite barrier model, 80 
infrared photodetector (QWTP), 756 
lasers, 432-457 
odd solutions, 86 
separate confinement heterostructure 
(SCH), 14 
strained, 168-172, 446-457 
Quantum wire, 381 
absorption, 383-384 
density of states, 84, 382, 458 
gain, 383-384 
joint density of states, 383 
laser, 376, 459 
Quarter-wave plate, 236 
Quasi-electrostatic fields, 30 

INDEX 
819 
Quasi-Fermi levels, 33, 357, 362, 367, 414, 
434, 436 
for p-N junction, 64 
Quarternary compounds, 805 
RoA product, 738 
Radiation, 249 
far-field pattern, 253 
Radiative current density, 398, 456 
Raman-Nath diffraction, 659 
Rate equations: 
for electrical and optical 
injections, 616 
for microcavity lasers, 527 
for quantum-cascade lasers, 535 
semiconductor lasers, 412, 605 
Ray optics approach, 271 
Reciprocity relations, 185 
Recombination, 40 
Auger, 40-46 
band-to-band, 40 
defects, at, 42 
Hall-Shockley-Read, 42 
nonradiative, 414 
radiative, 40, 414 
rate, 41, 414 
surface, 39, 44 
Reduced: 
mass, 190 
effective mass, 95, 374 
Reflection: 
coefficient for a dielectric slab, 209 
from a multilayered medium, 206 
from a surface, 197 
of a distributed feedback structure, 
total internal, 199 
Reflection coefficient: 
a dielectric slab, 209 
DBR at resonance, 219 
distributed-Bragg reflector, 216 
multilayered medium, 208 
plane wave, 198,201,202 
Reflectivity, 199 
Refractive index: 
complex, 189 
extraordinary, 235 
of MxGat-xAs, 
264, 265 
optical, 189 
ordinary, 235 
Relative intensity noise (RIN) spectrum, 
629-631 
Relaxation frequency, 609, 612 
maximum, 613 
Responsivity, 726, 739 
current, 726, 739 
Ring resonator, 311 
coupled-mode equations, 311 
optical add-drop filter, 314 
periodic, 318 
Rydberg energy, 96 
Scaling laws, for multiple quantum-well 
lasers, 442 
Schrödinger equation, 78 
for a periodic potential, 125 
for a uniform electric field, 673 
momentum-space representation, 80 
time-independent, 79 
Selected area growth (SAG), 696 
Self-consistent solution: 
for a modulation-doped quantum 
well, 146 
Self-electrooptical effect devices (SEEDs), 
702 
field-effect transistor (F-SEED), 704 
resistor (R-SEED), 702, 703 
symmetric (S-S), 702, 703 
Semiconductor electronics equations, 30 
Semiconductor lasers, 4 
distributed Bragg reflector (DBR), 
500-502 
distributed-feedback (DFB), 487 
double heterojunction, 10, 412 
gain-guided, 428 
index-guided, 431 
invention of, 4 
quantum-well, 432 
strained quantum-well, 446-456 
surface-emitting, 502 
Semiconductor optical amplifiers, 470 
Separate-confinement heterostructure 
(SCH) quantum-well lasers, 14 
Short circuit current, 764 
Shot noise, 730 
Signal-to-noise ratio, 732, 739, 753 
Snell's law, 198 
Small-signal ac analysis: 
for semiconductor lasers, 608 

820 
INDEX 
Small-signal modulation response: 
linear gain model, 609 
with nonlinear gain saturation, 613 
Solar cells, 761 
back-surface field, 768 
basic device parameters, 762 
fill factor, 764 
ideal conversion efficiency, 764 
multijunction, 771 
quantum-dot, 776 
quantum-well, 770 
spectral response, 765 
Solar radiation spectrum, 762, 763 
Sommerfeld enhancement factor, 96, 97 
Spectral density function, 729 
Spectral linewidth, 622-629 
Spin-orbital: 
interaction, 118 
split-off band, 124 
split-off band coupling, 142, 143, 170 
split-off energy, 121 
Spontaneous emission (SE), 6, 353, 416, 
419, 427, 462, 529, 606, 622 
amplified (ASE), 7, 419, 422, 469 
factor, 519-524, 527, 606 
measurement of, 419, 422 
rate, 41 
spectrum, 358, 359 
Square well potential, 77, 80, 85 
finite barrier model, 85 
infinite barrier model, 80 
Stationary state, 80 
Stimulated emissions, 6, 47, 353, 529 
recombination by, 47 
spectrum, 358, 359 
Stop bands: 
periodic media, 210-213 
distributed-Bragg reflections, 217 
Strain: 
biaxial, 136 
biaxial tension, 14, 137, 138, 141 
biaxially compressive, 14, 141 
compression (compressive), 14, 138, 141 
in-plane, 13 
tensile, tension, 14, 138, 141 
Strain effects: 
on band edge energies, 138, 139, 449 
on band structures, 132-144, 452 
on lasers, 447-449 
Strained quantum-dot lasers, 457-472 
Strained quantum-well lasers, 446-457 
Stranski and Krastanow (SK) growth, 459 
Stress, 137 
uniaxial, 137, 554 
biaxial, 554 
Superlattice, 152, 158 
Surface-emitting lasers (see Vertical 
cavity), 504-515 
Surface plasmon mode, 286, 287 
field profiles, 290 
guidance condition, 288, 289 
Surface plasmon waveguide, 285, 
538, 539 
Surface recombination, 768 
Susceptibility, 182 
Switch: 
waveguide, 307 
Switching diagram: 
for a Δ/3 coupler, 310 
for an optical waveguide switch, 308 
Terahertz (THz) quantum-cascade lasers, 
542 
Ternary compounds, 804 
interpolation formula, 804, 808 
Thermal equilibrium, 41 
Threshold: 
condition, 415 
current, 444 
current density (Jlh), 411, 441, 458, 465 
gain, 7, 399 
gain condition, 7 
Time-dependent perturbation theory, 104 
Time-harmonic fields, 181 
Time-independent perturbation theory, 97 
Total internal reflection, 199 
Transit time, 725 
Transition rate: 
due to electron-photon interaction, 349 
Transmission: 
coefficient for a dielectric slab, 209 
Transmissivity, 199 
Transparency: 
(carrier) density, 442, 447 
concentration, 414 
current density, 442, 455 
Transport effects: 
on quantum-well lasers, 614 

INDEX 
Tunneling: 
injection, 468 
photon-assisted, 673 
Uniaxial media, 227 
positive, negative, 228 
V number, 264, 280 
Vanational method, for exciton problem: 
for lossy waveguide, 281 
Variational principle, 712 
Velocity: 
group, 606 
phase, 234, 235 
Vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers, 502 
carrier injection, 508 
gain guidance, 508 
index guidance, 511 
junction heating, 511 
lasing condition, 504 
optical output, 512 
optical profile, 508 
oxide, 511 
phase condition, 505 
quantum efficiency, 512 
temperature dependence, 511 
threshold condition, 505 
Voigt configuration, 245 
821 
Waveguide: 
asymmetric dielectric slab, 268 
couplers, 295, 307 
lossy (gain), 281-285 
modulator, 654 
rectangular dielectric, 273 
surface plasmon, 285, 538, 539 
switch, 307 
symmetric dielectric slab, 257 
Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), 
10, 19 
dense (DWDM), 10, 19 
Wetting layer, 460 
Whispering gallery mode, 517 
Wurtzite crystal: 
band edge, 551 
band structure, 550 
Hamiltonian for, 578 
optical transition matrix element, 581 
piezoelectric polarization, 
558-563 
quantum well, 557 
spontaneous polarization, 
559-563 
strained, 554 
structure, 549, 559 
Zinc-blende structure, 1, 3 

