Review
The overﬁtted brain: Dreams evolved
to assist generalization
Erik Hoel1,*
1Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
*Correspondence: erik.hoel@tufts.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100244
SUMMARY
Understanding of the evolved biological function of sleep has advanced considerably in the past decade.
However, no equivalent understanding of dreams has emerged. Contemporary neuroscientiﬁc theories often
view dreams as epiphenomena, and many of the proposals for their biological function are contradicted by
the phenomenology of dreams themselves. Now, the recent advent of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
ﬁnally provided the novel conceptual framework within which to understand the evolved function of dreams.
Notably, all DNNs face the issue of overﬁtting as they learn, which is when performance on one dataset in-
creases but the network’s performance fails to generalize (often measured by the divergence of performance
on training versus testing datasets). This ubiquitous problem in DNNs is often solved by modelers via ‘‘noise
injections’’ in the form of noisy or corrupted inputs. The goal of this paper is to argue that the brain faces a
similar challenge of overﬁtting and that nightly dreams evolved to combat the brain’s overﬁtting during its
daily learning. That is, dreams are a biological mechanism for increasing generalizability via the creation of
corrupted sensory inputs from stochastic activity across the hierarchy of neural structures. Sleep loss, spe-
ciﬁcally dream loss, leads to an overﬁtted brain that can still memorize and learn but fails to generalize appro-
priately. Herein this ’’overﬁtted brain hypothesis’’ is explicitly developed and then compared and contrasted
with existing contemporary neuroscientiﬁc theories of dreams. Existing evidence for the hypothesis is sur-
veyed within both neuroscience and deep learning, and a set of testable predictions is put forward that
can be pursued both in vivo and in silico.
INTRODUCTION
During the Covid-19 pandemic of 2020, many of those in isola-
tion reported an increase in the vividness and frequency of their
dreams,1 even leading #pandemicdreams to trend on Twitter.
Yet dreaming is so little understood there can be only speculative
answers to the why behind this widespread change in dream
behavior. This is despite the fact that humans spend hours every
night dreaming and that dream deprivation is highly damaging to
animals2; indeed, dreaming is homeostatically regulated in that
there even appears to be a ’’dream drive.’’3 In addition, dreaming
is conserved across many species,4 indicating an essential
evolved purpose.5 Yet ﬁnding a biological function for dreams
themselves has evaded resolution. The ’’null theory’’ that dreams
are byproducts of other adaptions,6 or biological ’’spandrels,’’7
or sleep and dreams are adaptive only in that they prevent
THE BIGGER PICTURE
Dreaming remains a mystery to neuroscience. While various hypotheses of why
brains evolved nightly dreaming have been put forward, many of these are contradicted by the sparse, hallu-
cinatory, and narrative nature of dreams, a nature that seems to lack any particular function. Recently,
research on artiﬁcial neural networks has shown that during learning, such networks face a ubiquitous prob-
lem: that of overﬁtting to a particular dataset, which leads to failures in generalization and therefore perfor-
mance on novel datasets. Notably, the techniques that researchers employ to rescue overﬁtted artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks generally involve sampling from an out-of-distribution or randomized dataset. The overﬁtted
brain hypothesis is that the brains of organisms similarly face the challenge of ﬁtting too well to their daily
distribution of stimuli, causing overﬁtting and poor generalization. By hallucinating out-of-distribution sen-
sory stimulation every night, the brain is able to rescue the generalizability of its perceptual and cognitive abil-
ities and increase task performance.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021 ª 2021 The Author(s).
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

organisms from moving during periods that they are not adapted
to, such as ensuring that diurnal animals are inactive during
night,8,9 are still taken seriously.
It is notable that approximately 50% to 70% of the time sub-
jects report having a dream upon a sudden waking during sleep,
with more dreams being reported later on in the night.10,11 Re-
ports from those who keep regular dream journals, or who spend
time each morning recollecting dreams, indicate that preserving
a memory of dreams increases signiﬁcantly with practice.12 All
this hints that individuals may regularly underestimate how
much time they actually spending dreaming during sleep.
The phenomenology of dreams is different from that of waking
experience.13 However, few contemporary theories appropri-
ately account for the phenomenology of dreams, particularly
their sparse, hallucinatory, and narrative contents. What is the
purpose of this strange state? The fact that sleep overall has
some relationship to learning was known even by the Roman
orator Quintilian.14 Yet, as is discussed in detail in the next sec-
tion,
contemporary
neuroscientiﬁc
theories
which
relate
dreaming to memory storage, memory replay, or emotional pro-
cessing, still view dreams themselves as epiphenomena.
This lack of viable theories about why animals dream stands in
contrast with how much is known about sleep physiology and its
stages.15 As originally discovered by lesion studies and later
supported by genetic knockout studies, the sleep state is
brought about by a far-reaching set of subcortical neuromodula-
tory systems, with no one system being necessary, indicating
redundancy in how the waking state is sustained.16 In general,
this multifaceted arousal system is excitatory during wake in
that it has the greatest ﬁring, and becomes more quiescent to
bring about sleep, although this is not true for all such systems,
especially those that establish rapid eye movement (REM).
A classic signature of sleep are slow waves, which are waves
of activity that traverse the cortex, which can be identiﬁed when
the dominate frequency of electroencephalogram (EEG) is less
than 1 Hz. In this state, the cortex become bistable, oscillating
between periods of intense ﬁring and periods often referred to
as ‘‘down states’’ wherein neurons are silent. In general, it should
be noted that there is a spectrum wherein sometimes a brain re-
gion is experiencing slow wave sleep and this is not synchro-
nized with other regions.17 This is despite the fact that sleep itself
is traditionally broken down into non-REM (NREM) sleep and
REM sleep, with REM sleep being more associated with
dreaming than NREM sleep. Yet there is evidence that dreaming
occurs regularly throughout the night, across different sleep
stages,18 although it is rarest in the ‘‘deepest’’ stage of NREM,
stage 3, wherein surface EEG reﬂects low-frequency cortical
slow waves. Recent neuroimaging and sudden-waking experi-
ments have demonstrated that all sleep stages can have
dreams, which are the result of localized wake-like ﬁring.19 On
average, high-frequency EEG signals in posterior areas of the
brain were most correlated with reports on waking. Despite the
ubiquity of dreams, it is still the case that REM is most strongly
associated with dreaming, more than 80% to 90% of the time
in some awakening studies, although it should be noted again
that sleep involves a spectrum wherein it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd any
stage at any time of the night that does not contain any dreams
at all.20 Although early on in the night dreams can present them-
selves as more ‘‘thought-like’’ and simple, later on in the night,
particularly during REM, dreams can become incredibly com-
plex with a fully developed narrative structure.21 Therefore, while
the story of dreaming occurring solely during REM has been
complicated, it is true they are still associated.
As far as is currently known, dreaming of is a brain-wide state
where the brain is experiencing a single narrative or event, which
is supported by the activation of the default-mode network dur-
ing dreaming.22 Consider, for instance, the evidence from sud-
den-waking experiments that higher frequency activity in the
frontal lobe predicted emotional affect within the subject’s
dream.23 Or consider the evidence that during lucid dreaming,
activity is similar to waking movements in the sensorimotor
cortex.24
Despite the nuances and redundancies of the cortical systems
in play, it still makes sense to view the change from dreamless
sleep to dreaming as occurring via a brain-wide neuromodula-
tory system that regulates level of consciousness, such as by
the increase in ﬁring of acetylcholine-containing neurons during
REM. Neuromodulatory systems also create the conditions of
muscle atonia during dreaming, without which dreams can be
acted out by the body during sleep, a dangerous parasomnia
called REM sleep behavior disorder.25
What is the overall evolved purpose or function of sleep? The
evidence of distinct physiological states brought about by neuro-
modulation suggests answering this requires identifying multiple
functions, particularly for dreamless sleep versus dreaming.
Across the Tree of Life, sleep as a whole is highly conserved;
most mammals spend somewhere between 4 and 20 h
sleeping.26 There is even evidence that Caenorhabditis elegans
sleeps.27 In the past 2 decades there has been signiﬁcant prog-
ress when it comes to understanding the evolved function of
sleep as a whole, although this has not been true for dreams
themselves.
First, a novel discovery has led to a clear purpose for at least
one aspect of sleep. This was the discovery of the brain’s glym-
phatic system, showing that sleep involves the brain-wide ﬂush-
ing of metabolites with cerebral spinal ﬂuid.28 This led to the the-
ory that sleep, especially during slow wave activity, had the goal
of waste clearance and this is at least partly behind sleep’s
restorative aspect. Glymphatic activity in the form of this ﬂushing
is low in waking but high during both sleep and while under
certain types of anesthesia. In sleep and also under anesthesia,
the greatest amount of ﬂushing occurs during slow wave sleep
when low-frequency delta power dominates the EEG,29 indi-
cating that it may be anticorrelated with dreaming, although
this has not been explicitly established. Dreams may still occur
during these ﬂushing events; indeed, it is unknown if the function
of dreams might even change depending on sleep stages or
background neurophysiological conditions.
Another important theory of the purpose of sleep is the Synap-
tic Homeostasis Hypothesis (SHY).30 According to SHY, daily
learning leads to net synaptic potentiation across the brain,
which, if left unchecked, would lead to a saturation of synaptic
weight and a cessation of learning.31 SHY hypothesizes that
slow waves trigger a brain-wide down-scaling of synaptic
weights. This indiscriminate down-scaling ensures that the rela-
tive weights of synapses are kept proportional while removing
the risk of saturation. SHY has served as a model neuroscientiﬁc
theory in that it has generated a number of new empirical
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
Review

ﬁndings.32 At the same time, it has also triggered fecund debate
and investigation.33 Traditionally, SHY is more associated with
slow wave sleep than with the high frequencies that indicate
dreaming. It has also not been explored how SHY faces the
problem that a global down-scaling of synapses could easily
fail to keep the pattern of synaptic weights the same, since neu-
rons are nonlinear mechanisms. Even a net down-scaling of an
artiﬁcial neural network with rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activation
functions would likely affect its function if the scaling dropped
any weights below zero; in the case of sigmoid activation func-
tions, it would signiﬁcantly impact function, and in an un-
known way.
The overall evidence indicates that sleep can be broken into
two parts: during dreamless sleep metabolic clearance and
cellular it is likely that repair occurs, and some form of unknown
contribution to improvements in performance and learning on
tasks occurs during dreaming.34 Ultimately, this purpose of the
dreaming phase or aspect of sleep lacks hypotheses as explicit
and clear as those for slow wave sleep.35
In order to offer forward a distinct theory of the purpose of
dreams, this paper outlines the idea that the brains of animals
are constantly in danger of overﬁtting, which is the lack of gener-
alizability that occurs in a deep neural network when its learning
is based too much on one particular dataset, and that dreams
help mitigate this ubiquitous issue. This is the overﬁtted brian hy-
pothesis (OBH). The goal of this paper is to formally ﬁll-out the
OBH by investigating the evidence that the brain ﬁts to a dataset
composed of the statistically similar daily experiences of the or-
ganism, while nightly dreams improve the generality and robust-
ness of an animal’s representations, cognition, and perceptual
systems, by generating data far outside the organism’s daily
’’training set’’ in a warped or corrupted way.36 This idea is sup-
ported by the idea that stochasticity (such as corrupted or sparse
inputs) is critical in machine learning.37 As will be discussed, the
OBH ﬁts with known biological understanding and data,
matches better with dream phenomenology than most other the-
ories, draws various antecedents and similar approaches under
one speciﬁc roof, and additionally has roots in common prac-
tices in deep learning. It makes unique predictions that can be
tested both via computational modeling and also in vivo.
CONTEMPORARY THEORIES OF DREAMS
A hypothesis for the evolved purpose of sleep must outline a
clear and distinct function from other aspects of sleep. It must
also explain how dreams present themselves, that is, the phe-
nomenology of dream experience. Speciﬁcally, it must explain
why dream phenomenology is different from wake phenomenol-
ogy. Consider three phenomenological properties unique to
dreams. First, the sparseness of dreams in that they are generally
less vivid than waking life in that they contain less sensory and
conceptual information (i.e., less detail). This lack of detail in
dreams is universal, and examples include the blurring of text
causing an impossibility of reading, using phones, or calcula-
tions.38 Second, the hallucinatory quality of dreams in that they
are generally unusual in some way (i.e., not the simple repetition
of daily events or speciﬁc memories). This includes the fact that
in dreams, events and concepts often exist outside of normally
strict categories (a person becomes another person, a house a
spaceship, and so on). Third, the narrative property of dreams,
in that dreams in adult humans are generally sequences of
events ordered such that they form a narrative, albeit a fabulist
one. As we will see, the OBH posits it is not in spite of these prop-
erties that dreams serve their evolved purpose, but because
of them.
This section explores existent theories of dreams, the support-
ing evidence (or lack thereof) and how they fail to integrate well
with, or explain, dream phenomenology.
Dreams are for emotional regulation
The idea that dreams are important for emotional health is a
descendant of Freudian theories of psycholanalysis.39 While
Freud’s theories of dreams as expressions of taboo frustration
are discredited, there is still a historical association between
dreams as expressions of, or important for, emotional pro-
cessing.
The speciﬁc proposals for how dreams impact emotional
regulation involve hypotheses like that dreams are somehow
for fear extinction.40 Such hypotheses reason that dreams might
act somewhat like cognitive behavioral therapy treatment for
phobias, wherein they provide a safe space for ‘‘rehearsals’’ to-
ward fearful things in order to make them less frightful.41 Yet
there is no evidence that the fears of nightmares are the kind
of irrational fears faced by those with phobias, nor that fears to-
ward nightmarish events in general should be attenuated, as fear
is evolutionarily quite useful.
Another kind of theory is that dreams act much like an
‘‘emotional thermostat’’ in order to regulate emotions.42,43
From dream journals there is some evidence that more emotional
dreams predict better recovery from disorders like depression,44
although sample size for this sort of research is prohibitively
small throughout oneirology. From neuroimaging there is evi-
dence that emotional processing centers like the amygdala
show greater activity during REM even than during wake,45
although the role of the amygdala ranges widely from emotions
to rewards to motivations.46 There is some evidence that
changes in REM sleep indicate mood disorders.47 However,
this is not unique to only REM sleep, as NREM sleep is also
changed or reduced in mood disorders,48 and many cognitive
disorders show sleep problems in general.49 Sleep deprivation
does appear to lead to emotional issues such as a lack of
emotional inhibition and also irritability.50 But such failures of
appropriate function holds true across many cognitive pro-
cesses following sleep deprivation, including executive function,
which would affect emotional regulation.51
Overall, the hypothesis that dreams are for resolving emotional
conﬂicts speciﬁcally does not have overwhelming empirical evi-
dence. It is also not supported by the phenomenology of dreams,
which, at least in general, are not emphatically emotional.
Indeed, emotionally neutral dreams are common. Overall there
appears to be a slight bias to dreams to have negative affect,52
although this may simply be that dreams that have high
emotional valence are memorable (and it is worth noting that in
studying dream reports joy/elation was the next most common
to anxiety/fear). Given the evidence it seems likely that whatever
the evolved purpose of dreams is, its function can affect emo-
tions, but there is no strong evidence that dreaming has evolved
speciﬁcally for emotional regulation.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
3
Review

Dreams are for memory consolidation
Perhaps the leading contemporary theory is that dreams some-
how involve memory consolidation and storage,53 often via a
proposed form of memory replay.54 The dominant metaphor
for this theory of consolidation is that of the computer: memories
need to be ‘‘stored’’ somewhere in the brain, like storing a com-
puter ﬁle on a hard drive, and therefore there must be a storage
process. This viewpoint is held by much of traditional cognitive
neuroscience, wherein the goal of the brain is to ‘‘store’’ mem-
ories as veridically as possible,55 although there is growing
recognition that veridical ‘‘computer-like’’ storage is not desir-
able for complex learning and that forgetting is just as impor-
tant.56 According to the memory consolidation hypothesis,
memory storage occurs during dreams, or alternatively dreams,
by accessing previously stored memories, strengthen them, or
that somehow dreams are a byproduct of integrating new mem-
ories with older ones.
There is a signiﬁcant line of research that draws from this the-
ory, including many neuroimaging studies, and a full review of the
literature would be beyond the scope of this paper.57 However,
there is also debate. Speciﬁcally the consolidation hypothesis
is both very broad and rarely meant to specify just dreams rather
than sleep in general.58 For example, there is evidence that
learning a new task leads to a greater activation during both
REM59 and slow wave sleep60 in the task-relevant cortical areas,
which indicates there is no preferential consolidation during
dreaming. This is true even when comparing a wake/sleep con-
dition versus a control condition without sleep but over the same
time, which has found that blood-oxygen-level-dependent
(BOLD) activity increased in associated brain regions with the
task.61 But these sorts of neuroimaging studies are not very
speciﬁc, since increased activation in relevant areas does not
actually mean storage, nor replay, nor integration with existing
memories. Indeed, they could be interpreted just as easily for ev-
idence of the OBH (see ‘‘Evidence from neuroscience’’).
A signiﬁcant line of direct evidence for the consolidation theory
comes in the form of ‘‘replay’’ of memories during sleep, a spe-
ciﬁc hypothesis with a clear thesis and standards of evidence.
Replay was originally discovered in the hippocampus of
rats,62,63 although the original analysis was again for slow
wave sleep, not correlating this process to dreaming speciﬁcally.
Indeed, the same statistically increased ﬁring in correlated neu-
rons that counts as ‘‘replay’’ occurs during quiet wakefulness,
indicating it has nothing speciﬁc to do with dreams.64 In general,
if two neurons potentiate at the same time and from the same
cause, they are more likely to be correlated in the sense of
increased ﬁring in the future, regardless of whether they are re-
playing anything speciﬁc, a view supported by the ﬁnding that
‘‘replay’’ events are much faster in terms of their ﬁring.65
There are a number of signiﬁcant issues with the speciﬁc hy-
potheses that dreams are replaying memories.54 First, ofﬂine
replay of episodic memories may not actually assist memoriza-
tion; since ground truth is absent ofﬂine, such replays might
actually introduce errors. Indeed, neuroscience has shown that
re-accessing memories generally changes them, rather than en-
forces them.66,67 Due to the issues in assuming that speciﬁc
memories are actually replayed, a number of authors have pro-
posed more complex theories of consolidation, such as that
the idea there exists two complementary learning systems and
replay connects these two systems together.68 Furthermore,
the hypothesis must grapple with the fact that well-controlled
neuroimaging experiments show little evidence for exact
sequence replication and strong evidence for mostly never-
before-seen ﬁring patterns.69 In light of this sort of evidence,
some have argued that sleep promotes gist extraction from spe-
ciﬁc memories,70,71 although these sorts of hypotheses have not
speciﬁcally been about dreaming.
Overall, replay is unlikely to be the purpose of dreams, since,
as previously discussed, based on the most detailed studies
on dream reports after awakenings, dreams are not connected
or, at most, only vaguely connected with the day’s events.72
Overall, it appears that less than 1% to 2% of dream reports
have anything to do with episodic memories.73 Except in cases
of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), dreams do not repeat
speciﬁc memories, and those that do are considered patholog-
ical; for instance, closely after Hurricane Andrew, the only hurri-
cane-related dreams, even from a sample of the population from
the hardest hit area, were from those already diagnosed with
PTSD.74 Close studies of dream journals have in general found
that replays of speciﬁc memories or a day’s events are generally
either rare or nonexistent, although they do in general involve ac-
tions and people the dreamer is familiar with.75 One study exam-
ining dreams after the terrorist attacks of 9/11 found that ‘‘not a
single one of the 880 dreams (440 of them after 9/11) involved
planes hitting tall buildings or similar scenarios, even though all
the participants had seen these events many times on television
(and it was clearly an emotionally important experience). No
scenes were pictured that were even close to the actual
attacks.’’76,77
Indeed, there is signiﬁcant evidence that episodic memory and
dreams are dissociated.78 While there is behavioral evidence
that repetitive daily tasks, like having subjects play Tetris for sig-
niﬁcant periods of time, can lead to Tetris-inspired dreams, such
inculcated images or sequences do not represent replay in that
they are not veridical repeats of previous games, being more
hallucinatory and sparse in content and only being loosely
related to the played game, such as dreaming of playing some
altered version of a maze game after being exposed to it during
the day.79 Moreover, dreams triggered by such repetitive games
appear even in patients completely lacking all memory, those
with clinically diagnosed amnesia.80 It can take several days
for repetitive tasks to show up in dreams, a form of ‘‘dream
lag,’’ and almost always these tasks appear in partial forms
that are, again, only loosely similar.81 Overall, the behavioral ev-
idence suggests that dreams are not replays of memories or
waking events.
There is a strong line of evidence from Tetris-studies to sudden
wake-ups to dream-lag effects showing that partial or loosely
similar dreams can be triggered most reliably by recently learned
tasks, and yet such inculcated dreams generally take the form of
never-before-seen experiences or sequences with the traditional
dream-like properties of sparseness and hallucination, matching
no speciﬁc memory but rather a seeming exploration of the
state-space of the task itself.
It is worth noting that in most cases the sparse, hallucinatory,
and narrative properties of dreams are unaccounted for by the
consolidation hypothesis. Most dreams do not involve speciﬁc
memories at all, making the integration of new memories a
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
Review

questionable purpose for dreaming. Indeed, it is openly admitted
that the consolidation hypothesis still views dreams themselves
as epiphenomena.54 As we will see, much of the supporting re-
sults for the integration, replay, or storage of memories actually
ﬁts better with the OBH (‘‘Evidence from neuroscience’’).
Dreams are for selective forgetting
Notably, Francis Crick and Graeme Mitchinson proposed an
alternative purpose for dreams in 1983, which they called
‘‘reverse learning.’’82,83 In this hypothesis, the point of dreaming
is somehow to remove ‘‘undesirable’’ connections and help the
brain ‘‘unlearn.’’ Yet this hypothesis has been largely ignored in
contemporary dreaming research. Instead, the alternative hy-
pothesis, that dreams involve replay or consolidation of memory,
became favored by the community84 due to the excitement
around early replay results.62 Contemporary neuroscientiﬁc
research often views there as being both a consolidation phase
as well as a forgetting phase for memories, although this is again
predominately associated with slow wave sleep, rather than
dreaming speciﬁcally.85 Within deep learning it is known that
averaging together models and renormalizing can assist in
learning86 which could broadly be thought to resemble some
sort of selective forgetting in real neural networks. More specif-
ically, it has been proposed that Boltzmann machines may actu-
ally implement something very similar to the Crick and Mitchin-
son notion of reverse learning wherein synaptic down-scaling
could eliminate the discrepancy between environmental inputs
and a system’s internal model of the environment,87 which is
an earlier version of the sorts of predictive processing theories
discussed in the section ‘‘Dreams beneﬁt predictive processing
by reﬁning generative models.’’ Indeed, it has been argued that
down-scaling of synapses might themselves prevent overﬁt-
ting,88,89 thus providing a possible link between SHY, the OBH,
and the original reverse learning hypothesis.
Recently there has been explicit computational modeling in
spiking neural networks showing that ‘‘reverse learning’’ in the
form of reverse learning rules can indeed prove helpful. Specif-
ically, the authors showed that an anti-learning rule during a
‘‘sleep phase’’ of the network, in the form of anti-Hebbian
learning, could break up attractor states that were detrimental
to learning.90 It is worth noting that breaking up detrimental at-
tractor states could lead to similar outcomes as the OBH. How-
ever, in general any sort of ‘‘reverse learning’’ is not necessary
from the perspective of the OBH. This is because ‘‘reverse
learning’’ approaches differ signiﬁcantly by focusing on how
speciﬁc memories are destroyed (via anti-learning mechanisms
like a hypothetical ‘‘reverse Spike-timing-dependent plasticity’’)
rather than how corrupted inputs or top-down noise can improve
generalization like in the OBH.
Dreams are preparations for real-world problems
The close correlation between creativity and dreams, as well as
the similarity of dreams to simulations or virtual realities, has led
to hypotheses that dreaming can be used to solve relevant real-
world problems for the animal. For example, perhaps dreams
allow for creative experimentation where the dreamer keeps
the best ideas put forth,91 although this is problematic given
the generally amnesiac nature of dreams and their lack of real-
world relevance. A more direct hypothesis is that dreams act
as rehearsals for stereotypical behaviors for animals in a form
of ‘‘genetic programming.’’92 In more contemporary studies,
this has been referred to as the hypothesis that dreams act as
proto-conscious states to prepare for activities during waking
behavior.93
Similar examples of this hypothesis include an interpretation
based off of robots that used simulations to ﬁgure out self-
models94 or that an animal might ‘‘dream up strategies for suc-
cess’’ at night, like for how to best climb obstacles, like rocks,
that it faced during the day.95 Evidence for this sort of hypothesis
is that there is a form of neural ‘‘pre-play’’ wherein the sequences
of activity predict future behavior of the animal and indicate plan-
ning or pre-processing,96,97 although this effect may simply be
because animals are forced to use a limited set of preconﬁgured
ﬁring sequences to represent the world.98,99 In a similar manner
to the replay results, it is also likely that most of the time pre-play
is not the actual speciﬁc future sequences of activity, and that
most sequences are never instantiated during wake. Perhaps
the simplest and most direct hypothesis is that dreams allow
for avoidance practice of dangerous situations, such as running
from a predator, that would be impossible to practice in real life
without immense risk.100 However, this is contradicted by the
fact that only a small percentage of dreams contain this sort of
behavior (even when deﬁning threats incredibly broadly), and in
those that do realistic plans of actions in these scenarios are
rarely actually implemented.101,102 Yet despite the unrealistic na-
ture of dreams, it may be that exploring unlikely or weak associ-
ations has psychological beneﬁts.103
Another hypothesis is the idea that dreams are actually for
reﬁning the ability to create simulations themselves. This ’’InSim’’
hypothesis, which speciﬁcally is a hypothesis about the dreams
of young children, posits that dreams are chances to create sim-
ulations and then test their predictions against the real world
upon waking.104,105 However, this only applies to young children
(with the assumption that the few studies are correct that chil-
dren’s dreams are more ‘‘boring’’ than adult dreams), since, as
the authors themselves point out, adult dreams would be consis-
tently invalidated by daily events. Indeed, the phenomenology of
dreams as sparse and hallucinatory and fabulist make it unlikely
that strategies or abilities or preparations that originate in
dreams work at all in the real world.
However, these types of theories are likely right to view
dreams as simulations. Yet according to the OBH the purpose
of these simulations is not to reﬁne a particular ability or strategy
or plan of action, which is what simulations normally are for.
Instead, the purpose is to provide ’’out-of-distribution’’ simula-
tions speciﬁcally to prevent overﬁtting and improve generaliza-
tion, wherein overﬁtting is essentially an unavoidable issue
brought about by daily learning and therefore a constant threat
to the brain’s performance on various tasks.
Dreams beneﬁt predictive processing by reﬁning
generative models
Predictive processing is the view that the brain continuously tries
to predict its own future states in relation to extrinsic sensory
input.106,107 In a predictive processing framework, predictions
traverse in a top-down fashion, while sensory input occurs in a
bottom-up fashion. Predictions are then compared with inputs,
with the goal of minimizing prediction errors, which corresponds
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
5
Review

to improving the brain’s predictions about its own future states.
Prediction error can be minimized by changes in action and
behavior, a process called ‘‘active inference.’’108
Predictive processing has become a popular lens through
which to view cognitive science,109 and has origins in work on
Helmholtz machines, statistical inference, and the ‘‘wake-sleep
algorithm.’’110 Note the proposal of the wake-sleep algorithm
for unsupervised learning goes back 25 years,111 which are
effectively a precursor to the contemporary notion of an au-
toencoder.
Despite its origins in the ﬁeld of machine learning, the predic-
tive processing approach is controversial due to its claims of uni-
versality: it is unclear that the cortex actually functions primarily
to generate predictions about its own future state.112 Further-
more, there are fundamental criticisms about whether mini-
mizing prediction error via actions is actually a theoretically
coherent goal for a universal principle. For instance, why would
an organism not go sit in a ‘‘dark room’’ in order to minimize its
prediction errors, since it would always know what to expect?113
Multiple views of dreams in the light of predictive processing
has been put forward114 arguing for speciﬁc neurophysiological
correlates and mechanisms. In general, in such theories the phe-
nomenology of dreams is accounted for by the breakdown of the
perception-action loop during dreaming: essentially the brain’s
activity is dominated by its ‘‘priors’’ rather than bottom-up input.
Some predictive processing proponents have put forward views
that the role of dreams is not actually to test inferences about ac-
tions, but to improve a hypothesized generative model (in this
context a model used by brain to make predictions), speciﬁcally
by reducing this generative model’s complexity by pruning
redundant synapses.115 According to this hypothesis, the pro-
posed evolved purpose of dreaming during REM sleep is to mini-
mize the free energy of the brain. Free energy is essentially the
complexity of the brain’s model minus the accuracy of the brain’s
predictions about its own states, and therefore reducing model
complexity is important for minimizing free energy. Speciﬁcally,
the hypothesis put forward in Hobson and Friston115 is that syn-
aptic pruning (of the kind proposed in SHY during slow wave
sleep)31 can help minimize model complexity (and therefore
help minimize the free energy) since overall parameters of a
model are reduced when synapses are pruned. However, SHY
actually speciﬁes that there is a net reduction of synaptic weight
speciﬁcally so that waking activity is generally unaffected by this
change, and additionally it is also speciﬁcally associated with
NREM and slow wave sleep rather than REM and dreaming. It
is worth noting that down-scaling in general and its effects on
model complexity and minimization of error, even the possibility
of this occurring during REM, had been previously pro-
posed,88,89 as discussed in the section ‘‘Dreams are for selective
forgetting.’’
In Hobson and colleagues,116 a further related hypothesis
without reference to synaptic pruning or down-scaling was intro-
duced based on the idea that, according to the free energy prin-
ciple, the brain is continuously trying to better predict its own
future states. Therefore when the brain lacks bottom-up sensory
input (i.e., during dreaming) the brain is still compelled to mini-
mize free energy, meaning that the model complexity must
implicitly be reduced since any prediction errors can stem only
from internal consistency of the model rather than inconsis-
tencies with the outside world. According to this view ‘‘ . we
propose that REM sleep is an occasion for reiterating and opti-
mizing a generative model of the embodied self with reference
to waking experience.’’116 However, in general, predictive pro-
cessing
and
particularly
active
inference
approaches
to
dreaming face a problem: in the vast majority of dreams agency
is actually minimized, not maximized (a view supported by the
decreased
contribution
of
prefrontal
areas
during
dreaming).117,118 That is, dreams are not ‘‘causal playgrounds’’
wherein the outcomes of actions are continuously tested against
the perceptions they generate. This may be the case of lucid
dreaming, but lucid dreaming accounts for a small minority of
dreams.119
Outside of relying on the assumption that the goal of the brain
is always to minimize free energy and that actions are conse-
quential in dreams in the same way they are in wake, another
particular concern about the hypothesis is that dreams, given
their phenomenology as fabulist and hallucinatory, do not
seem very good candidates for minimizing the surprise of predic-
tions created by a gestalt generative model (let alone a model of
the ‘‘embodied self’’). For instance, if dreams were about
creating optimal prior beliefs or improving a model’s self-consis-
tency by minimizing input-less prediction errors (as in Hobson
and colleagues116), the consequence would be that dreams
should become less surprising throughout development as
input-less prediction error is minimized. This process should
lead to the generative model becoming more internally consis-
tent, more parsimonious, tame, and therefore more like the
waking world, both over development and over a given night’s
sleep. Yet this is precisely the opposite of what empirical data
show, wherein dreams of children are self-reported as static
and uninteresting and become more interesting and surprising
across development.120 Indeed, there is no evidence that
dreams become optimized for a lack of surprise or for internal
consistency over time. While the world may become more pre-
dictable over a lifetime, dreams do not. This same sort of criti-
cism can be applied to the suggestion that the purpose of sleep
is actually to implement the wake-sleep algorithm itself.121 In
addition, this idea faces a number of other problems, such as
the fact the wake-sleep algorithm is only for a speciﬁc form of un-
supervised learning that trains a generative model and the brain
obviously does much more than that. Furthermore, implement-
ing the wake-sleep algorithm requires several assumptions
that are not biologically realistic, like training solely feedforward
or feedback connections at different times.
However, it should be stressed that the background advan-
tage posited by this approach to dreaming is its effect on model
complexity, which is similar to the focus of the OBH, since reduc-
tions in model complexity in machine learning are generally
associated with a reduction in overﬁtting. It is also worth noting
that the free energy principle approach to dreaming is highly spe-
ciﬁc in how this is accomplished by the minimization of errors in a
generative model’s predictions of itself without inputs, rather
than via how corrupted or stochastic inputs assist generalization
as in the OBH. This provides evidence that the concerns of the
OBH, although not the OBH itself, can be motivated by diverse
takes on brain function (further discussed in ‘‘Dreams are for se-
lective forgetting’’ and the Discussion). Indeed, the OBH could
possibly be thought of as a generalization of the issue model
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
Review

complexity plays in predictive processing to all of learning and
performance instead of a just for a speciﬁc self-model, and
without relying on an assumed drive to minimization prediction
errors as the mechanism of action (and therefore the OBH
does not share the consequences of this drive like dreams
becoming unsurprising over time). However, the OBH can be
motivated entirely independently by common practices in deep
learning, their resemblance to dream phenomenology, and the
similar challenges the brain faces during its daily learning to
those of training a neural network.
THE OVERFITTED BRAIN HYPOTHESIS
As technology advances, science often appropriates new tech-
nologies for metaphors that help understand complex sys-
tems.122 This has been particularly true of neuroscience. In the
past decade it has become apparent that there are many lessons
for neuroscience to be taken from brain-inspired deep neural
nets (DNNs), which offer a different framework for thinking about
learning than standard computer architectures. DNNs are far and
away the only successful analog to human intelligence on com-
plex tasks, and they tend to develop brain-like connectivity and
representational properties, like grid-cells, shape-tuning, and vi-
sual illusions.123 One of the most signiﬁcant differences between
DNNs and the brain is that updating of synaptic weights in accor-
dance with the backpropagation of errors has traditionally been
looked on as biologically unrealistic. Yet new research reveals
that the brain may implement core features of backpropagation,
with viable candidates like neural gradient representation by ac-
tivity differences.124
Therefore, there is good reason for neuroscience to look to
deep learning for inspiration, since both are systems that
perform complex tasks via the updating of weights within an
astronomically large parameter space. It is clear that the chal-
lenges the brain and DNNs face during learning and performance
on complex tasks overlap signiﬁcantly. Notably, one of the most
ubiquitous challenges DNNs face is a trade-off between general-
ization and memorization, wherein as they learn to ﬁt one partic-
ular dataset, they can become less generalizable to others. This
overﬁtting is identiﬁable when performance on the training set
begins to differentiate from performance on the testing set. An
omnipresent problem within the deep learning community, solu-
tions to overﬁtting in DNNs most often comes in the form of a
noise injection, such as making input datasets corrupted and
therefore less self-similar.125 Perhaps the most common explicit
technique to prevent overﬁtting is dropout, which is mathemati-
cally the injection of noise and the corruption of input during
learning.126 Notably the more self-similar or biased your sam-
pling of training data is, the more overﬁtting will be an issue.
The brain faces these challenges as it learns, since what an or-
ganism experiences every day can be highly self-similar and
biased in its sampling of the environment. The OBH states that
dreams offer a biologically realistic ‘‘noise injection.’’ Specif-
ically, there is good evidence that dreams are based on the sto-
chastic percolation of signals through the hierarchical structure
of the cortex, activating the default-mode network.127 Note
that there is growing evidence that most of these signals origi-
nate in a top-down manner,128 meaning that the ‘‘corrupted in-
puts’’ will bear statistical similarities to the models and represen-
tations of the brain. In other words, they are derived from a
stochastic exploration of the hierarchical structure of the brain.
This leads to the kind of structured hallucinations that are com-
mon during dreams.
The hallucinogenic, category-breaking, and fabulist quality of
dreams means they are extremely different from the ‘‘training
set’’ of the animal (i.e., their daily experiences). The diurnal cycle
of ﬁtting to tasks during the day, and avoiding overﬁtting at night
via a semi-random walk of experiences, may be viewed as a kind
of ‘‘simulated annealing’’129 in the brain. That is, it is the very
strangeness of dreams in their divergence from waking experi-
ence that gives them their biological function.
To sum up: the OBH conceptualizes dreams as a form of pur-
posefully corrupted input, likely derived from noise injected into
the hierarchical structure of the brain, causing feedback to
generate warped or ‘‘corrupted’’ sensory input. The overall
evolved purpose of this stochastic activity is to prevent overﬁt-
ting. This overﬁtting may be within a particular module or task
such a speciﬁc brain region or network, and may also involve
generalization to out-of-distribution (unseen) novel stimuli. As
will be discussed, the OBH ﬁts well with the disparate known
data about dreams, such as their physiological origin in the
form of noise that creates ‘‘corrupted features’’ via neuromodu-
latory inﬂuences, their role in learning, and their importance for
problem solving and creativity. However, most importantly, it
does not consider dreams as epiphenomena generated by
some background process, and it also accounts for, and is moti-
vated by, the actual phenomenology of dreams themselves. The
sparseness of dreams comes from the ‘‘dropout’’ of bottom-up
inputs since they are driven solely by feedback activity, their
hallucinatory nature comes from the higher-up stochastic origin
which means they are purposeful corrupted or warped away
from the daily ‘‘training set’’ the organism normally experiences,
and their narrative nature from the top-down genesis of dreams
since the brain understands reality in the form of events and stor-
ies. That is, according to the OBH, the distinct phenomenology
of dreams exists to maximize their effectiveness at improving
generalization and combating mere memorization of an organ-
isms day. The evidence for the OBH, as well as more details
about its distinguishing claims, are overviewed in the following
section.
Evidence from neuroscience
What is the evidence for the OBH from traditional methods of
neuroscience? It is worth focusing not on all the studies avail-
able, but those that distinguish the OBH from the theory that
dreams are correlated (in some unspeciﬁed way) with learning.
In human behavioral experiments, there is good supporting
evidence for the OBH speciﬁcally. First, the most effective
means of triggering dreams that contain partial similarities to
real-life events is through repetitive overtraining on a task. Exam-
ples of this include extensive playing of games like Tetris80 or ski-
simulators,130 which led to dreams involving the learned task,
although not speciﬁc repetitions or replays of memories. Put
another way: the surest way to trigger dreams about a real-world
event is to perform a task repetitively during the day, preferably
one that is novel. Under the OBH, the explanation for this effect,
as well as the speciﬁcs of the beneﬁts of dreaming, is clearly out-
lined. Overtraining on a novel task creates the condition of the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
7
Review

brain being overﬁtted to the task, which then triggers nightly
dreams attempting to generalize performance on the task. Evi-
dence of dreaming about tasks speciﬁcally improving daily per-
formance on those tasks can be found for things like mirror
tracing131 and reading with inverted goggles on.132 Even driving
cars seems correlated to dreams about driving.75 It is likely
therefore there is a homeostatic component to the OBH wherein
different modules, processes, or systems within the brain
become overﬁtted from usage, which are then most likely to
trigger dreams involving those modules. If so, neurons involved
in recent learning would be most affected by overﬁtting. In this
way the OBH can account for many of the statistical ‘‘replay’’ re-
sults since those neurons that saw synaptic changes in response
learning are most affected by the regularization of dreaming, and
since exact sequence replication is rare and most ‘‘replay’’ is
actually never-before-seen ﬁring patterns.69
Another line of evidence for the OBH is that in humans there is
evidence of task-dependency when it comes to whether sleep
improves learning. For adult humans, perceptual tasks showed
little to no learning increase from sleep wherein cognitive tasks
showed signiﬁcant gains from learning.133 Since it is likely that
adult humans already have well-ﬁtted perceptual models, we
should expect complex cognitive tasks to trigger more gain
from an increase in generalizability. While dream reports are
actually less common in young children, particularly below the
age of 7, from what can be gleaned, children’s dreams are
much more static and perceptual, focusing on individual scenes
rather than full narratives or events, indicating that perceptual
systems are likely still being reorganized during dreams.120
Meanwhile newborns exhibit ‘‘active sleep,’’ their version of
REM, for 50% of their 16 to 18 h of daily sleep, perhaps indicating
that early perceptual models are in constant danger of over-
ﬁtting.
The OBH is also supported by evidence that sleep does not
simply improve memory directly, but affects some aspects of
memory more than others. For instance, in a word association
test, direct associations, the equivalent of pure memorization,
did not beneﬁt that much from a night’s sleep, while word asso-
ciations were better able to resist interfering associations.134
This indicates again that memorization is least affected by sleep,
but generalized performance is most affected. This holds true
even in infants, wherein sleep is correlated with increased gener-
alization and abstraction abilities.135,136
In addition, there is evidence from behavioral studies that
overtraining on a texture-discrimination task leads to decreased
performance on it, and that sleep speciﬁcally, above and beyond
the passage of time, rescues this performance.137 This ﬁts with
anecdotal reports of plateauing in terms of performance on a
task, like a video game, only to sleep and have increased perfor-
mance the next day.
There is also the long-standing traditional association be-
tween dreams and creativity, a rich literature. Anecdotal re-
ports about dreams and creativity are supported by careful
studies of how sleep improves abstraction and reasoning on
tasks.138,139 This ﬁts directly with the OBH, since an increase
in generalization would directly lead to more insights in com-
plex problems, or better performance on cognitive tasks that
require creativity. Indeed, it explains the link between crea-
tivity and dreaming better than the hypotheses that dreaming
is for the integration of new with old memories, the replay of
memories, or their storage.
Finally, it might be argued that it is a problem for the OBH that
dreams are generally amnesiac, with explicit memory a rarity
during dreams. Would it not be strange then that the content of
dreams have any effect on the abilities of a neural network?
Here, an important distinction should be made between access-
ing explicit declarative memories and the general fact that
learning involves changes to synapses. For instance, the amne-
siac effect during sleep may due to prefrontal inhibition. Just as
prefrontal cortex inhibition means that dreams are not recogniz-
able as dreams when they are occurring, it may be that the same
inhibition makes it difﬁcult to recall in the sense of cognitive ac-
cess.21 Anecdotal evidence from those with dream journals sug-
gests that paying attention to dreams makes them easier to
remember, lending credence to this hypothesis.12 In addition,
sudden-waking experiments show that dream content is com-
mon and recallable. Likely the effects of not being able to either
form or access episodic memories of all dreams at the end of the
night are due to the neuromodulatory milieu during sleep.
Supporting the OBH is evidence indicating that dreams lead to
synaptic changes in the connectivity of the brain, albeit likely this
is not as strongly as waking experience, with episodic memory
storage signiﬁcantly reduced. What is the evidence that synap-
ses change during sleep? Proponents of SHY have argued that
there is evidence that synapses change during sleep in the
form of synaptic homeostasis, regularization which occurs every
night in the form of universal down-scaling of synaptic
strength.32 However, this has been challenged by the observa-
tion of potentiation during sleep.140 In general it appears that
whether there is net potentiation or depression during waking
depends on the task,141 indicating that learning involves synaptic
plasticity in both directions in both wake and sleep.142 If during
dreams synapses are indeed still plastic, then dreams can leave
a synaptic trace that can affect performance. However, it should
be noted that as of yet there is no strong empirical evidence that
the content of dreams can lead to synaptic changes and learning
as the content of waking experience does, and this is difﬁcult to
explore experimentally.
Evidence from deep learning
One of the most signiﬁcant, and ubiquitous, challenges any deep
neural network faces is the ability to generalize beyond the data-
set it has been trained on, that is, to avoid simply memorizing the
dataset. There has been signiﬁcant effort in the past decade by
the deep learning community to develop methods and tech-
niques to avoid overﬁtting on particular datasets and, at the
broadest level, to allow for extrapolation to never-before-seen
datasets. This section overviews three commonly used such
techniques within deep learning (and research into artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks generally). Notably, each of these three techniques
embodies some phenomenological property of dreams and also
ﬁts with what is known about the neurophysiology of dreaming.
The ﬁrst technique is the data augmentation method of
dropout, perhaps the most widely used technique for preventing
overﬁtting in deep learning.143 Dropout occurs during the training
of a network, when inputs are made sparse by randomly ‘‘drop-
ping out’’ some of them, a form of regularization during learning
which is mathematically similar to a noise injection.126 It is
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
Review

important to note that dreams resemble dropout in their spare-
ness, as they do not contain as much perceptual information,
or details in general, as waking experiences. For example,
phones are generally unusable in dreams because there is not
enough phenomenological detail to support such small icons
and text. This likely increases the salience of relevant features
while minimizing irrelevant features, assisting in generalization
by making representations more robust and invariant, since
one reason dropout is successful is that it acts like an averaging
effect over different models the data could be drawn from.
Dreams are a lesser or weakened state of conscious experience
because of this dropping out of bottom-up stimuli, lacking much
of the detail of waking conscious experiences. This, according to
the OBH, actually assists, rather than hinders, their function.
The second technique that supports the OBH is the method of
domain randomization used in training DNNs. In domain
randomization, the inputs during learning are ‘‘randomized’’ in
the sense of being warped or corrupted in particular ways. This
can drastically assist with learning and generalization. Paradox-
ically, simulating hallucinatory inputs rather than learning off of
real inputs helps deep neural networks learn real-world tasks.144
Domain randomization has have been used in cutting-edge tech-
niques in deep learning, such as being necessary for having a
DNN solve a Rubik’s Cube using a robot hand.145 Domain
randomization resembles the hallucinatory quality of dreams in
that dreams depart signiﬁcantly from normal experiences, as if
they have been randomly drawn from a varied set of different
domains.
The third common practice in deep learning that has ties to
dreaming is the use of some generative model to expand the
training set of the neural network, which can assist in learning
various tasks. Generative models lie behind the success of
generative adversarial networks (GANs) and other techniques
that allow for cutting-edge performance on complex tasks us-
ing sets of feedforward networks that anticipate the other’s
output.146 It is worth noting that GANs and others often pro-
duce
notoriously
dream-like
fabulist
outputs.147
Indeed,
recently an external generative model that created ‘‘dream-
like’’ input helped train a DNN to produce the code behind a
given mathematical mapping.148 It has been shown that input
created from a generative model can indeed assist with
learning, such as preventing catastrophic forgetting.149 It
should be noted that in most these cases the generative
model exists outside the network itself, which is not biologi-
cally realistic in the case of the brain, although there are
some exceptions.150 What of those cases where the network
itself acts the generative model? This is much closer to the
case of the dreaming brain. In networks that are not purely
feedforward or have external models that can be manipulated
by experimenters, the stimulation of higher layers (generally
through the injection of noise) can lead to patterns of activity
in the lower layers that recapitulate the statistical properties of
inputs, as if the network were being stimulated from the bot-
tom-up from imaginary sources (this is similar to the wake-
sleep algorithm discussed in ‘‘Dreams beneﬁt predictive pro-
cessing by reﬁning generative models’’). This is likely the
case in the brain, wherein stochastic activity high in the hier-
archy of brain regions creates hallucinatory patterns of inputs
via feedback connections.
Indeed, it is likely the case that dreams are indeed a result of
noise in the brain’s hierarchical structure that traverses its feed-
back connectivity, which ﬁts with the evidence that dreams are
‘‘top-down.’’151 This further ﬁts with evidence that dreaming
drawn from the brain’s model of the world becomes more narra-
tive and complex over time, particularly during adolescence.152
By adulthood, dreams take on the narrative structure of human
cognition wherein stories and metaphors and events make up
the core function of thought.153 Since narratives are the way by
which human brains understand the world,154 stochastic stimu-
lation of the hierarchical structure of the brain produces narra-
tives, which act as hallucinatory and sparse bottom-up input
for learning, thus combating overﬁtting and improving general-
ization. In this way they are a direct expansion of the normal
‘‘training set’’ of an animal, since narratives and events are
how conscious perception itself proceeds and understands the
world.155
The OBH claims that dreams resemble a combination of these
three techniques: a sparse, corrupted, or randomized set of sen-
sory inputs, which are likely created by feedback exploiting the
hierarchical nature of the brain as a generative model, and the
purpose of these experiences is to expand and regularize the
limited and biased ‘‘training set’’ of the organism to prevent over-
ﬁtting. Of course, the precise implementation of these tech-
niques (such as their combined nature) must be different for
the brain than in deep learning research. This is because the
brain faces many challenges that artiﬁcial neural networks do
not. Any organism that implemented dropout or domain random-
ization during its daily learning would face serious survival is-
sues. Therefore, in order to increase generality and avoid overﬁt-
ting and pure memorization of waking sensory input a dedicated
ofﬂine period is needed. Sleep, possibly having originally
evolved for other housekeeping reasons, is the perfect time.
Overall, the overlap between the phenomenology of dreams
and common methods in the ﬁeld of deep learning for mitigating
overﬁtting, avoiding pure memorization, and assisting general-
ization lend credence to the idea that the evolved function of
dreaming is for precisely these purposes.
PREDICTIONS
The OBH puts together several lines of investigation under one
roof by being explicit about asking how generalization during
learning can beneﬁt from dreams. This involves understanding
how dreams can help overcome an organism’s reliance on
memorizing just a day’s events, which is often highly statistically
biased. The theory makes a number of speciﬁc predictions which
can be pursued both experimentally as well as theoretically.
Experimental validation
Experimental investigation of the OBH within neuroscience can
consist of several components. Under the OBH, much of the
beneﬁt of dreaming is in the realm of generalizability not memo-
rization per se, and this can be differentiated with well-designed
behavioral tests. For example, it may be that direct measurement
of overﬁtting is possible in humans. This may include the training
of subjects on overly repetitious tasks in order to ensure the con-
dition of overﬁtting. It may also include using similar techniques
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
9
Review

as those within deep learning to test for generalization of per-
formance.
In animal models there have not been explicit attempts to
separate out the difference between pure memorization and
generalization, and the effect of sleep deprivation on each. Ac-
cording to the OBH, memorization should be less affected by
sleep deprivation than generalization. Therefore, using mouse
models of things like context fear generalization156 could be
examined under conditions of sleep deprivation or, if possible,
dream deprivation. Beyond behavioral predictions and subse-
quent studies, there is also the possibility of attempting to track
synaptic plasticity in response to dreams. This may include
things like tracking changes in dendritic spine morphology dur-
ing REM, such have been used to track spine morphology
changes during sleep to investigate SHY.157
Notably, the sort of cognitive ﬂexibility and generalization the
OBH claims is the purpose of dreams is highly important for
workers and those in the armed forces who sometimes operate
under sleep deprivation during critical periods, which can lead to
increased accident rates,158 and has a signiﬁcant monetary
annual impact.159 If it is true that sleep-deprived brains are over-
ﬁtted, they will be prone to make errors in stereotypical ways.
Thus it may be easier to know what types of mistakes will be
made by individuals operating in sleep-deprived states and in
response build more robust fail-safes.
Furthermore, the OBH predicts there may be the possibility of
dream substitutions: dream-like stimuli that are artiﬁcially gener-
ated to have the properties of dreams, and therefore have a
similar ameliorative effect on overﬁtting. Such dream substitu-
tions, delivered via virtual reality (VR) or even video, might pro-
vide a simple yet effective means for delaying some of sleep dep-
rivation’s cognitive defects. For example, it may be that a pilot
who has been ﬂying for a long period of time is beginning to over-
ﬁt to their task, and a quick but intense exposure to an entirely
different sort of visual stimulus (like a dream-like nature scene
in VR) could stave off some of the effects of sleep deprivation.
The impact of substitutions can be examined both behaviorally
but also at the neurophysiological level of REM rebound.160
Theoretical validation
The OBH has consequences not just for neuroscience, but also
for the ﬁeld of deep learning. This is particularly true of biologi-
cally realistic models, like large-scale thalamocortical spiking-
neuron models, which have previously been used to investigate
the development of cortical connectivity and its effect on slow
waves.161 It is likely that biologically realistic spiking neurons
that are still trainable in the manner of DNNs162 can be used to
explore the beneﬁts of dreams directly. In such a cortical model,
neuromodulation can be used to be intersperse training with pe-
riods that mimic sleep stages, cycling ﬁrst through the real input
of its training set, and then hallucinatory corrupted input gener-
ated from its top-down connections. This should prevent or
delay overﬁtting.
What sort of stochastic biases allow for dreams to warp input
data in a way that is most efﬁcient for avoiding overﬁtting? If the
OBH is correct, then the sparse and hallucinatory nature of
dreams suggests that we should expect warping of input distri-
butions that successfully combats overﬁtting has these qualities.
Such distributions should be sparse in that they have less entries
than normal inputs, and hallucinatory in that they should be clus-
tered in a different way compared to the standard ‘‘daily’’ input.
This can be directly tested in state-of-the-art DNNs as well as
more biologically realistic artiﬁcial neural networks. That is, there
may be a point of criticality where inputs have been altered to be
as dream-like as possible and this is the most effective means of
preventing overﬁtting in biologically realistic artiﬁcial neural net-
works, which can be tested by exploring how differently corrup-
ted inputs assist in generalization. In addition, since learning is
diurnal in the brain, it may mean that adjusting to mimic realistic
patterns of cyclical dream-like activity could have the most
beneﬁcial effect in machine learning generally. A ﬁnal further po-
tential hypothesis is that a reduction to the learning rate (given
the neuromodulatory milieu of dreams that likely blocks the for-
mation of strong memories) during dream-like input could be
especially beneﬁcial for learning in DNNs.
DISCUSSION
The OBH posits the evolved purpose of dreams is to assist
generalization by stochastic corruptions of normal sensory input,
which combats the highly biased nature of inputs during an ani-
mal’s daily learning that can lead to overﬁtting, a ubiquitous
problem in artiﬁcial neural networks and machine learning in gen-
eral. It is supported by both empirical evidence (’’Evidence from
neuroscience’’) and theoretical evidence (’’Evidence from deep
learning’’). In many cases it can explain observed results better
than other hypotheses (comparative hypotheses are discussed
in ‘‘Contemporary theories of dreams’’). For example, it seems
the most effective way to trigger dreams about something is to
have subjects perform on a novel task like Tetris repeti-
tiously,73,130 likely because the visual system has become over-
ﬁtted to the task. In addition, the OBH ﬁts with the fact that
‘‘replay’’ results more often contain never-before-seen patterns
of activity than actual replays of waking sequences,69 a fact
that, as has been pointed out in the previous literature, indicates
that dreaming may play some sort of role in generalization or gist
extraction.79 In another example, the OBH also explains the fact
that synaptic potentiation occurs during sleep,140 indicating that
learning during dreams themselves leaves behind a synap-
tic trace.
The OBH does not necessarily contradict other hypotheses
about sleep, for instance, the idea that during certain periods
of sleep there is ongoing metabolic waste clearance.28 In this
sense then the OBH speculates that dreaming evolved as an ex-
aptation, wherein sleep evolved for molecular housekeeping
purposes, and only when brains had to signiﬁcantly learn during
the organism’s lifetime did the goal of avoiding overﬁtting and
increasing generalization become adaptive. The OBH does not
even contradict some hypotheses about dreams, instead adding
new dimensions. Examples of this include the hypothesis that
dreams are a test-bed for strengthening the brain’s ability to
generate mental imagery during wake, explaining the complexi-
ﬁcation of dreams from childhood to adulthood.120 Another
example of a novel hypothesis that does not stand in opposition
to the OBH is that dreams are for defending neural real estate163
(although this may be contradicted by non-wake activation pro-
ﬁles during dreaming). As a hypothesis, it shares similar back-
ground concerns with that of the free energy approach to
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
Review

dreaming,116 although without assuming that dreams are for
testing the predictions of a generative self-model’s priors or
that dreams should become less surprising over time as input-
less prediction error is minimized. There also appears to be
possible room for overlap between SHY, the OBH, and the
reverse learning hypothesis of dreaming (see ‘‘Dreams are for se-
lective forgetting’’). Overall the OBH should be viewed as ﬂexible
and an umbrella hypothesis with many antecedents; after all, it is
merely the formal proposal that the corrupted, warped, and sto-
chastic nature of sensory input in dreams serves to improve per-
formance on the brain’s daily tasks, motivated by the phenome-
nology of dreams and common practices in deep learning.
It is also worth noting that within the OBH dream’s role in
improving
generalization
may
include
related
things
like
combating ‘‘catastrophic forgetting,’’ which is a problem faced
by DNNs that try to train on multiple tasks, and which can also
be prevented or alleviated by methods like dropout or more
complicated techniques like elastic weight consolidation.164
Recent research shows that stimuli created from stimulation of
a network’s top-down connections (which are, according to
the OBH, similar to dreams), can indeed help avoid catastrophic
forgetting.165 So while issues like catastrophic forgetting (the
complete unlearning of a task while learning another) is not
well documented in humans, it may be that individual brain mod-
ules or networks face some lesser form of it, and dreams can be
conceptualized as a form of regularization that may ameliorate
several aspects of common learning failures simultaneously.
For example, beyond the improvements in both in- and out-of-
distribution generalization, the stochasticity and spareness
evinced in the phenomenology of dreams can also likely improve
things like security in response to adversarial attacks and overall
computational efﬁciency, as stochastic stimulation has these ef-
fects in DNNs.37 Perhaps the most distinguishing aspect of the
OBH is that it takes the phenomenology of dreams seriously, in
that they are sparse, hallucinogenic, and narrative in the sense
of containing fabulist and unusual events (and while the relation-
ship between phenomenology and neural activity remains un-
known, contemporary theories exist that attempt to map the
relationship).166 The OBH emphasizes that it is precisely
because of the departure from waking life that dreams evolved.
According to this hypothesis, dreams are not epiphenomena,
either in the sense of neutral evolution but also in the sense of
not being an expression of some other background process,
such as patterns of activity and associated experiences merely
brought about by some other processing integrating new mem-
ories.54 Rather, the point of dreams is the dreams themselves,
because they provide departures away from the statistically
biased input of an animal’s daily life, which can assist and there-
fore increase performance. It may seem paradoxical, but a
dream of ﬂying may actually help you keep your balance running.
The evidence for this possibility comes from common methods
in deep learning that improve generalization, such as dropout,126
domain randomization,144 and the use of input data created by
stochastic stimulation of generative models,148 which together
bear striking similarities to the properties of dreams.
The OBH makes several predictions that are useful for both the
ﬁeld of neuroscience and the ﬁeld of deep learning. These
include predictions on the neurophysiological level, as well as
behavioral, and even within the ﬁeld of deep learning. For
instance, the prediction that inputs with dream-like properties
(i.e., adhering to dream phenomenology) will assist with overﬁt-
ting in DNNs. Behaviorally, overﬁtting might be induced in sub-
jects via repetitive training on an undersampled task, and the
beneﬁt of dreaming might be directly measured. There is also
the possibility of dream substitutions, wherein artiﬁcial dream-
like stimuli might help improve generalization and therefore per-
formance in sleep-deprived individuals.
Finally, it is worth taking the idea of dream substitutions seri-
ously enough to consider whether ﬁctions, like novels or ﬁlms,
act as artiﬁcial dreams, accomplishing at least some of the
same function. Within evolutionary psychology, the attempt to
ground aspects of human behavior in evolutionary theory, there
has been long-standing confusion with regard to human interest
in ﬁctions, since on their surface ﬁctions have no utility. They are,
after all, explicitly false information. Therefore it has been
thought that ﬁctions are either demonstrations of cognitive
ﬁtness in order to inﬂuence mate choice,167 or can simply be
reduced to the equivalent of ‘‘cheesecake’’ — gratifying to
consume but without beneﬁt. Proponents of this view have
even gone so far as to describe the arts as a ‘‘pleasure technol-
ogy.’’168 Some researchers have proposed beneﬁts to ﬁction
consumption, like improving theory of mind169 or helping to ab-
stract social norms.170 The OBH suggests ﬁctions, and perhaps
the arts in general, may actually have a deeper underlying cogni-
tive utility in the form of improving generalization and preventing
overﬁtting by acting as artiﬁcial dreams.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Baran C¸ imen, Santosh Manicka, and Hananel Hazan as well as to
the anonymous reviewers, for their comments and feedback.
REFERENCES
1. Weaver, C. (2020). Why Am I Having Weird Dreams Lately? (The New
York
Times).
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/13/style/why-weird-
dreams-coronavirus.html.
2. Albert, I., Cicala, G.A., and Siegel, J. (1970). The behavioral effects of rem
sleep deprivation in rats. Psychophysiology 6, 550–560.
3. Dement, W. (1960). The effect of dream deprivation. Science 131,
1705–1707.
4. Siegel, J.M. (1999). The Evolution of REM Sleep (CRC Press).
5. Cirelli, C., and Tononi, G. (2008). Is sleep essential? PLoS Biol. 6.
6. Domhoff, G.W. (2019). The neurocognitive theory of dreams at age 20: an
assessment and a comparison with four other theories of dreaming.
Dreaming 29, 265.
7. Flanagan, O.J. (2000). Dreaming Souls: Sleep, Dreams, and the Evolution
of the Conscious Mind (Oxford University Press).
8. Siegel, J.M. (2011b). Sleep in animals: a state of adaptive inactivity. Prin-
ciples Pract. Sleep Med. 5, 126–138.
9. Siegel, J.M. (2011a). Rem sleep: a biological and psychological paradox.
Sleep Med. Rev. 15, 139.
10. Foulkes, W.D. (1962). Dream reports from different stages of sleep.
J. Abnormal Social Psychol. 65, 14.
11. Stickgold, R., Malia, A., Fosse, R., Propper, R., and Hobson, J.A. (2001b).
Brain-mind states: I. longitudinal ﬁeld study of sleep/wake factors inﬂu-
encing mentation report length. Sleep 24, 171–179.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
11
Review

12. Robb, A. (2018). Why We Dream: The Transformative Power of Our
Nightly Journey (Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt).
13. Windt, J.M. (2015). Dreaming: A Conceptual Framework for Philosophy
of Mind and Empirical Research (MIT press).
14. Duff, K. (2014). The Secret Life of Sleep (Simon and Schuster).
15. Lee, S.H., and Dan, Y. (2012). Neuromodulation of brain states. Neuron
76, 209–222.
16. Jones, B.E. (2005). From waking to sleeping: neuronal and chemical sub-
strates. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 26, 578–586.
17. Nir, Y., Staba, R.J., Andrillon, T., Vyazovskiy, V.V., Cirelli, C., Fried, I., and
Tononi, G. (2011). Regional slow waves and spindles in human sleep.
Neuron 70, 153–169.
18. Oudiette, D., Dealberto, M.J., Uguccioni, G., Golmard, J.L., Merino-An-
dreu, M., Tafti, M., Garma, L., Schwartz, S., and Arnulf, I. (2012).
Dreaming without rem sleep. Conscious. Cogn. 21, 1129–1140.
19. Siclari, F., Baird, B., Perogamvros, L., Bernardi, G., LaRocque, J.J., Ried-
ner, B., Boly, M., Postle, B.R., and Tononi, G. (2017). The neural corre-
lates of dreaming. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 872.
20. Cipolli, C., Ferrara, M., De Gennaro, L., and Plazzi, G. (2017). Beyond the
neuropsychology of dreaming: insights into the neural basis of dreaming
with new techniques of sleep recording and analysis. Sleep Med. Rev.
35, 8–20.
21. Siclari, F., and Tononi, G. (2016). Sleep and dreaming. The Neurol. con-
ciousness, 107–128.
22. Domhoff, G.W. (2011). The neural substrate for dreaming: is it a subsys-
tem of the default network? Conscious. Cogn. 20, 1163–1174.
23. Sikka, P., Revonsuo, A., Noreika, V., and Valli, K. (2019). Eeg frontal alpha
asymmetry and dream affect: alpha oscillations over the right frontal cor-
tex during rem sleep and presleep wakefulness predict anger in rem
sleep dreams. J. Neurosci. 39, 4775–4784.
24. Dresler, M., Koch, S.P., Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V.I., Holsboer, F.,
Steiger, A., S€amann, P.G., Obrig, H., and Czisch, M. (2011). Dreamed
movement elicits activation in the sensorimotor cortex. Curr. Biol. 21,
1833–1837.
25. Schenck, C.H., Bundlie, S.R., and Mahowald, M.W. (2002; 25:120–138).
Rem sleep behavior disorder: clinical, developmental, and neuroscience
perspectives 16 years after its formal identiﬁcation in sleep. Sleep.
26. Joiner, W.J. (2016). Unraveling the evolutionary determinants of sleep.
Curr. Biol. 26, R1073–R1087.
27. Trojanowski, N.F., and Raizen, D.M. (2016). Call it worm sleep. Trends
Neurosciences 39, 54–62.
28. Xie, L., Kang, H., Xu, Q., Chen, M.J., Liao, Y., Thiyagarajan, M., O’Don-
nell, J., Christensen, D.J., Nicholson, C., Iliff, J.J., et al. (2013). Sleep
drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. science 342, 373–377.
29. Hablitz, L.M., Vinitsky, H.S., Sun, Q., Stæger, F.F., Sigurdsson, B., Mor-
tensen, K.N., Lilius, T.O., and Nedergaard, M. (2019). Increased glym-
phatic inﬂux is correlated with high eeg delta power and low heart rate
in mice under anesthesia. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav5447.
30. Tononi, G., and Cirelli, C. (2003). Sleep and synaptic homeostasis: a hy-
pothesis. Brain Res. Bull. 62, 143–150.
31. Tononi, G., and Cirelli, C. (2006). Sleep function and synaptic homeosta-
sis. Sleep Med. Rev. 10, 49–62.
32. Bushey, D., Tononi, G., and Cirelli, C. (2011). Sleep and synaptic homeo-
stasis: structural evidence in Drosophila. Science 332, 1576–1581.
33. Frank, M.G. (2012). Erasing synapses in sleep: is it time to be shy? Neural
Plast. 2012, 264378.
34. Cao, J., Herman, A.B., West, G.B., Poe, G., and Savage, V.M. (2020). Un-
raveling why we sleep: quantitative analysis reveals abrupt transition
from neural reorganization to repair in early development. Sci. Adv. 6,
eaba0398.
35. Walker, M. (2017). Why We Sleep: The New Science of Sleep and Dreams
(Penguin UK).
36. Hoel, E. (2019). Enter the supersensorium: the neuroscientiﬁc case for art
in the age of netﬂix? Bafﬂer https://thebafﬂer.com/salvos/enter-the-
supersensorium-hoel.html.
37. Sabuncu, M.R. (2020). Intelligence plays dice: stochasticity is essential
for machine learning. arXiv.
38. Hartmann, E. (2000). We do not dream of the 3 r’s: implications for the na-
ture of dreaming mentation. Dreaming 10, 103–110.
39. Freud, S., and Cronin, A.J. (2013). The Interpretation of Dreams (Read
Books Ltd).
40. Levin, R., and Nielsen, T. (2009). Nightmares, bad dreams, and emotion
dysregulation: a review and new neurocognitive model of dreaming. Curr.
Dir. Psychol. Sci. 18, 84–88.
41. Scarpelli, S., Bartolacci, C., D’Atri, A., Gorgoni, M., and De Gennaro, L.
(2019). The functional role of dreaming in emotional processes. Front.
Psychol. 10, 459.
42. Cartwright, R. (2005). Dreaming as a mood regulation system. In Princi-
ples and Practice of Sleep Medicine (Elsevier), pp. 565–572.
43. Walker, M.P., and van Der Helm, E. (2009). Overnight therapy? the role of
sleep in emotional brain processing. Psychol. Bull. 135, 731.
44. Cartwright, R., Agargun, M.Y., Kirkby, J., and Friedman, J.K. (2006).
Relation of dreams to waking concerns. Psychiatry Res. 141, 261–270.
45. Hobson, J.A., Pace-Schott, E.F., Stickgold, R., and Kahn, D. (1998). To
dream or not to dream? relevant data from new neuroimaging and elec-
trophysiological studies. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8, 239–244.
46. Janak, P.H., and Tye, K.M. (2015). From circuits to behaviour in the
amygdala. Nature 517, 284–292.
47. Kupfer, D.J. (1976). Rem latency: a psychobiologic marker for primary
depressive disease. Biol. Psychiatry 11, 159.
48. Gillin, J.C., Duncan, W., Pettigrew, K.D., Frankel, B.L., and Snyder, F.
(1979). Successful separation of depressed, normal, and insomniac sub-
jects by eeg sleep data. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 36, 85–90.
49. Peterson, M.J., and Benca, R.M. (2006). Sleep in mood disorders. Psy-
chiatr. Clin. 29, 1009–1032.
50. Gruber, R., and Cassoff, J. (2014). The interplay between sleep and
emotion regulation: conceptual framework empirical evidence and future
directions. Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 16, 500.
51. Killgore, W.D.S. (2010). Effects of sleep deprivation on cognition. Prog.
Brain Res. 185, 105–129.
52. Merritt, J.M., Stickgold, R., Pace-Schott, E., Williams, J., and Hobson,
J.A. (1994). Emotion proﬁles in the dreams of men and women.
Conscious. Cogn. 3, 46–60.
53. Diekelmann, S., and Born, J. (2010). The memory function of sleep. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 11, 114–126.
54. Wamsley, E.J. (2014). Dreaming and ofﬂine memory consolidation. Curr.
Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 14, 433.
55. Marcus, G. (2009). Kluge: The Haphazard Evolution of the Human Mind
(Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt).
56. Richards, B.A., and Frankland, P.W. (2017). The persistence and tran-
sience of memory. Neuron 94, 1071–1084.
57. Vorster, A.P., and Born, J. (2015). Sleep and memory in mammals, birds
and invertebrates. Neurosci. Biobehavioral Rev. 50, 103–119.
58. Siegel, J.M. (2001). The rem sleep-memory consolidation hypothesis.
Science 294, 1058–1063.
59. Maquet, P., Ruby, P., Maudoux, A., Albouy, G., Sterpenich, V., Dang-Vu,
T., Desseilles, M., Boly, M., Perrin, F., Peigneux, P., et al. (2005). Human
cognition during rem sleep and the activity proﬁle within frontal and
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
Review

parietal cortices: a reappraisal of functional neuroimaging data. Prog.
Brain Res. 150, 219–595.
60. Peigneux, P., Laureys, S., Fuchs, S., Collette, F., Perrin, F., Reggers, J.,
Phillips, C., Degueldre, C., Del Fiore, G., Aerts, J., et al. (2004). Are spatial
memories strengthened in the human hippocampus during slow wave
sleep? Neuron 44, 535–545.
61. Debas, K., Carrier, J., Orban, P., Barakat, M., Lungu, O., Vandewalle, G.,
Tahar, A.H., Bellec, P., Karni, A., Ungerleider, L.G., et al. (2010). Brain
plasticity related to the consolidation of motor sequence learning and
motor adaptation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 107, 17839–17844.
62. Wilson, M.A., and McNaughton, B.L. (1994). Reactivation of hippocam-
pal ensemble memories during sleep. Science 265, 676–679.
63. Skaggs, W.E., and McNaughton, B.L. (1996). Replay of neuronal ﬁring se-
quences in rat hippocampus during sleep following spatial experience.
Science 271, 1870–1873.
64. Kudrimoti, H.S., Barnes, C.A., and McNaughton, B.L. (1999). Reactiva-
tion of hippocampal cell assemblies: effects of behavioral state, experi-
ence, and eeg dynamics. J. Neurosci. 19, 4090–4101.
65. Euston, D.R., Tatsuno, M., and McNaughton, B.L. (2007). Fast-forward
playback of recent memory sequences in prefrontal cortex during sleep.
science 318, 1147–1150.
66. Duvarci, S., and Nader, K. (2004). Characterization of fear memory recon-
solidation. J. Neurosci. 24, 9269–9275.
67. Scully, I.D., Napper, L.E., and Hupbach, A. (2017). Does reactivation
trigger episodic memory change? a meta-analysis. Neurobiol. Learn.
Mem. 142, 99–107.
68. Kumaran, D., Hassabis, D., and McClelland, J.L. (2016). What learning
systems do intelligent agents need? complementary learning systems
theory updated. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 512–534.
69. Gupta, A.S., van der Meer, M.A., Touretzky, D.S., and Redish, A.D.
(2010). Hippocampal replay is not a simple function of experience.
Neuron 65, 695–705.
70. Payne, J.D., Schacter, D.L., Propper, R.E., Huang, L.W., Wamsley, E.J.,
Tucker, M.A., Walker, M.P., and Stickgold, R. (2009). The role of sleep in
false memory formation. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 92, 327–334.
71. Lewis, P.A., and Durrant, S.J. (2011). Overlapping memory replay during
sleep builds cognitive schemata. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 343–351.
72. Nielsen, T.A., and Stenstrom, P. (2005). What are the memory sources of
dreaming? Nature 437, 1286–1289.
73. Stickgold, R., Hobson, J.A., Fosse, R., and Fosse, M. (2001a). Sleep,
learning, and dreams: off-line memory reprocessing. Science 294,
1052–1057.
74. David, D., and Mellman, T.A. (1997). Dreams following hurricane andrew.
Dreaming 7, 209.
75. Schredl, M., and Hofmann, F. (2003). Continuity between waking activ-
ities and dream activities. Conscious. Cogn. 12, 298–308.
76. Hartmann, E., and Brezler, T. (2008). A systematic change in dreams after
9/11/01. Sleep 31, 213–218.
77. Hartmann, E. (2010). The dream always makes new connections: the
dream is a creation, not a replay. Sleep Med. Clin. 5, 241–248.
78. Fosse, M.J., Fosse, R., Hobson, J.A., and Stickgold, R.J. (2003).
Dreaming and episodic memory: a functional dissociation? J. Cogn. Neu-
rosci. 15, 1–9.
79. Wamsley, E.J., and Stickgold, R. (2019). Dreaming of a learning task is
associated with enhanced memory consolidation: replication in an over-
night sleep study. J. Sleep Res. 28, e12749.
80. Stickgold, R., Malia, A., Maguire, D., Roddenberry, D., and O’Connor, M.
(2000). Replaying the game: hypnagogic images in normals and amne-
sics. Science 290, 350–353.
81. Blagrove, M., Fouquet, N.C., Henley-Einion, J.A., Pace-Schott, E.F., Da-
vies, A.C., Neuschaffer, J.L., and Turnbull, O.H. (2011). Assessing the
dream-lag effect for rem and nrem stage 2 dreams. PLoS One 6, e26708.
82. Crick, F., and Mitchison, G. (1983). The function of dream sleep. Nature
304, 111–114.
83. Crick, F., and Mitchison, G. (1995). Rem sleep and neural nets. Behav.
Brain Res. 69, 147–155.
84. Vertes, R.P. (2004). Memory consolidation in sleep: dream or reality.
Neuron 44, 135–148.
85. Feld, G.B., and Born, J. (2017). Sculpting memory during sleep: concur-
rent consolidation and forgetting. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 44, 20–27.
86. Hinton, G.E. (2002). Training products of experts by minimizing contras-
tive divergence. Neural Comput. 14, 1771–1800.
87. Hinton, G.E., and Sejnowski, T.J. (1986). Learning and relearning in Boltz-
mann machines. Parallel Distributed Process. Explorations Microstruc-
ture Cogn. 1, 282–317.
88. LeCun, Y., Denker, J.S., and Solla, S.A. (1990). Optimal brain damage. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 598–605.
89. Hinton, G.E., and Van Camp, D. (1993). Keeping the neural networks sim-
ple by minimizing the description length of the weights. In Proceedings of
the Sixth Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory, L. Pitt,
ed., pp. 5–13.
90. Thiele, J., Diehl, P., and Cook, M. (2017). A wake-sleep algorithm for
recurrent,
spiking
neural
networks.
arXiv
https://arxiv.org/abs/
1703.06290.
91. Blechner, M.J. (2013). The Dream Frontier (Routledge).
92. Jouvet, M. (1998). Paradoxical sleep as a programming system. J. Sleep
Res. 7, 1–5.
93. Hobson, J.A. (2009). Rem sleep and dreaming: towards a theory of pro-
toconsciousness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 803–813.
94. Bongard, J., Zykov, V., and Lipson, H. (2006). Resilient machines through
continuous self-modeling. Science 314, 1118–1121.
95. Adami, C. (2006). What do robots dream of? Science 314, 1093–1094.
96. Wikenheiser, A.M., and Redish, A.D. (2015). Decoding the cognitive map:
ensemble hippocampal sequences and decision making. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 32, 8–15.
97. Momennejad, I., Otto, A.R., Daw, N.D., and Norman, K.A. (2018). Ofﬂine
replay supports planning in human reinforcement learning. Elife 7,
e32548.
98. Dragoi, G., and Tonegawa, S. (2011). Preplay of future place cell se-
quences by hippocampal cellular assemblies. Nature 469, 397–401.
99. Liu, K., Sibille, J., and Dragoi, G. (2019). Preconﬁgured patterns are the
primary driver of ofﬂine multi-neuronal sequence replay. Hippocampus
29, 275–283.
100. Revonsuo, A. (2000). The reinterpretation of dreams: an evolutionary hy-
pothesis of the function of dreaming. Behav. Brain Sci. 23, 877–901.
101. Malcolm-Smith, S., and Solms, M. (2004). Incidence of threat in dreams:
a response to revonsuo’s threat simulation theory. Dreaming 14, 220.
102. Zadra, A., Desjardins, S., and Marcotte, E. (2006). Evolutionary function
of dreams: a test of the threat simulation theory in recurrent dreams.
Conscious. Cogn. 15, 450–463.
103. Zadra, A., and Stickgold, R. (2021). When Brains Dream: Exploring the
Science and Mystery of Sleep.
104. Thill, S., and Svensson, H. (2011). The inception of simulation: a hypoth-
esis for the role of dreams in young children. In Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33.
105. Svensson, H., and Thill, S. (2012). Should robots dream of electric
sheep?. . Workshop on Artiﬁcial Mental Imagery in Cognitive Systems
and Robotics, 11 (Citeseer).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
13
Review

106. Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? predictive brains, situated agents, and
the future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181–204.
107. Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind (Oxford University Press).
108. Friston, K., Mattout, J., and Kilner, J. (2011). Action understanding and
active inference. Biol. Cybernetics 104, 137–160.
109. Keller, G.B., and Mrsic-Flogel, T.D. (2018). Predictive processing: a ca-
nonical cortical computation. Neuron 100, 424–435.
110. Dayan, P., Hinton, G.E., Neal, R.M., and Zemel, R.S. (1995). The helm-
holtz machine. Neural Comput. 7, 889–904.
111. Hinton, G.E., Dayan, P., Frey, B.J., and Neal, R.M. (1995). The’’ wake-
sleep’’ algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science 268,
1158–1161.
112. Litwin, P., and Mi1kowski, M. (2020). Uniﬁcation by ﬁat: arrested develop-
ment of predictive processing. Cogn. Sci. 44, e12867.
113. Sun, Z., and Firestone, C. (2020). The dark room problem. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 24, 346–348.
114. Bucci, A., and Grasso, M. (2017:1–17). Sleep and dreaming in the predic-
tive processing framework. In PPP-philosophy and Predictive Process-
ing. Open MIND (MIND Group).
115. Hobson, J.A., and Friston, K.J. (2012). Waking and dreaming conscious-
ness: neurobiological and functional considerations. Prog. Neurobiol.
98, 82–98.
116. Hobson, J.A., Hong, C.H.C., and Friston, K.J. (2014). Virtual reality and
consciousness inference in dreaming. Front. Psychol. 5, 1133.
117. Braun, A.R., Balkin, T.J., Wesenten, N.J., Carson, R.E., Varga, M., Bald-
win, P., Selbie, S., Belenky, G., and Herscovitch, P. (1997). Regional ce-
rebral blood ﬂow throughout the sleep-wake cycle. an h2 (15) o pet study.
Brain a J. Neurol. 120, 1173–1197.
118. Nofzinger, E.A., Mintun, M.A., Wiseman, M., Kupfer, D.J., and Moore,
R.Y. (1997). Forebrain activation in rem sleep: an fdg pet study. Brain
Res. 770, 192–201.
119. Schredl, M., and Erlacher, D. (2004). Lucid Lucid dreaming frequency and
personality. Personal. Individual Differences 37, 1463–1473.
120. Foulkes, D. (2009). Children’s Dreaming and the Development of Con-
sciousness (Harvard University Press).
121. Sejnowski, T.J. (1995). Neural networks: sleep and memory. Curr. Biol. 5,
832–834.
122. Lunteren, F.V. (2016). Clocks to computers: a machine-based ‘‘big pic-
ture’’ of the history of modern science. Isis 107, 762–776.
123. Richards, B.A., Lillicrap, T.P., Beaudoin, P., Bengio, Y., Bogacz, R.,
Christensen, A., Clopath, C., Costa, R.P., de Berker, A., Ganguli, S.,
et al. (2019). A deep learning framework for neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci.
22, 1761–1770.
124. Lillicrap, T.P., Santoro, A., Marris, L., Akerman, C.J., and Hinton, G.
(2020). Backpropagation and the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1–12.
125. Maaten, L., Chen, M., Tyree, S., and Weinberger, K. (2013). Learning with
marginalized corrupted features. In Proceedings of the 30th International
Conference on Machine Learning, 28, pp. 410–418.
126. Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Salakhutdi-
nov, R. (2014). Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from
overﬁtting. J. Machine Learn. Res. 15, 1929–1958.
127. Domhoff, G.W., and Fox, K.C. (2015). Dreaming and the default network:
a review, synthesis, and counterintuitive research proposal. Conscious.
Cogn. 33, 342–353.
128. Nir, Y., and Tononi, G. (2010). And the brain: from phenomenology to
neurophysiology. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 88–100.
129. Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C.D., and Vecchi, M.P. (1983). Optimization by
simulated annealing. Science 220, 671–680.
130. Wamsley, E.J., and Stickgold, R. (2010). Dreaming and ofﬂine memory
processing. Curr. Biol. 20, R1010–R1013.
131. Schredl, M., and Erlacher, D. (2010). Is Sleep-dependent Memory
Consolidation of a Visuo-Motor Task Related to Dream Content? (Univer-
sit€atsbibliothek der Universit€at Heidelberg).
132. De Koninck, J., Prevost, F., and Mo, Lortie-Lussier (1996). Vertical inver-
sion of the visual ﬁeld and rem sleep mentation. J. Sleep Res. 5, 16–20.
133. Doyon, J., Korman, M., Morin, A., Dostie, V., Tahar, A.H., Benali, H.,
Karni, A., and Ungerleider, L.G. (2009). Carrier J.. Contribution of night
and day sleep vs. simple passage of time to the consolidation of motor
sequence
and
visuomotor
adaptation
learning.
Exp.
Brain
Res.
195, 15–26.
134. Ellenbogen, J.M., Hulbert, J.C., Stickgold, R., Dinges, D.F., and Thomp-
son-Schill, S.L. (2006). Interfering with theories of sleep and memory:
sleep, declarative memory, and associative interference. Curr. Biol. 16,
1290–1294.
135. Friedrich, M., Wilhelm, I., Born, J., and Friederici, A.D. (2015). Generaliza-
tion of word meanings during infant sleep. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–9.
136. Go´ mez, R.L., Bootzin, R.R., and Nadel, L. (2006). Naps promote abstrac-
tion in language-learning infants. Psychol. Sci. 17, 670–674.
137. Mednick, S.C., Nakayama, K., Cantero, J.L., Atienza, M., Levin, A.A., Pa-
thak, N., and Stickgold, R. (2002). The restorative effect of naps on
perceptual deterioration. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 677–681.
138. Wagner, U., Gais, S., Haider, H., Verleger, R., and Born, J. (2004). Sleep
inspires insight. Nature 427, 352–355.
139. Cai, D.J., Mednick, S.A., Harrison, E.M., Kanady, J.C., and Mednick, S.C.
(2009). Rem, not incubation, improves creativity by priming associative
networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 10130–10134.
140. Durkin, J., and Aton, S.J. (2016). Sleep-dependent potentiation in the vi-
sual system is at odds with the synaptic homeostasis hypothesis. Sleep
39, 155–159.
141. Fisher, S.P., Cui, N., McKillop, L.E., Gemignani, J., Bannerman, D.M.,
Oliver, P.L., Peirson, S.N., and Vyazovskiy, V.V. (2016). Stereotypic wheel
running decreases cortical activity in mice. Nat. Commun. 7, 1–12.
142. Raven, F., Van der Zee, E.A., Meerlo, P., and Havekes, R. (2018). The role
of sleep in regulating structural plasticity and synaptic strength: implica-
tions for memory and cognitive function. Sleep Med. Rev. 39, 3–11.
143. Achille, A., and Soatto, S. (2018). Information dropout: learning optimal
representations through noisy computation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
machine intelligence 40, 2897–2905.
144. Tobin, J., Fong, R., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Zaremba, W., and Abbeel, P.
(2017). Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (IEEE), pp. 23–30.
145. Akkaya, I., Andrychowicz, M., Chociej, M., Litwin, M., McGrew, B., Pet-
ron, A., Paino, A., Plappert, M., Powell, G., Ribas, R., et al. (2019). Solving
rubik’s cube with a robot hand. arXiv.
146. Goodfellow, I.J., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D.,
Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. (2014). Generative adversarial
nets.
In
Advances
in
Neural
Information
Processing
Systems,
pp. 2672–2680.
147. Hertzmann, A. (2019). Aesthetics of neural network art. arXiv https://
arxiv.org/abs/1903.05696.
148. Ellis, K., Wong, C., Nye, M., Sable-Meyer, M., Cary, L., Morales, L., He-
witt, L., Solar-Lezama, A., and Tenenbaum, J.B. (2020). DreamCoder:
growing
generalizable,
interpretable
knowledge
with
wake-sleep
bayesian program learning. arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.08381.
149. Zeng, G., Chen, Y., Cui, B., and Yu, S. (2019). Continual learning of
context-dependent processing in neural networks. Nat. Machine Intelli-
gence 1, 364–372.
150. van de Ven, G.M., Siegelmann, H.T., and Tolias, A.S. (2020). Brain-
inspired replay for continual learning with artiﬁcial neural networks. Nat.
Commun. 11, 1–14.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
Review

151. Foulkes, D., and Domhoff, G.W. (2014). Bottom-up or top-down in dream
neuroscience?
a
top-down
critique
of
two
bottom-up
studies.
Conscious. Cogn. 27, 168–171.
152. Strauch, I. (2005). Rem dreaming in the transition from late childhood to
adolescence: a longitudinal study. Dreaming 15, 155.
153. Lakoff, G., and Johnson, M. (2008). Metaphors We Live by (University of
Chicago Press).
154. Lakoff, G. (2008). Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories
Reveal about the Mind (University of Chicago Press).
155. James, W. (2007). The Principles of Psychology, volume 1 (Cosimo, Inc.).
156. Keiser, A.A., Turnbull, L.M., Darian, M.A., Feldman, D.E., Song, I., and
Tronson, N.C. (2017). Sex differences in context fear generalization and
recruitment of hippocampus and amygdala during retrieval. Neuropsy-
chopharmacology 42, 397–407.
157. Cirelli, C., and Tononi, G. (2020). Effects of sleep and waking on the syn-
aptic ultrastructure. Philosophical Trans. R. Soc. B 375, 20190235.
158. Powell, R., and Copping, A. (2010). Sleep deprivation and its conse-
quences in construction workers. J. construction Eng. Manag. 136,
1086–1092.
159. Leger, D. (1994). The cost of sleep-related accidents: a report for the na-
tional commission on sleep disorders research. Sleep 17, 84–93.
160. Ocampo-Garce´ s, A., Molina, E., Rodrı´guez, A., and Vivaldi, E.A. (2000).
Homeostasis of rem sleep after total and selective sleep deprivation in
the rat. J. Neurophysiol. 84, 2699–2702.
161. Hoel, E.P., Albantakis, L., Cirelli, C., and Tononi, G. (2016). Synaptic
reﬁnement during development and its effect on slow-wave activity: a
computational study. J. Neurophysiol. 115, 2199–2213.
162. Hazan, H., Saunders, D.J., Khan, H., Patel, D., Sanghavi, D.T., Siegel-
mann, H.T., and Kozma, R. (2018). Bindsnet: a machine learning-oriented
spiking neural networks library in python. Front. neuroinformatics 12, 89.
163. Eagleman, D.M., and Vaughn, D.A. (2020). The Defensive Activation The-
ory: Dreaming as a Mechanism to Prevent Takeover of the Visual Cortex
(bioRxiv).
164. Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Desjardins, G.,
Rusu, A.A., Milan, K., Quan, J., Ramalho, T., Grabska-Barwinska, A.,
et al. (2017). Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 114, 3521–3526.
165. Raghavan, A., Hostetler, J., and Chai, S. (2019). Generative memory for
lifelong reinforcement learning. arXiv.
166. Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., and Koch, C. (2016). Integrated infor-
mation theory: from consciousness to its physical substrate. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 17, 450–461.
167. Hogh-Olesen, H. (2018). The Aesthetic Animal (Oxford University Press).
168. Pinker, S. (1997). How the Mind Works (Norton), p. 1997.
169. Kidd, D.C., and Castano, E. (2013). Reading literary ﬁction improves the-
ory of mind. Science 342, 377–380.
170. Mar, R.A., and Oatley, K. (2008). The function of ﬁction is the abstraction
and simulation of social experience. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 3, 173–192.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 2, May 14, 2021
15
Review

