Article
Automatic versus Choice-Dependent Value
Representations in the Human Brain
Highlights
d Value representations in different brain regions serve distinct
behavioral aims
d mPFC value coding is ampliﬁed when choices are based on
values
d This enhancement of mPFC value signals is linked to choice
consistency
d PCC value coding is automatic and relates to value-driven
attentional capture
Authors
Marcus Grueschow, Rafael Polania,
Todd A. Hare, Christian C. Ruff
Correspondence
marcus.grueschow@econ.uzh.ch (M.G.),
christian.ruff@econ.uzh.ch (C.C.R.)
In Brief
Grueschow et al. report a functional
dissociation in the human brain valuation
system: activity in medial prefrontal
cortex underlies goal-directed choices
based on values, whereas neural signals
in posterior cingulate cortex serve to
attract attention to valuable, but
unattended, items.
Grueschow et al., 2015, Neuron 85, 874–885
February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.054

Neuron
Article
Automatic versus Choice-Dependent
Value Representations in the Human Brain
Marcus Grueschow,1,* Rafael Polania,1 Todd A. Hare,1 and Christian C. Ruff1,*
1Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems Research (SNS Lab), Department of Economics, University of Zurich, 8006 Zu¨ rich, Switzerland
*Correspondence: marcus.grueschow@econ.uzh.ch (M.G.), christian.ruff@econ.uzh.ch (C.C.R.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.054
SUMMARY
The subjective values of choice options can impact
on behavior in two fundamentally different types of
situations: ﬁrst, when people explicitly base their ac-
tions on such values, and second, when values
attract attention despite being irrelevant for current
behavior. Here we show with functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) that these two behavioral
functions of values are encoded in distinct regions
of the human brain. In the medial prefrontal cortex,
value-related activity is enhanced when subjective
value becomes choice-relevant, and the magnitude
of this increase relates directly to the outcome and
reliability of the value-based choice. In contrast, ac-
tivity in the posterior cingulate cortex represents
values similarly when they are relevant or irrelevant
for the present choice, and the strength of this repre-
sentation predicts attentional capture by choice-
irrelevant values. Our results suggest that distinct
components of the brain’s valuation network encode
value in context-dependent manners that serve fun-
damentally different behavioral aims.
INTRODUCTION
Any decision based on personal preferences rests on the
subjective value (SV) of the choice options, for example, when
deciding which food to eat or whether to buy a product at a
given price (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Rangel et al.,
2008). Elucidating the neural mechanisms by which such SVs
are represented is therefore paramount for understanding
both healthy and maladaptive choice behavior (Bickel et al.,
2007; Dixon et al., 2006; Leotti et al., 2010). To address this
issue, numerous laboratory studies have correlated SVs during
value-based choices with brain activity and have identiﬁed a
valuation system comprising several regions, including the
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC), and the ventral striatum (VS) (for recent meta-analyses
see Bartra et al., 2013; Clithero and Rangel, 2014). Critically,
these studies have typically examined value representations
during choices in which the goal is to maximize the personal
beneﬁt of the agent and which are therefore taken based on
the SVs (anticipated reward and costs) of the choice options.
In these situations, participants naturally focus their attention
on the choice-relevant SVs.
However, there is growing evidence that SVs can also inﬂu-
ence behavior when they are currently choice-irrelevant and
therefore outside the focus of attention (Della Libera and Che-
lazzi, 2006; Hickey et al., 2011; Theeuwes and Belopolsky,
2012). More speciﬁcally, the presence of a task-irrelevant item
that was previously coupled with a reward can slow down perfor-
mance of purely perceptual decisions performed on non-value-
related stimulus dimensions (Anderson, 2013; Awh et al.,
2012). This phenomenon—termed value-based attentional cap-
ture—is thought to reﬂect a brain mechanism that constantly
monitors the environment for behaviorally relevant stimuli that
may warrant a new course of action (Anderson, 2013; Pearson
et al., 2011). This mechanism may allow the agent to notice
valuable unattended alternative stimuli and enable behavioral
engagement when this is beneﬁcial.
Very little is known about how task-irrelevant SVs are repre-
sented in the brain and how they may exert their inﬂuence on
behavior. Only few studies have examined correlations of brain
activity with choice-irrelevant SVs, but crucially, the relationship
between these signals and the behavioral slowing of non-value-
based choices has not yet been established. This is primarily due
to the fact that automatic or task-irrelevant SV signals have been
investigated with paradigms that involved no choice at all (Levy
et al., 2011), forced actions (Plassmann et al., 2007), or hypothet-
ical choices (Tusche et al., 2010), thereby precluding quantitative
assessment of how choice-irrelevant SVs impact on task perfor-
mance during value-unrelated decisions. Moreover, it is an open
question whether any such automatic SV representations are
functionally overlapping with, or distinct from, choice-dependent
SV signals, as previous studies that have assessed automatic SV
coding during value-unrelated tasks have either focused on only
one region (Kim et al., 2007) or have pooled activity across
several brain areas (Lebreton et al., 2009). Thus, it is unclear
whether different regions of the brain’s valuation circuitry contain
functionally distinct SV representations that differentially relate
to value-based choices or value-based attentional capture.
To address this issue, we developed a choice task in which
human participants alternated between purchasing decisions
(for which SVs are directly choice-relevant) or perceptual deci-
sions (for which SVs are unrelated to the current choice). Both
types of choices were taken based on identical visual stimuli
and motor responses. This paradigm is ideally suited for various
hypothesis tests that can identify brain regions where SV repre-
sentations predominantly relate to value-based choices or to
value-based attentional capture.
874
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

First, we hypothesize that if a brain region speciﬁcally repre-
sents choice-relevant SV, then value coding should be enhanced
in the context of purchasing compared to perceptual choices.
This prediction stems from the well-documented effect that
directing attention toward a speciﬁc stimulus feature enhances
the sensitivity of visual neurons selective for that feature, typi-
cally by sharpening the neuronal tuning curve (Knudsen, 2007;
Martinez-Trujillo and Treue, 2004; Reynolds and Chelazzi,
2004; Spitzer et al., 1988). This mechanism is thought to
strengthen the neuronal representation of task-relevant features
relative to background activity, thereby improving the signal-to-
noise ratio and increasing the reliability of the neural signal used
to control behavior (Kastner et al., 1999; Martinez-Trujillo and
Treue, 2004; Moran and Desimone, 1985; Reynolds et al.,
2000). We thus hypothesize that a similar mechanism may boost
neural SV representations when these become choice-relevant.
Any region in the brain representing predominantly choice-rele-
vant SVs should exhibit a signiﬁcantly steeper slope of the
regression of neural activity on increasing SVs during purchasing
compared to perceptual choices.
Second, we expect that these enhancements of neural SV rep-
resentations are a critical determinant of the choice outcome. In
general, attention-related activity modulations in functionally
specialized regions are thought to result in higher reliability
of the choice-relevant signals, thereby decreasing trial-to-trial
variability of behavior for any constant stimulus (Desimone and
Duncan, 1995; Knudsen, 2007; Luck et al., 1997). Thus, we hy-
pothesize that the strength of the increase in SV representations
during purchasing choices compared to the perceptual task will
correlate with higher SV consistency across choices. SV consis-
tency in this context means that if an item A is assigned a higher
value than monetary amount X on a ﬁrst occasion, then item A is
also assigned a value higher than X when evaluated at a later
time point (Rangel et al., 2008). In addition, we expect based
on previous ﬁndings (Knutson et al., 2007) that regions imple-
menting choice-relevant SV representations should contain sig-
nals that predict the actual purchasing choice.
In contrast to these hypotheses about choice-relevant SV
representations, we expect that brain activity in regions repre-
senting SVs automatically (i.e., even when these are choice-
irrelevant) will show a constant relationship to SVs for both pur-
chasing and perceptual choices. This is because such regions
encode SVs of potential choice options without being affected
by the current task, and therefore in a similar fashion for both
types of decisions (Kim et al., 2007; Lebreton et al., 2009). How-
ever, the strength of this automatic SV-related activity should
relate to the degree of value-driven attentional capture for
perceptual choices. That is, we expect that the strength of neural
activity in any region representing SVs in an automatic fashion
should correlate with the reaction time (RT) slowing observed
during perceptual choices. This effect is thought to reﬂect that
these neural SV representations automatically capture attention
and therefore systematically slow down the unrelated perceptual
choice (Anderson et al., 2011; Awh et al., 2012).
We directly tested these hypotheses for all putative valuation
regions of the human brain, using fMRI in a sample of 26 healthy
volunteers who took purchasing or perceptual choices on iden-
tical visual stimuli. This allowed us to measure and compare the
neural response proﬁles for SVs when these were choice-rele-
vant (during purchasing choices) or unrelated to the present
decision (for perceptual choices). Moreover, we could directly
relate the strength of these two types of value representations
to SV consistency and choice outcome for value-based choices,
or to value-based attentional capture during perceptual choices.
RESULTS
Behavioral Results
Both types of decisions were based on the same visual stimuli
(DVD movie covers, each presented only once per decision
type; Figures 1A and 1B) and were carefully matched for identical
motor responses and RTs (Figures 1D–1F). RTs in both tasks
did not signiﬁcantly differ (t25 = 0.17, p = 0.86, paired t test; Fig-
ures 1D and 1E) but were strongly correlated across participants,
indicating that both types of choices did not entail fundamentally
different processing demands (r = 0.82, p < 0.001; Figure 1F). SV
for each movie was quantiﬁed by willingness-to-pay ratings
(Becker et al., 1964) (between 0 and 20 Swiss francs for
672 movies)—a standard method widely used in behavioral
economics and neuroeconomics (Krajbich et al., 2010; Plass-
mann et al., 2007)—which were provided by each participant
1–3 days prior to fMRI.
During scanning, SVs were directly relevant for the purchasing
decisions, which required the participants to choose whether or
not to buy the depicted movie at an aurally presented price that
varied around the predetermined SV. In contrast, SVs were irrel-
evant for the matched perceptual decisions (Polanı´a et al., 2014),
in which participants judged whether the numbers of faces (FV)
present on the DVD cover matched an aurally presented number
that varied around the actual FV (see Experimental Procedures
for details). Importantly, SV and FV were uncorrelated in both
tasks (t25 = 1.34, p = 0.19; Figure 1C), therefore allowing unbi-
ased analyses of how SVs are neurally represented during both
types of choices.
We conﬁrmed that SV was indeed choice-relevant for purchas-
ing decisions and choice-irrelevant for perceptual decisions us-
ing multiple logistic regression analyses of participants’ behav-
ioral responses. This showed that the difference between SV
and the aurally presented price strongly affected accept/reject
purchasing choices (t25 = 9.24, p = 1.5 3 109; Figure 2A; one-
sample t test; see Experimental Procedures), but not perceptual
choices (t25 = 1.62, p = 0.12; Figure 2B). Conversely, the abso-
lute difference between FV and the aurally presented number
strongly affected perceptual choices (t25 = 16.03, p = 1.1 3
1014; Figure 2B), but not purchasing choices (t25 = 1.37, p =
0.18; Figure 2A). These analyses thus conﬁrm that participants
indeed based their choices exclusively on SVs for value-based
choices and on FVs for perceptual decisions.
To test whether our data also exhibit the predicted value-
driven attentional capture effect (i.e., slowing of perceptual
choices with increasing choice-irrelevant SV) (Anderson et al.,
2011), we regressed RTs of perceptual decisions on the trial-
wise SV and FV (Figure 2D). Unsurprisingly, we found that RTs
increased with an increasing number of faces participants
had to match (FV; t25 = 14.35, p = 1.4 3 1013), but crucially,
we also found a signiﬁcant RT increase proportional to the
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
875

choice-irrelevant SVs of the DVDs (t25 = 3.66, p = 1.2 3 103).
This conﬁrms that a value-driven attentional capture mechanism
is engaged during perceptual choices. The speed of purchasing
decisions was also affected by choice-relevant SV (t25 = 2.22, p =
0.036; Figure 2C), but not by the number of faces on the cover
(t25 = 0.76, p = 0.45; Figure 2C), thereby further conﬁrming that
participants were only affected by SVs (and not FVs) when taking
value-based choices.
Functional Imaging Results
The primary aim of the fMRI analyses was to compare how auto-
matic and choice-dependent value representations are imple-
mented in the human brain. To this end, we took great care to
ensure that experimental stimulation (visual/auditory), RTs, and
motor responses were identical across both types of choices.
This precise match in sensory and motor-related neural process-
ing between both types of decisions was reﬂected in the sub-
stantial overlap of blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activity
in audio-, visual-, and motor-associated regions common to
both types of choices (conjunction analysis all p < 0.05, FWE-
corrected; Figure 3A; see Table S1). Nevertheless, purchasing
and perceptual choices strongly differed in how they recruited
value-related or perceptual processing: when comparing mean
BOLD activity between both types of choices (averaging across
all levels of SV and FV), we found regions routinely associated
with subjective valuation (such as the mPFC and PCC; see Bartra
Figure 1. Experimental Task and Reaction Time Results
(A) In the scanner, participants performed two types of choices on identical DVD cover stimuli (see also Experimental Procedures for details). For value-based
choices (SV choice-relevant), participants indicated their willingness to pay a speciﬁed price for that movie under real purchasing conditions. For perceptual
choices (SV choice-irrelevant), participants indicated whether the aurally presented number of faces matched the number of faces on the cover.
(B) Purchasing and perceptual choices were presented in randomly alternating mini-blocks of 3–5 trials each. The choice type was indicated prior to each block
via an auditory cue. During each block, the choice type was furthermore indicated by a central visual marker (C for purchasing decisions and rotated C for
perceptual decisions). Each movie cover was presented only once for purchasing and perceptual choices, respectively, in a randomized order to counteract
possible novelty or memory effects.
(C) SV and FV were uncorrelated in both tasks (mean b = 0.234, linear regression, t25 = 1.3398, p = 0.1924, one-sample t test). Gray lines represent single-
subject regressions of FV on SV. Thick black line represents this regression across subjects. Gray dots indicate SV/FV combinations that occurred at least once
during the experiment.
(D and E) Reaction time distributions for purchasing choices (SV choice-relevant) and for perceptual decisions (SV choice-irrelevant). Bars represent observed
counts, and smooth lines represent gamma probability density functions ﬁtted to the underlying distributions using maximum-likelihood estimation. Vertical black
lines represent the reaction time means, which were not signiﬁcantly different (purchasing decisions = 1.694 s, perceptual decisions = 1.7 s; t25 = 0.17, p = 0.86,
paired t test).
(F) Individual mean RTs were strongly correlated between both types of choices, indicating that both types of choices did not entail fundamentally different
processing demands.
876
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

et al., 2013; Clithero and Rangel, 2014) signiﬁcantly more acti-
vated during purchasing decisions than during perceptual deci-
sions, whereas regions of the so-called dorsal attention network
(i.e., inferior parietal sulcus [IPS], frontal eye ﬁelds [FEFs]; see
Corbetta et al., 1991; Corbetta and Shulman, 2002) as well as
the lateral occipital complex (LOC) were signiﬁcantly more acti-
vated during perceptual as compared to purchasing choices (all
p < 0.05, FWE-corrected; Figure 3B; see Table S2). These results
conﬁrm that despite their identical sensory and motor demands,
the two types of decisions in our paradigm ﬂexibly recruited
regions that are functionally specialized for processing the infor-
mation relevant for the current choice.
Two Distinct Types of Value Representations in the
Brain
To distinguish choice-related versus automatic value compu-
tations in the human brain, we tested for neural activity that
either represented SVs predominantly when these were task-
relevant or that coded value irrespective of current behavioral
goals. For this purpose, we regressed BOLD signals against
the trial-wise SV of the DVDs during purchasing decisions—
when the choice strongly depended on SV—and during
perceptual decisions, in which SVs were irrelevant for the cur-
rent choice. This analysis revealed that both types of SV repre-
sentations are encoded in the brain, but in clearly dissociated
regions of the valuation system. On the one hand, BOLD sig-
nals in mPFC (Figures 4A, 4C, 4E, and 4G) and bilateral VS
(Figure S1; Table S3) signiﬁcantly correlated with SVs during
purchasing decisions, but not during perceptual decisions,
suggesting that both these regions mainly represent values
when these are choice-relevant. Importantly, a direct contrast
between purchasing and perceptual decisions conﬁrmed that
activity in both mPFC and VS showed signiﬁcantly stronger
correlations with SVs during purchasing decisions compared
to perceptual decisions (Figures 4C, 4E, 4G, and S1B–S1D).
We also note that this BOLD signal enhancement during pur-
chasing choices was indeed related to the SVs of the DVDs
and did not reﬂect the varying levels of prices presented along-
side the items (see Supplemental Results for the relevant con-
trol analyses).
In contrast to mPFC and VS, BOLD signals in the PCC (Figures
4B, 4D, 4F, and 4H) showed similar positive correlations
with both choice-relevant SV during purchasing decisions and
choice-irrelevant SV during perceptual decisions. Note that
correlations with SV during perceptual choices were also found
for other areas such as bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(dlPFC) and bilateral parietal lobule (Figure S2; Table S3). This
may possibly index a function of these areas in the ﬁltering of dis-
tracting stimuli during perceptual choice (Friedman-Hill et al.,
2003; Lennert and Martinez-Trujillo, 2011). However, the PCC
was the only region that represented SVs both when these
were relevant and irrelevant for the current decision (Figures
4D, 4F, and 4H), thereby fulﬁlling our requirements for an
area that contains truly automatic, choice-independent value
representations.
Our data therefore demonstrate a functional dissociation
between brain regions consistently linked to value processing
(Bartra et al., 2013; Clithero and Rangel, 2014). While the PCC
represents SV in an automatic fashion that is invariant to current
behavioral aims, the mPFC and VS represent SV predominantly
when it is relevant for the current choice.
mPFC Activity Relates to Value-Based Choice
Consistency
We next tested whether the strength of the choice-dependent
SV representations related to the behavioral consistency of
value-based choices. Consistency here refers to how well the
participants’ choices in the scanner agreed with their Becker-
DeGroot-Marshak (BDM) auction rating for each DVD provided
1–3 days prior to scanning (Becker et al., 1964; Krajbich et al.,
2010; Plassmann et al., 2007). That is, a choice is SV-consistent
Figure 2. Behavioral Results
The trial-wise SVs were directly relevant for the participant’s purchasing de-
cisions, but irrelevant for the matched perceptual decisions.
(A and B) During purchasing trials, decisions to accept or reject depended
positively on the difference between SV and the aurally presented price
(multiple logistic regression; t25 = 9.24, p = 1.5 3 109), while this index was
irrelevant for perceptual choices (t25 = 1.37, p = 0.18). This regression indicates
that the higher the difference between SV and offer price (consumer surplus),
the more likely a purchase response.
During perceptual trials, responses depended negatively on the absolute dif-
ference between the number of faces (FV) and the aurally presented number
(t25 = 16.03, p = 1.2 3 1014), while this index was irrelevant during pur-
chasing choices (t25 = 1.62, p = 0.12). This regression indicates that the higher
the absolute difference between FV and the offered criterion, the less likely an
accept response. Please note that the y scale in (B) has been inverted to
facilitate illustration and visual comparison with the other panels.
(C) RTs during purchasing decisions were signiﬁcantly affected by the task-
relevant SV (t25 = 2.22, p = 0.036), while the number of faces on the cover had
no effect (t25 = 0.76, p = 0.45) on RTs.
(D) RTs during perceptual choices were slowed down by task-relevant FV (t25 =
14.3517, p = 1.4 3 1013), and crucially, also by task-irrelevant SV (t25 = 3.66,
p = 0.00117), thereby conﬁrming value-based attentional capture. Error bars in
all panels represent ± 1 SEM (n = 26).
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
877

if participants purchase a DVD when its price is less than or equal
to the value they stated previously, or if they decline to purchase
a DVD when its price is above their previously stated value. We
expected a relation between SV consistency and neural SV rep-
resentations because stronger neural choice-relevant value re-
sponses result in an enhanced signal-to-noise ratio and thus
more reliable behavioral readout of the values across both
testing occasions. We tested for such a consistency effect with
a linear mixed-effects regression of the proportion of consistent
choices on the average strength of the neural choice-relevant
value responses (this analysis was conducted across value quin-
tiles, see Experimental Procedures for details). Note that the data
submitted to these analyses were extracted from regions of in-
terest that were independently deﬁned by the leave-one-sub-
ject-out (LOSO) procedure to avoid circularity (Esterman et al.,
2010; Kriegeskorte et al., 2009; Poldrack and Mumford, 2009;
see Experimental Procedures for details).
Only the mPFC showed a relationship between the magnitude
of BOLD response and choice consistency (X2 = 4.85, p = 0.027,
likelihood ratio test), while no such relationship was found for
PCC (X2 = 0.23, p = 0.629), and only a trend emerged for VS
(X2 = 2.43, p = 0.12) (Figure 5A; Table S5). Importantly, the
strength of value-related BOLD activity in the mPFC was more
strongly related to choice consistency than the corresponding
PCC activity (X2 = 6.49, p = 0.01, likelihood ratio test; Table
S5), suggesting that the value signals in mPFC are more relevant
for purchasing behavior than SV signals from task-invariant PCC.
The data regarding stronger involvement of the VS as compared
to PCC are inconclusive, as they revealed only an effect at trend
level (X2 = 2.38, p = 0.13).
We also tested whether SV consistency was speciﬁcally
related to the strength of the choice-related enhancement of
value coding in mPFC. That value-based consistency is not
driven purely by behavioral SVs (but rather by their neural repre-
sentation) is already evident from the ﬁnding that during pur-
chasing choices, SV consistency was selectively related to value
coding in the mPFC, but not in the PCC. If the choice-related
enhancement of mPFC value responses indeed increases the
ﬁdelity of value coding, then SV consistency should relate to
the strength of the difference between the choice-relevant and
choice-irrelevant value response proﬁle. We again tested this hy-
pothesis with linear mixed-effects analyses (see Experimental
Procedures for details). This revealed a signiﬁcant relationship
only in the mPFC (X2 = 4.12, p = 0.042, likelihood ratio test),
but not in PCC (X2 = 0.36, p = 0.55) or VS (X2 = 0.01, p = 0.94).
Crucially, the value signal enhancement in mPFC accounted
for value-based consistency signiﬁcantly better than the corre-
sponding enhancement in the PCC (X2 = 3.78, p = 0.05) or the
VS (X2 = 4.95, p = 0.026). Thus, these ﬁndings suggest that
the enhancement of value representations in the mPFC during
purchasing decisions speciﬁcally increases the stability of these
representations and thereby leads to more consistent value-
based choices.
Relating Neural Signals to Purchasing Choices
Previous studies (Knutson et al., 2007; Padoa-Schioppa, 2013;
Strait et al., 2014) have shown that valuation regions contain
signals that can be used to predict choice outcomes. We
therefore expected that regions containing choice-relevant
SV signals should—in addition to supporting consistent valua-
tion of items across decision contexts—also provide informa-
tion about whether or not a DVD will be purchased in our task.
We tested this hypothesis with analyses of how purchasing
decisions on any given trial can be predicted by BOLD activity
in the mPFC, VS, and PCC. To this end, we performed a
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis (Green and
Swets, 1966) that quantiﬁes the reliability with which the sin-
gle-trial amplitude of the BOLD signal—at various time points
following stimulus onset—predicts the purchasing choice on
that trial (see Experimental Procedures for details). Consistent
with previous reports (Knutson et al., 2007), we found that
BOLD signals in the mPFC within 4–8 s post-stimulus signiﬁ-
cantly predicted purchases, while the corresponding signals
extracted from PCC did not (Figure 5B). The response timing
of this relationship was similar to the peak delay and temporal
spread of the hemodynamic response following trial onset,
Figure 3. Average Brain Activity that Is Com-
mon and Distinct for Both Types of Choice
(A) Common decision-related activity in both tasks
(conjunction at p < 0.05, FWE cluster-corrected,
see Table S1 for complete list) was found in the
ventral visual stream along the fusiform gyrus, in
subcortical visual areas such as the lateral genic-
ulate nucleus, and in the auditory cortex along the
bilateral superior temporal gyrus. In addition, we
found regions associated with motor responses—
such as the SMA, pre-SMA, and the left motor
cortex—to be similarly engaged in both tasks.
SMA, supplementary motor area.
(B) Comparison of average decision-related activ-
ity (not parametric modulation by SV) between both
types of choice revealed distinct activations for
purchasing and perceptual choices. Blue repre-
sents signiﬁcant activity for purchasing > percep-
tual choices, whereas green represents signiﬁcant
activity for perceptual > purchasing choices (see
Table S2) (both at p < 0.05, FWE cluster-corrected).
878
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

suggesting that the mPFC activity that predicts purchases is
associated with the decision period lasting for about 1.7 s.
Importantly, within the time period between 4 and 8 s after
stimulus onset, the mPFC predicted purchases signiﬁcantly
better than the PCC (paired t tests, p < 0.05, two-tailed; Fig-
ure 5B). Note that we did not ﬁnd purchasing-predictive activ-
ity in the VS (see Figure S3), again in line with previous reports
examining similar ﬁxed-price purchasing decisions as em-
ployed here (Knutson et al., 2007).
PCC Activity Relates to Value-Driven Attentional
Capture
The BOLD signal response proﬁle observed in the PCC sug-
gests that this region is involved in automatic value coding,
as it exhibits context-invariant value representations that are
similar during purchasing and perceptual decisions. We there-
fore examined whether the choice-irrelevant value representa-
tions during perceptual decisions reﬂect automatic SV com-
putations that may facilitate attentional orienting to valuable
Figure 4. Distinct SV Representations in mPFC and PCC
(A) Choice-relevant SV during purchasing decisions correlates with BOLD signals in mPFC and PCC (see also Figure S1 for SV representations in the ventral
striatum).
(B) Choice-irrelevant SV during perceptual decisions correlates with BOLD signals in PCC, bilateral dlPFC, and bilateral parietal lobule (see Figure S2 and Table
S3 for statistics and peak coordinates).
(C) A direct comparison of SV representations during purchasing choices versus SV representations during perceptual choices reveals a slope increase when SV
is choice-relevant (during purchasing choices) in mPFC (peak t25 = 4.72, x = 3, y = 50, z = 11, p = 0.05, FWE cluster-corrected). This effect is visualized in (E) by
the parameter estimates extracted from 5-mm spheres centered on peak voxels of the choice-relevant SV > choice-irrelevant SV contrast, determined by the
leave-one-subject-out procedure to ensure independence (Experimental Procedures).
(D) A conjunction analysis between SV representations during purchasing choices and perceptual choices reveals a task-invariant SV representation in PCC
(conjunction, peak t25 = 5.04, x = 6, y = 52, z = 19, p < 0.05, FWE cluster-corrected). This effect is visualized in (F) by the parameter estimates extracted from
5-mm spheres centered on peak voxels of the choice-irrelevant SV contrast, as determined by the leave-one-subject-out procedure.
(G) and (H) visualize and quantify the slopes of the choice-relevant (dark blue) and choice-irrelevant (light blue) SV representation in mPFC and PCC, respectively.
The panels plot the contrast weights from the same 5-mm spheres as in (E) and (F), respectively. BOLD activity in both mPFC (t25 = 5.26, p = 1.8 3 105) and PCC
(t25 = 4.64, p = 9.4 3 105) signiﬁcantly increases with increasing task-relevant SV, but only activity in PCC also signiﬁcantly increases with increasing task-
irrelevant SVs (t25 = 3.66, p = 1.2 3 103). In direct comparisons, the slope of the task-relevant SV representation in mPFC is signiﬁcantly increased compared to
the task-irrelevant SV representation (t25 = 4.30, p = 2.3 3 104), whereas no such difference could be observed for PCC (t25 = 1.32, p = 0.1974). Error bars in all
panels represent ± 1 SEM (n = 26). Please see also Figure S4 and Table S4 for FV representations.
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
879

items outside the current focus of attention. To this end,
we tested whether the strength of choice-irrelevant SV repre-
sentations during perceptual decisions related to the degree
of value-based attentional capture, i.e., the behaviorally
observed RT slowing of perceptual choices with increasing
SVs (Anderson et al., 2011). We tested this hypothesis for all
three regions that were found to represent choice-irrelevant
SVs (PCC, dlPFC, and parietal lobule) using linear mixed-ef-
fects analyses (again, these analyses were performed on
data binned into SV quintiles, see Experimental Procedures).
Only signals in the PCC showed the predicted signiﬁcant
relationship between perceptual RTs and choice-irrelevant
SV response strength (X2 = 9.83, p < 0.002, likelihood ratio
test) (Table S6). Additionally, PCC value signals accounted
for this effect more strongly than corresponding signals in
the dlPFC (X2 = 10.27, p = 0.001) and parietal lobule (X2 =
11.45, p = 7 3 103) (Table S6). For completeness, we also
compared the strength of this relationship between the PCC
and the mPFC and VS, even though the latter two regions
did not actually contain any signiﬁcant SV representations
during perceptual choices (see above). This conﬁrmed that
choice-irrelevant SV signals from PCC explained the degree
of value-based attentional capture signiﬁcantly better than
the corresponding activity in mPFC (X2 = 5.74, p = 0.016)
and VS (X2 = 9.08, p = 0.003). These results demonstrate
that the strength of automatic neural SV representations in
the PCC directly relates to the degree to which choice-irrele-
vant SVs slow down perceptual performance, consistent with
the idea that these PCC signals are involved in value-based
attentional capture during perceptual choices.
DISCUSSION
Our study identiﬁed two distinct types of value-coding mecha-
nisms in the human brain, by comparing value representations
and their relation to behavior during two choice situations in
which SVs were either relevant or unrelated to the present
choice. Our results revealed a clear functional dissociation be-
tween different regions of the human brain’s valuation circuitry.
SV representations in the mPFC were enhanced when SVs
became choice-relevant, and the strength of this enhancement
related to the consistency and outcomes of choices. In contrast,
SV representations in the PCC were invariant across contexts
and related to value-driven attentional capture when SVs were
irrelevant for the choice.
The sharpening of SV response proﬁles in mPFC and VS may
reﬂect behaviorally relevant increases in signal-to-noise ratio
similar to the sharpening of neuronal tuning curves associated
with attention that lead to enhanced perceptual sensitivity
(Knudsen, 2007; Martinez-Trujillo and Treue, 2004; Reynolds
and Chelazzi, 2004; Spitzer et al., 1988). This sharpening
process may provide a mechanistic explanation for recent ﬁnd-
ings that attention can change value-based choices and related
neural activity. For instance, fMRI activity in the mPFC can in-
crease when participants direct attention to the affective value
(versus perceptual intensity) of a stimulus (Rolls and Graben-
horst, 2008) (cf. Figure 3B). Moreover, visual ﬁxations on
an item from a choice set are associated with a higher pro-
bability of choosing that item (Krajbich et al., 2010) and
can determine whether its SV impacts negatively or positively
on neural activity in the mPFC and VS (Lim et al., 2011).
Figure 5. Relating Neural Activity to Behavior
(A) Value representations in mPFC, but not PCC, relate to choice consistency. The plot shows standardized estimates from multiple regressions of choice
consistency on SV-related BOLD signals in different regions. BOLD signals in mPFC (X2 = 4.85, p = 0.027, likelihood ratio test) relate to choice consistency during
purchasing decisions, whereas the corresponding signals in PCC (X2 = 0.23, p = 0.629) do not (see Table S5). The same analyses for the VS reveal an effect at
trend level (X2 = 2.43, p = 0.12). Importantly, the mPFC effects are signiﬁcantly stronger than the corresponding effects for PCC (p = 0.01). Please see Exper-
imental Procedures for details on regressions and model comparison.
(B) Neural activity in mPFC, but not PCC, can predict purchases. The plot shows the time course of purchase-predictive activity estimated as the area under the Z-
transformed ROC curve. BOLD signals in mPFC (black line) predict purchases signiﬁcantly above chance (gray dotted horizontal line represents the one-tailed
group Z statistic critical value z = 1.64) approximately 4–8 s after stimulus onset (thick black line), whereas PCC responses do not predict purchases at any time
point (gray line). Additionally, mPFC signals predict participants’ purchases signiﬁcantly better than PCC signals during the time period indicated by the thick gray
bar after stimulus onset (paired t tests, p < 0.05). Please see Experimental Procedures for details on the ROC analysis and Figure S3 for ventral striatum results.
(C) Value representations in PCC relate to value-driven attentional capture. The plot shows standardized estimates from multiple regressions of value-based
attentional capture on value-related BOLD signals from all regions identiﬁed as showing task-irrelevant SV representations. Neural activity in PCC shows a strong
relationship (X2 = 9.83, p = 1.7 3 103) with the RT slowing due to task-irrelevant SV during perceptual decisions, while dlPFC (X2 = 0.21, p = 0.65) and parietal
lobule (X2 = 0.08, p = 0.78) do not (see Table S6). Error bars in all panels represent ± 1 SEM (n = 26). Please see Experimental Procedures for details on regressions
and model comparison.
880
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

Furthermore, computational models that include attentional
modulation of the relative model inputs account better for several
aspects of value-based choice behavior than models that do not
incorporate attention or ﬁxation patterns (Krajbich et al., 2012;
Towal et al., 2013). Finally, non-human primates with mPFC le-
sions exhibit deﬁcits in focusing on the most relevant compari-
son in a three-option task (Noonan et al., 2010), and addition
of a third choice option changes mPFC value signals and choices
between two constant stimuli (Chau et al., 2014).
While all these previous ﬁndings suggest that attention-related
mechanisms can inﬂuence value-based choices and SV-related
BOLD signals, our study clearly demonstrates that attention to a
single item’s SV leads to an enhancement of its value represen-
tation in the mPFC, and this signal enhancement directly relates
to the consistency and outcome of purchasing choices. These
effects may provide a value-based analog to effects of covert
attention on perception and corresponding neural modulations
observed in visual cortex (Reynolds and Heeger, 2009), which
are thought to improve the ﬁdelity of the neural signal and
thereby the reliability of the choice-relevant information (Desi-
mone and Duncan, 1995; Kastner et al., 1999; Knudsen, 2007;
Luck et al., 1997; Martinez-Trujillo and Treue, 2004; Moran and
Desimone, 1985; Reynolds et al., 2000). Please note in this
context that the observed task-related modulations of SV coding
were clearly distinct from corresponding effects on FV represen-
tations relevant for the perceptual choices: contrasting choice-
relevant and choice-irrelevant FV effects for perceptual choices
(Table S4) revealed activation in parietal cortex and FEFs, just as
one would predict based on studies comparing active attention
conditions to passive ﬁxation (Figure S4) (Culham et al., 2001;
Kanwisher and Wojciulik, 2000).
Our ﬁndings also have bearings on previous studies investi-
gating choice-relevant and choice-irrelevant SV representations
with seemingly contradictory results (Lebreton et al., 2009;
Plassmann et al., 2007). Lebreton et al. described the ventrome-
dial PFC as part of a multi-region brain valuation system that
shows automatic choice-irrelevant SV coding, whereas Plass-
mann et al. ﬁnd this region to correlate stronger with SV in free
(SV-relevant) than in forced (SV-irrelevant) value-based choices.
These conﬂicting conclusions may reﬂect differences in analysis
methodology. While Plassmann et al. performed a whole-brain
voxel-wise analysis as employed by the present work, Lebreton
et al. pooled activity across several regions (including mPFC, VS,
and PCC), therefore precluding the possibility of region-speciﬁc
inference. It is possible that the features of the automatic SV
representations reported by Lebreton et al. are mainly driven
by the PCC. Another possible explanation for the divergent ﬁnd-
ings relates to the nature of the behavioral paradigms. The non-
value-related tasks used by Plassmann et al. and ourselves
required an evaluation/action that could be objectively correct
or wrong and that was fully unrelated to the item’s value. In
contrast, the SV-irrelevant task used by Lebreton and colleagues
required the participants to subjectively evaluate the age of the
stimulus in unspeeded choices, which may have triggered
concomitant assessment of the items’ SV (i.e., the age of a paint-
ing/house/person usually has implications for its value to an
observer). Further studies may be required to fully resolve these
inconsistencies.
We found that the strength of value-related activity in the PCC
correlated with the degree by which RTs were slowed for
perceptual decisions. These results suggest a crucial role for
the PCC in automatic value coding and value-driven attentional
capture. Our ﬁndings may thus have important implications for
a large body of data on shifts of attention as studied with electro-
encephalography (EEG). The crucial scalp component associ-
ated with shifts of attention (N2pc) (Eimer, 1996) has consistently
been attributed to parietal-occipital scalp sites (Luck and Hill-
yard, 1994; Woodman and Luck, 1999), including cases in which
the targets were associated with higher, compared to lower,
reward (Kiss et al., 2009). The precise neuroanatomical source
for these effects, however, is difﬁcult to locate with EEG. Our
data suggest that the PCC may be a likely origin for the parie-
tal-occipital N2pc component, at least in situations where previ-
ously unattended values of visual objects capture attention.
The automatic nature of SV representations in PCC may
constitute an important evolutionary advantage, as it could
ensure that SVs of external environmental features are continu-
ously encoded with minimal use of attentional resources, in order
to trigger behavioral engagement with alternative courses of ac-
tion whenever this is beneﬁcial. This proposed function is in line
with recent ﬁndings that in volatile environments, macaque PCC
neurons encode dynamic signals that are used for the decision to
explore alternative actions in the future (Hayden et al., 2008).
Moreover, our results also appear consistent with ﬁndings that
macaque PCC neurons are involved in change detection and
policy control during reward-guided behavior (Pearson et al.,
2011), by contributing to the automatic detection of a superior
option (based on prior experience or reward history) and the sub-
sequent actions taken to either exploit or explore alternative op-
tions (Pearson et al., 2009). All these proposals support the view
that the PCC may play a crucial role in optimizing reward-based
behavioral control by evaluating alternative courses of actions
(Heilbronner and Platt, 2013), and the neural computations
necessary for this function may arrest or at least slow down cur-
rent behavior as observed in value-based attentional capture.
We found two additional regions, bilateral dlPFC and bilateral
parietal lobule, that coded irrelevant SV during perceptual
choices. Both regions are part of a broader brain network
involved in the control of cognitive functions such as working
memory and spatial attention (Constantinidis and Procyk,
2004; Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Todd and Marois, 2004).
The two areas are tightly interconnected and share many func-
tional properties, including a crucial role in maintaining a stimulus
in working memory and ﬁltering distracting stimuli (Katsuki and
Constantinidis, 2012). Thus, it is possible that these two areas
worked to counteract the automatic SV effects triggered by the
PCC, by preventing the increasing interference of stimulus value
with the perceptual task demands. This interpretation is consis-
tent with the ﬁnding that the two regions only coded SVs during
perceptual choices, but not when the SVs became choice-rele-
vant during the purchasing decisions.
Taken together, our results demonstrate a fundamental func-
tional dissociation between different brain regions whose contri-
butions to reward representation and value-based choice have,
thus far, been largely indistinguishable (Bartra et al., 2013; Cli-
thero and Rangel, 2014). In the mPFC, SV representations reﬂect
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
881

a choice-dependent value-coding mechanism that is enhanced
when SV becomes relevant for the decision at hand. These
value-related neural responses in the mPFC carry information
related to choice consistency and can be used to predict pur-
chases. In the PCC, by contrast, SV representations are invariant
across situations where SV is relevant or irrelevant for current
behavior, and the strength of this automatic SV representation
relates to value-driven attentional capture. The PCC may there-
fore play a crucial role in facilitating shifts of attention toward
valuable items or actions outside the current focus of attention.
The functional dissociation observed here suggests that disrup-
tions of each of these two mechanisms will have distinct impacts
on behavior. Direct comparisons of choice-dependent and
automatic value coding in the brain may therefore help in diag-
nosing and potentially treating pathological disturbances of
value-based behavioral control in the context of brain disorders
such as addiction (Berridge, 2012; Davis, 2010; Field and Cox,
2008), attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (Castellanos and
Proal, 2012; Davis, 2010), and autism (Sasson et al., 2008, 2011).
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Participants
A total of 26 subjects (20–28 years old; 13 males) provided informed consent
as approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Canton of Zurich. All
subjects had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, were in good health, and
reported no current use of medication as measured with standard surveys.
Rating Session
Between 1 and 3 days prior to functional imaging, subjects were given an
allowance of CHF 20 and rated their willingness to pay (between 0 and 20
CHF) for each of 672 movies in a BDM auction (Becker et al., 1964). The
optimal strategy in this setting was to truthfully indicate the SV of each movie
(Krajbich et al., 2010; Plassmann et al., 2007). During each trial of the auction,
the movie cover and title were presented for 1 s; the title remained on screen
until the subject entered their SV via computer keyboard. Entered values were
displayed on the screen and could be changed until the subject ﬁnalized their
choice by pressing the enter key. Subjects were allowed to rate at their
own speed, but every 100 trials short breaks were suggested. The rating lasted
between 40 and 60 min.
fMRI Task
During the event-related fMRI sessions (Figures 1A and 1B), subjects took
either purchasing or perceptual choices in randomly alternating blocks,
thereby changing between choice settings in which SVs of the movie
were choice-relevant (purchasing choices) or choice-irrelevant (perceptual
choices). Both blocks were cued visually and aurally. For both types of deci-
sions, participants viewed the same DVD covers, heard numbers via head-
phones, and indicated their choices via the same two response buttons. For
purchasing decisions, subjects indicated whether the number represented
an amount they were willing to pay for that movie (Plassmann et al., 2007).
SV was therefore choice-relevant, because subjects had to evaluate whether
their SV for the DVD was high enough to pay the stated price. For these trials,
participants were endowed with an allowance of 20 CHF to spend, and one
trial was randomly selected, and the decision on that trial was implemented af-
ter the experiment. During perceptual decisions, subjects indicated whether
the presented number matched the number of faces on the cover. The SV of
the DVD was therefore choice-irrelevant. This allowed us to assess and
compare its representation between two contexts that differed in SV rele-
vance, but that were matched in sensory input, motor response, and RT (Fig-
ures 1D–1F).
In order to encourage active engagement and attentional focus on the
choice-relevant stimulus dimension (SV or number of faces [FV]), the covers
were slightly phase-randomized as in Rieger et al., 2013, ensuring a perceptual
accuracy level between 75% and 95% correct FV detections, as determined
from pilot data on 21 subjects. For each purchasing choice, the auditory offer
number was chosen from a uniform discrete distribution bracketing the SV
(possible difference to SV: 4, 2, 0, +2, or +4 CHF). For perceptual choices,
the number varied uniformly around the true number of faces (by 2, 1, 0, +1,
or +2). We deﬁned purchasing decisions as value-consistent if participants
accepted auditory offers equal to or below the SV or rejected offers that
were higher than the SV (all other choices were deﬁned as value-inconsistent).
The subject-speciﬁc SV values for the DVDs were determined prior to the
choice task using the BDM auction procedure. Perceptual choices were
deﬁned as correct if participants accepted auditory offer numbers that
matched the actual face number, whereas all other choices were incorrect
(see Supplemental Experimental Procedures for further details).
Behavioral Analysis
To conﬁrm that participants followed the task instructions and chose based on
the difference between SVs and the price (for purchasing decisions) or the
match between the perceptual criterion and the number of faces on the cover
(for perceptual decisions), we regressed accept/reject choices in both tasks
against (SV-Offer) and (jFV-Offerj) using within-subject multiple logistic regres-
sion with the formula below:
Paccept =
1
1 + expð  ðb0 + b1ðSV­OfferÞ + b2ðjFV­OfferjÞÞÞ
To test for attentional capture by choice-irrelevant SV during perceptual
choices, we performed a within-subject multiple linear regression of RTs on
each DVD’s SV and FV (SV should result in a slowing of perceptual choices
if it captures attention despite not being choice-relevant) with the formula
below:
RT = b0 + b1SV + b2FV
The resulting individual regression parameter estimates were standardized,
and their signiﬁcant deviance from zero was tested using a two-sided t test.
fMRI Data Analysis
Subjects performed ten choice-task sessions (each containing 30 purchasing
and 30 perceptual choices) while being scanned with a Philips Achieva 3 T
whole-body scanner (Philips Medical Systems). Image pre-processing and
analysis were conducted using SPM8 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimag-
ing). For more detailed information regarding fMRI data acquisition, pre-pro-
cessing, and peripheral measures please see Supplemental Experimental
Procedures.
We estimated ﬁve general linear models (GLMs). The main GLM was de-
signed to identify and contrast correlations of BOLD signals with choice-rele-
vant SV and choice-irrelevant SV during purchasing and perceptual choices,
respectively. It therefore contained the following regressors: ﬁrst, an indicator
function for purchasing choices onsets with three parametric modulators (1,
choice-irrelevant FV; 2, choice-relevant SV; 3, price, i.e., the auditory offer
number). Second, an indicator function for perceptual choices onsets with
three parametric modulators (1, choice-irrelevant SV; 2, choice-relevant FV;
3, auditory offer number). Trial duration in our GLMs was set to the RT
on that trial. Each of the regressors was convolved with a canonical
hemodynamic response function and regressed against the BOLD signal in
each voxel.
The second and third GLMs were estimated to extract parameter estimates
from regions of interest that could be used to visualize choice-relevant and
choice-irrelevant SV representations (Figures 4E–4H, S1C, and S1D) and to
relate brain activity to choice consistency and value-driven attentional capture
(see below and Tables S5 and S6). We created ﬁve levels of SVs and FVs by
partitioning each participant’s trials into quintiles (20% bins) based on their in-
dividual SV and FV distributions. The onsets of the trials contained in each SV
or FV quintile were then entered as indicator functions into the two additional
GLMs. The second GLM thus contained ﬁve indicator functions for the onsets
of purchasing choices corresponding to the choice-relevant SV quintiles and
ﬁve indicator functions for onsets of perceptual choices contained in the
882
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

choice-relevant FV quintiles. The third GLM was identical to the second GLM,
but now trials were sorted into quintiles according to the corresponding
choice-irrelevant FVs (purchasing choices) and SVs (perceptual choices). A
fourth and ﬁfth GLM served as control analyses to test whether price level
and price value difference explained any additional variance beyond that of
SV in the BOLD signal during purchasing choices (see Supplemental Experi-
mental Procedures and Supplemental Results).
All GLMs modeled MR image auto-correlations with a ﬁrst-order autoregres-
sive model and also included the following regressors of no interest: 2 indicator
functions for purchasing and perceptual block cues, 6 motion parameters (ob-
tained during the realignment procedure), 18 physiological parameters (ac-
counting for cardiac and respiratory ﬂuctuations as well as their interaction),
and indicator functions for blinks, saccades, and pupil activity. The last two re-
gressors additionally contained a parametric modulation with saccade size
and pupil size, respectively.
First-level summary statistics were obtained by calculating the single-sub-
ject voxel-wise contrasts of interest for the SV and FV parametric modulators,
both when choice-relevant and choice-irrelevant, as well as their respective
interactions. Second-level random-effects group contrast maps were then
tested for signiﬁcance by one-sample t tests on these single-subject contrasts
(except for conjunctions, which were tested in a one-way ANOVA). Statistical
inference was performed at the cluster level, using a whole-brain FWE-cor-
rected statistical threshold of p < 0.05 (based on a cluster-forming voxel cutoff
set to p < 0.001). For the hypothesis-guided ROI analysis of the VS, we cor-
rected for multiple comparisons using a small-volume correction (SVC; p <
0.05) within the bilateral nucleus accumbens volume mask provided by the
FSL-Harvard-Oxford-atlas (http://neuro.debian.net/pkgs/fsl-harvard-oxford-
atlases.html).
Relating Neural Activity to Behavior
All our analyses relating neural to behavioral measures were performed on data
extracted using the LOSO procedure (Esterman et al., 2010), in order to prevent
circularity and to ensure unbiased data extraction (Kriegeskorte et al., 2009;
Poldrack and Mumford, 2009). The LOSO procedure ﬁrst uses the data from
n-1 subjects to determine the peak activation for a contrast in a given region,
and then extracts BOLD signals from a sphere (here of 5-mm radius) around
this peak for the independent subject that was not included in the n-1 analysis
to determine the ROI. An n-fold replication of this procedure thus ensures that
for each subject, the peak coordinates have been determined from an indepen-
dent sample of participants, thus avoiding double-dipping and selection biases
(Kriegeskorte et al., 2009; Poldrack and Mumford, 2009).
In order to relate neural activity to value-based choice consistency, ﬁve
levels of SVs were created by partitioning each participant’s trials into quintiles,
identical to the fMRI trial parcellation employed to generate GLM 2 and 3. For
each of these SV quintiles, we then computed the proportion of purchasing
choices that were SV-consistent. Value-based choices were deﬁned as consis-
tent if a DVD with price % SV was purchased or if a DVD with price > SV was not
purchased. The fMRI data for these analyses from mPFC and PCC were ex-
tracted from ROIs deﬁned with the LOSO approach on the peak of the
choice-relevant SV contrast (threshold of p < 0.0005 uncorrected), whereas
the search space for the VS was conﬁned to the nucleus accumbens volume
mask provided by the FSL-Harvard-Oxford-atlas (Figures S1A and S1B).
To test the relationship between these extracted BOLD response proﬁles
and behavior, we performed linear mixed-effects analyses to regress each
participant’s average purchasing choice consistency for each quintile on the
extracted BOLD responses. In these analyses, BOLD responses were treated
as ﬁxed effects, and we included intercepts for each participant as random
effects. We determined a signiﬁcant effect of activity in a speciﬁc region on
behavior by means of a likelihood ratio test of the full model including activity
from the region against the null model containing only the intercepts. Addition-
ally, we tested for signiﬁcant differences in explanatory power between
regions by using likelihood ratio tests between full models containing two re-
gions and reduced models with only one region. For instance, to compare
the contribution of the mPFC to explaining value-based choice consistency
beyond what can be explained by PCC signals, we compared the full model
containing ﬁxed effects for mPFC and PCC signals against the reduced model
containing only PCC (Table S5; Figure 5A).
To test whether regions that code choice-irrelevant SV are involved in value-
driven attentional capture, we used the identical linear mixed-effects analyses
procedure as above, except that we now regressed RTs during perceptual
choices for each SV quintile on the corresponding SV BOLD responses
during perceptual decisions. Individual BOLD response proﬁles were ex-
tracted from spheres (5-mm radius) centered on peaks of the choice-irrelevant
SV response, independently determined using the LOSO procedure on the
choice-irrelevant SV contrast (threshold of p < 0.0005 uncorrected) for PCC,
bilateral dlPFC, and bilateral parietal lobule (Table S6; Figure 5C).
In order to test whether trial-wise signals in the mPFC, VS, and PCC also
differ in their capability of predicting actual purchases, we extracted BOLD
time series for each subject, session, and ROI using LOSO as above (restricted
to the choice-relevant SV contrast), and transformed them to percent signal
change. To increase precision with respect to trial onset, the average time
course for each region was interpolated to 100-ms intervals using a cubic
spline. We quantiﬁed the reliability with which the single-trial amplitude of
the BOLD signal predicted actual purchasing choices (purchasing versus not
purchasing) using an ROC analysis (Green and Swets, 1966), conducted at
each 100-ms time point within the period of 1 s before to 13 s after the onset
of a trial (Figure 5B). The area under the ROC (AUC) provides a measure of the
separability of two conditions and can be used to test the statistical signiﬁ-
cance of the purchasing/not purchasing prediction from the BOLD data.
AUC is widely employed for quantiﬁcation of categorical predictions, for
instance in single cell (Reddy et al., 2006), EEG (O’Connell et al., 2012), or
fMRI data (Skudlarski et al., 1999; Sorenson and Wang, 1996).
To estimate and compare the predictive power of BOLD signals in different
ROIs for purchases, we estimated the Z statistic for each ROI, subject, and
time point. To this end, we ﬁrst generated the null distribution of the AUC curve
for chance performance AUCchance via 1,000 iterations of randomly shufﬂed
trial labels while conserving the individual proportions of purchase/not pur-
chase decisions. These computations were implemented independently for
each time point t. For each ROI and subject, the individual Z statistic Zt was
then computed at each time point t using the following formula:
Zt = AUCt  mAUCt chance
sAUCt chance
mAUCt chance represents the mean AUC of the 1,000 randomizations, and
sAUCt chance represents the SD of the 1,000 randomizations. For each region,
the average across subjects at each time point t yielded the group Z statistic
at that time point. This index yields above-chance purchase predictability
when the group Z statistic exceeds the critical value of 1.64, corresponding
to a signiﬁcance level of p < 0.05 one-tailed (please note that identical results
are observed using the corresponding two-tailed signiﬁcance threshold, Z >
1.96). Group Z statistic comparisons between ROIs were conducted at each
time point t using a paired t test. This analysis allowed us to statistically
examine whether we can predict a purchasing decision on a single-trial basis.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes four ﬁgures, six tables, Supplemental
Experimental Procedures, and Supplemental Results and can be found with
this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.054.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Karl Treiber for scanning assistance, Adrian Etter for support with the
eye-tracking setup, and Lars Kasper for providing software for the analysis of
the peripheral physiological data. This work was supported by grants of the
Swiss National Science Foundation (105314_152891, CRSII3_141965, and
51NF40_144609) and the NCCR Affective Sciences to C.C.R. All authors
gratefully acknowledge support by the Neuroscience Center Zurich (ZNZ).
Received: April 29, 2014
Revised: October 17, 2014
Accepted: December 16, 2014
Published: January 29, 2015
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
883

REFERENCES
Anderson, B.A. (2013). A value-driven mechanism of attentional selection.
J. Vis. 13, 7.
Anderson, B.A., Laurent, P.A., and Yantis, S. (2011). Value-driven attentional
capture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 10367–10371.
Awh, E., Belopolsky, A.V., and Theeuwes, J. (2012). Top-down versus bottom-
up attentional control: a failed theoretical dichotomy. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16,
437–443.
Bartra, O., McGuire, J.T., and Kable, J.W. (2013). The valuation system: a co-
ordinate-based meta-analysis of BOLD fMRI experiments examining neural
correlates of subjective value. Neuroimage 76, 412–427.
Becker, G.M., DeGroot, M.H., and Marschak, J. (1964). Measuring utility by a
single-response sequential method. Behav. Sci. 9, 226–232.
Berridge, K.C. (2012). From prediction error to incentive salience: mesolimbic
computation of reward motivation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 1124–1143.
Bickel, W.K., Miller, M.L., Yi, R., Kowal, B.P., Lindquist, D.M., and Pitcock, J.A.
(2007). Behavioral and neuroeconomics of drug addiction: competing neural
systems and temporal discounting processes. Drug Alcohol Depend. 90
(Suppl 1), S85–S91.
Castellanos, F.X., and Proal, E. (2012). Large-scale brain systems in ADHD:
beyond the prefrontal-striatal model. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 17–26.
Chau, B.K., Kolling, N., Hunt, L.T., Walton, M.E., and Rushworth, M.F. (2014). A
neural mechanism underlying failure of optimal choice with multiple alterna-
tives. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 463–470.
Clithero, J.A., and Rangel, A. (2014). Informatic parcellation of the network
involved in the computation of subjective value. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci.
9, 1289–1302.
Constantinidis, C., and Procyk, E. (2004). The primate working memory net-
works. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 4, 444–465.
Corbetta, M., and Shulman, G.L. (2002). Control of goal-directed and stimulus-
driven attention in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 201–215.
Corbetta, M., Miezin, F.M., Shulman, G.L., and Petersen, S.E. (1991). Selective
attention modulates extrastriate visual regions in humans during visual feature
discrimination and recognition. Ciba Found. Symp. 163, 165–175.
Culham, J.C., Cavanagh, P., and Kanwisher, N.G. (2001). Attention response
functions: characterizing brain areas using fMRI activation during parametric
variations of attentional load. Neuron 32, 737–745.
Davis, C. (2010). Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: associations with
overeating and obesity. Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 12, 389–395.
Della Libera, C., and Chelazzi, L. (2006). Visual selective attention and the ef-
fects of monetary rewards. Psychol. Sci. 17, 222–227.
Desimone, R., and Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual
attention. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 193–222.
Dixon, M.R., Jacobs, E.A., and Sanders, S. (2006). Contextual control of delay
discounting by pathological gamblers. J. Appl. Behav. Anal. 39, 413–422.
Eimer, M. (1996). The N2pc component as an indicator of attentional selec-
tivity. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 99, 225–234.
Esterman, M., Tamber-Rosenau, B.J., Chiu, Y.C., and Yantis, S. (2010).
Avoiding non-independence in fMRI data analysis: leave one subject out.
Neuroimage 50, 572–576.
Field, M., and Cox, W.M. (2008). Attentional bias in addictive behaviors: a re-
view of its development, causes, and consequences. Drug Alcohol Depend.
97, 1–20.
Friedman-Hill, S.R., Robertson, L.C., Desimone, R., and Ungerleider, L.G.
(2003). Posterior parietal cortex and the ﬁltering of distractors. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100, 4263–4268.
Green,
D.M.,
and
Swets,
J.A.
(1966).
Signal
Detection
Theory
and
Psychophysics. (Wiley).
Hayden, B.Y., Nair, A.C., McCoy, A.N., and Platt, M.L. (2008). Posterior cingu-
late cortex mediates outcome-contingent allocation of behavior. Neuron 60,
19–25.
Heilbronner, S.R., and Platt, M.L. (2013). Causal evidence of performance
monitoring by neurons in posterior cingulate cortex during learning. Neuron
80, 1384–1391.
Hickey, C., Chelazzi, L., and Theeuwes, J. (2011). Reward has a residual
impact on target selection in visual search, but not on the suppression of dis-
tractors. Vis. Cogn. 19, 117–128.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: analysis of decision
under risk. Econometrica 47, 263–291.
Kanwisher, N., and Wojciulik, E. (2000). Visual attention: insights from brain im-
aging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1, 91–100.
Kastner, S., Pinsk, M.A., De Weerd, P., Desimone, R., and Ungerleider, L.G.
(1999). Increased activity in human visual cortex during directed attention in
the absence of visual stimulation. Neuron 22, 751–761.
Katsuki, F., and Constantinidis, C. (2012). Unique and shared roles of the pos-
terior parietal and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in cognitive functions. Front.
Integr. Neurosci. 6, 17.
Kim, H., Adolphs, R., O’Doherty, J.P., and Shimojo, S. (2007). Temporal isola-
tion of neural processes underlying face preference decisions. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 104, 18253–18258.
Kiss, M., Driver, J., and Eimer, M. (2009). Reward priority of visual target sin-
gletons modulates event-related potential signatures of attentional selection.
Psychol. Sci. 20, 245–251.
Knudsen, E.I. (2007). Fundamental components of attention. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 30, 57–78.
Knutson, B., Rick, S., Wimmer, G.E., Prelec, D., and Loewenstein, G. (2007).
Neural predictors of purchases. Neuron 53, 147–156.
Krajbich, I., Armel, C., and Rangel, A. (2010). Visual ﬁxations and the compu-
tation and comparison of value in simple choice. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1292–
1298.
Krajbich, I., Lu, D., Camerer, C., and Rangel, A. (2012). The attentional
drift-diffusion
model
extends
to
simple
purchasing
decisions.
Front.
Psychol. 3, 193.
Kriegeskorte, N., Simmons, W.K., Bellgowan, P.S.F., and Baker, C.I. (2009).
Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping.
Nat. Neurosci. 12, 535–540.
Lebreton, M., Jorge, S., Michel, V., Thirion, B., and Pessiglione, M. (2009). An
automatic valuation system in the human brain: evidence from functional neu-
roimaging. Neuron 64, 431–439.
Lennert, T., and Martinez-Trujillo, J. (2011). Strength of response suppression
to distracter stimuli determines attentional-ﬁltering performance in primate
prefrontal neurons. Neuron 70, 141–152.
Leotti, L.A., Iyengar, S.S., and Ochsner, K.N. (2010). Born to choose: the ori-
gins and value of the need for control. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 457–463.
Levy, I., Lazzaro, S.C., Rutledge, R.B., and Glimcher, P.W. (2011). Choice from
non-choice: predicting consumer preferences from blood oxygenation level-
dependent signals obtained during passive viewing. J. Neurosci. 31, 118–125.
Lim, S.L., O’Doherty, J.P., and Rangel, A. (2011). The decision value compu-
tations in the vmPFC and striatum use a relative value code that is guided
by visual attention. J. Neurosci. 31, 13214–13223.
Luck, S.J., and Hillyard, S.A. (1994). Electrophysiological correlates of feature
analysis during visual search. Psychophysiology 31, 291–308.
Luck, S.J., Girelli, M., McDermott, M.T., and Ford, M.A. (1997). Bridging the
gap between monkey neurophysiology and human perception: an ambiguity
resolution theory of visual selective attention. Cognit. Psychol. 33, 64–87.
Martinez-Trujillo, J.C., and Treue, S. (2004). Feature-based attention increases
the selectivity of population responses in primate visual cortex. Curr. Biol. 14,
744–751.
Moran, J., and Desimone, R. (1985). Selective attention gates visual process-
ing in the extrastriate cortex. Science 229, 782–784.
Noonan, M.P., Walton, M.E., Behrens, T.E.J., Sallet, J., Buckley, M.J., and
Rushworth,
M.F.S.
(2010).
Separate
value
comparison
and
learning
884
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

mechanisms in macaque medial and lateral orbitofrontal cortex. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 20547–20552.
O’Connell, R.G., Dockree, P.M., and Kelly, S.P. (2012). A supramodal accumu-
lation-to-bound signal that determines perceptual decisions in humans. Nat.
Neurosci. 15, 1729–1735.
Padoa-Schioppa, C. (2013). Neuronal origins of choice variability in economic
decisions. Neuron 80, 1322–1336.
Pearson, J.M., Hayden, B.Y., Raghavachari, S., and Platt, M.L. (2009).
Neurons in posterior cingulate cortex signal exploratory decisions in a dynamic
multioption choice task. Curr. Biol. 19, 1532–1537.
Pearson, J.M., Heilbronner, S.R., Barack, D.L., Hayden, B.Y., and Platt, M.L.
(2011). Posterior cingulate cortex: adapting behavior to a changing world.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 143–151.
Plassmann, H., O’Doherty, J., and Rangel, A. (2007). Orbitofrontal cortex en-
codes willingness to pay in everyday economic transactions. J. Neurosci.
27, 9984–9988.
Polanı´a, R., Krajbich, I., Grueschow, M., and Ruff, C.C. (2014). Neural oscilla-
tions and synchronization differentially support evidence accumulation in
perceptual and value-based decision making. Neuron 82, 709–720.
Poldrack, R.A., and Mumford, J.A. (2009). Independence in ROI analysis:
where is the voodoo? Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 4, 208–213.
Rangel, A., Camerer, C., and Montague, P.R. (2008). A framework for studying
the neurobiology of value-based decision making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9,
545–556.
Reddy, L., Quiroga, R.Q., Wilken, P., Koch, C., and Fried, I. (2006). A single-
neuron correlate of change detection and change blindness in the human
medial temporal lobe. Curr. Biol. 16, 2066–2072.
Reynolds, J.H., and Chelazzi, L. (2004). Attentional modulation of visual pro-
cessing. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 611–647.
Reynolds, J.H., and Heeger, D.J. (2009). The normalization model of attention.
Neuron 61, 168–185.
Reynolds, J.H., Pasternak, T., and Desimone, R. (2000). Attention increases
sensitivity of V4 neurons. Neuron 26, 703–714.
Rieger, J.W., Gegenfurtner, K.R., Schalk, F., Koechy, N., Heinze, H.J., and
Grueschow, M. (2013). BOLD responses in human V1 to local structure in nat-
ural scenes: implications for theories of visual coding. J. Vis. 13, 19.
Rolls, E.T., and Grabenhorst, F. (2008). The orbitofrontal cortex and beyond:
from affect to decision-making. Prog. Neurobiol. 86, 216–244.
Sasson, N.J., Turner-Brown, L.M., Holtzclaw, T.N., Lam, K.S., and Bodﬁsh,
J.W. (2008). Children with autism demonstrate circumscribed attention during
passive viewing of complex social and nonsocial picture arrays. Autism Res. 1,
31–42.
Sasson, N.J., Elison, J.T., Turner-Brown, L.M., Dichter, G.S., and Bodﬁsh,
J.W. (2011). Brief report: circumscribed attention in young children with
autism. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 41, 242–247.
Skudlarski, P., Constable, R.T., and Gore, J.C. (1999). ROC analysis of statis-
tical methods used in functional MRI: individual subjects. Neuroimage 9,
311–329.
Sorenson, J.A., and Wang, X. (1996). ROC methods for evaluation of fMRI
techniques. Magn. Reson. Med. 36, 737–744.
Spitzer, H., Desimone, R., and Moran, J. (1988). Increased attention enhances
both behavioral and neuronal performance. Science 240, 338–340.
Strait, C.E., Blanchard, T.C., and Hayden, B.Y. (2014). Reward value compar-
ison via mutual inhibition in ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Neuron 82, 1357–
1366.
Theeuwes, J., and Belopolsky, A.V. (2012). Reward grabs the eye: oculomotor
capture by rewarding stimuli. Vision Res. 74, 80–85.
Todd, J.J., and Marois, R. (2004). Capacity limit of visual short-term memory in
human posterior parietal cortex. Nature 428, 751–754.
Towal, R.B., Mormann, M., and Koch, C. (2013). Simultaneous modeling of vi-
sual saliency and value computation improves predictions of economic
choice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, E3858–E3867.
Tusche, A., Bode, S., and Haynes, J.D. (2010). Neural responses to unat-
tended products predict later consumer choices. J. Neurosci. 30, 8024–8031.
Woodman, G.F., and Luck, S.J. (1999). Electrophysiological measurement of
rapid shifts of attention during visual search. Nature 400, 867–869.
Neuron 85, 874–885, February 18, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
885

