Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems
Telescopes and Instrumentation


Terry D. Oswalt (Editor-in-Chief)
Ian S. McLean (Volume Editor)
Planets, Stars and
Stellar Systems
Volume 1:
Telescopes and Instrumentation
With 251 Figures and 45 Tables

Editor-in-Chief
Terry D. Oswalt
Department of Physics & Space Sciences
Florida Institute of Technology
University Boulevard
Melbourne, FL, USA
Volume Editor
Ian S. McLean
Department of Physics & Astronomy
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA
ISBN 978-94-007-5620-5
ISBN 978-94-007-5621-2 (eBook)
ISBN 978-94-007-5622-9 (print and electronic bundle)
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2
This title is part of a set with
Set ISBN 978-90-481-8817-8
Set ISBN 978-90-481-8818-5 (eBook)
Set ISBN 978-90-481-8852-9 (print and electronic bundle)
Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg New York London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012953926
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broad-
casting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and
retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or here-
after developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly
analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system,
for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only
under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission
for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the
Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does
not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective
laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication, nei-
ther the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions
that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Series Preface
It is my great pleasure to introduce “Planets, Stars, and Stellar Systems” (PSSS). As a “Springer
Reference”, PSSS is intended for graduate students to professionals in astronomy, astrophysics
and planetary science, but it will also be useful to scientists in other fields whose research inter-
ests overlap with astronomy. Our aim is to capture the spirit of 21st century astronomy – an
empirical physical science whose almost explosive progress is enabled by new instrumentation,
observational discoveries, guided by theory and simulation.
Each volume, edited by internationally recognized expert(s), introduces the reader to a
well-defined area within astronomy and can be used as a text or recommended reading for
an advanced undergraduate or postgraduate course. Volume 1, edited by Ian McLean, is an
essential primer on the tools of an astronomer, i.e., the telescopes, instrumentation and detec-
tors used to query the entire electromagnetic spectrum. Volume 2, edited by Howard Bond, is a
compendium of the techniques and analysis methods that enable the interpretation of data col-
lected with these tools. Volume 3, co-edited by Linda French and Paul Kalas, provides a crash
course in the rapidly converging fields of stellar, solar system and extrasolar planetary science.
Volume 4, edited by Martin Barstow, is one of the most complete references on stellar structure
and evolution available today. Volume 5, edited by Gerard Gilmore, bridges the gap between
our understanding of stellar systems and populations seen in great detail within the Galaxy
and those seen in distant galaxies. Volume 6, edited by Bill Keel, nicely captures our current
understanding of the origin and evolution of local galaxies to the large scale structure of the
universe.
The chapters have been written by practicing professionals within the appropriate sub-
disciplines. Available in both traditional paper and electronic form, they include extensive
bibliographicand hyperlink references tothe current literature that will helpreaders toacquire a
solid historical and technical foundation in that area. Each can also serve as a valuable reference
for a course or refresher for practicing professional astronomers. Those familiar with the “Stars
and Stellar Systems” series from several decades ago will recognize some of the inspiration for
the approach we have taken.
Very many people have contributed to this project. I would like to thank Harry Blom and
Sonja Guerts (Sonja Japenga at the time) of Springer, who originally encouraged me to pur-
sue this project several years ago. Special thanks to our outstanding Springer editors Ramon
Khanna (Astronomy) and Lydia Mueller (Major Reference Works) and their hard-working edi-
torial team Jennifer Carlson, Elizabeth Ferrell, Jutta Jaeger-Hamers, Julia Koerting, and Tamara
Schineller. Their continuous enthusiasm, friendly prodding and unwavering support made this
series possible. Needless to say (but I’m saying it anyway), it was not an easy task shepherding
a project this big through to completion!
Most of all, it has been a privilege to work with each of the volume Editors listed above and
over 100 contributing authors on this project. I’ve learned a lot of astronomy from them, and I
hope you will, too!
January 2013
Terry D. Oswalt
General Editor


Preface to Volume 1
From the first appearance of the telescope in 1608, better telescopes have led to more astronom-
ical discoveries. Every improvement in technology helps to provide answers to old questions.
Inevitably, the new observational methods uncovera host ofnew questions, which in turn drives
the quest for even better equipment. We strive for deeper surveys, fainter limits, better res-
olution, larger statistical samples, and broader spectral response. Of course, the ground-based
telescopes of today are enormous compared to those of Galileo. Computercontrol of optical sur-
faces has changed the way telescopes are built. By finding ways to compensate for atmospheric
turbulence, very large telescopes can operate at their diffraction limit. And today, powerful
space telescopes span the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
In the late nineteenth century, when dry, gelatin-based photographic emulsions became
routinely available, astronomers lost no time in putting them to use. The photographic pro-
cess was more accurate and more sensitive than the human eye. With the invention of the
charge-coupled device in 1969, the photographic plate gave way to digital imaging devices.
Today, all modern astronomical research is carried out with photoelectronic equipment that
converts radiant energy into electrical signals which can be digitized for immediate storage and
manipulation in a computer.
Amodern observatory, on the ground orin space, and irrespective ofits wavelength domain,
requires an enormous breadth of engineering, scientific, and managerial skills to operate effi-
ciently and produce the very best results. This volume provides an introduction to telescopes
and instrumentation for all kinds of astronomy. Each chapter has been written by pioneers and
practicing professionals.
The volume begins with a general introduction to telescopes written by David Silva and
myself in order to provide a basis for the articles that follow. Survey and robotic telescopes are
covered in >Chap. 2 by Przemysław Wo´zniak. Next, each of the three major groundbreaking
technologies forverylarge telescopes is described bythe people whoplayed leading roles in their
development. Segmented mirror telescopes are covered by Jerry Nelson and Gary Channan;
honeycomb mirrors for large telescopes are explained by John Hill, Buddy Martin, and Roger
Angel; actively supported thin-mirror telescopes are covered by Lothar Noethe and Ray Wilson.
Theo ten Brummelaar and Hal McAlister provide an excellent review of optical and infrared
interferometry. Ron Ekers and Tom Wilson describe radio telescopes while Jonas Zmuidzinas,
Tom Philipps, and Steve Padin focus on sub-millimeter and millimeter telescopes. Moving to
space, there is an overview of UV/optical/IR telescopes by Matt Mountain, Erin Elliott, and
Marc Postman. Very high-energy telescopes are reviewed by Elizabeth Hays, and telescopes
for the detection of the cosmic microwave background are covered by Lyman Page, Michael
Niemack, and Shaul Hanany. A general introduction to astronomical instruments and detectors
is given in a chapter written by myself with colleagues James Larkin and Michael Fitzgerald.
A more detailed chapter on silicon imaging devices is provided by Paul Jorden, and infrared
detectors are described in greater depth by Erick Young. Rebecca Bernstein and Steve Shectman

viii
Preface to Volume 1
close this version of the volume with a review of astronomical spectrographs. Other topics are
under development and will be added once the volume goes on-line.
It has been a privilege to work with each of the contributors to this volume, as well as our
General Editor Terry Oswalt and the entire staff of Springer.
Ian S. McLean
Los Angeles, CA
USA

Editor-in-Chief
Dr. Terry D. Oswalt
Department Physics & Space Sciences
Florida Institute of Technology
150 W. University Boulevard
Melbourne, Florida 32901
USA
E-mail: toswalt@fit.edu
Dr. Oswalt has been a member of the Florida Tech faculty since 1982 and was the first profes-
sional astronomer in the Department of Physics and Space Sciences. He serves on a number of
professional society and advisory committees each year. From 1998 to 2000, Dr. Oswalt served
as Program Director for Stellar Astronomy and Astrophysics at the National Science Founda-
tion. After returning to Florida Tech in 2000, he served as Associate Dean for Research for the
College of Science (2000–2005) and interim Vice Provost for Research (2005–2006). He is now
Head of the Department of Physics & Space Sciences. Dr. Oswalt has written over 200 scientific
articles and has edited three astronomy books, in addition to serving as Editor-in-Chief for the
six-volume Planets, Stars, and Stellar Systems series.
Dr. Oswalt is the founding chairman of the Southeast Association for Research in Astron-
omy (SARA), a consortium of ten southeastern universities that operates automated 1-meter
class telescopes at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona and Cerro Tololo Interamerican
Observatory in Chile (see the website www.saraobservatory.org for details). These facilities,
which are remotely accessible on the Internet, are used for a variety of research projects by
faculty and students. They also support the SARA Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program, which brings students from all over the U.S. each summer to participate one-
on-one with SARA faculty mentors in astronomical research projects. In addition, Dr. Oswalt
secured funding for the 0.8-meter Ortega telescope on the Florida Tech campus. It is the largest
research telescope in the State of Florida.
Dr. Oswalt’s primary research focuses on spectroscopic and photometric investigations of
verywide binaries that contain known orsuspected white dwarfstars. These pairs ofstars, whose
separations are so large that orbital motion is undetectable, provide a unique opportunity to
explore the low luminosity ends of both the white dwarf cooling track and the main sequence;
to test competing models of white dwarf spectral evolution; to determine the space motions,
masses, and luminosities for the largest single sample of white dwarfs known; and to set a lower
limit to the age and dark matter content of the Galactic disk.


Volume Editor
Dr. Ian S. McLean
Department of Physics & Astronomy
University of California
475 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1547
USA
E-mail: mclean@astro.ucla.edu
Dr. McLean has been a member of the faculty at UCLA and director of the UCLA Infrared
Laboratory for Astrophysics since 1989. He has served as vice chair for astronomy since 2009.
The IR Lab at UCLA is well known for the development of many astronomical instruments for
the Keck Observatory and other telescopes. Dr. McLean is one of the world’s leading authorities
on the application of electronic imaging systems to advanced astronomical instrumentation.
He has written over 300 articles and his current book, > Electronic Imaging in Astronomy:
Detectors and Instrumentation, published by Springer is in its second edition.
Dr. McLean received his B.Sc. (Hons) in physics and astronomy and his Ph.D. in astron-
omy from Glasgow University (UK) in 1971 and 1974, respectively. While a member of staff at
the Royal Observatory Edinburgh from 1979–1989, he developed the first CCD-based imaging
spectro-polarimeter and the first facility-class camera for the 3.8-m UK Infrared Telescope to
use infrared arrays. Since joining UCLA, his lab has delivered or assisted in all of the currently
operational infrared instruments at the W. M. Keck Observatory. Dr. McLean was the principal
investigator for the NIRSPEC and MOSFIRE instruments at Keck, the twin-channel infrared
camera at Lick Observatory, and the FLITECAM instrument for NASA’s Stratospheric Obser-
vatoryforInfrared Astronomy. He served on the Science Steering Committee forthe W. M. Keck
Observatory for 10 years and he is an associate director of the University of California Observa-
tories. Dr. McLean is a former president of IAU Commission 25 (Photometry and Polarimetry)
and a former president of IAU Commission 9 (Instrumentation and Techniques). He is a mem-
ber of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and the Society of Professional Instrument
Engineers (SPIE). His research interests are broad. From his early career, he is known for many
discoveries involving the intrinsicpolarization ofstarlight. Currently, his main research involves
the study of substellar mass objects (brown dwarfs), star-forming regions, the galactic center,
and star formation in high-redshift galaxies. His web site bdssarchive.org provides a public
database of infrared spectra for low-mass stars and brown dwarfs.


Table of Contents
Series Preface..........................................................................................
v
Preface to Volume 1..................................................................................
vii
Editor-in-Chief.........................................................................................
ix
Volume Editor .........................................................................................
xi
List of Contributors ..................................................................................
xv
Volume 1
1
Introduction to Telescopes..............................................................
1
David Silva ⋅Ian S. McLean
2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes........................................................
43
Przemysław Wo´zniak
3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes..........................................................
99
Jerry Nelson ⋅Terry Mast ⋅Gary Chanan
4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes .......................................... 137
John Hill ⋅Hubert Martin ⋅Roger Angel
5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes.......................................................... 185
Lothar Noethe ⋅Ray Wilson
6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers................................................ 241
Theo A. ten Brummelaar ⋅Harold A. McAlister
7
Submillimeter Telescopes ............................................................... 283
Thomas G. Phillips ⋅Stephen Padin ⋅Jonas Zmuidzinas
8
Radio Telescopes........................................................................... 315
Ron Ekers ⋅Thomas L. Wilson
9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)....... 361
Erin Elliott ⋅Matt Mountain ⋅Marc Postman ⋅Anton Koekemoer ⋅Leonardo Ubeda ⋅
Mario Livio

xiv
Table of Contents
10 CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems................................................ 431
Shaul Hanany ⋅Michael D. Niemack ⋅Lyman Page
11 Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes......................................... 481
Elizabeth Hays
12 Instrumentation and Detectors........................................................ 507
Ian S. McLean ⋅James Larkin ⋅Michael Fitzgerald
13 Silicon-Based Image Sensors ........................................................... 541
Paul R. Jorden
14 Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors................................................ 565
Erick T. Young
15 Astronomical Spectrographs........................................................... 587
Rebecca A. Bernstein ⋅Stephen A. Shectman
Index................................................................................................ 619

List of Contributors
Roger Angel
Department of Astronomy
University of Arizona
Steward Observatory
Tucson, AZ
USA
Rebecca A. Bernstein
Astronomy and Astrophysics
Department/UC Observatories
UC Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA
USA
Theo A. ten Brummelaar
Mount Wilson Observatory
The CHARA Array of Georgia State
University
Mount Wilson, CA
USA
Gary Chanan
University of California
Irvine, CA
USA
Erin Elliott
Space Telescope Science Institute
Baltimore, MD
USA
Ron Ekers
Australia Telescope National Facility
CSIRO Astronomy and Space Science
Epping, NSW
Australia
Michael Fitzgerald
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of California
Los Angeles, CA
USA
Shaul Hanany
School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN
USA
Elizabeth Hays
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, MD
USA
John Hill
Large Binocular Telescope Observatory
University of Arizona
Steward Observatory
Tucson, AZ
USA
Paul R. Jorden
e2v technologies plc
Chelmsford
Essex
UK
Anton Koekemoer
Space Telescope Science Institute
Baltimore, MD
USA
James Larkin
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of California
Los Angeles, CA
USA
Mario Livio
Space Telescope Science Institute
Baltimore, MD
USA

xvi
List of Contributors
Hubert Martin
Department of Astronomy
University of Arizona
Steward Observatory
Tucson, AZ
USA
Terry Mast
UC Observatories/Lick Observatory
Santa Cruz, CA
USA
Harold A. McAlister
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA
USA
Ian S. McLean
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of California
Los Angeles, CA
USA
Matt Mountain
Space Telescope Science Institute
Baltimore, MD
USA
Jerry Nelson
UC Observatories/Lick Observatory
Santa Cruz, CA
USA
Michael D. Niemack
National Institute of Standards and
Technology
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO
USA
Physics Department
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
USA
Lothar Noethe
European Southern Observatory ESO
Garching
Germany
Stephen Padin
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA
USA
Lyman Page
Department of Physics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
USA
Thomas G. Phillips
Physics, Mathematics & Astronomy
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA
USA
Marc Postman
Space Telescope Science Institute
Baltimore, MD
USA
Stephen A. Shectman
Observatories of the Carnegie Institution
Pasadena, CA
USA
David Silva
National Optical Astronomy Observatory
(NOAO)
Tucson, AZ
USA
Leonardo Ubeda
Space Telescope Science Institute,
Baltimore, MD
USA
Ray Wilson
European Southern Observatory ESO
Garching
Germany

List of Contributors
xvii
Thomas L. Wilson
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington, DC
USA
Przemysław Wo´zniak
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM
USA
Erick T. Young
Director, SOFIA Science Mission Operations
NASA Ames Research Center
Moﬀett Field, CA
USA
Jonas Zmuidzinas
George W. Downs Laboratory of Physics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA
USA


1
Introduction to Telescopes
David Silva⋅Ian S. McLean
National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO), Tucson,
AZ, USA
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA
1
Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1
What Is a Telescope?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
General Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
EMR Wavelength as Key Design Driver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Telescopes in the Observatory Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Geometric Optics and Idealized Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1
Basic Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.2
Refracting Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.3
Reflecting Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2.4
Grazing Incident Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.3
Physical Optics and Image Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.3.1
Ideal Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.3.2
Image Errors from Optical Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.3.3
Image Errors from Atmospheric Turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.3.4
Parameterization of Image Quality and Wavefront Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
1.3.5
Aperture Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
1.4
Ancillary Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
1.4.1
Telescope Mounts and Motion Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
1.4.2
Active Optics and Optics Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
1.4.3
Adaptive Optics and Turbulence Compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
1.4.4
Enclosures and Protection from Inclement Environmental Conditions . . . . . . . . . .
38
1.5
Looking Forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Selected References (Books) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Selected Technical/Semi-technical References (Journal Articles) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Selected Technical or Semi-technical Publications (Web-Based) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
SPIE Conference Proceedings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_1, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

2 1
Introduction to Telescopes
1
Preamble
Since the dawn of consciousness, humanity has sought to make sense of the surrounding
universe by observing the world and recording what is seen. Paleolithic figurines and cave paint-
ings testify silently to early attempts to find meaning in what seemed to be chaos. While some
phenomena could be explored by multiple senses, the sky above with its immovable and
movable objects was only observable by vision.
Today, our ability to observe the universe visually has been extended enormously by the
telescope, a device to collect and focus electromagnetic radiation (EMR) on to a recording device.
While the original recording device was a combination of the human eye to see and the human
hand to draw, electronic imaging and recording now dominate. The handheld telescopes of
Galileo have been replaced by sophisticated machines on the ground and in space that can be
used to capture radiation across the entire electromagnetic spectrum to study objects and events
distant in space and time.
This chapter starts with a general description of the astronomical telescope, what drives its
design, and how it fits within an observatory context. Principles of geometric optics are used to
introduce ideal telescopes while principles ofphysical optics are used todescribe how images are
formed and deformed. Important ancillarysystems are alsocalled out and described. The overall
intent is to provide enough introductory background and nomenclature to allow readers to
efficiently seek more details in the literature and to provide a foundation for understanding the
more detailed reviews found elsewhere in this volume.
1.1 What Is a Telescope?
1.1.1 General Description
A telescope is a device for observing distant objects by collecting their emitted EMR and
concentrating it onto a recording device. Most but not all telescopes create enlarged (magni-
fied) images of those distant objects. Image brightness depends on how much EMR power is
collected. Since most astronomical objects of interest are faint, maximizing telescope collecting
area and throughput without degrading image quality (or exhausting financial resources!) is
always desired. In the nomenclature of signal or information processing, telescopes are devices
for collecting and processing EMR.
Mechanically, a telescope consists of one or more optical elements, each mounted within
an individual mechanical structure designed to keep the optical elements safe and properly
shaped. In turn, those structures are mechanically connected within a structure designed to
maintain their alignment relative to a common axis. The first optical element to collect light
is called the primary, the second is called the secondary, and so on. The primary elements in
the first astronomical telescopes were refractive (lenses) but most professional telescopes now
use reflective optics (mirrors). Secondary optics and so on can be a combination of reflective
and refractive optics. Originally passive, most modern professional optical systems have active
mechanisms to compensate for mechanical deformation caused by time-variable thermal or
gravity loading effects. The surface (collecting) area of the primary determines the amount of
EMR energy collected. Energy delivered to the recording device is less than collected energy
due to a combination of optical beam obstructions and imperfect reflection or transmission by
optical elements.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
3
Telescopes fall into three general types: refractor (all lenses), reflector (all mirrors, although
lens systems are often used as so-called field correctors), and grazing incidence (a special case
of reflector for EMR with very small wavelength, i.e., x-ray). Because the main EMR collecting
elements of such systems are spatially continuous, they are known as filled aperture telescopes.
Unfilled aperture telescopes, otherwise known as spatial interferometers, combine the input of
multiple telescopes to create images with spatial resolution equivalent to a filled aperture tele-
scope with diameter equal to the separation of the individual telescopes in the interferometer.
Each of these types is discussed in more detail later.
1.1.2 EMR Wavelength as Key Design Driver
The most important telescope design criterion is wavelength (frequency) of incident EMR.
Why? Because the wavelength of EMR emitted by astronomical objects is intimately connected
with the physical mechanisms that create it, and in turn, it is those mechanisms that astronomers
want to investigate. The extremely hot (millions of degrees K) gas that fills the gravitational
potential wells of galaxy clusters or surrounds the Sun emits EMR predominately at x-ray
(0.01–10 nm) wavelengths. At the other end of the temperaturescale, the extremely cold (2.7 K)
cosmic microwave background emits EMR at microwave (1 mm–1 m) wavelengths. All celes-
tial phenomena emit a combination of continuum and spectral line radiation. The former is
often emitted by thermal mechanisms whose EMR spectrum can be closely approximated by
a blackbody spectrum I(λ) parameterized by a specific temperature. Other physical origins of
continuum radiation exist and have their own characteristic I(λ) forms (e.g., synchrotron radi-
ation). Emission lines are created by photon emission due to electronic and nuclear energy state
transitions in atoms and molecules. Conversely, absorption lines are created by photon absorp-
tion by the same energy state transitions. To understand the physical underpinnings of various
astrophysical phenomena, it is often necessary to observe continuum and spectral line radiation
at several widely separated wavelengths (>Fig. 1-1).
Many astronomers want to study objects in the distant universe. Because the speed of light
is finite and the universe is expanding, the wavelength of EMR emitted by the object is stretched
10-16
Gamma rays
WAVELENGTH
X-rays
UV
IR
Visible
Sub-mm
Radio waves
10-14
10-12
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
1
102
104
WAVELENGTH (m)
⊡Fig. 1-1
Electromagnetic spectrum

4 1
Introduction to Telescopes
during its journey to Earth and is said to become redder. Therefore, spectral features critical for
probing physical conditions and mechanisms at their creation point must be observed at longer
wavelengths. A profound example of this effect is the cosmic microwave background, created
about 380,000 years after the Big Bang and emitted at λ = .nm but observed at λ = .mm
(redshift z = ,). To study the geometry of the universe itself, redshift measurements of large
samples of distant objects can be collected to probe its expansion history as well as how mass
(matter) is distributed.
Before proceeding, recall that EMR has wavelike properties where wavelength (distance
between waves) and frequency (waves per second) are related by the speed of light for a given
medium (c = λν) as well as particle-like properties where quantized energy per photon is equal
to Planck’s constant multiplied by frequency (E = hν). In a very deep sense, EMR detection
energy is a function of its particle-like properties while EMR detection location is a function
of its wave-like properties. For historical reasons related to detection and recording technol-
ogy, astronomers emphasize different wavelength, frequency, and energy units in different
wavelength bands. Gamma ray and x-ray astronomers tend to use energy units (e.g., keV),
optical-infrared astronomers use wavelength units (e.g., Ångstroms, nanometers, microns), and
radio astronomers tend to use frequency units (e.g., MHz, GHz). In this chapter, wavelength
units are used throughout for consistency (>Fig. 1-2).
Selected based on science goals, chosen wavelength drives two critical decisions: optical
design (especially surface quality of all optical elements) and location (especially altitude above
sea level). Important related decisions include desired image quality and field of view. Such deci-
sions must be moderated by fiscal reality – just because something is technologically possible
(or plausible) does not mean it is affordable.
⊡Fig. 1-2
Milky Way galaxy observed at multiple wavelengths (Image credit: NASA/Goddard Space Flight
Center)

Introduction to Telescopes 1
5
Following these decisions, all telescopes are designed around a primary optical elementthat
must collect EMR of a given wavelength. To concentrate EMR usefully, the primary optical
element must be significantly larger and smoother than the wavelength of the incident EMR.
For filled aperture systems, primary element size also determines achievable spatial resolution
and amount of EMR power collected, both important given that most celestial objects of interest
are faint and small in angular size.
The terrestrial atmosphere attenuates or completely blocks broad ranges of the EMR spec-
trum. While this is fortunate for humans in general, it creates a significant challenge for
astronomers. At wavelengths less than 0.3 μm, oxygen (O) and ozone (O) are the dominant
absorbers, and no EMR reaches the ground. Research at these wavelengths requires telescopes
flown at stratospheric altitudes or completely outside Earth’s atmosphere, adding significant
complexity and expense (>Fig. 1-3).
Between 0.3 and 2 μm, wide atmospheric transmission windows exist, moderated by
absorption from dust (e.g., volcanic), ozone (below 0.32 μm), oxygen (most notably in the
so-called A and B bands at 0.760 and 0.688 μm, respectively), various molecular species
(e.g., hydroxide, OH−), and, especially, water vapor. Telescopes designed to work at these wave-
lengths are typically located on remote, high (2,000-m or greater) mountain tops to reduce
interference from artificial EMR and to rise above the inversion layer that increases local atmo-
spheric turbulence, low altitude, and dust interference. At these wavelengths, astronomers also
seek dry, cloud-free sites. High-altitude dust from, for example, volcanoes is an additional,
unpredictable source of attenuation for celestial EMR. At these wavelengths, atmospheric dust
is large relative to observed λ and to first order absorbs uniformly with wavelength. Working
above the atmosphere removes atmospheric turbulence, leading to best possible image quality
but also highest expense.
Between 2 and 2,000 μm, transmission windows are defined primarily by the molecular
absorption properties of water vapor and carbon dioxide (CO) with lesser absorption con-
tributions coming from oxygen, ozone, methane (CH), and nitrous oxide (NO). Since the
fractional water vapor content falls rapidly with altitude, researchers working at these wave-
lengths seek very high altitude sites (4,000 m and higher), use balloons or airplanes above the
troposphere (∼20,000 m and higher), or go outside of the atmosphere completely. Higher alti-
tude means lower temperatures,which is also important to reduce the thermal background that
can overwhelm the celestial signal being investigated.
100%
50%
0.1 nm
1 nm
10 nm 0.1 mm
1 mm
10 mm 100 mm 1 mm
1 cm
10 cm
RADIO
INFRARED
WAVELENGTH
VISIBLE
ATMOSPHERIC
OPACITY
1 m
10 m
⊡Fig. 1-3
EMR transmission of terrestrial atmosphere vs. wavelength

6 1
Introduction to Telescopes
None of the windows between 0.29 and 2,000 μm are completely transparent. The amount
of absorption is a function of current atmospheric dust content (a function of altitude above
sea level), absorber scale height (again, a function of altitude above sea level), and path length
through atmosphere (increasing as the telescope points further away from zenith). Path length
through the atmosphere can be parameterized as airmass (X), the secant of the angle between
the observed object and the apparent zenith of the observer. Airmass is unity when the telescope
is pointed at the zenith and increases as the telescopes points toward the horizon.
Between 2,000 μm (0.02 m) and 20 m, the atmosphere is essentially transparent. Free elec-
tron scattering in the ionosphere blocks all celestial EMR for wavelengths >20 m.
1.1.3 Telescopes in the Observatory Context
The stereotypical image of an astronomical observatory is a large enclosure with a hemispheric
dome located on top of a remote mountain. The truth behind this stereotype is that all telescopes
are surrounded by various ancillary systems that together allow the telescope to function prop-
erly. In the ensemble, the telescope and these systems are known as an observatory. While short
descriptions of typical ancillary systems are provided here, more details are given later.
The telescope mount is used to point the telescope toward an astronomical object and
then move the telescope to compensate for the rotation of Earth, motion around Earth, or
motion through space. These actions are commonly known as target acquisition and track-
ing. The mount often provides various services (e.g., communication, electrical power, coolant)
needed for telescope and instrument operation. For ground-based telescopes, two kinds of
two-axis mounts are common: equatorial and altitude-azimuth (alt-az). For equatorial mounts,
one axis of motion is aligned with Earth’s axis of rotation while the other axis is orthogonal
to that (i.e., parallel to Earth’s equator projected on the celestial sphere). For alt-az telescopes,
one axis of motion is perpendicular to the surface of Earth and the other is orthogonal to that
(i.e., parallel to Earth’s surface).
The telescope control system (TCS) accepts positional coordinates of an astronomical object
and then issues appropriate motion commands to the telescope mount. Telescope control sys-
tems are embedded within more extensive observatory control systems that coordinate the
actions all telescope and observatory systems. The TCS is often associated with a telemetry
system that collects and stores data about system status.
EMR collected by telescopes are projected into instruments capable of recording received
energy (power) or created images. Instrument nomenclature follows function and wavelength
band, using historical conventions. For example, instruments that record energy are usually
called receivers for radio telescopes but bolometers for infrared telescopes. Spectrographs
(spectrometers) are instruments that disperse received EMR. Instruments can be physically
connected to the telescope or located nearby.
A ground-based telescope, its mount, and its instruments must be protected from weather
to function properly. As the ensemble is too large to be moved under a shelterwhen not in use, it
is surrounded by an enclosure. Modern enclosure design strives to balance protection from the
elements (e.g., telescope motion induced by wind buffeting, optical surface damage from rain
or dust) and the need to minimize thermal turbulence within the enclosure that can degrade
delivered image quality. Exact details depend on the telescope wavelength range. For example,
as λ increases into the submillimeterrange and beyond, problems related to internal turbulence
and optical surface damage become less important. In the radio band, telescopes are left exposed

Introduction to Telescopes 1
7
to the elements all the time. Space-based telescopes do not have enclosures per se but sometimes
have sunshades to minimize heat loading from solar illumination and to prevent damage to
instrumentation from inadvertent observation of the bright sources such as the Sun.
Ground-based observatories have support facilities for activities such as performance mon-
itoring, correction and preventive maintenance, utility delivery (e.g., power, water, communi-
cations), implementation of new capabilities, and data processing and archiving. Space-based
facilities have a similar set of support facilities. Of course, in situ spacecraft maintenance and
improvement is not possible for most such observatories, with the obvious exception of the
Hubble Space Telescope.
Finally, the observatory staff is a group of people that operate, maintain, and extend obser-
vatory capabilities. A broad mix of scientific, technical, and administrative skill is needed. In a
mature professional observatory, the annual cost of operation is usually dominated by labor
(staff) costs. Over the lifetime of an observatory, operations costs eventually dominate the orig-
inal construction costs. Therefore, minimization of operations costs is an important design
requirement for modern observatories.
1.2 Geometric Optics and Idealized Telescopes
1.2.1 Basic Principles
Modern development of EMR wave-particle duality began with work by Huygens (1690)
(wave) and Newton (1704) (particle). The wave-based unification of electricity and magnetism
(Maxwell 1861), the discrete oscillator explanation of blackbody emission (Planck 1901), and
the photon-based explanation of the photoelectric effect (Einstein 1905) lead ultimately to
the development of quantum mechanics (Heisenberg 1925). Astronomers tend to think in
terms of photons (or equivalently energy) collected per unit time per unit area per wavelength
(or frequency) since that has the most direct physical connection to the phenomena being
studied. Photons (often in terms of intensity or power) are also what astronomical detectors
measure.
However, it is the wave-like properties of EMR that determines detection location. Hence,
optical designers follow the approach first proposed by Huygens and work in terms of spatially
continuous wave fronts composed of the superposition of the individual wave fronts emitted by
idealized point sources. In the realm of geometric optics, such composite wave fronts are con-
ceptualized as bundles of rays, arbitrarily narrow beams of light of known wavelength λ. Rays
represent the direction of flow of the energy in an electromagnetic wave and are perpendicular
to the wavefront. This simplification is highly appropriate when λ is small relative to the size
of the intervening optical elements. However, it is cumbersome for modeling two-dimensional
image creation via diffraction (interference) and image modification via aberration. Imaging is
more easily conceptualized by physical optics, discussed later in this chapter (>Fig. 1-4).
Rays travel in straight lines in homogeneous media but curve in media with variable refrac-
tive indices. Rays are split when they strike the boundary between two transparent materials.
One component is bent (refracted) as it crosses the boundary while the other is reflected away
from the boundary. At the point of contact, the ray makes an angle of incidence θ with a line
that is perpendicular or “normal” to the interface at that point. As θ →, incident rays are said
to have normal (or nearly normal) incidence angles.

8 1
Introduction to Telescopes
Incident ray
Reflected ray
Refracted
ray
Transmitted ray
Air (n~1)
Glass
(n′)
q
j
q¢
⊡Fig. 1-4
Basic principles of reﬂection and refraction
The law of reflection has been known since antiquity (putatively first by Hero of Alexandria)
and states that the reflected ray lies in the same plane as the incident ray and the angle of
reflection (φ) relative to the normal is equal to the angle of incidence. Therefore,
θ = φ
(1.1)
Specular (mirror-like) reflection is produced by surfaces where all incident rays in a bun-
dle are reflected in the same direction. As a general rule, a surface is considered to be specular
(smooth) when h × cos(θ) < λ, where h is the characteristic roughness height of the material.
This is called the Rayleigh criterion, not to be confused with the Rayleigh criterion for resolv-
ability of point sources. Today, optical smoothness is usually specified by a structure function
that defines h (or σh) as a function of measurement point separation. As surface roughness
increases relative to λ, the ray bundle broadens and the reflection is said to become more diffuse.
At optical-infrared wavelengths, once a smooth surface is produced (usually on glass sub-
strate), a thin (∼100 nm) metal coating is applied to maximize reflectivity, the ratio of reflected
energy to incident energy. Reflectivity as a function of wavelength varies from metal to metal
(see >Fig. 1-5). While aluminum is used at many professional telescopes, observatories that
concentrate on observations beyond 1 μm have used silver and gold. Recently, complex mul-
tilayer coatings have been developed to better and more uniform reflectivity curves than are
possible with single-layer coatings.
Energy that is not reflected is transmitted or absorbed. Absorbed energy is later reemit-
ted as longer wavelength (lower energy) EMR. Surface material (or differences in material at
interfaces) can cause the phase and/or polarization of the reflected light to be different than the
incident light, as seen, for example, in visible light (λ ∼.μm) reflected from the surface of
calm water. At small enough wavelength (e.g., x-ray, λ ∼.μm), conventional reflectivity at
near normal incidence is negligible.
The behavior of the transmitted ray is described by the law of refraction, first accurately
described by Ibn Sahl (891), but commonly known as Snell’s Law (Snellius 1621), which states
(in its common sine form after Descartes 1637) that the transmitted ray lies in the same plane as
the incident ray, but moves in a different (deviated) direction such that the sine of the angle of

Introduction to Telescopes 1
9
0.2
0
20
40
60
Reflectivity (%)
80
100
0.4
1
Rh
Al
Ti
Cu
Au
Ag
2
Wavelength (μm)
4
10
⊡Fig. 1-5
Reﬂectivity for several metals as a function of wavelength
refraction (θ′) divided by the sine of the angle of incidence (relative to the normal at that point)
is a constant, equal to the ratio of the refractive indices (n/n′) in the two materials. This result
is commonly written as
n sinθ = n′ sinθ′
(1.2)
In physical terms, n is the ratio of EMR speed v within a medium relative to the speed
of light in vacuum, that is, n = c/v. At visible wavelengths, n = 1–2 for transparent materials.
The change of ray direction can be understood by realizing that the first part of the wavefront to
intercept the surface is slowed down relative to an adjacent front that travels further in the same
time, and so the entire wavefront seems to progressively change direction. The distance between
crests inside the material is now λ/n. As shown by Newton, refraction separates white light
into its component colors, which implies that the refractive index varies with wavelength. The
angular divergence of EMR of different wavelengths is called dispersion. The inverse dispersive
power V of a given material is expressed as the difference in the refractive indices at two extreme
wavelengths (n, n) relative to the difference between their average < n > and vacuum, that is,
V = n−n
⟨n⟩−
(1.3)
When EMR travels a distance d in a medium of refractive index n, the product nd is the
optical path (or path of least time). Given the definition of n, the optical path is the distance that
the EMR would travel in vacuum in the same time that it travels the distance d in the medium.
Fermat first generalized this principle in the mid-1660s. The modern version of Fermat’s prin-
ciple is that the path taken by an EMR ray from one point to another through any set of media
is such that its optical path is equal, in the first approximation, to other paths closely adjacent

10 1
Introduction to Telescopes
to the actual one. In the language of calculus, the optical path must be a minimum, maximum,
or stationary point (point of inflection) for the actual path.
Optical rays are said to be paraxial when the angles of reflection or refraction are small
enough to satisfy the condition sin θ = θ (in radians). A paraxial optical system is a simplifica-
tion where all elements are infinitely thin, rotationally symmetric and centered on a common,
central optical axis. Only images centered on the optical axis (on-axis images) and created on
a flat focal plane parallel to the optical elements are considered. Paraxial optics and relation-
ships are also known as first-order optics and solutions because only the first terms of series
expansions of trigonometric expressions are needed to describe basic on-axis optical properties.
As described later, higher order terms in the series expansions are needed to describe off-axis
image formation and distortion effects on curved focal surfaces.
From these paraxial assumptions, it is possible to derive a number of well-known formulas
for lenses and mirrors. Such derivations are given in all standard textbooks on optics; thus, only
a few useful results are provided here.
The thin lens equation in air or vacuum is written as

f = 
s + 
s′
(1.4)
where f is the focal length (the distance from the optical element to the point where an image is
formed) and s and s′ are the object and image distances respectively. The distances, s and s′ are
called conjugate points. A lens is considered thin if its thickness is small in relation to its focal
length. This equation assumes that the lens is in vacuum (n = ) or to a first approximation air
(n ≈.). If not, then the expression can be generalized to include the refractive indices of
the mediums. For astronomical telescopes, the object distance is effectively infinite, /s →,
and the conjugate image distance is just the focal length of the lens (s′ = f ).
Newton’s form of the thin lens equation is
x′x = f 
(1.5)
where the distances are now measured relative to the focal points (x = s −f and x′ = s′ −f ).
The lateral or transverse magnification orthogonal to the optical axis is
m = −s′
s = h′
h
(1.6)
Here, h and h′ are the object and image heights (lengths). The longitudinal magnification (along
the optical axis) is m. With rays traveling left to right through the lens (i.e., the object is to the
left of the lens), the sign convention is that s is positive if on the left of the lens and s′ is positive
if on the right, and the negative sign for m indicates that the image is inverted when s and s′ are
both positive.
The largest unobstructed diameter in an optical system defines the amount of light that can
be collected and is called an aperture stop. For filled aperture telescopes, the aperture stop is
usually set by the diameter of the primary optical element. For many systems, the field of view
(FOV) that can be imaged is not set by the aperture stop but by other obstructions. In those
cases, the diameter that limits the field of view is called the field stop. Since obstructions also
block rays admitted at the edge of the aperture stop, EMR power received decreases toward
the edge of the field stop, an effect known as vignetting. If there are no such obstructions, the
aperture and field stops are one and the same. The entrance pupil is an image (often virtual) of
the aperture stop as seen from the entrance of the optical system. Conversely, the exit pupil is
an image of the aperture stop as seen through the optical system.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
11
For a thin lens, the focal ratio (otherwise known as the f-number, f-ratio, or f-stop) is the
diameter of the entrance pupil (D) in terms of focal length. It is expressed as a dimensionless
number, for example, f/16:
f −ratio = f
D
(1.7)
The angular field of view (φ, in radians) for a single lens can be written as
φ = × arctan (

× f −ratio)
(1.8)
As noted above, the achieved field of view is often determined by a field stop that is different
than the aperture stop.
Effective light collected is sometimes defined as aperture area, A, where
A = π (
f
× f −ratio)

(1.9)
As f-ratio decreases, magnification decreases, while field of view and light concentration per
unit area increase at the focal point. Elements with small focal ratios (like f /) are said to be
“fast” since it takes less time to collect a certain amount of light. Smaller f-ratios also imply
shorter telescopes and smaller enclosures, reducing overall cost.
The paraxial simplification assumes on-axis images formed on a flat focal plane. In reality,
each optical element projects its exit pupil onto a curved focal surface. As f-ratio decreases, so
must focal length and the focal plane becomes more curved. For many applications, additional
corrector optics must be introduced to project a flat enough focal plane onto a flat detector
(e.g., a charge coupled device, CCD).
Equations similar to the thin lens equations hold for spherical mirrors in the paraxial
approximation.

f = 
s + 
s′ = 
R′
(1.10)
where f = R/and R is the mirror radius of curvature. By convention, convex mirrors have
negative radii of curvature and concave mirrors of positive radii of curvature. So, by (> 1.10),
convexmirrors have negative focal lengths and are said toform virtual images behind the mirror
to allow geometric analysis. Conversely, concave mirrors have positive focal points and form
real images in front of the mirror. For astronomical telescopes, the object distance is effectively
infinite, /s →, and therefore, s′ = f = R/.
The optical power (P = /f ) of a thin lens is a measure of how much an optical element
converges or diverges incident EMR. Optical power has units of diopters (inverse meters). It is
related to the physical properties of a lens by the lensmaker’s formula:
P = 
f = (n −) [ 
R
−
R
+ t(n −)
nRR
]
(1.11)
where Rand Rare the radius of curvature of the front surface and the back surface, respec-
tively, and t is the central thickness of the lens. If t is less than 1/6 of the lens diameter, then
the third term can be neglected. Thick lenses can be handled by defining two principal planes
where refraction occurs or by point-to-point ray tracing using computer programs.

12 1
Introduction to Telescopes
For thick lenses, or two thin lenses separated by a distance d, power is additive, so that
overall power, or effective focal length, is given by
P = P+ P−(d
n) PP
(1.12)
Convex (positive, converging) lenses focus paraxial rays at a focal point centered on the
optical axis. Concave (negative, diverging) lenses cause paraxial rays to diverge and appear to
come from a focal point on the same side of the lens as the incident light. Image formation and
the resultant magnification depend on the relative positions of the object and the focal points.
When the image formed by the lens cannot be made visible on a screen because no EMR actually
travels to or from that location, but only appears to do so, such images are said to be “virtual.”
A simple example occurs when an object is placed closer to a convex lens than its focal point.
The EMR appears to come from a magnified, upright virtual image on the same side of the lens
as the object.
Angular magnification is defined in terms of the slope angles of the rays rather than the
object and image heights. If the incident ray makes an angle u with respect to the optical axis
(slope = tan u) and the refracted ray makes an angle u′ with the optical axis, then the angular
magnification is
M = tan u′
tan u = s
s′ = h
h′
(1.13)
More generally, magnification is often characterized in terms of the plate scale, the number of
seconds of arc on the sky corresponding to 1 mm at the focus of the telescope:
Plate Scale (′′/mm) = ,/f
(1.14)
where the focal length f is in mm. The primary element of a telescope always has the shortest
focal length and therefore the largest plate scale.
The Lagrange invariant H is a measure of light propagation, constant across all refractions
and reflections. In the paraxial limit,
hnu = h′n′u′
(1.15)
where h and h′ are the object and image heights, n and n′ are the refractive indices in object and
image space, respectively (usually n = n′ = ), and u and u′ are the (small) angles with respect
to the optical axis of the same ray in object space and in image space. Astronomers often use this
in its area-solid angle (AΩ) form, also known as étendue or throughput. Because the total flux
collected from a uniformly radiating source is proportional to (AΩ) it follows that the Lagrange
invariant is a consequence of the conservation of energy.
For a two-element system, the effective focal length is
feff =
f× f
f+ f−d
(1.16)
where fand fare the focal lengths of the two optical elements and d is the separation between
the two elements. Recall that focal length is negative for concave (diverging) lens and mirrors.
1.2.2 Refracting Telescopes
Refracting telescopes (or simply refractors) use a primary optical element called an objective
lens to form an image that is then magnified by a second optical element called an eyepiece,

Introduction to Telescopes 1
13
which consists of one or more lenses. Refractors were the earliest telescopes, appearing first in
the Netherlands in 1608. Their invention is usually credited to Lippersky, Janssen, and Adri-
annzoon. Galileo Galilei is credited with the first use of telescopes to observe celestial objects in
1609. Such telescopes are said to be dioptric since the objective lens is convex. In these simple
systems, the objective is both the aperture stop and the entrance pupil while the final, magni-
fied image of the objective is the exit pupil. A closed tube connects the objective and eyepiece
to prevent optical rays from bypassing the objective lens (aperture stop), entering the eyepiece,
and overwhelming the rays received from the astronomical object of interest. Refractor tubes
were the first example of telescope baffles.
The basic properties for the refractor are illustrated in >Fig. 1-6 where the double-ended
arrow marked O represents the long-focus (weak) objective lens and the smaller (strong) eye-
piece lens is labeled E. For essentially infinite objects (s ≫f ), (> 1.4) shows that the objective
forms an image at its focal point (s′ = f ), which in turn becomes the object for the eyepiece
lens. If the eyepiece is moved along the axis such that the real image formed by the objective lens
coincides with the focal point of the eyepiece lens (separation of the lenses is then the sum of
the focal lengths), then the emergent rays are parallel and the final (virtual) image is at infinity.
Notice that the telescope is afocal: parallel rays in, parallel rays out, and the image is inverted.
This is a Keplerian refractor (Kepler 1611). In contrast, a Galilean refractor (Galilei 1610) uses
a divergent (concave) eyepiece, and the lenses are separated by the difference (not the sum) of
their focal lengths. One ray in the figure is labeled as a chief ray because it passed through the
center of both the entrance and exit pupils.
Refractors have several inherent problems. Most important is chromatic aberration. Because
refractive index changes with wavelength, a single lens forms a series of images along the opti-
cal axis, that is, focal length f is a function of wavelength. The horizontal distance along the
optical axis between the different focal positions is called longitudinal chromatic aberration.
But the lateral magnification (m) must vary as well because the image height (h′) depends on
s′ which is controlled by f . The vertical difference in image height is called lateral chromatic
aberration. The classical method for correcting both forms of chromatic aberration is to use
two lenses of different materials (historically crown glass and flint glass) in contact to make an
achromatic doublet. Colors outside the corrected range can still cause a halo of color around
a point source referred to as the secondary spectrum. However, each lens absorbs a significant
amount of incident EMR, which varies as a function of lens material and wavelength.
Entrance
Pupil
Chief ray
Objective Lens
Eyepiece Lens
fo
fe
h
E
Exit
Pupil
s
s¢
q¢
O
q
⊡Fig. 1-6
Basic layout of refracting telescope

14 1
Introduction to Telescopes
Another problem with refractors is the size and f-ratio of the objective lens. To observe
fainter objects, more light must be collected, so aperture area and hence objective size must be
increased. However, the manufacture of large lenses using high transmissive material without
internal defects is difficult. Furthermore, since they can only be supported at the edge, large
objective lenses bend (sag) due to gravity, degrading delivered image quality. Finally, because
such lenses have large (slow) f-ratios, their focal lengths are long, resulting in long telescopes
that also bend (sag) due to gravity. In practice, the largest refractor ever built was the Great
Paris Exhibition Telescope of 1900 with an objective diameter of 1.25 m at f/46 – a focal length
of 57 m!
1.2.3 Reﬂecting Telescopes
Soon after the invention of the refractor, the idea of using curved (powered) mirrors to build
telescopes was discussed by Galileo, among others. Consideration of mirror-based telescopes
accelerated once it was recognized that curved mirrors could be used to overcome some of
the intrinsic problems of refractors. Newton is credited with building the first mirror-based
telescope in 1668, although Gregory published reflector designs several years earlier (1663).
Reflecting telescopes (or simply reflectors) use one or more mirrors to form an image. Such
telescopes are known as catoptric because they use curved mirrors. When refractive field cur-
vature correctors are introduced, the combined system is said to be catadioptric. Reflectors have
several key advantages over refractors, including significant reduction of chromatic aberration
(since EMR of all wavelength is focused at the same point), reduced EMR scattering (due to
smoother surfaces), higher end-to-end EMR transmission, ability to use additional mirrors to
fold the focal length of the primary mirror into a smaller volume, and ability to build arbitrary
large primary mirrors.
Today, virtually every professional astronomical telescope is a reflector of one sort or
another. In comparison to the largest objective lens (1.25 m), the largest existing monolithic
primary mirrors used at optical-infrared wavelengths are 8.4 m in diameter at f/1.1 (Large
Binocular Telescope, LBT) while the largest segmented primary mirror is 10.4 m at f/1.65
(Gran Telescopio Canarias, GTC). Designs exist for 30 m and larger segmented optical-infrared
mirrors. The largest steerable filled-aperture radio telescope has a diameter of 100 m (Robert
C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope, GBT) but a nonsteerable 305-m-diameter telescope has been
in operation for decades (Arecibo). A 500-m-diameter system (500 m Aperture Spherical
Telescope, FAST) is under construction in China.
Newton’s reflector used a concave spherical mirror with a flat mirror to bend the optical path
to an off-axis eyepiece. While spherical mirrors have no chromatic aberration (EMR of all wave-
lengths are brought to the same focal point), parallel rays from distant astronomical sources
will come to a different focus depending how far they are from the optical axis of the mirror
(see >Fig. 1-7) producing spherical aberration. In principle, that aberration can be minimized
by very long focal lengths to minimize focal plane curvature.
In practice, the problem of spherical aberration was solved using mirrors with the shapes of
conic sections where any ray starting at one focus will form a perfect point image at the other
(an effect called stigmatism). Conic sections can be described by
z (r) =
cr
+
√
−(k + )cr
(1.17)

Introduction to Telescopes 1
15
⊡Fig. 1-7
Reﬂection from a spherical surface
⊡Table 1-1
Conic constant vs. conic surface
Conic constant
Conic surface
< -1
Hyperboloid
−1
Paraboloid
−1 to 0
Prolate ellipsoid
0
Sphere
> 0
Oblate ellipsoid
where r is the distance from the axis of rotational symmetry, (usually the optical axis) ri is the
radius of curvature of the mirror at its vertex, c is the vertex curvature of the surface perpen-
dicular to the optical axis) (= 1/ri), z(r) is sag (deflection from a flat surface perpendicular to
the optical axis) as a function of r, and k is the Schwarzschild (conic) constant (see >Table 1-1).
Two-mirror aplanatic systems that minimize spherical and comatic aberration across large FOV
can be created through proper matching of conic constants.
Gregory (1663) proposed the first such design. A Gregorian telescope combines a con-
cave parabolic primary mirror with a concave ellipsoidal secondary mirror (see > Fig. 1-8).
Converging rays from the parabolic primary are allowed to go through the focal point of the
primary (the prime focus) and reflect from the elliptical secondary mirror back through the hole
in the primary to a (curved) focal plane.
The idea of combining a concave parabolic primary mirror with a convex hyperbolic sec-
ondary mirror appears is commonly attributed Cassegrain (see >Fig. 1-8). Converging rays
from the parabolic primary are allowed to go through the focal point of the primary (the prime
focus) and reflect from the elliptical secondary mirror back through the hole in the primary
to a (curved) focal plane (see > Fig. 1-8). Cavalieri (1632), Mersenne (1636), and Gregory
(1663) proposed similar designs. In the Cassegrain version, the hyperbolic secondary is placed
to intercept optical rays before they reach the prime focus. Image quality is limited by comatic
aberration (coma) where images become more and more comet-like as angular distance from
the optical axis increases. For optical telescopes, the final focus is projected behind the primary,
but radio telescopes often produce a final focus in front of the primary. In asymmetric designs,

16 1
Introduction to Telescopes
⊡Fig. 1-8
Schematic layout of Gregorian and Cassegrain reﬂecting telescopes
one or both mirrors may be tilted to minimize how much primary collecting area is obscured
by the secondary. Magnification is simply the ratio of the effective focal length (see > 1.16) to
the focal length of the primary mirror. The final focal surface is curved inward (toward the sky)
with radius of curvature related to the radii of curvature of the primary and secondary mirrors
(Rprimary and Rsecondary, respectively) by

Rfocal
=

Rprimary
+

Rsecondary
(1.18)
There are many variants of the classical Cassegrain design. For professional optical astron-
omy, Ritchey and Chrétien designed the most widely used variant in the 1910s. Both mirrors
in a Ritchey–Chrétien (R–C) reflector are convex hyperboloids, a combination that eliminates
low-order spherical and comatic aberration across a large field of view at the cost of increased
field curvature.
For some applications, it is desirable to transfer the reflector optical beam to an instrument
that is not mounted on the telescope but located in a fixed physical location where it will not
flex mechanically as the telescope moves. For many years, the common solution was to use
a flat tertiary (“third”) mirror to direct the telescope beam through an axis of rotation to the
so-called coudé focus in a nearby room. For this to work, large telescope f-ratios were required to
produce long enough focal lengths for the beam to reach from the primary mirror to the coudé
instrument. When it was desirable for a telescope to have both Cassegrain and coudé foci, it was
necessary to have separate secondary mirrors for each focus. In recent years, the introduction
of alt-az mounts has allowed instruments that require gravity invariant environments to be
located much closer to the telescope at the Nasmyth focus. Since Nasmyth and Cassegrain foci
are separated from the primary mirror by the same physical distance (focal length), only one
secondary is needed. This has become more important as primary and secondary mirrors grow
in size and cost.
Many optical-infrared telescopes deploy field correctors in order to improve off-axis image
quality and thereby increase the usable field of view. The highest priority is to decrease (flatten)
field curvature but other optical aberrations can be minimized as well. The general topic of
optical aberrations is discussedin more detail below. Field correctors are particularly important
for instruments mounted at the telescope prime focus, that is, the focal point of the primary
mirror. Prime focus systems are desirable because they provide the largest possible field of view

Introduction to Telescopes 1
17
(aperture stop) and least loss of collected energy. These principles are exemplified by Schmidt
telescopes that have spherical primary mirrors, aspheric field correctors located at that mirror’s
center of curvature, and a detectorsystem at the mirror’s prime focus. Additional field flattening
optical elements are sometimes implemented in front of the detector system.
1.2.4 Grazing Incident Telescopes
At veryshort λ (veryhigh energy), EMR arriving at nearlynormal (small)incidence angles is not
reflectedorrefracted,butisabsorbed(bycombinationofphotoelectricabsorptionandCompton
scattering, depending on the material)or transmitted without any directional change. However,
at small grazing angles (the complement of large incidence angles), EMR at x-ray wavelengths
can be reflected and brought to a focus. The critical grazing angle is a function of λ and material
properties. Heavier elements such as nickel, iridium, platinum, and gold are typically used at
critical grazing angles in the range of 0.15–2○for soft x-rays (λ ∼0.1–10 nm, E ∼0.12–12 keV).
Toestablish and maintain appropriate optical shape, such films are deposited on rigid substrates.
For most materials, x-ray reflectivity is not a smooth function of wavelength because strong
absorption occurs when the photon energy corresponds to electron transition energies in the
reflecting material. These absorption features are often called x-ray absorption edges.
Kirkpatrick and Baez (1948) were the first to implement grazing angle reflection techniques
for x-ray imaging for microscopy. Their system used two sets of parabolic sheets with perpen-
dicular axes of rotations. The first sheet focused incident light into a line (i.e., astigmatism), and
the second set focused that line into a spot. Wolter (1952a, b) described a number of alternative
approaches for x-ray microscopy that used pairs of parabolic and hyperbolic or parabolic and
elliptical mirrors. Soon afterward, Giacconi and Rossi (1960) proposed an orbital x-ray imaging
telescope that implemented a Wolter-type design.
Since the late1970s, several space-based x-ray imaging telescopeshave been launched.Most
have used the so-called Wolter Type 1 design that consists of one or more coaxial and confocal
parabolic and hyperbolic reflective shells (see >Fig. 1-9). For any given parabolic-hyperbolic
⊡Fig. 1-9
Grazingincidencetelescope, Wolter Type 1, example (Illustration credit: NASA/SAO/Chandra X-Ray
Observatory)

18 1
Introduction to Telescopes
set, the collecting surface is only a small annulus. To increase collecting area, the number of
shells is increased. Existing x-ray telescopes have achieved sub-arcsecond image sizes for point
sources. The design and construction of grazing incidence telescopes that can focus higher
energy x-rays into images is an area of current research interest.
1.3 Physical Optics and Image Formation
Although the basics of geometric optics were empirically established by 1800, image forma-
tion (and deformation) in a general sense was not well understood. Young’s classic double-slit
experiment changed all that by establishing the wave-like nature of light, which in turn laid the
formation for a mathematical description of diffraction (interference) and hence ideal image
formation. Actual images delivered by telescopes are distorted by imperfections in the optical
elements and their relative alignments. For ground-based telescopes, atmospheric turbulence
is the main source of image deformation at millimeter and shorter wavelengths.
1.3.1 Ideal Images
As an approximation, all distant luminous objects can be considered collections of point sources
radiating spherical wave fronts. By the time those spherical waves reach Earth, they act like
plane waves. In the nomenclature of geometric optics, astronomical objects exist in the far-
field regime. When impeded by obstacles such as physical barriers or interfaces between media
with different indices of refraction, these arriving plane waves bend. Such bending is the prox-
imate cause of image formation by optical elements and devices and is known as diffraction or
interference depending on the application.1
Although diffraction was first described qualitatively by Grimaldi (1665), Fresnel (1815)
used wave principles developedby Huygens (1690) (and vindicated by Young in the early 1800s)
to develop the Huygens-Fresnel principle, a geometric theory for near-field diffraction, where
incident waves are still spherical. The Fraunhofer diffraction equations were later derived for
the case where a diffraction pattern is viewed a long way from the diffracting element or at
the focal point of a positive optical element, that is, the case for all astronomical telescopes
that form images. In the mid-twentieth century, the application of Fourier analysis to signal
processing crossed over into classical optics (e.g., Duffieux 1946), bringing the appreciation that
observed diffraction patterns can be described as the convolution of the Fourier transforms of
the diffracting elements and the objects being observed.
Consider an idealized point source at great distance that is radiating monochromatic
(Δλ →) EMR that can be described as sinusoidal waves with form x(t) = Asin(πf t + φ)
where A, f , and φ are the amplitude, frequency, and phase, respectively. Such monochromatic
EMR is said tobe coherent (indeed, self-coherent), that is, all emitted EMR waves have phase and
amplitude that are constant in time, and can therefore interact with itself to produce diffraction
patterns.
1Classically, interference occurs when waves overlap and combine to form resultant waves of greater or lower
amplitude, while diffraction occurs when waves encounter obstacles that hinder wave propagation. From an
image creation perspective, the distinction between interference and diffraction is essentially artificial.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
19
In a vacuum, the image of that source produced by a single, round, perfect, and uniformly
illuminated optical element is known as an Airy pattern (or disk) (from Airy 1835, the first
mathematical description). In the nomenclature of Fourier optics, the Airy pattern is simply
the squared modulus of the Fourier transform of a round, filled aperture (optical element):
I(θ) = I(J(x)
x
) ,
x = kr sin θ
(1.19)
where Iis the maximum central intensity, Jis a first-kind Bessel function of order one, λ is
the wavelength of incident light, k (= 2π/λ) is the wavenumber, r is the circular aperture radius,
and θ is the angle in radians between the central maximum and any other point in the pattern
(see >Fig. 1-10). For any given λ, larger r leads to higher ideal spatial resolution as well as larger
total (integrated) intensity since a larger area collects more photons.
Maximum central intensity Iis related to total power Pincident on the aperture by
I= Pπr
λR
(1.20)
where πris the aperture area and R is the distance from the aperture. Encircled power P(θ) is
P(θ) = P[−J
(x) −J
(x)],
x = kr sin θ
(1.21)
The angular width of the central maximum where intensity equals 50% of peak intensity I
is known as the full width at half maximum (FWHM), that is,
FWHM = .λ
D = .λ
r
(1.22)
⊡Fig. 1-10
Airy pattern for circular aperture

20 1
Introduction to Telescopes
where λ is the wavelength of the incident light and r and D are the circular aperture radius
and diameter, respectively. Since plate scale (arcsec per linear distance) equals 206,265 divided
by focal length, FWHM in linear units equals FWHM (radians) × focal length. As focal length
increases at constant aperture diameter D, images are magnified and collected energy is spread
out over a large spatial area. So, images appear dimmerper unit area, and more time is necessary
to record a fixed amount of energy per unit area in the image plane. Following Nyquist sampling
theory, at least two spatial resolution elements must be contained within the delivered FWHM
to avoid degrading spatial resolution during image detection and recording.
Peaks of intensity maxima (“fringes”) occur at x ∼5.136, 8.417, 11.617, and so on while
zero intensity minima (“dark rings”) occur at x ∼3.832, 7.016, 10.173, and so on. The angular
separation between the central maximum and the first zero is
sin θR = .λ
D = .λ
r (radians)
(1.23)
where λ is the wavelength of the incident light and r and D are the circular aperture radius
and diameter, respectively. This angular separation is known as the Rayleigh criterion or the
“diffraction limit” because (in vacuum) two point sources can be separated (resolved) if the
central maximum of one source lies at the position of this first minimum of the second source.
Point sources are said to be fully resolved when the central cores of their Airy disks are
completely separated by 2θR.
Obviously, many astronomical objects are extended, not point-like, and consist of many
features of different shapes, sizes, and relative intensities. These features are only distinguishable
if their intensity difference, their contrast, is large enough. Michelson (1927) defined contrast
(also known as visibility or modulation) as
C = Imax −Imin
Imax + Imin
(1.24)
The concept of contrast can be simply illustrated by pairs of bright and dark lines (the comb
function in Fourier analysis nomenclature). Spatial frequency is a measure of number of line
pairs per unit interval. As spatial frequency increases, contrast decreases as the diffraction pat-
terns from each bright line overlap more. The contrast transfer coefficient (CTC) is the ratio of
the input contrast to the delivered contrast at a given spatial frequency, where CTC = 1 means
input and output contrast are identically equal. The contrast transfer function (CTF) (also known
as modulation transfer function, MTF) is essentially CTC as a function of spatial frequency. For
an ideal system, CTF = 1 at all spatial frequencies. For a real system, CTF decreases as spatial
frequency increases and eventually reaches zero at the cutoff frequency.
In an imaging system, the observed point spread function (PSF) is the Fourier transform
of that system’s CTF (and vice versa). In optics design nomenclature, the PSF is the impulse
response (or function) of a focused optical system, while in Fourier optics nomenclature, the
PSF is the CTF (MTF) in the spatial frequency domain. For a point source, the first minimum
(dark ring) in an Airy disk corresponds to zero contrast and a cutoff spatial frequency of D/λ f
where f is the focal length. In that case, spatial frequency ν and wavenumber k are related by
k = 2πν (see (> 1.19)). In short, as aperture diameter D increases, so does cutoff frequency, and
therefore, a higher contrast (more detailed, higher fidelity, higher resolution) image is formed.
The connection to the classic Rayleigh criterion is clear (see (> 1.23)). On the other hand, as
observed EMR bandwidth Δλ increases, EMR coherence decreases (especially in phase) and so
does contrast. This effect is usually overwhelmed by the imperfections of real optical elements.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
21
More generally, extended objects can be thought of as a two-dimensional collection of point
sources where each point source produces its own PSF in the telescope focal plane. Since the
EMR emitted by these point sources is incoherent (i.e., they have differing amplitude, frequency,
or phase), the intensities of overlapping PSFs are additive. In short, the image of an extended
object is the two-dimensional convolution of the spatial intensity of that object with the tele-
scope PSF. Low spatial frequencies encode information about smooth (large spatial scale) inten-
sitychanges, such as general shape, orientation, and intensitygradients. High spatial frequencies
encode information about sharp (small spatial scale) intensity changes such as edges.
1.3.2 Image Errors from Optical Elements
In a perfect system, an incident plane wave is transformed into an image wavefront that
converges to an ideal diffraction pattern in the focal plane. The image wavefront is a two-
dimensional map of phase relative to a reference surface, usually spherical. Real, imperfect
systems introduce wavefront deviations at both high and low spatial frequencies. In physical
terms, these deviations are phase changes, sometimes also called curvature, slope, or tilt errors.
Classically, such wavefront errors are known as optical aberrations that arise from both imper-
fect individual optical elements and imperfect relative alignment ofthe optical elements. Optical
aberrations are sometimes classified as intrinsic (created by design and/or manufacturing chal-
lenges) and induced (created by setup and/or operational errors). Relative to perfect images,
aberrated images have reduced energy concentration, spatial resolution, and contrast.
To begin, consider three geometric issues that are not technically aberrations because the
image wavefront is not deformed relative to the ideal case but merely misaligned. The first such
geometric effect is piston, the mean value of the wavefront phase at the focal surface (really the
exit pupil). The next two effects are x (sagittal) and y (tangential) tilt (tip-tilt), the average x
and y slopes of the wavefront as it crosses the focal surface. Measuring and correcting piston
and tip-tilt is critical to the performance of segmented mirrors and adaptive optics systems as
described elsewhere in this volume.
The lowest order true aberration is defocus, the effect of forming an image before or after
the optimal focal surface. It occurs when the imaging device (e.g., a camera detector) is placed
in front or behind the effective focal point. The most common cause is incorrect separation
between the primary and secondary mirrors. Defocus reduces image contrast (resolution). Fast
(f-ratio ∼3 or less) optical systems are very sensitive to defocus while slower optical systems
are not.
The next five monochromatic(Δλ →)aberrations are spherical aberration, coma, astigma-
tism, field curvature, and distortion. Spherical aberration is constant in magnitude everywhere
in the focal plane but the magnitude of the other four aberrations increases with angular dis-
tance from the optical axis. In geometric optics, such aberrations are known as third-order
errors because they can be described by third-order (or higher) terms of power series expan-
sions oftrigonometricfunctions as shown byvon Seidel (1856). Hence, these five aberrations are
also known as Seidel aberrations. In Fourier optics terms, the five Seidel aberrations correspond
to low spatial frequency wavefront errors that affect the entire two-dimensional image.
Spherical optical elements focus off-axis and paraxial rays at different points along the opti-
cal axis. This effect is known as spherical aberration and can be either positive (wavefront bend
too much) or negative (wavefront bend too little). Spherical aberration is more pronounced
in short (fast) focal length systems. Multielement correctors that combine convex and concave

22 1
Introduction to Telescopes
refractive elements (lens) in an appropriate fashion can be used to correct spherical aberration.
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) provides the most famous example of spherical aberra-
tion in the twentieth century. Due to a fabrication error, the HST primary mirror produces
severe spherical aberration. Fortunately, it was possible to deploy optical systems to cancel that
aberration, first through the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement (COSTAR)
instrument and then later through correcting elements directly integrated into instruments
deployed during later refurbishment missions.
Aspheric optical elements,such as parabolic or hyperbolic mirrors, can be used to minimize
spherical aberration. However, such mirrors produce comatic aberration (coma). While point
sources near the center of the field of view (on-axis) are well focused, point sources away from
the center (off-axis) look wedge shaped, similar to comets. Coma results from a change in mag-
nification with position that increases as focal ratio decreases (gets faster). It can be minimized
by using multielement correctors or by appropriate combinations of primary and secondary
mirrors. The Ritchey–Chrétien combination of a hyperbolic primary mirror with a hyperbolic
secondary mirror is a widely used solution for minimizing coma (see >Sect. 1.2.3).
Astigmatism is introduced when EMR traveling in two perpendicular planes (tangential
and sagittal relative to the optical axis) is focused at two different focal distances. A common
illustration is a plus sign where each arm is in focus at different distances from the imaging
element.
While an input two-dimensional object plane is flat, the output image (focal) plane from a
single optical element is curved. In essence, an overall curve (or change in radius) is added to the
input wavefront. Field curvature increases as focal ratio decreases (becomes faster). To correct
for field curvature, the imaging surface must be curved (e.g., the retina in a human eye) or
the initial focal surface must be reimaged by other correcting optics. Without such correction,
off-axis images are defocused relative to on-axis images.
Field distortion is the result of image scale (magnification) changing as a function of angular
distance (radius) from the optical axis. Decreasing magnification with distance produces barrel
distortion while increasing magnification with distance produces pincushion distortion.
Reflective optics create a single, common focal surface for all incident λ, while refractive
optics in essence create an individual focal surface for each incident λ. This effect is known
as chromatic aberration. Chromatic aberration is not per se a wavefront error, as each Δλ can
produce an unaberrated image.
All real optical elements induce one or more of the Seidel aberrations simply because
fabrication errors are always nonzero to some extent. However, Seidel and other low spatial
frequency aberrations can also be induced when the element shape is wrapped or twisted
by gravitational slumping, incorrect mechanical support (e.g., pinching), or internal ther-
mal gradients. Maintaining proper support and uniform temperatures is a significant design
and operational challenge for large, massive telescope systems that are exposed to temporal
temperature changes and must move to compensate for the rotation of the Earth.
Misalignment of optical elements is another source of low spatial frequency image aberra-
tions. In a perfect system, all elementsare centered on the optical axis, parallel to each other, and
separated precisely so that each optical elementimages the focal surface of the preceding optical
element. All three of these conditions can be violated individually or simultaneously. As general
rules, centering errors (if small) cause optical aberrations to shift laterally on the focal surface
without changing form, physical tilt errors increase (or create) coma, and separation (focus)
errors reduce energy concentration as energy shifts from central core into diffraction rings and
hence reduce image contrast. To maintain proper relative alignment, all optical elements must
be supported within a common mechanical structure.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
23
Real images suffer also from the effects of small-scale (high spatial frequency) wavefront
errors. One common source of high spatial frequency error is diffraction from thin (sharp)
mechanical obstructions such as secondary mirror support vanes and edges within segmented
mirrors. Mirror surface roughness is another common source of high spatial frequency errors.
The former error type produces sharp image features (e.g., diffraction “spikes”) while the latter
type scatters energy into a low-intensity envelope (“noise floor”) throughout the more distinct
diffraction pattern.
Additional diffuse background energy can also reach the focal surface without being cap-
tured and focused by the primary mirror, just from oblique stray rays entering from outside
the entrance pupil. For small telescopes (D ∼2-m or smaller), a closed tube can prevent such
stray light from reaching the primary. For large telescopes, mechanical barriers called baffles
are often deployed to block stray EMR paths.
Obviously, a secondary mirror obstructs (“shadows”) the central area of the primary mirror
and its effective collecting area. But this central obstruction also transforms the primary mir-
ror from filled circle to an annulus, which is easily seen in out-of-focus images.2 In turn, the
system PSF is transformed from a classic Airy disk into the Fourier transform of an annulus,
which has similar form with less total energy in the central core and more energy in the diffrac-
tion rings. Compared to a filled aperture, the effective CTF has relatively worse transfer at low
spatial frequencies, comparable transfer at high spatial frequencies, and almost identical cutoff
frequency. Thus, systems with relatively large obstructions maintain good image contrast, in the
absence of other optical aberrations.
1.3.3 Image Errors from Atmospheric Turbulence
Before the wavefront from a celestial object reaches a ground-based telescope, it must pass
through a column of terrestrial atmosphere that schematically consists of a series of turbulent
cells, each with different density, temperature, and internal wind speed, and hence different
indices of refraction. The exact mixture of cells in the line-of-sight changes rapidly with time.
Turbulence as a function of altitude above a given location can be parameterized by the index
of refraction structure function, C
n(h). This structure function can be measured empirically but
varies on both short and long timescales. Students ofseeing often speak oftwozones: the ground
(boundary) layer right above the telescope location (h ≪km) and the rest of the column
where the jet stream (h ∼km) is often the dominant source of turbulence. More sophisticated
models use multiple layers. As the original wavefront passes through this turbulent column, it
is deformed multiple times, reducing coherence and contrast. In effect, the wavefront passes
through series of time-variable drifting lenses. The overall effect is to introduce atmospheric
seeing.
Wavefront perturbations introduced by a given C
n(h) can be predicted by models based
on the atmospheric turbulence theory of Kolomogrov (1941). Fried’s parameter (r) is the spa-
tial scale over which root-mean-square wavefront errors are less than 1 radian, the wavefront
is unchanged (phase is constant, coherence is maintained), and it is possible to produce a
diffraction-limited image. By definition, Fried’s parameter corresponds to the diameter of a cir-
cular aperture that will deliver the same image resolution an atmospheric column with a given
C
n(h). Telescopes with aperture diameter D < rproduce diffraction-limited images while
2The position and shape of the central hole in these out-of-focus “donut” images can be quite informative when
trying to determine the presence and magnitude of the classic Seidel aberrations.

24 1
Introduction to Telescopes
telescopes with D > rproduce so-called seeing limited images.3 As rdecreases, contrast
decreases, that is, the atmospheric CTF has a smaller cutoff spatial frequency. The isopla-
natic angle θiso is the observed angular size of the isoplanatic patch over which coherence is
maintained. Fried’s parameter rand mean turbulence height ¯h are related to θiso by
θiso(arcsecs) ∼r
¯h × ,
(1.25)
The timescale between one wavefront deformation and another (and hence the timescale for
coherence, contrast and seeing changes) is parameterized by τ, the coherence time. The Fried
parameter and coherence time are inversely related by the wind speed v in the dominant layer,
that is, τ= r/v.
For plane waves, C
n(h) and rare related by
r= [.ksec ζ ∫C
N(h)dh]
/
(1.26)
where k is the wavenumber 2π/λ and ζ is the zenith distance (i.e., angle between zenith and
optical axis of telescope). Since r∝λ/, the effects of atmospheric seeing decrease with
increasing wavelength and are negligible for radio telescopesoperating at centimeterand longer
wavelength.
Schematically, an object wavefront passes through a different turbulence column (isopla-
natic patch) every time interval τ. The dominant changes are piston (mean phase) and tilt
(mean intensity centroid). The telescope transforms each modified wavefront into a separate
image with slightly different aberrations at a slightly different position in the focal plane. Each of
these instantaneous images is known as a speckle. The rapid position and intensity changes from
speckle to speckle causes scintillation, which is further complicated by interference between
deformed wavefronts that are not completely incoherent. Over t > τ, for a point source, the
intensities of these individual speckles are summed into a two-dimensional, pseudo-Gaussian
intensity profile (seeing disk) with full width half maximum related approximately to rby:
FWHM(arcsec) ≈.× λ(μm)
r(cm)
(1.27)
At optical wavelengths (λ ∼.μm), the best mountain sites (e.g., Mauna Kea, essentially
all major Chilean observatories) have r∼cm and τ∼ms for the corresponding to a
free-air FWHM ∼0.63 arcsec in the mean. It is not uncommon to find that the seeing-limited
PSF actually has two Gaussian components: a semi-diffraction-limited “core” with FWHM
∼λ/D and a “halo” with FHWM ∼λ/rformed when ris larger and smaller, respectively.
This core–halo effect is more evident during periods of larger mean r(better seeing).
Encoded in each speckle is an ideal image modified by aberrations introduced by atmo-
spheric turbulence and the telescope itself. Since the 1960s, enormous effort by both civilian
and military teams has gone into developing techniques to capture these images, character-
ize their inherent optical aberrations, and apply wavefront corrections in real time to produce
near-diffraction-limited images over as large a field of view as possible. Broadly speaking, these
3For seeing limited telescopes, atmospheric turbulence effects dominate delivered image quality. Very prag-
matically, this implies that ground-based telescope systems do not have to be perfect, they need merely to
deliver images better than the site seeing. This is an extremely important concept toward minimizing design,
construction, and operations costs.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
25
efforts separate into two approaches. The first approach is to capture and record rapidly each
individual speckle and then use post facto digital techniques to center each image to a common
origin and sum their two-dimensional intensities, with or without additional filtering. Such
speckle imaging has several variants. The second technique records each speckle (wavefront),
immediately determines what wavefront errors are present, and then sends correction signals
to a deformable surface to remove those errors in subsequent wavefronts. This technique is
generically known as adaptive optics (AO). The topic of AO is revisited later in this chapter and
elsewhere in this volume.
1.3.4 Parameterization of Image Quality and Wavefront Error
Achieved point source image quality and generalized wavefront quality can be parameterized
in a number of ways and then compared to what a perfect system should produce.
For images of point sources, commonly used parameters include:
Full width half maximum (FWHM) – the PSF angular width of an observed point source at the
position where the observed intensity is 50% of the peak observed intensity. The ideal,
diffraction-limited value is given by (> 1.22). Observed FWHM is usually computed
from a Gaussian or Lorentzian function fit to the observed PSF.
Encircled energy (EE) – really the radius of a circle that encompasses a certain fraction of light,
for example, 80% (EE80) or 50% (EE50). For diffraction-limited images and circular
apertures, EE80 is 1.38 λ/D (where D is the aperture diameter), that is, somewhat later
than the angular size of the first Airy minimum (see (> 1.23)). A larger EE80 means
that energy has been redistributed from the central peak into other maxima. EE can be
measured directly from real images of point sources and compared to EE calculated for
ideal images.
Ellipticity (shape) – the radial behavior of image shape depends strongly on what aberration
(or combination of aberrations) is dominant. Image shape is also a diagnostic of telescope
tracking and wind buffeting rejection performance (discussed below). Since telescopes
commonly have circular apertures, shape is often parameterized by ellipticity.
Optical path difference (OPD) – the path length difference between the ideal wavefront and the
actual, aberrated wavefront. Systems with OPD less than λ/4 (quarter wave)are said to be
diffraction-limited. As OPD increases, phase differences increase, interference decreases,
and more energy is distributed in the other maxima (wings) of the diffraction pattern.
Strehl ratio (S) – the ratio of aberrated (achieved) PSF peak intensity to the diffraction-limited
(theoretical) PSF peak intensity. If σ is the RMS wavefront deviation, then
S = e−(πσ/λ)
(1.28)
By definition, these metrics parameterize the quality of an in-focus image of a single point
source at a specific position in the focal plane. Since most optical aberrations vary with radial
distance from the optical axis, such on-axis measurements alone are not sufficient to charac-
terize system performance completely. Two-dimensional approaches are necessary. While it is
possible to obtain and analyze 2D images of a star fields, inherent intensity differences between
stars and nonoptimal field coverage complicates post facto analysis.

26 1
Introduction to Telescopes
The Hartmann (1900) test overcomes those problems by using an aperture plate to divide
up the primary aperture into sub-apertures. When a single, bright star is observed out of focus,
each sub-aperture produces a separate image with constant total intensity, known separation
from other images, and aberrations as a function of radius from the optical axis. In fact, the
bright star is observed at either side of the optimal focus. The observed spot diagrams can be
compared to theoretical spot diagrams to determine the nature and magnitude of optical aber-
rations. Since the 1970s, more sophisticated wavefront charaterization (“sensing”) techniques
have been developed, including Shack-Hartmann, pyramid, and curvature. Contrarytothe clas-
sicHartmann test, the telescope pupil is split intoseparate sub-apertures orsub-images byoptics
in the focal plane. Since an aperture mask is not present, it becomes possible to measure wave-
front errors in real time while also observing astronomical objects, by using a beam splitter to
direct the telescope beam to both a wavefront sensor and a focal plane instrument. In turn, this
enables real-time wavefront corrections to improve delivered image quality by driving active
and adaptive optics systems, as discussed later.
Zernike polynomials (Zernike 1934) are often used to characterize (or reconstruct) observed
wavefronts because they are orthogonal over a circle (the characteristic shape of telescopes
optics) and three-dimensional (as are deformations from an ideal, unaberrated wavefront).
The polynomials use polar coordinates ρ (normalized to 1 at the edge of the circle) and θ.
They are defined by integer indices m (azimuthial frequency) and n (radial degree) where
m ≤n and m −n is even. Each allowed shape Zm
n (ρ, θ) is known as a Zernike mode with
an index j. For values m > , each allowed (m, n) pair has two identical mode shapes
except for rotation. The classic Seidel aberrations can be defined by various low-order Zernike
modes, as listed in >Table 1-2 and shown in >Fig. 1-11. Remember that Zernike modes have
three-dimensional shapes.
The total wavefront is characterized by
w(ρ, θ) = ∑
j
A jZm
n (ρ, θ) = ∑
j
A jZ j(ρ, θ)
(1.29)
where A j is the relative contribution of each mode. The different summations only differ in
assumed notation, not functional form. For wavefronts produced by static optical elements,
values of A j are fixed until some mechanical change is made (e.g., gravitational deformation,
iterative fabrication). On the other hand, to model wavefronts modified by time-variable atmo-
spheric turbulence, values of A j must also vary every coherence time interval, τ. The A j m
variations are not completely independent of each other; rather, they are statistically coupled
under the assumption that atmospheric turbulence is well modeled by a Komogoroff spectrum,
⊡Table 1-2
Seidel aberration as function of Zernike mode
Seidel aberration
j
n
m
Piston
0
0
0
Tilt
1,2
1
1
Defocus (ﬁeld curvature)
3
2
0
Astigmatism
4,5
2
2
Coma
6,7
3
1
Spherical aberration
8
4
0

Introduction to Telescopes 1
27
0
0
1
2
3
Azimuthal Frequency, m
4
5
1
2
3
Radial Degree, n
4
5
⊡Fig. 1-11
Zernike polynomials
that is,
⟨AiA j⟩= Ci j ( D
r
)
/
(1.30)
where ci j are the Noll coefficients (after Noll 1976), D is the aperture diameter, and ris the
Fried parameter.
Since sharp (high spatial frequency) errors are not well described by any kind of polynomial,
they are usually parameterized by structure functions with form:
Δϕ(r) = ⟨[ϕ(r′) −ϕ(r′ −r)]
⟩
(1.31)
where Δφ(r) is the squared wavefront difference averaged over all separations Δr = r′ −r.
High spatial frequency (sharp) features are the domain of small separation. For ground-based
telescopes, the goal is to fabricate optical surfaces with structure functions that do not degrade
atmospheric seeing. This general rule implies that surface phase error is allowed to increase
as separation increases as atmospheric seeing effects dominate at large separations, reducing
fabrication costs. Similar growth in phase difference with separation is not acceptable for space-
based telescopes.
1.3.5 Aperture Synthesis
In Young’s double-slit experiment, observed fringe spacing (in radians) θ f ∼λ/B were B is the
slit separation while the fringe envelope is essentially the Fourier transform of the slit shape. If

28 1
Introduction to Telescopes
round pinholes are used, that envelope is essentially an Airy pattern characterized by the diam-
eter of the pinhole (see >Fig. 1-11). Increasing slit separation reduces coherence and therefore
fringe contrast (visibility, see (> 1.24)). In Fourier terms, when zero contrast is reached, so has
the cutoff spatial frequency and hence the maximum spatial resolution. In the late 1800s, Fizeau
and Michelson realized independently that these principles could be inverted to measure the
diameters of distant objects. In the latter case, Michelson derived the basic principles behind
single pair (or rather single baseline) spatial interferometry, which he used most famously with
Pease in 1920 to measure the angular size of a star beyond the Sun for the first time. Simply
put, if coherence can be established and maintained between two telescopes with separation
B, their received EMR can be combined to produce fringe patterns with separation ∼λ/B con-
tained within an envelope with width ∼λ/D where D is the aperture diameter of the telescopes
(assuming they have the same aperture size).
In essence, a single-filled aperture is a very large collection of single baselines. Each virtual
baseline measures visibility at a given point in the two-dimensional spatial frequency (image)
domain, called the u-v plane by interferometrists. In other words, the image produced by a
filled aperture telescope is the superposition of fringe patterns from all baseline combinations
in the telescopepupil. Delivered image contrast (quality) is degraded by a combination of atmo-
spheric seeing and telescope intrinsic PSF (i.e., the intrinsic CTF with it’s finite cutoff spatial
frequency). In the ideal case, the deconvolution of the telescope PSF and this two-dimensional
visibility function produces an accurate representation of the observed object in the spatial
(object) domain. If the primary mirror is blocked somehow (e.g., by a secondary), not only is
total collected energy reduced, but spatial frequency information is lost, reducing image quality
(contrast). For many interesting objects, especially ones with simple geometries, such loses are
not critical.
Aperture synthesis (often synthesis imaging) emerged from these concepts, first at radio
wavelengths in the 1950s and then at optical wavelengths in the 1980s. In essence, sparse arrays
of telescopes are deployed to create an imaging system with high spatial resolution determined
by the largest pair separation at the cost of incomplete, instantaneous spatial frequency cover-
age and a total collecting area only equal to the sum of the collecting areas of the individual
telescopes. To increase image fidelity, more visibilities and more u-v points must be mea-
sured. Adding more telescopes to measure more visibilities simultaneously can accomplish that
goal while also increasing total collected energy. In practice, all existing arrays use a differ-
ent approach – they periodically change the geometric arrangement of the existing telescopes
and/or let the Earth rotate to create different projected baselines. As new baselines emerge,
visibilities can be measured at different u-v points. With patience, the u-v plane can be explored
as thoroughly as desired for a given research problem.
Interferometers can only work if both amplitude and phase can be measured at each tele-
scope and the signals from each pair combined coherently. In practice, this requires precise
control of the optical path difference between any telescope pair. At radio wavelengths, this can
be done electronically, sometimes waiting to combine (correlating) the signals until a later time
if very large distances separate the telescopes. Radio interferometers working at centimeter and
millimeter wavelengths have been very successful over the last 40 years.
The technical challenges of optical interferometry are much more daunting, primarily
because the signals must be combined and measured in real time while the optical path differ-
ence must be controlled to submicron precision. Signal decoherence arising from atmospheric
turbulence introduces a challenge not found in radio interferometers. The intricacies of optical
interferometry are explored in more detail later in this volume.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
29
1.4 Ancillary Systems
Modern telescopes are not merely static sets of high-precision optics – they are massive
(100s of metric tons), highly dynamic, interconnected, automated systems of subsystems.
Modern telescope systems must maintain the proper shapes and alignments of their optical
components, point them toward the right point on the celestial sphere, compensate for Earth’s
rotation (or spacecraft orbital motion), reduce the impact of turbulence induced seeing effects,
and protect themselves from inclement environmental conditions. In this section, some of these
practicalities are discussed, with an emphasis on ground-based, nearly normal incidence optical
reflectors. Aspects of radio telescopes and space-based systems are interweaved as a secondary
theme.
Throughout this section, a common theme is minimize wavefront deformation to maximize
image fidelity. It is a continual challenge during design, construction, and operation to identify
potential sources of wavefront error and minimize them in a balanced way. As one illustrative
example, at optical wavelengths, mirror surface accuracy requirements can be more relaxed for
ground-based telescopes than space-based telescopes because ground-based delivered image
quality is dominated by atmospheric seeing at those wavelengths. The nature and magnitude of
all potential error sources can be captured in a delivered image quality error budget.
Although maximizing image fidelity is the primary goal for all telescopes, maximizing total
system throughput of incident energy is an important secondary consideration. A telescope
designed to achieve excellent image quality at the cost of highly attenuated energy transmission
is not very attractive. The first step is to create the largest possible collecting area by maximizing
aperture (primary mirror) size and minimizing obstructions between its surface and the energy
source. Next is to minimize the number of reflections, transmissions, and obstructions between
the primary mirror and recording device. Since no real mirror or lens is perfect, more optical
elements means more energy loss and lower system throughput. Obstructions can both prevent
energy transmission and scatter energy. The latter increases the observed background, resulting
in decreased image contrast. Finally, each optical element must be tuned appropriately for the
wavelength of interest. For mirrors, that means obtaining spectral smoothness and using reflec-
tive coatings appropriate for that wavelength (see >Section 1.2.1). For lenses (used frequently,
e.g., in field correctors), that means using high purity transmissive materials and multi-layer
anti-reflection coatings. For optical-infrared ground-based telescopes, the last steps are to clean
each air-exposed surface regularly (weekly to monthly) and re-coat them more infrequently
(every several years).
1.4.1 Telescope Mounts and Motion Control
Whether on the ground or in space, telescopes must in general move to bring objects of inter-
est (targets for short) into the telescope field of view (FOV) and then must continue to move
to keep them in the FOV. The former process is known as target acquisition while the latter
is called target tracking. These motions must be accomplished at some appropriate rate (angu-
lar change per unit time) and smoothness. All telescopes have a mechanical telescope structure
that envelops the optical elements and allows telescopes to move as semi-rigid bodies. Most
telescope structures are made from steel but substructures made from carbon-fiber-reinforced
polymers (CFRP) are growing more common. Ground-based telescopes have low friction bear-
ings that carry telescope weight and enable motion. To move ground-based telescopes, torque is

30 1
Introduction to Telescopes
⊡Fig. 1-12
Equatorial and altitude-azimuth (alt-az) mounts, schematic
applied by drive systems that consist of motors to generate the torque, encoders to track telescope
position, and servomechanisms (servos for short) to control the motion through closed-loop
feedback. As an ensemble, these structures and mechanisms are called the telescope mount.
The mount is anchored to a concrete pier that in turn is anchored in bedrock.
While free-floating spacecraft do not require bearings or drive motors, they still need
to acquire and track targets under servo control. Such orientation changes can be accom-
plished bythrusters, flywheels, and/orgyroscopes. Some spacecraft implement several solutions
(e.g., Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, WMAP, uses thrusters and gyroscopes), while
some only use gyroscopes (e.g., Hubble Space Telescope). Position information can be provided
both directly (e.g., Sun or star trackers) or indirectly (e.g., inertial motion tracking systems).
All telescopes must have at least one axis of motion, most have two axes, and space-
based telescopes usually have three. Two coordinate systems are used to define ground-based
telescope motion. In the equatorial system, one axis points along the Earth’s axis of rotation
(enabling motion in hour angle or right ascension) and the other points toward the celes-
tial equator (enabling motion in declination).4 Various types of equatorial mounts have been
implemented over time but they are impractical for very large modern optical and radio tele-
scopes. Introduction ofdigital control technologyenabled the use ofthe altitude-azimuthsystem
(or alt-az for short) where one axis is orthogonal to the Earth’s surface (enabling motion in
azimuth) while the other axis is parallel to the Earth’s surface (enabling motion in altitude).
Because they are free-floating, space-based telescopes can move in three dimensions. The
relative orientation of the telescope to itself and the Earth is known as its attitude (>Fig. 1-12).
During target acquisition (also known as telescope pointing), a mean target position must be
converted from known (catalog) celestial coordinates (right ascension and declination) specific
to a fixed date (epoch) to the desired physical telescope attitude. Various motion, atmospheric,
and mechanical effects must be taken into account. For ground-based and orbiting telescopes,
the dominant factor is the motion of the Earth – its annual revolution around the Sun (and the
associated effects of parallax and aberration), its daily rotation, and long-duration changes in
axis of rotation orientation relative to the celestial sphere (nutation and precession with periods
4Analogous to longitude and latitude on the Earth’s spherical surface, right ascension and declination are used
to specify position on the celestial sphere.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
31
Catalog Mean [α,δ]
Apparent [α,δ]
Apparent [h,δ]
Topocentric Place
Observed Place
Focal Plane Place
Sidereal time
Diurnal aberration
Atmospheric refraction
Telescope deformation
Proper motion
Parallax
Light deflection
Annual aberration
Precession
Nutation
⊡Fig. 1-13
Pointing model, transformation steps
of 18.6 and 26,000 years, respectively). Next, the apparent celestial motion of targets relative to
theircatalog position must be removed. Forobjects in the local solarneighborhood, this is called
proper motion and it can be significant. For solar system objects, these motions can dominate
the pointing solution! Since mean target position is given for a specific date and time, the time
of target acquisition must be known precisely to adjust for terrestrial and celestial motion. For
ground-based telescopes, two final steps are necessary: compensating for atmospheric refrac-
tion (that changes apparent position on the sky) and gravity-induced mechanical deformation
(sag) of the telescope mount (that changes where the extrapolated optical axis “pierces” the
celestial sphere) (>Fig. 1-13).
Generically, every modern telescope builds up a pointing model that accepts mean position
and current time as input, produces desired telescope attitude as output, and then transmits that
output to the servos that change telescope attitude so that the extrapolated optical axis reaches
the desired position on the celestial sphere. All-sky RMS pointing precision (i.e., the achieved
celestial position of the projected optical axis vs. the desired position) of ±2 arcsec or better
on timescales of minutes from point-to-point has been achieved by many modern telescope

32 1
Introduction to Telescopes
mounts. Small field-of-view acquisition cameras are used to detect and correct small pointing
errors during target acquisition.
As the target acquisition ends, target tracking begins. Fundamentally, telescope motion
while tracking should not degrade the image quality delivered by the convolution of atmo-
spheric seeing and the native telescope PSF. Tracking has two components. The first component
is open loop tracking, that is, smooth and continuous motion to compensate for Earth’s rotation
(on the ground) or motion through space (in orbit or free-floating). For equatorial mounts,
the mount is rotated about the equatorial axis at the Earth’s rotation rate, the sidereal rate.5
For alt-az mounts (and spacecraft), the pointing model is used continuously to determine
desired position and send position commands to the servos at each axis. Open-loop tracking is
never perfect. Sources of tracking errors include pointing model problems that produce inac-
curate position updates and tracking trajectories, servo control problems that limit position
update precision, and fundamental mechanical problems that prevent smooth enough motion.
At radio wavelengths, these errors are often negligible because the native telescope PSF is large
relative totracking errors. Not soat millimeterand shorterwavelengths, where open-looptrack-
ing is rarely precise enough to maintain image quality over long periods of times. Closed-loop
tracking, that is, auto-guiding or optical feedback, overcomes these problems by continuously
measuring the position of a star in the telescope FOV and transmitting small position updates
to the mount servos to correct inaccuracies in open-loop tracking. Position updates on seconds
(∼1 Hz or slower) timescales are adequate. Faster updates to the mount servos can excite high-
frequency mount vibrations (resonances) that will degrade image quality, defeating the primary
purpose of tracking.
To move ground-based telescopes smoothly and accurately, low friction bearings are
critical. While exact details vary between telescopes, in practice, there are two bearing types:
mechanical and hydrostatic. The former are all variants of wheels moving on smooth surfaces
(e.g., bogies on tracks, rollers on rails) while the latter injects a thin (10s of microns) film of
oil between two flat surfaces. In essence, the entire telescope mass (often 100s of metric tons)
floats on that film with such low friction that a single person can move the telescope simply by
pushing on it.
Drive systems have three parts: electric motors that apply torques to move the telescopes,
analog-to-digital encoders to determine and report telescope position, and servos to provide
automated control. This combination is repeated in form for each axis of motion but usually
with different details. Motors can be coupled to axes in three ways: gears (motor turns an axis
connected to a gear that is mechanically coupled to the telescope axis, e.g., rack-and-pinion
type), friction (motor turns an axis connected to a gear that is mechanically coupled to the
telescope axis byfriction alone), ordirect (motorstatoris constructed around the axis sothat the
axis effectively becomes the motor rotor). Encoders can also be coupled to axes in three ways:
gears (encoder counts revolutions of geared shaft coupled to axis), friction (encoder counts
revolutions of wheel coupled by friction to axis), and optical (encoder reads markings analogous
to barcodes on axis). Encoders that use gears or friction can only determine a position relative
to some starting point, while optical encoders can determine position absolutely because the
axis markings are static and permanent.
The task of the main axis servos is to accept desired position updates during target acquisi-
tion and tracking and then move the telescope to that desired position as quickly and smoothly
5To observe solar system objects, it is necessary to drive telescopes at nonsidereal rates, that is, faster than
rotation of Earth and on trajectories on angles with the celestial equator.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
33
Controller
Controller
Tachometer
Angular velocity
Angular position
+
–
+
–
Encoder
Power
Amplifier
Motor &
Structure
⊡Fig. 1-14
Servomechanism, schematic
as possible without harming the motors (by demanding more torque then they can safely
deliver) or the telescope components (by nonuniform “jitter” that rapidly shakes the telescope
directly or induces uncontrollable vibrational resonances).6
>Figure 1-14 illustrates a common, straightforward servo setup for motion control of one
telescope axis.
1.4.2 Active Optics and Optics Control
For the most part, space-based telescopes operate in static environments. After launch, deploy-
ment, and commissioning, additional mechanical adjustments are rare.
Not so for ground-based telescopes, where time-variable gravity, thermal, and wind loads
can and do cause mirror shape and alignment changes that introduce wavefront errors and
degrade delivered image quality. Gravity and thermal effects produce smooth (low spatial fre-
quency) changes on a timescale of minutes. Wind effects are more complicated since wind can
induce significant spatially variable pressure changes on small timescales. To minimize these
effects, each mirror must be embedded within mechanical designed to compensate for variable
gravity, thermal, and wind loading by both passive and active means.
Radio telescopes must have large primary mirrors to provide enough collecting area to
detect cosmic sources at these long wavelengths. But because wavelength is large (millime-
ters and larger), relatively large surface errors (micron to millimeter scale) can be tolerated.
To compensate for variable gravity loading, many radio telescopes are constructed so that over-
all mechanical structure deforms under gravity in such a way that the primary mirror remains
parabolic at all time. This causes small changes in the position of the primary focal point, so it
is necessary for the instrument or reflector at prime focus to move in compensation. Surface
changes induced by thermal and wind loading can be rendered negligible by passive mechan-
ical means in most cases. Load compensation becomes more important as EMR wavelength
decreases from meter to millimeter scales.
Operating at smaller wavelengths, the shape and alignment of mirrors in optical telescopes
must be controlled much more precisely (nanometer scale). In the first telescopes, mirrors were
supported passively – mechanical constraints were adjusted during construction and then only
6No real mechanical structure is infinitely stiff. Torque changes that are applied too quickly and/or too fre-
quently on one axis can induce uncontrollable motions at a more distant point. Think of small shakes at one
end of a thin piece of wood causing much larger motion at the other end.

34 1
Introduction to Telescopes
readjusted occasionally later. As optical mirrors increased in diameter, they also decreased in
mass density per unit volume, either by removing unnecessary material (“light weighting”)
and/or becoming thinner. In effect, mirrors become more susceptible to all three kinds of load-
ing and more sophisticated compensation systems had to be implemented. Generically, these
mechanical systems are known as mirror cells.
First, consider gravity loading, usually separated into two components: axial (parallel to the
optical axis) and lateral (perpendicular to the optical axis). It follows that optical mirror cells
have axial and lateral support systems, each consisting of a number of load-bearing mechanical
supports. For all mirror cells, the overall goal is to maintain mirror shape (in both dimensions)
and alignment (centered on optical axis, tilted properly relative to other mirrors). While once
completely static, these support systems have evolved to become highly dynamic. Early work
introduced axial support systems with a small number (usually three) static supports (called
hard points) to establish a known reference point and a larger number of dynamic supports that
adjusted pressure applied to the mirror telescope altitude changed. Common examples include
counterweighted (astatic) levers and air-filled bellows.
Since the 1990s, most new professional telescopes have implemented active optics systems
where mirror support and alignment is continuously updated under closed-loop servo control.
The support systems themselves consist of actuators of one sort or another that push or relax in
the axial direction and push or pull in the lateral direction. Such systems have two basic control
loops. The slow (or outer) loop uses static lookup tables to adjust mirror shape and alignment as
a function of telescope elevation (telescope tilt relative to the gravity vector) and temperature
(telescope length and hence mirror separation) on a timescale of minutes. Lookup tables are
established by measuring delivered wavefront errors as a function of elevation and temperature,
computing corrective force matrices, and storing those matrices for later use. It can be difficult
to determine which mirror causes which wavefront error, so it is common to arbitrarily correct
low-order aberrations (tip-tilt, focus) by tilting and/or moving the secondary mirror and high-
order aberrations (e.g., the Seidel aberrations) by applying appropriate force changes to the
primary mirror. It can also be difficult to separate atmospheric- and telescope system-induced
wavefront errors. The common solution is to measure wavefront error as a function of telescope
elevation and temperaturerepeatedly to average out atmospheric effects. Lookup table accuracy
is greatly improved when such measurements are done on nights of good seeing (large r).
A second (inner) loop is often used to adjust mirror shape and alignment based on wave-
front measurements made by a wavefront sensor located in the telescope focal plane (or fed
by a pickoff mirror in the focal plane). Deviations from the ideal wavefront are determined
and then actuator force updates are computed. Since the outer loop is still running, the inner
loop is essentially applying corrections to small imperfections in the outer loop lookup table.
Again, it can be difficult to separate atmospheric- and telescope-induced wavefront errors,
so it is common to restrict inner loop updates to low-order corrections using the secondary
mirror.
Thermal loading creates two kinds of wavefront error for ground-based optical-infrared
telescopes. First, temperature gradients within mirrors induce torques that cause shape defor-
mations relative to the ideal shape. Second, a temperature difference at the mirror/air interface
can induce small-scale turbulence and hence phase errors. In concept, the solution to both
problems is straightforward – maintain an isothermal mirror at the current air temperature.
In practice, this is nontrivial since air temperature often changes faster than it is possible to
change the temperature of a large mirror by forced cooling, even within the course of a night.
These thermal effects are negligible for radio telescopes.

Introduction to Telescopes 1
35
Wind loading has both static and dynamic components. The static component is a mean
force related to the mean wind velocity. Typically, telescope mechanic and control systems are
designed to maintain specified motion and optic support performance up to a given mean
wind velocity, after which performance is allowed to degrade until some critical wind veloc-
ity is reached and the telescope must be stowed and/or enclosed to protect it. The dynamic
component (known as wind buffeting or gusting) is much more problematic in two regards.
First, wind buffeting can induce sudden telescope motions of small, random amplitude that
cannot be stabilized by the main axis servo loops.7 Such motions introduce significant image
blur (tip-tilt error) as the optical axis moves with the telescope. The availability of low-mass
secondary mirrors capable for rapid tip-tilt motions enables a solution to this problem, at
least up to some mean wind speed limit. If guide star flux is high enough (because star is
bright or aperture is large enough), star trackers for closed-loop tracking systems can measure
image centroids at very high rates (10s of Hz). Those centroids can be processed to deter-
mine mean image motion vectors on short (∼2 Hz) and long (∼0.2 Hz) intervals. The short
timescale vectors are used to remove buffeting effects by rapidly changing secondary tip-tilt,
while the long timescale vectors are used to correct open-loop tracking errors as discussed
above. Second, wind buffeting can create differential pressure across the primary mirror sur-
face, inducing shape changes that introduce sudden, rapidly changing wavefront errors. In
some, but not all, wind buffeting regimes, these errors can be detected and corrected by adap-
tive optics systems (see next section). In many cases, the only recourse is to adjust enclosure
openings to reduce wind loading, at the cost of reducing airflow and enclosure flushing. Find-
ing the right balance between wind and thermal loading control is a topic of continuing active
research.
Before leaving this topic, note that the largest optical primary mirrors in existence are
segmented. The primary mirror support system must not only control the shape of each small
(∼1-m segment) against gravity, thermal, and wind loading on a nanometer-size scale, the cell
must also maintain the relative positions of the segments to each other to similar tolerance.
In short, it is a very complex system of tens to hundreds of servo-controlled actuators. The
intricacies of this challenge are discussed elsewhere in this volume.
1.4.3 Adaptive Optics and Turbulence Compensation
As discussed above, atmospheric turbulence creates incident wavefront deformations in the
form of tilts (phase changes) at optical-infrared wavelengths, fundamentally limiting image
quality (fidelity). Development of phase correction techniques generically known as adaptive
optics (AO) has been a major effort since the late 1960s in the military world and later by civil-
ian groups. Similar phase changes are introduced at submillimeter–millimeter wavelengths by
changes in water vapor content integrated along the line of sight. Development of phase calibra-
tion techniques has been a major effort since the 1990s in support of the deployment of major
new (sub-)millimeter interferometric systems such as ALMA.
7As primary mirrors become larger and/or more segmented, differential pressure changes across the mirror
diameter caused by wind loading will introduce detectable wavefront errors and thus become a noticeable
challenge. Compensation strategies for this challenge are a matter of active analysis and design for extremely
large next-generation optical-infrared telescopes.

36 1
Introduction to Telescopes
Wavefront
Deformable
mirror
DM
commands
Beam splitter
Tip/Tilt
mirror
Science
focus
Wavefront
sensor
Control
system
WFS
measurements
⊡Fig. 1-15
Adaptive optics system, schematic
A schematic AO system is shown in
> Fig. 1-15. The EMR wavefront from a bright
point source passes through the atmosphere and telescope, containing dominant phase errors
from atmospheric turbulence and secondary errors caused by the telescope optics. It is then
injected into the AO system where phase corrections are applied. The wavefront sensor (WFS)
measures phases in the corrected wavefront, either directly or indirectly depending on WFS
type. Measured wavefront information is passed to a control system that determines differences
between measured and idea wavefront. The control system then issues wavefront correction
information to the tip-tilt (woofer) and deformable mirrors (and in some instances to the tele-
scope secondary mirror, thus establishing a connection to the active optics system). The tip-tilt
mirrormust be capable ofmotions on the scale ofthe incident EMR wavelength in ordertocom-
pensate for low-order tip-tilt errors – it must have large stroke – but it can move as a rigid body.
The deformable mirror must be capable of smaller motions – smaller strokes – at many points
to compensate for high-order errors. By their nature, deformable mirrors are thin and flexible
with many actuators to change their shape. Actuator numberand spacing determine the highest
spatial frequency that can be corrected. A beam splitter sends the corrected beam to the science
instrument as well as back to the WFS and the cycle repeats. The correct-measure-correct cycle
creates a closed-loop process.
This is the description of a single conjugate AO (SCAO) system using a natural guide star. For
satisfactory phase correction, the natural guide star and target must lie within the same isopla-
natic patch, (> 1.25) leading to two key limitations of SCAO systems. First, not all targets have
a suitable (bright enough) guide star nearby. Second, as wavelength decreases, the isoplanatic
patch decreases in size and phase changes occur faster. In principle, a constant level of phase
correction can be maintained by increasing actuator density and update rate. In practice, the
production of high-fidelity (near diffraction limited) images is limited to λ > μm for various
technological reasons.
Driven by these limitations, various other AO approaches have been developed, including:

Introduction to Telescopes 1
37
⊡Fig. 1-16
Gemini Multi-conjugate adaptive optics System (GeMS) ﬁrst-light image (Credit: Gemini
Observatory/AURA)
Laser guide star AO (LGS-AO) – a laser tuned to the Na D resonance line (λ ∼.nm)
can create an artificial star in the atmospheric Na layer at altitude ∼90 km, essentially
creating a guide star next to any target. Since tip-tilt errors are introduced into the artifi-
cial star when the laser beam passes upward through turbulence to the Na layer, a natural
guide star must be observed to correct tip-tilt errors delivered to the science instrument.
However, natural guide stars for LGS-AO systems can be much fainter than required for
SCAO systems because only tip-tilt (position or centroid) information must be mea-
sured and because their contrast (energy concentration) is increased by the LGS-AO
correction. Stars suitable for LGS-AO tip-tilt correction have high enough surface den-
sity on the celestial sphere to make LGS-AO practical, at least for 8 m and larger aperture
telescopes.
Multi-conjugate AO (MCAO) – by using multiple natural or artificial guide stars (or sources),
near diffraction-limited correction can be achieved over a much larger area than the
natural isoplanatic patch. The European Southern Observatory (ESO), National Solar
Observatory (NSO), and Gemini Observatory (GO) have all made recent impressive
progress (see >Fig. 1-16).
Ground-layer AO (GLAO) – partial phase correction over a FOV of several arcmin can be
achieved by sensing phase errors created by low-altitude (ground-layer) turbulence less
2 km above the telescope, providing significant seeing improvements at λ < μm.
While multiple natural guide stars can be used, performance is best when a low-altitude
(∼10 km) laser guide star is used as well. Optical and UV lasers can be used to illumi-
nate molecules and dust at such low altitude and create (via Rayleigh scattering) artificial
stars. Such Rayleigh systems are much less expensive and complicated than Na layer sys-
tems. The Isaac Newton Group (ING) observatory, Steward Observatory (in partnership
with the MMT Observatory), and the National Optical AstronomyObservatory(NOAO)
(in partnership with the Southern Observatory for Astronomical Research, SOAR) have
all deployed GLAO systems in recent years.

38 1
Introduction to Telescopes
AO technology is advancing rapidly at present time. One of the most promising develop-
ments is the development of thin shell, adaptive secondary mirrors by groups at Steward and
Arcetri Observatories (among others). Such secondary mirrors can move low-order and high-
order correction “up stream,” significantly improving system energy throughput for SCAO,
LGS-AO, and MCAO systems as well as enabling large FOV for GLAO systems.
Imaging synthesis arrays rely on the assumption that incident EMR has the same phase at
all antennas (telescopes) in the array or that phase differences can be corrected in some fashion.
Significant differences in received phase between array antennas are equivalent to phase errors
between the emitted and received wavefronts for filled aperture optical-infrared telescopes.
In both instances, final image quality (fidelity or contrast) is degraded.
At centimeter wavelengths, phase differences between antennas are dominated by instru-
mentation effects that vary slowly (timescale of minutes) that can be calibrated via observations
of sources with known phase. At (sub-)millimeter wavelengths, phase differences are domi-
nated by C
n(h) variations caused by differences in the integrated water content along the line
of sight of each telescope in the array that occur on timescales of seconds to tens of seconds.
Two methods can be used to detect and correct these variations. During fast switching, each
telescope switches between observations of a target source of unknown phase and a calibra-
tor source of known phase at intervals of tens of seconds. Using water vapor radiometry, the
line-of-sight water vapor content is measured in near real time at every telescope. From these
measurements, phase differences are inferred and corrections are applied immediatelyorduring
post facto data processing. At optical wavelengths, phase differences are dominated by C
n(h)
variations caused by difference in atmospheric turbulence along the line of sight of each tele-
scope on sub-second timescales. Phase correction techniques at these wavelengths use systems
analogous to natural guide star AO systems to detect and correct phase differences.
This whole topic is irrelevant for space-based telescopes!
1.4.4 Enclosures and Protection from Inclement Environmental Conditions
Most telescopes need some kind of protection from their local environment. For space-based
telescopes, the key challenges are maintaining proper temperature despite solar thermal load-
ing and preventing damage to on-board detectors from over-illumination by bright objects
(Sun, Earth, Moon). While various subsystems (e.g., detectors, control systems) are enclosed,
the performance of ground-based radio telescopes is essentially immune to local environ-
mental conditions and therefore they are typically left exposed to the elements. On the
other hand, ground-based optical-infrared telescopes are always surrounded by enclosures
that can be completely sealed during the day or under inclement weather conditions (e.g.,
high wind, precipitation) and opened during the night to allow cosmic EMR to reach the
telescope and to allow air within the enclosure to mix with external air to achieve thermal
equilibrium.
The classic enclosure is a hemispheric dome with a closeable slit that rotates on top of
a tall cylindrical building (> Fig. 1-17). As initially conceived, such enclosures allow very
little air transfer between the enclosure interior and exterior, even when the slit is open at
night. By the 1970s, it was widely appreciated that telescopes surrounded by such enclo-
sures were producing much worse images than the natural (free-air) atmospheric seeing.
Although originally attributed to nonisothermal, turbulent air within the enclosure, eventually
the dominant source of so-called dome seeing was found to be turbulent air near the surface

Introduction to Telescopes 1
39
⊡Fig. 1-17
NOAO
Cerro
Tololo
Inter-American
Observatory
Blanco
4-m
telescope
(Credit:
Roger
Smith/NOAO/AURA/NSF)
of the primary mirror caused by temperature differences between the mirror surface and the
surrounding air.
Since the 1980s, optical-infrared enclosure designs have strived to achieve three goals:
minimize temperature differences at the primary mirror surface/air interface, minimize wind
buffeting on telescope, and minimize cost. To achieve these goals, enclosure design must be
tightly coupled with the design of other telescope systems. The solution to the mirror/air tem-
perature interface problems has multiple components: minimize heat release by all telescope
systems into the enclosure, actively cool the enclosure during the day when the enclosure is
closed, actively manage mirror temperature at day and night, create many dome openings so
that the air volume in the enclosure is flushed multiple times per hour under mean wind condi-
tions at night, and design vent systems so that a laminar airflow is established across the primary
mirror surface when the enclosure vents are open. Reducing the effect of wind buffeting involves
a combination of variable venting as a function of wind speed, wind screen systems to reduce
or eliminate wind pressure on telescope components with significant surface area, and active
secondary mirrors that can remove tip-tilt errors produced by residual buffeting (see above).
Finally, minimizing cost is related to minimizing enclosure size (and hence required raw mate-
rial, such as steel) and mechanism count. Minimizing size has the added value of minimizing
enclosed air volume, which enables more efficient air flushing and smoother airflow. While the
next generation of extremely large telescopes all share these enclosure design goals, each has
produced a different design concept, as presented later in this volume.

40 1
Introduction to Telescopes
1.5 Looking Forward
In the 400 years since Galileo turned his telescope toward the sky and ushered in a revolu-
tion, telescope designs have evolved dramatically to adapt to new EMR windows and new
environments, such as near-Earth space. In essence, all telescope builders must address several
fundamental issues:
1. How to achieve a large collecting aperture of the required optical performance
2. How to move such a massive machine in an optimal fashion
3. How to control a system of subsystems in an optimal fashion
4. How to protect that system from inclement environmental conditions without reducing
performance
5. How to maximize delivered image quality
6. How to minimize life-cycle costs
These topics and more are discussed by leaders in the field throughout the rest of this
volume.
References
Selected References (Books)
Anderson, T., & Enmark, A. 2011, Integrated Model-
ing of Telescopes (1st ed.; New York: Springer)
Bely, P. ed., 2003, The Design and Construction of
Large Optical Telescopes, (1st ed.; New York:
Springer)
Born, M., & Wolf, E. 1997, Principles of Optics (6th
ed.; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Bracewell, R. N. 1999, The Fourier Transform and Its
Applications (3rd ed.; New York: McGraw-Hill)
Bracewell, R. N. 2004, Fourier Analysis and Imaging
(1st ed.; New York: Springer)
Cassegrain, L. 1672, in Letter, ed. M. de Bercé
(Chartes, France), Recueil des mémoires et con-
férences concernant les arts et les sciences (trans:
Journal of memoirs and conferences concerning
arts and sciences), 1672 April 25
Cavalieri, B. Lo specchio ustorio: overo, Trattato delle
settioni coniche, et alcuni loro mirabili effetti
intorno al lume, caldo, freddo, suono, e moto
ancora (trans: the burning mirror, or a treatise
on conic sections) (Bologna, Italy)
Descartes, R. 1637, Discours de la méthode pour
bien conduire sa raison, et chercher la vérité
dans
les sciences
(trans:
Discourse
on the
Method of Rightly Conducting One’s Reason
and of Seeking Truth in the Sciences) (Leiden,
Netherlands)
Dorf, R. C., & Bishop, R. H. 2010, Modern Con-
trol Systems (12th ed.; Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall)
Duffieux,
P. M. 1946, L’intégral
de Fourier
et
ses Applications à l’Optique (Rennes: Societé
Anonyme des Imprimeries Oberthur)
Duffieux, P. M., 1983, The Fourier Transform and
Its Applications to Optics (2nd ed.; New York:
Wiley)
Florence, R. 1994, The Perfect Machine: Building the
Palomar Telescope (1st ed.; New York: Harper-
Collins)
Galilei, G. 1610, Sidereus Nuncius (trans: Starry Mes-
senger) (Venice, Italy)
Glindemann,
A.
2011,
Principles
of
Stel-
lar
Interferometry
(1st
ed.;
Heidelberg:
Springer)
Goodman, J. 2004, Introduction to Fourier Optics
(3rd
ed.;
Greenwood
Village,
CO:
Roberts
and Company)
Gregory,
J.
1663,
Optica
Promota
(trans:
The
Advance of Optics) (London, England)
Grimaldi, F. M. 1665, Physico mathesis de lumine,
coloribus, et iride, aliisque annexis libri duo
(Bologna, Italy)
Hardy, J. W. 1998, Adaptive Optics for Astronomical
Telescopes (1st ed.; New York: Oxford University
Press)
Huygens, C. 1690, Traité de la lumiere (Leiden,
Netherlands)
Kepler, J. 1611, Dioptrice
Malacara, D. (editor), 2007, Optical Shop Testing,
(3rd ed.; Hoboken: Wiley)

Introduction to Telescopes 1
41
McLean, I. S. 2008, Electronic Imaging in Astron-
omy: Detectors and Instrumentation (2nd ed.;
New York: Springer, Chichester, UK: published
in association with Praxis)
Mersenne, M. 1636, L’Harmonie universelle (trans:
the harmonious universe) (Paris, France)
Michelson, A. A. 1927, Studies in Optics, (1st ed.;
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press) (also
available 1995 from Dover)
Newton, I. 1704, Opticks, or, a treatise of the reflex-
ions, refractions, inflexions and colours of light:
also two treatises of the species and magnitude
of curvilinear figures (London, England)
Schroeder, D. J. 1999, Astronomical Optics (2nd ed.;
San Diego: Academic)
Tyson, R. K. 2010, Principles of Adaptive Optics (3rd
ed.; Boca Raton, FL: CRC)
Rutten, H. G. J., & Van Venrooij, M. A. M. 1988, in
Telescopes Optics: Evaluation and Design, ed.
R. Berry (1st ed.; Richmond, VA: Willman-Bell)
Wilson, R. N. 2007, Reflecting Telescope Optics
I: Basic Design Theory and its Historical Devel-
opment (2nd ed.; New York: Springer)
Wilson, R. N. 2002, Reflecting Telescope Optics
II Reflecting
Telescope Optics II: Manufac-
ture, Testing, Alignment, Modern Techniques
(Corrected edition, New York: Springer)
Wilson, T. L., Rohlfs, K., Hüttenmeister, S. 2009,
Tools of Radio Astronomy (5th ed.; Berlin:
Springer-Verlag)
Selected Technical/Semi-technical References (Journal Articles)
Airy, G. B. 1835, On the diffraction of an object-glass
with circular aperture. Trans. Camb. Philos. Soc.
5, 283–291
Aschenbach, B. 1985, X-ray telescopes. Rep. Prog.
Phys., 48, 579
Einstein, A. 1905, Über einen die Erzeugung und
Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden heuristis-
chen Gesichtspunkt (trans: On a Heuristic Point
of View about the Creation and Conversion of
Light). Ann. Phys. 17(6), 132–148
Fried, D. L. 1966, Optical resolution through a ran-
domly inhomogeneous medium for very long
and very short exposures. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 56,
1372
Fresnel, A.-J. 1816, Mémoire sur la diffraction de la
lumière ï¿½ (trans: Memoir on the diffraction
of lightï¿½). Ann. Chem. Phys. 2nd series, 1,
239–281
Frizeau, H. 1868, Prix Borodin: rapport sur le con-
cours de l’année 1867. Comptes Rendus de
l’Academie des Sciences, 66, 932
Giacconi, R., & Rossi, B. 1960, A ‘Telescope’ for soft
X-ray astronomy. J. Geophys. Res., 65, 773
Gorenstein, P. 2010, Focusing X-ray optics for astron-
omy. X-Ray Opt. Instrum., Article ID 109740
Hanbury Brown, R., & Twiss, R. Q. 1956, A test of
a new type of stellar interferometer on Sirius.
Nature, 178, 1046
Hartmann, J. 1900, Bemerkungen über den Bau
und die Justierung von Spektrographen (trans:
Remarks on the construction and calibration of
spectrographs), Zt. Instrumentenkd. 20, 47
Heisenberg,
W.
1925, Über
quantentheoretische
Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer
Beziehungen (trans: Quantum theoretical re-
interpretation of kinematic and mechanical rela-
tions). Z. Phys. 33(1), 879–893
Kirkpatrick, P., & Baez, A. V. 1948, Formation of
optical images by x-rays. J. Opt. Soc. Am.,
38, 766
Kolomogrov, A. N. 1941, The local structure of tur-
bulence in incompressible viscous fluid for very
large Reynolds numbers. C. R. (Dok.) Acad. Sci.
URSS, 30, 301
Kolomogrov, A. N. 1941, Dissipation of energy in the
locally isotropic turbulence. C. R. (Dok.) Acad.
Sci. URSS, 32, 16
Labeyrie, A. 1970, Attainment of diffraction limited
resolution in large telescopes by Fourier ana-
lyzing speckle patterns in stars images. Astron.
Astrophys., 6, 85
Mahajan, V. V. 1994, Zernike annular polynomials
and optical aberrations of systems with annular
pupils. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 33, 8125
Maxwell, J. C. 1861, On physical lines of force (in 4
parts). Lond. Edinb. Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci.
21 and 23. (London, England)
Meinel, A. B., 1965, Introduction to the design of
astronomical telescopes, Technical Report No. 1,
Optical Sciences Center (Tucson: University of
Arizona)
Michelson, A. A., & Pease, F. G. 1920, Measurement
of the diameter of α Orionis with the interferom-
eter. ApJ, 53, 249
Monnier, J. D. 2003, Optical interferometry in astron-
omy. Rep. Prog. Phys., 66, 789
Noll, R. J. 1976, Zernike polynomials and atmo-
spheric turbulence. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 66, 207

42 1
Introduction to Telescopes
Planck, M. 1901, Über das Gesetz der Energiev-
erteilung im Normalspektrum (trans: On the
Law of Distribution of Energy in the Normal
Spectrum). Ann. Phys. 4, 553
Quirrenbach, A. 2001, Optical interferometry, Ann.
Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 39, 353
Roddier, F. 1981, The effects of atmospheric turbu-
lence in optical astronomy, in Progress in Optics
XIX, ed. E. Wolff (Amsterdam: North-Holland),
281
Roddier, N. 1990, Atmospheric wavefront simulation
using Zernicke polynomials. Opt. Eng. 29, 1174
Seidel, L. 1856, Zur Dioptrik. Über die Entwicklung
der Glieder 3ter Ordnung welche den Weg eines
ausserhalb der Ebene der Axe gelegene Licht-
strahles durch ein System brechender Medien
bestimmen (non-literal trans: Discussion of the
development of third-order terms for off-axis
light that passes through a system of refracting
media), Astro. Nach., 43, 289
Snellius,
W. 1621, unpublished
(and now lost)
manuscript, reported by Vossius and Huygens in
later works.
Wolter, H. 1952a, Spiegelsystem streifenden Ein-
falls als abbildende Optiken für Röntgenstrahlen
(trans: Glancing Incidence Mirror Systems as
Imaging Optics for X-rays), Ann. Phys., 10, 94
Wolter, H. 1952b, Verallgemeinerte Schwarzschild-
sche Spiegelsysteme streifender Reflecion als
Optiken für Röntgenstrahlen (trans: A Gener-
alized Schwarschild Mirror Systems For Use at
Glancing Incidence for X-ray Imaging), Ann.
Phys., 10, 286
Wyant, J. C. & Creath, K., 1992, Basic wavefront aber-
ration theory for optical metrology, in Applied
Optics and Optical Engineering, ed. J. C. Wyant,
& R. R. Shannon (Orlando: Academic), 2
Zernike, F. 1934, Beugungstheorie des Schneiden-
verfahrens und seiner verbesserten Form, der
Phasenkonstrastmethode. Physica, 1, 689
Zernike, F. 1938, The concept of degree of coherence
and its applications to optical problems. Physica,
5, 875
Selected Technical or Semi-technical Publications (Web-Based)
Meister, D. 2010, Wavefront Aberrations and Spec-
tacle Lenses, Parts 1 and 2, Dispensing Optics
Journal, http://www.opticampus.com/files/wave
front_aberrations_and_spectacle_lnses.pdf
Quirrenbach, A. 2002, The Effects of Atmospheric
Turbulence
on
Astronomical
Observations,
Center for Adaptive Optics Summer School,
http://cfao.ucolick.org/aosummer/book/pdf/3.1
_quirrenbach.pdf
Sacek, V. 2006 (with continuing updates), Amateur
Telescope Optics, http://www.telescope-optics.
net/
Tripoli, N. 2003, The Zernike polynomials http://
www.optikon.com/en/articles/keratron_023/me
dia/TheAberrometers_2003_Tripoli%20(Zernik
e%20Polynomials).pdf
Wallace, P. 2012, Telescope Pointing, http://www.
tpsoft.demon.co.uk/pointing.htm
SPIE Conference Proceedings
SPIE (formerly – Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers, now – The International
Society for Optical Engineering) organizes major symposia on all aspects of observatories,
telescopes, and instrumentation. Proceedings from the bi-annual Astronomical Telescopes and
Instrumentation (1996 – 2012) symposia provide a comprehensive, in-depth overview of all
aspects of a field in constant evolution.

2
Robotic and Survey
Telescopes
Przemysław Wo´zniak
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
2
Design Considerations for Autonomous and Survey Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.1
Modular Design and Logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.2
Optical Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
2.3
Telescope Mounts and Fast Slewing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.4
Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.5
Weather Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
2.6
Control Systems, Data Acquisition, and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3
Diversity of Survey and Follow-Up Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.1
All-Sky Monitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.1.1
CONCAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.1.2
RAPTOR-Q. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.2
Mid Range Robotic Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.2.1
ASAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.2.2
HAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.2.3
WASP and SuperWASP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.2.4
ROTSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.2.5
RAPTOR/Thinking Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.2.6
“Pi of the Sky” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.2.7
MASTER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3.2.8
KAIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.2.9
PAIRITEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.2.10 REM, TORTORA, and MegaTORTORA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.3
Dedicated Survey Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
3.3.1
Microlensing Searches: OGLE and MOA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
3.3.2
Near-Infrared Surveys: 2MASS, VISTA, and SASIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
3.3.3
Moving Object Searches: Spacewatch, LINEAR, and CSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.3.4
Spectroscopic Surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
3.4
Large Robotic Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
3.4.1
Liverpool Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
3.4.2
GROND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
3.5
Large-Scale Surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3.5.1
SDSS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3.5.2
Palomar Transient Factory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_2, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

44 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
3.5.3
Pan-STARRS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
3.5.4
LSST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4
Telescope Networking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.1
Communication Protocols and Virtual Observatory Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4.2
Real-Time Event Brokers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.3
Automated Transient Detection and Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.4
Follow-Up Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
4.5
Global Telescope Networks and Deployable Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5
Science with Robotic and Survey Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.1
Cosmic Explosions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.2
Solar System Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.3
Extrasolar Planets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.4
Variable Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6
Conclusions and Future Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
45
Abstract:
Robotic telescopes are revolutionizing the way astronomers collect their data and
conduct sky surveys. This chapter begins with a discussion of principles that guide the pro-
cess of designing, constructing, and operating telescopes and observatories that offer a varying
degree of automation, from instruments remotely controlled by observers to fully autonomous
systems requiring no human supervision during their normal operations. Emphasis is placed
on design trade-offs involved in building end-to-end systems intended for a wide range of sci-
ence applications. The second part of the chapter contains descriptions of several projects and
instruments, both existing and currently under development. It is an attempt to provide a rep-
resentative selection of actual systems that illustrates state of the art in technology, as well as
important ideas and milestones in the development ofthe field. The list ofpresented instruments
spans the full range in size starting from small all-sky monitors, through midrange robotic
and survey telescopes, and finishing with large robotic instruments and surveys. Explosive
growth of telescope networking is enabling entirely new modes of interaction between the sur-
vey and follow-up observing. Increasing importance of standardized communication protocols
and software is stressed. These developments are driven by the fusion of robotic telescope hard-
ware, massive storage and databases, real-time knowledge extraction, and data cross-correlation
on a global scale. The chapter concludes with examples of major science results enabled by these
new technologies and future prospects.
Keywords: Asteroids, Astronomical databases: miscellaneous, Catalogs, Gamma rays: bursts,
Gravitational lensing, Instrumentation: detectors, Instrumentation: miscellaneous, Methods:
data analysis, Methods: observational, Minor planets, Miscellaneous, Planetary systems, Solar
system: general, Spectrographs, Standards, Stars: variables, Statistical, Supernovae, Surveys,
Telescopes
1
Introduction
Sky surveys play a crucial role in astrophysical research. A fundamental problem in astronomy,
as in any observational science, is our inability to perform controlled experiments on most
objects of interest. We only have one universe, given to us as the observable slice through vast
expanses of space and time. Therefore, we need to thoroughly map its content and build statis-
tical ensembles in order to learn about the inner workings of astrophysical objects, understand
where they came from, and predict what their future fate will be. With the help of systematic
sky surveys, we can also build uniform samples of rare objects and transient phenomena that
occur at random times and locations and are otherwise hard to find. Much of the progress
in observational astrophysics is made possible by a healthy interplay between the surveys and
follow-up observations. The role of surveys is not only to build large statistical samples and ini-
tially characterize as many sources as possible but also to identify the most interesting ones for
detailed follow-up studies that often require the use of large telescopes and specialized instru-
ments such as spectrographs and polarimeters. Time-domain work creates its own challenges
such as the need for prompt response. The focus of this chapter is on optical telescopes and
supporting technologies that enable massive photometric sky surveys and highly automated
follow-up programs. Although the following discussion is limited to professional efforts, it
should be recognized that robotic astronomy benefits from a strong involvement of amateurs
who are regularly making important research contributions.

46 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
Cosmic objects populate an enormous parameter space that spans many orders of magni-
tude in multiple dimensions, creating serious technological challenges for survey designers and
instrument builders. At the topofthe list ofproblems that must be addressed byanysurveyis the
basic tension between the sky coverage, depth (sensitivity), and temporal resolution. The need
for more wavelength coverage and better spectral resolution introduces another level of compli-
cation, hence a large diversity of approaches and designs. In the limited space of this chapter, we
will not be able to even mention all relevant projects and contributions. Our goal is to illustrate
the range of possibilities with examples chosen to demonstrate a particular point. The con-
tinuing pressure for more coverage, better completeness, and greater fidelity of the recorded
information coupled with the availability of relatively cheap detector arrays is the driving force
behind a data tsunami that is beginning to overwhelm the existing data processing capacity.
The demand for data-intensive computing right at the telescope, hands-free data acquisition,
and automated real-time knowledge extraction is greater than ever before. Taking humans out
of the loop not only increases the efficiency of survey operations but is also an enabling factor for
time-critical applications. Full automation is especially important for studies of explosive phe-
nomena such as gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) that require rapid follow-up observations before the
optical signal fades away on a time scale of minutes. Robotic telescopes and autonomous obser-
vatories completely dominate this arena. With the advent of the new generation of gravitational
wave and neutrino observatories (e/a-LIGO, Icecube), we are witnessing the brith of multi-
messenger astronomy. Robotic instruments will play a key role in maximizing the scientific
impact of these new detectors. Historically, observations outside the optical window provided
the signatures of the most exotic physical phenomena, but the optical cross-identifications are
still crucial for providing key ingredients of the physical interpretation such as accurate position
and distance.
The golden era of great sky surveys is upon us. Over the past decade, we have seen rapid
progress toward a continuous photometric record of the optical sky (Paczy´nski 2000). Numer-
ous sky surveys are discovering and monitoring variable objects by hundreds of thousands, and
innovative follow-up programs that were not possible just a few years ago are now in routine
operation. Advances in detector, computing, database, and networking technology are enabling
applications of all shapes and sizes ranging from small all-sky monitors, through networks of
robotic telescopes of modest size, to big glass facilities equipped with gigapixel CCD mosaics.
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) will be the first peta-scale astronomical survey
(LSST Science Collaborations et al. 2009). It will expand the volume of the parameter space
available to us by three orders of magnitude and explore the mutable heavens down to an
unprecedented level of sensitivity.
LSST will deliver up to ∼10variability alerts per night. It will take a worldwide effort and
a follow-up program coordinated on a global scale to utilize this amount of real-time action-
able information. Automated scheduling and rapid response optimization will be the key to
success. Telescope networking, the field that hardly existed 15 years ago, is taking survey astron-
omy by the storm. A brief review of publications on ADS reveals an explosion in the number of
papers related to this topic. The words “telescope network” appear in nearly 3,000 abstracts with
two thirds of the papers published in the last decade. And robots are doing the work. Roughly
1,300 abstracts contain the words “robotic telescope,” and over 80% of these were published
after 2000. A good place to start for those who would like to learn more about robotic astron-
omy and telescope networking are the proceedings of the Heterogeneous Telescope Networks
(HTN) workshop and Hot-Wiring the Transient Universe meeting published in special issues
of Astronomishe Nachrichten (Naylor et al. 2006; Allan et al. 2006a). Another valuable resource

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
47
on the topic is the special issue of Advances in Astronomy devoted to robotic astronomy
(Castro-Tirado 2010).
2
Design Considerations for Autonomous and Survey Telescopes
This section summarizes the main factors that influence the design of robotic and survey
telescopes given the required degree of automation. Ever since the introduction of computer-
controlled electromechanical interfaces more than three decades ago, the level of automation
in telescope operations and survey observing has been steadily increasing. It is hard to imag-
ine a modern telescope without any robotic features. The spectrum of capabilities extends from
simple command line interfaces that execute commands as they are typed by the observer all
the way to fully autonomous systems requiring no human supervision to carry out their nightly
activities. Today, the term robotic telescope is typically reserved to describe a complete obser-
vatory including the telescope with supporting instrumentation and control systems making
observations without human intervention. In some cases, a human observer must initiate obser-
vations in the evening and closeout in the morning. By contrast, the so-called remote telescope,
although operated by a human from a distant location using a computer network, does not
qualify as a robotic telescope.
Robotic telescopes are complex hardware/software systems composed of a number of sub-
systems such as optical elements, detectors, pointing devices, protective enclosures, weather
monitoring equipment, and control logic. The main reasons to go through the trouble of
building an autonomous observatory are:
•
Streamlining survey operations to minimize gaps in observing and maximize efficiency
•
Taking humans out of the loop to enable rapid response with very short reaction times
•
Deploying instruments to remote sites with minimal infrastructure support or hostile
environment, e.g., in order to achieve global sky coverage, while avoiding expensive
travel
It is impossible to list all factors that may affect hundreds of decisions involved in this process,
just as it is impossible to think of all potential applications for robotic telescopes. What follows
is therefore an attempt to identify the most common scenarios.
2.1 Modular Design and Logistics
Early implementations of robotic telescopes built in the 1980s were very expensive when com-
pared to their capabilities. The lack of reusable hardware and software contributed to very
slow progress at that time. Over the past decade, the landscape has been completely trans-
formed. The availability of inexpensive commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components is fueling
an explosion of activity in the area of robotic astronomy. While purpose-built components can
be highly optimized toward specific research goals, the use of COTS equipment wheneveravail-
able dramatically cuts the development time and cost. The ease of integration is paramount.
Top level control systems are generally implemented in software that must communicate with
all hardware components. When it comes to purchasing hardware, the availability of standard
development kits and drivers for a particular operating system should always be considered.

48 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
Another important factor is open access to source code and specifications of signaling protocols
for commercial products such as cameras, mounts, shutters, focusers, etc. Reliance on closed
source software and proprietary standards is better avoided, as it frequently leads to a loss of
flexibility to modify the design in the future and accommodate new observing programs. This
is not always possible, however, and numerous robotic telescopes operating today utilize a mix
of COTS and custom-made elements with some dependency on proprietary products.
Logistical considerations have a surprizing wayofcreeping intoeveryaspect ofdevelopment
in robotic astronomy. Availability of cranes at a remote site, the size of commercial shipping
containers, and differences in voltage standards may not be the first things that come to mind
when planning a new sky survey, but they have a great potential to become showstoppers if
ignored. Shipping fewer preassembled modules is a way to eliminate complicated and labor-
intensive jobs at the site. At the same time, this will increase the size and weight of parts that
must be handled. If multiple telescopes must be installed around the globe, adding a voltage
switch and replicating the same hardware is far easier than dealing with different components
at different sites.
2.2 Optical Design
A vast majority of contemporary robotic telescopes are small instruments with some notable
exceptions like the Liverpool Telescope (Steele et al. 2004). >Table 2-1 shows the distribution
of apertures from a listing of 224 robotic telescopes1 published by Frederic Hessman. The com-
plexity of engineering an autonomous mechanical system increases very quickly with the size
and weight of the structure, especially for applications that require fast slewing. However, our
knowledge of the bright sky is still suprisingly incomplete (Paczy´nski 2001). Numerous science
goals can be accomplished using commercially available photo lenses for very wide-field imag-
ing (8–50 deg across). But there is a price for this convenience. Such systems deliver images
dominated by instrumental seeing that may be significantly undersampled for the typical 14-μ
CCD pixel. Another complication is strong vignetting with light attenuations reaching 50–60%
at the edge of the field. The sky background is never uniform on such large spatial scales, so
good flat field corrections are very difficult to obatin. Field distortions near image corners can
reach the amplitude of 10–20 pixels. Standard data reduction and astrometric/photometric cal-
ibration techniques are usually of little help, and special algorithms must be developed on case
by case basis. Introducing color filters and other specialized equipment such as polarizing and
dispersing elements may be complicated by the fixed form factor. For some applications (e.g.,
localization of fast optical transients with broad emission spectra), skipping filters is a cheap
way to boost the sensitivity of a small optical telescope, provided that the loss of fidelity and
nonstandard calibrations can be tolerated. Stray light from the Moon is a serious problem for
wide-field imagers and must be managed with a combination of filters and baffles.
At the next level of the size spectrum (0.2–0.5 m), there are several models of telescopes
marketed primarily to amateurs and educators (Meade, Takahshi, DFM) that can be sufficiently
ruggedized for professional use and autonomous operation (e.g., Vestrand et al. 2008; Bakos
et al. 2009). But custom designs are also common in this aperture range. Larger telescopes are
almost exclusively custom designed for particular projects. In wide-field imaging, the S/N ratio
of the recorded point sources is dominated by the sky brightness due to a large angular size of
1http://www.uni-sw.gwdg.de/~hessman/MONET/links.html

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
49
⊡Table 2-1
Robotic telescopes of the world by aperture
Aperture (m)
# telescopes
Fraction (%)
<0.25
93
41.5
0.25–0.50
66
29.5
0.50–0.75
15
6.7
0.75–1.00
25
11.2
1.00–1.25
7
3.1
>1.25
18
8.0
⊡Table 2-2
Data collecting power (etendue) of various telescopes
Instrument
Aperture (m)
FOV (deg)
AΩ (m2deg2)
Ntel
CONCAM
0.004
180.0
0.3
1
Super-WASP
0.100
15.0
11.1
8
ROTSE-III
0.453
2.0
0.5
1
RAPTOR-P
0.143
15.0
11.3
4
RAPTOR-T
0.420
0.4
0.02
1
RAPTOR-Q
0.017
60.0
3.1
5
ASAS
0.100
3.0
0.06
1
HAT
0.100
8.0
0.4
1
LINEAR
1.000
1.4
1.2
1
SDSS
2.500
1.5
8.7
1
Palomar/QUEST
1.200
4.0
14.2
1
PS-1
1.800
2.6
13.5
1
LSST
8.400
3.0
391.7
1
KAIT
0.800
0.1
0.004
1
pixels that collect lots of sky photons in a short time. Narrow field follow-up instruments can
afford larger plate scales and therefore longer exposures for the same aperture size. Factors such
as these in combination with primary science requirements and budget constraints ultimately
determine the type and number of telescopes to build. Depending on derived survey parame-
ters such as sky coverage, frequency of observations, and magnitude limits, an array of smaller
telescopes may be a better fit than a single instrument with a large detector.
Covering a large portion of the sky with sensitive observations in a short amount of time
is hard. Survey grasp measures the rate at which a given instrument collects information about
objects ofinterest, and is one ofthe most important characteristics ofa surveytelescope. Afigure
of merit commonly used to compare survey grasp of various telescopes is the etendue defined
as AΩ, the product of the collecting area times the solid angle covered by the instantaneous
field of view. The larger the etendue, the more objects will be recorded in a single exposure, and
less time will be taken to survey a given area of the sky. >Table 2-2 compares parameters of
several telescopes and telescope arrays: aperture diameter in meters, field of view in degrees,

50 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
102
101
100
field of view (deg)
telescope aperture (m)
10−1
10−2
10−1
100
KAIT
Concam
RAPTOR-Q
Super-WASP
RAPTOR-P
Palomar/QUEST
HAT
ASAS
10
EtendueAΩ
1
0.1
LINEAR
SDSS
PS-1
ROTSE-III
LSST
RAPTOR-T
101
⊡Fig. 2-1
Survey grasp comparison for selected robotic and survey telescopes from >Table 2-2. The chosen
ﬁgure of merit is etendue equal to the product of the collecting area times the solid angle covered
by the combined ﬁeld of view for each instrument. The values range from 0.004 for KAIT to 390
for LSST and are proportional to the area of the corresponding symbols. Note that the etendue of
small wide-ﬁeld telescopes can be comparable to that of much larger survey instruments, albeit at
a diﬀerent sensitivity
etendue in meter degrees squared, and the number of individual telescopes Ntel. This data is
also shown in > Fig. 2-1, where the area of the symbol is proportional to AΩ. As expected,
larger telescopes tend to cover a smaller field of view. More interesting is the fact that for certain
types of surveys, relatively small telescopes and photo lenses occasionally outcompete much
larger instruments. For example, four 200-mm Canon EF lenses have a larger data-gathering
power than the 2.5-m SDSS telescope. Obviously, etendue does not tell a complete story. The
former system offers great sky coverage at the expense of sensitivity, while the opposite is true
for the latter telescope. Other measures of survey grasp may be more relevant depending on
the science goals. In case of time-domain surveys, it is informative to compare the depth of
the survey at a specified cadence, which gives an idea of the volume of the universe sampled
for a particular type of transient variability. The number and type of filters to include with the
telescope are also crucial for the science mission but are more difficult to include in survey
metrics.

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
51
2.3 Telescope Mounts and Fast Slewing
Robotic telescopes are frequently deployed to perform rapid follow-up observations of targets
at random locations and times. This drives the need for fast-slewing speeds. Even in the survey
mode, faster repointing of the telescope will eliminate breaks between exposures and improve
efficiency. In a sense, the fastest telescope is the one that does not have to move at all, because
it already contains any possible target in its field of view. This is how full-sky monitors work.
Such instruments are implemented using a set of stationary wide-field lenses or a single fish-
eye lens for a full horizon to horizon imaging (>Sect. 3.1) and are quite limited in sensitivity.
For larger pointed instruments, fast slewing at rates exceeding 10 deg/s poses the challenge of
constructing a mount that is both rigid and not too heavy and delivers a high torque. >Table 2-3
and > Fig. 2-2 compare the peak slewing rate for several telescopes spanning a large range
of apertures. Telescope flexure and oscillations in the acceleration/deceleration phase strongly
limit the range of practical solutions for large telescopes. Custom-built fast-slewing mounts
for military applications tend to be very expensive. ROTSE-III and several types of RAPTOR
telescopes (> Sects. 3.2.4 and >3.2.5) are among the fastest slewing astronomical instruments
ever built, achieving peak rates around 50 deg/s and accelerations reaching 20 deg/sat ∼0.4-m
aperture. Both are based on a very successful line of mounts from The Pilot Group, LLC.
2.4 Detectors
The availability of affordable CCD cameras is arguably the single most important enabling fac-
tor behind the proliferation of robotic telescopes and autonomous observatories. Small format
×pixel entry level science grade detectors prepackaged with readout electronics and ther-
moelectric cooling can be purchased for less than 10,000 dollars as of 2011. The Apogee Imaging
Systems2 product line called Alta U series consists of over 30 cameras including front- and
⊡Table 2-3
Telescopes compared by slewing speed and size
Instrument
Aperture (m)
Slew rate (deg/s)
Bart
0.254
6.0
Liverpool
2.032
2.0
LSST
8.400
0.7
Pan-STARRS
1.800
2.3
RAPTOR-P
0.143
100.0
RAPTOR-T
0.420
40.0
RAPTOR-Q
0.017
∞
CONCAM
0.004
∞
REM
0.6
12.0
ROTSE-III
0.453
50.0
Swift
0.927
0.7
2http://www.ccd.com

52 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
103
102
101
100
Bart
REM
Swift
LSST
Liverpool
Pan-STARRS
RAPTOR-T
RAPTOR-P
RAPTOR-Q
CONCAM
∞
ROTSE-III
10−1
10−2
10−1
100
telescope aperture (m)
max slewing rate (deg/s)
101
⊡Fig. 2-2
Comparison of the peak slewing rate for robotic and survey telescopes of various apertures. All-
sky monitors such as RAPTOR-Q and CONCAM are formally inﬁnitely fast. The Swift satellite oﬀers
state-of-the-art slewing capability in space. The aperture for Swift is the diameter of the circular
aperture equivalent to the collecting area of the onboard gamma-ray Burst Alert Telescope (BAT)
back-illuminated CCDs, as well as a few interline transfer models. Andor Technology3 offers
high-quality cameras based on E2V chips including high-sensitivity electron multiplication
CCDs (EMCCD) allowing extremely fast frame readout at video rates. This enables observa-
tions of astronomical sources with time resolution of 0.03 s or better or even in the photon
counting regime in case of faint objects. Back-illuminated CCDs are characterized by much
higher quantum efficiency and better response to blue light by comparison to front-illuminated
chips. But they are about four times more expensive and may not offer any advantage for wide-
field observations dominated by the sky background. > Figs. 2-3 and > 2-4 show examples
of devices that found use in robotic telescopes. Any of these products can be connected to a
computer over the standard USB 2.0 interface.
One of the most important elements of a CCD camera is the cooling system. Filling a
dewar with liquid nitrogen (LN2) on a daily basis is simply out of the question for autonomous
systems. Air-cooled Peltier devices are very popular in small CCD cameras and used extensively
in robotic astronomy. Closed-loop liquid cooling may be a better option for a larger detector.
3http://www.andor.com

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
53
⊡Fig. 2-3
Prepackaged CCD detectors from Andor Technology: the iKon-L camera with a 2,048 × 2,048 pixel
high dynamic range CCD (left) and model iXon X3 hosting an electron multiplication CCD (right)
⊡Fig. 2-4
Alta U10 CCD camera from Apogee Imaging Systems (top) and the autofocus ring for Canon lenses
from Birger Engineering Inc.4(bottom)
4http://www.birger.com

54 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
Andor cameras for low light imaging applications now feature a five-stage thermoelectric cooler
that can maintain temperatures as low as −○C comparable to solutions based on cryogenics.
Large surveys optimized for specific science objectives require purpose-built focal plane arrays
that often employ dozens of CCD detectors (>Sect. 3.5).
2.5 Weather Protection
An autonomous robotic observatory must be able to protect itself from adverse conditions such
as rain and high winds. Otherwise, soonerorlaterit will suffera catastrophicdamage. Therefore,
most robotic telescope enclosures are connected to a dedicated weather station that monitors
ambient temperature,humidity, barometric pressure, wind velocity, and, most importantly, pre-
cipitation. IR cloud sensors and sky brightness monitors are also frequently employed. Upon
detecting conditions outside the operating range, the system automatically shuts down.
Another level of protection is required to hedge against the loss of power and com-
puter/software failures. This can be accomplished with a separate controller, a watchdog timer
that initiates an immediate shutdown unless it receives “I’m alive” signal every second or so.
Emergency uninterruptible power supplies must be installed with sufficient capacity to close
the roof and to provide clean power at remote sites. Many survey telescopes are housed in rotat-
ing domes that shield against the wind. However, this option does not work for rapid follow-up
telescopes that must be able to point in a random direction on the spot. Several types of enclo-
sures providing an unobscured view of the entire sky are shown in >Fig. 2-5. A classic roll-off
roof is one possibility. There are also many types of “clamshells” with one or more sections that
rotate out of the way or fold to the side.
2.6 Control Systems, Data Acquisition, and Processing
Robotic and survey telescopes require a large amount of sophisticated control software to oper-
ate. Reliable operation without human supervision implies a high level of system self-awareness;
multiple layers of automatic control, recovery, and parallel execution; robust hierarchical sta-
tus reporting; and hardware redundancy (Bowman et al. 2002). To achieve the required level
of reliability, such systems must monitor their own health. Ideally, faults would be predicted to
give some advance warning when an equivalent of the “check engine” light in a car turns on.
Structural health monitoring methodology has been applied to successfully predict mechanical
failures in RAPTOR telescope mounts using simple sensors that “listen” and detect anomalous
vibration patterns (Stull et al. 2011).
Large instruments typically require custom-built control systems. However, there are sev-
eral software packages that have reached the level of a complete observatory manager and are
being adopted by a growing number of autonomous observatories. The top-level architecture
of such system is typically based on a set of daemons, each tasked with controling and moni-
toring some hardware component: telescope, mount, camera, enclosure, and weather station.
There are also daemons for scheduling using a variety of inputs such as precompiled list of
targets, live alert feeds from external sources, or even manual override. The central master pro-
cess communicates with the rest of the system via predefined protocols (e.g., string commands
over TCP sockets or shared memory, XML-RPC, HTTP). RTS2, the second-generation Remote

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
55
⊡Fig. 2-5
Comparison of enclosure designs for autonomous observatories and survey telescopes. (a) A sym-
metric clamshell of ASAS actuated by a commercial gate motor. The rotating dome of the 1.3-m
Warsaw telescope with adjustable slit is visible in the background. (b) Highly portable ROTSE-III
enclosures with a one-sided clamshell consist of four easy to assemble pieces. (c) This node of
the MASTER telescope network is an example of a popular dome design that folds on itself when
opening. (d) Classical roll-oﬀroof enclosure used by SuperWASP
Telescope System,5 is an open-source package for managing networks of autonomous robotic
observatories with the goal of providing plug and play functionality (Kubanek 2010b). A block
diagram of a particular system under the control of RTS2 is shown in >Fig. 2-6. This software
has been deployed on over dozen telescopes and runs on a wide variety of Linux distributions,
the Solaris operating system, and at least in part on Windows and Mac OS X.
Optimal scheduling of observations is a complex problem. The list of commonly used algo-
rithms includes (1) precompiled night plan; (2) dispatch scheduling, i.e., maximizing the merit
function for the next target; and (3) semi-automatic queue scheduling of observable targets with
manually adjusted priority. In addition to those three methods, RTS2 offers scheduling based
on constrained optimization over a set of possible schedules using genetic algorithms (Kubanek
2010a). Most robotic systems have some provisions for observing targets of opportunity (TOO).
The simplest response protocol is to abort the current observation, immediately slew to a new
5http://rts2.org

56 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
GUI
WEB CLIENT
WEB SERVER
XML RPCD 1
CENTRALD 1
DOME MAIN
TELESCOPE
SELECTOR
MAIN CCD
EXECUTOR
FILTER WHEEL
GUIDING CCD
WEATHER
CCD ALL SKY
SCRIPTOR
CENTRALD 2
DOME ALL SKY
XML RPCD 2
HTTP
XML-RPC
RTS2 protocol
⊡Fig. 2-6
Schematic view of a hypothetical system controled via RTS2 (second-generation Remote Telescope
System). RTS is an integrated open-source package for automated observatory control
target and execute a preprogrammed sequence of exposures. Autonomous observing is rapidly
evolving to include increasingly sophisticated data processing tasks such as astrometric and
photometric pipelines, automated detection of variability, and real-time cross-identication of
sources. One of the most important developments of the last decade is closed-loop observing
whereby the results of the automated data analysis, system status, and quality assurance infor-
mation are fed back into the system and used to schedule a tailored follow-up sequence. In
2002, a pair of wide-field telescopes deployed by the RAPTOR project at Los Alamos National
Laboratory became the first robotic system operating in a closed loop. Coordinated observa-
tions of rapidly variable objects (e.g., GRB follow-up) require a time reference accurate to 0.1 s
or even better. This is typically achieved with a combination of NTP (Network Time Protocol)
servers and GPS receivers. Network bandwidth is a scarce resource at a typical observing site
and forces time-sensitive and data-intensive projects to process the bulk of the data right at
the telescope. Many robotic observatories are now equipped with substantial computing and
storage resources.
3
Diversity of Survey and Follow-Up Instruments
3.1 All-Sky Monitors
All-sky monitors populate the bottom of the telescope food chain. They are small and limited
in sensitivity but also cheap and easy to replicate for what they can deliver. The idea is to have

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
57
a complete “passive observatory” designed to work without human supervision that provides a
truly continuous record of the night sky. Instruments in this category see from horizon to hori-
zon but do not track the sky. Although they are mostly constructed out of COTS components,
significant modifications are typically required to put together a complete system.
3.1.1 CONCAM
The Night Sky Live project (Pérez-Ramírez et al. 2004) has deployed three generations of CON-
CAM (continuous camera; > Fig. 2-7). The system consists of a fish-eye lens attached to a
CCD camera under the control of a laptop computer. The main design principle adopted by
the creators of CONCAM is “If it moves, it breaks,” so there are no moving elements in this
design, except for the rotating hard drive of the control computer. A complete remotely con-
troled observatory fits in a container the size of a large briefcase and is designed to be bolted
to a rooftop. Depending on the system version, the optical element is either Nikon FC-E8 or
SIGMA F4-EX 8-mm fish-eye lens with FOV ∼180 deg. A low-cost CCD camera with a rel-
atively low dark current was chosen to allow long integrations: SBIG ST-8 (CONCAM-2) or
ST-1001E (CONCAM-3). Any low-end personal laptop has sufficient computing power, stor-
age, and network connectivity to serve the needs of CONCAM. All components are mounted
inside a modified case from Pelican to make a self-contained package that is easy to transport,
maintain, and operate. Power, Ethernet, and telephone wires connect to the bottom and are
threaded through the center of a mounting tube.
Every 236 s, CONCAM takes a single 1K × 1K pixel image exposed for 180 s that contains
approximately1,200 objects down to a detection limit slightly better than that of the human eye.
CONCAMs were the first source of real-time all-sky relative opacity maps and resolved cloud
cover information to support astronomical observing sites, including Gemini North, Keck,
Subaru, IRTF, Spacewatch, Wise, ING 4-m, Mayall 4-M, SARA, and WIYN. Photometric and
astrometric calibration of this type of data poses a challenging problem and typically requires
⊡Fig. 2-7
CONCAM installation at the Siding Spring Observatory near Coonabarabran, Australia

58 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
custom algorithms and software. Of some help is the fact that for an instrument pointed at
zenith, many lens and sky characteristics become functions of the zenith angle alone. CON-
CAM has been used to derive limits on bright optical counterparts to GRBs. It is well suited
for a variety of science programs including observations of meteors, variable stars, novae, and
supernovae, as well as education and outreach activities.
3.1.2 RAPTOR-Q
The RAPTOR/Thinking Telescopes network developed at the Los Alamos National Laboratory
hosts telescope arrays of several types covering a range of capabilities (Vestrand et al. 2008).
RQD2 (Raptor-Q Design 2) is a small, transportable, robotic observatory designed to func-
tion as the basic node in a global network capable of continuous persistent monitoring of the
night sky (Wren et al. 2010). A single unit ready for deployment is shown in >Fig. 2-8. The
observatory employs five wide-field imagers that altogether view about 90% of the sky above
⊡Fig. 2-8
RQD2, an autonomous all-sky monitor developed at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.
The enclosure contains a complete observatory with control computers, data processing, and
storage hardware in a compact air-conditioned package

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
59
12 deg elevation with a sensitivity of R ∼mag assuming a 10-s exposure. This system fills an
important niche in the field of robotic astronomy, providing nearly all-sky monitoring with the
sensitivity and cadence suitable to detect interesting astronomical transients lasting as little as
30 s. Another important use of RQD2 is as an extinction and cloud cover monitor with sufficient
spatial resolution to allow other facilities navigate in partially cloudy conditions.
The most expensive part of the system is a set of five CCD detectors. Thermoelectrically
cooled Alta U10 cameras from Apogee featuring a 2,048 × 2,048 pixel front-illuminated CCD
provide good image quality at a reasonable cost. The pixel readout is digitized at 16 bit reso-
lution, and an entire image can be read out in 4 s. The camera is controlled over a USB 2.0
connection. Although Apogee does not provide LINUX drivers for its products, the Random
Factory based in Tucson AZ provides a LINUX driver for these cameras. The sky is imaged
using off-the-shelf Canon 24-mm EF camera lenses with a focal ratio of 1.4 and a 17-mm clear
aperture. This particular camera/lens combination covers a 60-deg field of view. All cameras
are attached to the enclosure and pointed in fixed directions, four of them at a 45-deg eleva-
tion above the horizon, and the fifth at zenith. Canon EF lenses allow autofocusing using an
ultrasonic motor built into the lens. Birger Engineering Inc. has reverse engineered the propri-
etary lens control system and offers a device for controlling the Canon lenses via a serial link.
In RQD2, the Birger units connected to the camera control computer are used to compensate
for focus changes due to variations in the ambient temperature.
The RQD2 enclosure must provide complete environmental protection for lenses, cam-
eras, and substantial computing resources. It is constructed out of two combined 4/12 NEMA
(National Electrical Manufactures Association) enclosures, one × × and the other
× × in. in size. A major design goal was to make the system easily transportable and
rugged enough to survive shipping to distant locations. The NEMA enclosures are standard off-
the-shelf components constructed of 14 ga steel and have a watertight closed-cell polyurethane
seal on the doors. The “dome” is a custom designed truncated pyramid structure made of 14 ga
aluminum sheet metal and attached to the top of the NEMA box cube. CCD cameras with aut-
ofocus mechanisms are attached to the inside faces of the dome. The lenses are protected with
cover boxes, small × × in. NEMA 4 enclosures fitted with circular aluminum shutters. The
shutters actuated by 12 VDC gear motors are the only moving parts in this system (except for
hard disk platters in control computers). RCM-4000 microcontroller from Rabbit Semiconduc-
tor Inc. is used to command the five individual cover controllers (PIC 16F88) over the RS-485
serial link. During observations, the shutters are rotated away from the optical axis to provide
unobstructed field of view. The lens compartment is insulated with closed-cell silicone foam.
A watchdog timer closes the covers within 10s in case of a system lockup or a software error. The
system is programmed to automatically stop observations and cover the lenses in bad weather
conditions. The weather station on RQD2 includes a precipitation detector (Vaisala DRD11A),
an anemometer, and a temperature/humiditysensor monitored by a separate Rabbit RCM4000
controller running a TCP/IP server over its Ethernet interface. The system is powered using
a 1,000-W 12 VDC power supply capable of running on 120/240 VAC, 60/50 Hz, grids and
backed up by an uninterruptable power supply (UPS). An external 10,000 BTU air conditioner
is normally connected to the main RQD2 enclosure via 5′′ diameterconduit to keep the interior
temperature in the operating range.
RQD2 performs full online data processing using its onboard network of six computers run-
ning Linux. Each custom-built computer consists of a Mini-ITX motherboard, an Intel2.5-GHz
Core2 Duo processor, 4 GB of RAM, and a 250-GB hard drive installed in a standard 1U rack
mount. The master node controls five slaves (one per camera) via the USB interface. This way,

60 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
the cameras can be exposed and read out in parallel, and the data analysis can be completed
before the next exposure is initiated. The typical exposure time is 10 s, followed by a 4–5 s read-
out. Images are taken 20 s apart and stored in a 3TB RAID array. Computers are cross-mounted
using the Network File System (NFS)and synchronized with the Network Time Protocol (NTP).
A Virtual Network Computing (VNC) server provides remote access to machines that may
require a soft reboot, while the power distribution unit (PDU) allows computers to be remotely
power cycled.
The first-generation RAPTOR-Q system consists ofcameras mounted toenclosures oflarger
RAPTOR telescopes and has been in operation since 2006. Despite its lower image quality due
to the lack of autofocusing mechanism, and therefore lower sensitivity, it obtained scientifically
important observations such as the onset of the eruption on comet 17P/Holmes that brightened
by a factor of , thus demonstrating the potential of RQD2. Operating autonomously, RQD2
acquires a nearly full-sky image every 20 s, taking more than 10,000 individual 2K × 2K pixel
frames per night. It also runs real-time astrometric and photometric pipelines that provide the
capability to search for bright astronomical transients and monitor transparency changes across
the full sky. The first RQD2 observatory was deployed in March 2009 and is currently operating
at the Fenton Hill site near Los Alamos, New Mexico.
3.2 Mid Range Robotic Telescopes
3.2.1 ASAS
One of the pioneering efforts in the area of continuous photometric sky monitoring for vari-
ability is the All-Sky Automated Survey (ASAS) (Pojmanski 1997; Pojma´nski 2009). The project
began in 1996 and was in part inspired by Prof. Bohdan Paczy´nski. The idea was to use inex-
pensive COTS components to build several small telescopes capable of surveying the bright
sky in a completely automated manner. The first ASAS device at Las Campanas, Chile, was a
135-mm f/1.8 photo lens with a ×pixel amateur grade CCD camera on a horseshoe par-
allactic mount that could point in about 10 s and track for 5 min. In 2000, this was replaced by
two wide-field cameras equipped with 200-mm f/2.8 lenses and 2K × 2K pixel CCDs covering
.× .degeach and a 250-mm f/3.3 modified Cassegrain reflector for follow-up. ASAS-
North wide-field instruments in Hawaii attached to the platform of the Faulkes Telescope North
are similar, except for better Nikon 200 f/2.0 lenses. Early on, the system required some assis-
tance from observers at the nearby OGLE telescope, but after a move to computer controled
domes, human support has been reduced to occasional maintenance and data transport. Fields
are selected from a fixed list by automated scheduling software based on their position with
respect to zenith, Moon, and desired frequency of observations. Each camera takes between
160 and 250 images per night, and the entire available sky is covered in two filters after 1–2 days.
ASAS quickly demonstrated that at least 80% of bright variable stars are still waiting to be dis-
covered. In the first decade of operation, ASAS collected 700,000 images in V, R, I bands and
constructed a photometric catalog of 20 million stars brighter than V = .with hundreds
of measurements per star on average. The resulting catalog of 50,000 variables stars, mostly
brighter than 12.5 mag, is the first homogeneous record of this kind. The ASAS Alert Service
provides almost instantaneous notification on unexpected behavior of existing or new objects
above 12.5 mag limit.

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
61
3.2.2 HAT
HAT (Hungarian Automated Telescope) started as an all-sky variability search of the northern
hemisphere (Bakos et al. 2002). HATNet established in 2003 gradually evolved into a mul-
tisite, multi-instrument network with instruments deployed at FLWO, Mauna Kea, and also
WISE Observatory, searching for transit signatures of extrasolar planets as they “eclipse” their
parent star. The first-generation network was composed of stand-alone, fully robotic units,
each consisting of a 200-mm Canon telephoto lens with an I-band filter and a 2K × 2K pixel
front-illuminated Apogee AP10 CCD on a horseshoe mount (> Fig. 2-9). The latest genera-
tion HAT-South experiment is designed to bridge the gap between shallow and medium-deep
searches for transits of planets around F0-M5 dwarfs (Bakos et al. 2009). With three sites in
Chile, Australia, and Southern Africa, the network provides nearly round the clock monitoring
of selected fields, which is critical for achieving high efficiency to detecting brief light curve
dips that last a few hours and repeat every few days. Each site hosts two THarrays of four
0.18-m f/2.8 Takahashi hyperbolic astrographs with Apogee Alta U16 4K × 4K CCDs. The effec-
tive field of view of the array is ×deg and the pixel scale is 3 arcsec/pixel, which greatly limits
the impact ofsource confusion that dilutes the eclipses and increses the numberoffalse positives
to be rejected with follow-up observations. The telescopes are protected by a clamshell dome
and operated in a fully automated manner. Since 2006, HAT discovered 30 planets. HAT-South
is expected to generate roughly 250 candidate transiting planets per year.
3.2.3 WASP and SuperWASP
The Wide Angle Search for Planets (WASP) is one of the leading exoplanet transit detection
programs conducted by a consortium of eight academic institutions in UK (Pollacco et al. 2006;
⊡Fig. 2-9
Hungarian Automated Telescope (HAT): design of a single unit (left) and an array of four units
deployed at the FLWO, Arizona (right)

62 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
⊡Fig. 2-10
Array of wide-ﬁeld telescopes and CCD cameras employed by the WASP project
Christian et al. 2006). The SuperWASP instruments are located on La Palma, Canary Islands,
and at the South African Astronomical Observatory. Each station is equipped with an array of
eight wide-field cameras on a single equatorial mount capable of slewing at a rate of 10 deg/s
inside a roll-off roof enclosure (> Fig. 2-10). The CCD cameras based on back-illuminated
2K × 2K pixel E2V chips are from Andor Technology. Like several other projects of this type,
SuperWASP uses Canon 200-mm f/1.8 telephoto lenses and a broadband visual filter (400–
700 nm) for high-quality wide-field imaging. Each array covers a combined field of view of
482 degsampled at ∼14 arcsec/pixel and is capable of surveying the entire visible sky every
40 min. The combined data rate is up to 100 GB per night, depending on the observing strategy.
The top level control software is a modified version of the commercial Linux package Talon
from Optical Mechanics Inc. that has been released in the open-source domain. Observing is
fully automated and the telescopes can protect themselves in case of a weather alarm. Failure to
close the roof generates a radio signal for an attendant in a neighboring dome. The system rou-
tinely delivers photometry accurate to 1% for objects in the magnitude range V ∼.–11.5 mag
and so far discovered over 30 planets.
3.2.4 ROTSE
Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) dates back to the mid-1990s when the
first-generation instrument was installed at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, New Mexico.
The system consisted of four Canon lenses attached to commodity large-format CCD cameras
on a fast-slewing mount and covered the field of view ×deg to match GRB localization error
boxes delivered by the BATSE satellite. On January 23, 1999, ROTSE-I made a landmark obser-
vation, the first detection of contemporaneous optical emission from an exceptionally bright
GRB that reached ninth magnitude in visible light (Akerlof et al. 1999). This result greatly
stimulated further development of robotic GRB follow-up projects. The current generation
ROTSE-III system is a global network of 0.45-m telescopes operated by an international con-
sortium (Akerlof et al. 2003). With telescopes located in Australia, Namibia, Turkey, and Texas,

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
63
⊡Fig. 2-11
ROTSE-IIIb telescope on Mt. Fowlkes, Texas. ROTSE-III is a network of four virtually identical 0.45-m
telescopes on fast-slewing mounts capable of observing poorly localized transients within a short
few seconds following the alert
the ROTSE-III network provides 24-h coverage of the night sky. The telescope is a modified
Cassegrain with a very fast f/1.8 primary mirror and a refractive field corrector on a rapidly
slewing mount (>Fig. 2-11). Achieving a large field of view (2.64 deg diameter) was an express
design goal driven by the accuracy of GRB positions from HETE. The 2K × 2K pixel back-
illuminated Marconi CCD detector with 13.5-μ pixels in combination with the effective focal
length of 0.85 m delivers pixel scale of 3.28 arcsec/pixel and produces undersampled images of
point sources. This was accepted in order to meet the specification on the field coverage. The
ROTSE-III camera from Astronomical Research Cameras employs propylene glycol heat trans-
fer loop driven by air-cooled recirculator to cool the CCD sensor down to −○C from ambient
temperatures reaching ○C. The CCD detector and the field corrector are mounted inside the
telescope tube between the primary mirror and the flat secondary. The telescope mount can slew
at a maximum speed of 35 deg/s and accelerate at 16.4 deg/sin right ascension and 20.6 deg/s
in declination. This makes it possible to slew from horizon to horizon in just 8 s. A typical
response time to a GRB localization is less than 4 s from a standby position (zenith). In order
to collect as many photons as possible, ROTSE-III telescopes are operated without filters. Since
the launch of the Swift satellite in the fall of 2004, ROTSE telescopes are a leading supplier of
early detections and accurate positions of optical GRB counterparts. They were also used in a
successful supernova search.
3.2.5 RAPTOR/Thinking Telescopes
Since the very beginning in 2001, the RAPid Telescopes for Optical Response (RAPTOR)
project at Los Alamos National Laboratory has been focusing on innovative approaches to tele-
scope networking and untriggered searches for optical transients. The first-generation system
was a pair of identical arrays of photo lenses with CCD cameras. It was designed to mimick
the functionality of evolved biological systems such as human vision (Vestrand et al. 2004b).

64 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
Each array had four wide-field detectors (corresponding to rods of a human eye) and a sin-
gle more sensitive, narrow-field detector in the middle (fovea) for immediate self follow-up
after a slight change of pointing (closed-loop operation). RAPTOR-A and B were separated by
38 km to enable selection of transient objects in the “stereoscopic vision” mode. This allowed
the system to reject artifacts and false positives due to man-made phenomena based on parallax
measurements and coincidence filtering. Real-time, automated data analysis pipeline served as
the “brain.” In 2002, RAPTOR became the first fully autonomous robotic telescope to operate
in a closed loop.
The Thinking Telescopes project is a continuation ofthe original RAPTOR program with the
purpose of developing a global network of sky monitors and rapid response telescopes to search
for and follow up optical transients in real time (Vestrand et al. 2008). This is a challenging
goal that will require a sustained investment in information technology and software (Vestrand
et al. 2004a). The current system includes several types of telescopes optimized for different
roles (> Fig. 2-12). Fast-cadence/full-sky monitoring is accomplished with RAPTOR-K and
RAPTOR-Q. RAPTOR-K is a wide-field array for persistent optical monitoring componsed of
200-mm Canon lenses carried on a single rapidly slewing mount. Each telescope has a 2K × 2K
pixel E2V back-illuminated CCD at the focal plane and detects sources down to a 3-sigma lim-
iting magnitude of R ∼mag in 30 s. Altogether, the full array of 16 telescopes covers an
instantaneous field of view of 1,024 degand is capable of patrolling the full sky on a 15-min
circuit. RAPTOR-Q persistent monitoring arrays (> Sect. 3.1.2) provide a continuous record
of the night sky to a depth of ∼10 mag every 20 s. RAPTOR-T (for technicolor) is tasked with
fast response and multicolor imaging. These follow-up arrays are composed of four 0.4-m f/5
optical telescopes that are co-aligned and colocated on a single rapidly slewing mount. Each
of the four channels images through a different filter (Johnson VRI and clear). An advantage
of this approach over a traditional filter wheel is that it allows true simultaneous multicolor
⊡Fig. 2-12
RAPTOR/Thinking Telescopes arrays at the Fenton Hill observatory, New Mexico: RAPTOR-K cover-
ing1,000 deg2 down to ∼16 magdesigned to autonomously detect optical ﬂasheson time scalesof
minutes(left) and RAPTOR-T featuringfour co-aligned 0.4-m telescopesfor simultaneousfollow-up
imaging in VRI and clear channels (right)

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
65
imaging of rapidly varying sources. RAPTOR-T arrays slew to the location of the transient and
begin observations in less than 10 s. They respond to both internal triggers from RAPTOR-
K/RAPTOR-Q and external alerts such as GRB localizations from GCN (GRB Coordinates
Network; cf. >Sect. 4.1). This unique combination of simultaneous multicolor imaging, rel-
atively large aperture, and short response time makes RAPTOR-T the instrument of choice for
probing the prompt optical emission of GRBs within a few seconds of the explosion.
3.2.6 “Pi of the Sky”
The “Pi of the Sky” (PIOTS) experiment is designed for continuous high-cadence observations
of a large region of the sky and searching for astrophysical variability on short time scales down
to a few seconds (Malek et al. 2010). The project builds their own custom designed CCD cam-
eras employing ST A0820 2K × 2K pixel chips cooled by a two-stage Peltier module. Another
interesting innovation introduced by PIOTS is a highly durable shutter based on the voice-coil
principle used in read-write heads of hard disk drives. By eliminating friction, the durability
was dramatically increased to about opening cycles (over 2,000 exposures per night for a
few years). This additional investment of time and effort resulted in both better performance
and substantial savings in hardware cost. PIOTS uses 85-mm, f/1.2 Canon EF lenses to detect
point sources down to ∼12 mag in a single unfiltered 10-s exposure. The frames are separated
by readout intervals lasting only 2 s.
Transient detection runs in coincidence mode between a pair of detectorscovering the same
20 × 20 deg field of view. >Figure 2-13 shows the camera and a single PIOTS array. The pro-
totype system operating since 2004 at the Las Campanas Observatory, Chile, has been very
⊡Fig. 2-13
“Pi of the Sky” detector system: optical element attached to the camera (left) and the ﬁrst array
installed at the INTA El Arenosillo test center in Mazagon near Huelva, Spain. The main goal of the
“Pi of the Sky”experiment is to detect optical counterparts of GRBs before and during the gamma
emission

66 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
successful. Its most important contribution is the discovery of the optical transient associated
with GRB 080319B that peaked at 5.3 mag, the “naked-eye burst,” independently of the Swift
trigger. The target system was designed as two sites separated by ∼100 km with 16 detectors on
four mounts per site. Currently, there are two PIOTS installations, one at Mazagon, Spain, and
one at the San Pedro de Atacama Observatory, Chile.
3.2.7 MASTER
The main goal of the MASTER project (Mobile Astronomical System of Telescope Robots)
launched in 2002 in Russia is to produce a nightly survey of the full sky down to a limit-
ing magnitude 19–20 (Lipunov et al. 2010). This photometric record will make it possible to
address a broad range of astrophysical problems including supernovae and the nature of dark
energy, exoplanet searches, gravitational microlensing, and solar system science. All MASTER-
Net telescopes also respond to external alerts, primarily GCN. As of 2010, the network consists
of three sites equipped with two types of instruments. MASTER VWF (Very Wide Field) based
on 50- and 85-mm f/1.4 Nikor lenses covers up to 1,000 degdown to ∼12 mag. MASTER-II
telescopes consist of a pair of 0.4-m catadioptric Maksutov tubes fitted with a 4K × 4K pixel
Alta U16 CCD cameras from Apogee and carried on a common German equatorial mount
(>Fig. 2-14). The slew rate is up to 30deg/s and the survey rate approaches 480deg/h assuming
1-min exposures (19 mag limit). MASTER-Net extends over 7 h in longitude and provides vir-
tually continuous 24-h sky coverage during winter months. Over the past few years, MASTER
telescopes detected a number of optical flashes from GRBs, discovered several supernovae, and
performed synchronous observations of gamma-rayburst error boxes. Expansion plans include
a total of seven nodes and new hardware to obtain multicolor photometric and polarimetric
follow-up.
⊡Fig. 2-14
MASTER-II robotic telescopes at Sternberg Astronomical Institute Caucas Observatory, Kislovodsk
(Russia)

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
67
3.2.8 KAIT
The Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope (KAIT) located at the Lick Observatory is dedi-
cated to the search for optical transients and monitoring of celestial objects with a strong focus
on supernovae (Filippenko et al. 2001). Its history goes back to 1990s and the Berkeley Auto-
matic Imaging Telescope (BAIT; Richmond et al. 1993). The telescope is equipped with a f/8.2
Ritchey-Chretien mirror set on a light weight frame (>Fig. 2-15). Over nearly 15 years of oper-
ation, KAIT has been fitted with several different thermoelectrically cooled CCD cameras from
Apogee and Finger Lakes. The pixel scale is 0.8 arcsec and the field of view is relatively narrow
.× .arc min. This is well matched for GRB follow-up and pointed observations of galax-
ies to check for the presence of a supernova. Every 3–7 days, KAIT visits the same galaxies
from a preprogrammed list and takes 16–20-s unfiltered exposure that can reach 19th magni-
tude objects. New images are automatically compared with reference templates, and candidate
supernovae are then examined by observers. The best candidates are reobserved and upon con-
firmation released via International Astronomical Union Circulars (IAUC) and Central Bureau
Electronic Telegrams (CBET). The emphasis is on catching and monitoring nearby supernovae
⊡Fig. 2-15
The Katzman Automatic ImagingTelescope(KAIT), a 30-in. robotic telescopeat theUCO Lick. Photo
credit: Weidong Li and Alex Filippenko, University of California, Berkeley

68 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
in the Hubble flow before maximum light. Confirmed supernovae are automatically observed
in BVRI filters on a 2–3 day cadence. Data taking is completely automated. The system checks
the weather, opens the dome, points to targets, finds and acquires guide stars, takes exposures,
and finally stores and processes the data, all without human intervention.
3.2.9 PAIRITEL
The Peters Automated Infrared Imaging Telescope (PAIRITEL) on Mt. Hopkins in Arizona
is the first 1-m class IR instrument to achieve the status of a fully robotic system (Bloom
et al. 2006). Until 2001, the 1.3-m telescope and simultaneous J, H, Ks imager were used by
the 2MASS survey (> Sect. 3.3.2). After refurbishing work was completed in 2004, the new
system began automated observing based on queue scheduling combined with an override
mode for rapid response to targets of opportunity, primarily GRB localizations from GCN.
Observatory software continuously monitors critical weather and control system diagnostics.
Automated data processing pipeline handles the complexities of reducing IR images such as
real-time dark current corrections or variable atmospheric transmission. Although PAIRITEL
is not 100% autonomous, it became one of the most productive GRB follow-up instruments
of the Swift era. Response times are typically ∼2 min after receiving the alert and can be as
low as 1.5 min, which is sufficient for catching some of the long duration bursts before the
end of the gamma-ray emission. More recently, PAIRITEL also responds to triggers from opti-
cal surveys such as Palomar Transient Factory (PTF) and the Catalina Real-Time Transient
Survey (CRTS).
3.2.10 REM, TORTORA, and MegaTORTORA
The main motivation behind REM (Rapid Eye Mount) was to enable prompt identifications of
GRBs in the visual and near-IR wavelengths in order to study early afterglows, select high red-
shift events, and alert larger telescopes with spectrographs. REM is an Italian facility located at
La Silla, ESO (Molinari et al. 2010). The telescope is a f/8 Ritchey-Chretien on a fast-slewing
alt-azimuth mount that provides two stable Nasmyth focal stations suitable for fast motions
(> Fig. 2-16). One of the Nasmyth foci hosts two instruments fed from a dichroic: ROSS
visual camera and spectrograph and REMIR infrared imager with a filter wheel of ten slots
including broadband Z′, J, H, Ks, a narrowband H2 filter, and a grism for low-resolution slit-
less spectroscopy. The mean time for response to a satellite trigger is 30 s. After a few years of
semiautomated operation, the facility is now working autonomously and offers non-alert time
to the astronomical community through regular proposal calls.
Since late 1990s, the Special Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) in Russia has been devel-
oping concepts and systems for optical sky monitoring with vey high temporal resolution.
TORTORA (Telescopio Ottimizzato per la Ricerca dei Transienti Ottici RApidi) is a joined
project between SAO and REM (Beskin et al. 2010). A schematic drawing of the instrument
and the actual hardware attached to the REM telescope are shown in >Fig. 2-16. The camera
employs a TV-CCD detector and collects data at a rate of 7.5 frames per second with 0.128-s
exposures separated bygaps lasting only0.005 s. The resulting data rate is 20 Mb/s, and therefore

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
69
⊡Fig. 2-16
TORTOREM telescope tandem at the La Silla Observatory (ESO, Chile): schematic view of the TOR-
TORA detector (top) and the actual instrument attached to the fast-slewing NIR telescope REM
(bottom). The TORTORA system records optical transients with 0.13-s temporal resolution and
consistsofthefollowingcomponents:(1)baﬄe,(2)objectivelens,(3)focusingunit,(4)image inten-
siﬁer, (5) transmission optics and CCD focuser, and (6) fast low-noise TV-CCD (Adopted from Beskin
et al. (2010))
raw frames must be discarded after 1–2 days assuming a 1 TB storage buffer. Untriggered selec-
tion and classification of transients is performed automatically in real time by custom software.
The TORTOREM strategy paid off with a spectacular detection of GRB 080319B (known as the
“naked-eye burst”) and extremely high fidelity optical light curve simultaneous with gamma-
ray emission. Plans for expansion involve increasing the sensitivity by 2–3 mag while preserving
the current time sampling and a wide field of view, as well as new instrumentation for multicolor
photometry and polarimetry. MegaTORTORA is envisioned as a collection of small telescope
arrays with each telescope on a given mount observing the same field of view in a fixed photo-
metric band and polarization state. Fast frame rates can be achieved using relatively affordable
EMCCD cameras such as the one shown in >Fig. 2-3. This new system is designed to push
the envelope of the observable time scale and survey depth that can be reached with existing
systems (>Fig. 2-17).

70 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
5
10
15
Limiting magnitude
20
25
Unexplored area
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Temporal resolution (seconds)
100000
1 day
1 year
LSST
LINEAR
ASAS−3
Variable stars
Flaring stars
Meteors
Satellites, debris
Asteroids
Supermovae
Pi of the sky
GRB 0803198
GRB 990123
TORTORA
Mega-TORTORA
Mega-TORTORA alert mode
Active Galactic
nuclei
100 years
Microlensing events
⊡Fig. 2-17
Discovery space for fast celestial transients with optical emission. The ovals denote astrophysi-
cal phenomena, and the lines compare the capability of several instruments, both existing and
planned for the future (Adopted from Beskin et al. (2010))
3.3 Dedicated Survey Telescopes
Specialized telescopes with moderate apertures in the range 0.5–3.0-m are often built for time-
consuming surveywork. Such instruments are typicallyoptimized for a particular task and higly
automated. The following sections provide examples of high impact projects in this category.
3.3.1 Microlensing Searches: OGLE and MOA
The first searches for gravitational microlensing in the Local Group of galaxies came online in
the early 1990s. Three groups, EROS, MACHO, and OGLE, embarked upon then an enormous
task of monitoring tens of millions of stars in extremely dense stellar fields of the galactic bulge
and Magellanic Clouds searching for dark matter in the form of compact objects. This is neces-
sary because the probability that a random star is microlensed at any given time is only one per

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
71
million. Today, OGLE (Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment) and MOA (Microlensing
Observations in Astrophysics) are continuing this quest.
Since 1996, OGLE is conducted using the 1.3-m Warsaw University Telescope at Las Cam-
panas (Chile) equipped with successively larger detectors (Udalski et al. 1997). The telescope
is a f/9.2 (f/2.8 primary) Ritchey-Chretien system of ultralow expansion (ULE) glass mirrors
with a three-element field corrector giving a 1.5-deg diffraction limited field of view. The par-
alactic fork mount with friction drives provides precise control of the tracking rate in both
RA and DEC, an essential feature for the OGLE-II phase of the project that collected data in
the drift-scan mode without autoguiding. The telescope and instruments are operated from a
control building located 15 m away from the dome. Survey operations are highly automated
with only an occasional need for human assistance for data quality assurance. Real-time data
reduction and analysis pipelines automatically process the incoming images and resulting light
curves. Microlensing is in principle achromatic, and therefore most observations are conducted
in a single band (I) with a small fraction of time invested in gathering basic color information
(primarily V). The OGLE-IV experiment that began in 2009 employs the “third generation”
camera based on a mosaic of 32 thin E2V 2,048 × 4,096 pixel CCD chips (over 250 million
pixels) covering practically the entire usable area of the focal plane. A single “image” takes 20 s
to read out and requires 0.5 GB of storage space. This latest upgrade constitutes almost an order
of magnitude increase in survey capability compared to OGLE-III and is expected to increase
the rate of microlensing detections to several thousand per year. Over 18 years of operation,
OGLE produced an impressive stream of high-quality data and scientific results, most of them
actually unrelated to microlensing. OGLE was the first microlensing survey to implement an
alert system for reporting newly found microlensing events and light curve anomalies in near
real time. The OGLE Early Warning System (EWS) dating back to 1994 is one of the earliest
examples of this type of service (Udalski 2003). The project web pages offer public access to
OGLE databases and other tools, including EWS.
Following a successful MOA-1 project, MOA-2 has been launched in 2004 on a dedicated
1.8-m telescope at Mount John University Observatory, New Zealand (Hearnshaw et al. 2006;
Sumi 2010). The optics is characterized by a fast focal ratio at f/3. Corrector lenses have been
designed to realize good image quality over the wide focal plane at prime focus. The current gen-
eration MOA-cam3 camera consists of ten E2V 2K × 4K pixel CCD chips and covers a 2.2 deg
of sky in a single exposure. The camera is based on the GenIII system from Astronomical
Research Cameras Inc. and can read the entire focal plane array in 25 s. A special wideband
red filter was designed for a more sensitive microlensing search. General astronomical studies
are mainly conducted using Bessell V, I filters. Thanks to a wide field of view, MOA-2 monitors
24 degevery 2 h in the LMC and 50 degevery hour in the galactic bulge. Fastercadence boosts
detection statistics for brief planetary events on top of regular microlensing. In 2008, the com-
bined yield of OGLE and MOA was over 1,000 microlensing events. Both projects are currently
focusing on early detection of light curve anomalies that signal the presence of planets around
stars acting as microlenses.
3.3.2 Near-Infrared Surveys: 2MASS, VISTA, and SASIR
The current “gold standard” of the NIR sky is the Two Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS)
(Skrutskie et al. 2006). Between 1997 and 2001, the survey collected over four million images
covering 99.998% of the sky and obtained JHKs photometry for 471 billion point sources with

72 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
S/N ratio of about 10 at 1 mJy and 1.6 million extended sources. To complete this monumental
task, 2MASS used two highly automated 1.3-m telescopes: one at Mt. Hopkins, AZ, and one at
CTIO, Chile. Each telescope was equipped with a camera capable of observing the sky simulta-
neously in all three bands separated by two dichroic mirrors and feeding a single NICMOS-3
256 × 256 pixel HgCdTe detectorper channel. The secondary mirror had to be rotated smoothly
during every 1.3 s exposure to “freeze” the field of view as the telescopes uniformly scanned the
entire sky in declication at a rate of 57 arcsec/s. After each exposure, the secondary flew back
to its starting position shifting the .× .arcmin field of view by about 1/6 of the frame size
and producing six independent images of each object over the full scan. This brings the effective
integration time to 7.8 s and allows sub-pixel “dithering” to enhance spatial resolution. The dead
time for reseting the detector array and the secondary was less than 0.1 s. The overall efficiency
of the survey was about 84%. In many ways, 2MASS is an exemplary survey project where both
hardware and software sides of the house worked together to produce timely data releases that
reinvigorated many fields of research.
VISTA, the Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy, is a 4.1-m, state-of-the-art
wide-field near-IR survey facility at Cerro Paranal Observatory, ESO (Emerson and Sutherland
2010; Dalton et al. 2006). Its 3-m long, 67 megapixel cryogenic camera weights 3 tons and covers
a 1.65-deg field of view at resolution 0.34 arcsec/pixel. The focal plane is sparsely sampled with
16 VIRGO 2K × 2K pixel HgCdTe detectors. Although the original specification called for J, H,
and Ks filters, the detector QE remains at 70–80% down to 0.85 μ. Thus, additional Z and Y
filters were placed in the filter wheel to extend the science capability of the instrument. Active
control of the position and tilt of the secondary mirror and curvature sensors inside the camera
deliver excellent image quality over a wide field of view (0.66 arcsec FWHM). The cold-baffle
design that minimizes the background combined with high optical throughput and detectorQE
allows VISTA to reach J = .mag objects in a 60-s exposure. Since the end of 2009, VISTA
has been carrying out its original program of large-scale surveys of the southern sky that cut
across a wide variety of science goals.
While there are many scientific questions that can be answered using deep, multi-epoch
photometry in the infrared, the NIR time domain remains somewhat of a blind spot. The Syn-
optic All-Sky Infrared Survey (SASIR) is a proposal by the University of California at Berkeley
and several institutions in Mexico intended to close this gap (Bloom et al. 2009). The proposed
6.5-m telescopeat San Pedro Mártir Observatoryin Mexico would perform simultaneous imag-
ing in Y, J, H, K bands and repeatedly survey the entire sky north of δ = −○for 4 years to
collect data on variability on time scales from minutes to months. The SASIR camera featuring
124 2K × 2K pixel arrays would be the largest IR imager ever constructed and would reach 100
times deeper than 2MASS (million times larger volume). “Etendue-couleur” (etendue times the
number of photometric bands) for this system is more than three orders of magnitude larger
than 2MASS and ten times that of VISTA. SASIR will for the first time reveal the dynamic
infrared universe, study transients burried by dust, and discover thousands of quasars at z ∼
reaching to z > to probe the epoch of reionization.
3.3.3 Moving Object Searches: Spacewatch, LINEAR, and CSS
Priorto1980s, foralmost a century, systematicsearches forsmall solarsystem bodies were based
on photographic methods. In 1998, NASA set out to meet the US Congressional mandate and
discover 90% of all bodies larger than 1 km with potential for Earth impact by 2008. This greatly
stimulated efforts to search for near-Earth objects (NEOs).

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
73
Spacewatch is the longest running search for moving celestial objects and was the first sys-
tem to use CCDs to find new comets and asteroids (Gehrels 1991; Carusi et al. 1994). Along
the way, the project made more groundbreaking contributions to survey astronomy, including
the first use of drift-scan technique in astronomy, the first real-time software for moving object
detection, and the first automatic discoveries of new moving objects of various types. The Space-
watch program at the University of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory utilizes about 20
nights per lunation on Steward Observatory 0.9-m telescope and since 2002 also on the Space-
watch 1.8-m telescope on Kitt Peak, Arizona. Both telescopes scan the sky using modern CCD
detectors and routinely discover new asteroids down to V = 21–22 mag.
The Lincoln Laboratory’s Near-Earth Asteroid Research (LINEAR) program is a joined
project between US Air Force, NASA, and MIT (Stokes et al. 2000). The project uses a pair
of 1-m, f/2.2 robotic telescopes located at White Sands Missile Range near Socorro, New
Mexico. Each telescope is fitted with a low-noise, frame-transfer 1,960 × 2,560 pixel thinned
CCD designed and fabricated by MIT Lincoln Labs. The field of view is 2 degand allows
covering the entire available sky each lunation down to ∼19.2 mag with 10-s integrations. The
LINEAR moving object detection pipeline requires at least three detections in a sequence of five
visits separated by 30 min. At the end of 2007, LINEAR has discovered over 200 thousand new
objects including 2,000 NEOs and 200 comets.
Since 2005, the Catalina Sky Survey (CSS) and its companion Siding Spring Survey (SSS)
(Larson et al. 1999) dominate the rate of asteroid detections and new discoveries. The survey
utilizes three telescopes: 1.5 m, f/2 telescope on Mt. Lemmon; 0.68-m, f/1.7 Schmidt telescope
near Mt. Bigelow (both near Tucson, Arizona); and a 0.5-m f/3 Uppsala Schmidt telescope at
Siding Spring Observatory in Australia. The cameras are cooled to approximately −○C, so
their dark current is about 1 electron per hour. Each telescope is equipped with a 4,096 × 4,096
pixel camera that covers a field of view between 1 and 9 degdepending on the telescope. The
1.5-m instrument can reach a detection limit of V = .mag in 30 s. CSS discovers 300–600
NEOs per year and has a distinct advantage of reaching the sourthern sky. Over the past few
years, the Catalina survey also became a major supplier of real-time detections of transient
photometric variability.
3.3.4 Spectroscopic Surveys
Spectra are like astronomical fingerprints that immediately reveal the physical nature of the
object at hand. But collecting a large number of them in a reasonable time is not easy. Spec-
troscopy requires large light collecting areas and/or long integration times by comparison with
photometry, automated target acquisition is tricky, and special measurement techniques must
be used to handle the added dimension along the wavelength. Fortunately, recent advances in
photonics and robotics are making it possible to take hundreds or even thousands of spectra at
the same time and automate most if not all of the work.
Several existing telescopes have been fitted with new generation multi-object spectrographs
and harnessed by spectroscopic surveys. The two-degree field facility (2dF) on AAT uses flex-
ible optical fibers to collect light from 400 objects located anywhere within a 2-deg field of
view (Lewis et al. 2002). This light is then directed to a spectrograph that records all 400
spectra simultaneously with a CCD. Other examples of ongoing or completed spectroscopic
surveys are RAVE using the 6dF instrument on UK Schmidt at Siding Springs (Steinmetz 2003)
and a suite of SDSS-II/III surveys (SEGUE, APOGEE, MARVELS, BOSS) on Apache Point
2.5-m telescope (Eisenstein et al. 2011). A necessarily incomplete list of planned spectroscopic

74 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
survey projects includes HERMES on ATT, BigBOSS on Mayall, WINERED in Japan, and
LAMOST in China. The BigBOSS instrument features 5,000 robotically actuated fibers cov-
ering a 3-deg-diameter field of view and feeding ten identical spectrographs each covering the
wavelength range from 340 to 1,060 nm with a resolution R = 3,000–4,800. LAMOST is a 4-m
Schmidt telescope in a meridian-crossing configuration with 4,000 fibers over a 5 deg field.
The Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) (Hill et al. 2008), a 9.2-m telescope located at the McDon-
ald Observatory, and its twin SALT in South Africa are primarily spectroscopic facilities built
according to a new revolutionary design that dramatically cuts the construction cost. The tele-
scope stays at a fixed elevation above the horizon and rotates in azimuth to access most of the
useful sky.
Completely autonomous medium to high-resolution spectroscopy on 1- and 2-m class tele-
scopes is now feasible (Plokhotnichenko et al. 2010). STELLA is a fully robotic observatory
hosting two 1.2-m altazimuth telescopes located on Tenerife, Spain (Strassmeier et al. 2010).
Stella Echelle Spectrograph (SES) delivers spectra between 390 and 860 nm with resolving
power up to 75,000 recorded on a single CCD frame. The autoguiding unit must position the
target on a diaphragm with sub-arcsecond precision and maintain the alignment for an hour. A
beam splitter sends 4% of the target light to a guiding CCD. Off-axis light is redirected to form
another image of the target. When the alignment is perfect, both images coincide. The design
allows adjusting the telescope focus and guiding during the same readout cycle. While STELLA
is primarily devoted to studies of stellar activity, it is also used for other programs, including
rapid follow-up of targets of opportunity. Several groups are developing systems for integrated
field unit (IFU) spectroscopy for rapid response telescopes around the world that can contin-
uously follow transients brighter than ∼22 mag. An example is the Las Cumbres Observatory
Global Telescope Network of 2-m telescopes carrying photometric/IFU instruments dedicated
to follow-up (Hidas et al. 2008).
3.4 Large Robotic Telescopes
3.4.1 Liverpool Telescope
The Liverpool Telescope is a 2.0-m fully robotic telescope located at the Roque de Los Mucha-
chos Observatory on La Palma, Canary Islands (Steele et al. 2004). It is owned and operated
by the Astrophysics Research Institute of Liverpool John Moores University (JMU) in Eng-
land. While most robotic telescopes are strongly dominated by a single science program, the
objective of the Liverpool Telescope is to provide a generic research facility offering a broad
suite of instrumentation and allocated by independent time allocation panels. Routine night-
time operations of the Liverpool Telescope are completely autonomous, including configuration
of instruments, selection of targets, and scheduling observations while adapting to changing
weather conditions (Smith et al. 2010). This is a truly impressive feat for a 2-m class telescope
(shown in > Fig. 2-18). Since 2010, programs approved by the allocation committee can be
uploaded by observers directly into the scheduling database at any time during the day or at
night for autonomous execution by the system. The observatory is particularly well suited for
ambitious programs requiring robotic response to unpredictable events and their follow-up,
monitoring variable sources on time scales from seconds to years, and coordinated simultane-
ous observations with other facilities in space and on the ground. Together with the Faulkes

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
75
⊡Fig. 2-18
Liverpool Telescope and its founder professor Mike Bode. This 2-m giant in the world of robotic
telescopes is capable of observing transient events at random locations within minutes of the
localization alert using one of the ﬁve permanently mounted instruments
Telescope North (FTN) in Maui, Hawaii, and the Faulkes Telescope South (FTS) in Siding
Spring, Australia, the Liverpool Telescope (LT) forms a global network of 2-m telescopes called
RoboNet (Tsapras et al. 2009).
The LT was designed and constructed by Telescope Technologies Limited (TTL), a spin-off
company of JMU. The design is Ritchey-Chretien/Cassegrain at f/10 placed on an altazimuth
mount. Up to five instruments can be permanently mounted on the telescope. An instrument
is selected for observing using a rotating tertiary mirror in the optical path. As of 2010, the LT
carried the following instruments: (1) optical imager RATCam, (2) ultrafast optical polarimeter
RINGO2, (3) infrared imager SupIRCam, (4) intermediate dispersion dual-beam spectrometer
FRODO-Spec, and (5) fast-readout optical camera RISE. Perhaps the most interesting on this
list in terms of innovation is the RINGO polarimeter (Steele et al. 2010) capable of measuring
polarization of highly variable sources. The idea is to use a fast rotating Polaroid to modu-
late the polarized part of the flux and deflect the light using a wedge prism, also rotating. This
way, a polarization signal forms a sin θ pattern around a ring. A serious disadvantage of this
original design is spreading of the signal over many CCD pixels compounded by source confu-
sion due to overlapping rings of neighboring objects. RINGO2 addressed these shortcomings

76 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
by eliminating the prism and recording the fast variable signal directly using an electron mul-
tiplication CCD. The current system employs the Andor iXon+897 camera hosting a 512 × 512
E2V CCD97 detector in a Peltier cooled package. The Polaroid rotates at 60 RPM, and the sig-
nal is divided into eight time bins per rotation resulting in 125 ms exposures, well within the
specification of the EMCCD device.
The unique capability of LT can be illustrated using real-time GRB follow-up. >Figure 2-19
shows the flowchart of LT-TRAP, the Liverpool Telescope Transient Rapid Analysis Pipeline
(Guidorzi et al. 2006). Upon receiving a GRB localization alert from a gamma-ray observatory
via a live GCN socket, the telescope enters the override mode, automatically slews to the target
position, and within 2–3 min of the GRB alert begins observing. During the first phase of the
response (detection mode), two sets of three 10 s exposures using the r′ filter are taken. The
data is automatically reduced and analysed. A variable object in the error box is interpreted
as the candidate optical counterpart. At this point, LT-TRAP determines the most productive
observing strategy given what has been seen (or not seen) so far and puts the telescope in one
of the detailed follow-up modes: multicolor imaging, polarimetry, spectroscopy, or a series of
deeper exposures using the Sloan r′i′z′ filters. Among other interesting results, the LT-TRAP
system delivered the first measurements of polarization in the early optical GRB afterglow and
showed that the level of polarization can be as high as 10%. In addition to rapid GRB follow-up,
Telescope override
Detection Mode (DM)
Short RINGO Exposure (2006)
MultiColor
Imaging Mode
(MCIM)
r’ (R)<15 mag?
Fading OT
found?
Polarimetry
z’,r’,i’ (B,R,i’) Light Curves
or deep Upper Limits
Polarimetry Mode (PM) (2006)
Spectroscopy Mode (SM) (2007)
Spectra
Spectroscopy
Mode (SM)
MultiColor
Light Curves
LTTRA P
YES
YES
LT
FTN
LT & FTN
NO
NO
RIZ Mode
(RIZM)
NO
⊡Fig. 2-19
Flowchart of the LTTRAP observing and data analysis strategy used at the Liverpool Telescope and
the Faulkes Telescope North facilities. This sophisticated software system is designed to optimize
the rapid response sequencefollowingGRB localization alerts(Adopted from Guidorzi et al. (2006))

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
77
the list of science programs on LT includes observations of extrasolar planets detected using
both the transit method and gravitational microlensing anomalies, monitoring of active galactic
nuclei, and follow-upofotherexplosive transients such as cataclysmicvariables and supernovae.
3.4.2 GROND
GROND (Gamma-Ray Burst Optical and Near-Infrared Detector) is a seven-channel imager
specifically designed for GRB afterglow observations (Greiner et al. 2008). High-resolution
spectroscopy is the key probe of detailed physical conditions in the burst environment and
must be obtained within the first few hours after the explosion. High redshift events are par-
ticularly important and best identified with multiband photometry in optical/NIR providing a
photometric redshift based on the Lyα break. The initial positions of GRBs are only accurate to
a few arcminutes, so the associated transient must be first identified using time-resolved images
covering the entire error box. Simultaneous multi-color images provide robust measurements
of the spectral energy distribution (SED) for an afterglow that fades by 2–3 mag within the first
few minutes. A 2-m class telescope is required to detect a large fraction of GRB afterglows.
GROND is a state-of-the-art instrument designed to address all those issues.
GROND is installed on the ESO’s 2.2-m MPI telescope on La Silla (Chile). The telescope is a
f/8 Ritchey-Chretien with a focal length of 17.6 m on an equatorial fork mount. The instrument
employs a focal reducer in the infrared to produce a × arcmin field of view and delivers
.′′ images (FWHM). Different photometric bands are separated using multiple dichroics that
reflect the short-wavelentgh light, while the long wavelengths pass through. GROND resides
on the side of the telescope in a Coude-like focus. During a GRB alert, a movable flat mirror
is folded in the main telescope beam to direct the light into GROND. The visual channels uti-
lize 2,048× 2,048 pixel back-illuminated E2V devices with 13.5-μ pixels. The field of view in
griz is .× .arcmin and determined by the telescope focal length and the size of the CCD.
In the JHK, a 1,024×1,024 pixel Rockwell HAWAII-1 array combined with the focal reducer
delivers images covering ×arcmin. The entire assembly resides in a single cylindrical cryo-
stat. A two-stage closed-cycle coolers (CCC) maintains different operating temperaturesfor the
visual and NIR benches (80 and 65 K, correspondingly).
It would be difficult to take advantage of GROND’s capabilities without a sophisticated
control software that coordinates exposure and readout cycles of various components of the
system. The control system is integrated with the ESO scheduling using standard observation
blocks to facilitate rapid response and coordinate the interaction of GROND with other instru-
ments on the 2.2-m telescope. The GROND Pipeline is a software package written specifically
for automated scheduling and analysis of GROND observations. The system consists of multi-
ple processes that work asynchronously. The processes in the observation control layer receive
GRB alerts from the GCN connection, calculate the visibility, as well as schedule and inter-
rupt/reschedule observations. Unlike the Liverpool Telescope, GROND does not use JIT (just
in time) scheduling but rather plans ahead to observe all GRBs that are accessible and makes
the schedule known to observers working with other instruments several hours in advance.
Conflicts are resolved based on a priority scheme. Once the observation is accepted, the sys-
tem executes a standard rapid response mode procedure adopted from the VLT and creates
a master process that controls the analysis of data from all seven channels collected from all
relevant observation blocks. Subsequent data analysis depends on the user-selected strategy.
There are 22 different arrangements of data analysis strategies mapped onto 12 processes. The
full data processing chain consists of (1) automated data reduction to obtain astrometry and

78 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
time-resolved multicolor photometry for all objects in the field, (2) comparisons with external
catalogs and GRB data to establish the best candidates for the optical GRB counterpart, and (3)
testing for the presence of the Lyα break and derivation of the photometric redshift using the
public HyperZ code. Since its comissioning in April 2007, GROND has enabled many impor-
tant contributions to GRB science, including rapid redshift determination for GRB 090423 at
z = , the most distant object ever observed.
3.5 Large-Scale Surveys
3.5.1 SDSS
The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) is arguably the most ambitious and influential astronom-
ical survey completed to date (York et al. 2000). The survey was funded and carried out by
a consortium of 25 institutions from around the globe. Using a dedicated telescope at Apache
Point Observatory in New Mexico equipped with state-of-the-art instruments, the core projects
SDSS-I and SDSS-II collected approximately 5 terabytes of deep multicolor images covering
more than a quarter of the sky, high precision photometry for 230 million celestial objects, and
more than one million spectra. Special purpose SDSS-III programs will continue through 2014.
This extraordinary observational material is available online to anyone willing to use it and has
literally transformed the astrophysical research.
The SDSS telescope (Gunn et al. 2006) is a 2.5-m f/5 modified Ritchey-Chretien altitude-
azimuth telescope. A large secondary mirror and two corrector lenses provide a large distortion-
free field of view. In order to maximize the efficiency of the survey, SDSS imaging was collected
by drift-scanning along great circles at the sidereal rate and adjusting the CCD readout accord-
ingly. The data is then divided into manageable pieces for processing. The telescope was
equipped with the multi-color photometric camera and two multi-fiber spectrographs. Besides
the 2.5-m telescope, the SDSS made use of the photometric calibration telescope, a seeing
monitor, and a cloud scanner.
The SDSS imaging camera (Gunn et al. 1998) contained two sets of CCD arrays: the imaging
array and the astrometric arrays. The imaging array consists of 30 2,048×2,048 pixel Tektronix
CCDs with filters placed directly in front of them. The pixel size is 24 μ (0.36 arcsec on the
sky). Detectors are arranged in six columns and five rows. Each row observed the sky in one
color, and the direction of the scan was along the columns. As a result, each point on the sky
passed through all filters in a temporal sequence u′g′r′i′z′. Each CCD covered a swath of sky
13.5 arcmin in width. The gaps between the columns required two scans to produce a filled
stripe 2.54 deg wide. The camera design allowed for about 8% overlap between the two “half-
scans” on each side to ensure that no area was lost. The resulting integration time was 54.1 s
per filter. The northern galactic cap was covered by 45 such great-circle arcs. In many ways,
SDSS served as a path-finder mission for large-scale surveys in the era of electronic imaging
and established the standard of quality for future time domain surveys.
3.5.2 Palomar Transient Factory
The Palomar Transient Factory (PTF) is an automated,wide-field survey dedicated to a system-
atic exploration of the transient optical sky (Law et al. 2009). To the extent possible, existing

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
79
technology was reused to lower the cost with modifications necessary for achieving the science
goals. The survey is performed using the Samuel Oschin telescope at Palomar Observatory, a
48-in. Schmidt with a glass corrector plate, and a 72-in. primary mirror at f/2.5. The same tele-
scope was used for Palomar Sky Surveys (POSS-I/II) and Palomar-QUEST digital synoptic sky
survey (Djorgovski et al. 2008).
Changes to the optics included replacement of the flat dewar window with a field corrector
designed to handle the curvature of the focal plane, tuning primary mirror supports, refur-
bishing of optical surfaces, improved baffling, and installation of internal calibration lights.
The original LN cooling system was replaced with a closed-cycle system based on a Polycold
Compact Cooler with no moving parts to minimize vibration. A commercial shutter from Sci-
entific Instrument Technology provides fine control of the exposure time to within 2 ms with
minimal vignetting. Filter exchanges are completed in 15 s using a microstepper motor and a
custom-made mechanism that selects one of two filters preselected for a given night.
The CCD detector is based on the CFH12K design developed for the prime focus of the
Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope (CFHT). It is a 12K × 8K pixel mosaic of × 2K × 4K pixel
MIT/LL CCID20 CCDs. The array readout time was lowered to 30.7 s (about 50% relative to
the original design) to match the telescope slew and settle time for PTF operations. The survey
is conducted robotically by the Observatory Control System (OCS) written in MATLAB. OCS
issues command to the camera, filter exchanger, shutter, telescope, dome, and focuser based on
the feedback from the scheduler, the telescope/camera, a weather station, and the data quality
monitor. Most PTF images (92%) are taken through either the SDSS g′ filter or Mould-R in
order to optimize the detection sensitivity in full moon and dark-sky conditions, respectively.
For maximum efficiency, four distinct experiments take turns on P48 throughout the year:
(1) explosive transient search on a 5-day cadence, (2) dynamic cadence experiment designed to
explore transient phenomena on time scales between 90 s and 1 day, (3) a fast-cadence search
in the “stare mode” to discover eclipsing binaries and transiting planets in Orion, (4) a deep
survey in Hα covering 3π sr of sky for three nights each full Moon. PTF performs automatic
real-time transient detection using difference images between program frames and historical
template images. The Transients Classification Pipeline utilizes a Bayesian framework toprovide
machine generated type determination for detected transients. PTF conducts semiautomated
follow-up of the most interesting transients, primarily using the automated Palomar 60 tele-
scope, and also Palomar Hale Telescope, the Keck telescopes, PARITEL, and the Las Cumbres
Observatory telescope network. Since the beginning of regular survey operations in the fall of
2009, PTF has been delivering a steady stream of transient detections, mostly newly discov-
ered supernovae. PTF is an important milestone in the development of autonomous systems
for detection, classification, and follow-up of astrophysical transients.
3.5.3 Pan-STARRS
The Pan-STARRS (Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response System) project is an
implementation of the synoptic survey concept (Kaiser et al. 2010). It has been funded by
the US Air Force for the design and construction of the observatory facility with support-
ing control software, image processing pipeline, and database system. Survey operations are
supported by a consortium of academic partners in the USA, Germany, the UK, and Taiwan
and partially NASA. While addressing the threat associated with near-Earth objects (NEOs) is
one of the original science drivers for the project, Pan-STARRS is optimized to tackle a wide

80 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
spectrum of problems related to the solar system science, time-domain astrophysics, galactic
and extragalactic astronomy, and cosmology, including dark energy studies.
The target Pan-STARRS system, PS4, will be composed of four individual telescopes
(Hodapp et al. 2004), each with a 1.8 m diameter mirror observing the same patch of sky simul-
taneously. This “distributed aperture” approach is more cost-effective and carries a much lower
technological risk compared to a large monolithic mirror design with the same collecting area.
The price for added flexibility such as the freedom to use four different filters at once, or tem-
porarily point each telescope in a different direction, is four times more pixels and computing
power per survey area. The importance of the latter factor is diminished by continuing exponen-
tial fall in the cost of electronics. Upon completion, the PS4 system will have an etendue of 60,
i.e., five times better than any existing instrument. Optical layout is based on Ritchey-Chretien
design with a Cassegrain focus and a three-lens corrector. The focal ratio of f/4 gives a focal
length of 8 m and a plate scale of 38.5 μ/arcsec. Each telescope will have a 3-deg field of view and
be equipped with a 1.4 billion pixel CCD camera. The spatial sampling of the sky will be about
0.3 arcsec. When searching for potential killer asteroids and variable objects, Pan-STARRS cov-
ers 6,000 degper night. The entire sky as seen from Hawaii will be observed three times during
the dark time per lunation. Searches for asteroids and NEOs may utilize a very wide filter cov-
ering most of the visible waveband from 0.5 to 0.8 μ. For other works, Pan-STARRS employs
standard SDSS filters g′r′i′z′. Excellent near-infrared response of the Pan-STARRS detectors
also allows the use of a y-band filter at 1 μ.
The Pan-STARRS project has completed its first 1.4 gigapixel focal plane array, the world’s
largest CCD camera (Onaka et al. 2008). The detector consists of 60 densely packed 4K × 4K
pixel MITLL CCD orthogonal transfer arrays (OTAs) developed at MIT Lincoln Labs (Tonry
et al. 2008). The focal plane array is shown in > Fig. 2-20. Each OTA is an × array of
× pixel CCDs known as “cells,” each equipped with its own logic and output. OTAs
allow rapid shifting of the collected charge during exposure. This functionality is the basis of
the sophisticated on-detector image compensation employed by Pan-STARRS, an electronic
equivalent of the tip-tilt correction using tiny motions of the secondary mirror. A camera com-
posed of OTAs automatically functions as a telescope guider. The readout is performed using
⊡Fig. 2-20
Focal plane of GPC1, the ﬁrst gigapixel CCD camera of Pan-STARRS

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
81
480 outputs operating at a rate of 1 Mpixel/sec with gigabit Ethernet interfaces. The new con-
troller electronics developed for this purpose called STARGRASP can be scaled to even larger
focal planes.
The first Pan-STARRS system, PS1, is located on Mount Haleakala and started regular
observing in March 2009. During a “demonstration month” it produced an average of ∼500
images per night and detected several hundred supernovae and thousands of asteroids. The PS1
science mission began on May 13, 2010. A single observation with a broadband filter will reach
a 5σ depth of 24 mag. By adding observations taken over several years, Pan-STARRS should be
able to reach a maximum depth of 29.4 mag.
3.5.4 LSST
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST; LSST Science Collaborations et al. 2009) has been
selected as the top priority large ground-based project by the Astro2010 Decadal Survey of
the National Academies. The design grew out of ideas surrounding the Dark Matter Telescope,
a large wide-field telescope with enormous etendue proposed around the turn of the cen-
tury. >Figure 2-21 illustrates the concept. The effective etendue of LSST will be 319 mdeg,
more than an order of magnitude improvement over existing facilities. There are four major
science drivers that shape the current reference specification for LSST (Ivezic et al. 2008): (1)
taking an inventory of the Solar System, (2) mapping the Milky Way, (3) exploring the transient
optical sky, and (4) probing dark energy and dark matter. Remarkably, the same instrument
will enable breakthrough discoveries in all these areas without introducing imbalanced engi-
neering requirements and multiple survey strategies. One can think of this as massively parallel
astrophysics. Each patch of sky will be visited 1,000 times over 10 years, producing trillion mea-
surements with temporal astrometric and photometric data on 20 billion objects. About 90% of
the observing time will be devoted to a uniform deep-wide-fast survey mode. The survey will
cover 30,000 degwith south of declination δ = +.○, 20,000 degof which will be covered
with the deep-wide-fast pointings. The remaining 10% of the observing time will be allocated
to special programs such as fast-cadence monitoring of selected fields.
The LSST optical layout (Seppala 2002) is a modified Paul-Baker three-mirror system with
a three-lens refractive field corrector. The color filter is placed in front of the third lens that also
serves as the entrance window to the cryostat with the sensor at the focal plane. This design pro-
duces a large field of view with uniformly excellent image quality. The primary-tertiary mirror is
8.4 m in diameter, equivalent to a 6.7-m-diameter unobscured clear aperture. Overall, the opti-
cal system is extremely fast for its size with the f/ratio 1.23 at the effective focal length 10.3 m.
The LSST camera assemblywill be inserted through a 1.8-m opening in the secondary. The effec-
tive aperture diameter of 6.5 m was chosen to achieve the coadded survey depth r ∼.mag
(σ, point source), given the total exposure time of 30 s per visit (× -s split) and the 10-year
duration of the project. In a single visit, LSST will cover 9.6 deg(3.5 deg FOV) down to r ∼..
The key to achieving a high duty cycle and minimizing the loss of exposure time is a short
slew and settle time that is beyond the capability of today’s large telescopes. The LSST telescope
will be one of the most accurate and agile large telescopes ever built, despite its substantial size
and weight. This is accomplished with an innovative design that exploits the small focal ratio
of the telescope. The result is a very compact and stiff structure of welded and bolted steel on
a powerful altitude over azimuth mount. A nominal move by 3.5 deg in elevation and 7 deg in
azimuth will take only 5 s, including the time to acquire the new pointing with an error below

82 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
⊡Fig. 2-21
Proposed Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST): 8.4-m telescope in the enclosure (top) and
3.2-gigapixel, six-color camera (bottom)
0.1 arcsec. Allowing 2 min per filter change, LSST will spend 80% of the available time actually
exposing the sky (weather permitting). The pointing accuracy across the sky is expected to be
better than 0.2 arcsec.
The LSST camera (Gilmore et al. 2008) features a 3.2-gigapixel focal plane array of 189
4K × 4K pixel, CCD sensors with 10.0-μ pixels. At the plate scale of 0.2 arcsec/pixel this cor-
responds to an area 64 cm in diameter paved with silicon! The camera employs deep-depletion,
back-illuminated CCD devices, each segmented into 16 channels to enable reading out the
entire array in just 2 s. Individual detectors, as well as the associated camera electronics, are
organized into relatively independent units called “rafts” hosting 3 × 3 CCDs and placed in a
vacuum cryostat that maintains the operating temperature −○C. The key characteristics of
the camera that will make LSST science possible are (1) high quantum effciency between 320
and 1,080 nm, (2) minimal PSF degradation due to charge diffusion, (3) very flat focal plane,
(4) tightly packed design, and (5) fast readout enabled by highly segmented detectors.

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
83
LSST will employ active optics image corrections using wavefront measurements collected
with special purpose CCDs mounted at the corners of the science array. The feedback loop that
maintains the tracking of the telescope relies on the guide sensors that sample the locations of
bright stars ten times every second. The camera body also contains a mechanical shutter and
a sophisticated filter exchange mechanism holding five of the six LSST optical filters (ugrizy)
arranged in a 3-D structure to minimize the obstruction in the optical path. The sixth filter
can only be swapped in during daylight. The LSST filter system bears a strong similarity to
the one used for SDSS (Fukugita et al. 1996). It covers the observed wavelength range with
roughly logarithmic spacing and samples the Balmer break, while avoiding prominent telluric
features. A notable extension is the presence of the y band due to high sensitivity of the deep-
depletion CCDs at 1 μ. LSST filters are characterized by nearly perfect transmission, very flat
peaks, and only a small amount of cross-talk between the bands. They were designed to achieve
0.5% relative photometric calibration.
4
Telescope Networking
Networking is a powerful way to combine resources. Computer networks have completely rev-
olutionized the way we access and process information. They are also one of the major enabling
technologies behind the proliferation of autonomous telescopes and observatories. Telescope
networks are the next logical step in this progression and are already delivering previously
impossible observations. Nevertheless, the full potential of linking telescopes, databases, and
search engines for real-time knowledge extraction and observing optimization is yet to be
unleashed. The field is undergoing rapid growth driven by the fusion of major technologies:
robotic telescope hardware, cutting-edge storage devices, online databases, and state-of-the-
art knowledge extraction algorithms that work together as an end-to-end system (Allan et al.
2006c).
The concept of a telescope network is illustrated in > Fig. 2-22. A geographically dis-
tributed ensemble of survey instruments is systematically searching the sky for interesting
events. Depending on the target science, each site may actually host an array of telescopes. The
RAPTOR/Thinking Telescopes network for transient detection and monitoring is a good exam-
ple of such system on a single project scale (> Sect. 3.2.5). The data is processed on the fly by
a set of dedicated computers running image processing pipelines, performing astrometric and
photometric calibrations, real-time transient recognition, and reporting of interesting changes
to a central decision engine that determines subsequent actions. The system is integrated with
databases that provide historical context information, both internal and external to the project.
This information is used by the decision engine to “interpret” events and attempt inferences
about their nature. Response requests are then sent automatically to follow-up instruments
for the most promising candidate transients. Follow-up telescopes are typically more sensi-
tive and provide detailed information such as multicolor photometry or spectra but require
well-localized targets. The results of the follow-up are fed back to the decision engine. This
autonomous “closed-loop” operation with little or no human supervision enables a radically
new approach to exploring the variability of the night sky on short time scales. It will also play a
crucial role in the Peta-scale surveys of the future such as LSST. One immediate consequence of
this topology is that the distinction between survey and follow-up is slowly disappearing. The
same instrument assumes different roles depending on what is happening at the moment.

84 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
⊡Fig. 2-22
Schematic view of a modern telescope network. Note the presence of multiple feedback loops that
determine new data acquisition activity based on what has been inferred so far
Local networks are integrated with the global network via event messaging protocols and
the so-called aggregator nodes. Aggregators process information from a heterogeneous col-
lection of instruments including ground-based telescopes and space observatories covering
all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum or even non-electromagnetic signals (gravity waves
and neutrino). With the new generation of sensitive neutrino observatories and gravitational
wave detectors (Icecube, e/a-LIGO, and LISA in the future) coming online, we are witnessing
the birth of multi-messenger astronomy. However, the astronomical community is still rather
unprepared to take advantage of these developments. The event of the century could easily be
missed if it occurred in the galactic plane or appeared as a saturated object in one of the deep
wide-field surveys. Optical and NIR robotic observatories are helping to gradually fill these
blind spots, but the level of coordination between the various survey and follow-up instruments
must be increased to make this strategy effective (Stubbs 2008). >Figure 2-23 illustrates the dif-
ficulty involved in this type of work that requires cross-correlating and combining observations
made with instruments of vastly different coverage and spatial resolution. The significance and
the assigned level of priority of a random low signal-to-noise detection strongly depends on the
available context information. The data stream from LIGO is full of possible 3σ detections that
will normally be ignored, unless we can reliably link any of them to rapid optical variability.
Telescope networking is about enabling this type of analysis on a global scale.

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
85
240
210
180
150
120
90
60
Field of view
Swift BAT part coded
Swift BAT fully coded
LIGO S/N = 3
LIGO S/N = 10
RAPTOR-P
RAPTOR-T
30
20
40
60
80
330
300
270
00
⊡Fig. 2-23
Illustration of challenges involved in correlative multiwavelength, multi-messenger observations
of cosmic explosions. An instantaneous view of the sky as seen by the RAPTOR-Q all-sky monitor
(>Sect. 3.1.2) serves as the background. The ﬁeld of view of the Swift/BAT gamma-ray telescope
is compared to a typical error box associated with a gravitational wave detection from LIGO and
the ﬁeld of view covered by modern rapidly slewing optical telescopes, RAPTOR-P, and RAPTOR-T
(>Sect. 3.2.5)
4.1 Communication Protocols and Virtual Observatory Standards
The ultimate goal of telescope networking is to maximize the science output from a distributed
collection of instruments by coordinating their activity using a set of intelligent software agents.
As the number of robotic telescopes and networks supported by individual projects is growing,
so does the need for greater connectivity between heterogeneous collections of instruments
and for better communication standards. There is a clear trend to move away from propri-
etary data formats and protocols relying on binary data representations and toward adopting
portable text-based specifications that can take advantage ofmodern technologies forrepresent-
ing content such as XML (Extensible Markup Language). Connectivity is normally achieved by
implementing astronomy-specific protocols for establishing connections and exchanging data
that utilize existing lower level mechanism such as SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol),

86 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
RSS (Real Simple Syndication), or XMPP (eXtensible Messaging and Presence Protocol) on
top of basic TCP/IP sockets (e.g., Klotz 2010).
There are two major types of protocols involved. The first type is primarily for requesting
new observations and sending commands to remote hardware and the second serves as the
medium for sharing scientific information about interesting events. Remote Telescope Markup
Language6 (RTML) created in 1999 by UC Berkeley’s Hands-On Universe project is an XML
dialect that supports a transparent use of remote and/or robotic telescopes (Hessman 2006b;
Hessman et al. 2006). The language handles instrument capability assessments, scheduling
requests, and status collecting functions. RTML provides a high level of telescope interoper-
ability and is not intended for driving individual hardware components such as motors, filter
wheels, sensors, etc. It has been adopted as the main hardware centric communication protocol
by RoboNet and integrated with e-STAR (> Sect. 4.5). RTML is now available in commerical
astronomy software like Bob Denny’s ACP2 internet telescope package. Other means of using
XML to dynamically drive hardware are NASA’s AIML (Astronomical Instrument Markup
Language) developed for the SOFIA Observatory and INDI (Instrument Neutral Distributed
Interface).
The grand daddy of rapid event disseminationsystems is GCN (GRB Coordinates Network)
created in 1997 (Barthelmy 2008). Its main purpose is to enable rapid follow-up of gamma-ray
bursts and other high-energy transients detected by satellites such as Swift and Fermi. There are
several types of GCN alerts including e-mail notifications and instant messages to cell phones
and pagers. A GCN notice is a packet of 160 bytes structured as 40 long integers delivered over
a live TCP/IP socket and intended for triggering hardware. Typical latency between the time a
trigger is received by the GCN system and the time it is delivered to recipients is only a fraction
of a second. The rules of decoding these binary transmissions are quite complicated and depend
on the type of event (encoded in the first 4 bytes). Each node is configured with a mask of packet
types to be transmitted combined with some simple criteria such as the size of the error box and
the maximum delay between the event and the localization alert. Certain packet types are used
to distribute pointing updates for instruments providing GCN triggers so that the follow-up
telescopes on the ground can track the field of view of gamma-ray monitors. The main GCN
process acts as a client and establishes persistent connections to all nodes configured to receive
alerts treating them as servers. While this arrangement may provide more control at the GCN
gateway, it is very inconvenient in modern environments with security firewalls. Regardless
of its limitations, GCN has been tremendously successful and directly contributed to many
groundbreaking discoveries.
Proliferation oftime-domain surveys created a need foran event messaging system designed
to serve a wide range of projects. In 2006, the International Virtual Observatory Alliance
(IVOA) officially adopted VOEvent as a standard format to report time-sensitive observations
of astronomical objects. VOEvent messages written in XML are readable to both machines and
humans and capture metadata related to the observations, as well as the inferences derived from
those observations. A valid VOEvent transmission contains the following elements:
• <Who> – the author and the publisher of this information
• <How> – description of the instrumental setup
• <What> – actual measurements and other numerical data
• <Why> – scientific interpretation of the event
• <WhereWhen> – time and location of the event
6http://www.astro.physik.uni-goettingen.de/hessman

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
87
The VOEvent specification draws on other Virtual Observatory standards like Space-Time
Coordinate (STC), VOTable, and VOTimeSeries. Reports of follow-up observations can be
linked to messages that triggered them by cross-referencing VOEvents. Provisions were made
for updates and retractions. VOEventLib is a reference Python implementation and parser for
VOEvent.
4.2 Real-Time Event Brokers
The job of event brokers is to provide a platform for sending, receiving, and archiving events.
VOEventNet at Caltech was the first system of this kind. Its successor Skyalert achieved a
considerable level of sophistication and is scalable to handle many publishers and subscribers
exchanging events at a high rate (Williams et al. 2009). The system uses modern transport pro-
tocols to communicate with both humans (RSS, Twitter, XMPP) and machines (SOAP, XML,
TCP/IP sockets). It is built on top of the Python web mega-framework Django with MySQL
database as the storage back end. One of the main challenges that must be addressed by event
brokers is filtering a diverse flow of events so that subscribers only receive information they
are interested in. Subscribers configure a set of rules to decide which events will be sent to
them (or their robots). Those triggering rules are expressed in Python syntax and may utilize
any information in the database, including cross-correlations between multiple data sources
(e.g., equivalent to “Catalina transients without SDSS detections”). Users can annotate events
with new information emerging from subsequent follow-up observations. >Figure 2-24 shows
several screenshots of the online interface to Skyalert. A standard set of existing alert feeds is
accessible by general public. Registered Skyalert users can also create customized alert feeds.
Setting up a new event stream takes some assistance from the support team. Publishers arrange
to make remote event submissions using either a Java client distributed by Skyalert or a custom
implementation of the protocol. For iPhone enthusiasts, there is an application called Transient
Events that communicates with the Skyalert database and allows users to receive notifications of
transient events shortlyaftertheyare discovered. As of2011, overa dozen event streams are con-
nected to Skyalert including optical transient searches (Catalina, “Pi of the Sky”), microlensing
surveys (OGLE, MOA), and UV/X-ray/γ-ray satellite observatories (GALEX, Swift).
4.3 Automated Transient Detection and Classiﬁcation
Although astronomers are typically early adopters of hardware technology (especially new
detectors), they are suprisingly slow to introduce more sophisticated statistical methods in
their work. Perhaps this is why machine learning is so underutilized in astronomy compared
to other disciplines such as biology or market research. But the situation is changing and time-
domain surveys are leading the way. Accurate real-time transient classification can be achieved
by assimilating on the fly the required context information: multicolor time-resolved photome-
try, host galaxy and other environment data, broadband spectral properties, and features across
the wavelength range (Mahabal et al. 2008b). Neural nets, decision trees, and kernel methods
such as support vector machines have been shown to perform well in low-level event recogni-
tion and quality assurance where there is little need to handle missing features. Bayesian belief
networks are particularly useful for high-level classification work dominated by the seman-
tics of the scientific interpretation of the data. At this stage, the system must fuse all available
data from a very heterogeneous set of databases. This means that each data vector contains

88 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
⊡Fig. 2-24
Screenshots of the Skyalert web pages showing a transient from the Catalina Real-Time Tran-
sient Survey. Users are able to display light curves, ﬁnding charts, discovery images, and cross-
identiﬁcation data from external databases
potentially hundreds of features, but most of the time the actual values will be missing for
most of the features. Bayesian nets are a natural choice for these high-dimensional but sparsely
populated data spaces. An example application to astronomical time-domain data is the classifi-
cation engine developedfor the Catalina survey(Mahabal et al. 2008a). The RAPTOR/Thinking
Telescopes project at Los Alamos is developing a real-time classification system for explosive
transients based on the same approach.
4.4 Follow-Up Optimization
Much of the early experience with robotic systems performing autonomous follow-up comes
from GCN. In case of GRB response, the rate of alerts is low and localizations are generated by

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
89
an expensive asset such as an orbiting satellite, and then distributed to less expensive instru-
ments. The potential scientific payoff is very high and typically far outweighs the risk of wasting
telescope time. In this regime, we can afford the simplest strategy “all kids go after the ball.”
Even modest instruments like “Pi of the Sky” and RAPTOR survey arrays monitoring large
areas of sky down to 12–15 mag are capable of generating terabytes of images per week and
finding several candidate objects for follow-up at any given moment. The emerging Peta-scale
surveys such as Pan-STARRS and LSST bring a new set of challenges. LSST is expected to
deliver ∼50,000 variability alerts per night and will quickly saturate the world supply of follow-
up instruments. This bottleneck is particularly severe for spectroscopy that provides the key
to unraveling the physics of the event. Humans simply lack the time, attention span, memory,
and reaction speed to handle this volume of real-time data or short time scale characteristic for
explosive phenomena. Increasingly, the expert observer is only involved at the highest level, and
most processing takes place without human interaction. Taking humans out of the loop is not an
easy task, but a number of promising results have been obtained using information-theoretic
approach (Mahabal et al. 2008a). Limited data leads to degenerate event classifications with
ambiguous probability distributions that must be resolved with follow-up observations taking
into account instrument capability, cost, and availability, e.g., due to local weather. A success-
ful follow-up strategy can be obtained by choosing observations that maximize the decrease in
conditional entropy of the posterior probability distribution for object class. This is equivalent
to maximizing the conditional mutual information of the next observation about the desired
classification given previously collected data. In other words, observations with flat probability
distributions contain little information about the nature of the object, while those with bumpy
histograms take us closer to the final answer. A first-generation system based on this algorithm
has been deployed on the data streams from the Catalina survey and PTF, clearly demonstrating
the utility of this approach.
4.5 Global Telescope Networks and Deployable Computing
Globally distributed systems of a few relatively loosely connected telescopes are becoming
increasingly common (Hessman 2006a). Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Inc.
(LCOGT) is a privately funded, nonprofit organization with the ambitious goal of building and
fielding a network of about 50 telescopes located at 6–7 sites around the world (Hidas et al.
2008). The network will have a complete coverage of the night sky to “keep you in the dark”
and will be used for education and time-domain astrophysics. The 2-m Faulkes telescopes built
by Telescope Technologies Ltd. (TTL), one on Haleakala, Hawaii, and one at Siding Springs,
Australia, are now part of the network and will be equipped with new instruments for visi-
ble/NIR imaging and spectroscopy. Currently, the LCOGT team is developing a fleet of 1-m
telescopes (3 per site) for optical imaging. Each site will also host five or more 0.4-m telescopes
based on Meade RCX400 f/8 tubes dedicated primarily to education. LCOGT will be primarily
a follow-up facility with the remaining time used for variability studies.
Tightly integrated networks of instruments that work together without human interven-
tion to accomplish a specific science goal are much less common. Good examples are the first
generation of RAPTOR telescopes and “Pi of the Sky.” Both systems run transient detection
algorithms based on coincidence checks between redundant telescopesobserving the same field
of view and use the parallax information to reject nearby objects. The distinguishing feature
of the RAPTOR/Thinking Telescopes network at Los Alamos is its self follow-up capability

90 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
enabled by the TALONS (Telescope Alert Operations Network System) infrastructure engi-
neered as a central bidirectional hub (White et al. 2004). A very different approach was taken
by eSTAR (eScience Telescopes for Astronomical Research), a peer-to-peer network developed
and operated by the University of Exeter, UK (Allan et al. 2006b). eSTAR is a completely decen-
tralized collection of relatively independent software agents, each performing a well-defined
task such as resource discovery, delivering observation requests, reducing and analyzing data,
or detecting the presence of objects of some type. TALONS is built around the push model for
data transport to minimize the latency of response, while eSTAR implements both push and
pull transfers. The eSTAR system was used to coordinate a network of four telescopes for deep
follow-up: UKIRT, Liverpool Telescopes, and the two Faulkes telescopes. In 2005, eSTAR and
TALONS joined forces, opened a gateway between the two proprietary networks, and thus cre-
ated the first astronomical meta-network (White et al. 2006). The community effort to federate
existing telescope networks and individual instruments into a global meta-network is now led
by the Virtual Observatory and Skyalert.
Modern observational science is becoming very data intensive. Astronomy is on the lead-
ing edge of the data deluge that threatens to overwhelm our computing and storage capabilities.
Due to limitations of network bandwidth, data-intensive and time-critical processing is mov-
ing closer to data-generating instruments in the field, creating serious constraints on power
and physical footprint. There is a renewed interest in high-density storage media based on non-
volatile memory technologies such as Flash and phase-change memory. Computing industry is
developing radically new architectures designed around tightly integrated processing/storage
boards. While these solutions will provide the horse power necessary to handle the data at
observing sites, they create even more need for intelligent software that integrates a set of
telescopes, databases, and compute clusters into coherent systems for scientific exploration.
5
Science with Robotic and Survey Telescopes
Robotic telescopes found regular use in at least a dozen different types of projects. A breakup by
primary science of 152 projects is listed in >Table 2-4. The list has been compiled by Frederic
Hessman and is available online.7 General purpose remote observing and educational services
account for almost a third of robotic telescope usage. About a quarter of instruments on the
list are devoted to optical observations of cosmic explosions, mainly GRBs and supernovae.
Another large group is devoted to exoplanet searches and stellar variability surveys.
5.1 Cosmic Explosions
The launch of the Swift satellite in 2004 marks the beginning of a new era in gamma-ray burst
research. Follow-up observations with fast-slewing optical telescopes on the ground deliver
well-sampled multicolor light curves reaching into the critical first minutesof the explosion and
provide accurate localizations before the object is too faint to grant a spectrum. As a result, the
number of bursts with spectroscopic redshifts increased dramatically to nearly a hundred (Xiao
and Schaefer 2011). Autonomous robotic telescopes played an important role in discoveries of
7http://www.uni-sw.gwdg.de/~hessman/MONET/links.lst

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
91
⊡Table 2-4
Robotic telescopes of the world by project science
Primary purpose
# telescopes
Fraction (%)
Gamma-ray bursts
31
20.4
Service observations
26
17.1
Education
20
13.2
Exoplanet searches
18
11.8
Photometric monitoring
14
9.2
All-sky surveys
12
7.9
Supernovae search
10
6.6
Asteroids
8
5.3
Spectroscopy
4
2.6
Astrometry
4
2.6
AGN, Quasars
4
2.6
(Micro)lensing
1
0.7
prompt optical/IR emission simultaneous with gamma rays (Vestrand et al. 2005), color evolu-
tion of the early afterglow (Perley et al. 2008), and delayed explosive activity in GRBs (Wo´zniak
et al. 2006). GRB 080319B, the so-called naked-eye burst is the most luminous object known
to humanity. It was found automatically by the “Pi of the Sky” system and was also observed
by TORTORA and RAPTOR wide-field monitors. These modest instruments provided key
data on the event including deep limits on optical precursors and a high fidelity light curve
starting before the high-energy trigger (Racusin et al. 2008; Wo´zniak et al. 2009). Using polar-
ization detectors on robotic telescopes, we are beginning to probe the strength and topology
of magnetic fields responsible for the synchrotron emission in GRB afterglows. The Liverpool
Telescope made the first two detections and found a high degree of polarization at the level of
10% (Steele et al. 2009).
For many years, the world supply of supernova discoveries was dominated by galaxy-
targeted surveys with robotized instruments like KAIT. Automated nontargeted searches
acquired new momentum after the discovery of accelerating expansion of the universe and
dark energy. In 2010 alone, there were 538 supernova discoveries, most of them by automated
searches like Catalina Real-Time Transient Search and PalomarTransient Factory(Gal-Yam and
Mazzali 2011). There is a renewed interest in novae and the existence of events that populate the
luminosity gap between novae and supernovae (Kasliwal et al. 2011). An automated supernova
search with ROTSE-III telescopes turned up several anomalously bright supernovae that could
be powered by theoretically predicted pair instability (Quimby et al. 2011). More members of
this new class have been found by PTF. Learning about the diversity of cosmic explosions and
dark energy is one of the major drivers for large-scale synoptic surveys such as Pan-STARRS
and LSST.
5.2 Solar System Science
The current moving object searches are focused on detection of potentially hazardous asteroids
(PHAs) (Stokes et al. 2002). Over the past decade, the number of known near-Earth asteroids

92 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
increased tenfold to nearly 10,000, with ∼% characterized as large (1 km or larger). Objects
passing through the Earth-Moon system are now routinely found. The number of all moving
objects discovered by leading searches (LINEAR, Catalina, Spacewatch) is measured in hun-
dreds of thousands. Scientific benfits include a better characterization of asteroid populations
as tracers of the formation and dynamical history of the solar system, new studies of comets,
and identifying potential targets for flight projects (Bottke et al. 2002). The discovery volume
for objects below a few 100 m in size is very small. Guarding against these types of hazards will
require continuous searches. Robotictelescopes are a perfect match forthis work. Deepsynoptic
sky surveys discover moving objects serendipitously. LSST will build a comprehensive inven-
tory of the solar system including 80% of PHAs larger than 140 m, ∼20,000 trans-Neptunian
objects (TNOs) down to 100 km in diameter and millions of main-belt asteroids (MBAs)
(Jones et al. 2009).
5.3 Extrasolar Planets
Wide-field robotic telescopes of modest size are well suited for high-cadence photometric mon-
itoring of stellar fields in search of tiny dips in light due to transits of planets in front of their
parent stars. Such systems require special data processing pipelines performing sophisticated
detrending of systematic effects to supress the noise down to a few millimagnitudes. So far,
nearly 100 transiting planetary systems have been discovered with ground-based instruments of
this type, mostly WASP and HAT (The Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia8). Due to the eclipsing
geometry, the majority of planets found this way are hot jupiters on tight orbits with periods of
a few days. Unlike other exoplanet detection methods, the transit method reveals the size of the
planet. The disadvantage of this technique is low probability of transits in randomly oriented
systems and high rate of false positives due to low mass stellar companions and field crowd-
ing. High preponderance of hot jupiters so close to their parent stars is forcing the theorists to
rethink the models of planet formation and evolution (Mordasini et al. 2011).
Microlensing surveys found a few extrasolar planets around stars that gravitationally lensed
other stars in the background (Bennett 2008). The main advantage of this method is great sen-
sitivity to very small Earth-sized planets and potentially habitable systems. However, very low
intrinsic probability of microlensing and poor prospects for observing parent stars in most
events limit the usefulness of this method.
5.4 Variable Stars
Large homogeneous samples of high-quality light curves collected by modern CCD-based sur-
veys are a gold mine of information on stellar variability. One of the many by-products of
microlensing surveys (OGLE, MACHO, EROS) are extensive catalogs of variable stars in the
Magellanic Clouds and in the vicinity of the galactic bulge, reaching down to V ∼mag and
collectively listing over hundred thousand objects (e.g., Soszy´nski et al. 2011; Alcock et al. 2004).
Small robotic telescopes will soon provide a complete census of bright variables of major types
down to about 15th magnitude (> Fig. 2-25). ASAS alone released a database of 50,000 light
curves, tripling the number of known variable stars in this magnitude range (Pojmanski 2002).
8http://exoplanet.eu

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
93
ASAS # of frames (in gal. coord.)
ASAS Variable Stars
800+
700
600
500
400
# of frames
300
200
100
60°N
30°N
30°S
60°S
0°
60°N
30°N
30°S
60°S
0°
⊡Fig. 2-25
Statistics of the All-Sky Automated Survey (ASAS) in Galactic coordinates (as of early 2010): the
locations of ASAS variable stars, mostly brighter than V = 12.5 mag (bottom) can be compared to
the number of images available for a given line of sight (top). The total duration of the survey is
more than a decade
Many examples of rare objects are now available for analysis such as RR Lyrae and Cepheids
displaying odd combinations of pulsational modes (Poleski et al. 2010), Nova and dwarf Nova
eruptions (Pojma´nski 2009), or R Coronae Borealis stars that can suddenly disappear in a cloud
of dust produced in their atmospheres (Tisserand et al. 2011). Entirely new classes of variability
have been discovered, e.g., OSARGs (OGLE Small Amplitude Red Giants; Wray et al. 2004).
This wealth of new material on stellar pulsation and eclipsing systems has given us a better
understanding of the structure and evolution of both single stars and binaries. A good example
is the recent discovery of a classical Cepheid in a well-detached, double-lined eclipsing binary
that confirmed the agreement between the dynamical mass and the pulsation mass with 1%
accuracy, providing strong support for pulsation theory (Pietrzynski et al. 2010). New samples
of standard candles and detached binaries are enabling improvements to distance scale in the
Local Group.

94 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
6
Conclusions and Future Outlook
Sky surveys continue to play a central role in astronomy. The current trend toward automa-
tion and autonomous observing will likely accelerate over the next decade. The ultimate goal
is to provide a continuous record of the entire sky with ever increasing sensitivity. Arrays of
small robotic telescopes are progressively eliminating gaps of coverage that still exist for objects
as bright as 12–15 mag and are opening for exploration the domain of very short time scales,
from minutes down to video rates at 10–20 Hz. The availability of inexpensive detectors and
optical components is enabling a dynamic growth in this area. Rapid follow-up instruments
are evolving toward larger apertures and more sophisticated instrumentation that can deliver
high fidelity simultaneous multicolor imaging, spectroscopy, and polarization measurements.
While traditional target of opportunity programs will continue to play a vital role, in the follow-
ing years, we will witness a global proliferation of dedicated rapid follow-up networks of 2-m
class imagers and low-resolution spectrographs. Sky monitoring projects of the future must
integrate state-of-the-art information technology such as computer vision, machine learning,
and networking of the autonomous hardware and software components (Borne 2008). Emerg-
ing standards for communication (RTML, VOEvent, Skyalert) are gradually integrated into
working systems.
The next generation of wide-field surveys is positioned to revolutionize the study of astro-
physical transients by linking heterogeneous surveys with a wide array of follow-up instruments
and by rapid dissemination of transient alerts using a variety of mechanisms on the Inter-
net. The main challenges ahead of massive time-domain surveys are timely recognition of
interesting events in the torrent of imaging data and maximizing the utility of the follow-
up observations. Accurate event classification can be achieved by assimilating on the fly the
required context information from external catalogs and real-time alert feeds from other
instruments, both in space and on the ground: multicolor time-resolved photometry, galactic
latitude, host galaxy information, broad-band spectral properties from radio to high-energy
γ-rays, etc. But in order to apply this approach to extremely data-intensive projects of the
future, a fundamental change is required in the way astronomy interacts with information
technology. Major investments are required in the development of hierarchical, distributed
decision engines capable of understanding and refining information such as partially degener-
ate event classifications and time-sensitive constraints on follow-up assets. The need to delegate
increasingly complex tasks to machines is stimulating concentrated efforts on a number of
fronts:
•
Fault-tolerant system architectures and network topologies that maximize the usability
•
Better classification and anomaly detection algorithms for time-variable astronomical
objects
•
Improved standards for real-time communication between heterogeneous hardware and
software agents
•
Logical and physical spatiotemporal database design with support for data fusion
•
New ways of evaluating and reporting the most important science alerts to humans
Experience shows that a major leap in capability of telescopes sooner or later leads to exciting
and totally unanticipated results. As far as we can tell, technology development will maintain
its dazzling pace for some time. Robotic and survey telescopes are certainly at the forefront of
discovery today and will remain there in the foreseeable future.

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
95
References
Akerlof, C., et al. 1999, Nature, 398, 400
Akerlof, C. W., et al. 2003, PASP, 115, 132
Alcock, C., et al. 2004, AJ, 127, 334
Allan, A., Bloom, J. S., & Seaman, R. 2006a, Astron
Nachr, 327, 741
Allan, A., Naylor, T., & Saunders, E. S. 2006b, Astron
Nachr, 327, 767
Allan, A., et al. 2006c, in Presented at the Soci-
ety of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation
Engi-
neers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 6274
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Bakos, G. Á., Lázár, J., Papp, I., Sári, P., & Green, E. M.
2002, PASP, 114, 974
Bakos, G., et al. 2009, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 253,
IAU Symposium (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press), 354–357
Barthelmy, S. 2008, Astron Nachr, 329, 340
Bennett, D. P. 2008, Detection of Extrasolar Plan-
ets by Gravitational Microlensing, ed. J. Mason,
(Berlin: Springer), 47–88
Beskin, G., et al. 2010, Adv Astron, 2010, Article ID
171569
Bloom, J. S., Starr, D. L., Blake, C. H., Skrutskie, M. F.,
& Falco, E. E. 2006, in ASP Conf. Ser. 351, Astro-
nomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XV,
ed. C. Gabriel, C. Arviset, D. Ponz, & S. Enrique
(San Francisco, CA: ASP), 751
Bloom, J. S., et al. 2009, ArXiv e-print 0905.1965
Borne, K. D. 2008, Astron Nachr, 329, 255
Bottke, W. F., Jr, Cellino, A., Paolicchi, P., & Binzel,
R. P. 2002, in Asteroids III, ed. W. F. Bottke,
A. Cellino, P. Paolicchi, & R. Binzel (Tucson:
University of Arizona press), 3
Bowman, M. K., Ford, M. J., Lett, R. D. J., McKay, D. J.,
Mücke-Herzberg, D., & Norbury, M. A. 2002, in
Presented at the Society of Photo-Optical Instru-
mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE
Conf. Ser. 4848, ed. H. Lewis (Bellingham, WA:
SPIE), 137–147
Carusi, A., Gehrels,
T., Helin, E. F., Marsden,
B. G., Russell, K. S., Shoemaker, C. S., Shoe-
maker, E. M., & Steel, D. I. 1994, in Hazards
Due to Comets and Asteroids, ed. T. Gehrels,
M. S. Matthews, & A. M. Schumann (Tucson:
University of Arizona press), 127
Castro-Tirado, A. J. 2010, Adv Astron, 2010, Article
ID 824731
Christian, D. J., et al. 2006, Astron Nachr, 327, 800
Dalton, G. B., et al. 2006, in Presented at the
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engi-
neers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 6269
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Djorgovski, S. G., et al. 2008, Astron Nachr, 329, 263
Eisenstein, D. J., et al. 2011, AJ, 142, 72
Emerson, J. P., & Sutherland, W. J. 2010, in Presented
at the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser.
7733 (Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Filippenko, A. V., Li, W. D., Treffers, R. R., & Modjaz,
M. 2001, in ASP Conf. Ser. 246, IAU Colloq. 183:
Small Telescope Astronomy on Global Scales,
ed. B. Paczynski, W.-P. Chen, & C. Lemme (San
Francisco, CA: ASP), 121
Fukugita, M., Ichikawa, T., Gunn, J. E., Doi, M.,
Shimasaku, K., & Schneider, D. P. 1996, AJ, 111,
1748
Gal-Yam, A., & Mazzali, P. 2011, ArXiv e-print
1103.5165
Gehrels, T. 1991, Space Sci Rev, 58, 347
Gilmore, K., et al. 2008, in Presented at the Soci-
ety of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation
Engi-
neers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 7014
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Greiner, J., et al. 2008, PASP, 120, 405
Guidorzi, C., et al. 2006, PASP, 118, 288
Gunn, J. E., et al. 1998, AJ, 116, 3040
Gunn, J. E., et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 2332
Hearnshaw, J. B., et al. 2006, in The 9th Asian-
Pacific Regional IAU Meeting, ed. W. Sutan-
tyo, P. W. Premadi, P. Mahasena, T. Hidayat,
& S. Mineshige (Bandung, Indonesia: Depart-
ment of Astronomy and the Bosscha Observa-
tory, Institut Teknologi Bandung Press), 272
Hessman, F. V. 2006a, Astron Nachr, 327, 763
Hessman, F. V. 2006b, Astron Nachr, 327, 751
Hessman, F. V., Tuparev, G., & Allan, A. 2006, in
Presented at the Society of Photo-Optical Instru-
mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE
Conf. Ser. 6270 (Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Hidas, M. G., Hawkins, E., Walker, Z., Brown, T. M.,
& Rosing, W. E. 2008, Astron Nachr, 329, 269
Hill, G. J., MacQueen, P. J., Palunas, P., Barnes, S. I.,
& Shetrone, M. D. 2008, in Presented at the
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engi-
neers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 7014
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Hodapp, K. W., et al. 2004, Astron Nachr, 325, 636
Ivezic, Z., Tyson, J. A., Allsman, R., Andrew, J., Angel,
R., & for the LSST Collaboration. 2008, ArXiv
e-print 0805.2366
Jones, R. L., et al. 2009, Earth Moon and Planets, 105,
101
Kaiser, N., et al. 2010, in Presented at the Soci-
ety of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation
Engi-
neers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 7733
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE)

96 2
Robotic and Survey Telescopes
Kasliwal, M. M., Cenko, S. B., Kulkarni, S. R., Ofek,
E. O., Quimby, R., & Rau, A. 2011, ApJ, 735, 94
Klotz, A. 2010, Adv Astron, 2010, Article ID 496765
Kubanek, P. 2010a, ArXiv e-print 1002.0108
Kubanek, P. 2010b, Adv Astron, Article ID 902484
Larson, S., Spahr, T., Brownlee, J., Hergenrother, C.,
& McNaught, R. 1999, in Advanced Maui Optical
and Space Surveillance Technologies Conference
(Maui, Hawaii: The Maui Economic Develop-
ment Board), 182–186
Law, N. M., et al. 2009, PASP, 121, 1395
Lewis, I. J., et al. 2002, MNRAS, 333, 279
Lipunov, V., et al. 2010, Adv Astron, 2010, Article ID
349171
LSST Science Collaborations et al. 2009, ArXiv
e-print 0912.0201
Mahabal, A., et al. 2008a, Astron Nachr, 329, 288
Mahabal, A., et al. 2008b, in Am. Inst. of Phys. Conf.
Ser. 1082, American Institute of Physics Confer-
ence Series, ed. C. A. L. Bailer-Jones (New York:
American Institute of Physics), 287–293
Malek, K., et al. 2010, Adv Astron, Article ID 194946
Molinari, E., et al. 2010, Adv Astron, 2010, Article ID
253675
Mordasini,
C., Alibert, Y., Klahr,
H., & Benz,
W. 2011, in EPJ Web of Conf. 11, Detec-
tion and Dynamics of Transiting Exoplanets,
St. Michel l’Observatoire, ed. F. Bouchy, R. Díaz,
& C. Moutou (Paris: EDP Sciences), id.04001, 11,
4001
Naylor, T., Allan, A., & Steele, I. A. 2006, Astron
Nachr, 327, 741
Onaka, P., Tonry, J. L., Isani, S., Lee, A., Uyeshiro,
R., Rae, C., Robertson, L., & Ching, G. 2008, in
Presented at the Society of Photo-Optical Instru-
mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE
Conf. Ser. 7014 (Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Paczy´nski, B. 2000, PASP, 112, 1281
Paczy´nski, B. 2001, in Mining the Sky, ed. A. J. Ban-
day, S. Zaroubi, & M. Bartelmann
(Berlin:
Springer), 481
Pérez-Ramírez, D., Nemiroff, R. J., & Rafert, J. B.
2004, Astron Nachr, 325, 568
Perley, D. A., et al. 2008, ApJ, 672, 449
Pietrzynski,
G.,
Thompson,
I.
B.,
Gieren,
W.,
Graczyk,
D., Udalski,
G. B. A., Soszynski,
I., Minniti, D., & Pilecki, B. 2010, Nature,
468, 542
Plokhotnichenko, V., Beskin, G., Karpov, S., Bondar,
S., de-Boer, V., Lioubetski, A., & Badjin, D. 2010,
Adv Astron, Article ID 109681
Pojmanski, G. 1997, AcA, 47, 467
Pojmanski, G. 2002, AcA, 52, 397
Pojma´nski, G. 2009, in ASP Conf. Ser. 403, The Vari-
able Universe: A Celebration of Bohdan Paczyn-
ski, ed. K. Z. Stanek (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 52
Poleski, R., Soszyñski, I., Udalski, A., Szymañski,
M. K., Kubiak, M., Pietrzyñski, G., Wyrzykowski,
Ł., & Ulaczyk, K. 2010, AcA, 60, 179
Pollacco, D. L., et al. 2006, PASP, 118, 1407
Quimby, R., et al. 2011, Nature, 474, 487
Racusin, J. L., et al. 2008, Nature, 455, 183
Richmond, M., Treffers, R. R., & Filippenko, A. V.
1993, PASP, 105, 1164
Seppala, L. G. 2002, in Presented at the Society
of
Photo-Optical
Instrumentation
Engineers
(SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 4836, ed.
J. A. Tyson & S. Wolff (Bellingham, WA: SPIE),
111–118
Skrutskie, M. F., et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 1163
Smith, R. J., Clay, N. R., Fraser, S. N., Marchant, J. M.,
Moss, C. M., & Steele, I. A. 2010, in Presented
at the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser.
7737 (Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Soszy´nski, I., et al. 2011, AcA, 61, 1
Steele, I. A., et al. 2004, in Presented at the Soci-
ety of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 5489, ed.
J. M. Oschmann Jr. (Bellingham, WA: SPIE),
679–692
Steele,
I.
A.,
Mundell,
C.
G.,
Smith,
R.
J.,
Kobayashi, S., & Guidorzi, C. 2009, Nature,
462, 767
Steele, I. A., Bates, S. D., Guidorzi, C., Mottram, C. J.,
Mundell, C. G., & Smith, R. J. 2010, in Presented
at the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser.
7735 (Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Steinmetz, M. 2003, in ASP Conf. Ser. 298, GAIA
Spectroscopy:
Science
and
Technology,
ed.
U. Munari (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 381
Stokes, G. H., Evans, J. B., Viggh, H. E. M., Shelly,
F. C., & Pearce, E. C. 2000, ıcarus, 148, 21
Stokes, G. H., Evans, J. B., & Larson, S. M. 2002,
in Asteroids III, ed. W. F. Bottke, A. Cellino, P.
Paolicchi, & R. P. Binzel (Tucson: University of
Arizona Press), 45
Strassmeier, K. G., et al. 2010, Adv Astron, Article ID
109681
Stubbs, C. W. 2008, Class Quantum Gravity, 25,
184033
Stull, C., Taylor, S. G., Wren, J., Mascareñus, D. L., &
Farrar, C. 2011, ASCE J Struct Eng, 137
Sumi, T. 2010, in ASP Conf. Ser. 430, Pathways
Towards Habitable Planets, ed. V. Coudé Du
Foresto, D. M. Gelino, & I. Ribas (San Francisco,
CA: ASP), 225
Tisserand, P., et al. 2011, A&A, 529, A118+
Tonry, J. L., Burke, B. E., Isani, S., Onaka, P. M.,
& Cooper, M. J. 2008, in Presented at the
Society
of
Photo-Optical
Instrumentation

Robotic and Survey Telescopes 2
97
Engineers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser.
7021 (Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Tsapras, Y., et al. 2009, Astron Nachr, 330, 4
Udalski, A. 2003, AcA, 53, 291
Udalski, A., Kubiak, M., & Szymanski, M. 1997, AcA,
47, 319
Vestrand, W. T., Theiler, J., & Woznia, P. R. 2004a,
Astron Nachr, 325, 477
Vestrand, W. T., et al. 2004b, in Am. Inst. of Phys.
Conf. Ser. 727, Gamma-Ray Bursts: 30 Years
of Discovery, ed. E. Fenimore & M. Galassi
(Melville, NY: American Institute of Physics),
728–732
Vestrand, W. T., et al. 2005, Nature, 435, 178
Vestrand, T., et al. 2008, in Advanced Maui Optical
and Space Surveillance Technologies Confer-
ence,
ed.
S.
Ryan
(Kihei:
Maui
Economic
Development Board)
White, R. R., Wren, J., Davis, H. R., Galassi, M.,
Starr, D., Vestrand, W. T., & Wozniak, P. 2004,
in Presented at the Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference,
SPIE Conf. Ser. 5496, ed. H. Lewis & G. Raffi
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE), 302–312
White, R. R., Allan, A., Evans, S., Vestrand, W. T.,
Wren, J., & Wozniak, P. 2006, in Presented at the
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engi-
neers (SPIE) Conference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 6274
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE)
Williams, R. D., Djorgovski, S. G., Drake, A. J., Gra-
ham, M. J., & Mahabal, A. 2009, in ASP Conf. Ser.
411, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and
Systems XVIII, ed. D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand,
& P. Dowler (San Francisco, CA: Astronomical
Society of the Pacific), 115
Wo´zniak, P. R., Vestrand, W. T., Panaitescu, A. D.,
Wren, J. A., Davis, H. R., & White, R. R. 2009,
ApJ, 691, 495
Wo´zniak, P. R., Vestrand, W. T., Wren, J. A., White,
R. R., Evans, S. M., & Casperson, D. 2006, ApJL,
642, L99
Wray, J. J., Eyer, L., & Paczy´nski, B. 2004, MNRAS,
349, 1059
Wren, J., Vestrand, W. T., Wozniak, P., & Davis,
H. 2010, in Presented at the Society of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE ) Con-
ference, SPIE Conf. Ser. 7737 (Bellingham, WA:
SPIE)
Xiao, L., & Schaefer, B. E. 2011, ApJ, 731, 103
York, D. G., et al. 2000, AJ, 120, 1579


3
Segmented Mirror
Telescopes
Jerry Nelson⋅Terry Mast⋅Gary Chanan
UC Observatories/Lick Observatory, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
2
History of Segmented-Mirror Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
3
Segmentation Geometries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
4
Segment Surface Asphericity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5
Segment Polishing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6
Segment Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
7
Diffraction Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
8
Infrared Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
9
Active Control System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
9.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
9.2
Actuators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
9.3
Edge Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
9.4
Construction of the Active Control Matrix for Keck-Type Sensors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
9.5
Construction of the Active Control Matrix for Vertical Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
9.5.1
Singular Value Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
9.5.2
Error Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
9.5.3
Surface Errors from SVD (for Diffraction-Limited Observing) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
9.5.4
Tip-Tilt Errors from SVD (for Seeing-Limited Observing) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
9.6
Focus Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
10
Optical Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
10.1
Tip-Tilt Alignment of Segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
10.2
Phasing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
10.2.1 Shack-Hartmann Phasing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
10.2.2 Other Phasing Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
10.3
Warping Harnesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
10.4
Alignment of the Secondary Mirror . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_3, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

100 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
11
Other Segmented-Mirror Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
11.1
Gran Telescopio Canarias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
11.2
Hobby-Eberly Telescope and Southern African Large Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
11.3
Large Area Multi-Object Spectrographic Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
11.4
James Webb Space Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
12
Giant Segmented-Mirror Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
12.1
GMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
12.2
TMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
12.3
E-ELT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
101
Abstract:
Constructing the primary mirror of a telescope out of segments, rather than from
a monolithic piece of glass, can drastically reduce the mass of the mirror and its material costs,
thereby making possible the construction of optical/infrared telescopes with very large diame-
ters. However, segmentation also introduces a host of complications, involving the fabrication
of off-axis optics, novel diffraction effects, active segment control systems, in situ aberration
correction, and the optical alignment of large numbers of degrees of freedom. Progress in
these latter areas over the last 25 years has led to the successful development of the two Keck
telescopes, as well as several other segmented telescopes in the 10-m class. Giant segmented
telescopes of similar design, but with mirror diameters of 30–40 m, are now in the planning
stages, with first light expected around the end of the decade. Segmentation has also made pos-
sible the 6.5-m James Webb Space Telescope, which is currently under construction. In this
work, the technical issues associated with segmentation are discussed and reviewed in detail.
Particular attention is paid to the properties of arrays of hexagonal segments (the segmentation
pattern of choice for these telescopes), including their diffraction patterns and algorithms for
their active control. Optical alignment issues are also discussed.
1
Introduction
The motivation for building larger ground-based telescopes has been clear for a very long time:
for a telescope of fixed (seeing-limited) resolution, the observing time necessary to reach a given
signal-to-noise ratio varies as /D, where D is the diameter of the primary mirror. However,
with the developmentof adaptive optics (AO), the motivation for building everlarger telescopes
is even more powerful. In the first place, with AO, the resolution is no longer set by the atmo-
sphere, independent of the telescope diameter, but rather is given by the diffraction limit λ/D,
where λ is the wavelength, so that the angular information content now increases dramatically
as the telescope gets larger. In addition, at least for background-limited adaptive optics obser-
vations, the benefit of a large telescope grows as D, not D; not only is there the collecting area
advantage, according to which the signal grows as D, but there is less background “behind”
the image, so that the noise is reduced by this same factor.
Building a giant telescope from a single monolithic mirror presents many difficulties.
These difficulties typically grow rapidly with increasing mirror size and make building mono-
lithic mirrors with diameters of 10 m or more highly impractical. The key issues, briefly
stated, are:
•
Mirror blank material is expensive and availability may be limited.
•
The financial risk associated with breakage increases rapidly with the mirror diameter.
The probability of breakage may also increase.
•
Passive support of the mirror will result in large optical deflections.
•
Larger mirrors are subject to larger deformations and hence large optical aberrations from
thermal changes.
•
The vacuum chamber for mirror coatings becomes very large and expensive.
•
Tool costs for all parts (fabrication and handling) are large.
•
Shipping a very large mirror to the observatory site may be impractical.
An obvious solution to these and other problems is to construct the primary mirror from
smaller segments, rather than building a single large mirror. Consider problems related to the

102 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
mass or thickness of the mirror. The gravitational deflection suffered by an optic increases as D.
This means that a monolith must have N times the thickness of a segmented mirror consisting
of N equal segments covering the same area. Thus, the 36 segments of each Keck telescope are
7.5 cm thick; an equivalent monolith would be 2.7 m thick! Although many important problems
are greatly reduced by building the primary from small segments, there are a number of issues,
concerns, and problems that arise with segmentation, and these must be understood and dealt
with before one can confidently proceed with building a large telescope having a segmented
primary.
The various issues and complications associated with segments can generally be grouped
into four categories:
•
Because of the large number of segments (36–91 in the current segmented telescopes,
500–1,000 in the extremely large telescopes of the future), the telescope will have a large
increase in the number of parts and a proportional increase in complexity.
•
Segments are difficult to polish because they are off-axis sections of the parent figure of
revolution and are therefore not locally axisymmetric.
•
Segments require both active position control and optical alignment. Here and throughout
this review, these concepts are distinguished as follows. Optical alignment places the mir-
ror segments in the proper relative positions with respect to one another to within optical
tolerances; active position control keeps these relative positions fixed (i.e., it “freezes” the
mirror).
•
Segment edges and the associated intersegment gaps add to both diffraction and thermal
background effects.
The first item, increased complexity, is a general one and is only addressed in a general
way in this review. To some extent, the increase in complexity is offset by the advantage, not
shared by monolithic systems, that small prototype subsystems, consisting, for example, of a
few (full-sized) segments, together with their mechanical supports and associated control elec-
tronics, can be built relatively cheaply and used for thorough testing and optimization. In this
way, one can engineer components that are highly reliable, so that the probability of failure of
critical components can be kept relatively low.
The complexity problem can be further mitigated by providing sufficient spares and by
designing the system so that one is able to replace defective components quickly and easily,
especially in those cases where the failure of even a single component of a given type (e.g., a
segment position actuator) would have serious consequences. It may also be possible to design
some aspects of the system so that the failure of a few components of a given type will have
little or no effect on the performance of the overall system. Thus, the active control systems of
the Keck telescopes are sufficiently robust that the failure of several edge sensors can be tol-
erated (as long as they can be identified and removed from the control loop). Indeed, neither
Keck telescope has ever operated with its full complement of 168 edge sensors all working at
the same time. Note that for extremely large telescopes even the temporary loss of an actuator
may have little impact on many kinds of science.
The last three items in the above list are specific issues that are discussed in some detail
below. A brief history of segmented-mirror telescopes is presented in >Sect. 2. General seg-
mentation issues are discussed in > Sect. 3, followed by segment asphericity in > Sect. 4,
segment polishing in > Sect. 5, and segment support in > Sect. 6. Diffraction and thermal
effects are treated in > Sects. 7 and >8, respectively. Active control of segments is discussed
in > Sect. 9 and optical alignment in > Sect. 10. Little or no time is spent on those aspects
of large (or extremely large) telescopes that are not specifically related to segmentation – for

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
103
example, telescope drives or dome shutters. However, it is worth noting that adapting the con-
ventional designs of such items to the scale of a 10-m telescope (or larger) can often be a
nontrivial problem in itself.
The technical issues listed in the previous paragraph are discussed below in the specific
context of the Keck telescopes but with an indication as to how these may be generalized,
as, for example, in the discussion of control matrices; alternative approaches to such topics
as segment phasing are also described. The review concludes with descriptions of the other
segmented-mirrortelescopescurrently in operation in >Sect. 11, as well as those that are under
development in >Sect. 12.
2
History of Segmented-Mirror Telescopes
The first recorded use of segmented optics appears to have been by Archimedes, who in 212 BC
used an array of mirrors to focus the sun’s rays on the ships of the attacking Roman navy in
order to defend Syracuse (although claims that the ships burst into flames as a result may have
been exaggerated (Papadogiannis et al. 2009)). More recently, Horn d’Arturo in Italy made a
1.5-m mirror out of 61 hexagonal segments in 1932. However, it was only used vertically and
was not actively controlled (Horn D’Arturo 1955). In the 1970s, Pierre Connes in France made
a 4.6-m segmented-mirror telescope for infrared astronomy (Chevillard et al. 1977). It was fully
steerable and actively controlled, but there were problems with image quality, and the telescope
was never put into operation.
A variation on the theme of a segmented-mirror telescope was the Multiple Mirror Tele-
scope (MMT) (Beckers et al. 1982); it consisted of six 1.8-m telescopesin a common mount. The
MMT was not a true segmented-mirror telescope and no longer exists in its original multiple
mirror configuration, but its advantages and disadvantages compared to a true segmented-
mirror telescope are nevertheless worthy of some discussion (see >Sect. 3).
The Keck Observatory began as a conceptual design study for a 10-m segmented-mirror
telescope (Nelson et al. 1985) in the late 1970s. This project was formally begun in 1984, and
full science operations began in 1993. The telescope was quite successful, and as a result, funds
were acquired to build a second Keck telescope, 75 m from the first. The close proximity was
designed to allow the two Keck telescopes to be used for interferometry as well as for individual
telescope observing. Keck 2 was completed in 1996 and began science observations in that year.
Each of the telescopes has its own suite of scientific instruments and an adaptive optics system.
Interferometric science observations began in 2003. The success of the Keck telescopes led to a
Spanish project, the Gran Telescopio Canarias, (GTC) (Rodriguez Espinosa et al. 1999), a 10-m
telescope similar to Keck on La Palma in the Canary Islands (see >Sect. 11.1).
The Keck telescopes have hyperbolic primary mirrors and this leads to the requirement of
polishing off-axis mirror segments. However, this is not the only possible approach to segmen-
tation. Telescopes with spherical primaries can also be designed; these have identical, although
not identically spaced, segments, and must contend with a large amount of spherical aberration.
A telescope of this latter design, the Hobby-Eberly Telescope, was completed in the late 1990s at
the McDonald Observatory in Texas (Barnes et al. 2000). The HET has 91 spherically polished
primary mirror segments and is effectively a 9-m telescope. A telescope of very similar design,
the Southern African Large Telescope (SALT) (Buckley et al. 2004) saw first light in 2005. The
HET and SALT are described in further detail in >Sect. 11.2.
Segmented-mirror telescopes as large as 50–100 m have been proposed (Andersen et al.
2004; Dierickx et al. 2002), but the two largest such telescopes currently well into the design

104 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
stage are the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) (Nelson and Sanders 2006), a collaboration of the
United States, Canada, and several international partners, and the 42 m European Extremely
Large Telescope (E-ELT) (Gilmozzi and Spyromilio 2008), a project of the European South-
ern Observatory. The Giant Magellan Telescope (circumscribed diameter 24.5 m), although of
markedly different design than the other telescopes described in this review, is nevertheless con-
sidered a giant segmented-mirror telescope and is discussed briefly in >Sect. 12.1. The TMT
and E-ELT are described further in > Sects. 12.2 and >12.3.
3
Segmentation Geometries
There are many ways one can imagine dividing up a primary mirror into smaller optical
elements, including:
•
Independent telescope arrays
•
Independent telescopes on a common mount
•
Random subapertures as part of a common primary
•
Annular segmentation of a common primary
•
Hexagonal segmentation of a common primary
Independent arrays of telescopes have been considered for decades but have generally not
been successful, except for radio telescopes, which are aided by the fact that the individual
telescope signals can be amplified and combined while preserving phase information. This is
not practical in the optical; thus, there are significant inefficiencies associated with coherently
combining the light from an array of optical telescopes. Instrumentation for an array of tele-
scopes has also been a cause of difficulty. Perhaps the best known successful array has been the
VLT with four 8-m telescopes, each with its own suite of science instruments, and the capac-
ity to combine all telescopes together for interferometric measurements. (The VLT can also be
operated as four individual telescopes.)
An alternative to a segmentedprimary is to put a modest number of independenttelescopes
into a common mount. The Multiple Mirror Telescope (MMT) (Beckers et al. 1982), consisting
of six 1.8-m telescopes, including six separate secondaries, configured in this way (equivalent
to a 4.5-m aperture), operated on Mount Hopkins in Arizona, from 1979 to 1998. Although the
multiple mirror approach can result in large, well-corrected fields of view, it has many disadvan-
tages compared to a true segmented-mirror telescope. These include the less compact design,
which necessitates a larger dome and slit, the difficulty of phasing noncontiguous mirrors, the
need for an expensive and complicated beam combiner to bring the light to a common focus,
and a generally more complicated diffraction pattern from the sparse aperture. The original
six-mirror MMT is no longer in use, having been replaced by a single 6.5-m mirror of honey-
comb design (West et al. 1997) in 2000. The proposed Giant Magellan Telescope (Johns 2008)
resembles the original MMT in that it has seven circular primary mirror “segments,” each 8 m
in diameter, (it includes an on-axis mirror, which the original MMT did not have), but it will
have a single secondary so that a beam combiner is not needed.
Special application telescopes have been built with very sparse arrays in order to sample
the resolution space with the minimum number of mirrors. Systems like this may give greater
angular resolution (longer baseline) but have less sensitivity due to the smaller collecting area.
Dense segmentation is generally favored when one is attempting functional replication of the
optical properties of a single monolithic mirror. These kinds of mirrors have the best central

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
105
concentration of light, leading to the smallest instruments and best signal-to-noise ratio, and,
for a given collecting area, are generally the most compact and thus the least expensive.
Dense segmentation can be achieved with radial petals (Burgarella et al. 2002), annular
patterns, hexagonal patterns, and many others. A regular pattern can only be made of regu-
lar polygons (e.g., hexagons) if the mirror is flat, since a curved surface can only be tessellated
with nonregular polygons. However, the segments may appear regular when seen in projec-
tion. Each of these patterns has its advantages and disadvantages, specific to the fabrication
techniques planned. For example, annular rings in general have large numbers of identical seg-
ments, so that replication techniques may be utilized and the number of necessary spares is
reduced. Hexagons make the best use of the material typically produced in round boules of
glass and are easier to polish because the corners are less severe than are four-sided polygons.
In general, for a telescope with N hexagonal segments, there are N/different segment
shapes. Having six segments of each shape has not been enough to motivate the use of repli-
cation techniques, but at least the number of required spares is reduced by a significant factor.
Hexagonal segments also tend to be easier to support against gravity and to attach to position
actuators (three per segment) because of their symmetry. Overall, the advantages of hexago-
nal segments have made this the segmentation pattern of choice for most of the current and
planned segmented-mirror telescopes.
Hexagonal segments are naturally arrayed in rings. The Keck telescopes consist of three
rings with a total of 36 segments; the central segment, which would be blocked by the secondary
mirror, is omitted. For a telescopeof n rings, with the central segment omitted, the total number
of segments is
Nseg = n+ n
(3.1)
and the total number of intersegment edges is
Nedge = n+ n −
(3.2)
There are three actuators per segment and two sensors per intersegment edge. As the num-
ber of segments becomes large, the number of sensors approaches six per segment (two per
actuator), since the 12 sensors around a segment are shared with its nearest neighbors. Edge
effects, larger for smaller values of n, reduce this ratio somewhat. (Note that, with the central
segment missing, a single ring of six segments (n = ) would have fewer sensors (12) than actu-
ators (18) and thus would not provide a stable configuration for testing a partially completed
telescope. However, two rings (72 sensors and 54 actuators) is a stable configuration.) For the
extremely large telescopes of the future, with very large numbers of segments, it is advanta-
geous to omit some segments in the outer rings in order to produce a more nearly circular
primary.
A significant issue in the segmentation of a telescope mirror is the determination of the
optimal segment size. This involves a complicated trade-off: smaller segments are easier and
less expensive to fabricate and to support, but there need to be more of them, so alignment and
control becomes more difficult. The Keck design study chose a segment side length of 0.9 m, so
that 36 segments were required to fill the 10-m aperture; the thickness was 75mm. In retrospect,
for these parameters, the control and alignment of the segments was in some sense easier than
the fabrication. As a result, the giant segmented telescopes of the future will have somewhat
smaller segments, with a hexagon side length of about 0.7 m.

106 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
4
Segment Surface Asphericity
Two-mirror telescopes are the most common optical design for ground-based telescopes.
These systems require a parabolic or hyperbolic primary mirror. As mentioned above, it is
possible to build a segmented-mirror telescope with a primary mirror that is spherical so that
the segments are easier to fabricate; however, several additional mirrors are then needed to
correct the resultant spherical aberration, and the associated light loss and additional align-
ment complexity make this configuration less commonly used. In this review, it is assumed that
a nonspherical primary is desired and the resulting requirements on the segment figures are
discussed.
The primary mirror is typically a figure of revolution, but since it is not spherical, pieces
of the primary will not look identical and will not be figures of revolution about their local
centers. This basic fact introduces significant complexity for segmented mirrors. The polishing
of off-axis segments, which are not figures of revolution, is generally much more difficult than
the polishing of spheres. Second, off-axis optics must be carefully aligned in all six rigid body
degrees of freedom, and the larger the segmentasphericity (deviation from a sphere), the tighter
the alignment tolerances become.
This section describes in mathematical detail the surfaces of these segments. The general
equation of a conic can be written as
r−kx + (+ K)z= 
(3.3)
where r is the (global) radial coordinate, k is the radius of curvature, and K is the conic constant.
It is useful to expand this in powers of r as
z(r) = r
k + (K + ) r
k+ (K + )r
k+ (K + )r
k+ ⋯
(3.4)
Expressed in the local segment coordinate system, the symmetry of the equation seen in the
global coordinate system is lost, and one will see azimuthal variations. It is useful to express the
equation for the segment surface in its local coordinate system:
z(ρ, θ) = ∑
n,m
αnmρn cos mθ + ∑
n,m
βnmρn sin mθ
(3.5)
where ρ, θ are the local coordinate system polar coordinates. A suitable rotation of the local
coordinate system will cause the βnm to vanish, and analyticity requires that n, m ≥, n ≥m,
and n −m must be divisible by 2. The expansion has been made (Nelson and Temple-Raston
1982) and yields for the expansion coefficients αmn:
α= a
k [
−Kє
(−Kє)/]
(3.6)
α= a
k [
Kє
(−Kє)/]
(3.7)
α= a
k[ Kє[−(K + )є]/(−Kє)
(−Kє)
]
(3.8)
α= a
k[ Kє[−(K + )є]/
(−Kє)
]
(3.9)
α= a
k[(+ K) −Kє+ K(−K)є−K(−K)є
(−Kє)/
]
(3.10)

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
107
⊡Table 3-1
Expansion coeﬃcients for Keck outermost segment shapes
Coeﬃcient
Value (μm )
Name
α20
11,376
Focus
α22
−101.1
Astigmatism
α31
−38.1
Coma
α33
0.17
Trefoil
α40
0.09
Spherical aberration
where a is the segment radius, є = R/k, and R is the off-axis distance of the segment center. It
is useful to expand each of the above equations as a power series in є:
α= a
k + Kaє
k
+ Kaє
k
+ ⋯
(3.11)
α= Kaє
k
+ Kaє
k
+ ⋯
(3.12)
α= Kaє
k+ (K −)Kaє
k
+ ⋯
(3.13)
α= Kaє
k
+ ⋯
(3.14)
α= (+ K)a
k
+ ⋯
(3.15)
As an explicit example consider the outermost segment (R = 4.68 m) for the Keck telescopes,
which has a = 0.9 m, k = 35 m, K = −., and D = 10.95 m. The segment figures are given
in terms of the expansion coefficients in >Table 3-1. Note that the expansion here is in terms
of the functions ρm cos nθ. These are not the same as Zernike polynomials, but for the lowest
orders, they differ only in terms of normalization and in meaningless piston, tip, and tilt (and in
defocus for α). (They are therefore referred to by the same names.) The former functions are
used here for simplicity, for continuity with the literature, and because it is convenient in the
present context that the coefficients αnm give the maximum deviation of the surface directly.
Elsewhere in this review, aberrations (as opposed to nominal surface shapes) are expressed in
terms of Zernike polynomials. For the latter, the numbering and normalization conventions of
Noll (1976) are followed. In the latter convention, the Zernike coefficient gives the rms over the
circumscribed circular surface, not the maximum deviation.
The focus term simply represents the nominally spherical surface. The higher terms quantify
the departures from sphericity. As the size of the segments is reduced (for a fixed overall primary
mirror area), the higher order terms quickly become smaller, making the segments easier to
polish, but more difficult to control, since there are more of them. For the 1.8-m-diameter Keck
segments, inspection of >Table 3-1 shows that both the astigmatism and coma terms are quite
large compared to the ∼0.5 μm wavelength of visible light and must therefore be polished out
correctly to a fraction of a percent of their nominal values. This represents a unique challenge
for segmented optics and requires special polishing techniques.

108 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
5
Segment Polishing
There are two major areas of concern in polishing segments. The first is the challenge of pol-
ishing aspheres. The second is the issue of polishing the surface properly all the way out to the
edge of the segment.
Polishing aspheres is difficult because polishing only works well when the polishing tool fits
the glass surface to within typical distances of order 1 μm. Polishing tools move in a random
motion to produce the desired smoothness, which means that the tool must be spherical in
shape, and thus the contact area is limited by the asphericity. There are three main approaches
to polishing. The first, the one used for the Keck segments, is stressed mirror polishing (Lubliner
and Nelson 1980; Nelson et al. 1980) where the mirror is deformed so that the desired shape
is mapped into a sphere. Large tools can then be used to polish a spherical surface, which will
relax into the desired shape when the stresses are released. The second approach, stressed lap
polishing, is to deform the tool dynamically so that it always fits the mirror as it moves around
the surface. The third method is to use suitably small tools so that the tool fit is adequate and
make raster scans of the mirror with this small tool.
In addition to these approaches, there are two methods currently in use that do not require
a good fit between the tool and the part. These are ion beam figuring and magnetic rheological
figuring (MRF). In ion beam figuring, a beam of argon or another rare gas ion is used to remove
material from the optical surface, analogous to sandblasting, but at the atomiclevel (Braunecker
et al. 2008). The technique has the advantages of being noncontact, non-iterative, and quite
accurate, but it must be done in a vacuum chamber, and the rate of material removal is relatively
slow. Ion figuring was used as the final production step in making the Keck segments. The MRF
technique exploits the fact that a magneto-rheological fluid greatly increases its viscosity in the
presence of a magnetic field, so that its ability to transmit a force can be accurately controlled
and rapidly adjusted. Like ion beam figuring, MRF is accurate but relatively slow.
Edge effects must be considered carefully because a significant fraction of the overall area
of the primary mirror lies relatively close to at least one intersegment edge. Again, several
approaches have been considered. The approach used for the Keck segments was to polish the
mirrors as rounds and, when the main polishing was complete, to cut the rounds into the desired
hexagonal segments. This introduces no local effects but introduces some global deformations
associated with the release of internal stresses. For the Keck segments, the latter deformations
were removed by ion figuring. A second approach is to add small “shelves” of material to the
edges in order to support the polishing tool when it is near the edge. It is the polishing near
the edge that typically rolls the edge in an optically objectionable fashion. The third approach
is to polish near the edges with smaller and smaller tools to control the size of the rolled edge.
A variant on the first method is to polish spheres with a so-called planetary polisher. In this
case, the polishing tool is much larger than the part, and the part is placed face down on the
polishing tool in order to produce roll-free edges.
6
Segment Support
Supporting the primary mirror segments is a nontrivial problem in mechanical engineering.
If a Keck segment were supported on the three actuator points alone, the maximum deflection
under gravity due to the weight of the segment itself would be about 1.7 μm when the telescope
is pointed at the zenith (Nelson et al. 1985). (A formal study of the deflection of thin plates

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
109
on point supports has been made by Nelson et al. (1982)). In order to reduce the deflections
by the required two orders of magnitude, the axial force of each actuator is distributed over
a 12-point whiffletree, so that the segment is supported on a total of 36 points. This reduces
the gravitational deflections to 8 nm. To satisfy the high-bandwidth requirements of the active
control system, the whiffletrees must be very stiff axially, but they also need to be very flexible
radially. The Keck whiffletree design accomplishes this by means of aluminum I-beams with
flex pivots and flex rods at each of the 36 points. The flexures also minimize stress on the mirror
due to thermal expansion of the whiffletrees.
By attaching springs that extend from the whiffletree to the mirror cell, forces can be applied
to the segment in order to warp its surface. These so-called warping harnesses are used at Keck
to provide in situ correction to the segment figures. The ability to make warping harness adjust-
ments allows one to correct for the aberrations that segmentsmay acquire as the result of release
of internal stresses when the originally circular segments are cut into hexagons, and also allows
one to relax the polishing tolerances on the segments, with a resulting cost savings. Adjustment
of the Keck warping harnesses is carried out manually immediately after a segment is installed
after aluminization. The measurements required for warping harness adjustments at Keck are
described in >Sect. 10.3 below.
Each Keck segment is supported radially by a thin diaphragm. As the telescope moves
from zenith to horizon, the load gradually transfers from the whiffletrees to the diaphragm.
The mechanical characteristics of the diaphragm are opposite to those of the whiffletrees: the
diaphragm is radially stiff and axially flexible. A thick displacement-limiting disk beneath the
diaphragm provides a hard stop that prevents the segment from moving far enough to damage
the edge sensors.
7
Diﬀraction Eﬀects
Segment edges will introduce diffractive effects in the image in addition to the diffractive effects
caused by the overall aperture itself. Of course, it is desirable to minimize the size of seg-
ment gaps, but finite physical and optical gaps are both necessary. Physical (air) gaps provide
clearance so that segments do not touch each other during installation and removal. Optical
(non-reflective) gaps in the form of bevels are necessary to avoid chipping of edges. Both the
physical and optical gaps are typically a few millimeters wide. The Keck segments have 2-mm
bevels on the edges and a 3-mm air gap between segments, for a 7-mm total nonoptical strip
between segments. The design for the TMT calls for gaps about half this size. By contrast, for a
telescope made up of identical segments with spherical surfaces, the gaps are set by geometry,
since, as previously noted, it is impossible to tessellate a curved surface with regular polygons.
These latter gaps tend to be larger than those mandated by physical and optical considerations,
but the concern in this section is primarily with the smaller, Keck-type gaps.
For circular apertures, the simplest of mirrors, the diffraction-limited image is an Airy pat-
tern, and for large angular distances ω the intensity pattern falls as ω−, and is azimuthally
symmetric. Polygonal mirror segments (such as those of Keck) will concentrate the diffracted
energy into lines perpendicular to the segment edges, thus producing a diffraction pattern that
is brighter or darker in some places than that of a circular aperture.
The amount of energy in the diffraction pattern and the angular scale of this pattern are set
by the size of the segment and the size of the intersegment gaps. In general, diffracted energy is
spread out over an angular scale of order λ/ℓwhere λ is the wavelength and ℓis the appropriate

110 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
linear scale. This may be the segment gap, the segment diameter, the full diameter of the primary
mirror, etc. Furthermore, the fraction of the total intensity that is diffracted out to the angular
scale characteristic of the segment gaps will simply be equal to the fraction of the area of the
primary mirror that is covered by the gaps (including the associated edge bevels).
The Keck gaps (physical and optical combined) cover about 0.7% of the area of the pri-
mary mirror; thus, there is an added diffraction pattern that has about 0.7% of the flux in the
central image. At 1 μm, this energy will be diffracted into angular scales of about 30 arcsec.
The diffracted energy is small and is spread over a very large region, making its local effects
even less significant. For comparison, the structural spiders that typically support the sec-
ondary mirror generally block about 1% of the light going to the primary, and since the support
widths are typically 1–4 cm, this diffracted energy is larger than that of segment edges and more
centrally concentrated by a factor of several. Both of these factors tend to make diffraction from
secondary mirror supports more problematic than diffraction from intersegment gaps.
The diffraction pattern for a regular hexagon is proportional to the absolute value squared
of the Fourier transform of the hexagon aperture function H. This function is defined by the
condition H(x, y) = when the aperture plane coordinates x and y fall within the aperture and
H(x, y) = otherwise. Let u and v be the corresponding image plane coordinates (in units of
spatial frequency), k = π/λ, and s′ be the side length of the hexagon, which is assumed to be
centered at the origin, with two sides parallel to the x-axis. The Fourier transform is real and
may be obtained analytically (Chanan and Troy 1999) as
ˆH(u, v) = 
√

ku [ ˆK+(u, v) + ˆK−(u, v)]
(3.16)
where
ˆK±(u, v) = cos(
√
kvs′/± kus′/) −cos(kus′)
u ∓
√
v
(3.17)
For u = v = , this expression reduces as expected to the area of the hexagon: ˆH(, ) = 
√

s′.
Now consider an array of hexagons. Let s be the side length of the hexagons which define
the array (to be distinguished from the physical side length s′ of the hexagonal segments), and
let the vector ρi specify the position of the center of the ith segment in a nonoverlapping array
in the aperture plane. The diffraction pattern from an array of hexagons can then be obtained
directly from the pattern for a single hexagon as
ˆf (ω) = ˆH(ω) ∑
i
exp(ikρi ⋅ω)
(3.18)
For close-packed arrays of hexagons, the coordinates of ρi are
x = 
ks,
y =
√

ℓs
(3.19)
where k and ℓare integers (positive, negative, or zero) such that k + ℓis even; for Keck, the 36
segment coordinates are defined by the strict inequality:
< k+ ℓ< 
(3.20)
Because there are physical (and optical) gaps between the segments, s will in general be slightly
larger than s′; the gap width is
√
(s−s′). Plots of monochromatic diffraction patterns for large
telescopes are often somewhat misleading because much of the fine structure (of order λ/D)

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
111
1e-09
1e-08
1e-07
1e-06
1e-05
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Intensity (arb. units)
Angle (arcsec)
Keck -X 
Circle 
1e-09
1e-08
1e-07
1e-06
1e-05
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Intensity (arb. units)
Angle (arcsec)
Keck -Y 
Circle 
⊡Fig. 3-1
Theoretical diﬀraction patterns for the Keck telescopes at a wavelength of 1 μm, in the direction
parallel (left panel) and perpendicular (right panel) to the segment edges. The diﬀraction pattern
corresponding to a circular aperture, shown for comparison, is quite similar
will be washed out for even relatively modest bandwidths Δλ. Note that this same formalism
can be applied to the case of circular segments.
Theoretical monochromatic point source profiles for Keck at 1 μm in the directions parallel
and perpendicular to the segment edges are shown in >Fig. 3-1, together with the correspond-
ing profiles for a circular aperture of diameter10 m. On this angular scale, the Keck and circular
profiles are quite comparable. Not apparent in these figures are the effects of gaps, which show
up on much larger angular scales. The issue of background surface brightness from diffraction
effects in general is a complicated one and beyond the scope of this review, involving not only
the effects of gaps but also the secondary mirror support structure, optical aberrations, and
finite bandwidth effects. Troy and Chanan (2003) have considered this problem in the context
of giant segmented-mirror telescopes.
8
Infrared Properties
At infrared wavelengths longer than ∼2.2 μm, the thermal emission from the environment
(including the telescope and optics) becomes an important source of background. Typical envi-
ronmental temperatures are of order 300 K, for which the peak emission occurs at wavelengths
of about 10 μm. The short wavelength tail of the blackbody spectrum falls off exponentially,
which means that the thermal background rises very rapidly from 2 to 10 μm.
All telescopes that are used in the infrared suffer to some degree from this thermal back-
ground, depending on the temperature of the telescope and its optics. In practice, telescopes
with clean and freshly applied mirror coatings (such as silver) have emissivities of about 1% per
surface at wavelengths beyond 1 μm. As the optics degrade with time and the accumulation of
contaminants, the emissivity will grow.
The gaps between segments will generally have much higher emissivities, often close to
unity. Thus, for a telescope like Keck, the segment edges will add an additional 0.7% thermal

112 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
background flux in addition to the roughly 3% associated with the three-mirror Nasmyth con-
figuration. When one includes the typical effects of dirt and aging and the backgrounds from the
atmosphere and from any additional warm optics in the beam train (such as windows or warm
adaptive optics mirrors), the added background from segment edges is a real but nonetheless
rather small effect.
9
Active Control System
9.1 Introduction
At Keck and other segmented-mirrortelescopes,the primary mirror segments are actively posi-
tioned in their three out-of-plane degrees of freedom by three mechanical actuators, which con-
nect the segment toits supporting subcell (Mast and Nelson 1982; Jared et al. 1990). (Becausethe
optical tolerances on the in-plane degrees of freedom are considerably less restrictive, these
three degrees offreedom are positioned passively.)The relative displacements ofadjacent mirror
segments are sensed by precision electromechanical edge sensors, of which there are two per
intersegment edge. The segments are actively controlled (Cohen et al. 1994) by means of a two-
step process: (1) initially, the desired readings of the edge sensors are determined by external
optical means; (2) subsequently, the mirror is stabilized against perturbations due to gravity and
thermal effects by moving the actuators so as to maintain the sensor readings at their desired
values. At Keck, the actuators are updated every 0.5 s; for the large segmented telescopes of the
future, the update rate is likely to be somewhat higher.
In the following subsections, the actuators and sensors used in the Keck telescopes are dis-
cussed first, followed by a description in somewhat general terms of the construction of the
control matrix that relates actuator motions to sensor readings. This in turn leads naturally to a
discussion of mirror modes and error propagation by the control matrix. One particular mode,
focus mode, is singled out for more detailed discussion.
9.2 Actuators
In the Keck actuators, a DC motor drives a roller screw with a 1-mm pitch, which in turn sup-
plies axial drive to a slide. The slide drives a small piston into an oil-filled chamber. On the
other side of the chamber, a large piston drives an output shaft, which is attached to the mirror.
The piston areas are in the ratio 24:1, and the rotary encoders have 10,000 steps per revolu-
tion, so that the actuator step size is about 4 nm. The actuator range is 1.1 mm. Each actuator
is contained within a cylindrical package 15 cm in diameter and 63 cm long, with a total mass
of 11.5 kg. The power dissipation is 0.5 W per actuator, mostly due to the light source in the
rotatary encoder (Meng et al. 1990).
9.3 Edge Sensors
The Keck edge sensors are interlocking, with one half of the sensor attached to each neigh-
boring mirror segment. To be precise, a drive paddle mounted on one segment fits into the
sensor body on a neighboring segment, with a 4-mm clearance both above and below the

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
113
paddle. (These mechanical parts are mounted on the back of the mirror and do not obscure
any of the reflective surface.) The surfaces above and below the nominal 4-mm gaps are
conducting so that the gaps and conducting surfaces define two capacitors. When the two
segments move relative to each other, the drive paddle moves relative to the sensor body,
changing the gaps and hence the capacitance. The difference between the two capacitances
is related linearly to the relative displacement of the segments. A sensor preamplifier and
analog-to-digital converter measure this difference in capacitance and produce a digital out-
put proportional to the displacement. This output is sent to the control electronics for further
processing.
The sensor noise (Minor et al. 1990) is only a few nanometers. The low thermal error (less
than 3 nm/K), low drift rate (less than 4 nm/week), and predictable deformation of the sensor
under gravity (correctable to better than 7.5 nm rms) make the overall sensor contribution to
the optical error budget quite low.
9.4 Construction of the Active Control Matrix for Keck-Type
Sensors
The linear relationship between the actuators and sensors in the active control system is given by
Az = s
(3.21)
where z is a vector containing all of the actuator lengths (with 108 components in the case
of Keck) and s is a vector of all of the sensor lengths (168 components). The control matrix A
(168 × 108) is determined solely by geometry. The calculation of the precise values of the matrix
elements Ai j is described in the following paragraph.
As noted above, the Keck sensors are horizontal, that is, the plates of the differential
capacitors which make up the sensors are parallel to the segment surface. The geometrical rela-
tionships between the twelve half sensors and the segment which they monitor are defined
in >Fig. 3-2; the placement of the three segment actuators is also indicated. The Keck parame-
ters are given by a = mm, f = mm, g = mm and h = mm. The sensors sense the
relative edge height, that is, the height of a segment relative to its neighbor, at the points indi-
cated bythe numbered squares in the figure. Forthe Keck geometry, and formost practical cases,
the sensing points for sensors 7 and 12 are both above the line connecting actuators 2 and 3; the
simple sign convention below is affected if this is not the case. The values of the ratios f /a, g/a,
and h/a for Keck are close to optimal in the sense of minimal noise multiplication (see below),
but theyalsoreflect various practical considerations, sothat the precise values donot have a fun-
damental significance. Practical concerns (specifically, the interchangeability of segments) may
dictate that the orientation of the actuator triangle will vary from segment to segment, but for
simplicity in this discussion, all actuator triangles are taken to have the same orientation. This
simplification will not change the basic properties of the associatedcontrol matrix; in particular,
it will have no effect at all on the error multipliers or other similar quantities derived below.
Now if actuator 1 is pistoned by an amount Δs, the segment will rotate about a line through
actuators 2 and 3, so that the reading of each sensor on the segment (in height units) will
change by
Δs = r Δz
h
(3.22)

114 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
2
1/3 h 
2/3 h 
1
4
3
2
1
f
5
g
6
7
8
9
10
a
12
11
3
⊡Fig. 3-2
The geometry of the Keck active control system, showing the locations of the 3 actuators and
12 sensors halves on a typical segment
where r is the perpendicular distance from the sensor to the rotation axis and where the sign of
r is positive if the sensor and the actuator are on the same side of the rotation axis and negative
if they are on opposite sides.
If actuator 1 is moved by an amount Δz, then from ( >3.22), the corresponding edge height
increment at sensor positions 1–6 will be
Δs,= Δz [ 
h + f cos ○−g sin ○] /h
Δs,= Δz [ 
h + (a −f ) cos ○+ g sin ○] /h
Δs,= Δz [ 
h + a cos○−g]/h
Δs,= Δz [ 
h + a cos○+ g]/h
Δs,= Δz [ 
h + (a −f ) cos ○−g sin ○] /h
Δs,= Δz [ 
h + f cos ○+ g sin ○] /h
(3.23)

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
115
For sensor positions 7–12, Δs j,can be obtained from Δs j−,, but with sin ○and cos ○
replaced by −sin ○and −cos ○, respectively. A useful check on the signs and normalizations
ofthe above relations is provided byvarious closure relations, which follow from the symmetries
of the system. For example,
Δs,+ Δs,+ Δs,= Δz
(3.24)
It is a straightforward matter to relate the edge height increments to the readings on the differ-
ential capacitors that constitute the edge sensors (Chanan et al. 2004). It is convenient to define
the signs of the edge height differences so that all segments are similar. For actuator 1 and the
sensors in >Fig. 3-2, one has
A j,= ±Δs j,/Δz
(3.25)
where the sign is positive for j = , , , , , and negative for the remaining values of j. The
entire control matrix can readily be filled out in this way. Each actuator affects 12 sensors
(or fewer for peripheral segments, since these do not have six nearest neighbors), and each
sensor is affected by six actuators (in all cases). Thus, each row of the control matrix has up to
12 nonzero elements, and each column has exactly six nonzero elements, independent of the
number or arrangement of segments.
9.5 Construction of the Active Control Matrix for Vertical Sensors
For the sake of simplicity and definiteness, the above discussion was presented in the context
of Keck-style capacitive edge sensors. In this sensor design, the capacitor plates are horizontal
and the two capacitors lie one above the other. Such sensors are interlocking, which compli-
cates segment exchanges, and involve many parts, which makes them expensive to build. By
contrast, the sensor design under consideration for the future Thirty Meter Telescope has the
capacitors attached directly to the vertical sides of the segments (Mast and Nelson 2000); that
is, the capacitor plates are perpendicular to the segment surface. In particular, one half of the
sensor consists of a single vertical sense plate bonded or plated directly onto the side of one seg-
ment, and the other half consists of two vertical drive plates on the side of its neighbor segment
directly across the intersegment gap; in effect, there are again two capacitors, one above the
other. Even though there is no physical offset from the segment edge, such sensors still retain
a sensitivity to dihedral angle: a change in dihedral angle will affect the two capacitor gaps dif-
ferently. There is therefore an effective offset, although its geometrical interpretation is not as
simple as before, and it tends to be smaller than for the Keck-style sensors. (The TMT sen-
sor design calls for an effective offset of about 25 mm, compared to the actual offset of 55 mm
for the Keck sensors.) The construction and properties of the active control matrix for verti-
cal capacitive sensors are similar to those for the horizontal sensors described above (Chanan
et al. 2004), and the same is true as well for sensors that utilize induction, not capacitance,
to measure relative displacement. For primary mirrors of sufficiently small focal ratio, it may
be necessary to take the curvature of the mirror into account explicitly, as opposed to using
the planar approximation considered above. However, the planar approximation is adequate
for Keck.

116 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
9.5.1 Singular Value Decomposition
The control equation ( > 3.21) directly gives the sensor values corresponding to the actuator
lengths. Implementing the actual control requires solving the inverse problem: what (changes
in the) sensor readings are required to produce the desired (changes in the) actuator lengths? If
the control matrix could be inverted, the desired solution would be obtained as
s = A−z
(3.26)
However, for an overdetermined system, the matrix A is not square and its inverse does not
exist; for that matter, in general, an exact solution does not exist. Nevertheless,the least-squares
solution can be constructed from the pseudo-inverse matrix, which does exist and can be con-
structed by straightforward means and which will still be denoted by A−. A particularly useful
technique for constructing the pseudo-inverse is singular value decomposition (SVD) (Golub
and van Loan 1996; Press et al. 1989; Anderson et al. 1999) of the original control matrix.
This technique is briefly reviewed here. In SVD, the m × n matrix A (where m ≥n) can be
written as the product of three matrices:
A = UWVT
(3.27)
where U is an m × n column orthogonal matrix, W is an n × n diagonal matrix whose diagonal
elements wi are positive or zero and are referred to as the singular values of the matrix A, V is
an n × n orthonormal matrix, and the symbol T denotes transpose. The pseudo-inverse is then
obtained as
A−= VW−UT
(3.28)
where the jth diagonal element /w j of W−is replaced by 0 in the event that w j = . The
matrix V defines an essentially unique orthonormal basis set of modes of the system, such that
any arbitrary configuration of the system can be expressed as a unique linear combination of
these modes. In particular, Vi j gives the value of the ith actuator in the jth mode.
For the control matrices considered here, three of the singular values are identically equal
to zero; the corresponding singular modes are the three actuator vectors corresponding to rigid
body motion (global piston, tip, and tilt) of the primary mirror as a whole (since such motion
has no effect on the sensor readings). If there are N segments, there are N actuators and N −
modes of interest in the basis set.
Once the elements of the pseudo-inverse matrix are known, control of the mirror is imple-
mented as follows: The desired sensor readings are defined when the alignment of the telescope
is correct as determined by external optical means; actuator lengths are changed further only to
maintain these desired sensor readings in the face of deformations due to gravity and tempera-
ture changes. The actuator changes that will maintain the desired sensor readings are calculated
with the aid of the pseudo-inverse matrix elements A−
ji via
Δz j = ∑
i
A−
ji Δsi
(3.29)
where the symbol Δzi refers to the difference between the actual and desired actuator values
and similarly for the corresponding differences Δsi in the sensor readings.
In principle, the control matrix only needs to be inverted once and for all time; in practice, it
has to be re-inverted every time a sensor is removed from or added to the control loop. At Keck,
such changes typically happen every few months or so. By contrast, maintaining the sensor

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
117
readings at their desired values requires only a simple matrix multiply. This must be done at the
frequency of the control loop, 2 Hz for Keck.
The computational power required to support the control algorithm increases rapidly with
the size of the telescope. While the Keck active control system uses 168 sensors to control 108
actuators, the Thirty Meter Telescope will require 2,772 sensors to control 1,476 actuators.
9.5.2 Error Propagation
The SVD analysis can readily be extended to describe error propagation in the control system.
If one were to put random uncorrelated noise equally into all sensors, then the actuators would
respond proportionally as determined by the A-matrix:
δa = α δs
(3.30)
where δs and δa are the rms values of the sensor and actuator errors, and we refer to the dimen-
sionless parameter α as the (overall) noise multiplier. Alternatively, one could put random noise
into the sensors and determine the rms amplitude δαk for each of the above N −modes.
By the orthogonality of the modes, one has
δa= ∑
k
δa
k = ∑
k
α
k δs
(3.31)
It is convenient to order the modes (the columns of the matrix V) according to the magnitude
of their error multipliers, from largest to smallest, or – what is the same thing – according to
the size of the singular values from smallest to largest. With this ordering, it is convenient to
define a residual error multiplier rk, which includes the error multiplier of the kth mode and
all higher modes:
r
k = ∑
j≥k
α
j
(3.32)
(Note that ris then the same as the overall error multiplier α.) When the modes are ordered
in this way, they are also more or less ordered in spatial frequency from lowest to highest. The
reason for this correspondence is not hard to understand: low spatial frequency modes have
small edge discontinuities that are difficult for the sensors to detect and therefore for the active
control system to control; high spatial frequency modes have large edge discontinuities that are
easily detected by the edge sensors. The error multiplier α j associated with the jth mode can be
shown to be
α
j = n
w
j
(3.33)
For a fixed number of segments, the individual error multipliers α j and the overall error
multiplier α are (exactly) independent of the hexagon side length a.
>Figure 3-3 shows the two Keck modes with the lowest spatial frequencies (largest error
multipliers) and the two highest spatial frequency modes (smallest error multipliers). These
results are typical of all sensor geometries. Inspection of the modes shows that there is a close
correspondence between the lowest order modes and the Zernike polynomials.
The full range of error multipliers for the three-ring Keck telescope, a five-ring telescope
similar to the Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET), and a TMT-type (492 segment) telescope is plot-
ted in >Fig. 3-4. For directness of comparison, the identical sensor geometry has been assumed

118 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
⊡Fig. 3-3
Top panels: the two lowest spatial frequency modes of the Keck telescope active control system.
The mode on the upper left is focus mode. This mode has continuous edges and the slope discon-
tinuities are too small to be seen. The mode on the upper right is one of two global astigmatism
modes. This mode has small edge discontinuities in addition to the slope discontinuities. The small
size of the discontinuities makes these modes the most diﬃcult to control. Bottom panels: the two
highest spatial frequency modes. The large edge discontinuities make these modes the easiest to
control
in each case. Except for focus mode, however, the multipliers are only weakly dependent on
sensor geometry. The error multiplier curves scale approximately as the square root of the total
number of segments; equivalently, the singular value for a mode of particular spatial frequency
is, for low spatial frequencies, virtually independent of the number of segments.
Because of the sharp increase in error multiplier with decreasing mode number, one might
worry that for extremely large segmented telescopes, effective mirror control will require
optically determined wavefront information to supplement the electromechanical sensors.
Although the issue has not yet been completely resolved for the giant telescopes currently in
the design stages, it seems likely that little or no supplemental wavefront control for giant seg-
mented telescopes will in fact be necessary (MacMartin and Chanan 2002, 2004). The argument
may be summarized as follows. For diffraction-limited (adaptive optics) observing, a wavefront
sensor will already be present as a part of the AO system, and it is expected that a reasonable

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
119
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1
10
100
1000
Error Multiplier
Mode Number
TMT
HET
Keck
⊡Fig. 3-4
Error multipliers for the control systems for TMT, HET, and Keck. For directness of comparison, the
Keck actuator and sensor geometry has been assumed for each control system, together with the
actual segment geometry for the telescope
AO system will necessarily have the dynamic range and bandwidth to correct automatically any
residual low spatial frequency errors left over from the active control system, without the need
for a supplementary alignment wavefront sensor. For seeing-limited observations, one will not
have an AO wavefront sensor to correct the misalignments automatically, but the large aber-
rations from atmospheric turbulence will likely dominate those due to residual misalignments
from the control system.
9.5.3 Surface Errors from SVD (for Diﬀraction-Limited Observing)
For diffraction-limited observing, a useful optical figure of merit for the telescope is the rms
wavefront error, which is equal to twice the rms surface error. Note that here the averaging
should be over the entire surface; the actuator calculation presented above averages the surface
only over the discrete points corresponding to the actuator locations. However, one can show
that the true rms surface error is very nearly equal to the rms actuator error.
Let zi j represent the displacement of the ith actuator (i = , , ) on the jth segment, let
p j = (zj + zj + zj)/
(3.34)
represent the piston error on that segment, and let ˜z represent the continuous height variable
over the segment surface, where ˜z = zi at the actuator locations. Averaging over all segments
and over an ensemble defined by a Gaussian distribution of sensor (not actuator) errors yields
⟨̃z⟩= κ⟨z⟩+ (−κ)⟨p⟩
(3.35)
where
κ = 

a
h
(3.36)

120 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
and ⟨z⟩denotes the average over the discrete actuator points only. If the actuators on a given
segment were uncorrelated, one would have ⟨z⟩= ⟨p⟩and thus ⟨˜z⟩= ⟨z⟩, and there would
be no distinction between the rms actuator and the true rms surface. In fact, if the state of the
mirror is defined by the sensors, which have a Gaussian distribution of errors, then the actuators
will be weakly correlated and there will be a (small) difference between the rms surface and the
rms actuator. In general, however, the difference is very small (in theory about 3% for the Keck
telescopes), and there is little point in maintaining a distinction between these two quantities.
The rms actuator is preferred on the grounds of simplicity.
9.5.4 Tip-Tilt Errors from SVD (for Seeing-Limited Observing)
For seeing-limited observations, one is interested not in the rms surface error (as discussed
above) but rather in the rms segment tip/tilt, or the rms ray tip/tilt, where the latter includes
the factor of two for doubling on reflection. The rms ray tip/tilt may be obtained directly from
the SVD formalism (Chanan et al. 2004). The results may be summarized as follows.
While the error multipliers discussed above are independent of the segment size (for a fixed
number of segments) and scale as the square root of the total number of segments, the tip/tilt
errors scale inversely as the segment size, can vary by 50% or so depending on sensor geometry,
and are virtually independent of the number of segments. The typical rms one-dimensional
image blur is 2–3 milliarcsec per nm of sensor noise for a segment with a = .m or
1–1.5 milliarcsec per nm for a segment with a = m.
9.6 Focus Mode
Although it is convenient to think of the edge sensors as responding to the vertical shear of one
segment with respect to its neighbor, in general, the sensors will also respond to a change in the
dihedral angle between adjacent segments. If all of the segment dihedral angles are changed by
the same amount, or (what is essentially the same thing) if a constant is added to all of the sensor
readings, this defines a defocus-like configuration of the primary mirror that is referred to as
focus mode. In focus mode, the radius of curvature of the surface defined by the segment centers
does not match the individual segment radii of curvature. Focus mode corresponds to one of
the V-modes of the singular value decomposition, usually the mode with the smallest nonzero
singular value and hence the largest error multiplier; that is, it is the least well-controlled mode.
(If the dihedral angle sensitivity goes to zero, the singular value of this mode also goes to zero,
and it becomes truly unobservable.) The problem may be aggravated by practical considera-
tions. For example, if all sensors had a small but common temperature dependence, then a
change in temperature could lead spontaneously to the introduction of focus mode.
However, focus mode can be corrected to first order by pistoning the secondary mirror.
This will leave the wavefront with an overall residual scalloping, but since the aberration is
quadratic in the coordinates, the scalloping amplitude will be smaller than the original focus
mode amplitude by a factor of N, the number of segments. At Keck, this means that focus mode
only has to be corrected very occasionally (typically once per month); in the interim, it can be
corrected by conventional focusing of the telescope and one simply tolerates the small residual
scalloping.

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
121
10
Optical Alignment
10.1 Tip-Tilt Alignment of Segments
The measurement of segment tip/tilt angles is similar to wavefront sensing in adaptive optics
but with one important difference. As in adaptive optics, a Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensor is
used, with either single or multiple subapertures per segment (Chanan 1988). The difference is
that in adaptive optics, one is essentially trying to freeze the atmosphere, so that the exposures
need to be very short (typically a few milliseconds); in segment alignment measurements, one
is trying to average over local atmospheric tip/tilt errors, so that the exposures need to be quite
long, typically tens of seconds.
Although the optical effects of turbulence are well understood theoretically in the short
exposure limit, (Fried 1966; Noll 1976) the theoretical situation is much less clear for the long
(but not infinitely long) exposures that are typical of alignment measurements. Measurements
made at the VLT suggest that the residual atmospheric aberrations (up to Zernike terms of order
n ∼) for long exposures are well described by the same statistical distribution of Zernike coef-
ficients as in the theoretical short exposure limit but with an effective atmospheric coherence
diameter ras a single free parameter (Noethe 2002). Although the effective rfor these long
exposures may be as much as an order of magnitude larger than the usual “instantaneous” r,
residual atmospheric turbulence nevertheless still limits the alignment process at the VLT. Sim-
ilar results have been found at Keck, for length scales on the order of a segment. Outer scale
effects, which tend to become important beyond 10 m (Ziad et al. 2004), may ameliorate this
situation somewhat for the extremely large telescopes of the future.
10.2 Phasing
The most challenging degrees of freedom to align optically are those associated with segment
piston errors. In order that the telescope achieve the diffraction limit corresponding to the full
aperture, as opposed to the diffraction limit of the individual segments, the piston errors (or
steps between segments) must be small compared to the wavelength of observation. The Strehl
ratio for a segmentedtelescope whose N perfect segments are aligned in tip/tilt but not piston is
S = + (N −)e−σ
N
(3.37)
where σ is the standard deviation of the piston errors measured in radians at the wavefront (not
at the segment surface) (Chanan and Troy 1999). For a 10-m telescope with adaptive optics in
the near-IR, the corresponding segment piston error requirement is less than about 30 nm for
high angular resolution imaging; for the giant segmented telescopes of the future, it may be as
small as 10 nm.
In principle, a segment with a piston error will produce an out-of-focus image, but this
effect is extremely small: at the f/15 focus of the Keck telescope, the individual segment beams
have a depth of focus of some 10 mm, which exceeds the dynamic range of the segment
pistons by a factor of several. One is instead forced to exploit diffraction effects from mis-
aligned intersegment edges. At Keck, this is accomplished by a physical optics generalization
of the traditional geometrical optics Shack-Hartmann test. The Keck technique is described in
the >Sect. 10.2.1 below. Recently, several other techniques have been developed, and these are
described in >Sect. 10.2.2.

122 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
10.2.1 Shack-Hartmann Phasing
The basic idea of Shack-Hartmann phasing is to place the subapertures so that they straddle
the intersegment edges of the (reimaged) primary mirror (Chanan 1988). The two halves of the
subaperture are analogous to the slits in Young’s two-slit interference experiment. The details of
the resulting interference or diffraction pattern are sensitive to the relative piston error between
the two segments. (In principle, relative tip/tilt errors between the two segments can also be
detected with Shack-Hartmann phasing, but this possibility is not examined here.)
For simplicity, consider the interference pattern from a single subaperture and assume
that an adaptive optics system either is not used or is located downstream from the image
plane under consideration here. This means that the phasing subimages will be affected by
atmospheric turbulence and this limits the phasing subaperture diameter d to less than about
r(λ), the atmospheric coherence diameter at the wavelength at which the phasing measure-
ments are made. At Keck, this wavelength is about 0.9 μm, and the subapertures, referred to
the primary mirror, are 12 cm in diameter. Atmospheric tip/tilt errors across a subaperture (the
dominant atmospheric error for d ≤r) are generally the limiting factor for geometrical optics
Shack-Hartmann tests, but have little effect on phase measurements. As a result, phasing mea-
surements donot require the long exposure times that are necessarytoeliminate segment tip/tilt
errors. Typical exposure times for phasing measurements at Keck are 15s, although the question
of the minimum exposure time has not been thoroughly explored.
A modest amount of analysis will clarify the basic physics of Shack-Hartmann phasing.
Let ρ = (ρ, θ) be the position vector in the subaperture plane and let ω = (ω, ϕ) be the position
vector in the image plane. (It is assumed that the components of ρ have units of length and
components of ω have units of radians.) Consider a circular subaperture of radius a straddling
two segments separated by the horizontal diameter of the circle, with a physical step height
δ between the two. (The corresponding wave-front step height is δ.) In the absence of other
aberrations, the complex amplitude of the wavefront in the image plane ˆf (ω; kδ) is the Fourier
transform of the complex aperture function f (ρ; kδ):
f (ρ; kδ) =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩
exp(+ikδ) for ρ ⩽a; ≤θ < π
exp(−ikδ) for ρ ⩽a; π ≤θ < π
for ρ > a
(3.38)
where k = π/λ and the normalization is chosen such that the integral of the intensity over the
image is unity. The intensity in the image plane is then (Chanan et al. 1998)
I(ω; kδ) = [cos kδ ˆf(ω; ) + sin kδ ˆf(ω; π/)]
(3.39)
where the in-phase amplitude (kδ = ) is that corresponding to the familiar Airy disk:
ˆf (ω; ) = J(kaω)
kaω
(3.40)
and the out-of-phase amplitude (kδ = π/) is given by
ˆf (ω; π/) = 
π ∫
π

u cosu −sin u
u
dθ
(3.41)
where u = kaω cos(θ −ϕ), with both angles defined as above. This integral can be evaluated
explicitly for only a few values of ϕ. For ϕ = or ϕ = π, the integral vanishes; for ϕ = ±π, it
reduces to ∓H(kaω)/(kaω), where His the Struve function of order 1. However, these four

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
123
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
Intensity (arb. units) 
Y
k δ = 0
k δ = π/2
⊡Fig. 3-5
Slicesalongthe y-axis(perpendicular to theintersegment edge) of the phasingdiﬀraction patterns
for in-phase (kδ = 0) and (maximally) out-of-phase segments (kδ = π/2). In the former case, the
image is the familiar Airy disk; in the latter, it splits into two equal images. The horizontal units are
kaω. The vertical units are arbitrary but the same for both slices
⊡Fig. 3-6
Theoretical diﬀraction patterns from a single phasing subaperture with relative piston errors of
0, 150, 200, 250, and 400 nm. The wavelength is 800 nm and the subaperture diameter is 120 mm.
The ﬁgure may be read left to right or right to left, depending on the sign convention for the piston
error
cases are sufficient to show that for kδ = π/, the image splits into two equal subimages, with
the intensity vanishing everywhere along the x-axis (see >Fig. 3-5).
For phase differences other than kδ = and kδ = ±π/, the image splits into two unequal
subimages; the ratio of the intensities of the subimages provides a measure of the phase dif-
ference or step height between the two segments. > Figure 3-6 shows the two-dimensional
theoretical diffraction patterns for several steps between kδ = and kδ = π. The middle

124 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
panel (kδ = π/) corresponds to a step height of λ/, which is the maximal effect. The step
height may be extracted from the diffraction pattern via a cross-correlation (Chanan et al. 2000)
against a sequence of numerically generated template images. Alternative analytical extraction
techniques have been discussed in the literature (Schumacher et al. 2002).
It is clear from physical considerations and from the equations that the above monochro-
matic phasing technique can only give answers for δ in the range to λ/or equivalently (and
more conveniently for our purposes) −λ/to λ/. All piston errors of larger absolute value will
be aliased into this latter interval. There are two different approaches to resolving the resulting
piston ambiguity: multiple wavelength measurements and broadband measurements.
In the multiwavelength approach, one makes monochromatic measurementsat several dis-
crete wavelengths and looks for a solution that is consistent with all of the measurements.
This is also referred to as the artificial wavelength method, since for the case of two wavelengths,
the capture range is the same as that for a single effective wavelength λa:
λa =
λλ
∣λ−λ∣
(3.42)
where λand λare the two individual wavelengths. For large initial piston errors, the technique
can be extended to more than two wavelengths. There is an optimal way to choose the individual
wavelengths that depends on the initial piston uncertainty as well as on the uncertainty in the
individual measurements (Lofdahl and Eriksson 2001).
By contrast, in the broadband approach (Chanan et al. 1998), a continuous range of wave-
lengths is used. In this case, one is interested in the coherence of the signal. (The precise
mathematical definition of coherence is not essential to the present discussion; see Chanan et al.
(1998) for one possible definition.) The coherence length of the filter, which sets the wavelength
bandwidth, is defined by
λc = λλ
Δλ
(3.43)
The diffraction pattern will then resemble that of the monochromatic case for δ ≪λc.
Conversely, if δ ≫λc, the details of the diffraction pattern will be washed out, and the image
will be incoherent; the incoherent image can be obtained theoretically by taking the monochro-
matic result for a nonzero edge step and averaging over all wavelengths in the bandpass or by
taking the nominal wavelength and averaging over all possible phases. In broadband phasing,
the primary mirror segments are stepped through a series of different configurations such that
every intersegment edge changes from its nominal value by jλc/(n + ), where j takes on all
integer values from −(n −)/to +(n −)/and n is an odd integer of moderate size; the
Keck broadband phasing procedure uses n = . The overall capture range is a bit less than
±λc. Practical considerations make it difficult to decrease the initial piston error uncertainty by
more than about a factor of 30 in a single cycle of 11 measurements with a given filter. At Keck
this means that a few cycles are needed to reduce the piston errors from their initial values of
order 10 μm to the required 30 nm. Each cycle involves a filter of broader bandwidth, hence
shorter coherence length. The detailed characteristics of each cycle used at Keck may be found
elsewhere (Chanan et al. 1998).
Although the broadband technique is more time consuming to execute than the multiwave-
length technique and the extraction of the edge step from the data is not as straightforward, the
former has a distinct advantage: If the initial piston error is underestimated,then the technique
will fail in a well-defined and easily recognized way: most or all of the signals from the edge
in question will be incoherent. However, if the initial errors or the measurement uncertainties
are underestimated in the multiwavelength technique, then it will often converge to the wrong

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
125
answer, with no easily generated diagnostic. For this reason, the broadband technique has been
preferred at Keck.
A variation of the broadband technique called dispersed fringe sensing (DFS) uses a grism
(a transmission grating replicated onto a prism) to disperse the light along each intersegment
edge, so that a continuum of wavelengths can be observed simultaneously, and there is no need
to step through different configurations of the primary mirror. A prototype of this technique
was successfully tested at the Keck telescope (Shi et al. 2004). The DFS technique was proposed
as the coarse segment phasing technique for the James Webb Space Telescope, but ultimately
a different though closely related technique, dispersed Hartmann sensing, was selected instead
(see >Sect. 11.4).
10.2.2 Other Phasing Techniques
In late 2008 and early 2009, the European Southern Observatory mounted an active phasing
experiment (APE) at the Very Large Telescope in order to compare three alternative phasing
techniques to the Shack-Hartmann approach describe in the preceding section (Gonte et al.
2004). The 8-m aperture of one of the VLTs was reimaged onto a 150 mm mirror with 61 actively
controlled segments, so that the testing could be done under conditions of realistic atmospheric
turbulence. The three techniques involve variations of curvature sensing and pyramid sensing,
as well as a modified Mach-Zehnder interferometer. Unlike Shack-Hartmann sensing, which
perturbs the wavefront in the pupil plane, these techniques perturb the wavefront in the focal
plane (except for curvature sensing, which effects its wavefront perturbation simply by going
out of focus) and relay the pupil plane to the detector. They all therefore eliminate the problem
of very tight pupil registration in the Shack-Hartmann approach, although in general the deter-
mination of the precise mapping between points on the primary mirror and the corresponding
points on the detector is more complicated for these techniques than for Shack-Hartmann
phasing. The additional phasing techniques tested by ESO are briefly described as follows:
•
Curvature Sensing. Roddier (1988) developed a wavefront sensing technique based on mea-
suring the spatial variation of the intensity of defocused images; this gives a measure of the
Laplacian of a continuous wavefront from which, with suitable boundary conditions, the
wavefront can be reconstructed. For the discontinuous wavefronts from segmented mir-
rors, piston errors can be reconstructed using Fresnel diffraction theory(Chueca et al. 2008).
A variation of this technique has been implemented at infrared wavelengths at Keck, with
some success (Chanan et al. 1999).
•
Pyramid Sensing. In this wavefront sensing technique, developed for use in adaptive optics,
a four-faceted pyramid in the focal plane splits the beam so that four separate pupil images
are formed. It is in some sense a quantitative version of the classical knife edge test but with
knife edges in two orthogonal directions at the same time. The signal is a measure of the
first derivative of the wavefront and thus again has good piston sensitivity (Esposito et al.
2005).
•
Mach-Zehnder Interferometer. In this technique, a spatially filtered beam from the tele-
scope is interfered with a phase-shifted version of itself (Montoya 2004; Surdej et al. 2010;
Yaitskova et al. 2005). The output is a measure of the second derivative of the phase, and
there is good sensitivity to segment piston errors.
All four techniques (including Shack-Hartmann phasing) tested in the APE experiment were
successful to some degree. Each technique has its advantages or disadvantages with respect

126 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
to pupil registration or determination of the pupil mapping, the fraction of the segment sur-
face which is sampled, ability to determine segment tip/tilt errors simultaneously, sensitivity to
rolled edges, and the ability to handle piston errors that are large compared to the wavelength
of light. A full discussion of the relevant details may be found in the papers cited above.
10.3 Warping Harnesses
It is desirable to be able to adjust the segment figures (at least in the lower spatial frequen-
cies) while the segments are in the telescope. In stressed mirror polishing, when the rounds are
cut into hexagons, internal stresses are relieved, which tends to produce low spatial frequency
aberrations that are very expensive to polish out at this late stage of the fabrication process. Also,
errors in the in-plane positioning of segments cannot be corrected directly, as these degrees of
freedom are not actively controlled; however, they can be corrected indirectly by adjusting the
segment figures, since the predominant effect of these positioning errors is to cause apparent
focus and astigmatism errors in the segments.
The in situ adjustment of segment figures is accomplished at Keck by means of warping
harnesses, sets of leaf springs attached to the segment whiffletrees that can apply forces and
moments to the backs of the segments so that they can be warped into the correct shapes.
>Figures 3-7 and >3-8 show the results of two warping harness experiments at Keck. In the
first of these, the predicted changes that result from the application of a given force to a single
warping beam were accuratelyconfirmed. In the second, the astigmatismof one of the segments
was successfully changed by 500 nm, to within the experimental errors of 15 nm.
Keck segments are normally measured and warped immediately after they are installed in
the telescope, either initially or after aluminizing (and only at such times). The warping har-
nesses are typically not adjusted again until after the next aluminization cycle, typically 3 years
later. Prior to warping, the Keck segments have a surface error of 98 nm (rms); after warp-
ing, this is reduced to 37 nm. The predicted performance for the warping harnesses is for a
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Zernike Coefficient (nm)
Zernike Index
Measured
Predicted
⊡Fig. 3-7
Theoretical and observed diﬀerential response of a Keck telescope segment to the adjustment of
a single leaf spring in the warping harness

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
127
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Zernike Coefficient (nm)
Zernike Index
Measured
Predicted
⊡Fig. 3-8
Results of an experiment to increase the astigmatism (Zernike polynomial 6) of a Keck segment by
200 nm via warping harness adjustment
post-warp rms of 25 nm; this includes both the theoretical performance of the springs and the
errors associated with making Shack-Hartmann measurements through atmospheric turbu-
lence. The discrepancy between theory and performance (25 vs. 37 nm) is apparently due to
aliasing in the measurementsand to the presence of significant non-Zernike aberrations, which
the mathematical model for the segment surface error does not readily accommodate.Note that
warping a known low spatial frequency aberration into a segment is not the same as (and is in
general not as difficult as) flattening a segment with high spatial frequency aberrations present.
The Keck warping harness procedures involve manual adjustmentof the warping harnesses.
At the Gran Telescopio Canarias, this procedure can be done automatically, and this will also
be the case for the giant segmented-mirror telescopes of the future. In principle, such warping
harnesses can be exercised as often as several times a night to correct, for example, for temper-
ature variations or gravity. This would require either continuous wavefront sensing or lookup
tables to determine the necessary corrections.
10.4 Alignment of the Secondary Mirror
As is the case with any two mirror telescope, the secondary mirror of a segmented-mirror tele-
scope must be aligned with respect to the primary in piston, tip, and tilt. (Precise centration
of the secondary is typically not required, as the effect of decentering on the image is nearly
degenerate with that of tip and tilt.) The complication for a segmented-mirror telescope is that
the global rigid body parameters of the primary are not trivial to determine; at best, they can
be represented as suitable averages over the corresponding segment quantities.
The basic idea underlying the alignment of the secondary in a segmented-mirror telescope
can be understood as follows. In an otherwise perfect telescope, the defocus of the image due
to a piston error δz (in microns) of the secondary is
AD = δz s (m+ )/F
(3.44)

128 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
where AD is the full diameter of image in arcsec, s is the image scale in arcsec per micron,
m is the magnification of the secondary, and F is the overall focal ratio of the system. The
corresponding global focus error can be expanded locally about the center of each segment.
It follows immediately that each segment will have the same focus error to first order. There-
fore the piston of the secondary can be adjusted until the average segment focus error is zero.
The accuracy of the procedure is limited by atmospheric turbulence. At Keck, the average sec-
ondary mirror piston uncertainty is about 4 μm, as determined from the variation in a sequence
of measurements.
The idea is similar for secondary tip/tilt. Schroeder (2000) gives the corresponding expres-
sion for the coma of the image due to a tilt of the secondary:
ATC = δα (m −) (+ β)/(F)
(3.45)
where δα is the secondary tilt angle, and β is the ratio of back focal distance to the focal length
of the primary. Again, expanding the wavefront error about each segment center shows that
each segment will have an apparent coma. In this case, each segment will also be astigmatic,
with the astigmatism varying from segment to segment; the astigmatism in fact dominates.
Thus, the secondary tip/tilt can be reconstructed from the ensemble of segment astigmatisms.
The uncertainty in the secondary tip/tilt as determined at Keck is about 3 arcsec each in tip
and tilt.
11
Other Segmented-Mirror Telescopes
In the last decade or so, several other large segmented-mirror ground-based telescopes have
come on line, and the segmented James Webb Space Telescope is currently under construction.
These telescopes are briefly described in the following sections.
11.1 Gran Telescopio Canarias
The Gran Telescopio Canarias (GTC) (Rodriguez Espinosa et al. 1999) is a 36-segment 10-m
telescope with a design very similar to that of the Keck telescopes. The GTC, a project of Spain
with the participation of Mexico and the University of Florida, is located on the island of La
Palma in the Canary Islands and saw first light in 2007. The GTC incorporates several improve-
ments over Keck, including the capability to continuously monitor the optical alignment and
to adjust the segment figures remotely.
11.2 Hobby-Eberly Telescope and Southern African Large
Telescope
The Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET) at the McDonald Observatory in Texas (Barnes et al. 2000)
is a segmented-mirror telescope designed to do spectroscopy and built for a fraction of the
cost (about 20%) of a comparably sized segmented-mirror telescope like Keck or GTC. HET is
joint project of the Pennsylvania State University and the University of Texas at Austin. Partner

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
129
institutions include Stanford University and two German institutions: Ludwig-Maximilians-
Universität and Georg-August-Universität. Science operations began in October of 1999.
In order to achieve its dramatic cost reduction, the HET design incorporates a number of
design innovations, the most dramatic of which is that the telescope is fixed in elevation and
rotates only in azimuth. This means that the primary mirror is fixed with respect to gravity, a
fact which greatly simplifies the support structure for the mirror. As the telescope tracks a star in
elevation, its image moves with respect to the telescope across the focal surface. A star tracker,
which contains a spherical aberration corrector and the science instrument, or the fore optics
for fiber-fed instruments that reside below the telescope, follows the image. A large fraction of
the sky is covered in this way. Observing times are limited compared to a conventional telescope
that can move in altitude as well as azimuth; however, observations as long as 2.5 h are possible.
Although the full HET array is 11.1 by 9.8 m, the effective diameter seen by the instruments
is 9.2 m.
The HET primary mirror consists of five rings of hexagonal segments, each of which has a
circumscribed diameter of 1.15 m. The central segment is included because it is not blocked by
a secondary (the telescope is used only at prime focus). Thus, there are 91 segments and 273
actuators (three per segment). Unlike Keck, the HET segments are all spherical and identical,
which means that the spacing between adjacent segments varies slightly from the center to the
edge of the array. The HET segments are aligned not using starlight but rather using an artificial
source and a Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensor located in a tower at the primary mirror cen-
ter of curvature. The HET was originally designed without edge sensors, so that there was no
active control of the primary mirror actuators. The telescope was realigned many times a night
by rotating to the center of curvature alignment sensor. However, in the interest of observing
efficiency, the telescope was retrofitted with an active control system, similar to the one used at
Keck but with inductive, not capacitive, sensors. There are two sensors per intersegment edge
for a total of 480, and the system updates once a minute. With the active control system in place,
the HET segments only need to be aligned in tip/tilt at the beginning of each night. Because the
telescope is not used for imaging, the segment piston tolerances are relatively loose and can be
achieved by careful segment installation; the phasing procedures used at Keck are not necessary.
A major upgrade to the telescope is planned in order to support an extensive dark-energy study
known as HETDEX (Booth et al. 2006).
The Southern African Large Telescope (Buckley et al. 2004) is a southern hemisphere twin
of the Hobby-Eberly, built near Sutherland, South Africa, by the South African Astronomical
Observatory and a host of international partners. The baseline design was the same as that of
the HET, but modifications were introduced to increase the field of view and to incorporate
edge sensors and hence active control from the beginning. The telescope was inaugurated in
November of 2005.
11.3 Large Area Multi-Object Spectrographic Telescope
The Large Sky Area Multi-Object Fibre Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST) (Cui et al. 2010)
is a Schmidt telescope, built by China and devoted, as the name implies, to spectroscopy. The
telescope has two segmented optics: a spherical primary mirror, roughly 6 m in diameter and
consisting of 37 hexagonal segments of circumscribed diameter 1.1 m, and a corrector mirror,
5.72 × 4.4 m, consisting of 24 segments of the same size.

130 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
11.4 James Webb Space Telescope
Although the design considerations for a space-based telescope are much different than for
a ground-based one, the James Webb Space Telescope (Sabelhaus and Decker 2004; Gardner
et al. 2006), the successor to the Hubble Space Telescope, deserves mention in this review.
The 6.5-m primary mirror of JWST will consist of 18 hexagonal segments in two rings. The
segments are about the same size as those of Keck but made of light-weighted beryllium, not
Zerodur. The motivation for the segmentation of JWST comes not only from fabrication con-
siderations but also from those of launch: it must be both light-weight enough and compact
enough to be launched later in this decade by an Ariane 5 rocket. The telescope will be launched
in a folded configuration so that it can fit into the 4.5-m-diameter rocket and will be deployed
on orbit.
JWST differs from ground-based segmented-mirror telescopes in that the primary mirror
will not have an active control system; there are actuators but no sensors. There are several
reasons for this. After initial deployment, there is little for the actuators to do since thermal
perturbations to the system should be minor and of course the gravitational perturbations are
nonexistent. In general, one wants to move actuators in a space-based system as seldom as
possible in order to minimize the chance of an actuator failure, even one of which could jeop-
ardize the entire mission. Additionally, a system of segment edge sensors and its electronics
could create heat leaks which would compromise the cryogenic environment of this infrared
telescope.
As noted in >Sect. 10.2, the coarse phasing of the JWST segments will be accomplished
with a technique known as dispersed Hartmann sensing (DHS) (Sivaramakrishnan et al. 2003).
In DHS, an array of prisms is placed over the intersegment edges at the location of a small
image of the primary. The prisms disperse the light so that the wavelengths corresponding to
constructive or destructive interference can be identified; the relative piston error can then be
reconstructed from this information. The prisms also displace the interference patterns from
one another on the detectorso that multiple edges can be measuredin parallel. Fine phasing will
be accomplished using a variation of the Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm (Gerchberg and Saxton
1972; Redding et al. 2000) in which a Fourier transform-based procedure is used to reconstruct
the wavefront from an out-of-focus image. Such techniques have not been used for ground-
based telescopes because they are severely limited by atmospheric turbulence, but this is clearly
not a problem in space.
12
Giant Segmented-Mirror Telescopes
There are three extremely large telescope projects currently in the design stages: the Giant Mag-
ellan Telescope (GMT), the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT), and the European Extremely Large
Telescope (E-ELT). All three projects involve large international collaborations, all have bud-
gets in the range $1 billion to e1 billion, and all expect to see first light around the end of the
current decade. Because the GMT has only a small number of segments and because these are
circular and of the lightweight honeycomb design, a detailed discussion of this telescope is left
to
>Chap. 4 of the current volume; only a brief description is given below. The emphasis here

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
131
is on the highly segmented TMT and to a lesser extent on the E-ELT. Further information on
the E-ELT may be found in
>Chap. 5 of the current volume.
12.1 GMT
The collaboration forthe Giant Magellan Telescope (GMT)includes the five partners in the orig-
inal Magellan project, which built the twin 6.5-m Magellan telescopes: the Carnegie Institution
for Science, the University of Arizona, Harvard University, the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, and the University of Michigan, plus several other US universities as well as interna-
tional partners. The GMT primarymirrorwill consist ofseven circular8.4-m segments and have
an overall diameter of 24.5 m (http://www.gmto.org/science-conceptu.html). The hollow hon-
eycomb segments are similar to those of the Large Binocular Telescope but are somewhat thin-
ner and more flexible in order to accommodate potentially larger aberrations in the six off-axis
segments, which are significantly asymmetric. The overall optical design is aplanatic Gregorian,
with an exceedingly fast primary mirror focal ratio of f/0.7 and a final focal ratio of f/8.0.
Although the 700-mm-thick primary mirror segments are far stiffer than an 8-m menis-
cus mirror, some measure of active figure control is nevertheless required; this is supplied by
an array of 165 actuators per segment. A ventilating system is used to reduce thermal gradi-
ents, since the glass has a nonzero coefficient of thermal expansion. The concave secondary
mirror (3.2 m in diameter) is also segmented, with its seven segments conjugated to those of
the primary. There will in fact be two secondary mirrors with this geometry: for diffraction-
limited aberrations, an adaptive mirror whose segments are deformable thin face sheets, and,
for seeing-limited observations, a fast steering mirror with rigid but independently moveable
segments.
Wavefront information is supplied by a Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensor. In contrast to
the electromechanical edge sensors used on Keck and GTC (and planned for TMT), the active
alignment of the GMT segments in tip/tilt will be monitored by two (widely separated) opti-
cal sensors on each intersegment edge. According to current plans, the relative piston errors
between segments will be measured using a modified phase-diversity scheme (Lloyd-Hart et al.
2006). The fact that the secondary mirror is conjugated to the primary means that the task of
phasing the telescope segments can be divided between primary and secondary; for example,
piston errors between segments could be sensed at the primary but corrected at the (more agile)
secondary.
The GMT enclosure will be a cylinder approximately 65 m high. The telescope will rotate
independently of the enclosure and will be able to observe at zenith angles from ○to ○.
The GMT will be built at the existing Las Campanas Observatory in Chile, at an altitude of
about 2,500 m. A site testing campaign will determine the optimal peak among several possible
candidate sites at LCO.
12.2 TMT
The
Thirty
Meter
Telescope
(http://www.tmt.org/sites/default/files/TMT-Construction-
Proposal-Public.pdf) represents a merger of three formerly independent segmented-mirror
telescope projects: the University of California/Caltech California Extremely Large Telescope

132 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
(Nelson 2000), the National Observatory’s Giant Segmented-Mirror Telescope (Strom et al.
2002), and Canada’s Very Large Optical Telescope (Roberts et al. 2002). In addition to the
University of California and Caltech (the original partners in the development of the Keck
Observatory), the collaboration includes the Association of Canadian Universities for Research
in Astronomy, and other international partners are expected to join.
For telescopes with monolithic mirrors, the financial rule of thumb is that overall cost scales
with primary mirror diameter D as D.. A TMT study concluded, by contrast, that for a seg-
mented thirty meter telescope, the costs relative to the Keck capital investment should scale
far more slowly. This, coupled with the Ddependence of the figure of merit for background
limited observations, makes TMT an extremely good scientific value.
To be precise, 30.0 m is the diameterof the circumscribing circle around the primary mirror,
which serves as the entrance pupil of the telescope. The optical design of TMT is Ritchey-
Chretien (concave hyperbolic primary mirror and convex hyperbolic secondary), although,
unlike most R-C telescopes, there is no Cassegrain focus. This is because an articulated tertiary
mirror (2.45 × 3.51 m in diameter) not only folds the telescope beam but also rotates it to direct
the light to the science instruments arrayed around the two Nasmyth platforms. This eliminates
the need to reposition the very large instruments and also eliminates the need for a conven-
tional (unfolded) Cassegrain focus. Like GMT, TMT will support both diffraction-limited and
seeing-limited observations, but unlike GMT, there is only a single secondary mirror, and it is
neither active nor adaptive. The primary mirror focal ratio is f/1, converted to f/15 by the 3.02 m
diameter secondary mirror.
For adaptive optics observations, TMT will have a facility on the Nasmyth platform capable
of feeding a 1 arcmin AO-compensated beam to multiple science instruments. This Narrow
Field IR AO System (NFIRAOS) will utilize two deformable mirrors, conjugated to altitudes of
0 and 12 km.
The TMT primary mirror will consist of 492 hexagonal segments, each 0.715 m on a side
(somewhat smaller than the 0.9 m Keck segments). There are 492/6 = 82 different types of seg-
ments; one spare segment of each type will be provided. The Keck segments are identical regular
hexagons when seen in projection. This means that the physical size of the outermost Keck seg-
ments is significantly larger than that of the innermost segments. The TMT design, by contrast,
utilizes a scaling approach that keeps the physical size of all segments equal to within a few mil-
limeters. As a consequence, the TMT segments are not seen as regular hexagons in projection
but appear increasingly foreshortened with increasing radial distance from the center.
As was the case for Keck, the primary mirror control system for TMT will consist of three
actuators per segment (a total of 1,476) and two edge sensors per intersegment edge (a total
of 2,772). The TMT actuators are considerably more complicated than the Keck actuators in
order to provide substantial vibration attenuation and damping in addition to achieving the
desired positioning accuracy. Significant geometrical differences between the TMT and Keck
edge sensors, described in >Sect. 9.3 above, help to reduce the sensor costs and to simplify
segment exchanges. The large number of sensors makes it likely that at any given time, several
of them will not be functional. At Keck, bad sensors are identified “by hand” and removed
from the system. Computer algorithms that will do the identification automatically are being
developed for TMT (Chanan and Nelson 2009).
In order to reach the 30-m diffraction limit, the TMT wavefront errors must be a factor
of three smaller than the corresponding Keck errors. This presents a significant challenge for
both segment fabrication and for optical alignment. The optical alignment system of TMT is still
being designed, but it will be based on a Shack-Hartmann approach, similar to that used at Keck.

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
133
The TMT enclosure is not of the conventional dome/shutter design but rather involves a
calotte configuration, consisting of a base, cap, and shutter. The base and cap form a spherical
shell cut by a plane inclined at an angle of θcap = .○, with respect to the horizontal. The
base rotates about a vertical axis in the azimuth direction, and the cap rotates about an axis
perpendicular to the plane that divides cap and base. The cap incorporates a circular aperture
that can be positioned for observing at zenith angles from ○to 2θcap = ○. The shutter struc-
ture, which rotates about the same axis, but independently of the cap, includes a plug to seal the
aperture. Three rows of vents near the bottom of the base structure provide an open area of up
to 1,700 mfor natural ventilation of the enclosure during observations.
The TMT site selection process was particularly thorough. On-site measurements with a
variety of instruments, including differential image motion monitors and multi-aperture scin-
tillation sensors, were undertaken at five prospective sites: Cerro Tolar, Cerro Armazones,
and Cerro Tolonchar in Chile; San Pedro Martir in Mexico (Baja California); and Mauna Kea
in Hawaii, for a period of 1–2 years at each site. The atmospheric data were supplemented
by existing long-term data sets and also by computational fluid dynamics simulations. Other
issues considered in the selection included construction and operating costs; cultural, environ-
mental, and land use issues; labor force issues; proximity to astronomers and to astronomical
infrastructure; geological conditions; and other factors. Based on all of these considerations, in
July of 2009, the TMT Board selected Mauna Kea as the preferred site for TMT.
12.3 E-ELT
The European ExtremelyLarge Telescope (E-ELT)(http://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/eelt/docs/e-
elt_constrproposal.pdf) is a project of the 14-member-nation European Southern Observatory.
The E-ELT diameter of 42 m will give it twice the area of the Thirty Meter Telescope.
The optical design of the E-ELT is an anastigmat with three powered mirrors and two fold-
flats. The f/1 primary mirror (M1) consists of 984 segments with a nominal circumscribed
diameter of 1.45 m, very similar to those of TMT. The convex secondary (M2) is 6 m in diam-
eter. A 4.2-m concave and mildly aspheric tertiary (M3) relays light to a flat 2.5-m deformable
mirror (M4) with some 5,000 degrees of freedom and then a 2.7-m field stabilizing mirror (M5).
The primary mirror focal ratio is f/1 and the final Nasmyth focal ratio is f/17.7. Besides the two
Nasmyth foci, there is a gravity-invariant focus that is fed by an additional fold flat (M6) and
an f/60 Coude focus.
The enclosure for the E-ELT will be a hemispherical dome with a design that is fairly
conventional except for its 100 m diameter; the design for the shutter has not yet been finalized.
In April 2010, the ESO Council selected Cerro Armazones (altitude 3,060 m) as the baseline
site forthe E-ELT. CerroArmazones is in the central part ofChile’s Atacama Desert, about 20 km
from the VLT on Cerro Paranal.
Acknowledgments
The preparation of this chapter was supported in part by the Thirty Meter Telescope Corpo-
ration. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the TMT partner institutions: the
Association of Canadian Universities for Research in Astronomy (ACURA), the California

134 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
Institute of Technology, and the University of California. This work was supported as well by
the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, the Canada Foundation for Innovation, the Ontario
Ministry of Research and Innovation, and the National Research Council of Canada.
References
Anderson, E., Bai, Z., Bischof, C., Blackford, S.,
Demmel, J., Dongarra, J., Croz, J. D., Green-
baum, A., Hammarling, S., McKenney, A., &
Sorensen, D. 1999, LAPACK User’s Guide (3rd
ed.; Philadelphia: Society for Pure and Applied
Mathematics)
Andersen, T., Ardeberg, A., Beckers, J., Gontcharov,
A., Owner-Petersen, M., & Riewaldt. H. 2004,
Euro 50, in Proceedings of the Second Back-
askog Workshop on Extremely Large Telescopes,
eds. A. Ardeberg and T. Andersen, (Bellingham:
SPIE). Proc SPIE 5382, 169–181
Barnes, T. G., Adams, M. T., Booth, J. A., Cornell,
M. E., Gaffney, N. I., Fowler, J. R., Hill, G. J.,
Hill, G. M., Nance, C. E., Piche, F., Ramsey,
L. W., Ricklets, R. L., Spiesman,
W. J., &
Worthington,
P.
T.
2000,
Commissioning
experience with the 9.2-m Hobby-Eberly tele-
scope,
in
Telescope
Structures,
Enclosures,
Controls,
Assembly/Integration/Validation,
and
Commissioning,
ed.
T.
A.
Sebring
&
T. Andersen (Bellingham: SPIE). Proc. SPIE,
4004, 14–25
Beckers, J. M., Ulich, B. L., & Williams, J. T. 1982,
MMT – the first of the advanced technology
telescopes. Proc. SPIE, 332, 2–8
Booth, J. A., MacQueen, P. J., Good, J. M., Wesley,
G. L., Hill, G. J., Palunas, P., Segura, P. R., &
Calder, R. E. 2006, The wide field upgrade for
the Hobby-Eberly telescope. Proc. SPIE, 6267,
62673W-1–62673W-11
Braunecker, B., Hentschel, R., & Tiziani, H. J. 2008,
Advanced Optics Using Aspherical Elements
(Bellingham: SPIE), SPIE Press Monograph Vol.
PM 173
Buckley, D. A. H., Meiring, J. G., Swiegers, J., & Swart,
G. P. 2004, Many segments and few dollars: SALT
solutions for ELTs? Proc. SPIE, 5382, 245–256
Burgarella,
D.,
Dohlen,
K.,
Ferrari,
M.,
Zamkotsian,
F., Hammer,
F., Sayede,
F., &
Rigaut, R. 2002, Large petal telescope for the
next-generation
Canada-France-Hawaii
Tele-
scope, in Future Giant Telescopes, ed. J. R. P.
Angel & R. Gilmozzi (Bellingham: SPIE). Proc.
SPIE, 4840, 93–103
Chanan, G. A. 1988, Design of the Keck Observa-
tory alignment camera, in Precision Instrument
Design, ed. T. C. Bristow & A. E. Hathaway
(Bellingham: SPIE). Proc. SPIE, 1036, 59–70
Chanan, G., & Nelson, J. 2009, Algorithm for the
identification of malfunctioning sensors in the
control systems of segmented mirror telescopes.
Appl. Opt., 48, 6281–6289
Chanan, G., & Troy, M. 1999, Strehl ratio and mod-
ulation transfer function for segmented mirror
telescopes as functions of segment phase error.
Appl. Opt., 38, 6642–6647
Chanan, G. A., Troy, M., Dekens, F. G., Michaels, S.,
Nelson, J., Mast, T., & Kirkman, D. 1998, Phas-
ing the mirror segments of the Keck telescopes:
the broadband phasing algorithm. Appl. Opt.,
37, 140–155
Chanan, G., Troy, M., & Sirko, E. 1999, Phase discon-
tinuity sensing: a method for phasing segmented
mirrors in the infrared. Appl. Opt., 38, 704–713
Chanan, G. A., Ohara, C., & Troy, M. 2000, Phasing
the mirror segments of the Keck telescopes: the
narrowband phasing algorithm. Appl. Opt., 39,
4706–4714
Chanan, G., MacMartin, D., Nelson, J., & Mast, T.
2004, Control and alignment of segmented-
mirror telescopes: matrices, modes, and error
propagation. Appl. Opt., 43, 1223–1232
Chevillard, J.-P., Connes, P., Cuisenier, M., Friteau,
J., & Marlot, C. 1977, Near infrared astronomical
light collector. Appl. Opt., 16, 1817–1833
Chueca,
S.,
Reyes,
M.,
Schumacher,
A.,
&
Montoya, L. 2008, DIPSI: measure of the tip-tilt
with a diffraction phase sensing instrument.
Proc. SPIE, 7012, 701213-1–701213-11
Cohen, R., Mast, T., & Nelson, J. 1994, Performance
of the W. M. Keck telescope active mirror control
system, in Advanced Technology Optical Tele-
scopes, ed. V, L. M. Stepp (Bellingham: SPIE).
Proc. SPIE, 2199, 105–116
Cui, X., Su, D.-Q., Wang, Y.-N., Li, G., Lui, G., Zhang,
Y., & Li, Y. 2010, The optical performance of
LAMOST telescope. Proc. SPIE, 7733, 773309-1–
773309-8
Dierickx, P., Beckers, J. L., Brunetto, E., Conan, R.,
Fedrigo, E., Gilmozzi, R., Hubin, N. N., Koch,
F., Lelouarn, M., Marchetti, E., Monnet, G. J.,
Noethe, L., Quattri, M., Sarazin, M. S., Spy-
romilio, J., & Yaitskova, N. 2002, The eye of the

Segmented Mirror Telescopes 3
135
beholder:
designing
the
OWL,
in
Future
Giant Telescopes,
ed. J. R. P. Angel & R.
Gilmozzi (Bellingham: SPIE). Proc. SPIE, 4840,
151–170
Esposito, S., Pinna, E., Puglisi, A., Tozzi, A., &
Stefanini, P. 2005, Pyramid sensor for segmented
mirror alignment. Opt. Lett., 30, 2572–2574
Fried, D. L. 1966, Optical resolution through a ran-
domly inhomogeneous medium for very long
and very short exposures. JOSA, 56, 1372–1379
Gardner,
J.
P.,
et
al.
2006,
The
James
Webb
Space
Telescope.
Space
Sci.
Rev.,
123,
485–606
Gerchberg, R. W., & Saxton, W. O. 1972, A prac-
tical algorithm for the determination of the
phase from image and diffraction plane pictures.
Optik, 35, 237–246
Gilmozzi, R., & Spyromilio, J. 2008, The 42m Euro-
pean ELT: status, in Ground-Based and Air-
borne Telescopes II, ed. L. Stepp & R. Gilmozzi
(Bellingham: SPIE), 5662, 701219-1–701219-10
Golub, G., & van Loan, C. 1996, Matrix Computations
(3rd ed.; London: The Johns Hopkins University
Press)
Gonte, F. Y., Yaitskova, N., Dierickx, P., Karban, R.,
Courteville, A., Schumacher, A., Devaney, N.,
Esposito, S., Dohlen, K., Ferrari, M., & Mon-
toya, L. 2004, APE: a breadboard to evaluate
new phasing technologies for a future Euro-
pean giant optical telescope. Proc. SPIE, 5489,
1184–1191
Horn
D’Arturo
G.
1955,
Pubblicazioni
dell’Osservatorio Astronomico Universitario di
Bologna, VI, 6
http://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/eelt/docs/e-elt_con
strproposal.pdf
http://www.gmto.org/science-conceptu.html
http://www.tmt.org/sites/default/files/TMT-Constru
ction-Proposal-Public.pdf
Jared, R. C., Arthur, A. A., Andreae, S., Biocca, A.,
Cohen, R. W., Fuertes, J. M., Franck, J., Gabor, G.,
Llacer, J., Mast, T., Meng, J., Merrick, T., Minor,
R., Nelson, J., Orayani, M., Salz, P., Schaefer, B.,
& Witebsky, C. 1990, The W. M. Keck telescope
segmented primary mirror active control system.
Proc. SPIE, 1236, 996–1008
Johns, M. 2008, The Giant Magellan
Telescope
(GMT). Proc. SPIE, 6986, 698603-1–698603-12
Lloyd-Hart,
M.,
Angel,
R.,
Milton,
N.
M.,
Rademacher, M., & Codona, J. 2006, Design of
the adaptive optics system for the GMT. Proc.
SPIE, 6272, 62720E-1–62720E-12
Lofdahl, M., & Eriksson, H. 2001, An algorithm
for resolving 2π ambiguities in interferometric
measurements by use of multiple wavelengths.
Opt. Eng., 40, 984–990
Lubliner, J., & Nelson, J. 1980, Stressed mirror
polishing:
a
technique
for
producing
non-axisymmetric
mirrors.
Appl.
Opt.,
19,
2332–2340
MacMartin, D. G., & Chanan, G. A. 2002, Control of
the California extremely large telescope primary
mirror, in Future Giant Telescopes, ed. J. R. P.
Angel & R. Gilmozzi (Bellingham: SPIE). Proc.
SPIE, 4840, 69–80
MacMartin, D. G., & Chanan, G. 2004, Measure-
ment accuracy in control of segmented-mirror
telescopes. Appl. Opt., 43, 608–615
Mast, T., & Nelson, J. 1982, Figure control for a
fully segmented primary mirror. Appl. Opt., 21,
2631–2641
Mast, T., & Nelson, J. 2000, Segmented mirror control
system hardware for CELT, in Optical Design,
Materials, Fabrication, and Maintenance, ed.
P. Dierickx (Bellingham: SPIE). Proc. SPIE, 4003,
226–240
Meng, J. D., Minor, R., Merrick, T., & Gabor, G.
1990, Position control of the mirror figure con-
trol actuator for the Keck Observatory ten meter
primary mirror. Proc. SPIE, 1236, 1018–1022
Minor, R. H., Arthur, A. A., Gabor, G., Jackson, H. G.,
Jr., Jared, R. C., Mast, T. S., & Schaefer, B. A.
1990, Displacement sensors for the primary mir-
ror of the W. M. Keck telescope. Proc. SPIE, 1236,
1009–1017
Montoya, L. 2004, Applications de l’interferometre
de Mach-Zehnder au cophasage des grands tele-
scopes segmentes. Ph.D. Thesis, Universite de
Provence
Nelson, J. E. 2000, Design concepts for the California
Extremely Large Telescope (CELT). Proc. SPIE,
4004, 282–289
Nelson, J., & Sanders, G. H. 2006, TMT status report,
in Ground-Based and Airborne Telescopes, ed.
L. M. Stepp (Bellingham: SPIE). Proc. SPIE,
6267, 745–761
Nelson, J., & Temple-Raston, M. 1982, The off-axis
expansion of conic surfaces. University of Cali-
fornia TMT Report No. 91
Nelson, J., Gabor, G., Hunt, L., Lubliner, J., & Mast, T.
1980, Stressed mirror polishing: fabrication of an
off-axis section of a paraboloid. Appl. Opt., 19,
2341–2352
Nelson, J., Lubliner, J., & Mast, T. 1982, Telescope
mirror supports: plate deflections on point sup-
ports. Proc SPIE, 332, 212–228
Nelson, J. E., Mast, T. S., & Faber, S. M. 1985, The
design of the Keck observatory and telescope.
Keck Observatory Report No. 90 (Berkeley: Keck
Observatory Science Office)
Noethe, L. 2002, Active optics in modern large optical
telescopes. Prog. Opt., 43, 1–69

136 3
Segmented Mirror Telescopes
Noll, R. J. 1976, Zernike polynomials and atmo-
spheric turbulence. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 66, 207–211
Papadogiannis, A. S., Papadogianni, N. S., Carabelas,
A., Tsitomeneas, S., Kyraggelos, P., & Chondros,
T. G. 2009, The mirror weapon in Archimedes’
era. (Dordrecht: Springer) Proc. EUCOMES08,
29–36
Press, W., Flannery, B., Teukolsky, S., & Vetterling, W.
1989, Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific
Computing (1st ed.; New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press)
Redding, D. C., Basinger, S. A., Cohen, D., Lowman,
A. E., Shi, F., Bely, P. Y. Bowers, C. W., Burg, R.,
Burns, L. A., Davila, P. S., Dean, B. H., Mosier,
G. E., Norton, T. A., Petrone, P., Perkins, B. D.,
& Wilson, M. 2000, Wavefront control for a seg-
mented deployable space telescope. Proc. SPIE,
4013, 546–558
Roberts, S. C., Morbey, C. L., Crabtree, D. R.,
Carlberg, R., Crampton, D., Davidge, T. J.,
Fitzsimmons, J. T., Gedig, M. H., Halliday, D. J.,
Hesse, J. E., Herriot, R. G., Oke, J. B., Pazder,
J. S., Szeto, K., & Veran, J.-P. 2002, Canadian
very large optical telescope technology studies,
in Future Giant Telescopes, ed. J. R. P. Angel
& R. Gilmozzi (Bellingham: SPIE). Proc. SPIE,
4840, 104–115
Roddier, F. 1988, Curvature sensing and compen-
sation: a new concept in adaptive optics. Appl.
Opt., 27, 1223–1225
Rodriguez Espinosa, J. M., Alvarez, P., & Sanchez, F.
1999, The GTC: an advanced 10m telescope for
the ORM. Astrophys. Space Sci., 263, 355–360
Sabelhaus, P., & Decker, J. 2004, An overview of the
James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) project.
Proc. SPIE, 5487, 550–563
Schroeder, D. J. 2000, Astronomical Optics (San
Diego, CA: Academic)
Schumacher, A., Devaney, N., & Montoya, L. 2002,
Phasing
segmented
mirrors:
a
modification
of the Keck narrow-band technique and its
application to extremely large telescopes. Appl.
Opt., 41, 1297–1307
Shi, F., Chanan, G., Ohara, C., Troy, M., & Red-
ding, D. C. 2004, Experimental verification of
dispersed fringe sensing as a segment phasing
technique using the Keck telescope. Appl. Opt.,
43, 4474–4481
Sivaramakrishnan, A., Makidon, R. B., Acton, D. S.,
& Shi, F. 2003, Coarse phasing JWST using
dispersed fringe sensing and dispersed Hart-
mann sensing during commissioning.
Space
Telescope Science Institute Technical Memoran-
dum STSCI-JWST-TM-2003-0022A, Baltimore
Strom, S. E., Stepp, L. M., & Gregory, B. 2002,
Giant
segmented
mirror
telescope:
a point
design based on science drivers, in Future Giant
Telescopes, ed. J. R. P. Angel & R. Gilmozzi
(Bellingham:
SPIE).
Proc.
SPIE,
4840,
116–128
Surdej, I., Yaitskova, N., & Gonte, F. 2010, On-sky
performance of the Zernike phase contrast sen-
sor for the phasing of segmented telescopes.
Appl. Opt., 49, 4053–4063
Troy, M., & Chanan, G. 2003, Diffraction effects from
giant segmented-mirror telescopes. Appl. Opt.,
42, 3745–3753
West, S. C., Callahan, S., Chaffee, F. H., Davidson,
W. B., Derigne, S. T., Fabricant, D. G., Foltz, C. B.,
Hill, J. M., Nagel, R. H., & Poyner, A. D. 1997,
Toward first light for the 6.5-m MMT telescope.
Proc. SPIE, 2871, 38–48
Yaitskova, N., Dohlen, K., Dierickx, P., & Montoya, L.
2005, Mach-Zehnder interferometer for piston
and tip-tilt sensing in segmented telescopes: the-
ory and analytical treatment. JOSA A, 22, 1093–
1105
Ziad, A., Schoeck, M., Chanan, G. A., Troy, M.,
Dekany, R., Lane, B. F., Borgnino, J., & Martin, F.
2004, Comparison of measurements of the outer
scale of turbulence by three different techniques.
Appl. Opt., 43, 2316–2324

4
Honeycomb Mirrors for
Large Telescopes
John Hill⋅Hubert Martin⋅Roger Angel
Large Binocular Telescope Observatory, University of Arizona,
Steward Observatory, Tucson, AZ, USA
Department of Astronomy, University of Arizona, Steward
Observatory, Tucson, AZ, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
1.1
Large Telescopes Using Honeycomb Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
1.2
Experience of the MMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
1.3
Early Casting Experiments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
1.4
Development of SOML and Hextek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
1.5
Requirements for Ground-Based Telescope Primary Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
1.5.1
Large Collecting Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
1.5.2
Image Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
1.5.3
Diffraction-Limited Performance in the Infrared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
1.5.4
Lightweight Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
1.5.5
Structural Stiffness of the Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
1.5.6
Low Thermal Inertia (Mirror Seeing) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
1.5.7
Low CTE and Fast Thermal Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
1.5.8
Affordable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
1.5.9
Compact Focal Lengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
2
Casting Borosilicate Honeycomb Mirror Blanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
2.1
Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
2.2
Process Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
2.2.1
Mold Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
2.2.2
Furnace Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
2.2.3
Casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
2.2.4
Annealing and Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
2.2.5
Mold Removal and Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
2.3
Why E6 Borosilicate Glass? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
2.4
Blank Dimensions and Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
2.4.1
Honeycomb Sandwich Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
2.4.2
Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
3
Optical Fabrication and Testing of Large, Aspheric Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
3.1
Overview of Fabrication and Testing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
3.2
Accuracy Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_4, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

138 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
3.3
Polishing of Large Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
3.4
Measurement of Large Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
4
Experience in Operating Astronomical Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
4.1
SDSS 2.5 Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
4.2
Lennon 1.8 Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
4.3
APO 3.5 Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
4.4
WIYN 3.5 Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
4.5
SOR 3.5 Meter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
4.6
MMT 6.5 Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
4.7
Magellan 6.5 Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
4.8
LBT × .Meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
4.8.1
Support and Positioning of Primary Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
4.8.2
Active Optics and Wavefront Sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
4.8.3
Ventilation and Thermal Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
4.8.4
Reflective Coating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
4.8.5
Handling and Transportation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
4.8.6
Adaptive Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
4.8.7
Phased Array Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
4.8.8
Partners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
5
Future Telescopes Under Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
5.1
LSST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
5.2
GMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
5.3
SASIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
139
Abstract:
This chapter deals with the design, fabrication, and use of the borosilicate glass
honeycomb mirrors which are being produced at the University of Arizona’s Steward Obser-
vatory Mirror Laboratory. These mirrors are a core technology for the whole telescope, and a
number of telescopes are now operational using these primary mirrors. The mirrors contribute
to the telescope design because of their light weight, their high stiffness, and their short ther-
mal time constant. The light weight of the primary mirrors helps to keep the weight of the entire
telescope low and to maximize the structural performance. The ability to circulate air through
the glass honeycomb structure allows control of local seeing in the telescope environment. The
honeycomb sandwich is formed by spin casting borosilicate glass into a ceramic fiber mold. The
Mirror Lab has previously produced three 3.5-m mirrors, three 6.5-m mirrors, and two 8.4-m
mirrors which are now operating successfully in telescopes. Results are highlighted from these
telescopes with emphasis on the Large Binocular Telescope with two 8.4 m primaries. Excellent
results have been obtained with adaptive secondary mirrors in combination with the honey-
comb primary mirrors. Two additional 6.5-m mirrors and two additional 8.4-m mirrors have
also been cast and are in various stages of production for other projects including the first off-
axis segment for the future Giant Magellan Telescope. An additional key technology for large
telescopes is the ability to fabricate high-precision primary optics with short focal lengths in
order to keep the telescope structure and enclosure compact. The stressed lap allows efficient
polishing of these fast conicsurfaces by actively adjusting its shape as it strokes across the mirror.
Keywords: Active optics, Adaptive optics, Beam combination, Borosilicate glass, Diffraction
limit, Future telescopes, Gas fusion, Honeycomb sandwich, Lightweight optics, Mirror seeing,
Mirror support, Off-axis paraboloid, Optical testing, Phased Array imaging, Polishing, Primary
mirror, Prime focus, Spin casting, Strehl ratio, Stressed lap, Telescope
List of Abbreviations:
MMT, Multiple Mirror Telescope; LBT, Large Binocular Telescope;
CTE, Coefficient of thermal expansion; SOML, Steward Observatory Mirror Laboratory
(Mirror Lab); SDSS, Sloan Digital Sky Survey; VATT, Vatican Advanced Technology Telescope
(Alice P. Lennon Telescope); APO, Apache Point Observatory; WIYN, Wisconsin Indiana Yale
NOAO; GMT, Giant Magellan Telescope; LSST, Large Synoptic Survey Telescope; NOAO,
National Optical Astronomy Observatory; IMACS, Inamori Magellan Areal Camera; HST,
Hubble Space Telescope; PSF, Point spread function; RTV, Room temperature vulcanizing sil-
icone; IRAF, Interactive Reduction and Analysis Facility; “km, m, cm, mm, μm, nm”, Metric
distances; FWHM, Full width at half maximum; P, Poise (unit of viscosity); SASIR, Synoptic
All-Sky Infrared Imaging Survey; CCD, Charge coupled device; DSP, Digital signal processor
1
Introduction
1.1 Large Telescopes Using Honeycomb Mirrors
Honeycomb mirrors were developed at the University of Arizona to enable the construction
of large telescopes with excellent performance at moderate cost. The performance is a result of
the mirrors’ high stiffness against gravity and wind, their rapid response to changing ambient
temperature, and the fact that monolithic mirrors automatically provide a smooth wavefront.
The honeycomb mirrors help control telescope costs because of their low mass, low sensitivity
to support forces, and the fact that short focal lengths were adopted for all telescopes using

140 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
honeycomb mirrors. The operating large telescopes using honeycomb mirrors are the 6.5-m
MMT ( >Sect. 4.5), the two 6.5-m Magellan telescopes ( >Sect. 4.7), and the Large Binocular
Telescope ( >Sect. 4.8) with two 8.4-m mirrors. These and other telescopes are described below
in Experience in Operating Astronomical Telescopes. Additional telescopes described in Future
Telescopes Under Development will also use honeycomb mirrors. The Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope ( >Sect. 5.1) will use an 8.4-m honeycomb substrate for its combined primary and
tertiary mirrors. The Giant Magellan Telescope ( >Sect. 5.2) will use seven 8.4-m honeycomb
segments to form its 25-m primary mirror.
1.2 Experience of the MMT
The original Multiple Mirror Telescope ( >Sect. 4.5) was built in the late 1970s using six 1.8-m
diametermirror blanks which were surplus satellite optics of honeycomb construction (Beckers
and Williams 1980; Beckers et al. 1981). One of the favorable surprises from the early obser-
vations with the MMT on Mt. Hopkins in 1979 was that the telescope sometimes gave superb
image quality (<0.5 arcsec) (Beckers et al. 1982) which was not expected from typical ground-
based telescopes at that time (Woolf 1982a). It was quickly recognized by Woolf (1979) that
the light weight honeycomb primary mirrors and the light weight telescope structure were sig-
nificant contributors to the reduced amount of local dome seeing (image blurring due to air
turbulence) which was observed. The concept of honeycomb mirrors in large telescope dates
back to Ritchey (1928) who recognized the potential performance gains of light weight optics
some 50 years earlier. The success of the original MMT led Angel and Woolf to start considering
large telescope designs which took advantage of light weight honeycomb mirrors and to direct
attention to seeing management in the telescope and enclosure designs (Angel and Woolf 1980;
Woolf 1982b).
1.3 Early Casting Experiments
In the fall of 1980, Angel and Hill (1981) undertook a series of experiments in the fabrication
of honeycomb primary mirrors from borosilicate glass. The idea was to achieve the excellent
imaging performance seen in the MMT, while using a simpler and less expensive glass technol-
ogy than the fused silica used in the MMT honeycomb mirrors. Borosilicate glass is relatively
inexpensive, is easy to form into complex shapes at modest temperatures, and already had sig-
nificant astronomer experience in the Hale 5-m telescope on Mt. Palomar with its borosilicate
ribbed structure produced by Corning Glass in 1935 (McCauley 1934). The initial experiments
attempted to replicate the fused eggcrate structure of the MMT primary mirrors in borosilicate
glass. The honeycomb rib structure was easy to replicate, but fusing together the edges of flat
plates to make facesheets larger than a single sheet of glass was problematic. Eventually, the
experimental path led to turning up the furnace temperature to 1,200○C and melting broken
pieces of borosilicate glass into a ceramic fiber mold. The higher temperature allowed the glass
pieces to melt together and to flow into the mold to create the continuous honeycomb sand-
wich structure including the facesheet. This casting technology opened the path to making a
borosilicate honeycomb blank of nearly any diameter without constraint by the size of available
glass sheets (Angel et al. 1981; Angel and Hill 1982; Hill and Angel 1983; Angel and Hill 1984).

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
141
1.4 Development of SOML and Hextek
Some early experiments with fusing close-packed glass tubes together between plates to form
a honeycomb structure were commercialized by Hextek Inc. (Parks et al. 1990). Hextek has
been producing borosilicate honeycomb mirrors with this gas fusion technology in the 1 m
size range for more than 20 years. Slight air pressure is used to inflate glass tubes so that they
morph into a honeycomb as they are fused between facesheets. The resulting flat blanks can be
slumped to the desired radius of curvature. The experiments in casting borosilicate glass into
molds at highertemperature led tothe formation ofthe Steward ObservatoryMirrorLaboratory
(SOML) located under the stands of the University of Arizona football stadium in Tucson. The
initial casting experiments produced two 1.8-m f/1.75 honeycomb blanks in 1983 (Angel and
Hill 1984) followed by the spin casting of the 1.8-m f/1.0 primary for the VATT telescope in 1985
(Goble et al. 1985) . Construction of the present laboratory began in 1984 as part of a program
to produce several 3.5-m honeycomb mirrors as a stepping stone to larger sizes (Angel et al.
1990). These 3.5-m mirrors were used in the APO, WIYN, and SOR telescopes discussed below
in Experience in Operating Astronomical Telescopes. The Mirror Lab has specialized in the
development and production (both casting and polishing) of large honeycomb mirrors from
3.5- to 8.4-m diameter.
1.5 Requirements for Ground-Based Telescope Primary Mirrors
A key step in the development of the borosilicate honeycomb mirrors was to understand what
design parameters were required formirrors in large ground-based telescopes (Angel and Woolf
1984). Astronomers always want a large collecting area and sharp images in order to have a
crisp view of extremely faint distant objects (Pease 1926). Historically, each significant step in
collecting area has also resulted in unexpected new astronomical discoveries along with the
expected gains in light-gathering power. To constrain our design, it is necessary to peel back
another level of engineering detail and see what those basic astronomer requirements entail for
practical large telescope mirrors. At the same time, the technological solutions for large optics
must be explored to see how they mesh with the astronomical requirements. Those are the
iterative trade-offs needed for a successful telescope design. The successful design must meet
the astronomical needs while being produced with practical technology. Note that there are
other mirror technology solutions for large telescopes, developed around the same time that
are described in adjacent chapters on
>Chap. 3 and
>Chap. 5.
The following parameters must be optimized for large ground-based telescopes: maximum
light-collecting area, maximum light collection efficiency, and sharpest image quality. At the
same time, the engineering solutions must fight the effects of varying gravity forces as the tele-
scope moves around the sky and the effects of wind and other stray forces bending the mirrors.
The technology must also deal with the effects of a changing temperature environment in order
to minimize local mirror seeing and other disturbances so that the delivered image quality
will be limited only by the turbulence of the free atmosphere. The importance of temperature
management was not widely recognized in earlier generations of telescopes built prior to 1975
(Woolf 1979). The design of the optics must have minimum impact on the telescope structure,
the telescope enclosure, and the resulting cost so that the entire observatory is practical to build.

142 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
Those considerations have led to the following specific items to be optimized during the design
and production of the borosilicate honeycomb mirrors for ground-based telescopes.
1.5.1 Large Collecting Area
The signal-to-noise ratio for observing distant objects with a telescope almost always depends
on the total number of photons collected. The need for photons is particularly critical for high-
resolution spectroscopy where the total number of photons is dispersed among many spectral
resolution elements, and observations are frequently limited by readout noise. Optical/infrared
telescopes with the largest collecting areas are built on the ground rather than in space because
the area (size of the telescope) is not limited by the launch capability. For some observations
(those which are photon starved on bright objects), the ground-based telescopes are able to
compete with the lower background in space-based telescopes by having larger collecting area.
1.5.2 Image Quality
All telescopes, especially the largest telescopes, must have excellent image quality. They cannot
simply be “light buckets,” or smaller telescopes with better images will be able to outperform
them by detecting faint astronomical objects against a background. Because of the large size of
the primary mirrors and their important light collecting function in the telescope, the optical
surface figure specification of the primary optics is critical to the cost, schedule and perfor-
mance of the telescopes. The goal is always the best possible image quality, but there is risk in
asking for too much. Overspecifying the figure for polishing the optics may drain resources
from other parts of the telescope. The figure of the mirrors for ground-based telescopes is
set to match the performance of the atmosphere on the best nights as opposed to being fully
diffraction-limited in visible light (Hill 1990). Most large telescopes of the current generation
adopt a similar strategy for the optical specification as used by the Keck 10-m telescopes (Keck
Observatory Project Office 1985). This strategy puts the atmosphere as the limiting factor for
image quality all the time. This also means that any adaptive optics correction which can com-
pensate the atmospheric wavefront can also compensate residual static errors in the telescope
optics. The result of this specification strategy is that the small to mid-scale (10–20 cm) surface
errors are the most critical. The detailed requirements for polishing are discussed in more detail
below in >Sect. 3.2.
1.5.3 Diﬀraction-Limited Performance in the Infrared
A key assumption in designing telescopes with large apertures (larger than 4 m for the pur-
poses of this discussion) is that some observations will be made in the infrared where the
diffraction-limit sets the ultimate imaging performance. The effects of atmospheric turbu-
lence on seeing decrease as the wavelength increases, so diffraction takes over as the limit
on image quality in the mid-infrared (Dierickx et al. 1990). At shorter wavelengths, technol-
ogy limitations may restrict the image quality so that multiple smaller apertures may be the
most effective solution for a particular telescope. Diffraction-limited imaging (with adaptive
optics in the near infrared and without the need for adaptive optics at longer mid-infrared

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
143
wavelengths) forces the telescope to have sections of continuous phased aperture in the 6–10-m
size range. Imaging limited byatmosphericturbulence at shortervisual wavelengths can be done
more economically with arrays of smaller nonphased apertures (with the exception of speckle
interferometry which requires the implicit resolution of larger apertures) (Kaiser et al. 2002).
Developments in telescope design and adaptive optics have made this case even stronger with
future telescopes pushing to diffraction-limited performance over 25–40-m apertures such as
those described below in > Sect. 5. Some multiple mirror or multiple telescope designs are
able to improve the single-aperture diffraction limit by combining the light from multiple aper-
tures. The Large Binocular Telescope ( >Sect. 4.8) discussed below is an example of combining
the light from two 8.4-m apertures to achieve additional resolution over a 22.65-m diffrac-
tion baseline. For some observations, the ground-based telescopes are able to compete with the
lower background in space-based telescopes by having larger apertures and better diffraction-
limited resolution. This advantage has only recently been realized on the ground with the
advent of adaptive optics as discussed in >Sect. 4.8.6 to minimize the effects of atmospheric
turbulence.
1.5.4 Lightweight Optics
The mirror substrate should be light weight – a restriction that becomes more demanding as
the size and resulting mass of the telescope increases. Scaling up classical mirror substrates with
aspect ratios (diameter/thickness) of 6:1 quickly leads to 8-m primary mirrors that are slabs
of glass over a meter thick with weights approaching 100 tons. Many people have recognized
that these classical designs with heavy slabs of glass are impractical even when executed in
zero-expansion materials. There are serious problems with mirror seeing when such a thick
slab of glass is always out of temperature equilibrium (thermal time constant of 1 week) with
the mountaintop environment. The weight of the classical blank also drives the entire telescope
structure to be far too heavy and expensive. Lightweight optics allow the optical support system
and the entire telescope structure tobe much less massive at a given level ofoptical performance.
1.5.5 Structural Stiﬀness of the Optics
Having optics that are light weight is not sufficient. The telescope mirrors must also be stiff
enough to resist disturbing forces and maintain their precise shapes. Of course, the function of
the mirror substrate is to support and stabilize the thin metal layer which is the actual reflecting
surface. The honeycomb sandwich structure is an opportunity to preserve the inherent stiffness
against gravity of the 6:1 aspect ratio of earlier mirrors, while reducing the total weight by a fac-
toroforder5. The present borosilicate honeycomb blanks are designed tohave a stiffness/weight
ratio similar to a thick solid mirror. That gives them a stable figure against the forces of wind
and gravity. As mirrors grow to even larger diameters (and become more difficult to shield from
the wind), it is the wind forces that provide the ultimate limit to how much the stiffness can be
reduced by light weighting.
All ground-based telescope optics must be carefully supported to minimize flexure under
gravityloading. The common approach is toprovide a distributed support force to float the optic
against gravity. The honeycomb substrates have been optimized to reproduce the original figure
with fairly simple mechanical supports. For more flexible mirrors, the tolerances on the support

144 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
forces become tighter. Thus, there is a practical trade-off between the stiffness and weight of the
substrate, on the one hand, and the complexity of the support system. Mirror substrates that
are more flexible require more precise support forces (either passive or active) to maintain the
same optical precision.
Active optics apply slow correction forces to the mirrors (timescales of minutes or hours)
in order to compensate for figure errors including those due to residual and transient errors in
the support. These corrections serve to lessen the absolute requirements on the mirror support
system. Active optics are also discussedin detail in >Chap. 5 and by Noethe (2002). We discuss
active optics later in this chapter as they are critical to the mirror figuring process ( >Sect. 3.3)
and to the performance in the telescopes ( >Sect. 4.8.2).
1.5.6 Low Thermal Inertia (Mirror Seeing)
Making the mirror substrates thinner and lighter provides another performance gain by lower-
ing their thermal inertia. Ideally, the surface of the mirror (as well as the surrounding telescope)
should be in α precise thermal equilibrium with the ambient mountain air. A thick mirror will
tend to lag behind the temperature of the cooling mountain air on a typical night due to the
thermal inertia of the glass. If the mirror (or the surrounding support structure) is out of tem-
perature equilibrium, then mixing of the air by convection and/or wind can create pockets of
warmer and colder air with higher and lower refractive index which blurs the image. To min-
imize this “mirror seeing,” the mirror surface should track the ambient temperature within
about 0.2○C (Siegmund et al. 1990). This means the mirror substrate should have a thermal
time constant less than 1 h in typical conditions. Such a short time constant can be achieved
in the honeycomb structure by actively ventilating the inside of the mirror structure since the
thickest section of glass is only 28 mm thick at the faceplate.
1.5.7 Low CTE and Fast Thermal Equilibrium
Any thermal difference within or across the mirror substratewill induce a distortion in the opti-
cal figure if the coefficient of thermal expansion α is nonzero. Local differences in temperature
δT through the body of the mirror can produce bumps (or dips) on the surface. These bumps
are proportional to the CTE, the temperature variation, and the thickness h (αδT h) (Angel
et al. 1983). Vertical temperature gradients also cause bending proportional to (αδT/h). This
thermal distortion has been an issue since telescopes were first invented. An approach in the
mid-twentieth century has been to make telescope optics from newly invented materials with
effectively zero CTE at room temperature (Cervit, Zerodur, ULE). Unfortunately, these mate-
rials are only available in the form of solid slabs or meniscii and are not amenable to forming
large light weight structures. The zero-CTE solutions are optimal for thermal distortion, but
they are generally poor for mirror seeing because their increased mass and thickness makes
them frequently out of thermal equilibrium. An alternative approach is to use a material with
high thermal conductivity to suppress temperature gradients. A thermally optimized substrate
represents a trade-off of short thermal time constant, high thermal conductivity, and low CTE
(Miroshnikov et al. 1992).

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
145
Variations in CTE (δα), like variations in temperature, induce thermal distortion in the
mirror surface. The polished mirror must be stable against temperature changes since it will
work in a mountaintop environment that may be 40○C colder than the optical laboratory. This
requires the mirror substrate to have a homogeneous CTE so that uniform temperaturechanges
(ΔT) do not induce distortions in the surface (δαΔT) (Angel et al. 1983).
1.5.8 Aﬀordable
The cost of a telescope mirror is perhaps the most difficult parameter to specify from first prin-
ciples, although there is broad agreement that the cost should be optimized downward. Perhaps
we can conclude that we must contain the mirror budget within a reasonable fraction of the total
telescope project. Elaborate fabrication schemes such a machining an 8-m honeycomb blank out
of zero-expansion glass ceramic have been ruled out for that reason. The same machined hon-
eycomb technology may well be practical for a space telescope where the budget-to-aperture
ratio is significantly higher. Cost may also be a significant factor when considering the support
and handling schemes for large mirrors.
1.5.9 Compact Focal Lengths
Independent of the substrate technology, keeping the telescope optics compact may signifi-
cantly impact the total cost of a telescope and its enclosure. The pure construction costs have to
be traded with the tighter alignment tolerances of fast optics. Meinel (1979) discussed how the
costs of larger telescopes might be reduced below the traditional D.scaling law. Factors that
significantly affect the scaling are the focal ratio of the optics, the structural configuration of the
telescope, and the configuration of multiple or segmented apertures. Telescopes with primary
mirrors approaching f/1 (focal length equal to the diameter) seem to be optimal in controlling
the overall cost of the telescope and enclosure, and have been demonstrated to fall below the tra-
ditional scaling relation. The technology for fabrication and testing of fast paraboloidal surfaces
near f/1 is discussed below. LBT ( >Sect. 4.8) is an example of a large telescope that included
short focal ratios, multiple primary apertures, and novel structural design in its construction.
2
Casting Borosilicate Honeycomb Mirror Blanks
2.1 Key Concepts
The borosilicate honeycomb mirrorblanks developed bythe Steward ObservatoryMirrorLab at
the University of Arizona are continuous glass structures with a sandwich geometry. By melt-
ing chunks of glass into a mold, two facesheets are formed with a hexagonal rib structure in
between to provide mechanical stiffness. The key concepts involved in that development are
the following:
1. Complex shapes can be formed by remelting borosilicate glass into a complex ceramic mold
that is the negative of the desired shape. A version of this process was used by Corning in

146 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
1935 to produce the blank for the Hale 5-m mirror with 100-mm wide ribs on the back side
ofthe mirrortoimprove stiffness. SOMLhas refined the process toachieve an increased light
weighting factor (×5) with 12-mm wide ribs and increased stiffness with a nearly continuous
backsheet. Details of the molding process are discussed below in >Sect. 2.2.
2. The furnace and mold are spun during the remelting process to produce the rough
paraboloidal shape by centrifugal force. The radius of curvature of the molten glass surface is
controlled by the rotation rate. When a liquid is rotated with angular velocity ω in a gravity
field, the surface takes on the shape of a paraboloid with radius of curvature R = g/ω, where
g is the acceleration due togravity. In addition toforming the desired surface shape, the spin-
ning eliminates the need for an enormous amount of rough grinding. The glass that would
need to be ground away (without the spinning) is greater than the mass in the remaining
honeycomb sandwich structure for the fast paraboloidal surfaces being produced.
3. Existing industrial technologies are used for furnace materials and controls. The mirror
blanks are formed in a rotating electrical furnace with heated surfaces all around the perime-
ter, base and top. A crossed roller bearing allows the entire furnace to rotate while slip rings
bring the electrical power onto the rotating platform. While this particular application is
novel, all of the furnace technologies are in common use for steel production and similar
industries. Additional details on the furnace and the casting facility are discussed below.
4. After remelting, the resulting glass structure must be cooled and annealed carefully in order
to achieve a low-stress blank and the long-term stability and safety which that entails. This
slow cooling is the most challenging part of the process from the controls point of view as
precise temperature control is needed for several months.
5. After the glass reaches room temperature, it is necessary to remove the mold material from
the inside of the glass honeycomb to produce a useable light weight mirror blank. The alu-
minosilicate mold material must withstand chemical attack from the molten glass, it must
withstand the hydrostatic forces of the molten glass, yet it must also be friable enough to
be removed from inside the glass structure. The mold material is mechanically broken up
using high pressure water spray which erodes the fibrous ceramic mold without damaging
the glass surface. The surface of the glass has a texture matching that of the mold.
2.2 Process Description
2.2.1 Mold Assembly
The casting of one of three 3.5-m diameter blanks has been described in detail by Goble et al.
(1989). The procedures used for mold assembly and casting have been described by Hill and
Angel (1992) and Olbert et al. (1994) for the first of five 6.5-m mirrors. This section describes
the mold assembly process for an 8.4-m honeycomb blank. The two 8.4-m primaries for LBT
have been described by Hill et al. (1998) and Martin et al. (2006).
A large cylindrical tub is assembled to contain the entire mold under the hydrostatic pres-
sure of the glass that will flow into it. The viscosity of the glass is similar to that of honey on a
cold day (10P) and is sufficiently low that the full hydrostatic forces are applied to the mold.
The base of the mold is assembled from a close-packed array of individual silicon carbide (SiC)
basetiles aligned with the positions of the honeycomb core molds that will form the voids in
the honeycomb. Each hexagonal basetile has a captive SiC nut below it which holds the SiC bolt

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
147
Lid Heater Panels
Tub Walls
Inconel
Bands
Wall Liner
Core Tops
Cross Pins
Core Boxes
SiC Bolts
SiC Nuts
SiC Basetiles
SiC Hearthplates
⊡Fig. 4-1
This ﬁgure shows a cross section of the mold for the 8.4-m diameter honeycomb mirror. Glass
chunks are piled directly on top of the cores before the casting process begins. The furnace
boundary is shown on the left side. Steward Observatory drawing by Eric Anderson
used to restrain the core mold from floating under buoyancy forces. The basetiles can be seen
attached to the bottom of the mirror mold in >Fig. 4-1.
The classic failure mode of such a mold is having the core boxes float in the molten glass.
This is a challenging problem because common fastener materials such as steel melt at or below
the casting temperature. The reuseable injection molded SiC bolts and nuts used to hold down
the core boxes are manufactured by Ferro Corporation. Inner and outer tub wall sections are
assembled around the tile base in the manner of barrel staves. The segments of the tub wall are
made from Carborundum Carbofrax SiC-based castable refractory. The barrel-like walls are
restrained by bands of Inconel 601 steel which is the last alloy that will survive in an oxygen
atmosphere at these temperatures. Each band wraps 90○around the tub and connects to pneu-
matic cylinders outside the furnace in order to take up slack and maintain tension as the band
expands with temperature. The pneumatic cylinders constrain the tub against hydrostatic pres-
sure and centrifugal forces during casting but can be relaxed to avoid stressing the honeycomb
blank during cooling. The tub walls and the restraining bands can be seen in >Fig. 4-2. The
8.4-m mold uses a total of 124 Inconel bands with a cross section of 12.9 square cm each.
The tub and basetiles are lined with aluminosilicate refractory fiberboard to avoid chemical
reactions between the SiC and the molten glass. Inside the tub, the 8.4-m LBT mold has 1,662
ceramic fiber core boxes which form the voids in the honeycomb structure. Each of these core
boxes is manufactured by Rex Roto Corporation and then machined to its final shape at the
Mirror Lab. Olbert and Schenck (1997) report on several studies of the material properties of
this particular ceramic fiber and rigidizer formulation. The friable aluminosilicate fiberboard
has reasonable structural strength and is only mildly attacked by the chemistry of the molten

148 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
⊡Fig. 4-2
This photo shows the 8.4-m GMT1 primary mirror on the furnace hearth as it was being de-molded
after casting in October 2005. The SiC refractory tub walls surrounded by the Inconel steel bands
which constrain thehydrostatic pressureof themolten glasscan be seen. One of eight setsof pneu-
matic cylinders which tension the bands can be seen in the lower left corner. Heater elements in
the walls of the furnace can be seen near the top. The honeycomb core molds can be seen through
the partially transparent surface of the glass. Because this mirror blank will be an oﬀ-axis section
of a larger parent paraboloid, no central hole is required
glass. Each machined core box is aligned with its particular hex tile using a special box place-
ment tool in order to maintain the uniformity of the honeycomb ribs. After the SiC bolt has
been tightened to hold each core to the bottom of the mold, stabilizing cross pins are installed
to prevent the cores from leaning to the side during the casting and spinning. Post collars sep-
arate the body of the core from the floorboard to form the holes in the perforated backplate of
the mirror. Finally, a lid is glued and pinned onto the top of each core box. Before the mold is
loaded with glass, it is heated to the glass melting temperature to cure all the ceramic glue and
to stabilize the shrinkage.
2.2.2 Furnace Description
The process for spincasting large borosilicate honeycomb mirrors requires heating tons of glass
in a complex mold to 1,165○C while spinning the entire furnace at 6.8rpm. The peak power con-
sumption during heating exceeds one megawatt. After casting, the honeycomb blank must be
cooled through the annealing temperaturerange at 0.1○C/h. The glass is in the furnace on a con-
trolled temperatureschedule for a 14 week period. The furnace control system reads 600 N-type
thermocouples and controls 270 8-kW heaters. The control system regulates the furnace tem-
perature to a few degrees over the entire casting cycle. Considerable design effort has gone into
assuring that a component failure or a control system error does not turn an 8-m mirror into
an expensive patio ornament. Errors are avoided by four strategic steps: fault avoidance, fault
detection, fault containment, and fault recovery. System redundancy begins with three onboard
68,000-family VME-bus computers (powerful when they were new) which control overlapping

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
149
areas of the furnace. Redundancy extends down through the temperature measurement and
power control systems with many modular, interleaved, and optically isolated subsystems. Data
logging and system monitoring are achieved with a pair of Sun workstations running IRAF
software in the control room. Rotation of the furnace is controlled by two 40-horsepower DC
servomotors with speed regulation to 0.1%. A 6-m diameterfurnace was constructed on a larger
turntable in 1986 to cast three 3.5-m blanks. The furnace was expanded in 1990 on the same
turntable to cast 6.5- and 8.4-m blanks. The full-size furnace has an internal diameter of 9.5 m.
There is a cylindrical wall 1.2 m high, topped by a flat disk and a conical lid section. The furnace
has as major components a hearth, walls, and lid. The circular bottom plate, or hearth, is pieced
together from smaller pie-shaped segments of silicon carbide-based refractory. The hearth pro-
vides the working surface on which tobuild the complexhoneycomb mold described above. The
hearth, walls, and lid contain embedded electric heaterelements to heat the furnace. Additional
details on the furnace and its control system are provided by Hill et al. (1990).
2.2.3 Casting
For each 8.4-m LBT mirror, 19 metric tons of glass were carefully loaded onto the mold and
the furnace lid was lowered into place. The chunks of glass must be placed carefully by hand
in order to avoid damage to the fragile ceramic mold material as shown in >Fig. 4-3. Heating
of the glass and mold begins after the top is placed on the furnace. The temperature is ramped
up to the maximum temperature over the course of a week. The rate of heating is controlled
in order to limit the thermal stresses on the refractory mold components. Rotation at 6.8 rpm
begins when the furnace reaches 750○C – the temperature at which the glass blocks just begin
to flow. Spinning and heating continue until the maximum temperature of 1,165○C is reached.
The glass blocks slump and flow together to form a meniscus on top of the honeycomb mold.
Then the glass slowly flows down the gaps for the honeycomb ribs as the viscosity decreases
over several hours. The furnace temperature is held at the maximum temperature for 5 h to
allow the glass to flow into all corners of the mold and to allow trapped air bubbles to rise to
the surface. This process is monitored by CCD cameras looking through pinholes in the furnace
wall. Flash lamps are used to provide blue light in order to achieve contrast against the strong red
blackbody radiation. A sequence of these images showing the glass blocks slumping is shown
in >Fig. 4-4. The temperature is ramped back down to 650○C over the next 2 days while the
furnace continues to spin. At this point, the glass is viscous enough to hold the paraboloidal
shape without spinning, but is still soft enough to flow microscopically under mechanical or
thermal stresses.
2.2.4 Annealing and Cooling
In order to produce a low-stress glass blank at the end of the process, the glass must be cooled
slowly through the annealing range. The annealing range is that range of temperatures where the
relaxation time of stresses in the glass increases from hours to years. Any stresses leftover from
the casting process relax quickly away above the annealing point (upper end of the annealing
range). The blank must be cooled very slowly through the annealing range in order to minimize
the thermal gradient (due to the cooling) that becomes a stress gradient after the blank reaches

150 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
⊡Fig. 4-3
This photo shows the loading of the 19 tons of Ohara E6 borosilicate glass chunks on top of the
honeycomb mold for the casting of the LBT2 8.4-m primary in June 2000. The mold is assembled
inside the rotating furnace at the Steward Observatory Mirror Laboratory. Each 5 kg chunk of pre-
inspected glass is carefully placed by hand in order to protect the fragile mold material
⊡Fig. 4-4
These photos show the melting sequence of the E6 glass during the casting of the LSST primary
mirror in April 2008. The left photo shows the glass as discrete chunks while the furnace is heating
at a temperature of 300○C. The middle photo shows the glass chunks merged into a meniscus on
top of the honeycomb mold at a temperature of 966○C. The zigzag lines are the reﬂections of elec-
tric heater elements in the lid of the furnace. The right photo shows the ﬁnished product with the
glass ﬂowed into the honeycomb mold while the blank was annealing. The horizontal lines show
the depth of the faceplate glass in inches. The outlines of the core molds can be seen through the
transparent glass surface

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
151
thermal equilibrium at room temperature. Annealing theory is discussed by Morey (1938). The
annealing time increases as the square of the thickness for a solid slab of glass. Because the mold
inside the honeycomb structure is more conductive than glass, the annealing time increases
roughly linearly with the thickness of the honeycomb sandwich. In practice, the mirror is cooled
at a rate of 0.1○C/h in order to achieve a thermal gradient less than 1○C through the thickness of
the blank. This cooling rate is maintained from 530○C to 450○C which is a conservative estimate
of the annealing range. The entire surface of the furnace around the mold is controlled to a frac-
tion of a degree in order to make the entire mold nearly isothermal. The cooling rate increases
below the annealing range, but care must be taken to avoid thermal stresses in the now rigid
glass structure. Thermal gradients of 10○C across the blank would induce dangerous stresses.
The honeycomb sandwich is much more sensitive to thermal gradients than borosilicate bake-
ware because of its rigid structure. The total casting process uses 9 days for the initial heating
and spinning, plus an additional 90 days for annealing and cooling back to room temperature.
2.2.5 Mold Removal and Handling
A handing fixture composed of a 10-m diameter lifting frame, and turning ring is used to lift,
support, and flip (invert) blanks up to 8.4-m diameter as they are removed from the furnace.
The lifting strategy is to insure that tensile stresses in the glass blank stay less than 0.7 mPa at
every point in handling. The first lift of the mirror off the furnace and into a vertical position
causes the largest stress it is ever likely to see because the honeycomb structure is carrying the
extra 16-ton load of the refractory mold material. Some finite element analysis of the handling
support is described by Parodi et al. (1992). The designs of the support systems for holding the
8.4-m mirrors in the furnace, in the handling fixture, and in the telescope are summarized by
Parodi et al. (1997). Additional details about the lifting and handling of these large honeycomb
mirrors are provided by Davison et al. (1998).
In the first step of lifting, the cast mirror off of the furnace hearth, 36 mild steel pads 60 cm
in diameter are positioned and attached to the blank’s faceplate with a 1-cm thick patchwork
layer of RTV silicone sealant and silicone rubber tubing. The silicone tubing acts as a portal for
easy removal of reaction products released during cure, letting the RTV silicone cure rapidly
and uniformly throughout the layer. Shear strength, tensile strength, and creep response of
steel-RTV-glass sandwiches are measured to assess the short- and long-term performance of
the attachment method. The glass blank plus mold material are lifted off the furnace hearth
with the steel lifting frame attached to these 36 pads. Rubber spacers between the frame and
the pads assure that the load is spread uniformly across the glass blank using all of the pads.
The lifting frame with the glass blank attached is mounted horizontally in the turning ring. To
clean the mold material from the blank, the turning ring is rotated until vertical. This exposes
the backplate of the mirror which had been resting on the hearth. A special washout stand
with two independent elevating work platforms is assembled and moved within easy reaching
distance of the backplate. Working from top to bottom, the cleaning crew removes all the SiC
nuts and hexagonal tiles which are the reusable parts of a mold. Then working from bottom
to top, each cell box is breached and the SiC bolt and washer removed. Using a high pressure
(11 mPa) water jet “cleaning wand” which breaks up the friable ceramic, the core material is
sliced into chunks and the pieces of soft refractory mold are removed by hand. This particular
order of operation is done to avoid filling the mold with additional tons of water. Once the mold

152 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
material has been removed from the glass honeycomb, the blank is rotated again with the same
lifting fixture to a downward facing position to prepare for machining the rear surface of the
blank.
2.3 Why E6 Borosilicate Glass?
The honeycomb sandwich blanks produced at the Steward Observatory Mirror Lab are all made
of remelted E6 glass supplied by Ohara Incorporated of Kanagawa, Japan. E6 is a borosilicate
crown glass produced in 1-ton batches by traditional glassmaking techniques in large clay pots.
Glass is used as the substrate for a great majority of optics because its amorphous structure can
be polished very smooth without problems with crystal grain structure in the surface. Glasses
hold their shapes indefinitelyas long as they are not stressed to the point of fracture. Contrary to
urban legend, the glass in very old windows or telescope mirrors does not flow (Zanotto 1998).
Thus, a precise figure produced in the optical shop can be stable for centuries in the telescope.
Moreover, glass is perfectly elastic, meaning a shape change due to applied stress disappears
completely when the stress is removed, provided no fractures are induced. Metals and other
candidate materials may deform inelastically under applied loads. The optical figure produced
in the shop, with the glass mirror on a given set of support forces, will be reproduced in the
telescopewhen the mirror is supported with the same forces. A limitation of glassmirrors is that
stresses must be kept low enough to avoid fractures for the life of the telescope. The maximum
allowed stress depends on the area and processing of the glass surfaces but is generally on the
order of several MPa.
Borosilicate glass was chosen for this application because it can be readily worked and
formed at modest temperatures below 1,200○C. Other glasses such as fused silica (SiO) must
be heated to near their decomposition temperaturebefore they can be slumped or molded. Typ-
ical glass ceramics cannot be remelted after the initial production. The ideal mirror substrate
would have a zero coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE). Borosilicate glass has a reasonably
low CTE and excellent chemical durability. In particular, E6 has a room temperature CTE of
27.8 × 10−/○C which is about 15% lower than typical borosilicate glasses. For ground-based
telescopes, one can compensate for the finite CTE by ventilating the honeycomb structure to
follow the ambient air temperature on the mountain. E6 is supplied in 5-kg chunks with broken
surfaces as it is mined out of the 1-ton batch pots. These chunks are particularly attractive for
the remelting process as the broken glass surfaces are uncontaminated and fuse back together
without any detectable bond line in the final honeycomb structure. Each individual chunk is
inspected under polarized light to permit any impurities to be removed before the remelting
process.
Empirically, the batch production of E6 allows very careful control of the chemical compo-
sition and therefore the homogeneity of CTE. The variation of CTE from batch to batch (1-ton
batches) is 0.6 × 10−/○C p-v for production over several years. The Mirror Lab typically sorts
the batches by measured CTE to get a range of only 0.4 × 10−/○C within a single mirror. The
glass chunks are further mixed as they are placed in the mold to average any residual batch-to-
batch CTE variations across the blank. This low variation of the CTE is important as it allows
the mirror figure to be stable against the seasonal temperaturechanges on the mountaintop. The
mirror is able to retain the figure that it had in the optical laboratory as the ambient temperature
cools by 40○C.

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
153
2.4 Blank Dimensions and Properties
2.4.1 Honeycomb Sandwich Design
The basic concept of a honeycomb sandwich structure is to have a light weight core sepa-
rating two thin plates. This type of structure is encountered commonly in everyday life with
examples as varied as corrugated cardboard boxes or airplane wings. Often, the central core
structure is composed of ribs as the two-dimensional analog of an I-beam. The bending stiff-
ness comes mainly from the depth of the sandwich between the two faceplates. The light weight
core can have any geometry ranging from foam to posts to ribs. Structures with equal mass in
the facesheets and core seem to be the most mass efficient. The shear stiffness comes from the
structure of the core, so a pattern of interlocking ribs is quite efficient. For a telescope mirror,
the internal structure should have a uniform thermal time constant and therefore a uniform
mass density such as a regular pattern of square or hexagonal ribs. Hexagonal ribs resist the
hydrostatic pressure of the glass best because they have the shortest length for a given area of
the core. Fillets are added where glass plate structures intersect to avoid stress concentrations
at sharp corners in the structure.
2.4.2 Dimensions
As described by Hill et al. (1998), the finished outside diameterof the honeycomb mirror blanks
for LBT ( >Sect. 4.8) is 8.417 m with an optical aperture covering 8.405 m. This is the largest
diameter blank that SOML can produce for a number of practical reasons relating to the sizes
of doors, furnace, and handling fixtures. The central hole inside diameter is 0.889 m with an
optical aperture of 0.901 m. The finished facesheet thickness is 28 mm. The facesheet thickness
is set at 28 mm in order to reduce the thermal time constant below 1 h (with forced-air ven-
tilation). Given that thickness, the 192-mm spacing between ribs is chosen to limit deflection
of the unsupported facesheet under gravity and polishing pressure. Both the faceplate diame-
ter and thickness are cast with a 10-mm thickness margin to be removed during generation.
The finished backplate thickness is 25 mm, and the ribs are cast to a thickness of 12 mm. The
outer edge thickness of the blank is 894 mm, while the inner edge thickness is only 437 mm.
The 457-mm sag in the paraboloidal surface is a result of the 9.600-m focal length (f/1.142).
The pattern of the honeycomb ribs is shown in >Fig. 4-5. Unlike previous smaller mirrors, the
transition from the regular hexagon pattern to the circular edge of the mirror occurs over three
core widths. Each of the irregular core shapes at the edge is optimized for minimum stress of
the core bottom under the buoyant force. Having approximately uniform sizes of these irregu-
lar cores also aids in the fabrication of the mold. The finished weight of the mirror blank is just
over 16 metric tons. The honeycomb structure is slightly over 20% of the density of solid glass.
3
Optical Fabrication and Testing of Large, Aspheric Mirrors
While the casting process is unique to borosilicate honeycomb mirrors, the rest of the manu-
facturing process could be applied to any large telescope mirror in most respects. A number of
new manufacturing techniques have been developed for honeycomb mirrors, largely because

154 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
⊡Fig. 4-5
This ﬁgure shows the pattern of honeycomb ribs for the 8.4-m mirror. Each of the ribs is
12 mm thick. One thousand six hundred sixty-two core boxes make up the honeycomb structure.
A 28-mm thick faceplate and a 25-mm thick backplate complete the honeycomb sandwich struc-
ture. Steward Observatory drawing
the same telescope projects that use honeycomb mirrors have chosen to use relatively fast
primary mirrors, f/1.25 for the MMT and Magellan telescopes and f/1.14 for the LBT. The seg-
mented GMT primary mirror is f/0.7. The techniques developed for honeycomb mirrors are
therefore tuned to very aspheric surfaces. This has led to new technology for both polishing
and measurement. In addition to the emphasis on asphericity, the manufacturing techniques
that have been developed are appropriate for stiff mirrors, make use of the same support system
that is optimized for telescope performance, and incorporate thermal control. Additional new
technology has been developed to measure the off-axis segments of the GMT.
3.1 Overview of Fabrication and Testing
Following the production of a honeycomb mirror blank, the fabrication process can be divided
into three stages in which the surface accuracy is gradually improved until it meets the speci-
fications for the telescope. The first stage is fixed-abrasive grinding, also known as generating
or machining. The cutting tool is a rapidly rotating wheel with embedded diamond particles.
It is mounted on a computer-controlled mill and moved across the surface, removing glass to
a controlled depth. The surface accuracy depends on the accuracy with which the tool posi-
tion is controlled and on the accuracy of the measurements that guide the process. The surface
figure is taken from an initial accuracy of about 0.5 mm rms (that of the cast surface) to around
10 μm rms.

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
155
The second and third stages are both lapping processes. The tool is a disk that is dragged
over the mirror surface and wears away the glass. The tool’s position in the direction normal
to the surface is not controlled by the polishing machine; instead it rests on the surface with
a controlled downward pressure. The rate of removal is generally assumed to follow Preston’s
relation (Preston 1927): it is proportional to pressure and relative lateral speed between the tool
and the mirror surface. The surface accuracy is therefore limited by the predictability of removal
rate and the accuracy of control of tool pressure, speed, and time spent on any part of the mirror.
The first of the two lapping stages is loose-abrasive grinding, in which hard abrasive particles
roll between the mirror and a hard surface on the lapping tool. The surface accuracy is on the
order of 1 μm rms and may be limited by the measurements available for the unpolished surface.
This lapping also removes the subsurface damage (microscopic fractures) caused by the prior
fixed-abrasive grinding.
The final stage is polishing, in which the hard surface of the lap is replaced by a softer surface
such as pitch (the traditional material, a very viscous tar-like fluid) or synthetic polishing pads.
Fine abrasive particles, generally one of several metal oxides, remove glass through a combina-
tion of chemical processes and mechanical abrasion. The surface becomes specular (reflective
at visible wavelengths), microscopic roughness is reduced to about 1 nm rms, and subsurface
damage due to loose-abrasive grinding is removed. The removal rate is low, on the order of
1 nm of depth for every meter of tool surface passing over a point on the mirror, and the sur-
face can be controlled at the level of nanometers. While Preston’s relation may be fairly accurate
for the effects of pressure and speed, additional variables that describe the surface of the tool
and the conditions of the abrasive appear to be important in polishing. The average pressure
over the tool is generally well controlled, but the pressure distribution across the tool is more
difficult to control, especially for very aspheric mirrors. The ultimate accuracy depends on the
ability to control the pressure distribution and other variables that affect removal rate. Accurate
measurements are critical. All of these aspects are discussed more in the following sections.
The preceding overview and the following subsections apply to the optical surface. The flat
rear surface and edges of the mirror are also processed after the casting. The rear surface is
machined flat, then lapped and polished to a specular finish. This provides an accurate inter-
face for the mirror support system and allows visual inspection for flaws in the backplate and
ribs. The lapping and polishing operations remove subsurface damage, leaving a surface that is
essentially free of flaws and has maximum toughness against accidental impacts. After the rear
surface is polished, the loadspreaders that will interface with the support system are surveyed
into position and permanently bonded with a thin layer of compliant RTV adhesive. The mirror
is then inverted to have the optical surface up. The inner and outer edges of the front facesheet
and the backplate are also machined and lapped to provide accurate mechanical dimensions.
3.2 Accuracy Requirements
The general rule for surface accuracy of a ground-based telescope is that the optics must be
more accurate than the best wavefront the atmosphere will deliver at all spatial scales. This rule
holds whether or not adaptive optics is used. Without adaptive optics, the telescope’s optics must
not significantly degrade the images delivered by the atmosphere. With adaptive optics, most of
the stroke of actuators in the deformable mirror should be reserved to correct the atmosphere
rather than errors in the telescope optics.

156 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
The atmosphere induces large wavefront errors on large spatial scales but delivers a very
smooth wavefront on small scales. The telescope optics therefore must be very smooth on small
scales. The spectrum of wavefront errors after propagation through the atmosphere is usually
described by a structure function, which gives the mean square difference in wavefront between
points in the pupil as a function of their separation. The phrase “mean square difference” here
refers to an average over all pairs of points with a given separation in the pupil. In the standard
Kolmogorov model of turbulence, the structure function of the wavefront is
δ(x) = ( λ
π)

.( x
r
)

,
where x is the separation in the pupil, λ is the wavelength, and ris the coherence diameter
or Fried’s parameter. The coherence diameter is related to the long-exposure image size θ (full
width at half maximum) as
θ = .λ
r
.
Almost all of the projects using honeycomb mirrors have adopted a mirror figure specifica-
tion of the same form as the atmospheric structure function. The one free parameter is ror
equivalently θ. A good telescope site will have median seeing of about 0.7 arcsec FWHM and
exceptional seeing as good as 0.3 arcsec. A reasonable value of θ for the primary mirror fig-
ure specification is about 0.1 arcsec. In a perfect atmosphere, a mirror whose surface just meets
this specification on all scales would form 0.1 arcsec images. In practice, it is easy to meet such a
specification on large scales, so the finished mirror is much betterthan the specification on large
scales while matching it on small scales. The actual image formed by the finished mirror (in a
perfect atmosphere) has a nearly diffraction-limited core (width λ/D) and a halo of width θ.
The structure function for the atmosphere approaches zero at small separations. There is
no need for the telescope optics to be perfect on small scales. The effect of small-scale errors
whose rms wavefront error σ is a small fraction of a wavelength is to scatter a fraction of the
light outside the localized point-spread function. This fraction, or loss, is L = −e−(πσ/λ)≈
(πσ/λ). The mirror specification is relaxed on small scales to allow, typically, L ≤.at a
wavelength of 500 nm.
The Kolmogorov structure function is dominated on large scales by wavefront tilt across
the full pupil, equivalent to image motion, which changes slowly and is generally corrected by
active guiding. For this reason, and because the mirror’s surface error contains no global tilt,
the mirror specification is tightened on large scales to eliminate the effect of tilt induced by the
atmosphere.
Because the mirror figure will be controlled with active optics in the telescope, there is a
relaxation for low-order aberrations like astigmatism and trefoil. There is no point in trying to
eliminate these aberrations bypolishing because theywill be adjusted in the telescope with small
changes in the support forces to an accuracy that depends on the wavefront measurements at the
telescope. More precisely, the figure errors that will be controlled with active optics are the low-
order bending modes of the mirror. The bending modes form an orthogonal basis set for mirror
figure errors and can be listed in order of decreasing flexibility defined as the ratio of rms surface
distortion to rms correction force. (The rms correction force is the rms over all the support
actuators.) The two most flexible bending modes look like the two components of astigmatism,
and other low-order modes are also similar to low-order Zernike polynomials. For an 8.4-m
honeycomb mirror supported by 160 actuators, each astigmaticmode has a flexibility of 130 nm

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
157
1500
1000
500
0
−500
−1000
−1500
1500
1000
500
0
−500
−1000
−1500
1500
1000
500
0
−500
−1000
−1500
⊡Fig. 4-6
Several low-order bending modes measured for the ﬁrst LBT primary mirror. One each of the ﬁrst
three pairs of non-axisymmetric modes are shown. The rms force over the 160 actuators is, from
left to right, 5 N for the astigmatic mode, 30 N for trefoil, and 85 N for quadrafoil. The color bars are
labeled in nm of surface deﬂection
rms per N rms force. The average actuator’s force at zenith is about 1,000 N, so several hundred
nm of astigmatism can be corrected using a small fraction of the actuators’ force ranges.
>Figure 4-6 shows some low-order bending modes for the first LBT mirror (Martin et al.
2004). These modes were measured by bending the mirror with its active support system. The
forces were calculated by analysis and applied to the mirror support system while the mirror
was measured with the interferometer. Each plot is the difference between two measurements
with different forces, so the mirror’s figure errors cancel.
During manufacture, the mirror is supported passively, not on the active telescope support.
The active optics correction is therefore simulated for figure measurements made in the lab.
Correction forces are limited toa magnitude ofaround 30 N rms. Anylow-orderbending modes
that are correctable within that constraint can be ignored during manufacture. The residual
error after the simulated correction must meet the structure-function specification. Typically
around ten low-order modes will be ignored in the lab, while up to about 30 modes might be
corrected at the telescope.
Alignment of the mirror in the telescope provides additional degrees of freedom for active
correction. The precise alignment is set according to wavefront measurements in the telescope,
so the manufacturing requirement is to control alignment aberrations within the adjustment
range at the telescope. For a Cassegrain or Gregorian telescope, the two axial degrees of free-
dom are the spacing between the primary and secondary, and between the secondary and
focal plane. The corresponding wavefront aberrations are focus and spherical aberration. Most
primary mirrors are conic sections of revolution with the surface height z, measured parallel to
the optical axis, given as a function of distance r from the axis by
z =
r
R +
√
R−(+ k)r.
R is the radius of curvature at the vertex and k is the conic constant. An error in R is equivalent
to the focus aberration and an error in k is equivalent to spherical aberration. Tolerances for
the LBT mirrors were 1 mm in R, equivalent to 6.9 μm rms focus in the surface, and 0.0001
in k, equivalent to 46 nm rms spherical aberration. Methods of measuring these alignment
parameters are discussed in >Sect. 3.4.

158 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
The lateral position of the primary mirror in the telescope represents two more degrees of
freedom (for x and y displacements). A displacement of the mirror’s optical axis causes coma
in the wavefront. The LBT specification allowed a 1-mm displacement between the optical axis
and the mirror’s mechanical axis defined as the line centered on the mirror’s outer diameter
and normal to the surface. This 1-mm displacement is equivalent to 620 nm rms coma in the
surface. Measurement of centration is also discussed in >Sect. 3.4.
Active optics plays a broader role in the manufacture of the GMT off-axis segments. Three
factors contribute to this difference. First, the seven segments must have the same focal length
in order to maintain a common magnification over the 20-arcmin field of view. This means
focus must be controlled much more tightly. Second, alignment aberrations are very different
for an off-axis mirror. Translation in the off-axis direction – sliding the segment along the par-
ent surface – causes primarily focus and astigmatism followed by coma. Rotating it within the
parent surface causes astigmatism then coma. (For a symmetric mirror, only the coma due to
translation is present.) Alignment in the telescope therefore provides two important degrees of
freedom that can be used to correct figure errors due to imperfect manufacture. >Figure 4-7
shows that displacements of 1 mm can produce large changes in focus, astigmatism and coma.
The third factor making active optics so important for manufacture of the GMT segments
is the difficulty of measuring low-order aberrations in the lab for a large off-axis mirror. The
telescope will provide much better wavefront measurements using the optical system’s natu-
ral geometry that brings collimated light to a focus, but this geometry is not practical in the
lab. >Section 3.4 describes the optical test of the GMT segments. Small misalignments in the
test optics, at the limit of the achievable accuracy, cause measurementerrors of about 1 μm rms
surface in focus and several hundred nm in astigmatism. These aberrations exceed the specifi-
cation for figure errors at the telescope and are close to the amounts that can be corrected by
bending the mirror with acceptable forces and residual errors. With a combination of alignment
and bending, however, they can be corrected without exceeding the budget for either. One of
the principles for manufacture of the GMT segments is that all low-order aberrations must be
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1.5
−1
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1.5
−2
−1
⊡Fig. 4-7
Mirror surface change equivalent to displacements of the oﬀ-axis GMT segment along the par-
ent surface. Left: a 1 mm shift in oﬀ-axis distance. Right: a 25 arcsec rotation of the segment about
its center (1 mm across the 8.4-m diameter). The vertex of the parent is to the left. Color bars are
labeled in microns of surface

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
159
controlled to an accuracy such that they can be eliminated with a combination of alignment
and bending once they are measured accurately at the telescope.
3.3 Polishing of Large Mirrors
The challenge of polishing telescope mirrors comes largely from their asphericity. Their size
implies a need for some large and expensive equipment but does not constitute a fundamental
challenge. Polishing a spherical surface makes use of a powerful principle known as passive
smoothing: as the tool moves across the mirror surface, the surfaces of the tool and mirror
naturally come to a common shape with constant curvature, with little or no explicit guidance
by the optician. A bump on the mirror surface automatically sees higher pressure from the tool
and is smoothed down to the correct height. Any deviation from this principle makes it more
difficult to achieve a smooth and accurate surface. The honeycomb mirrors have faster focal
ratios and are therefore more aspheric than other telescope mirrors. The LBT primary mirrors
have 1.4-mm peak-to-valley departure from the closest spherical surface, a large departure for
optics that need to be accurate to a few hundred nm on large scales and the order of 10 nm on
small scales. The GMT off-axis segments have 14-mm p-v departure. The difference is not as
severe as it appears because the asphericity of the off-axis mirrors is largely astigmatism, with
gentler curvature changes than the spherical aberration of a symmetric mirror.
Many methods of dealing with asphericity have been developed over centuries and espe-
cially in recent decades. The problem with a traditional lap, or polishing disk, is that it can
match the shape of the surface at one position but not at other positions. The misfit causes
large pressure variations across the contact surface, leading to uneven and unpredictable local
removal of glass. These problems can be reduced by using small tools (so the magnitude of mis-
fit is limited to a few μm) or flexible tools that sag to match the mirror surface. They can be
eliminated by using figuring process such as ion beam figuring (Wilson and McNeil 1987) and
magneto-rheological finishing (Prokhorov et al. 1992; Jacobs et al. 1995) that remove material
without abrasion with a lap. These methods have been successful in a number of applications.
They have the limitation that they give up or compromise the principle of passive smoothing
that automatically creates smooth spherical surfaces.
Nelson and colleagues (Lubliner and Nelson 1980) preserved the smoothing principle when
they developed stressed-mirror polishing for the aspheric segments of the Keck telescopes.
Forces and moments are applied to the edge of the mirror to bend the desired aspheric sur-
face into a sphere, which is then polished with a large, stiff lap. Release of the applied stresses
lets the mirror relax to the desired shape. The method is powerful but not accurate enough to
produce a finished mirror in part because it cannot easily be applied to segments with a polyg-
onal outline, so the Keck segments and similar segments have been finished with methods such
as those listed in the previous paragraph (Allen et al. 1992).
The Steward Observatory Mirror Lab developed stressed-lap polishing, which shares some
of the principles of stressed-mirror polishing but bends the lap instead of the mirror (Angel
1984; Martin et al. 1988). This method is most appropriate for large, stiff mirrors. (It would
be impossible to bend an LBT mirror into a spherical shape without breaking it.) It allows use
of a relatively large, stiff lap that has strong passive smoothing on scales up to a large fraction
of a meter. Control of the surface on larger scales is achieved by figuring, that is, by varying
the pressure, speed, and dwell time as a function of position on the mirror. A stressed lap bends
dynamically as it moves over the mirror surface so as to match the local shape at any point. A set

160 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
of actuators on the circumference of the polishing disk apply bending and twisting moments to
induce low-order shape changes.
This principle can be applied to any aspheric surface. One can think of the stressed lap as
matching a Taylor expansion of the mirror surface. A rigid passive lap resting on the surface
matches a low-order expansion consisting of a constant and 2 tilts. By adding curvature varia-
tions, the stressed lap matchesa high-order expansion of the mirror surface including curvature
in orthogonal directions and several higher derivatives. For a given level of misfit, a stressed lap
can be many times larger than a passive lap and, therefore, it gives passive smoothing over a
larger range of scales.
Stressed laps up to 1.2-m diameter have been used for honeycomb primary mirrors
(> Fig. 4-8) and down to 30 cm for smaller secondary mirrors. Stressed-lap polishing has
generally been supported by a complementary process that uses small, passive laps to bridge
the gap between the scales of strong passive smoothing and well-controlled figuring. One such
process is a so-called rigid-conformal lapof10–30 cm diameterused with a small orbital motion
(Kim and Burge 2010). Varying its dwell time as a function of position on the mirrorgives highly
predictable figure changes.
>Figure 4-9 and >4-10 show color maps of the surface error in the finished LBT primary
mirrors as measured in the Mirror Lab. The mirrors had been installed in their operational
support cells, and active optics were used to control the first 43 bending modes. (Correction
forces were less than 100 N.)
⊡Fig. 4-8
Polishing with the stressed lap for the GMT1 primary mirror in 2009. The 18 actuators bend the
lap continuously to match the local curvature of the mirror surface. The plastic pipes on the left
distribute polishing slurry (red) across the mirror surface (Steward Observatory photo by Ray
Bertram)

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
161
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
⊡Fig. 4-9
Measured surface error for the ﬁrst 8.4-m LBT primary mirror. The color bar labels surface error
in nm. At left is the direct measurement with the mirror on its active support, with an accuracy
of 28 nm rms. At right, slight residual astigmatism and spherical aberration are subtracted, giving
27 nm rms
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
⊡Fig. 4-10
Same as >Fig. 4-9, for the second LBT primary mirror. The direct measurement gives an accuracy
of 25 nm rms. Subtracting astigmatism and spherical aberration gives 18 nm rms
3.4 Measurement of Large Mirrors
The basic method that gives the most accurate measurements of telescope optics is phase-
measuring interferometry, in which the full mirror surface is illuminated with a coherent
wavefront (the test wavefront), and the reflected wavefront is combined with an accurate ref-
erence wavefront from the same laser. This produces an image of the mirror overlaid with
interference fringes and ultimately a contour map of the mirror surface with a resolution of
λ/100 or better. In this method, the test wavefront serves as a template that the mirror surface is
compared with, so the test wavefront must be shaped to match the desired surface. This is done
with a set of optics called a null corrector, which can be as simple as a single lens for mildly

162 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
aspheric mirrors or a combination of lenses, mirrors, and/or computer-generated holograms
for more severe aspheres. The mirror is made to match the template wavefront, so the accuracy
of the null corrector is critical.
The interferometric test requires normal incidence to make the reflected light return to the
interferometer, so the light source and null corrector are located near the mirror’s center of
curvature, that is, a distance R away from the mirror. Even the fast LBT primary mirrors have
R = .m, so a large test tower is required to support the test optics and hold them stable
relative to the mirror.
The null corrector for an LBT mirror converts a spherical wavefront into one that will match
the 1.4-mm asphericity of the mirror after it propagates 19 m to the mirror surface. The null
corrector consists of two large lenses, 200–300 mm in diameter. All axial dimensions, including
the spacing between the lenses and their separation from the interferometer, must be controlled
with challenging tolerances on the order of 10 μm. It is difficult to rule out the possibility of a
mistake such as the one that occurred with the primary mirror for the Hubble Space Telescope
(HST). Because the LBT mirror is 30 times more aspheric than the HST primary, even a much
smaller mistake could not be tolerated.
Burge (1993a, b) developed an independent test of null correctors that has been used for
all the large honeycomb primary mirrors (except for the GMT segments discussed below). It
consists of a small computer-generated hologram designed to mimic a perfect telescope mirror.
Placed close to the null corrector, this certifying hologram returns light to the interferometer
along the same ray paths as the light that would be reflected from a perfect primary mirror. The
return wavefront is produced by diffraction from a pattern of rings written on a glass substrate.
The hologram’s design and manufacture are independent of the null corrector, apart from the
fact that both are based on the prescription of the mirror. This method has been successful in
validating the measurementsof primary mirrors for LBT, MMT, Magellan, and other telescopes
using honeycomb mirrors.
In routine use of the interferometric test, the mirror is aligned to the interferometer and
null corrector (or vice versa) to minimize the measured aberrations. This allows the template
wavefront to shift relative to the physical mirror surface to find the best match. In order to con-
trol radius of curvature and centration of the optical axis, the position of the mirror relative to
the null corrector must be known to an accuracy better than the tolerances on those param-
eters (for LBT, 1 mm for both radius of curvature and centration). The certifying hologram is
a valuable tool for this measurement because it provides an optical reference to the test wave-
front (the diffraction pattern on the hologram) as well as a mechanical reference for the distance
measurement (the glass substrate on which the pattern is written).
The axial displacement between the mirror and the hologram can be measured with a steel
tape or a laser tracker. The laser tracker has become an indispensable tool for measurement
of large optics. It combines a distance-measuring interferometer with angular encoders and a
steering mechanism to follow a moving retroreflector and measure its position in 3 dimensions.
It includes an absolute distance measurement accurate to tens of microns over the distances
involved in measuring large optics. Radial displacements (along the interferometer’s line of
sight) are measured to submicron accuracy and angles to better than 1 arcsec. Including all
sources of uncertainty, the radius of curvature can be measured to an accuracy of a few tenths
of a mm.
When the mirror is aligned to minimize coma in the interferometric test, its optical axis
matches that of the test wavefront. This will generally be different from the mirror’s mechanical
axis. The relation between the two axes can be found by rotating the mirror on its mechanical

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
163
axis and measuring the change in coma. The displacement of the mechanical axis can be con-
trolled to a few tenths of a mm with dial indicators or a laser tracker, and the coma can be
measured to an accuracy better than 100 nm rms, which for LBT corresponds to 0.16 mm of
displacement.
The conic constant k represents spherical aberration in the surface. The amount of spherical
aberration in the template wavefront is determined by the null corrector. All parameters of
the null corrector must be controlled to an accuracy consistent with the tolerance on conic
constant or spherical aberration (for LBT, 0.001 in k or 46 nm rms spherical aberration). Since
the certifying hologram validates the accuracy of the null corrector, it must be accurate to the
same tolerance in spherical aberration.
Measuring the mirror surface to an accuracy of nanometers on small scales and around
100 nm on large scales requires interferometry at visible wavelengths, which can be done only
for a polished surface. Before the surface is fully polished, it must be measured to an accu-
racy one to two orders of magnitude looser in order to limit the figure change that will have
to be achieved by polishing. Interferometry at infrared wavelengths, typically with a 10.6 μm
COlaser, works with a ground surface and has adequate accuracy and resolution. It generally
requires a separate null corrector using IR-transmissive elements. Another option is to scan
the surface with a laser tracker (Zobrist 2009). The laser tracker is most accurate in its radial
dimension, so the best surface measurement is obtained when the tracker is located near the
mirror’s center of curvature, and its line of sight is roughly normal to the surface. The measure-
ment is sensitive to drift in the position of the mirror and the laser tracker during the scan. Such
motion can be measured and compensated by continuously monitoring fixed retroreflectors on
the mirror. The laser tracker method is attractive in cases where an IR null corrector is difficult
or impractical, as is the case for the GMT segments (Zobrist et al. 2010).
The mirror’s shape depends on its support forces and temperaturedistribution, so both sup-
port and temperature must be controlled for the lab measurements. For honeycomb mirrors,
the support in the lab is nominally identical to that in the telescope at zenith pointing but is
achieved with a passive hydraulic system instead of the telescope’s active pneumatic system.
Both systems have load cells to measure the force at each of the roughly 160 supports. The stiff
mirrors can tolerate maximum support errors of about 20 N without significant impact on the
figure apart from low-order bending modes that will be set by the active optics system at the
telescope.
The borosilicate honeycomb mirrors are relatively sensitive to temperature gradients.
Thermal control of the mirror is available in the lab as well as the telescope, but a simple
system – drawing ambient air across the mirror’s rear surface – is adequate because of the stable
conditions in the lab. Roughly 100 thermocouples are attached to the internal surfaces of the
honeycomb and monitored. Analysis shows that, formost temperature distributions, departures
up to 0.05 K from an isothermal mirror have no significant effect on mirror figure. Somewhat
tighter tolerances apply for axisymmetric temperature gradients. This is especially important
for the GMT segments because they have to match in radius of curvature. An axial gradient
of 0.05 K p-v changes the radius by about 0.4 mm, roughly the level of uncertainty that can
be tolerated. The gradients can be kept below this level in the lab. The thermocouple system
allows measurement of axial gradients down to a level of about 0.01 K, and a correction based
on analysis can be applied to the measured figure.
The off-axis GMT segments present challenges beyond those of large symmetric tele-
scope mirrors. Each segment is ten times more aspheric than an LBT primary mirror, and
the aspheric departure is not axisymmetric. The null corrector for the interferometric test

164 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
3.75 m fold sphere
interferometer
for in situ test
of fold sphere
GMT segment
0.76 m fold sphere
computer-generated
hologram
vibration-
insensitive
interferometer
⊡Fig. 4-11
Model of the principal optical test for the GMT oﬀ-axis segments, in the 28 m test tower. At the
right is a blow-up of the interferometer and ﬁrst two elements of the null corrector. The reference
hologram is inserted for alignment of the test system but removed for the measurement of the
GMT segment. Gold light cones represent the measurement of the GMT segment, while the aqua
cone in the full model at left represents a simultaneous measurement of the 3.75 m fold sphere
introduces the asphericity in the test wavefront using a large non-axisymmetric optical system
shown in >Fig. 4-11 (Burge et al. 2008). It consists of a 3.75-m spherical mirror, a 75-cm spher-
ical mirror, and a computer-generated hologram. Oblique reflections off the two mirrors do
most of the shaping of the wavefront, and the hologram cleans up the remaining aberrations.
In addition to introducing most of the aspheric departure, the large mirror folds and shortens
the test beam so it can fit in the 28-m test tower.
The most challenging aspect of the GMT null corrector is alignment. Small misalignments
cause large amounts of focus, astigmatism, and coma, and the lack of symmetry complicates
the alignment process. The small package containing the interferometer, hologram, and 75-cm
mirror requires an alignment accuracy of about 10 μm, and the larger dimensions between that
package, the 3.75-m mirror, and the GMT segment have to be controlled to about 100 μm. This
accuracy is obtained through use of computer-generated holograms and laser trackers. Like
the certifying holograms described earlier, a reference hologram can be aligned optically to the
wavefront and provides both optical and mechanical references so other components can be
aligned to the wavefront. A laser tracker is used to measure the position and orientation of the
reference hologram as well as the components of the test system (West et al. 2010).
For symmetric mirrors, it is possible to validate the null corrector with a certifying holo-
gram. The GMT test wavefront is over 3 m in diameter by the time it leaves the null corrector,
much too large to validate with a hologram. But the same goal can be achieved with an

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
165
independent measurement of the segment, in particular a measurement of the low-order
aberrations that are sensitive to misalignment of the null corrector. For this purpose Burge
and Su (Su et al. 2008, 2009) developed a scanning pentaprism system that scans the surface
with a narrow collimated beam, which is focused on a detector in the mirror’s focal plane. The
displacement of the focused spot is proportional to the slope error on the surface. The scan-
ning pentaprism test is accurate to about 0.1 arcsec rms surface slope. Two features of the test
account for this remarkable accuracy. First, the pentaprism deflects an incoming beam in a fixed
direction (in one dimension) independent of the orientation of the pentaprism. This keeps the
beam parallel to the optical axis as it scans across the surface. Second, the system includes a
nonmoving pentaprism beam splitter that produces a second spot in the focal plane. Displace-
ment common to both spots indicates misalignment or instability of components including the
light source, the GMT segment, and the focal plane detector, while differential motion between
two spots is proportional to slope error of the mirror surface A set of four scans across differ-
ent diameters of the segment determines the first eight low-order aberrations to an accuracy
similar to that of the interferometric test and well within the correction range of active optics
at the telescope. Agreement between the interferometric test and the pentaprism test provides
high confidence that all segments will perform at the specified accuracy. >Figure 4-12 shows
the scanning pentaprism system for the GMT segments.
⊡Fig. 4-12
GMT1 segment with the 8.4-m pentaprism rail under the optical test tower. A pentaprism on the
rail is used to scan a collimated beam across the segment. The rail lies in a plane perpendicular to
the optical axis of the parent mirror, making the collimated beam parallel to the axis. Not shown is
the pentaprism detector, which is at the parent’s focus 18.5 m above the segment and 4.5 m to the
right of the segment center. (Steward Observatory photo by R. Bertram)

166 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
4
Experience in Operating Astronomical Telescopes
4.1 SDSS 2.5 Meter
The telescope built by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) on Apache Point, New Mexico, is
dedicated to an imaging and spectroscopic survey of the sky (York et al. 2000). The 2.5-m f/2.25
borosilicate primary mirror was cast by Hextek and polished by the Optical Sciences Center at
the University of Arizona. The f/5 secondary mirror with a 3○field of view is a gas fusion blank
also made by Hextek and polished by SOML. The telescope is instrumented for wide-field CCD
photometry and plug-plate fiber spectroscopy. The survey described by Abazajian et al. (2003)
and references therein has been tremendously successful. Science results include discovery of a
number of dwarf spheroidal companions to the Milky Way (Belokurov et al. 2007) and young
galaxies at redshifts above 6 (Fan et al. 2004).
4.2 Lennon 1.8 Meter
The Alice P. Lennon telescope was built in 1990 on Mt. Graham, Arizona, by the Vatican
Observatory and the University of Arizona. Its 1.8-m f/1.0 primary was the first spincast
blank produced by the Mirror Lab (Goble et al. 1985; Martin et al. 1992). The short focal
length optics and the altitude-azimuth mounting lead to an extremely compact mechanical
structure and dome and the unofficial moniker of Vatican Advanced Technology Telescope
(VATT). A Gregorian f/9 secondary feeds CCD imagers, a polarimeter, and a low-resolution
spectrograph. Science observations include a microlensing survey of stars in M31 reported by
Uglesich et al. (2004). VATT was the first optical telescope installed on Mt. Graham.
4.3 APO 3.5 Meter
The 3.5-m telescope built by the Astrophysical Research Consortium at Apache Point Observa-
tory (APO) in New Mexico uses the first 3.5-m f/1.75 honeycomb blank produced by the Mirror
Lab (Goble et al. 1989). The secondary and tertiary mirrors are gas fusion blanks from Hextek.
The telescope uses a variety of spectroscopic and imaging instruments at an f/10 Cassegrain
focus and is automated for remote observations. Many follow-up observations have been made
of objects discovered with SDSS. The telescope mount and its performance have been described
by Mannery et al. (1989).
4.4 WIYN 3.5 Meter
The WIYN 3.5-m telescope was constructed on the southwest ridge of Kitt Peak, Arizona, by a
consortium including Wisconsin, Indiana, Yale, and NOAO (WIYN). It uses the second 3.5-m
f/1.75 borosilicate honeycomb mirror produced by the Mirror Lab (Anderson et al. 1994). It
was initially built as a spectroscopic telescope to provide a wide field of view for the workhorse
HYDRA fiber spectrograph (Barden and Armandroff 1995). Typical multifiber science results
with HYDRA involve measuring redshifts of stars or galaxies in clusters (Miller et al. 2004).
The compact and light weight 3.5-m telescope is a notable contrast to the massive Mayall 4-m

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
167
telescope built on Kitt Peak 20 years earlier. The careful thermal design of the telescope and
enclosure quickly demonstrated that very good imaging was routinely possible on Kitt Peak.
Active optics using the primary mirror support actuators were included in the telescope design
from the beginning (Roddier et al. 1995).
4.5 SOR 3.5 Meter
The Air Force Phillips Laboratory installed the 3.5-m telescope at its Starfire Optical Range
(SOR) on Kirtland Air Force Base near Albuquerque, New Mexico, in 1993. The f/1.5 hon-
eycomb primary mirror was cast and polished by SOML. The polishing and the active optics
system of the primary mirror have been described by Martin et al. (1994). The high-speed
mount was built by Contraves USA in Pittsburgh, and the retractable enclosure was built by
Coast Steel in Vancouver. The telescope facility has been described by Fugate (2003). The tele-
scope is equipped with a high-performance adaptive optics system and laserguide star. Adaptive
optics results with a 50-W sodium laser guide star have been presented by Denman et al.
(2006). The telescope is typically used for imaging man-made earth-orbiting satellites and for
the development of imaging technologies.
4.6 MMT 6.5 Meter
The original MMT with six1.8-m telescopes on a common mount was highlysuccessful in terms
of providing a 4.5 m effective collecting area with the resolution of a 6.9-m telescope and as a
platform for instrument development. It was the first of a generation of new large telescopes on
computer-controlled elevation-over-azimuth mounts. Astronomers were eager to replace the
original six primary mirrors with a 6.5 m honeycomb mirror when the opportunity became
available because the converted MMT would have 2.4 times the light-gathering power and a
very similar resolution. The first 6.5 m borosilicate honeycomb mirror was cast by SOML in
1992 (Hill and Angel 1992). The MMT Conversion Project has been described by West et al.
(1997) with the new telescope going on-line in 2000 (Blanco et al. 2004). This was the first of
the large honeycomb mirrors to go into operation on sky. The f/1.25 primary mirror meant that
a new elevation structure could fit on the existing azimuth yoke in the existing enclosure with
only minor modifications. Martin et al. (1998a) describe the figuring of the fast paraboloidal
primary mirror. The active supports and force optimization for the primary mirror have been
described also by Martin et al. (1998b). The new MMT has three Cassegrain focal ratios to feed a
variety of instrumentation. An f/9 secondary (Hextex honeycomb) feeds several legacy instru-
ments developed for the old MMT. A 1.7-m f/5 secondary (machined Zerodur honeycomb)
combined with a refractive corrector provides a 1○field-of-view for imaging and multifiber
spectroscopy (Hastie and McLeod 2008). An f/15 adaptive secondary (Brusa et al. 2004) feeds a
new generation of infrared instrumentation compatible with Magellan and LBT. This adaptive
secondary with 336 actuators has been operating at the MMT for several years and is a pre-
cursor to the units now operating on LBT. Typical science observations are similar to those of
Liu et al. (2007) who used adaptive optics and nulling interferometry to resolve disks around
nearby Herbig Ae stars. A Rayleigh laser guide star system has been developed by Milton et al.
(2008). The MMT is also the first telescope to do in situ aluminizing of the primary mirror.

168 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
The logic was that it was easier to bring the vacuum belljar to the mirror than it was to move
the mirror to the belljar. The partners in the MMT are Arizona and Harvard/Smithsonian.
4.7 Magellan 6.5 Meter
The twin 6.5-m Magellan telescopes (Shectman and Johns 2003) named for Walter Baade and
Landon Clay are located at Las Campanas Observatory in Chile. Each separate telescope has
a 6.5-m honeycomb primary mirror with support technology similar to MMT and LBT. The
figuring of the f/1.25 primary mirror and its support system with 104 active supports has been
described by Martin et al. (2000). An excellent site with good thermal control of the telescope
structures and mirrors leads to excellent image quality with images as sharp as 0.2 arcsec (Osip
et al. 2008). The active optics system for Magellan with Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensors
has been described by Schechter et al. (2003). A classical Gregorian optical design provides a
wide field of view at f/11. The IMACS instrument (Dressler et al. 2006) is able to do imaging and
multislit spectroscopy over a 27-arcminute field of view. Herbert-Fort et al. (2010) used IMACS
to study the kinematics of nearby galaxy NGC 628. Some of the f/5 and f/15 instrumentation
at Magellan is shared with the MMT. An f/15 adaptive secondary mirror for Magellan is under
development. The Magellan primarymirrors are aluminized in a central facilitybetween the two
telescopes. The partners in the Magellan Telescope are the Carnegie Institution of Washington,
the University of Arizona, Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the
University of Michigan.
4.8 LBT 2 × 8.4 Meter
The Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) uses two 8.4-m-diameter honeycomb primary mirrors
mounted side by side on the same mount to produce a collecting area (110 m) equivalent to an
11.8-m circular aperture. The two Gregorian telescope sides point at the same field. A unique
feature of LBT is that the light from the two primary mirrors can be combined optically in
the center of the telescope to produce phased array imaging of an extended field. In practice,
this extended phased field can be of order 1 arcmin in diameter. Active and adaptive optics
have been designed into the telescope from the beginning to augment the telescope perfor-
mance from visible tomid-infrared wavelengths. The main wavefront correctors are the twof/15
Gregorian adaptive secondary mirrors. The interferometric focus combining the light from
the two 8.4-m primaries will reimage the two folded Gregorian focal planes in a central
location. Several of the instruments will implement an additional wavefront corrector at a
higher conjugate after the initial Gregorian focus. This cophased imaging gives the telescope
the diffraction-limited resolution of a 22.65-m telescope in one spatial direction. Images at
the combined focus have a resolution of 5 milliarcsec in visible light and 20 milliarcsec in the
near infrared. The binocular configuration of the telescope optics leads to a compact and stiff
mechanical structure. The fast primary mirrors help minimize the size of the corotating enclo-
sure. > Figure 4-13 shows the telescope enclosure open in twilight for observing. The two
f/1.14 primary mirrors of LBT are mounted on an altitude-over-azimuth mount with hydro-
static bearings operating at 120 bar. There is a quite direct load path from the primary mirror
cells to the elevation bearings to the azimuth structure to the azimuth bearings to the telescope
support pier. The azimuth and elevation drives each have four brushed DC servomotors directly

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
169
⊡Fig. 4-13
Photo of the Large Binocular Telescope with two 8.4-m- diameter primary mirrors open and ready
for observingat sunset with thetwo primefocuscameras(deployed) and two Gregorian secondary
mirrors (retracted). The telescope enclosure with two 10-m wide shutter openings co-rotates with
the azimuth axis of the telescope at speeds up to 1.5○/sec. The forest around the telescope on Mt.
Graham is composed of spruce, ﬁr, and aspen trees. The trees on the hill in the background burned
during a forest ﬁre in July 2004
driving pinions (60:1) on common shafts against large diameter segmented gear sectors. The
drives in elevation and azimuth are applied at a 7-m radius to give high stiffness as described by
Davison (1990). This stiff mechanical design combined with the light weight optics allows the
LBT to achieve a minimum eigenfrequency of nearly 8 Hz. The telescope is located at Mount
Graham International Observatory in the Pinaleño Mountains of southeast Arizona at an ele-
vation of 3,192 m. The development of the LBT has been previously described by Hill et al.
(2008b), and by Hill (2010) and by Hill et al. (2010).
The two paraboloidal primary mirrors can also be used independently (without optical
combination) to obtain seeing limited images over a wide field of view. The LBT offers instru-
ments mounted at a variety of focal stations. Instruments with wide fields of view, including
imagers and low-moderate resolution spectrographs, are mounted in pairs at the separate foci
of the two telescopes. These instruments are typically background limited and gain little benefit
from optical combination of the light from the two sides of the telescope. Interchange between

170 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
the various optical configurations during the night is accomplished with swing arms that hold
the secondary mirrors, the tertiary mirrors, and the prime focus correctors. Monocular prime
focus science imaging started in fall 2006, with regularly scheduled science observations using
both primary mirrors in parallel at prime focus starting in January 2007. The prime focus
cameras have been described by Ragazzoni et al. (2006). An early science result was the deep
imaging of the Hercules dwarf galaxy by Coleman et al. (2007) which showed the galaxy to be
elongated. Much of the deep imaging time with the prime focus cameras has been devoted to
adding U-band and z’-band imaging to deep survey fields thereby taking advantage of the large
collecting area of LBT. As an example, see the deep near-UV galaxy counts reported by Grazian
et al. (2009). Commissioning of the multiple f/15 Gregorian focal stations began in April 2008
and continues through the present. The initial observations used a conventional secondary mir-
ror of Hextek design mounted on the left side of the telescope along with a Hextek tertiary flat
mirror. The first science observations at the bent Gregorian focus began in December 2009.
Bian et al. (2010) used LUCI1 to obtain images and infrared spectra of a redshift two galaxy
lensed by a foreground cluster. A near-infrared image of the planetary nebula M57 obtained
with LUCI1 is shown in >Fig. 4-14.
Commissioning of the adaptive optics system on sky began in May 2010 and is discussed
below in
> Sect. 4.8.6. Instruments that work at the diffraction-limit benefit significantly
from the increased resolution obtained by combining light from the two sides of the tele-
scope (Hill 1994; Angel et al. 1998). The first cophased binocular experimental observations
were in October 2010 (see the discussion of phasing and interferometric instruments below
under >Sect. 4.8.7.)
4.8.1 Support and Positioning of Primary Mirrors
Each primary mirror is supported in the LBT on a set of 160 loadspreaders which are glued to
the flat backplate of the mirror substrate. A pneumatic force actuator connects to each of the
loadspreaders in order to provide a force to float the mirror against the changing gravity and
wind loads. Both axial and lateral forces are applied only to the backplate of the glass honey-
comb. One hundred and fourofthe actuators have a second cylinderangled at 45○from the axial
cylinder to provide lateral forces in vector combination. Four actuators have the second cylin-
der rotated into the cross-lateral plane (parallel to the elevation axis) to stabilize side-to-side
motion. The force actuators are controlled by individual servos which allow active correction
forces to be applied to adjust the mirror figure in addition to pre-calculated forces to compen-
sate gravity. These actuators apply forces that are independent of the mirror position (relative to
the mirror cell) over a range of 8 mm in all directions. A set of static supports holds the mirror
in the cell in case either power or air pressure is lost.
Six hardpoints arranged as a Stewart platform define the kinematic position of each pri-
mary mirror in its cell without carrying a significant portion of the load. These hardpoints are
adjustable in length to provide the collimation and focussing (6 degrees of freedom in position)
of the mirror in the telescope. Each of the hardpoints includes a breakaway mechanism so that
they cannot apply large local forces to the back of the mirror. The forces on these stiff hardpoints
are measured with a set of loadcells and used to adjust the overall set of commands to the force
actuators so that the load on each hardpoint is minimized (servoed to a small fixed offset). The
six hardpoint forces are resolved into three net forces and three net moments that can be com-
pensated with corresponding sets of axial and lateral support forces (applied by the pneumatic

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
171
⊡Fig. 4-14
This infrared image of the Ring Nebula (Messier 57) shows molecular hydrogen emission in red as
a tracer of the shock waves from distinct mass ejection episodes, and Brackett-gamma emission in
blue from Hydrogen ionized by the central star. Continuum emission at 2.2 μm displayed as green
contributes to the traditional ring that is also observed in visible light (LBTO image courtesy of
D. Thompson)
actuators) with minimal effect on the mirror figure. Each force actuator receives a feed-forward
force command based on the telescope elevation to float the mirror against gravity. The outer
servo loops provide additional force commands to react to wind, telescope acceleration, and
residual gravity loads as sensed by the hardpoints. The mirror support concept and the actuator
design were described by Gray et al. (1994). Additional performance details of the LBT mirror
support system are discussed by Ashby et al. (2008).
4.8.2 Active Optics and Wavefront Sensing
Active optics is principally used for correcting the alignment and low-order figure of the
primary mirrors plus the telescope focus and collimation by making slow adjustments to the
mirror position and support forces. These adjustments allow the compensation of residuals
from the gravity supports, the wind load, and thermal effects in the mirror and telescope struc-
tures. Corrections are typically made on 1-min timescales which are slower than atmospheric

172 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
turbulence but much faster than thermal and gravitational changes in the telescope. Even thick
and relatively stiff mirrors are able to benefit from active correction although the total range
of adjustment is smaller (Parodi et al. 1992). Minimal additional complexity is added to the
mirror support system other than to require that the forces on all actuators be adjustable under
computer control.
The strategy for the support of the plano-concave honeycomb mirrors is to compute the
required support forces to float the mirror against gravity using finite element techniques
(Parodi et al. 1997). The mirrors are polished on a hydraulic support system that applies the
calculated forces at the zenith-pointing position. This means that first-order deviations from
the ideal support forces are polished out from the zenith figure and only appear in reverse at
horizon. After polishing, the mirror is mounted in the telescope support cell while still located
under the test tower in the optical lab. The precision optical test is then used to confirm that the
telescope supports match the polishing supports and to tune out small residual bending errors.
As part of the optimization process, a number of bending modes were measured and compared
with the calculated modes (Martin et al. 2004). The forces supplied by the active pneumatic
actuators in the telescope support cells are calibrated to a part in 1,000. This precision calibra-
tion is not strictly necessary when the telescope uses active optics, but it allows failed actuators
to be replaced with spare units without significantly changing the figure of the mirror. Using
the calibrated force actuators, the figure of the LBT primary mirrors is stable and matches that
measured in the Mirror Lab 5 years earlier to the level of 1 arcsec images without any active
optics correction. Residual errors are dominated by a few hundred nm of astigmatism from
stray forces. The mirrors are stiff enough that only the axial forces (along the optical axis) need
to have active adjustment. The lateral forces remain at their pre-computed values (varying with
elevation) while operating in the telescope.
Three kinds of wavefront sensing are used on LBT (through 2010). At prime focus, extra-
focal pupils provide focus, collimation, and low-order active figure correction to the primary
mirrors. Typically, this CCD sensor slightly displaced from the focal plane takes 16-s exposures
and is used every 20–40 min to update the collimation. Lookup tables correct the collimation
and focus of each primary mirror between the active corrections. This extra-focal pupil system
is described by Hill et al. (2008b).
For seeing limited observations at the Gregorian foci, an off-axis guide probe uses a Shack-
Hartmann wavefront sensor with × lenslets across the pupil. This sensor typically takes
30-s integrations (to average out the atmosphere) at 1-min intervals for making active optics
corrections to the telescope collimation and the primary mirror figure. The off-axis guiding and
wavefront sensing units have been described by Storm et al. (2004). Active corrections are typ-
ically made once per minute to account for gravity-induced flexure and thermal disturbances.
With predetermined lookup tables to follow the changes, the active correction interval can be
reduced to a few times per hour for seeing-limited observations. On a stable night, the active
optics residuals are less than 100 nm rms wavefront for Zernike terms Z4–Z11, Z22 (focus,
astigmatism, coma, trefoil, plus third- and fifth-order spherical) to give telescope images that
are dominated by seeing at 0.3 arcsec FWHM.
The adaptive optics system uses an on-axis pyramid sensor to measure the wavefront at up
to 1-kHz rate. The red light from a natural guide star is reflected off a tilted dichroic window in
front ofthe infrared science instrument. Toreduce the bending forces on the adaptive secondary
shell, certain low-order wavefront errors are off-loaded to the positions of the mirrors and the
shape of the primary on a timescale of 10–20 s.

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
173
4.8.3 Ventilation and Thermal Management
The honeycomb primary mirrors on LBT are actively air-conditioned to follow the changing
ambient temperature in the nighttime environment of the telescope. This conditioning allows
the honeycomb structure to follow the mountain ambient temperaturewith a thermal time con-
stant of 45 min. It minimizes distortion of the mirror surface due to temperature gradients and
minimizes mirror seeing due to convection when the mirror surface deviates from ambient
temperature. Cheng and Angel (1986) found that 8 l/sec of air circulated through each hon-
eycomb cell kept the mirrors in good thermal equilibrium. Air entrainment devices (a.k.a. jet
ejectors) are used in LBT to pressurize air inside the mirror support cell and to circulate air
through the glass honeycomb. In practice, this ventilation system works well, and the mirrors
are normally within a fraction of a degree of ambient in the observing chamber. The internal
temperature gradients across the glass are approaching 0.1○C when the temperature is chang-
ing slowly, although gradients at this level are challenging to measure. Thermal errors in the
primary mirror shapes are within the force correction range of the active optics system.
The LBT also does some thermal management of the telescope structure and the observing
chamber to control the dome seeing. Most of these strategies for seeing control were summa-
rized by Bely and LeLievre (1987). All instrumentation on the telescope is liquid-cooled to
keep it near ambient temperature (but still above the dew point) and to avoid warm surfaces in
contact with the air within the telescope. Structural members of the telescope with thin cross
sections are wrapped with low emissivity aluminum foil tape to minimize the radiative cooling
to the cold night sky. Thicker sections of steel (50–100 mm) such as the azimuth frame and the
elevation sectors will be covered by a sheet metal skin to control any warm air created in that
area (this “stealth” air system has not yet been completed on the telescope). Ambient air will
be drawn in behind this metal skin with fans and the warm air exhausted downwind (Salinari
and Hill 1994). The heavy steel columns of the rotating enclosure are fabricated as trusses to
control the thermal time constant of the enclosure interior (Teran et al. 2002). Unused daytime
chiller capacity can be used to cool the observing chamber. The air circulation system on the
roof for melting accumulated snow also has the ability to remove daytime heat from the roof
skin. The roof surface is coated with aluminum tape to minimize radiative cooling during the
night. Large vent doors at the sides and rear of the observing chamber serve to flush ambient
air through the observing chamber and telescope structure on nights when the wind is low.
4.8.4 Reﬂective Coating
Like MMT, the LBT was designed to aluminize the two 8.4-m primary mirrors in situ on the
telescope structure. After washing and chemically stripping off the old aluminum, the telescope
is moved to the horizon-pointing position and locked in place. The 25-ton aluminizing belljar
is lifted up with the overhead crane and sealed against the corresponding vacuum flange on the
primary mirror cell. The technical details and results of the aluminizing system are described
by Atwood et al. (2006). The rough vacuum to 20 mTorr is made with a roughing pump and
a Roots blower. Inside the belljar, a group of charcoal cryopanels cooled by liquid nitrogen
provides the final pumping down to the coating vacuum of 6 μ Torr. Aluminum is evaporated
bya set of28 BN crucibles heated with tungsten heaters. The LBT system is unique in that each of
these 28 source modules contains an integrated transformer mounted with the crucible heater.

174 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
The control system supplies 280 VAC at 20 kHz which is then stepped down in voltage and up in
current by a factor of 26 at the location of the crucibles. Each of the first seven primary mirror
coatings has been successful as evaluated by reflectivity and coating thickness measured on
witness slides. Selecting in situ aluminizing was a good choice operationally, and the innovative
design of the source modules with transformers has been a technical and economic success.
The only significant penalty to the telescope design was the need to make the mirror cell a
vacuum vessel. This makes the cell weldment somewhat heavy (44 tons), restricts access to the
mirror supports in some areas, and requires mechanisms in the cells to use vacuum-compatible
lubrication.
4.8.5 Handling and Transportation
The transportation of the 8.4-m mirrors from the SOML polishing facility in Tucson to the
mountaintop was a cooperative effort between the University of Arizona and Precision Heavy
Haul of Phoenix, Arizona. Moving a single large piece of glass is clearly one of the challenges
of this primary mirror design. Each 8.4-m mirror was transported in a specially designed box
which provides multiple layers of spring isolation. The mirror box was transported horizontally
down interstate highway 10 between Tucson and Safford, Arizona. The truck with the mirror
box traveled at speeds up to 80 km/hr on the highway with a rolling roadblock escort to control
traffic. After arriving at the observatory basecamp, the box was tilted by 60○and mounted on a
Goldhofer trailer for the drive up the 48 km of winding mountain road as shown in >Fig. 4-15.
The mirror transport took 3 days of travel to reach the mountaintop site from Tucson. Davison
et al. (2004b) provide additional details on the engineering aspects of mirror transportation and
mirror handling.
4.8.6 Adaptive Optics
LBT is one of the first telescopes to have adaptive optics to compensate atmospheric turbu-
lence designed in from the start. The main deformable elements in the LBT adaptive optics
system are the secondary mirrors. Each of two concave ellipsoidal secondary mirrors on LBT
is a 911-mm diameter Zerodur shell which is 1.6 mm thick. On the back side of each shell
are 672 small magnets which can be actuated by DSP-controlled voice coils. The magnets and
voice coils provide forces to bend the shell relative to a rigid reference body at 1,000-Hz rates.
Capacitive sensors provide a reference signal for the fast servos that stabilize the shell position.
The aspheric Zerodur (glass ceramic) shells of the adaptive secondaries are manufactured by
the Steward Observatory Mirror Lab, while the mechanics are manufactured by ADS Inter-
national in Lecco, Italy, and the electronics are manufactured by Microgate in Bolzano, Italy.
The secondary mirror is made the deformable element in order to reduce the telescope back-
ground at longer wavelengths by having fewer warm optics (Lloyd-Hart 2000). The Gregorian
optical design of LBT places the secondary shell conjugate to turbulent layers 100 m above the
telescope. The ellipsoidal mirror also provides access to two real conjugate foci, so it is straight-
forward to test the optical surface of the secondary mirrors without light from stars. The first
adaptive secondary unit was mounted on the right side of the telescope during March 2010,
and with a static shape (nonadaptive) was able to deliver 0.4 arcsec FWHM images in red light
(2-s exposures in r’). The second adaptive unit for the other side of the telescope is at Arcetri

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
175
⊡Fig. 4-15
This photo shows the ﬁrst LBT 8.4-m primary mirror on the way up the mountain road on
Mt. Graham in 2004. The mirror transport box is mounted on a Goldhofer trailer with a tractor
pulling and a loader pushing. An operator on the Goldhofer controls the lateral tilt of the load as
the road slope changes. The trip up the 48-km mountain road took 2.5 days while stopping at night
to rest
Observatory for closed-loop system testing before moving to the telescope in 2011. Each adap-
tive system is capable of providing a Strehl ratio above 90% at a wavelength of 1.6 μm. The
LBT adaptive optics system uses an on-axis pyramid sensor to measure the atmospheric wave-
front at up to 1-kHz rate using a natural star. The wavefront sensor units have been designed
and constructed at the Arcetri Observatory in Firenze, Italy. A Rayleigh laser system to allow
correction of ground-layer turbulence over an extended field (4 arcmin) is under development
(Rabien et al. 2010).
The adaptive optics system on the right side of LBT achieved better than 60% Strehl ratio
on sky in H-band (400 modes, 1,000 frames/sec) on the first night of adaptive optics commis-
sioning in May 2010. The initial performance was limited by residual vibrations in the telescope
and some calibration issues. (See Esposito et al. (2010) for additional details of the laboratory
acceptance tests and on-sky commissioning.) Recent data shows an H-band Strehl of 93% when
correcting on a bright star with 500 modes as shown in >Fig. 4-16. This excellent performance
is due to a combination of a continuous deformable mirror with 672 actuators, an efficient pyra-
mid wavefront sensor, a primary mirror which is smooth at mid-scales, and careful calibration
of the system in the laboratory. The LBT mount tracks open loop to a precision of 10 milliarcsec

176 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
⊡Fig. 4-16
This image from the infrared test camera was taken during commissioning observations with the
adaptivesecondaryonLBTinNovember2010.Theadaptiveopticsloophasbeenclosedonabright
star with 500-mode correction and a 1,000-Hz frame rate. This 20-s H-band (1.6 μm) exposure has
a Strehl ratio of 93% and a FWHM in the diﬀraction-limited core of 40 milliarcsec. The halo outside
of the diﬀraction rings is from wavefront errors at higher spatial frequency than the correction of
the adaptive secondary. The image is displayed with a logarithmic stretch to make the diﬀraction
rings clearly visible (image courtesy of the LBT Adaptive Optics team at Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di
Arcetri)
rms to provide a stable base for adaptive optics. The adaptive system provides useful correction
at lower Strehl ratio for stars as faint as magnitude 17. Additional information on adaptive optics
in general can be found in >Sect. 4.8.6.
4.8.7 Phased Array Imaging
Two instruments to combine the light optically from the two sides of LBT are under develop-
ment. These instruments are often called “interferometric” because the light from the two sides
of the binocular telescope is combined together at a common focal plane in phase. Fizeau-
mode beam combination combines the light in the focal plane while preserving the relative
geometry of entrance and exit pupils in a homothetic manner in order to have an extended
phased field. From the telescope point of view, the two telescopes are combined as a phased
array which is a more optically precise description. The diffraction-limited PSF in the com-
bined focal plane is the Airy pattern of a single 8.25-m aperture modulated by Young’s fringes

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
177
whose spacing depends on the center-center separation of the apertures (Sabatke et al. 2006).
The LINC-NIRVANA instrument (Herbst et al. 2010) will work at 1–2.5 μm in the near infrared
to do phased array imaging in Fizeau mode with multiconjugate adaptive optics. The 22.65-m
baseline, B, of LBT will provide diffraction-limited resolution (λ/B) of 20 milliarcsec at 2 μm in
one spatial direction. Several of these observations at different parallactic angles can be com-
bined numerically to produce the Airy PSF of a circular aperture 22.65-m telescope (Carbillet
et al. 2002). The LBTI instrument (Hinz et al. 2008) will work at longer wavelengths for both
Fizeau imaging and Bracewell nulling interferometry to image planets around nearby stars.
During its first night of testing on sky in October 2010, LBTI obtained Fizeau fringes in the
diffraction pattern at wavelengths of 5, 10, and 12 μm. These fringes in the PSF at 12 μm can be
seen in >Fig. 4-17. Nulling interferometry observations will be made in the future with LBTI
when adaptive optics are correcting both sides of the telescope.The nulling interferometerover-
laps the two 8.25-m pupils on a 50% transmissive optic, with a half-wave phase step between
the two beams, in order to project a pattern of light/dark fringes on the sky (rather than the
focal plane). When a bright star is placed in the central dark fringe (destructive interference),
the neighboring bright fringe (constructive interference) will be used to search for exoplanets
and exo-zodiacal dust. Hénault (2010) provides an overview of various types of imaging and
nulling interferometers.
1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
⊡Fig. 4-17
This image shows the diﬀraction pattern of the LBTI instrument on LBT which combines the two
sides of the telescope in a common focal plane. This is a 0.1-s integration at a wavelength of 12 μm
taken in November 2010 using the MIRAC camera. Active and adaptive optics were only opera-
tional on one side of the telescope at that time so, some residual coma and astigmatism can be
noticed around thecentral core. The spacing of thefringes at 12 μm is0.17 arcsec. Theentireimage
is 2.4 arcsec square (Steward Observatory image courtesy of P. Hinz and W. Hoﬀmann)

178 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
4.8.8 Partners
The international partners in the Large Binocular Telescope Corporation include Arizona
(25%), Germany (25%), Italy (25%), Ohio State (12.5%), and Research Corporation (12.5%).
The Arizona portion of the project includes astronomers from the University of Arizona, Ari-
zona State University and Northern Arizona University. The German portion is represented
by the LBT Beteiligungsgesellschaft which is composed of Max-Planck-Institut für Astronomie
in Heidelberg, Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Max-Planck-Institut für
Radioastronomie in Bonn, Max-Planck-Institut für Extraterrestrische Physik in Munich, and
Astrophysikalisches Institut Potsdam. National participation in Italy is organized by the Isti-
tuto Nazionale di Astrofisica (INAF). Partners at individual institutions include the Ohio State
University in Columbus, Research Corporation in Tucson, the University of Notre Dame,
the University of Minnesota, and the University of Virginia. These partners have joined to
form the Large Binocular Telescope Corporation in order to build and operate this telescope.
Astronomers and engineers at all of these institutions are involved in building instruments and
auxiliary equipment for the telescope.
5
Future Telescopes Under Development
5.1 LSST
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), following a concept first proposed by Angel
(Tyson et al. 2001), uses a 3-mirror design with an 8.4-m primary mirror to achieve a 3.5○
field of view for surveying the sky quickly to a significant depth with a 6.5-m effective aperture.
The primary mirror with a tertiary mirror polished into the same blank is being produced at
SOML as described by Martin et al. (2008). The 3.4-m secondary mirror blank is being made
by Corning from ULE. The survey has been described by Axelrod (2006), and the data man-
agement has been described by Kantor and Axelrod (2010). The design of the telescope system
has been described by Krabbendam and Sweeney (2010). The telescope is a high performance
design purpose-built for this particular survey (Davison et al. 2004). The detector package is a
3,200 Megapixel CCD array. The LSST is a US-led public data project with funding to be sup-
plied by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Department of Energy (DOE). The
telescope will be located in Chile at Cerro Pachón because of the frequently photometric skies
and the available infrastructure.
5.2 GMT
The Giant Magellan Telescope (GMT) recently described by Shectman and Johns (2010) uses
seven 8.4-m borosilicate honeycomb mirrors as circular segments of a 25-m f/0.7 primary.
The first off-axis segment is under production at SOML as described by Martin et al. (2010).
Many of the polishing and testing challenges are described in >Sect. 3 above. The secondary
mirror is divided into seven adaptive segments in the same geometry as the primary. The GMT
relies on many of the technologies already demonstrated in the operational LBT including pri-
mary mirrors, adaptive secondary mirrors, and the telescope mount structure with large radius
C-rings. The telescope will be located in Chile on Cerro Las Campanas as shown in >Fig. 4-18.

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
179
⊡Fig. 4-18
A model of thefuture Giant Magellan Telescope with seven 8.4-m segmentsmakingup a 25-m f/0.7
primary mirror. The GMT segments are the same size (8.4 m) as the LBT primary mirrors (compare
this model with the photo of LBT in >Fig. 4-13)
Partners in developing the GMT include Carnegie Institution for Science, Harvard Univer-
sity, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Texas A&M University, Korea Astronomy and
Space Science Institute, The University of Texas at Austin, The Australian National University,
University of Arizona, Astronomy Australia Ltd., and The University of Chicago.
5.3 SASIR
The Mirror Lab cast a fifth 6.5-m f/1.25 honeycomb mirror in 2009 to become the primary
mirror of a telescope to be located on San Pedro Martir, Baja California, Mexico. This telescope
will be used in the Synoptic All-Sky Infrared Imaging (SASIR) Survey which is a collaboration
between astronomers at Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), the University
of California at Berkeley, Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica and Electrónica (INAOE),
and the University of Arizona.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Neville Woolf, Peter Strittmatter, Warren Davison, and
J.T. Williams for their continuous wisdom, inspiration, and support over decades of mirror and

180 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
telescope development. Of course, the ideas discussed here could never turn into reality with-
out the substantial engineering and organizational talents of the following persons at Steward
Observatory: D. Anderson, R. Allen, J. Burge, B. Cuerden, S. DeRigne, L. Dettmann, K. Duffek,
L. Goble, J. Hagen, S. Hinman, M. Hunten, D. Ketelsen, K. Kenagy, J. Kingsley, C. Kittrell, R.
Lutz, S. Miller, D. Mitchell, R. Nagle, B. Olbert, B. Powell, B. Sisk, P. Schaller, B. Smith, M. Tuell,
R. Warner, S. Warner, D. Watson, S. West, R. Young, C. Zhao, T. Zobrist, and numerous others.
The early funding of the Steward Observatory Mirror Lab came from the University of Ari-
zona, from the National Science Foundation, and from the Air Force Weapons Laboratory. This
present work has been supported by Steward Observatory and the Large Binocular Telescope
Observatory at the University of Arizona.
References
Abazajian, K., Adelman-McCarthy, J. K., Agueros,
M. A., Allam, S. S., Anderson, S. F., Annis, J., et
al. 2003, The first data release of the sloan digital
sky survey. Astron J, 126, 2081–2086
Allen, L. N., Keim, R. E., Lewis, T. S., & Ullom,
J. R. 1992, Surface error correction of a Keck
10-m telescope primary mirror segment by ion
figuring. Proc SPIE, 1531, 195–204
Anderson, D. S., Martin, H. M., Burge, J. H., & West,
S. C. 1994, Rapid fabrication strategies for pri-
mary and secondary mirrors at Steward Obser-
vatory Mirror Laboratory. Proc SPIE, 2199,
199–210
Angel,
J.
R. P.
1984,
Steps
towards
8M hon-
eycomb mirrors V. A method for polishing
aspheres as fast as F/1. in Very Large Telescopes,
Their Instrumentation and Programs, ed. M.-H.
Ulrich, & K. Kjar (Garching: ESO), 11–21
Angel, J. R. P., & Hill, J. M. 1981, Honeycomb mirrors
of borosilicate glass. Scientific Importance of
High Angular Resolution at Infrared and Optical
Wavelengths (Garching: ESO), 61–65
Angel, J. R. P., & Hill, J. M. 1982, Manufacture of large
honeycomb mirrors. Proc SPIE, 332, 298–306
Angel, J. R. P., & Hill, J. M. 1984, Steps toward 8m
honeycomb mirror blanks III. 1.8m honeycomb
sandwich blanks cast from borosilicate glass.
Proc SPIE, 444, 194–199
Angel, J. R. P., & Woolf, N. J. 1980, MT-2. Optical
and Infrared Telescopes for the 1990s (Tucson:
KPNO), 1062–1149
Angel, J. R. P., & Woolf, N. J. 1984, Steps toward
8-meter honeycomb mirror blanks. I. Rationale
and Approach. Proceeding
of the XI Texas
Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics (Austin,
TX: New York Academy of Sciences), 163–170
Angel, J. R. P., Arganbright, D., Harmonson, L.,
Hill, J. M., & Woolf, N. 1981, Honeycomb
mirrors
of
borosilicate
glass:
current
results
and
plans
for
7–8m
diameter.
Instrumentation
for
Astronomy
with
Large
Optical Telescopes,
ed. C. M. Humphries,
33–36
Angel, J. R. P., Hill, J. M., Goble, L., & Woolf,
N. J. 1983, Steps toward 8m honeycomb mirror
blanks: IV. Structural design and the fabrication
facility. Proc SPIE, 444, 194–199
Angel, J. R. P., Davison, W. B., Hill, J. M., Mannery,
E. J., & Martin, H. M. 1990, Progress toward mak-
ing light weight 8m mirrors of short focal length.
Proc SPIE, 1236, 636–640
Angel, J. R. P., Hill, J. M., Strittmatter, P. A., &
Weigelt, G. 1998, Interferometry with the large
binocular telescope. Proc SPIE, 3350, 881–889
Ashby, D. S., Kern, J., Hill, J. M., Davison, W. B.,
Cuerden, B., Brynnel, J. G., et al. 2008, The
large binocular telescope primary morror sup-
port control system description and current per-
formance results. Proc SPIE, 7018, 70184C–12
Atwood, B., Pappalardo, D. P., O’Brien, T. P., Hill, J.
M., Mason, J. A., Belville, R., et al. 2006, The alu-
minizing system for the 8.4-meter diameter LBT
primary mirrors. Proc SPIE, 6273, 62730T–12
Axelrod, T. S. 2006, The large synoptic survey tele-
scope. Astronomical Data Analysis Software and
Systems XV, Vol. 351 (San Francsico: Astronom-
ical Society of the Pacific), 103–111
Barden, S. C., & Armandroff, T. 1995, Performance of
the WIYN fiber-fed MOS system: HYDRA. Proc
SPIE, 2476, 56–67
Beckers, J. M., & Williams, J. 1980, The MMT as it
exists today. Optical and Infrared Telescopes for
the 1990s (Tucson: KPNO), 108–126
Beckers, J. M., Ulich, B. L., Shannon, R. R., Car-
leton, N. P., Geary, J. C., & Latham, D. W., et al.
1981, The multiple mirror telescope. Telescopes
for the 1980s (Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews),
63–128

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
181
Beckers, J. M., Ulich, B. L., & Williams, J. T. 1982,
Performance of the multiple mirror telescope
(MMT) I. – MMT the first of the advanced tech-
nology telescopes. Proc SPIE, 332, 2–8
Belokurov, V., Zucker, D. B., Evans, N. W., Kleyna,
J. T., Koposov, S., Hodgkin, S. T., et al. 2007, Cats
and dogs, hair and a hero: a quintet of new milky
way companions. Astrophys J, 654, 897–906
Bely, P. Y., & LeLievre, G. 1987, Seeing control in
domes and telescopes. in Identification, Opti-
mization, and Protection of Optical Telescope
Sites, ed. R. L. Millis, O. G. Franz, H. D. Ables,
& C. C. Dahn (Flagstaff), 155–166
Bian, F., Fan, X., Bechtold, J., McGreer, I. D., Just, D.
W., Sand, D. J., et al. 2010, LBT/LUCIFER obser-
vations of the z∼2 lensed galaxy J0900+2234.
Astrophys J, 725, 1877–1885
Blanco, D., Alegria, M., Callahan, S., Clark, D., Com-
misso, B., Foltz, C. B., et al. 2004, The new MMT.
Proc SPIE, 5489, 300–311
Brusa, G., Miller, D. L., Kenworthy, M. A., Fisher,
D. L., & Riccardi, A. 2004, MMT-AO: two years
of operation with the first adaptive secondary.
Proc SPIE, 5490, 23–33
Burge, J. H. 1993a, Advanced techniques for measur-
ing primary mirrors for astronomical telescopes.
University of Arizona, Ph. D. dissertation, Col-
lege of Optical Sciences
Burge, J. H. 1993b, Certification of null correc-
tors for primary mirrors. Proc SPIE, 1994,
248–259
Burge, J. H., Davison, W., Martin, H. M., & Zhao, C.
2008, Development of surface metrology for the
Giant Magellan Telescope primary mirror. Proc
SPIE, 7018, 701814–12
Carbillet, M., Correia, S., Boccacci, P., & Bertero, M.
2002, Restoration of interferometric images. II.
The case study of the large binocular telescope.
Astron Astrophys, 387, 744–757
Cheng, A. Y., & Angel, J. R. P. 1986, Steps toward 8m
honeycomb mirrors. VIII – Design and demon-
stration of a system of thermal control. Proc
SPIE, 628, 536–544
Coleman, M. G., de Jong, J. T., Martin, N. F., Rix,
H.-W., Sand, D. J., Bell, E. F., et al. 2007, The elon-
gated structure of the Hercules Dwarf spheroidal
galaxy
from deep large binocular
telescope
imaging. Astrophys J Lett, 668, L43–L46
Davison, W. B. 1990, Design strategies for very large
telescopes. Proc SPIE, 1236, 878–883
Davison, W. B., Williams, J. T., & Hill, J. M. 1998,
Handling 20 tons of honeycomb mirror with a
very gentle touch. Proc SPIE, 3352, 216–225
Davison, W. B., Rascon, M. H., Cuerden, B., Sebag, J.,
Claver, C., Muller, G., et al. 2004a, LSST struc-
tural design. Proc SPIE, 5495, 180–188
Davison, W. B., Warner, S. H., Williams, J. T., Lutz,
R. D., Hill, J. M., & Slagle, J. H. 2004b, Handling
and transporting the 8.4m mirrors for the large
binocular telescope. Proc. SPIE, 5495, 453–462
Denman, C. A., Drummond, J. D., Eickhoff, M. L.,
Fugate, R. Q., Hillman, P. D., Novotny, S. J.,
et al. 2006, Characteristics of sodium guidestars
created by the 50-watt FASOR and first closed-
loop AO results at the starfire optical range. Proc
SPIE, 6272, 67721L
Dierickx, P., Enard, D., Merkle, F., Noethe, L., &
Wilson, R. N. 1990, ESO VLT II: optical spec-
ification and performance of large optics. Proc
SPIE, 1236, 138–151
Dressler, A., Hare, T., Bigelow, B. C., & Osip, D.
J. 2006, IMACS: the wide-field imaging spec-
trograph on Magellan-Baade. Proc SPIE, 6269,
62690F–13
Esposito,
S.,
Riccardi,
A.,
Quiros-Pacheco,
F.,
Pinna, E., Puglisi, A., Xompero, M., et al. 2010,
Laboratory characterization and performance
of the high-order adaptive optics system for
the large binocular telescope. Appl Opt, 49,
G174–G189
Fan, X., Hennawi, J. F., Richards, G. T., Strauss, M. A.,
Schneider, D. P., Donley, J. L., et al. 2004, A sur-
vey of Z > .quasars in the sloan digital sky
survey. III. Discovery of five additional quasars.
Astron J, 128, 515–522
Fugate, R. Q. 2003, The starfire optical range 3.5-
m adaptive optical telescope. Proc SPIE, 4837,
934–943
Goble, L., Angel, J., & Hill, J. M. 1985. Steps toward
8m honeycomb mirrors: VII. Spin casting of
an experimental F/1 1.8m honeycomb blank of
borosilicate glass. Proc SPIE, 571, 92–100
Goble, L. W., Angel, J., Hill, J. M., & Mannery, E. J.
1989, Spincasting of a 3.5-m diameter f/1.75 mir-
ror blank in borosilicate glass. Proc SPIE, 966,
300–308
Gray, P. M., Hill, J. M., Davison, W. B., Callahan, S. P.,
& Williams, J. T. 1994, Support of large borosil-
icate honeycomb
mirrors. Proc SPIE, 2199,
691–702
Grazian, A., Menci, N., Giallongi, E., Gallozzi, S.,
Fontanot, F., Fontana, A., et al. 2009, Wide
and deep near-UV (360 nm) galaxy counts and
the extragalactic
background
light with the
large binocular camera. Astron Astrophys, 505,
1041–1048
Hastie, M., & McLeod, B. 2008, Comprehensive
review of the converted MMT’s instrument suite.
Proc SPIE, 7014, 70140B–14
Hénault, F. 2010, PSF and field of view characteris-
tics of imaging and nulling interferometers. Proc
SPIE, 7734, 773419–14

182 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
Herbert-Fort, S., Zaritsky, D., Christlein, D., &
Kannappan, S. J. 2010, The surface mass den-
sity and structure of the outer disk of NGC 628.
Astrophys J, 715, 902–907
Herbst, T. M., Ragazzoni, R., Eckart, A., & Weigelt, G.
2010, Imaging beyond the fringe: an update on
the LINC-NIRVANA Fizeau interferometer for
the LBT. Proc SPIE, 7734, 773407–7
Hill, J. M. 1990, Optical design, error budget and
specifications for the columbus project tele-
scope. Proc SPIE, 1236, 86–107
Hill, J. M. 1994, Strategy for interferometry with
the large binocular telescope. Proc SPIE, 2200,
248–259
Hill, J. M. 2010, The large binocular telescope. Appl
Opt, 49, D115–D122
Hill, J. M., & Angel, J. 1983, Steps toward 8m honey-
comb mirror blanks: II. Experiments with waf-
fleplates and honeycomb casting. Proc SPIE, 380,
100–110
Hill, J. M., & Angel, J. 1992, The casting of the
6.5m borosilicate mirror for the MMT conver-
sion. Progress in Telescope and Instrumentation
Technologies (Garching: ESO), 57–66
Hill, J. M., Hunten, M. R., Johnson, K. J., Mitchell,
D., Schaller, S., & Esterline, R. S. 1990, A con-
trol system for spincasting 8-meter borosilicate
honeycomb mirrors. Proc SPIE, 1235, 486–502
Hill, J. M., Angel, J., Lutz, R. D., Olbert, B. H.,
& Strittmatter, P. A. 1998, Casting the first
8.4 meter borosilicate honeycomb mirror for
the large binocular telescope. Proc SPIE, 3352,
172–181
Hill, J. M., Green, R. F., Slagle, J. H., Ashby, D. S.,
Brusa-Zappellini, G., Brynnel, J. G., et al. 2008a,
The large binocular telescope. Proc SPIE, 7012,
701203–15
Hill, J. M., Ragazzoni, R., Baruffolo, A., Biddick, C. J.,
Kuhn, O. P., Diolaiti, E., et al. 2008b, Prime focus
active optics with the large binocular telescope.
Proc SPIE, 7012, 7012M–10
Hill, J. M., Green, R. F., Ashby, D. S., Brynnel,
J. G., Cushing, N. J., Little, J., et al. 2010,
The large binocular telescope. Proc SPIE, 7733,
77330C–11
Hinz, P. M., Bippert-Plymate, T., Breuninger, A.,
Connors, T., Duffy, B., Esposito, S., et al. 2008,
Status of the LBT interferometer. Proc SPIE,
7013, 701328–9
Jacobs, S. D., Golini, D., Hsu, Y., Puchebner, B. E.,
Strafford, D., Prokhorov, I. V., et al. 1995, Mag-
netorheological finishing: a deterministic pro-
cess for optics manufacturing. Proc SPIE, 2576,
372–382
Kaiser, N., Aussel, H., Burke, B., Boesgaard, H.,
Chambers,
K.,
Chun,
M.
R.,
et
al.
2002,
Pan-STARRS: a large synoptic survey telescope
array. Proc SPIE, 4836, 154–164
Kantor, J., & Axelrod, T. 2010, The large synoptic sur-
vey telescope data management overview. Proc
SPIE, 7740, 77401N–8
Keck observatory project office. 1985, Telescope per-
formance specifications. in The Design of the
Keck Observatory and Telescope (Ten Meter
Telescope), ed. J. E. Nelson, T. S. Mast, & S. M.
Faber (Berkeley: LBL), 3–1 to 3–13
Kim, D. W., & Burge, J. H. 2010, Rigid conformal pol-
ishing tool using non-linear visco-elastic effect.
Opt Express, 18, 2242–2257
Krabbendam, V. L., & Sweeney, D. 2010, The large
synoptic survey telescope preliminary design
overview. Proc SPIE, 7733, 77330D–11
Liu, W. M., Hinz, P. M., Meyer, M. R., Mamajek,
E. E., Hoffmann, W. F., Brusa, G., et al. 2007,
Observations of Herbig Ae disks with nulling
interferometry. Astrophys J, 658, 1164–1172
Lloyd-Hart,
M.
2000,
Thermal
performance
enhancement of adaptive optics by use of a
deformable secondary mirror. Pub ASP, 112,
264–272
Lubliner, J., & Nelson, J. E. 1980, Stressed mir-
ror polishing: a technique for producing non-
axisymmetric mirrors. App Opt, 19, 2332–2340
Mannery, E. J., Siegmund, W. A., & Hull, C. L. 1989,
The performance of the apache point observa-
tory 3.5m telescope. Astrophys Space Sci, 160,
269–274
Martin, H. M., Angel, J. R. P., & Cheng, A. Y. 1988, Use
of an actively stressed lap to polish a 1.8-m F/1
paraboloid. in Very Large Telescopes and Their
Instrumentation, ed. M.-H. Ulrich (Garching:
ESO), 353–361
Martin, H. M., Anderson, D. S., Angel, J. R. P., Burge,
J. H., Davison, W. B., DeRigne, S. T., et al. 1992,
Stressed-Lap polishing of 1.8-m f/1 and 3.5-m
f/1.5 primary mirrors. in Progress in Telescope
and Instrumentation Technologies, ed. M.-H.
Ulrich (Garching: ESO), 169–172
Martin, H. M., Davison, W. B., DeRigne, S. T., Hill,
J. M., Hille, B. B., & Trebisky, T. T. 1994, Active
supports and force optimization for a 3.5m
honeycomb sandwich mirror. Proc SPIE, 2199,
251–262
Martin, H. M., Allen, R. G., Angel, J. R. P., Burge, J.
H., Davison, W. B., DeRigne, S. T., et al. 1998a,
Fabrication and measured quality of the MMT
primary mirror. Proc SPIE, 3352, 194–204
Martin, H. M., Callahan, S. P., Cuerden, B., Davison,
W. B., DeRigne, S. T., Dettmann, L. R., et al.
1998b, Active supports and force optimization
for the MMT primary mirror. Proc SPIE, 3352,
412–423

Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes 4
183
Martin, H. M., Allen, R. G., Cuerden, B., DeRigne,
S. T., Dettmann, L. R., Ketelsen, D. A., et al. 2000,
Primary mirror system for the first magellan
telescope. Proc SPIE, 4003, 2–13
Martin, H. M., Cuerden, B., Dettmann, L. D., & Hill,
J. M. 2004, Active optics and force optimization
for the first 8.4m LBT mirror. Proc SPIE, 5489,
826–837
Martin, H. M., Allen, R. G., Cuerden, B., Hill, J. M.,
Ketelsen, D. A., Miller, S. M., et al. 2006, Man-
ufacture of the second 8.4 m primary mirror for
the large binocular telescope. Proc SPIE, 6273,
62730C–10
Martin, H. M., Burge, J. H., Cuerden, B., Davison,
W. B., Kingsley, J. S., Lutz, R. D., et al. 2008,
Manufacture of a combined primary and tertiary
mirror for the large synoptic survey telescope.
Proc SPIE, 7018, 70180G–12
Martin, H. M., Allen, R. G., Burge, J. H., Kim, D.
W., Kingsley, J. S., Tuell, M. T., et al. 2010, Fab-
rication and testing of the first 8.4-m off-axis
segment for the giant magellan telescope. Proc
SPIE, 7739, 77390A–13
McCauley, G. V. 1934, Making the glass disk for a
200-inch reflecting telescope. Sci Mon, 39, 79–86
Meinel, A. B. 1979, Cost scaling laws applicable to
very large optical telescopes. Proc SPIE, 172,
2–7
Miller, N. A., Oegerle, W. R., & Hill, J. M. 2004.
The dynamics of abell 2125. Astrophys J, 613,
841–850
Milton, N. M., Lloyd-Hart, M., Baranec, C., Stalcup,
T., Powell, K., McCarthy, D., et al. 2008, Commis-
sioning the MMT ground-layer and laser tomog-
raphy adaptive optics systems. Proc SPIE, 7015,
701522–11
Miroshnikov, M. M., Ljubarsky, S. V., & Khimich, Y.
P. 1992, Mirrors for optical telescopes. Opt Eng,
31, 701–710
Morey, G. W. 1938, The Properties of Glass (New
York: Reinhold)
Noethe, L. 2002, Active optics in modern, large opti-
cal telescopes. Progress in Optics (Amsterdam:
North-Holland), 3–69
Olbert, B. H., & Schenck, S. R. 1997, Fracture of an
aluminosilicate fiberboard. J Am Ceram Soc, 80,
2789–2797
Olbert, B., Angel, J., Hill, J. M., & Hinman, S. F. 1994,
Casting 6.5 meter mirrors for the MMT conver-
sion and magellan. Proc SPIE, 2199, 144–155
Osip, D. J., Phillips, M. M., Palunas, P., Perez, F., &
Leroy, M. 2008, Magellan telescopes operations
2008. Proc SPIE, 7016, 701609–10
Parks, R. E., Wortley, R. W., & Cannon, J. E. 1990,
Engineering with light weight mirrors. Proc
SPIE, 1236, 735–743
Parodi, G., Hill, J. M., & Salinari, P. 1992, Sup-
porting
the
8.4-m
honeycomb
mirrors
of
columbus. Progress in Telescope and Instru-
mentation
Technologies
(Garching:
ESO),
301–305
Parodi, G., Cerra, G. C., Hill, J. M., Davison, W. B., &
Salinari, P. 1997, LBT primary mirrors: the final
design of the supporting system. Proc SPIE,
2871, 352–359
Pease, F. G. 1926, On the design of very large tele-
scopes. Pub Astron Soc Pac, 38, 195–207
Preston, F. W. 1927, The theory and design of plate
glass polishing machine. J Soc Glass Technol, 11,
214–256
Prokhorov, I. V., Kordonsky, W. I., Gleb, L. K.,
Gorodkin, G. R., & Levin, M. L. 1992, New high-
precision magnetorheological instrument-based
method of polishing optics. OSA OF&T Work-
shop Digest, 134–136
Rabien, S., Ageorges, N., Barl, L., Beckmann, U.,
Blumchen, T., Bonaglia, M., et al. 2010, ARGOS:
the laser guide star system for the LBT. Proc
SPIE, 7736, 77360E–12
Ragazzoni, R., Giallongo, E., Pasian, F., Baruffolo, A.,
Bertram, R., Diolaiti, E., et al. 2006, The wide-
field eyes of the large binocular telescope. Proc
SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng, 6267, 626710–8
Ritchey, G. W. 1928, The modern photographic tele-
scope and the new astronomical photography
part I. – The fixed universal telescope. JRASC,
22, 159–177
Roddier, N. A., Blanco, D. R., Goble, L. W., & Roddier,
C. A. 1995, WIYN telescope active optics system.
Proc SPIE, 2479, 364–376
Sabatke, E. E., Burge, J. H., & Hinz, P. 2006, Optical
design of interferometric telescopes with wide
fields of view. Appl Opt, 45, 8026–8035
Salinari, P., & Hill, J. M. 1994, The enclosure of
the large binocular telescope. Proc SPIE, 2199,
442–451
Schechter, P. L., Burley, G. S., Hull, C. L., Johns, M.,
Martin, H. M., Schaller, S., et al. 2003, Active
optics on the baade 6.5-m (Magellan I) telescope.
Proc SPIE, 4837, 619–627
Shectman, S. A., & Johns, M. 2003, The Magellan
telescopes. Proc SPIE, 4837, 910–918
Shectman, S. A., & Johns, M. 2010, GMT overview.
Proc SPIE, 7733, 77331Y–11
Siegmund, W. A., Stepp, L., & Lauroesch, J. 1990,
Temperature control of large honeycomb mir-
rors. Proc SPIE, 1236, 834–843
Storm, J., Seifert, W., Bauer, S. M., Diones, F., Fech-
ner, T., Kraemer, F., et al. 2004, The acquisition,
guiding and wavefront error sensing units for
the Large Binocular Telescope. Proc SPIE, 5489,
374–381

184 4
Honeycomb Mirrors for Large Telescopes
Su, P., Burge, J. H., Cuerden, B., Sasian, J., & Mar-
tin, H. M. 2008, Scanning pentaprism measure-
ments of off-axis aspherics. Proc SPIE, 7018,
70183T–10
Su, P., Burge, J. H., Cuerden, B., Allen, R., & Martin, H.
M. 2009, Scanning pentaprism measurements of
off-axis aspherics II. Proc SPIE, 7426, 74260Y–9
Teran U., J., Slagle, J. H., Hill, J. M., & Neff, D.
2002, Completion of the large binocular tele-
scope enclosure. Proc SPIE, 4837, 217–224
Tyson, J. A., Wittman, D. M., & Angel, J. R. P.
2001, The dark matter telescope. in Gravitational
Lensing: Recent Progress and Future Goals, Vol.
237, ed. T. S. Brainerd, & C. S. Kochanek (San
Francisco: Astronomical Society of the Pacific),
417–420
Uglesich, R. R., Crotts, A. P., Baltz, E. A., de Jong,
J., Boyle, R. P., & Corbally, C. J. 2004, Evidence
of halo microlensing in M31. Astrophys J, 612,
877–893
West, S. C., Callahan, S., Chaffee, F. H., Davison, W.,
DeRigne, S., Fabricant, D., et al. 1997, Toward
first light for the 6.5-m MMT telescope. Proc
SPIE, 2871, 38–48
West, S. C., Burge, J. H., Cuerden, B., Davison, W.,
Hagen, J., Martin, H. M., et al. 2010, Alignment
and use of the optical test for the 8.4-m off-axis
primary mirrors of the Giant Magellan telescope.
Proc SPIE, 77390N–15
Wilson, S. R., & McNeil, J. R. 1987, Neutral ion beam
figuring of large optical surfaces. Proc SPIE, 818,
320–324
Woolf, N. J. 1979. Dome seeing. PASP, 91, 523–529
Woolf, N. J. 1982a, High resolution imaging from the
ground. ARAA, 20, 367–398
Woolf, N. J. 1982b, Seeing and the design and location
of a 15-meter telescope. Proc SPIE, 332, 193–197
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, J. E., Anderson, S.
F., Annis, J., Bahcall, N. A., et al. 2000, The sloan
digital sky survey: technical summary. Astron J,
120, 1579–1587
Zanotto, E. D. 1998, Do cathedral glasses flow? Am J
Phys, 66, 392–399
Zobrist, T. L. 2009, Application of laser tracker tech-
nology for measuring optical surfaces. Univer-
sity of Arizona, Ph.D. dissertation, College of
Optical Sciences
Zobrist, T. L., Burge, J. H., & Martin, H. M. 2010,
Accuracy of laser tracker measurments of the
GMT 8.4 m off-axis mirror segments. Proc SPIE,
7739, 77390S–12

5
Active Thin-Mirror
Telescopes
Lothar Noethe ⋅Ray Wilson
European Southern Observatory ESO, Garching, Germany
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187
2
Error Sources and Generated Wavefront Aberrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
2.1
Error Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
2.2
Definition of the Telescope Image Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190
2.3
Generated Wavefront Aberrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
2.3.1
Description of Aberrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
2.3.2
Aberrations of a Perfect Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
2.3.3
Optical Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
2.3.4
Tracking and Misalignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194
2.3.5
Mirror Deformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194
2.3.6
Local Air and Free Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
2.3.7
Comparison of Aberrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198
3
Passive Stabilizing Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200
3.1
Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200
3.2
Telescope Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
3.3
Mirror Geometries and Substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
3.4
Mirror Supports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
3.4.1
Continuous Versus Point Supports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
3.4.2
Position-Based Supports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
3.4.3
Force-Based Astatic Supports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
3.4.4
Optimal Support Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
3.5
Limitations of Passive Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210
4
Active Optics in Telescopes with Meniscus Mirrors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
4.1
Advantages of Active Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
4.2
Control Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
4.3
Optical Wavefront Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
4.3.1
Choice of the Type of Wavefront Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
4.3.2
Indistinguishable Error Sources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
4.3.3
Disturbances by the Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
4.4
Correction of Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
4.4.1
Correction of Misalignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_5, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

186 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
4.4.2
Correction of Mirror Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
4.4.3
Correction of Deflections of the Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
4.5
Historical Development of Active Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
5
Active Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
5.1
Telescopes of the Four-Meter Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
5.2
Telescopes of the Eight-Meter Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
5.2.1
Design of the VLT Active Optics System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
5.2.2
Open-Loop Performance of the VLT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
5.2.3
Closed-Loop Performance of the VLT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
5.2.4
Other Large Active Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
5.3
Future Extremely Large Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
187
Abstract:
Until to the late 1980s, large optical telescopes relied on sufficient stiffness of their
structures and their mirrors as well as on mechanical design features enhancing their stability to
achieve an image quality that was only limited by the errors introduced by the free atmosphere.
The only degrees of freedom that were controlled were the tracking and the focus. With the
developmentof computers and electronics, it became feasible to correct the optics of a telescope
during the operation, a technique called active optics. Wavefront sensors equipped with CCD
detectors could measure the optical errors generated by the telescope with speed and precision,
and these errors could then be corrected during observations by realigning the mirrors with
respect to each other and by modifying their shapes. In particular, the large tolerances for the
errors after polishing allowed for the manufacture of large, thin mirrors with diameters of up to
8 m. With active optics, telescopes with mirror diameters of the order of 4 and even 8 m could
routinely achieve a seeing-limited performance. Active optics is also an integral component of
the next generation of extremely large telescopes, which by necessity are systems with complex
control of all optical elements.
1
Introduction
The goal of astronomical telescopes is to deliver a large number photons with high resolution to
instruments located at the focal plane. The light-collecting power can rather easily be increased
by enlarging the primary mirror. According to the principles of diffraction optics, this would
also improve the resolution if the wavefront errors generated by the atmosphere and by the
telescope itself remained below the wavelength of the observed light. Keeping the telescope
errors small requires that the positions and the shapes of the optical surfaces do not deviate
too strongly from their prescriptions. However, this is not easy to achieve for large telescopes
that point at different locations in the sky and are operated in environments with changing
temperatures and wind conditions.
Before the development of so-called adaptive optics devices, which correct the errors intro-
duced by the atmosphere, the resolution of ground-based telescopes was fundamentally limited
by the atmosphere. The smallest diameters of point-source images were typically of the order of
half an arcsecond. Therefore, the goal for telescopes was less ambitious, namely, to deliver only
a so-called “seeing-limited” image quality. For this performance, it was sufficient that the errors
generated by the telescope itself were small compared with the substantial errors introduced by
the atmosphere.
In passive telescopes, traditionally only the tracking and, occasionally, the focusing were
controlled. Even the much less ambitious goal of seeing-limited performance could only be
achieved if the diameter of the primary mirror was not larger than 2–3 m. Most large passive
telescopes with mirror diameters of the order of 4 m would only occasionally reach a seeing-
limited performance. Despite the use of mechanical principles and features to improve the
stability, they suffered from a lack of stiffness both of the structure and of the mirrors, which
caused misalignments and deformations of the mirrors.
Real improvements within the 4-m class and the opening up of the option of building tele-
scopes with much larger diameters were achieved only with the introduction of computerized
control of the alignment and the shapesof the mirrors. This technique, called active optics, mea-
sures the wavefront errors with optical wavefront sensors and corrects the errors preferably with
those elements that generated the errors. An important advantage of active optics is that some
stringent performance requirements, which often demandexpensive engineering solutions, can
be relaxed because the telescope errors can be corrected during operation.

188 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
Active optics can be operated in open or in closed loop. In open-loop operation, the sig-
nals are taken from calibration tables, whereas in closed-loop operation, they are collected
continuously. One of the advantages of closed-loop active optics, which became feasible with
the development of CCD cameras, is that the optical quality of the telescope is automatically
monitored during observations.
With active optics control applying approximately one correction per minute, telescopes
with diameters of 4–10 m could routinely reach a seeing-limited performance, even at much
lower costs than traditional passive telescopes.
Future extremely large telescopes face additional challenges. First, with the development of
adaptive optics, either the telescope alone or the full system consisting of the telescope and the
instrument will be required to deliver diffraction-limited rather than seeing-limited images.
Despite the additional correction capabilities supplied by adaptive mirrors, this also imposes
stringent requirements on the optical quality of the telescope itself.
Second, their large structures are naturally more flexible. The stiffness can be enhanced by
reducing the length of the telescope. However, a compact tube requires much steeper primary
mirrors, which increases the sensitivity to misalignments due to gravity or wind.
Third, large errors can often no longer be sufficiently corrected by the large elements gen-
erating the errors, since the frequencies required for the corrections may interfere with the
mechanical eigenfrequencies of the system. The solution is to correct the bulk of the large
amplitude errors with the large elements with a restricted bandwidth and the residual errors
with elements of much smaller masses with much higher bandwidths. For diffraction-limited
and often even seeing-limited performance, modern very large telescopes therefore require a
multistage control with correcting elements of different sizes.
> Section 2.1 gives a short overview of the potential error sources in optical tele-
scopes,
> Sect. 2.2 describes the various metrics that are used for the telescope quality,
and >Sect. 2.3 outlines which wavefront aberrations are generated by the various error sources
and how they are best described mathematically. >Section 3 introduces the passive features
used in telescopes tosupplythe necessarystabilityagainst the influences ofvarious errorsources
and the limitations faced by telescopes using only these passive features. > Section 4 shows
how these problems can be overcome by the control of the optics. Finally, >Sect. 5 presents
the designs of existing telescopes with mirror diameters of the order of 4 and 8 m and of future
telescopes with diameters of the order of 30 m or more.
Other reviews of the use of active optics in telescopes can be found in Ray (1991), Hubin
and Noethe (1993), in Chapter 3 of Wilson (1999), in Chapter 8 of Bely (2002), and in Noethe
(2002). A book dedicated to astronomical optics and elasticity theory discusses in great detail
the control of optics using various forms of thin mirrors (Lemaitre 2009). Historical reviews of
the use of thin elastic mirrors and the evolution toward active optics are given in Wilson (1999)
and Noethe (2009).
2
Error Sources and Generated Wavefront Aberrations
2.1 Error Sources
The optical configuration of a telescope is defined by the relative positions and the figures of the
mirrors. Even a hypothetical perfect telescope is not free of aberrations in the field. Additional
aberrations can be generated by misalignments and figure errors of the optical elements as well

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
189
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
dc
Hz
Adaptive Optics
Atmosphere
Telescope movements
Optical manufacturing
Mirror temperature
Wind
Active Optics
Tube temperature
Local air
⊡Fig. 5-1
Frequencyrangesofsourcesofwavefrontaberrationsandofactiveandadaptive opticscorrections
in optical telescopes
as by environmental conditions. The frequency ranges of the various error sources discussed
below are shown in >Fig. 5-1.
Optical Manufacturing. The intrinsic stiffness of large telescope mirrors decreases with their
diameter. Their precise shapes are therefore to a large extent defined by their support systems.
Under the back surface and along the rim of the mirror, so-called position-based supports
define the positions of the support points, whereas so-called force-based supports define the
forces at the support points.
On the one hand, the shape of the mirrors is much easier to control with force-based sup-
ports, which are therefore the usual choice for the support systems in telescopes. On the other
hand, the optical manufacturing process requires comparatively stiff supports if polishing forces
are applied on the front surface. However, stiff supports are much harder to adjust than the
softer supports used in the telescope during operation, and the difference between the support
systems will lead to low spatial frequency errors in the shapes of the mirrors.
Independently of the type of the support system, the polishing process may also generate
errors with mid and high spatial frequencies.
Another problem is that in most telescopes, only the combination of all powered mirrors
will deliverthe required high-qualityimage. The desired shapes ofthe individual mirrors usually
deviate strongly from spherical shapes, and thus cannot be tested at their centers of curva-
ture with a simple source like an illuminated pinhole generating a perfect spherical wavefront.
Instead, the polishing process of single mirrors usually requires special optics, so-called null or
compensation systems (Wilson 1999), to convert the spherical wavefront generated by a point-
like source into a wavefront with the aspheric shape to be polished into the mirror. Incorrect
manufacturing of null systems, which has occurred quite frequently, can generate low spatial
frequency wavefront errors of several micrometers.
Telescope Movements. Telescope movements have two effects on the image quality. First, if
the telescope does not precisely follow the movement of the stars, the image of a point source
will be smeared out because its position moves on the detector. Second, changes of the incli-
nation of the telescope may lead to deformations of the tube and to incorrect mirror support
forces, which will generate misalignments and shape errors of the optical elements,respectively.

190 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
In addition, the sag of the mirror between discrete support points is usually polished out with
the mirror pointing upward. However, some fraction of it will reappear when the axis of the
mirror is no longer vertical or, as is the case for secondary mirrors, the mirror is pointing
downward.
The frequency range of the generated errors depends strongly on the efficiency of mechan-
ical features that attempt to reduce the misalignments and decouple the deformations of the
mirrors from the deformations of their cells. Only small telescopes with mirror diameters up to
2 m are often sufficiently rigid to be unaffected by telescope movements.
Temperature. Temperature variations affect both the telescope structure and the mirrors.
The relatively large thermal inertia of the mirrors filters the variations of the ambient tempera-
ture, and the generated errors therefore evolve slowly with time.
Wind. In very large telescopes, the wind possibly becomes the most critical source for telescope
errors. It applies torques on the main structure, which cause errors in the tracking of the object.
In addition, deformations of the structure will lead to misalignments, and pressures on thin
mirrors will cause deformations of the mirrors. The errors can be quite large with appreciable
contributions even at frequencies of the order of 1 Hz.
Local air. Because of the thermal inertia of the structure and the mirrors, their temperatures
cannot follow the fast temperature variations of the ambient air. The temperature differences
between the structure and the mirrors on the one hand and the ambient air on the other hand
can generate turbulent convection patterns above the surfaces. In the case of the mirror, the
impact on the image quality, the so-called the mirror seeing, is approximately proportional to
the square of the temperature difference (Guisard et al. 2000; Racine et al. 1991). Therefore, a
common requirement is to keep the temperature differences within a range of ±○C.
Free atmosphere. A major error source for ground-based observations are effects caused by
atmospheric turbulence that mixes air volumes of different temperatures. The strongest effects
are due to the turbulence near the ground and at heights of approximately 10km. The correction
of wavefront errors caused by the free atmosphere is done by adaptive optics systems operating
at frequencies up to several hundred Hz.
2.2 Deﬁnition of the Telescope Image Quality
Metric for diffraction-limited telescopes. Large telescopes can approach their diffraction limit if
they either operate in space or correct the wavefront errors caused by the atmosphere using
adaptive optics devices. The common criterion for an image quality close to the diffraction
limit is the Strehl ratio s (Born and Wolf 1997), which is the ratio of the peak intensity in the
image of a point source taken with the real telescope to the one taken with a corresponding
perfect telescope, with both telescopes operating in vacuum. For wavefront errors that are small
compared with the wavelength λ of the light, the Strehl ratio depends quadratically on the rms
σ of the wavefront error, that is, s = −(πσ/λ)(Born and Wolf 1997). Telescopes are often
defined as diffraction-limited if the Strehl ratio is larger than 0.82, which is equivalent to an rms
of the wavefront error smaller than a 15th of the wavelength of the observed light.
Metric for the effects of the atmosphere. Without adaptive optics corrections, the image quality
even of perfect ground-based telescopes is limited by the wavefront errors generated by the free
atmosphere. The metric commonly used for the effects of the atmosphere is called the seeing.
It is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the image, blurred by the atmosphere, of a
perfect large telescope with a diameter of the primary mirror much larger than the atmospheric
coherence length or Fried parameter r(Fried 1965). For a seeing of arcsec, ris of the order

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
191
of mm. The very best seeing values recorded at the current sites of large telescopes are of the
order of .arcsec FWHM.
Metrics for seeing-limited telescopes. The performance of a telescope is called seeing-limited if the
errors introduced by the telescope alone are significantly smaller than the errors introduced by
the atmosphere. The wavefront errors due to the atmosphere are so large that also the effects of
possibly much smaller telescope errors on the image quality are best described in terms of geo-
metrical optics, for example, by the FWHM of the geometric point spread function generated
by the telescope errors.
Without the disturbances of the atmosphere, a large telescope with a seeing-limited per-
formance should generate point spread functions of less than .arcsec FWHM. Under the
assumption that the telescope errors are statistically independent of the errors introduced by
the atmosphere, such a figure is quadratically insignificant compared with best seeing values of
.arcsec FWHM.
Design metrics for seeing-limitedtelescopes. Two other metrics have been introduced for ground-
based telescopes. They are based on comparisons of certain characteristics of images taken by
the real and a corresponding perfect telescope. Both of these images have to be affected by
atmospheric disturbances that generate the same seeing conditions. One of the metrics, the
central intensity ratio CIR (Dierickx 1992), is similar to the Strehl ratio. It is the same ratio of
the maxima of the images taken by the real and the perfect telescope, this time, however, with
both images affected by the atmosphere. For small slope errors the CIR depends quadratically
on the rms of the slope errors.
The other metric is the normalized point source sensitivity (PSSN) (Seo et al. 2009), which
is defined as the integral of the square of the intensity in the image of the real telescope, nor-
malized by the same integral for the image of the perfect telescope. Again, both images must be
identically affected by the atmosphere. The PSSN is directly related to the photometric errors
in background limited observations and therefore represents the loss in efficiency in telescope
observing time.
For sufficiently small wavefront errors, the last two metrics offer the advantage that the
values for the complete system can approximately be computed by multiplying the values cor-
responding to the individual contributing error sources. The problem with these two metrics
is that they depend on the current seeing conditions, which can vary strongly even over short
periods of time. Therefore, any of them could only be measured at the telescope if the seeing
was well known. However, to define seeing values for the telescope environment measured by
independent devices that are close to the telescope has proven to be difficult (Sarazin et al.
2008). These metrics are therefore mainly of theoretical nature, but can conveniently be used
for specifications during the design phase.
2.3 Generated Wavefront Aberrations
This section describes which wavefront aberrations are generatedby the error sources discussed
above, how they scale with the telescope size, and how they are best described mathematically.
2.3.1 Description of Aberrations
Wavefront aberrations w(ρ, φ) over a circular pupil, with ρ being the normalized radial and
φ the azimuthal cylindrical pupil coordinates, are distributed over a large range of spatial

192 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
frequencies. In general, the amplitudes of the aberrations decline rapidly with increasing spa-
tial frequencies. The wavefront error w(ρ, φ) is therefore suitable for a modal description in
terms of the coefficients of the first terms of its expansion across the pupil in a complete set of
preferably orthonormal functions. However, special polishing processes or the geometry of the
support system may, in addition, generate characteristic spatial frequencies with possibly large
amplitudes.
If the telescope optics is rotationally symmetric, these sets can be expressed as Fourier series.
A function w(ρ, φ) will then be written as a sum of products of two contributions that depend
either on ρ or on φ, that is w(ρ, φ) = ∑cm,i fm,i(ρ) cos(mφ) + sm,i fm,i(ρ) sin(mφ), with cm,i
and sm,i being the expansion coefficients. The functions fm,i(ρ) form a complete set within each
individual rotational symmetry m. The order i of the mode within the rotational symmetry m
is related to the number of nodes of the radial function fm,i(ρ).
In general, there exists an infinite number of such sets. Which ones are most appropriate for
the description of the wavefront errors dependson the type of the aberrations that are generated
by the various error sources.
2.3.2 Aberrations of a Perfect Telescope
Certain wavefront aberrations are naturally generated even by a perfect telescope. In general,
the optical quality of a telescope with rotationally symmetric optics can reach its physical limit,
that is, the diffraction limit, only along its optical axis in the center of the field. Away from the
center, so-called field aberrations occur, which increase with the field angle.
For rotationally symmetric systems, the set of possible field aberrations, together with their
dependence on the pupil and field coordinates, can easily be derived from symmetry considera-
tions (Wilson 2004). In such systems, the field aberrations can depend on the coordinate vector
⃗ρ in the pupil and the field angle vector ⃗σ only through scalars. The only scalars, which can be
formed from ⃗ρ and ⃗σ are ρ, σ , and ⃗σ ⋅⃗ρ = σρ cos φ, where φ is the angle between the vectors
⃗σ and ⃗ρ. Consequently, every aberration can be written as a product of functions depending
either on the modulus σ of the field angle, the radial pupil coordinate ρ, or the azimuth pupil
coordinate φ. Furthermore, any powers of cosm φ can be rewritten as Fourier series. Finally,
with x = ρ cos φ and y = ρ sin φ, the pupil dependencies of all field aberrations can also be
expressed as polynomials in Cartesian coordinates x and y. The orthonormalized set of these
polynomials are the Zernike polynomials (Born and Wolf 1997), which are the functions most
commonly used for the description of optical aberrations (Tango 1977).
Using the notation introduced in >Sect. 2.3.1, >Table 5-1 shows the most important wave-
front aberrations expressed as Zernike polynomials. All functions are normalized such that the
variance, that is the rms, across the pupil is equal to one.
In general, the coefficients of the field aberration in optical systems decrease rapidly with the
rotational symmetry as well as with the order of the Zernike polynomials within each rotational
symmetry. For the small field angles of astronomical telescopes, that is, for σ ≪rad, the
dominant aberrations in the field are the ones with the lowest powers of σ. For each rotational
symmetry m, the lowest possible powerof σ is always equal to m. The dominant field aberrations
are, therefore, spherical aberration, which is constant over the field, third-order coma, which
depends linearly on the field angle, and third-order astigmatism with a quadratic dependence
on the field angle.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
193
⊡Table 5-1
Most important wavefront aberrations expressed as Zernike polynomials
Rotational
Aberration
symmetry
Order
Symbol
Zernike polynomials
Piston
0
1
z0,1
1
Tilt
1
1
z1,1
2ρ cos φ, 2ρ sin φ
Defocus
0
2
z0,2
√
3 (2ρ2 −1)
Third-order spherical aberration
0
3
z0,3
√
5 (6ρ4 −6ρ2 + 1)
Third-order coma
1
2
z1,2
√
8 (3ρ3 −2ρ)cos φ,
√
8 (3ρ3 −2ρ)sin φ
Third-order astigmatism
2
1
z2,1
√
6 ρ2 cos2φ,
√
6 ρ2 sin2φ
For an arbitrary first-order definition of an optical system, that is, for arbitrary axial posi-
tions and radii of curvature of the optical elements, k field aberrations can be eliminated with
k aspheric surfaces (Wilson 2004). The aberrations that are usually eliminated first by the opti-
cal design are those with the weakest field dependences. Spherical aberration can be eliminated
with one parabolic mirror, in addition, linear third-order with two mirrors in the so-called apla-
natic Ritchey-Chrétien design, and, furthermore, also quadratic third-order astigmatism with
three mirrors in so-called anastigmatic telescopes.
For telescopes with seeing-limited performance and moderate fields of view of the order of
20 arcmin, the Ritchey-Chrétien design is sufficient. However, for telescopes with diffraction-
limited performance, the field aberrations even over small fields of view of the order of a few
arcminutes have to be minimized. The same applies to large survey telescopes with mirror diam-
eters of up to 8 m and field diameters of possibly a few degrees, in which the field aberrations
are usually minimized by a combination of reflective and refractive optics. Therefore, unless
the field aberrations are corrected over smaller fields by additional optics in the instruments,
diffraction-limited and large survey telescopes require anastigmatic optics with at least three
aspheric mirrors.
2.3.3 Optical Manufacturing
Optical manufacturing errors are spread over a large range of spatial frequencies k. The spec-
trum of the polishing errors is usually rather flat up to a corner frequency and then drops
approximately with k−for spatial frequencies above cycles/m (Hull et al. 2003).
Similar to field aberrations, low spatial frequency errors due to optical manufacturing are
most conveniently described by Zernike polynomials. For example, incorrectly manufactured
null systems (Wilson 1999) generate predominantly third-order spherical aberration. The high
spatial frequency errors are largely independent of the size of the mirror.
All these errors are field independent if the mirror is located in a pupil. Otherwise, the
aberrations in the mirror generate additional field aberrations with field dependencies that are
different from the ones in rotationally symmetric systems.

194 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
2.3.4 Tracking and Misalignments
Tracking errors, which are errors in the pointing of the telescope to the requested position in
the sky, manifest themselves as image motions in the focal plane.
Misalignments are caused by relative rigid-body movements of the optical elements, except
by rotations around the symmetry axes in the case of circular elements. The generated aberra-
tions can be best described by Zernike polynomials. For example, movements along the optical
axis, which preserve the rotational symmetry, generate field-independentdefocus and spherical
aberration.
Lateral movements or tilts relative to the optical axis break the usual rotational symmetry of
the initially aligned system. With respect to the dependence on the pupil coordinates ρ and φ,
the generated aberrations are the same as in rotationally symmetric systems, that is, they can be
expressed as Zernike polynomials. However, their field dependences are different (Shack and
Thompson 1980). In general, the power of the field dependence, that is, the power of σ, of an
aberration in the form of a Zernike polynomial generated by a misalignment is at least one order
lower than the power of the field dependence of the same Zernike polynomial in the aligned
system. For example, whereas the field dependence of third-order astigmatism in the aligned
system is quadratic, it can be constant or linear for the additional third-order astigmatism in
the misaligned system.
By far the most important additional aberrations generated by lateral displacements or tilts
ofthe mirrors are field-independent third-ordercoma and third-orderastigmatism with a linear
field dependence. Furthermore, a misalignment can also generate a tilt of a focal plane, that is,
a defocus that is proportional to the difference between the tilted and the ideal focal plane.
All these field aberrations in misaligned optical systems can be calculated very elegantly by the
method outlined in Shack and Thompson (1980) and Thompson (2005).
The amplitudes of the structural deformations depend on the stiffness of the structure.
For similar designs, the eigenfrequencies are roughly inversely proportional to the linear size
of the telescope, whereas the deflections due to wind pressures and gravity forces scale with the
first and second power of the linear size, respectively.
Another parameter that influences the effects of misalignments on the wavefront error is
the focal ratio of the primary mirror. For identical misalignments, the generated third-order
coma is proportional to the inverse of the third power of the focal length or, equivalently, the
focal ratio of the primary mirror. Focal ratios have evolved from values of about 3 in classical
m telescopes to values around and even below 1 in modern large telescopes.
2.3.5 Mirror Deformations
Derivation of elastic modes. The deformations of telescope mirrors generated by external forces
are best expanded in elastic modes of the mirrors. For thin shallow shells and if the mir-
rors are not constrained at the edges, the elastic modes are very similar to the free vibration
modes (Noethe 1991) of the mirrors. Elastic modes are deformations with minimum strain
energy for a given root mean square of the deformation. The mathematical construction of
the minimum-energy modes requires the solution of an eigenvalue problem, which can be
formulated as a variational problem
δ(J −˜ξA) = .
(5.1)

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
195
J is the total elastic energy, A the rms of the deformation, and ˜ξ a free parameter, which can
be interpreted as the energy per unit of the rms of the deflection. The problem is then to mini-
mize the ratio J /A among all possible deflections satisfying appropriate boundary conditions.
For a thin shallow circular spherica shell, ( > 5.1) leads to a second-order differential equation
for the deflections in each rotational symmetry. If the shape of the mirror is not constrained
by the supports defining its rigid-body position in space, the appropriate boundary condi-
tions for the usual support systems described in > Sect. 3.4 are the ones for free inner and
outer edges.
Within each rotational symmetry m, the solutions of the differential equations form a com-
plete set of orthogonal functions, the elastic modes em,i, where the index i denotes the order, as
outlined in >Sect. 2.3.1. Since, in the case of thin shallow shells, the inertial effects parallel to
the surface are negligible, the modes derived from ( > 5.1) are identical to the vibration modes
of the shell with angular eigenfrequencies ωm,i. The corresponding eigenvalues ξm,i, which are
proportional to the elastic energies of the modes, can then be expressed as
ξm,i = 
hγω
m,i,
(5.2)
where γ is the mass density of the mirror and h its thickness. The shapes of the modes can be
described analytically as sums of Bessel functions and rational functions ρm and ρ−m. They can
also be obtained numerically by singular value decomposition of interaction matrices describ-
ing deformations at a large number of points across the mirror generated by the application of
discrete forces at several points under the mirror.
More details about the shapes of the elastic modes are given in >Sect. 2.3.7.
Scaling laws. Leaving temperature variations aside, the deformation of a mirror depends essen-
tially on the ratio of external, disturbing forces to the intrinsic stiffness of the mirror. For
mirrors with similar geometries and identical substrates, the eigenfrequencies scale with h/D.
For a single force acting on a mirror with a diameter D and a thickness h, the deformation is
proportional to D/h.
Stiffnesses of the modes. In a log-log plot, >Fig. 5-2a shows the eigenfrequencies of the lowest
elastic modes of a typical thin primary mirror of an 8 m class telescope as functions of their
rotational symmetry m and order i within the rotational symmetry. The mirror has a thickness
of 175 mm and a radius of curvature of 28.8 m. The most important and useful feature of the
elastic modes is that their stiffnesses increase rapidly both with the rotational symmetry m and
with the order i. In the log-log plot, the eigenfrequencies increase linearly with slopes of about
both with i for constant m and with m for constant i. Therefore, the eigenfrequencies are
approximately proportional to mi.
The strongest deviations from the linear behavior in the log-log plots occur for the lowest
modes of the rotational symmetries 0–3. For the rotational symmetries 0 and 1, the relative
increase ofthe stiffnesses is due tostrong membrane stresses that arise in thin shells in particular
for the lowest modes of these symmetries. The noticeably lower frequencies of the lowest modes
of the rotational symmetries 2 and 3 and, to lesser degrees, also 4 are due to their similarity to
deformations of the form ρn cos nφ, which are free of membrane stresses.
The major consequence of the fast increase of the stiffnesses is that higher-order modes con-
taining high spatial frequency deformations are far less likely to be generated than the low-order
modes. Therefore, a mirror serves as a filter for the force distribution, reducing very efficiently
the effects of forces with high spatial frequency distributions on the deformation of the mirror.
Therefore, force errors, which occur naturally in the support of large mirrors, will generate

196 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
3.5
3
2.5
m
8
7
6
5
1
4
0
3
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
log10 (i)
log10 (Vm,i /Hz)
log10 (sresid /sinit)
nsub
0
−3
−2
−1
0
a
b
10
20
30
40
2
1.5
1
⊡Fig. 5-2
(a) Eigenfrequencies νm,i of the elastic modes of the VLT primary mirror for the lowest nine rota-
tional symmetries m and lowest six orders i within each rotational symmetry. (b) Logarithm of
the ratio of the rms σresid of the residual deﬂections after the subtraction of the nsub lowest elastic
modes to the rms σinit of initial deﬂections generated by random pressure ﬁelds
significant amounts of aberrations only in the lowest elastic modes. By far the softest one is
the lowest mode e,of rotational symmetry 2, which is similar to third-order astigmatism.
>Figure 5-2b shows the logarithm of the statistical average of the ratio σresid/σinit, where
σinit is the rms of the initial deflections, which are generated by random white noise pressure

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
197
fields, and σresid is the rms of the residual deflections after the subtraction of the lowest nsub
elastic modes. A subtraction of only the softest and therefore dominant mode e,reduces the
rms of the residual deflection already to 40% and a subtraction of the softest five modes even
to 10%.
Calculation of mirror deformations due to applied pressure fields and forces. A pressure field that
is proportional to an elastic mode generates deflections exactly in the form of this mode. For all
pressure fields in the form of elastic modes, the deflection of the mirror is then proportional to
the rms of the pressure field and inversely proportional to the stiffness of this mode.
Arbitrary pressure fields as well as discrete forces, which can be described as delta functions,
can be expanded in elastic modes. The amplitudes of the deflections in given modes decrease
rapidly with the order of the modes. Except for local effects, the contributions from the higher-
order variations in the pressure fields or the force distributions to the deformations are therefore
negligible. The low-order deformation of a mirror can then, with high accuracy, be calculated
as the linear sum of the low-order contributions from all supports.
Density of support points. The sag of the mirror between neighboring support points creates
high spatial frequency aberrations. Together with the thickness of the mirror, the specification
for this sag defines the density of the support points.
Mass reduction. One way to reduce the mass or increase the stiffness of monolithic mirrors is to
use structured instead of solid mirrors. An even larger mass reduction can be achieved by seg-
menting the mirror. However, by itself, a segmented mirror has no global stiffness, which must
then be supplied by a fast control loop that stabilizes the relative positions of the segments.
In this loop, the segment positions are modified by three position actuators under each seg-
ment, based on signals from edge sensors, which measure primarily the steps between adjacent
segments.
The effects of actuator movements on the signals measured by the edge sensors can be
described by an interaction matrix. For a finite number of segments, segment alignment modes
are defined as the orthogonal sets of vectors of actuator displacements that generate orthogonal
sets of vectors of edge sensor signals. Both sets of vectors can be obtained by a singular value
decomposition of the interaction matrix. In the limiting case where the size of the segments goes
to zero and at the same time the number of segments to infinity, the segment alignment modes
become smooth functions, which are all combinations of Bessel functions (Noethe 2005).
Field aberrations generated by mirror deformations. If a mirror is not in a pupil of the telescope,a
deformation of the mirror will generate additional field aberrations. For an aberration described
by a Zernike polynomial zm,i with a power nρ = m+(i−) of the radial coordinate ρ, the sums
of the powers of ρ and the field coordinate σ of the generated field aberrations are always equal
to nρ. For example, a deformation of a nonpupil mirror in the form of third-order astigmatism
with nρ = will generate a field aberration that is linear in ρ and σ, which is a field dependent
tilt, that is a distortion.
2.3.6 Local Air and Free Atmosphere
The spatial spectrum of wavefront aberrations generated by the free atmosphere is usually
described by a von Kàrmàn spectrum, which is constant for small frequencies and declines like
a Kolmogoroff spectrum with a power law for frequencies above a certain corner frequency.
The wavefront aberrations themselves are best expanded in orthogonal functions that are
statistically independent across the pupil, the so-called Karhunen-Loève modes (Roddier 1999).

198 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
The description of the aberrations generatedby the local air inside the dome is more difficult
since it depends on several parameters like the geometries of the dome and the telescope struc-
ture, the complex air flow inside the dome, and temperature differences between the elements
of the telescope and the air. As a coarse approximation, the spectrum is often described by a
von Kàrmàn model with, for example, the corner frequency defined by the size of the opening
of the dome and the velocity of the incoming wind.
2.3.7 Comparison of Aberrations
General similarities and differences. All four types of functions or modes introduced in the pre-
vious sections to describe the effects of the error sources on the wavefront are qualitatively
similar. Being defined on a circular disc, they can be written as products of cosine or sine func-
tions depending only on the polar angle φ on the one hand with functions depending only
on the normalized radial coordinate ρ on the other hand. The order i within each rotational
symmetry is characterized by the number of nodes along the range of the radial coordinate.
For the rotational symmetries larger than , the modes of a given order are qualitatively
similar for all four types of modes. However, the first-order modes of the rotational symmetries
0 and 1 are different for the Zernike and Karhunen-Loèvemodes on the one hand and the elastic
and segmentalignment modeson the other hand. For the symmetry 0, the lowest Zernike mode
is a constant, also called piston, and for the symmetry 1, it is a tilt. Both modes represent rigid-
body modes, which do not generate elastic stresses or signals in edge sensors that only measure
the steps between adjacent segments. The lowest modes of the elastic and the segment alignment
modes of the symmetries 0 and 1 are therefore similar to the second Zernike modes of these
symmetries, namely, to defocus and third-order coma, respectively.
Often, edge sensors in segmented mirrors can only measure the steps between two seg-
ments, but not the relative tilts around an axis parallel to their adjacent edges. A so-called
defocus mode of rotational symmetry 0, which is generated by identical tilts and zero steps
between all adjacent segments, is then invisible to the edge sensors. The lowest segment align-
ment mode of rotational symmetry zero is then not equivalent to Zernike defocus, but is similar
to the third Zernike mode of this symmetry, representing third-order spherical aberration.
For the rotational symmetry 2, > Figs. 5-3a, b show all four types of modes with the orders 1
and 3, respectively.
Zernike polynomials versus elastic modes. Zernike polynomials are most strongly curved near
the outer edge. On the contrary, elastic modes tend to minimize the curvature in the large areas
toward the outer edge of the mirror since this minimizes the total strain energy for a given rms
of the deformation. Consequently, the elastic modes are effectively linear near the outer edge
but more strongly curved near the inner edge than the Zernike polynomials, which can be seen
by comparing the solid and the dashed lines in >Fig. 5-3.
The differences increase with the order of the modes. As a consequence, the higher-order
elastic modes cannot be well approximated by a small number of annular Zernike polynomials.
For example, within the rotational symmetry 2, an elastic mode of the order i can be fitted by
the same number i of the lowest modes of the Zernike polynomials. The relative residuals are
then only 0.05 for i = , but 0.35 for i = and as large as 0.62 for i = . Four and six annular
Zernike polynomials are required for the fit to push the relative residuals below 0.05 for the
orders i = and i = , respectively.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
199
z2,1 (r)
e2,1 (r)
2
1
0
0
0.5
1
s2,1 (r)
k2,1 (r)
r
4
0
2
−2
0
0.5
1
a
b
r
z2,3 (r)
e2,3 (r)
s2,3 (r)
k2,3 (r)
e2,3 (r) – k2,3 (r)
⊡Fig. 5-3
Diﬀerent types of orthonormal modes of rotational symmetry 2. Solid: Zernike polynomials z2,i,
dashed: elastic modes e2,i, dashed-dotted: segment alignment modes s2,i, dotted: Karhunen-Loève
modes k2,i. (a) Order i = 1, (b) order i = 3. Line with three dots in ﬁgure b: diﬀerence e2,i −k2,i
between the elastic and the Karhunen-Loève modes
Nevertheless, viewed as elements of a vector space, at least the lowest elastic modes of the
lowest rotational symmetries are nearly parallel to their corresponding Zernike polynomials.
Examples of such pairs are Zernike defocus z,and the first elastic mode e,within the rota-
tional symmetry 0, Zernike third-order coma z,and the first elastic mode e,within the

200 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
rotational symmetry 1, and Zernike third-order astigmatism z,and the first elastic mode e,
within the rotational symmetry 2.
Segmented mirror and Karhunen-Loève modes versus Zernike polynomials. For the higher orders,
the segment alignment modes sm,i converge rapidly to the corresponding elastic modes em,i.
The reason is that the relative displacements of segments in height measured by two edge sen-
sors per border are equivalent to local torsions in monolithic mirrors. The differential equations,
from which the segment alignment and the elastic modes for thin shells are derived, are iden-
tical, and the differences between the boundary conditions decrease with the increase of the
order of the modes (Noethe 2005).
>Figure 5-3b shows that also the higher-order Karhunen-Loève modes km,i are similar
to the corresponding elastic modes em,i. For orders larger than 2, the rms of the difference
km,i(ρ) −em,i(ρ) between these two types of modes is always of the order of 15%, as shown
in >Fig. 5-3b by the line with one dash and three dots.
In summary, the higher orders of the elastic, segment alignment and Karhunen-Loève
modes are rather similar. They are, however, very different from the corresponding Zernike
polynomials. Therefore, except for the lowest-order modes, the Zernike polynomials are not
well suited for expansions of the modes of any of the other three sets.
Choice of set of modes for an expansion of the wavefront error. The choice of the set of func-
tions that are used for the expansion of the wavefront error depends on the type of aberrations
expected to be generated by the system. The two low-order aberrations Zernike defocus and
third-order coma are, in general also with large amplitudes, generated by misalignments and
are usually included in the set. The easiest choice is then to use only Zernike polynomials and
reconstruct other functions from the coefficients of the Zernike polynomials.
However, the best fit or the smallest residual error will be obtained if the chosen functions
best describe the expected aberrations in the wavefront. Since several types of errors sources are
usually present in a telescope, the best fit requires the use of different types of functions. In gen-
eral, these functions will not be orthogonal, and functions from different sets may even be very
similar. In such cases, only one function out of a group of similar functions should be included
in the set of fitted functions. The same considerations apply if not the functions themselves are
used, but instead their derivatives, which could be convenient for those wavefront sensors that
measure the slopes of a wavefront.
3
Passive Stabilizing Features
3.1 Deﬁnition
Several mechanical features can be used in telescopes to minimize the deleterious effects of
some of the error sources on the image quality. Those features that do not require any control
are called passive.
Passive telescopes were the standard telescopes until the late 1980s. Apart from occasional
refocusing, no corrections of the alignment or the shapes of the mirrors could be done, and,
usually, only the tracking of the telescope was controlled. For equatorial mounts, this required
onlysmall corrections ofthe pointing positions generated bya rotation at constant speed around
the axis parallel to the axis of the earth.
The largest passive telescopes had diameters of the primary mirror of the order of 5 m. Nat-
urally, they suffered from deformations of the structure and of the mirrors primarily due to

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
201
changes of the inclination of the telescope tube. However, passive telescopes profited from con-
structional mechanical principles for the design of the structure and the mirror supports, which
significantly reduced the deformations. In addition, since the correction of atmospheric effects
was not possible at that time, they only had to achieve a seeing-limited performance.
3.2 Telescope Structure
One of the most serious sources for wavefront errors is a relative shift or tilt of the secondary
with respect to the primary mirror. The structures holding the cells of both mirrors are usually
attached via substructures to the centerpiece, the central part of the telescope tube. A particular
substructure is the Serrurier truss (Diffrient 1994), which was first used in the 200-in Hale
telescope. A proper dimensioning of the struts ensures that the cells of the two mirrors move
laterally by the same amount and also without relative tilt. Therefore, the two mirrors remain
aligned with respect to each other irrespective of the inclination of the tube.
3.3 Mirror Geometries and Substrates
>Figure 5-4 shows a typical primary mirror of a passive 4 m class telescope with a thickness
of mm at the outer edge and a weight of approximately 12 t. The largest monolithic mirror
with a diameter of 6 m, a thickness of mm, and a weight of 45t is that of the BTA-6 telescope.
One way of increasing the stiffness of a mirror without increasing its mass is lightweighting.
The first example of such a structured large mirror was the 200 in mirror of the Hale telescope
⊡Fig. 5-4
Primary mirror of the 4.0-m telescope on Cerro Tololo

202 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
with approximately 84, mostly triangular, cavities and a lightweighting of approximately 60%.
Later on, lightweighting was used for the primary mirror of the Hubble Space Telescope, the
6.5 m mirror of the MMT and the 8.4 m blanks of the Large Binocular Telescope. The latter,
with a total thickness at the outer edge of the blank of approximately mm, were cast in a
spinning oven. During the casting, the 1,662 honeycombs cavities and the thickness of mm of
the ribs were defined by pieces of ceramic. With a lightweighting of 78%, this structured mirror
is, in terms of forces required to generate a certain deformation, approximatelyfour times stiffer
than the solid monolithic mirrors of the VLT, which have roughly the same diameter and a 50%
higher mass.
The shapes of mirrors are also sensitive to temperature variations. The major effect for a
powered mirror is a change of the radius of curvature, which generates mainly defocus in the
focal plane. Inhomogeneities of the coefficient of thermal expansion within the mirrors may
also lead to other deformations in the lowest elastic modes. One solution to prevent these tem-
perature related effects, which has been applied in most modern telescopes, is the use of mirror
substrates with negligible coefficients of thermal expansion.
3.4 Mirror Supports
3.4.1 Continuous Versus Point Supports
Lenses can onlybe supported along theirrim, which implies that an essentiallyone-dimensional
support has to maintain the proper three-dimensional shape of a lens under different inclina-
tions. Mirrors, on the other hand, can also be supported at the back surface. They are therefore
the only feasible option for large optical elements in large telescopes.
Ideally, axial supports across the back surface and lateral supports along the rim would be
continuous. Such supports, which would have toapplypressure fields with possiblyspecial func-
tional dependencies, are difficult to design. Therefore, all large telescope mirrors are supported
at discrete points. The additional unwanted local deformations introduced by the point supports
die off rather quickly due to the filtering effect of the elastic medium. A proper distribution of
the point supports across the back surface and the rim will, to a great extent, also avoid the
generation of low spatial frequency errors.
Aberrations with high spatial frequencies generated by the sag between the supports can
be limited to tolerable amounts by choosing an adequate density of the support points, once
the thickness h and the substrate of the mirror have been defined. If d is the typical distance
between neighboring supports, the sag scales with d/h.
3.4.2 Position-Based Supports
In the past, mirrors rested on hard support points, which themselves were rigidly attached to
the mirror cell. Depending on the errors in the vertical positions of the hard points on the one
hand and the intrinsic stiffness of the mirror on the other hand, the shape of the mirror would
either follow the support points or the mirror would be supported by only a reduced number
of supports. In extreme cases, the mirror could even rest on three points only.
At best, these three points would form a regular triangle and would be located at a distance
of approximately 75% of the outer radius from the center. The dominant aberration would then
be in the form of the lowest elastic mode e,of rotational symmetry 3. For a mirror with a

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
203
diameter of m and a thickness of mm, the coefficient of this mode would be of the order
nm. Such an error would cause a blur of a spot with a FWHM of the order of arcsec, which
would be far above the limit even for a seeing-limited performance.
Since the wavefront errors scale with D/hfor the effect of a single force and the forces
applied by three support points scale with Dh, the deformation on a three-point support scales
with D/h. Therefore, larger mirrors would have to be prohibitively thick to reduce the errors
to acceptable values.
Even if a mirror was supported by several hard points, the positions of the support points
would require accuracies in the axial direction better than 1 μm. However, because of man-
ufacturing errors as well as deformations of the mirror cell, such accuracies are impossible
to achieve. Position-based supports are, therefore, ruled out for large monolithic mirrors. A
much more practical solution for maintaining the proper figure of the mirror is to use force-
based supports, which can, to a great extent, decouple the deformations of the mirror from the
deformations of the mirror cell.
3.4.3 Force-Based Astatic Supports
Definition. The shape of a mirror is defined by its shape in a force-free environment and by the
forces acting on it: the gravity field, exerting a body force, and the localized support forces. In
any of the two extreme positions, that is, when the mirror is either horizontal or vertical, its full
weight is supported either by the axial or the lateral support system.
For arbitrary inclination angles ϑ, the gravity forces acting along the axial and lateral direc-
tions are proportional to cos ϑ and sin ϑ, respectively. The same dependencies on ϑ must then
be valid for the applied axial and lateral support forces as well as for the errors generated by the
axial and lateral supports. Therefore, if the axial or lateral forces generate a nearly perfect shape
when the mirror is in horizontal or lateral position, they will maintain the proper shape of the
mirror for all inclination angles.
Furthermore, the rigid-body position of the mirror with respect to its cell must be defined
by so-called fixed points, which constrain the movements in the six potential rigid-body degrees
of freedom without affecting the shape of the mirror. A support system with such fixed points,
which, in addition, guarantees that the shape of the mirror is decoupled from the shape of the
mirror cell, is called astatic.
For maintenancepurposes that require the removal of the mirror from its cell, it is an advan-
tage not tohave fixed connections between the mirrorand the support points. However, such so-
called push-only supports cannot apply pull forces on the mirror. While it is possible to achieve
a near-perfect mirror shape with push-only axial supports for the mirror in horizontal position,
this is not usually the case with push-only lateral supports for a mirror in vertical position.
Lever-type astatic supports. Two frequently used types of astatic supports use mechanical levers.
One of them is the whiffle tree support (Bely 2002), which, possibly using more than one stage,
distributes a force over several support points at the back surface of the mirror. At each stage,
the support force is astatically distributed via a pivoting lever to two or three points in the next
level. The fractions of the forces applied by the individual support points therefore depend only
on the geometry of the whiffle tree. This type of support is the preferred choice for mirrors with
diameters up to approximately 2 m. Larger thin mirrors need a large number of support points,
which would inevitably require complicated whiffle trees with several stages.
A better solution is then to use astatic lever supports. Here, the support point at one end of
the lever, the rotation axis of the lever, and the center of gravity of the counterweight at the other

204 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
end of the lever are located on one line. In such a configuration, the applied individual forces
are independent of the inclinations of their levers, which, in turn, depend on the local distances
between the mirror and its cell. Consequently, the applied individual forces are decoupled from
the deformations of the mirror cell (Lassell 1842) and, therefore, astatic.
In an axial whiffle tree support, three fixed points are required to constrain the three
rigid-body degrees of freedom: a translation perpendicular to the surface, called a piston, and
rotations around two orthogonal axes parallel to the surface, called tip and tilt. The fixed points
are realized by using three whiffle trees, with the bases of the whiffle trees being attached to the
cell at angles of 120○.
In astatic lever supports, three points could be added, at which the mirror is coupled to its
cell and which should ideally carry no weight. Another solution is to convert three of the astatic
supports into fixed points. Since the axial positions of the fixed points do not affect the mirror
shape and since all the other individual supports are astatic, also the full support is astatic.
Hydraulic and pneumatic supports. An alternative to lever-type supports, which add an appre-
ciable amount of weight to the mirror cell, are hydraulic or pneumatic supports. Here, a fixed
point is defined by a constant volume in a single support or in a group of connected supports.
Therefore, the number of groups of connected supports must not be larger than the number
of degrees of freedom for the rigid-body movements. As in the lever-type supports, piston, tip,
and tilt of a mirror are defined by three fixed points, that is, by three sectors of connected axial
supports, usually following a threefold symmetry.
Since the liquid or the air can freely flow within one sector, the forces are not affected by
deformations of the cell. Therefore, hydraulic and pneumatic supports designed this way fulfill
the two conditions for the astaticity of a support system.
One disturbing feature of these connected supports is that in nonhorizontal positions of the
mirror, the hydrostatic pressure produces additional forces, which increase from the highest to
the lowest axial support point. In pneumatic supports, such additional pressures are clearly
negligible, whereas in hydraulic supports, a two-chamber system must be used to compensate
the additional forces (Stanghellini et al. 1997).
3.4.4 Optimal Support Patterns
The patterns and the force distributions of the axial and lateral supports have to be chosen
such that the mirror figure is close to the prescribed figure for any zenith angle, in particular
when the mirror surface is horizontal or vertical. Since in these limiting cases the full weight
is either supported by the axial or the lateral supports, they can be designed separately. An
advantage of thin solid meniscus mirrors is that they can be approximated mathematically as
two-dimensional entities. Many problems related to the mirror support can then be treated
analytically.
Axial supports. The optimum pattern to minimize the rms of the surface error with a given
number of supports should be a regular pattern consisting of equilateral triangles. However, for
circular mirrors this leads to rather irregular sags at the outer edge. Therefore, the traditional
choice is a pattern with supports on concentric rings. Only two parameters are available for the
optimization of such supports: the radii of the rings and the fractions of the load supported by
each ring. The optimization is a nonlinear process. However, since analytical formulas exist for
thin meniscus mirrors (Schwesinger 1988), it can be done rapidly and efficiently by trial and
error methods.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
205
5
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−5
−10
−15
−6
−4
−2
0
2
w(r) / nm
r
r
w(r) / nm
a
b
⊡Fig. 5-5
Minimum wavefront errors w(ρ) generated by a thin plate supported on four continuous rings.
(a) Load fractions deﬁned, only free parameters: radii of the rings. (b) Solid line: Free parameters:
load fractions and radii of the rings, Dashed line: Additional free parameter: defocus
In particularforhydraulicorpneumaticsupports, it can be an advantage ifall supports apply
the same force. If, in addition, the number of supports on each ring is defined, the fractions of
the total load supported by each ring are fixed. Therefore, the radii of the rings are the only
free parameters for minimizing the rms of the deformation. As an example, >Fig. 5-5a shows

206 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
the optimized radii and the corresponding radial deformation for a support with four rings.
The mirror has an outer diameter of 2 m, a diameter of the inner hole of 200 mm, a radius of
curvature of 10 m, and a thickness of 100 mm. It is supported by 6, 12, 18, and 24 forces on
four rings. Clearly, such a support cannot generate a deformation with similar sags between the
rings. Also, a different distribution of the total number of approximately 60 supports on the
rings will not significantly improve the rms of the deformation.
Ahomogeneous pattern can onlybe obtained ifalsothe otherdegrees offreedom, that is, the
load fractions, are used. >Figure 5-5b shows that in that case the sags between the rings decrease
from the center to the outer edge because the areas of annular sections with the same diameter
increase toward the outer edge. Furthermore, a certain amount of defocus can be tolerated since
it can be corrected by movements of mirrors along the optical axis. Using also this additional
degree of freedom, the rms of the wavefront error of 1.6 nm can be reduced to 1.0 nm with a
defocus of −.μm ρ. Finally, the number of supports on each ring is chosen such that the
sags between the neighboring supports on one ring are approximatelyequal to the sags between
neighboring rings.
Scaling laws for axial supports. The sag between adjacent support points scales with d/h, where
d is the distance between the support points. With D denoting the diameter of the mirror and
nsupp the numberofsupport points, d ∝D/√nsupp. Therefore, the number nsag ofsupports that
are required to limit the sag to a given value scales with D/h and the nominal support forces
scale with h. With the assumption that the errors in the applied passive forces are proportional
to the nominal forces and using that the deflections for the application of a single force scale
with D/h, the total low spatial frequency wavefront errors wp generated by nsag random forces
under a passive mirror scale with wp ∝
√
D/h ⋅h⋅D/h= (D/h)/.
Lateral supports. Lateral and axial supports may either be combined or separated units. In com-
bined units, the individual supports apply both axial and lateral forces. If the lateral forces are
not applied in the neutral surface of the mirror halfway between the back and front surface, they
generate additional unwanted moments. In passive telescopes, the attachment points should
therefore be in the neutral surface. This can rather easily be done in structured mirrors with
sufficiently thick ribs, but requires additional bores from the back surface up to the neutral
surface in solid mirrors.
If the lateral support is independent of the axial one, the support points are usually only
located at the outer rim. If the meniscus mirrors are neither too large nor too steep, the plane
perpendicular to the axis of the mirror and containing its center of gravity intersects the rim.
The mirror can then be supported along the rim under its center of gravity with all force
vectors lying in this plane. However, for large, thin, and strongly curved mirrors, the plane
through the center of gravity does not intersect the rim. A lateral support system with forces
all lying in one plane and acting on the rim would then generate a torque (Schwesinger 1994).
To balance this torque, the lateral forces must also contain components along the axis of the
mirror.
Analytical expressions can be derived for the deformations of thin meniscus mirrors due to
lateral support forces (Schwesinger 1988, 1991). The lateral forces are expressed as Fourier com-
ponents depending on the azimuth angle φ, which is measured with respect to the horizontal
axis (> Fig. 5-6). Only forces proportional to the sine or the cosine of φ can support any
weight.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
207
a
b
Lateral forces
Radial
j
j
Lateral forces
Tangential
⊡Fig. 5-6
Lateral supports with purely (a) radial and (b) tangential forces
Consequently, the lateral support should only apply forces that are proportional to sin φ
and cos φ. Since such forces only generate deformations that are also proportional to sin φ and
cos φ, the major task of the design of the lateral support system is to minimize the deformations
in the rotational symmetry 1.
The vectors of the forces applied at the rim can be split into three orthogonal components: a
radial, a tangential, and an axial one. The radial components will be proportional tosin φ and the
tangential ones to cos φ, as shown in >Fig. 5-6. The axial forces, which are required to balance
the torque when the mirror is supported at the center of the rim, are proportional to sin φ.
With the functional dependence on φ given, the only parameters that need to be defined
are the maxima of the three force components. The maximum of the axial forces is determined
by the requirement to balance the torque. The sum of the maxima of the radial and tangential
forces is defined by the requirement to support the full weight of the mirror. Therefore, the only
free parameter for the definition of the lateral support is the ratio of the maxima of the radial
to the tangential forces or, in other words, which fraction β of the weight is supported by the
tangential forces.
Lateral supports of the NTT and the VLT. An example for a lateral support without axial com-
ponents is the one of the primary mirror of the ESO New Technology Telescope (NTT). This
mirror has a diameter of 3.58 m, a thickness of 241 mm, and a moderate focal ratio of 2.2. It can
laterally be supported in the plane through its center of gravity with, therefore, no need for axial
force components. The wavefront error does not depend critically on the ratio β of the fraction
of the weight supported by tangential forces (>Fig. 5-7a). With the chosen value of β = ., the

208 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
a
b
0.5
Lateral forces
NTT
1
0
1.0
0.8
0.5
0.3
0.0
−200
0
200
r
w(r) / nm
b
⊡Fig. 5-7
(a) Wavefront error w(ρ) generated by the NTT primary mirror along a normalized radius ρ in ver-
tical direction due to the lateral supports for various fractions β of the weight supported by the
tangential forces. (b) Lateral support forces for β = 0.5
equidistant lateral forces all point upward and are all identical (>Fig. 5-7b), which considerably
simplified the mechanics.
On the contrary, the large mirrors of the ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT) with diameters
of 8 m, thicknesses of 175 mm, and f-ratios of 1.75 cannot be supported in the plane contain-
ing their centers of gravity. Since the lateral forces are applied at the center of the rim, they
must also have components in the axial direction. The vectorial sums of the axial and the radial
components are approximately parallel to the slope of the mirror at the outer edge.
The wavefront error is very sensitive to the fraction β, with the minimum with a rms
of 8.7 nm obtained for β = .(> Fig. 5-8a). Additional supports at the inner edge
or attachments of the supports away from the center of the rim do not yield any improve-
ments (Schwesinger 1991). The better quality achieved for the much more flexible VLT as
compared with the one for the NTT is due to the additional axial forces, which were not used
for the NTT.
A lateral support system with equidistant support points and 75% of the load carried by
tangential forces would lead to forces three times larger at the two sides of the mirror than at
the top and the bottom (>Fig. 5-8b). However, forces with the same moduli can be applied if
the density of the support points increases towards the sides of the mirror (>Fig. 5-8c).
The analytical method used for calculating deflections generated by forces with the rota-
tional symmetry 1 can be extended to arbitrary rotational symmetries (Noethe 2001). Densely
applied lateral forces that are proportional to cos mφ or sin mφ will only generate deflections
with the rotational symmetry m. Similar to the case of axial supports, this feature offers a
convenient and fast way of calculating deflections generated by arbitrary forces along the rim
in a modal fashion in terms of rotational symmetries.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
209
a
b
c
Lateral forces
VLT equidistant
Lateral forces
VLT 
0.5
0
0
500
0.7450
0.7600
0.7560
0.7529
0.7500
−500
1
r
b
w(r) / nm
⊡Fig. 5-8
(a) Wavefront error w(ρ) generated by the VLT primary mirror along a normalized radius ρ in verti-
cal direction due to the lateral supports for various ratios β of the weight supported by tangential
forces. (b) and (c) Lateral support forces projected onto the plane perpendicular to the axis of the
mirror for β = 0.75 with equidistantly distributed support points (b) and identical moduli of the
forces but varying densities of the attachment points along the rim (c)

210 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
3.5 Limitations of Passive Telescopes
Performance of a passive 4-m telescope. Despite the use of stabilizing constructional mechanical
principles, the image quality of large passive telescopes suffered inevitably from deformations
of the structure and the mirrors. Wavefront aberrations generated in passive telescopes were
investigated systematically at the equatorial ESO 3.6 m telescope on La Silla (Wilson 1982).
A Shack-Hartmann sensor measured the coefficients of the lowest-order Zernike polynomials
with the telescope pointing at different sky locations.
After the mathematical subtraction of the effects of the low-order aberrations, the image
quality was always of the order of .–.arcsec FWHM, independent of the sky location
(> Fig. 5-9). These values can be regarded as the intrinsic quality of the telescope, which is
defined as a quality obtained without the wavefront aberrations generated by deflections of the
structure and errors in the mirror support. Under average seeing conditions of .arcsec, the
performance of the telescope could be considered as seeing-limited if the telescope could reach
its intrinsic quality of .arcsec FWHM.
Passive performance of an 8-m telescope. >Figure 5-10a demonstrates how an active telescope
with a primary mirror with a diameter of 8 m and a thickness of mm would perform if it was
operated passively. The data were obtained with continuous measurementsof the coefficients of
the low-order aberrations with the telescope following a star from the zenith to the horizon in
a passive mode, that is, without applying any active optics corrections (Guisard et al. 2000). The
figure shows the evolution of the coefficient of the y-component of the softest elastic mode e,.
Obviously, the evolution can be split into a smooth evolution and fast random variations.
The systematic evolutions of the low-order coefficients were obtained by fitting, rather arbi-
trarily, sixth-orderpolynomials. The circles in >Fig. 5-10bshow the rms values ofthe systematic
variations of the coefficients of the lowest 16 modes, plotted logarithmically because of the large
differences between the modes. For random force errors, one should expect that the systematic
0        All aberrations present (axcept defocusing)
zenith-mean plate
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.6
80% diameter (arcsec)
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
0 1 2 3 4 5
north
east
west
south
1 and Decentering coma removed
2 and Seidel astigmatism removed (2 axes)
3 and Spherical aberration removed
4 and Triangular coma removed (3 axes)
5 and Quadratic astigmatism removed (4 axes)
⊡Fig. 5-9
Improvement of the image quality of the ESO 3.6-m telescope after the removal of low-order aber-
rations (Reproduced from Wilson 1982). Triangular coma is ρ3 cos3φ and quadratic astigmatism is
ρ4 cos4φ

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
211
0
4
3
2
1
0
5
10
15
mode
0
2000
4000
6000
ce2,1,y /nm
20
40
60
1 – e2,1
9 – e6,1
10 – e3,2
11 – e1,2
12 – e7,1
13 – e4,2
14 – e8,1
15 – e2,3
16 – e0,3
2 – e3,1
3 – z0,2
4 – e4,1
5 – z1,2
6 – e5,1
7 – e2,2
8 – e0,2
log10(sela/nm)
J
log10(500000/(n sec)2)
a
b
⊡Fig. 5-10
(a) Coeﬃcient of the y-component of the elastic mode e2,1 as a function of the zenith angle ϑ.
The dashed line is a best ﬁt of a sixth-order polynomial. (b) Correlations between the scaled inverse
stiﬀnesses of modes, expressed through their eigenfrequencies ν, and the measured rms values of
the variation of the coeﬃcients with the zenith angle

212 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
variations are inversely proportional to the stiffnesses of the modes. According to ( > 5.2),
these stiffnesses are proportional to the square of their eigenfrequencies ν listed in >Table 5-2
in >Sect. 5.1. They are represented in >Fig. 5-10b by the triangles and are scaled to minimize
the differences between the circles and the triangles for the lowest modes.
For most of the modes, the measured variations and the inverse stiffnesses are well corre-
lated. Only the measured coefficients of z,, which is Zernike defocus, and z,, which is Zernike
third-order coma, are larger than expected. The reason is that they are not generated by defor-
mations of the primary mirror alone. The much stronger variations of these two coefficient
are due to misalignments of the secondary mirror, which are caused by deformations of the
telescope structure.
Nevertheless,for the other modes, the variations are inversely proportional to the stiffnesses
and are probably generated by random forces. Otherwise, specific systematicforce errors would
have generated comparatively larger coefficients of specific lower modes. From the variation of
, nm of the coefficient of the lowest elastic mode e,for a change of the zenith angle of
○, one can estimate the rms of the random force errors. Statistically, the axial support may
generate half of this error, that is , nm/
√
≈, nm. This would require axial random
force errors with an rms σF ≈N, which is equivalent to an rms of the variation of the nominal
axial support forces of 2% and, therefore, close to what one would expect for the inaccuracies
of the passive forces.
The conclusion of the measurement is that the wavefront errors that are generated during
a passive operation of a telescope with a large, thin monolithic mirror exceed by far even the
limits for seeing-limited operations.
4
Active Optics in Telescopes with Meniscus Mirrors
4.1 Advantages of Active Optics
The limitations for the performance of large telescopes due to the deformation of the structure
and application of incorrect forces can be overcome by a continuous control of the alignment
and the shapes of the mirrors (Wilson et al. 1987). The most obvious disadvantage of thin mir-
rors, namely, that they change their shape under the influence of external forces, then turns into
a major advantage. Low spatial frequency errors, which are difficult to control during the polish-
ing of large mirrors, can be corrected by moderate forces during the operation of the telescope.
As a consequence, certain amounts of low spatial frequency errors introduced by the polishing
can be tolerated, and more emphasis can be put on minimizing the high spatial frequencyerrors.
Another important advantage is the capability to correct misalignments of the telescope
mirrors. The sensitivity of the image quality to tilt and lateral misalignments of the secondary
mirror increases strongly with the inverse of the focal ratio of the primary mirror and, therefore,
with the inverse of the length of the telescope. The option to correct such misalignments during
the operation of the telescope opens the door for the construction of much shorter and therefore
lighter and more rigid telescopes. >Figure 5-11 shows the evolution of the focal ratios of pri-
mary mirrors in the last 40 years. The CFHT and the ESO 3.6 m were typical passive telescopes
of the 4-m class, whereas the NTT was the first active telescope.
With active optics, modifications of the optical configuration of the telescope also become
feasible. One example is the switch between the telescope foci at the VLT. The optical design

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
213
2010
VISTA 4.1 m
LBT 8 m
VLT 8 m
Keck 10 m
NTT 3.5 m
ESO 3.6 m
CFHT 3.6 m
Focal ratios of primary mirrors
2000
1990
1980
1970
0
1
2
3
4
⊡Fig. 5-11
Evolution of the focal ratios of the primary mirrors in the last 40 years with the transition from
passive to active telescopes
of the telescope is optimized for the Nasmyth focus and a switch to the Cassegrain focus with
its different back focal distance requires a refocus with the secondary mirror. A consequence of
this change of the first-order characteristics of the optics is a violation of the Ritchey-Chrétien
condition, which generates strong aberrations even at the center of the field. However, by an
appropriate deformation of the primary mirror, at least the dominant field-independent spher-
ical aberration can be corrected. The major field aberration is then third-order coma with a
linear dependence on the field angle. A correction of the coma would require a modification of
the shape of the secondary mirror, which is not possible in the VLT.
Another example of a change of the optical configuration is the modification of the plate
scale. In a two-mirror telescope with a flexible primary mirror, this can be done by introducing
simultaneously two defocus errors that compensate each other. The first defocus is introduced
by changing the radius of curvature of the primary mirror and the second one by an axial
movement of the secondary mirror. Again, such a change of the first-order characteristics also
generates spherical aberration and third-order coma, of which the first can be corrected by an
additional modification of the aspheric shape of the primary mirror.
4.2 Control Strategy
Open-loop control. In principle, there are two possible types of control, namely, open- and
closed-loop control. Both of them need signals to drive the correction devices (> Fig. 5-12).
Ultimately, the signals are obtained by optical measurements of the wavefront aberrations at
the focal stations of the telescopes, using reference stars as light sources.

214 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
Wavefront
analyser
Instrument
⊡Fig. 5-12
Principle of active optics corrections
Whereas open-loop corrections are based on calibration tables, which are obtained outside
the observing hours, closed-loop operations measure the control signals during observations.
On the one hand, the advantage of open-loop control is that there is no need to operate the
wavefront sensing during the observations. Furthermore, it can alsobe applied when sufficiently
bright reference stars are not available.
On the other hand, the open-loop approach faces a few problems. First, often only a small
number of measurements can be made, which leads to inaccurate calibration data if the mea-
surements are strongly affected by noise. Second, effects like hysteresis cannot be calibrated and
therefore limit the correction capabilities of the control system. Third, the components of the
telescope system, in particular the passive supports and the force and position actuators, must
be sufficiently stable and failure-free between the calibrations, possibly over periods of several
weeks.
Closed-loopcontrol. The alternative is touse closed-loopcontrol, where the corrections are based
on continuous measurements of the wavefront errors during the observations. A very impor-
tant advantage of closed-loop control is the continuous check of the telescope quality, with the
possibility of immediate corrective actions whenever a component fails. For example, if one
support fails and applies incorrect forces, the generated errors can largely be compensated by
other active supports. Such corrections could be based also on calibration tables. However, the
setup of such tables would require reliable models for the prediction of the errors generated by
failures of specific components and also sensors that detect the failures.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
215
There are further advantages of closed-loop control compared with open-loop control. First,
no observing time is lost to obtain calibration data. Second, the times over which components
have to be stable can strongly be reduced. Third, as a by-product, issues such as the dependence
of the image quality on temperature differences can be investigated statistically, based on possi-
bly millions of measurementsaftera few years of operation (Cullum and Spyromilio 2000; Guis-
ard et al. 2000). Such studies would be very difficult to undertake with only a few measurements
since the measured parameters are often heavily affected by various types of noise.
Degree of control. Naturally, the amplitudes of the wavefront errors often increase rapidly with
the size of the telescope. In addition, requirements on the resolution become more stringent in
modern large telescopes, which are often designed to reach a diffraction-limited instead of a
seeing-limited performance. The degree of control required to maintain the optical quality of
the telescope then depends primarily on the size of the telescope, the efficiency with which it is
stabilized by the passive components, and the desired image quality.
Multistage control. One important consequence of the increase of the telescope size is the
decrease of the lowest eigenfrequencies of the full system. If the massesof the correcting devices
are sufficiently large to excite the lowest eigenfrequencies, the bandwidth of the control will be
limited bythese frequencies. Yet, high bandwidth is required fora correction offast disturbances
as well as for an efficient correction of errors with large amplitudes.
One solution to this problem is to introduce a second stage of control, where the corrections
aredonebysmallerelements.Thesecanoperateathigherfrequencieswithoutexcitingvibrations
in the elements with much highermasses. Thesmall elements will nearlyinstantaneouslycorrect
allerrorswithhighbandwidths.However,theirstrokesareusuallynotsufficienttocorrectthefull
amplitudes of the errors that evolve over longer periods of time. Therefore, well before they run
out of their correction range, they have to offload the accumulatederrors at lower frequencies to
larger controlled elements. In addition, they can also be designed in such a way that the moving
masses are balanced, thereby avoiding the generation of spurious vibrations.
4.3 Optical Wavefront Sensors
4.3.1 Choice of the Type of Wavefront Sensor
Types of wavefront sensors. The wavefront sensors most commonly used in active optics can
coarsely be classified according to the planes from which they retrieve the information on the
wavefront aberrations: image planes or pupil planes (>Fig. 5-13). In the pupil planes, the phase
information must be converted into detectable intensity information, which can be achieved by
imaging of subapertures, by defocusing or by spatial filtering. One sensor, the curvature sensor,
retrieves the information from planes somewhere between the image and the pupil planes.
The wavefront errors must be expressed as functions across the pupil. The pupil plane detec-
tors have the advantage that the locations on the detector are directly related to the positions in
the pupil and that the algorithms for the calculation of the wavefront aberrations therefore do
not require iterations.
Image plane detectors. In principle, the wavefront aberrations can be deduced from the shape of
the point images, a method called phase retrieval (Gerchberg and Saxton 1972; Gonsalves 1976).
The major problem with this method is that different aberrations may have similar effects on
the images.

216 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
Image plane
Single
image
Two
images,one
with a small
defocus
Strong
defocus
Imaging of
subapertures
Pupil plane
Spatial
filtering
in image
plane with
half-plane
mask
Interferometric
comparisons
Spatial
filtering with
a circular
mask
Lateral
shift of
 the pupil
Shearing
interferometer
Mach-Zehnder
Pyramid
Hartmann,
Shack-Hartmann
Curvature
Phase
diversity
Phase
retrieval
⊡Fig. 5-13
Classiﬁcation of most common wavefront sensors used in active optics
To a large extent, the simultaneous analysis of a second image can remove the ambigui-
ties. This method of disentangling the aberrations is known as phase diversity (Gonsalves 1982;
Gonsalves and Childlaw 1979). The second image is obtained with an additional small amount
of a well-known aberration, usually a defocus. However, close to the image plane, the effects are
not linear, and the solution still requires an iterative process. Furthermore, the accuracy of the
method is strongly affected by atmospheric effects.
Curvature sensing. This method retrieves the wavefront errors either from strongly defocused
images or strongly defocused pupil planes (Roddier 1988). The introduced amount of defocus
must be sufficient to get out of the caustic near the image plane or sufficiently far away from the
pupil plane to generate intensity variations. Curvature sensors measure the Laplacian, that is,
the local curvatures of the wavefront error.
The information on the wavefront aberrations can be extracted directly for the locations in
the defocused planes. Iteratively, these locations can be related tothe positions in the pupil. Since
aberrations like defocus and third-order astigmatism have constant curvature, their coefficients
cannot be determined from information inside the defocused image. Instead, their coefficients
are derived from the size and the shape of the edge of the image.
This type of wavefront sensing is of interest in particular in survey telescopes, where the
whole field is often covered by the detector. By displacing a few of the chips of the detectoralong
the optical axis up or down, the images of the stars in the corresponding fields are defocused
and can be used for this type of wavefront analysis.
Shack-Hartmann sensor. The most common pupil sensor is the Shack-Hartmann wavefront ana-
lyzer (Platt and Shack 1971; Shack and Platt 1971; Wilson 1999) (>Fig. 5-14), in which a lenslet
array is placed in a reimaged exit pupil. Each lenslet samples a subaperture in the pupil and
creates an image of the star on the detector. In the focal plane of the telescope, a mask with a
diameter of only a few arcseconds usually ensures that the spot pattern is generated by the light
of a single star.
The differential movements of the spots in the focal plane of the lenslets are proportional to
the average slopes of the wavefront across the corresponding subaperture in the pupil. It would
then be natural to fit derivatives of functions. If only the coefficients of Zernike polynomials
were required, one could fit the derivatives of Zernike-type polynomials, whose derivatives are

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
217
Mask
fcol
Telescope
focus
Collimator
Shack-Hartmann
grid
Detector
f1
d1
⊡Fig. 5-14
Principle of the Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensor
orthogonal over the unit circle (Lukosz 1963). However, there are no orthogonal sets of deriva-
tives for other functions like the elastic or segment alignment modes. A better solution is then
to fit, after a reconstruction of the wavefront from the local slopes, the functions themselves.
The lenslet array may be irregular, and additional aberrations may be generated by the optics
of the sensor itself. The common solution to single these errors is to compare the spot pattern
generated by the reference star in the sky and the full optical train with a pattern generated by
a perfect wavefront and the optics of the sensor. The perfect wavefront can be produced by an
artificial point source at a telescope focus in front of the sensor.
The overall tip and tilt of the wavefront is given by the average positions of all spots. These
also depend on the position of the mirror, which picks up the light of the reference star and
whose position is often not known with high accuracy. Therefore, tip and tilt cannot be mea-
sured with high absolute accuracy and are not usually included in the set of measured modes.
Furthermore, the focus in the instrument may not be equivalent to the focus inside the wave-
front analyzer. However, once this offset between the two foci has been calibrated, the wavefront
analyzer can also measure the focus errors seen by the instruments.
The number of subapertures should be at least as large as the number of controlled modes.
The choice of the size of the detector and the diameter and the focal ratio of the lenslets is
a compromise between the effects of several parameters (Noethe 2002). For example, for faint
stars, the size of the spots should ideally be approximately twice as large as one pixel. In addition,
a spot should not interfere with neighboring spots. Both features require small spot sizes and
therefore small focal ratios. On the other hand, larger focal ratios increase the sensitivity to
slope errors.
In general, a major advantage of the Shack-Hartmann method is its simplicity in terms of
analysis. Furthermore, nearly all the light is used and concentrated on a relatively small number
of pixels, which improves the signal-to-noise ratio.
Pyramid sensor. Another sensor, which measures slopes in the pupil, is the pyramid wavefront
sensor(Raggazoni 1996), which is a two-dimensional implementation ofa linearized knife-edge
test. In a traditional knife-edge test, a sharp blade covers a fixed half plane in the focal plane. In
the geometrical optics regime, such an arrangement only gives information on whether a ray
passes through the uncovered half plane or not. However, by moving the edge up and down, the
fraction of the time when the ray passes through the unobstructed half plane depends smoothly

218 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
on the location where the ray intersects the focal plane. Since this location depends linearly on
the slope of the ray in the pupil plane, the intensity of the corresponding pixel in a reimaged
pupil plane on the detector is proportional to the slope.
The use of a prism, with the edge taking over the role of the knife edge, offers the advantage
of sampling the two half planes simultaneously and thereby using all of the light. Furthermore,
replacing the prism by a glass pyramid yields information on the slopes of the wavefront in
two orthogonal directions. One advantage of the pyramid sensor is that its sensitivity can be
adjusted to the actual image quality by adapting the stroke of the movements to the size of the
image in the focal plane.
Interferometric sensors. Interferometric methods also usually work in pupil planes. The wave-
front that will be compared interferometrically with the wavefront in the exit pupil of the
telescope can be generated by spatial filtering with a circular mask in the image plane, as in
a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. An alternative is a lateral shift of the pupil as in the shearing
interferometer, which then measures slope errors.
Accuracy. The accuracy of a wavefront sensor depends to a great extent on nuisance parameters
related to the detector. For a CCD, in particular, these are the readout noise and the non-
uniformity of the sensitivity of individual pixels. A common practical assumption is that the
rms σpixel of the centroiding errors is of the order of 5% of the pixel size, caused to a large extent
by the pixelization itself.
Particularly for faint stars, a major source for centroiding errors is the photon shot noise.
With only a small number of photons available, the best centroiding precision is achieved
if the light is, in one dimension, concentrated on two pixels. In pixel units, the rms of the
spot size is then approximately equal to 1. Now, for a single photon, the rms σphoton of the
centroiding error due to photon shot noise is equal to the rms of the spot size. Therefore, a
reduction of σphoton to a value similar to σpixel, that is, to approximately 0.05, requires about
400 photons.
For subapertures with diameters of half a meter, typical transmissions of the atmosphere
and the optics, a quantum efficiency of the detector of more than 50%, and a bandwidth of the
light of a few hundred nm, 400 photons would be delivered by stars of magnitude of the order
of 16. The feasibility to use such dim stars nearly guarantees a full sky coverage even close to
the galactic pole.
Atmospheric noise. If only those errors are measured and corrected that are due to slowly varying
error sources like the change of the altitude angle, the disturbing effects of the free atmosphere
can be reduced by longer integration times. The chosen integration time and therefore the min-
imum time between corrections also depend on the rate of change of the wavefront errors
introduced by the various error sources. In pure active optics, typical integration times are of
the order of 1 min.
4.3.2 Indistinguishable Error Sources
Ideally, any error generated by a specific optical element of the telescope would be corrected
by the same element. One necessary condition for this is that the wavefront sensing is capable
of attributing the errors unambiguously to the specific elements. For a single field location, the
contributions of different elements to any of the modes simply add up. With only one wave-
front sensor using a star in only one field position, the error sources can, therefore, not be
disentangled.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
219
However, most errors generate aberrations in the field with specific dependencies on the
field locations. The amplitudes of these field aberrations depend on the distance of an optical
element from a pupil. Therefore, as long as two elements are not optically conjugated, it may
be possible to disentangle the error sources. However, this requires that the coefficients of a
sufficient number of modes can be measured at different field positions and that any two error
sources always generate different field aberrations.
A major problem would still be the measurement of distortions of the field, which require
the precise knowledge of the position of the star in the sky and the wavefront sensor in the focal
plane of the telescope. Often, the latter is not known with sufficient accuracy, and, therefore,
information on the distortion of the field cannot usually be obtained.
Misalignments. An unambiguous correction of a misalignment of N mirrors requires (N −)
modes to be measured with more than one wavefront sensor in the field (Piatrou and Chanan
2010; Schechter and Sobel 2010). Apart from the first-order aberrations tip, tilt, and defo-
cus, misalignments of the mirrors generate predominantly third-order aberrations: spherical
aberration for movements along the optical axis and third-order coma and third-order astig-
matism for lateral and rotational out-of-plane movements. The only remaining third-order
effects, namely, the field distortions, are difficult to measure. Also the coefficients of the fifth-
and higher-order optical aberrations are usually too small to be measurable with sufficient
accuracy.
The simplest and also most important example of how to use a certain set of modes and
a minimum number of wavefront sensors is the alignment of a two-mirror Ritchey-Chrétien
telescope. A perfect Ritchey-Chrétien telescope is, in addition to spherical aberration, free of
third-order coma in the field. This is still the case after a rotation of its secondary mirror around
the coma-free point, which is located approximately halfway between the center of curvature
and the apex of the secondary mirror. Freedom of coma therefore only guarantees that the
axes of the two mirrors intersect in the coma-free point, but not that the telescope is fully
aligned.
The full alignment therefore requires the measurementof another mode, whose coefficients
in the field depend on the angle between the two axes. The one with the largest coefficients
is third-order astigmatism, for which the misalignment generates a linear field dependence. A
Ritchey-Chrétien telescopecan therefore be perfectly aligned by measuring two modes, namely,
third-order coma and third-order astigmatism, with at least two wavefront sensors (McLeod
1996; Noethe and Guisard 2000).
Figure errors. In addition to the ones generated by misalignments, wavefront aberrations are
also generated by figure errors of the mirrors. If a mirror is not located in a pupil, the figure
errors will also give rise to additional field aberrations.
Such additional field aberrations due to figure errors in the form of third-order astigma-
tism are all distortions. Since these are difficult to measure, the contributions of the third-order
astigmatisms of the individual mirrors to the total amount of this mode cannot usually be dis-
entangled. The same applies to the contributions to third-order coma from misalignments of
the mirrors on the one hand and figure errors of the mirrors in the form of this mode on the
other hand.
As a consequence, in both examples, the same wavefront aberrations can be corrected by
different combinations of correcting elements. However, if such ambiguities cannot be detected
by the wavefront sensors, they will, most likely, not have any deleterious effects on the image
quality. The only remaining error that may have an impact on the image quality will then be a
distortion of the field.

220 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
4.3.3 Disturbances by the Atmosphere
Consider again the passive evolution of the coefficient of the lowest elastic mode e,of
symmetry 2 with the altitude angle (> Fig. 5-10a). The residual after the subtraction of the
systematic evolution represents the high temporal frequency variations (>Fig. 5-15a). The cir-
cles in >Fig. 5-15b show the rms values σhf of the high-frequency residuals for all the modes
controlled in the VLT.
For comparison, the squares represent the coefficients σcent that one would expect from ran-
dom centroiding errors with rms values of as much as 30% of the pixel size. Obviously, not only
the amplitude, but also the relative values of the coefficients expected from centroiding errors
are very different from the corresponding measured figures σhf. Therefore, the accuracy of the
measurements of the low-order coefficients generated by the telescope optics is not limited by
the accuracy of the wavefront analysis.
Instead, a good correlation can be established with the variation of the coefficients expected
from the Kolmogoroff model of atmospheric turbulence (Fried 1965; Noll 1976). For a given
diameterofthe telescope, these variations ofthe coefficients depend onlyon the Fried parameter
r, which has a value of approximately r= mm for median seeing conditions of .arcsec.
The Fried parameter takes variations of all frequencies into account, but for longer integra-
tion times, the high-frequency contributions are averaged out. One may then define a fictitious
Fried parameter rfor the integration times of s used for the measurement. With a value
of r≈mm, the expected variations σkolm of the coefficients, represented by the triangles,
are in excellent agreement with the measured variations σhf. This suggests that, at least for the
lowest modes, the noise is predominantly generated by atmospheric turbulence.
1 – e2,1
9 – e6,1
10 – e3,2
11 – e1,2
12 – e7,1
13 – e4,2
14 – e8,1
15 – e2,3
16 – e0,3
2 – e3,1
150
nm
100
50
0
5
10
15
mode
0
−200
0
200
20
40
60
3 – z0,2
4 – e4,1
5 – z1,2
6 – e5,1
7 – e2,2
8 – e0,2
ce2,1,y /nm
a
b
J
shf
skolm
scent
⊡Fig. 5-15
(a) Residual of the coeﬃcient of e2,1 as a function of the zenith angle ϑ after removing the smooth
curve shown in >Fig. 5-10a. (b) Correlations between expected rms values of the variations of the
coeﬃcients due to centroiding errors (σcent) or Kolmogoroﬀturbulence (σKolm) and the rms (σhf) of
the measured high-frequency nonelastic variations

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
221
4.4 Correction of Errors
4.4.1 Correction of Misalignments
Misalignments can be corrected by appropriate rigid-body movements of the optical elements.
In two-mirror telescopes, the major device for such corrections is usually the secondary mirror.
A connection of the structure holding the secondary mirror cell to the telescope structure by a
hexapod facilitates rigid-body movements in all degrees of freedom.
The ultimate reference for the alignment is the plane defined by the instrument adapter.
Ideally, the telescope axis should intersect this plane at the center of the adapter and should be
perpendicular to it. A full alignment of a two-mirror telescope to the instrument would then
also require a control of the rigid-body positions of the primary mirror. Whetherthis is possible
depends on the design of the fixed points. With a hydraulic support system, the position of the
primary mirror can rather easily be controlled in five degrees of freedom. On the other hand, for
a segmented mirror, a simultaneous lateral movement of all segments is very difficult to realize.
4.4.2 Correction of Mirror Shapes
Comparison of the correction of elastic and Zernike modes. Since most of the deformations in the
mirrors will be generated by incorrect support forces, the deformations are expected to be in
the form of elastic modes. For the correction of mirror figures, it is, therefore, more natural and
efficient to generate deformations in the form of the elastic modes of the mirrors rather than in
the form of Zernike polynomials. Both the required forces and the residual errors will be much
smaller if elastic modes are used for the corrections.
A good example for a higher accuracy obtained with smaller forces is the comparison of the
forces that are required to generate the lowest elastic mode e,and the corresponding Zernike
polynomial z,, which represents third-order astigmatism. The rms of the relative difference
between these two modes is only approximately 5%. In the VLT mirror, 1,000 nm of the elastic
mode can be generated with a force pattern with a maximum force of Fmax = .N on one ofthe
actuators and with a residual error of 0.03 nm rms. Despite applying a much higher maximum
force of Fmax = .N, the Zernike mode can only be generated with a residual error of 2.4 nm
rms.
An expansion of the Zernike mode in elastic modes of rotational symmetry two and a cor-
rection of only a few of the elastic modes would also reduce the maximum forces. For example,
approximating the Zernike mode by the two lowest modes only, the maximum force would be
reduced to 4.2 N. However, the residual error would increase to 12 nm.
Choice of set of corrected modes. The choice of active modes, that is, those to be corrected,
depends on the characteristics of the optical elementsof the telescope. Misalignments of optical
elements will generate considerable amounts of Zernike defocus and third-order coma, which
should therefore be included in the set of active modes.
For a telescope with a large monolithic primary mirror, the natural choice for the other
active modes are the elasticmodes ofthis mirror. However, twoofthem, the lowest elasticmodes
e,and e,of the rotational symmetries 0 and 1, will not be included in the set of active modes
since they are very similar to the two corresponding Zernike modes defocus and third-order
coma, respectively.

222 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
How many of the other elastic modes should be included depends on the stiffness of the
mirror, the available force range, and, possibly, on the noise in the wavefront measurements.
The forces required for the correction of the modes increase strongly with their spatial fre-
quencies. Because of the limited range of the correction forces, this prohibits the correction of
higher-order modes unless their coefficients decrease so rapidly that the correction forces are
sufficiently small. Usually, this is not the case in wavefronts affected by various types of noise,
in particular atmospheric noise.
One way to define the set of active modes starts with the assumption that most of the errors
in the mirrorare generated byforce errors. From experience, the force errors are random with an
rms of approximately % of the nominal force at zenith. Such random forces generate deflec-
tions in all modes, which, however, decrease strongly with the order of the mode. Therefore,
corrections are applied only to those modes that are generated with coefficients larger than a
small fraction of the diffraction limit, say 15 nm for visible wavelengths. The coefficients can
conveniently be calculated by the methods described in >Sect. 2.3.5.
Potential use of lateral supports for corrections. The easiest way to control the shape of a mirror is
to modify the axial support forces. In addition, modifications of the lateral support forces could
be used. However, since these supports can only generate and therefore correct one specific
deformation for each rotational symmetry, the control of mirror shapes is usually only done
with the axial supports.
Scaling laws for active mirrors. The first scaling of interest is the one for the forces required
to generate and therefore correct the aberrations that are present in the initially uncorrected,
that is, passive telescope. Using the scaling for the number nsag of supports that are required to
fulfill the specification for the sags between the supports ( >Sect. 3.4.4) and the scaling h/D
to generate a given deformation with a single force, the active forces Fa,c required to generate
global wavefront errors with identical rms values scale very strongly with (h/D). However,
the active forces Fa,p required to correct the expected wavefront errors due to incorrect passive
forces, which scale with (D/h)/, scale more weakly with h//D.
The second scaling ofinterest is the one forthe tolerable errors in the active forces, which will
finally limit the quality of the mirror in terms of low spatial frequency aberrations. Assuming
that the errors in the nsag active forces are random and proportional to the active forces Fa,p and
using that the effects of a single force on the wavefront error scale with D/h, the generated
wavefront errors scale with (h//D)
√
D/h (D/h) = D/h. For a given wavefront error, the
tolerances for the active force errors therefore scale with Fa,err ∝h/Dand, therefore, decrease
strongly with the diameter of the mirror than the absolute tolerances.
However, the mechanical limitations for the accuracy of the force setting are not absolute
values, but are given by fractions of the total force. Therefore, if the setting of the active forces is
independent of the passive forces, the scaling of the relative tolerances of the active force errors
is obtained by dividing h/Dby the maximum Fa,p of the active forces. The relative tolerances
then scale with (h/D)/Fa,p ∝(h/D)/(h//D) = /(Dh/) and, therefore, more weakly
with the diameter of the mirror than the absolute tolerances.
Often, the maximum active forces are higher than Fa,p, since the active forces are also used
forthe correction ofpolishing errors and formodifications of mirrorshapes that are required for
a change of the optical configuration ( >Sect. 5.2.1). Nevertheless, the active forces are usually
still much smaller than the passive ones and should be decoupled from the passive forces.
Fixed points. In axial supports with astaticlevers, three support points are usually chosen as fixed
points. They are preferably located at angles of ○. Of course, the forces at these points cannot
be modified by actuators. However, when correction forces with a certain rotational symmetry

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
223
are applied at all other support points, the three conditions of the equilibria of the forces and the
two moments guarantee that the reaction forces on the three fixed points automatically assume
the values requested for the correction.
Number of supports required for the correction. The required total number of supports depends
on the set of modes that have to be corrected and on the purity with which the modes have to
be generated. >Figure 5-16a, b show the residual rms σresid that can be obtained if a mode i
of the rotational symmetry 2 and an rms of nm is corrected with n rings. At least partially, n
rings can correct modes up to the order n −.
For a given order i of the mode, ranging from 1 to 5, >Fig. 5-16a shows σresid as a function of
the number n of rings. The slopes in the log-log plot are approximately −. For a given number
n of rings, ranging from 1 to 6, >Fig. 5-16b shows σresid as a function of the orders i. The slopes
in the log-log plot are approximately +. Therefore, the residual error σresid scales approximately
with i/n.
Because of the existence of three fixed points, the generation of all modes with rotational
symmetries other than multiples of three will also generate a tilt of the mirror. During obser-
vations, this tilt will be quickly corrected by an autoguider working with correction rates of at
least a few Hertz.
Furthermore, a limited number nof supports on a ring will cause crosstalk between modes.
If the system generates a mode with a rotational symmetry m < n, it will also generate defor-
mations with the rotational symmetry n−m. Generating a more rigid mode with a rotational
symmetry m close to nmay then generate considerable crosstalk into a much softer mode
with the much lower rotational symmetry n−m. However, in the next active optics cycle, this
crosstalk will be eliminated by a correction of the lower mode, and the generated crosstalk into
the higher mode will be insignificant (Noethe 2002).
Corrections with position-based supports. In principle, a meniscus mirror can also be actively
supported by position actuators. However, with such a position-based support the mirror is
log10(sresid/nm)
0
Rings 2
3
4
5
6
5
4
3
2
1
Mode
Mode 1
2
2
3
4
5
6
Rings
3
4
5
Log10(n)
Log10(i)
−2
−4
−6
log10(sresid/nm)
0
−2
−4
−6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.5
0
1
a
b
⊡Fig. 5-16
Purity of generated modes of rotational symmetry two. (a) Mode given, dependence on the
number of rings. (b) Number of rings given, dependence on the order of the mode

224 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
strongly coupled to the mirror cell. Because of potentially large deflections of the mirror cell,
corrections have to be applied more frequently than in support systems with force actuators,
where the mirror can largely be decoupled from the mirror cell.
Large mirror cells deform in the lowest-order modes by approximately mm peak-to-valley
between horizontal and vertical positions. With a position-based support, the maximum rate
of change of the coefficient of the lowest-order mode will then be of the order of nm/s, which
would require correction rates of the order of Hz. During time intervals of 1 min, the correc-
tions could be done at this rate in open loop based on calibration tables. Measurements of the
wavefront errors with integration times of 1 min could then perform closed-loop corrections
of possible open-loop errors and update the calibrations tables accordingly.
One case, where a position-based support is unavoidable, is the support of a segmented
mirror. Each individual segment is usually supported by three whiffle trees. The bases of
these whiffle trees define the rigid-body position of the mirror with respect to the mirror cell.
Therefore, seen as one unit, a segmented mirror has a position-based support. Consequently,
corrections of the errors caused by the large deformations of the mirror support structure down
to the nanometer level require correction rates of a few Hertz.
4.4.3 Correction of Deﬂections of the Structure
Most of the tubes of telescopes up to the 8-m class are supported by bearings close to the alti-
tude axis. Larger telescopes like radio telescopes often use rocking-chair designs with large rails
closer to the center of the tubes, which serves to reduce the deflections of the tube and in par-
ticular the primary mirror cell. It would also be possible to extend the concept of active optics
to the structures, that is, to introduce active devices that control the shape of the structures.
4.5 Historical Development of Active Optics
First suggestions of a systematic process to improve the image quality, in particular by modify-
ing the forces under the primary mirror, were made by Couder (1931) and Maksutov (1954).
Much later, the control of the shape of a thin, deformable primary mirror was suggested for
an orbiting astronomical observatory (Creedon and Lindgren 1970), using the elastic modes
of the mirror. With a chosen number nsupp of supports, all nsupp −deformation modes that
could be generated by these supports were controlled. In addition, to reduce the deformations
in the weakest modes above the set of controlled modes, the supports were located as closely as
possible to the nodes of these weakest modes. An experiment with a mirror with a diameter of
790 mm verified the feasibility of this approach.
Independently, a second control scheme was derived from the results of the measurements
at the ESO 3.6-m telescope described in >Sect. 3.5. The major difference to the other scheme
is that the number of controlled modes is much smaller than the number of supports (Wilson
1982). Although this approach does not yield the best possible correction, it reduces the forces
by correcting only those modes, in which the mirror can easily be deformed. Usually, these
modes are also the dominant modes in the expansion of the wavefront error. The distribution of
the support points is then primarily driven by the geometry of the mirror and the requirements
on the sag between the supports.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
225
5
Active Telescopes
5.1 Telescopes of the Four-Meter Class
Dimensions of the Primary Mirror. The first telescope that was right from the start designed and
operated as an active telescope was the New Technology Telescope of the European Southern
Observatory (ESO) (Wilson et al. 1991) with a diameter of the primary mirror of 3.58 m. At
that time, active optics was a new, not yet proven technology. Therefore, in addition to the active
mode, the telescope was requested to be capable of working also in a passive mode, albeit with
a reduced performance.
Consequently, the thickness of mm for the primary mirror (> Fig. 5-17) was a com-
promise between a typical thickness of mm of a passive mirror and a possible thickness
of mm of a fully active mirror. Nevertheless, the chosen thickness reduced the weight of
the NTT primary mirror to half of that of a conventional mirror with the same diameter. After
the operation of the NTT had proven the feasibility of active optics, it was applied in all new
telescopes with monolithic mirrors of similar or larger size.
Optical performance specifications. The NTT had to fulfill performance specifications both for
the passive and the active mode. The performance was defined in terms of the diameter d
of the circle containing 80% of the points in the geometrical point spread function generated
by the telescope errors alone. The specifications were d= .arcsec for the passive and d=
.arcsec for the active mode, which is equivalent to image sizes of approximately 0.3 and
.arcsec FWHM, respectively.
Passive components. Contrary to most of the classical predecessors in the 3–4-m class and fol-
lowing the evolution of telescope mounts in that period, the NTT has an alt-azimuth mount.
In particular, this mount simplified the design of the lateral support of the mirrors since gravity
is acting in only one direction relative to the mirror.
⊡Fig. 5-17
NTT mirror in the optical workshop

226 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
⊡Table 5-2
Eigenfrequencies, given in Hz, of the lowest elastic modes of the NTT and the VLT
Symmetry
2
3
0
4
1
5
2
0
6
Order
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
NTT
115
273
192
479
434
732
737
852
1,034
VLT
16
38
42
66
68
102
107
119
143
Symmetry
3
1
7
4
8
2
0
5
3
Order
2
2
1
2
1
3
3
2
3
NTT
1,131
1,229
1,383
1,577
1,779
1,749
2,050
2,077
2,366
VLT
160
176
192
221
246
246
272
289
331
Like conventional passive telescopes, the NTT is equipped with all the passive devices that
stabilize the image quality in the presence of potential error sources. For example, the structures
holding the cells of the primary and secondary mirrors are attached to the center piece via
Serrurier trusses.
Following the rotational symmetry of the primary mirror, the support points were placed
on concentric rings. Due to the sag between the supports points, a three-ring support would
have generated high spatial frequency slope errors of the order of .arcsec, which would have
been too close to the overall specification of .arcsec FWHM for the active mode. Therefore, a
support was chosen with 9, 15, 24, and 30 supports on 4 rings, which generated slope errors of
.arcsec FWHM. 75 out of the 78 supports are astatic levers. The remaining three supports,
which are located on the third ring at relative angles of ○, are the fixed points.
The combination of the thickness and the curvature is such that the plane perpendicular to
the optical axis containing the center of gravity intersects the rim. Therefore, the lateral support
points could be located on the rim in this plane without the need for axial force components.
The equidistant forces are all identical and point in the direction of the projection of the grav-
ity vector onto the plane of the lateral support points. More details are given in >Sect. 3.4.4
and in >Fig. 5-7.
Equipmentforactiveoperation.Inmanyrespects,theNTTrepresentsastraightforwardevolution
fromoldertypesoftelescopes.Theadditionalequipmentrequiredforanactiveoperationconsists
of a wavefront sensor, a motorized position control of the secondary mirror, and a motorized
control of the positions of the counterweights on the astatic lever supports under the primary
mirror (>Fig. 5-12). The active forces are therefore coupled to the passive support forces.
The wavefront sensor is of the Shack-Hartmann type, with a 25 by 25 lenslet array, that
is, each lenslet collects the light of a mm by mm subaperture. The sensor is installed
in the guide probe and can measure the wavefront errors continuously, that is, also during
observations. It uses guide stars in the outer annular section of the full 30 arcmin field.
The secondary mirror can be moved along the optical axis to correct the focus of the
telescope. Furthermore, it can be rotated around the center of curvature to correct the field-
independent third-order coma without affecting the pointing. As described in > Sect. 4.3.2,
such a coma correction does not fully align the telescope optics. It only guarantees that the axes
of the primary and secondary mirror intersect in the coma-free point. A full alignment requires
both the measurement of the coefficient of third-order astigmatism in at least two field positions
and the capability to rotate the secondary mirror around the coma-free point.
With only one wavefront analyzer available, such measurements at different field positions
of the coefficient of third-order astigmatism could only be done sequentially. This procedure

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
227
proved to be very tedious and time-consuming, in particular due to noise introduced by the
atmosphere. Furthermore, the correction, that is a required rotation of the secondary mirror
around the coma-free point, could only be performed by installing shims to shift the cell of the
secondary mirror with respect to the telescope structure. Therefore, this alignment has so far
only been performed once (Gitton and Noethe 1998).
To enable changes of the support forces for the correction of the shape of the primary mirror,
only a minor modification had to be done to the axial supports used in passive telescopes of
this size. Instead of using the usual astatic levers with fixed counterweights, the corresponding
active astatic levers were equipped with motorized movable counterweights. They can adjust
the support forces within a range of ±% of the nominal support forces.
Since these nominal forces are proportional to the cosine of the zenith angle, the range for
the correction forces is strongly reduced forlarge zenith angles. Therefore, in addition, the active
supports were equipped with manually adjustable springs, which supply correction forces that
are independent of the inclination of the telescope tube.
Corrected modes. The number of modes that have to be corrected can be calculated with the
method introduced in >Sect. 4.4.2. The stiffest elastic mode that random force errors with an
rms of 2% of the nominal force of N at zenith can generate with a coefficient larger than
nm is the mode e,, the first mode of rotational symmetry 3. Therefore, one would need to
correct only the two softest modes e,and e,. However, the next stiffest mode e,has also
been included in the set of active modes.
Four rings are sufficient to correct the modes e,, e,and e,with accuracies of at least %.
According to >Fig. 5-16a, the lowest mode e,of rotational symmetry 2 can even be corrected
with a residual relative error of −.
The lowest elastic modes of the rotational symmetries 0 and 1, which are similar to
defocus and third-order coma, are not corrected by deforming the primary mirror. Instead,
they can be corrected with sufficient accuracy by rigid-body movements of the secondary
mirror.
The limit for the rms of the wavefront error introduced by random incorrect settings of
the active forces was very stringently defined as nm rms. However, this performance can be
achieved with a rather relaxed accuracy of the force setting of the order of N rms. The same
value of nm was also specified for the wavefront error introduced by imperfect corrections
of defocus and third-order coma, using rigid-body movements of the secondary mirror along
the optical axis and rotations around its center of curvature, respectively. The accuracies for the
differential axial movements have to be of the order of 4 μm and for the differential rotations of
the order of arcsec. The latter involves differential lateral movements of the secondary mirror
of approximately μm and is therefore rather easy to achieve. The most difficult mode to
control in the NTT is therefore the defocus.
Correction of polishing errors. Like the Hubble Space Telescope, the primary mirror of the NTT
initially suffered from a figuring error, which had been introduced by an incorrectly assembled
null system. The wavefront error was predominantly third-order spherical aberration ρwith a
coefficient of the order of 3.5 μm, which is equivalent to a FWHM in the point spread function
of .arcsec. In the passive mode, the telescope image quality would therefore have exceeded
its specification of .arcsec FWHM. Usually, such an error would have required a refiguring of
the primary mirror or, possibly, of the secondary mirror. However, an inclination-independent
correction of the first elastic mode of rotational symmetry 0 by the springs included in each
of the active supports and a simultaneous correction of defocus could nearly perfectly correct
this error.

228 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
The axial supports are pure push supports. The maximum negative active correction force
that a support can apply at a certain zenith angle is equal to its nominal force at this zenith angle.
Otherwise, if a negative correction force at a certain support is larger than the nominal force at
this support, the mirror will be lifted off this support. Since the nominal forces are proportional
to the cosine of the zenith angle, a need for negative correction forces will limit the zenith angle,
up to which corrections can be performed. In the NTT, the strong active forces required for the
correction of the polishing error restrict the maximum zenith angle to ○.
5.2 Telescopes of the Eight-Meter Class
5.2.1 Design of the VLT Active Optics System
Dimensions of the primary mirror. The next step in the evolution of telescopes with large thin
monolithic mirrors, both with respect to the size of the primary mirrors as well as the role
of active optics, was the ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT), an array of four identical telescopes.
The massesof the primary mirrors with diametersof m and thicknesses of mm are approx-
imately 23 t (> Fig. 5-18). In terms of the response of wavefront errors to passive force errors
and assuming a design of the support system with identical sags between the support points, the
VLT is approximately 30 times more flexible than the NTT (see >Sect. 3.4.4), which excluded
a passive operation of the telescope right from the start.
Optical performance specifications. The VLT was designed as a telescope with a seeing-limited
performance. Expressed in terms of the central intensity ratio CIR (see >Sect. 2.2), the global
specification was CIR = 0.8 for seeing conditions of .arcsec (Dierickx 1994). The two largest
contributions were allocated to the surface errors after active optics corrections with a CIR of
0.920 and the control errors due to guiding and active optics with a CIR of 0.944.
The surface errors were split into the deformations generated by the sags between the sup-
ports and the high spatial frequency residuals of the generated wavefront errors after the active
⊡Fig. 5-18
Back surface of a VLT primary mirror with the 150 tripod supports

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
229
optics corrections. For the primary mirror the specification for the sag between the supports
was CIR = ., which corresponds to a FWHM of the point spread function of .arcsec
or to an rms of the wavefront print-through of nm. To reach this specification for the high-
frequency residuals, the manufacturer could use maximum active forces of N under the
primary mirror to remove the low spatial frequency errors, which are unavoidable with such a
flexible mirror.
The specification for the active optics errors was CIR = ., which was more or less evenly
split into contributions from the wavefront sensing, the coma and defocus corrections by the
secondary mirror and errors due to the setting of the active forces under the primary mirror.
For each of these contributions, the related CIR of 0.995 corresponds to an rms of the dominant
low spatial frequency modes of approximately 100 nm.
In terms of wavefront errors, the specification for the high spatial frequency errors seems
to be more stringent than the one for the low spatial frequency errors. However, the central
intensity ratio is a metric that is designed for the geometrical optics regime, in which the image
quality depends primarily on slope errors. For a given rms of the wavefront errors, these slope
errors are much larger for the high spatial frequency wavefront errors than for the low spatial
frequency ones.
Passive components. As in the NTT, the structures holding the cells of the primary and sec-
ondary mirrors are connected to the centerpiece via Serrurier trusses. The design of the passive
axial support system was driven by the specification of nm for the rms of the sag between
the support points. Four hundred simple support points would have been required to fulfill
this specification, which was considered too complicated and, as shown below, was also not
necessary for the correction of the lowest elastic modes.
Instead, the number of active supports was restricted to 150. Each of these supports
distributes the force tothree points via a tripod (Schneermann et al. 1990)(>Fig. 5-18). The sup-
ports are arranged on six rings, with 9, 15, 21, 27, 36, and 42 supports, respectively. Mechanical
astatic levers would have added an appreciable amount of weight to the mirror cell. Instead,
hydraulic systems were chosen for the passive axial and also the 64 lateral supports of the VLT
primary mirrors.
Equipment for active operation. As is the case with the NTT, the VLT is equipped with only one
Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensor with a sampling of approximately 20 by 20 subapertures.
Unlike the NTT, electromechanical actuators apply the active forces via a spring in series with
the passive forces. Consequently, the active forces are independent of the passive ones and,
therefore, also independent of the inclination of the telescope tube.
For the control of five degrees of freedom for the rigid-body position of the primary mirror,
the volumes in each of the three sectors of the passive hydraulic support as well as in the two
sectors of the lateral hydraulic support can be modified. Corrections are done in closed loop
whenever the mirror is laterally more than 100 μm out of position with respect to its cell.
The rigid-body position of the secondary mirror can be controlled in 5 degrees of free-
dom. Therefore, in principle, the axis of the secondary mirror can be fully aligned with the
axis of the primary mirror. During operation, this would require the use of two wavefront
sensors, whereas only one is available. However, a full alignment was done during the com-
missioning, based on simultaneous measurements with the permanently installed wavefront
sensor in the adapter and an additional wavefront sensor in a test camera (Noethe and Guisard
2000).
A fast tip-tilt control of the secondary mirror with a bandwidth of a few Hz facilitates, in
addition to chopping, also a second, fast stage for the control of the image motion.

230 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
Corrected modes and correction rate. The number of modes that have to be corrected can be
defined by the method described in >Sect. 4.4.2. The third mode of rotational symmetry 2,
e,, is the stiffest elastic mode that random forces with an rms of 2% of the nominal force of
, N at zenith can generate with a coefficient larger than nm. Therefore, apart from the
modes e,and e,, which are replaced by Zernike defocus and third-order coma, respectively,
the set of active modes includes all the modes in >Table 5-2 with eigenfrequencies up to Hz,
plus the next softest mode, e,.
With six rings, even the highest active mode e,can be corrected with an accuracy of 99%
(>Fig. 5-16). The required correction rate can be estimated from the variation of the coefficient
ofthe most sensitive modes e,and defocus. According to >Fig. 5-10b, the rms ofthe wavefront
error generated by a variation of these coefficients over one minute is of the order of nm.
Therefore, the specification of nm can be fulfilled with cycle times of s.
The specification of nm rms for the average effect of random force errors required an
accuracy of the force setting for individual supports better than .N rms. Errors in the dif-
ferential movements of the secondary mirror in any direction of the order of 5 μm and in the
rotation about its center of curvature of approximately .arcsec generate wavefront errors of
approximately nm for defocus and nm for third-order coma. Together with third-order
astigmatism, defocus is therefore the most difficult mode to control.
Switch between foci. Each of the four telescopes is equipped with four focal stations, two Nas-
myth stations, one Cassegrain, and one Coudé station. Since these have different back focal
distances, the optical quality of the telescope could only be optimized for one focal station. The
Ritchey-Chrétien condition is therefore only fulfilled at the Nasmyth focus.
After refocusing, but without any other active optics corrections, the Cassegrain focus
would suffer from field-independent spherical aberration ρwith a coefficient of 20.8 μm as
well as from third-order coma with a linear field dependence. Since the asphericity of the sec-
ondary mirror could not be modified, a correction with the only available degree of freedom,
namely, a deformation of the primary mirror, could only eliminate the spherical aberration.
The best possible correction of 20.8 μm ρwith six rings would leave a residual wavefront
error wresid with six nodes along the radius (solid line in >Fig. 5-19) and a residual rms of only
nm. However, the correction can be done even more efficiently both in terms of the residual
error and the required forces if a defocus term αρis added to the pure spherical aberration
ρ. This produces a deformation that is much closer to the lowest elastic mode of rotational
symmetry 0 and can therefore be generated with smaller forces and also more precisely than a
pure ρdeformation. The optimum value for α is −.. Compared with the correction of pure ρ,
the residual error with an rms of the wavefront error of nm is 4.5 times smaller (>Fig. 5-19),
and the maximum forces of −N and +N are % smaller.
This also shows that the range of the active forces is primarily defined by the change of the
configuration, rather than the correction of errors introduced by polishing or incorrect passive
forces.
Uncorrectable aberrations. Special care has to be taken to minimize wavefront aberrations that
cannot be corrected by the active optics system. One of these aberrations is the mirror seeing,
which is generated when there is a temperature difference between the primary mirror and the
ambient air. Therefore, the temperature in the enclosure is actively controlled by a ventilation
system and the temperature ofthe primarymirrorbya cold plate behind its back surface. During
the day, the two devices set the temperatures of the structure, the mirrors, and the air in the
enclosure to the temperature of the ambient air expected at the beginning of the night.
During the night, the cold plate is also used to equilibrate the mirror temperature with the
falling temperature of the ambient air. Most of the time, the temperature differences between

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
231
r
1000nm (r4 − 4.1r2)
1000nm r4
Wresid /nm
20
10
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−10
−20
⊡Fig. 5-19
Residual wavefront aberration wresid as a function of the normalized radial coordinate after opti-
mum correction of spherical aberration ρ4 (solid line) and ρ4 −4.1ρ2 (dashed line)
the mirror and the ambient air can then be kept within a small range of ±○C. For such small
temperature differences, the generated mirror seeing is insignificant (Cullum and Spyromilio
2000; Guisard et al. 2000).
Also the disturbances generated by the wind contain frequencies that are too high to be
controllable by the quasistatic control of the optical elements of the VLT. Inside the enclosure,
averagewind speeds across the primary mirror of m/s are associatedwith pressure fluctuations
with an rms of the order of N. These can cause deflections of the primary mirror in the form
of the lowest elastic mode e,with rms values of the global wavefront error of approximately
nm. The errors scale with the square of the pressure variations. Therefore, under strong wind
conditions, the primary mirror must be protected by an enclosure that is also equipped with a
wind screen.
Another source of errors with frequencies ranging to well above those of wind pressure is
vibration. Since the generated tip-tilt errors are difficult if not impossible to correct even by
adaptive optics systems, vibrations must be avoided as much as possible by a proper design of
several of the telescope components.
5.2.2 Open-Loop Performance of the VLT
Correction of initial aberrations. After the initial installation of the mirrors and the application
of the nominal forces under the primary mirror, the two dominant aberrations with coefficients
of about 20 μm were Zernike third-order coma and third-order astigmatism. They generated
point spread functions with a FWHM of at least arcsec.

232 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
They also generated a Shack-Hartmann pattern that was too heavily distorted to be analyz-
able by the standard algorithm in the wavefront analysis. However, an initial coarse correction,
which was based on a visual inspection of strongly defocused images, removed a large frac-
tion of the aberrations. The coefficients of the two dominant aberrations could be estimated
from certain characteristics of the defocused images. In combination with a defocus, third-
order astigmatism causes an elongation of the image,which changes its orientation by ○when
the defocus goes through zero. For third-order coma, the characteristic feature is a shift of the
central obscuration with respect to the outer edge.
After a coarse correction of the two dominant aberrations, the Shack-Hartmann pattern
was sufficiently regular to be usable for automatic analyses.
Hysteresis effects. Even with a precise knowledge of the calibrations for the rigid-body posi-
tions of the mirrors and the active forces under the primary mirror, the corrections could still
be affected by hysteresis. To measure such effects, the zenith angle was modified in the range
from ○to ○in steps of ○several times up and down, and, at each position, the appropriate
calibrated position and force corrections were applied. The wavefront measurements showed
noticeable hysteresis of the order of 600 nm, 90 nm, and 15 nm for the elastic modes e,, e,,
and e,, respectively. The ratios of these values are in reasonably good agreementwith the ratios
of the inverse stiffnesses of the modes.
The mode e,with a coefficient of nm generates a point spread function with a FWHM
of approximately .arcsec. If this had been the only error and all other corrections based
on calibrations had been perfect, the VLT could have been operated in open loop, at least
under average seeing conditions. In practice, however, failures of mechanical components like
an individual support would require a time-consuming setup of new calibration tables.
5.2.3 Closed-Loop Performance of the VLT
Minimum number of active modes. Over an altitude range of ○, the rms values of the variations
of the coefficients of the four stiffest active modes are of the order of only 10 nm (>Fig. 5-10b).
Even the variations of the modes 8–12 are all smaller than 30 nm, and the variations of the
modes 4, 6, and 7 are smaller than 100nm. Therefore, for a seeing-limited performance, it would
be sufficient to control, after an initial correction of all active modes, only the modes 1, 2, 3 and
5, that is, defocus, third-order coma and the lowest elastic modes of the rotational symmetries
2 and 3 during operation.
Residual aberrations. As in >Fig. 5-15b, the circles in >Fig. 5-20 show the rms of the varia-
tions of the low-order coefficients. However, this time, the coefficients were measured during
operation with continuous closed-loop corrections of all active modes. If significant errors were
introduced by the telescope mechanics, they would predominantly appear in the lowest elastic
mode e,. In comparison with the other coefficients, the one of e,should then be larger than
expected from Kolmogoroff statistics. >Figure 5-20, which looks very similar to >Fig. 5-15b,
shows that this is not the case. Mechanically induced errors, including those accumulating
between two corrections, are therefore negligible compared with the ones introduced by the
atmosphere.
As discussed before, the measured coefficients contain two components, a telescope com-
ponent due to the errors in the telescope optics and an atmospheric component due to the
effects of the atmosphere. On the one hand, without corrections, the telescope components
change slowly. The correlations between successive values of the quickly varying atmospheric

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
233
1 – e2,1
9 – e6,1
10 – e3,2
11 – e1,2
12 – e7,1
13 – e4,2
14 – e8,1
15 – e2,3
16 – e0,3
2 – e3,1
3 – z0,2
4 – e4,1
5 – z1,2
6 – e5,1
7 – e2,2
8 – e0,2
scl
skolm
5
0
0
50
150
100
200
250
nm
10
15
mode
⊡Fig. 5-20
Correlations between expected rms values of the variations of the coeﬃcients due to Kolmogoroﬀ
turbulence (σkolm) and the rms σcl of the coeﬃcients in closed-loop operation
components that are due to the atmosphere are approximately 25%, which means that they are
only weakly correlated.
On the other hand, in closed-loop active optics, the slow variations of the telescope optics
will be largely corrected. However, the measured quickly varying atmospheric component will
now be introduced into the telescope optics by the resultant correction. Consequently, it will
appear as the major contributor to the telescope component in the subsequent measurement.
Therefore, the two components are of the same origin and of the same order of magnitude.
Since they are largely uncorrelated, the rms values of the fast variations of the coefficients of the
active modes measured in closed loop and shown in >Fig. 5-20 should then be, and actually
are, approximately
√
times larger than the corresponding rms values in >Fig. 5-15b.
Filtering of the data. The noise introduced by the free atmosphere on the wavefront measure-
ments cannot be avoided. However, the results can be filtered such that the active optics system
corrects effectively only the slowly evolving errors introduced by the mechanics of the telescope.
This can be accomplished very efficiently by a Kàlmàn filter, which is a special type of Bayesian
filter. For each coefficient, the filter requires a priori knowledge about three parameters:first, the
expected initial correction, say, after a preset; second, the expected systematic variation during
a given time interval; and third, the expected noise.
All this information can be obtained from the results of the drift measurements summarized
in the > Figs. 5-10b and > 5-15b. From > Fig. 5-10b, the first parameter can be estimated
from the differences of the coefficients for zenith distances typical for presets and the second
parameter from differences evolving over time intervals of 30 s. The third parameter is directly
given in > Fig. 5-15b. The solid line in > Fig. 5-21 shows how the coefficient of one of the
components of the elastic mode e,would effectively follow its systematic evolution if the noise

234 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
0
0
100
50
2000
6000
t/sec
c2,3,y/nm
4000
⊡Fig. 5-21
Measured coeﬃcients of the y-component of the elastic mode e2,3 with an added constant oﬀset of
50 nm (dots) and the evolution of thecoeﬃcient, which would be corrected after ﬁltering(solidline)
due to the atmosphere was filtered out. To demonstrate that the corrections converge quickly
also for large initial errors, a constant offset of nm has been added to the measured data.
An important consequence of the use of a filter is a significant reduction of the applied
correction forces during each correction cycle. For the highest active modes like e,or e,, the
systematic variation over one minute is of the order of nm, whereas the noise is of the order
of nm. The maximum force required for a correction of such a single, relatively rigid mode
with a coefficient of nm is of the order of N. Consequently, the largest forces required for
a correction of all active modes based on unfiltered coefficients are usually of the order of N.
These large forces could be reduced to approximately .N if only the lowest three active
elastic modes e,, e,, and e,were corrected. However, using the filtered data for the correc-
tions, the maximum forces for the correction of the whole set of active modes are even smaller,
namely, about .N.
Best performance of the VLT. Unlike the NTT, the VLT can achieve its specified image quality
only with a two-stage control of the tracking. Using only the main axes drives, the resid-
ual tracking error was of the order of .arcsec rms. However, additional corrections by
the secondary mirror with a bandwidth of Hz reduced the tracking error to approximately
.arcsec rms.
With continuous active optics corrections during the integrations, including the application
of the Kàlmàn filter, the best recorded image quality was .arcsec FWHM for long expo-
sure times of min. For short exposure times of only a few seconds, the best measured value
was .arcsec FWHM, which is close to the best seeing values ever measured on Paranal with
devices dedicated to seeing measurements.These results prove that a large active telescope with
mirror diameters of 8 m can achieve seeing-limited performance also under excellent seeing
conditions. To reach even diffraction-limited image qualities requires, in addition, adaptive
optics techniques, that is, also the correction of the wavefront aberrations generated by the
atmosphere.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
235
5.2.4 Other Large Active Telescopes
Telescopes with thin meniscus mirrors. Other 8 m telescopes that are similar to the VLT are the
two Gemini telescopes and the Subaru telescope (Iye 1991). All of them are equipped with VLT-
like thin meniscus mirrors with diameters of approximately 8 m. In the Subaru telescope, each
axial support also acts as a lateral support. To avoid additional torques due to the lateral sup-
ports, the contact points of the supports are located in the neutral surface of the mirror, which
required bores in the solid meniscus mirror.
Telescopes with structured mirrors. With the same weight, structured mirrors are consider-
ably stiffer than solid ones. Nevertheless, all large structured mirrors such as the ones in the
MMT and the Magellan Telescope with diameters of .m and the ones in the Large Binocular
Telescope and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope with diameters of .m are actively con-
trolled (Martin et al. 1998, 2004; Schechter et al. 2002). Like the push-pull axial forces, also the
lateral forces are applied at the back surface of the honeycomb mirror, which generates a global
moment. The deformations introduced by this moment, as well as other low-order deforma-
tions, are corrected by 160 actuators under the .-m mirrors, of which 108 actuators also apply
controllable lateral forces. In addition, since the substrateis borosilicate glass with a nonnegligi-
ble coefficient of thermal expansion, a ventilation system minimizes the temperature gradients
within the blank and also, to prevent mirror seeing, keeps its temperature close to the one of
the ambient air.
The mirror is held in position by fixed points, which ideally take no loads. Any nonzero
loads, which are detected by load cells, will be reduced by adjusting the active forces at a rate of
Hz. More details about these structured mirrors are given in
>Chap. 4 of this book.
The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) will be an anastigmatic three-mirror survey
telescope with a field of view of .○(Krabbendam et al. 2010; Olivier et al. 2008). The primary
and tertiary mirrors share the same blank, with the inner edge of the primary mirror coinciding
with the outer edge of the tertiary mirror. Since the latter has a smaller radius of curvature,
excess material that is left after the spin casting above the prescribed surface of the tertiary
mirror has to be ground off before polishing. The convex secondary mirror is a solid meniscus
with a diameter of .m and a thickness of mm and is made of ultra low expansion glass.
A special feature is that not only its axial but also its lateral support is active.
Reflective active Schmidt telescope. The use of active optics has also pushed up the size limit for
wide-field telescopes based on the Schmidt design. The largest Schmidt telescope with a refrac-
tive aspheric corrector plate has a diameter of the entrance pupil, that is, of the Schmidt plate,
of .m. However, larger Schmidt telescopes can be built with all-reflective optics (Lemaitre
1976).
The first telescope of this kind is the LAMOST telescope, a survey telescope with a field of
view of ○. The entrance pupil is a flat steerable siderostat of elliptical shape with a diameter of
approximately m along the short axis, which sends the light to a fixed spherical mirror with a
diameter of approximately m (Su et al. 1998). The two LAMOST mirrors consist of 24 and 36
hexagonal segments with diameters of .m corner to corner.
Similar to the aspheric plate in conventional Schmidt telescopes, the siderostat mirror
has to correct the spherical aberration produced by the spherical mirror. Therefore, the sur-
face of the siderostat mirror has to deviate from the prescribed flat shape, whereby the exact
form depends on the pointing of the mirror. The change of the surface figure of the siderostat
mirror is accomplished by active modifications of both the alignment and the shapes of the
segments.

236 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
Segmented mirror telescopes. The thickness of the primary mirror can be substantially reduced
by splitting the mirror into segments. The first large telescope of this kind was the Keck telescope
with a diameter of the primary mirror of 10 m (Wizinowich et al. 1994). A detailed description
of telescopes with segmented mirrors is given in
>Chap. 3 of this book.
5.3 Future Extremely Large Telescopes
Segmentation of the pupil. Currently, the only feasible method to increase the collecting area of
optical telescopes above the areas given by existing 8–10 m telescopes is the segmentation of, at
least, the primary mirror. Broadly speaking, there are two approaches to segment a large mirror.
In one approach, the segments fill, apart from small gaps, the aperture completely. In this case,
the shapes of the segments are usually regular hexagons with diameters of the order of 1–2 m.
An alternative would be to use a pattern with petals, where the borders of the segments would
be along concentric rings and along the radii. The other approach to segmentation, which is
pursued in the design of the proposed Giant Magellan Telescope, is to fill the aperture only par-
tially with circular monolithic mirrors with diameters of several meters (Shectman and Johns
2010).
Two proposed telescopes use hexagonal segments of the primary mirror to fill the aperture,
the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) and the European Extremely Large Telescope (E-ELT) with
a diameter of the primary mirror close to 40 m.
Thirty Meter Telescope. The primary mirror of the TMT with a diameter of m consists of
approximately 500 hexagonal segments with diameters of .m corner to corner (Stepp 2012).
The optical design is a Ritchey-Chrétien design with two Nasmyth foci. The control of the pri-
mary mirror will be very similar to the control of the primary mirror of the Keck Telescope.
For the secondary mirror, a thin meniscus with a diameter of m and a thickness of mm,
there are two options. It can be an active mirror that controls the lowest modes of rotational
symmetries 2, 3, and 1 with approximately 60 supports on four rings. Alternatively, it can be a
passive mirror since all aberrations generated by the secondary mirror that are constant across
the field can, with high accuracy, be corrected by the primary mirror.
European Extremely Large Telescope. The E-ELT (Gilmozzi and Spyromilio 2007) with a diam-
eter of the primary close to m marks, in terms of control, a further step in the evolution of
telescopes, namely, from active to adaptive telescopes. In addition to measuring and correcting
devices already used in active telescopes, an adaptive mirror forms an integral part of the E-ELT.
The adaptive correction features are essential to fulfill the major performance requirements on
the telescope.
Specifications for the E-ELT. First, over a field of arcmin, the telescope by itself should cor-
rect the wavefront aberrations generated by the ground layer of the air. This alone will not be
sufficient to reach a diffraction-limited performance. However, the improvement of the image
quality will be equivalent to a reduction of the seeing by a factor of approximately 2, which can
also be expressed by the metric PSSN = as defined in >Sect. 2.2.
Second, over a small field of view of only a few arcseconds and under seeing conditions
of .arcsec FWHM, the telescope, again by itself, should be capable of delivering diffraction-
limited images at wavelengths of 2.2 μm with a Strehl ratio of 0.7. For this performance, the rms
of the total wavefront error, which includes the residual aberrations due to the atmosphere after
adaptive optics corrections, must not be larger than nm.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
237
Another specification is a diffraction-limited performance at wavelengths of .μm with
a Strehl ratio of 0.7 over a field of at least arcsec, which can only be achieved with an
additional adaptive mirror in the instrument. Used in tandem, the two adaptive mirrors can
simultaneously correct wavefront errors generated in the ground layer and at high altitudes.
Optical Design of the E-ELT. Since the adaptive mirror has to be conjugated to a layer a few hun-
dred meters above the ground, it is optically nearly conjugated to the primary mirror and can
therefore not be used for the corrections of field aberrations. The third requirement, asking for
diffraction-limited optics over a fairly large field, which can only be fulfilled by an anastigmatic
optical design, therefore requires a third aspheric mirror sufficiently far from the pupil.
For technological reasons, the correction of the image motion is split between two mirrors.
One of them corrects only medium-amplitude image motion at medium frequencies. The other
one, the adaptive mirror, corrects both the residual small amplitude image motions and the
wavefront shape errors at high frequencies.
>Figure 5-22 shows the anastigmatic optical design of the E-ELT with three powered mir-
rors and two flat mirrors (Delabre 2008). The primary mirror with an elliptic figure consists of
approximately 800 segments, the hyperbolic secondary mirror is a convex solid meniscus with
approximately 100 active pneumatic supports, and the third mirror is a weak general asphere
with approximately 70 active pneumatic supports. M4 is the flat adaptive mirror with approxi-
mately 4,000 actuators and a thickness of mm, and M5 the flat mirror for medium-amplitude,
medium-frequency tip-tilt corrections.
⊡Fig. 5-22
Optical design of the adaptive European Extremely Large Telescope

238 5
Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes
Adaptive and active optics operation of the E-ELT. For its control, the E-ELT requires four wave-
front sensors. Three of them sample the wavefront with approximately 4,000 subapertures
at a rate of about Hz. Their reference stars form, depending on the availability of suffi-
ciently bright stars, as closely as possible a triangle in the field. The fourth sensor measures
the segment figures and the phase steps for the calibration of the edge sensors. This can be
done at intervals of a few weeks if the stability of the edge sensors and the segment support
system is sufficient to rely on infrequently updated calibrations. Otherwise, if closed-loop cor-
rections are required, the sensor can deliver the correction signals at rates of approximately
.Hz.
Whereas active and adaptive optics are usually separated, this is no longer the case in the
E-ELT. All wavefront errors are first and nearlyinstantaneouslycorrected bythe adaptive mirror
M4 across the full field. Before M4 runs out of its correction range, the accumulated errors will
be offloaded at lower frequencies to the other active elements.
However, with three wavefront sensors and assuming that field distortions cannot be
measured, a total of about 20 error sources cannot be disentangled with sufficient accu-
racy. For example, an appropriate reshaping and simultaneous realigning of the segments
can generate nearly perfect third-order astigmatism across M1. Independently, M2 and
M3 can also generate third-order astigmatism. Without the possibility to measure distor-
tion in the field, the three contributions cannot be separated and only their sum can be
measured.
Multistage control of tip-tilt errors. Because of the large errors and the high temporal frequencies
to be corrected, the control of the E-ELT is not quasistatic anymore, but highly dynamic. For
example, the lowest eigenfrequency of the E-ELT is of the order of 2–3 Hz, which limits the
bandwidth for the correction of tracking errors with the main drives to effectively Hz. The
residual tracking errors after the first stage would then be approximately .Hz, which is barely
sufficient even for a seeing-limited performance.
In a second stage, corrections with M5 with a bandwidth of Hz can reduce the tracking
errors to approximately .Hz. In a third stage, these residual errors will then be further cor-
rected by the adaptive fourth mirror with a correction bandwidth of Hz to residual errors of
approximately .arcsec.
Observations of exoplanets require an extreme diffraction-limited performance, which can,
in a fourth stage, be reached with another adaptive mirror in the instrument. Apart from
residual wavefront shape errors, this mirror corrects the tracking errors at a bandwidth of
approximately Hz and reduces them to .arcsec. Such cascaded control loops will also
be used for the correction of other aberrations.
Complex control will be essential to extend the active optics operations, which were
sufficient to reach seeing-limited performances in -m class telescopes, to adaptive optics
operations, which will enable diffraction-limited observations in even larger telescopes.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Steffan Lewis, Andrew Rakich, Jason Spyromilio, and Isabelle
Surdej for helpful discussion and suggestions.

Active Thin-Mirror Telescopes 5
239
References
Bely, P. Y. ed., 2002, The Design and Construction of
Large Optical Telescopes (Berlin: Springer)
Born, M., & Wolf, E. 1997, Principles of Optics (6th
ed.; Oxford: Pergamon Press)
Couder, A. 1931, Bull Astron, 2me Sèrie, Tome VII,
Fasc. VI, 243
Creedon, J. F., & Lindgren, A. G. 1970, Automatica,
6, 643
Cullum, M., & Spyromilio, J. 2000, Proc SPIE 4004,
194
Delabre, B. 2008, Astron Astrophys, 487, 389
Dierickx, P. 1992, J Mod Opt, 39, 569
Dierickx, P. 1994, Proc SPIE 2199, 950
Diffrient, R. 1994, Sky Telesc, 91
Fried, D. L. 1965, J Opt Soc Am, 55, 1427
Gerchberg, R. W., & Saxton, W. O. 1972, Optik,
35, 237
Gilmozzi, R., & Spyromilio, J. 2007, The Messenger,
127, 11
Gitton, P., & Noethe, L. 1998, The Messenger,
92, 15
Gonsalves, R. A. 1976, J Opt Soc Am, 66, 961
Gonsalves, R. A. 1982, Opt Eng, 21, 829
Gonsalves, R. A., & Childlaw, R. 1979, Proc SPIE 207,
32
Guisard, S., Noethe, L., & Spyromilio, J. 2000, Proc
SPIE, 4003, 154
Hubin, N., & Noethe, L. 1993, Science, 262, 1390
Hull, T., et al. 2003, Proc SPIE, 277
Iye, M. 1991, JNLT Technical Report No. 2
Krabbendam, V.L., Sweeney, D. and the LSST Collab-
oration 2010, Proc SPIE 7733, 77330D
Lassell, W. 1842, Mem R Astron Soc XII, 265
Lemaitre, G. 1976, J Opt Soc Am, 66, 1334
Lemaitre, G. 2009, Astronomical Optics and Elastic-
ity Theory (Berlin: Springer)
Lukosz, W. 1963, Opt Acta, 10, 1
Maksutov, D. D. 1954, Technologie der astronomis-
chen Optik (Berlin: VEB Verlag Technik), 74
Martin, H. M., et al. 1998, Proc SPIE, 3352, 412
Martin, H. M., Cuerden, B., Dettmann, L. R., & Hill,
J. M. 2004, Proc SPIE 5489, 826
McLeod, B. A. 1996, PASP 108, 217
Noethe, L. 1991, J Mod Opt, 38, 1043
Noethe, L. 2001, Active Optics in Large Telescopes
with Thin Meniscus Primary Mirrors, Habilita-
tionsschrift (Technische Universität Berlin)
Noethe, L. 2002, Program Optim, 43, 1
Noethe, L. 2005, J Mod Opt, 52, 603
Noethe, L. 2009, Exp Astron, 26, 1
Noethe, L., & Guisard, S. 2000, Astron Astrophys.
Suppl. Ser. 144, 157
Noethe, L., & Guisard, S. 2000, Proc SPIE 2003, 382
Noll, R. J. 1976, J Opt Soc Am, 66, 207
Olivier, S.S., Seppala, L., Gilmore K. and the LSST
camera team 2008, Proc SPIE 7018, 70182G
Piatrou, P., & Chanan, G. 2010, Appl Opt, 49,
6395
Platt, B., & Shack, R. V. 1971, Opt Sci Center Newsl
(University of Arizona, Tucson), 5(1), 15
Racine, R., Salmon, D., Cowley, D., & Sovka, J. 1991,
Proc Astron Soc Pac, 103, 1020
Raggazoni, R. 1996, J Mod Opt, 43, 289
Ray, F. B. 1991, Proc SPIE 1532, 188
Roddier, F. 1988, Appl Opt, 27(7), 1223
Roddier, F. 1999, Adaptive Optics in Astronomy
(Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University
Press)
Sarazin, M., Melnick, J., Navarrete, J., Lombardi, G.
2008, The Messenger, 132, 11
Schechter, P. L., & Sobel, R. E. 2010, Publ Astron Soc
Pac, 123(905), 812
Schechter, P. L., et al. 2002, Proc SPIE, 4837,
619
Schneermann, M., Cui, X., Enard, D., Noethe, L., &
Postema, H., 1990, Proc SPIE 1236, 920
Schwesinger, G. 1988, J Mod Opt, 35, 1117
Schwesinger, G. 1991, J Mod Opt, 38, 1507
Schwesinger, G. 1994, Appl Opt, 33, 1198
Seo, B. J., et al. 2009, Appl Opt 48, 5997
Shack, R. V., & Platt, B. C. 1971, JOSA, 61, 656
Shack, R. V., & Thompson, K. 1980, Proc SPIE, 251,
146
Shectman, S., & Johns, M. 2010, Proc SPIE 7733,
77331Y, doi: 10.1117/12.857852
Stanghellini, S., Legrand, P., Baty, A., & Hovsepian,
T. 1997, Proc SPIE 2871, 314
Stepp,
L.,
2012,
Proc
SPIE
8444,
84441G,
doi: 10.1117/12.9280006
Su, D., Cui, X., Wang, Y., & Yao, Z. 1998, SPIE, 3352,
76
Tango, W. J. 1977, Appl Phys 13, 327
Thompson, K. P. 2005, J Opt Soc Am A, 22, 1389
Wilson, R. N. 1982, Opt Acta, 29, 985
Wilson, R. N. 1999, Reflecting Telescope Optics II
(Berlin: Springer)
Wilson, R. N. 2004, Reflecting Telescope Optics I
(Berlin: Springer)
Wilson, R. N., Franza, F., & Noethe, L. 1987, J Mod
Opt, 34, 485
Wilson, R. N., Franza, F., Noethe, L., & Andreoni, G.
1991, J Mod Opt, 38, 219
Wizinowich, P., Mast, T., Nelson, J., & DiVittorio, M.
1994, Proc SPIE, 2199, 94


6
Optical and Infrared
Interferometers
Theo A. ten Brummelaar⋅Harold A. McAlister
Mount Wilson Observatory, The CHARA Array of Georgia State
University, Mount Wilson, CA, USA
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University,
Atlanta, GA, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
2
Basic Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
3
The Effect of the Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
4
Visibility Calibration and Closure Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
5
Basic Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
6
Beam Combination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 280
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_6, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

242 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
Abstract:
Stellar interferometers achieve limiting angular resolution inaccessible to even
next-generation single-aperture telescopes. Arrays of small or modest apertures have achieved
baselines exceeding 300 m producing submilliarcsecond resolutions at visible and near-infrared
wavelengths. The technical cost and challenge in building interferometric arrays is substantial
due to the very high tolerance imposed by optical physics on the precision of beam combina-
tion and optical path length matching for two or more telescopes. This chapter presents the
basic theory and overall design considerations for an interferometer with an emphasis on the
practical aspects of constructing a working instrument that overcomes obstacles imposed by
the atmosphere, submicron path length matching requirements, limitations on number of tele-
scopes and their layout, light losses through multiple reflections and transmissions necessary to
superimpose telescope beams in the beam-combining laboratory, and other realities of the art of
interferometry. The basic design considerations for an interferometer are laid out starting with
site selection and telescope placement and then followed through to beam combination and
measurement of interferometric visibility and closure phase after the encountering of numer-
ous subsystems by incoming wavefronts. These subsystems include active wavefront sensing
for tip/tilt correction or even full-up adaptive optics, telescope design for directing collimated
beams over large distances, diffraction losses, polarization matching, optical path length inser-
tion and active compensation, correction for atmospheric refraction and differential dispersion
in glass and air, separation of light into visible and near-infrared channels, alignment over long
optical paths, high-precision definition of the three-dimensional layout of an interferometric
array, and, finally, a variety of beam-combining schemes from simple two-way combiners to
multitelescope imaging combiners in the pupil and image planes. Much has been learned from
a modest but robust collection of successful interferometers over the last 25 years or so, and
interferometry is poised to become a mainstream technique for astrophysical research.
Keywords: Adaptive optics, Adaptive optics: sampling time, Advantages/disadvantages,
Alignment system: strategies, Aperture plane combination: Michelson interferometer, Array
layout: UV coverage, Astrometric model: three-dimensional array layout, Atmospheric phase
error, Atmospheric seeing, Baseline, Baseline solution, Beam expansion, Beam reduction, Bis-
pectrum, Bootstrapping, Calibration, Calibrator object, Cat’s-eye, Closure phase, Construction
stability and vibration: vibration isolation, Control systems, Control tolerance, Correla-
tion, Coupling losses, Delay line, Dichroics, Differential diffraction and dispersion: angu-
lar refraction, Diffraction: beam propagation, Dither mirrors, Diversity of beam combiners,
Fiber-based beam combiners, Field of view: baseline dependency, Fixed delay, Fizeau inter-
ferometry, Fourier transform, Fringe amplitude, Fringe detection strategies, Fringe envelope,
Fringe tracker, Fringe tracking: group delay tracking, Geometric delay, High angular resolu-
tion, Hilbert transform, Image plane combination: spectrographic combination, Image recon-
struction, Inner and outer scale lengths, Instrumentation, Integrated optics beam combiners,
Interferometerdesign, Laser metrology, Light pipes: vacuum propagation, Longitudinal disper-
sion, Minimizing optical surfaces, Opposing glass wedges, Path length control: time variable
delay, Optical fibers and spatial filtering: coherence loss with aperture, Optical path length dif-
ference, Optical path length equalizer, Optical quality and throughput: light losses, Optical
windows, Phase locking, Phase variance, Piston error, Polarimetry: polarization state sepa-
ration, Polychromatic fringe, POP mirrors, Quantification of seeing, Polarization: reflection
sequencing, Quantification of turbulence, ro, Remote control, Reynold’s number, Risley prisms,
Separating fringe tracking from science: detection strategies, Shutter sequences, Siderostat,
Single-mode fibers, Site selection: criteria, Spatial filtering, Spatial fringe encoding, Speckle

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
243
interferometry, Strehl ratio, τo, Taylor hypothesis, Telescope arrays, Telescope placement,
Telescopes: collimated beams, Temporal fringe encoding, Thermal stability, Tip/tilt control,
Triple correlation, Turbulent flow, UV plane, Visibility amplitude, Visibility from fringe
power spectrum, Visibility function, Visibility phase, Wollaston prism, Young’s double slit,
Zernike/Van Cittert theorem
1
Introduction
Optical interferometry is a technique that brings the light of many telescopes together in a single
location in ordertocreate veryhigh angularresolution images. These images have the resolution
of a telescope with a diameter the size of the largest separation between the smaller telescopes,
albeit with much less sensitivity. An optical interferometer is a large and complex instrument,
comprised of many active and passive subsystems involving many engineering challenges in
their design and construction. These include, but are not confined to, physical stability, atmo-
spheric seeing, path length equalization, beam combining, fringe tracking, dynamic control,
and dispersion/diffraction considerations. In this chapter some of these critical aspects will be
discussed along with the solutions that the community has used to date.
A seminal overview of what is required to build an interferometer is given by Tango and
Twiss (1980). This is a “must read” for any student of the subject. Other excellent starting points
for reading are the book by Labeyrie et al. (2006) and the course notes of the 1999 Michelson
Interferometry Summer School (Lawson 1999). More recent articles on the practice of Interfer-
ometry can be found in New Astronomy Reviews volumes 51 and 53. Good reviews of relatively
recent astrophysics done using this technique can be found in Monnier (2003) and Quirrenbach
(2001), while all the important historical papers on the subject are collected together in Lawson
(1997). For the most recent news and publications, the Optical Long Baseline Interferometry
Newsletter (olbin.jpl.nasa.gov) is an excellent resource.
2
Basic Theory
In its simplest form, an interferometer brings together the light from two telescopes and mixes
them. The electric fields of the two beams from the two telescopes can be written as
A= Icos(kx+ kct),
A= Icos(kx+ kct),
where Iand Iare the amplitudes, k = π
λ is the wave number, λ is the wavelength, xand x
are the optical paths from the star through the two telescopes all the way to the point at which
the two beams are combined, c is the speed of light, and t is the time. Once these two signals
have been mixed, the camera detects the time-averaged intensity which will be given by
I = (A+ A)
= I
cos(kx+ kct) + IIcos(kx+ kct) cos(kx+ kct) + I
cos(kx+ kct)
= (I
+ I
)

+II[cos(kx) cos(kct) + sin(kx) sin(kct)][cos(kx) cos(kct) + sin(kx) sin(kct)]

244 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
where the cos(kct) = .substitution has been used. This can be further simplified by noting
that cos(kct) sin(kct) = , resulting in
I = I
+ I


+ II[cos(kx) cos(kx) + sin(kx) sin(kx)]
= I
+ I


+ IIcos(k[x−x]).
The detected signal is then an oscillating intensity pattern with a magnitude and a phase, called
the correlation of the two waves. In most practical applications, this function is normalized by
the mean intensity (I
+ I
)/, resulting in
I(ν) = .+ T(I, I)V(ν) cos(πνOPD + ϕ(ν)),
where OPD = x−xis the optical path length difference, and the wave number k has been
replaced with ν = /k. The transfer function
T(I, I) = II
I
+ I

has also been introduced. This has a value of 1.0 if the two beams are of equal intensity. This
visibility function can also be expressed as a complex number, because it has an amplitude and a
phase, and is a function of the intensity pattern of the object being studied on the sky. The fringe
phase is, in fact, the same as the phase difference between the two incoming wavefronts. This
visibility function can also be expressed as a complex number, because it has an amplitude and a
phase, and is a function of the intensity pattern of the object being studied on the sky. All of this
is, in its essence,identical to the well-known Young’s double slit experiment for monochromatic
light as shown in >Fig. 6-1.
All of this has assumed monochromatic light, but in practice of course astronomical objects
emit light at many wavelengths, and an optical filter, or spectrograph, of some kind is nor-
mally used to restrict the bandwidth to a known finite size, say from ν−Δν/to ν+ Δν/.
This requires an integration over the entire pass band, which we here assume is flat and finite,
resulting in
I(ν, Δν) = 
Δν
ν+Δν/
∫
ν−Δν/
[.+ T(I, I)V(ν) cos(πνOPD + ϕ(ν))]dν.
The first part of this integral is trivial, and the second part can be simplified by assuming that
the visibility function does not change very much inside the small bandwidth. This leads to
I(ν, Δν) = .+ 
Δν T(I, I)V(ν)
ν+Δν/
∫
ν−Δν/
cos(πνOPD + ϕ(ν))dν.
(6.1)
Next, the substitution η = ν −νis made, and it is then relatively easy to show that
I(ν, Δν) = .+ T(I, I)V(ν)sinc(πOPDΔν)cos(πνOPD+ϕ(ν)).
(6.2)
So what was an infinitely large fringe pattern for a single wavelength becomes a finite fringe
packet when a nonzero bandwidth is considered. The modulation of the fringe pattern, which
in this case is a sinc function, is called the fringe envelope and has a maximum when OPD = and
its first zeros when πOPDΔν = ±π. The full width ofthe fringe envelope, known as the coherence
length, is therefore given by /Δν = λ/Δλ. The effect of a finite band pass is demonstrated

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
245
Point Source
Double Slit
Screen
D
x
d
λ
⊡Fig. 6-1
Young’s double slit experiment. Monochromatic light enters from the left through a single small
aperture, which is then sent through two small apertures and onto a screen on the right. The result
is a continuously oscillating intensity pattern of fringes on the right. Replacing the ﬁrst small aper-
ture with a star and the two next apertures with two telescopes pointing at that star turns this into
a simple stellar interferometer. This can be done in practice by placing a piece of cardboard with
two small holes over the aperture of a small telescope and using a very-high-power eyepiece to
observe a star. The result will be an image of the star with fringes across it
graphically in >Fig. 6-2. For example, a standard filter in the near infrared centered on 2.3 μm
and a width of 0.3 μm will have a coherence length that is only 34 μm wide. This means that
the optical path length, from the star to the point at which the two beams are combined, must
be controlled at the sub-μm level. This can impose very challenging constraints on the design
of an optical stellar interferometer.
In this calculation, the band pass was assumed to be flat, that is, the band pass is a top-hat
function, and it is no coincidence that the shape of the envelope, a sinc function, is the Fourier
transform of a top-hat function. In actual practice, filters are not perfectly top-hat shaped and
have rounded edges. Furthermore, the filter shape is convolved with the spectrum of the star as
well as with the wavelength-dependent effects of the atmosphere and the optical system itself.
In general, the fringe envelope shape is always the Fourier transform of the resulting convolved
filter shape, which is a function of the filter used, the optical system, and the spectrum of the star.
This relationship can be used to perform a kind of spectroscopy, known as Fourier Transform
Spectroscopy, or FTS (Davis et al. 2001).
> Equation 6.2 is a simplified version of the fringe equation, and it is central to the art of
stellar interferometry, both from scientific and engineering points of view. The scientific impli-
cations derive from the Zernike/Van Cittert theorem (Van Cittert 1934; Zernike 1938) which
states that the correlation of the radiation collected by two separate apertures or telescopes is
one Fourier component of the intensity pattern on the sky. The spatial frequency of this Fourier
component is a function of the distance between the two telescopes, called the baseline, divided
by the mean wavelength of the band-pass filter λ. This Fourier plane is called the UV plane,
and the parameters U and V are used to designate the two orthogonal spatial frequency axes.
If the amplitude and phase of the visibility function can be measured for many baselines and
many orientations on the sky, an inverse Fourier transform of these measurements in the UV

246 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
Monochromatic Fringe
Superposition of Fringes of Increasing λ
Visibility
Resulting Polychromatic Fringe
~20 μm
⊡Fig. 6-2
While monochromatic light produces fringes of an inﬁnite extent, multiple wavelengths, when
combined together, reduce the extent of the fringes to a very small range of optical path length
diﬀerences, often as small as a few tens of microns. This can impose very tight tolerances on the
path length control systems in a stellar interferometer
plane can be used to produce an image of the object of interest, which has a spatial resolution
that is a ratio of the wavelength of light being used and the largest baseline, or telescope sepa-
ration. For a 100-m baseline with ν= .μm, this is of the order of 1 milliarcsecond. While it
is not yet possible to build a telescope with a 100-m diameter, it is possible, indeed it has been
done many times, to place two smaller telescopes 100 m apart and bring their light together in
a central location. This is the reason why interferometers are built.
One way of looking at the Zernike/van Cittert theory is to compare an interferometer to a
single large lens. A lens is itself a Fourier transform machine (See, e.g., Goodman 2005), that
is, the intensity pattern in the image plane is the Fourier transform of the wavefront reaching
the aperture. Thus a point source, like a star, will produce a flat wavefront at the aperture of the
telescope if atmospheric distortions are not present. If this aperture is circular, the incoming
wavefront will be a flat round disk, and the Fourier transform of a flat disk is the Airy disk
pattern so often seen in a simple optical system. An interferometercan be seen as an instrument
for sampling the incoming wavefront presented to a very large input aperture, and instead of
using a lens to perform the transformation from aperture plane to image plane, it is done using
image reconstruction software. This does assume, however, that enough amplitudes and phases
are measured to make image reconstruction possible. A complete derivation of the Zernike/van
Cittert theorem can be found in Born and Wolf (2002).

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
247
3
The Eﬀect of the Atmosphere
Of all the sources of noise, the atmosphere is the most significant contributor. The atmosphere
is in an unpredictable and complex state of turbulent flow, and an understanding of the theory
of optical propagation through a turbulent atmosphere is important because it is the charac-
teristics of the atmosphere that determine many of the design constraints of a ground-based
interferometer, indeed of any ground-based astronomical system. There is only enough space
for a very brief introduction here, but more detailed reviews of atmospheric turbulence theory
and how it affects optical propagation can be found in Roddier (1981) and Coulman (1985).
The usual approach, first formulated by Reynolds, is to describe these flows using ensemble
averages rather than in terms of individual components. He defined a nondimensional quantity,
now known as the Reynolds number, that characterizes a turbulent flow. It is defined as
R = UL
νmol
,
where U and L are the typical velocity and length for the flow and νmol is the kinematic molec-
ular viscosity. A low Reynolds number indicates that the flow is laminar, that is, regular and
smooth in space and time, while a large Reynolds number signifies a highly turbulent flow.
Between these extremes, the fluid will undergo a series of unstable states. The atmosphere is
difficult to study because it has a Reynolds number of the order of 10. In the classical the-
ory, proposed by Lev Landau, the number of the unstable states between laminar and fully
turbulent flow would be very large, even infinite. More recent work in the area of chaos the-
ory shows, however, that the final state of full-blown turbulence can arise after only a few such
transitions.
The standard model for atmospheric turbulence and its affect on light propagation, first
published by Taylor (1921) and Richardson (1922) and later expanded by Taylor (1935) and
Kolmogorov (1941a, b), states that energy enters the flow of the atmosphere at low spatial fre-
quencies as a direct result of the nonlinearity of the Navier-Stokes equation governing fluid
motion. This forms eddies of large sizes which have a length Lknown as the outer scale length.
This outer scale length varies according to local conditions, ranging from the distance to the
nearest physical boundary when close to the ground up to the thickness of the largest turbu-
lent eddies. Measurements of Lrange from 2 m (Nightingale and Buscher 1991), through to
40–60 m (Davis et al. 1995) all the way out to the rather controversial figure of 2 km (Colavita
et al. 1987).
These large eddies are unstable and break up into smaller eddies, corresponding to a dif-
ferent scale length and a higher spatial frequency. These “second-generation” eddies are also
unstable and will break up into still smaller eddies. Since the scale length associated with these
eddies decreases, the Reynolds number associated with the flow must also be decreasing. When
the Reynolds number is low enough, the turbulent breakup of the eddies stops, and the kinetic
energy of the flow is lost as heat via viscous dissipation. This imposes a highest possible spatial
frequency on the flow beyond which little or no energy is available to support turbulence. This
inner scale length is denoted as l. The inner scale length varies from a few millimeters near
the ground up to about 1 cm high in the atmosphere. Richardson (1922) neatly described this
turbulent cascade in the couplet:
Big whirls have little whirls that feed on their velocity,
And little whirls have lesser whirls and so on to viscosity.

248 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
However, simply stating that the atmosphere is turbulent does not imply it will affect optical
propagation. It is possible to have a fluid in which strong mechanical turbulence will not affect
optical propagation, for example, an incompressible fluid-like water. It is changes in the refrac-
tive index of the air, and not turbulence in itself, that cause changes in optical propagation. Since
the refractive index of air is a function of its density and turbulence changes the density, there
is a direct link between air turbulence and optical propagation.
The inner and outer scale lengths of the atmosphere determine many of the properties of
atmospheric seeing. For example, the inner scale length is almost always smaller than the diam-
eter of the telescopes, and there is therefore no escaping the fact that these turbulent cells will
be blown past the aperture and cause distortions in the wavefront. Furthermore, the outer scale
length is often of the same order as the distance between telescopes. So long as the outer scale
length is larger than the telescope separation, the affects of the atmosphere on the observations
will increase as the baseline is increased. Once the baseline is larger than the outer scale length,
this will no longer be true and the detrimental effects of the atmosphere will get no worse with
increasing telescope separation.
In order to establish bandwidths for the various servo systems in an interferometer, the tem-
poral properties of the wavefronts entering our telescopes must be understood. This is done by
first studying the spatial properties and then moving to the temporal domain by using the Taylor
hypothesis of frozen turbulence. The Taylor hypothesis means that a frozen piece of turbulence is
blown past our apertures by the prevailing wind. It is called frozen because it is assumed that it
does not change shape significantly during the time it takes to move past the telescope aperture.
The temporal characteristics of the wavefront entering the telescope will therefore be a function
of the spatial distribution of turbulent cells, the speed of the prevailing wind, and the size of the
aperture or baseline.
The atmospheric affects on optical propagation are characterized by defining two param-
eters: the atmospheric coherence length r, which should not be confused with the fringe
coherence length, and the atmospheric coherence time τ. The atmospheric coherence length
r, where l< r< L, is defined as the length over which the wavefront can be well approx-
imated by a flat wavefront, and τis defined as the time over which that assumption is valid,
where our definition of “flat” is having an rms phase error of π radians. One way of looking
at this is to think of ras the size of the “typical” turbulent cells being blown past the aper-
ture of a telescope, or between telescopes, and that these cells are being blown past by the
wind at a velocity of r/τ, a manifestation of the Taylor hypothesis. Another way of looking
at this is that ris the largest diameter a telescope can have and still be diffraction limited.
A “typical” value for ris 10 cm, which corresponds to 1-arcsecond seeing. If the wind were
moving at 10 ms−, it would result in a characteristic time scale of τ= ./= .s or
10 ms. Time scales in an interferometer range from the value of τup to the time it takes
for the largest L-sized cells to be blown between the telescopes, which can be many tens of
seconds.
A single large aperture telescope contains many r-sized areas. These can be thought of
as small patches of parallel wavefronts spread across the aperture, each of which producing a
diffraction-limited image in a different part of the image plane. As the prevailing wind blows
these past the aperture, these multiple diffraction-limited images dance around in the image
plane on a time scale of τ. This is the origin of the well-known speckle patterns seen in high
magnifications of the image plane of a large-aperture telescope. As first pointed out by Labeyrie
(1974), the morphological information in these speckles can be used to obtain diffraction-
limited astrometric data using the technique of Speckle Interferometry. Both rand τscale

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
249
as λ/, resulting in atmospheric seeing improving with observational wavelength. It is for this
reason that a majority of interferometry is done in the infrared.
The value of τis in the range of a few milliseconds in the visible during normal seeing
conditions and can be as high as several tens of milliseconds in excellent seeing in the infrared.
Without a full adaptive optics system on each telescope, this basically sets the time constant for
the servo systems and detector systems within the interferometer, that is, it will be necessary
to sample the incoming wavefronts on time scales of order τ. The value of rcan range from
several centimeters in the visible to many tens of centimeters in the near infrared. As for the
coherence time, the size of the coherence length will place engineering tolerances on the design
of the interferometer itself. It turns out that the optimum size of telescope aperture without
adaptive optics is of order r(Buscher 1988) and so in the near infrared, where ris of order
10–40 cm in good seeing telescopes with apertures of 1–2 m are used. In order to use larger
telescopes, full adaptive optics systems for each telescope would be required.
It is, of course, important that the seeing internal to the instrument does not further reduce
the visibility. To this end, it is common to keep as much as possible of the light paths within the
instrument in a vacuum, and in most cases, evacuated tubes are used to carry the light from
the telescopes to the beam combination area. Once the light reaches the delay line and beam
combination building, there are several other things that can be done to reduce the internal
seeing, most importantly ensuring that the thermal properties of the beam combination facility
are well known and controlled.
4
Visibility Calibration and Closure Phase
It is impossible to know the true value of the change in visibility amplitude introduced by the
combination of atmospheric and instrumental effects. What is certain, however, is that both the
atmosphere and all but the more obscure instrumental effects will lower the fringe amplitude by
a random amount. If it is assumed that the amount of visibility reduction is, on average, constant
over relatively short time periods and within nearby offset locations on the sky, this effect can be
calibrated out by observing objects whose visibility is well known. Ideally this would be a nearby
and unresolved single round star whose visibility will always be 1.0. If the visibility amplitude of
the calibrator is found to be Vcal(ν) and the measured fringe amplitude of the object of interest
is Vobj(ν) then
V(ν) = Vobj(ν)
Vcal(ν) .
In practice, of course, it is not always possible to find such a star close in angular separation
to the object of interest, and resolved objects of a well-known size must be used. Fortunately,
for objects only partially resolved, the visibility amplitude is not a strong function of size and
the errors introduced by the uncertainty in calibrator size do not affect the final calibrated vis-
ibilities very much. Furthermore, Vcal(ν) is a time-varying function, especially in poor seeing,
and the calibrator must be measured both before and after the object of interest and then inter-
polated between these two measurements. Visibility amplitude calibration is one of the more
difficult aspects of the analysis of interferometric data, and bad choices in calibrators, or poor
observation method, have often led to poor, or even erroneous, results.
Apart from reducing the visibility amplitude, the atmosphere, along with some instrumental
effects, changes the optical path lengths and introduces random visibility phase errors. While

250 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
it is always possible to measure the fringe phase when the atmosphere is present, this is not a
measure of the Fourier phase. Without good phase measurements, an inverse Fourier trans-
form cannot be performed. These atmospherically induced phase errors totally overwhelm the
real phase of the visibility function, and on a single-baseline instrument, the true phase of the
coherence function cannot be determined at all. Fortunately, for instruments with more than
two telescopes, there is a way around this problem. While these phase errors are a function of
the atmosphere above each telescope and are associated with the individual telescopes, the visi-
bility function phase is a differential measurementbetween two telescopes,and this relationship
can be used in the following way. Consider three telescopes (i = , , ) where the true phase
of the incoming light above the atmosphere is ϑi so that the visibility phase signal between any
two telescopes is ϕi j = ϑi −ϑ j. Note that this visibility phase is the same as ϕ(ν) in the fringe
equation (> 6.2) but the dependence on the baseline has been added and the dependence on
wave number ν has been removed for clarity. At each telescope, the atmosphere, as well as the
instrument itself, introduces a random phase error σi. For each baseline, or pair of telescopes,
the measured phase difference will be
ψi j = (ϕi + σi) −(ϕ j + σj) = ϕi j + σi −σj.
In most cases the random atmospherically induced phase errors σi −σj totally overwhelm the
visibility phase ϕi j. This means that the phase of the fringes of a single baseline is not readily
observable and will almost always average out to zero. If instead three telescopes are used, the
sum of fringe phases around a closed triangle of baselines will be
Ψ
=
Ψ+ Ψ+ Ψ
=
ϕ+ σ−σ+ ϕ+ σ−σ+ ϕ+ σ−σ
=
ϕ+ ϕ+ ϕ.
Note that the random phase errors cancel out. This quantity, the sum of phases on a closed tri-
angle of baselines, is called the closure phase and is a good measurable in the sense that many
measurements of the closure phase will average out to the sum of the true visibility phases
despite the phase errors introduced at each telescope by the atmosphere. Unlike the visibility
amplitude, no calibration is required, although in a real instrument there will always be some
small offsets in the closure phase that need to be removed. These offsets are constant and do not
vary in time, or on the sky, and are a function of the beam combiner hardware, not the atmo-
sphere. They will therefore appear as a constant, nonzero closure phase signal in the calibrator
stars that can be subtracted from the closure phase signal of the object.
So while the phase information for each individual baseline is lost, enough phase informa-
tion is available in the closure phases to perform the inversion from Fourier space and create
the required image (Monnier 2011). In its simplest sense, a closure phase is a measurement of
the nonsymmetry of the morphology of the object. A circularly symmetric object will have a
closure phase of zero, while a binary star will have a very large closure phase.
It is extremely important here to note that the triangle must be truly closed, that is, for
example, ψand not ψmust be used, otherwise the random errors will not cancel and this
will no longer be a good measurable. Furthermore, in practice, the complex visibility
Vi j(ν) = Vi j(ν)eiϕi j(ν)

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
251
is normally used for each baseline to calculate the visibility triple product, also known as the
bispectrum or triple correlation (Lohmann et al. 1983):
V(ν)
=
V(ν)V(ν)V(ν)
=
V(ν)V(ν)V(ν)ei[ϕ(ν)+ϕ(ν)+ϕ(ν)].
The mean of this triple product over many fringe samples can then be used to calculate a mean
closure phase. Since the fringe visibility varies constantly from one sample to the next, this
results in a mean closure phase weighted by fringe amplitude, a better value than the more
direct mean of the closure phase.
Interferometry, then, is in practice a matter of measuring as many visibility amplitudes and
closure phases as possible and either fitting a model to these data or performing the inversion
from Fourier space to image space and creating a picture. In the remainder of this chapter, the
various hardware and control systems required to collect these data will be described.
5
Basic Design
The basic layout of a two-dimensional single-baseline interferometer is shown in >Fig. 6-3.
Ageometricdelayof B sin θ, where B is the baseline length and θ is the zenith angle ofthe object,
is created whenever the telescopes are pointing at a star that is not exactly at zenith. In a real
three-dimensional system, one uses the dot product of the baseline vector and the unit vector
pointing at the star to determine the geometric delay. Furthermore this delay is continually
changing as the earth rotates and, as discussed above, continually modulated by the atmosphere,
and even by optical systems within the interferometer itself. Since the fringe envelope is only a
few tens of microns across, it is necessary to ensure that the optical paths, from star to fringe
position, are the same. This is done bymeasuring the path difference between the twobeams and
then adding or subtracting optical path in each beam using an optical system called a delay line
or optical path length equalizer (OPLE) to make the path difference zero. This requirement of
path equalization is one of the most difficult aspects of interferometry and imposes some of the
strongest constraints on the design of the optical system. We note that because we are dealing
with optical frequencies, the technology does not currently exist to time encode the incoming
signals and combine beams a posteriori in software as has long been utilized in astronomical
radio interferometry.
There are numerous other active optical systems required. For example, atmospheric distor-
tions of the wavefront reaching each telescope need to be controlled using either a tip/tilt servo
or a full adaptive optics system. Additionally, differential air path lengths within the instrument
introduce differential longitudinal dispersion, which also may need to be corrected. Here each
of the important subsystems will be described in the order that they are normally seen as the
wavefront moves through the instrument.
There are numerous design decisions to be made when building an interferometer, and, of
course, no two groups make exactly the same choices. Many of these choices will be strongly
dependent on the available funding, the main scientific thrust of the research group or groups
involved, and the availability of existing infrastructure. > Table 6-1 shows a list of existing
ground-based facilities and a very short summary of the basic features of each. For more
information, refer to the citations listed.

252 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
Basic Optical
Interferometer
Telescope
1
Telescope
2
Arriving wavefronts of starlight
Optical path difference
TiIt-correcting
mirror
Delay
line 1
Wavefront
tiIt detector
White-light
fringe
Dispersed
fringe
Beam
combiner
Prism
Dichroic
mirrors split IR
and visible light
Tilt-correcting
mirror
Delay
line 2
⊡Fig. 6-3
Basiclayoutofasingle-baselineinterferometer.Twotelescopespointatthesameobject,then send
the light through a tilt correction system, an optical path length equalizer, and ﬁnally to a central
location where fringes are formed. The most important problem to be solved is ensuring the light
paths, from the star all the way to the fringe position, are equal to within a small fraction of the
coherencelength of the light (ﬁgure courtesy of Sky and Telescope magazine and Dr. Peter Lawson)
Site Selection – Selecting a site for an interferometer is very much like site selection for
any astronomical observatory but with the added constraint of requiring a large relatively flat
area in order to accommodate the large baselines required. The fact that there needs to be an
unobscured line of site between each telescope and the beam-combining facility must also be
taken into account. The largest possible baseline will be determined by the morphology of the

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
253
⊡Table 6-1
This table contains a very brief overview of existing and under construction facilities at the time of writing of this chapter listed in order of their commis-
sioning. Items in brackets are upgrades expected in the near future and the expected dates of ﬁrst results. Note that the LBTI is unlike the rest of those listed
as it uses a combination of ﬁlled aperture and interferometry that is beyond the scope of this chapter. Also, the ISI uses a heterodyne combination method
similar to that used by radio interferometers that is also beyond the scope of this chapter. Here, visible light means a wavelength of 0.5–1 μm, near infrared
is 1–3 μm, and mid-infrared is around 10 μm
Name
Citation
Apertures
#Combined
Baselines
Wavelengths
Location
Status
SUSI
Davis et al. (1998)
13 × 15 cm ﬁxed
2
5–160 m (640 m)
Visible
Narrabri, Australia:
low-altitude ﬂat plain
Operational
ISI
Hale et al. (2000)
3 × 165 cm movable
3
5–80 m
Mid-infrared
Mount Wilson, CA, USA:
mountaintop
Operational
NPOI
Armstrong et al.
(1998)
6 × 12 cm movable
6
7–79 m (437 m)
Near infrared
Anderson Mesa, AZ,
USA: mesa
Operational
Keck
Colavita et al. (2003)
2 × 10 m ﬁxed
2
85 m
Near and mid-infrared
Mauna Kea, HI, USA:
mountaintop
Operational
CHARA
ten Brummelaar
et al. (2005)
6 × 1 m ﬁxed
6
34–341
Visible and near infrared
Mount Wilson, CA, USA:
mountaintop
Operational
VLTI
Haguenauer et al.
(2010)
4 × 8.2 m ﬁxed
4 × 1.8 m Movable
4
11–129 m
Near infrared
Cerro Paranal, Chile:
mountaintop
Operational
LBTI
Hinz et al. (2004)
2 × 8.4 m ﬁxed
2
0–23 m
Near and mid-infrared
Mount Graham, AZ,
USA: mountaintop
Under
construction
(2011)
MROI
Creech-Eakman
et al. (2010)
10 × 1.4 movable
6
7–340 m
Visible and near infrared
South Baldy, NM, USA:
mesa
Under
construction
(2012)

254 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
observatory site, and ideally a large flat area at the top of a mountain is desired. Unfortunately
this is hard to find, as mountaintops tend to havecomplex rather than flat terrain. Existing inter-
ferometers (See >Table 6-1.) have been built in a variety of locations, with some on traditional
mountaintops and others on planes located much closer to sea level. In the case of the VLTI,
the top of the mountain was removed in order to create a large flat area at high altitude. Other
inland interferometers are placed on mesas, which by their very nature are large, flat, and at
high altitudes. Most, however, are on more traditional mountaintops and must deal with the
local topography. Ultimately, of course, the choice will be a compromise of some sort, and will
also include factors such as existing infrastructure, weather patterns, and proximity to nearby
towns and cities.
Construction Stability and Vibration – Since an interferometer has engineering tolerances
of the same order as the wavelength at which it will operate, everything must either have an
active optical system for correction or be stable at the submicron level. Not only are large iner-
tial masses required but it is also necessary to isolate them from any local sources of vibration.
Thus, the foundations of the buildings must not be physically coupled to the telescope sup-
port systems, delay lines, or optical table supports. Sometimes this is impossible to do, and
vibrations from the building and other instruments and nearby equipment are transferred to
the interferometer optics. In these cases, it is necessary to measure these vibrations with either
accelerometers, or with the fringe tracker described below and remove them by sending the
appropriate error signals to the delay lines. In the end, this requirement means interferometers
contain a great deal of concrete and steel, as can be seen in >Fig. 6-4.
The buildings must also have very good thermal stability; otherwise, internal paths and
optical alignment will continually change with temperature. For the telescopes and domes, it is
only necessary to use the standard methods, such as removal of local electronic heat sources, of
ensuring minimal dome seeing. The problem of the necessarily large beam-combining facility
is different. It is not wise to have moving air from an air conditioning system inside the optical
laboratory, as this will create very turbulent air and a large amount of internal seeing. The two
most common solutions are to either place the facility under ground or use a “building within
⊡Fig. 6-4
One of the concrete piers that support the siderostats for the SUSI interferometer. The concrete
goes down into the ground all the way to local bed rock to ensure very high stability and low levels
of vibration (Figure courtesy of Professor John Davis)

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
255
a building” where the laboratory is inside the inner building, which contains a large but passive
thermal mass, and the space between the two buildings serves as an HVAC plenum volume.
Array Layout – The positioning of the input apertures, be they siderostats or telescopes, is
often a case of logistics and is always a matterof solving several, often conflicting, requirements.
As many telescopes as possible are desired as well as a large range of baseline sizes and orienta-
tions. In order to enable a “snap-shot” mode, that is, have the ability to collect enough data in a
short time to form an image, the minimum number of telescopes is normally said to be six. This
is largely a case of how many baseline sizes and orientations can be collected at any one time,
something referred to as UV coverage. As with the choice of site, the available funding often has
a large influence over the number of telescopes, as does the topography of the site itself. One
way of getting around this is to have telescopes that can be moved around, but this, of course,
adds its own complexities.
Another consideration in array layout is whether or not to have a nonredundant base-
line arrangement. All optical interferometers have a limited number of telescopes, and so in
most cases they are arranged such that the distance and orientation of any two is unique. This
gives the maximum number of different baselines for a given number of telescopes. However,
one of the most difficult problems to overcome in an interferometer is locating and tracking
the fringes, that is, controlling the delay lines in order to keep the fringes in a stable position
within the beam combiner. Invariably, the larger a baseline is, the lower the visibility amplitude
will be and, depending on the baseline size and current outer scale length of the atmosphere,
the more the fringes will move around. This makes finding and tracking fringes on very large
baselines extremely difficult. If there are enough telescopes, it is possible to get around this by
using a technique called bootstrapping where the telescopes are placed relatively close together
in a long, usually redundant, line of telescopes. The separation of each pair of telescopes is
then small, and finding and tracking the fringes between each local telescope pair is relatively
easy. If each adjacent pair of telescopes is phased, then all the telescopes in that line are in
phase, and it is then certain that all the other baselines, including the longest, are also correctly
phased.
Telescopes – The input apertures ofan optical interferometerneed tobe able todirect the stel-
larlight toward the central facility, and sothe output of these systems, unlike imaging telescopes,
will almost always be a collimated beam of light. In some cases, and for smaller apertures,
no powered optics are required at all and a flat mirror in an alt/az mount can be used. This
is known as a siderostat, similar to the heliostats used in many solar observatories. For larger
apertures, even if siderostats are used, powered optics are needed in order to bring the beam
diameterdown to a manageable size. In the case of a telescope utilizing confocal paraboloids for
the primary and secondary optics, maintenance of a perfectly collimated beam from the tele-
scope into the beam-combining area at the center of the interferometer array requires the use
of temperature-insensitive structures, such as Invar rods, to maintain a nearly constant distance
between the primary and secondary.
The design of the telescopes, or siderostats, will also be influenced by the need for the struc-
tural stability discussed above, and this places constraints on these subsystems not normally
found in standard telescopes. For example, longitudinal path length modulations and vibra-
tions do not adversely affect single-aperture imaging telescopes but can be a major concern
in an interferometer. The result is that telescopes designed for interferometers normally are
much more massive than single-aperture systems, and the control electronics and other poten-
tial sources of heat and vibration are frequently placed in a separatebuilding from the telescopes
themselves.

256 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
Since, by definition, an interferometer will include multiple telescopes spread out over a
large area, possibly kilometers across, each telescope must be designed as a stand-alone system
capable ofcomplete remote control, including mirrorcovers, fiducials, telescope pointing, dome
control, and acquisition and finder cameras.
Adaptive Optics – The wavefronts reaching the telescopes have been distorted as they pass
through the atmosphere, and some of this at least needs to be corrected, preferably as close to
the telescope itself as possible. For smaller telescopes, a tip/tilt, or image stabilization, servo is
enough (ten Brummelaar and Tango 1994) though a full adaptive optics system is of course
much better (Tyson 2000). It is desirable to place this subsystem as close as possible to the
telescope, for example, using the secondary mirror to act as a tip/tilt device is common. The
wavefront and image position for each telescope must be measured, but it is not always clear
where this sensor system should be. Since the optical system between the telescope and the
beam-combining laboratory can also introduce wavefront tilt and higher order aberrations, it
has until recently been standard practice to place the sensor system in the beam-combining
laboratory itself. Unfortunately this also means that it is placed behind the many reflections in
the optical system and will therefore lose sensitivity. To maximize sensitivity, the sensor system
needs to be located as close to the telescope as possible. More recently it has become the practice
to have a high-speed, that is, sampling as fast or faster than the atmospheric coherence time
of τ, tip/tilt or wavefront detector at the telescope to close the servo loop and a much slower
detector system in the beam-combining laboratory that can detect any noncommon path errors
introduced by the remaining optical system.
One useful bonus of having a tip/tilt system is that the motion of the mirror required to keep
the stellar image stable is a direct measurementof the wavefront tilt imposed by the atmosphere.
Thus, it is possible to extract an estimate of the atmospheric coherence length rfrom these
data. The variance of the angle of arrival σ 
θ as measured by the tip/tilt servo is directly related
to the diameter of the telescope D and the coherence length r(Noll 1976 and Tango and Twiss
1980) via
σ 
θ = .( D
r
)
/
( λ
D )

,
and this can be inverted in order to find an estimate for r. Of course, if an AO system is used,
much more sophisticated measurements of atmospheric turbulence are possible.
Polarization – Each reflection from a mirror surface introduces a phase shift between polar-
ization states. This means that the reflections used in each arm of an interferometer must be
the same: reflection symmetry should not be broken. Reflection symmetry is also important in
order to have the same image rotation in each arm (Traub 1988). For a two-dimensional inter-
ferometric array, this means that there will be more reflections than are desirable, but there is
little that can be done about this.
Two complications arise when designing a completely symmetric series of reflections to
bring the light from the telescopes into the optics lab where the beams are combined. These
are that the telescopes are spread out in a two-dimensional pattern, and that they may also
be at different heights, that is the pattern may actually be three-dimensional. Mountaintops
are rarely completely flat. One solution to the two-dimensional case is shown in > Fig. 6-5.
A similar solution to the three-dimensional problem would require one more reflection in each
telescope line.
Light Pipes – Once the telescopes have sampled the light, it must be sent to the beam-
combining laboratory, and this is why the output beam of the telescopes is normally a collimated

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
257
A
B
C
Beam Combiner
⊡Fig. 6-5
One method of preserving reﬂection symmetry in the optical system of an interferometer. Each
telescope output beam undergoes the same reﬂections in the same order, thereby ensuring that
thepolarizationstateswillbethesameinthebeamcombiner.Asimilarsolutionexistsforthethree-
dimensional problem but involves one more reﬂection per telescope line
rather than a diverging or converging beam. This will almost always be done close to the ground,
and in order to avoid sending the beam through a great deal of ground-level air turbulence,
it is commonly placed inside a vacuum tube system. This also has advantages in combating
dispersion in the air as will be discussed below. A more recent trend is to use matched length
single-mode optical fibers (Vergnole et al. 2005), although they are temperature sensitive, cause
substantial losses, and a different set of fibers for each optical band is required.
Diffraction – Interferometers have, by their very nature, very long path lengths of many
hundreds of meters. A collimated optical beam of this length will necessarily diffract, and this
can have very detrimental effects. There are two main concerns with diffraction in an interfer-
ometer. First, the paths within the interferometer will not be the same for each telescope line
and there will therefore be differential diffraction that can reduce the system visibility. This can
in theory be calculated (Sheppard and Hrynevych 1992) and calibrated out, but this is difficult
at best. Second, a lot of diffraction will result in the beam size expanding as the beam prop-
agates, no matter how carefully it has been collimated at the telescope. One can actually take
advantage of this to spatially filter the beams (Horton et al. 2001). The problem of diffraction
can be avoided altogether by using optical fibers for beam transport, but they bring with them
a number of other difficulties including dispersion, light loss, temperature sensitivity, and the
need for a different fiber for each waveband of interest.
In the end, the amount of diffraction must be minimized and the amount of diffraction is
proportional to the beam reduction factor squared and the propagation distance. While there
is little that can be done about the propagation distance, which will be determined by the array
geometry, the reduction factor must be chosen very carefully by selecting the maximum beam
size practicable for the beam propagation and having a second beam reduction much closer to
the final point of beam combination. This can only be taken so far, however, and as baselines of
many kilometers come into existence, this solution will ultimately fail as the beam size required
will become too large and unwieldy, making the beam transport system prohibitively expensive.

258 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
Another method of avoiding the problems of diffraction is to reimage the telescope pupil
inside the beam-combining system, thereby ensuring that the wavefront reaching the beam
combiner is the same as that sampled by the telescope primary mirror. Unfortunately, since the
distance between the telescope primary mirror and the beam combiner is constantly changing
(see the Path Length Control section below), this requires a variable focus device of some kind
to continually ensure that the primary mirror is correctly imaged in the beam-combining labo-
ratory by use of a variable curvature mirror or lens system of some kind. For example, the VLTI
makes use of a variable curvature mirror controlled by compressed air (Ferrari et al. 2003).
Optical Quality and Throughput – Ultimately, it is the signal-to-noise ratio that will deter-
mine how faint the interferometer can go and how long it takes to reach the desired measure-
ment precision. By their very nature, optical interferometers have a very large number of optical
surfaces, both reflective and transmissive, and each of these surfaces degrades the wavefront as
well as reduces the total number of photons reaching the beam-combining laboratory.
The most common form of measurement of visibility amplitude is V (ν), and if detector
noise and background counts are, the signal-to-noise ratio is given by1
SNR(V (ν)) = NPHV (ν),
where NPH is the numberof detected photons. The number of surfaces dependson the details of
the design, but it is not unusual to have of the order of 20 reflections from the telescope primary
tothe beam-combining laboratory. Ifeach reflection is 90% efficient, the total throughput is only
12%. Optical coatings are rarely this good, however, and even less often stay that good over
time. The upshot is it is extremely important to have as few reflections as possible, something
very difficult to achieve given that the solutions to most of the other problems in designing an
interferometer involve adding reflections. Using optical fibers to transport the light can reduce
the total number of reflections, but as discussed above, they come with their own performance
costs.
In order to characterize the affect of V(ν) on the signal-to-noise ratio, the way the optical
quality of the components affects the final raw visibility must be investigated. The parameter
most commonly used to characterize the quality of an astronomical system is the Strehl ratio
S(ν) defined as the ratio of the intensity of light in the center of the image and the intensity
of light in the center of a perfect image, most often an Airy disk. So a perfect optical system
has a Strehl ratio of 1.0, while the atmosphere in good seeing conditions on a large telescope
rarely has a Strehl ratio of above 0.01 in optical wavelengths. Like rand τ, S(ν) is a strong
function of the seeing and observational wavelength and, in an interferometer, the visibility.
A good approximation for the Strehl ratio is given by
S(ν) ≈e−σ(ν),
where σ (ν) is the variance of the phase errors at the wave number ν and the phase variance is
related to the peak to valley error of the optical component EPV(ν) via
σ (ν) ≈(πEPV(ν)
.
)

.
1A more detailed discussion of signal-to-noise ratio in the presence of detector noise can be found in ten
Brummelaar 1996.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
259
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
Surface RMS
0.05
0.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
Strehl Ratio
0.6
0.8
1.0
⊡Fig. 6-6
The surface rms error required to achieve a given Strehl ratio for a range of numbers of reﬂections
starting with 10 at the top, 30 at the bottom, and moving up in increments of 5 reﬂections
A more common way to specify optical surface quality is the root mean square surface error, or
ERMS, and a good approximation of this is .EPV(ν). Combining these equations results in
ERMS(ν) ≈.
π
√
ln S(ν)
−NREF
,
where NREF is the number of reflections in the optical system. This function is plotted
in > Fig. 6-6 for the full range of Strehl ratio and a number of reflections ranging from 10
to 30 in increments of 5.
It turns out that under good conditions, the Strehl ratio and the raw visibility have a one-
to-one correspondence, that is, V(ν) ≈S(ν) (ten Brummelaar et al. 1995). This means that
the raw visibility can never be greater than the Strehl of the optical system. So, for example, the
minimum raw visibility of the optical system is set to 0.9, the individual optics in the system
all need to be λ/or better, and this is almost independent of the total number of reflections
in the system. Optics up to about 2 in. in diameter of this quality are commercially available,
but anything larger will need to be custom built. Furthermore, any powered optics, such as the
telescopes and any other beam reducers in the system, need to achieve wavefronts as good or
better than this.
Finally, the transmissive optics, such as windows on the vacuum system, dichroics, and
lenses, need to be considered. As for the reflective optics, any flat or powered element like a lens
will have to meet the tolerances discussed above. There are also other considerations for the flat
transmissive optics. For example, while nonreflective coatings are extremely efficient, it is very
difficult to make one equally efficient across the very wide optical bandwidths most interferom-
eters use, and there will always be residual reflections on both surfaces of an optical window or
dichroic. Also, if the two surfaces of these optics are parallel, there is a real risk of causing multi-
ple internal reflections, so it is standard practice to purposefully introduce an angle between the
two sides of the substrate, normally of the order of 20 seconds of arc. This in turn introduces
a small amount of angular dispersion into the beam, which, over the very long propagation
lengths and wide bandwidths in an interferometer, can be quite significant. This can be avoided
by ensuring that the windows at either end of a vacuum system have matching and opposite

260 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
wedges wherever possible. This, however, does not correct for the wavelength-dependant beam
offset caused by dispersive elements in the optical train, only the angular offset.
Path Length Control – Basic theory states that the typical envelope width is only a few tens
of microns across, that there is a continually changing geometric delay between the telescopes
as the earth rotates, and that the atmosphere is continually changing this path length difference.
In fact, the internal paths of an interferometer must be controlled to a tolerance much smaller
than the observation wavelength. In order to keep the fringe location stable, the location of the
fringes must be known, which will be discussed in the following section, and a way of adding
or subtracting optical path in each telescope line is also required. The hardware used to adjust
internal path lengths is called the optical path length equalizer (OPLE) or delay line.
The total amount of path length correction required is a direct function of the size of the
baselines and how far away from zenith the observations might take place. For example, a
100-m baseline going to 70○from zenith requires approximately 64 m of controllable delay.
Furthermore, this delay must be controlled to a small fraction of the size of the observational
wavelength. This calls for quite a large and complex optomechanical system capable of intro-
ducing paths many hundreds of meters long to a precision of a fraction of a wavelength, 10 nm
or so, or about one part in 10.
In most cases, the OPLE system is broken up into two separate parts: one to introduce large
but static delays and one that has a smaller but variable delay. The first can be implemented
by using numerous fixed mirrors on movable stages that flip in and out of the beam, some-
times referred to as “POP” mirrors, and, in comparison with many of the optical systems in an
interferometer, these are relatively simple systems. The second continuously variable part of the
OPLE is more difficult but, in almost all cases, makes use of what is known as a cat’s eye. Because
POPs introduce more reflections, in some cases they are not used at all, which will either reduce
sky coverage, maximum baseline length, or imply the need for very long optical rails. A more
detailed description of these types of optomechanical systems can be found in Colavita et al.
(1991), Frederic (2000) and Fisher et al. (2010).
A cat’s eye is an optical system that returns the outgoing beam very closely parallel to the
direction of the incoming beam. Cat’s eyes are very insensitive to the angle of arrival, that is,
the cat’s eye can be rotated with respect to the incoming beam without changing the direction
of the outgoing beam. They most often consist of a parabola and a small flat mirror as shown
in >Fig. 6-7. These cat’s eye assemblies are mounted on small carts that move along optical
rails and, because they are double pass, introduce an optical delay twice as large as the move-
ment of the cart along the rail. These rails need to be quite long, extremely long in the case of
interferometers that do not have POPs.
A final requirement for the OPLEs is some way of measuring the true optical delay. Without
this it would be impossible to close the control servo loop. This is normally done by passing a
metrology laser through a different axis of the cat’s eye and using that to measure the position
of the cart. It is also sometimes useful to use “end-to-end” metrology where the full internal
path all the way from the beam combiner out to the telescopes is measured. This is particu-
larly important in astrometric applications where the position of objects on the sky needs to
be measured with very high precision. If the positions of the telescopes are known very accu-
rately and the position of the OPLEs required to find the fringes is recorded, the OPD = B sin θ
relationship can be inverted to solve for θ.
For even greater precision, more metrology systems are required in order to measure the
locations of the telescopes themselves in all three dimensions (Hutter and Elias 2003). Finally,
it is also possible to achieve extremely high-precision small-angle separation measurements by

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
261
piezo secondary mount
Incoming collimated beam
voice coil
linkage
Tow Cart
Cable
Tensioner
Outgoing collimated beam
⊡Fig. 6-7
Bottom: A picture of the delay line carts of the CHARA Array Interferometer. Above: A schematic of
the delay line cart. The collimated input beam enters one side, forms an image on the secondary
mirror, and isthen recollimated and exitsthecart on theother side. A metrology laser goesthrough
the same optical system but vertically to make it possible to measure the position of the cart and
close the servo loop. The piezo can introduce path modulation at the submicron level, while the
whole optical unit is mounted on an inverse pendulum driven by a voice coil, able to modulate the
beam by a few centimeters. The cart itself is attached to a tow cart via a voice coil and the whole
cart moves on a 50-m-long set of optical rails. The control system is a four-tiered nested servo with
the piezo position updated at a rate 5,000 Hz, the pendulum at 200 Hz, the tow cart voice coil at
20 Hz, and the stepper motor at 2 Hz
breaking the incoming beam into two beams, one pointing at each of two objects, and hav-
ing a delay line for each target. A measurement of the differential delay between the two carts
is a direct measurement of the separation of the two objects in the direction of the projected
baseline. See, for example, Woillez et al. (2010) and Delplancke (2008).
More exotic methods of controlling optical delay exist, for example, stretching an optical
fiber, but they have yet to be put into practice in long-baseline interferometry, and, despite their
complexity, the cat’s eyes used in the current generation of interferometers more than meet their
extremely tight design tolerances.
Differential Refraction and Dispersion – There are two types of effects caused by the
atmosphere’s refractive index that are of concern: angular refraction and longitudinal disper-
sion. >Figure 6-8 shows the basic geometry of the causes of refraction and dispersion. There is
only enough space here for a brief discussion of these issues, but more complete discussions of
refraction and dispersion can be found in Tango (1990) and ten Brummelaar (1995).
Differential angular refraction in an interferometer is very similar to that in a single-
aperture telescope. Unless the object being observed is exactly at the zenith, the incoming
light will enter the earth’s atmosphere at an angle and, since the atmosphere has a refractive

262 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
⊡Fig. 6-8
Diagram of the geometry used to calculate the diﬀerential path eﬀects caused by the refractive
indexofair:Thetelescopes(curvedlines)aremountedontheground(lowerhorizontalline)andsep-
arated by the baseline distance B. The upper horizontal line represents the top of the atmosphere.
The ARCs (one in each beam) are represented by the rectangles with crossed lines, and the LDC by
the rectangle with the single diagonal line. φ is the zenith angle of the scientiﬁc target after refrac-
tion by the atmosphere. The dashed-dotted line represents the baselines of the pointing center and
center of scientiﬁc interest
index different to that of the vacuum of space, this angle will change. Furthermore the refrac-
tive index of the air is wavelength dependent, so the change in direction will be different for
each wavelength. This change in angle is given by
Δθ = (

nair(ν) −)tan(θ),
where nair(ν) is the wave number-dependant refractive index of air. In standard, imaging
this results in a blurred or “banana”-shaped point spread function, but in an interferometer,
the problem is slightly different. In any given band pass, each wavelength will have a slightly
different angle of arrival, and so the geometric optical delay B sin θ will be slightly different.
Unfortunately, the delay line can only be in one position and so the different wavelengths will
each have a different delay offset with only one, normally the one in the middle of the band,
having a true zero delay. The result is a smearing of the fringes into a broader fringe enve-
lope, with one side containing the “red” fringes and the other side containing the “blue” fringes.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
263
This can be a serious problem for closure phase measurements when fringe overlap is not per-
fect, causing the combination of the red fringes with the blue fringes and thereby introducing
noise into the phase signal.
A second, and more important, problem introduced by differential angular dispersion
results from the fact that the light must be split up in order to divide it between the various
detectors such as tip/tilt and the beam combiners. It is not unusual for the tip/tilt detector to
operate at a very different wavelength to that of the beam combiners, and since by definition
the tip/tilt will center the beam for its operational wavelength, the beams reaching the beam
combiner will enter at a substantially different angle. Fortunately, the beams from all telescopes
will be affected in the same way and will all enter the beam combiner at the same angle, albeit
not the correct one. This can, however, result in a significant beam shear, causing vignetting
and a loss of signal. This can be overcome by introducing offsets in the tip/tilt detector to find
a compromise between signal loss in the tip/tilt system and signal loss in the beam combiner
(Stomski et al. 2003). A similar problem results from the fact that the system can only have the
correct delay for one position in the sky and for one wave length, the so-called phase center, and
since the field of view and the band pass are both nonzero, this can also result in beam offsets
and vignetting as shown in >Fig. 6-8.
In both the single aperture and interferometer cases, there are two ways of dealing with dif-
ferential refraction. First, the bandwidth of the spectral channels can be reduced as the smaller
the bandwidth, the smaller the differential refraction. Secondly, atmospheric refraction can be
corrected by using two optical wedges called Risley Prisms (Breckinridge et al. 1979) that can
be rotated with respect to one another in a device called an atmospheric refraction corrector
(ARC). In order to minimize the vignetting problem described above, the ARCs need to be
installed at or near the telescopes. In most existing facilities, the beam size is so large and the
required optical bandwidth is so broad that building ARCs is quite expensive and they are often
not used.
Unlike single-aperture imaging systems, in an interferometer, not only changes in angle but
changes in optical path lengths are a major concern. This introduces the other type of effect
caused by the refractive index of the atmosphere: differential longitudinal dispersion caused by
differences in air paths inside the instrument. If the air paths are not the same in each arm of
the interferometer, each wavelength will “see” a different optical path. At best this creates the
same increase of size in the fringe envelope, causing it to have a red side and a blue side, and at
worst, it can destroy coherence altogether. Differential longitudinal dispersion is a much more
serious problem than atmospheric refraction.
There are two potential sources of differential air paths in an interferometer. First of all, tele-
scopes may be at different elevations and different distances from the central beam-combining
facility. This can be ameliorated by sending the beams from each telescope through evacuated
light pipes as discussed above. The vacuum need not be extreme as only enough of the air has
to be removed to minimize the refractive index effects of the air, and a vacuum of a few Torrs
is sufficient for this. Secondly, the geometric delay caused by the object not being at zenith is in
fact in the vacuum of space above the atmosphere, as shown in >Fig. 6-8. This means that if
the delay lines are in air, they are correcting a path length difference in a vacuum by one in the
air and in this way can introduce very large amounts of differential dispersion. One way around
this is to place the delay lines in a vacuum system, essentially very large light pipes, and this
is the preferred method. This can, however, be expensive from the point of view of both con-
struction and maintenance, as it means placing a very complex optomechanical system inside a
vacuum, which will need to be broken any time an adjustment to the optics or other hardware is

264 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
needed. It also implies the need for vacuum-resistant motors and other materials. Finally, a long
vacuum system can make servicing the carts very difficult should one get stuck in the middle of
a vacuum delay line 100 m in length. The result is that in many cases the delay line is left in air.
Fortunately, like refraction, it is possible to correct for most of the different dispersion by
using two glass wedges that move with respect to one another and thereby introduce more or
less glass into each beam. This can be done in such a way as to introduce the same amount of
dispersion using the glass in one beam that is introduced into the other beam by the air. In
an interferometer, differential and not absolute effects are important, and so the total amount
of dispersion in each beam is not important, only that each beam contains the same amount of
dispersion.
This means changing (> 6.1) and introducing terms for the dispersion so the optical path
length difference now becomes
OPD=Bsinθ + nglass(ν)d


LDC
−nair(ν)xOPLE


OPLE
,
where d is the amount of glass in the LDC and xOPLE is the air path within the delay line. The
OPLE path is then defined as a displacement l from the position x:
xOPLE = l + x,
where xis the position the delay needs to be to find fringes when there is no glass in the LDC
and the instrument is observing at the phase center. Thus,
x=

nair(νpc) B sin θ,
where νpc is the wave number that defines the phase center and this results in
ΔOPD = Bsin θ (−nair(ν)
nair(νpc)) + nglass(ν)d −nair(ν)l,
which can now be substituted into (> 6.1). Since the refractive indices of air and the glass used
in the LDC are functions of ν, the integral in (> 6.1) is now nontrivial. The solution is to use
a first-order Taylor expansion and assume that within the limited size of the band pass, the
refractive indices of both air and of glass are approximately linear and that
nair(ν) ≈−(ν −ν)dnair
dν (ν) + O [(ν −ν)] ,
with a similar expression for nglass(ν). This makes the integral in (> 6.1), while still messy,
much easier to perform, and the result is a new fringe equation in the same form as (> 6.2)
with a modified fringe phase, which, since closure phases are being used, can, to first order, be
ignored. This leads to a much more complex expression for the optical path length difference
in the sinc or envelope part of the fringe equation:
OPD = B sin θ ⎛
⎝−nair(ν)
nair(νpc) −ν
dnair
dν (ν)
nair(νpc)
⎞
⎠+ (ν
dnglass
dν
(ν) + nglass(ν)) d
−(νdnair
dν (ν) + nair(ν)) l.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
265
0
−200
−400
−600
−800
−1000
−1200
0.60
0.60
0.65
0.65
0.70
0.70
0.75
0.75
0.80
0.80
Wavelength (um)
Wavelength (um)
Fringe envelope (um)
5.24×104
5.22×104
5.20×104
5.18×104
5.16×104
⊡Fig. 6-9
Left: The fringe envelope for a baseline of 100 m and a zenith angle of 50○without dispersion
correction. The central line represents the center of the envelope. The succeeding pairs of lines
represent, respectively, the 95% point, the 90% point, and the 85% point. The outermost lines rep-
resent the ﬁrst zero. The Y axis shows the delay with respect to zero point x0. Right: The same fringe
envelope but with the correct amount of glass, in this case BK7, for dispersion correction
Thus by knowing the geometry of the array, the position of the target star, the amount of
air and vacuum paths within the interferometer, the functional form of the refractive index
in air, and the glass used in the LDC, the amount of glass required at any given time to
balance out the effects of differential dispersion can be calculated. An example of this is given in
>Fig. 6-9.
The left plot of >Fig. 6-9 shows that across an optical band of0.2 μm and a baseline of100m,
the fringes in the center of the band have been shifted by 0.5 μm from x, and the envelope
center has moved by 0.5 μm within the band. The first of these can be corrected simply by
moving the delay line 0.5 μm, but the second will completely smear out the fringes and no
signal will be seen at all. When the correct amount of glass, in this example BK7, is inserted, the
change in delay across the band is reduced with the result of removing fringe smearing. Note,
however, that the whole fringe packet has now been moved some 5 cm away from the default
position, and this implies moving the delay line by that amount also.
Astrometric Model – In order to correctly position the delay lines and find fringes, an accu-
rate mathematical model of the entire interferometer, known as the astrometric model, must
be created that includes the array geometry, telescope pointing models, air and vacuum paths,
POPs, ARCs, LDCs, and any path length changes introduced by beam-switching optics within
the beam-combining laboratory. As shown in the previous section, many of these systems are
coupled. For example, if the delay line is in air, changing its position will introduce differential
dispersion which means the LDC must be moved to correct for this. Moving the LDC will then
introduce changes in optical delay and require a change in the delay line position, thereby once
again changing the differential air paths and differential dispersion. This process converges, but
as the earth rotates and the position of the star in the sky changes, all of these optical systems are
continually moving. In the case of the telescopes and delay lines, this requires constant motion
in order to track the star and the fringes, with frequent new predictions of the position and
velocity of motion of the telescope axes and the delay line. In the case of the telescope axes,
this is necessary a few times per second, while in the case of the delay line this need only be
done every few seconds. The ARCs and LDCs do not need to be in constant motion and can be
moved to a new position in between data integration cycles. This helps circumvent the coupling
between the delay line and the LDC.

266 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
It is rare that this model can correctly place the delay lines such that fringes appear imme-
diately – there are just too many variables – and there will almost always be a need to search
for the fringes. For example, a one arcsecond error in the alignment of a mirror that sends
a beam down 200 m of light pipe will result in a beam shift of 1 mm, which if reflected on
a 45○mirror, will introduce a path length change also of about 1 mm, representing an error
some 30 times the size of the typical envelope width. Similar errors can be introduced by mis-
alignments in the mirrors within the telescopes and these will change with position on the
sky. Nevertheless, the better the astrometric model is, the less time will be spent searching for
fringes. To do this, it is necessary to know the positions of the telescopes and the internal path
lengths to very high precision. To know a 100-m baseline to a tolerance of 1 mm represents
one part in 10, and no ordinary surveying technique will yield this kind of accuracy. The solu-
tion is to find fringes on many targets across the sky, record the delay line and LDC positions
required, and then solve for the telescope positions and internal paths. Here, the position of
the telescope is defined as the intersection of the rotational axes. This is known as perform-
ing a baseline solution, and it is the equivalent of a pointing solution for a single telescope,
which of course must also be done for each of the telescopes in the array. In many cases, the
data required for the baseline solution can be collected in the normal course of an observing
season.
Control System – Interferometers are made up of numerous subsystems and servo systems,
many of which require active real-time control. They are also spread out over large areas. This
means that the control system for an interferometer needs to be a highly distributed multiple-
CPU real-time network of computers. Furthermore, many of the servo systems are coupled and
must interact, for example, the LDC and OPLE systems discussed above, and the tip/tilt servo
and telescope pointing systems. Anotherveryimportant requirement is that all ofthe computers
in the control system must agree on the time, and that this time is very accurate, at least better
than within 1 mS of the true Universal Time. It is also necessary to have some way to coordinate
the various subsystem control computers in order to correctly sequence the actions necessary
to collect data. For example, all the telescope control systems must acquire the same target, the
tip/tilt system needs to be locked, and the delay lines, LDCs, and ARCs must be in the correct
position, all before it is possible to begin searching for the fringe signal.
6
Beam Combination
Given that all the telescopes are pointing at the same object, all the mirrors in the system are
correctly aligned, and all the delay lines, ARCs, and LDCS are in the correct positions and
tracking, there will be a collection of beams reaching the beam-combining laboratory that are
all in phase. What remains is to find a way to combine these beams in an efficient manner. This
is similar to having a single-aperture telescope well aligned and pointing at the sky – without
scientific instruments at the back end no science can be done. The beam combiner is the back
end instrument ofan interferometerand, as with a single-aperture telescope employing multiple
focal-plane instruments, there will often be multiple beam combiners, each optimized for a
particular kind of observation and science goal, employing different wavebands from the optical
to the infrared, and with various spectral resolutions, numbers of beams, and sensitivities.
There are so many different approaches to designing a beam combiner, it is not possible to
deal with them all here, but the most important elementsof the design choices will be discussed.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
267
1
2
3
4
⊡Fig. 6-10
A four-beam aperture-plane beam combiner based on the COAST design (Baldwin et al. 1998).
The four beams are mixed together and are sampled in each of the four output beams. The output
beams are all sampled by a single-pixel detector, or by multiple pixels if spectrally dispersed
Aperture-Plane Combination – In this method of beam combination, the beams are com-
bined using beam splitters in something that is sometimes erroneously called a Michelson
interferometer despite the fact that the first interferometer to measure a stellar diameter was
built by Michelson and Pease (1921) and did not use this method. >Figure 6-10 shows a sim-
ple bulk optic four-way aperture-plane beam combiner where two sets of pairs of beams are
combined on beam splitters, and then these two pairs of beams are combined in a second set of
beam splitters. This kind of layout can be expanded to more beams but is restricted to powers
of two, and, of course, many other similar approaches exist for a range of numbers of beams.
In this beam combiner, there are fourbeams in and fourbeams out, and if there is nospectral
resolution, only four single-pixel detectors are required for each spectral channel or only four
pixels on a multipixel detector. This has the advantage of concentrating as much light as possible
into the smallest number of pixels, and this will give the highest possible signal-to-noise ratio in
each pixel and, therefore, the best sensitivity. It is for this reason that sensitivity is the primary
advantage of an aperture-plane beam combiner.
The four beams will produce four different pairs and four sets of fringes, representing four
different baselines, and all four of these are present in each of output pixel data streams. It is
necessary to analyze each fringe signal separately, so these four sets of fringes must be encoded
in some way and this is normally done by modulating the optical path length in each tele-
scope, sometimes by using the delay lines and sometimes with the use of a mirror mounted on
a piezoelectric stack called a dither mirror. In this way, a time series of samples of each output
will have four superimposed fringe packets each one very much like those shown at the bottom
of >Fig. 6-2. This technique is known as temporal fringe encoding. This path length modulation
must be done so that each set of fringes has a unique fringe frequency so that band-pass filters

268 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
centered on each of these frequencies can then be used to separate the signals of the four base-
lines. In practice, the Fourier transform of each fringe scan is used to extract a complex fringe
amplitude at each of the four frequencies that gives a visibility amplitude and phase for each
baseline.
For example, if beam 1 is not modulated and the frequencies of the other beams are
f, f= f, and f= f, the frequencies for the four baselines will be
f= f,
f= f+ f= f,
f= f+ f= f,
f= f= f.
So all that is left is to choose the frequency for beam 2. There are other constraints that must be
taken into account. Each of these scans must take the same amount of time, and so the stroke
of beams 3 and 4 will need to be half that of beam 2, and the length of this stroke must be larger
than the fringe envelope, as well as large enough to take into account any changes in fringe
location introduced by the atmosphere. Furthermore, in order for these frequencies to add as
set out above, the motion of the stroke of beam 3 must be in the opposite direction to that of
beams 2 and 4. The minimum fringe frequency must also be fast enough to ensure that the
fringes between beams 1 and 2 are scanned in less than the coherence time of the atmosphere
τ. There will also be a maximum possible sample rate set either by the detector itself or by the
magnitude of the star being observed, and because fringe phases will be required in order to
calculate phase closure, the fringes between beams 2 and 3 must have at least three samples per
fringe.
Finally, atmospheric seeing will modulate the fringe frequency in each channel, and so the
peaks in the power spectrum can be quite broad. If these peaks are not separated by more
than the atmospheric broadening, there will be cross talk between the baselines, and this will
reduce both the quality of amplitude calibration and the precision of the closure phase mea-
surements. All of these things need to be balanced and will change as the atmospheric seeing
changes.
Normally, the fastest sample rate t that still has enough photons per sample is chosen, and
this then determines the rate of motion of the strokes in beams 3 and 4 so that f= f= /t.
The velocities of motion of the dither mirrors are then set to
ν= fλ
,
ν= −ν,
ν= ν,
where λis the central wavelength of the current band pass and the factor of 2 is there because
these dither mirrors are normally double pass. A normal data set would consist of a few hundred
fringe scans followed by an equal number of scans consisting of some scans with the shutters on
all beams closed, and four sets of scans each with only one beam reaching the beam combiner.
These so-called shutter sequences are required in order to measure the background counts and
to measure the value of the transfer function Ti j for each baseline. They also yield the mean
photon count in each beam which is used to compensate for unequal beam intensities and are
useful for calculating the noise in the fringe power spectra.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
269
A visibility estimate can then be obtained by integrating the power in the fringe power
spectra. The power spectrum of the fringe equation (> 6.2) is
PS[Ii j(ν, Δν)] = T
i j (
V
Δνgi j
)

[Π (V −νgi j
Δνgi j
) + Π (V + νgi j
Δνgi j
)],
where gi j is the group velocity of the baseline set by the speed of the dither mirrors and
Π(x) =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩
for x < −.and x > .,
.for x = −.and x = .,
.for −.< x < .
is the top-hat function. Since the fringe signal is real, this can be simplified to
PS[Ii j(ν, Δν)] = T
i j (
V
Δνgi j
)

Π (V −νgi j
Δνgi j
),
and the total integrated power is then
∫PS[Ii j(ν, Δν)]d f = T
i j
V 
Δνgi j
.
Since the transfer function has been measured and the group velocity is known from the dither
mirror velocities, this is a good estimate for the visibility amplitude. Note that if there is more
than one baseline the limits of this integral must be carefully chosen in order to include all the
power for that baseline without including any other.
Since it is extremely unlikely that τis larger than the time it takes to sweep through all
four fringe packets in order to measure closure phase, it is necessary to break each scan up into
smaller segments with each segment equal to the time it takes to scan through a single fringe of
the slowest beam 1 and 2 baseline, which will be /f. This segment will also contain two fringes
of the beams 1 and 4 baseline, three of the beams 2 and 3 baseline, and four of the beam 3 and 4
baseline. A Fourier transform, which in practice will in fact be a discrete Fourier transform, will
contain in the first four bins a measurementof the complex visibility for each baseline including
both amplitude and phase. It is from these phases that closure phases can be formed, though it
is extremely important to very carefully consider the signs of these phases.
For example, consider the closure phase signal for the first three beams, that is, Ψ. The
phase of beams 1 and 2 is positive by definition, and we wish to add the phase of beams 2 and
3. Note, however, that the dither mirror for beam 3 is moving in the opposite direction and so
this phase has a negative sign. Furthermore, a closure-phase triangle must be closed and so it
is the phase of beams 3 and 1 that is required, and so it too has a negative sign. This is more
easily expressed as a triple product of the three complex visibilities, and using the fact that a
sign change of the phase is the same as taking the conjugate of a complex number, we find that
V(ν) = V(ν) × conj[V(ν)] × V(ν).
This can be calculated for all the fringe segments within the area where all three fringes overlap
for all scans to find a mean triple product that will contain an amplitude weighted mean of the
closure phase. A more comprehensive description of the analysis of fringe data can be found in
Monnier (2011).
Finally, it is also possible to obtain an estimate of the atmospheric coherence time from these
data. As atmospheric seeing changes, it will introduce variations in the group velocity of each

270 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
fringe scan. This is what causes the broadening of the peaks in the power spectrum mentioned
above. Thus, the peak of the power spectrum for each scan will be in a slightly different place.
If the peak in a given scan is found at frequency fmax, the group velocity will be given by
g = fmax
ν
.
The mean of this group velocity should be the same as the group velocity defined by the motion
of the dither mirrors for that baseline, while the standard deviation of the group velocity σg is
related to the coherence time of the atmosphere via
τ≈
λ
πσg
.
To summarize, an aperture-plane beam combiner uses bulk optics, such as beam splitters and
mirrors, to bring the light from all telescopes together. This has the advantage that it uses the
minimum number of pixels and therefore the maximum amount of light and, in the case of
detectors with readout noise, signal-to-noise ratio in each pixel, giving it the best possible sen-
sitivity. The disadvantage is that it requires temporal fringe encoding, that is, changing the path
lengths of each beam in time, which imposes limits on the sample times in the detector and
involves precise and fast motions of the delay line, or a separate dither mirror, with the added
danger of cross talk between the baselines. Furthermore, if the delay lines are used, the path
length modulations will be present in all parts of the beam-combining optics including all other
beam combiners. Finally, it is not possible to modulate the paths fast enough to freeze the atmo-
sphere through the area of fringe overlap without imposing impossible constraints on sample
time and sensitivity, and so, residual atmospheric noise will always be present in the amplitude
and closure phase measurements.
Image-Plane Combination – An alternative beam combination method is to combine the
beams in the image plane by using lenses or other powered optics as in the example image-
plane combiner shown in > Fig. 6-11. In this example, the box marked “Beam Combiner
Spectrograph” contains the power optic that forms the actual fringes.
This will only work if the image is close to being diffraction limited, that is, the telescope
diameters must be small or must have adaptive optics. An alternative is to use spatial filtering
which will be covered in the next section. A second requirement is that the telescopes do not
resolve the object, but there would be no point in building an interferometer if this were the case.
The result is that the image plane will contain the point spread function of the optical system
across which there will be one set of fringes for each pair of beams. As with Young’s double slit
experiment discussed above, the spatial frequency of these fringes will depend only upon the
spacing of the beams as they enter the powered optic. Note that in >Fig. 6-11, the beams are
arranged so that the spacing between any two beams is unique, and this results in the fringe
frequency of each fringe pattern being unique. This is known as spatial fringe encoding, and
as for aperture-plane interferometry, this is required so that it is possible to extract the fringe
information for each baseline without cross talk. Also like aperture-plane interferometry, it is
possible to disperse the light and obtain spectral information, but in this case it is first necessary
to compress the image perpendicular to the fringe axis before adding dispersion in order to
avoid spectral channel overlap. A method for doing this will be discussed in the next section.
A Fourier transform of the image plane will contain several peaks, one for each baseline, and
these data can be analyzed in a manner analogous to that of aperture-plane data.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
271
Beam
Combiner
Spectro-
graph
OUTPUT BEAMS
1
3
2
⊡Fig. 6-11
A four-beam image-plane beam combiner. The four beams enter from above with nonredundant
spacing and are reduced in size by a pair of parabolas. The four output beams are in the same
nonredundant pattern but are now small enough to pass through a lens, forming an image with
fringes inside the box at the bottom. This requires a multipixel detector
The principal advantages of image-plane interferometry are twofold. First, it normally
involves fewer optical components than aperture-plane systems. Second, all fringe amplitudes
and phases are sampled simultaneously, and so unlike aperture-plane systems, where the sam-
ple time must increase as you add baselines and thereby force an increase in the maximum
fringe frequency, the sample rate of an image-plane system is independent of the number of
baselines. So long as the sample time of the detector is less than τ, there is much less atmo-
spheric smearing of the fringes and less noise in the closure phases. An image-plane beam
combiner is relatively easy to expand to very large numbers of beams while an aperture-plane
combiner is not.
There are, of course, disadvantages, and the most significant one of these is that this method
requires many pixels in order to properly sample the image plane. In the example system shown
in >Fig. 6-11, the maximum spatial frequency is six times that of the minimum. Like aperture-
plane systems, we require better than Nyquist sampling, so assuming a minimum number of
three samples for the highest spatial frequency, it turns out we need 18 pixels for each spectral
channel as opposed to the four in the aperture-plane beam combiner shown in > Fig. 6-10.
Thus, each pixel will have 4.5 times less light and therefore a much lower signal-to-noise ratio.
Field of View – The field of view of an aperture-plane interferometer is a function of the
baseline and the fringe envelope size. The telescopes, LDC, ARC, and delay lines are nominally
positioned such that the center of the image is the phase center defined above. At an angle dθ

272 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
away from the phase center, the geometric delay will be B sin(θ + dθ) and, assuming this angle
is small, this means there is a delay error of approximately B ×dθ. If this reaches the first null in
the fringe envelope, no fringes will be seen, so the edge of the field of view will be reached when
B × dθ < 
Δν,
and thus the full field of view of the instrument is
FOV =

BΔν = λ
BΔλ.
This can be a very small angle. For example, for a 100-m baseline in the near-infrared K band,
the field of view is 0.13 microradians or 26 milliarcseconds. Furthermore, the field of view will
be determined by the maximum baseline currently being used.
The field of view of an image-plane interferometer is subject to the same path length restric-
tions as the aperture-plane interferometer discussed above, but there is another restraint set by
the aperture size of the telescopes. This arises if the point spread functions do not overlap in the
image plane so that no fringes can be formed and sets an upper limit for the field of view inde-
pendent of the baseline size. So, for example, for a circular aperture, the point spread function is
an Airy disk whose size is inversely proportional to the telescope aperture size given by .λ/D.
For a 1-m diameter telescope in the near-infrared K band, this will be about one arcsecond. At
shorter wavelengths, this upper limit really comes into play, for example, at 0.5 μm, it is only
0.25 arcseconds.
Using a technique known as Fizeau interferometry can substantially increase the field of
view of an image-plane beam combiner. In a Fizeau interferometer, the arrangement of the
apertures that enter the beam combiner are not necessarily nonredundant but are in the same
pattern as the projection of the telescopes on the sky. This brings the idea of an interferometer
as being a large lens to its logical conclusion. Such an arrangement will only be limited by the
size of the telescopes and not by the internal paths inside the beam combiner. One serious
difficulty of Fizeau interferometry is that the projected arrangement of the telescopes on the
sky is continually changing, and this means that the output apertures of the beam combiner
must also continually change. This is extremely difficult as this motion must also be stable to
within a small fraction of the central wavelength. Another is that the aperture is very dilute
unless there are a very large number of telescopes. At the time of writing, no one has succeeded
in doing this.
Optical Fibers and Spatial Filtering – As > Figs. 6-10 and >6-11 show, beam combiners are
very complex optical systems and they require many optical surfaces and large areas of optical
table space in a complexity that goes up geometrically with the number of input beams. They are
also restricted by the wavefront quality of the incoming light, for without an adaptive optics sys-
tem, it is not possible to use an aperture size of more than about rwithout losing all coherence
due to atmospherically induced distortions in the wavefronts. Another problem when con-
structing beam combiners is how to arrange the incoming beams in the correct pattern while
still preserving all the internal path lengths. For example, the beam combiner in >Fig. 6-11
shows the four beams entering the system in a nonredundant spacing, but it does not show the
optics required to get them into that pattern without introducing differential paths. One ele-
gant way around all of these difficulties is to use single-mode optical fibers as beam transport
mechanisms instead of bulk optics.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
273
Single-mode fibers have the advantage of being able to be moved around to form any
arrangement of output aperture spacing desired without the need to add more optical com-
ponents. They are also very small and so very complex optical systems can be built without the
need for vast areas of optical table space. The most important advantage of single-mode fibers
is, however, the fact that they are a coherent transport mechanism, that is, while it is not possible
to get all of the light from a telescope into a fiber, whatever light is coupled into a single-mode
fiber will be coherent and completely free of wavefront distortions. This is known as spatial fil-
tering and is the equivalent of using a lens and a pinhole to clean up the output of a laser on an
optical bench.
As previously mentioned, a lens is a Fourier transform device, so the light focused onto a
fiber, or a pinhole, is the Fourier transform of the incoming wavefront. A perfectly flat wavefront
has no high spatial frequency power in its transform if it is infinite in extent. A finite-sized
beam will have edges, which do contain high spatial frequency information, and it is this that
results in the formation of the rings in an Airy disk. A distorted wavefront will have more high
spatial frequency power and a broader point spread function, but the pinhole or fiberin a spatial
filter will only allow the very-low-spatial-frequency light through. The result is that the final
wavefront is of very high quality, albeit with a great deal of the light missing, the light that
would not form fringes anyway. This is, in effect, trading wavefront quality for throughput and
turning atmospheric distortions into intensity fluctuations.
Consider the image-plane beam combiner for seven beams shown in >Fig. 6-12. The fibers
are used to bring the beams into a one-dimensional nonredundant pattern, which is compressed
in the orthogonal vertical axis by cylindrical lenses which can then be spectrally dispersed. In
this way, this system can provide both high spatial and high spectral information. Note that
the nonredundant pattern has been chosen to minimize the total separation of the first and
last beams, which in this case is 25 times the minimum spacing. If this were to be done using
bulk optics, this minimum spacing would need to be at least twice the beam diameter so that
the outside edges of each beam are at least one beam diameter apart. If the beams are one inch
in diameter, the total width of this output array would be 50 in., while in the case of the opti-
cal fibers whose outside diameter is only a few tens of microns, this can be as small as a few
millimeters.
The beam combiner shown in >Fig. 6-12 is the fiber equivalent of an image-plane system,
but there are also fiber equivalents of aperture-plane devices. The communications industry has
made enormous investments in fiber technology, and there are fiber-based equivalents of almost
every kind of optical device from beam splitters through to dispersive elements for spectral
resolution. Once the light is inside the fibers, the entire beam-combining operation can be per-
formed inside fiber optics. The first beam combiner to make use of optical fibers was the Fiber
Linked Unit for Optical Recombination, or FLUOR instrument (Coudé du Foresto et al. 1998),
first installed at the now decommissioned IOTA interferometer (Dyck et al. 1995) and now
still in operation at the CHARA Array. FLUOR still achieves the highest precision-calibrated
visibility amplitude measurements of all optical or infrared beam combiners to date.
A more recent technology now being applied to optical interferometry is integrated optics.
Integrated optics is the equivalent of integrated circuits in the electronics industry where com-
plex fiber-optic based systems are etched into a substrate. It is now possible to make full beam
combiner systems on a piece of glass the size of a match. These integrated optics systems have
recently been used on the sky (Benisty et al. 2009) and have enormous potential for the minia-
turization and simplification of beam combiners. For the time being, however, they are very

274 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
Single Mode Optical Fibers
Collitmating Lens Array
Beam Combiner
and
Spectrograph
1D Non-Redundant Array Clamp
(Spacing 2-1-7-6-5-4)
Detector
Cylindrical 2
Cylindrical 1
Achromat
XYZ FIBER CLAMP
XYZ FIBER CLAMP
XYZ FIBER CLAMP
XYZ FIBER CLAMP
XYZ FIBER CLAMP
XYZ FIBER CLAMP
XYZ FIBER CLAMP
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Input Beams
⊡Fig. 6-12
A seven-way beam combiner that uses single-mode ﬁbers matched in length to arrange the beams
into a linear nonredundant pattern. The box on the top right contains the optics shown on the bot-
tom of the ﬁgure. The cylindrical lenses compress the ﬁnal image into a small vertical space while
the fringes appear across the horizontal axis. This can then be spectrally dispersed in the vertical
axis, providing both spatial and spectral resolution. The Michigan Infrared Combiner (Che et al.
2010) is a version of this type of beam combiner
expensive, and those building integrated optics beam combiners have often had torelyon “piggy
backing” their chips’ manufacture in the unused parts of substrates in large commercial runs.
It is likely, however, that this will change in time, and integrated optics will become a common
component in optical interferometers.
As might be expected, there is a price to pay for the use of optical fibers, and that is
the difficulty of coupling the light from telescopes that can be many meters in diameter into
single-mode optical fibers that are a few microns across. The beam shape of an optical fiber is
Gaussian, while that of a circular aperture is an Airy disk, so even in a perfect world it is not
possible to have perfect coupling into a fiber. The best coupling is when the Airy disk and Gaus-
sian shapes are matched as well as possible and this yields a coupling efficiency never better
than 78%. In the real world, this is rarely achieved, and, when atmospheric distortions of the

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
275
wavefront are taken into account, it is rare to get even close to this maximum so that coupling
efficiencies of only a few percent are not uncommon. Adding to this, as the atmospheric seeing
changes in a chaotic way, the coupling efficiency will also fluctuate chaotically with the result
that there will be large fluctuations in light intensity, some of which will be at the fringe fre-
quency. This can add a large amount of noise to the fringe signal. The problem of the overall
amount of coupling can only be overcome by improvements in the wavefront quality with the
use of adaptive optics while the increased intensity fluctuations must be measured and cali-
brated out or else they can overwhelm the fringe signal (Coudé du Foresto et al. 1997). The
result is that while single-mode fiber-based beam combiners produce the highest quality data,
they are very limited in sensitivity. If higher sensitivity is required, it is best to use bulk optics
instead.
There are other difficulties associated with the use of single-mode fibers. While fibers do an
excellent job of removing wavefront aberrations, they can do nothing about path length mod-
ulations, or piston error, introduced by the atmosphere. The fibers must also be polarization
preserving or otherwise the polarizations will mix and the fringe coherence will be lost. Fur-
thermore, fibers are not perfect light conductors and can lose several dB of intensity over very
short distances. Another difficulty is that the glass from which fibers are made is a highly dis-
persive medium, and, in order to avoid introducing large amounts of differential dispersion,
the fibers used in a beam combiner must be matched in length to very tight tolerances. Finally,
although there are numerous fibers on the market produced for the communications industry,
the development of fiber technology has been concentrated on very specific wavelengths, and
procuring fibers for other wavebands of astrophysical interest can be difficult and exceedingly
expensive.
Spatial filters can also be used without fibers. For example, the PAVO beam combiner
(Ireland et al. 2008) is a kind of hybrid beam combiner where the incoming beams are set out
in a nonredundant linear pattern in the same way as is done in an image-plane beam combiner,
but the telescope pupils are reimaged and the fringes are formed in the aperture plane. PAVO
includes spatial filtering by passing the light through very small square apertures. Another way
of performing some spatial filtering has been used in the CLassic Interferometry with Multiple
Baselines or CLIMB beam combiner (Sturmann et al. 2010). CLIMB is a fairly standard three-
beam aperture-plane beam combiner that includes some spatial filtering by taking advantage of
the fact that the camera pixels are of finite size. Spatial filtering is included in CLIMB by care-
fully ensuring that the spot size of the beams on the camera is slightly larger than the pixels on
which they land.
Polarimetry – Part of the fundamental design constraints of the optics in an interferometer
has been to preserve optical polarization in order not to mix different polarization states in the
beam combiner. This has the added bonus that it is possible to add a few small optical elements
in the beam combiner, such as a Wollaston prism, that can separate the polarization states on
the detector, allowing the beam combiner to also serve as a polarimeter. In this way, images
can be created that show the morphology of the different polarization states. Interferometric
polarimetry (Elias 2001, 2004) is a relatively new part of interferometry, but almost all modern
beam combiners recently or now being built include a polarimetry capability.
Fringe Tracking – A beam combiner has two important roles in an interferometer. Not only
does it need to record the fringe data for later analysis but it must also fringe track, that is, locate
and lock on to these fringes by sending offsets to the delay lines. The astrometric model is never
perfect, and the atmosphere is constantly moving the fringes around so this is a very important
part of an interferometer.

276 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
In the simplest form, the fringe-tracking signal is intended only to keep the fringe envelope
within the scanning range of the dither mirrors in an aperture-plane beam combiner or in the
correct position in the spectrally dispersed power spectrum of an image-plane beam combiner.
This is called group delay tracking. Consider a single scan of a fringe in a single baseline of
an aperture-plane beam combiner. This scan will contain a fringe pattern like that defined in
(> 6.2), but the fringe envelope will not necessarily be centered in the scan. It is possible to
demodulatethis fringe data and thereby locate the center of the fringe envelope in the following
manner. First, the data are band-pass-filtered at the known fringe frequency. Then, by the use
of a modified Hilbert transform (Bracewell 2000), it is possible to demodulate this signal and
obtain the envelope function. This is done by setting all the negative frequencies of the Fourier
transform of the scan to zero and then calculating the modulus of the inverse transform. The
distance of the center of this envelope function to the center of the scan is the current path
length error and can be used as an offset for the delay lines.
Numerous other methods for group delay tracking exist, but they all have the same function
of providing a measurement of the piston error, that is, the distance of the center of the fringe
packet from where it should be. Group delay tracking is a very good technique for ensuring
that fringes stay within the range of the dither mirrors, or roughly in the correct position of the
image-plane beam combiner, but the group delay signal can only be provided at the same rate
at which the scan data arrives. This is rarely even close to the coherence time of the atmosphere.
The result of this is that group delay tracking does not enable longer integration times in the
beam combiner, and it is still necessary to sample the data at rates faster than /τ.
An alternative method is known as phase locking in which the fringe tracker holds the
fringes to a tolerance of much less than a single wave. For example, if the scan length of the
dither mirror is reduced so that it is exactly one wavelength long, and this is done in such a
way that there are exactly four samples across the scan, it is possible to extract both the fringe
amplitude and the fringe phase from these data. It is also not too difficult to do this in a time
less than τand in this way provide an error signal for the delay lines that makes it possible to
lock onto a single fringe within the fringe envelope.
If the four parts, labeled A, B, C, and D, of the scan are in discrete steps, it is relatively easy
to extract the fringe phase, which will be given by
ψi j = tan−( B −D
A −C ).
When this is multiplied by the central wavelength of the band pass, it gives a delay offset, which
can then be used as an error signal for the delaylines. In practice, the scan is continuous and not
discrete, and this adds a number of biases and a little more complexity to the analysis but with
a very similar phase estimator (Colavita et al. 1999). These four data points will also provide a
visibility amplitude estimate (Colavita 1999).
Phase tracking can provide the necessary error signal to lock the delay of the interferometer
to within a fraction of a wavelength inside a single fringe, but it gives no information about
which fringe inside the fringe envelope this is. In practice, both group delay tracking and phase
locking are required to lock the delay lines onto the central fringe of the fringe packet.
Separating Fringe Tracking from Science – In the first generation of interferometers, a single
beam combiner was required to both provide the fringe tracking information and also collect
the data needed for the scientific program. This worked quite well, but it does impose extra
constraints on the design of the system which then need to be optimized for both collecting

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
277
imaging data and for fringe tracking. These constraints are sometimes contradictory. More
recently, these functions have been separated into two different optical systems, one for fringe
tracking and one for the collection of the scientific data (ten Brummelaar 1994).
One of the main differences between a fringe tracking beam combiner and an imaging beam
combiner is that a fringe tracker does not need to measure all fringes for every possible com-
bination of telescopes, it merely needs to sample a subset of baselines that include each of the
telescopes in the array at least once. If these baselines are correctly phased, then all possible
baselines will be phased and the imaging system can then collect data on all baselines. This
means that for N telescopes, the minimum number of baselines required for fringe tracking is
N-1, although it is more common for symmetry reasons to form N baselines. An example layout
for a seven-beam fringe tracker is given in >Fig. 6-13.
CCD
CCD
Imaging Lenses
Dispersive
Prisms
6
7
5
4
3
2
1
Input Beams
⊡Fig. 6-13
A fringe tracking system for a seven-beam interferometer. In this system, only seven baselines are
sampled, but they include all seven telescopes and will therefore provide all the necessary infor-
mation required to phase lock all 21 possible baselines. Here the baselines sampled are beams 17,
12, 23, 34, 45, 56, and 67. The dispersion before the cameras provides the ability to perform group
delay tracking

278 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
When the task of fringe tracking and imaging is separated, it is the fringe tracking system
that determines the magnitude limit, and so the fringe tracker will most likely use an aperture-
plane scheme. It must also have fast sample times and will most likely not use spatial filtering.
It is not necessary in the case of the fringe tracker to be concerned about data calibration; it is
only necessary to be able to detect fringe phase. As long as the fringe tracker locks the fringe
phase, the imaging combiner can integrate on the fringes for all baselines. In this way, the sensi-
tivity limitations of image-plane combination and spatial filtering with single-mode fibers can
be overcome.
The fringe tracker can also take advantage of the layout of the interferometric array. Resolu-
tion scales with B/λand visibility amplitude will be large for smaller resolutions. Thus, since it
is only necessary to sample a small number of baselines in the fringe tracker, it is best to ensure
that these are the smallest baselines possible. This method is called bootstrapping. Moreover, the
light is most often broken up by wavelength, so it is preferable to use a longer wavelength for
fringe tracking in order to ensure the highest possible signal-to-noise ratio.
Alignment System – An optical interferometer is a very complex instrument contain-
ing large numbers of optomechanical systems that must be properly coaligned if it is to
work at all. This requires careful alignment and frequent adjustments. By the very nature of
long baseline interferometry, the components that require adjustment can be hundreds of
meters away from the operator so a large number of remote actuators and sensors will be
required.
Probably the most essential part of the alignment system is a method of injecting both laser
and white light into the back end of the beam combiner, which then propagates through the
entire optical system all the way out to the telescopes. Various pop-up targets, screens, and
video cameras can then be used to ensure the laser hits all of the designated targets throughout
the optical path. One way of creating these fiducials is to drill small holes in the center of some
of the mirrors. The laser will have a shadow created by each of these holes and these must all
overlap one another. It is also possible to place LEDs in these holes.
Once the laser, or white light, reaches the telescope, it can be retroreflected by a corner
cube and sent all the way back into the laboratory and through the beam combiner. In tele-
scopes with a secondary shadow, this corner cube can be placed in the middle of the secondary.
This makes it possible to form fringes using the white light source and test all the internal
detector systems and servos. It is also an excellent way of measuring the differential inter-
nal path lengths of each baseline as well as the path length changes introduced by each of
the POPs.
Putting It All Together – An example full back end for a six-beam interferometer is shown
in >Fig. 6-14. This layout includes tip/tilt detection, a single-mode fiber-based imaging beam
combiner, a bulk optic aperture-plane fringe tracking combiner, and the necessary parts for
injecting alignment laser and white light sources.
This is by no means the only, or even necessarily the best, way of designing an interferom-
eter. Indeed, there is no “best” way. In the end, design decisions will be based on the intended
science goals, on the personal preferences of the design team, and also to a large extent on
the available budget. Nevertheless while each interferometer is unique, there are common
attributes to them all, and there is little doubt that their design will continue to evolve with
time.

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
279
Visibility and Phase Closure Data
35% of Light
Fringe Tracking
and Visibility Data
25% of Light
Imaging Lenses
Dispersive Prisms
Telescope for Optical Alignment
Filters
Spatial Filter
White Light
Laser
Microscope
Objective
Fringe Tracking
and Visibility Data
25% of Light
CCD
CCD
Reference Quad
and Imaging Camera
Aperture Wheels
Shutters
Polarizing
Beam
Splitters
30% Beam
Splitters
Movable
Mirrors
Aperture
Wheels
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Input Beams
Alignment Mirror Set A
Imaging Lenses
Wavefront Tilt Detection
15% of light
Optical
Fiber
Couplers
Matched Length Single
Mode Optical Fibers
1D Non-Redundant Array
Collimating Lens Array
Beam Combiner & Spectrograph
CCD
CCD
⊡Fig. 6-14
A possible layout for a complete back end beam-combining system for a seven-beam optical interferometer

280 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
References
Armstrong, J. T., Mozurkewich, D., Rickard, L. J.,
Hutter, D. J., Benson, J. A., Bowers, P. F., Elias,
N. M., II, Hummel, C. A., Johnston, K. J.,
Buscher, D. F., Clark, J. H., III, Ha, L., Ling, L.-
C., White, N. M., & Simon, R. S. 1998, The navy
prototype interferometer. ApJ, 496, 550
Baldwin, J. E., Boysen, R. C., Haniff, C. A., Lawson,
P. R., Mackay, C. D., Rogers, J., St-Jacques, D.,
Warner, P. J., Wilson, D. M., & Young, J. S. 1998,
Current status of COAST. Proc SPIE, 3350, 736
Benisty, M., Berger, J.-P., Jocou, L., Labeye, P., Malbet,
F., & Perraut, K. 2009, An integrated optics beam
combiner for the second generation VLTI instru-
ments. A&A, 498, 601
Born, M., & Wolf, E. 2002, Principles of Optics
(7th
ed.;
Cambridge/New
York:
Cambridge
University Press)
Breckinridge, J. B., McAlister, H. A., & Robinson, W.
G. 1979, Kitt peak speckle camera. Appl Opt, 18,
1034
Buscher, D. F. 1988, Optimizing a ground-based opti-
cal interferometer for sensitivity at low light
levels. MNRAS, 235, 1203
Bracewell, R. N. 2000, The Fourier Transform and its
Applications (3rd ed.; Singapore: McGraw Hill
Higher Education)
Che, X., Monnier, J. D., & Webster, S. 2010, High
precision interferometer: MIRC with photomet-
ric channels. Proc SPIE, 7734, 91
Colavita, M. M. 1999, Fringe visibility estimators
for the palomar testbed interferometer. PASP,
111, 111
Colavita, M., Shao, M., & Staelin, D. H. 1987, Atmo-
spheric phase measurements with the Mark III
stellar interferometer. Appl Opt, 26, 4106
Colavita, M. M., Hines, B. E., Shao, M., Klose, G. J., &
Gibson, B. V. 1991, Prototype high speed optical
delay line for stellar interferometry. Proc SPIE,
1542, 205
Colavita, M. M., Wallace, J. K., Hines, B. E., Gursel,
Y., Malbet, F., Palmar, D. L., Pan, X. P., Shao, M.,
Yu, J. W., Boden, A. F., Dumont, P. J., Gubler, J.,
Koresko, C. D., Kulkarni, S. R., Lane, B. F., Mob-
ley, D. W., & van Belle, G. T. 1999, The palomar
testbed interferometer. ApJ, 510, 505
Colavita, M., Akeson, R., Wizinowich, P., Shao, M.,
Acton, S., Beletic, J., Bell, J., Berlin, J., Boden, A.,
Booth, A., & 53 other coauthors. 2003, Observa-
tions of DG Tauri with the Keck Interferometer.
ApJ, 592, 83
Coudé du Foresto, V., Ridgway, S., & Mariotti,
J. M. 1997, Deriving object visibilities from
interferograms
obtained with a fiber stellar
interferometer. A&AS, 121, 2
Coudé
du
Foresto,
V.,
Perrin,
G.,
Ruilier,
C.,
Mennesson, B. P., Traub, W., & Lacasse, M. G.
1998, FLUOR fibered instrument at the IOTA
interferometer. Proc SPIE, 3350, 856
Coulman, C. E. 1985, Fundamental and applied
aspects of astronomical seeing. Ann Rev Astron
Astrophys, 23, 19
Creech-Eakman,
M.
J.,
Romero,
V.,
Payne,
I.,
Haniff, C., Buscher, D., Aitken, C., Anderson, C.,
Bakker, E., Coleman, T., Dahl, C., & 26 other
coauthors. 2010, Magdalena Ridge Observatory
Interferometer advancing to first light and new
science. Proc SPIE, 7734, 11 (page numbers odd
on ads)
Davis, J., Lawson, P. R., Booth, A. J., Tango, W. J., &
Thorvaldson, E. D. 1995, Atmospheric path vari-
ations for baselines up to 80 m measured with
the Sydney University Stellar Interferometer.
MNRAS, 273, 53
Davis, J., Tango, W. J., Booth, A. J., ten Brummelaar,
T. A., Minard, R. A., & Owens, S. 1998, The
Sydney University Stellar Interferometer – I. The
instrument. MNRAS, 303, 773
Davis, S., Abrams, M. C., & Brault, J. W. 2001, Fourier
Transform Spectroscopy (San Diego: Academic
Press)
Delplancke, F. 2008, The PRIMA facility phase-
referenced
imaging
and
micro-arcsecond
astrometry. New Astron Rev, 52, 199
Dyck,
H.
M.,
Benson,
J.
A.,
Carleton,
N.
P.,
Coldwell, C.,
Lacasse,
M.
G.,
Nisenson,
P.,
Panasyuk, A., Papaliolios, C., Pearlman, M. R.,
Reasonberg, R. D., Truab, W. A., Xu, A., Pred-
more, C. R., Schloerb, F. P., & Gibson, D. M.
1995, First 2.2 micrometer results from the IOTA
interferometer. AJ, 109, 378
Elias, N. M. 2001, Optical interferometric polarime-
try I. Foundation. ApJ, 549, 647
Elias, N. M. 2004, Optical interferometric polarime-
try II. Theory. ApJ, 611, 1175
Ferrari,
M.,
Lemaitre,
G.
R.,
Mazzanti,
S.
P.,
Derie, F., Huxley, A., Lemerrer, J., Lanzoni, P.,
Dargent, P., & Wallander, A. 2003, Variable cur-
vature mirrors: implementation in the VLTI
delay-lines for field compensation. Proc SPIE,
4838, 1155
Fisher, M., Boysen, R. C., Buscher, D. F., Haniff, C. A.,
Seneta, E. B., Sun, X., Wilson, D. M. A., & Young,
J. S. 2010, Design of the MROI delay line optical
path compensator. Proc SPIE, 7734, 135

Optical and Infrared Interferometers 6
281
Frederic, D. 2000, VLTI delay lines: design, develop-
ment and performance requirements. Proc SPIE,
4006, 25
Goodman, J. W. 2005, Introduction
to Fourier
Optics (Greenwood Village, USA: Roberts and
Company Publishers)
Haguenauer, P., Alonso, J., Bourget, P., Brillant, S.,
Gitton, P., Guisard, S., Poupar, S., Schuhler, N.,
Abuter, R., Andolfato, L., & 32 other coauthors.
2010, The very large telescope interferometer:
2010 edition. Proc SPIE, 7734, 4 (page numbers
odd on ads)
Hale, D. D., Bester, M., Danchi W. C., Fitelson, W.,
Hoss, S., Lipman, E. A., Monnier, J. D., Tuthill,
P. G., & Townes, C. H. 2000, The Berkekey
Infrared Spatial Interferometer: a heterodyne
stellar interferometer for the mid-infrared. ApJ,
537, 998
Hinz, P. M., Connors, T., McMahon, T., Cheng, A.,
Peng, C. Y., Hoffmann, Wi., McCarthy, D., Jr., &
Angel, R. 2004, Large Binocular Telescope Inter-
ferometer: the universal beam combiner. Proc
SPIE, 5491, 787
Horton, A. J., Buscher, D. F., & Haniff, C. A. 2001,
Diffraction losses in ground-based optical inter-
ferometers. MNRAS, 327, 217
Hutter, D. J., & Elias, N. M. 2003, Array metrology
system for an optical long-baseline interferome-
ter. Proc SPIE, 4838, 1234
Ireland, M. J., Mérand, A., ten Brummelaar, T. A.,
Tuthill, P. G., Schaefer, G. H., Turner, N. H., Stur-
mann, J., Sturmann, L., & McAlister, H. A. 2008,
Sensitive visible interferometry with PAVO. Proc
SPIE, 7013, 63
Kolmogorov, A. 1941a, On degeneration of isotropic
turbulence in an incompressible viscous fluid.
C R Acad Sci URSS, 31, 538, Reprinted 1961 in
“Turbulence,” Interscience Publishers, Inc., New
York, Ed: Friedlander, S.K. and Topper, L
Kolmogorov, A. 1941b, Dissipation of energy in the
locally isotropic turbulence. Compt Rend Acad
Sci USSR, 32, 16–18, Reprinted 1961 in “Turbu-
lence,” Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York,
Ed: Friedlander, S.K. and Topper, L
Labeyrie,A.1974,Speckleinterferometryandpossible
extensions. Astron Astrophys Suppl, 15, 463
Labeyrie, A., Lipson, S. G., & Nisenson, P. 2006, An
Introduction to Optical Stellar Interferometry
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Lawson,
P. R. (ed.),
1997,
Selected
Papers
on
Long
Baseline
Stellar
Interferometry,
Proc.
(Bellingham, WA: SPIE Press)
Lawson, P. R. (ed.), 1999, Principles of Long Baseline
Stellar Interferometry: Course notes from the
1999 Michelson Interferometry Summer School
(Pasadena,
CA:
Jet
Propulsion
Laboratory),
available from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Lohmann, A. W., Weigelt, G., & Wirnitzer, B. 1983,
Speckle masking in astronomy – tripple corre-
lation theory and applications. Appl Opt, 22,
4028
Michelson, A. A., & Pease, F. G. 1921, Measure-
ment of the diameter of Alpha Orionis with an
interferometer. ApJ, 53, 249
Monnier, J. 2003, Optical interferometry in astron-
omy. Rep Prog Phys, 66, 789
Monnier, J., & Allen, R. J., 2011, The article in
the other book in this series describing how to
reduce data from interferometers (Springer)
Nightingale, N. S., & Buscher, D. F. 1991, Inter-
ferometric seeing measurements at La Palmer.
MNRAS, 251, 155
Noll, R. J. 1976, Zernike polynomials and atmo-
spheric turbulence. JOSA, 66, 207
Quirrenbach, A. 2001, Optical interferometry. Ann
Rev Astron Astrophys, 39, 353
Richardson,
L. F. 1922, Weather
Prediction
by
Numerical
Process
(Cambridge:
Cambridge
University Press), Reprinted 1965, Dover Pub.
Inc., New York, Intro: Chapman, S.
Roddier, F. 1981, The effects of atmospheric tur-
bulence in optical astronomy. Prog Opt, XIX,
281
Sheppard, C. R. J., & Hrynevych, M. 1992, Diffraction
by a circular aperture: a generalization of Fresnel
diffraction theory. JOSA-A, 9, 274
Stomski, P. J., Jr., Le Mignant, D., Wizinowich, P. L.,
Campbell, R. D., & Goodrich, R. 2003, Com-
pensation for differential atmospheric refraction
in the W.M. Keck Observatory adaptive Optics
system. Proc SPIE, 4839, 943
Sturmann, J., ten Brummelaar, T. A., Sturmann, L.,
& McAlister, H. A. 2010, Dual three-way beam
combiner at the CHARA array. Proc SPIE, 7734,
104
Tango, W. J. 1990, Dispersion in stellar interferome-
try. Appl Opt, 29, 516
Tango, W. J., & Twiss, R. Q. 1980, Michelson stellar
interferometry. Prog Opt, XVII, 241
Taylor, G. I. 1921, Diffusion by continuous move-
ments.
Proc
Lond
Math
Soc,
2,
196–211,
Reprinted 1961 in “Turbulence,” Interscience
Publishers, Inc., New York, Ed: Friedlander, S.K.
and Topper, L.
Taylor, G. I. 1935, Statistical Theory of Turbu-
lence (London: Royal Society), Reprinted 1961
in “Turbulence,” Interscience Publishers, Inc.,
New York, Ed: Friedlander, S.K. and Topper, L.
ten Brummelaar, T. A. 1994, The CHARA beam com-
biner design. Proc SPIE, 2200, 140

282 6
Optical and Infrared Interferometers
ten Brummelaar, T. A. 1995, Differential path con-
siderations in optical stellar interferometry. Appl
Opt, 34, 2214
ten Brummelaar, T. A. 1996, Correlation measure-
ment and group delay tracking in optical stellar
interferometry with a noisy detector. MNRAS,
285, 135
ten Brummelaar, T. A, & Tango, W. J. 1994, A wave-
front tilt correction servo for the Sydney Univer-
sity Stellar Interferometer. Exp Astron, 4, 297
ten Brummelaar, T. A., Bagnuolo, W. G., Jr., &
Ridgway, S. T. 1995, Strehl ratio and visibility in
long baseline interferometry. Opt Lett, 20, 521
ten Brummelaar, T. A., McAlister, H. A., Ridgway, S.
T., Bagnuolo, W. G., Jr., Turner, N. H., Sturmann,
L., Sturmann, J., Berger, D. H., Ogden, C. E.,
Cadman, R., Hartkopf, W. I., Hopper, C. H., &
Shure, M. A. 2005, First results from the CHARA
array II: description of the instrument. ApJ, 628,
453
Traub, W. A. 1988, ESO Conf Workshop Proc, 29, Part
2, 1029
Tyson, R. K. 2000, Adaptive Optics Engineering
Handbook (New York: Marcel Dekker)
Van
Cittert,
P.
H.
1934,
Die
Wahrscheinliche
Schwingungsverteilung
in
Einer
von
Einer
Lichtquelle Direkt Oder Mittels Einer Linse
Beleuchteten Ebene. Physica, 1, 201
Vergnole, S., Kotani, T., Perrin, G., Delage, L., &
Reynaud, F. 2005, Calibration of silica fibers
for the Optical Hawaiian Array for Nanora-
dian Astronomy (OHANA): temperature depen-
dence of differential chromatic dispersion. Opt
Commun, 251, 115
Woillez, J., Akeson, R., Colavita, M., Eisner, J., Ghez,
A., Graham, J., Hillenbrand, L., Millan-Gabet,
R., Monnier, J., Pott, J.-U., & 17 other co-authors.
2010, ASTRA: astrometry and phase referenc-
ing astronomy on the Keck interferometer. Proc
SPIE, 7734, 30
Zernike, F. 1938, The concept of degree of coherence
and its application to optical problems. Physica,
5, 785

7
Submillimeter Telescopes
Thomas G. Phillips⋅Stephen Padin⋅Jonas Zmuidzinas
Physics, Mathematics & Astronomy, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
George W. Downs Laboratory of Physics, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
2
Submillimeter Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
2.1
Heterodyne Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
2.1.1
Hot Electron Bolometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
2.1.2
SIS Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 292
3
Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
3.1
Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
3.1.1
Cassegrain and Gregory Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
3.1.2
Plate Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300
3.1.3
Other Telescope Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
3.1.4
Chopping and Scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
3.1.5
Scattering and Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
3.1.6
Optical Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
3.2
Structure and Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
3.2.1
Pointing and Wavefront Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
3.2.2
Primary Mirror Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
3.2.3
Mirror Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
3.2.4
Telescope Mount. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307
3.3
Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_7, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

284 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
List of Abbreviations:
CFRP, Carbon fiber reinforced plastic; CMB, Cosmic microwave
background; FOV, Field of view; PSF, Point spread function; RC, Ritchey-Chrétien
1
Introduction
The submillimeter band is a critical one for astronomy. It contains spectral and spatial infor-
mation on very distant newly formed galaxies and on the early stages of star formation within
gas clouds. Yet it is one of the few regions of the electromagnetic spectrum still to be made fully
available to astronomy. This is in part due to the general difficulties of construction of detec-
tors, receivers, and telescopes for these wavelengths and in part to the attenuating nature of
the Earth’s atmosphere. In recent years, optical style telescopes have become available, either
on high mountain sites, or in the case of the NASA Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) or
Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) on board a high-altitude airplane.
The James Clerk Maxwell telescope at 15 m and the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory (CSO)
telescope at 10.4 m are both large enough to have developed the field. However, the ESA satellite
Herschel has now provided the required space platform for complete spectral coverage and the
Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA) the high spatial resolution, aperture
synthesis, high-sensitivity platform.
On the whole, the emission strength is low in the submillimeter for astronomical objects.
The electronic processes which provide strong emission in the radio fade away at high frequen-
cies, and the thermal emission from cold objects is relatively weak, particularly when highly
redshifted. An overall view of the spectrum of a dense interstellar cloud in our own galaxy pro-
vides a sense of the spectroscopic requirements. >Figure 7-1 shows a schematic representation
of the likely emission from a typical star-forming cloud in the galaxy. The cloud dust and gas
temperatures are assumed to be 30 K. A black body curve provides an upper bound to the emis-
sion strength, apart from possible maser action which is ignored here. Dust is optically thick at
short wavelengths, and the continuum emission from it lies on the black body curve, but drops
well below at long wavelengths where the dust is optically thin. At millimeter wavelengths the
gas spectrum is dominated by emission due to the rotation spectrum of heavy molecules. The
strongest of these by far is that of the carbon monoxide (CO) molecule which is so abundant
that it can have optical depths of ∼100, even though it has a dipole moment of only ∼0.12 debye.
Low-lying transitions of CO usually reflect the gas temperature and are represented in the fig-
ure as reaching the black body curve, at least for the line centers. However, for high values of
the rotational quantum number (J), the molecules tend to be deexcited and emit less strongly,
so the line intensities drop below the black body curve.
An actual example of part of the millimeter band spectrum of the Orion Cloud (OMC-1)
with the continuum removed is shown in >Fig. 7-2. This was taken with one of the Leighton
Caltech telescopes using an SIS (see >Sect. 2) receiver (Blake et al. 1987). The result was the
detection of about 1,000 lines which were identified as various transitions of about 30 molecules,
varying in complexity from CO to dimethyl ether (CHOCH). The spectrum observed was
about 60 GHz in width which permitted multiline observations of the molecules so necessary
for secure identification. It is clear that providing a large instantaneous bandwidth is a primary
requisite of a millimeter or submillimeter receiver system. Much higher spectral resolution is
available. An expanded region is shown in >Fig. 7-3. It turns out that several different spatial

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
285
OI
SH
H2D+ (PARA)
H2D+ (ORTHO)
MgH
DUST EMISSION
HEAVY MOLECULES
2.7 K COSMIC BACKGROUND
VIBRATION-ROTATION SPECTRA
OF POLYACETYLENES AND PAH’S
DUST RESONANCES
2 mm
109
1010
1011
1 mm
500 mm
200 mm
100 mm
H2O (ORTHO)
H2O+
NH3
H2S
O2
OH+
CH+
SiH
CH
LiH
HC
A  H
NH
OH
OIII
HD
SiI
CH2
OI
CII
HeH+
H2O (PARA)
CI
CO
30K
BLACKBODY
O2
l
Jy / sr
CI
⊡Fig. 7-1
The anticipated spectrum of a 30 K cloud, showing the dust emission, the heavy molecule line
forest, and, at high frequencies, the fast rotating light hydrides (Phillips and Keene 1992)
objects, within the one telescope beam, can be discriminated by their distinctive line shapes.
This emphasizes a second requirement for interstellar spectroscopy, namely, very good spectral
resolution.
Returning to > Fig. 7-1, as we move from the millimeter band, containing many lines
of heavy molecules, to the submillimeter, we find that the spectrum is dominated by light
molecules containing hydrogen. These light molecules have small moments of inertia and there-
fore rotate fast, so their fundamental rotation lines appear in the submillimeter.Heavy molecule
lines become less important due to the de-excitation suffered by a molecule in a high J energy
level, well above the ground state. The postulation of >Fig. 7-1 has been verified by the space
project, HIFI, on the Herschel telescope orbiting at the L2 point. Many transition lines were
recently discovered by the HIFI instrument, under the water lines which prevent observations
from even high mountain sites. An example is HF (>Fig. 7-4) and water itself was seen, initially
for weak lines for which the atmosphere is not opaque, mostly from the KAO. More recently,

286 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
234
HC3N
CH3OH
CH3OH
HC3N
CH3OH
CH3OH
CH3CN
CH3CN
CH3CN
CH3OH
OCS
OCS
H2CO
H2CO
H2CO
CN
CN
SO2
SO2
OCS
OCS
CS
SO
SO
SiO
CCH
SO2
SO2
SO2
SO2
SO2
SO2
SO2
SO2
SO2
29SiO
H13CN
C18O
SiO
34SO
13CO
CO
SO
SO
TA
*
TA
*
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
236
238
240
208
210
212
214
216
218
220
222
224
226
228
230
232
242
244
FREQUENCY (GHz)
FREQUENCY (GHz)
246
248 254
256
258
260
262
⊡Fig. 7-2
Part of the heavy molecule spectrum as seen from the ﬁrst Leighton telescope in Blake’s thesis
it was seen from space probes such as SWAS and finally, definitively, with HIFI. Although it is
clear from >Fig. 7-1 that there is a tremendous quantity of astrophysical information contained
in the submillimeter band, it has proved hard to obtain, even for our own galaxy, because of the
interfering effects of the Earth’s atmosphere.
>Figure 7-5 shows the transmission for good weather (about 1 mm of precipitable water)
at the 4,200-m level on Mauna Kea for the submillimeter band. There are three useful regions:
the radio/millimeter region from 0 to 300 GHz which is almost completely transparent, apart
from a few Oand HO lines, and the two wide submillimeter windows at roughly 650 GHz
(∼450 μm) and 850 GHz (∼350 μm). The rest of the spectrum is blacked out by water lines,
apart from some narrow windows near 400 GHz. The atmosphere is completely black at shorter
wavelengths until the mid-infrared windows at ∼30 μm are reached.
At airborne altitudes, say 12,000 m for SOFIA, the transmission is much better, but also not
perfect. Several of the lines of >Fig. 7-1 were initially detected with early versions of submil-
limeter detectors from the KAO, such as the fundamental rotation lines of NH(Keene et al.
1983) and HCl (Blake et al. 1985). Many of the high-frequency lines of CO (Phillips et al.
1980a) were observed and some lines of OH and CH (Stacey et al. 1987; Storey et al. 1981).

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
287
218.31
0
2
4
218.32
Hot Core
Plateau
Ridge
HC3N    J = 24
23
218.33
FREQUENCY (GHz)
TA
*
218.34
⊡Fig. 7-3
The Orion “hot core,”“Plateau”(outﬂow), and quiescent “ridge”
Also the atomic fine structure lines of carbon and ionized carbon have been detected by various
techniques (Jaffe et al. 1985; Phillips and Huggins 1981; Russell et al. 1980).
With the advent of the mountain-sited submillimeter telescopes and new space-based tele-
scopes, the quality of submillimeterspectroscopy has surpassed that of the millimeter spectrum
of >Fig. 7-2. An example of the modern line surveys (HIFI) is shown in >Fig. 7-6. The data is
taken double sideband but deconvolved to single sideband. In actuality, these spectra include
common molecules with so many lines that they have to be subtracted in order to see the
underlying spectrum. They are designated as “weeds” (an example is CHOH).
Being situated between the radio and infrared fields, submillimeterastronomy has naturally
borrowed its techniques from these more established areas. The radio is generally considered to
be a thermally dominated regime, i.e., kT > hν; the thermal energy is greater than the photon
energy. By contrast, the infrared or optical regimes are in the limit where quantum energies
dominate thermal. In the submillimeter, neither thermal effects nor quantum effects can nec-
essarily be assumed negligible and so both must be considered when designing detectors. The
two basic methods of detection to be compared are the infrared technique of direct detection,
such as bolometric or photodetection, and the radio technique of heterodyne mixing which has
been so successful in the millimeter and submillimeter bands. We can make the comparison for
a range of required spectral resolutions and astronomical conditions (Phillips 1988). The radio
approximation kT ≫hν is often used, even though it is not fully valid.
There are clearly two types of science that can be carried out in the submillimeter;
continuum observation of dust and high spectral resolution measurements of atomic and
molecular line features. The importance of the dust observation became clear when Michael
Rowan-Robinson (Rowan-Robinson et al. 1991) found that the IRAS object F10214 was at a
large distance (z = 2.3). The bolometers in use were the doped Ge type, developed by Frank
Low (1961).

288 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
−20
0
HF J=1–0
para–H2O
111–000
Flux / Continuum Flux
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
20
VLSR (km s−1)
40
60
⊡Fig. 7-4
HF is a strongly bonded, fast-rotating molecule, which is often seen in absorption, and in hot
dense regions in emission (Neufeld et al. 2010) and a water absorption spectrum for comparison.
The spectra are very similar as seen when the frequencies of observation are shifted to allow this
comparison
>Figure 7-7 shows a photograph of Phillips and Huggins with the initial InSb hot electron
bolometer (see >Sect. 2) receiver mounted at the prime focus of the 200-in. telescope (Phillips
et al. 1977). Due to the water and oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere, work from the ground
becomes very difficult in the submillimeter, and, as a result, some initial effort was switched to
operation on the KAO. Flying at an altitude of 40,000 feet effectively reduced the attenuation
by the atmosphere to a reasonable value and allowed observations at much higher frequen-
cies. These included the detection of the CO (4–3) line at 460 GHz (Phillips et al. 1980a); the
ground state fine-structure line of atomic carbon (CI) at 492 GHz (Phillips et al. 1980b); the
fundamental rotational line of ammonia, NH(1–0) at 572 GHz (Keene et al. 1983); the fun-
damental rotational line of HCI (1–0) at 626 GHz (Blake et al. 1985); etc. The telescope was
small (91.5 cm) but served the purpose of allowing the discovery of many of the molecular and
atomic species present in the dense interstellar medium. This work has been now superseded
by the SIS receivers (see >Sect. 2) on HIFI/Herschel and SOFIA. SIS receivers also were chosen
for ALMA, probably the outstanding astronomy instrument of the decade.

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
289
Wavelength (mm)
Altitude:
4.1 km
Water vapor:
0.5 mm
Zenith transmission
0
0.5
1
1 mm
300 mm
100 mm
Air/Space
Ground-based
⊡Fig. 7-5
The Earth’s atmospheric transmission in the submillimeter band as seen from the CSO. A suitable
platform for the various frequency ranges is shown in green
2
Submillimeter Detection
There are two basic techniques for millimeter and submillimeter detection. The first is direct
detection with a bolometer or photodetector device, and the second is heterodyne detection
using a mixer device. Although modern bolometers are more sensitive than mixers, it is still
necessary to use mixers where it is required to keep track of phase, e.g., for interferometers, or
where very high spectral resolution is needed. Bolometer direct detection requires a detection
element such as resistance or reactance which is a function of temperature. If the element has a
sufficiently rapid function of temperature that the signal voltage across the device is very much
larger than all locally generated noise voltages (e.g., Johnson noise or thermal fluctuation noise),
then the signal to noise ratio (S/N) is determined by the background noise. By contrast, the
heterodyne process is limited by quantum noise (∼hν/k) which is a linear function of frequency.
Thus, in general, one can say that direct detection is preferred at infrared wavelengths, and
heterodyne techniques are preferred in the radio. In a given case, where noise is determined by
the detector element, a comparison will depend on the channel width (Δν), the noise equivalent
power (NEP) of the direct detector, and the noise temperature of the heterodyne instrument
(TN) as:
(S/N) heterodyne
(S/N) direct
=
NEP
kTN
√
Δν
In the case where the background is dominant, this ratio depends only on the root of the ratio
of channel widths (Phillips 1988).

290 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
⊡Fig. 7-6
A line survey of Orion using HIFI. The spectrum is amazingly complicated
2.1 Heterodyne Detectors
2.1.1 Hot Electron Bolometers
Any power detector, such as a bolometer, acts to detect the square of the total electric field
and can therefore act as a mixer. It comes in two forms, semiconducting and superconducting.
First, came the semiconducting device (Phillips and Jefferts 1973). This surprising simple detec-
tor was a rod of indium antimonide (InSb) mounted in the E-field of a full-height waveguide
with a directly coupled baseband IF amplifier. The device was matched to the waveguide using
an E-H tuner in front and a backshort behind. The waveguide device was mounted in a liq-
uid helium cryostat resulting in the first very low temperature mixer receiver for millimeter or
submillimeter astronomy. The way in which this hot electron bolometer worked was to absorb
the incoming photons via the electron gas and make use of the temperature variation of the
electron resistance due to the fact that the resistance was caused by impurity scattering of the

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
291
⊡Fig. 7-7
Phillips and Huggins at the prime focus of the Palomar 200′′ with the InSb hot electron bolometer
Rutherford type. The scattering is less effective as the electrons speed up resulting in a temper-
ature dependence of the resistance. The original mounting scheme showing a scalar feedhorn,
a 20-dB coupler for the local oscillator, and various waveguide tuners is displayed in >Fig. 7-8.
The simple InSb detector really opened up the millimeter and submillimeter field of inter-
stellar spectroscopy in spite of the very small IF bandpass (∼1 MHz). This bandpass is set by the
relaxation rate of the hot electrons excited by the DC bias. If the astronomical spectrum of the
source was needed, the local oscillator had to be swept in frequency and the single pixel back
end provided the spectrum. If a single channel map were desired, the local oscillator was fixed
and the telescope swept over the desired area of the sky. >Figure 7-9 shows a photograph of
the InSb receiver mounted at the focus of the NASA Kuiper Observatory, used for frequencies
from 400 to 600 GHz.
A superconducting version of the hot electron bolometer has been developed more recently
(Gershenzon et al. 1990). This is a device in which a small area (submicron) of a thin supercon-
ducting ribbon (a few nm) is heated by the DC bias and the local oscillator power (McGrath
et al. 1997) and the IF passband is determined by the phonon interactions which cool the elec-
trons (see >Fig. 7-10). An alternative mixer has been constructed using the electron diffusion
out of the hot region to provide the cooling (Prober 1993) (see >Fig. 7-11). Both styles of HEB
have fast electron cooling which allows an IF of about 2 GHz. The superconducting material is

292 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
⊡Fig. 7-8
ThewaveguidemountfortheInSbhotelectronbolometer.Thedeviceismatchedtothewaveguide
by an E-H tuner and a backshort
either Nb or NbN. The upper end of the frequency response of the devices is determined by the
available local oscillator power. Probably the most effective application, to date, is in the HIFI
instrument on Herschel where the local oscillator power is available to 1.9 THz. This is achieved
by means of a synthesizer at ∼30 GHz which is multiplied up by a series of multipliers (Pearson
et al. 2000).
2.1.2 SIS Detectors
Superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS) receivers were developed independently at
Bell Labs for 115 GHz mixing (Dolan et al. 1979) and for 36 GHz (Richards et al. 1979) at
Berkeley. They have proved to be the most effective receivers in the submillimeter band of
100–800 GHz and have been used in nearly all receivers in telescopes which work in this range.
Although considerable success had been achieved by the semiconductor hot electron bolome-
ter receiver in opening up a new, complex, and interesting field, it was clear that a better
receiver was needed as the 1-MHz baseband was unacceptable for a general purpose instru-
ment. The alternative at that time was to attempt to operate the Schottky diode receivers at
submillimeter wavelengths. Although this was possible, they were rather noisy, so an improved
low-temperature receiver was required. The low-temperature solution to the receiver problem
came about from the intense rivalry between AT&T and IBM in their competition to develop
a superconducting computer. Neither company was successful, mainly due to the instability of
the lead alloy superconducting tunnel junction electrodes. However, they did develop a high-
frequency switching system using superconducting tunnel junctions which could be used as
fast millimeter or submillimeter wave detectors. Bell Labs supported this and the necessary
lithography.
The effect in use is the photon-assisted quasiparticle tunneling discovered by Dayem and
Martin at Bell Labs (1962), but passed over as a device due to the more glamorous Josephson

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
293
⊡Fig. 7-9
From the left: Chas Beichman, Jocelyn Keene, and Tom Phillips with the InSb receiver mounted at
the focus of the 91.5-cm telescope of the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), operated by NASA
Nanobridge
Au
Au
e
e
e
To
Antenna
To
Antenna
⊡Fig. 7-10
Basic geometry of the superconducting HEB mixer device
junction discovered soon afterward which, however, eventually proved too noisy. The physics
of this low-temperature, quasiparticle tunneling superconducting device is related to that of
the photodetectors used in the optical and infrared where the bandgap of semiconducting
materials of about 1 eV is suitable to allow absorption of optical/IR photons. Equivalently, the
superconducting energy gap of typically 1 or 2 meV is suitable for photo-detection in the mil-
limeterand submillimeterinvolving the breaking of Cooper pairs. The superconducting devices
are now known by their structure, “superconductor-insulator-superconductor” (SIS), rather

294 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
Bolometer
SiO
10 μm
⊡Fig. 7-11
SEM of Nb HEB mixer-embedding circuit showing twin-slot antenna and CPW lines. Inset shows
area around the submicron device
S
a
b
DENSITY OF STATES
S
I
eV
CURRENT
hn
hn
2Δ
2Δ
e
e
VOLTAGE
ENERGY
⊡Fig. 7-12
(a) Diagram of the superconducting bandgap and photon-assisted tunneling. (b) Idealized cur-
rent as a function of the voltage. Dotted line is without any radiation and the solid line is with local
oscillator radiation applied
than their physics since the SIS structure supports both quasiparticle and Josephson tunnel-
ing. This device, using the lead alloy materials, was mounted on a telescope for the first time
in 1979 (Phillips and Woody 1982). The lead alloy materials were notoriously unstable both
chemically and physically and were eventually replaced by niobium which is acceptably stable.
During this time, as excellent theory of the operation of the SIS detector was developed by John
Tucker (1979).
Early work on quasi-particle tunneling at Bell Labs demonstrated photon assisted tunneling
which is revealed by step structure in the current vs. voltage at a spacing of hν/e when local
oscillator (LO) radiation at a frequency ν is applied (Dayem and Martin 1962). >Figure 7-12

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
295
shows a diagram of the superconducting bandgap and photon-assisted tunneling for an SIS
junction along with an idealized current vs. voltage characteristic. The quasiparticle tunneling
description predicted the current vs. voltage characteristics as a function of the LO drive level,
and this in turn was used to develop a phenomenological prediction of the mixer conversion
efficiency (Phillips and Woody 1982).
The steps in the current vs. voltage relationship were seen in the early mixers and are shown
in >Fig. 7-13 for an SIS receiver operating at 115 GHz. The hot and cold response does not look
impressive by today’s standards but achieving even this performance for the first-generation
devices demonstrated the excellent potential for SIS mixers at millimeter and submillime-
ter wavelengths. A critical issue for SIS mixers was verification that it was the quasiparticle
tunneling and not Josephson-pair tunneling that was responsible for the IF output power.
A magnetic field is very effective at suppressing the effects of Josephson-pair tunneling. As seen
in
>Fig. 7-13, the IF output power near 0 v was decreased dramatically when a magnetic field
was applied, but the output power at the photon step at the 2.3-mV gap voltage was only slightly
changed by the application of a magnetic field. The conversion efficiency and noise temperature
60
b
a
40
PIF(K)
I (mA)
20
20
HOT
COLD
10
00
1
2
V (mV)
3
4
5
0
⊡Fig. 7-13
(a) Current vs. voltage characteristic without and with 115 GHz LO applied. (b) IF output power
with the receiver looking at a 300 K room temperature load and at a 77 K liquid nitrogen load with
the LO on. The solid line is without any magnetic ﬁeld applied and dashed line is with a magnetic
ﬁeld applied. The photon-assisted tunneling is clearly revealed by the modulation in IF power as a
function of the bias voltage (Woody 2009)

296 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
actually improved with the application of the magnetic field. >Figure 7-12 also shows that even
at 115 GHz the voltage step size is a significant fraction of the superconducting bandgap volt-
age. As these devices were pushed to higher frequencies, the Josephson-pair tunneling became
more troubling, and new alloy systems needed to be developed for THz receivers.
Tucker’s development of the full quantum mechanical description of quasi-particle tunnel-
ing and mixing in SIS tunnel junctions was a major advance that enabled a complete description
and prediction of both the conversion efficiency and noise (Tucker 1979). This theory showed
that the performance of SIS heterodyne mixers is limited only by the added noise imposed
by quantum mechanics (Caves 1982; Wengler and Woody 1987). The mixers have conversion
gains greater than unity, exceeding the limits for classical heterodyne mixing. This theoretical
work was quickly incorporated into the receiver design process resulting in well-engineered
astronomical receivers. Receiver performance within a factor of a few of the quantum limit for
heterodyne mixing became feasible.
The critical component in SIS receivers is the tunnel junction. The current density, area, gap
voltage, leakage current, as well as the stability of the thin film materials used are all important
for producing reliable astronomical SIS receivers with good performance.
The widespread adoption of the SIS receivers on radio telescopes required the
development of more reliable thin film systems. Most SIS receivers in the millimeter and
low-frequency submillimeter band now utilize devices with Nb electrodes and Al-oxide tunnel
barriers. This system produced high-quality devices with predictable and stable design parame-
ters with the tuning structures and matching circuits fabricated on the chips along with the SIS
device. Excellent performance is achieved throughout the millimeter and submillimeter bands
(Kooi et al. 1992).
3
Telescopes
3.1 Optics
Most submillimeter telescopes are two-mirror reflecting telescopes (Baars 2007; Korsch 1991)
similar to those used at optical and IR wavelengths (Wilson 1996, 1999). Reflecting surfaces
have low loss, and the folded optical path results in a compact design, which is an important
advantage for the telescope structure. The following sections give an overview of the most com-
mon designs. The emphasis here is on ground-based telescopes, but some examples of space
telescopes are included.
3.1.1 Cassegrain and Gregory Telescopes
Submillimeter telescopes are usually on-axis Cassegrain or Gregory designs. Optical layouts
for these telescopes are shown in >Fig. 7-14. The classical Cassegrain and Gregory forms both
have a paraboloidal primary (conic constant b= −). In the Cassegrain form, a convex hyper-
boloidal secondary (conic constant b< −) relays the inaccessible image at prime focus to the
Cassegrain focus, which is usually behind the primary. A flat tertiary is often included to pro-
vide a Nasmyth focus on the elevation axis. The Cassegrain is the shortest of the two-mirror
designs, so it is widely used. Examples of submillimeter classical Cassegrain telescopes include

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
297
f1
d1
b
D
D2
L
⊡Fig. 7-14
Cassegrain (top left) and Gregory (top right) telescopes, their oﬀ-axis variants (bottom left and
center), and the crossed Mizuguchi-Dragone (bottom right). The horizontal dotted line in each dia-
gram is the optical axis of the primary. D and D2 are the diameters of the primary and secondary
mirrors
CSO, JCMT, SMA, SMT, IRAM, APEX, ALMA, and Herschel (see >Table 7-1). In the Gregory
form, the secondary is a concave ellipsoid (conic constant −< b< ), mounted just beyond
prime focus. The Gregory is longer, but its concave secondary is easier to test.
Submillimeter telescopes usually have a fast primary to keep the secondary support struc-
ture small. A primary focal ratio ≤.minimizes the size and cost of the enclosure because
the volume swept out by the telescope is set by the telescope diameter. Given the primary focal
length, f, and a back focal distance, b, chosen to give reasonable access to instruments, the
focal length of the telescope, f , or secondary magnification, m= f /f, or secondary diameter,
D, fixes the design (Wilson 1996). Small blockage generally requires D< D/, but if Dis
too small, the focal length of the telescope becomes unreasonably large. The layout is specified
by the secondary to image separation
L = ∣f ∣D
D = f −b/f
−m
,
(7.1)
and the primary to secondary separation
d= b −L = fb/f−m
−m
,
(7.2)
and the secondary surface is specified by its radius of curvature
r=
L
+ m
,
(7.3)

298 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
⊡Table 7-1
Submillimeter telescopesa
Surface
Altitude
Diameter
error
Telescope
Location
m
m
μm rms
Conﬁgurationb
Segments and supportc
Enclosure
CSO (Leighton 1978)
Hawaii
4,200
10.4
13
Cassegrain
Al/Ah/Al, steel truss
Al dome, vertical shutter
JCMT (Baars 2007)
”
4,200
15
24
”
Al/Ah/Al, steel truss
Cylinder, sliding doors
SMA (Blundell 2007)
”
4,200
8 × 6
13
”
mAl, CFRP truss
No
SMT (HHT) (Baars 2007)
Arizona
3,300
10
15
”
CFRP/Ah/CFRP,
Box, hinged doors
CFRP truss
IRAM (Baars et al. 1994; Guilloteau
et al. 1992; Morris et al. 2009)
Spain
2,850
30
50
”
Al/Ah/Al, steel truss
No
France
2,550
6 × 15
61
”
CFRP/Ah/CFRP,
No
steel/CFRP truss
ALMA (Mangum et al. 2006; Saito
2011)
Chile
5,100
54 × 12
25
”
mAl, CFRP/Ah/CFRP box
No
eNi/Ah/eNi, CFRP plates
No
12 × 7
20
mAl, steel truss
No
APEX (Gusten et al. 2006)
”
5,100
12
17
”
”
No
NANTEN2
”
4,900
4
20
”
mAl, CFRP
Dome, horizontal shutter
KOSMAd (Kramer et al. 1998)
Switzerland
3,100
3
30
”
mAl, CFRP truss
Dome, horizontal shutter
AST/ROe (Stark, et al. 2001)
South Pole
2,800
1.7
9
OAG
CFRP
Cloth dome, clamshell
SPT (Carlstrom et al. 2011)
”
2,800
10
20
”
mAl, CFRP box
No
ACT (Fowler et al. 2007; Swetz et al.
2011)
Chile
5,190
6
31
”
mAl, Al
Ground shield
WMAP (Page et al. 2003)
L2
0.7
76
”
CFRP/KOREX/CFRP
Planck (Tauber et al. 2010)
L2
1.5
50
”
CFRP
Herschel (Pilbratt et al. 2010)
L2
3.5
2.5
Cassegrain
SiC
aThis list also includes some millimeter-wave telescopes to illustrate designs options with low blockage
bOAG = oﬀ-axis Gregory
cAl/Ah/Al indicates a segment with Al facesheets and an Al honeycomb core. mAl machined Al, eNi electroformed Ni
dMoved to Tibet in 2010
eDecommissioned in 2005

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
299
⊡Table 7-2
Sign conventions
Sign
Cassegrain
Gregory
+ve
f, b, L,
b, L, m2
−ve
f1, d1, m2
f, f1, d1
⊡Table 7-3
Third order aberrations for classical Cassegrain and Gregory telescopes (Schroeder 2000).
Aberration
Angular spot sizea
FOV/ (λ/D)
Sagittal coma
θ/16F2
32F2
Astigmatism
θ2/2F1
2 (2F1D/λ)1/2
Field curvatureb
θ2D/r2
2 (r2/λ)1/2
aθ is the ﬁeld angle, F = f/D is the ﬁnal focal ratio,F1 = f1/D is the primary focal ratio,and r2 is the radius of curvature
of the secondary mirror. The terms for astigmatism and ﬁeld curvature assume small back focal distance and large
secondary magniﬁcation, which is typical for submillimeter telescopes. The Cassegrain and Gregory designs have
the same coma and the same astigmatism
bFortheCassegrain design,thefocalsurfaceis concaveviewedfromthesecondary.FortheGregory,thefocalsurface
is convex
and conic constant
b= −(m−
m+ )

.
(7.4)
Sign conventions for (> 7.1–7.4) are shown in >Table 7-2.
>Table 7-3 shows aberrations for classical Cassegrain and Gregory telescopes. A submil-
limeter telescope typically has a primary focal ratio ≤0.7, so field curvature and astigmatism are
the largest aberrations. Field curvature can be corrected by a field-flattening lens, or by tiling
the detectors on a facetted approximation to the focal surface, so astigmatism limits the FOV.
It is difficult to make fast mirrors for optical wavelengths, so optical telescopes typically have
a primary focal ratio in the range 1–2, and coma becomes more important. Third order coma
can be eliminated by changing the conic constants of the primary and secondary to
b′
= −−
L
dm

b′
= −
f
d(m+ )−( m−
m+ )

,
(7.5)
resulting in the RC and aplanatic Gregory designs. The absence of coma and short overall length
makes the RC form the choice for most optical and IR telescopes. Adjusting the conic constants
of the primary and secondary does mean that the optical configuration is fixed, so it is not
possible to change the final focal length by installing a new secondary, as is the case for the
classical forms. The hyperboloidal RC primary also renders prime focus useless without a cor-
rector. Since third-order coma does not limit the FOV in a telescope with a fast primary, all
existing submillimeter telescopes are classical Cassegrain and Gregory designs. However, the
development of large submillimeter detector arrays is pushing new telescopes to much wider
FOV, which requires optical designs with good correction of higher order aberrations. As an
example, the 25-m-diameter CCAT is a RC design with a shaped tertiary. This gives .○FOV
at λ = μm, compared with .○for a similar classical design with a shaped tertiary.

300 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
If the blockage due to the secondary and its support cannot be tolerated, an off-axis design
must be used. This is often the case at longer wavelengths, where scattering from the telescope
would exceed the loss through the atmosphere, or for observations of low surface brightness
extended sources where false signals due to scattering and sidelobes would be a problem. The
Gregory form is generally used for wide-field, off-axis designs because it gives a less offset pri-
mary and easy access to a pupil for chopping and scanning. Off-axis optical systems suffer from
severe astigmatism and coma, but the secondary can be tilted to correct astigmatism (Dragone
1978, 1982; Hanany and Marrone 2002; Rusch et al. 1990), and the mirrors can be shaped to
reduce coma, resulting in a FOV similar to that of an on-axis design with the same primary
diameter and focal length. The secondary must be tilted to satisfy
m′
tan i= (m′
+ ) tan i,
(7.6)
where m′
is the magnification of the tilted secondary and iand iare the angles of incidence
of the principal ray at the primary and secondary. Examples of off-axis Gregory telescopes
include AST/RO, SPT, ACT, WMAP, and Planck. With the exception of AST/RO, these are all
millimeter-wave telescopes designed for CMB observations.
Most submillimeter instruments have a cold stop to control the illumination on the primary,
so the entrance pupil is a little smaller than the primary mirror. In some cases, the stop can be at
the secondary mirror, with the spillover falling on the cold sky, or on a cooled absorber (Padin
et al. 2008a).
The main disadvantage of the Cassegrain and Gregory designs is the tight alignment tol-
erance. Most submillimeter telescopes provide active control of the secondary position to
compensate gravitational deflection of the secondary support.
3.1.2 Plate Scale
In on-axis designs, the Cassegrain or Gregory focus is usually placed just behind the primary,
partly to avoid blockage due to placing a large camera in the telescope beam and partly to give
easy access to the camera. This configuration requires a telescope focal ratio greater than ∼f /,
which may lead to unreasonably large detectors. Submillimeter telescopes generally have a focal
reducer to couple the telescope to the detectors.
For maximum aperture efficiency, a detector should just fill the central part of the Airy
pattern delivered by the telescope, so the detector diameter must be Fλ, where F is the focal
ratio at the detector. Arrays of Fλ feedhorn-coupled detectors are often used for small cameras.
The telescope FWHM beamwidth corresponds to Fλ at the detectors, so a detector array that
Nyquist samples the sky must have .Fλ detectors. If the number of detectors is limited, e.g., by
cost, Fλ detectors give the highest mapping speed; otherwise, smaller pixels are better (Griffin
et al. 2002). The typical size of an absorber-coupled submillimeter detector is 1 mm, so a .Fλ
detector must be fed at ∼f /. This usually requires a focal reducer, which can be a single off-
axis ellipsoid for small FOV (Serabyn 1997). A focal reducer for larger FOV might use a pair of
off-axis ellipsoids with an intermediate focus. Aberrations from the first off-axis ellipsoid can
be at least partly compensated by the second (Serabyn 1995).
In an off-axis telescope, the camera can be placed in front of the primary without block-
ing the beam. In this case, the telescope focal ratio can be made small enough to directly feed
the detectors, leading to a very simple, low-loss optical system (Padin et al. 2008a). The main

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
301
disadvantage of such an approach is that the camera must be mounted close to the secondary
mirror, so access is difficult and the camera moves around as the telescope tracks and scans.
3.1.3 Other Telescope Designs
Cassegrain and Gregory designs dominate at submillimeter wavelengths, but other designs are
sometimes used. The crossed Mizuguchi-Dragone telescope is an off-axis design with a large
secondary (see >Fig. 7-14). It offers significantly wider FOV and better polarization perfor-
mance compared with an off-axis Gregory of the same size (Dragone 1983; Tran et al. 2008). The
crossed design has been proposed for CMB observations that do not require a large telescope.
Refracting telescopes have been built for similar applications (Keating et al. 2003). Refracting
optics are widely used inside submillimetercameras and spectrometers, but dielectrics are quite
lossy at submillimeter wavelengths, so thick lenses must be cooled. This severely limits the size
of a refracting telescope.
3.1.4 Chopping and Scanning
Cassegrain telescopes are often equipped with a chopping secondary which allows a small field
to be switched rapidly between the source and a reference position. Differencing the on and
off source positions removes offsets and fluctuations in sky brightness (due to variations in the
water vapor column) on timescales longer than the switching period. Chopping is an important
technique for ground-based spectroscopy because sky brightness fluctuations typically domi-
nate the noise. The throw for a chopping secondary is usually of order 10 beamwidths, limited by
aberrations due to the tilt of the secondary. The chopping period must be a few times smaller
than the wind crossing time, which is ∼1 s for a 10-m telescope with a typical 10 ms−wind
speed (Radford et al. 2008). Fast chopping with a large secondary is challenging, so chopping
secondary mirrors are often made of very lightweight materials, e.g., CFRP or beryllium.
In an off-axis Gregory telescope, the pupil just afterthe secondary is a convenient, accessible
location for a chopping mirror. In this case, the chopping mirror is a flat that can be tilted to
generate a phase gradient across the pupil, which is equivalent to shifting the telescope beam
on the sky. Chopping at a pupil allows a large chop throw without degrading the image quality
over a wide FOV. Examples of telescopes with chopping flats include AST/RO and the Viper
millimeter-wave telescope (Peterson et al. 2000). The development of large detector arrays has
significantly reduced the requirements for chopping because sky brightness fluctuations are
correlated across the detector array, so much of the sky signal can be removed by subtracting
the average over the array (Jenness et al. 1998; Sayers et al. 2010).
For imaging observations, the telescope beam is usually scanned in a pattern that gives uni-
form coverage across the source, e.g., a raster or Lissajous pattern. Scanning fully samples the
source, and allows the removal of offsets and sky brightness fluctuations that appear as low-
frequency variations in the detector timestreams. During a scanning observation, it is usually
sufficient for the telescope to follow the commanded path within about 1/2 a beamwidth to
maintain adequate coverage. The actual path is then accurately reconstructed after the obser-
vation using encoder readings and models of the telescope deformation due to acceleration.
A scanning flat at a pupil can be used to scan the beam, and may be appropriate if very
fast scanning is needed, but now it is often possible to scan the entire telescope at speeds of

302 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
order 1○s−. The SPT and ACT millimeter-wave CMB experiments, which are both Gregory
designs, scan the entire telescope rather than a flat at a pupil. The major disadvantage of scan-
ning the entire telescope is mechanical noise, which can cause problems for refrigerators and
high-impedance detector readouts.
3.1.5 Scattering and Loss
Scattering and loss in the telescope degrade the aperture efficiency, increase the loading on the
detectors, and maycause false signals. The main scattering contributions are blockage due to the
secondary (typically 1% in an on-axis telescope), the secondary support (a few percent) (Cheng
and Mangum 1998; Lamb and Olver 1986), gaps between mirror segments (usually <1%), and
surfaces of refractive elements inside cameras and spectrometers. Some of the scattering from
the telescope can be directed to the sky, e.g., by using shaped secondary support legs (Lawrence
et al. 1994; Moreira et al. 1996) and covering segment gaps with reflecting strips (Padin et al.
2008b), but some of the scattered light will be absorbed at ambient temperature.
On-axis telescope designs are generally adequate for ground-based observations at λ <
mm because the atmospheric transmission is worse than the telescope transmission. At longer
wavelengths, the atmosphere is more transparent, so blockage is more important. This is one of
the reasons millimeter-wave CMB experiments favor off-axis telescopes.
3.1.6 Optical Components
Primary mirrors for large telescopes must be segmented.Segments for submillimetertelescopes
are made from machined Al (e.g., ALMA Vertex), electroformed Ni facesheets with an Al hon-
eycomb core (e.g., ALMA Alcatel), Al facesheets with an Al honeycomb core (e.g., CSO), and
aluminized CFRP with an Al honeycomb core (e.g., SMT). Conventional milling can achieve
surface errors of ∼2 μm rms on a 0.5-m Al segment. The reflectivity of a machined Al mirror
is ∼−.× exp(−λ/μm) (Baars et al. 2006). Metal mirrors are too heavy for space tele-
scopes, so CFRP facesheets with a CFRP core (e.g., Planck) or lightweighted SiC (e.g., Herschel)
are used. These technologies are generally too expensive for ground-based telescopes.
The mass of the primary must be minimized because it is a strong driver for the overall mass
and cost of a telescope. Machined Al segments can achieve an areal density of ∼20kg m−, which
is about the same as the areal density of the entire Herschel primary. The choice of segment size
is a trade-off between manufacturing errors and thermal deformations, which increase with
segment size, vs. areal density, complexity, and noise for active control, all of which decrease
with segment size. Most submillimeter telescopes have 1–2-m segments.
Plastics are widely used for submillimeter lenses and windows, with machined grooves
(Goldsmith 1998) or plastic foam anti-reflection (AR) coatings (Savini and Hargrave 2010).
HDPE and UHMWPE (refractive index n = ., loss tangent tan δ ∼×−at λ = μm) are
popular because they have low loss in the submillimeter, but other plastics, e.g., teflon, nylon,
and polystyrene, are used, particularly at longer wavelengths (Lamb 1996). High-resistivity
Si (n = ., tan δ ∼−at λ = mm) has lower loss, and the high-refractive index generally
gives better image quality, but AR coating is more difficult. AR coatings can be etched on small
Si optics and polyimide (Fowler et al. 2007) layers have been used on larger Si lenses.

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
303
3.2 Structure and Mechanics
Structural and mechanical systems support the optical surfaces as the telescope scans and tracks
a source. The quality of the wavefront delivered to the detectors is generally determined by the
telescope structure, so this is a critical aspect of the telescope design. The following sections
describe the key telescope systems and some simple models that illustrate typical performance
at submillimeter wavelengths.
3.2.1 Pointing and Wavefront Errors
The telescope mount usually determines the pointing error, while the primary mirror support
determines the mirror surface error and hence higher-order wavefront errors. All these errors
are related in that a pointing error is just a tilt, which is the lowest-order wavefront error. It is
usual to carry pointing and surface error as separate terms in the telescopeerror budget because
the pointing error can easily be measured and corrected by observing a nearby, bright, point
source. At submillimeter wavelengths, atmospheric seeing does not dominate the wavefront
error under good observing conditions, so the telescope sees a diffraction-limited image (with
resolution .λ/D) that moves around slowly as the telescope pointing error varies (typically
1–2′′ on timescales of hours).
3.2.2 Primary Mirror Support
The primary mirror is the most difficult part of any reflecting telescope. The key design
consideration is maintaining the mirror surface accuracy in the presence of gravity, temper-
ature variations, wind, solar illumination, and acceleration due to scanning. Gravitational and
thermal deformations are the biggest problems for ground-based telescopes.
Telescope primary mirrors are essentially plate structures, so a simple model of the sag of
a plate supported around its edge can provide some insight. The p-p deflection of a simply
supported plate is (Timoshenko and Woinowsky-Krieger 1959)
δ ≈
qD
Eηh,
(7.7)
where q is the pressure on the plate, h is the plate thickness, E is Young’s modulus for the plate
material, and η is the filling factor. The pressure on the plate due to its own weight and the
weight of the segments is
q ∼ghρη,
(7.8)
where g is the acceleration due to gravity and ρ is the density of the plate material. The factor 2
in (> 7.8) is a somewhat pessimistic estimate of the areal density of the segments. The thickness
of a submillimeterprimary mirror is typically similar to the depth of the primary surface, which
is D/for a focal ratio of 0.5, so the rms gravitational deflection is
σ ≈δ
∼gρD
E
,
(7.9)

304 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
101
102
103
101
102
Surface error (μm rms)
Diameter (m)
gravity−steel
gravity−CFRP
thermal−steel
thermal−CFRP
CCAT
CSO
ALMA
APEX
SPT
GBT
JCMT
ACT
LMT
⊡Fig. 7-15
Diameter vs. surface error for passive (*) and active (o) primary mirror supports made of steel
(black), CFRP (red), and aluminum (blue). Points for CCAT and LMT are predictions. Materials
properties are given in >Table 7-4
where the rms is taken to be one third of the p-p. Temperaturevariations across the plate change
its thickness, resulting in rms surface error
σT ≈αT (D/),
(7.10)
where T is the rms temperature variation and α is the coefficient of thermal expansion of
the plate material.
> Equations 7.9 and
> 7.10 are plotted in
> Fig. 7-15 for different
materials and 1-K-rms temperature variation, which is typical for a submillimeter telescope
(Greve and Bremer 2010). The primary diameter vs. surface error plot is often called a von
Hoerner plot after its inventor (von Hoerner 1967). The plot is useful because it indicates
which materials must be used to achieve a given performance with a passive support struc-
ture, or alternatively when active control of the optical surfaces is needed. Passive supports
are often designed to deform under gravity in a way that maintains a paraboloidal surface,
but with an elevation-dependent focal length. These homologous designs achieve gravitational
deflections a few times smaller than predicted by (> 7.9). The CSO uses a combination of
homology and slow active control to beat the limits for gravitational deflection of its steel
structure, so the performance is limited by thermal deformations. The GBT and LMT are
examples of much larger, lower-frequency, telescopes with steel structures and fast active sur-
faces (Baars 2007). ALMA uses a CFRP structure to achieve the required performance with
a completely passive support. ACT is made of Al, so its performance is limited by thermal
deformations.

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
305
For a given surface error in >Fig. 7-15, the Strehl ratio is
S = exp−(πσ
λ )

,
(7.11)
which is the Ruze formula familiar to designers of microwave telescopes (Ruze 1966). High
Strehl ratio places stringent demands on the surface error. For example, S > ., corresponding
to <20% increase in integration time compared with an ideal telescope, requires σ < λ/,
which is challenging at short wavelengths.
During a scanning observation, acceleration of the telescope causes the primary to deflect,
resulting in pointing errors that can degrade the image resolution. The effect is small for existing
submillimetertelescopes, which have large beamwidths and slow drives, but it will be important
for future, large, submillimeter telescopes that scan quickly. The pointing error can be calculated
in terms of the gravitational deflection or natural frequency, leading to some useful expressions
that capture the dynamic performance of the primary. The stiffness of the primary is
k = mg
δ ,
(7.12)
where m is the mass of the primary, so the natural frequency is
ω =
√
k
m =
√g
δ ∼
D
√
E
ρ .
(7.13)
The deflection of the primary due to angular acceleration Ω is
δa ≈Ω (D/) δ/g ≈Ω (D/)/ω,
(7.14)
and the corresponding pointing error is
θa ≈δa/ (D/) ≈Ω/ω.
(7.15)
A 25-m primary made of steel should achieve ∼14-Hz natural frequency, so at ○s−accel-
eration, the pointing error should be .′′, which is 1/7 of the beamwidth at λ = μm,
essentially the entire pointing budget. If the natural frequency were only 7 Hz, which is proba-
bly more realistic, the pointing error would be >1/2 the beamwidth, which is enough to severely
degrade the image resolution.
Submillimeter telescopes often have a simple enclosure to protect the telescope from wind
buffeting, solar heating, and severe weather (see >Table 7-1). Wind protection is important for
telescopes with light structures because these designs tend to have low stiffness, even though
the stiffness to mass ratio is high enough to give small gravitational deformation. The rms wind-
induced deformation of the primary is
σw ≈σ qw
q ,
(7.16)
where
qw = 
ρairv
(7.17)
is the wind pressure, ρair ≈kg m−is the density of air, and v is the wind speed. Combining
(> 7.16), (> 7.13), (> 7.9), and (> 7.8) yields
σw ∼
ρairvD
Eη ∼
ρairv

ωDρη.
(7.18)

306 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
The outside wind speed at a submillimeter site might be ms−, so qw ≈Pa. For a 25 m
diameter steel primary with 7 Hz natural frequency and 1% filling factor, this wind pressure
will cause ∼13 μm rms deformation, which is the entire surface error budget for a λ = μm
telescope and an order of magnitude larger than the fraction of the budget that might typically
be allocated to wind-induced deformation. If this primary were exposed, its stiffness would have
to be increased by an order of magnitude. Stiffness scales roughly with filling factor, so the cost
of the primary support would also increase by an order of magnitude. However, wind pressure
scales with the square of the wind speed, so even a simple enclosure can make the wind pressure
negligible. This approach can be much less expensive than making the structure stiff enough to
resist outside wind forces.
3.2.3 Mirror Control
Most existing submillimeter telescopes have passive primary mirror support systems, which
can achieve ∼15-μm-rms surface accuracy on a ∼10-m telescope. The CSO is an example of a
submillimeter telescope with an active primary. Its segments are attached to a steel spaceframe
truss with ∼100-mm-long steel rods that can be heated to give ∼10 μm of length adjustment.
This allows slow active control which has improved the surface error from 22 to ∼13 μm rms
(Leong et al. 2006; Woody et al. 1998). Future, larger telescopes will have larger gravitational
deformations and will require fast active control.
The simplest approach to active control is open loop, based on look up tables for gravity
and temperature. The GBT, LMT, JCMT, and CSO use this type of control. Open loop control
requires a mirror support with good repeatability. In practice, open loop control is limited by
the thermal stability of the mirror support because it is difficult to generate a thermal model
that can predict deformations on small spatial scales.
Closed loop control is used on segmented optical telescopes and may be needed for future,
large, submillimeter telescopes. The usual approach is to measure the relative piston and tilt
of neighboring segments using edge sensors. These can be capacitive displacement sensors, as
in the Keck telescopes (Nelson et al. 1985), inductive sensors, as in HET (Booth et al. 2003)
and SALT (Menzies et al. 2010), or optical sensors, as proposed for CCAT (Woody 2011). Edge
sensors have good sensitivity to deformations on the scale of a segment, but the sensitivity to
low-order modes of the primary is poor because many sensor readings must be combined to
measure a low-order deformation. This is not a big issue for an optical telescope, because a
wavefront measurement on a bright star can quickly constrain the low-order modes, but it is a
serious concern for a submillimeter telescope, where submillimeter wavefront measurements
are slow and a suitable source is often not available. If the noise for a single sensor is es (in units
of length) and the noise is uncorrelated between sensors, the noise for a measurement of the
lowest-order mode of the primary is
eu ∼es
√
D/d,
(7.19)
where d is the size of a segment and D/d is the number of sensors across the mode. The fac-
tor
√
D/d in (> 7.19) is often called the error multiplier. For an optical telescope, the sensor
noise is mainly electrical noise, but a submillimeter telescope is made of materials with higher
and less uniform coefficient of thermal expansion, so thermal deformation of the sensor mounts
dominates. A submillimetermirror segmentmight have es ∼μm rms, so sensor noise is a seri-
ous issue for a large telescope. The situation is even worse for deformations that are correlated

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
307
between segments,e.g., gravitational deformation and cupping of the segmentsdue to a thermal
gradient through the segments. In this case, the noise for a measurement of the lowest-order
mode is
ec ∼esD/d.
(7.20)
In principle, an edge sensor system with enough sensors can measure cupping of the segments,
so it may be possible to correct the effect of segment deformations in a closed loop control
system.
3.2.4 Telescope Mount
The telescope mount usually has little impact on the surface accuracy of the primary, but it does
set the pointing performance. Most modern telescopes have an elevation over azimuth mount
to minimize the mass and cost of the mount. There are many design variations, but elevation
over azimuth mounts fall into two broad groups: a fork on a pedestal, or an alidade on a track
(see >Fig. 7-16). Mount structures are generally made of steel, to reduce the cost, and the filling
factor for the structure is typically ∼1% for box and spaceframe mount designs. The mounts
in >Fig. 7-16 look roughly like beams ∼D/high ×D/wide (along the elevation axis) ×D/
deep (fore-aft), so a simple beam model can provide a useful estimate of the performance. The
stiffness of the beam for end loading is (Olberg et al. 1992)
k′ ∼E′η′D

,
(7.21)
where E′ is Young’s modulus for the mount material and η′ is the filling factor. The primary
requires a counterweight with mass similar to that of the primary, and an elevation axle that
might be twice the mass of the primary, so the mass of the tipping structure is ∼4× the mass of
the primary. The mass of the mount is usually similar to the mass of the tipping structure, so
the total mass of telescope is
m′ ∼π (D/)(D/) ηρ,
(7.22)
⊡Fig. 7-16
Fork on pedestal (left) and alidade on track (right) telescope mounts. Crosses indicate bearings.
Some fork mounts are inverted, with the fork arms attached to the primary rather than to the
pedestal

308 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
where the mass of the primary is given by (> 7.8). The natural frequency of the telescope is then
ω′ ∼
√
k′
m′ ∼

D
√
E′η′
ρη .
(7.23)
For a steel structure, ω′/ (π) ∼/D, where D is in meters. This is consistent with measured
natural frequencies for radio telescopes in the 10–30-m-diameter range (Gawronski 2005).
> Equation 7.23 is a rough but useful guide to the dynamic performance of the structure, and
it immediately gives an estimate of the fast motion capabilities of the telescope because the
drive control loop bandwidth must be a factor 4–10 smaller than the natural frequency. Thus,
a 25-m steel telescope should achieve a drive bandwidth of 0.4–1 Hz, which would allow posi-
tion switching at ∼0.1 Hz. A CFRP primary would improve the drive bandwidth by roughly a
factor 2.
A simple model can also give us a useful estimateof pointing errors due to temperaturevari-
ations in the mount. For a massive structure like the mount, thermal deformations are mainly
driven bydiurnal temperature variations, while forlighter, open structures like the primary, spa-
tial variations in air temperatureare more important. The thermal time constant of the mount is
τ = C/G,
(7.24)
where C is the specific heat and G is the thermal conductance. For pointing errors, we are
concerned with temperature variations across the mount. Breaking the upper part of the mount
into three slices, one for each elevation bearing and one in the center, gives
G ∼β (D/)η′/ (D/),
(7.25)
where β is the thermal conductivity of the mount material. The specific heat of one of the slices is
C ∼c (D/)(D/) η′ρ′,
(7.26)
where c and ρ′ are the specific heat capacity and density of the mount material. The thermal
time constant is then
τ ∼cρ′
β × D
.
(7.27)
For a steel mount, β/cρ′ = .× −ms−(see >Table 7-4), so τ ∼D/h, where D is in
meters. If the mount acts as a single-pole, low-pass, thermal filter, the mount temperature is
⊡Table 7-4
Material properties (Wilson 1999)
Property
Symbol
Units
Aluminum
Steel
CFRP
Density
ρ
kg m−3
2,600
7,850
1,550
Young’s modulus
E
Pa
7 × 1010
2.1 × 1011
1.5 × 1011
Stiﬀness
E/ρ
J kg−1
2.7 × 107
2.7 × 107
9.7 × 107
Coeﬃcient of thermal expansion
α
K−1
2.2 × 10−5
1.1 × 10−5
2 × 10−7 to 10−6
Speciﬁc heat capacity
c
J kg−1 K−1
890
460
Thermal conductivity
β
W m−1 K−1
160
49
Thermal diﬀusivity
β/(cρ)
m2 s−1
6.9 × 10−5
1.4 × 10−5

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
309
T (t) ∼(ΔT/τ)sin (πt),
(7.28)
where ΔT is the amplitude of diurnal variations in air temperature. Temperature gradients
across the mount can be as large as T (t), in which case the pointing error is
θT ∼α′T (t),
(7.29)
where α′ is the coefficient of thermal expansion of the mount material. Pointing errors are usu-
ally measured by observing a nearby bright point source, and the measurementsare made often
enough to keep the pointing error smaller than about 1/10 of the beamwidth. The time between
pointing measurements is then
t′ < (/)(.λ/D)/ ˙θT ∼λD/ (α′ΔT) h,
(7.30)
where D and λ are in meters. ΔT is typically 5 K at high desert sites (Radford et al. 2008), so
for a 10-m steel telescope at λ = μm, t′ < /h. Pointing measurements typically take a
few minutes, so a measurement roughly every hour does not significantly impact the observing
efficiency. Since the thermal time constant scales with D, larger telescopes have better mount
thermal performance, despite the smaller beamwidth.
Telescope mounts are equipped with encoders to measure the position of the axes. Most
modern telescopes use optical tape or disk encoders. A tiltmeter is often mounted on the
azimuth axis to measure changes in the overall tilt of the structure. Some mounts include
metrology systems to directly measure thermal deformations of the yoke, and some use tem-
perature sensors to predict thermal deformations. All existing submillimeter telescope mounts
have rolling element bearings, but hydrostatic bearings will likely be used on future, large, sub-
millimeter telescopes. The drives are typically brushless DC motors with gearboxes driving a
ring or sector gear, but some telescopes (e.g., ALMA, Mangum et al. 2006) have direct drives.
3.3 Alignment
The telescope optics must be aligned when the telescope is built, and alignment must be
maintained during observations. This is a difficult problem. Some of the techniques that have
been developed for aligning submillimeter telescopes are described below. These fall into two
groups: direct measurements of the mirror surfaces and measurements of the wavefront deliv-
ered to a detector. In general, telescope alignment starts with direct measurements and then
moves to wavefront measurements when the errors are much smaller than the observing
wavelength.
Initial alignment of submillimeter telescope surfaces used to be done with a theodolite and
tape, which can achieve a few ×100-μm-rms surface errors on a 10-m telescope, but photogram-
metry and laser trackers are now widely used. Photogrammetry involves taking photographs of
reflective targets on the primary from different angles. A calibrated ruler is included somewhere
in the photographs to give the overall scale. Photogrammetry can measure features to about one
part in , i.e., a few ×μm rms for a 10-m primary. This technique was used for initial align-
ment of ALMA, and SPT. Laser trackers use precise measurements of the angle of a laser beam
reflected from a retro-reflector on the surface being measured, combined with interferometry
to measure the distance to the surface. The retro reflector is usually a corner cube mounted in a
sphere that can be moved around on the surface. A laser tracker can measure features to a few
×μm rms on a 10-m primary in the field, but much more accurate results can be achieved

310 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
under controlled conditions (Zobrist et al. 2009). ACT was aligned using a lasertracker (Hincks
et al. 2008).
Following initial alignment, millimeter-wave holography (Bennett et al. 1976; Scott and
Ryle 1977) is often used to measure and correct the surface. Holography measurements can
easily achieve an accuracy of a few microns. The technique measures the far field response
of a telescope, which is the Fourier Transform of the complex illumination pattern on the
primary. The phase of the illumination pattern corresponds to the wavefront error. A mea-
surement of the far field response requires an interferometer in which the telescope under
test is scanned across a source while the reference telescope is fixed on the source. A bright
celestial source, e.g., a planet, can be used to measure the wavefront over a range of eleva-
tions. This type of measurement typically requires a large reference telescope, so it is easy
for telescopes in an array, but rarely practical for a single telescope. An artificial source
on a tower can be used (Baars et al. 2007), in which case the reference telescope might
be just a small horn, but this measurement yields the near field response. The far field
response can be calculated if the relative position of the source and telescope is known. For
some near field holography measurements, the reference horn is mounted on the back of
the secondary of the telescope being measured. In this case, the horn also moves, but it is
small, so its response does not change much. The main problem with measurements that
use an artificial source on a tower is that the surface can be measured at only one, low
elevation.
Out of focus holography (Morris et al. 1991; Nikolic et al. 2007a) can be used to measure
low-order wavefront errors because they change the shape of the PSF. The technique involves
measuring the PSF at and on either side of focus, e.g., by moving the secondary while observ-
ing a bright point source with a camera. Model fits to the PSF yield the first few modes of the
wavefront. This is useful because the largest errors are typically in the lowest-order modes. Out
of focus holography is routinely used to measure and correct the 100-m diameter GBT (Nikolic
et al. 2007b).
The CSO uses a shearing interferometer (Serabyn et al. 1991) to measure wavefront errors.
This is another way of measuring the far field response of the telescope, but instead of using
a reference telescope, as in holography, light from the core of an image of a point source pro-
vides the reference. The beam from the telescope is split and then recombined at a focus so
that one point source image (the signal) can be moved relative the other (the reference). A path
length modulator is included in the reference arm so that a total power detector can measure
the complex field vs. frequency where the reference and signal images overlap. The signal image
is stepped across the reference until the response function has been sampled to large enough
radius to give the desired spatial resolution on the primary.
Phase contrast interferometry (Dicke 1975; Malacara 1992; Serabyn and Wallace 2010) is
another promising technique for submillimeter wavefront measurements. In this case, a cam-
era is used to inspect the pupil while the average phase of the illumination is changed. A π/
phase shift converts small phase variations into brightness variations, so a measurement of the
brightness over the pupil gives the wavefront error. The phase shift is done by modulating the
path length at the core of a point source image, either using phase plates or a small moving
mirror in the center of a larger mirror. CCAT will use phase contrast interferometry to set and
maintain its optics. A measurement of the 25-m surface with 0.5-m spatial resolution and a
few μm rms accuracy will take ∼10 s on Mars to ∼2 h on Uranus, depending on the wavelength
(Serabyn 2006).

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
311
References
Baars, J. W. M. 2007, The Paraboloidal Reflector
Antenna in Radio Astronomy and Communica-
tion (New York: Springer)
Baars,
J. W. M., et
al. 1994, Proc.
IEEE,
82,
687–696
Baars, J. W. M., et al. 2006, ALMA Memo 566 NRAO,
Charlottesville VA
Baars, J. W. M., et al. 2007, IEEE Antennas Propag.
Mag., 49, 24–41
Bennett, J. C., et al. 1976, IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag. 24, 295–303
Blake, G. A., Keene, J., & Phillips, T. G. 1985, Chlo-
rine in dense interstellar clouds – the abundance
of HCl in OMC-1. ApJ, 295, 501
Blake, G. A., Sutton, E. C., Masson, C. R., & Phillips,
T. G. 1987, Molecular abundances in OMC-1 –
the chemical composition of interstellar molec-
ular clouds and the influence of massive star
formation. ApJ, 315, 621
Blundell, R. 2007, in IEEE/MTT-S International
Microwave
Symposium
(New
York:
IEEE),
1857–1860
Booth, J. A., et al. 2003, Proc. SPIE, 4837, 919–933
Carlstrom, J. E., et al. 2011, PASP, 123, 568–581
Caves, C. 1982, Quantum limits on noise in linear
amplifiers. Phys. Rev. D, 26, 1817
Cheng, J., & Mangum, J. G. 1998, MMA Memo, Vol.
197 (Tucson: NRAO, Charlottesville VA)
Dayem, A. H., & Martin, R. J. 1962, Quantum inter-
action of microwave radiation with tunneling
between superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett., 8, 246
Dicke, R. H. 1975, ApJ, 198, 605–615
Dolan, G. J., Phillips, T. G., & Woody, D. P. 1979,
Low-noise 115 GHz mixing in superconducting
oxide-barrier
tunnel
junctions.
Appl.
Phys.
Lett., 34, 347
Dragone, C. 1978, Bell Syst. Tech. J., 57, 2663–
2684
Dragone, C. 1982, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
30, 331–339
Dragone, C. 1983, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
31, 764–775
Fowler, J. W., et al. 2007, Appl. Opt., 46, 3444–3454
Gawronski,
W.
2005,
in
American
Control
Conference. IEEE, FrA11.2
Gershenzon, E., Gol’tsman, G., Gogidze, I. G., Gusev,
Y. P., Elant’ev, A. I., Karasik, B. S., & Semenov, A.
1990, Millimeter and submillimeter range mixer
based on electronic heating of superconducting
films in the resistive state. Sov. Phys. Supercond.,
3, 1582
Goldsmith,
P.
F.
1998,
Quasioptical
Systems
(Piscataway: IEEE). Chap. 5
Greve,A., & Bremer, M. 2010, Thermal Design and
Thermal Behaviour of Radio Telescopes and
their Enclosures (Berlin: Springer). Chap. 9
Griffin, M. W., Bock, J. J., & Gear, W. K. 2002, Appl.
Opt., 41, 4666–4670
Guilloteau, S., et al. 1992, A&A, 262, 624–633
Gusten, R., et al. 2006, A&A, 454, L13–L16
Hanany, S., & Marrone, D. P. 2002, Appl. Opt., 41,
4666–4670
Hincks, A. D., et
al. 2008,
Proc.
SPIE,
7020,
70201P
Jaffe, D. T., Harris, A. I., Silber, M., Genzel, R., &
Betz, A. L. 1985, ApJ, 290, L59
Jenness, T., Lightfoot, J. F., & Holland, W. S. 1998,
Proc. SPIE, 3357, 548–558
Keating, B. G., et al. 2003, Proc. SPIE, 4843, 284–295
Keene, J., Blake, G. A., & Phillips, T. G. 1983, First
detection of the ground state JK = 1→0sub-
millimeter transition of interstellar ammonia.
ApJ, 271, L27
Kooi, J. W., Chan, M., Phillips, T. G., Bumble, B., &
LeDuc, H. G. 1992, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory.
Technol., 40, 812
Korsch, D. 1991, Reflective Optics (San Diego:
Academic Press)
Kramer, C., et al. 1998, Proc. SPIE, 3357, 711–720
Lamb, J. W. 1996, Int. J. Infrared Millim. Waves, 17,
1997–2034
Lamb, J. W., & Olver, A. D. 1986, Proc. IEE-H, 133,
43–49
Lawrence, C. R., Herbig, T., & Readhead, A. C. S.
1994, Proc. IEEE, 82, 763–767
Leighton, R. B. 1978, A 10 meter telescope for
millimeter and submillimeter astronomy. Final
Technical Report for NSF Grant 73–04908
Leong, M., et al. 2006, Proc. SPIE, 6275, 62750P
Low,
F.
J.
1961,
Low-temperature
germanium
bolometer. JOSA, 51(11), 1300–1304
Malacara, D. 1992, Optical Shop Testing (2nd ed.;
New York: Wiley). Chap. 3
Mangum, J. G., et al. 2006, PASP, 118, 1257–1301
McGrath, W. R. et al. 1997, Superconductive hot
electron mixers with ultra-wide RF bandwidth
for heterodyne receiver applications up to 3 THz,
in Proceedings of the ESA Symposium ‘The Far
Infrared and Submillimetre Universe’, Grenoble,
France, ESA SP-401
Menzies, J., et al. 2010, Proc. SPIE, 7739, 77390X
Moreira, F. J. S., Prata, A., Jr., & Thorburn, M.
A. 1996, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 44,
492–499
Morris, D., Davis, J. H., & Mayer, C. E. 1991, Proc.
IEE-H, 138, 243–247

312 7
Submillimeter Telescopes
Morris, D., et al. 2009, IET Microw. Antennas
Propag. 3, 99–108
Nelson, J. E., Mast, T. S., & Faber, S. M. 1985, Keck
Obs. Rep. 90, The Design of the Keck Obser-
vatory and Telescope (Berkeley: W. M. Keck
Observatory, Kamuela HI)
Neufeld, D. A., et al. 2010, Strong absorption by
interstellar hydrogen fluoride: Herschel/HIFI
observations
of the sight-line
to G10.6–0.4
(W31C). A&A, 518, L108
Nikolic, B., Hills, R. E., & Richer, J. S. 2007a, A&A,
465, 679–683
Nikolic, B., et al. 2007b, A&A, 465, 685–693
Olberg, E., et al. 1992, Machinery’s Handbook (24th
ed.; New York: Industrial Press), 226
Padin, S. et al. 2008a, Appl. Opt., 47, 4418–4428
Padin, S., et al. 2008b, Electron. Lett., 44, 950–952
Page, L., et al. 2003, ApJ, 585, 566–586
Pearson, J. C., Guesten, R., Klein, & T., Whyborn,
N. D. 2000, The local oscillator system for the
heterodyne instrument for FIRST (HIFI), in
Proceedings of the SPIE 4013, UV, Optical, and
IR Space Telescopes and Instruments, ed. J. B.
Breckinridge, & P. Jacobsen, Munich, Germany
(Bellingham: SPIE), 264
Peterson, J. B., et al. 2000, ApJ, 532, L83–L86
Phillips, T. G. 1988, Techniques of submillimeter
astronomy, in Millimetre and Submillimetre
Astronomy, ed. R. D. Wolstencroft, & W. B.
Burton (Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer), 1–25.
Phillips, T. G., & Huggins, P. J. 1981, Abundance of
atomic carbon (CI) in dense interstellar clouds.
ApJ, 251, 533–540
Phillips, T. G., & Jefferts, K. B. 1973, A cryogenic
bolometer heterodyne receiver for millimeter
wave astronomy. RScI, 44, 1009
Phillips, T. G., & Keene, J. 1992, Submillimeter
astronomy. IEEE Proc., 80, 1662
Phillips, T. G., & Woody, D. P. 1982, Millimeter- and
submillimeter-wave receivers. ARA&A, 20, 285
Phillips, T. G., Neugebauer, G., Werner, M. W., &
Huggins, P. J. 1977, Detection of submillimeter
(870-micron)
CO emission from the Orion
molecular cloud. ApJ, 217, L161
Phillips,
T. G., Kwan,
J. Y., & Huggins,
P. J.
1980a, Detection of submillimeter lines of CO
(0.65 mm) and HO (0.79 mm), in IAU Symp. 87,
Interstellar Molecules (Dordrecht: Reidel), 21
Phillips, T. G., Huggins, P. J., Kuiper, T. B. H., &
Miller, R. E. 1980b, Detection of the 610 μm
(492 GHz) line of interstellar atomic carbon.
ApJ, 238, L103
Pilbratt, G. L., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L1
Prober, D. I. 1993, Superconducting terahertz mixer
using a transition-edge microbolometer. Appl.
Phys. Lett., 62, 2119
Radford, S., et al. 2008, Proc. SPIE, 7012, 70121Z
Richards, P. L., Shen, T. M., Harris, R. E., & Lloyd,
F. L. 1979, A quasiparticle heterodyne mixing in
SIS tunnel junctions. Appl. Phys. Lett., 34, 345
Rowan-Robinson, M., Broadhurst, T., Lawrence, A.,
McMahon, R. G., Lonsdale, C. J., Oliver, S. J.,
Taylor, A. N., Hacking, P., Conrow, T., Saunders,
W. S., Ellis, R. S., Efstathiou, G. P., & Condon, J.
J. 1991, A high-redshift IRAS galaxy with huge
luminosity – hidden quasar or protogalaxy?
Nature, 351, 719
Rusch, W. V. T. et al. 1990, IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., 38, 1141–1149
Russell, R. W., Melnick, G., Gull, G. E., & Harwit, M.
1980, Detection of the 157 micron (1910 GHz)
[C II] emission line from the interstellar gas
complexes NGC 2024 and M42. ApJ, 240, L99
Ruze, J. 1966, Proc. IEEE, 54, 633–640
Saito, M. 2011, in Proceedings of the General Assem-
bly and
Scientific
Symposium 2011 XXXth
URSI, Istanbul, J10.6
Savini, G., & Hargrave, P. C. 2010, Proceedings of
the 35th International Conference on Infrared,
Millimeter and Terahertz Waves (Piscataway:
IEEE), 1–2
Sayers, J., et al. 2010, ApJ, 708, 1674–1691
Schroeder, D. R. 2000, Astronomical Optics (2nd
ed.; San Diego: Academic). Chap. 6
Scott, P. F., & Ryle, M. 1977, Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc. 178, 539–545
Serabyn, E. 1995, Wide-field imaging optics for
submm arrays, ASP Conference Series 75, 74–81,
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Orem UT
Serabyn, E. 1997, Int. J. Infrared Millim. Waves, 18,
273–284
Serabyn, E. 2006, Proc. SPIE, 6275, 62750Z
Serabyn, E., & Wallace, J. K. 2010, Proc. SPIE, 7741,
77410U
Serabyn, E., Phillips, T. G., & Masson, C. R. 1991,
Appl. Opt., 30, 1227–1241
Stacey, G. J., Lugten, J. B., & Genzel, R. 1987, Detec-
tion of interstellar CH in the far-infrared. ApJ,
313, 859
Stark, A. A., et al. 2001, PASP, 113, 567–585
Storey, J., Watson, D., & Townes, C. 1981, Detection
of interstellar OH in the far-infrared. ApJ, 244,
L27
Swetz, D. S., et al. 2011, ApJ Suppl., 194, 41–
Tauber, J. A., et al. 2010, A&A, 520, A2
Timoshenko, S., & Woinowsky-Krieger, S. 1959,
Theory of Plates and Shells (2nd ed.; New York:
McGraw-Hill), 57
Tran, H., et al. 2008, Appl. Opt., 47, 103–109
Tucker,
J. R. 1979, Quantum
limited
detection
in tunnel junction mixers. IEEE J. Quanum
Electron., 15, 1234

Submillimeter Telescopes 7
313
von Hoerner, S. 1967, AJ, 72, 35–47
Wengler, M. J., & Woody, D. P. 1987, Quantum
noise in heterodyne detection. IEEE J. Quantum
Electron., 23, 613
Wilson, R. N. 1996, Reflecting Telescope Optics I
(Berlin: Springer)
Wilson, R. N. 1999, Reflecting Telescope Optics II
(Berlin: Springer)
Woody, D. P. 2009, Submillimeter
Astrophysics
and
Technology:
A
Symposium
Honoring
Thomas G. Phillips, ASP Conference Series,
417, 3
Woody, D. P. 2011, in Proceedings of the General
Assembly
and
Scientific
Symposium
2011
XXXth URSI, Istanbul, J10.7
Woody, D., Serabyn, E., & Shinckel, A. 1998, Proc.
SPIE, 3357, 474–485
Zobrist,
T.
L.,
et
al.
2009,
Proc.
SPIE,
7426,
742613


8
Radio Telescopes
Ron Ekers⋅Thomas L. Wilson
Australia Telescope National Facility, CSIRO Astronomy and
Space Science, Epping, NSW, Australia
Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
2
History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
2.1
Early History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
2.2
Evolution of Radio Telescope Sensitivity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
2.2.1
Exponential Growth in Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
2.2.2
Livingston Curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 320
2.3
The Development of the Aperture Synthesis Radio Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
2.3.1
Australian Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
2.3.2
Cambridge Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
2.3.3
The Beginnings of Aperture Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
2.3.4
Earth Rotation Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322
3
Radio Astronomy Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322
3.1
Radiative Transfer and Black Body Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322
3.2
The Nyquist Theorem and Noise Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
3.3
Overview of Intensity, Flux Density, and Main Beam Brightness Temperature . . . . 324
3.4
Polarization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
3.5
Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
4
Antennas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
4.1
The Hertz Dipole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
4.2
Filled Apertures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
4.2.1
Angular Resolution and Efficiencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
4.2.2
Foci, Blockage, and Surface Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
5
Interferometers and Aperture Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
5.1
Aperture Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
5.2
Interferometer Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
6
Design Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
6.1
Frequency Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
6.2
Sensitivity and Survey Speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
6.3
Angular Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
6.4
Field of View (FoV) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_8, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

316 8
Radio Telescopes
7
The Antenna Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
7.1
Fourier Synthesis Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
7.2
Crosses, Ts, and Other 2D Aperture Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335
7.3
Phased Array Beamforming. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
7.4
Cylindrical Reflectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
7.5
Phased Array Feeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
7.6
Mosaicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
7.7
Rotation Measure Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
7.8
Long Baseline Interferometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
8
The Fundamental Differences Between Arrays and Dishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
8.1
Filling Factor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
8.2
Analog Beam Formation in the Focal Plane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
8.3
Equivalence of Dishes and Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
8.4
Array Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
9
Backends, Data Analysis, and Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
10
Types of Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) and Mitigation Strategies . . . . . . . . 341
10.1
Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
10.2
RFI Mitigation Methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
10.3
Adaptive Beam Nulling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342
11
General Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342
11.1
Open Skies Policy in Radio Astronomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342
11.2
Selecting the Best Telescope for Your Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
11.3
Analog Versus Digital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
11.3.1 Fully Digital Receivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 344
11.4
General Purpose Versus Specialized Telescope Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 344
12
The World’s Major Radio Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
12.1
Very Large Array (VLA, Now JVLA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
12.2
Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 346
12.3
VLBA (Very Long Baseline Array) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
12.4
MERLIN (Multi-element Radio Linked Interferomer Network) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
12.5
Parkes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
12.6
Arecibo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 348
12.7
Effelsberg 100-m Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
12.8
Green Bank Telescope (GBT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
12.9
Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
12.10 Jodrell Bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
12.11 Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope (GMRT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
13
Future Big Science Projects in Radio Astronomy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
13.1
The Karl G Jansky Very Large Array (JVLA, Previously the EVLA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
13.2
ALMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
13.3
LOFAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351

Radio Telescopes 8
317
13.4
Murchison Widefield Array (MWA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
13.5
Long Wavelength Array (LWA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
13.6
FAST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
13.7
SKA and the SKA Precursors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
13.7.1 MeerKAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
13.7.2 ASKAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
13.7.3 SKA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
14
The Future. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 354
A.1. Optical and Radio Analogs and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 354
A.2. The World’s Largest Centimeter and Meter Radio Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 354
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 357

318 8
Radio Telescopes
Abstract:
“Radio Telescopes” starts with a brief historical introduction from Jansky’s 1931
discovery of radio emission from the Milky Way through the development of radio telescope
dishes and arrays to aperture synthesis imaging. It includes sufficient basics of electromag-
netic radiation to provide some understanding of the design and operation of radio telescopes.
The criteria such as frequency range, sensitivity, survey speed, angular resolution, and field
of view that determine the design of radio telescopes are introduced. Because it is so easy
to manipulate the electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies, radio telescopes have evolved
into many different forms, sometimes with “wire” structures tuned to specific wavelengths,
which look very different from any kind of classical telescope. To assist astronomers more
familiar with other wavelength domains, the >appendix A.1. includes a comparison of radio
and optical terminology. Some of the different types of radio telescopes including the filled
aperture dishes, electronically steered phased arrays, and aperture synthesis radio telescopes
are discussed, and there is a section comparing the differences between dishes and arrays.
Some of the more recent developments including hierarchical beam forming, phased array
feeds, mosaicing, rotation measure synthesis, digital receivers, and long baseline interferom-
eters are included. The problem of increasing radio frequency interference is discussed, and
some possible mitigation strategies are outlined.
The open-sky policy adopted by most radio astronomy observatories makes it possible to
select the best radio telescope for an experiment, and some guidelines are provided together
with an >appendix A.2. listing all of the world’s large centimeter and meter radio wavelength
telescopes. Finally, we include a short description of some of the great radio telescopes which
have had the most scientific impact in the last decade and give some indications of future
directions.
Keywords: Angular resolution, Aperture synthesis, Digital receivers, Field of view, History,
Phased arrays, Radio telescopes, RFI, Sensitivity
1
Introduction
The intention is to give an overview of the history, design, and use of radio telescopes
with emphasis on the general principals rather than detailed analysis. This should allow the
astronomer to make informed decisions about the most suitable type of radio telescope to use
to obtain observational information. Once this decision is made, most observatories will pro-
vide the tools needed to fine-tune sensitivity requirements and the other detailed specifications
needed to make effective observations. These fundamentals are also essential when considering
the design of future radio telescopes. The discussions of the basics is extended, and receivers,
backends, and data processing are discussed in Volume 2, >Chap. 6.
Volume 1, >Chap. 7, covers submillimeter and millimeter radio telescopes, and we focus
here on the wavelength range from about 30GHz (1 cm) down to the ionospheric cutoff at about
15 MHz (20 m). This range of 2,000:1 in wavelength results in a great diversity in radio telescope
designs.
Because it is so easy to manipulate the electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies, radio
telescopes have evolved into many different forms, sometimes with “wire” structures tuned to
specific wavelengths, which look very different from any kind of classical telescope. The most
striking difference is between the dishes which are single monolithic collectors, either parabolic
or parabolic sections, which concentrate the radiation at the focus where it is amplified in
radio receivers, and the arrays which involve many separated receptors which sample the wave

Radio Telescopes 8
319
front over large areas in the aperture plane and form an image by combining these signals
electronically. In either case, the receiver amplifies the power collected by the telescope over
a solid angle determined by the aperture of the telescope and the wavelength.
Appendix 1 summarizes some of the key concepts in optical and radio telescopes with the
different nomenclature used at optical and radio wavelengths.
Appendix 2 is a compilation of the world’s large cm radio telescopes. Only operating radio
telescopes with a diameter greater than 25 m (or equivalent area) are included.
2
History
2.1 Early History
The definitive history of the development of radio astronomy from the beginnings in the 1930s
up to 1953 can be found in Sullivan (2009). The new radio window on the universe was opened
unexpectedly in 1932 by Jansky (1933a, b) from Bell Telephone Laboratory in the USA. Jansky
detected radio emission from the Milky Way while investigating the source of noise on Trans
Atlantic telephone routes. With no theoretical framework to understand these results and a
vast communication gap between the astronomers and the engineers, this discovery was largely
ignored until 1937 when Reber built the first parabolic dish larger than a few meters (see Reber
1958). Reber changed from the “bent wire” antennas to a 31-ft parabolic dish with amplifiers at
the focus so he could work at higher frequencies (3.3 GHz) and more easily change frequency.
At the time, the only concept for the source of the radio emission was thermal processes, so in
this Rayleigh-Jeans region of the spectrum, it was expected that the emission detected by Jansky
at 20.5 MHz (15 m) would be much more intense at cm wavelengths. This division between
arrays oftuned elements at low frequencies and the more recognizable parabolicdishes at higher
frequencies continues to this day.
During World War II the radio frequency technology developed rapidly due to the use of
radar systems, so by 1946, the time was ripe to return to observations of the sky with far more
sensitive radio equipment. Development of the equipment needed for receiving radio waves
took off in many countries (UK, France, Australia, Japan, Russia, Canada, USA, see Sullivan
(2009), but early developments were dominated by the groups led by Ryle at the University of
Cambridge, UK, and by Pawsey at the CSIR (later CSIRO) in Sydney, Australia.
2.2 Evolution of Radio Telescope Sensitivity
2.2.1 Exponential Growth in Science
Harwit (1981) showed that the most important discoveries in astronomy result from techni-
cal innovation. The discoveries peak soon after new technology appears, and typically within
5 years of the technical capability. Instruments used for discoveries are often built by the
observer. It had already been well established that most scientific advances follow technical
innovation in other areas of science. de Solla Price (1963) applied quantitative measurement
to the progress of science (scientometrics) and reached the conclusion that most scientific
advances follow laboratory experiments. His analysis also showed that the normal mode of
growth of science is exponential. A rather simplified conclusion to draw from this is that any

320 8
Radio Telescopes
3
Radio Telescope Sensitivity
Arecibo
WSRT
Bonn
Parkes
Jodrell
Dwingeloo
Reber
ATCA
VLA
VLA
GMRT
GBT
VLA*
SKA
2
Log Relative Sensitivity
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
Date
⊡Fig. 8-1
Radio telescope sensitivity vs. time. Points are the relative continuum point source sensitivity
when the telescopes were built, or after major upgrades. VLA* is the EVLA upgrade, now named
the Jansky VLA. SKA is the proposed sensitivity for a telescope which has not yet been built
(see >Sect. 13)
field which has not maintained an exponential growth has now died out, so current active
research areas are all still in an exponential growth phase. Furthermore, to maintain the expo-
nential, the continual introduction of new technology is required since just refining existing
technology plateaus out.
2.2.2 Livingston Curve
A famous example which illustrates this very well is the rate of increase of operating energy in
particle accelerators byLivingston and Blewett (1962). Starting in 1930, each particle accelerator
technology provided exponential growth up to a ceiling when a new technology was introduced.
The envelope of the set of curves is itself an exponential with an increase in energy of 10in
60 years. This has been updated by Riesselmann (2009) to include the Large Hadron Collider.
This example of exponential growth, originally presented by Fermi in 1954, has become known
as the “Livingston Curve.”
To this we can add the now famous “Moore’s law” for computing devices (more precisely for
transistors on a chip). Moore (1965) noted that the transistor density of semiconductor chips

Radio Telescopes 8
321
doubled roughly every 1–2 years. This was later refined to doubling every 18 months, and this
exponential growth has been maintained for the last 40 years (Mollick 2006).
> Figure 8-1 plots the point source continuum sensitivity of telescopes used for radio
astronomy since the first discovery of extraterrestrial radio emission in 1940. It has been expo-
nential with an increase in sensitivity of 10since 1940, doubling every 3 years. Also in this case,
we can see particular radio telescopetechnologies reaching ceilings and new technologies being
introduced, e.g., the transition from huge single dishes to arrays of smaller dishes in the 1980s.
2.3 The Development of the Aperture Synthesis Radio Telescope
Because of the long radio wavelengths, it was realized that interferometers with large spacings
between the elements would be required to obtain high-enough angular resolution to determine
the origin of the radio waves. Two of the main pioneering groups were at the University of
Cambridge in the UK, led by Ryle, and at the CSIRO (then CSIR) Division of Radiophysics
in Sydney, Australia, led by Pawsey. Both groups used the WWII radar technology to build
astronomical instruments.
2.3.1 Australian Group
In Australia, the main focus was on solar imaging (see >Chap. 71). The sun is a strong source
but has a complex and time variable structure requiring good instantaneous measurements of
the Fourier components. For this reason, the Australian arrays followed an evolutionary path
with large numbers of relatively small elements.
In 1951, Christiansen built the Potts Hill grating array with thirty-two 6-ft diameter dishes
near Sydney, Australia. By 1955, the first earth rotation synthesis image was obtained by
Christiansen and Warburton (1955). Wild (1967) built a 3-km diameter circle of ninety-six
3-m dishes which made moving images of the radio sun. It operated for 17 years from 1967 and
resolved many of the questions about the nature of solar bursts.
2.3.2 Cambridge Group
After early experiments observing the sun, Ryle’s group in Cambridge moved their focus to the
observation of “radio stars.” These sources were static but much weaker than the sun, so the
arrays evolved along a different path. They used movable antennas and earth rotation to build
up the Fourier components over time, and they needed much larger elements to achieve the
sensitivity required for the fainter sources. This evolution culminated in the construction of the
One-Mile Telescope in 1963 (Ryle and Hewish 1960).
2.3.3 The Beginnings of Aperture Synthesis
The first published suggestion that it would be possible to synthesize an image of the radio
sky by measuring a range of Fourier components was made by McCready et al. (1947). How-
ever, this technique was impractical with the cliff interferometers they were using and was not
suitable for imaging solar bursts which were strongly variable in both time and frequency.

322 8
Radio Telescopes
The first observations using a range of Fourier components measured with an interferome-
ter with movable elements were made at the Cavendish Laboratory by Stanier (1950), Machin
(1951), and O’Brien (1953).
2.3.4 Earth Rotation Synthesis
In June 1961, radioastronomers at the Cavendish Laboratoryin Cambridge, UK, used 4Caerials
operating at 178 MHz to make a radio source survey of the North Pole region using the earth’s
rotation to fully sample the aperture plane (Ryle and Neville 1962). Computations and graph-
ical display used EDSACII which was the first use of a digital computer for radio astronomy
imaging. The X-ray crystallographers in the Cavendish laboratory had developed the necessary
Fourier transform programs. This was 7 years after Christiansen and Warburton (1955) first
demonstrated the Earth’s rotation synthesis with an observation of the quiet sun using an array
of small dishes in Australia. However, the Australian group took many months to calculate by
hand the Fourier transforms for one image, and the method was considered impractical at the
time.
In 1962, the Cambridge group went on to build the One-Mile Telescope (Ryle and Hewish
1960) and the 5-km telescope in 1971. Ryle was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1974 “For his
observations and inventions, in particular for the aperture synthesis technique.”
The further development of Fourier imaging, deconvolution, and self-calibration will be
described in Volume 2, >Chap. 7.
3
Radio Astronomy Fundamentals
A summary of the basics of electromagnetic radiation that are useful for the discussions in this
chapter is provided in the following section. More details and physical background are available
in a number of textbooks, for example, Kraus (1986), Burke and Graham-Smith (1996), and
Wilson et al. (2008).
3.1 Radiative Transfer and Black Body Radiation
The total flux of a source is obtained by integrating intensity (in W m−Hz−sr−) over the total
solid angle Ωs subtended by the source
Sν = ∫
Ωs
Iν(θ, φ) cos θ dΩ.
(8.1)
The flux density of an astronomical source is given in units of a jansky (Jy). The jansky was
adopted by the IAU in 1973 as the unit of spectral flux density. Jy = −W m−Hz−. The
strongest of the (nonsolar) continuum radio sources are a few hundred jansky, and the current
sensitivity limits for modern radio telescopes are now at the sub mJy level. Future telescopes
such as the SKA will reach μJy sensitivity.

Radio Telescopes 8
323
The spectral distribution of the radiation of a black body in thermodynamic equilibrium is
given by the Planck law:
Bν(T) = hν
c

ehν/kT −
.
(8.2)
If hν ≪kT, the Rayleigh-Jeans Law is obtained:
BRJ(ν, T) = ν
ckT
.
(8.3)
In the Rayleigh-Jeans relation, the brightness and the thermodynamic temperatures of black
body emitters are strictly proportional (> 8.3). This feature is useful, so the normal expression
of brightness of an extended source is brightness temperature TB:
TB = c
k

νIν = λ
k Iν .
(8.4)
If Iν is emitted by a black body and hν ≪kT, then (> 8.4) gives the thermodynamic
temperature of the source, a value that is independent of ν. If other processes are responsible
for the emission of the radiation (e.g., synchrotron, free-free, or broadband dust emission), TB
will depend on the frequency; however, (> 8.4) is still used.
3.2 The Nyquist Theorem and Noise Temperature
This theorem relates the thermodynamic quantity temperature to the electrical quantities volt-
age and power. This is essential for the analysis of noise in receiver systems. The average
power per unit bandwidth, Pν (also referred to as power spectral density, PSD), produced by a
resistor R is
Pν = ⟨iv⟩= ⟨v⟩
R = 
R⟨v
N⟩,
(8.5)
where v(t) is the voltage that is produced by i across R, and ⟨⋯⟩indicates a time average. The
first factor 
arises from the condition for the transfer of maximum power from R over a broad
range of frequencies. The second factor 
arises from the time average of v. Then
⟨v
N⟩= R k T .
(8.6)
When inserted into (> 8.5), the result is
Pν = k T .
(8.7)
> Equation 8.7 can also be obtained by a reformulation of the Planck law for one dimension
in the Rayleigh-Jeans limit. Thus, the available noise power of a resistor is proportional to its
temperature, the noise temperature TN, independent of the value of R and of frequency.
Not all circuit elements can be characterized by thermal noise. For example, a microwave
oscillator can deliver 1 μW, the equivalent of more than K, although the physical tempera-
ture is ∼300 K. This is an example of a very nonthermal process, so temperature is not a useful
concept in this case.

324 8
Radio Telescopes
3.3 Overview of Intensity, Flux Density, and Main Beam
Brightness Temperature
Temperatures in radio astronomy have given rise to some confusion. A short summary is given
here. Power is measured by an instrument consisting of an antenna and a receiver. The power
input can be calibrated and expressed as flux density or intensity. For very extended sources,
intensity (see (> 8.4)) can be expressed as a temperature,the main beam brightness temperature,
TMB. For discrete sources, the combination of (> 8.1) with (> 8.4) gives
Sν = k
λTB
.
(8.8)
For a source with a Gaussian spatial distribution, this relation is
[ Sν
Jy ] = .TB [
θ
arcsec]

[ λ
mm]
−
(8.9)
if the flux density Sν and the actual (or “true”) source size are known, then the true brightness
temperature, TB, of the source can be determined. For local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE),
TB represents the physical temperature of the source. If the apparent source size, that is, the
source angular size as measured with an antenna is known, (> 8.9) allows a calculation of TMB.
For discrete sources, TMB depends on the angular resolution. If the antenna beam size has a
Gaussian shape θb, the relation of actual θs and apparent size θo is:
θ
o = θ
s + θ
b .
(8.10)
then from (> 8.8), the relation of TMB and TB is
TMB (θ
s + θ
b) = TB θ
s
(8.11)
Finally, the PSD entering the receiver (> 8.7) is antenna temperature, TA; this is relevant
for estimating signal to noise ratios (see (> 8.21) and (> 8.24)).
3.4 Polarization
Hertz dipoles are sensitive to a single linear polarization. By rotating the dipole over an angle
perpendicular to the direction of the radiation, it is possible to determine the amount and angle
of linearly polarized radiation. Helical antennas or arrangements of two dipoles are sensitive
to circular polarization. Generally, polarized radiation is a combination of linear and circular,
and is usually less than 100% polarized; so four parameters must be specified. It is usual to
characterize polarization by the four Stokes parameters, which are the sum or difference of
measured quantities. The total intensity of a wave is given by the parameter I. The amount and
angle of linear polarization are given by the parameters Q and U, while the amount and sense
of circular polarization are given by the parameter V. The definition of the sense of circular
polarization in radio astronomy is the same as in electrical engineering but opposite to that used
in the optical range; see Born and Wolf (1965) for a complete analysis of polarization, using the
optical definition of circular polarization. Poincaré introduced a representation that permits an
easy visualization of all the different states of polarization of a vector wave. See Radhakrishan
(1990), Thompson et al. (2001), or Wilson et al. (2008) for more details.

Radio Telescopes 8
325
3.5 Sensitivity
The noise contributions from source, atmosphere, ground, telescope surface, and receiver are
always additive:
Tsys = ∑Ti
(8.12)
From Gaussian statistics, the root mean square, RMS, noise is given by the mean value divided
by the square root of the number of samples. From the estimate that the number of samples is
given by the product of receiver bandwidth multiplied by the integration time, the result is
ΔTRMS =
Tsys
√
Δν τ
= (TA + TRX)
√
Δν τ
.
(8.13)
Where TA represents the power entering the receiver from the antenna and includes the
source, the atmosphere, and the ground and TRX represents the noise power added by the
receiver. At very long (m) and short (mm) wavelengths, TA will dominate Trx. A more detailed
derivation is to be found in Wilson et al. (2008).
4
Antennas
The antenna serves to focus power into the feed, a device that efficiently transfers power in the
electromagnetic wave to the receiver. According to the principle of reciprocity, the properties of
antennas such as beam sizes, efficiencies, etc. are the same whether these are used for receiving
or transmitting. Reciprocity holds in astronomy, so it is usual to interchangeably use expressions
that involve either transmission or reception when discussing antenna properties. For example,
the terms beam and feed come from early radar usage. All of the following applies to the far-field
radiation.
4.1 The Hertz Dipole
The total power radiated from a dipole carrying an oscillating current I at a wavelength λ is
P = c
( IΔl
λ )

.
(8.14)
For the dipole, the radiation is linearly polarized with the electric field along the direction of the
dipole. The radiation pattern has a doughnut shape,with the cylindrically symmetric maximum
perpendicular to the axis of the dipole. Along the direction of the dipole, the radiation field is
zero. To improve directivity, reflecting screens have been placed behind a dipole, and in addi-
tion, collections of dipoles, driven in phase, are used. Dipole radiators have the best efficiency
when the size of the dipole is /λ.

326 8
Radio Telescopes
4.2 Filled Apertures
This section provides a simplified description of antenna properties. For more details, see Baars
(2007). At cm and shorter wavelengths, flared waveguides (“feed horns”) or dipoles are used to
convey power focused by the antenna (i.e., electromagnetic waves in free space) to the receiver
(voltage). At the longest wavelengths, dipoles are used as the antennas. Details are to be found
in Love (1976) and Goldsmith (1988, 1994).
4.2.1 Angular Resolution and Eﬃciencies
From diffraction theory (see Jenkins and White 2001), the angular resolution of a reflector of
diameter D at a wavelength λ is
θ = k λ
D
.
(8.15)
where k is of order unity. This universal result gives a value for θ (here in radians when D and
λ have the same units). Diffraction theory also predicts the unavoidable presence of sidelobes,
that is, secondary maxima. The sidelobes can be reduced by tapering the antenna illumination.
Tapering lowers the response to very compact sources and increases the value of θ, that is,
widens the beam due to the effective decrease in D.
The normalized power pattern is:
Pn(ϑ, φ) =

Pmax
P(ϑ, φ)
.
(8.16)
The beam solid angle ΩA of an antenna is given by
ΩA = ∫∫
π
Pn(ϑ, φ) dΩ =
π
∫

π
∫

Pn(ϑ, φ) sin ϑ dϑ dφ
(8.17)
that is measured in steradians (sr). The integration is extended over all angles; so ΩA is the solid
angle of an ideal antenna having Pn = for ΩA and Pn = everywhere else. For most antennas,
the (normalized) power pattern has much larger values for a limited range of both ϑ and φ than
for the remainder; the range where ΩA is large is the main beam of the antenna; the remainder
are the sidelobes or backlobes (>Fig. 8-2).
In analogy to (> 8.17), the main beam solid angle ΩMB is defined as
ΩMB = ∫∫
main
lobe
Pn(ϑ, φ) dΩ
.
(8.18)
The quality of a single antenna depends on how well the power pattern is concentrated in the
main beam. The definition of main beam efficiency or beam efficiency, ηB, is
ηB = ΩMB
ΩA
.
(8.19)

Radio Telescopes 8
327
main
lobe
ΩM
side lobes
stray
pattern
⊡Fig. 8-2
A polar power pattern showing the main beam, and near- and farside lobes. The weaker farside
lobes have been combined to form the stray pattern
ηB which is the fraction of the power is concentrated in the main beam. The main beam effi-
ciency can be modified (within limits) for parabolic antennas by changing the illumination of
the main reflector. An under-illuminated antenna has a wider main beam but lower sidelobes.
The angular extent of the main beam is usually described by the full width to half power width
(FWHP), the angle between points of the main beam where the normalized power pattern falls
to /of the maximum. The beamwidth θ is given by (> 8.15).
If a plane wave with the power density ∣⟨⃗S⟩∣in W m−is intercepted by an antenna, a certain
amount of power is extracted from this wave. This power is Pe, and the fraction is
Ae = Pe / ∣⟨⃗S⟩∣,
(8.20)
the effective aperture of the antenna. Ae has the dimension of m. Compared to the geometric
aperture Ag, an aperture efficiency ηA can be defined by
Ae = ηAAg
.
(8.21)
If an antenna with a normalized power pattern Pn(ϑ, φ) is used to receive radiation from
a brightness distribution Bν(ϑ, φ) in the sky, at the output terminals of the antenna, the power
per unit bandwidth (PSD), in W Hz−, Pν is
Pν = 
Ae ∫∫Bν(ϑ, φ) Pn(ϑ, φ) dΩ .
(8.22)
By definition, this operates in the Rayleigh-Jeans limit, so the equivalent distribution of
brightness temperature can be replaced by an equivalent antenna temperature TA (> 8.7):
Pν = k TA .
(8.23)

328 8
Radio Telescopes
This definition of antenna temperature relates the output of the antenna to the power from a
matched resistor. When these two power levels are equal, then the antenna temperature is given
by the temperature of the resistor. The effective aperture Ae can be replaced by the the beam
solid angle ΩA ⋅λ. Then (> 8.22) becomes
TA(ϑ, φ) = ∫TB(ϑ, φ)Pn(ϑ −ϑ, φ −φ) sin ϑ dϑ dφ
∫Pn(ϑ, φ) dΩ
(8.24)
From (> 8.24), TA < TB in all cases. The numerator is the convolution of the brightness temper-
ature with the beam pattern of the telescope (Fourier methods are of great value in this analysis;
see Bracewell 1986). The brightness temperature Tb(ϑ, φ) corresponds to the thermodynamic
temperature of the radiating material only for thermal radiation in the Rayleigh-Jeans limit from
an optically thick source; in all other cases, TB is a convenient quantity that represents source
intensity at a given frequency.
For a source small compared to the beam, (> 8.22) and (> 8.23) give
Pν = 
Ae Sν = k TA
(8.25)
TA is the antenna temperature at the receiver.
TA = ΓSν
(8.26)
where Γ is the sensitivity of the telescope measuredin K Jy−. Introducing the aperture efficiency
ηA according to (> 8.21), we find
Γ = ηA πD
k
.
(8.27)
Thus, Γ or ηA can be measured with the help of a calibrating source provided that the diameter
D and the noise power scale in the receiving system are known. When (> 8.26) is solved for Sν,
the result is:
Sν = ,
TA(K)
ηA(D/m).
(8.28)
4.2.2 Foci, Blockage, and Surface Accuracy
If the size of a radio telescope is more than a few hundred wavelengths, designs are similar
to those of optical telescopes. Cassegrain, Gregorian, and Nasmyth systems have been used.
See >Fig. 8-3 for a sketch of these focal systems. In a Cassegrain system, a convex hyperbolic
reflector is introduced into the converging beam immediately in front of the prime focus. This
reflector transfers the converging rays to a secondary focus which, in most practical systems, is
situated close to the apex of the main dish. A Gregorian system makes use of a concave reflector
with an elliptical profile. This must be positioned behind the prime focus in the diverging beam.
In the Nasmyth system, this secondary focus is situated in the elevation axis of the telescope by
introducing another, usually flat, mirror. The advantage of a Nasmyth system is that the receiver

Radio Telescopes 8
329
RX
a
b
c
d
RX
RX
RX
ELEVATION
AXIS
⊡Fig. 8-3
The geometry of parabolic apertures: (a) Cassegrain, (b) Gregorian, (c) Nasmyth, and (d) oﬀset
Cassegrain systems (From Wilson et al. 2008)
front ends remain horizontal while the telescope is pointed toward different elevations. This is
an advantage for receivers cooled with liquid helium, which may become unstable when tipped.
Cassegrain and Nasmyth foci are commonly used in the mm/sub-mm wavelength ranges.
In a secondary reflector system, feed illumination beyond the edge receives radiation from
the sky, which has a temperature of only a few K. For low-noise systems, this results in only a
small overall system noise temperature. This is significantly less than for prime focus systems.
This is quantified in the so-called G/T value, that is, the ratio of antenna gain to system noise.
Any telescope design must aim to minimize the excess noise at the receiver input while max-
imizing gain. For a specific antenna, this maximization involves the design of feeds and the
choice of foci.
The secondary reflector and its supports block the central parts in the main dish from
reflecting the incoming radiation, causing some significant differences between the actual beam
pattern and that of an unobstructed antenna. Modern designs seek to minimize blockage due
to the support legs and subreflector.
Feed leg blockage will cause deviations from circular symmetry. For altitude-azimuth tele-
scopes, these sidelobes will change position on the sky with hour angle (see Reich et al. 1978).
This may be a serious defect, since these effects will be significant for maps of low-intensity
regions near an intense source. The sidelobe response may depend on the polarization of the
incoming radiation. Equatorially mounted telescopes avoid this problem but at high cost for a
large telescope. A new option now being explored is the three axis mount so an alt-az telescope
can rotate about a third axis parallel to the beam axis keeping the sidelobe patterns fixed on
the sky.
The gain of a filled aperture antenna with small-scale surface irregularities ε cannot increase
indefinitely with increasing frequency but reaches a maximum at λm = πε, and this gain is a
factor of 2.7 below that of an error-free antenna of identical dimensions. The usual rule-of-
thumb is that the irregularities should be 1/16 of the shortest wavelength used.

330 8
Radio Telescopes
5
Interferometers and Aperture Synthesis
From diffraction theory, the angular resolution is given by (> 8.15). However, as shown by
Michelson (see Jenkins and White 2001), a much higher resolving power can be obtained by
coherently combining the output of two reflectors of diameter d ≪B separated by a distance B
yielding θ ≈λ/B. In the Rayleigh-Jeans regime, hν ≪kT , the outputs can be amplified without
seriously degrading the signal-to-noise ratio. This amplified signal can be divided and used to
produce a large number of cross-correlations (e.g., see Radhakrishnan 1999).
The simplest case is a two-element system in which electromagnetic waves are received by
two antennas. These induce the voltage Vat A:
V∝E e i ωt ,
(8.29)
while at A:
V∝E e i ω (t−τ) ,
(8.30)
where E is the amplitude of the incoming electromagnetic plane wave, τ is the geometric delay
caused by the relative orientation of the interferometer baseline ⃗B and the direction of the wave
propagation. For simplicity, receiver noise and instrumental phase were neglected in (> 8.29)
and (> 8.30). These two outputs will be correlated. Today, all radio interferometers use direct
correlation followed by an integrator.
The output is proportional to
R(τ) ∝E
T
T
∫

e i ωt e −i ω(t−τ) dt .
If T is a time much longer than the time of a single full oscillation, that is, T ≫π/ω, then the
average over time T will not differ much from the average over a single full period, resulting in
R(τ) ∝Ee i ωτ
.
(8.31)
The output ofthe correlator + integratorvaries periodicallywith τ, the delay. Since⃗s is slowly
changing due to the rotation of the earth, τ will vary, producing interference fringes as a function
of time.
The basic components of a two-element system are shown in >Fig. 8-4. If the radio bright-
ness distribution is given by Iν(⃗s), the power received per bandwidth dν from the source
element dΩ is A(⃗s)Iν(⃗s) dΩ dν, where A(⃗s) is the effective collecting area in the direction ⃗s;
the same A(⃗s) is assumed for each of the antennas. The amplifiers are assumed to have constant
gain and phase factors (neglected here for simplicity).
The output of the correlator for radiation from the direction ⃗s (>Fig. 8-4) is
r= A(⃗s) Iν(⃗s) e i ωτ dΩ dν
(8.32)
where τ is the difference between the geometrical and instrumental delays τg and τi. If ⃗B is the
baseline vector between the two antennas
τ = τg −τi = 
c
⃗B ⋅⃗s −τi,
(8.33)

Radio Telescopes 8
331
B·s
τg = B·s/c
B
Amplifier
V1
V2
Correlator
Visibility
Integrator
Voltage
Multiplier
τi
S
⊡Fig. 8-4
Aschematicdiagramofatwo-elementcorrelationinterferometer.Theantennaoutputvoltagesare
V1 and V2; theinstrumental delay is τi and thegeometric delay is τg.
→s isthe direction to the source.
Perpendicular to
→s is the projection of the baseline
→
B. The signal is digitized after conversion to an
intermediate frequency. Time delays are introduced using digital shift registers (From Wilson et al.
2008)
the total response is obtained by integrating over the source S
R(⃗B) = ∫∫
Ω
A(⃗s)Iν(⃗s) eπ i ν( 
c ⃗B⋅⃗s−τi) dΩ dν
(8.34)
The function R(⃗B), the Visibility Function is closely related to the mutual coherence function
(see Born and Wolf 1965; Thompson et al. 2001; Wilson et al. 2008) of the source. For parabolic
antennas, it is usually assumed that A(⃗s) = outside the main beam area so that (> 8.34)
is integrated only over this region. A one-dimensional version of (> 8.34), for a baseline B,
frequency ν = νand instrumental time delay τi = , is
R(B) = ∫A(θ) Iν(θ) eπ i ν( 
c B θ) dθ,
(8.35)
With θ = x and Bx/λ = u, this is
R(B) = ∫A(θ) Iν(θ) eπ i u x dθ.
(8.36)
This form of (> 8.34) illustrates more clearly the Fourier transform relation of u and x.

332 8
Radio Telescopes
5.1 Aperture Synthesis
To produce an image, the integral equation (> 8.34) must be inverted. A number of approxima-
tions may have to be applied to produce high-quality images. In addition, the data are affected
by noise.
For imaging over a limited region of the sky, rectangular coordinates are adequate, so rela-
tion (> 8.34) can be rewritten with coordinates (x, y) in the image plane and coordinates (u, v)
in the Fourier plane. The coordinate w, corresponding to the difference in height, is set to zero.
Then the relevant relation is
I′(x, y) = A(x, y) I(x, y) =
∞
∫
−∞
V(u, v, ) e−π i (ux+v y) du dv
(8.37)
where I′(x, y) is the intensity I(x, y) modified by the primary beam shape A(x, y). It is easy
to correct I′(x, y) by dividing by A(x, y).
5.2 Interferometer Sensitivity
The random noise limit to an interferometer system can be calculated following the method
used for a single telescope (> 8.13). The use of (> 8.25) provides a conversion from ΔTRMS
to ΔSν. For an array of n identical antennas, there are N = n(n −)/simultaneous pairwise
correlations, so the RMS variation in flux density is
ΔSν =
M k Tsys
Ae
√
N t Δν
,
(8.38)
with M≅, Ae the effective area of each antenna and Tsys given by (> 8.12). This relation can
be recast in the form of brightness temperature fluctuations using the Rayleigh-Jeans relation;
then the RMS noise in brightness temperature units is
ΔTB =
M k λTsys
AeΩb
√
N t Δν
.
(8.39)
For a Gaussian beam, Ωmb = .θ, so the RMS temperature fluctuations can be related to
observed properties of a synthesis image.
6
Design Criteria
Parabolic dishes are the design choice if a large collecting area is required with frequency agility.
All high-frequency radio telescopesare based on the parabolic dish concept, either single dishes
(>Sect. 4.2) or arrays of such dishes (>Sect. 7).
The advantage of the parabolic dish is the flexibility resulting from having a single receiver
at the focal point. Frequency agility can then be obtained by changing the receiver system used.
Such receiver changes can be made manually or with automatic systems involving rotating
turrets, translators, or tilting subreflectors to move the different receivers into the focus.
However, recent developmentsare now changing this many decades old paradigm: Narrow-
band highly optimized single pixel feeds which had to be moved in and out of the focal position

Radio Telescopes 8
333
to change observing frequency are being replaced by wideband feeds and receivers which cover
all the required frequencies simultaneously. The single pixel feeds which observed a single point
on the sky are being replaced by multibeam receivers or focal plane arrays which can use more
of the information in the focal plane to image a larger area of sky (> Sect. 7.5) or to observe
more than one direction simultaneously as in the VERA astrometric VLBI array (Kawaguchi
et al. 2000). The huge advances in digital processing have changed the balance between analog
and digital, moving the transition from the aperture arrays of dipoles to the parabolic dishes to
higher frequencies (>Sect. 11.3).
6.1 Frequency Range
The combination of the antenna and feed which couples the electromagnetic radiation field to
the amplifying receiver makes it impossible to design a single detector system that works over
the entire >1,000:1 radio astronomy wavelength range. High-efficiency systems are generally
constrained to an octave bandwidth, but extending this range is an active current research topic
in feed design, forexample, Kildal et al. (2009), Akgirayet al. (2011). Bandwidths of 10:1 are now
being achieved. The advent of higher-speed digital signal processing (> Sect. 11.3.1) has also
made it possible to increase the backend bandwidth to many GHz so a wide range of frequency
can be observed simultaneously.
6.2 Sensitivity and Survey Speed
From (> 8.13) and (> 8.25) for one polarization channel, we have
ΔSν = k(TA + Trx)
Ae
√
τΔν
.
The maximum possible point source sensitivity only depends on effective aperture area (Ae),
system temperature (Tsys = TA +Trx), observing time (τ), and bandwidth (Δν). >Section 4.2.2
discussed the optimization of Tsys and Ae by minimizing “G/T.” Further details of radio tele-
scope receivers will be discussed in Volume 2 >Chap. 6 but we note that optimized modern
radio receivers in the cm bands are now close to the ultimate noise limits, and in the meterband
are already well below the background noise, TA > Trx. Hence, the only way to further improve
point source sensitivityis with more collecting area, more bandwidth, ormore observation time.
For spectral line observations, more bandwidth may increase the number of lines observed but
cannot improve the sensitivity for any one line. It is the extreme sensitivity needed to observe
the unique 21 cm H line at cosmological distances that has driven the vision of a square kilo-
meter area array (SKA) discussed in >Sect. 13.7.3. Similarly, for some transient phenomena, it
is not possible to increase the observing time so again increasing collecting area is the only way
forward.
For surveys, the limiting sensitivity in a given time also depends on the field of view, FoV. A
survey speed figure of merit (SSFoM) can be defined which is related to the number of sources
detected in a given time.
SSFoM ∝FoV.Δν.(Ae/Tsys)
(8.40)

334 8
Radio Telescopes
where FoV = total instantaneous solid angle, Δν = bandwidth, Ae = total effective area of the
array, and Tsys = system temperature, Cordes (2007). This opens up other design opportunities
as it is possible to make trade-offs between collecting area and field of view (see > Sects. 6.4
and >7.5).
6.3 Angular Resolution
The struggle to obtain higher angular resolution has been the main driver since the beginning of
radio astronomy. The development of all aspects of high angular resolution in radio astronomy
has been reviewed by Kellermann and Moran (2001). It is ironic to note that although the long
radio wavelength results in poor angular resolution, the ability to independently sample the
electromagnetic field on almost unlimited baselines also gives the highest angular resolution in
astronomy, see >Sect. 7.8.
6.4 Field of View (FoV)
The instantaneous FoV of any radio telescope can be shown to be the product of the
diffraction-limited primary beam (> 8.15) and the number of independent receiving elements.
These receiving elements can be either in the focal or the aperture plane. The receivers might
be incoherent bolometer arrays (preferred at high frequency) or coherent detectors including
both multibeam receivers and phased array feeds as discussed in the next section.
7
The Antenna Arrays
The basic theory of the interferometer and an introduction to aperture synthesis is given
in >Sect. 5. Here we explore a number of topics which may be of interest to a broader multi-
wavelength audience. There are some excellent references for the basics and for more detailed
treatment, for example, Thompson et al. (2001), and Christiansen and Hogbom (1985). Further
aspects of this topic are included in >Chap. 7 on Radio and Optical Interferometry.
7.1 Fourier Synthesis Imaging
The theory of interferometry is straightforward: the coherence of the radiation field is measured
over a large volume of space and an image formed by Fourier inversion. The practical problems
of measuring the coherence from telescopes confined to the earth’s surface are numerous but
not too onerous. A very useful collection of practical lectures on modern aperture synthesis
techniques can be found in the NRAO Summer School, Taylor et al. (1999).
The radiation can be conveniently collected using parabolic reflectors with typical diameters
at centimeter wavelengths in the range 5–100 m, a diameter of 25 m being a popular compro-
mise between cost of construction and sensitivity. Both the ability to point the antennas and the
surface accuracy limit the highest practicable observing frequency.
Once the signals have been collected and amplified, they must be relayed to a central
location where they are correlated with each other to form estimates of the coherence func-
tion (>Sect. 5). Direct digital correlation is almost universally preferred for the flexibility and

Radio Telescopes 8
335
lower levels of systematic error. Before the correlation is performed, the signals must be lined
up to eliminate the continually changing geometric delay of one antenna relative to the other
due to the earth’s rotation. This process is analogous to tracking of a celestial object by con-
tinually tilting an optical telescope as the earth rotates. For digitized signals, the delaying is
conveniently performed using large digital buffers of high-speed memory. This earth rotation
complicates matters somewhat. First, a given pair of antennas, as seen from the object, rotates
around in the aperture plane, smearing out fine structure in the coherence function unless the
integration time is short enough. The integration timescale in which the visibility is smeared
is simply related to the time it takes for earth rotation to move the most distant antenna by
its diameter. For a 25 m antenna at tens of kilometers baseline, this is about 10 s. Second, the
relative motion between the antennas introduces a differential Doppler shift in the radiation
received, which must be canceled before correlation.
High-quality imaging required good sampling of the coherence across the aperture plane.
The largest separation of the antennas fixes the highest resolution possible, while the distribu-
tion of the samples over the aperture plane determines the complexity of structure that can
be imaged. While the goal is to obtain the densest possible coverage of the aperture plane, the
finite number of observed correlations and the desire for high angular resolution usually results
in a compromise with incomplete sampling and higher sidelobes in the synthesis image. A
detailed description of the range of deconvolution algorithms which correct for the nonuniform
or incomplete sampling of the aperture plane is included in >Chap. 7 on Radio and Optical
Interferometry and in Volume 2 >Chap. 6 on Techniques of Radio Astronomy.
The coherence measurements can be made at any time over the interval while the structure
has not changed. This is of course the requirement for earth rotation synthesis, and it also makes
it possible to build up samples of coherence at different spacings by moving the array elements.
This is essential to obtain dense coverage of the aperture plane and high resolution with a small
number of elements.Many aperture synthesis arrays have some, or all, antennas moveble (VLA,
WSRT, ATCA in >Sect. 12).
7.2 Crosses, Ts, and Other 2D Aperture Arrays
The list of large cm radio telescopes in Table A2 includes many crosses and T-shaped aperture
arrays. Ryle (1952) first pointed out that an effective gain in resolving power can be obtained
with an interferometer consisting of two dissimilar primary antennaes, for example, one with a
narrow beam in the east-west direction and the other with a narrow beam in the north-south
direction. The next logical step was made by Mills and Little (1953), who proposed that if the
two elements had a common electrical and physical center (virtually an interferometer with
separations down to zero spacing), a pencil beam antenna would result. Such an antenna is
known as a Mills Cross. To minimize cost, simple collinear feed systems with fixed lengths
from each element to the receiver were used but this greatly restricts the band width.
This design produced a high-quality pencil beam and could be implemented with all analog
components, requiring minimal digital signal processing and no Fourier transform calcula-
tions. By the 1990s, digital technology had made this approach unattractive, and some of the
old crosses and Ts were modified to incorporate the more flexible digital technology (e.g., Large
et al. 1994). New array designs such as VLA (> Sect. 12.1), GMRT (> Sect. 12.11), ASKAP
(>Sect. 13.7.2), and MEERKAT (>Sect. 13.7.1) use nonuniform 2D antenna element distribu-
tions to measure the maximum number of Fourier components with the minimum number of
elements (minimum redundancy arrays) instead of the cross or T geometry. However, the VLA

336 8
Radio Telescopes
still uses linear structures, the arms of the Y, to simplify antenna movement. In a recent twist, the
computer processing and I/O requirements have become so extreme that telescope designs are
again being proposed with geometrical arrangements of elements which minimize the compu-
tational load, for example, Tegmark and Zaldarriaga (2010) propose a regular antenna grid for
optimum use of the fast Fourier transform, and Bunton (2011) proposes redundant geometries
to decrease computer load.
7.3 Phased Array Beamforming
The traditional phased arrays formed a single beam by electronically adjusting the phases of
all the elements to correspond to a given pointing direction. This is still the preferred telescope
design at low frequencies because the effective area of a single antenna element, such as a simple
dipole is ∼λso is large at long wavelengths, and the cost per element is low. Hence, sparse-
phased arrays are a very cost-effective wayto obtain a large collecting area at very low frequency.
However, if only a single-phased array beam is formed, the advantage of the wide FoV of each
element of the array is lost and the survey speed is greatly reduced. Since we are in the Rayleigh-
Jeans regime with many photons per state in the system, for example, see Radhakrishnan (1999),
we can split the signal without any loss in S/N to form multiple beams pointing in different
directions. It is then theoretically possible to form enough simultaneous beams to cover the
whole FoV of each element. However, the number of beams needed scales as n = Atot/λfor an
n element array of total geometrical area Atot. The inputs to the electronic beamformer will also
scale with n, so some of the electronics is scaling as n(Atot / λ). For 1 kmarray at 1 m, this is
a factor of 10which is well beyond even Moore’s law extrapolation and beyond viable power
consumption limits. The solution to this dilemma is to introduce hierarchical beamforming
which allows a smooth trade-off between the number of beams, and hence electronics cost, and
the areas of sky imaged simultaneously. In an array with hierarchical beam formation such as
LOFAR (> Sect. 13.3), groups of elements, referred to as tiles, are combined to form the tile
beam, groups of tiles in one geographic location are then combined to form one or more station
beams and the stations are finally combined using the normal cross-correlating techniques of
aperture synthesis to form a synthesized beam. Hence, an observation with LOFAR will have a
tile beam (roughly equivalent to the primary beam of an array of single dishes), a number of
station beams which can be simultaneously pointing to different regions in the tile beam, and
finally a Fourier transform image for the FoV of each station beam with the resolution of the
synthesized beam.
Hierarchical beamforming in phased arrays is used to reduce the FoV and information data
rate to a manageble level. In this process, it is possible to replace parts of the digital hierarchy
with analog beamforming, and the cylinders and phased array feeds in dishes discussed in the
next two sections are two examples.
7.4 Cylindrical Reﬂectors
Another method of reducing the FoV is to place a one-dimensional phased array at the focus
of a parabolic cylindrical reflector. For a given collecting area, the reduction in the number
of inputs to the beamformer is reduced by the factor lambda/2D where D is the width of the
cylindrical reflector. Typically, this is a factor of 0.1–0.01 allowing the cylinders to operate at

Radio Telescopes 8
337
higher frequencies than phased arrays for the same electronics cost. The advantage of the cylin-
der over a dish is the fact that the reflector is much cheaper, and this made the approach popular
in the 1960s. However, the number of feed elements in one-dimensional phased arrays make
cylindrical reflectors hard to upgrade and they were gradually displaced by the dishes.
7.5 Phased Array Feeds
There is an exact analogy between phased array beamforming in the aperture plane and the
phased array feeds (PAFs) which can be placed in (or near) the focal plane of a single dish. The
great advantage of putting the PAFs at the focus of a single dish is to reduce the numberof active
elements while retaining the sensitivity corresponding to the area of the dish. The next logical
step is to place arrays of feeds in the focal plane of each dish in an interferometer array to image
many fields at once. First suggested by Fisher and Bradley (2000) and now being implemented
in Westerbork (APERTIF) based on an array of Vivaldi feeds (Oosterloo et al. 2010) and in
ASKAP based on a self-complimentary checker board antenna using a connected patch array
(Hay et al. 2008). Note that for the same FoVm the electronics’ cost advantage of the PAF over
the arrays is area PAF/area dish which is in the range 0.01–0.001 for current designs.
The PAF can be placed at any location along the wavefront as long as the complex distribu-
tion of amplitude of the electromagnetic wave is fully sampled. The PAF does not have to be in
the focal plane, but as long as it is in a region where the wavefront has a small waist, the number
of receptor elements needed is minimized.
PAFs are also referred to as focal plane arrays (FPA). The terminology PAF is preferred for
arrays of elements which are combined to form phased array beams. The term FPA would refer
to any array of receiving elements in the focal plane, including multibeam receivers which do
not sample the focal plane continuously and bolometer detector arrays which produce separate
total power beams for each element. The term “smart feeds” is also used for feeds which are
electronically configurable.
7.6 Mosaicing
When a number of interferometric imaging observations are made with overlapping primary
beams to cover a larger area of the sky, this is called a mosaic. Mosaicing has two benefits; obvi-
ously, the area of sky observed is now larger than the primary beam, but more subtly, additional
Fourier components of the sky brightness distribution have been measured (Ekers and Rots
1979). To see how this is possible, first consider a single pointing made with a filled aperture.
All the Fourier components, from the area of sky in its primary beam, are combined into a single
value with weights determined by the illumination of the aperture (taper). If two dishes form
an interferometer all the Fourier components corresponding to all possible pairs of elements
between the two apertures are combined into a single complex visibility, that is, for two dishes
of diameter D, separated by a baseline B, the resulting visibility is the average of baselines from
B −D to B + D. By combining two interferometer observations with different pointings with
overlapping primary beams, all the Fourier components from B −D to B + D are recovered.
This is particularly powerful when B is ≈D because the recorded baselines from 0 to 2D are the
“missing” short spacings that plague interferometric observations of large sources. A simple way
to see how this works is to consider the two different pointings as two different phase gradients

338 8
Radio Telescopes
across the aperture of the dishes. These known phase gradients make it possible to disentangle
the combined Fourier components. Cornwell (1988) and Cornwell et al. (1993) demonstrate
how the image deconvolution algorithms can be modified to incorporate the additional infor-
mation measured in a mosaiced observation. Methods using both the linear combination of
overlapping primary beams and the joint deconvolution of overlapping primary beams are now
in routine use.
A new and exciting development is the combination of the use of phased array feeds in
each element of the interferometer array. Now the overlapping mosaiced fields are all mea-
sured simultaneously, greatly increasing the instantaneous FoV but also reducing the effect of
some errors caused by the changing atmosphere or single dish pointing, which accumulate in
sequential observations of a mosaiced area.
Mosaicing becomes especially important at higher frequencies when the primary beam of
the larger and more sensitive telescopes is relatively narrow. For a more detailed treatment of
mosaicing, see Sect. 11.6 in Thompson et al. (2001).
7.7 Rotation Measure Synthesis
The birefringence of the magnetized plasma in interstellar and intergalactic space causes the
observed linear polarization properties of radio sources to be strongly frequency-dependent.
This Faraday rotation causes the position angle of the linear polarization vector to increase by an
amount RM.λwhere the magnitude of the rotation measure (RM) ranges between 10 rad m−
for typical sources observed through the interstellarmedium of our Galaxy and 5 × 10rad m−
for the compact radio source at the center of the Milky Way. Observations made over a large
frequency range will average out all the linear polarization, unless the spectral resolution is
fine enough that Faraday rotation does not cause appreciable rotation of the polarization vector
across individual spectral channels (bandwidth smearing). However, the signal-to-noise ratio of
the polarization measurementin each spectral channel may be too low to compute the polariza-
tion vector. The technique of rotation measure (RM) synthesis has been developed,for example,
Brentjens and de Bruyn (2005), to simultaneously utilize the measurements across an entire
wide frequency band and is the optimum method to extract polarization information from
noisy data Macquart et al. (2012).
7.8 Long Baseline Interferometry
In 1967, a new technique of interferometry was developed in which the receiving elements
were separated by such a large distance that it was necessary to operate them independently
with no real-time communications link. This was accomplished by recording the undetected
voltages from each site on magnetic tape timed using independent atomic clocks sufficiently
accurate to maintain coherence. Later, this data is cross-correlated at a central processing sta-
tion. The technique is called very long baseline interferometry (VLBI). The principles involved
in VLBI are fundamentally the same as those involved in interferometers with connected ele-
ments (Thompson et al. 2001). We are now seeing a convergence of VLBI and connected arrays
as the independent tape recorders are being replaced by wideband fiber optic communica-
tions links, and it is now also technically possible to maintain phase coherence with stabilized
optical links.

Radio Telescopes 8
339
8
The Fundamental Diﬀerences Between Arrays and Dishes
8.1 Filling Factor
A filled aperture telescope measures all Fourier components up to its maximum diameter and
has brightness sensitivity which is independent of diameter. An array has a filling factor, η,
which is less than 1. The brightness sensitivity of the array is decreased, and the power in its side-
lobe increased by 1/η. The array may still measure all Fourier components up to its maximum
spacing and consequently have relatively low sidelobes even though η is less than 1 because
the number of redundant spacings can be minimized. However, high angular resolution arrays
will often have η much less than 1 and incomplete coverage of Fourier components with higher
sidelobes and lower brightness sensitivity.
8.2 Analog Beam Formation in the Focal Plane
A conventional radio telescope at shorter wavelengths, for example, single parabolic dish with a
conventional focal plane, will form a beam when the signals reflected from all the apertures are
combined at a point in the focal plane before amplification and detection. The parabolic shape
of the dish surface ensures that all signals from the pointing direction are combined in phase.
In an array, the undetected receiver voltage outputs from each element are sampled and stored
before they are later combined with appropriate delay and phase for each direction in the sky.
This corresponds to the Fourier transform operation as described in > Sects. 5 and >7.1, and
an aperture array is normally performed in a digital computer.
8.3 Equivalence of Dishes and Arrays
Consider a single parabolic dish of diameter, d, focusing radiation from a given direction in the
sky at a point in the focal plane. The surface of the dish can be divided into n contiguous sub
elements of area Ai = Atot /n. The parabolic shape of the dish ensures that the path length to the
focus will be the same for radio waves reflected from each element of the aperture. Now replace
each aperture elementby a small dish and receiver system which samples and amplifies the volt-
age averaged over the same area Ai. The voltages from all these sub elements, Vi, can then be
added in the phase (either in real time or later in a computer) to produce the same signal that
would be received at the focus of the single dish. It can then be detected (∑Vi)to obtain the
power from the direction in which the dish is pointing. Now if we move all the sub elements
off the parabolic surface along the direction of the received wave, we can more conveniently
locate them on a plane (e.g., along the ground) provided we compensate for the extra path
length by adding the appropriate delay to each sub element before adding the signals. We have
now formed a “phased array” as discussed in >Sect. 7.3 – see, for example, Christiansen and
Hogbom (1985). If the signal is monochromatic, the change in delay (which is a function of the
pointing position in the sky) can be replaced by a change in phase. If the signal is not monochro-
matic, this change in phase will only be correct for a small region of sky around the pointing
direction (called the phase center for an array); the region with no bandwidth de-correlation is
called the delay beam. The signals from the sub aperture are only averaged over an area Atot/n
so the phased array has a much larger primary beam than the full dish. Note that the signals

340 8
Radio Telescopes
formed by this phased aperture with n elements of area Atot/n is identical to that of the single
aperture of area Atot so the S/N estimated for the single dish (> Sect. 6.2) applies to a phased
array with the same area.
Now consider the radiation received at a nearby point in the focal plane of the single dish or
equivalently the radiation received if the pointing of the dish is changed by Δθ. For the signals
from the sub elements, this is equivalent to changing all the delays by B. cos (Δθ) where B is
the distance from the center of the dish/array. We can now form multiple beams pointing in
different directions in the sky by combining the signals with the appropriate delays.
The detected power from the sum of all the sub elements is
(∑Vi)
= ∑(Vi)+ ∑(Vi . Vj).
The first term is just the sum of self-correlations which are the total power from each element,
and the second term is the sum of all possible cross-correlations between the elements. The
sum of all the self-correlations includes all the emission from the sky, the atmosphere, and the
ground, but these are uncorrelated between elementsso do not influence the cross-correlations.
Only the signal from the astronomical source will be correlated. The self-correlation term can
be quite large and will be affected by gain variations in the system and variability in the radia-
tion received from the atmosphere and the ground, making it hard to detect weak astronomical
signals. It was this component that Ryle and Vonberg (1946) removed from the interferometer
response when they invented the phase switch. The result is equivalent to the modern corre-
lation interferometer array in which only the product terms are measured, either by analog or
digital means.
8.4 Array Sensitivity
The previous section demonstrated the equivalence between dishes and arrays and can be used
to obtain a simple sensitivity comparison. The sensitivity of the single dish is
ΔS =
KTsys
Atot
√
τΔν
=
kTsys
Ai
√
nτΔν
where Ai is the area of each element. The removal of the n independent auto-correlations
reduces the sensitivity of the array from nindependent measurements to n(n−1) measure-
ments so the sensitivity for a correlation array of total area Atot = nAi is
ΔS =
KTsys
Ai
√
n(n −)τΔν
.
For a more formal derivation of the sensitivity, see, for example, Thompson et al. (2001).
Hence, we see that the sensitivity of an array approaches the sensitivity of a single dish of the
same area for large n. For a point source, all cross-correlations in the array have the same S/N,
so the sensitivity is independent of the element separation, and the equivalence to a single dish
of the same area applies to a correlation interferometer array of any configuration. However, if
the source is resolved on some baselines, the S/N will be reduced in a complex manner which
will depend on the array configuration and the source structure. In this situation, it is often
necessary to estimate the resulting S/N using simulations. However, a simple estimate of the
approximate sensitivity to an extended source can be obtained by estimating the total area of
those array elements which are close enough to not resolve the source.

Radio Telescopes 8
341
9
Backends, Data Analysis, and Software
Backends, data analysis, and software are discussed in application and data reduction/analysis
methods in T.L. Wilson, Volume 2, >Chap. 6, Sects. 9.1–9.5.
10
Types of Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) and Mitigation
Strategies
At present, 1–2% of the spectrum in the meter and centimeter bands is protected for passive
uses, such as radio astronomy. These regulations are coordinated by the International Telecom-
munications Union (ITU) and implemented by national regulations. However, future telescopes
like the SKA and JVLA will have sensitivities up to 100 times greater than present sensitivities
and bandwidths far exceeding the few percent covered by regulation. There are also experi-
ments (e.g., the epoch of re-ionization, redshifted hydrogen in galaxies, or various molecular
lines) which require access to arbitrary parts of the spectrum. Other experiments require very
large bandwidths for sensitivity, spectropolarimetry, or spectral line information. The current
regulations alone will not provide the necessary protection against RFI, so we need technol-
ogy and radio quiet sites as well as regulation (Ekers and Bell 2002). See Ellingson (2005) and
Kesteven (2010) for a more recent compilation of RFI mitigation strategies.
10.1 Radio Frequency Interference (RFI)
Interference may be naturally occurring or human-generated. Examples of naturally occur-
ring interference include the following: spill-over, sun, lightening, meteors. Human-generated
interference may come from broadcast services (e.g., TV, radio), voice and data communica-
tions (e.g., mobile telephones, two-way radio, wireless IT networks), navigation systems (e.g.,
GPS, GLONASS, Galileo), radar, remote sensing, electric fences, car ignitions, and domestic
appliances (e.g., microwave ovens, Goris 1998).
Undesired interfering signals and astronomy signals can differ (be orthogonal) in a range of
parameters, including frequency, time, position, polarization, distance, coding, positivity, and
multipath. It is extremely rare that interfering and astronomy signals do not possess some level
of orthogonality in this >8-dimensional parameter space. Signal processing systems are being
developed to take advantage of the orthogonality and separate the astronomy signals from the
RFI signals.
External interference mayarise from fixed or moving sources. Not all methodsof mitigation
apply to both, and methods that work well for fixed sources may not work at all for moving
sources.
10.2 RFI Mitigation Methods
There is no silver bullet for detecting weak astronomical signals in the presence of strong unde-
sired RFI. A/D converters must be fast enough to give sufficient bandwidth, with a sufficient
number of bits so that both strong and weak signals are well sampled. There are a range of

342 8
Radio Telescopes
techniques that can make passive use of other bands possible, and, in general, these need to be
used in a progressive or hierarchical way.
•
Remove at source is obviously best, but may not be possible.
•
Regulation providing radio quiet frequencies or regions.
•
Farside lobes of primary and secondary elements must be both minimized and well charac-
terized.
•
High dynamic range linear receivers to allow appropriate detection of both astronomy
(signals below the noise) and interfering signals (with peaks in some frequencies ≫noise).
•
Notch filters (analog, digital, or photonic) to excise bad spectral regions; if the RFI is strong,
this may require Front-end filtering (possibly using high-temperature super conductors) to
remove strong signals as soon as they enter the signal path.
•
Clip samples from time-based data streams to mitigate burst type interference.
•
Decoding to remove multiplexed signals. Blanking of period or time dependent signals is a
very successful but simple case of this more general approach.
•
Cancelation of undesired signals, before correlation using adaptive filters (Barnbaum and
Bradley 1998).
•
Post-correlation cancelation of undesired signals, taking advantage of phase closure tech-
niques (Briggs et al. 2000).
•
Parametric techniques allow the possibility of taking advantage of known interference
characteristics to excise it (Ellingson et al. 2001; Athreya 2009).
•
Adaptive beamforming to steer spatial nulls onto interfering sources. Conceptually, this
is equivalent to cancelation, but it provides a way of taking advantage of the spatial
orthogonallity of astronomy and interfering signals (see next section).
10.3 Adaptive Beam Nulling
This is a promising new approach and is applicable to arrays in either the aperture or focal plane,
for example, Nagel et al. (2007). A physical interpretation of why you can form nulls without
wrecking the synthesized beam might go as follows: Big arrays, once phased up to point in a
given direction, have lots of far sidelobenulls, which are all over the place once you get a reason-
able distance from the main beam. Imagine changing the coefficients a little to get the closest
null onto an interferer. Very little variation in the coefficients is required. Since the difference is
so small, the main beam is hardly affected. The other nulls will shift around, of course, because
they are sensitive to small changes in the coefficients.
11
General Discussion
11.1 Open Skies Policy in Radio Astronomy
Almost all radio observatories operate with an “open sky” model in which access is not limited
to scientists from country or organization that operates the telescope.
This is usually justified on the basis that it guarantees the best science with the facility,
whereas guaranteed access rights for scientists from funding nations favors the individual sci-
entists more than the funding nations. The facility will still get the recognition regardless of

Radio Telescopes 8
343
the nationality of the user, and with an open skies policy, it is easier to set up the large teams
conducting surveys which can be made available to the entire community.
There are national benefits for financial participation in an observatory other than prefer-
ential access. These include representation in policy setting committees, involvement in future
instrumental developments, and representation in time allocation committees.
11.2 Selecting the Best Telescope for Your Experiment
Given the “open skies” policy at many radio astronomy observatories, it makes sense to think
about the best radio telescope for your experiment. The main decision will depend on the same
telescope design criteria discussed in >Sect. 6. To these, you need to add geographic location
and adequate sky coverage to see your source. If you need to make an image, there may be
additional declination constraints, depending on the geometry of the array. For time-variable
phenomena, you may also need to observe at a specific time and hence geographic longitude.
Some telescopes are optimized for imaging (usually the arrays) and others for time domain
astronomy (usually the single dishes).
Selecting the right frequency will depend on the scientific requirements. If specific rest
frame line transitions are involved (possibly with red shifts), the observing frequency will be
obvious. Note that modern correlation spectrometers and some telescope systems support more
than one simultaneous frequency band, but there are usually telescope-specific constraints
which still need to be considered.
Radio continuum observations are either thermal or nonthermal. If thermal, the frequency
choice will depend on the optical depth with higher frequencies required for regions with signif-
icant optical depth. For nonthermal sources at low frequencies (<1 GHz), you need to consider
the S/N balance between the spectrum of the sources and the background (nonthermal) noise.
If polarization information is required, you will have a complex trade-off between depolariza-
tion effects favoring higher frequencies and Faraday rotation measure sensitively favoring the
lower frequencies and large fractional bandwidths.
Perhaps the most critical of the other factors are the angular resolution and field of view.
Angular resolution varies by a factor of 10(hence 10in brightness sensitivity). Single
dishes and low frequency arrays have low-resolution and high-brightness sensitivity. The cur-
rent mainstream-connected arrays (VLA, GMRT, ATCA, and WSRT) have a resolution in
′′.–′′ range and are very good when comparing with images at other wavelengths. Very
high-resolution (VLBI) observations are more specialized and usually involve a very small FoV
due to data transfer and processing limits.
11.3 Analog Versus Digital
This has always separated different telescope designs. In the beginning, the aperture synthe-
sis had to wait for the computational capability to calculate Fourier transforms, and later fast
Fourier transforms (Cooley and Tukey 1965). Before that, analog beamforming was the only
solution. Over time, the arrays have increasingly relied on digital processing, while the single
dishes used analog systems up to the final data analysis stage.
The digital vs. analog divide as a function of processing speed has evolved dramatically over
time. Digital processing speed has been following Moore’s law, but most analog developments

344 8
Radio Telescopes
have been much slower so the transition between analog and digital has been moving to higher
frequencies and wider bandwidths. Despite these changes, the digital analog divide is still with
us because the bandwidths and maximum frequencies in radio telescopes still push the maxi-
mum achievable digital signal processing limits. Currently, the digital-analog transition is in the
100 GHz range for most arrays, but for very large arrays such as SKA, the number of elements
still makes fully digital difficult even at a few GHz. At high frequency, the balance shifts to larger
dish size due to the increased cost contribution of the very low-noise cryogenic receivers and
the cost of digital signal processing bandwidth.
In addition to these general design issues, we have also had the movement of the digi-
tal/analog transition closer and closer to the front end of the system, ultimately resulting in
the digital receiver.
11.3.1 Fully Digital Receivers
In a digital receiver, the whole analog radio frequency band from the output of the low-noise
amplifieris digitized directlywithout anypriordown-conversion and analog processing. All sig-
nal processing operations are performed in the digital domain, and the digital sampler (clock)
replaces the local oscillator in a conventional receiver. This is also known as a software radio. The
digital receiver revolution has been dramatic and has huge impact for wireless communications.
For example, see Reed (2002).
These digital receivers are extremely flexible, and production costs are low. Once designed
and manufactured, they are simpler to use and replicate because there is no need to tune or
match various analog components. In a digital receiver, it is also easier to implement specialized
real-time signal processing techniques such as RFI suppression, programmable de-dispersion,
and real-time time-domain processing.
For radio astronomy applications, the digital receivers present some special challenges
which are now being overcome with modern technology. High performance and stability are
required, and self-generated interference produced close to the high-gain amplifiers has to be
suppressed. High bandwidths are required, but multibit samplers with up to 30 GHz clock rates
are now commercially available.
11.4 General Purpose Versus Specialized Telescope Designs
This debate is still as vigorous as ever involving the cost trade-offs between specialized vs.
flexible general use telescopes.
The beginning of radio astronomy provides excellent examples of discoveries made by
exploring the unknown (Kellermann et al. 2009). Wilkinson et al. (2004) included a tabula-
tion of the key discoveries in radio astronomy since the beginning of the field in 1933 to 2000.
>Figure 8-5a plots these discoveries against time, comparing the discoveries made with spe-
cial purpose instruments with those made on the larger general user facilities. It is clear that
the number of discoveries made with special purpose instruments has declined with time.
> Figure 8-5b shows that serendipitous discoveries are also more prevalent at the inception
of a new branch of science.

Radio Telescopes 8
345
7
a
b
6
5
4
3
2
Number/decade
1
0
1930
1940
1950
1960
Date
Type of instrument
1970
Specialized
General-purpose
1980
1990
7
6
5
4
3
2
Number/decade
1
0
1930
1940
1950
1960
Date
Predicted v Serendipity
1970
Serendipity
Predicted
1980
1990
⊡Fig. 8-5
Key discoveries in radio astronomy (From Wilkinson et al. (2004))
12
The World’s Major Radio Telescopes
It is not practical to describe all the telescopes listed in Table A2, so this section is restricted to
the subset of telescopes which have had the most impact based on the bibliometric analysis of
Trimble and Ceja (2010).
12.1 Very Large Array (VLA, Now JVLA)
In 1965, a proposal to construct the VLA (> Fig. 8-6) was submitted to the US National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF). With twenty-seven 25-m dishes and reconfigurable baselines in a 2D
Y-shaped array extending to 36 km, this was a huge step forward in sensitivity and angular res-
olution (Napier et al. 1983). The antennas are Cassegrain, and the receivers are in a ring at the

346 8
Radio Telescopes
⊡Fig. 8-6
VLA with rainbow 1985 (© Doug.Johnson/Science Photo Library)
secondary focus where they can be quickly changed by a tilting 2.3-m subreflector. The 2D array
provides good-quality imaging from the North Pole down to declinations of ∼−40○. The four
configurations give a wide range of resolution and brightness sensitivity. This was one of the
first centimeter synthesis telescopes to provide good-quality imaging of equatorial sources.
The VLA construction commenced in 1972, and it was formally inaugurated in 1980.
The VLA has been the most productive ground-based telescope ever built at any wavelength in
both its numberof publications and numberof citations. The VLA sensitivity and imaging qual-
ity open radio wavelength observations to many fields of astronomy including stellar (mass loss
rates), planets, Galactic variables, Galactic Center, and normal galaxies as well as the expected
radio galaxy and quasar research. It is now undergoing a major upgrade (see > Sect. 13.1)
and will have almost complete frequency coverage with multiple low-noise dual polarization
receivers from 1 to 40 GHz.
The JVLA is operated by NRAO as a National Science Foundation facility with open sky
access policy.
12.2 Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA)
The Australian Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) started operating in 1987. It has six 22-m
movable dishes and a 6-km E–W baseline. It is the premier southern hemisphere aperture syn-
thesis telescope (Frater et al. 1992). Although it has only modest collecting area, it has multiple
simultaneous frequencies and dual polarization low-noise receivers extending up to 100 GHz,
very high (8 GHz) bandwidth, and low system temperature (Wilson et al. 2011).
Like the JVLA (see > Sect. 13.1), it illustrates the degree to which technology develop-
ment has enhanced radio telescope performance. All receivers are on a turret at the secondary
focus which is rotated to bring the active receiver on-axis, resulting in exceptional polarization

Radio Telescopes 8
347
performance. The long baselines are on an E–W rail track limiting good 2D imaging to
declinations less than −20○. However, there are short (200-m) N–S baselines which provide
lower-resolution 2D arrays which are especially useful for synthesis imaging at short wave-
lengths even near the equator. The ATCA was completed just in time to image the nonthermal
radio emission of the SN1987a in the Magellanic Clouds and has continued to follow the
development of the expanding shell for the last 25 years (Zanardo et al. 2010).
The ATCA is operated by CSIRO as a national facility with open sky access policy.
12.3 VLBA (Very Long Baseline Array)
The VLBA is a system of ten 25-m diameterparabolic dishes which was dedicated in 1993. With
antennas distributed from Mauna Kea on the Big Island of Hawaii to St. Croix in the US Virgin
Islands, the VLBA spans 8,000 km and provides the highest angular resolution of any telescope
on Earth or in space.
The first and one of the very few confirmed super massive black holes was found in the
galaxy NGC4258. Its mass and small size is traced by VLBA observations of a HO masersource
in its nucleus (Miyoshi et al. 1995). In 1999, follow-up VLBA observation (Herrnstein et al.
1999) made the first direct extragalactic geometric distance measurement.
The VLBA is operated by NRAO as a US National Science Foundation facility and has had
an open sky access policy.
12.4 MERLIN (Multi-element Radio Linked Interferomer Network)
The Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network (MERLIN) is an array of radio tele-
scopes spread across the UK. The array consists of up to seven radio telescopes and includes the
Lovell Telescope, Mark II, Cambridge, Defford, Knockin, Darnhall, and Pickmere. The longest
baseline is 217 km, and MERLIN operates at frequencies between 151 MHz and 24 GHz. It was
originally connected in real time using microwave radio links which have now been replaced
by wideband optical fiber links.
MERLIN is operated from Jodrell Bank on behalf of the Science and Technology Facilities
Council as a National Facility.
12.5 Parkes
In 1960, the CSIRO Radiophysics group in Australia built a 210-ft parabolic dish now known as
the Parkes 64-m radio telescope. The aerial cabin at the prime focus houses feeds and receiver
equipment. The feed platform translator at the base of the aerial cabin holds up to four receivers.
The translator has remotely controled motion both up/down for focus and lateral/ rotational
movement for receiver changes and polarization measurement. The alt-az mounted dish is
limited in zenith angle to 59.5○.
The Parkes 21-cm Multibeam Receiver consists of a 13-beam cooled dual polarization
21-cm receiver system located at the prime focus of the 64-m dish. This receiver has had huge
impact for pulsar and HI surveys and was the forerunner for multibeam receivers now available
on many radio telescopes (>Fig. 8-7).

348 8
Radio Telescopes
⊡Fig. 8-7
Installation of the multibeam receiver on the Parkes radio telescope in 1997
One of the most famous observations of the CSIRO’s Parkes Observatory made soon after its
completion was the Lunar Occultation of 3C273 by Hazard et al. (1963) which leads to the dis-
covery of quasars. The occultation showed an unresolved flat-spectrum core and a ′′ steeper
spectrum jet structure. The morphology and position clearly identified this strong but previ-
ously unidentified radio source with a bright 13-magnitude star with a wisp (jet) of optical
emission. Schmidt (1963) obtained an optical spectrum of the star and interpreted the lines as
having a redshift of 0.15.
Parkes is operated by CSIRO as a national facility with open sky access policy.
12.6 Arecibo
In 1963 at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, the US constructed the largest single aperture reflecting dish
ever built. This has a 1,000-ft diameter but is a fixed spherical reflector with a movable focus.
Originally designed for prime focus with a line feed, it was modified to a Gregorian with a 22-m
correcting sub-reflector (Goldsmith 1996). A major component of the Arecibo telescope is the
powerful radar system which enables the observatory to make radar observations of asteroids,
comets, planets, and planetary satellites.
The Arecibo 1,000-ft dish was designed by Bill Gordon in the 1950s for ionospheric
backscatter experiments, not for radio astronomy. It later became apparent that Gordon had
overestimated the spectral width of the returned echoes in calculating the dish size needed
to detect echoes from the ionosphere, and that a much smaller (and very much cheaper) dish

Radio Telescopes 8
349
would be sufficient for the ionosphere experiments. However, by then, enthusiasm for a 1,000-ft
dish had grown, and Gordon was able to obtain construction funds from the military who were
obsessed with anything that they might learn about the ionosphere in order to detect incoming
Russian missiles (Cohen, 2008, private communication), and the Arecibo telescope was built as
designed (Kellermann et al. 2009).
Arecibo was operated by Cornell University since it commenced operation until 2011 when
the NSF operational contract was moved to a consortium including SRI international, USRA,
and University of Puerto Rico. Arecibo is a national facility, funded by the NSF with open sky
access policy.
12.7 Eﬀelsberg 100-m Telescope
The Max Planck Institute, 100-m dish in Effelsberg near Bonn, is a classical steerable parabolic
dish completed in 1972. It is one of the largest fully steerable dishes in the world.
The antenna has a primary mirror 100 m in diameter and a 6.5-m secondary mirror. It oper-
ates at frequencies between 0.300 and 96 GHz. Receivers are mounted at both the primary focus
and at the secondary focus of the telescope enabling rapid changes between some receivers.
The high sensitivity and good performance of the 100 m made it an excellent tool for study-
ing the 22-GHz water vapor line both as a single dish and as the highest S/N element in VLBI
observations. The first extragalactic water vapor line was found by Churchwell et al. (1977).
This very well known 408-MHz all-sky image (> Fig. 8-8) is from the Effelsberg 100-m
telescope and the Parkes telescope (for the Southern Hemisphere). It was produced by Haslam
et al. (1982) and is now the basis for the estimation of foreground nonthermal contributions to
the CMB radio emission.
⊡Fig. 8-8
All-sky radio emission at 408 MHz (Haslam et al. 1982)

350 8
Radio Telescopes
The 100-m Effelsberg radio telescope of the Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie is
made available to all qualified scientists. The present policy allows the allocation of up to 40%
of available observing time to visitors.
12.8 Green Bank Telescope (GBT)
The Robert C. Byrd 100-m Green Bank Telescope (GBT), replacing an older transit dish, is the
last of the giant dishes to be built. It commenced operation in 2000. Unlike its predecessors, the
GBT is an off-axis segment of a parabola with offset focus (both prime and Gregorian) which
provides an unblocked aperture for high efficiency and minimum spectral ripple. It is one of
the largest fully steerable dishes in the world.
At the same Green Bank observatory, you will now also find the original Grote Reber dish
which was reassembled there by Reber in 1960, and a reconstruction of Jansky’s telescope.
The GBT is operated by NRAO as a National Science Foundation facility with open sky
access policy.
12.9 Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT)
The forerunner of the Westerbork telescope was the Benelux Cross,1 a joint Netherlands-
Belgium project initiated byProfessorJan Oort in 1958 touse the radioastronomysource counts
for cosmology.
The design was drastically modified under the influence of Jan Hogbom, a recent Ph.D.
graduate from Ryle’s group in Cambridge, and Chris Christiansen, from CSIRO in Sydney.
The Benelux Cross was transformed into the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT)
which combined aspects of aperture synthesis using movable elements and Earth rotation syn-
thesis, from Cambridge, with the grating array concepts, from Australia. The WSRT opened
in 1970 (Hogbom and Brouw 1974). In 1980, it was extended from twelve to fourteen 25-m
dishes and from 1.5- to 3-km maximum E–W baseline. With its much greater sensitivity, the
WSRT was able to make great advances in HI synthesis imaging and to open up areas of galactic
astronomy with the observations of HII regions, interacting binaries and the Galactic Center.
A phased array feed (PAF) system, called APERTIF, is being installed in the WSRT. APERTIF
will cover frequencies from 1.0 to 1.7 GHz, increasing the instantaneous FoV of the WSRT to
8 deg(Oosterloo et al. 2010).
Westerbork is operated by ASTRON, Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy, as an open
access user facility.
12.10 Jodrell Bank
For over 50 years, the giant Lovell telescope at Jodrell Bank has been an internationally
renowned landmark in the world of astronomy. It has been operating since the summer of 1957,
1http://www.astron.nl/radio-observatory/public/history-wsrt/benelux-cross-antenna-project/
benelux-cross-antenna-project.

Radio Telescopes 8
351
just in time for the launch of Sputnik. It is a fully steerable 76-m (250-ft) parabolic antenna with
receivers at the prime focus.
The Jodrell Bank 250-ft radio telescope was originally designed to detect radio echoes from
cosmic ray air showers. Although this was not possible because the fast recombination in the
ionized cosmic ray trail suppresses the echo below detectability, the 250-ft parabolic reflector
was built in the 1950s with an upgraded surface so it could reach the 21-cm hydrogen line
which was discovered in 1951. The latest upgrade took place in 2002 giving good performance
at frequencies above 5 GHz.
The Lovell telescope, used as an interferometerwith small telescopes, found that some radio
sources had exceedingly small angular size. These were eventually identified with high-redshift
stellar counterparts – the quasars.
Jodrell Bank is operated by the University of Manchester.
12.11 Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope (GMRT)
The GMRT was built near Pune in India in 1995. It is an array of 30 large fully steerable 45-m
dishes and occupies a key niche for very high sensitivity at intermediate and lower radio fre-
quencies (50 MHz–1.5 GHz). It is a 2D array with a range of baselines up to 20 km, giving an
angular resolution of ′′ at 21 cm. Although it was not in the top list of telescopes in Trimble
and Ceja (2010), its impact has increased rapidly since then.
GMRT is operatedby the National Centerfor Radio Astrophysics, a part of the Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research, with open sky access policy.
13
Future Big Science Projects in Radio Astronomy
13.1 The Karl G Jansky Very Large Array (JVLA, Previously the
EVLA)
After 30 years with only minimal upgrades, the VLA is undergoing a major upgrade, and the
Expanded VLA is now coming into operation with 5–20 times the sensitivity, almost com-
plete frequency coverage, and greatly enhanced spectral capability. This illustrates the dramatic
impact of improved technology even though the collecting area has not changed (Perley et al.
2011).
The Expanded VLA will be known as the Karl G Jansky Very large Array (JVLA).
13.2 ALMA
This major new mm and sub-mm array is covered in >Chap. 7, “Submillimeter Telescopes.”
13.3 LOFAR
LOFAR is a e150-million Dutch-led project building a novel low-frequency-phased aperture
arrays spread over northern Europe. It is an all-electronic telescope covering low frequencies

352 8
Radio Telescopes
from 30 to 80 MHz and 120–240 MHz. The array still has some sensitivity below 30 Mhz, and
it may be possible to do some astronomical observations in this range. In Europe, FM radio
occupancy of the band between 80 and 120 MHz makes this band unusable for radio astronomy.
LOFAR will begin its operational phase in mid 2012 following a period of commissioning in
2010 and 2011.
13.4 Murchison Wideﬁeld Array (MWA)
Construction of the MWA began in February 2012. It is an all-electronic-phased array with
no moving parts, observing at frequencies from 80 to 300 MHz, and located in the radio-quiet
Western Australia Outback. The majority of the array tiles are concentrated into a 1.5-km core.
The MWA is an international collaboration between institutions from the US, Australia,
New Zealand, and India.
13.5 Long Wavelength Array (LWA)
A phased array with plans for 53 stations each comprising 256 dipoles operating in the radio
frequency range of about 20–80 MHz. The core is located at the VLA site, and baselines will
eventually extend to 400 km.
The Long Wavelength Array project is a consortium led by the University of New Mex-
ico, and includes the Los Alamos National Laboratory, the United States Naval Research
Laboratories, and NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
13.6 FAST
FAST was originally conceived as an element of a future SKA proposal with a small number of
large elements. It is now being developed as a single very large 500-m Arecibo-like dish. It is
being built in the karst region of Guizhou province in China and uses an innovative stretched
membrane structure to deform the spherical dish into a parabolic shape rather than using a line
feed or a large correcting secondary mirror. It is now under construction and is expected to be
completed by 2016.
13.7 SKA and the SKA Precursors
The SKA precursor facilities are being developed to demonstrate technology needed for the
SKA. The two SKA precursor facilities under construction are MeerKAT and ASKAP.
13.7.1 MeerKAT
MeerKAT is a South African project to build an array of sixty-four 13.5-m diameter dishes
located near Carnarvon in the Northern Cape province of South Africa. MeerKAT is part of
the technology development required for the SKA. The full MeerKAT array is expected to be

Radio Telescopes 8
353
ready by 2015–2016. The dishes will be equipped with a number of high-performance single
pixel feeds to cover frequencies from 580 MHz up to 14 GHz.
13.7.2 ASKAP
The Australian SKA Pathfinder, ASKAP, is a project to build a telescope array of thirty-six 12-m
dishes. It will be testing advanced, innovative technologies such as phased array feeds and a
three axis mount to give a wide field of view (30 deg) with very high dynamic range (DeBoer
et al. 2009).
ASKAP is being built by CSIRO at the Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory site, an
extremely low RFI environment, located near Boolardy in the Midwest region of Western
Australia. All 36 antennas and their technical systems are expected to be completed in 2014.
13.7.3 SKA
The Square Kilometer Array (SKA) is a proposed radio telescope with a total collecting area of
approximately one square kilometer, a frequency range from 70 MHz to 25 GHz and baselines
up to at least 3,000 km from a concentrated central core. The SKA will be built in the southern
hemisphere, in either South Africa or Australia. Construction of the SKA is scheduled to begin
in 2016 for initial observations by 2019 and full operation by 2024.
The design will use aperture array technology for the lower frequencies and arrays of
parabolic dishes at the higher frequencies. To provide a square kilometer of aperture at an
acceptable cost, the SKA must make a revolutionary break with current radio telescope design.
Some aspects of the technology needed are still in the development stage, and the various SKA
precursors are now exploring some of the key technologies.
The construction will be a major undertaking and will be implemented in phases. Phase
1 is the initial deployment (15–20%) of the array at mid-band frequencies, Phase 2 is the full
collecting area at low- and mid-band frequencies (∼70 MHz–10 GHz), and Phase 3 sees the
implementation at higher frequencies of 25 GHz or more.
The key science areas driving the current SKA are described in detail in “Science with the
Square Kilometer Array” (Carilli and Rawlings 2004).
14
The Future
As discussed in >Sect. 2.2.2 , the growth of radio astronomy facilities has been exponential
since the beginning in 1940, but how do we maintain exponential growth? If the improvement
in sensitivity has reached a ceiling, the rates of new discoveries will decline and the field will
become uninteresting and slowly die. On the other hand, if we can shift to new technology
or find new ways to organize our resources, the exponential increase in sensitivity can con-
tinue. Do we have such new technology to continue the exponential improvement? In radio
astronomy, the combination of transistor amplifiers and their large scale integration into com-
plex systems which can be duplicated inexpensively provides one of the keys for change. The
other key technology is the computing capacity to apply digital processing at high bandwidth

354 8
Radio Telescopes
thereby realizing processes such as multiple adaptive beam formation and active interference
rejection in ways not previously conceivable. Finally, the move to international facilities such
as the proposed SKA will also be needed to avoid the resource ceiling.
Appendix
A.1. Optical and Radio Analogs and Terminology
Radio
Optical
Antenna, dish
Telescope, element
Sidelobes
Diﬀraction pattern
Near sidelobes
Airy rings
Feed legs
Spider
Aperture blockage
Vignetting
Dirty beam
Point spread function (PSF)
Primary beam
Field of view
Map
Image
Source
Object
Image plane
Image plane
Aperture plane
Pupil plane
UV plane
Fourier plane
Aperture
Entrance pupil
UV coverage
Modulation transfer function
Grating responses
Aliased orders
Primary beam direction
Grating blaze angle
UV (visibility) plane
Hologram
Bandwidth smearing
Chromatic aberration
Local oscillator
Reference beam
Dynamic range
Contrast
Phased array
Beam combiner
Correlator
No analog
No analog
Correlator
Receiver
Detector
Taper
Apodise
Self-calibration
Wavefront sensing (adaptive optics)
A.2. The World’s Largest Centimeter and Meter Radio Telescopes
Notes on the Table A.2:
Only operating radio telescopes with diameter greater than 25 m (or equivalent area) are
included. Note that this excludes many of the important smaller mm telescopes. For simplicity,
the geometric areas are given. Effective areas (see > Sect. 4.2.1) will be less and depend on

Radio Telescopes 8
355
Country
Name
Latitude
Longitude (east)
Frequency range (GHz)
No
Size (m)
Area (sqm)
Type
Argentina
IAR
−34.88
−58.14
1.42
1.72
2
30
1,414
Dish
Australia
ATCA – Narrabri
−30.31
149.55
1.30
106
6
22
2,281
Dish array
Australia
Ceduna
−31.87
133.81
2.20
22
1
30
707
Dish
Australia
DSS43 Tidbinbilla
−35.41
148.98
1.70
22
1
70
3,848
Dish
Australia
Hobart
−42.81
147.44
1.40
22
1
26
531
Dish
Australia
MOST
−35.37
149.42
0.84
0.84
2
778 × 12
9,336
Cylinder cross
Australia
Parkes
−33.00
148.26
0.44
24
1
64
3,217
Dish
Canada
DRAO – synthesis telescope
49.32
−119.62
0.41
1.42
7
8.5
397
Dish array
Canada
DRAO 26-m
49.32
−119.62
1.42
1.67
1
26
531
Dish
China
Shanghai
31.10
121.20
1.62
22.6
1
25
491
Dish
China
Urumqi
43.50
87.18
0.31
24
1
25
491
Dish
France
IRAM – Plateau de Bure
44.63
5.91
0.08
230
3
15
530
Dish array
France
Nancay decametric array
47.38
2.20
0.01
0.08
144
2 × 3,500
3,526
Array
France
Nancay radio heliograph
47.38
2.20
0.15
0.45
44
5
864
Dish cross
France
Nancay radio telescope
47.38
2.20
1.30
3.3
1
200 × 40
8,000
Kraus type
Germany
Eﬀelsberg
50.52
6.88
0.41
100
1
100
7,854
Dish
India
Gauribidanur
13.60
77.45
0.03
0.15
1
1,500 × 25
37,500
Array T
India
GMRT
19.10
74.05
0.38
1.67
30
45
47,713
Dish array
India
Ooty radio telescope
11.38
76.67
0.33
0.33
1
530 × 30
15,900
Cylinder
Italy
Medicina
44.52
11.65
0.32
3.5
1
32
804
Dish
Italy
Medicina northern cross
44.52
11.65
0.41
0.41
600 × 34
30,000
Cylinder T
Italy
Noto
36.88
14.99
1.33
43.5
1
32
804
Dish
Italy
Sardinia
39.50
9.24
0.41
100
1
64
3,217
Dish
Japan
Kashima
35.95
140.65
1.50
43
1
34
908
Dish
Japan
Nobeyama
35.94
138.48
1.40
116
1
45
1,590
Dish
Japan
Usuda
36.13
138.37
1.40
43
1
64
3,217
Dish
Japan
VERA
24–39
124–142
2.20
87
4
20
1,257
VLBI dishes
Korea
KVN
33–37
126–129
2.00
115
3
20
942
VLBI dishes
Mauritius
MRT
−20.13
57.73
0.15
0.15
1
2,000 × 2
25,000
Array T
Netherlands
Dwingeloo
52.81
6.40
1
25
491
Dish

356 8
Radio Telescopes
Country
Name
Latitude
Longitude (east)
Frequency range (GHz)
No
Size (m)
Area (sqm)
Type
Netherlands
Westerbork
52.92
6.60
0.32
8.65
14
25
6,872
Dish array
Poland
Torun
52.91
18.56
0.15
6.95
1
32
804
Dish
Puerto Rico
Arecibo
18.34
−66.75
0.33
8.5
1
305
73,062
Fixed spherical
Russia
Kalyazin
57.22
37.90
0.61
22.5
1
64
3,217
Dish
Russia
KVAZAR
44–61
30–102
1.40
22.39
3
32
2,413
VLBI dishes
Russia
Puschino BSA
54.82
37.67
0.11
0.11
1
25,000
Phased array
Russia
Puschino DKR-1000
54.82
37.67
0.04
0.12
1
2 × 1,000
16,000
Cylinder cross
Russia
RATAN 600
43.83
41.59
1.00
22
1
2 × 1,812
3,624
Parabolic section
South Africa
Hartebeesthoek
−25.89
27.68
1.60
22
1
26
531
Dish
Spain
DSS63 Madrid
40.43
−4.25
1.70
22
1
70
3,848
Dish
Spain
IRAM – Pico Veleta
37.07
−3.39
1.61
360
1
30
707
Dish
Sweden
Onsala
57.40
11.93
1.33
116
1
25
491
Dish
UK
Cambridge – Ryle
52.17
0.04
0.04
31.8
8
13
1,062
Dish array
UK
Jodrell Bank – Lovell
53.24
−2.31
0.15
24
1
76
4,536
Dish
UK
Jodrell Bank – MkII
53.24
−2.31
0.15
24
1
25 × 28
550
Dish
UK
Merlin – Cambridge 32 m
52.17
0.04
0.15
24
1
32
804
VLBI dishes
UK
Merlin
52–54
−2 to −3
0.15
24
4
25
1,963
VLBI dishes
Ukraine
Evpatoriya
48.38
31.16
1.60
22
1
70
3,848
Dish
Ukraine
URAN 1-4
42–50
25–43
0.01
0.04
4
Interferometer
Ukraine
UTR-2 Grakovo
49.63
36.93
0.01
0.04
1
1,800 × 54 +
150,000
Array T
900 × 54
USA
DSS13 Goldstone
35.25
−116.79
2.30
8.4
1
26
531
Dish
USA
DSS14 Goldstone
35.43
−116.89
1.70
22
1
70
3,848
Dish
USA
Greenbank, 140′
38.44
−79.83
0.05
25.2
1
43
1,452
Dish
USA
Greenbank, interferometer
38.44
−79.83
2.10
8.6
2
26
1,062
Interferometer
USA
Haystack observatory
42.62
−71.49
2.20
115
1
36
1,018
Dish
USA
Owens Valley 40 m
37.00
−118.00
0.32
43.4
1
40
1,257
Dish
USA
Owens Valley interferometer
37.23
−118.29
0.50
18
2
27
1,145
Interferometer
USA
JVLA
34.08
−107.62
0.05
50
27
25
13,254
Dish array
USA
VLBA
17–48
−64 to −155
0.31
43.5
10
25
4,909
VLBI dishes

Radio Telescopes 8
357
actual aperture efficiency which is a function of frequency. At best, both these will usually be
65% of the geometric area and sometimes much less. Upper and lower frequencies are based on
available receivers rather than the antenna frequency range.
Groups of antennas used primarily as part of a VLBI array are not listed separately (e.g.,
VLBA antennas), and the range of coordinates given and number of antennas indicate the full
extent of the array.
Longitude is given as an angular measurement ranging from 0○at the prime meridian to
+180○eastward and −180○westward. For calculations, the west/east suffix is replaced by a neg-
ative sign in the western hemisphere. Confusingly, the convention of negative for east is also
sometimes seen. We use the preferred convention that east be positive. Latitude south is minus.
References to Table A.2:
The most complete listings of radio telescopes and their operating frequencies are main-
tained by the three ITU radio astronomy spectrum management authorities:
CORF (North America) http://sites.nationalacademies.org/BPA/BPA_059065#list
CRAF (Europe) http://www.craf.eu/raobs.htm
RAFCAP (Asian Pacific) http://www.atnf.csiro.au/rafcap/AP_RT.htm
References
Akgiray, A., Weinreb, S., & Imbriale, W. A. 2011,
Design and measurements of a dual-polarized
wideband
constant-beamwidth
quadruple-
ridged flared
horn, in IEEE Antennas
and
Propagation International Symposium, Spokane,
Washington DC, July 2011
Athreya, R. 2009, ApJ, 696, 885–890
Baars, J. W. M. 2007, The parabolic reflector antenna
in
radio
astronomy
and
communications,
in Astrophysics Science library (Heidelberg:
Springer)
Barnbaum, C., & Bradley, R. F. 1998, AJ, 116,
2598–2614
Born, M., & Wolf, E. 1965, Principles of Optics
(Oxford: Pergamon)
Bracewell, R. N. 1986, The Fourier Transform and Its
Applications (2nd ed.; New York: McGraw Hill)
Brentjens, M. A., & de Bruyn, A. G. 2005, A&A, 441,
1217
Briggs, F. H., Bell, J. F., & Kesteven, M. J. 2000, AJ,
120, 3351–3361
Bunton, J. D. 2011, IEEE Trans. Antenna Propag., 59,
2041–2046
Burke, B. F., & Graham-Smith, F. 1996, An Intro-
duction to Radio Astronomy (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press)
Carilli, C. L., & Rawlings, S. 2004, New Astron. Rev.,
48, 979–984
Christiansen, W., & Warburton, J. 1955, Aust. J. Phys.,
8, 474–486
Christiansen, W. N., & Hogbom, J. A. 1985, Radiote-
lescopes (2nd ed.; Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press)
Churchwell,
E. B., Witzel, A., Huchtmeier,
W.,
Pauliny-Toth, I., Roland, J. & Sieber, W. 1977,
A&A, 54, 969
Cooley, J. W., & Tukey, J. W. 1965, Math. Comput. 19,
297–301
Cordes,
J.
2007
revised
2009,
Survey
Metrics.
SKA Memo 109, http://www.skatelescope.org/
publications/
Cornwell, T. J. 1988, A&A, 202, 316
Cornwell, T. J., Holdaway, M. A., & Uson, J. M. 1993,
A&A, 271, 697
DeBoer, D. R., Gough, R. G., Bunton, J. D., Cornwell,
T. J., Beresford, R. J., Johnston, S. Feain, I. J.,
Schinckel, A. E., Jackson, C. A., Kesteven, M. J.,
Chippendale, A., Hampson, G. A., O’Sullivan,
J. D., Hay, S. G., Jacka, C. E., Sweeloam, T. W.,
Storey, M. C., Ball, L., & Boyle, B. J. 2009, Proc.
IEEE, 97, 1507–1521
de Solla Price,
D. J. 1963, Little
Science,
Big
Science (New York, NY: Columbia University
Press)
Ekers,
R.
D.,
&
Bell,
J.
F.
2002,
Radio
fre-
quency interference, in IAU Symposium 199:
The Universe at Low Radio Frequencies, Pune,
India, 30 November–4
December
1999, ed.
A. Pramesh Rao, G. Swarup, & Gopal-Krishna,
498–505

358 8
Radio Telescopes
Ekers, R. D., & Rots, A. H. 1979, in Image Forma-
tion from Coherence Functions in Astronomy,
Proc. IAU Colloq. 49, Groningen, Netherlands,
August 10–12, 1978, Astrophysics and Space Sci-
ence Library. Vol. 76, ed. C. van Schooneveld
(Dordrecht/Boston: Reidel), 61
Ellingson, S. W. 2005, Introduction to special section
on mitigation of radio frequency interference in
radio astronomy. Radio Sci., 40, RS5S01
Ellingson, S. W., Bunton, J. D., & Bell, J. F. 2001,
ApJSS, 135, 87–93
Fisher, J. R., & Bradley, R. F. 2000, Proc. SPIE, 4015,
308–318. Radio Telescopes, ed H. R. Butcher
Frater, R. H., Brooks, J. W., & Whiteoak, J. B. 1992,
J. Electr. Electron. Eng. Aust., 12, 103–12
Goldsmith, P. F. ed. 1988, in Instrumentation and
Techniques for Radio Astronomy (New York:
IEEE)
Goldsmith, P. F. 1994, Quasioptical Systems: Gaus-
sian Beam Quasioptical Propagation and Appli-
cations (New York: Wiley/IEEE)
Goldsmith, P. F. 1996, IEEE, 15, 38–43
Goris, M. 1998, Categories of Radio Interference,
NFRA Technical Report – 415/MG/V2.3
Harwit, M. 1981, Cosmic Discovery – The Search,
Scope and Heritage of Astronomy (New York,
NY: Basic Books)
Haslam, C. G. T., Salter, C. J., Stoffel, H., & Wilson,
W. E. 1982, A&A Suppl 47, 1
Hay, S., O’Sullivan, J., & Mittra, R. 2008, IEEE Anten-
nas and Propagation Society International Sym-
posium, AP-S, San Diego, CA, July 5–11 2008,
1–4
Hazard, C., Mackey, M. B., & Shimmins, A. J. 1963,
Nature, 197, 1037–1039
Herrnstein, J. R., Moran, J. M., Greenhill, L. J.,
Diamond, P. J., Inoue, M., Nakai, N., Miyoshi,
M., Henkel, C., & Riess, A. 1999, Nature, 400,
539–541
Hogbom, J. A., & Brouw, W. N. 1974, A&A, 33, 289
Jansky, K. G. 1933a, Nature, 132, 66
Jansky, K. G. 1933b, Proc. IRE, 21, 1387–1398
Jenkins, F. A., & White, H. E. 2001, in Fundamentals
of Optics (4th ed.; New York: McGraw-Hill)
Kawaguchi, N., Sasao, T., & Manabe, S. 2000, in Radio
Telescopes, ed H. Butcher, Proc. SPIE, Vol. 4015
(Washington, DC: SPIE), 544–551
Kellermann, K. I., Cordes, J. M., Ekers, R. D., Lazio, J.,
& Wilkinson, P. N. 2009, in Accelerating the Rate
of Astronomical Discovery – SPS5, IAU GA, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, August 11–14
Kellermann, K. I., & Moran, J. M. 2001, Ann. Rev.
A&A, 39, 457–509
Kesteven, M. 2010, Proc. RFI Mitig. Workshop, 29–
31 March 2010. Groningen, the Netherlands.
PoS(RFI2010)007
Kildal,
P.-S.,
Jian
Yang,
Karandikar,
Y.,
Wade-
falk, N., Pantaleev, M., & Helldner, L. 2009,
Development of a coolable 2–14 GHz Eleven
feed for future radio telescopes for SKA and
VLBI 2010, in Electromagnetics in Advanced
Applications, 2009. ICEAA ’09, Turin, Italy,
545–547
Kraus, J. D. 1986, Radio Astronomy (2nd ed.; Powell,
OH: Cygnus-Quasar)
Large, M. I., Campbell-Wilson, D., Cram, L. E., Davi-
son, R. G., & Robertson, J. G. 1994, Astron. Soc.
Aust. Proc. 11, 44–49
Livingston, M. S., & Blewett, P. 1962, Particle Accel-
erators (New York: McGraw Hill)
Love, A. W. ed. 1976, in Electromagnetic Horn
Antennas (New York: IEEE)
Machin, K. E. 1951, Nature, 167, 889–89
Macquart, J.-P., Ekers, R. D., Feain, I., & Johnston-
Hollitt, M. 2012, ApJ, 750, 15
McCready,
L.
L.,
Pawsey,
J.
L.,
&
Payne-
Scott,
R.
1947,
Proc.
R.
Soc.
A,
190,
357–375
Mills, B. Y., & Little, A. G. 1953, Aust. J. Phys., 6,
272
Miyoshi, M., Moran, J., Herrnstein, J., Greenhill,
L., Nakai, N., Diamond, P., & Inoue, M. 1995,
Nature, 373, 127–129
Mollick E. 2006, Establishing Moore’s law. IEEE Ann.
History Comput., 28(3), 62–75
Moore G. E. 1965, Cramming more components onto
integrated circuit. Electronics, 38, 8
Nagel, J. R., Warnick, K. F., Jeffs, B. D., Fisher,
J.
R. & Bradley,
R. 2007,
Radio
Sci.,
42,
RS6013
Napier, P. J., Thompson, A. R., & Ekers, R. D. 1983,
Proc. IEEE, 71, 1295–1320
O’Brien, P. A. 1953, MNRAS, 113, 597–612
Oosterloo, T., Verheijen,
M., & van Cappellen,
W.
2010,
in
Proc.
ISKAF2010
Sci.
Meet.,
June
10–14
2010,
Assen,
the
Netherlands,
PoS(ISKAF2010) 043
Perley, R. A., Chandler, C. J., Butler, B. J., & Wrobel,
J. M. 2011, ApJL, 739, L1
Radhakrishan,
V., 1990, in Modern
Radio Sci-
ence, from URSI General Assembly, Prague,
Czechoslavakia, ed J. Bach Anderson (Published
for the International Union of radio Science and
the ICSU Press by Oxford University Press, UK),
187
Radhakrishnan, V. 1999, in Synthesis Imaging in
Radio Astronomy II, A Collection of Lectures
from the Sixth NRAO/NMIMT Synthesis Imag-
ing Summer School, ASP Conf. Ser. 180, ed.
G. B. Taylor, C. L. Carilli, & R. A. Perley (San
Francisco, CA: ASP), 671
Reber, G. 1958, Proc. IRE, 46, 15–23

Radio Telescopes 8
359
Reed,
J.
H.
2002,
Software
Radio:
A
Modern
Approach to Radio Engineering (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall)
Reich, W., Kalberla, P., Reif, K., & Neidhöfer, J. 1978,
A&A, 76, 92
Riesselmann, K. 2009, Deconstruction: Livingston
plot. Symmetry, 6, 30
Ryle, M. 1952, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 211(1106),
351–375
Ryle, M., & Hewish, A. 1960, MNRAS, 120, 220
Ryle, M., & Neville, A. C. 1962, MNRAS, 125,
39
Ryle, M., & Vonberg, D. D. 1946, Nature, 158,
339–340
Schmidt, M. 1963, Nature, 197, 1040–1041
Stanier, H. M. 1950, Nature, 165, 354–355
Sullivan, W. T. 2009, Cosmic Noise (New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press)
Taylor, G. B., Carilli, C. L., & Perley, R. A. 1999, Syn-
thesis Imaging in Radio Astronomy II, A Collec-
tion of Lectures from the Sixth NRAO/NMIMT
Synthesis Imaging Summer School. ASP Conf.
Ser. 180 (San Francisco, CA: ASP)
Tegmark, M., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2010, Phys. Rev. D,
82, id. 103501
Thompson, A. R., Moran, J. M., & Swenson, G. W.
2001, Interferometry and Synthesis in Radio
Astronomy (New York, NY: Wiley)
Trimble, V., & Ceja, J. A. 2010, Astron. Nachr., 331,
338
Wild, J. P. 1967, Proc. Instn. Radio Electron. Engrs.
Aust., 28(9), 279–291
Wilkinson, P. N., Kellermann, K. I., Ekers, R. D.,
Cordes, J. M., & Lazio, T. J. W. 2004, The explo-
ration of the unknown. New Astron. Rev., 48(11–
12), 1551–1563
Wilson, T. L., Rohlfs, K., & Hüttemeister, S. 2008,
Tools of Radio Astronomy (5th edn.; Heidelberg:
Springer)
Wilson, W. E., Ferris, R. H., Axtens, P., Brown, A.,
Davis, E., Hampson, G., Leach, M., Roberts,
P., Saunders, S., Koribalski, B. S., et al., 2011,
MNRAS, 416, 832–56
Zanardo, G., Staveley-Smith, L., Ball, L., Gaensler, B.
M., Kesteven, M. J., Manchester, R. N., Ng, C.-Y.,
Tzioumis, A. K., & Potter, T. M. 2010, ApJ, 710,
1515–1529


9
Space Telescopes in the
Ultraviolet, Optical, and
Infrared (UV/O/IR)
Erin Elliott ⋅Matt Mountain ⋅Marc Postman ⋅
Anton Koekemoer ⋅Leonardo Ubeda ⋅Mario Livio
Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA
1
Introduction: Advantages of Observatories in Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 365
1.1
Atmospheric Extinction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 366
1.2
Atmospheric Emission and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
1.3
Atmospheric Turbulence and a Resolution Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 369
1.4
A Sensitivity Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 370
1.4.1
Method and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 373
1.5
Comparison of Exposure Times when Imaging Faint Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 374
1.6
Very High-Contrast Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
2
Space Observatories in the UV/O/IR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 380
2.1
Space Observatory Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 381
2.2
Hubble Space Telescope (HST) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
2.3
Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 385
2.4
James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 388
2.5
Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope (ATLAST)
and Other Future Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 390
3
Science Goals, Cost, and Productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 391
3.1
Early Design Trades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
3.2
Mission Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394
3.3
Mission Productivity Metrics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394
4
Orbits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396
4.1
Low Earth Orbit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 396
4.2
Drift-Away Orbit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398
4.3
Libration Point Orbit at Sun-Earth L2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 399
4.4
Orbits and Communications for Future Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 400
5
Packaging and Launch Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 400
6
Optical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404
6.1
Optical Designs and FOV Allocations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405
6.2
Stray Light Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_9, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

362 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
6.3
Lightweight Mirror Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408
6.4
Optical Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410
6.5
Optical Alignment for Future Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413
7
Pointing and Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414
7.1
Pointing and Control Systems for Future Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 418
8
Thermal Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419
8.1
Basic Components of Thermal Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
8.2
Radiative and Conductive Heat Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421
8.3
HST Thermal Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422
8.4
SST Thermal Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
8.5
JWST Thermal Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 425
8.6
The Future in Thermal Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
9
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 428

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
363
Abstract:
Space telescopes are essential for advancing our understanding of the physics of
the cosmos. The vacuum environment of space means the light entering the aperture of a space
telescope has not suffered any atmospheric extinction, enabling observations in ultraviolet,
far-infrared, and X-ray wavelengths. At wavelengths that are accessible from both space and
ground-based facilities, the sky background levels in space are considerably lower than those
at ground-based sites, particularly in the near and mid-infrared. The lack of atmospheric tur-
bulence allows space telescopes to obtain diffraction-limited image quality without the need
for adaptive optics. Their inherently high stability, and ability to observe for long continuous
periods of time, allows observations to be performed from space that are difficult or impossible
to accomplish from the ground. In >Sect. 1, comparisons are made between the sensitivities,
spatial resolutions, and exposure times for ground- and space-based observatories.
Fundamentally, the science objectives drive the design of a space telescope, but these have
to be balanced by the technological maturity of the space systems needed, the availability of
suitable launch vehicles, and ultimately the overall mission cost. Today, it is normal practice
to use cost models to attempt to capture the physical parameters that drive cost. If the early
estimates of mission cost become too large, science objectives may have to be reduced, or
new technologies developed and the mission redesigned accordingly. In >Sect. 3, the types
of high-level trades that have to be made in designing and building a space observatory are
discussed.
To illustrate the kind of trades that are undertaken, three space telescopesthat have different
science objectives and span nearly 30 years in launch dates are described: the Hubble Space
Telescope (HST), Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), and the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST).
Overviews of the three missions are given in >Sect. 2. HST is a warm observatory with a 2.4 m
primary mirror diameter in low Earth orbit launched in 1990. It observes in ultraviolet, optical,
and near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths. SST is a cold infrared observatory with a 0.85 m primary
mirror in a drift-away orbit launched in 2003. JWST will be a cold, infrared observatory with a
6.6 m primary mirror in orbit at the second Lagrange point of the Earth-Sun system (L2). JWST
is currently scheduled to launch in 2018.
Different orbits were selected for HST, SST, and JWST, as discussedin >Sect. 4. A low Earth
orbit was chosen for HST to allow for human servicing that changed and improved the obser-
vatory over its multi-decade lifetime. SST’s heliocentric drift-away orbit was selected because it
minimized the mission mass and allowed the observatory to continually radiate heat into deep
space, but contact with the mission will eventually be lost. JWST’s orbit about the metastable
Sun-Earth Lagrange Point 2 (L2) keeps the Sun, Earth, and Moon constantly behind its sophis-
ticated sunshield, enabling the telescope assembly to passively cool to 40 K, operate in a highly
stable thermal environment, and stay in constant communication with the ground system for
its 10-year mission using NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN).
The ratios of telescope aperture diameter to launch volume and mass have increased over
time, as discussed in >Sect. 5, driven by the need for missions to fit into available launch vehi-
cles. For HST and JWST, some components are folded to fit into the launch vehicles and are
deployed after launch. JWST, in addition, requires that optical alignment be carried out on orbit
because the optics themselves deploy after launch (>Sect. 6.4).
Optical trades are discussed in >Sect. 6. HST and SST are compact, two-mirror Cassegrain
telescopes. HST minimizes the number of mirrors in order to achieve reasonable throughput
at ultraviolet wavelengths. JWST has a three-mirror design that achieves a reasonable field of
view to accommodate multiple instruments despite the very large primary mirror diameter.
The three-mirror design also produces an accessible pupil, and a planar mirror and mask at

364 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
that location are used for fine-pointing adjustments and stray light control. Because it operates
in the IR, JWST’s throughput remains high despite the additional reflections in the telescope.
HST uses a glass primary with a low thermal expansion, which enabled it to be polished
to reach the lower surface errors required for observing at visible and ultraviolet wavelengths.
JWST and SST, operating in infrared wavelengths, were able to make use of a beryllium pri-
mary mirror technology with much lower areal density than that of HST’s light-weighted
glass primary mirror. The beryllium technology has excellent cryogenic properties as discussed
in >Sect. 6.3.
HST’s telescope and instruments operate near room temperature, with the exception of its
actively cooled IR and CCD detector systems. HST experiences a somewhat unstable thermal
environment because of its low Earth orbit, as discussed in > Sect. 8. SST and JWST must
operate cold to ensure that the sensitivity of the infrared detectors is limited by the shot noise
from the deep-space background rather than by infrared emission from the telescope structure.
SST uses a combination of passive cooling for the optics and active cooling for the detectors and
instruments in order to reach their respective operational temperatures in its drift-away orbit.
JWST relies almost solely on passive cooling in its orbit about the Sun-Earth L2 point, with
the exception of the detectors on the mid-infrared instrument which are actively cooled by a
mechanical cooler.
Many of the science objectives for future space telescopes will build on the science legacies
of the telescopes covered in this chapter and will require larger primary mirror diameters. With
a combination of greater angular resolution and higher sensitivity, future observatories will be
capable of detecting signs of life on extrasolar planets, will reveal the mechanisms that con-
trol early galaxy formation, and will provide windows into new and unexplored regimes of the
universe from ultraviolet to infrared wavelengths. Such missions are likely to make use of new,
larger launch vehicles, but will still need to fold more compactly for launch and have lower areal
densities than current observatories. Consequently, automatic deployments or in-space assem-
bly will be required, as will on orbit optical alignment. Future large telescopes will likely also
incorporate real-time active and adaptive optical and alignment control; such technology has
been successfully developed for the recent generation of very large ground-based telescopes.
With its thermal stability and high observing efficiencies, L2 will continue to be an attractive
orbit for these future missions. Other orbits might be selected if there is renewed interest in
servicing these future “Great Observatories.”
Keywords: Active, Advanced mission cost model, Alignment, Ariane, ATLAST, Background,
Cassegrain, Communication, Conductive, Cost, Cost model, Delta, Deployment, Design trade,
Drift-away, DSN, Exposure times, Extinction, Fairing, Field of view, Fine guiders, Fine point-
ing, FWHM, Gyroscopes, Heat transfer, High-contrast, Hubble, Instrument, James Webb, L2,
Lagrange point, Launch vehicle, LEO, Lightweight mirrors, MLI, Orbit, OTA, Passive, Pay-
load, Pointing and control, Primarymirror, Productivity, PSF, Pupil, Radiative, Reaction wheels,
Resolving power, Ritchey-Chretien, Science system engineering, Sensitivity, Shroud, Signal-to-
noise, Space launch system, Spacecraft bus, SST, Star trackers, Stray light, Sunshield, TDRSS,
Thermal stability, Thrusters, TMA, Wavefront sensing
List of Abbreviations:
ACS, Attitude Control System; ACS, Advanced Camera for Surveys
(HST Instrument); AMCM, NASA Advanced Mission Cost Model; AO, adaptive optics; AOS,
Aft Optical System (JWST component); AS, aft shroud (HST component); ATLAST, Advanced
Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope; AU, astronomical unit; BATC, Ball Aerospace and

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
365
Technologies Corporation; CCD, charge-coupled device; COBE, Cosmic Background Explorer;
COS, Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (HST instrument); CSA, Canadian Space Agency; CTA,
Cryogenic Telescope Assembly (SST component); DOF, degree of freedom; DSN, Deep Space
Network; ESA, European Space Agency; FGS, Fine Guidance Sensors; FOSR, Flexible Optical
Solar Reflector; FOV, field of view; FS, forward shell (HST component); FSM, Fine Steering mir-
ror (JWST component); FWHM, full width half maximum; GALEX, Galaxy Evolution Explorer;
GMOS, Gemini Multi-object Spectrographs (Gemini instrument); GSFC, Goddard Space Flight
Center; HST, Hubble Space Telescope; ICRP, Independent Comprehensive Review Panel; IFOV,
instantaneous field of view; IR, infrared; IRAC, Infrared Array Camera (SST instrument);
IRAS, Infrared Astronomical Satellite; IRS, Infrared Spectrograph (SST instrument); ISIM,
Integrated Science Instrument Module (JWST component); ISO, Infrared Space Observatory;
JPL, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; JWST, James Webb Space Telescope; LEO, low-Earth orbit;
LST, Large Space Telescope (now HST); MIC, Multi-Instrument Chamber (SST component);
MIMF, Multi-Instrument Multifield; MIPS, Multiband Imaging Photometer for SIRTF (SST
instrument); MIRI, Mid-Infrared Spectrometer (JWST instrument); MLI, multi-layer insula-
tion; NASA, National Aeronautics and Space Administration; NICMOS, Near Infrared Camera
and Multi-Object Spectrometer (HST instrument); NIR, near infrared; NIRCam, Near-Infrared
Camera (JWST instrument); NIRI, Near InfraRed Imager (Gemini instrument); NIRSpec,
Near-Infrared Spectrometer (JWST instrument); NIRISS, Near-infrared Imaging Slitless Spec-
trometer; OTA, Optical Telescope Assembly; OTE, Optical Telescope Element (JWST com-
ponent); PCRS, Pointing Control Reference Sensor (SST component); PMT, photomultiplier
tube; PSF, point spread function; PWFS, Peripheral wave front sensor (Gemini equipment);
QE, quantum efficiency; RMS, root mean square; r.p.m., rotations per minute; ROC, radius of
curvature; S/N, signal-to-noise ratio; SAA, South Atlantic Anomaly; SAFIR, Single-Aperture
Far-Infrared Observatory; SIRTF, Space Infrared Telescope Facility; SLS, Space Launch System;
SPICA, Space Infrared Telescope forCosmologyand Astrophysics; SST, SpitzerSpace Telescope;
STIS, Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (HST instrument); STS, Space Transportation
System (Space Shuttles); TDRSS, NASA’s Tracking and Data RElay Satellite System; TEC, ther-
moelectric cooler; THEIA, Telescope for Habitable Exoplanets and Interstellar/Intergalactic
Astronomy; TMA, three-mirror anastigmat; UDF, ultra-deep field; ULE, ultra-low expan-
sion (glass); UV, ultraviolet; UV/O/IR, ultraviolet/optical/infrared; VLT, Very Large Telescope
(ground-based); WFE, wavefront error; WFC3, Wide-fieldCamera 3 (HST instrument); WFSC,
Wavefront Sensing and Control (alignment process for JWST); WISE, Wide-Field Infrared Sur-
vey Explorer; WMAP, Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe; XMM, X-ray Multi-mirror
Mission (ESA)
1
Introduction: Advantages of Observatories in Space
In all areas of astronomy and astrophysics, forefront research requires obtaining data from both
space and ground-based observatories. On the ground, very large aperture diameters can be
constructed for a cost per unit collecting area that is much lower than that of space-based
observatories. Ground-based observatories are also easily upgraded. However, ground-based
observatories are subject to key limitations tied principally to the physics of the atmosphere.
Atmospheric extinction – the absorption and scattering of radiation from space due to the
atomic, molecular, and aerosol components of the atmosphere – limit observations from the

366 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
ground tospecificwindows in the optical, near-infrared, sub-millimeter, and radiowavelengths.
At certain wavelengths, the emission from the atmosphere itself becomes significant, and shot
noise on this atmospheric emission becomes a significant noise source for faint astronomical
observations. In addition, because ground-based telescopes sit at ambient atmospheric temper-
ature (typically 0○C at good sites), the thermal emission from the optics, telescope structure,
and atmosphere can overwhelm the signals from faint astrophysical sources at wavelengths in
the thermal infrared, beyond about 2 µm. Finally, atmospheric turbulence can limit the sharp-
ness of the system’s point spread function (PSF), which is the width of an image of a perfect
point source (unresolved star). For certain observations, turbulence also limits the dynamic
range of measurements from the ground. Adaptive optics (AO) systems can partially compen-
sate for the atmospheric turbulence encountered by ground-based observatories but are also
subject to limitations on the fields of view, wavelength, and the availability of sufficiently bright
reference stars.
Assuming a background-limited observation in which the detectors are not a dominant
source of noise, a simple formulation of the achievable signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) for a telescope
observing a small, faint astronomical source over a given time is given by
signal
noise ∝telescope_diameter
image_size
⋅
√
QEλ
Bλ
,
(9.1)
where QEλ is the total system quantum efficiency, which is relatively high for modern ground-
and space-based systems operating in optical and infrared wavelengths. However, atmospheric
absorption features introduce greater wavelength dependence in the QEλ for ground-based
systems. Bλ represents the sky and telescope background and is generally low for space
telescopes. The delivered image quality is characterized by the width of the delivered PSF
(image_size).
Without atmospheric turbulence, the PSF width is limited only by the quality of the tele-
scope’s optics and the stability of the system. Space-based observatories can produce diffraction-
limited images over a wide range of wavelengths and over wide fields of view. As (> 9.1)
shows, space-based systems, with their combination of low background and better image qual-
ity, have the potential to reach significantly higher sensitivities than ground-based systems with
equivalent collecting areas.
1.1 Atmospheric Extinction
Atmospheric extinction reduces the flux of an extraterrestrial source through absorption and
scattering of photons by the atmosphere. Total atmospheric extinction as a function of wave-
length is shown in > Fig. 9-1. Ground-based observations are not possible for wavelengths
where the atmospheric extinction is high: below approximately 300 nm, from 30 µm up to
1 mm, and beyond 10 m.
Ground-based observations are possible in the transmission “windows” that occur in the
visible, the near UV, the near-infrared, and the radio wavelength ranges. A detail of atmospheric
transmission in visible and infrared wavelengths is shown in >Fig. 9-2.

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
367
⊡Fig. 9-1
The electromagnetic spectrum and the absorption of the atmosphere as a function of wavelength,
with an indication of the primary absorbing molecules (After Bely 2003)
⊡Fig. 9-2
Atmospherictransmissioninwavelengthsfromtheultraviolettothefarinfrared.Thelettersdenote
the names of several standard-wide passbands that are deﬁned by regions of high atmospheric
transmission (After Elachi 1987)
1.2 Atmospheric Emission and Background
For astronomical observations, atmospheric emission introduces unwanted background noise
(the shot noise on the detected background photons) to an image or spectrum measured by a
ground-based telescope, reducing the signal-to-noise ratioofthe measurement given by(>9.1).
A comparison of the typical background emission for a good, high-altitude ground site and the
minimum sky background attainable from space is shown in > Fig. 9-3. The black curve is
the typical optical/infrared (O/IR) background for a ground-based telescope located at a high-
altitude site like Mauna Kea, Hawaii.1
The gray dashed curve in >Fig. 9-3 represents an estimate of the sky background for JWST
operated at 40 K and located at L2. Below 13 µm, the background is conservatively estimated
as twice the cosmic background as measured by the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE)
1http://www.gemini.edu/sciops/telescopes-and-sites/observing-condition-constraints/
optical-sky-background

368 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-3
Typical “dark time”visibleand infrared background emission for a ground-based telescope as mea-
sured at Mauna Kea (Hawaii). An estimate of the background for a cryogenically cooled telescope
at L2 is shown for comparison (After Gillet and Mountain 1998)
(Gillet and Mountain 1998). Outside the Earth’s atmosphere, the sky background is dominated
by the superposition of many partially or completely unresolved discrete sources of emission,
including zodiacal light, light from Galactic and extragalactic objects, and emission from dust
outside the solar system. Thermal emission from the observatory itself can also be a nontrivial
component of background noise. For infrared telescopes in space, the optics, instruments, and
detectors must be cooled to prevent the observatory from emitting in the wavelengths of inter-
est. Beyond about 13 µm, JWST’s background curve is dominated by thermal emission from
the 40 K telescope mirrors and structure.
In the optical regime, the background seen by space-based telescopes is only about three to
ten times lower than that seen by ground-based systems. At night, atmospheric emission in the
near infrared is dominated by fluorescence from OH−molecules. Ground-based observations
using high-resolution spectroscopy can detect signals from within the OH background (essen-
tially observing between the OH lines) if the spectrometer’s resolving power is high. Resolving
power (R) is a measure of a spectrometer’s ability to resolve features in an image that is spectrally
dispersed over the detector:
R = λ/Δλ,
(9.2)
where Δλ is the spectral resolution, which is the smallest difference in wavelengths that can be
distinguished (or resolved) in the dispersed spectrum at a wavelength of λ. For R > 5,000, space-
based observations have significantly less advantage over the ground in terms of background.
For broadband imaging (R ∼), however, not only is the ground-based background noise
dominated by the shot noise on the integrated OH emission but the “OH airglow” fluctuates in
a non-Gaussian way, limiting the accuracy of ground-based infrared observations from about

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
369
1 to 2.3 µm (Ramsay et al. 1992). In addition during periods called “bright time,” light from the
Moon that scatters off the atmospheric aerosols can also increase the visible and near-infrared
backgrounds.
Beyond 2.3 µm, the ground-based background is dominated by thermal emission from the
telescope itself, with temperatures of about 230–280 K, and the thermal emission from
molecules in the lower atmosphere with an effective temperature of approximately 250 K. This
results in an exponential rise of background flux with wavelength that dramatically reduces a
ground-based telescope’s sensitivity at those wavelengths.
1.3 Atmospheric Turbulence and a Resolution Comparison
If an observatory is “diffraction-limited,” the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of its PSF at
a given wavelength, λ, is
FWHM (arcsec) ∼.λ(μm)/D(m),
(9.3)
where the FWHM has units of arcseconds, D is the effective diameter of the observatory’s pri-
mary mirror in meters, and λ has units of microns. If the delivered PSF width is limited only
by the fundamental physics that govern the diffraction of light, rather than by other effects
such as mirror surface or alignment errors, the system is referred to as “diffraction-limited”
(Schroeder 1987). Well-figured and well-controlled space-based systems can be designed and
built to achieve diffraction-limited imaging over a wide range of wavelengths and over wide
fields of view.
For a ground-based telescope without AO, the PSF size is dominated by atmospheric tur-
bulence rather than by the diameter of the primary mirror. This is true even if the telescope
optics are designed to be diffraction-limited. Typically, a coherence or Fried length, Ro, is used
to characterize the turbulence at a good astronomical ground-based site, and the resulting
time-averaged image FWHM can be estimated using (> 9.3) with Ro replacing D. At visible
wavelengths, where Ro can be as large as 30 cm at good sites, the PSF width, or “seeing,” is
about 0.37 arcsec for a wavelength of 0.55 µm.
Ro is proportional to λ/so the seeing improves as λ−/as the wavelength increases. Today,
AO technologies enable telescopes as large as 10 m to compensate for this turbulence beyond
wavelengths of about 1.2 µm, but only over restricted fields of view (typically tens of arcseconds
to a maximum of a few arcminutes with newer tomographic AO systems).
>Figure 9-4 shows the dependenceof an image’sFWHM on wavelength for different optical
configurations both on the ground and in space. The solid lines represent theoretical diffrac-
tion limits for five telescopes and are provided over the range of their operational wavelengths:
Spitzer Space Telescope (D = 0.85 m), Hubble Space Telescope (D = 2.4 m), James Webb Space
Telescope (D = 6.6 m), Gemini North (D = 8.1 m), and a proposed space-based mission, the
Advanced Technology Large Aperture Space Telescope (ATLAST) (D = 10 m) (Postman 2009).
For comparison, two seeing-limited curves are included; the first shows 1.0 arcsec seeing at
0.55 µm and the other shows a median seeing case of 0.5 arcsec at the same wavelength. Median
seeing and diffraction limits become comparable at a wavelength of about 10 µm for the Gem-
ini observatory. This indicates that at wavelengths less than 10 µm, the use of AO becomes
mandatory in order to make full use of the image quality from a very large ground-based
telescope.

370 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-4
Seeing and diﬀraction limits for diﬀerent sky conditions and telescope apertures. The seeing-
limited curves assume a seeing FWHM of 1 and 0.5′′ at 0.55 µm. The diﬀraction-limited curves
are shown for ﬁve optical conﬁgurations. Actual measurements of image FWHM using a variety
of instruments and observatories are also shown as symbols. The vertical oﬀset in the HST data is
due to the diﬀering measurement uncertainties of the ACS and WFC3 instruments
The individual symbols in >Fig. 9-4 represent actual measurementsof image widths at sev-
eral wavelengths using a variety of instruments and observatories. There are wavelength regimes
where diffraction-limited observations are achieved from both space and ground observato-
ries. Diffraction-limited imaging becomes extremely difficult for large ground-based telescopes
below about 1.2 µm, though, due to the current limitations of AO systems. Space-based systems
depart from the diffraction limit at shorter wavelengths, usually due to alignment and surface
errors in the telescope optics.
1.4 A Sensitivity Comparison
A comparison of the sensitivity performance between a large ground-based telescope with a
diameter of 8.1 m (similar to each of the telescopes in the Gemini Observatory) and a space-
based telescope with an effective aperture diameter of 5.8 m (with equivalent collecting area to
the JWST mission) is shown in >Fig. 9-5. Two cases are shown: imaging, where the resolving

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
371
⊡Fig. 9-5
The ratio of the S/N for a space-based telescope to a ground-based observatory is shown as a func-
tion of wavelength and spectral resolution. The aperture chosen for the space-based telescope,
5.8 m, corresponds to the eﬀective collecting area of JWST. The aperture chosen for the ground-
based telescope, 8.1 m, corresponds to that of the Gemini Observatories in Hawaii and Chile. The
assumptionsfor the calculation arelisted in >Sect. 1.4.1. Theerror barsrepresent a ±40% variation
in the S/N ratio
power is assumed to be 5 (R= 5), and high-resolution spectroscopy, where R = 10,000. The com-
parison assumes that both systems are observing the same point source and that they achieve
the best delivered image quality from >Fig. 9-4. Both observatories are assumed to have com-
parable detectors and identical instrument throughputs, filter, and spectrometer band passes.
The calculation is a variation on the method discussed by Gillet and Mountain (1998), and the
assumptions are detailed in >Sect. 1.4.1.
There are two limiting observational regimes: background-limited observations and
detector-limited observations. The regime is determined by the respective telescope aperture
size, the background as shown in > Fig. 9-3, and the delivered image width as illustrated
in >Fig. 9-4. The contributions of the respective background noise, detector noise, and source
noise for three illustrative wavelengths are given in >Table 9-1 for the assumptions summarized
in >Sect. 1.4.1.
For optical and NIR imaging (R = 5), > Table 9-1 shows that for equal observing times
of 1,000 seconds, the observations from space and ground will be background-limited (and

372 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Table 9-1
Contributions of background, detector (dark current and read noise), and source shot noise for
three representative wavelengths, for hypothetical space-based and ground-based systems. Both
imaging and high-resolution spectroscopy cases are shown. All noise values shown are photoelec-
trons per pixel for an integration time of 1,000 seconds
Imaging, R = 5
Wavelength
0.55 µm
1.6 µm
10 µm
Source AB magnitude
30
28
24
Space system (t = 1,000 s, D = 5.8 m)
Pixel scale (arcsec/pix)
0.022
0.035
0.217
Detector noise (e−/pix)
3
7
12
Background shot noise (e−/px)
36
48
2,631
Source shot noise (e−/px)
3
8
42
Ground system (t = 1,000 s, D = 8.1 m)
Pixel scale (arcsec/px)
0.300
0.038
0.156
Detector noise (e−/px)
3
7
12
Background shot noise (e−/px)
1,094
1,396
6⋅106
Source shot noise (e−/px)
17
44
197
Spectroscopy, R = 10,000
Wavelength
0.55 µm
1.6 µm
10 µm
Source AB magnitude
24
24
22
Space system (t = 1,000 s, D = 5.8 m)
Pixel scale (arcsec/pix)
0.022
0.035
0.217
Detector noise (e−/pix)
3
7
12
Background shot noise (e−/px)
1
1
29
Source shot noise (e−/px)
1
1
3
Ground system (t = 1,000 s, D = 8.1 m)
Pixel scale (arcsec/px)
0.300
0.038
0.156
Detector noise (e−/px)
3
7
12
Background shot noise (e−/px)
12
3
7⋅104
Source shot noise (e−/px)
2
2
3
= detector-limited;
= background-limited
(> 9.1) applies). In this regime, a diffraction-limited telescope in space will deliver a higher
signal-to-noise observation than a comparable telescope on the ground over a wide range of
wavelengths as shown in >Fig. 9-5. At wavelengths below 1 µm, it is assumed that the ground-
based telescope is seeing-limited since current AO systems cannot correct for atmospheric
turbulence over a substantial field of view, as illustrated in >Fig. 9-4. At these shorter wave-
lengths, > Fig. 9-5 shows that the space-based S/N is higher by a factor of 10 or more. At
wavelengths above 2 µm, the AO system produces diffraction-limited images for the ground-
based system, but the background increases sharply and offsets the improved image quality,
reducing the ground-based S/N gain. At a wavelength of 10 µm and beyond, the S/N of the
space-based system is 1,000 times greater than can be achieved with a diffraction-limited
Gemini-like system.

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
373
For spectroscopy, the background flux becomes dispersed across the detector focal plane
and reduces the background seen by each pixel. The detector noise characteristics can become
important, reducing the space-based advantage as >Table 9-1 demonstrates. For wavelengths
between 1 and 2 µm with a resolving power of 10,000, the ground-based system is somewhat
more sensitive than the space-based system, as shown in > Fig. 9-5. For wavelengths below
1 µm, the ground-based system loses its advantage because of the lower delivered image quality.
Beyond 3 µm, even at resolving powers as high as R = 10,000, the ground-based observations
become background-limited.
1.4.1 Method and Assumptions
In >Fig. 9-5, theoretical S/N values were calculated and compared for two hypothetical tele-
scopes: one in space and the other on the ground. It was assumed that the two telescopes
considered are able to perform observations in the optical/infrared regime. It was also assumed
that they are equipped with instruments that have the same characteristics, such as quan-
tum efficiency, readout noise, and dark current in both the optical and infrared, as listed
in >Table 9-4.
An exposure time was estimated for a point source with a flux density that achieves a S/N
of 10 in a given filter when observed using the space-based telescope. The exposure time was
then used to calculate the S/N achieved by a larger ground-based telescope that observes the
same source.
Twelve different spectral bands were selected to perform the analysis, covering the optical-
IR wavelength range. In each band, a stellar AB magnitude was selected as shown in >Table 9-2
to keep the total exposure times below 10s. By definition, the relationship between AB
magnitude and stellar flux is given by:
AB(mag) = −.log(fv) −.,
(9.4)
where fv is the intrinsic source flux in units of Janskys (10−W/mHz) (Oke 1974).
⊡Table 9-2
Assumed AB magnitudes of the sources used in the S/N comparison shown in >Fig. 9-5
Central
wavelength (µm)
Assumed source AB
magnitude, R = 5
Assumed AB source
magnitude, R = 10,000
0.36
30
24
0.44
30
24
0.55
30
24
0.64
30
24
0.79
30
24
1.26
28
24
1.6
28
24
2.22
28
24
3.45
28
24
4.75
28
24
12
24
22
20
22
16

374 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
The S/N of an observation of a stellar source calculated with an exposure time is defined as
S/N =
Ist
N(t).
(9.5)
The number of photoelectrons per unit time from the source is given by
Is = Ac ∫
fν ⋅qe ⋅Ta ⋅Tt ⋅Ti ⋅f ⋅
hν⋅dν,
(9.6)
where Ac represents the telescopecollecting area, qe is the detectorquantum efficiency, Ta is the
atmospheric transmission, Tt is the telescope transmisison, Ti is the instrument transmission,
f is the fraction of source photons collected (determined by the number of and size of pixels
used to capture the image), h is the Planck constant, and ν is the frequency of the detected
electromagnetic wave.
Expressing Ac in square meters, fν in Janskys, and assuming a narrow-band filter so that
δν →Δν gives
Is ∼.AcqeTaTtTi 
R fv f
electrons/s,
(9.7)
where R is the spectral resolution.
The measurement noise in (> 9.5), N(t), is a function of time and is given by
N(t) =
√
Ist + Ibgt + npix Idct + npix N r
electrons/s,
(9.8)
where Ibg represents the background flux:
Ibg = .Ac qe Tt Ti 
R βvΩ
electrons/s
(9.9)
and βν is the sky background surface brightness in units of Jy/arcsec, Ω is a solid angle that
encloses the fraction f of the point source flux, npix is the number of pixels required to cover
Ω, Idc is the detector dark current in units of e−/s/pix, and Nr is the read noise in units of e−/pix.
Assuming a S/N equal to 10 and a given AB stellar magnitude in a given filter, a total expo-
sure time can be estimatedfor a space-based telescope from (>9.5). Once the exposure time for
a space-based telescope is known, the S/N of the same source as observed with a ground-based
telescope can be calculated. The ratio of both S/N values is presented in >Fig. 9-5.
Assumptions used for the calculations are listed in
> Tables 9-3 and
> 9-4. The sky
background surface brightness (βν) that was used for the calculations is shown in >Fig. 9-3.
It was also assumed that k observations with exposure time t can be combined with the
resultant S/N given by
S/N(t, k) = S/N(t)
√
k.
(9.10)
1.5 Comparison of Exposure Times when Imaging Faint Objects
An important advantage of space-based telescopes over ground-based is the ability to probe to
significantly fainter magnitudes for sources that are small and faint compared to the sky back-
ground, such as the high-redshift galaxies found in the Hubble Ultra-Deep Field (UDF)2 shown
2http://www.stsci.edu/hst/udf

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
375
⊡Table 9-3
List of the assumptions used in the S/N comparison presented in >Fig. 9-5
Space-based
Ground-based
Aperture diameter
5.8 m
8.1 m
FWHM
Diﬀraction-limited
Seeing-limited, λ < 1 µm,
AO-limited, 1 < λ < 3 µm,
diﬀraction-limited λ > 1 µm
Pixel scale
FWHM/2
FWHM/2
npix
4 × 4 for R = 5
2 × 2 for R = 10,000
4 × 4 for R = 5
2 × 2 for R = 10,000
Fractional ﬂux (f)
0.84 for R = 5
0.48 for R = 10,000
0.84 for R = 5
0.48 for R = 10,000
Instrument transmission (Ti)
0.9 for R = 5
0.5 for R = 10,000
0.9 for R = 5
0.5 for R = 10,000
Atmospheric transmission (Ta)
1
0.6–0.95 depending on λ
Telescope transmission (Tt)
1
1
⊡Table 9-4
Detector assumptions used in the S/N comparison presented in >Fig. 9-5, for both ground- and
space-based observatories
Wavelength
range
Quantum
eﬃciency (qe)
Dark
current (Idc)
Read
noise (Nr)
Assumed detector
technology
0.3–1 µm
0.7
0.0008 e−/s⋅pix
3 e−/pix
CCD
1–5 µm
0.8
0.006 e−/s⋅pix
7 e−/pix
HgCdTe
5–20 µm
0.6
0.012 e−/s⋅pix
5 e−/pix
Si:As
in >Fig. 9-6. This advantage allows space-based telescopes to reach very high sensitivities in
reasonable exposure times, while achieving similar depths from the ground may take up to
100–1,000 times longer. The primary reasons for this are the ease with which diffraction-limited
imaging is achieved from space, and the lower sky background attainable from space; these two
effects contribute to different extents in the optical and near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths.
A useful metric for capturing the relative performance of different telescopesis the exposure
time required to reach a given signal-to-noise ratio, as a function of the incident flux from an
astronomical target of interest. An expression for S/N is given in (> 9.5) and (>9.7), and some
of the scaling laws that result are summarized here:
•
For sources much brighter than the sky background (i.e., Ta fv f >> βvΩ), the exposure
time required to reach a fixed S/N scales as (Ta fv f )−(for a given telescope aperture, sky
background and spatial resolution, and assuming also that detector read-noise and dark
current are negligible compared with the total counts from the sky and the source)
•
For sources much fainter than the sky background (i.e., Ta fv f << βvΩ), the exposure time
required scales as (Ta fv f )−(again keeping all other variables as above)
•
For a given source flux, the exposure time required to reach a particular signal-to-noise
scales as (S/N)(βvΩ)(Ac)−(again underthe condition that detectorread-noise and dark
current are negligible compared with the total counts from the sky and the source)

376 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-6
TheHubbleUltra-Deep Field imaged by HST. This ﬁeld is 186×186 arcsec acrossand wastaken with
a total exposure timeof approximately 1,000,000 s. Thisimage containsover 10,000 galaxies, some
of which are only 0.2 arcsec across and extremely faint (AB ∼30.5 magnitudes), at distances up to
almost 13 billion light-years. HST, with its 2.4 m diameter mirror and 0.1′′ PSF, was able to obtain
this depth with a total of about 12 days of exposure time; an 8 m ground-based telescope such as
Gemini, with its much broader optical PSF, would require almost 5 years of nightly observations
(including 50% eﬃciency due to weather) to reach the same depth, at lower resolution. Space-
based telescopes provide an enormous improvement over ground-based telescopes in the regime
of very small, faint sources that require the longest possible exposure times
These scaling relations can be used to examine the relative performance of ground-based versus
space-based telescopes in different regimes, in particular for very small, faint sources that are
a small fraction of the background flux, where much of the forefront astronomical research is
focused.
At optical wavelengths, the primary advantage of space-based telescopes is the ability to
reach diffraction-limited imaging over a large field of view, while a secondary advantage is the
somewhat lower sky background from space at those wavelengths. Thus, for example, the 0.08′′
PSF of HST in the optical enables it to achieve depths of AB ∼30.5 magnitudes in the Hubble
UDF where the total investment was ∼300 h of exposure time; by comparison an 8-m ground-
based telescope such as Gemini typically achieves a 0.8′′ PSF at visible wavelengths for at least
70% of the time. Therefore, although Gemini may have a collecting area 11 times larger than that
of HST, its PSF samples an area that is 100 times larger than that of HST, thereby dramatically
increasing the sky background contribution within the unresolved PSF. Moreover, the sky from
the ground is an additional factor of ∼3 times brighter at visible wavelengths than that observed
by HST. Therefore, as shown in >Fig. 9-7, a Gemini-class ground-based telescope would take
∼27 times longer (a total of 8,100 h investment, or ∼5 years of continuous observing for 8 h per

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
377
⊡Fig. 9-7
Comparison between the performance of diﬀerent telescopes (HST, JWST, a hypothetical 10-m
space telescope, versus 8-m and future 30-m ground-based telescopes), parameterized as the
exposure time required to achieve a S/N of 10 as a function of magnitude, for optical wavelengths
(V-band, or 500 nm)
night, assuming a realistic fraction of 50% usable nights) to reach comparable depths to the
300 h investment on the HST Ultra Deep Field and at a much lower spatial resolution.
Similarly, examining the performance of a hypothetical 10-m UV/optical telescope from
space (ATLAST) located at L2, which would be expected to achieve a diffraction-limited PSF of
0.012′′ at blue optical wavelengths, it is found that a plausible investment of 1,000 h of time on
an Ultra Deep Field could achieve limiting depths beyond AB ∼35th magnitude, far deeper
than has ever been explored to date and opening up completely new territory. This can be
compared with a hypothetical 30-m ground-based telescope, achieving a PSF of 0.4′′ at optical
wavelengths: although the collecting area is nine times largerthan ATLAST, the PSF subtends an
angular area that is 1,100 times larger than the diffraction-limited ATLAST PSF, and in addition
the ground-based sky is a factor of 5 times brighter than at L2 at visible wavelengths. Therefore,
in order to reach the same depths achieved by a 1,000 h investment on ATLAST, a 30-m tele-
scope on the ground with a 0.4′′ PSF at visible wavelengths would require ∼600 times more
exposure time (or 600,000 h), which is completely infeasible. (See >Fig. 9-7.)

378 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
At infrared wavelengths, ground-based telescopes are likely to be diffraction limited, though
typically with some loss of PSF intensity. The principal advantage of space-based telescopes
in infrared wavelengths is the fact that the sky background is dramatically fainter (a factor of
∼4,000 times at H-band, or 1.6 µm). Thus, for example, the near-infrared HST UDF (which
achieved AB ∼29 magnitudes with a ∼300 h investment) would still require a factor of ∼80
times longer to achieve on Gemini (i.e., many years of observing time). The difference is larger
still when comparing Gemini to JWST, as shown in >Fig. 9-8. Finally, a NIR UDF obtained
with a hypothetical 10-m ATLAST telescope should reach AB ∼34 magnitudes for a ∼1,000 h
investment, while achieving the same depth with a ground-based 30-m telescope would require
about 50 times longer integration (equivalent to several decades of observing time, using the
same efficiency assumptions as before).
Therefore, it is clear that space-based telescopes provide a unique window to exceptionally
faint depths that are completely unattainable from ground-based telescopes for small, compact
targets, even when considering the largest possible telescopes currently being planned. In all
⊡Fig. 9-8
Comparison between the performance of diﬀerent telescopes (HST, JWST, a 10-m space telescope
ATLAST, versus 8-m and future 30-m ground-based telescopes), parameterized as the exposure
time required to achieve a S/N of 10 as a function of magnitude, for NIR wavelengths (H-band, or
1.6 µm)

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
379
cases, this is primarily due to the limitations imposed by background emission, in the regime
where the targets of interest are much fainter than the background: at optical wavelengths the
difference in exposure times is primarily due to the much sharper resolution achievable from
space (which reduces the background contribution dramatically within an unresolved aper-
ture), while at NIR wavelengths, where ground-based telescopes will achieve diffraction-limited
performance more easily, the difference is primarilydue tothe much lowerbackground in space.
1.6 Very High-Contrast Imaging
One of the most exciting science goals of the “next generation” of telescopes is arguably the
direct detection of habitable terrestrial planets and the search for spectroscopic biomarkers –
signs of life on an exo-solar planet. In this last section on the comparisons between space-based
and ground-based telescopes, the theoretical limits of a perfect groundbased telescope (cor-
rected with AO) are examined, and the ability of the system to detect and measure an Earth-like
planet in the vicinity of a star at a distance of 10 pc (∼32 light-years) is estimated.
Strong motivations exist for searching for biomarkers at short wavelengths (λ ∼1 µm), as
discussed by Kasting et al. (2009), Lawson et al. (2009), and others. There is a strong oxygen
band at 760 nm, as well as other potential biomarkers such as ozone, vegetation’s “red edge,”
and Rayleigh scattering. For both the space-based and ground-based approaches, detection of
such biomarkers requires the use of coronagraphic instrumentation to suppress the flux from
the central star. The observations also require sufficient image quality and stability to measure
the planet which is separated from its parent star by only 0.1 arcsec and has a flux of only about
10−of the star’s light.
In the laboratory, coronagraphic technologies combined with high fidelity adaptive optics to
correct for imperfections in the telescope have demonstrated this level of suppression (Trauger
and Traub 2007). So it becomes interesting to ask whether “near-perfect” space-based and
ground-based telescopes perform comparably if fitted with a 10coronagraph.
On the ground, the necessary observations would require spatial resolutions considerably
greater than the typical natural seeing (∼0.5 arcsec), so atmospheric correction with AO would
be necessary. Even with a perfect AO system, its idealized performance is fundamentally limited
by the capacity to analyze the wavefront because of the finite number of photons available for
wavefront sensing, which for most astronomical observations can be ameliorated with careful
choice of objects, improved wavefront-sensing detectors, and/or the use of laser guide stars.
However, when observations move into the regime that require measurements of 1 part in 10
(required to observe earthlike planets) these fundamental limitations of AO become important
(Guyon 2005).
>Figure 9-9 shows the residual halo in the PSF of a perfect ground-based 30-m telescope
with a perfect AO system and perfect coronagraphicinstrumentation, as calculated in Mountain
et al. (2009). An ideal wavefront sensor that is making theoretically optimal use of all incom-
ing photons is also assumed. (A few existing wavefront sensor concepts do offer this level of
sensitivity, but have not yet been deployed on telescopes.) Only errors due to photon noise in
the wavefront sensor are considered, and the AO system is assumed to have no other source of
error.
The figure shows that under nearly ideal conditions, a 30-m ground-based telescope with
a perfect coronagraph and AO system will have difficulty reaching the requisite 10−contrast

380 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-9
The residual halo in the image of a star, after suppression with a perfect coronagraph. The calcu-
lation assumes a perfect 30-m telescope observing at 760 nm and a perfect AO system with only
photon shot noise in the wavefront sensor (After Mountain et al. 2009)
ratio within 0.1 arcsec of the central star because of the fundamental limits atmospheric tur-
bulence places on such a challenging observation. The residual halo can be subtracted further
(e.g., using calibration and differential methods) but even with perfect subtraction, an expo-
sure longer than 10 days would be required to achieve a S/N of 5 (assuming R = and a source
magnitude of 4.1 in the I band). Thus, AO techniques face a fundamental hurdle to reaching the
contrast of 10−necessary for imaging and low-resolution spectroscopy at wavelengths below
1 µm of an Earth-like planet at 10 pc.
In space, achieving contrasts of 10is still a daunting technical challenge, requiring either
coronagraphic techniques with optical surface and alignment errors held to low levels, or free-
flying, very large, high-precision starshades. These techniques, though, require surmounting
technology challenges rather than overcoming fundamental limits imposed by the physics of
the Earth’s atmosphere.
In summary, observations from the ground and from space will continue to complement
one another in the coming decades. There are certain observations that can only be done
from space: deep imaging of small faint objects, low- to medium-resolution spectroscopy at
the deepest magnitude in background-limited wavelength regimes, and the very high-contrast
measurements needed to characterize terrestrial exoplanets and to search for biomarkers in the
habitable zone around Sun-like stars.
2
Space Observatories in the UV/O/IR
The technologies used for space telescopes in ultraviolet/optical/infrared (UV/O/IR) wave-
lengths are constantly evolving. In infrared wavelengths, important missions include the
Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), which mapped the infrared sky in the year following its
launch in 1983 in wavelength ranges from 12 to 100 µm. The Infrared Space Observatory (ISO)
was the first general-purpose IR observatory, observed in wavelengths from 2.5 to 240 µm,

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
381
⊡Table 9-5
Basic parameters of the HST, SST, and JWST and the proposed ATLAST missions
HST
SST
JWST
ATLAST
Wavelength range
0.12–2.4 µm
3–180 µm
0.6–28 µm
0.11–2.5 µm
Primary mirror
diameter
2.4 m
0.85 m
6.6 m (maximum
dimension)
10 m
Collecting area
4.24 m2
0.49 m2
26.3 m2
∼64 m2
Launch date
April 1990
August 2003
(2018, planned)
(2025–2035)
Launch vehicle
Space
transportation
system (Shuttle)
Delta 7920H
Ariane 5
NASA’s space
launch system (SLS)
Orbit
Low Earth orbit
Solar, drift-away
Sun-Earth L2
L2 or high-earth
orbit
and was in operation from 1995 to 1997 (Davies 1997). The Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) is
a general-purpose IR observatory launched in 2003 that used a revolutionary radiative cool-
ing technique. It observes in wavelengths from 3 to 180 µm (Spitzer Science Center 2011). The
Herschel mission, another general-purpose IR/sub-mm observatory, launched in 2009 and has
an impressive primary mirror diameter of 3.5 m. It bridges the gap between IR and millimeter
observations with its wavelength range of 55–672 µm (Pilbratt 2008). The James Webb Space
Telescope (JWST) is currently under construction and will launch in 2018 with a maximum
primary mirror dimension of 6.6 m for extremely high observing sensitivities in its wavelength
range of 0.6–28 µm (Clampin 2011).
In ultraviolet and optical wavelengths, important missions include the Hubble Space Tele-
scope (HST), a general-purpose UV/O observatory which launched in 1990 and is still provid-
ing cutting-edge science (Space Telescope Science Institute 2011). In 2003, the Galaxy Evolution
Explorer (GALEX) began carrying out surveys and general-purpose observations in ultravio-
let wavelengths of 0.135–0.28 µm (Oswald et al. 2004). The Kepler mission is a photometer
designed to search for extrasolar planets. Launched in 2009, it is carrying out its search in optical
wavelengths, 0.4–0.85 µm (Koch et al. 2010).
To illustrate the comparisons between the technologies and approaches used in space tele-
scopes, the sections that follow give overviews of three major space telescopes: the Hubble Space
Telescope, the Spitzer Space Telescope, and the James Webb Space Telescope. To illustrate how
future space telescope technologies maydevelop, a proposed mission, the Advanced Technology
Large-Aperture Space Telescope, is also discussed (Postman 2009). These particular missions
were chosen because they are general-purpose observatories, and the information about each
mission is available in the publicdomain. Primarymirrorsizes, wavelength ranges, launch dates,
and launch vehicles for each mission are listed in >Table 9-5. A graphical comparison of the
mission’s collecting areas and wavelength ranges is shown in >Fig. 9-10.
2.1 Space Observatory Elements
All space observatories have common elements. Each observatory of course has a telescope
or “optical telescope assembly” (OTA) that collects photons from typically faint astronomical
objects and focuses these into the science instrument package. The OTA includes the primary

382 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-10
A representation of the relative observational parameter space occupied by JWST, HST, and SST.
The area of each box is proportional to the telescope’s collecting area
and secondary mirrors and their support structures. Tertiary and fine-steering mirrors also may
be present. Baffles and shrouds for stray light control and any actuators that control the mirrors
are also part of the OTA.
The instrument packages usually contain multiple science instruments. Each instrument
typically consists of a pickoff mirror that directs light from the OTA focal plane into the instru-
ment’s optics and ultimately to its detector arrays. Instruments that are commonly included in a
general-purpose observatory include imagers, spectrometers, photometers, and coronagraphs.
Instrument benches, shrouds, baffles, detector, and mechanism electronics (for filter wheels and
focus adjustment mechanisms) are also part of the instrument package. When there are multi-
ple instruments, each instrument typically samples a unique portion of the OT’s field of view,
and the observatory is repointed to place the selected target on the correct instrument. One or
more of the instruments may also provide fine guidance that increases the pointing and tracking
precision of the telescope during an observation.
The OTA and instrument package are integrated into what is termed the “spacecraft bus”
which includes several subsystems. Observatory pointing is coarsely measured at the spacecraft
typically using star trackers. Moving between science targets is accomplished using reaction
wheels, and momentum is dumped from the wheels periodically using thrusters or, if the space-
craft is in low Earth orbit and can make use of the Earth’s magnetic field, magnetic momentum
off-loaders. Solar panels that provide power to the observatory are also located on the space-
craft, along with the associated electronics and batteries. All command and data handling is
conducted via the spacecraft; the system includes electronics, memory, and high-gain antennas

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
383
for relaying science data and commands to and from ground stations. Drive and readout elec-
tronics for mechanisms on the observatory may also be located on the spacecraft bus, which
typically operates at warmer temperatures than the telescope section.
All space observatories include elaborate thermal control systems that stabilize the OTA to
maintain optical quality, alignments, and background levelsand to keep instruments and detec-
tors within their operational temperature ranges. For UV and optical observatories, the OTAs
and the instrument structures operateat relatively warm temperatures(typically 290 K), though
the detectors are cooled to minimize detector dark current and other noise sources. The ther-
mal control system may include multilayer insulation (MLI) blankets for protection from solar
radiation, radiator panels, heat pipes, and straps to redistribute heat from electronics and mech-
anisms around the observatory and thermoelectric coolers for the detector arrays. Resistance
heaters are often used to maintain temperature control. For infrared observatories that oper-
ate at wavelengths beyond 2 µm, it is necessary to cool the OTAs and instrument structures
so that their intrinsic thermal emission does not overwhelm the faint astronomical infrared
signals the observatory is trying to detect. The cooling can be accomplished passively (using
carefully designed sunshields, radiators, and material choices) and/or actively (using reservoirs
of cryogens, cryocoolers, or thermoelectric coolers).
2.2 Hubble Space Telescope (HST)
The Hubble Space Telescope was launched from the Space Shuttle Discovery in April of 1990
into a low Earth orbit (LEO) and is still operating at the time of this writing (2011). HST
observes in the UV, optical, and very near-infrared wavelength regimes (0.12–2.4 µm). Its
primary mirror diameter is 2.4 m. A 2009 photograph of HST is shown in >Fig. 9-11.
HST has seen further and more sharply than any optical/UV/NIR telescopebefore it. Unlike
some other astronomical observatories that were dedicated to a specific goal, HST has and
continues to contribute to all areas of astronomical research. In its 21 years of operation to
⊡Fig. 9-11
Photograph of the Hubble Space Telescope (NASA 2009)

384 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
date, findings enabled by HST have been published in more than 9,800 scientific papers in
refereed journals, and these papers generated more than 362,000 citations. The following five
achievements, for which HST observations have been absolutely crucial, deserve special note:
1. The unambiguous confirmation through the detection of very distant supernovae that the
cosmic expansion is accelerating, and the most stringent constraints to date on the nature
of the “dark energy” that appears to be propelling the acceleration.
2. The reduction of the uncertainty in the value of the Hubble constant to the 3% level.
3. The wealth of information about galaxy formation and evolution, as well as about the history
of the cosmic star formation rate, achieved through the Hubble Deep Fields.
4. The determination of the composition of the atmospheres of extrasolar planets, and the
direct visible-light imaging of such a planet.
5. The determination of the large-scale, three-dimensional distribution of dark matterthrough
gravitational lensing.
HST was placed into LEO so that astronauts could periodically service it. The five servicing
missions that have been carried out since launch have given the telescope an extraordinarily
long lifetime of more than 20 years. The servicing missions have made repairs to the telescope,
but they have also substituted newer, better technologies for older ones, continuously updating
HST’s capabilities as an observatory.
HST set several technological milestones when it was launched. It was the first general-
purpose observatoryin space, and the first mission that was designed to be serviceable. Its large,
lightweighted primary was unique (at least for civilian missions), as was the stringent require-
ment on precision pointing and tracking using interferometric fine guidance sensors. Its CCDs
were larger and had lower noise than had previously been flown.
A schematic of the HST observatory is shown in > Fig. 9-12. The OTA includes all the
telescope components: the primary and secondary mirrors, the metering truss that sets the
secondary-to-primary spacing, and the main, central, and secondary baffles. The main ring
assembly holds the loads of all the OTA components and connects the OTA to the Forward
Shell (FS) that encloses it. Magnetic torquers, two high-gain antennas, and the solar arrays are
attached to the exterior of the FS. A light shield and aperture door are located on the front of the
FS. An equipment section surrounds the main ring and contains the reaction wheel assemblies,
communications system, batteries, and other electronics. The Aft Shroud (AS), located behind
the main and equipment rings, contains the science instruments, the three fine guidance sen-
sors (FGS), the star trackers, and the gyroscopes. The aft bulkhead of the AS carries a low-gain
antenna and two coarse Sun sensors. The light shield, forward shell, equipment section, and aft
shroud all have exterior handrails, foot restraints, and access doors to allow for human servicing
(Lockheed Missiles and Space Company 1985).
As of late 2011, HST has four operational science instruments as summarized in >Table 9-6.
(The Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrograph, or NICMOS, is on board but is not
currently active because its cryocooler is not operating.) Many other instruments have been
installed, used, and then removed during servicing missions.3 The fine guidance sensors on
HST have occasionally been used to perform scientific observations as well; they can be used
to make very precise astrometric measurements, a capability that has been used to detect faint
asteroids in the solar system by the shift in the background star’s centroid as the asteroids pass
in front of the star.
3http://www.stsci.edu/hst/HST_overview/instruments

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
385
⊡Fig. 9-12
A schematic of the Hubble Space Telescope showing its major components (Space Telescope
Science Institute 2011)
⊡Table 9-6
A summary of science instruments on HST that are currently in use
HST instrument
Description
Space telescope imaging spectrograph (STIS)
Spectroscopy, imaging, and coronagraphy,
λ = 115 nm–1 µm
Cosmic origins spectrograph (COS)
Point-source spectroscopy, R = 2,000–24,000,
λ = 115–320 nm
Advanced camera for surveys (ACS)
Wide-ﬁeld imaging, λ = 115 nm–1.1 µm
Wide-ﬁeld camera 3 (WFC3)
Imaging, λ = 200 nm–1.7 µm
2.3 Spitzer Space Telescope (SST)
The Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) was launched in August 2003 in a Delta 7920H rocket into
a drift-away solar orbit (> Fig. 9-13). (Prior to launch, the mission was known as the Space
Infrared Telescope Facility, or SIRTF.) The telescope has a primary mirror diameter of 0.85 m

386 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-13
A photograph of the Spitzer Space Telescope in a cleanroom (NASA 2003)
and observes in wavelengths from 3 to 180 µm. The mission carries three instruments that are
summarized in >Table 9-7. The telescope was cooled to 4–10 K using a combination of passive
and active cooling methods. The mission’s superfluid helium coolant was exhausted in May of
2009. SST then moved into its “warm mission” phase; the two shortest wavelength channels of
the IRAC instrument, at 3.6 and 4.5 µm, are fully operational at the time of this writing (2011).
SST was designed to study cold and dusty environments, as well as the distant universe.
More than 3,000 scientific papers based on SST results have been published in its 8 years of
operation, and those papers have generated over 95,000 citations. SST has characterized the
atmospheric structure and the composition of extrasolar planets. It has demonstrated that the
process of planet formation is well underway within a few million years of the formation of
Sun-like stars and that organic materials have been abundant in the universe for the past 10

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
387
⊡Table 9-7
A brief description of the three instruments aboard the Spitzer Space Telescope
SST instrument
Description
Infrared array camera (IRAC)
Wide-ﬁeld imaging, λ = 3.6–8 µm
Infrared spectrograph (IRS)
Low-resolution spectroscopy, λ = 5.2–38 µm
High-resolution spectroscopy, λ = 9.9 – 37.2 µm
Multiband imaging photometer for
SIRTF (MIPS)
Photometry and imaging, λ = 24, 70, 160 µm
Low-resolution spectroscopy, λ = 50–90 µm
⊡Fig. 9-14
Schematic of the Spitzer Space Telescope (After Spitzer Science Center 2011)
billion years. It has also determined the masses and ages of galaxies when the universe was just
1 billion years old. While in its current “warm mission” phase, SST is engaged in an effort to
further reduce the uncertainty in the value of the Hubble constant.
A schematic of the SST observatory is given in > Fig. 9-14. The Cryogenic Telescope
Assembly (CTA) includes the telescope, the superfluid helium cryostat, the outer shell, and
the Multiple Instrument Chamber (MIC) which is mounted to the helium tank. The MIC con-
tains the three science instruments and a pointing control instrument (PCRS). The spacecraft
includes the instrument electronics, solar panel, high-gain antenna for communications, star

388 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
trackers, four reaction wheels, and nitrogen propellant that is used for off-loading momentum
that has built up in the reaction wheels.
The SST was the first to use a thermal design that passively cooled the telescope portion of
the mission. The design drastically reduced the amount of coolant required and significantly
lowered the total mass and volume of the mission. SST was also the first to use a lightweight
beryllium primary mirror. In addition, SST’s instruments used infrared detector arrays with
higher quality and larger formats than previous infrared missions (Gehrz et al. 2007).
2.4 James Webb Space Telescope (JWST)
The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), currently scheduled for a 2018 launch, will provide
imaging and spectroscopy in wavelengths from 0.6 to 28 µm. It will launch in an Ariane 5 rocket
and will orbit about L2. The segmented primary mirror is 6.6 m in diameter point-to-point and
will provide a collecting area of 26.3 m(Lightsey et al. 2012). A schematic of the system is
shown in >Fig. 9-15.
The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) will be the natural successor to the iconic Hubble
Space Telescope. It is expected to extend our view of the universe to regions beyond Hubble’s
reach. A comparison of an HST image to a simulated JWST image is shown in > Fig. 9-16.
With its 6.6 m maximum aperture diameter and wavelength range of 0.6–28 µm, JWST will
be ideally suited for observing the very first galaxies that have formed in the universe. These
galaxies are believed to have contained about a million solar masses in stars. The ultraviolet
light from these stars is redshifted into the NIR due to the intervening cosmic expansion. Since
the first generation of galaxies has probably played a crucial role in the cosmic reionization,
JWST will provide unique insights into this universal phase transition. While JWST will not be
⊡Fig. 9-15
An artist’s conception of JWST (NASA 2009, labels added)

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
389
⊡Fig. 9-16
JWST will obtain spectacular imageswith unprecedented power for discovery. The top panelsshow
an image of the Hubble Ultra-Deep Field in the near infrared, recently taken by Hubble’s WFC3
instrument. This 0.7 × 1 arcmin image of the universe is the deepest ever obtained. The bottom
panels show a simulated image of the same region by the NIRCam instrument on JWST. JWST’s
higher spatial resolution improves the clarity of the image and better reveals the morphology of
the sources. JWST’s exquisite sensitivity – much better than that of HST – brings out faint galax-
ies hidden in the noise of the Hubble image (Image courtesy of Space Telescope Science Institute:
M. Stiavelli, J. Kalirai, Z. Levay)
able to discern the individual first stars (Population III stars), it maybe able to see the supernova
explosions (Pair-Instability Supernovae) of these stars.
Going from the very large, cosmological scale, to the small, planetary scale, JWST will be
able to identify extrasolar planets in habitable zones that have liquid water on their surfaces.
This will be a giant step toward finding the necessary ingredients for life on extrasolar planets.
Clearly, JWST will address a rich host of phenomena at intermediate scales, as well. These will
range from the assembly and evolution of galaxies to the birth of stars and the formation of
protoplanetary systems. There is little doubt that JWST will provide new and valuable insights
into the origin of the cosmos and our place within it.
The main components of JWST are sketched in > Fig. 9-15. The OTA includes the 18
primary mirror segments, the primary mirror support structure, the secondary mirror, the sec-
ondary mirror support structure, and the Aft Optical System (AOS). The AOS contains the
tertiary mirror, the fine-steering mirror (FSM), and baffles and apertures for stray light control.
The Integrated Science Instrument Module (ISIM) carries the observatory instruments and is

390 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
located behind the primary assembly. ISIM is enclosed by radiators that cool the instruments
to about 40 K. A deployable tower connects the telescope to the spacecraft, which carries the
solar array, reaction wheels, star trackers, warm electronics, thrusters, and a high-gain commu-
nications antenna. A multilayer sunshield protects the observatory from stray light and thermal
loads from the Earth and Sun.
JWST’s design builds on the extensive experience from HST, SST, and to some extent, from
the Chandra X-ray telescope. It will demonstrate the feasibility of segmented primary mirrors
that can fold to fit into available launch vehicles. The deployable multilayer sunshield is unique
to space observatories, though commercial and military radar and communication satellites
have used deployable structures for many years. JWST will be the first mission in which full
on-orbit alignment of the optics is carried out. Finally, JWST will be the first observatory to
demonstrate a thermal design that relies almost entirely on passive cooling methods, building
on SST’s success with passive cooling techniques. JWST will carry four science instruments, as
listed in >Table 9-8; of these, only the MIRI instrument is actively cooled.
2.5 Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope
(ATLAST) and Other Future Missions
In looking to the future, it is important to understand what the intrinsic science drivers might be
forfuture space telescopes beyond those forthe telescopes above. One compelling encapsulation
of the key science themes for the twenty-first century was given by the Nobel Laureate Riccardo
Giacconi, “to relate causally the physical conditions during the Big Bang to the development of
RNA and DNA” which can be distilled into key questions such as:
•
How did the universe originate and what is it made of?
•
How unique was our occurrence? Are we alone?
Using today’salmost perfect detectors (QE ∼1) and exploiting the low background available
in space, the term QEλ/Bλ in (>9.1) is negligible. Combining (>9.1) and (>9.3) shows that for
diffraction-limited observations from space, signal-to-noise ratio is proportional to the square
of the aperture diameter:
S/N ∝D
λ .
(9.11)
⊡Table 9-8
Instruments planned for the James Webb space telescope
JWST instrument
Description
Near-infrared camera (NIRCam)
Wide-ﬁeld imager, λ = 0.6–5 µm
Mid-infrared instrument (MIRI)
Imaging, low- and medium-resolution
spectroscopy, coronagraphy, λ = 5–28 µm
Near-infrared spectrometer (NIRSpec)
Multi-object spectrograph, λ = 0.6–5 µm
Near-infrared imaging slitless spectrometer
(NIRISS)
Imager and slitless spectrometer, λ = 0.6–4.8 µm

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
391
Since exposure time is proportional to the square of S/N, the exposure time needed to reach
a given signal-to-noise ratio decreases by D. If it were possible to enable even larger tele-
scopes than JWST, future UV/O/IR space telescopes could achieve unprecedented sensitivities
and spatial resolutions (e.g., see > Figs. 9-7 and > 9-8). One such mission is the Advanced
TechnologyLarge-Aperture Space Telescope (ATLAST), which would operate in the wavelength
range of 0.11–2.5 µm with segmented primary mirror diameters as large as 16.8 m. To explore
lessons from previous space telescopes and the interplay in the design and operation of future
space telescopes, the 10-m ATLAST concept will be considered a reference mission for this
chapter.
ATLAST could be the first telescope to detect biosignatures – the spectral features gener-
ated by life – on Earth-like planets. Biosignatures on Earth are combinations of the spectral
features from molecular oxygen, water, methane, and ozone. Some spatial information about
the planet’s surface could also be recovered by measuring time variations in the planet’s bright-
ness. In addition, the mission could carry out UV surveys of the local intergalactic medium to
reveal the physics behind galaxy formation and evolution, determine star formation histories
for distant galaxies, and study dark matter by measuring the proper motions of stars in galaxies
(Postman 2009).
Other mission concepts with the goal of taking images and spectra of earthlike planets have
been proposed. The New Worlds Observer proposes a 4-m class telescope used in combina-
tion with an external starshade operating in a wavelength range of 0.1–1.1 µm (Cash et al.
2009). Similarly, the New Worlds Probe proposes the use of an external starshade for improved
high-contrast coronagraphic imaging with JWST. The mission would rely on the NIRCam and
NIRSpec instruments and would operate in wavelengths longer than 0.7 µm (Lo et al. 2010).
Another mission that proposes an external occulter is the Telescope for Habitable Exoplanets
and Interstellar/IntergalacticAstronomy (THEIA). THEIA includes a 4-m class telescope in the
wavelength range of 0.1–1 µm (Kasdin et al. 2009).
Other proposed infrared observatories include the Single-Aperture Far-Infrared Obser-
vatory (SAFIR) mission, which would study the formation of the first stars in the universe,
the formation of planetary systems, and the complex molecules that might presage life in
planet-forming regions (Lester et al. 2004). SAFIR would operate in the wavelength range
between JWST and ground-based microwave observations (20 µm–1 mm). With a primary
mirror diameter of 5–10 m and an operational temperature of 5 K, the mission would have sig-
nificantly greater far-infrared sensitivity than the SST or Herschel missions. A proposed mission
known as the Space Infrared Telescope for Cosmology and Astrophysics (SPICA) would carry a
3.5-m telescope and would be optimized to operate in the mid- and far-infrared (3.5–210 µm).
The mission would observe in the wavelength gap between JWST and Herschel, with higher
sensitivity than that of the SST (Nakagawa 2008).
3
Science Goals, Cost, and Productivity
As has been shown in the preceding sections, there is a broad observational parameter space
where space telescopes are extremely competitive. In certain wavelength regimes, space-based
observatories are essential. The central precept behind designing (and eventually flying) a space
telescope is to ensure that the science a specific telescope can deliver is sufficiently compelling
that it justifies the additional cost and complexity of the observatory.

392 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
Ideally, the design of a mission would be driven by the science objectives. In reality, though,
cost is a major constraint, and the science objectives must be maximized within the available
technology and, crucially, the funding limits. If the estimated cost is found to be too high
in the early design phase of a mission, science objectives might be reduced and the mission
redesigned accordingly. HST, SST, and JWST have been through redesigns that illustrate the
types of trades made during the design phase of a space telescope. Parameters that influence a
mission’s scientific return and its cost (usually inversely related) include primary mirror size,
launch vehicle, mass, launch volume, choice of orbit, thermal control strategy, and operation
approach.
A key approach to finding the optimum combination of science return, engineering matu-
rity versus technology development and ultimately overall mission cost is the use of “science
systems engineering.” The phrase was originally coined by Nobel laureate Riccardo Giacconi:
I should define here what was meant by science systems engineering, and expression
we at STScI came to use with increasing frequency. It signifies the analysis of a scien-
tific research problem in all its dimensions, even before developing the instrumentation.
Starting with a clear definition of the problem, we would design instruments capable of
obtaining the necessary data, then plan how these data would be analyzed, determine
what errors might occur because of the intrinsic limitations of the instruments, and
define the expected statistical weights of the observations. Only when it was clear that
crucial results could be obtained would we proceed with the project. The principles of
science systems engineering would be applied throughout the lifetime of the project to
ensure that no changes occurred that would jeopardize its scientific success. – Riccardo
Giacconi, Secrets of the Hoary Deep
Science systems engineering is used to describe the process of designing, deploying, and
operating complex space telescopes and instruments in a way that ensures that they meet their
ultimate scientificobjectives. The science goals and the flow-down toscience requirements must
be part of the trade studies and the decision processes that go on continuously throughout a
mission’s life. Science systems engineering is still used in the operation of the Hubble Space
Telescope to ensure that it is fulfilling its designated mission (Giacconi 2008). Some of the fac-
tors that have to be considered in a science system engineering approach are discussed in the
next sections.
3.1 Early Design Trades
The Hubble Space Telescope was originally conceived by Lyman Spitzer in 1946 in a famous
paper for the Rand Corporation, “Astronomical Advantages of an Extra-Terrestrial Observatory.”
Originally called the large space telescope (LST), HST was conceived of as a “120-in.” (3-m)
telescope, which was large by the standards of the day. At launch, HST’s primary mirror was
2.4 m in diameter. To quote from NASA’s history
In the mid-1960s, NASA and its contractors conducted phased studies into the feasi-
bility of a large space telescope. Although there was initial dissent within NASA over
whether the agency should work its way up to a large-scale observatory or take one
giant leap to the final product, the decision to develop the Space Shuttle program greatly
improved the flexibility NASA would have in designing a space telescope. In 1971,

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
393
George Low, NASA’s Acting Administrator, gave approval to the Large Space Telescope
Science Steering Group to conduct feasibility studies…
Unfortunately for the program, the large space telescope’s total cost was roughly esti-
mated at $400 to $500 million [dollars in 1970], making it a tough sell… A mirror
reduction from 3 to 2.4 meters helped bring the project down to about $200 million,
approximately half the originally expected price tag. The proposal was accepted by
Congress, which granted the Large Space Telescope program funding in 1977.”4
The Spitzer Space Telescope went through major redesigns twice during its design phase.
Originally, the mission weighed 5,700 kg and was to be placed into a high Earth orbit by a Titan
IV launch vehicle at a projected cost of approximately $2.2B in 1990 dollars. The mission was
radically redesigned and launched in a smaller Delta rocket into a heliocentric Earth-trailing
orbit, with a payload mass of 860 kg and a cost of approximately $0.7B in 1990 dollars. The
redesign was accomplished without reducing the size of the telescope or the lifetime of the mis-
sion. The science goals of the mission were reduced somewhat and the instruments simplified,
but the core science capabilities of the mission were preserved (Spitzer Science Center 2011).
JWST also went through a number of descopes in its early design phase. The original con-
cept was an optical/infrared telescope with a 36-segment primary mirror 8 m in diameter, as
sketched in >Fig. 9-17. In 2005, the primary mirror diameter was reduced to 6.6 m (maximum
dimension) and a primary design with 18 segments was selected. The minimum wavelength for
diffraction-limited imaging was raised to 1 µm. In addition to those changes, two instruments
were transferred to ESA and CSA, the instruments were simplified, and detector procurements
were consolidated. Later, the diffraction-limited wavelength was relaxed from the visible to the
near-IR to simplify fabrication of the telescope, and one of the Tunable Filter instruments (now
NIRISS) was removed to improve the mass and power margins for the mission. Optimization
of the design of major space observatories goes beyond just the resizing of the primary mirror.
⊡Fig. 9-17
The evolution of the JWST primary mirror conﬁguration from a 36-segment mirror with an 8-m
diameter, to its current conﬁguration of 18 segments with a maximum dimension of 6.6 m. Conﬁg-
urations are proportional to one another
4http://history.nasa.gov/hubble/index.html

394 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
3.2 Mission Cost
The factors that drive a mission’s cost are not perfectly known, but various models, based on
parameterized descriptions of past missions, can be used to try to predict costs (Stahl 2010).
In the past, the total mass of a mission has been the traditional metric to judge the cost of a
space mission: putting more mass into orbit normally cost more. However, mission complexity
for space-based observatories has been rising as larger systems must be fit into smaller launch
volumes. A heavier, simpler mission may be less expensive than a lighter but more complex
one. A cost model that attempts to account for complexity is the NASA Advanced Mission Cost
Model (AMCM), which here has been adapted to report cost in 2010 dollars:
C = ($.⋅) ⋅(mass/, kg).⋅(.difficulty level) ⋅(N−.),
(9.12)
where C is the cost to launch of the mission in 2010 dollars, N is the number of identical flight
systems manufactured, which has always been 1 for space-based astronomical observatories,
and the difficulty level ranges from −2 for “very low” to 2 for “very high.”
>Figure 9-18 shows the resulting relationship between cost, mass, and difficulty level. The
curve for a difficulty level of 3 is shown in an ad hoc attempt to account for the increased
complexity of systems such as JWST with deployable segmented primary mirrors, large deploy-
able multilayer sunshields, and the required new approach to integration and test (Casani et al.
2010a, b). No such missions were included in the historical missions from which the AMCM
was created. HST has a difficulty level of nearly 2, and JWST is significantly more complex than
HST.
The cost to develop, build, and launch HST is estimated at roughly $6B in 2010 dollars, as
shown in >Fig. 9-18. When the costs of the five servicing missions and the operating costs
from 1990 through to 2014 are included, NASA has estimated that the total mission cost of
HST is $19B in 2010 dollars. SST cost roughly $0.9B to launch and functioned as a cold infrared
observatory for nearly 6 years. JWST is currently projected to cost $8B (in 2010 dollars) from
design through its launch in 2018. Although more expensive than ground-based observatories,
the scientific productivity of general-purpose space-based observatories like HST and SST has
been extremely high.
3.3 Mission Productivity Metrics
In the “science system engineering” paradigm, the potential scientific impact of a space tele-
scope is a key part of the trade space when optimizing a space mission. Larger, more expensive
missions like HST, SST, and JWST, are designed to have a significant “discovery” potential owing
to their broad astrophysics objectives. A science mission’s productivity be roughly measured by
the number of peer-reviewed scientific papers produced. The number of scientific papers pub-
lished each year for various observatories is shown in >Fig. 9-19. HST and SST have produced
large numbers of papers in recent years.
Another productivity metric is the number of citations, which correlates to the value to
other researchers of the papers that have been published. Missions with a narrow focus may
not generate a large number of papers but might generate large citation counts because they
make made critical contributions to key areas of science (the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe, or WMAP, falls into this category). Attempts are also made to measure productivity by
counting the number of significant discoveries made by an observatory. The “Davidson metric”

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
395
⊡Fig. 9-18
The cost of a mission from birth through launch, as a function of mass and diﬃculty according
to NASA’s Advanced Mission Cost Model. The actual cost to launch values for SST and HST are
shown in 2010 dollars, as are two estimates for JWST’s cost-to-launch: one is a 2010 estimate by
the Independent Comprehensive Review Panel (ICRP) of the minimum cost to launch JWST (Casani
et al. 2010a, b), and the other is the amount currently budgeted by the JWST program as of 2011,
which includes the cost of stretching out the launch date by three additional years as compared
to the ICRP estimate. All values shown are 2010 dollars (Note that the AMCM was not designed
to accommodate a diﬃculty level of 3; no missions with deployable primary mirrors, large deploy-
ablemultilayersunshields,and new approachestoI&T(Casani etal. 2010a,b)formissionsofJWST’s
scale were included in the historical missions used to design the metric)
counts the number of stories in Science News that feature a significant discovery by a given
mission, as shown in >Fig. 9-20. Because Science News is a popular publication, the metric is
also related to a mission’s impact on the public (Christian and Davidson 2006).
As can be seen in > Figs. 9-19 and >9-20, as the preeminent UV/optical observatory that
has been in service for more than 20 years, HST has maintained a stunning level of scientific
return and has had a significant impact on the public. This longevity is largely due to the five
successful servicing missions that have continually repaired and upgraded the telescope and its
instruments. SST has also become the preeminent IR observatory in its 6 years of cold obser-
vations, achieving high levels of scientific return despite its limited aperture size by exploiting a
wavelength and sensitivity range that was inaccessible to ground-based systems and unexplored
by previous space telescopes. JWST was explicitly designed to build on the scientific capabili-
ties and legacies of both HST and SST. The science systems engineering approach was used to
ensure that JWST has comparably high scientific productivity and impact, based on the choice
of operational wavelength range enabled by its low operational temperature, the requirement
for extremely high sensitivities and spatial resolutions enabled by its aperture size, its compre-
hensive suite of imaging and spectroscopic instruments, and through its operational lifetime
goal of 10 years.

396 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-19
Number of scientiﬁc papers published each year for various observatories. Journals considered
include: Astrophysical Journal, Astronomy and Astrophysics, Astronomical Journal and Supple-
ment, MNRAS, Icarus, Publicationsof the Astronomical Society of thePaciﬁc, Nature, JGRA, Science,
and others (Lagerstrom 2011, private communication; Apai et al. 2010)
4
Orbits
The choice of orbit is a significant consideration, affecting the choice of launch vehicle, the
background radiation levels, observing efficiency, ease of communication, and the mission life-
time. These factors, in turn, contribute to the overall mission cost. HST is in a low Earth orbit,
SST is in a solar drift-away orbit, and JWST will orbit the second Lagrange point of the Earth-
Sun system (L2). Other common satellite orbits include Sun-synchronous, geostationary, and
high Earth orbits and are discussed by Bely (2003) and Davies (1997). (Also see Prussing and
Conaway 1993; Bate et al. 1971.)
4.1 Low Earth Orbit
HST is in a low-inclination, circular, LEO at about 600 km in altitude with an orbital period
of 96 min. The inclination of the orbit is about 28○, and was determined by the latitude of the
launch site at Cape Kennedy, Florida. The orbital nodes precess westward by about 6○per day.

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
397
⊡Fig. 9-20
Productivity of ten NASA missions according to the Davidson metric. The number of points shows
the cumulative number of discoveries between 1973 and 2010 (Carol Christian 2011, private
communication)
LEO has two major advantages: it is cheaper to reach than most other orbits and offers the
opportunity for human servicing. Five servicing missions went to HST to make repairs and
install new instruments, enabling the observatory to be scientifically productive for more than
20 years. Formissions that are not serviced, LEO is still advantageous because fora fixed payload
size, a smaller launch vehicle can be used to reach orbit. For a fixed cost, a larger payload can be
placed in LEO than in most other orbits. LEO also allows for high-bandwidth communications
to be carried out using relatively small onboard high-gain antennas.
The observing efficiency in LEO is limited by Earth occultations. Objects near the orbital
plane ofHST are routinelyocculted forabout 52 min sothat HST’s maximum long-term observ-
ing efficiency can never be much higher than 50% (Doxsey 2006). Objects near HST’s orbital
poles can be viewed continuously for several days, however. This “continuous viewing zone”
was used to perform several of the HST deep-field campaigns.
Communication with a satellite in LEO must be carefully planned since the satellite can
contact an individual ground station for only a few minutes at a time. HST communicates using
NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) (Davies 1997). The system relies on
nine satellites located in geosynchronous orbits so that their locations with respect to the Earth’s
surface remain fixed. The antennas on each satellite are designed so that signals can be received
from a wide range of angles. A ground station located in New Mexico communicates with the
network. Data from HST can be transmitted between individual TDRSSsatellites until it reaches
a satellite that is in contact with the ground station. Commands to HST travel the reverse route.
LEO’s lie between about 300 and 1,000 km in altitude. Below 300 km, atmospheric drag
shortens a mission lifetime to impractical levels. Above 1,000 km, there is a dense population

398 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
of high-energy particles trapped in the Van Allen belts. The inner belt contains high-energy
protons and electrons (roughly 30–50 MeV) that are spiraling around in the Earth’s magnetic
field. Such particles can cause false detections that obscure the desired science signals and can
occasionally cause unexpected behaviors in the flight electronics. Even within the LEO range,
there are some regions known to be plagued by higher densities of charged particles. The most
significant region is known as the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) and HST is programmed to
cease observations while it passes through the SAA.
HST’s low Earth orbit causes some degree of thermal instability. As it passes in and out of the
Earth’s shadow and thermal load, HST is exposed to temperatures from −80 C to +50 C. MLI
blanketing prevents the telescope structure from experiencing the full range of these temper-
atures, but the thermal changes that are transmitted to the telescope structure can cause small
transient changes in image quality and pointing. The errors are handled with a combination of
real-time and post-facto corrections.
4.2 Drift-Away Orbit
The Spitzer Space Telescopeis in a solar orbit that trails the Earth, drifting awayat a rate of about
0.12 AU per year. The orbit is plotted in >Fig. 9-21. Launch into a drift-away orbit is efficient,
⊡Fig. 9-21
SST’s solar orbit as viewed in the rotating frame; the Earth-Sun line is ﬁxed and the coordinate
system is centered on the Earth. When looking back from Earth at a trailing object in an identical
elliptical orbit, the object will appear to move in an elliptical pattern over the course of 1 year. SST’s
orbit is slower and has a slightly diﬀerent elliptical shape than that of the Earth; when viewing
SST from the Earth, then, it traces a more complicated shape. Much of SST’s time is spent in the
“turnaround”points sketched in the ﬁgure (After Gallagher et al. 2003)

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
399
since it requires reaching just a little more than Earth’s escape velocity. No additional fuel for
circularizing the orbit is required, which saves a great deal of launch mass, and no onboard
propulsion is needed to maintain the satellite’s position.
Because the observatory is far from the Earth, it simplifies observation planning and leads to
high observing efficiencies. The orbit alsoremoves the Earth as a heat source forthe observatory,
which is critical in the infrared where the thermal background from all sources must be kept
low. An observatory in drift-away orbit experiences relatively constant temperatures since the
Sun is always in the same relative position to the spacecraft.
Large ground antennas are required for communication after the observatory has drifted
a long distance from the Earth (Gallagher et al. 2003). SST communicates using NASA’s Deep
Space Network (DSN), which consists of ground-based radio antennas placed around the globe
to ensure that constant contact with spacecraft can be maintained despite the Earth’s rotation.
Each station contains large, steerable radio dishes ranging in size from 26 to 70 m. By January of
2014, SST will be sofarfrom Earth that consistent communication with its low-gain antenna will
no longer be possible, and it would be difficult to restore telescope operations if the observatory
went into its safe mode.
4.3 Libration Point Orbit at Sun-Earth L2
JWST will orbit about the second Lagrange point of the Earth Sun system as sketched
in >Fig. 9-22. The Lagrange points are solutions to the three-body gravitational problem in
the special case that all three bodies lie in a plane, the second body is in orbit about the first,
and the third body has a mass that is negligible compared to the other two bodies. A small
mass inserted at any of the Sun-Earth. Lagrange points will stay in a nearly constant position
with respect to the Earth and Sun. The L1 and L2 points are semi-stable; if the satellite were
nudged forward or backward along its orbital path, the gravitational forces from the Earth and
Sun would cause it to return to its original position. A nudge perpendicular to the orbital path
would not be self-correcting. (The L4 and L5 Lagrange points, about 1 AU from the Earth, exist
⊡Fig. 9-22
A schematic of the Lagrange points in the Earth-Sun system (not to scale) (After Bely 2003)

400 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
in the theoretical three-body system, but in the actual solar system, the gravitational pull of the
outer planets overwhelms the shallow potential wells at those locations.)
JWST will orbit about L2 using periodic station-keeping maneuvers. It will take the obser-
vatory about 3 months to reach its intended position 1.5 million kilometers from Earth. The
Sun, Earth, and Moon are always located on the same side of the telescope, and the orbit is
chosen so that JWST is never in the shadow of the Earth. The environment is thermally stable
and simplifies the design of passive cooling systems. The continuous solar illumination means
that the solar panels provide a steady supply of onboard power. The maximum observing effi-
ciency achievable in this orbit is higher than in LEO because there are no periodic occultations
of objects by the Earth (Sabelhaus et al. 2005). JWST will also use NASA’s Deep Space Network
for communications.
4.4 Orbits and Communications for Future Missions
It is likely that future missions will continue to make use of L2 in the Earth-Sun system because
of its stable thermal environment and relatively close proximity to Earth. For missions that
require lower launch costs or are considering human servicing, a Sun-synchronous low earth
orbit might be attractive. In a Sun-synchronous LEO, the satellite orbits about the Earth in the
plane perpendicular to the Earth-Sun line, passing over both poles of the Earth. The thermal
load from the Sun is constant in such an orbit, leading to better thermal stability than in a
low-inclination LEO. The IR load from the Earth varies just as it does for a standard LEO. For
additional thermal stability, the telescope pointing can be constrained to face away from the
Sun so that it never directly views the IR load from the Earth; a full year is then needed to cover
the whole sky.
To enable human servicing, it might be possible to transfer an observatory from an oper-
ational orbit far from Earth to a “servicing” orbit that passes close to Earth; the observatory
would be returned to its original orbit after the human servicing was complete (Thronson et al.
2005).
JWST will download about 230 Gbits/day of data using a 60 cm diameter high-gain antenna
to transmit data to the 34-m Deep Space Network antennas. The proposed ATLAST mission
would require a data volume of 200 GBytes/day, about seven times larger than that of JWST,
due to its larger detectors. This could be accomplished with a transmission antenna of 120 cm
in diameter. (A larger antenna increases the S/N, allowing for the transmission of higher-
frequency signals.) However, the antenna pointing requirement would be more stringent since
larger antennae have smaller beam sizes. This might require an antenna alignment procedure
that would be performed at the start of each downlink pass. Alternate possibilities include
developing a higher-power transmitter, longer downlink times to the DSN, the addition of
new receive-only antennas to the DSN, using a phased array so that pointing could be adjusted
without physical motion of the antenna, or using optical laser communication (Postman 2009).
5
Packaging and Launch Vehicles
Space telescope missions are limited by the volume available in the launch vehicle and by the
payload mass that the vehicle can place into the correct orbit. To launch larger primary mirrors,
observatories have been forced to become more lightweight and more compact in their launch

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
401
⊡Fig. 9-23
Over time, increasingly large primary mirrors can be ﬁt into smaller masses and volumes
⊡Table 9-9
Physical parameters for HST, SST, and JWST. The listed volumes represent an envelope around
the maximum dimension of the undeployed observatory. JWST’s collecting area was calculated as
the sum of 18 regular hexagonal segments with a ﬂat-to-ﬂat diameter of 1.3 m. JWST’s currently
planned launch date is 2018
HST
SST
JWST
Primary mirror diameter (m)
2.4
0.85
6.6
Collecting area (m2)
4.24
0.49
26.3
Observatory mass (kg)
10,760
860
6,300
Approximate stowed volume
of the observatory (m3)
∼13.1 × 4.3 m
dia. (190 m3)
∼4 × 2 m
dia. (12.6 m3)
∼10.7 × 4.3 m
dia. (155 m3)
Launch Year
1990
2003
2018
configurations. The primary mirror size as a function of mass and volume of the observatory
has increased over time, as shown in >Fig. 9-23. The values used to calculate the plotted ratios
are listed in >Table 9-9.
To fit ever-larger collecting areas into the mass and volume provided by the launch vehicles,
deployable technologies must be used, or on orbit assembly must be carried out. Most auto-
matic deployments add risk since an unsuccessful deployment could compromise the mission.
Everywhere possible, redundant systems are used so that if one deployment method fails, an
independent backup method can be used.

402 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-24
Schematic of HST folded into the Shuttle Orbiter for launch (Lallo 2012)
A schematic of the HST in its launch configuration is shown in >Fig. 9-24. HST’s launch
mass was approximately 10,760 kg and it was contained inside a volume 13 m long and 4.3 m in
diameter. Note that the diameterofthe shuttle baylimited thediameterofHST’s primarymirror.
HST had three key deployments: the solar arrays, the high-gain antennas, and the aper-
ture door. The solar arrays were rolled into cylinders for launch, and unfurled to their full
.× .m size after launch. The two high-gain antennas and their masts were latched to the
side of HST during launch and deployed by folding awayfrom the outer shell. The aperture door
was closed and latched during launch and opened toward the Sun after launch. The door was
designed to open and close multiple times; if the Sun sensors on the spacecraft indicate that the
telescope is pointing near the Sun, the door is designed to close automatically. All HST deploy-
ments included redundant electronics, bearings, and latches where possible. Because HST is in
a low Earth orbit, additional reliability was built into the system by designing all deployable
components to allow for manual operation by astronauts.
Aphotograph ofSST in its Delta 7920Hfairing is shown in >Fig. 9-25. The volume occupied
is roughly 4 m in length and 2 m in diameter; the observatory’s mass is only 861 kg. SST did
not use deployable components to reduce its launch volume. Like HST, the diameter of SST’s
primary mirror is the largest allowed by the chosen launch vehicle. After launch, three critical
deployments occurred: a helium vent valve opened, the dust cover at the end of the outer shell
was ejected 5 days after launch, and a valve opened the instrument chamber to space (Young
2011, private communication). The limited number of critical deployments results in lower risk
of mission failure and a lower overall mission cost, since actuators, controllers, and electronics
are kept to a minimum.
JWST launches in an Ariane 5 fairing. The undeployed telescope occupies a volume approxi-
mately 10.7m long and 4.3 m in diameter. After deployment, the observatory’s envelope is about
× × m. To reach its relatively small deployment volume, multiple parts of JWST deploy
after launch.

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
403
⊡Fig. 9-25
The Spitzer Space Telescope in its Delta 7920H launch shroud and at launch (NASA 2003)
The sunshield is stowed on two vertical palettes for launch, as shown in
> Fig. 9-26.
It deploys to its final area of about 170 m. A “momentum trim flap” deploys from the end
of the sunshield. The solar panel (underneath the sunshield) is folded into five segments that
unfold into a single plane after launch. A tower that separates the telescope and instruments
from the sunshield and spacecraft also deploys.
The telescope portion of the observatory deploys in three steps: the secondary mirror’s sup-
port structure unfolds from its vertical position. Then, the left and right primary mirror “wings”
fold forward to create the 18-segment primary mirror. Finally, the primary mirror segments and
secondary mirror are actuated out of their stowed launch position to a point where the optical
alignment process can begin (Lightsey et al. 2012). (Alignment of the optics and primary mirror
segments are discussed in >Sect. 6.4).
In the near term, missions will continue to be limited by the mass and volume constraints
of the available launch vehicles, and missions that require aperture diameters larger than the
available fairings will continue to rely on deployable primary mirrors and secondary mirror
supports. Currently, NASA is developing a heavy-lift launch vehicle known as the Space Launch
System (SLS), which will initially be capable of putting 70 metric tons into LEO, and will ulti-
mately reach 130 metric tons. The fairing diameter for cargo could be as large as 8 m in diameter,
which would allow larger observatories to be carried to L2.
In the long term, it may be possible to bypass the constraints imposed by launch vehicles by
assembling observatories in space. The observatory could be divided into segments that could
launch separately and would autonomously assemble in orbit. Observatories could also poten-
tially be assembled by astronauts in LEO or in depots located further away from the Earth
(Goddard Space Flight Center 2010).

404 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-26
A graphic of JWST stowed for launch in the Ariane 5 fairing. The secondary folds upward, the
primary mirror “wings” fold back around the instrument radiators and compartment, and the
sunshield folds into two pallets at the front and back of the assembly (NASA 2003, labels added)
6
Optical Considerations
Multiple requirements affect the optical design and fabrication of a space telescope. The optical
system must achieve diffraction-limited imaging below a specified wavelength and provide a
field of view large enough to accommodate the onboard instruments. Pupils and image con-
jugates might be required at certain locations so that they can be used for stray light control
and for pointing adjustments. The technology used to fabricate the mirrors must be lightweight

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
405
so that the telescope stays within its mass budget. The alignment of the optical system must
be maintained, either through structural stability or through active control of the mirrors once
on orbit.
6.1 Optical Designs and FOV Allocations
HST and SST are both variations on standard Cassegrain telescopes, which are compact two-
mirror telescopes with convex secondary mirrors. Cassegrains, with convex secondaries, are
more compact than systems with concave secondaries which helps to minimize a system’s
launch volume. (The convex secondary is more difficult to fabricate and test, however, since
test beams diverge from the surface and require very large relay or collection optics.) Two-
mirror systems also minimize the number of reflections within the OTA, which is especially
important for HST since it is difficult to achieve high reflectivities in ultraviolet wavelengths.
Each reflection off of a typical UV-coated mirror results in a 10% loss of intensity relative to
the incident beam. Also, current detector quantum efficiency (QE) is low (typically 10–20%),
so a 10% loss from an extra mirror reflection represents a significant degradation of science
capability.
Specifically, HST and SST both use Ritchey-Chretien designs in which spherical aberration
and coma are both corrected, and the aberration that limits the field of view in these systems is
astigmatism (Schroeder 1987). Both HST and SST have large fields of view in which instruments
can be placed: 32 arcmin in the case of SST and 28 arcmin in the case of HST (Lee et al. 1998).
HST achieves diffraction-limited imaging for wavelengths above about 0.6 µm, while SST is
diffraction-limited beyond 5.5 µm.
The instrument locations within the available fields of view for HST and SST are shown in
> Figs. 9-27 and >9-28. Since the instruments are separated in field space, the observatory
is repointed to select a particular instrument. Observations with more than one instrument
(parallel observations) can be made if the telescope is undertaking large areas surveys, or simply
by exploiting the “serendipity” of observing coincident areas of the sky next to targets of interest.
Within instruments, light may be split into different wavelength regimes so that objects can be
observed simultaneously in multiple wavelengths.
JWST is a three-mirror anastigmat (TMA), as sketched below in > Fig. 9-29. The aber-
rations that limit a telescope’s field of view scale linearly with aperture diameter. JWST, with
its 6.6-m primary mirror, uses three conic mirrors to achieve its × arcmin field of view.
The approximate locations of the instruments within that FOV are shown in >Fig. 9-30. The
gold-coated mirrors have high reflectivities in the IR and the QE of the IR detectors is high, so
the throughput of the system remains high despite the additional reflections within the OTA.
JWST is required to achieve diffraction-limited imaging for wavelengths above 2 µm, but its
performance may be better than required.
An advantage of TMA systems is that they provide a real pupil within the optical train.
The pupil is an image of the primary mirror, and that image does not change as a function
of the object’s position in the sky or as a function of wavelength. A planar mirror located at
a pupil plane can be tilted to steer all objects in the field of view by the same amount. The
mirror can refine the pointing of the observatory and may also be used to compensate for jitter
and other disturbances in the structure of the observatory. As sketched in >Fig. 9-29, JWST’s
FSM mirror occurs at a real pupil and is used to make fine adjustments to the observatory’s
pointing.

406 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-27
FieldallocationsfortheinstrumentsaboardSST.TheﬁeldallocationsfortheMIPSdetectorsinclude
the range accessible with the instrument’s scanning mirror (After Spitzer Science Center 2011)
6.2 Stray Light Control
Stray light is defined as any photon that reaches an instrument’s detectorthat did not come from
within the science field of view or that arrived at the detectors via an unplanned path. Sources
of stray light for orbiting observatories include the Sun, Earth, Moon, other celestial bodies,
galactic and extragalactic sources, zodiacal light, and in infrared wavelengths, self-emission
from the observatory itself.
OTA enclosures are a primary defense against stray light from a broad range of sources.
Field stops, placed in planes optically conjugate to the detectors, block stray light from celestial
objects outside of the detector’s field of view. Other baffles may be used at key locations inside
the instruments. Instruments and instrument compartments are also enclosed.
The telescope sections of both SST and HST are enclosed in outer shrouds. In >Fig. 9-39,
some of the elements used for stray light control in HST can be seen: the open aperture door
on the sunward side of the observatory prevents sunlight from entering the shroud directly.
The inner surface of the door is covered with black paint to reduce its reflectivity in the visible.
Inside the shroud, opposite the aperture door, a series of black baffles further prevents stray

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
407
⊡Fig. 9-28
Field allocations for the instruments aboard the Hubble Space Telescope after Servicing Mission 4
(After Space Telescope Science Institute 2010)
light from glinting off the inside of the shroud. All materials that cover the shroud have inner
surfaces that are black and absorb visible wavelengths.
For JWST, an OTA enclosure was omitted because its large size would have added sub-
stantial mass and would have been difficult to deploy and cool. Instead, a sunshield is used to
protect JWST’s optics from stray light and thermal effects from the Sun, Earth, and Moon, which
are always located on the same side of the observatory (see >Fig. 9-22). The accessible pupil
within JWST’s TMA design is also important for stray light control, and JWST’s FSM carries a
pupil mask. Since the image of the primary mirror at a pupil is constant as a function of wave-
length and field angle, a mask that lies just outside the edges of the primary image will block any
photons coming from objects just outside the primary mirror. (Such photons would miss the
primary mirror, but fall directly onto the secondary mirror and make their way to the instru-
ments.) The mask also blocks the central obscuration of the telescope so that photons cannot
pass the edges of the secondary mirror and fall directly onto the instrument pickoff mirrors
(Lightsey et al. 2012). Another layer of stray light control for JWST is a field stop placed near
the Cassegrain focus of the system, at the end of the AOS.

408 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-29
A schematic of the JWST optical design, which isa three-mirror anastigmat. The ﬁne steeringmirror
is located at a real pupil and can be steered to reﬁne the observatory’s pointing
⊡Fig. 9-30
A sketch of the JWST ﬁeld of view, as projected onto the sky. The allocations for each instru-
ment’s ﬁeld of view are also shown. (Not shown: long-wave NIRCam, NIRCam coronagraph, MIRI
coronagraph, NIRSpec ﬁxed slits, imaging window or IFU ﬁeld points, and MIRI mid-resolution
spectrograph FOV)
6.3 Lightweight Mirror Technologies
The total mass ofa space-based observatoryis strictlylimited bythe launch vehicle, and virtually
every component is lightweighted compared to components used in ground-based systems.
These lightweight structures must survive the rigors of launch and operate in the zero-gravity
on orbit environment, despite that fact that they are fabricated, aligned, and tested in a 1-g
environment. Primary mirrors are obvious targets for lightweighting since they are often the

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
409
⊡Fig. 9-31
A comparison of the areal densities of various primary mirrors shows a signiﬁcant decrease over
time. HST used a lightweighted glass mirror, JWST and SST used a beryllium technology, and tech-
nologies for future missions are achieving even smaller areal densities (Postman 2011, private
communication)
largest single element in an observatory. HST has a lightweighted glass primary that comprises
about 6% of HST’s total mass and has an areal density of 140 kg/m.
JWST and SST, more tolerant of wavefront error because of their longer wavelength ranges,
took advantage of an actuated beryllium mirror technology to reach areal densities of approx-
imately 25 kg/m(including the actuators and support structures). Future missions, with
ever-larger primary mirrors, will require even lower areal densities. A comparison of the areal
densities of primary mirrors is shown in >Fig. 9-31.
HST’s primary mirror is fairly rigid and consists of a lightweighted core with front, back,
and edge plates fused to it. The OTA is estimated to contribute about 18 nm of surface error
(mid- and high-spatial-frequency polishing errors) to the system, and the primary mirror was
polished to about 10 nm RMS. (This estimate excludes the low-spatial-frequency spherical aber-
ration that was found after launch, and that is now corrected within each Hubble instrument
(Krist and Burrows 1995)).
Both SST and JWST use lightweightedberyllium optics. The fabrication process begins with
the machining and etching of a beryllium blank to produce an extremely lightweight substrate.
The mirrors are initially polished to have a good surface figure at an ambient temperature. The
mirrors are then taken to cryogenic temperatures(5.5 K for SST, 40 K for JWST) and the surface
figures measured. The negative of the cryogenic surface errors are then polished into the mirror
so that when the cryogenic surface figure test is repeated, the mirrors are nearly perfect (Lee
et al. 1998).
JWST’s 18 segmentsare semirigid; they can be adjustedin six rigid-body degrees of freedom
and in radius of curvature so that they can be aligned to perform as a single primary mirror. The
quality of the surface figure depends largely on the quality of the final polish and the rigidity
present in the beryllium structure. Individual segments are required to reach surface figure
errors of better than 30 nm RMS.

410 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
A photograph of a JWST primary mirror segment is shown in >Fig. 9-33. The structure
of the extensive lightweighting in the beryllium substrate can be seen. Each mirror segment is
1.5 m point to point; the full 6.6 m primary mirror is designed to have a final surface figure of
betterthan 140 nm RMS. The total fabrication time fora single segment is currentlyseveral years
due to the large number of processes involved, but segments can be made in parallel (Chaney
et al. 2011). At this writing, all of the JWST mirrors have been successfully fabricated and most
are fully tested.
For future missions with larger primary mirrors, lighter mirror segments will be required.
Such segments are likely to have less rigidity and require active control of the surface figure
of each segment to achieve low figure errors. This is especially true for future optical and UV
missions; the ATLAST mission is specified to be diffraction-limited at a wavelength of 500 nm,
which would require mirror surfaces of high quality (∼10 nm RMS surface errors to achieve
a total WFE budget of ∼36 nm). While the required surface errors are comparable with those
achieved on the HST primary, the ATLAST mirrors need to achieve those errors on mirrors
with areal densities ten times less than HST’s. Because of the demanding surface error require-
ments, one option proposed for ATLAST is an 8-m monolithic primary that would fit into a
future heavy-lift launch vehicle. Segmented mirrors are also being considered and may be more
compatible with the capabilities of near-future launch vehicles.
There are several mirror technologies that may be useful for future missions as shown
in >Fig. 9-32. An actuated hybrid mirror technology is in development that allows for active
control ofthe mirrorsurface. The mirrors consist ofa nanolaminate facesheet formed on a preci-
sion mandrel that provides an optical surface of high quality. A silicon carbide sheet structurally
supports the facesheet and contains hundreds of embedded electrostrictive ceramic actuators
for active adjustment of the segment’s surface figure. The technology has a goal of achieving
areal densities as low as 12 kg/mincluding all support structures and actuators, fabrication
times of months, and surface figures of less than 10 nm. The technology is attractive for future
UV and optical missions that will require extremely low surface figure errors as well as low areal
densities (Postman 2009; Hickey et al. 2010).
An ultralow-expansion (ULE) glass semirigid mirror technology was initially developed
with a goal of an areal density of 15 kg/m. Faceplates over a honeycomb structure are fabri-
cated in a planar configuration, then “slumped” over a precision mandrel to achieve off-axis
and aspheric shapes. Standard polishing techniques are used to finish the mirrors. The mirrors
alone achieve an areal density of 8 kg/m(Matthews et al. 2003).
A “replicated corrugated” borosilicate mirror technology achieves areal densities of
11 kg/m(not including mounting hardware or any actuation). The mirrors are fabricated from
flat glass sheets and consist of five layers: a front facesheet, a “microcore,” an inner sheet, a
“macrocore,” and a back facesheet. The mirrors are replicated on precision surfaces so that
minimal polishing is required to finish the mirrors. The technology is especially attractive for
systems requiring a large number of individual mirror segments because of its low cost and
short fabrication times (Egerman et al. 2010; Strafford et al. 2006).
6.4 Optical Alignment
HST was aligned on the ground and largely relied on structural stability to keep the optical
aberrations low through launch and into orbit. To compensate for small structural changes,
though, the secondary mirror is actuated so that the telescope focus can be controlled. Focus

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
411
⊡Fig. 9-32
Lightweight mirror technologies under development include: (a) actuated hybrid mirrors (Hickey
et al. 2010), (b) fused ULE mirrors (Matthews et al. 2003), and (c) replicated corrugated borosilicate
mirrors (Egerman et al. 2010)
adjustments have been necessary once or twice a year, at most.5 In addition, most of HST’s
instruments have focus adjustment mechanisms to compensate for small amounts of focus
error. HST’s primary mirror does have 24 actuators that allow for limited correction of some
low-order aberrations in the primary mirror, but they have not been used since commissioning.
(Their range is too small to correct the spherical aberration that was detected in the primary
mirror early in the mission. Corrective optics that compensate for the aberration have been
incorporated in the later generations of science instruments (Lallo 2012)).
Similarly, SST has an adjustable secondary to compensate for small structural changes on
orbit. Its instruments do not include focus adjustment mechanisms, though, and the primary is
not actuated. Without focus adjustments, the instruments must be designed to tolerate a larger
amount of defocus, or the structural changes in the system must be held to low levels. The
advantage of the approach is that the number of actuators in the system is minimized, reducing
risk, complexity, and power consumption.
A more complex alignment approach was required for JWST due to its segmented pri-
mary mirror and the addition of tertiary and FSM mirrors. Optical alignment has to occur on
5http://www.stsci.edu/hst/observatory/focus/mirrormoves.html

412 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-33
A photo of the back of a JWST primary mirror segment. Extensive lightweighting of the beryl-
lium mirror can be seen. Seven actuators provide rigid-body motions and a radius of curvature
adjustment (NASA 2010)
orbit after the deployment of the segments and the secondary mirror. The alignment method is
image-based, and relies primarily on images from the NIRCam instrument. Initial alignment
of the telescope is expected to take several weeks. For maintenance of the optical alignment, the
telescope could be adjusted as frequently as every 2 weeks.
To accomplish the on orbit alignment, most of JWST’s mirrors are active. For each of the
18 primary mirror segments, six actuators in a hexapod configuration provide 6 degrees of
freedom (DOF) of rigid-body motion as shown in >Fig. 9-33. A seventh actuator and a set of
struts provide a radius of curvature adjustment. The secondary mirror also includes a hexapod
for 6 DOF rigid-body motions. The FSM, which is a planar mirror, can be moved in tip and
tilt. The tertiary mirror position is fixed. In addition to the active mirrors in the telescope, all
of JWST’s NIR instruments contain focus adjustment mechanisms. Each of the two redundant
NIRCam modules can also align their internal apertures to the telescope exit pupil using tip/tilt
motions of their focus adjust mechanisms.
A wavefront-sensing and control (WFSC) process has been developed to control on orbit
alignment of JWST’s mirrors. The process is fairly complex and requires human oversight; a
schematic of the full process is shown in >Fig. 9-34. The telescope is pointed toward a bright,
isolated star. When the primary mirror segments are initially deployed, they have large tilt,
piston, and other errors with respect to one another. Each segmentproduces a separate image of
the star on the image plane. The first few steps of the alignment process put the secondary in an
average focus position, identify which image belongs to which segment, and locate any segment
images that are not found in the NIRCam image plane. The segment images are then driven into
an array on the image plane, and “global alignment” optimizes the position of each segment to
produce the best image possible. The images are then stacked at the center of the image plane,
and the pistons are corrected using the coarse phasing process. The telescope is now sufficiently
aligned to carry out fine phasing, which is a phase retrieval process (Gerchberg and Saxton
1972) that completes the alignment process. Finally, the “multi-instrument multifield” (MIMF)
stepchecks the performance ofthe telescope at the otherinstruments and the process is repeated
if necessary. After this initial alignment process, the fine-phasing step will be repeated every
2 weeks as necessary to maintain the alignment of the mirrors (Lightsey et al. 2012).

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
413
⊡Fig. 9-34
A schematic of the JWST commissioning process that is used to align the telescope (Lightsey et al.
2012)
6.5 Optical Alignment for Future Missions
HST and SST relied on structural stability and infrequent focus adjustments of the secondary
mirrors to maintain optical alignment while on orbit. JWST, with lower areal density and less
structural stability, will rely on its active primary mirrors segments, secondary mirror, and FSM
to periodically correct its alignment. As primary mirrors in future space telescopes get larger
and the areal densities of the observatories fall, the systems are likely to have still less intrinsic
structural stability. To maintain the alignment and optical surface figures of these systems, the
control philosophy used will have to more closely resemble that of fully active and adaptive
ground-based telescopes.
In fact, the evolution of space-based systems is beginning to parallel that of ground-based
telescopes, which have gone from passive optical alignment (using the stability of the telescope
structure tomaintain alignment), toactivelycontrolled telescopes like the segmented 10 m Keck
Telescopes, and finally to completely active and adaptively controlled telescopes such as the
European Very Large Telescopes, the two 8-m Gemini Telescopes, and all the future 20–40-m
ground-based telescopes now in the planning stages. >Table 9-10 illustrates this evolution in
optical control philosophy.
JWST must steer away to a bright isolated star each time the alignment is adjusted, and
a human operator must oversee the alignment process. Future space observatories will have
to carry out alignment more frequently and might require fully active adjustment of mirror
surface figures. The WFSC process for these systems will have to be fully automated, and the

414 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Table 9-10
The evolution of optical and structural control philosophies for increasingly larger telescopes, both
on the ground and in space
Passive
Active
Active and adaptive
Fully adaptive
Optical
alignment and
optical ﬁgure
control
approach
Relies on
intrinsic
structural
stability and
occasional focus
adjustments
with secondary
using a
reference star
Moderate
bandwidth
(>1 Hz)
internally
referenced
alignment with
infrequent
(>week)
calibration of
alignment and
phasing of
primary mirror
using a
reference star
Low bandwidth
(<0.01 Hz) active
correction of
alignment and optical
ﬁgure using a
reference star, with
high bandwidth
(>100 Hz) adaptive
tip/tilt and focus
correction using a
guide star
Moderate to high
bandwidth
(>10 Hz)
continuous
correction of
alignment, optical
ﬁgure and
phasing using a
guide star
Ground-based
telescopes
• Palomar (5 m)
• KPNO (4 m)
• UKIRT (3.8 m)
• UofA MMT
• Keck (10 m)
• VLT (8 m, 4 ea.)
• Gemini (8 m, 2 ea.)
• Magellan (6 m, 2 ea.)
• GMT (20 m)
• E-ELT (40 m)
Space-based
telescopes
• HST (2.4 m)
• Spitzer (0.85 m)
• JWST (6.6 m maximum diameter)
• ATLAST concept
(10 m)
adjustments will have to be made without steering away from the science target, perhaps by
using the images of the guide stars for WFSC operations. From space, telescopes with diameters
of 8 m or greater should always be able to find sufficiently bright stars in the periphery of the
science field to allow continuous alignment and wavefront control. > Figure 9-35 shows the
availability of wavefront-sensing stars for the ground-based 8-m Gemini telescope.Gemini uses
wavefront information from a star selected in the periphery of the science fields to update the
telescope alignment and the primary and secondary mirror surface figures at a rate of 0.03 Hz.
For a space telescope, the number of available stars will be higher due to lower background
levels and improved image quality in the absence of atmospheric turbulence.
7
Pointing and Control Systems
Pointing and control systems are needed in order to position the science target at the appropri-
ate location in the observatory’s field of view, and to maintain that pointing despite disturbances
to the observatory. In general, the rule of thumb used by telescope designers is that the pointing
stability should be better than 1/8 the size of the PSF FWHM. External pointing disturbances
include solar pressure, and for telescopes in LEO, gravity gradients, and aerodynamic torque.
Such disturbances are usually low in frequency. Internal, high frequency disturbances are
known as “jitter,” and are usually too high-frequency to be controlled using the pointing system.
Sources of jitter include any moving or vibrating part in the observatory: reaction wheels, fuel
slosh, solar arrays and sunshields, thrusters, gyroscopes, filter wheels, actuators, cryocoolers,
and releases of structural strain.

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
415
⊡Fig. 9-35
The surface density of stars as function of optical R band magnitude for the galactic latitudes of
30○and 90○from the Galactic plane derived from the Bahcall–Soneira model (1984). The horizon-
tal line represents the patrol area of the Gemini Peripheral Wavefront Sensor (PWFS). Where this
line crosses the stellar curve indicates the magnitude where, statistically, one star should lie within
the PWFS patrol area (approximately 14 arcmin in diameter). For example, statistically, one star
of magnitude R = 13.5–15 will be available for wavefront sensing for any science ﬁeld between
galactic latitudes of 30○and 90○(http://www.gemini.edu/sciops)
Most spacecraft have multiple layers of pointing control. At the first level, a coarse-pointing
system uses star trackers and gyroscopes to measure the spacecraft’s orientation in space, or
attitude.
Star trackers are self-contained cameras that are affixed to the outside of the spacecraft.
They have very wide fields of view (about × ○) so that they can compare multiple bright
star positions to a star catalog in order to determine the spacecraft’s orientation in space. Most
missions include three star trackers. The best star trackers have about 10 arcsec RMS absolute
attitude accuracy. The location of HST’s star trackers are shown in > Fig. 9-12, and a more
detailed sketch of the system is shown in >Fig. 9-36. (The most visible part of the star trackers
are the relatively large baffles used to prevent stray light from reaching the tracker optics and
detectors.) The star trackers and gyroscopes are mounted in the aft shroud on a dimensionally
stable composite bench so that the locations and orientations remain constant. The actual star
trackers can be seen in the photograph in >Fig. 9-37.
A gyroscope is a flywheel that spins at a high rate and senses and measures changes in the
orientation of the spin axis (Den Hartog 1961). The flywheel is on a single gimbal and only
the corresponding axis is sensed, so three gyroscopes are needed to sense all three angles of a
spacecraft’s orientation. The rotation ofthe output axis is proportional to the spacecraft’s angular
rate about the input axis. That rotation is balanced by electromagnetic torque, and the torque
required provides a measure of the spacecraft’s angular rate. Most spacecraft use “rate gyros”
(Thomson 1986).
Onboard pointing control systems feed this information from the gyroscopes and star
trackers into the pointing control law, in order to accurately slew the observatory using the

416 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-36
HST carries three star trackers so that the spacecraft’s attitude can be determined. Large baﬄes
protect the trackers from stray light from the Sun. Gyroscope units share the support structure
with the trackers (After Gilmore 2002)
spacecraft’s reaction wheels. Reaction wheels are flywheels that can spin in either direction
about their axes up to some maximum rate of several thousand r.p.m. When accelerated or
decelerated, the wheels transfer momentum to the observatory since the total momentum of
the observatory and reaction wheels must remain constant. Most missions carry four reaction
wheels; one for each axis and one spare.
The observatory is not completely isolated from external momentum sources, though. Over
time, momentum is added to the observatory system due to radiation pressure and, in LEOs,
to gravity gradients. The added momentum can cause the reaction wheels to spin faster until
they reach their maximum speeds; control of the observatory would then be lost. The additional
momentum must be “dumped” every few hours. HST orbits within the Earth’s magnetic field,
so momentum desaturation is done continuously using magnetic torquers (Lockheed Missiles
and Space Company 1985).
For JWST and SST, momentum desaturation is done periodically using thrusters. SST
requires momentum dumping fairly infrequently – about once a week.
Coarse-pointing systems are generally unsuitable for scientific observations since both
image stability and absolute pointing accuracy is inadequate due to physical changes in the
gyroscopes and to sensing noise in the star trackers. For example, HST’s gyros achieve 0.25 mas
resolution but drift at a rate of 1 mas/s, while the star tracker performance is rarely better than
10 arcsec. Coarse-pointing accuracy is also limited by the fact that the star trackers and gyro-
scopes are mounted on the spacecraft bus, and they must be calibrated to match the telescope’s

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
417
⊡Fig. 9-37
Astronaut Michael Good, STS-125 mission specialist, in a session of extra-vehicular activity. Access
panels in the aft shroud are open, and the star tracker assemblies are visible (NASA 2009)
boresight. Any changes in the alignment between the spacecraft and telescope (usually due to
thermal changes in the observatory structure) cause an error in the coarse-pointing.
Fine-pointing supplements star tracker and gyroscope measurements with data from fine
guidance sensors located in the focal plane of the telescope. (The field locations of HST and
JWST’s FGSs are shown in >Figs. 9-28 and >9-30.) After the observatory is pointed toward the
science target, the FGS searches for and acquires a particular guide star that has been preselected
by the ground system. The FGS aperture size and instrument sensitivity are designed to provide
access to a suitable guide star for at least 95% of all telescope pointings at a given roll about the
boresight. Once the guide star image is located by the FGS, its position is used by the Attitude
Control System (ACS) to refine the pointing and stabilize the observatory to place the science
target image at the correct location in a science aperture.
For HST, three FGSs encircle the outer perimeterof the field of view as shown in >Fig. 9-28.
Each guider consists of two sets of scanning mirrors (star selector A, star selector B), a polar-
izing beam splitter (creating two beams with orthogonal polarizations), an X-axis and Y-axis
shearing interferometer, and two photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) on each axis. The system has
an instantaneous field of view (IFOV) of × arcsec, which can be placed anywhere in the full
69 arcminFOV using the star selectors. At the end of the spacecraft slew to the science target,
the FGS IFOV is commanded to the expected location of the guide star. The FGS flight software
commands the instrument to execute a spiral search for the guide star, which is detected using
the PMTs. Once located, the FGS IFOV nutates about the location of the guide star’s image to
precisely determine the image’s photo-center. Finally, the FGS interferometrically acquires the
guide star in “fine lock” by using the PMT data to locate and lock on to (track) the null point of
the sheared interference fringe. The location of the guide star in the FGS FOV is updated and
reported every 25 ms.

418 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
On HST, two FGSs are used simultaneously. One provides data that is used for pitch/yaw
control, while the other provides guide star centroids used for roll control. Guide star mag-
nitudes can range from 9 < V < 14. Fine guidance on HST achieves better than 7 mas image
stability. Absolute pointing accuracy is limited primarily by the accuracy of the guide star cat-
alog position on the celestial sphere (the error is expected to be ∼0.3 arcsec (Space Telescope
Science Institute 2010)).
The JWST FGS is a cryogenic instrument with two independent 2k × 2k NIR detectors cov-
ering .× .arcmin on the sky (see > Fig. 9-30). During a science observation, only one
channel is used and the other is idle. At the end of the spacecraft slew to the science target,
the FGS is commanded to locate the guide star in a particular channel. It does so by obtaining
a “full frame” image of the channel’s entire FOV. It then compares the observed scene to the
predicted scene provided by the ground system, and applies a pattern match to locate the guide
star image.
After identifying the guide star, the FGS places a subarray on the guide star, computes the
centroids, and reports them to the ACS to improve pointing accuracy. The process is repeated
with smaller subarrays to provide increasing centroiding accuracy. Once the guide star is within
3 arcsec of its desired location, the FGS continuously “tracks” the guide star using a smaller
subarray that can be frequently repositioned to follow the guide star. At this point, the ACS
enters its Fine Guide Control, using the FGS data to drive the FSM in a closed loop, as sketched
in >Fig. 9-38 The FSM has a finite range, so adjustments to the observatory pointing via the
reaction wheels are also made to keep the FSM near the center of its range. When the star is
within 35 mas of its desired location, the FGS images the guide star with an ×pixel subarray
at a rapid rate.
Note that the FGSdata are used onlyforpitch/yaw control. JWST roll is controlled bythe star
trackers. JWST will use guide stars as faint as J < 18.5. Using the FGS, star trackers, and gyros,
JWST is expected to achieve 0.007 arcsec pointing stability for long-duration science exposures.
As with HST, the absolute pointing accuracy is limited primarily by the accuracy of the guide
star’s cataloged position on the celestial sphere (the error is expected to be ∼0.3 arcsec).
SST does not use a fine guiderthat provides real-time pointing measurements. Rather, it uses
two small sensors instruments (labeled “PCRS” in >Fig. 9-27) that can be used to check the
relative alignment between the (cold) telescope boresight and the (warm) spacecraft’s coarse-
pointing system a few times per day. A calibration is done by placing a catalog star on the PCRS
and comparing its position to the positions of other catalog stars in the star trackers. Roll can
also be calibrated since there are two PCRS devices on opposite sides of SST’s field of view. This
process cannot control for high- or mid-frequency disturbances, but it is effective in compen-
sating for slow thermal drifts between the spacecraft and telescope. The system is extremely low
power, since it uses only two × pixel arrays (Mainzer and Young 2004).
7.1 Pointing and Control Systems for Future Missions
For future missions with larger primary mirror diameters, achieving the required pointing
stability may be challenging with present technology. Proposed pointing and control sys-
tems include fine guidance sensors integrated into the instrument packages of the observatory
and a fine-steering mirror that allows for active adjustment of the observatory’s line of sight.
Some of the proposed steering mirrors have reaction times fast enough that they can keep the
observatory’s line of sight stable despite the presence of high-frequency jitter disturbances.

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
419
⊡Fig. 9-38
A schematic of the pointing control system for JWST. Information from the ﬁne guider system con-
trols the FSM. Reaction wheels adjust the observatory pointing when necessary to keep the FSM
near the center of its range (After Balzano et al. 2008)
Current missions have built structural stability into the interface between the spacecraft and
the telescope, so that the offset between the star tracker and telescope lines of sight are fairly
stable. (This ensures that guide stars fall within the fine guider field after a slew and enables star
tracker data to be used to accurately control the “roll” position of the OTA.) As space telescopes
become larger and more lightweight, it will be more challenging to achieve such structural sta-
bility. For the proposed 10-m ATLAST system, the telescope is connected to the spacecraft
through a single long arm. The system requires an active measurement of the offset between
the coarse-pointing system on the spacecraft and the fine guidance sensors in the telescope
but has the advantage that the telescope is more isolated from mechanical disturbances on the
spacecraft (Postman 2009).
If an observatory’s solar panels were mounted on adjustable booms, they could potentially
be used as solar sails to nullify solar torques, or as solar rudders to dump momentum. This
would eliminate the momentum-dumping process and increase observing efficiency. The pro-
posed 8-m ATLAST mission has determined that a 10-m solar array boom extending from
the spacecraft could allow for over 6 days of continuous high-precision pointing observation
(Postman 2009).
8
Thermal Systems
Every component on a space telescope has been designed to work within a narrow range of
operating temperatures. The thermal design of the telescope must ensure that every component
is within its operating range despite the presence of external sources of heat (such as the Sun
and the Earth) and internal sources of heat (such as the spacecraft electronics, moving parts,
and sunshields).
For UV/optical observatories, most components can operate near room temperature with
the exception of the instrument detectors, which must be cooler in order to minimize detector

420 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
noise. HST operates at a temperature of about 290 K (20○C), but the instrument detectors are
cooled to lower temperatures to suppress detector noise sources. Infrared observatories must
operate at colder temperatures so that the mirrors and structures within the telescope do not
emit infrared radiation that falls on the detectors in the system. JWST will operate at 40 K
(−230○C) to reduce the background out to wavelengths of 28 µm and SST operated at about
6 K (−270○C) to reduce the background out to wavelengths of 180 µm.
The operating temperatures must also be stable over time. Temperature stability prevents
changes in the structure that could cause optics to misalign or distort; submicron changes in a
mirror position can degrade the performance of the telescope.Structural changes can also com-
promise calibrations, such as the measured offset between the star trackers and the instrument
line of sight. The observatory structures are designed to be mechanically stable and are ather-
malized as much as possible, but those processes are imperfect and cannot completely eliminate
the need for temperature stability.
Thermal stability is a difficult requirement for an observatory in LEO, since it travels in
and out of the shadow of the Earth approximately every 45 min. HST encounters a solar flux of
approximately1,300W/mwhen it is in the Sun, which drops tozerowhen HST is in the shadow
of the Earth. Temperatures on the exterior of HST can vary from 190 to 330 K. In addition, the
Earth reflects some of the Sun’s thermal energy onto the telescope, and the warm Earth itself
emits thermal radiation. JWST and SST experience a more stable thermal environment; because
they are in solar orbits, the Sun is always in view and on the same side of the observatory.
Thermal effects and reflection of sunlight from the Earth are also much less for telescopes in
solar orbits.
8.1 Basic Components of Thermal Control Systems
Thermal control methods can either be active or passive. Active means of thermal control
include systems that add or subtract heat from a component on command such as heaters,
thermoelectric coolers (TECs), coolants, and cryocoolers. Missions that rely on cryogens have
lifetimes limited by the amount of coolant on board. Thermoelectric coolers (TECs) do not
have lifetime limits but cannot achieve the extremely low temperaturesneeded for infrared mis-
sions. Mechanical cryocoolers also avoid lifetime limits but produce a great deal of jitter and
require mechanical isolation from the rest of the system. (To date, cryocoolers have been used
to cool individual instruments but have not been used to cool entire missions. The proposed
SPICA mission would be the first (Sato et al. 2010).) Heaters can be used to add heat in order
to control thermal gradients and to stabilize final operating temperatures, but the system must
first be cooled to a temperature lower than the operational temperature by some other means
(Donabedian 2003).
Passive means of thermal control are designed directly into the system and cannot be cycled
on and off. The most obvious parts of a passive thermal control system are the outer shroud
or sunshield (which protects the observatory from solar radiation) and radiators (large panels
that radiatively transmit heat into space). Multilayer insulation blankets, which consist of layers
of metallicized plastic sheets, are used throughout the telescope to protect components from
solar radiation and from thermal radiation from other components. The passive thermal control
system also includes all materials, component shapes, joint types, and thermal coatings chosen
for the observatory (Gilmore 2002).

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
421
8.2 Radiative and Conductive Heat Transfer
Radiative and conductive heat transfers determine the steady-state temperature of a space-
based observatory. Materials and their shapes can be carefully chosen to control the conduction
of heat through the telescope structure, and radiative emitters and insulators can be used to
manipulate radiative transfer.
The energy transferred conductively through a plate of area A and thickness l can be
written as
qc = kA
l ΔT,
(9.13)
where ΔT is the temperature difference between the front and back of the plate and k is the
thermal conductivity of the material. Materials with low conductivities, small cross-sectional
areas, and long lengths can be used to isolate parts of the system from conductive heat transfer.
Conversely, materials with high conductivities can be used to “dump” heat from the telescope
structure to its radiators orto transferheat to coolants. The shapes ofthe materials can be chosen
to further enhance or inhibit the heat transfer.
Radiative heat transfer involves absorption and emission of electromagnetic radiation.
Materials tend to absorb primarily in short wavelengths and emit that heat in infrared wave-
lengths. For any material, αs is the solar absorptance and gives the percentage of incident
sunlight absorbed by the material. The infrared emissivity of the material, εIR, is the percent-
age of that energy that is radiated away in the infrared. It is generally accurate to assume
that for infrared wavelengths, infrared emissivity is equal to the infrared absorption (εIR =
αIR). Both absorptance and emittance depend on temperature. The final temperature of a
surface of area A depends on the total energy input (due to solar flux, infrared flux, and con-
ductive heat, AαsΦs + AαIRΦIR + qc) and the total energy radiated away from the surface
(AεIRσT).
Observatory materials that are in the sunlight must not heat up and radiate onto the
rest of the observatory. To accomplish this, materials with low solar absorption and high-
infrared emissivity are used; the ratio of α/ε is low. Most sunlight is reflected by these mate-
rials. The little that is absorbed will be reemitted as infrared energy. Examples of materials
with low α/ε include dielectric films on polished metals, white paints, and second-surface
mirrors.
Radiators are designed to radiate heat from the observatory out into deep space. The heat
dissipated by a radiator can be written as
qr = εAσT,
(9.14)
where A is the area of the radiator, T is the temperature of the radiator, and σ is the Stephan-
Boltzmann constant (5.67⋅10−W/(mK)). To transfer heat efficiently, materials with high-
infrared emissivity are chosen. At cryogenic temperatures, very large radiator areas are needed
to dissipate even small amounts of power (Rohsenow et al. 1998). Often, radiators consist of
coated metallic honeycomb structures.
To prevent radiative heat transfer to an object inside the observatory shroud, materials with
low α and ε are used (radiative insulators). MLI accomplishes this by using low α/ε materials
in the outer layer, followed by layers with low emissivity that prevent infrared radiation from
reaching the objects behind the MLI. Thin polymer meshes are used between layers to prevent
conductive heat transfer.

422 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
8.3 HST Thermal Design
Since HST observes in the ultraviolet and visible, the structure of the observatory can operate
at room temperature without generating significant background in those wavelength regimes.
To reach a stable temperature of about 290 K (20○C), most components in HST are passively
cooled to below room temperatureutilizing MLI blankets, thermal control coatings, and design
to control conductive heat transfer. Heaters are then used to raise each component’s temperature
to the desired level (Goddard Space Flight Center 1993).
The primary mirror carries heaters to stabilize the temperature of the mirror at about 289 K
(16○C). The central baffle of the system is colder (267 K or −6○C) and could cause radial ther-
mal gradients in the primary mirror that could distort the shape of the mirror. MLI layers and
heaters at the inner diameter of the primary mirror prevent such gradients. MLI blankets also
protect the primary from the aft shroud temperature variations.
The secondary mirror is also actively heated. The main baffle, central baffle, and secondary
baffles (shown in >Fig. 9-12) are all passively cooled. All baffles facing the secondary use low-
emittance materials or MLI to prevent them from thermally radiating onto the secondary.
A graphite-epoxy truss called the “Metering Truss” holds the secondary and primary
mirrors in alignment and is carefully designed to minimize bending in the structure with tem-
perature. The temperature of the truss is passively controlled; each leg is enclosed in MLI. (The
truss length has changed slowly over time following an exponential decay pattern that suggests
an outgassing process. The secondary mirror has been adjusted to compensate (Lallo 2012).)
On the side of HST that carries the aperture door (which is usually in direct sunlight), the
external surfaces are covered with MLI blankets which have an outer layer of aluminum or silver
Teflon Flexible Optical Solar Reflector (FOSR), followed by many layers of aluminized Kapton,
and an inner layer of a dark material for stray light control, as sketched in > Fig. 9-39. The
side of the observatory that is opposite the aperture door is usually not in direct sunlight, but
the infrared load from the Earth passes across it periodically. That side of the external shell is
covered with MLI (without the FOSR) with an emittance of 0.01 so that it does not absorb the
Earth’s IR load.
Heaters are used to bring the instruments up to room temperaturefrom the cooler tempera-
ture ofthe aft shroud. Most ofthe instrument’s detectors, though, are cooled with thermoelectric
coolers to suppress detector noise sources. The detectors in the NICMOS instrument are cooled
with a cryocooler, and the ACS, STIS, and WFC3 CCDs are cooled by thermoelectric coolers.
A 6-stage TEC stack, shunted to a radiator via a set of single-stage TECs run in parallel, cools
the WFC3 IR detector to 145 K.
Problematically, the aft shroud on HST was found to be warming at a rate of about 1.2 K
per year. Engineers speculated that this was due to degradation of the aluminum FOSR in the
orbital environment. If temperatures in the shroud rise above the operating temperatures of the
instruments, thermal control of the instruments can be lost (Hopkins et al. 2002). An aft shroud
cooling system was installed in the third servicing mission in order to correct the problem.
Solar arrays generate large amounts of heat, and for missions in LEO, they undergo rapid
temperature changes due to the day-night cycle. To combat this, HST’s arrays are connected
to the forward shell with rods of insulating materials (see >Fig. 9-11). The aluminized Teflon
FOSR that encloses the forward shroud protects against radiative transfer from the solar arrays
to the telescope.The first generation of solar arrays on HST produced large amounts of mechan-
ical jitter caused by thermal stresses induced by the day-to-night temperature swings. The jitter
typically caused the FGSs to lose lock on the guide stars, which caused an interruption to

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
423
⊡Fig. 9-39
Materials in the outer enclosure of the Hubble Space Telescope are designed to control the tem-
perature of the telescope as it passes in and out of view of the Sun and as the thermal load from
the Earth rotates about the outer shell. The aperture door, black paints, and baﬄes are present to
help control stray light (After Lockheed Missiles and Space Company 1985)
the science exposures, resulting in degraded data quality and observatory efficiency. A second
generation of stiffer arrays was installed to correct the problem.
The focus of HST’s telescope varies with time, and an example is shown below in >Fig. 9-40
(Lallo 2012). The data correlate with temperature changes in the vicinityofthe secondarymirror
support structure caused by radiative loads. Temperature changes in the telescope are largely
driven by moving in and out of the shadow of the Earth, changes in the angle of the Sun with
respect to the telescope, and the infrared load from the Earth when the telescope pointing is
such that it looks directly at the Earth for part of every orbit.
8.4 SST Thermal Design
SST pioneered the use of passive cooling for infrared space telescopes. SST was initially envi-
sioned as an actively cooled telescope in low Earth orbit. After cost constraints forced a descope
of the mission, the new, smaller launch vehicle meant that the mass and volume of the mission
had to be cut by more than 50%. The resulting thermal design was driven by several goals:
•
Reduce the cryogen amount in order to fit into the mass and volume dictated by the launch
vehicle
•
Cool the instruments sufficiently to operate in a background-limited condition out to
wavelengths of 180 µm
•
Provide adequate cryogen to achieve a 2.5-year mission lifetime
To accomplish these challenging goals, the basic thermal design was changed to include a
passively cooled telescope attached to a cryogen tank that actively cooled the instruments to
1.25 K. The vented superfluid helium was used to further cool the telescope to its operational
temperature of 4–10 K once it was in orbit. The design was revolutionary; previous infrared
missions actively cooled both the telescope and the instruments (Davies 2006). The change to a

424 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
⊡Fig. 9-40
A typical change in focus over an HST orbit is seen here to be ∼3 µm of secondary mirror motion
or ∼18 nm RMS wavefront error. Round gray points are measurements of a single PSF in individ-
ual exposures taken with the Advanced Camera for Surveys’ High-Resolution Channel. The black
triangular points are values from an empirical model (Lallo 2012)
passively cooled telescope allowed the telescope to launch while warm and drastically reduced
the amount of cryogen needed for the mission since only the instruments were actively cooled.
A schematic of the SST observatory is shown in >Fig. 9-14. The “Outer Shell” section of
the observatory is passively cooled to 40 K. On the space-facing side of the outer shell, a high-
emissivity material is used to radiate heat into deep space. On the Sun-facing side of the outer
shell, the solar panel blocks direct solar flux onto the shell and telescope, and the outer shell is
polished aluminum. The choice of a drift-away orbit eliminates the Earth as a source of emitted
thermal and reflected solar radiation. A radiatively cooled panel with low emissivity (labeled
“Solar Panel Shield” in the figure) protects the outer shell from the warm solar panel (Lee et al.
1998).
The CTA (telescope, instrument, and cryostat assembly) is mechanically mounted to the
spacecraft using low-conductivity struts for thermal isolation. A radiatively cooled panel shields
the outer shell of the CTA from the spacecraft, which operates at room temperature.
The instrument chamber is mounted to the 360-L helium tank, which provides a 1.4-K heat
sink for the science instruments. The instruments comprise the majority of the 6-mW heat load
on the cryogen. The cryogen determines the science mission lifetime, so everything possible
was done to prevent unintended heat loads on the cryogen. The tank is enclosed in two vapor-
cooled shields, 45 layers of MLI, and an external guard vacuum shell. The helium gas vented
from the tank is routed along the cryostat’s shields, the vacuum shell, and the outer shell of the

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
425
CTA. This additional cooling brings the outer shell and the Telescope temperatures down to the
final operational temperature of 4–10 K. It also prevents the outer shell from placing additional
heat load on the cryogen.
8.5 JWST Thermal Design
JWST is designed to be passively cooled to approximately 40 K, including the instrument detec-
tors, primarilybecause both the telescope and instruments were physicallytoolarge tobe cooled
with cryogens or cryocoolers. Since no cryogens will be onboard, the maximum lifetime of
JWST is set by the propellant used to conduct orbital maintenance maneuvers. The fully passive
design requires highly accurate thermal models; if a cryogen-cooled system runs warmer than
planned, the lifetime of the mission is shortened, but if a passively cooled system runs warmer
than planned, the entire mission could be compromised due to increased detector noise.
JWST’s thermal design relies on a multilayer sunshield to separate the warm components
in the observatory (the spacecraft and the solar array) from the cold components (the telescope
and instruments) as sketched in >Fig. 9-41. The telescope and the instruments are always in the
shade of the sunshield and are not enclosed in an outer shroud. The sunshield reduces 200 kW
of incident solar radiation to milliWatts of radiation incident on the telescope and instruments
(Gardner et al. 2006). The outer layers use a material with a low α/ε, and inner layers provide a
low-ε material to prevent radiative heat transfer.
On the warm side of the observatory, much of the spacecraft bus is covered with MLI. Radi-
ator panels keep the bus from overheating, and shades over the panels keep Sunlight away from
the radiators.
On the cold side of the observatory, a deployed tower moves the telescope and instruments
away from the warm side of the observatory. This is mainly so that the primary and secondary
⊡Fig. 9-41
A sketch of JWST showing relevant thermal control components (NASA 2009, labels added)

426 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
mirrors “see” less of the sunshield. The primary, secondary, and secondary struts all cool pas-
sively. The tertiary and FSM in the Aft Optics Subsystem are cooled using radiators mounted
onto the structure.
The instruments and detectors in the ISIM compartment produce about 300 mW of heat,
which is radiated away using more than 8 mof radiator panels located behind the primary
mirror (Parrish 2004). The MIRI instrument, which will observe in wavelengths out to 28 µm,
is cooled to its operational temperature of 5–7 K using a cryocooler. It is the only instrument
that is actively cooled.
A warm electronics box is also located on the “cold” side of the observatory, underneath the
instrument compartment. It operates at 300 K and has dedicated radiators and baffles to prevent
the heat from radiating onto the cold components.
8.6 The Future in Thermal Designs
Cryogens severely limit mission lifetime and are a significant fraction of the mass and volume
for any mission. Future NIR missions will likely continue to avoid the use of cryogens. It is
difficult to passively cool to temperatures below about 40 K, though, so far-infrared missions
will continue to require active cooling systems.
Fully passive cooling strains current thermal design and modeling capabilities. As obser-
vatories get larger, it is increasingly difficult to create thermal chambers that can hold the
full observatory and recreate on orbit conditions, so ground testing of on orbit thermal envi-
ronments will not be possible. To accurately predict on orbit temperatures and background
levels, future passively cooled systems will require improvements in thermal modeling capa-
bilities, as well as extremely careful thermal designs in which every interface in the system
is designed to be both functional and have known thermal properties. Future observatories
could be designed to compensate for structural changes due to thermal uncertainties through
the more extensive use of continuous active and adaptive control of the optical alignment as
described in >Table 9-10. With a fully active and adjustable telescope, ground testing could be
limited to validation (through detailed modeling or the testing of smaller subsystems) that the
telescope can be assembled or deployed to within the capture range of the onboard alignment
system.
9
Conclusion
Space telescopes have made, and will continue to make, fundamental discoveries about the
physical nature of the cosmos. Space telescopes can produce diffraction-limited images of very
faint objects at any wavelength and over wide fields of view. They are free from the atmospheric
extinction, high background levels, and the atmospheric turbulence that limit ground-based
observations. Although space telescopes are currently limited to smaller aperture sizes, they can
still achieve higher spatial resolutions and sensitivities than their ground-based counterparts.
HST, SST, and other current space telescopes have demonstrated that the ability to hold a
large optical system on target and in focus for extended exposure times is now readily achievable
from free-flying space observatories. JWST is the next step in the evolution of space telescope

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
427
technology – a large segmented primary mirror with integrated wavefront sensing and control
systems.
The search for biosignature around nearby stars and the future demands of observational
astrophysics will drive the need to find ways to cost-effectively build, launch, and operate
optical and infrared telescopes that are even larger than JWST. To realize future large space
telescopes such as the 10-m ATLAST mission will take all the approaches described and push
the technologies and techniques one (or two) steps further. To keep the launch mass and vol-
ume within reasonable bounds, lightweight optics and structures will be required, which in
turn will require high-bandwidth active mirror control to carry out on orbit alignment and
possibly high-bandwidth adaptive control of the optical surfaces to reach the diffraction limit
in optical and UV wavelengths. Integrating and testing such large telescopes becomes increas-
ingly difficult as the limits of ground test equipment and thermal chambers that can recreate on
orbit conditions are reached. More sophisticated designs and models (optical, mechanical, and
thermal) of the entire observatory system will be required. In addition, higher data storage and
downlink bandwidths will be needed for the larger detector arrays of future missions. Advances
in heavy lift launch capability will need to be monitored and factored into observatory design
as well.
While costly, the scientific impact of space observatories is substantial. Space telescopes
working in conjunction with major ground-based telescopes have revolutionized our under-
standing of star and galaxy formation, of the nature of the universe, and have begun to address
the question of whetherthere are other Earth-like planets around other stars. The future genera-
tion of space observatories will extend this scientific inquiry to the earliest epoch when the very
first stars formed and will, ultimately, allow us to answer the question “Is there life elsewhere in
the Galaxy?”
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank many people that contributed greatly to this effort. Jill Lagerstrom
provided invaluable help with the research, reference formats, and measurements of observa-
tory papers and citations. Amy Gonigam and Elizabeth Fraser in the STScI library found every
book and article that we could possibly have needed. George Hartig and Matt Lallo are reser-
voirs of HST program, hardware, and operation knowledge and also reviewed the chapter. Carl
Biagetti kindly reviewed the chapter, and Remi Soummer reviewed the high-contrast imaging
section. Chris Long and Tom Wheeler shared their highly detailed knowledge of HST’s hard-
ware. Roeland van der Marel wisely directed us to Bely’s excellent book. Ed Nelan answered
many pointing and tracking questions and expertly reviewed the section for us. Scott Fried-
man answered several general astronomy questions. Elizabeth Barker helped find reasonable
assumptions for detector noise levels. Carol Christian provided current information on the
Davidson metric. Tracy Beck and Marianne Takamiya (University of Hawai’i Hilo) provided
information on Gemini’s seeing and background. Erick Young (SOFIA Science Center, Ames
Research Center) graciously answered SST questions and reviewed the chapter. Conrad Schiff
(GSFC) answered orbital questions. Randy Frank (BATC) was a valuable resource on thermal
designs. Paul Lightsey (BATC) chatted with us about design choices for both HST and JWST.
Chuck Bowers (GSFC) helpfully tracked down several JWST details for us. David Content
(GSFC) and Robert Egerman (ITT) provided information on corrugated mirror technology.

428 9
Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR)
References
Apai, D., Lagerstrom, J. P., Reid, I. N., et al. 2010,
PASP, 122, 808
Bahcall,
J.
N.,
&
Soneira,
R. M.
1984,
ApJS,
55, 67
Balzano, V., Isaacs, J. C., & Nelan, E. P. 2008, Proc.
SPIE, 7016, 70161X
Bate, R. R., Mueller, D. D., & White, J. E. 1971,
Fundamentals of Astrodynamics (New York:
Dover)
Bely, P. Y. 2003, The Design and Construction of
Large Optical Telescopes (New York: Springer)
Casani, J., et al. 2010a, JWST Test Assessment Team
(TAT) Final Report. http://www.jwst.nasa.gov/re
sources/JWST_TAT_Final_Report_100907.pdf
Casani,
J.,
et
al.
2010b,
JWST
Independent
Comprehensive
Review
Panel
(ICRP)
Final
Report. http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/499224main_
JWST-ICRP_Report-FINAL.pdf
Cash, W., Kendrick, S., Noecker, C., et al. 2009, Proc.
SPIE, 7436, 743606
Chaney, D. M., Hadaway, J. B., Lewis, J., Gallagher, B.,
& Brown, B. 2011, Proc. SPIE, 8150, 815008
Christian, C. A., & Davidson, G. 2006, in ASSL
335, Organizations and Strategies in Astronomy
Vol. 6, ed. A. Heck (New York: Springer), 145
Clampin, M. 2011, Overview of the James Webb
Space Telescope Observatory. Proc. SPIE, 8146,
814605
Davies, J. K. 1997, Astronomy from Space: The
Design and Operation of Orbiting Observatories
(New York: Wiley)
Davies, J. K. 2006, The Space Review. http://www.
thespacereview.com/article/688/1
Den Hartog, J. P. 1961, Mechanics (New York: Dover)
Donabedian, M. 2003, Spacecraft Thermal Control
Handbook, Volume 2: Cryogenics (El Segundo:
Aerospace Press)
Doxsey, R. E. 2006, Proc. SPIE, 6270, 627006
Egerman, R., De Smitt, S., & Strafford, D., 2010, Low-
weight, low-cost, low-cycle time replicated glass
mirrors. Proc. SPIE, 7739, 77390G
Elachi, C., 1987, Introduction to Physics and Tech-
niques of Remote Sensing (New York: Wiley)
Gallagher, D. B., Irace, W. R., & Werner, M. W. 2003,
Proc. SPIE, 4850, 17
Gardner, J. P., Mather, J. C., Clampin, M., et al. 2006,
SpaceSciRev, 123, 485
Gerchberg, R. W., & Saxton, W. O. 1972, Optik,
35, 237
Gehrz, R. D., Roellig, T. L., Werner, M. W., et al. 2007,
Rev. Sci. Instrum., 78, 011302
Giacconi, R. 2008, Secrets of the Hoary Deep (Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press)
Gillet, F. C., & Mountain, M. 1998, in ASP Conf. Ser.
133, Science with the NGST (Next Generation
Space Telescope), eds. E. P. Smith & A. Koratkur
(San Francisco: ASP), 42
Gilmore, D. G. 2002, Spacecraft Thermal Control
Handbook, Volume 1: Fundamental Technolo-
gies (El Segundo: Aerospace Press)
Goddard Space Flight Center 1993, OTA/FGS Ther-
mal Control System Description and Operating
Manual (Greenbelt: NASA GSFC)
Goddard Space Flight Center 2010, On-Orbit Satel-
lite Servicing Study: Project Report (Greenbelt:
NASA GSFC)
Guyon, O. 2005, ApJ, 629, 592
Hickey, G., Barbee, T., Ealey, M., & Redding, D. 2010,
Proc. SPIE, 7731, 773120
Hopkins, R. A., Schweickart, R. B., Finley, P. T. &
Volz, S. M. 2002, Proc. SPIE, 4850, 42
Kasdin, N. J., Cady, E. J., Dumont, P. J., et al. 2009,
Proc. SPIE, 7440, 744005
Kasting, J., Traub, W., Roberge, A., et al. 2009,
arXiv:0911.2936v1
Koch, D. G., Borucki, W. J., Basri, G., et al. 2010, ApJ,
713, L79
Krist, J. E., & Burrows, C. J. 1995, Appl. Opt., 34, 4951
Lallo, M. 2012, Experience with the Hubble Space
Telescope: 20 years of an archetype. Opt. Eng, 51,
011011
Lawson, P. R., Traub, W. A., & Unwin, S. C. 2009, Exo-
planet Community Report, JPL Publication 09-3
(Pasadena: Jet Propulsion Laboratory)
Lee, J. H., Blalock, W., Brown, R. J., Volz, S. M.,
Yarnell, T., & Hopkins, R. A. 1998, Proc. SPIE,
3435, 172
Lester, D. F., Benford, D. J., Blain, A., et al. 2004, Proc.
SPIE, 5487, 1507
Lightsey, P., Atkinson, C., Clampin, M., & Feinberg,
L. 2012, James Webb Space Telescope: large
deployable cryogenic telescope in space. Opt.
Eng, 51, 011003
Lo, A. S., Glassman, R., Dailey, D., et al. 2010, Proc.
SPIE, 7731, 77312E
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, 1985, Space
Telescope
Systems
Description
Handbook,
ST/SE-02
(Sunnyvale:
Lockheed
Missiles
&
Space Company)
Mainzer, A. K., & Young, E. T. 2004, Proc. SPIE, 5487,
93
Matthews, G., Barrett, D., Bolton, J., et al. 2003, Proc.
SPIE, 5180, 169
Mountain, M., van der Marel, R., Soummer, R. et al.
2009, arXiv:0909.4503v1
Nakagawa, T. 2008, Proc. SPIE, 7010, 70100H

Space Telescopes in the Ultraviolet, Optical, and Infrared (UV/O/IR) 9
429
Oke, J. B. 1974, ApJS, 27, 21
Oswald, H. W., Siegmund, B. Y., Welsh, C. M., et al.
2004, Proc. SPIE, 5488, 13
Parrish, K. 2004, in From Spitzer to Herschel and
Beyond: The Future of Far-Infrared Space Astro-
physics Conference (Pasadena). http://safir.jpl.
nasa.gov/BeyondSpitzerConf/index.shtml
Pilbratt, G. L. 2008, Proc. SPIE, 7010
Postman, M. 2009, arXiv:0904.0941v2
Prussing, J. E., & Conaway, B. A. 1993, Orbital
Mechanics (New York: Oxford University Press)
Ramsay, S. K., Mountain, C. M., & Geballe, T. R. 1992,
MNRAS, 259, 751
Rohsenow, W. M., Hartnett, J. P., & Cho, Y. I. 1998,
Handbook of Heat Transfer (3rd ed.; New York:
McGraw-Hill)
Sabelhaus, P. A., Campbell, D., Clampin, M., et al.
2005, Proc. SPIE, 5899, 58990P
Sato, et al. 2010, Conceptual design of a cryogenic
system for the next-generation infrared space
telescope SPICA. Proc. SPIE, 7731
Schroeder, D. J. 1987, Astronomical Optics (San
Diego: Academic)
Space Telescope Science Institute 2010, FGS Instru-
ment
Handbook
for
Cycle
19
(Baltimore:
STScI).
http://www.stsci.edu/hst/fgs/design/
hst/fgs/documents/instrumenthandbook/
Space Telescope
Science
Institute
2011, Hubble
Space Telescope Primer for Cycle 19 (Baltimore:
STScI).
http://www.stsci.edu/hst/proposing/
documents/primer/
Spitzer Science Center, 2011, Spitzer Space Tele-
scope Handbook, Version 2.0 (Pasadena: SSC).
http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/SPITZER/docs/
spitzermission/missionoverview/spitzertelescop
ehandbook/home/
Stahl, H. P. 2010, Opt. Eng., 49, 053005
Strafford, D. N., DeSmitt, S. M., Kupinski, P. T., &
Sebring, T. A. 2006, Proc. SPIE, 6273, 62730R
Thomson, W. T. 1986, Introduction to Space Dynam-
ics (New York: Dover)
Thronson, H., Lester, D., Watson, J., & Moe, R. 2005,
in Report of the Space Resources Roundtable VII
(Houston, TX: Lunar and Planetary Institute),
104
Trauger, J. T., & Traub, W. A. 2007, Nature, 446, 771


10
CMB Telescopes and Optical
Systems
Shaul Hanany⋅Michael D. Niemack,⋅Lyman Page
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA
National Institute of Standards and Technology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
Physics Department, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 432
1.1
Celestial Emission at CMB Frequencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 433
1.2
Instrument Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434
1.3
Throughput and Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 437
1.4
Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 439
1.5
Polarization Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 440
2
Ground- and Balloon-Based Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 442
2.1
General Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 443
2.2
Balloon- Versus Ground-Based Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 448
2.3
Arrays of Detectors and Increases in DLFOV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 450
2.4
Refractor-Based Optical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 452
2.5
Reflector-Based Optical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 453
2.6
Polarization Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 455
3
Large Ground-Based Telescopes, ACT and SPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 459
3.1
Detailed Optical System Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 459
3.2
ACTPol and SPTPol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 465
4
Interferometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 465
5
The CMB Satellites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 467
5.1
Relikt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 469
5.2
COBE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 470
5.3
WMAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 472
5.4
Planck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 474
5.5
A Future Satellite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 476
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 476
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 476
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_10, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

432 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
Abstract:
The cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB) is now firmly established as
a fundamental and essential probe of the geometry, constituents, and birth of the observable
universe. The CMB is a potent observable because it can be measured with precision and accu-
racy. Just as importantly, theoretical modelsof the universe can predict the characteristics of the
CMB to high accuracy, and those predictions can be directly compared to observations. There
are multiple aspects associatedwith making a precise measurement.In this chapter, we focus on
optical components for the instrumentation used to measure the CMB polarization and temper-
ature anisotropy. We begin with an overview of general considerations for CMB observations
and discuss common concepts used in the community. We next consider a variety of alterna-
tives available for a designer of a CMB telescope. Our discussion is guided by the ground- and
balloon-based instruments that have been implemented over the years. In the same vein, we
compare the arc-minute resolution Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) and the South Pole
Telescope (SPT). CMB interferometers are presented briefly. We conclude with a comparison
of the four CMB satellites, Relikt, COBE, WMAP, and Planck, to demonstrate a remarkable
evolution in design, sensitivity, resolution, and complexity over the past 30 years.
Keywords: CMB, Telescopes
1
Introduction
The tremendous scientific payoff from studies of the cosmic microwave background radiation
(CMB) has driven researchers to develop new detectors and new detection techniques. For
the most part, CMB measurements have been made with dedicated instruments in which the
optical elements are designed specifically to mate with the detectors (rather than in facility-
type telescopes). The instruments run the gamut of radio- and mm-wave detection techniques:
heterodyne receivers, direct power receivers, correlation receivers, interferometers, Fourier
transform spectrometers, and single- and multimode bolometric receivers. The quest for ever
more sensitive measurements of the CMB, including its polarization, has led to the develop-
ment of arrays of hundreds to thousands of detectors, some of which are polarization sensitive.
These arrays are coupled to unique, large-throughput optical systems. In this article, we will
focus primarily on optical systems for instruments that are used to measure the temperature
anisotropy and polarization of the CMB. In other words, instruments that are designed to mea-
sure only the temperature difference or polarization as a function of angle on the sky. We refer
the reader to the chapter by Mather et al. (2012) in these volumes for more information about
other aspects of the CMB.
Before explicitly discussing the optical systems, we introduce in this section the celestial
emission spectrum at CMB frequencies, discuss how the instrument resolution is determined,
and present the angular power spectrum. We then introduce the concepts of throughput and
modes and end with a discussion of the limits imposed by system noise because it is one of
the driving considerations for any optical design. In >Sect. 2, we review the various choices
available for a CMB optics designer and the main optical systems that have been used to date.
We also discuss more recent developments with the introduction of large focal plane arrays
and the efforts to characterize the polarization of the CMB. The ACT and SPT instruments are
the highest resolution telescopes dedicated to CMB measurements to date. They are also good
examples for the state-of-the-art in CMB optical design at the time of their design, mid-decade
2000. They are described and compared in >Sect. 3. CMB interferometers are briefly presented
in >Sect. 4, and the optical systems of the four CMB satellites to date are reviewed in >Sect. 5.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
433
102
102
103
CMB
Atm at SP/Chile
Synchrotron
Free-free
Spinning dust
Thermal dust
Atm at 36 km
Frequency (GHz)
101
101
100
100
10−1
10−2
10−3
Antenna Temperature (K)
⊡Fig. 10-1
Sources of sky emission between 1 and 1000 GHz for a region of sky near a galactic latitude
of roughly 20○. The ﬂat part of the CMB below ∼30 GHz is called the Rayleigh-Jeans portion. A
Rayleigh-Jeans source with frequency-independent emissivity would be indicated by a horizon-
tal line on this plot. The synchrotron emission is from cosmic rays orbiting in galactic magnetic
ﬁelds and is polarized. Free-free emission is due to “breaking radiation” from galactic electrons
and is not polarized. The amplitude of the spinning dust is not well known. This particular spinning
model comes from Ali-Haïmoud et al. (2009). The standard spinning dust emission is not apprecia-
bly polarized. Thermal emission from dust grains, which is more intense than the CMB above ∼700
GHz, is partially polarized. The atmospheric models are based on the ATM code (Pardo et al. 2001);
they use the US standard atmosphere and are for a zenith angle of 45○. The Atacama/South Pole
spectrum is based on a precipitable water vapor of 0.5 mm. The diﬀerence between the two sites
is inconsequential for this plot. The atmospheric spectra have been averaged over a 20% band-
width. The pair of lines at 60 and 120 GHz are the oxygen doublet. The lines at 19 and 180 GHz are
vibrational water lines. The ﬁner scale features are from ozone
1.1 Celestial Emission at CMB Frequencies
>Figure 10-1 shows the antenna temperature of the sky from 1 to 1,000 GHz for a region at a
galactic latitude of roughly 20○. Ignoring emission from the atmosphere, synchrotron emission
dominates celestial emission at the low frequency end and dust emission dominates at high
frequencies. These galactic emission components may be different by an order of magnitude
depending on galactic longitude. The CMB radiation dominatesemission between about 20 and
500 GHz. The experimental challenge is, however, to measure spatial fluctuations in the CMB
at parts in or of the level, a couple of orders of magnitude below the bottom of the plot.
The polarization signals are lower than the temperature anisotropy by a factor of 10, and they
too beckon to be measured to percent-level precision. The instrumental passbands, typically

434 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
20–30%, are chosen to avoid atmospheric emission lines or to help identify and subtract the
foreground emission.
The basic picture in > Fig. 10-1 has remained the same for over 30 years (Weiss 1980),
though over the past decade there has been increasing evidence for a new component of celes-
tial emission in the 30 GHz region (e.g., Kogut et al. 1996; de Oliveira-Costa et al. 1997; Leitch
et al. 1997). This new component is spatially correlated with dust emission and has been iden-
tified with emission by tiny grains of dust that are spun up to GHz rotation rates; hence,
it has been dubbed “spinning dust.” A variety of mechanisms have been proposed for spin-
ning up the grains (Draine and Lazarian 1998, 1999). Still, though, it is not clear that the
source is predominantly spinning dust. Understanding this emission source is an active area
of investigation.
1.2 Instrument Resolution
The resolution of a CMB telescope is easiest to think about in the time reversed sense. We imag-
ine that a detector elementemits radiation. The optical elementsin the receiver direct that beam
to the sky or onto the primary reflector. The size of the beam at the primary optic determines
the resolution of the instrument. Such a primary optic can be a feedhorn that launches a beam
to the sky, a lens, or a primary reflector. The connection between the spatial size of the beam
at the primary optic and the resolution can be understood through the Fraunhofer’s diffraction
relation (e.g., Born and Wolf 1980; Hecht 1987),
ψ(θ) ∝∫apt ψa(r)ekr sin θ cos ϕrdrdϕ,
(10.1)
where ψa(r) is the scalar electric field (e.g., one component of the electric field) in the aperture
or on the primary optic, ψ(θ) is the angular distribution of the scalar electric field in the far
field (d >> D/λ), and k = π/λ. The integral is over the primary reflector or, more generally,
the aperture. For simplicity, we have taken the case of cylindrically symmetric illumination
with coordinates r and ϕ for a circular aperture of diameter D, although a generalization is
straightforward. The normalized beam profile is then given by B(θ) = ∣ψ(θ)∣/∣ψ()∣. That is,
if the telescope scanned over a point source very far away, the output of the detector as measured
in power would have this profile as a function of scan angle θ. >Equation 10.1 gives an excellent
and sometimes sufficient estimate of the far field beam profile.
To be more specific, let us assume that the aperture distribution has a Gaussian profile so
that the integrals are simple. That is, ψa(r) = ψe−r/σ
r . We also assume that ψa is negligible
at r ≥D/so that we can let the limit of integration go to infinity. This is the “large edge taper”
limit. In reality, no aperture distribution can be Gaussian and some are quite far from it. The
integral evaluates to ψσ 
r e−σ
r ksin(θ)/. For small angles, θ ∼sin(θ), and we find from the
above that B(θ) = e−θ/σ
B where σB = λ/
√
πσr. In angular dimensions, the beam profile is
most often characterized by a full width at half maximum, or twice the angle at which B(θ) =
/. We denote this as θ/and find θ/=
√
ln()σB =
√
ln()λ/σrπ. We see the familiar
relation that the beam width is proportional to the wavelength and inversely proportional to
the size of the illumination pattern on the primary reflector with a prefactor that depends on
the geometry. For this far-field Gaussian profile, the beam solid angle is ΩB = ∫BdΩ = πσ 
B.
The natural “observable” for anisotropy measurements is the angular power spectrum for
the following reason. When the distribution of the amplitudes of the fluctuations is Gaussian,
as it apparently is for the primary CMB, all information about the sky is contained in the power

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
435
⊡Fig. 10-2
Current best published measurements of the CMB temperature power spectrum (data points,
Komatsu et al. 2011; Shirokoﬀet al. 2011; Das et al. 2011; Keisler et al. 2011) and a ΛCDM cosmo-
logical model (solid red, up to ℓ= 3,000). The model power spectrum for ℓ> 3,000 is due Poisson
noise from confusion-limited dusty star-forming galaxies (DSFGs) at 150 GHz. The x-axis is scaled
as ℓ0.45 to emphasize the middle part of the anisotropy spectrum. Gaussian approximations to the
window functions are shown for COBE (7○), WMAP (12′), Planck (5′), ACT (1.4′, Swetz et al. 2011),
and SPT (1.1′, Schaﬀer et al. 2011). The large size of the WMAP error bars near ℓ= 2 and 1,000 are
due to “cosmic variance”and ﬁnite beam resolution, respectively
spectrum. If there are correlations in the signal, for example, if the cooler areas had a larger spa-
tial extent than the warmer areas or discrete sources of emission were clustered together, then
higher-order statistics would be needed to fully describe the sky. Even in this case, the power
spectrum is the best first-look analytic tool for assessingthe sky. Searches for “non-Gaussianity”
are an active area of research. While there are many possible sources of non-Gaussianity, the
primary CMB anisotropy appears to be Gaussian to the limits of current measurements (e.g.,
Komatsu et al. 2011). A snapshot of the latest measurements of the power spectrum is shown
in >Fig. 10-2.
The instrument resolution as expressed in the power spectrum is obtained from the Leg-
endre transform of B(θ). To appreciate this, we take a step back and describe the connection
between the observable, that is, the angular power spectrum and the antenna pattern of the
instrument. Because the CMB covers the full sky, it is most usefully expressed as an expansion
in spherical harmonics. The monopole term (ℓ= ) has been determined by COBE/FIRAS

436 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
to be TCMB = .± .K (Fixsen and Mather 2002; plotted in > Fig. 10-1). The dipole
term (ℓ= ) is dominated by the peculiar velocity of the solar system with respect to the cosmic
reference frame. As we are primarily concerned with cosmological fluctuations, we omit these
terms from the expansion and we write the fluctuations as
δT(θ, ϕ) =
∑
ℓ≥,−ℓ≤m≤ℓ
aℓmY m
l (θ, ϕ).
(10.2)
To the limits of measurement, the CMB fluctuations appear to be statistically isotropic
(e.g., Basak et al. 2006): they are the same in all directions and thus have no preferred m
dependence. The overall variance of the CMB fluctuations is then given by
< δT(θ, ϕ) >= ∑
ℓ≥
ℓ+ 
π
< ∣aℓm∣>= ∑
ℓ≥
ℓ+ 
ℓ(ℓ+ )
ℓ(ℓ+ )
π
Cℓ≡∑
ℓ≥
ℓ+ 
ℓ(ℓ+ )Bℓ,
(10.3)
where the factor of ℓ+ comes from the sum of the m values, all of which have the same
variance, and the π comes from averaging over the full sky. Generally Cℓis called the power
spectrum, but in cosmology the term is just as frequently used for Bℓ. These quantities are
the primary point of contact between theory and measurements.Cosmological models provide
predictions for Cℓ; experiments measure temperatures on a patch of the sky and provide an
estimateof Cℓ. The quantity most often plotted is Bℓ.1 It is the fluctuation power per logarithmic
interval in ℓ. The x-axis of the power spectrum is the spherical harmonic index ℓ. As a rough
approximation, ℓ≈/θ with θ in degrees.
The process of measuring the CMB with a beam of finite size acts as a convolution of the
intrinsic signal (> 10.2) with the beam function, B(θ). The finite resolution averages over some
of the smaller angular scale fluctuations and thereby reduces the variance given in (> 10.3). By
Parseval’s theorem, a convolution in one space corresponds to a multiplication in the Fourier
transform space. In our case, because we are working on a sphere with symmetric beams,
Legendre transforms, as opposed to Fourier transforms, are applicable. We may think of the
square of the Legendre transform of B(θ), B
ℓ, as filtering the power spectrum. (There is one
power of B associated with one temperature map.) The transform of B(θ) is given by
Bℓ= π ∫B(θ)Pℓ(cos θ)d cos(θ) = Beℓ(ℓ+/)/σ
B,
(10.4)
where Pℓis a Legendre polynomial and Bis a normalization constant.
A Gaussian random field is fully described by the two-point correlation function, C(θ) (the
Legendre transform of the power spectrum), which gives the average variance of two pixels
separated by an angle. The variance given in (> 10.3) is the angular correlation function eval-
uated for zero angular separation between pixels. The general relation, including the effects of
measuring with a beam of finite resolution, is
Cmeas(θ) =< δTmeas(θ, ϕ)δTmeas(θ, ϕ) >= ∑
ℓ≥
ℓ+ 
π CℓPℓ(θ)Wℓ.
(10.5)
1The factor of ℓ(ℓ+ )/π (Bond and Efstathiou 1984), as opposed to the possibly more natural ℓ(ℓ+ )/π
(Peebles 1994), is derived from the observation that the cold dark matter model, without a cosmological con-
stant, approaches ℓ(ℓ+ ) at small ℓfor a scalar spectral index of unity. Needless to say, the model that gave
rise to the now-standard convention does not describe nature. Another choice would be (ℓ+ /)because the
wavevector k →ℓ+ /at high ℓ. There is not a widely agreed upon letter for the plotted power spectrum.
We use B for both “bandpower” and J. R. Bond who devised the convention. The term bandpower refers to
averaging the Bℓover a band in ℓ.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
437
Here, Wℓis the “window function.” In this expression, the angle θ goes between directions
“1” and “2.”2 The window function encodes the effects of the finite resolution. For a symmet-
ric beam, Wℓ= B
ℓ. >Figure 10-2 shows approximations to the window functions, assuming
Gaussian-shaped beams, for COBE, (θ/= ○), WMAP(θ/= ′), Planck(θ/= ′),
ACT(θ/= .′), and SPT(θ/= .′). One immediately sees the relation between the reso-
lution and how well one can determine the power spectrum. For example, COBE, which we
discuss in more detail below, was limited to large angular scales (low ℓ) because of its relatively
low angular resolution.
1.3 Throughput and Modes
One of the key characteristics for any optical system is the “throughput” or étendue (or
“A-Omega”) of the system. It is a measure of the total amount of radiation that an optical sys-
tem handles. Using Liouville’s theorem, which roughly states that the volume of phase space is
conserved for a freely evolving system, one can show that AΩ is conserved for photons as long
as there is no loss in the system. This means that at each plane of the system the integral of the
product of areal (dA) and angular distribution (dΩ) of the radiation is constant. For example,
let’s assume that the effective angular distribution of a beam launched from a primary optic of
radius r is a top hat in angular extent with an apex angle defined as θ/= θ, analogous to the
θ/definition for Gaussian distributions above. Then one obtains a throughput of
AΩ = πr(−cos θ) ≃
πDθ
/

,
(10.6)
where the approximation holds for sin θ≃θ. If the angular distribution is a Gaussian with
width σB (θ/=
√
lnσB), then
AΩ ≃πrσ 
B ≃
πDθ
/
ln 
≈
πDθ
/

.
(10.7)
Here, we also assume that σB is small, so that the integration over the angular pattern gives
appreciable contributions only for sin σB ≃σB. If the primary reflector has an effective diameter
of 1 m and the beam has θ/= .○, then the throughput is 0.04 cmsr (assuming (> 10.6)).
Let’s say this radiation is focused down to a feed with an effective collecting area of 1 cm.
Conservation of throughput implies that now θ/= ○. In other words, as you squeeze down
the area, the radiation has to go through by focussing or concentrating; the solid angle increases.
While AΩ is conserved for any lossless optical system, it has a specific value for a system that
supports only a “single mode” of propagating radiation:
AΩ = λ,
(10.8)
where λ is the wavelength of the radiation and A is the effective area of the aperture. We discuss
modes below. This relation, which may be derived from the Fraunhofer integral and conser-
vation of energy (as in Born and Wolf 1980; Sect. 8.3.3.), is a generalization of familiar results
from diffraction theory. For example, Airy’s famous expression that the angular diameter of the
2We follow common notation but note that in (> 10.2), θ is a coordinate on the sky; in (> 10.4), θ is the
angular measure of the beam profile with a θ = corresponding to the beam peak; and in (> 10.5), θ is the
angular separation between two pixels on the sky.

438 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
spot size from a uniformly illuminated aperture is .λ/D, where D is the aperture diameter,
is equivalent to (> 10.8).3 The relations above give a handy conversion between the system’s
effective aperture, the angular extent of the beam and the frequency of interest for single-mode
optical systems. Combining (> 10.7) and (> 10.8) we obtain
θ/,rad = .λ/D,
(10.9)
where D is the effective illumination on the primary reflector.
In the above treatment, we brought in the concept of a single propagating mode of radia-
tion. A mode is a particular spatial pattern of the electromagnetic field. Radiation propagation
in a rectangular waveguide of height a/and width a gives a familiar example. For frequencies
less than a cutoff, νc < c/a, no electromagnetic radiation can propagate down a waveguide of
length longer than a few λ. For c/a < νc <
√
/c/a, only the TEmode of radiation propa-
gates; at frequencies just above c/a,the TEand TEcan propagate. Above
√
/c/a,the TE,
TE, and TMmodes are free to propagate. With the geometry of a cylindrical waveguides of
diameter d, the lowest frequency mode is the TE(which supports two polarizations) with
a cutoff frequency νc = c/.d, and the next modes are TMand TEwhich turn on at
frequencies that are 1.31 and 1.66 higher, respectively, than the lowest.
Experimentally, the selection for operating in a single mode is typically achieved by hav-
ing a waveguide somewhere along the light path, typically at the entrance to the detecting
element.4 The waveguide is essentially a high-pass filter, selecting the lowest frequency that
can pass through the system. An additional low-pass filter then rejects frequencies at which
the second and higher modes are propagating. Experimenters have been using single modes
because these systems have particularly well-behaved and calculable beam patterns. If a sec-
ond mode were added, say by operating at a higher frequency so that both the TEand TM
propagated (for a cylindrical waveguide), one would receive more signal, an advantage, but the
beam pattern of the combination of modes would be different, likely more complex compared
to the single-mode illumination, and there would likely be increased spill over the edge of the
primary.
Consider a radio receiver that observes a diffuse Planckian source of temperature T through
a telescope. The surface brightness is given by
Sν(T) =
hν
c(ehν/kT −) →ν
ckT,
(10.10)
where h is Planck’s constant, k is Boltzmann’s constant, and Sν is measured in W/msrHz. The
expression on the right is the surface brightness in the Rayleigh-Jeans limit. The power that
makes it through to the detector is given by
P = 
∫Ω ∫ν є(ν, θ, ϕ)Ae(ν)Sν(θ, ϕ)B(ν, θ, ϕ)dΩdν,
(10.11)
where the factor of 1/2 comes from coupling to a single polarization, Ae is the effective area, and
є is the transmission efficiency of the instrument. For clarity of discussion, we will henceforth
3The Airy beam profile is given by B(θ) = [J(x)/x]where x = πD sin(θ)/λ and Jis a Bessel function. The
value of .λ/D is the angular separation between the maximum and the first null. For small angles, θ/=
.λ/D. The total solid angle is π ∫Bn(θ) sin(θ)dθ. To make the integral simple and avoid considering
the difference between projecting onto a plane versus a sphere, we consider the limit of small θ. Then, Ω =
λ/πD∫
∞

[J(πDx/λ)]x−dx = λ/A.
4In a close packed array, this may be approximated having the pixel size smaller than λ. Such a spatial mode
would support two polarizations.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
439
assume that the transmission efficiency is unity. If Sν is uniform across the sky, we are in the
Rayleigh-Jeans limit (hν << kT) and Ae and Bn are relatively independent of frequency over a
small bandwidth (commonly achieved), then
P = 
∫ν Ae(ν)ν
ckT ∫Ω B(ν, θ, ϕ)dΩdν = kT ∫ν
Ae(ν)Ω
λ
dν = kT ∫ν dν = kTΔν.
(10.12)
Thus, each mode of radiation delivers kTΔν of power to the detector. If there is a second mode
in the system that is supported in this bandwidth, then it also contributes kTΔν of power.
It is possible, even likely, that different modes are supported over different but overlapping
bandwidths.
Increasing the amount of celestial power on one’s detector is an advantage when trying to
detect a faint signal like the CMB. The trade-off is between control of the optical properties
of the system and collecting power onto the detector. Note that using a larger telescope does
not increase the detected power if one detects only a single mode. A larger telescope merely
increases the resolution. In a bolometric system, one can to a certain extent control the number
of modes that land on the detector. For example, one can place the absorbing area at the base
of a “light collector” or Winston cone (Welton and Winston 1978). An approximation to the
number of modes in the system is then found by beam mapping to determine ΩB, measuring
the pass-band to find the average wavelength λa, and dividing by the collecting area of the
input optics. This gives the number of modes as αm = AΩ/λ
a. This is only an approximation
because it assumes knowledge of the aperture distribution (for the collecting area) and that all
modes couple to the detector with the same efficiency. We use α because often this quantity
is not an integer. Although formally modes come in integer sets, not all modes couple equally
to the detector output. In the early days of CMB bolometry, mutimoded systems were often
used. As detectors became more sensitive, the field moved toward single-moded bolometric
systems as pioneered in the White Dish experiment (Tucker et al. 1993). This led to more precise
knowledge of the beams. To a good approximation, the current generation of bolometric CMB
instruments all operate single-moded (with the first mode of propagation). However, there are
modern examples ofmultimoded systems though theyare not used forthe primaryCMBbands.
They include the 345-GHz band on BOOMERANG (Jones 2005) and Planck’s 545- and 857-
GHz bands (Ade et al. 2010; Maffei et al. 2010) where there are just a few modes. In these cases,
the coupling of the radiation in the bolometer’s integrating cavity is in practice not possible
to compute accurately. Interest in multimoded systems has returned with at least one satellite
proposal for an instrument called PIXIE for measuring the CMB polarization in a massively
overmoded system (Kogut et al. 2011). The PIXIE concept is based on the observation that
the signal improves as the number of modes, nm, but the noise degrades only as √nm in the
photon-limited noise regime (see below). Thus, S/N improves as √nm.
1.4 Noise
The choice of an optical system and its location is intimately connected with the desired noise
performance. There are a number of contributing noise sources that depend on the type of
detector, how it is biased, and on its environment (see, e.g., Mather 1982; Pospieszalski 1992).
For this chapter, we concern ourselves primarily with the photon noise from the sky because
it sets the ultimate detection limit. We first consider bolometric or “direct” detectors which

440 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
detect the total power and destroy all phase information in the incident field. >Equation 10.13
gives the photon noise power on the detectors per mode (e.g., Zmuidzinas 2003) as
N (ν)τ =
Δν
η(ν)(kΔν)(hν)n(ν)[+ η(ν)n(ν)],
(10.13)
where τ is the integration time, Δν is the bandwidth, n(ν) is the occupation number (power in
a mode divided by hν), and η(ν) is the quantum efficiency which we take to be unity. We have
approximated integrals by multiplying by a bandwidth of Δν. Because each mode of radiation
delivers a power of kTΔν, one may convert from the Ws/to Ks/by dividing by kΔν. The
left-hand term in the expression is the Poisson term, and the right-hand term accounts for
the correlations between the arrival times of the photons. When there are multiple modes in
the system, one cannot simply assume that the above holds for each mode. One must take into
account the correlations between the photon noise in each mode(Lamarre 1986; Richards 1994;
Zmuidzinas 2003).
For coherent detector systems, one first amplifies the incident electric field while retain-
ing phase information. After multiple stages of amplification, mixing, etc. one at last records
the power in the signal. Because the amplitude and phase are measured simultaneously, and
these quantities do not commute, quantum mechanics sets a fundamental noise limit of N√τ =
hν/k
√
Δν. In practice, the best systems achieve three times the quantum limit over a limited
bandwidth and in ideal conditions. A good estimate of the noise limit is
N(ν)√τ = (hν/k) + Tsky
√
Δν
,
(10.14)
where Tsky is the antenna temperature of the incident radiation.
In >Fig. 10-3, we show the noise limit for a single-moded detector with 20% bandwidth at
a high-altitude ground-based site (e.g., the South Pole or the Atacama Desert) and at a typical
balloon altitude of 36 km. We also show the noise level for the current generation of detectors
on the Planck satellite. The quoted sensitivities for the bolometric detectors (Planck HFI Core
Team et al. 2011) (two polarizations combined and all noise terms in the high-frequency limit)
are adjusted uptoa 20% reference bandwidth. The quoted sensitivities forthe coherent detectors
(Mennella et al. 2011) (all noise terms in the high-frequency limit) have been adjusted down to
a 20% reference bandwidth.
Advances in bolometric detectors have reached the point where the intrinsic noise is near
the noise limit set by the photon noise at a high-altitude site. Thus, to improve sensitivity, one
wins more quickly by adding detectors as opposed to improving the detector noise. This is one
of the motivations behind large arrays of detectors, and their associated large fields of view. One
can also win by increasing the number of modes.
1.5 Polarization Terminology
There is a well-developed terminology for describing polarization. Imagine a telescope beam
that points at a single position on the sky and feeds a detector that can measure the amplitude
and phase of a partially coherent electric field. Because the electric field is a vector in a plane, it
can be completelyspecified by measuring its horizontal, Ex(t), and vertical, Ey(t), components
at each instant. To measure the intensity of the field, one averages the detector outputs over time.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
441
300
250
200
150
100
Single mode photon noise (mK s1/2)
50
100
101
Frequency (GHz)
Quantum limit
CMB noise
Coherent
(ground)
Bolometer
(ground)
Bolometer
(balloon)
102
103
⊡Fig. 10-3
Photon noise from 1 to 1,000GHz for a single mode of radiation for a 20% bandwidth in frequency.
The CMB noise (thick solid) is for a region of sky without any other foreground emission. It sets a
fundamental limit over most of this frequency range (the far infrared background, not shown, sets
the limit near 1 THz). Noise from atmosphere (Chile or South Pole, zenith angle of 45○) for bolome-
ters (dash dot) is lower than for coherent receivers (solid) except below ∼20 GHz. Bolometers on
balloon (dash dot) are limited by CMB noise between 80 and ∼200 GHz. The atmospheric noise
shown is due to thermal emission and does not include contributions from turbulence, changes in
column density, or water vapor, which can increase the noise many-fold. Also shown are reported
coherent receiver (square) and bolometer (star) noise for the Planck satellite, both adjusted as dis-
cussed in the text and both for total intensity. The Planck bolometers are close to the fundamental
noise limit
The polarization properties of the field, assuming they are relatively constant, are completely
specified with the coherency matrix:
( < ExE∗
x >
< ExE∗
y >
< EyE∗
x >
< EyE∗
y > ) ∝
( I


I ) + 
( Q
U
U
−Q ) + i
(

V
−V
)
(10.15)
where the “∗” denotes a complex conjugate and the average is taken over time. The coherency
matrix can also be represented by means of Stokes parameters I, Q, U, and V, as shown in the
right-hand side of (> 10.15). The polarization has the symmetries of a spin-two field. The pro-
portional sign indicates that the Stokes parameters, which represent intensities, are reported
in Kelvins. The total intensity in the radiation is the trace of the matrix. Stokes Q is the inten-
sity of the horizontal minus the vertical. Stokes U is the in-phase correlation between the two
components of the field minus the ○out-of-phase correlation. If the incident radiation was
pure Stokes Q and one rotated the field by ○in the x-y plane, then the output would be pure
U. Stokes V measures circular polarization. However, the CMB is expected to be only linearly

442 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
polarized. (See Zaldarriaga and Seljak (1997) and Kamionkowski et al. (1997) for a discussion
and formalism.) Although deviations from this prediction are of great interest, they are beyond
the scope of this chapter.
As the beam is scanned across the sky, one makes maps of I, Q, and U. Of course, the
values of Q and U depend on the specification of a coordinate system. However, the Q and
U maps may be transformed into E-modes and B-modes. The advantage of these modes is
that they are independent of the coordinate system and, for the CMB, are directly related to
different physical processes in the early universe (Kamionkowski et al. 1997; Zaldarriaga and
Seljak 1997). The E-modes correspond to a spin-two field with no curl and originate primarily
from density perturbations in the early universe. This E-mode signal has been detected by a
numberofinstruments. The B-modes correspond toa spin-twofield with nodivergence and can
originate from tensor-type physical processes such as gravity waves that are predicted to have
been generated by an inflationary epoch as close at −s after the big bang. To date the B-mode
signal has not yet been discovered. If the B-modes were of sufficient amplitude to be detected,
their impact on cosmology and physics would be enormous. Not only would the discovery
significantly limit the number of models that could describe the early universe, but it would
mark the first observational evidence of gravity operating on a quantum scale.
At large angular scales, ℓ<∼, B-modes may result from inflationary gravitational waves
and from galactic foreground emission. At higher ℓmultipoles, the primary contribution to the
B-mode spectrum is from E-modes being gravitationally lensed so that they produce a B-mode
component. The level of primordial (or inflationary) B-modes is quantified in terms of a param-
eter r, the ratio of the variance of density perturbations to tensor perturbations. Predictions for
r vary over many orders of magnitude. Currently, observations give r < .(95%) (Keisler
et al. 2011), a limit coming from temperature anisotropy and other cosmological probes (rather
than polarization).5 When translated into temperature units in > Fig. 10-2, this becomes a
faint B <∼× −K for ℓ∼. The experimental challenge is to make accurate and precise
polarization measurements at the level of few tens of nano-K.
2
Ground- and Balloon-Based Systems
In this section, we guide the reader through the set of considerations facing a designer of a
CMB telescope. Once a resolution is chosen, one must consider whether to use a reflective or
refractive system, a combination, or perhaps only a feedhorn. The information we provide is
informed by the history of the field. We focus on a number of core design elements some of
which have found use in multiple CMB experiments. Perhaps the largest difference in telescope
design between CMB and other applications is that in CMB work the edge tapers on ambient
temperature optics are kept low. We discuss the advantages and disadvantages of working on a
balloon-borne platform. After the turn of the millennium, emphasis in the field turned toward
large-throughput systems and polarization-sensitive experiments; both topics are discussed
toward the end of the section.
5The inflation-generated gravity waves also contribute to the temperature anisotropy and thus can be
constrained by such measurements.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
443
2.1 General Considerations
Following from the sky toward the detector, CMB optical hardware typically includes some
or all of the following elements: reflectors, lenses, band-defining filters, amplifiers, detectors,
and feedhorns or antennas. The order of some of these elements may vary somewhat. Inter-
mediate elements, such as a vacuum window, are generally not considered part of the optical
system although they do have to be considered as an optical element during the design of the
system.
As discussed in >Sect. 1, the throughput is an overall measure of the amount of light that
can be collected by the optical system. However, for a given aperture size and therefore for
telescopes with the same resolution, the performance of the optical system is more usefully
measured in terms of the “diffraction-limited field of view” (DLFOV), which is that portion
of the focal surface across which the optical performance is diffraction limited. Two related
measures are commonly used to determine whether the optical performance is diffraction lim-
ited: the Strehl ratio and the rms wavefront error. A system that provides a Strehl ratio larger
than 0.8 (rms wavefront error that is less than λ/) at a particular field point is generally
considered diffraction limited at that field point. The minimum DLFOV is the area on the
focal plane with a Strehl ratio larger than 0.8. However, some optical systems are optimized
for higher Strehl ratios and therefore define the DLFOV as a smaller area enclosing a higher
value.
The large majority of balloon- and ground-based CMB telescopes until the early 2000s illu-
minated the sky with either feedhorns or employed a combination of feedhorns and reflective
optical systems. At the end of this chapter, we present a table of instruments that have published
measurements of the primary CMB polarization or anisotropy. In the simplest feedhorn-only
system, the far-field beam shape, its angular size, and the bandwidth are determined by the
shape of the feedhorn and the waveguide components attached to it. The theory and design of
feedhorns of various types is quite mature, is discussed in a number of publications, and is sub-
ject of ongoing research (Clarricoats and Olver 1984; Olver et al. 1994; Balanis 2005). We can
use an approximate empirical relation for corrugated feeds, θ/,deg = λ/D,to show that prac-
tical considerations limit optical systems that use only feeds to have coarse resolution. A horn
with a reasonably large effective aperture diameter of ∼15 cm produces a beam size of ∼6○and
∼1○at 30 and 150 GHz, respectively. More complete studies show that it is difficult to produce a
beam with θ/< .○at 150 GHz with a corrugated structure of reasonable volume and toler-
ances (Lin, 2009, private communication for a study of a “feed farm” satellite concept available
from http://phy-page-g5.princeton.edu/~page/cmbpol_feedfarm.pdf).
There are several design choices for reflector-based systems. In a “centered” (or sometimes
“on-axis”) optical system, the reflectors are made from central portions of the typically conic
sections of revolution that describe the surface shape. As a consequence, such systems nat-
urally have central obscurations. Examples include the White Dish telescope (Tucker et al.
1993) and the QUAD optical system (Hinderks et al. 2009), shown in > Fig. 10-4, which
consisted of a 1.2-m and 2.6-m parabolic primaries, respectively, and hyperbolic secondary
in a Cassegrain configuration (QUAD also used lenses internal to the cryostat as part of the
optical train).
In a decentered(sometimes also called “off-axis,” or “offset”) optical system off-axis portions
of the conic sections are used, the reflectors are not centered on each other’s axis of symmetry,
and there is no self-obscuration by the reflectors. An example of a decentered optical system of

444 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
secondary mirror
on-axis beam
off-axis beam
primary mirror
lens L1
lens L2
cold stop
focal plane
30 CM
5 cm
vacuum 
window
secondary
reflector
tertiary
reflector
cold
stop
focal
surface
baffles
primary
reflector
cryogenic
reciever
Overall optical system
Zoom on optics inside
the cryogenic receiver
⊡Fig. 10-4
Examplesof centered (left) and decentered (right) CMB optical systems. The centered, two-reﬂector
Cassegrain system is that of the ground-based QUAD instrument (Figure from O’Sullivan et al.
(2008)). Theprimary reﬂector diameter was2.6 m. Theoptical elementsafter the secondary, shown
in the inset, are all maintained at a temperature of 4 K. The decentered, three-reﬂector Grego-
rian system is that of the MAXIMA (Rabii et al. 2006) balloon-borne experiment. The primary is an
oﬀ-axis section of a parabola with a diameter of 1.3 m. Two additional reﬂectors were maintained
inside the cryogenic receiver (only part of which is shown) at a temperature of 4 K; see zoom
the MAXIMA experiment (Hanany et al. 2000) is shown in >Fig. 10-4. For fixed entrance aper-
ture diameter, centered systems are more compact compared to decentered systems. However,
they have lower aperture efficiency and are more prone to scattering of radiation to side lobes
caused by either diffraction from the edges of the central obscuration or by beam-intercepting
supports of the secondary reflector(s). Decentered systems that have an intermediate focal point
are typically easier to baffle compared to centered systems and are thus less prone to stray
radiation. Most CMB telescopes to date use decentered systems; see >Table 10-1.
Practical considerations limit the use of a refractive-only system. One is the weight of
the lens. The density of ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene, a popular material for
millimeter wave lenses because of its low absorption, is 0.95 g/cm, making a 1-m-diameter
lens weigh around 100 kg. In contrast, the 1.3-m-diameter MAXIMA reflector weighed 11 kg,
and the 1.4-m-diameter WMAP primary weighed only 5 kg. The Archeops primary, which was
1.8 m × 1.5 m, and was made of 6061 aluminum (rather than specialty materials, as the former
two examples), weighed less than 50 kg. Another advantage of reflectors is their achromaticity.
Many CMB instruments operate with multiple frequencies simultaneously, which facilitates the

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
445
⊡Table 10-1
CMB polarization and anisotropy experiments with comments on their optical and detector conﬁgurations. Much of the information about experiments
prior to 2000 is adapted from “Finding the Big Bang”(Peebles et al. 2009). We include only instruments with astrophysical results as this indicates some level
of the maturity of the design. Except for Planck, the citations are for the ﬁrst astrophysical result from the instrument
Experiment
Typea
Nfeedsb
Ndetc
Optical design
Plat.d
Reference
Isotropometer
Dicke switched
2
1
Feed
Gnd
Wilkinson and Partridge (1967)
Stanford
Dicke-switched
2
2
Parabola
Gnd
Conklin and Bracewell (1967)
Crawford Hill
Maser
1
1
Horn/reﬂector
Gnd
Wilson and Penzias (1967)
Aerospace
Coherent
2
2
4.6 m telescope
Gnd
Epstein (1967)
White Mountain
Coherent
2
2
Dicke-switch two feeds
Gnd
Conklin (1969b)
Ratan
Coherent
1
1
Parabolic
Gnd
Pariiskii and Pyatunina (1971)
KaDip
Dicke-switched
2
2
Feeds
Gnd
Boughn et al. (1971)
XBal
Dicke-switched
2
2
Feeds
Bal
Henry (1971)
NRAO-P
Parametric amp
2
2
140 ft Greenbank Centered Cass.
Gnd
Parijskij (1973)
Goldstone
Maser
1
1
64 m Goldstone Centered Cass.
Gnd
Carpenter et al. (1973)
Parkes
Correlation
2
2
64 m Parkes Centered Cass.
Gnd
Stankevich (1974)
U2
Dicke-switched
2
2
Two corrugated feeds
Plane
Smoot et al. (1977)
Testa-Griga
Bolometers
1
1
Cass.
Gnd
Caderni et al. (1977)
Greenbank-R
Parametric amp
2
2
Cass.
Gnd
Rudnick (1978)
MIT
Bolometers
2
2
Two 0.4 m sph reﬂ+ ﬂat + lightpipe
Bal
Muehlner (1977)
KKaQBal
Dicke-switched
2
2
Feeds
Bal
Cheng et al. (1979)
PolCMB
Coherent (P)
1
1
First pol
Gnd
Nanos (1979)
KPRO
Coherent
1
2
11 m Cass.
Gnd
Partridge (1980)
Convair
Bolometer
1
1
Lens/feed on FTS with chopper
Plane
Fabbri et al. (1980b)
DBal
Bolometer
1
1
Lens/feed
Bal
Fabbri et al. (1980a)
NRAO91
Coherent
2
2
91 m NRAO
Gnd
Ledden et al. (1980)
OVRO40
Coherent
2
2
OVRO 40 m
Gnd
Seielstad et al. (1981)
GBank-UW
Coherent
1
1
140 ft GB
Gnd
Uson and Wilkinson (1982)

446 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
⊡Table 10-1
(Continued)
Experiment
Typea
Nfeedsb
Ndetc
Optical design
Plat.d
Reference
MaserBal
Maser
2
1
Dicke switch
Bal
Fixsen et al. (1983)
WBal
Mixer
1
1
Dicke-switched chopper
Bal
Lubin et al. (1983)
JodrellBank
Coherent
2
2
Prime focus of 100 ft MkII telescope
Gnd
Lasenby and Davies (1983)
Relikt
Parametric amp
2
2
Two feeds
Sat
Strukov and Skulachev (1984)
NCP
Coherent
2
2
Dicke switch w/ feed-fed parabolas
Gnd
Mandolesi et al. (1986)
Tenerife
Coherent
2
2
Two feeds with chopping plate
Gnd
Davies et al. (1987)
IAB-I
Bolometer
1
1
1 m parabola
Ant
dall’Oglio and de Bernardis (1988)
MITBal2
Bolometer
2
4
Horns and chopper
Bal
Halpern et al. (1988)
OVRO
Maser
2
1
OVRO 40 m
Gnd
Readhead et al. (1989)
SKInt
Mixer
2
2
Two feeds
Int
Timbie and Wilkinson (1990)
FIRS
Bolometer
1
4
Single cryogenic horn/lens
Bal
Page et al. (1990)
ARGO
Bolometer
1
4
1.2 m centered Casegrain
Bal
de Bernardis et al. (1990)
SP/ACME
SIS Mixer
1
1
1 m decentered Gregorian
Ant
Meinhold and Lubin (1991)
COBE
Coherent
10
12
Feeds
Sat
Smoot et al. (1991)
SP/ACME
HEMT
1
1
1 m decentered Gregorian
Ant
Gaier et al. (1992)
19 GHz
Maser
1
1
Feed plus lens
Bal
Boughn et al. (1992)
MAX
Bolometer
3
3
Same as SP/ACME
Bal
Alsop et al. (1992)
IAB-II
Bolometer
1
1
0.45 m decentered Cassegrain
Ant
Piccirillo and Calisse (1993)
White Dish
Bolometer
1
1
1.2 m centered Cassegrain
Ant
Tucker et al. (1993)
SASK
HEMT
1
1
1.2 m oﬀ-axis parabola
Gnd
Wollack et al. (1993)
MSAM
Bolometers
1
4
1.4 m decentered Cassegrain
Bal
Cheng et al. (1994)
PYTHON
Bolometers
4
4
oﬀ-axis parabola
Ant
Dragovan et al. (1994)
CAT
Coherent
3
6
Int
Gnd
O’Sullivan et al. (1995)
BAM
Bolometer
2
2
FTS with oﬀ-axis parabola
Bal
Tucker et al. (1997)
SuZIE
Bolometer
6
6
CSO
Gnd
Ganga et al. (1997)
IAC-BAR
Bolometer
4
4
0.45 m decentered para/hyper
Gnd
Piccirillo et al. (1997)
QMAP
HEMT
3
6
Feed + parabolic reﬂector
Bal
de Oliveira-Costa et al. (1998)

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
447
Toco
HEMT/SIS
5
8
Feed + parabolic reﬂector
Gnd
Miller et al. (1999)
JB-IAC
HEMTs
2
2
Feed plus reﬂector
Int
Dicker et al. (1999)
HACME
HEMT
1
1
Decentered Greg.
Bal
Staren et al. (2000)
Viper
HEMT
2
2
Decentered aplanatic Greg. with chopper
Ant
Peterson et al. (2000)
RING5M
HEMT
2
1
5.5 m/40 m OVRO Centered Cass.
Gnd
Leitch et al. (2000)
BOOMERANG
Bolometers
16
16
Decentered Greg., w/tert.+lenses
Bal
de Bernardis et al. (2000)
MAXIMA
Bolometers
16
16
Decentered Greg.
Bal
Hanany et al. (2000)
PIQUE
HEMT (P)
1
2
1.2 m oﬀ-axis parabola
Gnd
Hedman et al. (2001)
POLAR
HEMT (P)
1
2
Cryo feed
Gnd
Keating et al. (2001)
CBI
HEMTs
13
13
Centered Cass.
Int
Padin et al. (2001)
DASI
HEMTs
13
13
Feeds
Int
Halverson et al. (2002)
Archeops
Bolometers
21
21
Decentered Greg.
Bal
Benoît et al. (2003)
COMPASS
HEMT (P)
1
2
2.6 m centered Cass.
Gnd
Farese et al. (2003)
VSA
HEMTs
14
14
Feeds + oﬀ-axis parabolas
Int
Grainge et al. (2003)
WMAP
HEMTs
20
40
Decentered Greg.
Sat
Bennett et al. (2003)
Acbar
Bolometers
16
16
Decentered aplan. Greg. w/ chopper
Ant
Kuo et al. (2004)
BEAST
HEMT
8
8
2 m decentered Greg.
Bal
Meinhold et al. (2005)
CAPMAP
HEMT (P)
16
32
7 m decentered Cassegrain
Gnd
Barkats et al. (2005)
MINT
Mixers
4
4
30 cm Cass.
Int
Fowler et al. (2005)
MAXIPOL
Bolometer (P)
16
16
Decentered Greg.
Bal
Johnson et al. (2007)
QUAD
Bolometer (P)
31
62
Centered Cass. w/lenses
Ant
Ade et al. (2008)
WMPol
HEMT (P)
4
3
2.2 m decentered Greg.
Ant
Levy et al. (2008)
SPT
TES bolometer
966
966
Decentered Greg. w/lens
Gnd
Staniszewski et al. (2009)
BICEP
Bolometer (P)
49
98
Centered refractive
Ant
Chiang et al. (2010)
ACT
TES bolometer
Planar
3,072
Decentered Greg. w/lenses
Gnd
Fowler et al. (2010)
QUIET
HEMTs (P)
110
110
Crossed Dragone
Gnd
QUIET Collaboration et al. (2011)
Planck
HEMT/bol (P)
47
74
1.6 m aplanatic Gregorian
Sat
Tauber et al. (2010a)
aDetector technology. (P) indicated a design speciﬁcally for polarization
bNumber of feeds
cNumber of independent detectors
dPlatform. Gnd ground, Bal balloon, Sat satellite, plane airplane, Ant Antarctica, Int interferometer

448 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
discrimination of foregrounds sources from the CMB signal. Eliminating the ∼4–30% reflection
per refracting surface, for polyethylene and silicon, respectively, requires antireflection coatings
that operate over a correspondingly broad range of frequencies, assuming that the different fre-
quencies share the same light train. In contrast, metal-based reflectors can have nearly unity
reflectance between few MHz and several THz. To date, there have been less than a handful
of CMB refractive-only systems. They used polyethylene lenses of ∼30 cm diameter and hence
operated at degree-scale resolution, and with one or at most two frequencies per optical train.
An advantage of a refractive-only system is that it typically provides a large DLFOV with no
obscurations and in a relatively compact package.
A common theme for all CMB telescopes is controlling and understanding the sidelobes.
Invariably antenna patterns have nonvanishing response beyond the design radius of the optical
elements. This “spillover” is quantified by the edge taper, which is the level of illumination at
the edge of the optic relative to the center of the beam, typically quoted in dB. The best practice
is to ensure that such spillover radiation finds itself absorbed on a cold surface with stable tem-
perature. How cold and how stable? Sufficiently cold such that the total power coupled through
the spillover is small compared to the total load on the detectors and stable compared to the
timescales of the largest sky scans. Through scattering, some of the spillover radiation can find
its way to the sky, potentially coupling astronomical sources that are away from the main beam,
or to the ground causing spurious signals as the telescope scans the sky. Three techniques have
been used most widely to control sidelobes, sometimes in combination with each other: (1) use
of specifically shaped feedhorns to launch the beams from the detector element into the rest of
the optics (or to the sky). As mentioned earlier, the theory of the beam patterns produced by
feedhorns is quite developed, and measurementsare in good agreement with predictions. Thus,
one can design the antenna pattern to have only low levels of spillover. (2) Use of an aperture
stop to control and define the illumination on the primary reflector. A millimeter-wave black
and often cold aperture stop is placed at a location along the optical path that has an image of
the primary. Adjusting the diameter of the stop effectively controls the illumination and edge
taper on the primary optic. In addition, radiation on the wings of the beam, at levels below the
edge taper on the stop, is intercepted by cold surfaces. (3) Use of shields and baffles to absorb
and redirect spillover radiation.
2.2 Balloon- Versus Ground-Based Systems
High instantaneous sensitivity is the primary driver to mount a CMB experiment on a balloon-
borne platform. This improved sensitivity over a ground-based system is a consequence of
two distinct elements: lower atmospheric emission and higher atmospheric stability. There is
significantly less atmospheric power loading at balloon altitudes compared to ground, leading
to lower photon noise; see > Figs. 10-1 and >10-3. At 150 GHz, the atmospheric loading is
about 100 times smaller at balloon altitudes than on the ground. This implies that if balloon-
based systems control detector noise and emission from the telescope, their fundamental noise
limit could be the CMB itself. As a generic example, assume a telescope similar to MAX-
IMA’s (Rabii et al. 2006) with one ambient and two aluminum reflectors cooled to 4 K. For
simplicity, let’s assumea flat passband between 120 and 180 GHz. Since the instrument operates
in the single-mode limit at an effective wavelength of λ = .cm, the throughput per feedhorn
is 0.04 cmsr (> 10.8). Thus, the expected power from the CMB incident on the telescope

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
449
is 0.9 pWatt.6 In comparison, the power emitted by a 250-K ambient (at float) temperature
reflector is 0.6 pWatt. This value assumes the 150-GHz bulk emissivity of aluminum of 0.13%.
The two cold reflectors contribute together a negligible 0.01 pWatt.
This example illustrate several issues. Emission from even a single ambient temperature
reflectoron a balloon platform is not negligible compared tothe powerfrom the CMB. Emission
from a telescopewith two ambient temperaturereflectors, as in, for example, EBEX (Reichborn-
Kjennerud et al. 2010), would give rise to loading higher than the CMB. These calculations
assume the lowest aluminum emissivity, that is, the bulk emissivity. If the actual surface has
an effective emissivity of 0.5%, because of, for example, a layer of contamination, the power
produced by a single warm reflector is 2.1 pWatt, which is more than twice the power from
the CMB.
An effective way to mitigate emission is to maintain optical elements at low temperatures.
This technique is particularly useful for optical systems with small apertures. It has been used
with the ground-based BICEP (Aikin et al. 2010) experiment and the balloon-borne FIRS (Page
et al. 1994) and Arcade (Singal et al. 2011) instruments. Other experiments had one or two
ambient temperature reflectors but maintained subsequent optical components at cryogenic
temperatures; see, for example, >Fig. 10-4.
In addition to higher photon loading, variations in atmospheric emission on the ground,
essentially due to emission from transiting clouds of watervapor, are a source of increased noise
at low temporal frequencies. The /f knee of this extra noise, that is, the low-frequency point
at which the higher frequency white noise level doubles, varies with observing site on Earth
and with specific atmospheric conditions. The combination of low-frequency noise and higher
loading makes CMB observations above ∼250 GHz difficult from anywhere on Earth. Obser-
vations at large angular scales are a challenge at almost any frequency because of the spatial
structure of the atmosphere.7 The only ground-based experiment to report anisotropy mea-
surements at angular scales larger than ∼○(ℓ<∼) is Tenerife (Davies et al. 1987; Watson et al.
1992), which operated at 10 and 15 GHz. As shown in >Fig. 10-1, atmospheric emission drops
at lower microwave frequencies in part making the Tenerife measurement possible. The signifi-
cantly lower atmospheric emission on a balloon-borne platform and in particular the absence of
water clouds essentially eliminate atmospheric emission as a significant source of low-frequency
noise.
The situation is different formeasurements ofthe polarization ofthe CMB. One maythink of
a polarization measurement of Stokes Q or U as the difference in intensities of two polarization
states.8 If the two measurements are done simultaneously, or quickly relative to the timescale of
atmospheric turbulence, the measurement is immune to fluctuations in atmospheric emission
if the atmosphere is not polarized. Zeeman splitting of oxygen in Earth’s magnetic field (Weiss
1980) polarizes atmosphere emission near the strong oxygen lines at 60 and 118 GHz. How-
ever, it has been shown that the atmospheric linear polarization is negligible compared to
61 pWatt = −W.
7Spatial turbulence in the atmosphere is parametrized in terms of a Kolmogorov spectrum (Tatarskii 1961;
Church 1995; Lay and Halverson 2000) that depends on the spatial wave number q as either q−/or q−/
depending on whether the turbulent layer is three- or two-dimensional. Thus at large angular scale, low q,
atmospheric fluctuations can be quite large.
8For bolometric systems on can simply imagine the difference of two intensity measurements. For coherent
or interferometric systems, the square law detector outputs the product of two differently polarized electric
fields.

450 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
the levels expected for either CMB E- or B-modes (Keating et al. 1998). Circular polarization
near the lines is significantly higher than linear (Hanany and Rosenkranz 2003), and conver-
sion of atmospheric circular to linear polarization in the instrument is a source of concern.
Calculations of the effect of atmosphere polarization as a function of spatial scale depend on
knowledge of Earth’s magnetic field over the corresponding spatial scales. Available informa-
tion (Finlay et al. 2010) suggests that spatial variations in the field are limited to large angular
scales, roughly above ○. Thus, experiments probing polarization anisotropy at smaller angu-
lar scales should not be affected by atmospheric polarization. For this reason, there is a relative
abundance of experiments probing polarization from ground-based instruments at frequencies
below 250 GHz. Despite these comments, we note that large angular scale polarization (ℓ<∼,
θ >∼○) has so far been measured only by the WMAP satellite.
While the higher instantaneous sensitivity on a balloon-borne platform is appealing, it
comes with particular optical-system and total integration-time trade-offs. To date, the largest
CMB reflector mounted on a balloon platform was the 2.2-m primary of the BEAST exper-
iment (Meinhold et al. 2005). It was made with carbon-fiber technology and weighed 8 kg.
A similar reflector made using aluminum would likely weigh in excess of 50 kg. Using signif-
icantly larger telescopes is challenging, and thus resolution has a practical upper limit for a
balloon-borne platform. Although BEAST operated at 40 GHz with θ/= ′, one can imagine
using a similar telescope to achieve θ/= ′ at 150 GHz.9 To take full advantage of the balloon
platform, though, it would be advantageous to cool the large reflector to well below ambient
temperature to minimize radiation loading of the detectors. So far, this has not been achieved.
Finally, the duration of a balloon flight is ∼1 day (for launches in North America) to ∼20 days
(for two circumnavigations in a long duration flight in Antarctica),10 and a balloon experiment
can typically be launched once every 1–2 years. In contrast, ground-based observatories have
the potential for significantly longer continuous integration times.
2.3 Arrays of Detectors and Increases in DLFOV
Improvements in detector sensitivity throughout the 1990s placed new demands on optical sys-
tems. The sensitivity of individual detectorsapproached the photon noise limit (see >Fig. 10-3),
earlier for ground-based experiments for which the atmosphere is a strong source of emis-
sion, and then even for balloon-borne payloads. Improved experiment sensitivity could only be
realized by using arrays of detectorsin the focal plane and thus by increasing the DLFOV. Small-
sized focal plane arrays were used in the late 1990s by MAXIMA (16 elements), BOOMERANG
(16 elements, Crill et al. 2003), QMAP (6 elements, de Oliveira-Costa et al. 1998), and Toco
(8 elements, Miller et al. 1999). The detector elements were bolometers that used neutron
transmutation-doped germanium (MAXIMA, BOOMERANG), high electron mobility transis-
tors, or HEMTs (QMAP, Toco), and superconductor-insulator-superconductor, or SIS, mixers
(Toco). The push for large focal plane arrays accelerated in the early 2000, after the launch of
9For example, the BLAST balloon payload (Pascale et al. 2008), which had frequency bands between 600 and
1,200 GHz, had a centered Cassegrain system with a 2-m aperture primary providing a resolution of ′′ at the
highest frequency.
10Currently, record duration for a science payload in an Antarctic flight is close to 42 days (Seo et al. 2008).
NASA is developing capabilities for flights of 100 days.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
451
WMAP, and when Planck was slated for launch later in the decade. The main focus in CMB
studies evolved toward measurements of the faint polarization of the CMB and of small-scale
anisotropy, and it was broadly recognized that significantly higher mapping speeds can only be
achieved by implementing large arrays of detectors.
Toachieve higherthroughput, CMBtelescope designers turned toon-axis refractive systems
and to new reflective optical systems that included additional corrections of aberrations. In
addition, modern detector arrays with hundreds to thousands of elements are primarily based
on superconducting technologies (such as transition-edge sensor (TES) bolometers, e.g., Irwin
and Hilton (2005)) and are thus fabricated on flat silicon wafers. This requires optical systems to
have flat focal planes and, depending on the coupling to the detectors, can require that the focal
planes are image-space telecentric, namely, that the focal surface is perpendicular to all incident
chief rays. The use of large focal plane arrays also prompted designers to be more conservative in
their definition of DLFOV and strive for Strehl ratio values higher than the accepted minimum
of 0.8. Higher Strehl ratios are generically associated with smaller beam asymmetries, which
simplifies data analysis by reducing variations in the window functions across the focal plane
array. What Strehl value should one strive for? We are not familiar with a quantitative study of
the effects of minimum Strehl ratio on specific beam asymmetry nor its effects on the systematic
error budget for any experiment. Designers of large arrays have generally attempted to provide
for Strehl ratios larger than 0.9.
The advent of large focal plane arrays has stimulated research and innovation into the spe-
cific coupling of the electromagneticradiation into bolometric TES arrays. A variety of coupling
approaches have been developed, including feedhorn, contacting or immersion lens, phased
antenna, and filled focal plane arrays (e.g., Padin et al. 2008; O’Brient et al. 2008; Kuo et al.
2008; Niemack et al. 2008; Yoon et al. 2009). The optical coupling of the detector array can
have a substantial impact on the total system throughput and can drive critical optical design
decisions. Here we provide a brief overview of the trade-offs between filled and feedhorn-
coupled focal planes following the analysis of Griffin et al. (2002). > Section 3 provides an
example comparison between the optical coupling techniques used in the ACT and SPT focal
planes.
For an instrument with a fixed DLFOV that is fully populated with detectors, a filled focal
plane array of bare detectors can provide ∼3 times faster mapping speed of an extended source
(like the CMB) and with .Fλ spacing11 ∼3.5 times faster mapping speed of point sources
than a feedhorn-coupled array with Fλ spacing. For an instrument that is limited by readout
technologies to a fixed number of detectors, feedhorn-coupled arrays can provide the fastest
mapping speed by increasing the FOV until the feedhorns are spaced by ∼Fλ. In practice, large
detector arrays to date have generally operated between these extremes with feedhorn-coupled
arrays spaced between and Fλ and filled arrays spaced between .and Fλ.
The differences in instrument design requirements for filled focal plane arrays compared to
feedhorn (or other beam-forming element)arrays are substantial. The Gaussian illumination of
feedhorns provides well-understood beam properties (and potentially single-moded coupling)
and strong rejection of stray light from sources outside the main beam, and the horn itself pro-
vides a Faraday enclosure around the detector. In contrast, filled detector arrays are exposed,
11Note that parameterizing the detector spacing or the feedhorn aperture in units of the focal ratio, F, times
the wavelength, λ, provides sufficient information to approximate the aperture efficiency, spillover efficiency,
and other relevant optical quantities for estimating the mapping speed.

452 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
can couple to radiation from approximately π steradian, and therefore require a cryogenic stop
cooled to ∼1 K to prevent blackbody radiation within the cryostat from dominating the detector
noise. Individual detectors in a filled focal plane are smaller and have lower optical loading than
feedhorn-coupled detectors, making it more difficult to achieve photon-limited noise perfor-
mance and requiring readout of more detectors. The great potential advantage of filled arrays
is of course the opportunity to maximize the throughput and mapping speed of detector arrays
that fill the available field of view.
Another approach to maximizing the use of the DLFOV is to increase the optical band-
width of the optics and have multiple detectors operating in different frequency bands within
each focal plane element. This can be achieved by use of dichroic beam splitters in the
optical path that illuminate independent detector arrays, or by optical coupling techniques
being developed to make “multichroic” detectors by separating the frequency bands using
superconducting filters integrated into the detector array (e.g., O’Brient et al. 2008; Schlaerth
et al. 2010; McMahon et al. 2012). Advantages of multichroic detector arrays compared to
dichroic beam splitters include more compact optics designs, fewer optical elements, a smaller
detector array footprint, and the ability to fill the entire DLFOV in high optical throughput
systems.
2.4 Refractor-Based Optical Systems
In refractive systems, the absence of a central obscuration, combined with the on-axis nature
of the optics, provides large easy gains in DLFOV. For example, a NASA study for a CMB
polarization space-based mission (Bock et al. 2008) presented an optical design that had an
aperture of 30 cm, total throughput of 40 cmsr, Strehl ratio larger than 0.99 over a FOV of
.○in diameter, and resolution of .○at 135 GHz. The optical performance was achieved
with two polyethylene lenses that were pure conic sections. To our knowledge, BICEP was the
first CMB experiment to implement a refractive-only system; the focal plane was indeed tele-
centric, as shown in >Fig. 10-5. The throughput was 34 cmsr12 and it had resolution of .○at
150 GHz (Yoon et al. 2006). The optical design approach of the BICEP system is also used in the
ground-based Keck-Array (Sheehy et al. 2010) and the balloon-borne SPIDER (Filippini et al.
2010) instruments. They use five and six independent receivers, respectively, each of which is a
fully refractive optical system similar to BICEP’s, to increase the total throughput of the entire
system.
To achieve a combination of high throughput and high resolution, other experiments
have implemented a combination of reflective fore-optics (e.g., primary and secondary reflec-
tors) and refractive back-optics. The roles of the lenses is to further correct aberrations
and to produce telecentricity. Cases in point are EBEX, Polarbear (Arnold et al. 2010),
ACT, and SPT.
12Throughput calculations assume (> 10.6) taking the entrance aperture diameter and the total FOV available
by the optical system of the experiment. A significantly smaller throughput value can be obtained by taking
the throughput per detector element and multiplying by the number of detectors implemented. We opt for the
first version because our primary interest in this chapter is in the overall optical design independent of the
choice of detector spacing on the focal plane.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
453
Nylon blocker
Aperture
Objective lens
PTFE blockers
Vacuum
closeout
Focal plane
Metal-mesh
Low-pass edge
filter
Eyepiece lens
⊡Fig. 10-5
The all-refractive optical system of BICEP (Figure is from Aikin et al. (2010)). The vacuum window is
on the right. The two lenses and other ﬁlters are all maintained at a temperature of 4 K
2.5 Reﬂector-Based Optical Systems
The large majority of CMB telescopesto date are based on decenteredreflecting systems.13 Most
designers have found that systems with up to three powered reflectors14 are sufficient to provide
the DLFOV necessary for their experiments. Minimizing the number of reflectors makes the
system more compact, simpler to assemble, and easier to analyze in terms of misalignment
errors.
With essentially any ray-tracing program, it is fairly straightforward to show that the
DLFOV produced by a single reflector – typically, but not always an off-axis section of a
parabola – is rather limited. The primary limiting aberration is astigmatism (Chang and Prata
2005). Nevertheless, a combination of feedhorn and a single reflector was used with the Saska-
toon experiment and later for QMAP and Toco, which used the same telescope configuration
and managed to pack six and eight element array of detectors in the focal plane, respectively.
With two-reflector systems, the classical configurations are either a Cassegrain (parabolic pri-
mary and hyperbolic secondary) or a Gregorian (parabolic primary and elliptical secondary).
We don’t know of strong preferences between the two systems from an image quality point
of view. However, the Gregorian system offers advantages in that the intermediate focus point
between the primary and secondary reflectors is a convenient location for baffling (see, e.g.,
the decentered system in > Fig. 10-4) and that for a fixed aperture size the Gregorian has
been shown to be more compact (Brown and Prata 1994). Likely for these reasons most CMB
experiments that use reflectors opt for the Greogrian configuration.
13Korsch (1991) and Love et al. (1978) give thorough reviews of reflecting optical systems.
14The term “powered” reflectors refers to reflectors with focusing properties, rather than flat reflectors used
to only fold the path of the beam.

454 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
The primary source of aberrations in both Gregorian and Cassegrain systems are astigma-
tism and coma. Therefore, a good design starting point are those designs that provide some
cancelation of either of these aberrations, at least at the center of the FOV. In an aplanatic
Gregorian, making the primary slightly elliptical and the secondary a more eccentric ellipsoid
than in the classical Gregorian cancels coma. The Planck optical system is based on an aplanatic
Gregorian design.
Dragone has described designs that cancel astigmatism (D1) and both astigmatism and
coma (D2) at the center of the FOV of either Gregorian or Cassegrain systems (Dragone
1982, 1983a). In both cases, Dragone uses the concept of a single equivalent paraboloid that has
the same antenna pattern properties (at the center of the FOV) as the two-reflector system. He
finds modifications to this equivalent system that cancel aberrations and then translates these
modifications back to the two-reflector system. In a Gregorian D1 system, the modification is
conceptually simple, it is a relative tilt between the axes of symmetry of the secondary ellip-
soid and the primary parabola.15 In D2, Dragone derives additional corrections to the shape
of the reflectors such as to cancel coma. Variants of D1 have become a popular starting point
for several CMB designers. Hanany and Marrone (2002) compared the performance of several
optical designs including the classical Gregorian, the aplanatic Gregorian, the D1, and the D2
and showed that the D2 provides the largest DLFOV.
To our knowledge, ACME was the first telescope based on a Gregorian Dragone
design (Meinhold et al. 1993). The reflectors for EBEX and Polarbear are exact D1 designs.
The WMAP design started from a D1 design and Planck’s design is inspired by D1 in that it is
an aplanatic but with the addition of the D1 tilt between the symmetry axes of the primary and
secondary reflectors.
A third reflector, or equivalently refracting elements, are typically added to the base two-
reflector system to achieve additional requirements of the optical system, such as to produce a
distinct aperture stop, tofurthercancel aberrations and thus increase the DLFOV, ortomake the
focal surface telecentric. In MAXIMA, a cold aperture stop is placed at an image of the primary
that is formed by the tertiary reflector; see >Fig. 10-4. In BOOMERANG, the tertiary reflector
is the aperture stop. In ACT, EBEX, and Polarbear, lenses that reimage the primary form the
cold stop. In all cases, the cold stop is used to control the illumination on the primary reflector.
A useful property of the D1 and D2 designs is that they cancel cross polarization at the
center of the field of view. This property has been pointed out by earlier authors (see foot-
note 15). Minimum cross polarization is useful for telecommunication systems that can double
the bandwidth by using two distinct polarizations with a single antenna. It is also useful for
polarization-sensitive CMB experiments, but this usefulness is limited as will be discussed in
the next section.
An innovative two-reflector system that provides a particularly large FOV is described
by Dragone (1983b). This system, which has become known as the “crossed-Dragone”
15Graham (1973) first suggested introducing such a tilt in a decentered Cassegrain telescope to eliminate
the cross polarization introduced by the asymmetrical configuration of the two reflectors. Subsequently,
Mizuguchi and Yokoi (1974) and Mizugutch and Yokoi (1975), and later others (e.g., Mizugutch et al. 1976;
Mizuguchi et al. 1978; Dragone 1978), made the idea more quantitative, expanded it to a Gregorian system, and
to a system with more than two reflectors. (Some papers are published with Mizugutch in place of Mizuguchi.)
The primary motivation in these studies remained the elimination of cross polarization at the center of the
FOV. Thus, a decentered Cassegrain or Gregorian optical system with a tilt between the axes of symmetry of
the primary and secondary is sometimes referred to as a “Mizuguchi-Dragone telescope.” In a series of publi-
cations in the early 1980s, Dragone analyzes aberrations in decenetered reflecting system. It so happens that
the tilt that cancels cross polarization also cancels astigmatism.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
455
configuration, began to be adopted by some CMB experimenters in the mid-2000.16 However,
the first use of the general configuration for the CMB was by the IAB experiment (Piccirillo
1991; Piccirillo and Calisse 1993). The crossed-Dragone system has a parabolic primary and
hyperbolic secondary and is thus essentially a Cassegrain system. It minimizes both astigma-
tism and coma near the center of the FOV without introducing spherical aberrations. An exact
implementation of the design is shown in > Fig. 10-6. Variants of the crossed-Dragone sys-
tem and detailed design procedures are described by Chang and Prata (1999). In addition to
the large DLFOV provided by this system, the focal plane is nearly telecentric and the cross
polarization is small. Tran et al. (2008) compared the performance of the Gregorian Dragone
(of the D1 variety) and crossed-Dragone systems. They found that the DLFOV provided by the
crossed-Dragone is about twice that provided by the Gregorian Dragone.
A crossed-Dragone system was developed for CLOVER (Piccirillo et al. 2008), a UK-based
CMB experiment that has since been canceled. It was also proposed as an alternative optical
system in an initial concept study, called EPIC, for a future CMB polarization satellite (Bock
et al. 2008). In a subsequent round, the team had baselined the crossed-Dragone as its flagship
design (Bock et al. 2009; Tran et al. 2010). A very large throughput of 908 cmsr was obtained
at 100 GHz with an aperture diameter of 1.4 m. The ambitious design accommodated a total of
11,000 detectors in an elliptical focal plane with long and short axes of 1.5 and 1 m, respectively,
and Strehl ratios larger than 0.8 over this entire, nearly flat focal surface. The first CMB experi-
ment that has made measurements with a crossed-Dragone system was QUIET (Imbriale et al.
2011); see >Fig. 10-6. The telescope throughput was ∼530 cmsr with a 1.4-m primary reflec-
tor, and 0.22-deg resolution at 90 GHz. The ground-based ABS (Essinger-Hileman 2011), which
operates at ∼145 GHz, uses smaller, 60-cm reflector primary; both primary and secondary are
maintained at LHe temperature. In the ABS design, the entrance aperture is somewhat sky-side
of the primary reflector, rather than on the reflector itself. This modification, which was later
adopted by the EPIC team, is used to better define the illumination on the primary reflector
and to control side lobes, with minimal penalty in optical performance.
Despite’s its appealing features, the crossed-Dragone system has several challenges which
are described in Tran and Page (2009). One challenge is that the system’s aperture stop is at the
very front effectively limiting the resolution for systems in which this stop needs to be cold.
Another challenge is the compactness of the system. Both the secondary reflector and focal
surface are very close to the incoming bundle of rays causing diffraction side lobes on the edges
of the reflectors and leading to physical packing difficulties when implementing a cryogenic
focal plane. Tran et al. (2010) analyze the issue of side lobes in more detail in the context of the
EPIC Mission Concept report.
2.6 Polarization Properties
Interest in measurements of the polarization of the CMB has motivated interest in the polar-
ization properties of telescopes and other optical components. This is a relatively new area of
research, for which only limited experience is available.
16In a parallel development, Vokurka (1980) proposed a ‘crossed configuration’ made of two cylindrically
parabolic mirrors for an improved compact test range antenna. This crossed concept was expanded by Dudok
and Fasold (1986) - also in the context of compact test range antenna - to a Cassegrain system similar to the
one proposed earlier by Dragone, albeit without the various tilts and shape changes that reduce aberrations.

456 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
subreflector
entrance
baffle
groundscreen
main reflector
receiver
with
cryogenic
detectors
phase
center
⊡Fig. 10-6
The crossed-Dragone telescope of the QUIET experiment. The primary reﬂector is 1.4 m in diame-
ter; in the ray limit it is the limiting aperture in the system. The system was designed using physical
optics by propagating beams from the focal plane horns to the sky. An apparent entrance aper-
ture is formed sky side of the primary, even though there is no physical aperture stop there. The
entrance baﬄe intercepts side lobes that are inherent to the crossed-Dragone design, as described
in the text
The susceptibility of an instrument to polarimetric systematic errors depends on the exper-
imental approach to the polarization measurements, and a detailed discussion is beyond the
scope of this chapter. However, considering the optical system alone, one can generalize as
follows: systematic errors are minimized if the antenna pattern is completely independent of
the polarization state being probed, if such an antenna pattern is independent of field position
in the focal plane, and if the incident polarization orientation is not altered by the optical system.
These desirables are neverfully satisfied and a body of literature has evolved around quantifying
the systematic errors induced by nonidealities (e.g., Hu et al. 2003; O’Dea et al. 2007; Shimon
et al. 2008; Su et al. 2011).

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
457
As a starting point, one models the antenna patterns in each of the two polarization states
i = a, b as an elliptical Gaussian (Hu et al. 2003)
Bi(Ai, ˆn, ⃗bi, ei) = Ai exp[−
σ 
i
((n−bi)
(+ ei)
+ (n−bi)
(−ei))] ,
(10.16)
where ⃗b is an offset between the beam center and a nominal direction ˆn on the sky, σ is the
mean beam width, and e is the ellipticity. It has become common to quantify beam-induced
errors in terms of differential gain g
g ∝
Aa −Ab
(Aa + Ab)/,
(10.17)
differential pointing ⃗d
⃗d ∝
⃗ba −⃗bb

,
(10.18)
differential ellipticity
q ∝ea −eb

,
(10.19)
and cross polarization. We use the “proportional to” notation above because authors differ
on the normalization of the different quantities. The physical interpretation of these errors is
straightforward. Each of the Q and U Stokes parameters that quantifies the polarization content
of incident radiation is formed by differences of intensities between two orthogonal polarization
states. A “differential gain” systematic error arises when the overall beam size, or the antenna
gain, is different between any two orthogonal states.17 “Differential pointing” and “ellipticity”
arise when there is a difference in the centroid of the beams and their ellipticities, respectively.
It is not difficult to see that respectively these effects couple the temperature anisotropy, its gra-
dient and its second derivative into the polarization measurement (see also Yadav et al. 2010).
These errors are of the general category of “instrumental polarization,” in which unpolarized
radiation becomes partially polarized by the instrument. It is a different category from cross
polarization, also called “polarization rotation,” which acts only on polarized light, and its phys-
ical effect as far as the CMB is concerned is to mix E- and B-modes (see >Sect. 1.5). All of the
errors should be minimized through the design of the optics, or calibrated with an accuracy
commensurate with the goal of the experiment.
Both instrumental polarization and polarization rotation occur because reflection and
absorption, and hence transmission, of light depend on the polarization state of the incident
radiation, on the angle of incidence, and, where relevant, on the materials making lenses or
other optical elements(such as a half-wave plate, vacuumwindow, or reflectors). As an example,
consider the effects of a standard ∼0.05-mm-thick vacuum window made of ∼9-cm-diameter
polypropylene, which has an index of refraction close to 1.5. This will have high mm-wave
transmission. Such a window, which is similar to the one used on the MAXIPOL polarimeter,
is naturally bowed by few cm into the cryostat because of differential pressure. MAXIPOL had
an array of 16 photometers with an intermediate focus near this window and the angle of inci-
dence of rays for an edge photometer spanned 20–55○. Differential reflection between the two
polarization states is about 1%, which generates a 1 μK spurious, scan-synchronous polarized
17Differential gain also arises when other factors in the system affect gain between two polarization states,
for example, when two independent detectors that are sensitive to the two polarization states have different
responsivities.

458 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
signal from the ∼100 μK rms CMB anisotropy. This spurious signal was of no consequence for
the analysis of the MAXIPOL data, but is one example of an instrumental polarization that may
be a contaminant for future, higher sensitivity experiments. A much larger signal of ∼12 mK
is generated by the 0.5% emissivity of the 250-K primary reflector.18 However, if that signal is
stable, it can be removed in analysis as an overall offset. Of course, reflection from the asym-
metric primary reflector, which is an off-axis section of a parabola, also polarizes unpolarized
light, but this effect is very small, and, again, if the temperature is relatively constant, this overall
polarized offset, or even if it is slowly drifting, can be removed in analysis.
As mentioned above, the systematic errors associated with the optics are either negligible
compared to statistical errors in the measurement, or they need to be calibrated with an accu-
racy that makes them negligible. The faintness of the B-mode signal makes it susceptible to
the various systematic errors, and this is our focus in the following discussion. In terms of
absolute magnitude, the most challenging effects are differential gain and polarization rota-
tion. Differential gain is challenging because it couples the temperature anisotropy directly into
the polarization measurement.19 A residual differential gain of less than 0.1% is necessary if
the leakage from temperature anisotropy is to be less than 10% of the B-mode predicted power
spectrum with r = .(Zaldarriaga, 2006, private communication). Because polarization rota-
tion can mix E- and B-modes, an uncorrected rotation of .○of the incident polarization by
the instrument gives rise to a spurious B-mode that is a factor of 10 below the B-mode signal
from lensing. This is the level that should reasonably be targeted by an instrument that intends
to detect the B-mode from lensing and not be limited by this systematic effect. A rotation of .○
(.○) gives rise to a spurious B-mode that is a factor of 10 below the cosmological inflationary
signal with r = .(.) (Zaldarriaga, 2006, private communication).
The crossed-Dragone and the on-axis refractive-only systems appear to provide the low-
est levels of the systematic errors discussed above. The EPIC team has quantified the expected
level of instrumental polarization in their proposed crossed-Dragon telescope (Tran et al. 2010)
and showed that the telescope nearly satisfies mission goals. Exceptions included differential
gain, which is apparently caused by differential attenuation due to the finite conductivity of
the aluminum surface, and differential rotation, which was up to .○at the edge of the focal
plane (Johnson, 2011, private communication). Therefore, both would need to be calibrated
and corrected if the mission is to achieve its goals of setting a limit on r = .. Imbriale et al.
(2011) show measurements from QUIET’s crossed-Dragone that demonstrate the absence of
cross polarization at the center of the FOV.
A thorough analysis of beam-induced systematics for a refractive system was presented in
conjunction with the release of data from BICEP (Takahashi et al. 2010). All measured system-
atic effects were smaller than benchmarks calculated for r = .. Many measured effects were
also acceptable for r = .with the two exceptions: “relative gain” and differential pointing.20
The origin of the relative gain mismatch is likely the detection system and not BICEP’s cen-
tered refractive optics. The observed differential pointing is an intriguing effect also observed
by the QUAD experiment (Hinderks et al. 2009). The centroids of beams corresponding to two
polarization-sensitive bolometers, which do share the same optical path, were offset relative to
18A 1.2 K nearly unpolarized signal is generated by the 0.5% emissivity. This signal is differentially polarized
at the 1% level.
19The 2.7 K CMB monopole can also lead to a polarized signal through instrumental polarization. However,
the magnitude of this signal is a constant across the observation, and since essentially all CMB polarimeters
are differential, they are not sensitive to this overall offset.
20Although Takahashi et al. (2010) define relative gain slightly differently than in (> 10.17), the underlying
physics is the same.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
459
each other. The teams speculated birefringence in the high-density polyethylene lenses, among
other causes (Pryke, 2011, private communication). The effect was not of any consequence for
the analysis ofthe experiments’ data, and the BICEPteam reports sufficient sensitivitytoremove
the effect if it had been necessary. If it persists, then future refractive telescopes searching for r
values smaller than about 0.1 will also need to characterize the effect and subtract it during the
analysis of the data.
Tran et al. (2008) compare the polarization performance of the cross and Gregorian sys-
tems. They show that in every respect the crossed-Dragone has superior polarization properties
compared to the Gregorian system. For example, at a field point ○away from the center of
the focal plane of the Gregorian-Dragone system, the cross-polar response is −25 dB below
the copolar response, whereas for a similar aperture crossed-Dragone the response is −50 dB.
We note, however, that once the need arises to calibrate the effects induced by the optical sys-
tem, the difference in performance between the Gregorian and crossed systems may become
inconsequential.
3
Large Ground-Based Telescopes, ACT and SPT
With 6- and 10-m primary reflectors, the ACT (Fowler et al. 2007; Swetz et al. 2011) and SPT
(Carlstrom et al. 2011) (> Fig. 10-7) are currently the largest CMB survey telescopes provid-
ing the highest resolution. Reviewing them in more detail is instructive because the designs
incorporate the state of optics knowledge for ground-based instruments as of mid-2000.
There are a number of reasons to probe the CMB with high resolution. As can be seen
in >Fig. 10-2, arcminute resolution, and hence a window function that extends to ℓ> ,,
is required to determine the contribution of point sources and other secondary sources of
anisotropy (not shown) to the damping tail of the primary CMB anisotropy. It is also advan-
tageous to have minimal change in the beam over ℓ< ,, the region where the primary
anisotropy dominates. Even with its 6-m primary, the ACT beam suppresses the fluctuations
by a factor of 3 in power by ℓ= ,. Lastly, one can discover galaxy clusters via the thermal
Sunyaev-Zel’dovich (SZ) effect (Sunyaev and Zeldovich 1980) – the inverse Compton scattering
of CMB photons with hot electrons in ionized gas – which requires ∼1 arcminute resolution in
bands near 150 GHz.
The design of the ACT and SPT optical systems are shown in > Figs. 10-8 and >10-9. They
are both based on off-axis Gregorian telescopes. The SPT secondary mirror is maintained at
cryogenic temperatures and an additional lens focuses the light onto the telecentric focal plane.
In ACT, the secondary mirror is maintained at ambient temperature. At the entrance to the
cryogenic receiver, the focal surface provided by the the Gregorian telescope is split into three
distinct light trains, each dedicated to a single frequency band. An off-axis Gregorian telescope
was chosen for both systems because of the guiding principles listed in >Table 10-2, which are
also discussed in >Sect. 2.5. In addition, it is easier to implement co-moving ground shields
and to minimize spillover to the surroundings on the sides of an off-axis Gregorian.
3.1 Detailed Optical System Comparison
The SPT is a standard Gregorian-Dragone design (D1, in the language of >Sect. 2.5) (Padin
et al. 2008). The SPT Gregorian configuration and the primary diameter, parabolic shape, and

460 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
⊡Fig. 10-7
Left: The ACT 6-m telescope in northern Chile. The telescope is inside the 13-m-tall ground screen.
The secondary is just visible near the center of the ground screen. Right: The SPT 10-m telescope
at the South Pole. Most of the circular primary reﬂector is visible, while the cryogenic secondary
reﬂector and receiver are housed inside the white structure below and to the right of the primary
(Photos courtesy of ACT and SPT Collaborations)
⊡Table 10-2
Guiding principles of the ACT and SPT designs
●Clear aperture (oﬀ-axis optics) to minimize scattering and blockage
●Fast primary focus to keep the telescope compact and enable fast scanning
●Large (FOV ∼1○) and fast (F ∼1) diﬀraction-limited focal plane
●Space for structure and a cryogenic receiver near Gregorian focus
surface accuracy (20 μm rms) were designed to accomplish a wide range of millimeter and sub-
millimeter science goals. The initial ACT design started from a standard Gregorian-Dragone
(D1); however, the conic constants of both ACT reflectors were then numerically optimized
to maximize the DLFOV area by minimizing the transverse ray aberration across the focal
plane (Fowler et al. 2007).21 This leads to an aplanatic-like solution in which the primary
reflector becomes elliptical instead of parabolic. The ACT reflector optimization converged to
a 150-GHz DLFOV at the Gregorian focus of ∼370 cmsr with near zero tilt of the secondary
reflector axis, which led to the decision to align the ACT primary and secondary reflector axes
to simplify the system alignment (>Fig. 10-8).
The secondary reflectors of ACT and SPT meet substantially different design requirements.
The SPT secondary was designed to meet the science goals of the first generation camera and
21We note that this optimization approach in which the conic constants of both reflectors are simultaneously
optimized across a flat focal plane is different from the optimization discussed in Hanany and Marrone (2002),
where the focal plane shape and position were optimized to provide the largest DLFOV.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
461
⊡Fig. 10-8
Ray trace diagram of the ACT and SPT optical systems. >Figure 10-9 shows an enlarged view of the
parts of the systems that are maintained at cryogenic temperatures. The distribution of rays across
the primary reﬂectors is indicative of the proximity of the cold stop to an image of the primary
reﬂector. Having a stop at an image of the primary in ACT enables more uniform illumination of the
primary (>Table 10-3). The dashed line shows the conic axis of the primary reﬂector of both tele-
scopes, which is also the conic axis of the secondary reﬂector for ACT. The SPT secondary reﬂector
conic axis is tilted by 25.3○to minimize aberrations and cross polarization and maximize the FOV,
which also moves the Gregorian focus below the primary axis, providing space for the receiver. The
lower edge of the ACT primary is further oﬀ-axis than SPT, which provides space for the receiver
without tilting the secondary reﬂector (SPT ray trace courtesy of N. Halverson)
has a short focal ratio (FG ≈.) to couple to a close-packed feedhorn array at the Grego-
rian focus. The entire secondary is cooled to ∼10 K inside a vacuum vessel and is used at the
aperture stop of the system. Because this stop is not quite at an image of the primary, differ-
ent detectors across the focal plane illuminate different sections of the primary reflector. This is
one reason that only ∼7.5 m of the 10 m SPT primary reflector is illuminated by each feedhorn
(>Table 10-3, >Fig. 10-8). To ensure that the secondary reflector could be aligned accurately
inside the cryogenic receiver, it was machined as a single piece of metal, which limited the size
to ∼1 m diameter – the largest diameter that could easily be machined as a single element.
The ACT secondaryreflectorfocal ratio(FG ≈.)was selected as a balance between smaller
reimaging optics and minimizing beam expansion because of the need to closely pack neighbor-
ing stacks of optical elements at multiple cryogenic stages (including a vacuum window, filters
at 300, 40, and 4 K, and a lens at 4 K) near the Gregorian focus. The secondary diameter was
chosen to be ∼2 m as a balance between taking advantage of the increase in diffraction-limited
throughput that a larger secondary provides and minimizing the mass far from the telescope

462 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
⊡Table 10-3
Comparison of some ACT and SPT optical parameters. The top section gives the main telescope
parameters; the middlesection givesthe propertiesof the receiversdeployed prior to 2012; and the
bottom section is for the polarization-sensitive receivers. Dp, Di, and Ds are the diameters of the pri-
mary reﬂector, the illumination of the primary, and the secondary reﬂector, respectively. FG, Ftemp,
andFpol refertotheapproximatefocalratioattheGregorian,temperaturereceiver,andpolarization
receiver focii, respectively. Fλ150 refers to the approximate 150-GHz detector spacing or feedhorn
aperture for each receiver. AΩRtemp and AΩRpol refer to the approximate throughput of the “temper-
ature receivers”(for all three arrays) and “polarization receivers”for each telescope at the detector
focus, and AΩDeﬀis an estimate for the relative eﬀective throughput of the diﬀerent detector
array technologies following the prescription of Griﬃn et al. (2002). For the temperature receivers,
the minimum 150-GHz Strehl ratios and the measured 150-GHz beam full-width-half-maximum,
FWHM150, are also provided (Swetz et al. 2011; Schaﬀer et al. 2011)
ACT
SPT
Dp (m)
6
10
Di (m)
5.6
7.5
Ds (m)
2
1
FG
2.5
1.3
Temperature receivers
Ftemp
0.9
1.3
Fλ150
0.5
1.7
AΩRtemp (cm2 sr)
40
105
AΩDeﬀ(relative)
∼2.5
1
Min. Strehl150
0.97
0.89
FWHM150 (arcmin)
1.37
1.15
Polarization receivers
Fpol
1.4
1.3
Fλ150
1.4
1.6
AΩRpol (cm2 sr)
180
140
center-of-mass (to enable fast scanning) and cost. The combination of the aplanatic design,
a larger secondary, and a higher F result in the ACT having substantially greater diffraction-
limited throughput at the Gregorian focus, than the SPT; however, the ACT design requires
an additional set of reimaging optics because the secondary reflector cannot easily be incor-
porated into a cryogenic receiver (like the SPT secondary). This results in increased thermal
emission from the ACT secondary and constrains use of the ACT Gregorian DLFOV because
of the difficulty of building a compact, low-loss vacuum window as large as the DLFOV (∼0.7 m
diameter).
One characteristic of optimized aplanatic designs, like ACT, is that the Gregorian focal plane
becomes more perpendiculartothe conicaxis ofthe reflectors, which is an advantage foron-axis
systems, but results in a less image-space telecentric focal plane for off-axis systems. For exam-
ple, in the ACT design, the angle of incidence of the chief ray at the center of the Gregorian focal
plane is .○. A telecentric focal plane was not a requirement for the ACT receiver, and at higher
F numbers, this “focal plane tilt” is reduced, which led to an acceptable level of residual 5–8○tilts

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
463
at the filled-focal-plane arrays used in the ACT receiver. However, coupling toa tilted focal plane
does require custom reimaging optics, which generally prevents installing receivers from other
telescopes without reconfiguring the receiver optics to match the ACT focus. In addition, when
considering designs for future instruments that may require a different F, it is straightforward
to analytically calculate the new secondary parameters to match a parabolic primary, like SPT.
It has previously been stated that in an aplanatic Gregorian design, the range of secondary focal
lengths is limited (Padin et al. 2008); however, the ACT design demonstrated that numerical
optimization techniques can be used to adjust the focal length of the secondary with the design
of an ellipsoidal primary. As the secondary F is increased (decreased), the DLFOV throughput
increases (decreases), which is the same behavior as a classical Gregorian with a parabolic pri-
mary. The limits of changing F in an optimized aplanatic Gregorian design (ACT) relative to
a classical Gregorian (SPT) are not clear and warrant further study. Because of the focal plane
tilt and numerical optimization requirements of changing the secondary F, in >Table 10-4, we
characterize the SPT design as “easily reconfigurable” but not the ACT design.
Both the ACT and SPT teams began observing with multifrequency receivers to measure
the CMB and to search for galaxy clusters via the SZ effect in 2008 and are planning to deploy
new polarization-sensitive receivers in 2012–2013. Here, we brieflycompare the first-generation
receiver optics (>Fig. 10-9) and detector coupling, then discuss the planned upgrades. The SPT
receiver has two sections that can be operated independently, which is beneficial for testing both
systems and for upgrades that will use the same secondary reflector. The first section includes
the vacuum window, thermal blocking filters, cryogenic secondary reflector, and the majority of
the cold stop. The second section contains a lens, band-defining filters, and the detector array,
which includes detectors at ∼100, 150, and 220 GHz. Some advantages of this design include
reduced emission from the secondary reflector, a small-aperture vacuum window at the F ≈
primary focus, and a large stop surface, which minimizes diffraction at the stop. The SPT detec-
tors are coupled to the optics via a flat array of conical feedhorns, so a single high-density
polyethylene (n ≈.) lens is used to slightly speed up the focus and to improve the coupling to
the feedhorns by making the focal plane more telecentric. The feedhorn-coupled array includes
966 feeds with 4.5-mm apertures, resulting in ∼.-Fλ apertures at 150 GHz.
The ACT temperature receiver includes three independent optical paths that each operate
at a different frequency band: 148, 218, and 277 GHz. Each optical path has an independent
vacuum window, filters, three silicon (n ≈.) lenses, and detector array, which makes defin-
ing the bandwidth and antireflection coating the optical elements relatively easy compared to
⊡Table 10-4
Comparison of some ACT and SPT design features
ACT
SPT
Primary shape
Ellipsoid
Paraboloid
Easily reconﬁgurable
No
Yes
Stop type
Primary image
Secondary reﬂector
Cold stop temperature
1 K
10 K
Refractive optics
Three silicon lenses per array
HDPE lens
Temp. array coupling
Filled focal plane
Conical feedhorns
Pol. array coupling
Corrugated feedhorns
Corrugated and proﬁled feedhorns

464 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
⊡Fig. 10-9
Left:TheACTreceiveropticsincludethreeindependentopticalpaths,eachforadiﬀerentfrequency
band, with its own vacuum window, ﬁlters, and set of three silicon lenses (Fowler et al. 2007). Right:
An overview of the SPT receiver, which includes the cryogenic secondary reﬂector and a single
HDPE lens (Padin et al. 2008). The secondary mirror is the aperture stop of the system; spill-over
past the secondary is intercepted by cold surfaces
receivers that use common optical elements for multiple frequency bands. The first lens in each
optical path creates an image of the primary reflector, which is used as the system stop and
allows illumination of >90% of the primary reflector (>Table 10-3). The stop surface is cooled
to 1 K, which is required to minimize the background optical loading on the filled detector
arrays from spillover onto the stop. The following pairs of lenses create a fast focus (F ≈.)
onto the three filled detector arrays, each comprised of 1,024 square bolometric detectors with
.mm pitch (Niemack et al. 2008), or roughly .Fλ at 150 GHz.
>Section 2.3 provides an overview of the trade-offs between filled focal plane arrays (used
in ACT) and feedhorn-coupled arrays (used in SPT). The close packing of the detectors in ACT
led to having ∼3 times more detectors, despite the ACT receiver having less than half the opti-
cal throughput of the SPT receiver (> Table 10-3). We estimate that the ACT 150-GHz filled
array could have ∼2.5 higher mapping speed than a feedhorn array similar to the SPT design
filling the same FOV (listed as AΩDeff in >Table 10-3). Scaling the mapping speed ratio by the
total instrument throughput, AΩRtemp, provides an estimate of the relative mapping speeds of the
two instruments of MSSPT/MSACT ≈.. This estimateincludes assumptions about the instru-
ment optical loading conditions, does not include detector noise, and assumes that 150-GHz
detectors fill the same fraction of AΩRtemp of both instruments. Based on the mapping speed
estimate, the increased throughput of the filled detector arrays on ACT largely compensates
for the smaller AΩRtemp. This suggests that filled detector arrays hold promise for maximizing
the mapping speed of future instruments; however, significant development is needed to scale
the readout and fabrication of filled arrays for systems with larger AΩ. In addition to simplify-
ing instrument requirements as discussed above, feedhorns (and other beam-forming detector
coupling techniques) have advantages in terms of minimizing systematic effects in polarization
measurements.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
465
3.2 ACTPol and SPTPol
The ACT and SPT polarization-sensitive receivers, henceforth ACTPol (Niemack et al. 2010)
and SPTPol (McMahon et al. 2009), both use corrugated feedhorns (as well as 90-GHz profiled
feedhorns in the case of SPTPol) to couple to the detector arrays. This is done because of the
excellent polarization properties of corrugated/profiled feedhorns. SPTPol uses a nearly iden-
tical optics layout to the SPT layout, but the used FOV area has been increased by ∼33% by
surrounding the central 150-GHz detectors with individual 90-GHz feedhorns. ACTPol uses a
similar optics concept to ACT (three independent optics paths with three silicon lenses each);
however, the diameter of most of the optical components is roughly two times larger, and the
detector arrays are circular instead of square, which leads to a factor of 4.5 increase in through-
put at the final focus (> Table 10-3). Unlike the original ACT lenses, the orientation of the
ACTPol lenses is optimized to create image-space telecentric focal planes to couple to the flat
feedhorn arrays.
The ACT design approach included maximizing the throughput ofthe DLFOVat the Grego-
rian focus, but the DLFOV does not necessarily limit the usable FOV. For example, the edges of
the ACTPol lenses that are furthest from the boresight are placed outside the Gregorian DLFOV;
however, the lenses improve the image quality in this region to be strongly diffraction limited
(Strehl ratios > 0.9). Adding a tertiary reflector to a design like SPT is another approach for
increasing the DLFOV. Thus far, the throughput of the telescope receivers has generally been
designed to match the requirements of the superconducting detector arrays that were feasible
to manufacture and read out at that time. As superconducting detector array technologies con-
tinue to increase in size and decrease in cost, higher throughput optical systems will be required
to illuminate them. These examples suggest that modified secondary, tertiary, or reimaging
optics may allow substantial increases in the useable FOV for these telescopes in the future.
4
Interferometers
Interferometers are a natural choice for measuring the anisotropy in the CMB. The correlation
of the outputs from two antennas, called a visibility, is just a Fourier component of the product
of the sky and the response of a single antenna. The single antenna response is called the primary
beam and sets the interferometer’s field of view. It should not be confused with the response of
the pair of telescopes (or more generally, of an array of telescopes) to a point source, called the
synthesized beam. Thus, the visibility is directly relatable to the CMB power spectrum. In the
following, we imagine that the region of sky we cover is small enough that we may consider it
flat so that the expansion of the temperature field in Yℓm spherical harmonics can be replaced
by Fourier modes.
Consider the case of two identical antennas (or telescopes) of diameter D that are sepa-
rated by distance L. A particular configuration of the antennas, set by the spatial separation L
is called a ‘baseline’. When L=2D the antennas are is a ‘compact configuration’. The instanta-
neous beam pattern on the sky would resemble that of a double slit pattern for two wide slits. A
representation is shown in >Fig. 10-10. A visibility is the instrument response of the sky times
this instantaneous beam. As the telescopes are moved apart, the envelope of the pattern remains
that of the beam pattern of a single telescope although the number of fringes inside the envelope
increases. With multiple measurementswith baselines of different lengths and orientations, one

466 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
−2
−1
0
1
2
Theta (deg)
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Theta (deg) 
−2
−1
0
1
2
Theta (deg)
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Theta (deg) 
⊡Fig. 10-10
Instantaneous interferometer beams. Consider a 30-cm-diameter aperture with a Gaussian proﬁle
with σr = 6.3 cm (>Sect. 1.2) and λ = 1 cm. The resulting beam has θ1/2 = 2○. This is indicated
by the dashed circular lines in the ﬁgures. If two such apertures are placed so that the center-to-
center separation is 30 cm (30λ), then one obtains the instantaneous beam pattern shown on the
left. The dashed lines indicate negative lobes and the solid lines positive lobes. The output of the
interferometer is then the integral of the product of this beam pattern and the sky. One can see
that only spatial ﬂuctuations that resemble this pattern will give a nonzero output. If the center-
to-center separation is increased to 60λ, then one obtains the instantaneous pattern on the right.
Note that the extent of the pattern is still determined by θ1/2 from one antenna
may fill out the “U-V” (or loosely Fourier) plane with visibilities. To compute the power spec-
trum, one averages the variance over annuli in the U-V plane. To make a map of the sky, one
then transforms the visibility map to real space. There is no reason to constrain oneself to the
envelope of the beam, many images like the one in >Fig. 10-10 can be mosaicked together to
probe spatial wavelengths longer than that of the beam size and to increase the resolution of the
visibility spacing.
In some sense, interferometers are the opposite of more conventional mapping schemes.
With real-space maps, the size of the beam sets the resolution, and the scan size of the
instrument sets the size of the field one observes. With interferometers, the separation of the
telescopes determines the resolution and the transform of the antenna illumination pattern sets
the field size (before any mosaicking). With real-space methods, a map is made and the power
spectrum is obtained from its Fourier transform. With interferometers, the power spectrum
is fairly directly measured from the visibilities. The real-space maps can be obtained from the
transform of the visibilities, though they are rarely used for CMB science.
Interferometers have been used to measure the CMB anisotropy since the mid-1980s (e.g.,
Knoke et al. 1984 and reviewed in Partridge 1995), although most of the early efforts were
aimed at arc-minute angular scales or smaller because they used the VLA. The first interfero-
metric observation of the primary CMB was made with a dedicated two-element correlation
receiver (Timbie and Wilkinson 1988). Results from CAT, when combined with results at
lower ℓ, gave compelling evidence for the existence of the first acoustic peak in the CMB
(O’Sullivan et al. 1995; Scott et al. 1996; Baker et al. 1999). Anisotropy measurements by the
13 antennas of the Cosmic Background Imager interferometer at 31 GHz (Pearson et al. 2003),

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
467
together with results from ACBAR (Kuo et al. 2004) and WMAP, helped break cosmic param-
eter degeneracies. The DASI interferometer made the first measurements of the polarization of
the CMB (Kovac et al. 2002).
Interferometers have a number of advantages over real-space methods. The spatial filtering
of a visibility makes it insensitive to scales much larger (or smaller) than the fringe spacing, so
interferometers filterout almost all atmosphericfluctuations during the correlation. Theycan be
set up to measure fine angular resolution easily, simply by increasing the baseline length. As one
adds elements,the number of baselinesgrows as the square of the number of antennas.The rela-
tive response to different spatial wavelengths (analogous to the beam of a single-dish telescope)
is set by the easily measured separation of antennas. Because of the intrinsic atmospheric filter-
ing, they do not have to scan rapidly. The primary disadvantage is that the cost of correlation
in a classical interferometer grows as the number of dishes squared (though see, for exam-
ple, the Fast Fourier Transform Telescope (Tegmark and Zaldarriaga 2009, 2010)). For sparsely
sampled arrays interferometers are slower at mapping the sky; a separate cryostat is required
for each receiver; and the components are expensive. At 150 GHz coherent receivers are not
yet a “commodity” and the mechanical tolerances are tight. With the advent of arrays of thou-
sands of bolometers and of order 100-element polarization-sensitive coherent receivers (Gaier
et al. 2003), classically configured interferometers have lost much of their appeal for measuring
the CMB.
However, the quest for primordial gravitational waves and the advantages of interferometers
have driven the invention of new designs that go well beyond the classic configuration. There
is now an international effort called QUBIC (The Qubic Collaboration et al. 2011; Charlassier
2008; Timbie et al. 2006) to use arrays of bolometers in a novel optical configuration to make an
interferometer capable of detecting the polarization B-modes. The instrument observes the sky
through an array of feeds whose signals are then interferometrically combined on two arrays
of ∼1,000 bolometers, with one array per polarization. As opposed to multiplying the signals
from a pair of antennas, in QUBIC, the interfering electric fields are summed and squared by
the bolometers. It is a modern version of the Fizeau-style adding configuration.
5
The CMB Satellites
There have been four satellites with instruments dedicated to measuring the CMB anisotropy:
Relikt (Strukov and Skulachev 1984), the COsmic Background Explorer (COBE) (Boggess
et al. 1992), the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) (Bennett et al. 2003), and
Planck (Tauber et al. 2010b). The frequency coverage, sensitivity, and resolution are given
in >Table 10-5. There is a marked improvement over time.
The great benefit of a satellite is the ability to make all-sky maps from a very stable plat-
form. The stability of space allows one to understand the instrument, especially the noise and
systematic effects, in detail. An ideal anisotropy map would be fully described by simply a tem-
perature and uncertainty for each pixel on the sky with an overall offset removed. In reality,
all maps have some degree of correlation that must be accounted for in the most demanding
analyses. The source of the correlation could be due to nonideal aspects of the instrument’s
noise (e.g., “1/f” noise), remnants of glitch removal, contamination through the sidelobes, an
imperfect differential measurement (for COBE and WMAP), or asymmetric optics. Multiple
techniques have been developed to account for these correlations.

468 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
⊡Table 10-5
Characteristics of the four CMB anisotropy satellites giving for each frequency band (Freq) the number of science detectors (N), the sensitivity (S) for the
white noise limit and relative to a Rayleigh-Jeans emitter, and the angular resolution (θ1/2). The noise limits for each detector in a frequency band have been
added in quadrature for this estimate. To convert to a sensitivity in CMB temperature units, multiply by, for example, 1.03, 1.05, 1.13, 1.3, 1.66, 3.15, 13.8,
∼170, and ∼104, for the 28.5–857-GHz bands on Planck. The year of the launch is given next to each mission name. Relikt lasted 6 months, COBE 4 years,
WMAP 9 years, and the Planck HFI 2.5 years. The improvement in sensitivity and the increase in complexity over time are evident. For Planck, the bands with
ν > 100 GHz are bolometric. The notation “12/4P” means that there are 12 detectors of which there are 4 polarization-sensitive pairs for a total of 8 feeds.
For the HEMT bands each detector is a single linearly polarized radiometer; two orthogonally polarized radiometers share a feed. The same conﬁguration is
used for the 31.5 GHz band on COBE
Relikt (1983)
COBE (1989)
WMAP (2001)
Planck (2009)
Freq
θ1/2
Freq
θ1/2
Freq
θ1/2
Freq
θ1/2
GHz
N
S mKs1/2
deg
GHz
N
S mKs1/2
deg
GHz
N
S mKs1/2
deg
GHz
N
S mKs1/2
deg
22.7
2
0.49
0.82
28.5
4
0.15
0.54
31.5
2
30
7
33.0
2
0.51
0.62
37.5
1
25
5.8
40.7
4
0.47
0.49
44.1
6
0.16
0.47
53
2
11
7
60.6
4
0.54
0.33
70.3
12
0.13
0.22
90
2
16
7
93.4
8
0.58
0.21
100
8/4P
0.0173
0.16
143
12/4P
0.0084
0.12
217
12/4P
0.0068
0.078
353
12/4P
0.0055
0.074
545
4
0.0045
0.063
857
4
0.0019
0.061

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
469
An important factor in making high-fidelity maps is cross-linking. In the limit of a perfectly
stable instrument, cross-linking is not necessary, but in reality the gain and offsets of all detec-
tors vary over time. From the point of view of one pixel, a well cross-linked map would have
scan lines running through in all different directions connecting the pixel in question to those
around it. Ideally the cross-linking takes place on multiple timescales. A set of such measure-
ments for each pixel over the full sky provides a strong spatio-temporal filter that allows for the
separation of instrumental effects such as varying gains and offsets from the true underlying
signals.
Cross-linking has an advantage for the optics as well. Because of the premium on size
and mass for a satellite, the focal planes are packed to the hilt. As a result, the beam pro-
files are not symmetric let alone Gaussian. Perfect cross-linking has the effect of producing
an effectively symmetric beam profile (with a coarser resolution that depends on the inherent
asymmetry), thereby simplifying the data analysis. As with correlations, the most demanding
analyses must take the remaining asymmetries into account (Hinshaw et al. 2007; Hanson et al.
2010).
5.1 Relikt
Relikt was the first space-based anisotropy satellite (Strukov and Skulachev 1984). It was
part of the Soviet space program and was launched on the Prognoz-9 satellite in 1983,
roughly 6 years before the launch of NASA’s COBE. The microwave radiometer, shown
in >Fig. 10-11, was one of a number of instruments on the satellite. Its three objectives were
REF
Synchronous
Detector
Detector
Mixer
Calibrator
Switch
Parametric
Amplifier
Low Frequency
Amplifier
magnetometer
High Gain
Antenna
Radiometer
Sun
⊡Fig. 10-11
A line drawing of the Relikt satellite from Strukov and Skulachev (1986). The Sun is toward the top
of the page. The radiometer is the small box in the center between the bottom two solar panels.
The reference feed points toward the bottom of the page and the scanning feed points toward the
left. The instrument package weighed only 30 kg

470 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
(Strukov and Skulachev 1986) “(1) to determine the angular distribution of the relic radiation
and (in the case of the discovery of anisotropy) to estimate the mean density of matterin the uni-
verse; (2) to determine the distribution of faint extended radio sources on the celestial sphere;
and (3) to refine the velocity-vector parameters of the observer’s motion with respect to the
reference frame of the relic radiation.” Outside of detecting the primary anisotropy, these goals
were achieved.
Relikt was a differential instrument although was not symmetric. A reference-corrugated
feed with θ/= ○pointed in the antisolar direction. A second scanning feed with θ/= .○
was aimed ○to the reference direction and scanned the skyas the satelliterotated. The satellite
was in a highly elongated orbit, with a 26.7-day period. The rotation period was 113 s. In certain
parts of the orbit the Earth was observed as the beam scanned over it. After averaging data for
a week, the reference beam was stepped by ○in the ecliptic. Thus, all scans overlapped at the
ecliptic poles. Nearly the full sky was observed in the 6 months the satellite was operational
(Klypin et al. 1992).
The scanning feed had a corrugated cone feeding an offset parabola to direct the radiation
perpendicular to the symmetry axis of the base of the cone. Before launch the beam pattern
was mapped (Strukov and Skulachev 1984) to −80 dB of the peak and a broad sidelobe at the
−40 dB level for angles 30–60○was measured. As a result, during the data analysis, roughly half
the data were cut due to possible contamination by emission from the Earth and Moon into the
scanning beam sidelobes (Klypin et al. 1992). Nevertheless, at the time, they produced the best
measurement of the dipole (Strukov et al. 1987), one of their primary goals, and they placed
limits on the large angular scale anisotropy (Strukov et al. 1988) that were not improved upon
until FIRS (Meyer et al. 1991) and COBE (Smoot et al. 1991).
5.2 COBE
The Differential Microwave Radiometer(DMR) instrument (Smoot et al. 1990) was one of three
aboard the COBE satellite, shown in >Fig. 10-12. The other two were the Far Infrared Abso-
lute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS) which measured the absolute temperature of the CMB with
FIRAS (TCMB = .±.K) (Fixsen and Mather 2002) and the Diffuse Infrared Background
Experiment (DIRBE) which mapped the IR sky and detected the cosmic infrared background.
The COBE satellite was launched in 1989 into a high inclination polar orbit. The spin axis
of the spacecraft always pointed away from the Earth and at roughly ○from the Sun. At each
of the three frequencies given in > Table 10-5, there were two receivers like the one shown
in >Fig. 10-13. The radiometers were situated in the satellite so that the feeds observed ±30○
from the spin axis. COBE’s orbit and scan pattern were a marked improvement over that of
Relikt’s. Detailed attention was paid to possible contamination by emission from the Sun, Earth,
and Moon, and large cuts of the data were not required (Kogut et al. 1992). The most notable
systematic error was due to the affect of the Earth’s magnetic field on the Dicke switches.
The DMR optics are especially simple. In each of the six receivers, the sky is viewed through
two corrugated feeds with θ/= ○and separated by ○. There are, though, only five pairs
of feeds. At 31.5 GHz, the two output polarizations of feed pair are sent to two receivers. At
the other frequencies, a single polarization from each feed pair is sent to a receiver. The beam
patterns were measured before flight to roughly −90 dB from the peak (Toral et al. 1989).

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
471
Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer
FIRAS
Differential Microwave
Radiometers
DMR
Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment
DIRBE
Data Electronics Units
Instrument Power
Distribution Units
DEWAR
Sun-Earth Shield
Communications Antenna
Solar Panels
Earth
⊡Fig. 10-12
A line drawing of the COBE satellite (Boggess et al. 1992). Radiometers for the three DMR bands are
shown. The 31.5-GHz receiver (back right) has a single feed. The two separate radiometers in this
band look at the two orthogonal polarizations from one feed. The Sun would be, for example, oﬀ
to the left in this ﬁgure, thus illuminating the solar panels. The instruments always look away and
are shielded from the Earth. For scale, the diameter with the deployed solar panels is 8.5 m. The
mass of the DMR was 154 kg
The input to the receiver chain is Dicke-switched between the feed outputs at 100 Hz. The
31.5-GHz receiver operated at 300 K; the other two bands were at 140 K. The combined noise
level for the three bands was 30, 11, and 16 mK-s/, respectively.
The DMR instrument was much different in layout than the one on Relikt. As shown
in > Fig. 10-13, it took advantage of symmetry. The first manifestly symmetric anisotropy
instrument was designed by Edward Conklin (1969a, b) with the goal of measuring the CMB
dipole from White Mountain, CA. While there is no apparent evolutionary connection between
Conklin, COBE, and WMAP, the strong appeal of symmetry for making a differential measure-
ment guided the designs of all these instruments. As we show below, most modern anisotropy
instruments, including the Planck satellite, are not symmetric. In some cases, this is driven
by the use of bolometers; in others by the fact that the receivers are dual polarized and thus
intrinsically differential.

472 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
TUNNEL
DIODE
AMPLIFIER
TUNNEL
DIODE
DETECTOR
AUDIO
PREAMP
TURNTABLE MOTOR
& GEARBOX
SWITCH DRIVE
ZENITH
WEST
EAST
HA
HA
WT
SW
AA
TW
TW
FA
CC
Conklin
WMAP
Calibrator
Calibrator
Corrugated 
Antennas
Output Proportional
to Brightness Difference
100 Hz
Oscillator
Oscillator
Synchronous 
Demodulator Switch
Diode Detector
Amplifier
Frequency
Converter
Switch
DMR
⊡Fig. 10-13
The evolution of the manifestly diﬀerential CMB radiometer over 30 years. The left shows Conklin’s
radiometer for measuring the CMB dipole. The central picture shows the DMR aboard COBE. The
angle between the feeds is 60○. The right-most ﬁgure shows WMAP. (Adapted from Peebles et al.
(2009))
5.3 WMAP
As shown in > Figs. 10-13 and >10-14, WMAP has similarities to a classic feed plus telescope
design. However, unlike the classic system, two telescopes are combined in a back-to-back con-
figuration. When designing a CMB satellite telescope, there are a number of factors that must
be considered:
1. It is desirable to use an “offset” design so that the support structure for the secondary does
not scatter radiation.
2. In space, one wants to make optimal use of the rocket shroud size. For a given useable
focal plane area, the Gregorian family with its focus between the primary and secondary
is especially compact (Brown and Prata 1994). For WMAP, multiple designs were consid-
ered including the offset Cassegrain, single reflector systems, and three reflector systems,
but the two-mirror Gregorian was optimal.
3. One wants to get as many beams on the sky with as wide a frequency coverage as the tech-
nology will permit. In other words, one wants a large DLFOV. To minimize abberations and
maintain a DLFOV, the higher frequency feeds are placed near the center of the focal plane
and the lower frequency feeds on the outside. Asymmetric beam profiles are acceptable as
their effects maybe incorporated in the data analysis. For WMAP, the scan strategy(Bennett
et al. 2003) has the benefit of symmetrizing the beam profiles.
4. At least two types of modeling code are needed. A fast parametric code is useful for try-
ing many designs. However, the full response must be computed using physical optics in
which the field is solved for at each surface. WMAP used the Diffraction Analysis of a Dual
Reflector Antenna code (Rahmat-Samii et al. 1995) which proved to be sufficiently accurate.
5. The precise reflector shape is chosen to minimize abberations over as large as possible an
area. WMAP started as a classic Gregorian following the Mizuguchi-Dragone condition
(see >Sect. 2.5 and footnote 15). Then the surface was shaped using proprietary surface-
shaping software (Rahmat-Samii et al. 1995).

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
473
Radiators
Primary
Secondary
Feeds
Solar arrays/shield
GAC
Hex hub
⊡Fig. 10-14
Outline of the WMAP satellite. The thermal straps at the base of the large radiators provide the
passive cooling for the ﬁrst stage of the ampliﬁer chain. The overall height is 3.6 m, the mass is
830 kg, and the diameter of the large disk on the bottom is 5.1 m. Six solar arrays on the bottom
of this disk supply 400 W to power the spacecraft and instrument. Thermal blanketing between
the hex hub and thermal link provided by the gamma alumina cylinder (GAC), and between the
GAC and radiators, shield the instrument from thermal radiation from the support electronics and
attitude control systems
6. The feeds must not be able to view each other or couple to each other. This means that low-
frequency feeds are shortened or profiled and that high-frequency feeds are lengthened with
extra corrugations.
7. One must be able to account for all of the solid angle of the beam in intensity and polar-
ization. The optics are designed with the full π coverage in mind. Not only are the Earth,
Moon, and Sun bright objects in the sidelobes, but emission from the galaxy mustbe consid-
ered. For WMAP, a specialized test range was built to make sure that, by measurement, one
could limit the Sun as a source of spurious signal to <1 μK level in all bands. This requires
knowing the beam profiles down to roughly −45 dBi (gain above isotropic) or −105 dB from
the W-band peak. It was found that over much of the sky, the measured profiles differ from
the predictions at the −50 dB level due to scattering off of the feedhorns and the structure
that holds them that were not part of the model. During the early part of the mission, the
Moon was used as a source in the sidelobes to verify in part the ground-based measurements
and models.
8. After launch and before commanding the satellite attitude, the optics have a chance of
directly viewing the Sun. Thus, the surfaces must be roughened so that the Sun is not
focussed on the feeds. The roughening must not increase the microwave emissivity. In addi-
tion, the surface must be emissive at infrared wavelengths so that it can radiatively cool.
This is accomplished by evaporatively coating them with a mixture of silicon monoxide and
silicon dioxide.
9. There is a premium on mass and therefore the reflectors are almost always made of light-
weight composite material.

474 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
As a result of these considerations, the WMAP team settled on a design (Page et al. 2003;
Barnes et al. 2002) shown in >Fig. 10-14. The primary reflectors are .×.m. The secondaries
are roughly a meter across, though most of the surface simply acts as a shield to prevent the feeds
from directly viewing the Galaxy. Each telescope focusses radiation onto ten dual-polarization
scalar feeds. These are shown as triangles in the right panel of >Fig. 10-13. The primary optical
axes of the two telescopes are separated by ○to allow differential measurements over large
angles on a fast timescale. The feed centers occupy a 18 cm × 20 cm region in the focal plane,
corresponding to a ○× .○array on the sky.
At the base of each feed is an orthomode transducer (OMT) that sends the two polarizations
supported by the feed to separate receiver chains. The microwave plumbing is such that a single
receiver chain (half of a “differencing assembly,” Jarosik et al. (2003)) differences electric fields
with two nearly parallel linear polarization vectors, one from each telescope.
Because of the large focal plane, the beams are not symmetric nor are they Gaussian. In
addition, as anticipated, cooldown distortions of the primary reflectors distort the W-band and
V-band beam shapes.
As noted above, precise knowledge of the beams is essential for accurately computing the
CMB angular spectrum. For WMAP, one of the most CPU-intensive aspects of the data analysis
was modeling the beams. The goal was to find an antenna pattern that matched the in-flight
measurements of Jupiter using each of the two telescopes, the sidelobe measurements from the
Moon, and preflight ground-based measurements. Although intensive beam modeling would
have been needed in any case, it was all the more important for WMAP becauseof the cooldown
distortions. Due to composite CTE mismatches, the in-flight variations across the center of
the primary were approximately 0.5–1 mm, as shown in Hill et al. (2009). To understand the
distortions, we developed a model in which the surfaces were parametrized by over 400 Fourier
modes (Jarosik et al. 2007; Hill et al. 2009). For each set of parameters, the full physical optics
solution weighted by the measured passband was computed for all feeds. We then compared the
physical optics prediction to measurements of Jupiter. The solution required running for many
months on a 100 processors on Silicon Graphics Origin 300 machines. The reduced χof the fit
are typically <1.1, suggesting quite a good fit given the overall complexity of the system coupled
with multiple precise measurementsof Jupiter. With the combination of the measurements and
the model, the beam could be characterized at the −40 to −50dB level, and the beam solid angles
were determined to better than % (Hill et al. 2009).
5.4 Planck
Planck is significantlymore complexand sensitive than WMAP. Thus, although it was conceived
at roughly the same time, it took longer to build. Planck combines two different technologies
in one focal plane. The low-frequency instrument (LFI) uses coherent detectors cooled to 20 K
operating between 30 and 70 GHz. The high-frequency instrument uses bolometric detectors
cooled to 0.1 K operating between 90 and 900 GHz. An attractive aspect of the design is that it
covers a very wide frequency range in one spacecraft. Much of the telescope optimization that
was done for WMAP, and discussed earlier, was independentlycarried out for Planck. However,
because ofPlanck’s enormous frequencyrange and much highersensitivity(>Table 10-5), many
of the optical system specifications were considerably more demanding than similar ones for
WMAP.

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
475
Planck is the first CMB satellite to use a single telescope. This choice was driven by the
bolometers in the HFI, the most sensitive detectors aboard Planck. The LFI instrument uses
a differential receiver except that one of the inputs is terminated in a cold load as opposed to
the sky as with WMAP. For bolometers, the analogue to a differential microwave receiver is a
Fourier transform spectrometer(FTS). Not only would an FTS be more cumbersomeand costly
to build, but the intrinsically large FTS bandwidth is not amenable to single-mode optics or to
minimizing the photon background. A single telescope was the natural choice.
The Planck telescope, shown in >Fig. 10-15, is an aplanatic Gregorian (Tauber et al. 2010a)
and is roughly 20% larger than WMAP’s. Planck’s primary is .× .m and the secondary
is .× .m. Thus, at a given frequency, it has about 20% more resolution. As with WMAP,
the drivers for the design are to get the maximum number of feeds in the focal plane, with the
most symmetric beams, in the most compact telescope. Planck had the additional challenge
of supporting two different technologies in the focal plane operating at different temperatures.
The in-flight surface accuracy is significantly better than WMAP’s.
Planck HFI observations were completed in early 2012 when the instrument ran out of
liquid cryogens as expected. Early publications from Planck have demonstrated the excellent
performance of the instrument, and more results and CMB maps will be released by the Planck
team in the coming years.
⊡Fig. 10-15
A cutaway view and line drawing of Planck. The focal plane is located just below the primary reﬂec-
tor. Planck spins about a vertical axis. As with WMAP, Planck is located at the second Lagrange
point, roughly 1.5 × 106 km away from Earth. In this orientation, the Sun, Earth, and Moon are in
the direction of the bottom of the page. Note the open ground shield around the optical system
and the relatively large secondary reﬂector (Figures from Tauber et al. (2010a, b))

476 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
5.5 A Future Satellite
Because a satellite is the ideal platform for measuring the CMB, considerable effort has gone
into designing the next generation instrument. After Planck, there will be little motivation for
measuring the primary temperature anisotropy for ℓ<∼,if the fluctuations turn out to be
Gaussian to the limits of Planck’s detector noise. However, there is quite a bit more to be learned
from measuring the polarization, particularly the B-mode, as described in >Sect. 1.5. At the
time of this writing, there are two relatively mature US satellite concepts: EPIC (Bock et al.
2008, 2009) and PIXIE (Kogut et al. 2011). These are very different missions. EPIC is based
on the next generation single-moded detectors operating in the limit of CMB photon noise. In
the EPIC-IM design, about 11,000 transition edge sensor bolometers are fed by a 4-K-cooled
crossed-Dragone telescope that provides sensitivity to ℓ>∼,. The detectors are cooled to
∼100 mK by means of a continuously operating adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator. PIXIE,
on the other hand, operates in the limit of many modes that are measured by just four detectors
at the output of a polarizing fourier transform Spectrometer (FTS). Its sensitivity to B-mode
science is at ℓ<∼. The frequency spectrum of the anisotropy is determined by scanning the
reflectors of the FTS much in the same ways as was done by COBE/FIRAS in its absolute mea-
surement on the sky and by BAM (Tucker et al. 1997) in its search for the spectrum of the
anisotropy.
A European collaboration has proposed the COrE mission concept (The COrE Collabo-
ration et al. 2011). It is based on ∼1.5-m-diameter rotating half-wave plate as the first optical
element that feeds a two-mirror system. The primary reflector is ∼1.8 m diameter. The resolu-
tion varies between 23 and 1.3 arc-minutes for 45 and 795 GHz, respectively. Detection is based
on feedhorn-coupled superconducting detectors to maintain control of systematics and achieve
single-mode coupling with high sensitivity.
Acknowledgments
The authors are collaborators on just a subset of the instruments discussed in this chapter. We
have learned about other optical system through papers and talking with colleagues, though
all errors are of course ours. We would especially like to thank Elia Battistelli, Cynthia Chiang,
Nils Halverson, Bill Jones, Akito Kusaka, Jeff McMahon, Lucio Piccirillo, Jon Sievers, Suzanne
Staggs, Ed Wollack, and Sasha Zhiboedov for discussions and suggestions that improved this
chapter. Ed Wollack in particular made numerous helpful comments. We also thank Chaoyun
Bao, Angela Glenn, Michael Milligan, and Keith Thompson for help with the figures.
References
Ade, P., et al. 2008, ApJ, 674, 22
Ade, P. A. R., et al. 2010, A&A, 520, A11
Aikin, R. W., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7741
Ali-Haïmoud, Y., Hirata, C. M., & Dickinson, C. 2009,
MNRAS, 395, 1055
Alsop, D. C., et al. 1992, ApJ, 395, 317
Arnold, K., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7741
Baker, J. C., et al. 1999, MNRAS, 308, 1173
Balanis,D.2005,AntennaTheory:AnalysisandDesign
(3rd ed.; Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience)
Barkats, D., et al. 2005, ApJL, 619, L127
Barnes, C., et al. 2002, ApJS, 143, 567
Basak, S., Hajian, A., & Souradeep, T. 2006, Phys.
Rev. D, 74, 021301

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
477
Bennett, C. L. et al. 2003, ApJ, 583, 1
Benoît, A., et al. 2003, A&A, 399, L19
Bock, J., et al. 2008, ArXiv e-prints
Bock, J., et al. 2009, ArXiv e-prints
Boggess, N. W., et al. 1992, ApJ, 397, 420
Bond, J. R., & Efstathiou, G. 1984, ApJL, 285,
L45
Born, M., & Wolf, E. 1980, Principles of Optics (6th
ed.; Oxford/New York: Pergamon Press)
Boughn, S. P., Fram, D. M., & Patridge, R. B. 1971,
ApJ, 165, 439
Boughn, S. P., Cheng, E. S., Cottingham, D. A., &
Fixsen, D. J. 1992, ApJL, 391, L49
Brown, K. W., & Prata, A. 1994, IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., 42, 1145
Caderni, N., Fabbri, R., de Cosmo, V., Melchiorri, B.,
Melchiorri, F., & Natale, V. 1977, Phys. Rev. D,
16, 2424
Carlstrom, J. E., et al. 2011, PASP, 123, 568
Carpenter, R. L., Gulkis, S., & Sato, T. 1973, ApJL,
182, L61
Chang, S., & Prata, A. 1999, Antennas Propag. Soc.
Int. Symp. IEEE, 2, 1140
Chang, S., & Prata, A. 2005, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 22,
2454
Charlassier, R. 2008, ArXiv e-prints
Cheng, E. S., Saulson, P. R., Wilkinson, D. T., & Corey,
B. E. 1979, ApJL, 232, L139
Cheng, E. S., et al. 1994, ApJL, 422, L37
Chiang, H. C., et al. 2010, ApJ, 711, 1123
Church, S. E. 1995, MNRAS, 272, 551
Clarricoats, P., & Olver, A. 1984, IEE Electromagn.
Waves Ser., Corrugated Horns for Microwave
Antennas (London: P. Peregrinus on behalf of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers)
Conklin, E. K. 1969a, Ph.D. thesis, Stanford Univer-
sity
Conklin, E. K. 1969b, Nature, 222, 971
Conklin, E. K., & Bracewell, R. N. 1967, Nature, 216,
777
Crill, B. P., et al. 2003, ApJS, 148, 527
dall’Oglio, G., & de Bernardis, P. 1988, ApJ, 331, 547
Das, S., et al. 2011, ApJ, 729, 62
Davies, R. D., Lasenby, A. N., Watson, R. A., Daintree,
E. J., Hopkins, J., Beckman, J., Sanchez Almeida,
J., & Rebolo, R. 1987, Nature, 326, 462
de Bernardis, P., et al. 1990, ApJL, 360, L31
de Bernardis, P., et al. 2000, Nature, 404, 955
de Oliveira-Costa, A., Kogut, A., Devlin, M. J., Net-
terfield, C. B., Page, L. A., & Wollack, E. J. 1997,
ApJL, 482, L17
de Oliveira-Costa, A., Devlin, M. J., Herbig, T.,
Miller, A. D., Netterfield, C. B., Page, L. A., &
Tegmark, M. 1998, ApJL, 509, L77
Dicker, S. R., et al. 1999, MNRAS, 309, 750
Dragone, C. 1978, AT T Tech. J., 57, 2663
Dragone, C. 1982, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 30,
331
Dragone, C. 1983a, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
31, 764
Dragone, C. 1983b, Electron. Lett., 19, 1061
Dragovan, M., Ruhl, J. E., Novak, G., Platt, S. R.,
Crone, B., Pernic, R., & Peterson, J. B. 1994,
ApJL, 427, L67
Draine, B. T., & Lazarian, A. 1998, ApJ, 508, 157
Draine, B. T., & Lazarian, A. 1999, ApJ, 512, 740
Dudok, E. W. M & Fasold, E. 1986, Analysis of Com-
pact Antenna Test Range Configurations, JINA’
86 - International Symposium on Antennas
Epstein, E. E. 1967, ApJL, 148, L157
Essinger-Hileman, T. 2011, Ph.D. thesis, Princeton
University
Fabbri, R., Guidi, I., Melchiorri, F., & Natale, V. 1980a,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 44, 1563
Fabbri, R., Melchiorri, B., Melchiorri, F., Natale, V.,
Caderni, N., & Shivanandan, K. 1980b, Phys. Rev.
D, 21, 2095
Farese, P. C., et al. 2003, New Astron. Rev., 47, 1033
Filippini, J. P., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7741
Finlay, C. C., et al. 2010, Geophys. J. Int., 183, 1216
Fixsen, D. J., & Mather, J. C. 2002, ApJ, 581, 817
Fixsen, D. J., Cheng, E. S., & Wilkinson, D. T. 1983,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 50, 620
Fowler, J. W., et al. 2005, ApJS, 156, 1
Fowler, J. W., et al. 2007, Appl. Opt., 46, 3444
Fowler, J. W., et al. 2010, ApJ, 722, 1148
Gaier, T., Schuster, J., Gundersen, J., Koch, T., Seif-
fert, M., Meinhold, P., & Lubin, P. 1992, ApJL,
398, L1
Gaier, T., Lawrence, C. R., Seiffert, M. D., Wells,
M. M., Kangaslahti, P., & Dawson, D. 2003, New
Astro. Rev., 47, 1167
Ganga, K., Ratra, B., Church, S. E., Sugiyama, N.,
Ade, P. A. R., Holzapfel, W. L., Mauskopf, P. D.,
& Lange, A. E. 1997, ApJ, 484, 517
Graham, R. 1973, in IEEE International Conference
on Radar – Present and Future (IEEE), 134–139
Grainge, K., et al. 2003, MNRAS, 341, L23
Griffin, M. J., Bock, J. J., & Gear, W. K. 2002, Appl.
Opt., 41, 6543
Halpern, M., Benford, R., Meyer, S., Muehlner, D., &
Weiss, R. 1988, ApJ, 332, 596
Halverson, N. W., et al. 2002, ApJ, 568, 38
Hanany, S., & Marrone, D. P. 2002, App. Opt., 41,
4666
Hanany, S., & Rosenkranz, P. 2003, New. Astron. Rev.,
47, 1159
Hanany, S., et al. 2000, ApJL, 545, L5
Hanson, D., Lewis, A., & Challinor, A. 2010, Phys.
Rev. D, 81, 103003
Hecht, E. 1987, Optics (Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley)

478 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
Hedman, M. M., Barkats, D., Gundersen, J. O., Staggs,
S. T., & Winstein, B. 2001, ApJL, 548, L111
Henry, P. S. 1971, Nature, 231, 516
Hill, R. S., et al. 2009, ApJS, 180, 246
Hinderks, J. R., et al. 2009, ApJ, 692, 1221
Hinshaw, G., et al. 2007, ApJS, 170, 288
Hu, W., Hedman, M. M., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2003,
Phys. Rev. D, 67, 043004
Imbriale,
W.
A.,
Gundersen,
J.,
&
Thompson,
K. L. 2011, IEEE Tran. Antennas Propag., 59,
1972
Irwin, K., & Hilton, G. 2005, Transition-edge sensors,
in Cryogenic Particle Detection (Berlin/New
York: Springer)
Jarosik, N., et al. 2003, ApJS, 145, 413
Jarosik, N., et al. 2007, ApJS, 170, 263
Johnson, B. R., et al. 2007, ApJ, 665, 42
Jones, W. C. 2005, Ph.D. thesis, California Institute
of Technology
Kamionkowski, M., Kosowsky, A., & Stebbins, A.
1997, Phys. Rev. D, 55, 7368
Keating, B. G., Timbie, P. T., Polnarev, A., & Stein-
berger, J. 1998, ApJ, 495, 580
Keating, B. G., O’Dell, C. W., de Oliveira-Costa,
A., Klawikowski, S., Stebor, N., Piccirillo, L.,
Tegmark, M., & Timbie, P. T. 2001, ApJL, 560, L1
Keisler, R., et al. 2011, ApJ, 743, 28
Klypin, A. A., Strukov, I. A., & Skulachev, D. P. 1992,
MNRAS, 258, 71
Knoke, J. E., Partridge, R. B., Ratner, M. I., & Shapiro,
I. I. 1984, ApJ, 284, 479
Kogut, A., et al. 1992, ApJ, 401, 1
Kogut, A., Banday, A. J., Bennett, C. L., Górski, K. M.,
Hinshaw, G., & Reach, W. T. 1996, ApJ, 460, 1
Kogut, A., et al. 2011, J. Cos. & Par. Ast., 7, 25
Komatsu, E., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 18
Korsch,
D.
1991,
Reflective
Optics
(Boston:
Academic)
Kovac, J. M., Leitch, E. M., Pryke, C., Carlstrom,
J. E., Halverson, N. W., & Holzapfel, W. L. 2002,
Nature, 420, 772
Kuo, C. L., et al. 2004, ApJ, 600, 32
Kuo, C. L., et al. 2008, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7020
Lamarre, J. M. 1986, Appl. Opt., 25, 870
Lasenby, A. N., & Davies, R. D. 1983, MNRAS, 203,
1137
Lay, O. P., & Halverson, N. W. 2000, ApJ, 543,
787
Ledden, J. E., Broderick, J. J., Brown, R. L., & Condon,
J. J. 1980, AJ, 85, 780
Leitch, E. M., Readhead, A. C. S., Pearson, T. J., &
Myers, S. T. 1997, ApJL, 486, L23
Leitch, E. M., Readhead, A. C. S., Pearson, T. J., Myers,
S. T., Gulkis, S., & Lawrence, C. R. 2000, ApJ,
532, 37
Levy, A. R., et al. 2008, ApJS, 177, 419
Love, A., Antennas, I., & Society, P. 1978, IEEE Press
Sel. Repr. Ser., Reflector Antennas (New York:
IEEE Press)
Lubin, P. M., Epstein, G. L., & Smoot, G. F. 1983, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 50, 616
Maffei, B., et al. 2010, A&A, 520, A12
Mandolesi, N., Calzolari, P., Cortiglioni, S., Delpino,
F., & Sironi, G. 1986, Nature, 319, 751
Mather, J. C. 1982, Appl. Opt., 21, 1125
Mather, J., Hinshaw, G., & Page, L. 2012, Cos-
mic Microwave Background. Planets, Stars and
Stellar Systems. Vol. 6, Springer
McMahon, J. J., et al. 2009, in AIP Conf. Ser. 1185, ed.
B. Young, B. Cabrera, & A. Miller, 511–514
McMahon, J., et al. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Meinhold, P., & Lubin, P. 1991, ApJL, 370, L11
Meinhold, P. R., Chingcuanco, A. O., Gundersen,
J. O., Schuster, J. A., Seiffert, M. D., Lubin, P. M.,
Morris, D., & Villela, T. 1993, ApJ, 406, 12
Meinhold, P. R., et al. 2005, ApJS, 158, 101
Mennella, A., et al. 2011, ArXiv e-prints
Meyer, S. S., Cheng, E. S., & Page, L. A. 1991, ApJL,
371, L7
Miller, A. D., et al. 1999, ApJL, 524, L1
Mizuguchi, Y., & Yokoi, H. 1974, International Conv.
of IECE, Japan, 801
Mizuguchi, Y., Akagawa, M., & Yokoi, H. 1978, Elec-
tron. Commun. Jpn., 61, 58
Mizugutch, Y., & Yokoi, H. 1975, Trans of IECE of
Japan, 58–3
Mizugutch, Y., Akagawa, M., & Yokoi, H. 1976, in
Digest of 1976 AP-S International Symposium on
Antennas and Propagation (New York: IEEE)
Muehlner, D. 1977, in Astrophys. Space Sci. Libr.
63, Infrared and Submillimeter Astronomy, ed.
G. G. Fazio (Dordrecht/Boston: D. Reidel Pub.
Co.), 143–152
Nanos, G. P. Jr., 1979, ApJ, 232, 341
Niemack, M. D., et al. 2008, J. Low Temp. Phys., 151,
690
Niemack, M. D., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf. Ser.
7741
O’Brient, R., et al. 2008, J. Low Temp. Phys., 151, 459
O’Dea, D., Challinor, A., & Johnson, B. R. 2007,
MNRAS, 376, 1767
Olver, A. D. 1991, in Antennas and Propagation,
1991. ICAP 91., Seventh International Confer-
ence on (IEE), Vol. 1 (London: IEE), 99–108
Olver, A., Clarricoats, P., Kishk, A., & Shafai, L.
1994, Microwave Horns and Feeds (London:
IEEE Press and IEE)
O’Sullivan, C., et al. 1995, MNRAS, 274, 861
O’Sullivan, C., et al. 2008, Infrared Phys. Technol., 51,
277
Padin, S., et al. 2001, ApJL, 549, L1
Padin, S., et al. 2008, Appl. Opt., 47, 4418

CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems 10
479
Page, L. A., Cheng, E. S., & Meyer, S. S. 1990, ApJL,
355, L1
Page, L. A., Cheng, E. S., Golubovic, B., Meyer, S. S.,
& Gundersen, J. 1994, App. Opt., 33, 11
Page, L., et al. 2003, ApJ, 585, 566
Pardo, J. R., Cernicharo, J., & Serabyn, E. 2001, IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., 49, 1683
Pariiskii, Y. N., & Pyatunina, T. B. 1971, Sov. Astro.,
14, 1067
Parijskij, Y. N. 1973, ApJL, 180, L47
Partridge, R. B. 1980, ApJ, 235, 681
Partridge, R. B. 1995, 3K: The Cosmic Microwave
Background Radiation (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press)
Pascale, E., et al. 2008, ApJ, 681, 400
Pearson, T. J., et al. 2003, ApJ, 591, 556
Peebles, P. J. E. 1994, ApJL, 432, L1
Peebles, P. J. E., Page, L., & Partridge, B. 2009, Finding
the Big Bang (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press)
Peterson, J. B., et al. 2000, ApJL, 532, L83
Piccirillo, L. 1991, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 62, 1293
Piccirillo, L., & Calisse, P. 1993, ApJ, 411, 529
Piccirillo, L., et al. 1997, ApJL, 475, L77
Piccirillo, L., et al. 2008, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7020
Planck HFI Core Team, et al. 2011, ArXiv e-prints
Pospieszalski, M. W. 1992, in IEEE MTT-S Digest,
1369
QUIET Collaboration, et al. 2011, ApJ, 741, 111
Rabii, B., et al. 2006, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 77, 071101
Rahmat-Samii, Y., Imbriale, W., & Galindo-Isreal,
V. 1995, DADRA, YRS Associates, rahmat@ee.
ucla.edu
Readhead, A. C. S., Lawrence, C. R., Myers, S. T., Sar-
gent, W. L. W., Hardebeck, H. E., & Moffet, A. T.
1989, ApJ, 346, 566
Reichborn-Kjennerud, B., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf.
Ser. 7741
Richards, P. L. 1994, J. Appl. Phys., 76, 1
Rudnick, L. 1978, ApJ, 223, 37
Schaffer, K. K., et al. 2011, ApJ, 743, 90
Schlaerth, J. A., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7741
Scott, P. F., et al. 1996, ApJL, 461, L1
Seielstad, G. A., Masson, C. R., & Berge, G. L. 1981,
ApJ, 244, 717
Seo, E. S., et al. 2008, Adv. Space Res., 42, 1656
Sheehy, C. D., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7741
Shimon, M., Keating, B., Ponthieu, N., & Hivon, E.
2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 083003
Shirokoff, E., et al. 2011, ApJ, 736, 61
Singal, J., et al. 2011, ApJ, 730, 138
Smoot, G. F., Gorenstein, M. V., & Muller, R. A. 1977,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 39, 898
Smoot, G., et al. 1990, ApJ, 360, 685
Smoot, G. F., et al. 1991, ApJL, 371, L1
Staniszewski, Z., et al. 2009, ApJ, 701, 32
Stankevich, K. S. 1974, Sov. Astro., 18, 126
Staren, J., et al. 2000, ApJ, 539, 52
Strukov, I. A., & Skulachev, D. P. 1984, Sov. Astron.
Lett., 10, 1
Strukov, I. A., & Skulachev, D. P. 1986, Itogi Nauki i
Tekhniki Seriia Astronomiia, 31, 37
Strukov, I. A., Skulachev, D. P., Boyarskiy, M. N., &
Tkachev, A. N. 1987, JPRS Rep. Sci. Technol.
USSR Space, 3, 59
Strukov, I. A., Skulachev, D. P., & Klypin, A. A.
1988, in IAU Symp. 130, Large Scale Structures
of the Universe, ed. J. Audouze, M.-C. Pelletan,
A. Szalay, Y. B. Zel’Dovich, & P. J. E. Peebles
(Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer), 27–+
Su, M., Yadav, A. P. S., Shimon, M., & Keating, B. G.
2011, Phys. Rev. D, 83, 103007
Sunyaev, R. A., & Zeldovich, I. B. 1980, ARAA, 18,
537
Swetz, D. S., et al. 2011, ApJS, 194, 41
Takahashi, Y. D., et al. 2010, ApJ, 711, 1141
Tatarskii, V. I. 1961, Wave Propagation in a Turbulent
Medium (New York: McGraw-Hill)
Tauber, J. A., et al. 2010a, A&A, 520, A2+
Tauber, J. A., et al. 2010b, A&A, 520, A1+
Tegmark, M., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2009, Phys. Rev. D,
79, 083530
Tegmark, M., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2010, Phys. Rev. D,
82, 103501
The COrE Collaboration, et al. 2011, ArXiv e-prints
The Qubic Collaboration, et al. 2011, Astropart.
Phys., 34, 705
Timbie, P. T., & Wilkinson, D. T. 1988, Rev. Sci.
Instrum., 59, 914
Timbie, P. T., & Wilkinson, D. T. 1990, ApJ, 353,
140
Timbie, P. T., et al. 2006, New Astro. Rev., 50, 999
Toral, M. A., Ratliff, R. B., Lecha, M. C., Maruschak,
J. G., & Bennett, C. L. 1989, IEEE Trans. Anten-
nas Propag., 37, 171
Tran, H., & Page, L. 2009, J. Phys. Conf. Ser., 155,
012007
Tran, H., Lee, A., Hanany, S., Milligan, M., &
Renbarger, T. 2008, App. Opt., 47, 103
Tran, H., et al. 2010, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 7731
Tucker, G. S., Griffin, G. S., Nguyen, H. T., &
Peterson, J. B. 1993, ApJL, 419, L45+
Tucker, G. S., Gush, H. P., Halpern, M., Shinkoda, I.,
& Towlson, W. 1997, ApJL, 475, L73
Uson, J. M. & Wilkinson, D. T. 1982, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
49, 1463
Vokurka, V. J. 1980, Compact Antenna Range Perfor-
mance at 70 GHz, IEEE int. Symp. Ant. and Prop.,
260–263
Watson, R. A., Gutierrez de La Cruz, C. M., Davies,
R. D., Lasenby, A. N., Rebolo, R., Beckman,
J. E., & Hancock, S. 1992, Nature, 357, 660

480 10
CMB Telescopes and Optical Systems
Weiss, R. 1980, ARAA, 18, 489
Welton, W., & Winston, R. 1978, The Optics of Non-
imaging Concentrators (New York: Academic)
Wilkinson, D. T., & Partridge, R. B. 1967, Nature, 215,
719
Wilson, R. W., & Penzias, A. A. 1967, Science, 156,
1100
Wollack, E. J., Jarosik, N. C., Netterfield, C. B., Page,
L. A., & Wilkinson, D. 1993, ApJL, 419, L49
Yadav, A. P. S., Su, M., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2010, Phys.
Rev. D, 81, 063512
Yoon, K. W., et al. 2006, in SPIE Conf. Ser. 6275
Yoon, K. W., et al. 2009, in AIP Conf. Ser. 1185, ed.
B. Young, B. Cabrera, & A. Miller, 515–518
Zaldarriaga, M., & Seljak, U. 1997, Phys. Rev. D, 55,
1830
Zmuidzinas, J. 2003, Appl. Opt., 42, 4989

11
Very-High-Energy
Gamma-Ray Telescopes
Elizabeth Hays
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 482
2
Gamma Rays in Matter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 483
3
Space-Based Gamma-Ray Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 485
4
Ground-Based Gamma-Ray Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 486
4.1
Extensive Air Showers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 487
4.2
Water Cherenkov Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 490
4.3
WCTs: A Little History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 494
4.4
Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 494
4.5
IACTs: A Little History. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_11, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

482 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
Abstract:
Telescopes capable of collecting the highest energy light, called gamma radiation,
explore a region of the electromagnetic spectrum that was largely inaccessible until recently.
Observations at the highest energies reveal the existence and properties of extreme sites in the
Universe. In this chapter, I cover the techniques used to detect photons at frequencies above
Hz, photon energy >100 MeV, in the so-called pair production regime. Telescopes employ-
ing particle and optical detection methods are used in space or the upper atmosphere as well
as on the ground. Gamma-ray astrophysics is a young field with only one or two generations of
instruments completed for each of several techniques. In the past decade, telescopes through-
out this band have generated significantly deeper and more complete surveys and catalogs of
the high- and very-high-energy sky. Already the results are spectacular, but many challenges
remain for enhancing the performance of high- and very-high-energy gamma-ray telescopes.
Keywords: Cherenkov radiation, Cherenkov telescope, Extensive air shower, Gamma ray,
Imaging atmospheric, Pair production, Water Cherenkov telescope
List of Abbreviations:
eV, electronvolt; GRB, Gamma-ray burst; HAWC, High altitude water
Cherenkov; HE, High energy; H.E.S.S., High energy stereoscopic system; IACT, Imaging atmo-
spheric Cherenkov telescope; LAT, Large area telescope; PMT, Photomultiplier tube; VERITAS,
Very energetic radiation imaging telescope array system; VHE, Very high energy; WCT, Water
Cherenkov telescope
1
Introduction
The highest energy photons are known as gamma radiation. This refers to an enormous band
of the electromagnetic spectrum that spans many orders of magnitude in frequency begin-
ning around Hz or about electronvolts (eV) in the energy units commonly used in
this regime. High-energy (HE; ∼100 MeV–100 GeV) and very-high-energy (VHE; ∼100 GeV–
100 TeV) photons provide a tantalizing but elusive view of extremely powerful processes at work
in the Universe. Extended jets from black holes at the center of galaxies, expanding shockwaves
from supernova explosions, and magnetospheres of rapidly rotating neutron stars – these are a
few of the environments that supply conditions that can accelerate matter to relativistic speeds.
Gamma rays are an inevitable by product and therefore a telltale signature of particle accel-
eration at these sites. The sites of gamma-ray emission indicate astrophysical accelerators that
exceed the capabilities of laboratories on Earth. Astrophysical gamma-ray signals have been
observed above 10 TeV and even approaching 100 TeV (∼10Hz) from supernova remnants
in our Galaxy (Aharonian et al. 2007). These photons are among the most energetic recorded
from distinct objects, and they indicate the presence of particles accelerated to similar energy.
Recent observations of intense flares from the Crab Nebula indicate that somewhere within
the zone where the wind from the powerful central pulsar meets the surrounding medium,
electrons can attain energies in excess of 1 PeV (Abdo et al. 2011).
Gamma rays are used to map the distribution of the ubiquitous accelerated electrons and
nuclei, the cosmic rays, that permeate galaxies. Cosmic-ray interactions with the interstellar
medium create a gamma-ray glow that measures the cosmic-ray content of galaxies based on
their gamma-ray luminosity (Abdo et al. 2010). Our own Milky Way Galaxy is the bright-
est feature in the high-energy gamma-ray sky. Additionally, our Galaxy has huge lobes of
gamma-ray emission extending away from the central black hole. This feature, likely to be a
“bubble” of energetic electrons, has been observed for the first time using gamma rays and is

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
483
still being understood (Su et al. 2010). Features such as these are best observed byverywide-field
instruments and require substantial reduction of foregrounds and backgrounds.
Although there are many steady sources of gamma-ray emission, some of the most exciting
observations concern transient phenomena. Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), extremely fast and
bright flashes linked to supernovae and mergers of compact objects, are inherently gamma-ray
phenomena. The gamma-ray observations are typically the first indications used to locate these
events and point othertelescopes toward them. In GRBs, the gamma rays are thedefining feature
of an event that may last only a few seconds. The high-energy emission provides a critical test
for the engines that drive the explosions and their expansion into the surrounding environment.
GRBs are among the most distant objects observed, some at more than 13 billion light-years
distant. Such succinct events at high energy and large distances provide an extremely sensitive
test of our understanding of space and time (Abdo et al. 2009). The short-lived nature of these
events makes wide-field observations and rapid slewing of pointed instruments a necessity.
Additionally, since very-high-energy gamma rays are observed in an energy regime that
has not been explored in laboratories, they are an ideal tool to search for unexplained phenom-
ena that could indicate new and exotic physics. As ground-based accelerator facilities search to
confirm and extend the standard model and possibly discover the characteristics of dark matter,
potential gamma-ray signatures remain a promising avenue for studying dark matter in astro-
physical settings. In particular, current searches include seeking the unexplained presence of
gamma rays from regions with high dark matter content or unexplained gamma-ray spectral
features at a potential dark matter particle mass scale. These types of searches require careful
understanding of the telescope performance and the gamma-ray sky.
The varied characteristics of gamma-ray sources demand a corresponding variety in observ-
ing platforms to fully exploit the astrophysical phenomena accessible throughout the waveband.
A suite of telescopes with a combination of high sensitivity, good resolution, superb timing,
broad energy coverage, and both broad and frequent sky coverage as well as fast response are
key to probing the contents of the gamma-ray sky and the characteristics of its denizens.
Observing gammarays requires unique telescopesand innovative techniques. Gamma radi-
ation has very short wavelengths, at the scale of atomic nuclei and smaller, and falls in the
regime where light is treated as a particle instead of a wave. The reflection and refraction tech-
niques applicable at lower energies are not useful because instead of reflecting from a surface, a
gamma ray passes through, scatters, or is destroyed within the material of a traditional reflector.
However, the interaction products are not subtle and can be used to detect and characterize the
gamma ray. Although several interaction processes occur throughout the large range of energy
contained in the gamma-ray band, the telescopes described in this article specifically exploit
the pair production interaction, the most common process for the highest energy gamma rays
to undergo when encountering a material.
2
Gamma Rays in Matter
Before digging into the details of the telescopes, it is important to understand the properties
of gamma rays.1 They interact readily with matter. Within a few mm of lead or a few km of
air, a gamma ray will be scattered, absorbed, or converted into particles. This has important
1The Particle Data Group provides an excellent collection of references and reviews for many of the properties
and measurements necessary to understand the interactions of gamma rays in detectors (Beringer et al. 2012).

484 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
implications for gamma-ray telescopes. Because of these destructive interactions with matter,
telescopes do not focus gamma rays, but instead look for signatures of their passage through
the telescope.
Energetic photons interact electromagnetically with atoms through several processes.
The dominant interaction mode depends on the photon energy and the properties of the mate-
rial impacted. At the low energy end of the gamma-ray band (also referred to as a hard x-ray),
a photon may be coherently scattered and can be completely absorbed by an atom ejecting an
electron, the photoelectric effect. A more energetic gamma-rayphoton is not absorbed and may
free an electron from an atom, Compton scattering (>Fig. 11-1). This process becomes impor-
tant from a few MeV to a few hundred MeV. The cross section, indicating the probability of the
interaction, depends on the density of electrons in a material and decreases as approximately
the inverse of the photon energy (see >Fig. 11-2).
In the MeV range and above, photons passing near the nucleus of an atom can convert into a
matter-antimatterpair, most commonly an electron and a positron (>Fig. 11-1). The threshold
for electron-positron pair production is twice the rest mass energy of the electron, 1.022 MeV.
The cross section for this process increases rapidly above the threshold energy and then remains
e−
e−
e+
Y
a
b
Y
⊡Fig. 11-1
Interactions of high- and very-high-energy photons with matter. (a) Compton scattering. (b) Pair
production
Photon Energy [MeV]
10
105
104
103
102
Attenuation in Air [cm2/g]
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
⊡Fig. 11-2
Attenuation coeﬃcient for photons in air (Berger et al. 2010). The solid line gives the total attenu-
ation, while the dashed and dot-dashed lines give the contributions from Compton scattering and
pair production, respectively

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
485
roughly constant with increasing energy. This means that pair production begins to dominate
where the rate of Compton scattering drops, typically around 100 MeV–1 GeV, depending on
the medium. Pair production plays a more notable role below 1 GeV in materials with higher
atomic number.
Photon interactions with matter are characterized by an attenuation coefficient, or cross sec-
tion, that dependson the material properties (atomic numberand mass)and the photon energy.
The attenuation for air is shown in > Fig. 11-2 to illustrate the energy dependence of several
important interaction processes. The attenuation coefficient is given in inverse-length/density
and indicates the depth at which a photon loses 1/e of its energy, or in the case of discrete
interactions, the depth at which the probability that the photon has not interacted is 1/e. In the
pair production regime, photon attenuation is commonly talked about in terms of the radiation
length for a material, which is the characteristic distance for an electron in the material to radi-
ate a photon, 7/9 of the mean free path. A radiation length is about 37 g/cmin air or 6.8 g/cm
in tungsten (atomic number 74). The type and configuration of materials used in constructing
a gamma-ray telescope provide a palette for tuning its characteristics: where the gamma inter-
actions occur, what the dominant interaction mechanism is, and how the secondary products
are collected and observed.
3
Space-Based Gamma-Ray Telescopes
Gamma rays do not penetrate the atmosphere of the Earth deeply enough to reach the ground.
Only high-altitude balloons or space telescopes observe them directly. The instruments induce
the gamma-ray interaction and then record the secondary products to measure the properties
of the original gamma ray. Either of the high-energy interaction processes, Compton scattering
or pair production, can be leveraged to detect a gamma ray, but telescopes are optimized to
favor one process or the other. The energy dependence of the probable occurrence of the inter-
actions determines an approximate energy window for each technique. From a few hundred
keV to 30 MeV (depending on the material), gamma rays most commonly undergo Compton
scattering, and so Compton telescopes are designed to look for a scattered electron. At higher
energies, where the cross section for the Compton process drops, pair-production telescopes
measure an electron and positron pair generated within the instrument.
The Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory (CGRO), which operated from 1991 to 2000,
carried an imaging Compton telescope, COMPTEL (Schoenfelder et al. 1993), that operated at
energies from 1 to 30 MeV. A liquid scintillator measured the direction and energy of the recoil
electron from a Compton-scattered gamma ray. An array of sodium iodide crystals absorbed
the remaining energy of the scattered gamma ray. An interesting feature of this technique is
that the direction of the scattered gamma ray and the energy of the recoil electron conspire to
constrain the direction of the primary gamma ray to lie on a circle. When many gamma rays are
observed from the same source and a good knowledge of the instrument response is applied, the
intersection of the circles indicates the direction of the gamma-raysource. COMPTEL achieved
an angular resolution of about 1○.
A second instrument on CGRO, the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope
(EGRET), exploited the pair production interaction to explore energies from 20 MeV to 30 GeV
(Thompson et al. 1993; Esposito et al. 1999). EGRET consisted of a wire spark chamber to record
the electron and positron pair, scintillating detectors to trigger the spark chamber readout, and

486 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
a calorimeter to measure the deposited energy. The tracking of the electron and positron pair
in the spark chamber allowed the direction measurement of the original gamma ray, but the
gas degraded over time, limiting the life of the instrument. EGRET and COMPTEL, like most
space-borne gamma-ray detectors, carried plastic scintillator detectors to serve as anticoinci-
dence detectors, recording the passage of charged background particles into the instrument and
allowing them to be separated from gamma rays.
More recent pair-production telescopes have succeeded EGRET. The Large Area Telescope
(LAT) on the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope and the AGILE satellite (Astrorivelatore
Gamma a Immagini Leggero) (Tavani et al. 2009) are both currently operating in the high-
energy regime. In particular, the LAT has exceeded the energy range available to EGRET
by observing gamma rays from 20 MeV to >300 GeV (Atwood et al. 2009). Instead of a gas
tracker, the LAT uses silicon strip detectors interleaved with tungsten to convert the incom-
ing photon, trigger readout, and track the electron and positron pair. The LAT also includes
a plastic scintillator anticoincidence system and an imaging calorimeter. The configuration
of the LAT tracker enables a very large field of view, ∼2 sr. Although at the lower end of the
energy range, the limitation to angular resolution lies in scattering of the generated electron;
at higher energies, the resolution is only limited by the pitch of the silicon detectors and at a
fraction of a degree provides groundbreaking images of the high-energy sky. While EGRET
operated as a pointed telescope, focusing on specific targets, the LAT, possessing a wider field
of view and primarily operating in a survey mode, achieves complete coverage of the sky in
about 3 h.
The lack of focusing optics for gamma-ray telescopes means that the angular resolution
for these techniques remains far from diffraction limitations and enhanced sensitivity poses a
significant difficulty. The collection power of pair production telescopes, particularly at higher
energies, is closely linked to the telescope size and the amount of mass that it contains. Both
of these properties are constrained for space platforms. However, a significant benefit of parti-
cle detection telescopes is their acceptance of gamma rays arriving from many directions. The
fundamental limit for the field of view is the portion of sky that is not occulted by the Earth.
Realistically, the field of view is often smaller because of directional biases in the structure of
an instrument or in how it selects photons and rejects backgrounds. However, this still allows
for very large fields of view, often one or two steradians of sky, comparable to the human eye.
Observations made by space-based gamma-ray telescopes are also primarily unaffected by fea-
tures imposed by the atmosphere, a source of major systemic errors for instruments on the
ground.
For the rest of this chapter I will focus on ground-based instruments. For more information
about the fundamentals and history of Compton telescopes, see von Ballmoos et al. (1989).
For information about pair-production telescopes, see, for example, Thompson et al. (1993),
Esposito et al. (1999), and Atwood et al. (2009).
4
Ground-Based Gamma-Ray Telescopes
When gamma rays strike the Earth’s atmosphere, they leave an unmistakable signature as their
energy dissipates in an extended shower of electrons, positrons, and photons. The atmosphere
plays a key role in all ground-based gamma-raytelescopesout of necessity. A TeV photon passes
through a depth of about 48 g/cmof air before undergoing pair production. The atmosphere

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
487
is 1,030 g/cmthick. This means that gamma rays convert at altitudes high above sea level,
typically above 10 km. The atmosphere both initiates the pair production interaction and trans-
mits the by-products to instruments on the ground, making it the principal element of any
ground-based gamma-ray telescope. In order to discuss telescopes situated on the ground, we
must start with what happens above it.
4.1 Extensive Air Showers
Extensive air showers begin with a single photon. After the initial pair production reaction
occurs, an electromagnetic cascade of electrons, positrons, and high-energy photons devel-
ops. The electron-positron pairs produced by TeV energy gamma rays are extremely energetic
and do not proceed far from their creation point.2 The electrons lose energy in the air via
brehmsstrahlung, literally “braking radiation,” and emit high-energy photons (> Fig. 11-1).
A bremsstrahlung photon carries about half of the electron energy on average. This means
that the emitted photons are still energetic enough to convert to electrons via pair produc-
tion. As mentioned previously, the characteristic length scale for pair production and electron
bremsstrahlung are similar, and so the reaction continues fairly equitably. The cascade develops
multiplicatively with photons converting to pairs of electrons and positrons that then radiate to
produce increasing numbers of particles and photons (>Fig. 11-3). The air shower peaks and
dwindles when the electrons suffer enough loss through ionization that the radiated photon
energies fall below the pair-production threshold.
e−
e+
Y
⊡Fig. 11-3
Toy model of air shower interactions. The initial gamma ray converts into an electron and its
antiparticle, the positron, which then generate bremsstrahlung gamma rays
2Further mention of electrons also refers to positrons unless indicated differently.

488 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
Further details of air shower development and modeling can be found in Gaisser (1991)
or in the early treatment by Rossi and Greisen (1941). Here, I will consider some of the impor-
tant features of air showers in the GeV-TeV domain that impact the design and performance of
ground-based gamma-ray telescopes.
The pair production cross section in air is not strongly energy dependent above 1 GeV.
The initial pair production interaction occurs at similar depths independently of the photon
energy, on average at about 10 km above the ground. The development of the ensuing cascade,
however, is strongly dependent on the energy of the original gamma ray. The more energy that
must be dissipated, the more secondary particles are produced, and the more deeply the shower
extends into the atmosphere. At energies exceeding 10 TeV, an appreciable number of energetic
particles reach ground level, but at energies below 1 TeV, the particle density is much lower on
average. As a consequence, instruments that measure the particle component of air showers
benefit from being situated at high altitude.
The development of an air shower is a statistical process. Gamma rays of the same energy
produce interactions over a range of altitudes and create air showers that penetrate to a range
of depths. As a consequence, the longitudinal extent of the shower and the number of particles
reaching an observatory on the ground fluctuate substantially from the average values. These
observables offer an imprecise measure of the energy of the primary gamma ray. The lateral
developmentof an air shower is also driven by statistical fluctuations in the cascade interactions
that broaden the pool of secondary particles. Although the pair production and bremsstrahlung
processes contribute to the angular spread, Compton scattering of the electrons dominates the
transverse size. The transverse size of the shower sets the scale for the area on the ground that
an instrument must cover to contain the shower.
The particle cascade continues for many iterations, often called generations, of the pair pro-
duction and bremsstrahlung processes, but the shower front remains well defined. The thin disk
of energetic secondary particles may cover several hundred meters at ground level, but remains
only a few ns thick. In other words, a vertically propagating shower produces a signal that lasts
for only a few ns. The sensors and electronic systems in gamma-ray telescopes must respond
and sample data very quickly to distinguish an air shower from backgrounds that vary more
slowly over time.
Information about the primary gamma ray is encoded in the air shower that it generates.
The propagation direction of the shower remains largely true to the direction of the origi-
nal gamma ray (ignoring secondary effects like refraction in the atmosphere and distortions
from the Earth’s magnetic field acting on the charged particles). The relatively narrow plane
of the shower front at ground level provides a good indication of the origin of the gamma ray
(>Fig. 11-4). To make a quick and highly idealized estimate of the angular resolution we might
expect, consider having perfect knowledge of the shower front. A few ns for near-relativistic
speed translates into about 1m in width for the shower plane, which may extend over a diameter
of about 200 m at 10 TeV. This gives an approximate angular error of .○for a single photon.
The gamma-ray energy transfers into secondary particles and high-energy photons.
The more energy that a gamma ray carries, the more particles that are generated, and the
more deeply the shower penetrates into the atmosphere. An air shower can be characterized
by the depth at which it has generated the maximum number of particles, the shower maxi-
mum. The doubling nature of the interactions makes the shower maximum proportional to the
natural logarithm of the primary gamma-rayenergy. Alternatively, a measurementof the extent
and density of particles on the ground gives a much coarser indication of the energy. The sta-
tistical fluctuations for both the shower maximum and the number of particles reaching the

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
489
⊡Fig. 11-4
Cartoon illustrating the particle shower front, a thin pancake of surviving particles from the
extended air shower, traveling along the direction of the original gamma ray at close to the speed
of light and approaching an array of ground detectors
ground are large and can only indicate the gamma-ray energy in an average sense and not for
single photons. In other words, the average number of particles for a large sample of gamma-ray
air showers from a hypothetical source of 10 TeV photons differ from a source of 0.1 TeV pho-
tons. In reality, gamma ray sources emit over a continuum, and the business of distinguishing
spectral shapes using the particle content of the air shower is far from simple.
One way to observe an air shower is to simply detect the relativistic particles that reach
ground level. This is easy to do in a one-dimensional sense and can be accomplished by using
plastic scintillator, which emits light when charged particles pass through it, coupled to fast
light sensors and some basic electronics to count the flashes of light.3 Such a simple detector
can measure the rate that air showers strike it. In combination with the area of sky that the
detector observes and the efficiency for detecting showers passing through the scintillator, this
rate can be converted into a flux of air showers. However, this simple counter does not provide
the direction of the air showers on the sky or any estimate of their energy. To remedy this, an
array of scintillator devices can be combined to provide knowledge of the shower extent and
relative arrival times of the shower front on the ground (>Fig. 11-5).
There are significant challenges for doing gamma-ray astronomy with a simple scintilla-
tor array. Most importantly, the array must be large enough to collect an interesting number
of gamma rays; a typical TeV shower covers several hundred meters on the ground. Also, some
minimum numberofparticles must strike the scintillatorarraytoallow a useful measurement of
an air shower. That translates into a minimum energy for detectable gamma rays. Unless dense
coverage is possible over a large area, this minimum energy is uncomfortably high compared to
the bulk of expected emission from astrophysical sources. Additionally, we would really like to
know the rate of gamma rays impacting the top of the atmosphere not just the rateof air showers
reaching the ground. A gamma ray can strike the top of the atmosphere and generate a shower
that does not reach the detector, creating a substantial inefficiency for this method, particu-
larly for lower energy gamma rays. Detailed simulations of the atmosphere and the detector
3This device commonly uses pairs of scintillating plastic “paddles” and is often referred to as a muon telescope
because it is most likely registering the penetrating muons generated in cosmic-ray-induced air showers.

490 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
⊡Fig. 11-5
Diagram of a simple muon telescopemadeof plastic scintillator panelsmatched to photomultiplier
tubes
are necessary to account for showers that are not detected, thereby recovering the rate at the
top of the atmosphere. Then, in order to interpret the gamma-ray rate, the measurement must
be placed in an energy range. Simulations are necessary to determine the range of energies for
gamma rays generating the showers that are detectable by the instrument. Finally, the measured
rate of air showers does not represent only gamma rays, but also includes relativistic charged
particles capable of generating air showers that reach the ground. Air showers generated by
cosmic rays outnumber those from gamma rays by orders of magnitude. The simple array pro-
posed above gives little power to reject this substantial background. The more sophisticated
techniques described next address some of these challenges.
4.2 Water Cherenkov Telescopes
Water Cherenkov telescopes (WCTs) detect an air shower when particles generated in the cas-
cade survive to ground level and impact the instrument directly. This has several implications
for the telescope design. As with the scintillator arrays discussed above, the array of detectors
that make up the telescope must cover a very large area on the ground. This is important both to
constrain the size and location of the shower on the ground and to increase the overall collec-
tion area and therefore, the sensitivity. Minimally, the telescope should encompass an area large
enough to contain the lateral extent of a shower, which depends on the primary energy of the
gamma ray and on the altitude of the detector. A 1 TeV gamma ray will produce a shower with
a diameter of 100–200 m on average at sea level. If the shower is not laterally contained, then
the reconstruction of the direction, the estimate of the energy, and the efficiency for gamma-
ray selection are all severely compromised. Detectors that cover area beyond that required to
contain the shower allow the collection of more showers per source, or direction on the sky, in
the available observation time. Larger detectors also increase the knowledge of the shower size
and shape on the ground, allowing more efficient rejection of the cosmic-ray background.
Sensitivity ∝
Signal
√
Background
∝Area × efficiency × time
√
Area

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
491
e−
μ
γ
e+
e+/−
⊡Fig. 11-6
Diagram of a basic water Cherenkov detector consisting of a tank ﬁlled with water and housing a
photomultiplier tube. Relativistic charged particles, for example, electrons (e−) and positrons (e+)
passing through the tank generate Cherenkov light in the water until they lose energy and fall
below the emission threshold. Secondary gamma-ray emission interacts with the water to produce
additional electron-positron pairs that also generate Cherenkov emission. A muon (µ) generated
by cosmic-ray interactions in the atmosphere also generates Cherenkov emission in water but can
pass through the detector completely
Although the telescope must be large enough to contain and characterize the shower, the
individual detectors do not necessarily need to be densely packed. Large showers caused by
more energetic primaries that deposit many particles on the ground only need to be sampled
sparsely to obtain a good knowledge of the shower characteristics. An example of a very sparse
instrument is the ground array portion of AUGER, an ultra-high-energy cosmic-ray detector,
which includes 1,600 water Cherenkov detectors(>Fig. 11-6) separated by 1.5 km throughout a
3,000-kmregion (Abraham et al. 2010). However, the fractional coverage of an array becomes
very important for smaller, lower energy showers that have correspondingly smaller numbers
of particles reaching the ground. Higher density arrays of water Cherenkov detectors provide
sensitivity to gamma rays below 100 TeV. Closely packed arrays or instrumented pools, such as
Milagro (Atkins et al. 2000, 2003), provide effective area comparable to satellite-based instru-
ments near 100 GeV. Further discussion of the current capabilities and future potential for this
technique may be found in Buckley et al. (2008).
An obvious but important general feature of particle air shower detectors is that they are
not pointed telescopes. The detectors sit in fixed configurations on the ground and observe the
sky as it drifts overhead. WCTs and similar instruments are by nature very wide-field instru-
ments. The main limitations on the field of view are the local horizon and the increasing depth
of atmosphere that must be crossed by showers at low elevation angles. These instruments nat-
urally observe ∼2 sr of sky simultaneously and sweep out a full band in right ascension over the
course of a sidereal day.
The particles that reach the ground, mostly electrons and positrons in the case of gamma-
ray-induced air showers, are still moving at velocities close to the speed of light. Relativistic

492 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
charged particles incite lower energy radiation in a medium when the speed of the particle
exceeds the speed of light in that medium, an effect known as Cherenkov radiation (ˇCerenkov
1937). If the medium is transparent to the Cherenkov light, which peaks in the blue segment
of the optical band, then optical detectors can be used to detect the presence of the particles.
Cherenkov light is generated in a cone along the direction that the particle is traveling. The
angle of this cone is determined by the density of the material and the velocity of the particles.
In water, the Cherenkov angle is close to 41○. A light sensor lying within the Cherenkov
cone will detect a rapid flash from a charged particle passing nearby. If the light is not highly
attenuated by the medium, then a single sensor can cover a large volume. Water is one of the
most useful materials for Cherenkov detection because in addition to generally being cheap and
easy to work with, it also transmits Cherenkov radiation over a reasonable distance. Attenua-
tion lengths exceeding 10 m are easily achievable. Whereas scintillator detectors only observe
particles that pass directly through, a single light sensor within a pool of water can detect air
shower particles passing within a 10 m radius of the sensor. This allows for a very high, in fact
almost complete, efficiency for detecting particles within the detector area as compared to the
few percent fractional area accessible to sparse arrays of scintillator detectors. Note that this also
means that the energy threshold for a telescope employing an array of discrete water Cherenkov
detectors will have a dependence on the spacing of the detectors.
An array of light sensors distributed throughout a pool of water or among an array of tanks
(> Fig. 11-6) provides an image of the charged particles in the shower at ground level. A pool
containing an array of sensors or an array of discrete water tanks (or a combination of both)
that is large enough to contain the lateral extent of the shower can measure both the size and
intensity of the shower front. When a significant number of sensors detect Cherenkov light, the
telescope is triggered and the arrival time and amplitude of the light signals from each sensor
are read out as a candidate shower. The arrival times of the signals are used to reconstruct the
direction of the shower and thus the direction of the incoming gamma ray. The shower front
is not the perfect plane idealized in the cartoon of > Fig. 11-4, but is instead slightly conical.
Corrections to the shape of the shower front to allow the best direction to be found depend on
knowing the position of the center, or core, of the shower, where the gamma ray, unimpeded,
would have struck the ground. This is one reason that a WCT should be large enough to contain
the particle content that reaches the ground.
Water also converts secondary energetic photons into charged particles within a couple of
meters.4 These secondary cascades allow the detection of the energetic photons in an air shower
in addition to the charged particles, further increasing the detection efficiency of the instrument
and providing a more complete measurement of the energy in the shower at ground level.
Cosmic-ray air showers greatly outnumber gamma-ray air showers and form the dominant
background for detecting gamma-ray sources. As discussed earlier, gamma-ray-induced show-
ers consist primarily of electrons, positrons, and high-energy photons. Cosmic-ray nuclei also
produce cascading air showers, but these proceed primarily through hadronic interactions that
fragment nuclei and produce a broader array of particles including pions, muons, and neutrinos
in addition to electromagnetic cascades. The muons generated in these interactions provide a
means of distinguishing air showers with hadronic components, but the muons themselves can
produce a background for detecting gamma rays. Muons are more penetrating than electrons,
4This is one reason that certain nuclear reactors are operated in a pool of water. In addition to cooling, the water
moderates the fission process and absorbs radiation. The water glows a distinctive blue from the Cherenkov
light produced by relativistic electrons.

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
493
and the energetic muons commonly reach ground level. As they pass through the atmosphere or
the waterin a Cherenkov detector, they generatea distinctive ring of light. In a water Cherenkov
detector, a muon can be distinguished because it passes through the detector, beyond the inter-
action depth for electrons. The presence of muons in a shower provides one key diagnostic
for rejecting air showers produced by cosmic rays. However, muons passing through a pool of
water may be viewed by several light sensors and will trigger the data acquisition unnecessar-
ily. For this reason, it is beneficial to optically isolate the sensors used in a water Cherenkov
telescope. The isolation prevents a single particle from contributing light to many sensors and
mimicking a shower.
The high levels of background generated by cosmic rays create substantial challenges for
operating a water Cherenkov telescope. The high rate of events is difficult to remove with-
out using information about the shower direction and distribution available in high-level data
reduction. For example, the plane of the shower front and the position of the center of the
shower on the ground impact the ability to discern a cosmic-ray-generated air shower from a
gamma-ray-generated one, but these characteristics are not known until after the data is ana-
lyzed. In other words, these detectors trigger and read out thousands of light flashes per second,
and most are background to the desired gamma-ray signals. In order to not miss recording the
gamma-ray showers, fast timing and low dead time of the digitizing electronics must be paired
with good computing capabilities located at the telescope. The data can be processed in real
time to allow the best gamma-ray candidates to be read out and recorded despite the continu-
ous onslaught of showers. This is particularly important to enable the observation of more small
showers caused by lower energy gamma rays. Even after reconstructing the shower properties,
water Cherenkov data is still dominated by cosmic-ray showers.
The rate of cosmic rays at the top of the atmosphere is essentially uniform from all direc-
tions in the sky. In order to quantify the background recorded by a water Cherenkov telescope,
the data can be mapped in detector coordinates to reveal the background acceptance of the
instrument. The measuredcosmic-ray acceptance provides a templateto modelthe background
contribution toanypart ofthe celestial skyovera specified time period. Strong divergences from
this background template indicate the positions of gamma-ray sources and allow the calcula-
tion of a significance map for gamma rays, giving the probability of a gamma-ray source at each
location. This is different from using background subtraction, but very useful and necessary
in the case where the background rejection is limited and gamma rays can only be confidently
identified statistically, not on an event-by-event basis.
There are several interesting situations where the background limitation of water Cherenkov
telescopes is largely mitigated. The constant rate of the background means that a sufficiently
brief analysis, such as the few second to minute-long duration applicable to gamma-ray bursts,
is no longer background dominated but instead signal limited. WCTs have excellent sensitivity
to short events, and if a GRB emits enough photons above 100 GeV, it should be easily detected
in the field of a WCT with a suitably low energy threshold. The background spectrum falls as
a power law with energy, just as the cosmic-ray spectrum does. This also means that sources
with spectra that fall less quickly have an advantage at higher energy. The coverage area and
integration times achievable with WCTs, both of which increase sensitivity, and the decreasing
background rate with energy provide some advantages for the study of the highest energies
of very-high energy sources with these instruments. In fact, several of the candidate sources
identified first by the Milagro instrument have been this type of object (Abdo et al. 2007).
There are several very difficult backgrounds for detecting gamma-ray air showers even in
the case of a perfect reconstruction knowledge on the ground. A primary proton can interact to

494 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
produce a neutral pion, which then decays to gamma rays. The air shower initiated by the sec-
ondary gamma rays is purely electromagnetic and therefore practically indistinguishable from
a gamma-ray-induced shower. Cosmic-ray electrons also generateshowers that are nearly iden-
tical to those formed by gamma rays with the exceptions of a small difference in the depth of
the shower maximum and the additional presence of Cherenkov light caused by the primary
electron. Both of these backgrounds are relatively small compared to the substantial population
caused by more common proton interactions and do not limit current telescopes. However, the
electron background gains prominence quickly when attempting to lower the energy threshold
below 0.1 TeV.
4.3 WCTs: A Little History
Large arrays of scintillator detectors have been used very successfully to detect extensive air
showers generated by ultra-high-energy cosmic rays. Although such arrays are capable of
detecting showers from extremelyenergetic gamma rays, no definitive detections of gamma-ray
sources have been made using sparse arrays (Alexandreas et al. 1992; Borione et al. 1994). This
simplysuggests that there are not manygamma rays todetect at such high energies. The sensitiv-
ity of scintillator arrays is limited by the difficulties of detecting gamma rays in the energy range
where they are more common, below ∼100 TeV. At lower gamma ray energies, the particle den-
sity in an air shower at ground level is low, and distinguishing air showers generated by gamma
rays from those generatedby far more plentiful cosmic rays becomes very difficult. This is where
the properties of water Cherenkov detectors provide a significant advantage. Water Cherenkov
detectors were used to study cosmic-ray showers in the 1950s (Watson 2011), and they cur-
rently play an important role in the detection of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays (Abraham et al.
2010). However, the first instrument to successfully apply the water Cherenkov technique to the
study of gamma ray sources was the Milagro telescope (Atkins et al. 2003) shown in >Fig. 11-7.
The Milagro prototype first detected VHE gamma rays from the active galactic nuclei, Mrk 501,
during a flaring episode in 1997 (Atkins et al. 1999). By 2008, the completed Milagro instrument
found signals of TeV gamma rays coming from a variety of distinct objects that included blazar
galaxies, Galactic pulsar wind nebulae, and other sources with undetermined origins (Abdo
et al. 2007). Milagro also mapped the spatial distribution of VHE gamma rays from the Galaxy
and found an unexplained excess from the Cygnus Arm (Abdo et al. 2008).
A successor to the Milagro Observatory, the High-Altitude Water Cherenkov Experiment
(HAWC) is now under construction by an international collaboration at a high-altitude site
(∼4 km) at Sierra Negra in Mexico. The new site and planned configuration of large, isolated
tanks (> Figs. 11-8 and > 11-9) will allow substantial improvements in sensitivity of the
technique and the angular resolution for gamma rays.
4.4 Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes
The relativistic charged particles in an extensive air shower generate Cherenkov light through
interactions with molecules in the atmosphere. The Cherenkov light is at optical wavelengths
and transmits through air without significant absorption. The light is very faint compared to
sunlight and moonlight and is not visible without a telescope. The signal is very short in dura-
tion, but a sufficiently fast sensor enables detection above the background light if the sky is

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
495
⊡Fig. 11-7
An aerial view of the Milagro gamma ray observatorynear Los Alamos, New Mexico, USA (Courtesy
of the Milagro Collaboration http://umdgrb.umd.edu/)
⊡Fig. 11-8
The planned layout for the High-Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) Observatory, an array of 300
water Cherenkov tanksat Sierra Negra in Mexico. Existing prototype tanks are visible at the leftside
of the photo. The designed conﬁguration is overlaid (Courtesy of the HAWC Collaboration http://
hawc.umd.edu/)

496 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
⊡Fig. 11-9
One of the 7.2 × 4.3-m tanks that will be used in the HAWC observatory (Courtesy the HAWC
Collaboration http://hawc.umd.edu/)
⊡Fig. 11-10
Cartoon of the Cherenkov light generated by an extensive air shower passing through the atmo-
sphere.Theshowercoredominatestheemission.Theangleofthecone ofCherenkovlightdepends
on the density of the air and therefore evolves with altitude
reasonably dark. The Cherenkov emission allows the measurement of an air shower at a signif-
icant distance using an optical image (see > Fig. 11-10 to get an idea of this). The numerous
charged particles in a shower create a pool of light on the ground. A telescope sitting any-
where within the Cherenkov pool can record an image of the shower cascading through the
sky overhead. Even a small telescope has a large effective size because the ground covered by
the Cherenkov pool has a diameter of about 200 m at sea level.

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
497
⊡Fig. 11-11
Diagram of a very simple Cherenkov telescope made of a spherical reﬂector with a photomulti-
plier tube placed at the focal point. Additional phototubes and reﬂectors allow simple rejection of
background light by requiring a temporal coincidence of signals from the same shower
⊡Fig. 11-12
The Whipple 10 m reﬂector located at Mt. Hopkins in Arizona was the ﬁrst IACT to make a signiﬁ-
cant detection of a TeV gamma-ray source (Courtesy the VERITAS Collaboration http://veritas.sao.
arizona.edu/)
Cherenkov signals from air showers can be detected using a fast photo-sensor, such as a
photo-multiplier tube, pointed at a dark patch of sky. However, focusing systems are neces-
sary to constrain the shower properties and to reach a useful sensitivity level (> Fig. 11-11).
Moderately large collection dishes, of order 10 m allowing more than 100 min reflector area
(> Fig. 11-12), are favored because larger reflector area enhances sensitivity to lower energy
showers. Put simply, lower energy showers produce less particles and therefore less Cherenkov
photons. The lower the intensity is on the ground, the more important it is to collect photons
over a larger area in order to pass the minimum threshold to image the shower. Near the thresh-
old energy of the telescope, the reflector area is one of the most important factors affecting the
sensitivity. However, the benefits of larger structures are offset by their costs and complexities.

498 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
⊡Fig. 11-13
A Cherenkov camera used in one of the VERITAS telescopes is visible in a mounting box (1.8 m
sides). The camera views a 3.5○wide region of sky with 499 pixels spaced 0.15○apart (Courtesy
the VERITAS Collaboration http://veritas.sao.arizona.edu/)
Beyond the collection area, the optical requirements are not very strict. The mirror area
should be large but can be segmented. Many Cherenkov dishes are based on the Davies-Cotton
design, which specifies segmented mirrors on a spherical or parabolic primary, developed for
solarconcentrators (Davies and Cotton1957). This configuration allows some image distortions
that increase with the angle from the optical axis. This limits the filed of view, but a reasonable
amount of aberration is tolerable given the low resolution necessary for adequate measure-
ment of the Cherenkov signal. Distortions can be safely ignored if their size can be contained
within a single camera pixel. Current instruments favor pixels with diameters of about 0.2○. The
parabolic mirror configuration also introduces temporal distortion, a spreading in the arrival
times of photons at the camera, but this is unimportant as long as the spread in the time is
smaller than the intrinsic width of the Cherenkov shower front, ∼5 ns.
A less important consideration for the design of support structures for imaging Cherenkov
telescopes is the ability to rapidly point the reflector toward a specified part of the sky. Gamma-
ray bursts have not yet been detectedby ground-based telescopes,but their emission is expected
to decay quickly after the onset of the burst, perhaps lasting only a few seconds to minutes. This
means that even at a very fast slew rate of 3○s−, an event happening in the opposite direction in
the sky cannot be viewed for about half a minute. Additionally, as Cherenkov telescopes increase
in sensitivity and devote less exposure for each observation of a source, the time spent between
targets begins to make a more noticeable impact on the total amount of observing time that
can be obtained. The total time available in a year may only be 800–1,000 h. The faintness of
the Cherenkov signal requires darkness and limits high-quality observations to times when the
Moon is far from the field being observed.
The Cherenkov signal is very rapid. It lasts for approximately5 ns for 1 TeV showers at verti-
cal incidence and near the core of the shower. To match this signal size and to help in separating
shower signals from background light, a Cherenkov camera (e.g., >Fig. 11-13) must make very
fast images. Current state-of-the-art cameras produce signal pulses with rise times of a few ns.
These are well-matched to fast electronic systems, which sample signals at rates around 1 GHz

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
499
(1 ns frames). The fast sampling is important to reduce the confusion of Cherenkov signals
from air showers with the continuous bombardment of background photons and muon sig-
nals. Because the intensity of the light is an important gauge of the energy in the shower and
the major limitation at low energy, camera pixels must be able to characterize the signal gener-
ated at the single photon level. Cherenkov cameras are used to count every photon that arrives
at the image plane.
A camera should have suitable pixelation to resolve the shower image and constrain broad
structural features. The typical height of shower maximum at 1 TeV is about 10 km, meaning
that the image of the shower extends over about 1○of sky. The core of the shower makes up a
fraction of this, setting a basic scale for the imaging at ∼0.1○. Pixels covering ○are sufficient for
detecting showers, particularly those with energies above 1 TeV, but pixels closer to .○offer
several advantages. Smaller pixels allow improved fits of the axis of the ellipse and therefore bet-
ter resolution for the direction of the gamma ray. Increased resolution on the structures in the
shower allows better rejection of non-gamma-ray air showers. Reduced pixel area also helps
with limiting the ever-present noise background from stars and scattered light in the atmo-
sphere. In other words, the smaller the area of sky covered by a pixel, the lower the amount
of background light level collected in that pixel. The benefits of pixels with diameters less than
∼0.1○are outweighed by the cost and complexity of the increased number.
The size ofthe airshowers alsoset a scale forthe field ofview that the camera should cover. In
order to contain the full image, a requirement important for measuring both the direction and
energy content of the shower, the camera should view several degrees. Particularly for higher
energy showers at larger offsets, larger cameras are necessary to contain the full shower image.
Considerations must also be made for analysis and astrophysical implications of the camera
size. If a background estimate is made using portions of the sky viewed simultaneously with
the source of interest, then the fieldof view must be large enough to contain both. Gamma-ray
sources themselves also provide a minimum guideline. Several prominent Galactic supernova
remnants, for example, have diameters of around ○. Cameras that extend over ○or more can
contain these sources and allow a well-separated background measurement.Although there are
scientific advantages to observing larger fields of view, particularly for surveys, extended struc-
tures, and time-domain astrophysics, Cherenkov cameras are limited in size by items including
the optical properties of the dish, the supporting mechanical structure, and the expense of pixels
and accompanying electronics.
The Cherenkov image of an air shower represents a two-dimensional projection of the pas-
sage of the cascade through the atmosphere and can be used to characterize the direction and
energy of the incoming gamma ray. The image intensity is dominated by the region of high-
est particle density along the shower track, the shower core, which appears as an ellipse in the
image plane. The eccentricity of the ellipse depends on the distance of the shower track from
the optical axis of the telescope on the ground. When the telescope is looking directly along a
shower track, the ellipse becomes a circle and the origin of the track becomes ambiguous. When
the track is offset, a line drawn through the major axis of the elliptical image crosses the direc-
tion of the gamma ray in the sky. For this reason, showers with an axis passing directly through
the telescope optical axis are very poorly reconstructed. The best measurementsare for showers
that are off the telescope axis, but not so far as to be truncated by the edge of the field of view
(>Fig. 11-14).
The image of an air shower is best characterized by knowing not only the direction of the
initial gamma ray but also by knowing the location where the shower axis impacts the ground.
This fully constrains the path of the air shower through the atmosphere. The geometry of the

500 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
Tel A
Tel B
Tel C
Tel D
⊡Fig. 11-14
The image of an air shower in Cherenkov light can be parameterized as an ellipse. The major
axis aligns with the direction of the initial gamma ray. Multiple images of the same shower from
diﬀerent telescopes in an array provide constrain to the position of the gamma-ray source on
the sky
Tel A
Tel B
Tel C
Tel D
X
⊡Fig. 11-15
The major axis of the Cherenkov image of an air shower points to the location where the shower
core impacts the ground (marked by a red X). Observations by multiple telescopes in an array
constrain the location of the core
air shower and the distance that it falls from the telescope allow proper interpretation of the
shape and intensity of the camera image. A well-formed image in a single telescope provides
some information about the impact distance through the eccentricity of the ellipse, but the
measurement is greatly improved with the use of multiple telescopes (>Fig. 11-15).

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
501
More energetic gamma rays give rise to more secondary particles and thus, more Cherenkov
light. In fact, the energy of the shower is proportional to the number of photons in the shower
image, often referred toas the image size. The numberofphotons associated with a showerimage
in the camera indicates a lower limit and must be corrected for the loss of light in traversing the
atmosphere and inefficiencies in collection by the telescope mirror and camera. Not much can
be done about losses in the atmosphere, besides placing telescopes at higher altitudes to reduce
the amount crossed. Losses in the telescope can be minimized by using and maintaining good
mirrorreflectivity, reducing anygaps in the active surface of the camera, and using photosensors
that are tuned to the spectrum of the Cherenkov light, which actually peaks near the ultraviolet.
However, the primary limitation for detecting Cherenkov photons comes from the quantum
efficiency of the photosensors. Commonly used photomultiplier tubes are only about 20–30%
efficient in collecting the photons that strike them. More efficient devices are being explored and
provide the most obvious method of obtaining significant increases in efficiency. Although of
some importance for the precision of angular and energy measurementsof smaller showers, the
improvements translate directly into reduced energy thresholds because the faintest showers,
those from lower energy gamma-rays, are impacted by the loss of light.
Unfortunately, increasing the sensitivity of these instruments is not as simple as presented
above. While signal enhancements are important, the dominant sensitivity limitations come
from the backgrounds. IACTs, like WCTs, record thousands of candidate events per second,
but only a tiny fraction of these are gamma rays. In order to detect a significant gamma-ray
signal, several backgrounds must be rejected at the trigger level, removed from the recorded
data, or modeled in the analysis.
IACTs commonly employ a hierarchy of triggers to reject backgrounds and select gamma-
ray-like events to be recorded for further analysis. The signal in a single camera pixel must reach
the level expected from a photon in order to be considered as part of a shower image. At the
camera level, a cluster of neighboring pixels are required for the telescope to register an event.
In an array of IACTs, coincident signals exceeding the threshold for a camera are required from
multiple telescopes. At each level, the threshold conditions are adjusted to reduce the back-
ground contamination and throttle the rate of recorded events to something manageable at the
cost of rejecting a minimal level of gamma rays. The gamma rays that are lost are typically those
with lower energies, near the threshold for the instrument. Optimal settings for the trigger are
important for achieving a low threshold and keeping the amount and rate of recorded data at
manageable levels. Further event selection to enhance the signal to noise ratio can be done in
later analysis of the recorded data.
Reduction of the threshold requirement for accepting a recorded event in the telescope to
the level of a single photon in a single pixel, produces an explosion in the rate of collected data.
This is where the threshold is low enough to allow the general population of photons in the night
sky to trigger the telescope. The night sky background produces uncorrelated signals in pixels.
It can be dramatically reduced by requiring a signal to appear simultaneously in neighboring
pixels. For this reason, camera pixels should be small enough that the probability of a chance
coincidence ofnight skyphotons in a single pixel is low. Note that this alsomeans darkness ofthe
telescope site is an important factor for detectorperformance at the low end of the energy range.
Stars make up a foreground for observations by IACTs. A star that shines brightly in the
blue band (recall that IACT cameras are designed to be sensitive near the peak frequency for
Cherenkov emission) causes a very high rate of triggers in a pixel or could in some cases dam-
age the photosensor. Often stars produce correlated signals in neighboring pixels since the size
of a point source in the optics is typically close to the size of a pixel. This means that the image

502 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
of a bright star will pass the trigger criteria for a cluster of pixels in a telescope. It will also pass
a requirement for multiple telescopes. The locations of bright stars are well known and can be
managed at the analysis level. To reduce the rate of unwanted events, the only practical solution
is to prevent pixels affected by a bright star from participating in the telescope trigger. The pho-
tosensors used in Cherenkov telescopes are by necessity extremely sensitive. In the case where
a star is very bright, it may be necessary to disable pixels affect by the star to protect them from
damage. In either the case of disabling pixels or masking them out of analysis, stars form a
highly problematic structured foreground for gamma-ray observations. As the telescopes fur-
ther increase in sensitivity and observations of the sky deepen, this becomes more of a limiting
factor.
Cosmic rays generate air showers from all directions in the sky at a high rate in the VHE
band and drown out gamma-ray sources. Some of the air showers generated by cosmic-ray
nuclei look different enough to be separated out based on their image parameters. As discussed
in >Sect. 2, air showers produced by nuclei have several key differences from those produced
by gamma rays. Nuclei most commonly initiate hadronic cascades that produce a less uniform
energy deposit over the shower. This creates Cherenkov images that are less uniform along the
track, or clumpy, and more laterally broadened. Some nuclei interact to produce a neutral pion
that then decays into gamma rays. The following cascade is electromagnetic just like those of
primary gamma rays. Although there are subtle differences – the interaction depth for nuclei
differs from that for photon pair production and the nucleus generates additional Cherenkov
light before the air shower commences – for practical purposes, this population of showers
forms a nearly irreducible background for IACT observations. Because the cosmic-ray rates are
essentially uniform in direction at the top of the atmosphere, background showers that cannot
be rejected can be modeled.This can be done either by taking an observation of a blank field as a
templateor by using regions without gamma-raysources within an observed field.Backgrounds
that cannot be filtered out must be modeled by building a predicted profile for detected cosmic-
ray showers over an observed field.
The range of energies accessible to this type of telescope is limited at low energy by the ability
of the telescope to collect fainter Cherenkov signals and distinguish them from backgrounds.
Even if a shower is detectable below a few hundred GeV, there is little information available
to determine whether the origin is a gamma ray, a cosmic ray, or a single muon passing near
the telescope. Muons passing close enough to a telescope produce a distinctive ring image, but
the images can pass simple trigger requirements at the telescope level, especially in cases where
only a portion of the ring is visible in the camera and appears similar to a small shower image.
The rate of muons, like the rate of their cosmic-ray parents, is much higher than that for gamma
rays and provides a severe limitation to the minimum energy that can be reached by a single
IACT. A simple and powerful method of reducing muon contamination is to require a coinci-
dence among multiple telescopes. While an air shower will appear in all telescopes within the
∼10-mlight pool, a muon signal only appears in the telescope within range of the muon, some
10s of m in the impact parameter. This also sets a practical lower limit for array spacing.
At high energy, observations are statistically limited. The gamma-ray and cosmic-ray air
showers are more easily distinguished with increasing energy, but signal events become increas-
ingly rare. The flux of very-high-energy gamma-ray sources even in optimistic cases falls as E−
or more. The most obvious way to enhance the sensitivity to higher energy events is to cover
more area on the ground.
Coordinated arrays of IACTs can cover very large areas. Simply adding telescopes increases
the number of showers visible to the instrument and reduces some backgrounds. A little tuning

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
503
of the placement has substantial benefits for reconstructing the gamma-ray direction and
energy and for reducing backgrounds. When telescopes view the same field, events local to a
single telescope, often muons, can be easily rejected. Two or three telescopes within about 100m
of one another are close enough to fall within the Cherenkov light pool. Multiple images of the
same shower constrain the direction to improve angular resolution and the impact location of
the shower core on the ground to improve the energy measurement.
The sensitivity of an array of imaging Cherenkov telescopes depends strongly on the size
of the telescopes in the array, the area of ground that the array covers, and the layout of
telescopes within the array. Larger telescopes provide increased telescope mirror area that
enhances the detection of faint showers by collecting more Cherenkov photons per shower
image (e.g., > Fig. 11-16). Faint showers are produced by lower energy gamma rays, and so
larger dishes translate into more sensitivity at low energies and a reduction in the energy thresh-
old. Increasing the area of ground covered by the array increases the number of air showers
that can be detected. Observations at higher energy are more statistically limited, and so larger
arrays translate into better sensitivity to higher energy gamma rays and an increase in the upper
energy range. In the signal-dominated regime, the sensitivity increases proportional to the area.
The arrangement of the telescopes in the array, primarily characterized by the separation dis-
tance between telescopes,has a secondary influence on the sensitivity. Closer telescopespacings
favor smaller, fainter, lower energy showers, while large spacings favor larger, higher energy
showers.
⊡Fig. 11-16
The central, very large telescope structure is a 30-m addition to the center of the HESS array of
12-m dishes. It is designed to lower the energy threshold for the array below 100 GeV (Courtesy
the HESS collaboration http://www.mpi-hd.mpg.de/hfm/HESS/)

504 11
Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
4.5 IACTs: A Little History
Ground-based gamma-ray astronomy has become a thriving field containing multiple facilities
and exciting results that are stimulating work in a variety of areas. The current successes owe
a great deal to the vision, effort, and substantial persistence of early pioneers. It took nearly
half a century to achieve the sensitivity to detect the first sources, long after the promise of
the technique was recognized. Galbraith and Jelley (1953) reported the successful detection of
cosmic-ray air showers as early as the 1950s. In the 1960s Chudakov and Zatsepin in Crimea
and Jelley and Porter in the United Kingdom pursued observations of showers from gamma
rays. Weekes continued the work ofPorterand Jelley, working with the Whipple collaboration in
Arizona to obtain the first high significance detection of the Crab Nebula using a 10-m reflector
at the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory in 1989 (Weekes et al. 1989). Weekes (2005) reviews
the development of the technique.
The Whipple team continued to innovate camera and telescope designs and followed the
discovery of the Crab with discoveries of several dramatically variable TeV blazars. The HEGRA
telescopes made the first successful observations using an array of small IACTs (Pühlhofer et al.
2003). These efforts and their successes launched a second generation of instruments around
the world. These facilities have explored enhancements to further refine the technique, includ-
ing higher efficiency cameras, faster and smarter triggering and digitization, wide-field optics,
array configurations capable of extending the energy range, and photosensors and methods
for operating under moonlight. The H.E.S.S. collaboration operated the first array of medium-
class reflectors (∼12-m-diameter dishes) (Bernlöhr et al. 2003), producing the first map of a
resolved VHE gamma-ray source (Aharonian et al. 2006a) and revealing dozens of new sources
in a survey of the central portion of the Galactic plane (Aharonian et al. 2006b). The MAGIC
collaboration constructed the first large dish (17-m-diameter frames) to enhance sensitivity
below 100 GeV and has also explored high efficiency photo-sensors and active mirror control
(Baixeras et al. 2004). The MAGIC team exploited these capabilities to detect the first pulsar
signal using a ground-based gamma-ray telescope, finding the 33 ms period of the Crab Pulsar
(Aleksi´c et al. 2011) (clearly not wanting to be forgotten as the queen source of TeV gamma-ray
astronomy). The VERITAS observatory, a four-telescope array (Holder et al. 2006), has since
extended this work to detect pulsations above 100 GeV (Aliu et al. 2011). For a recent review of
TeV astronomy, see Hinton and Hofmann (2009).
An international consortium plans to build a next-generation observatory, the Cherenkov
Telescope Array (CTA) (The CTA Consortium 2010). The facility will be a much larger array of
IACTs than current instruments and may include various enhancements to the optics, cameras,
and electronics that will increase sensitivity by over an order of magnitude and further extend
the energy reach of the technique.
References
Abdo, A. A., Allen, B., & Berley, D., et al. 2007, ApJ,
664, L91
Abdo, A. A., Allen, B., & Aune, T., et al. 2008, ApJ,
688, 1078
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., & Ajello, M., et al. 2009,
Nature, 462, 331
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., & Ajello, M., et al. 2010,
A&A, 523, L2
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., & Ajello, M., et al. 2011,
Science, 331, 739
Abraham, J., Abreu, P., & Aglietta, M., et al. 2010,
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 613, 29

Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes 11
505
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., & Bazer-Bachi,
A. R., et al. 2006a, A&A, 449, 223
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., & Bazer-Bachi,
A. R., et al. 2006b, ApJ, 636, 777
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., & Bazer-Bachi,
A. R., et al. 2007, A&A, 464, 235
Aleksi´c, J., Alvarez, E. A., & Antonelli, L. A., et al.
2011, ApJ, 742, 43
Alexandreas, D. E., Allen, R. C., & Biller, S. D., et al.
1992, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 311,
350
Aliu, E., Arlen, T., & Aune, T., et al. 2011, Science,
334, 69
Atkins, R., Benbow, W., & Berley, D., et al. 1999, ApJ,
525, L25
Atkins, R., Benbow, W., & Berley, D., et al. 2000, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods, A449, 478
Atkins, R., Benbow, W., & Berley, D., et al. 2003, ApJ,
595, 803
Atwood, W. B., Abdo, A. A., & Ackermann, M., et al.
2009, ApJ, 697, 1071
Baixeras, C., Bastieri, D., & Bigongiari, C., et al.
2004, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A,
518, 188
Berger, M. J., Hubbell, J. H., & Seltzer, S. M., et al.
2010, XCOM: Photon Cross Sections Database,
(version 1.5), [Online] Avalable: http://www.
nist.gov.xcom
Beringer, J., & (Particle Data Group) et al. 2012, Phys.
Rev., D86, 010001 (http://pdg.lbl.gov)
Bernlöhr, K., Carrol, O., & Cornils, R., et al. 2003,
Astropart. Phys., 20, 111
Borione, A., Covault, C. E., & Cronin, J. W., et al.
1994, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 346,
329
Buckley, J., Byrum, K., Dingus, B., et al. 2008,
arXiv:0810.0444 [astro-ph]
ˇCerenkov, P. A. 1937, Phys. Rev., 52, 378
Davies, J. M., & Cotton, E. S. 1957, Sol. Energy,
1, 16. The Proceedings of the Solar Furnace
Symposium
Esposito, J. A., Bertsch, D. L., & Chen, A. W., et al.
1999, ApJS, 123, 203
Gaisser, T. K. 1991, Cosmic Rays and Particle Physics
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Galbraith, W., & Jelley, J. V. 1953, Nature, 171, 349
Hinton, J. A., & Hofmann, W. 2009, ARA&A, 47, 523
Holder, J., Atkins, R. W., & Badran, H. M., et al. 2006,
Astropart. Phys., 25, 391
Pühlhofer, G., Bolz, O., & Götting, N., et al. 2003,
Astropart. Phys., 20, 267
Rossi, B., & Greisen, K. 1941, Rev. Mod. Phys., 13, 240
Schoenfelder, V., Aarts, H., & Bennett, K., et al. 1993,
ApJS, 86, 657
Su, M., Slatyer, T. R., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2010, ApJ,
724, 1044
Tavani, M., Barbiellini, G., & Argan, A., et al. 2009,
A&A, 502, 995
The CTA Consortium. 2010, arXiv:1008.3703
Thompson, D. J., Bertsch, D. L., & Fichtel, C. E., et al.
1993, ApJS, 86, 629
von Ballmoos, P., Diehl, R., & Schoenfelder, V. 1989,
A&A, 221, 396
Watson, A. A. 2011, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl.,
212, 13
Weekes, T. C. 2005, Lectures given at the Inter-
national
Heraeus
Summer
School,
eprint
arXiv:astro-ph/0508253
Weekes, T. C., Cawley, M. F., & Fegan, D. J., et al. 1989,
ApJ, 342, 379


12
Instrumentation and
Detectors
Ian S. McLean ⋅James Larkin ⋅Michael Fitzgerald
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508
2
Classification of Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509
2.1
Camera Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509
2.2
Coronagraphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 511
2.3
Spectrometer Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 512
2.4
Integral Field Spectrometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 517
2.5
Polarimeter Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 520
2.6
Interferometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
3
Detectors and Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 523
3.1
Classification of Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 523
3.2
Semiconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 525
3.3
Photoconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 526
3.4
Photodiodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 527
3.5
Applications to CCDs and IR Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 528
3.6
Detectors for High Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 532
3.7
Thermal Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533
3.8
Coherent Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533
4
Cryogenics and Vaccum Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 538
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_12, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

508 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
Abstract:
This chapter contains a broad introduction to astronomical instruments and detec-
tors. The basic design principles for cameras, spectrometers, polarimeters, and interferometers
are given, together with some practical material on instrument building techniques, including
vacuum-cryogenic methods. Different detector technologies are introduced, such as CCDs and
infrared arrays, together with basic information on semiconductors.
Keywords: Cameras, Coronagraphs, Detectors, Interferometers, Polarimeters, Spectrometers
List of Abbreviations:
AO, Adaptive optics; CCD, Charge-coupled device; IF, Interme-
diate frequency; IFS, Integral Field Spectrometer; IR, Infrared; LO, Local oscillator; MCP,
Microchannel plate; MOS, Metal oxide semiconductor; NASA, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration; PMT, Photomultiplier tube; PSF, Point spread function; SIS, Superconductor
Insulator Superconductor; UV/O/IR, Ultraviolet/optical/infrared; VLT, Very large telescope;
VPH, Volume Phase Holographic
1
Introduction
When viewed across the electromagnetic spectrum, astronomical instrumentation can appear
quite different, in part because of the wide range of technologies involved, but variety is fun-
damentally limited by the properties that can be measured. Following the scheme offered in
McLean (2008), most instruments can be placed in one of four categories: a photometer or
radiometer for measuring the brightness and direction of radiation; a spectrometer for measur-
ing the distribution of brightness as a function of wavelength, frequency, or energy; a polarime-
ter to determine the degree of alignment or handedness of wave vibrations; or an interferometer
which relies on coherent phase relationships to achieve interference effects prior to detection.
All instruments contain some kind of radiation detector and, once again, the range of detec-
tor technologies is broad. For most applications in astronomy, however, there are three main
classifications of detectors as follows. Photon detectors in which individual photons release one
or more electrons (or other charge carriers) on interacting with the detector material; pho-
ton detectors have wide application from gamma rays to the far-infrared. Thermal detectors in
which the photon energy goes into heat within the material, resulting in a change to a measur-
able property of the device, such as its electrical conductivity; thermal detectors have a broad
spectral response but are often used for infrared and submillimeter detection. Coherent detec-
tors in which the electric field of the wave is sensed directly and phase information can be
preserved. The most common form of coherent detection takes advantage of wave interference
with a locally produced field, either before or after conversion of the electromagnetic radiation
to an electrical signal. Coherent detectors are used from the far-infrared to the radio.
Breakthrough discoveries in astronomy often rely on the development of new technologies.
Among the technologies that have made a difference, both on the ground and in space, in recent
years are larger and more sensitive charge-coupled devices(CCDs) and infrared array detectors;
more powerful cameras and spectrometers; improved methods for building very large opti-
cal/IR telescopes and for building efficient survey telescopes; advances in optics and detectors
for X-ray astronomy; devices for the study of the cosmic microwave background; new digital
signal processing techniques and new receiver/antenna designs for radio astronomy. Especially
impressive has been the advent of adaptive optics techniques that enable large ground-based
telescopes to operate at their ultimate diffraction limit.

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
509
When the silicon CCD was introduced into astronomy in 1974 (see Janesick 2001), it com-
pletely revolutionized astronomical imaging. From a modest 10,000 pixels in the early days,
individual CCDs are now 4–16 million pixels, and many instruments employ large mosaics
of CCDs to push the total number of pixels up to about one billion. A remarkable feature of
the CCD is that it can also detect X-ray photons, and so CCDs are found in the X-ray cam-
eras on the Chandra X-ray Observatory (Garmire et al. 2003). Modern CCDs can now be used
for ultraviolet work, but competing devices such as the microchannel plate (MCP) have been
used successfully on space missions such as GALEX (Morrissey et al. 2005). Silicon’s band gap
restricts the use of CCDs to wavelengths less than 1,100nm, and thus a different kind of detector
is needed for the infrared. Usually referred to as infrared arrays, these devices do not employ the
charge-coupling principle, and semiconductor materials with a lower band gap must be used.
In the near-infrared, these array detectors are now at the 4–16 megapixel size (McLean 2008).
For even longer wavelengths, devices known as Transition Edge Sensors (TES) that rely on
superconductivity have been developed into arrays for submillimeter astronomy. At the other
end of the spectrum, high-energy astronomers have obtained images using large pixel arrays
of cadmium zinc telluride (CZT) to detect gamma rays. One example is the Burst Alert Tele-
scope (BAT) on NASA’s Swift satellite which has 32,768 CZT detectors covering a focal plane of
.× .m (Gehrels et al. 2004).
As telescopes have grown in size and instruments have become more costly, a strong
trend toward general user facilities and large collaborations has occurred. Most astronomi-
cal instruments are therefore highly automated and capable of remote operation. Inevitably,
these instruments must be well engineered for reliability. Many important factors constrain the
design of new astronomical instrumentation. Engineering details are beyond the scope of this
article, but the following sections will serve as a starting point. Clearly, the choice of instrument
and the details of the design must depend on the science to be done. This chapter contains an
introduction to astronomical detectors and provides basic design principles for cameras, spec-
trometers, polarimeters, and interferometers. Also included is some material on instrument
building, including vacuum-cryogenic techniques. More details can be found in other chapters
in this volume and in the references given.
2
Classiﬁcation of Instruments
Astronomical instruments are often grouped into four classes: (1) photometers/cameras, (2)
spectrometers, (3) polarimeters, and (4) interferometers. Although the methods of implemen-
tation differ considerably, variations of these instruments exist from X-ray wavelengths to radio
wavelengths. The descriptions which follow are mainly applicable for UV, visible, and infrared
wavelengths (UV/O/IR).
2.1 Camera Systems
In the simplest camera, the detector (CCD or other array device) is placed directly in the focal
plane of the telescope behind a light-tight shutter. Filters to select different wavelength bands are
therefore located in the converging beam from the telescope. An alternative approach, shown
in >Fig. 12-1, is to collimate the beam by placing a lens after the focal plane at a distance s equal

510 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
⊡Fig. 12-1
The layout for a basic camera system in which optics are used to collimate the diverging beam
from the telescope focal plane and reimage the ﬁeld at a diﬀerent magniﬁcation. Photometry is
performed using software apertures on the digital image (From McLean 2008)
to its focal length (s = fcoll). The field is reimaged onto the detector with a lens (or mirror) with
s′ = fcam. By selecting the focal lengths of the collimator and camera lenses, one can either
magnify or reduce the scale; m = fcam/fcoll. Filters of arbitrary thickness can be located in
this collimated beam. Moreover, the filters can be placed near the image of the primary mirror
created by the collimating optics; this is called the “pupil” image. In addition, a circular aperture
or stop can be placed at the pupil image to reject stray light from outside the beam. A pupil stop
is important, especially in infrared cameras where the pupil is at cryogenic temperatures and
so it becomes a cold stop.
Matching the spatial orspectral resolution tothe physical size of the detectorpixels is impor-
tant. There are two factors to consider: ( >12.1) maximizing observing efficiency and ( >12.2)
obtaining accurate brightness measurements(photometry). In general, the image is either criti-
cally sampled, meaning that there will be about 2 pixels (the Nyquist limit) across the resolution
element, or it will be oversampled, implying that there may be about 5 pixels across the res-
olution element. In a spectrometer, the width of the entrance slit is usually the determining
factor.
The plate scale of the telescope is given in seconds of arc per mm (”/mm) by
(ps)tel = , 
ftel
(12.1)
Here, ftel is the focal length of the telescope in millimeters (ftel = Dtel × F where F is the focal
ratio or f/number) and the numerical factor is the number of seconds of arc in 1 radian. For
direct imaging, the angle on the sky subtended by the detector pixel is
θ = (ps)teldpix
(12.2)
where dpix is the physical pixel size in mm; pixels are usually square. Calculating the required
magnification factor can be done as follows:
•
choose a value for the diameter of the seeing in seconds of arc, θsee
•
decide on the sampling (p = 2–5 pixels)
•
divide seeing diameter by sampling factor to get angular size of 1 pixel, θpix = θsee/p
•
derive the plate scale at the detector from (ps)det = θpix/dpix
•
required magnification (m) is then

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
511
m = (ps)tel
(ps)det
(12.3)
where m = fcam/fcoll as before.
Note that m also defines an effective focal length (EFL = mf tel) for the entire optical system.
If m > , then the optical components are a magnifier, whereas if m < (the usual case), then
the optics are called a “focal reducer.” We can also relate the pixel size in seconds of arc to the
f-number of the focal reducer optics (or simply, “the camera”) by
θpix = , 
dpix
Dtel(f /number)cam
(12.4)
where (f /number)cam = fcam/Dcam = Fcam.
For example, if dpix = μm and Dtel = m, then θpix = .′′/(f/number)cam. Assuming
seeing of .′′ and 3-pixel sampling, this implies θpix = .′′ which leads to Fcam = ..
2.2 Coronagraphs
Astronomical investigations often seek to measure emission from material that lies at a small
angular separation from a much brighter source. Distinguishing light from the much fainter
source is the observational challenge. Coronagraphs attempt to suppress or steer the transmis-
sion of initially on-axis light while simultaneously allowing off-axis light to transmit relatively
unimpeded. Reducing the unwanted light subsequently reduces the noise in measurements of
the off-axis brightness. Many coronagraphic devices in astronomical instruments use a com-
bination of a focal plane mask and a Lyot stop. As shown in > Fig. 12-2, a traditional Lyot
coronagraph uses an opaque disk as the focal plane mask together with an undersized circular
pupil as the Lyot stop or mask (Lyot 1939).
Pupil
Focal
Plane
Mask
Lyot Mask
Imager
Collimator
Imager
Detector
⊡Fig. 12-2
In the Lyot coronagraph, a focal plane mask is used to block the on-axis light, while the Lyot mask is
a pupil stop that suppressesinitially on-axis light that isdiﬀracted by thepupil stop and focal plane
mask. Initially oﬀ-axis light is transmitted through the system, although the intensity is reduced
compared to a normal image by the action of the Lyot mask in particular

512 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
An image of a bright object, such as a star, is not an infinitesimal point in the telescope
image plane. Even in the absence of wavefront errors, diffraction by the telescope pupil causes
the image of a point-like source to be extended. For example, an image of a point source formed
by a system with a circular pupil of diameter D will have an Airy pattern (see
> Chap. 6),
characterized by a central core of width ∼λ/D surrounded by concentric rings. An opaque
circular focal plane mask can be used to block light from the Airy core and central bright Airy
rings. By itself, however, this focal plane mask has done little to improve the ability to detect faint
emission from around the star. Initially on-axis starlight is diffracted by the telescope pupil to
positions beyond the extent of a finite focal plane mask, that is, to the outer Airy rings. In the
pupil plane, located after the focal plane mask, this light is concentrated near the edge of the
pupil image. By placing an undersized stop at this location (the Lyot mask), on-axis starlight
that was initially diffracted to locations in the outer focal plane is also blocked.
Quantifying the performance of a coronagraphic imaging system is usually done in terms
of the contrast, which measures the detectable flux relative to that of the on-axis point source.
The precise definition can vary, but for point sources, this is commonly given in terms of the
flux ratio between the on-axis point source if it were not occulted and the minimum detectable
off-axis source flux. Contrast will be a function of position in the focal plane. The architecture
of the coronagraph has implications for the contrast. For example, the size of the focal plane
mask sets an inner working angle, inside of which off-axis sources are also occulted and thus
undetectable. The diameter of the Lyot mask affects the amount of diffracted light from the on-
axis source that is transmitted to the detector. Smaller Lyot masks result in more suppression
of light from on-axis sources. However, this will not necessarily increase the achieved contrast,
because decreasing the Lyot mask size also decreases the transmitted flux of any off-axis sources.
Variations of the Lyot coronagraph exist which use alternative focal plane masks. These
masks manipulate the phase of the light rather than the amplitude, in order to steer it to regions
in the Lyot plane that are masked. The Four Quadrant Phase Mask and the Optical Vortex
Coronagraph are two examples of such architectures (Rouan et al. 2000; Palacios 2005). These
devices have the advantage of reducing the inner working angle of the system. The effectiveness
of diffraction control can be enhanced by adding an apodizer to the pupil prior to the focal plane
mask. An apodizer smoothly tapers the transmission in the pupil, which has the effect of reduc-
ing the amplitude of rings in the focal plane compared to a hard-edged pupil stop (Soummer
et al. 2003). Guyon (2006) reviews the performance limitations of interferometric and Lyot-
style coronagraph designs. Shaped-pupil coronagraphs rely on novel shapes in the pupil plane to
create regions in the focal plane that are devoid of diffracted on-axis light (Kasdin et al. 2003).
Such systems often do not require smooth tapering of transmission profiles in the pupil mask,
which can be difficult to manufacture precisely, and also do not require focal plane masking.
Only a portion of the image plane achieves high contrast, which is a disadvantage.
2.3 Spectrometer Systems
> Figure 12-3 shows the essential features of a classical UV/O/IR spectrometer in which light
enters through a narrow slit. The width of the slit must be matched to either the seeing con-
ditions or the diffraction disk. As the beam diverges from the slit plane, it is collimated and
directed to the dispersing system, after which the spectrally dispersed beam is collected by the
camera optics and re-imaged onto the detector. Long-slit, multislit, and slitless spectrometers

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
513
⊡Fig. 12-3
Essential features in the optical layout of a spectrometer are illustrated. The beam is collimated
before intersecting the dispersive element and then the spectrum is reimaged with camera optics
onto the detector (From McLean 2008)
are in wide use throughout astronomy. In almost all cases, a two-dimensional detector records
the spectrum. With the advent of optical fibers to collect light from many locations in the focal
plane and feed it to the entrance slit, a huge multiplex advantage can be obtained which facil-
itates large-scale spectroscopic surveys. Following McLean (2008), for a given wavelength (λ)
range, the important design quantities are ( > 12.1) the resolving power (R = λ/Δλ), ( > 12.2)
the slit width, ( > 12.3) the diameter of the collimated beam, ( > 12.4) the sampling or match-
ing of the slit width to the detector pixels, and ( > 12.5) the resulting f/number of the camera
system.
Linear dispersion (L.D.) relates an interval of length (dx in mm) along the spectrum to a
wavelength interval (dλ in Ångstroms or nanometers)
L.D. = dx
dλ = dx
dθ
dθ
dλ = Fdθ
dλ
(12.5)
Here, fcam is the focal length of the spectrograph camera and dθ/dλ is the angular dispersion of
the prism or grating device. The units are usually expressed as mm/Å, but a more useful form is
the Reciprocal Linear Dispersion which is simply the inverse of the above expression in Å/mm.
Expressions for angular dispersion follow from the basic equations for prisms and gratings. For
a diffraction grating, the equation is
mλ = d(sin i + sin θ) cosγ
(12.6)
where d is the spacing of adjacent grooves or slits, i is the angle of incidence of the collimated
beam, θ is the angle of the emergent diffracted beam, γ is the angle out of the normal plane of
incidence (usually ○, hence cos = 1), and m is an integer called the “order” of interference. For
zero order (m = ), sin θ = −sin i or θ = −i. The negative sign comes from the fact that we
have chosen to call i and θ positive when on the same side of the normal. Whenever the rays
cross over the normal, the angle of diffraction is taken to be negative. With this sign convention,
the equation applies when the grating is used in transmission and when the grating is used in
reflection. There is an alternative form of the equation that uses a negative sign between the
terms to describe a reflection grating. In that case, the angles are positive if they are on opposite

514 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
sides of the normal. If the medium on either side of the grating is not a vacuum, then a more
general form would be (nsin i + nsin θ). From ( > 12.6), the angular dispersion of a grating
is given by
dθ
dλ =
m
d cos θ cos γ
(12.7)
Substituting for m/d gives
dθ
dλ = sin i + sin θ
λ cos θ cos γ
(12.8)
Usually cosγ ∼and therefore angular dispersion is determined entirely by i and θ for a given
λ. Many combinations of m and d yield the same A.D. provided the grating angles remain
unchanged. Typical “first-order gratings” (m ∼) have 300–2,400 grooves or lines/mm; the
number of lines per mm is given by T = /d. Coarse-ruled reflection gratings (large d) can
achieve high angular dispersion by making i and θ very large, typically ○. Such gratings are
called “echelles” and have groove densities from 20 to 200 lines/mm with values of m in the
range 10–100. This results in severe overlap of the orders unless a second disperser of lower
resolving power is used at right angles to the first to “separate” the orders.
In practice, spectrometers are usually slit-width or seeing-limited. Taking θsee = p × θpix,
where p is the number of pixels across the slit image, and converting to seconds of arc, gives a
form which shows explicitly the trade-offs of size versus resolution:
R = (sin i + sin θ
cos i
) Dcoll
Dtel
, 
pθpix
(12.9)
This formula makes it clear that as telescopes get larger, the spectrograph (defined by the beam
size Dcoll) gets larger too, all else being equal.
By tilting the facets of a reflection grating through an angle θB (known as the blaze angle)
with respect to the plane of the grating surface, it is possible to maximize the grating efficiency
in the direction in which light would have been reflected in the absence of diffraction. Grating
efficiency is a maximum when the angle of incidence and angle of diffraction are related by
(i + θ) = θB. The separation between the beams (i −θ) is just the spectrograph angle ϕ. Thus,
mλB = d sin θB cos(ϕ/)
(12.10)
A special case occurs when ϕ = , for then the incident ray enters along the normal to the
facet and the diffracted ray leaves along the same direction. This is the “Littrow” condition and
the incident and diffracted angles measured relative to the grating normal are now equal to
each other and to the blaze angle. The grating equation simplifies to mλB = d sin θB, and the
resolving power is given by
R = Dcoll tan θB
ϕDtel
(12.11)
The only way to work in the Littrow condition is with a central obscuration in the optics. Alter-
natively one can use the “near” Littrow condition by moving off by a 10–20○or the “quasi”
Littrow condition by going out of the plane (γ > ○).
Prisms find applications in spectrographs both in the role of primary disperser in (usually)
low-resolution instruments and as a cross-disperser in high-resolution echelle spectrographs.
The basic layout of a prism disperser is shown in >Fig. 12-4. From the definition of angular
dispersion:
dθ
dλ = dθ
dn
dn
dλ =
B
Dcam
dn
dλ
(12.12)

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
515
⊡Fig. 12-4
The relationship of angles and lengths in a prism at minimum deviation are used to derive the
resolving power (From McLean 2008)
In this expression, dn/dλ describes the wavelength dependence of the refractive index n.
The purely geometric term dθ/dn can be derived by differentiating Snell’s law applied to the
second surface and then doubling the rate to account for both surfaces. At minimum deviation,
the angle ϕ = α/giving dθ/dn = [s sin(α/)/s cosθ]. However, s sin(α/) = B, the base
length of the prism, and s cos θ = Dcam the emergent collimated beam width toward the camera.
The resolving power of a prism is R = B (dn/dλ), and for a slit-limited instrument, the resolving
power is given by
R =
λ
θresDtel
B dn
dλ
(12.13)
A popular way to convert a camera into a spectrograph is to deposit a transmission grating on
the hypotenuse face of a right-angled prism and use the deviation of the prism to bring the
first order of diffraction on axis. Such a device is called a “grism” and the basic geometry (not
to scale) is illustrated in >Fig. 12-5. A grism can be placed in a filter wheel and treated like
another filter. The basic relationships needed to design a grism are
mλcT = (n −) sin ϕ
(12.14)
and
R = EFL
dpix
(n −) tan ϕ
(12.15)
where λc is the central wavelength, T (= /d) is the number of lines per mm of the grating, n is
the refractive index of the prism material, and ϕ is the prism apex angle. EFL is the effective focal
length of the camera system, and dpix is the pixel size. The factor of 2 assumes that 2 pixels are
matched to the slit width. In practice, the number of free parameters is constrained by available
materials and grating rulings, and given conditions within the camera system. Resolving powers
(2 pixels) of R ∼500–2,000 are practical.
Most astronomical gratings are of the surface relief kind in which the grooves are formed on
the surface of the substrate (direct ruling) or as a replicated grating in a material bonded to the
substrate.Reflection gratings can be coated with a reflective surface such as silver or gold, where
the latter is particularly useful in the infrared. An alternative technology for grating fabrication
is the Volume Phase Holographic or VPH grating. Not to be confused with a normal holo-
graphic grating which is another method for creating a surface relief grating, a VPH grating

516 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
⊡Fig. 12-5
A simpliﬁed schematic giving the basic geometry of a grism – a transmission diﬀraction grating
deposited on the hypotenuse face of a right-angled prism (From McLean 2008)
is an optical substrate in which the refractive index varies periodically throughout the body
of the grating (Barden et al. 2000; Baldry et al. 2004). The grating body is made from a thin
(3–30 μm) slab of dichromated gelatine (DCG) trapped between glass plates. Light passing
through a VPH transmission grating obeys the following grating equation:
mλ = niΛg(sin αi + sin βi)
(12.16)
where m is an integer representing the order, ni is the refractive index of the medium, Λg is
the grating period (equivalent to groove spacing) and is the projected separation between the
fringes; Λg = Λ/ cos φ where φ is the slant angle between the grating normal and the plane of the
fringes. The angles of incidence (αi) and diffraction (βi) are relative to the grating normal with
the convention that zero order (no diffraction) corresponds to βi = −αi. The equation applies
to each layer, where i = is the air, i = is the glass substrate, and i = is the DCG layer. High
diffraction efficiency can occur when light is effectively reflected from the plane of the fringes,
that is, when β+ φ = α−φ in the DCG layer. This behavior is the same as Bragg diffraction
of X-rays from the atomic layers in a crystal lattice. In both cases, because the thickness of the
medium is much greater than the wavelength, constructive interference occurs for radiation
scattered in that direction. The Bragg condition implies
mλ = nΛ sin αb
(12.17)
where nis the refractive index of the DCG layer and αb is the “Bragg angle” or angle of inci-
dence with respect to the plane of the fringes αb = α−φ. At wavelengths sufficiently displaced
from the Bragg condition, there is no diffraction. Diffraction efficiency also depends on the
semiamplitude of the refractive index modulation (Δn) and the grating thickness (d). The
DCG holds a fringe pattern generated by holography which provides planes of constant refrac-
tive indexseparated bya length Λ = /νg. The indexvariations are the result ofdensityvariations

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
517
which are trapped into the material by exposure to light (the fringe pattern) because those
regions collapse to a different density in the process of swelling the gelatin with water and then
drying it rapidly. One form for the refractive index is n(x, z) = n+ Δncos[πνg(x sin γ +
z cos γ)], which gives the variation in the x, z plane where z is the optical axis through the
VPH, and γ is the angle between the normal to the planes and the z-axis. Line densities can
range from 300 to 6,000 lines/mm, and index modulations of 0.02–0.1 are typical. Because of
the Bragg condition, it is necessary to articulate the camera to a new angle to tune to a new
wavelength.
2.4 Integral Field Spectrometers
An integral field spectrograph (IFS) samples a rectangular or other two-dimensional field of
view and produces spectra for each spatial location. It does this by reformatting the focal plane
in such a way that a traditional dispersing spectrograph can simultaneously disperse adjacent
regions of the field without overlapping on the detector. Spectra from the various pieces of the
field can then be reassembled into a cube of data covering two spatial dimensions and one of
wavelength. Depending on the choices of field of view, spectral resolution, and spectral band-
width, such cubes can contain tens, hundreds, or even thousands of spectral channels, all taken
simultaneously and all covering a contiguous field. Almost all integral field spectrographs at
telescopes use a standard CCD or infrared array as the detector. Because practical detectors are
limited in terms of the total number of pixels, and since each spatial location uses hundreds or
thousands of pixels for their respective spectra, the field of view of an IFS is often much smaller
than in a traditional camera.
Nevertheless, having adjacent and simultaneous spectra can be a powerful scientific advan-
tage in many cases. Examples include, measuring line ratios across such diverse objects as a
high-redshift galaxy or a Jovian moon in an individual exposure in which slit losses from a
classical spectrometer, changing seeing conditions and effects from adaptive optics on the point
spread function are all minimized. In crowded fields like the Galactic Center, an integral field
spectrometer can be used without fear of pointing errors since the entire field is reconstructed
and syntheticapertures can be used on the cubes ofdata much like aperture photometryon indi-
vidual images. In most cases, some portion of the field of view will also contain blank regions
of sky, and thus atmospheric emission lines are recorded simultaneously with science photons.
Depending on the design, a surprising benefit can be a very low wavefront error which is crucial
for high-resolution applications. In particular, lenslet arrays and fiber bundles sample the focal
plane prior to any of the spectroscopic optical elements like the collimators, cameras, and grat-
ings. Consequently, image quality at the input to the reformatting optics remains the final image
quality of the cubes. For example, in this way, the OSIRIS instrument at the Keck Observatory
has a measured wavefront error below 25 nm across its entire field. In high-contrast applica-
tions, like the Gemini Planet Imager and Lyot Project, an integral field spectrograph with a
lenslet array dramatically reduces noncommon path chromatic errors because the speckle pat-
tern is recorded at the lenslet arraywhere essentiallynorefractive elements, except fora window,
have been in the beam path. Speckle coherence is maintained across a broad bandwidth which
supports speckle suppression techniques to increase contrast with faint companions.
Three techniques have received the most use in astronomical instruments and are shown
graphically in >Fig. 12-6. The first approach illustrated is that of a lenslet array placed in the
focal plane. Each tiny lens takes its portion of the field and condenses the light into a much

518 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
⊡Fig. 12-6
A summary of the three most common methods of creating an integral ﬁeld spectrograph is
illustrated. For each model, the image plane is shown on the left, the spectrograph input in the
middle, and detector plane on the right (Based on a similar ﬁgure in Allington-Smith and Content
(1998))
smaller pupil image. Thus, approximately one focal length behind the lenslet array, a grid of
small pupil images serves as the entrance plane to a traditional spectrograph. The lenslet array
is rotated compared to the dispersion axis of the spectrograph so that spectra are interleaved
on the detector. Traditionally, lenslet-based spectrographs at optical wavelengths have been
optimized for large spatial coverage with either low spectral resolution or small wavelength
coverage. Lenslet designs were first proposed by Courtes (1982) and have since been imple-
mented in a variety of instruments (e.g., Bacon et al. 1995). The first diffraction-limited use
of a lenslet-based spectrograph was OSIRIS (Larkin et al. 2006) working in the near-IR with
the Keck Adaptive Optics System (Wizinowich et al. 2000). This integral field spectrograph
can produce spectra with as many as 1,800 spectral channels from 1,000 spatial locations in a
×pattern. Similar lenslet based spectrographs with many more spatial elements and much
shorter spectra (R ∼45) have been chosen and built for the high-contrast Lyot Project (Hinkley
et al. 2008) and Gemini Planet Imager projects. For the latter, a ×lenslet yields ∼40,000
spectra with each spectrum having only 18 spectral channels, but covering a full 20% bandpass.
Advantages of a lenslet-based IFS include excellent image quality because only optics in
front of the lenslet array can affect the wavefront error. Lenslet arrays are also manufactured

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
519
in very large formats allowing nearly infinite expansion of the field of view. These commercial
arrays also have no internal surfaces, approximately 98% fill factors and high transmission. It
is generally easy to change the plate scale of a lenslet-based IFS because they are essentially
like detector pixels in the sense that reimaging optics in front of them can be used to magnify
the field, and their fast focal ratios make them relatively insensitive to the input focal ratio.
Among the disadvantages of a lenslet-based IFS is the complexity of the data. Thousands of very
long spectra are scattered over the detector in a complex pattern which must be mapped and
individually calibrated. In principle, this is comparable to reductions of multislit data and has
the advantage that unlike slits which can be repositioned, the lenslets have a fixed geometry. But
with dense packing of spectra, sophisticated algorithms are often required to extract all of the
spectra and reassemble the final cube. Lenslet array spectrographs must put at least some pixel
gap between neighboring spectra. So the total number of elements in the final data cube will be
at most half the number of original detectorpixels. The other methods suffer similar pixel issues
but for different reasons. A challenging problem with a lenslet IFS which must be considered
carefully is crosstalk between neighboring spectra on the detector. Since they are staggered in
wavelength space, a bright line from one spectrum could blend into a neighboring spectrum
at a different wavelength creating in effect a ghost line. With good optics and knowledge of the
packing geometry, this contamination can be eliminated or at least understood, but it does put
pressure on the optical design, detector utilization, and data reduction algorithms.
A second technique, and perhaps the most commonly implemented one, is an image slicer.
A parallel set of narrow mirrors is used to divert different parts of the focal plane into differ-
ent directions. A second set of mirrors redirects these portions back into something close to a
slit-like arrangement (a pseudo slit), which is then fed into a traditional spectrograph. The first
cryogenic version of such an instrument for astronomy was the 3D Spectrograph (Krabbe et al.
1997). Other early successful instruments are PIFS at Palomar (Murphy et al. 1999) and SPIFFI
(Tecza et al. 1998) for the VLT. The latter can be fed by an adaptive optics system where the com-
bination is called SINFONI. For diffraction-limited spectrographs, there are some significant
disadvantages to slicer-based spectrographs. The first is the relatively large size of the slicing
mirrors which are usually ∼1 mm wide. For small plate scales, this forces the design to long
focal ratios which can be cumbersome. The second disadvantage is that diffraction off the indi-
vidual slits causes the pupil on the grating to grow through the same process that causes pupil
diffraction in lenslet-based designs. But perhaps the most important difficulty is with image
quality. Particularly in the long axis of the slit, all optical elements, including the grating, affect
the wavefront. However, if the wavefront error issue can be overcome, as some recent designs
for SNAP and JWST indicate, then a slicer offers two very major advantages. First, it is more
efficient in utilizing detector pixels (maybe by a factor of 2 or more). This translates directly into
the number of spatial pixels or spectral bandwidth of the spectrograph. Secondly, each source
is spread over fewer pixels which mitigates the effect of detector noise and thus increases sensi-
tivity. In a simple comparison, the sensitivity gain could be as much as 40% at detector limited
flux levels.
The third technique uses a bundle of fiber optic cables arranged to sample a region of the
focal plane. This bundle is then reorganized into a linear arrangement in order to produce a
slit-like pattern to feed the spectrograph. Optical fibers require a relative thick cladding and so
the fill factor is usually quite low. Fibers also have fast output focal ratios making the collimator
and camera optics more difficult. Fiber-based IFS systems have been used for relatively bright
targets. Early examples of such spectrographs include 2D-FIS and HEXAFLEX (Garcia et al.
1994) and INTEGRAL at WHT (Arribas et al. 1998). Many of the inherent problems with fibers

520 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
can be overcome by using lenslets coupled to the input and sometimes the output of the bundles
to give them higher fill factors in the focal plane. Focal ratio degradation within the fibers and
coupling losses at the lenslet-fiber boundary still need to be considered.
2.5 Polarimeter Systems
To measure polarization properties, such as the fraction polarized, the direction of vibration,
and the handedness of rotation, all polarimeters “convert” the polarization information into
brightness modulations which are directly measurable with an electronic detector. Polarime-
ters can be created from camera and spectrometer designs by adding a polarization modulator.
A typical approach is to construct the polarization modulator in two parts. A retardation device
comes first to introduce a known and controllable phase shift into the beam, and this is followed
by a fixed polarizer (also called an analyzer) that only allows one plane of polarization to pass
unhindered and reduces others by the factor cosθ, where θ is the angle between the polar-
izer’s axis and the plane of polarization in the beam. The intensity transmitted by the analyzer
is therefore modulated by the action of the phase retardation device.
Linear polarization is described by three parameters: intensity (I), degree (or fraction) of
linear polarization (p), and the direction of the (fixed) plane of vibration projected on the sky
(θ). Circular polarization is similarly described by three parameters: intensity (I), degree of
circular polarization (q), and handedness of the rotation of the electric vector (+ or −). A more
convenient way to express polarization information is to use the four Stokes parameters (I, Q,
U, V). These quantities are phenomenological, that is, they are more directly related to actual
measurements.The Stokes parameters are easily relatedto the amplitudes (Ex, Ey) of the electric
vectorin twoorthogonal directions and tothe phase difference (δ)between the twocomponents
(e.g., Clarke and Grainger 1971; Tinbergen 1996). The degree of linear and circular polarization
is given by
p = [Q+ U]


I
, q = ±V
I
(12.18)
and the direction of vibration of the linearly polarized part is given by
tan θ = U
Q
(12.19)
and it follows that
Q = Ip cos θ
U = Ip sin θ
V = Iq
(12.20)
The intensity of light transmitted by a retarder of retardance τ at angle ψ followed by a perfect
polarizer with principal plane at ϕ = ○or ϕ = ○(upper/lower signs, respectively) is given by
I′ = 
[I ± Q(G + H cos ψ) + ±UH sin ψ ± V sin τ sin ψ]
(12.21)
where
G = 
(+ cos τ),
H = 
(−cos τ),
τ = π
λ δ
(12.22)
There are several special cases and multiple ways to solve these equations for the Stokes
parameters. Although harder to measure than other properties, polarization from astronomical

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
521
sources can be detected from X-rays to radio waves. Because it may contain information about
the formation of the early universe, one important area of interest is the polarization of the
cosmic microwave background.
2.6 Interferometers
Interferometer techniques in astronomy are applied in two different ways, one as a collec-
tion method and the other as a detection method. Combining the light collected by many
widely separated telescopes overcomes the diffraction limit of an individual telescope. Single-
aperture telescopes can be equipped with interferometer equipment for specific detection
purposes. Several types of detection interferometers have been used for spectroscopy, such as
the Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS) which is a scanning Michelson interferometer and
the Fabry-Perot interferometer which is an imaging spectrometer.
A typical FTS is shown in >Fig. 12-7. For a collimated monochromatic beam, the intensity
at the detector is determined by the “path difference” Δx = (xb −xa), where xa refers to the
arm containing the fixed mirror A and xb is the distance to the scanning mirror B. The phase
difference is given by kΔx where k = π/λ. The fraction of the incident beam in the output is
given by
T(k, Δx) = 
[+ cos(kΔx)]
(12.23)
from which it follows that T = 1 when the combining beams are in phase and T = 0 when they
are 180○out of phase. Given an incident beam whose spectrum is I(k), the signal F measured
in the output is
F(Δx) = c ∫I(k)T(k, Δx)dk = constant + c
∫I(k) cos(kΔx)dk
(12.24)
⊡Fig. 12-7
The principle of the scanning Michelson interferometer is shown. As the mirror is scanned, the
intensity recorded by the detector is modulated to produce an interferogram. The spectrum can
be extracted by an inverse Fourier transform (From McLean 2008)

522 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
where c is a constant. The measured signal F(Δx) is called the interferogram, and the last integral
is the Fourier cosine transform of the spectrum. Therefore, the transform of the interferogram
is I(k).
The Fabry-Perot interferometer is an imaging spectrometer formed by placing a device
called an “etalon” in the collimated beam of a typical camera system. One arrangement is shown
in >Fig. 12-8. The etalon consists of two plane parallel plates with thin, highly reflective coat-
ings on their inner faces. The plates are in near contact but separated by a distance d. Assuming
that the refractive index of the medium in the gap is n (usually n = ) and θ is the angle of
incidence of a ray on the etalon (usually very small), then multiple reflections and destructive
interference within the gap occur and the wavelengths transmitted with maximum intensity
obey the relation
mλ = nd cos θ
(12.25)
For monochromatic light, the image is a set of concentric rings. To ensure that a sufficiently
narrow band of light passes through the system, it is necessary to “prefilter” the light. This can be
done with a very narrow band interference filter. Usually, a circular aperture isolates the central
order which has an angular diameter δβ = √(/R) and the free spectral range is given by
ΔλFSP = λ
m = λ
nd
(12.26)
The resolving power (R = λ/δλ) is
R = Fnd
λ
(12.27)
where F (= ΔλFSP/δλ)is called the “finesse” of the etalon, which is a measure of the plate quality
and the reflectance (r) of the coatings; F = π√r/(−r) and typical values are 30–50. Defining
δ = (π/λ) (2nd cos θ), the transmitted intensity is I(δ) = I()/[+ (F/π)sin(δ/2)]. One
application of Fabry-Perot etalons is the Taurus Tunable Filter (Bland-Hawthorn and Kedziora-
Chudczer 2003) which allows wide-field narrow-band imaging with a CCD.
⊡Fig. 12-8
One typical layout for a Fabry-Perot interferometer is shown. The device P is used to narrow the
range of wavelengths fed to the etalon (From McLean 2008)

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
523
3
Detectors and Materials
3.1 Classiﬁcation of Detectors
High-energy photons are usually detected with particle detectors, but for lower energy photons,
detectors are generally grouped into three broad classes:
1. Photon detectors in which individual photons release one or more electrons (or other charge
carriers) on interacting with the detector material; photon detectors have wide application
from gamma rays to the far-infrared.
2. Thermal detectors in which the photon energy goes into heat within the material, resulting in
a change to a measurable property of the device, such as its electrical conductivity; thermal
detectors have a broad spectral response but are often used for infrared and submillimeter
detection.
3. Coherent detectors in which the electric field of the wave is sensed directly and phase infor-
mation can be preserved. The most common form of coherent detection takes advantage
of wave interference with a locally produced field, either before or after conversion of the
electromagnetic radiation to an electrical signal. Coherent detectors are used from the
far-infrared to the radio.
Photon detectors can be subdivided into ( > 12.1) photoemission devices employing the exter-
nal photoelectric effect in which the photon causes a charge carrier (electron) to be ejected from
the material and ( > 12.2) photoabsorption devices that use the internal photoelectric effect in
a semiconductor to free a charge carrier within the material. The most well-known detector in
the photoemission category is the photocathode of a photomultiplier tube (PMT) in which an
electron is emitted from the photocathode surface and subsequently amplified by a cascade of
impacts with secondary surfaces before being detected as a charge pulse.
Photoemissive materials can provide excellent detectors far into the ultraviolet. Most impor-
tantly, it is possible to create ultraviolet imaging devices based on this process. For example,
long, narrow curved tubes or “microchannels” of lead oxide (PbO) can perform the same func-
tion as the secondary surfaces in a PMT resulting in a large pulse of electrons emerging from
the end provided there is a potential gradient. As shown in >Fig. 12-9a, such channels can be
packaged very close together (like straws in a box) to make a two-dimensional array called a
microchannel plate (MCP). MCPs are used across most of the UV and have been the detec-
tor of choice for almost all major UV missions. For example, the GALEX spacecraft employs
two MCPs (>Fig. 12-9b) fabricated by the experimental astrophysics group at the University of
California Berkeley, Space Sciences Laboratory. This group has been responsible for the devel-
opment of most of the UV detectors in space. For example, there were seven on EUVE, four in
two different instruments on SOHO, two in FUSE and a custom-designed MCP for COS (Hub-
ble), to give just a partial list (Siegmund et al. 2007). The length of the microchannel is typically
50–100 times the diameter of the channel, which implies a large surface-to-volume ratio and
the tendency to trap residual gas unless exceptional measures on cleanliness and plate condi-
tioning are employed. Because MCPs are operated at potentials of a few thousand volts, residual
gases can lead to destructive discharges. The channels have diameters ranging from 5 to 25 μm
on 10 to 40 μm centers, and plates with active areas as large as × mmare available;
the GALEX detectors are 75 mm in diameter with an active area of 68 mm. The response of the
MCP is a strong function of the angle of incidence of the photons. Photocathodes can be placed
on the top face or on a window in proximity focus immediately above the MCP. Materials with

524 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
⊡Fig. 12-9
(a) The structure of a microchannel plate (MCP) device. (b) The GALEX MCP detector (Credit:
Experimental Astrophysics Group, UC Berkeley (From McLean 2008))
large work functions such as CsI, CsTe, and KBr have good UV quantum efficiency but very
low response to visible photons. More recently, gallium nitride (GaN), which has a band gap of
3.4 eV, has been added to the list of photocathodes available for UV astronomy. Microchannel
plate detectors use a variety of anode structures. One of the simplest is a single resistive anode
in which the location of the event is determined by the amount of charge or current “divided”
between amplifiers attached to the corners. Other anode structures include the wedge and strip
anode, the spiral anode, and the delay Line, each of which is described as “continuous” anodes. It
is also possible to utilize “discrete” anode structures at the expense of many more amplifiers and
encode the event location through direct detection. One such system is called the Multi-Anode
Microchannel Array (MAMA). MAMA detectors with , × , pixels were constructed
for Hubble’s STIS and ACS instruments.
Detectors employing photoabsorption make up the largest category. There are many possi-
ble outcomes, including chemical change as in photography, but absorption in semiconductor
devices is the important one for astronomy. There are essentially two basic types of interactions,
the photoconduction effect and the photovoltaic (or photodiode) effect. The photoconductor is
composed of a single uniform semiconductor material in which the conductance is changed by
the creation of free charge carriers in the material when photons are absorbed. There is usually
always an external applied electric field. In the photodiode (or photojunction), internal elec-
tric fields and potential barriers are created by suitable junctions between different materials or
deliberate variations in the electrical properties of the material so that photogenerated carriers
in these regions respond to those fields.

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
525
3.2 Semiconductors
When individual atoms come close together to form a solid crystal, electrons in the outermost
orbits or upper energy levels of adjacent atoms interact to bind the atoms together. Because
of the very strong interaction between these outer or “valence” electrons, the upper energy
levels are drastically altered, with the result that the outer electrons are shared between the
different atomic nuclei. In fact, the energy levels are spread out into a “band.” The lowest band
of energies, corresponding to all the innermost orbits of the electrons, is filled with electrons
because there is one electron foreach atom. This band offilled energylevels is called the “valence
band.” Conversely, the upper energy band is empty of electrons because it is composed of the
combined unoccupied higher energy levels of the individual atoms in the crystal. It is called
the “conduction band” for reasons that will become apparent. Thus, the individual atoms have
a gap in energy between the inner filled levels and the outer unoccupied levels. The energy
region between the valence band and the conduction band in the crystal must be a “forbidden
energy gap” (EG). The crystal must be pure and contain atoms of only one kind; otherwise,
additional energy levels corresponding to those atoms will be formed. More importantly, the
periodic or repetitive crystalline structure must be unbroken to avoid distortions in the energy
levels caused by abnormal sharing of electrons. In practice, both of these conditions are vio-
lated in real crystals, and such departures from the simplified model contribute to degraded
performance.
In metals, the valence and conduction bands overlap, and so any of the many valence elec-
trons are free to roam throughout the solid to conduct electricity and heat and to move in
response to the force of an electric field. Insulating materials, on the other hand, have a highly
ordered structure and a very wide forbidden energy gap. The conduction band is totally empty
of electrons and so cannot contribute to an electrical current flow. Electrons in the completely
filled valence band cannot move in response to an electric field because every nearby orbit is
occupied. In a semiconductor, a few electrons can be elevated from the valence band to the
conduction band across the forbidden gap merely by absorbing heat energy from the random,
microscopic, jostling motions of the crystal structure at normal “room” temperature. Thermal
energy is given approximately by
Eth(eV) = kT = .(T/)eV
(12.28)
where k is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the absolute temperature. At room temperature
(T = 300 K), the thermal energy is quite small at 0.026 electron volts. Electrons promoted to
the conduction band can then conduct electricity, that is, they are free to move under the influ-
ence of an electric force field. Interestingly, the corresponding vacancies or “holes” left in the
valence band allow it to contribute to electrical conductivity as well because there is now some-
where for electrons in adjacent atoms to go; descriptions of solid-state devices therefore refer
to “electron-hole” pairs.
Most semiconductor crystals have band gap energies around 1 eV, but the range is from
almost 0 to about 3.5 eV. Visible light photons have energies around 2.25 eV (for 550 nm). As
the number of electrons which can be promoted to the conduction band by absorbing heat
will vary with the temperature of the crystal, typically as exp(−EG/2kT), those semiconductors
with larger band gaps are preferred because transistors and other devices made from them will
be less sensitive to environmental changes. If the semiconductor is cooled to a low enough
temperature, random elevation of valence electrons to the conduction band can be virtually
eliminated. The primary semiconductors, like silicon and germanium, belong to the “fourth

526 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
column” elements of the periodic table, which also includes carbon. Each of these elements
has four valence electrons. Compounds of elements on either side of the fourth column can be
formed, and these alloys will also have semiconductor properties. For example, gallium arsenide
(GaAs) and indium antimonide (InSb) are III–V (or “three–five”) compounds, and mercury-
cadmium telluride (HgCdTe) is one possible II–VI (or two–six) compound.
When a photon is absorbed in the crystalline structure of silicon, its energy is transferred
to a negatively charged electron, the photoelectron, which is then displaced from its normal
location in the valence band into the conduction band. When the electron reaches the conduc-
tion band, it can migrate through the crystal. Migration can be stimulated and controlled by
applying an electric field to the silicon crystal by means of small metal plates called “electrodes”
or “gates” connected to a voltage source. For each semiconductor, there is a wavelength of light
beyond which the material is insensitive to light because the photons are not energetic enough
to overcome the forbidden energy gap (EG) in the crystal. The cutoff wavelength is given by
λc = hc
EG
(12.29)
where h is Planck’s constant and c is the speed of light; hc = 1.24 for wavelengths in microns and
energy in electron volts.
All of the materials mentioned so far are “intrinsic” semiconductors because each has a
well-defined band gap intrinsic to the material. It is also possible to create an “extrinsic” semi-
conductor in which impurity atoms produce intermediate energy levels within the forbidden
gap. Forexample, when silicon atoms in the crystal structure are deliberatelyreplaced with other
atoms, the semiconductor is said to be “doped.” If the impurity atom has more valence electrons
than the semiconductor, then it will donate these negative charges to the conduction band; such
a material is called n-type. Conversely, if the impurity atom has fewer valence electrons than
the semiconductor, then a positively charged hole is left in the valence band ready to accept any
available electrons; this material is called p-type. In p-type material, there is an excess of holes
and so electrons are said to be the minority carriers of charge, whereas the opposite is true for
n-type material. Because of the much lower transition energies, extrinsic semiconductors are
used in far-infrared photon detection.
3.3 Photoconductors
This is the simplest application of a semiconductor for detection of photons. Photons are
absorbed and create electron-hole pairs. If the material is extrinsic rather than intrinsic, then
Ei must be substituted for EG. Also, for extrinsic materials, there are limits on solubility of the
dopants and high concentrations introduce unwanted conductivity modes. In practice, both
electrons and holes contribute to the photocurrent, but it is usually the electrons that domi-
nate. The main parameters in the construction and operation of a photoconductor are shown
in >Fig. 12-10. For this discussion, it is assumed that the detector has been cooled to eliminate
thermally generated charges.
The average photocurrent (I) between the terminals that is generated by an incident flux
with power P (watts) is given by
I = (eηP/hν)(vτ/l)
(12.30)

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
527
⊡Fig. 12-10
Construction and operation of a semiconductor used in photoconduction mode (From McLean
2008)
In this expression, η is the quantum efficiency and P/hν is just the photon arrival rate. The
quantity τ is called the mean carrier lifetime and measures how long the photogenerated charge
exists before recombination. Values are usually less than to much less than a few milliseconds
but depend on doping and temperature.The average charge carrier velocity is v, which is related
to the applied electric field across the photoconductor E = V/l by v = μE where μ is called the
mobility of the charge carrier. Thus, l/v is the transit time across the device from one terminal
to the other, and the quantity G = vτ/l is just the ratio of mean carrier lifetime to transit time.
It is known as the “photoconductive gain.” The response (S) of the detector (in amps per watt
or volts per watt) is just I/P or V/RP where V is the bias voltage across the photoconductor
and the resistance R due to the photocurrent is l/σA and the conductivity σ = neμ, where n
is the average density of carriers. It follows that S = (eηG/hc)λ. Finally, the root mean square
noise for a photoconductor is given by √(4eGIB) where B is the electrical bandwidth of the
measurement.
3.4 Photodiodes
Junctions between p- and n-type regions are used many times in semiconductor structures to
produce different devices. One such device is the photodiode. When a pn junction is formed
as shown in >Fig. 12-11, electrons from the n region tend to diffuse into the p region near
the junction and fill up some of the positively ionized states or holes in the valence band, thus
making that p-type region more negative than it was. Similarly, the diffusion of holes from the
p to the n side leads to an increasingly more positive electrical potential.
A narrow region forms on either side of the junction in which the majority charge carriers
are “depleted” relative to their concentrations well awayfrom the junction. As the concentration
of electrons in the n-type material is usually very much larger than in the p-type material, the
flow of electrons would tend to be one way were it not for the fact that the diffusion process itself
begins to build up an electrostatic potential barrier which restrains the flow of electrons from
the n-type region; the buildup of electrons on the p side makes it negatively charged which starts
to repel further diffusion. The magnitude of this potential barrier (V) depends on the impurity
concentrations, that is, on the number of donor electrons at the junction that are available for
transfer to nearby acceptor levels and is just equal to the required shift of the energy bands

528 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
⊡Fig. 12-11
Formation of a pn junction between p-doped and n-doped materials results in a region depleted
of carriers and the creation of a potential barrier (From McLean 2008)
needed to ensure that the Fermi level (EF) remains constant throughout the crystal. The Fermi
level is the energy at which there is a 50/50 chance of the corresponding electron energy state
or orbit being occupied by an electron. For an intrinsic semiconductor, EF lies halfway between
the valence and conduction bands, whereas for an n-type doped semiconductor, the Fermi level
moves up toward the conduction band and conversely p-type doping lowers the Fermi level.
When a positive voltage is applied to the p side of the junction, it will tend to counteract
or reduce the built-in potential barrier and attract more electrons across the junction, whereas
a negative voltage on the p side will enhance the internal barrier and increase the width of the
depletion region; these conditions are called “forward” and “reversed” bias, respectively. There-
fore, on one side of a pn junction, there is a region which is more negative, and on the other side,
there is a region which is more positive than elsewhere in the crystal. When light of the cor-
rect wavelength is absorbed near the junction, an electron-hole pair is created and the potential
difference across the junction sweeps the pair apart before they can recombine. Electrons are
drawn toward the region of greatest positive potential buried in the n-type layer which therefore
behaves like a charge storage capacitor. Of course, as more electrons accumulate, the positive
potential is progressively weakened. In the photodiode, an electron-hole pair is created within
the depletion region by the absorption of a photon, and the charge carriers are immediately
separated by the electric field across the junction. The current due to an incident photon flux
(signal and background) of power P is just I = eηP/hν, and the root mean square noise is given
by √(2eIB) where B is the electrical frequency bandwidth of the measurement. Comparing
these results to the photoconductor shows that G = 1 for the photodiode and the noise is less by
a factor of √2 because recombination does not occur in the depletion region.
3.5 Applications to CCDs and IR Arrays
Most infrared arrays are either photodiodes or photoconductors. Infrared arrays employ a
hybrid construction. They are like a sandwich (> Fig. 12-12) in which the upper slab is the
IR sensor (e.g., InSb, HgCdTe; Si:As, Ge:Ga), and the lower slab is a silicon readout device.

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
529
⊡Fig. 12-12
The“hybrid”structure of infrared array devices: the two slabs are separated by a grid of tiny indium
bumps that remain soft at cryogenic temperatures (From McLean 2008)
The infrared layer is a tightly packed grid of individual pixels with minimum dead space
between them. Both slabs are provided with a grid of electrical connections in the form
of tiny raised sections – referred to as “bumps” – of an electrical conductor called indium;
indium remains soft at low temperatures. The two slabs are literally pressed together to enable
the indium bumps to mate. A microscopic array of “switches” made from Metal–Oxide–
Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistors (MOSFETs) is used to access the signal from each IR
pixel (whether photodiode or photoconductor). Charge storage may occur on the junction
capacitance of the IR sensor itself (in the case of a photodiode) or on a separatestorage capacitor
associated with the silicon circuitry.
The entire structure is often called a Focal Plane Array (FPA) or a Sensor Chip Assembly
(SCA), and the silicon readout integrated circuit part by itself is called a ROIC or mux. In the
infrared array, stored charge is read out directly from each pixel in turn using a source follower
transistor which permits nondestructive sampling of the signal voltage. The charge does not
“pass through” any other pixels in the array. This is quite different from the CCD discussed
below.
Silicon CCDs (charge-coupled devices) are used widely in astronomy from X-ray to near-
infrared wavelengths. The CCD is an array of individual pixels each one of which can absorb
photons and utilize the energy to release an electron within the semiconductor. To confine the
electron within a pixel requires a special electrostatic field to attract the charged electron to a
specific spot. Creating a storage region capable of holding many charges is more complicated.
It is achieved by applying metal electrodes to the semiconductor silicon together with a thin
(100 nm = 0.1 μm) separation layer made from silicon dioxide, which is an electrical insulator.
The resulting structure behaveslike a parallel plate capacitor which can therefore store electrical
charge. It is called an MOS (metal-oxide-semiconductor) structure.
An electric field is generated inside the silicon slab by the voltage applied to the metal elec-
trode. Ifthe material is p-type, then a positive voltage on the metal gate will repel the holes which

530 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
⊡Fig. 12-13
Development of a single metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) storage well, the basic element in a
CCD, is shown for diﬀerent applied gate voltages (From McLean 2008)
are in the majority and sweep out a region depleted of charge carriers. These conditions are illus-
trated in >Fig. 12-13. When a photon is absorbed in this region, it produces an electron-hole
pair, but the hole is driven out of the depletion region and the electron is attracted toward the
positively charged electrode. The MOS capacitor is the combination of two parallel plate capac-
itors, namely, the oxide capacitor and the silicon depletion region capacitor, and therefore, the
capacitance is proportional to the area of the plates (electrodes) and inversely proportional to
their separation. As the voltage on the plate can be controlled, then the depletion width can be
increased or decreased, and so the capacity to store charge can also be controlled. The deple-
tion region is an electrostatic “potential well” into which many photogenerated charges can be
collected. Typically, the number of electrons stored is just Q = CV/e, where e is the charge
on the electron (.× −C), V is the effective voltage, and the capacitance C is given by the
“parallel-plate” formula C = Aκε/d in which A is the area of the pixel or gate electrode, d is
the thickness of the region, κ is the dielectric constant of the SiOinsulator (∼3.9), and εis the
permittivity of free space (.× −farad/m). As the voltage on the electrode increases, the
“depth” of the well increases; other ways are needed to create sidewalls to the well. Eventually,
at a certain “threshold” voltage, even the minority charge carriers due to impurities, electrons
for a p-type semiconductor, will be drawn to the electrode.

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
531
The unique feature of the CCD that gives it its name is the way in which the photogenerated
charge, and hence the image of the scene, is extracted from the MOS storage and detection site.
It is called “charge coupling.” To transfer charge from under one electrode to the area below an
adjacent electrode, raise the voltage on the adjacent electrode to the same value as the first one.
This is like lowering the floor of the adjacent potential well. The charges will now flow, like water,
and be shared between both regions. Transfer can be in either direction, and by connecting sets
of electrodes together, the entire charge stored on the two-dimensional imaging area can be
moved simultaneously in that direction. When the voltage on the original electrode is reduced
to zero volts, transfer is complete because the collapse of the storage well pushes any remaining
charges across to the new electrode. Because it takes three electrodes to define 1 pixel, three of
the above transfers are required to move the two-dimensional charge pattern by one whole pixel
stepalong the direction at right angles tothe electrode strips. The process ofraising and lowering
the voltage can be repeated over and over. These drive or “clock” pulses can be described in a
diagram called a timing waveform. Finally, there is another set of electrodes at right angles to
the first to enable charges to be moved along that row to the output amplifier where the charge
is converted to a voltage that can be further amplified and digitized by an analog-to-digital
converter. Details and applications can be found in Janesick (2001) and McLean (2008).
The digital signals recorded by the detector system – usually called Data Numbers (or DN)
or sometimes Analog-to-Digital Units (ADU) – must be turned back into microvolts and then
into electrons and finally to photons in order to calibrate the system. The relation between DN
and microvolts at the CCD or infrared array output depends on the “gain” of the amplifiers in the
system, and conversion between microvolts at the output and an equivalent charge in electrons
requires knowledge of the capacitance (C) of the output node of the on-chip amplifier. Counts
or DN recorded in a given time by the camera system are linearly related to the numbers of
electrons in the charge packets by
S = (Ne + ND)
g
+ b
(12.31)
where S is the recorded output signal in Data Numbers (or counts), Ne is the number of elec-
trons in the charge packet (ηNp), and the system photon transfer gain factor is g electrons/DN;
b is the electronic offset or bias level (in DN) for an empty charge packet and Nd is the residual
dark current signal still present after cooling the device. Both the bias (b) and the dark cur-
rent (Nd) can be determined from measurements without illumination and can therefore be
subtracted. There are two ways to derive the transfer factor g in electrons/DN, either by cal-
culation, knowing the overall amplifier gain and the capacitance of the CCD/IR array, or by a
series of observations of a uniformly illuminated scene at different brightness levels.
Let Vfs be the full scale voltage swing allowed on the A/D unit, and n be the numberof bits to
which the A/D can digitize. The full scale range is therefore subdivided into2n parts, the smallest
part – the least significant bit or LSB – is simply 1 DN. Thus, the voltage corresponding to 1 DN
at the A/D unit is Vfs/2n; as an example, suppose the full scale voltage is 10 V and the A/D is
16 bits then 2n is 65,536 and so the ratio is 0.0001525 V, or 152.5 μV at the A/D is equivalent to
1 DN. Similarly, for a 14 bit A/D, the range is 16,384 and 1 DN corresponds to 610 μV. To get
the number of microvolts corresponding to 1 DN at the CCD rather than at the A/D, divide the
number derived above by the total gain product Ag of all the amplifiers in the system; usually
this means the on-chip amplifier (ASF), the preamplifier (Apre), and a postamplifier (Apost). To
convert this number of microvolts to an equivalent charge of electrons, multiply by the CCD

532 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
capacitance (C) and divide by the value of the charge on the electron (e). Therefore,
g = Vf sC
nAge
(12.32)
where e = .× −Coulombs.
Assuming that there are only two sources of noise when imaging a uniformly illuminated
flat field, photon noise from the signal and readout noise from the detector, these two noise
sources should be independent and random. Therefore, adding them together in quadrature
gives the total noise
(noise)= p+ R
(12.33)
This expression applies to photoelectrons and not to counts (DN). The measured quantities,
the mean signal (SM) and its variance (VM), are in DN. To convert from electrons to DN in
( > 12.33), divide each noise term by g (electrons/DN) to give
(noise
g
)

= ( p
g )

+ (R
g )

(12.34)
The left-hand side is now exactly VM, the observed variance in DN. Also, the mean number of
photoelectrons is g(e−/DN)SM(DN) or gSM, and the photoelectron noise (p) on this number is
simply the √(gSM) for Poisson statistics, so p= gSM. Hence, ( > 12.34) becomes
VM = 
g SM + (R
g )

(12.35)
> Equation 12.35 is just the equation of a straight line in a signal-variance plot of y = VM
and x = SM. Plotting these observed quantities (noise-squared and signal) as the illumination
changes will yield a straight-line of gradient (slope) m = /g with the value of the intercept on
the VM axis when SM = giving (R/g)which yields R as g is known from the slope.
3.6 Detectors for High Energy
Gamma rays cannot be readily focused, even using the grazing incidence mirrors that operate
successfully for X-rays. In addition, gamma rays are different from other photons in that they
may not be fully absorbed. In fact, there are three regimes: total absorption by the photoelectric
effect, Compton scattering, and pair production. Pair production dominatesabove 10 MeV. Pair
conversion telescopes use devices like spark chambers and silicon strip detectors to track the
particles produced. Sheets of silicon detectors can be stacked in towers to produce the solid-
state equivalent of a spark chamber. An incident gamma-ray photon is forced to pair-produce
by a plate of high atomic weight material, and the electrons and positrons from the conver-
sion cause ionization in the silicon strip. Another useful device is the proportional counter.
Cylinders of solid germanium with a central axial node and surrounded by a cylindrical cath-
ode. The incoming gamma ray creates ion-electron pairs, and the electrons are attracted to the
anode such that the number released is proportional to the gamma ray’s energy. These kinds
of units can form a “pixel” in a large array of germanium detectors. Another semiconductor
material with good stopping power is cadmium zinc telluride, sometimes called simply CZT.
When ionizing radiation interacts with the CZT crystal, electron-hole pairs are created in pro-
portion to the energy of the incoming photon. CZT elements can be tightly packed to make an

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
533
array detector for gamma rays. A large array of CZT elements is used, for example, in the Burst
Alert Telescope (BAT) on the Swift satellite (Gehrels et al. 2004). Finally, Earth’s atmosphere
forces high-energy gamma rays to pair-convert, and the resulting shower of particles produce
Cherenkov light which can be detected by wide-field telescopes equipped with “cameras” using
hundreds of PMTs as the pixel elements.
3.7 Thermal Detectors
In the class of thermal detectors, there is only one type that is used widely in astronomy and that
is the “bolometer,” which is described in more detail in
>Chap. 14. Semiconductor bolome-
ters, based on silicon or germanium, are well developed for far-infrared and submillimeter
astronomy. Essentially, a bolometer consists of a sensitive thermometerand a high cross-section
absorber that absorbs almost all of the incident radiation falling on it, that is, QE (η) ∼100%.
The absorber has a heat capacity of C joules per kelvin. The thermometer and absorber are con-
nected by a weak thermal link to a heat sink at a low temperature, and the conductivity of this
link is G watts per kelvin. If the detector element of the bolometer absorbs an amount of energy
E = ηPΔt/hν in a time interval Δt from a source with power P, that energy is converted to heat
which raises the temperature by an amount ΔT = T −T= E/C above that of a heat sink at
T. The temperature rise decays exponentially as power in the absorber flows out to the heat
sink via the weak link and the time constant is τ = C/G. Temperature rise is proportional to the
absorbed energy. In the classical circuit, a constant bias current, generated by the bias supply
and a load resistor, flows through the bolometer. Provided that the bias power remains constant
T = T+ (P + Pbias)/G
(12.36)
and the temperature rise causes a change in bolometer resistance, and consequently a change in
the voltage across it which can be measured. Differential on/off source measurements are nor-
mally required to remove bias levels. A more detailed account is given in Rieke (2003). Arrays
of bolometers now exist and will be described in the chapter on far-infrared detectors.
3.8 Coherent Detectors
A coherent detector or “receiver” is any device that directly responds to the electric field of the
wave. The most important form of receiver is the heterodyne or superheterodyne which func-
tions by mixing signals of different frequencies and detecting a signal at the difference or “beat”
frequency between the original two frequencies. Depending on the frequency of the incoming
wave, the electric field may be converted to an electrical signal which is then amplified before
being mixed with a local oscillator. For frequencies below 1 GHz, cryogenic transistor pream-
plifiers are used. From 1 to 40 GHz, FET, parametric and maser amplifiers are employed, but
above 40 GHz, the mixer must precede the preamplifier in order to reduce the frequency before
amplification. The local oscillator (LO) produces a strong signal with a frequency that is close
to but different from the signal frequency. The beat frequency, or intermediate frequency (IF),
is νIF = νS −νLO. Subsequent amplification and filtering of the intermediate frequency signal by
a large factor then follows and the resultant signal is rectified by a diode and integrated. The key
element in this entire process is the mixer. This device must be a nonlinear device that converts
power from the original frequencies to the beat frequency, and is typically a diode because it

534 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
is a good approximation to a square-law device in terms of its current-voltage (I–V) behavior.
If I = V, then the output current is proportional to the input power P, because Vis propor-
tional to the electric field Ewhich is a measure of P. Within the mixer, the electric fields sum as
vectors and the resultant power is the square of the amplitude of the electric fields. One of the
best modern mixers is a junction made by separating two superconductors (not semiconductors)
with a thin insulator; this is the SIS mixer.
The simplest radiometer (photometer) measures the average total power received over a
well-defined radio frequency bandwidth Δν and over a time interval τ. Just as for optical and
infrared wavelengths, the weak astronomical source is measured against a background of many
other radio signals such as the cosmic microwave background, the atmosphere, and the noise
in the receiver itself. Power is usually expressed as a temperature, and the total system power
is Tsys. The total noise in the measurement is given by the practical form of the radiometer
equation:
σT = Tsys[(/ΔνRFτ) + (ΔG/G)]/
(12.37)
where ΔG represents possible fluctuations in gain. If those fluctuations are negligible, then the
equation simplifies to its ideal form (Tsys/√(ΔνRFτ)). In a manner similar to chopping in the
infrared, one way to minimize fluctuations in receiver gain and atmospheric emission is to
perform differential measurementsby switching rapidly between two adjacent feeds as first sug-
gested by Robert Dicke in the 1940s. The main drawback of Dicke switching is that the measured
noise is doubled to 2 Tsys/√(ΔνRFτ) as a result of the difference measurement.
No quantum detectorthat usesthe liberation of a (photo)electron by an incident photon can
work at wavelengths longer than about 0.2 mm. Across the entire radio spectrum, the electro-
magnetic field, or the current which it induces in an antenna, is applied to a nonlinear element
(diode) or mixer. The mixer either measures the total power or changes the signal frequency
to one which is more easily measured. Frequently used devices are the Schottky diode and the
superconducting junction (Zmuidzinas and Richards 2004).
When a metal and a semiconductor are brought into contact, the majority charge carriers of
the semiconductor leave the contact zone until the Fermi levels of the metal and semiconductor
are equalized. As a result, a “barrier” or “depletion region” empty of majority carriers appears
in the semiconductor; typical barrier widths are ∼0.3 μm. Even without any voltage across the
junction, a current can flow through it. This is the Schottky diode. In practice, the semiconduc-
tor used is heavily doped gallium arsenide (GaAs) with a very thin lightly doped layer on the
surface to reduce quantum mechanical tunneling and a contact layer of metal on top. Cooling
the detector to a temperature of about 20 K yields a low-noise detector. Above 300 GHz (wave-
lengths shorter than 1 mm), the capacitance of the diode creates an RC filter which reduces its
response.
When a thin insulating barrier is created between a normal metal and a superconducting
metal (not a semiconductor) or between two superconductors, the structures are called SIN
and SIS junctions. Nonlinear current can flow by quantum mechanical tunneling, and hence
the device can be used as a mixer. When the voltage V is large enough that occupied states
on one side are opposite vacant states on the other side, then a tunneling current can flow.
Conversely, no current flows if eV < 2Δ. Absorption of a photon can excite a charge carrier to
the energy where the tunnel effect occurs. The high-frequency limit is about the same as the
Schottky diode.
The output of the mixer is a signal with a frequency of νIF = ±(ν−νLO), where νLO is the fre-
quency of the local oscillator, which is passed to the intermediate frequency (IF) amplifier and

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
535
then to a rectifying and smoothing circuit called a “detector.” This terminology seems strange
compared to our previous usage where the detector is the device that receives the photons and
converts them to an electrical signal. The detector part of the radio receiver is usually called
the “backend” and can be quite complicated with a number of options, even for the same “front
end” system. Rather than a single detector, a “backend” spectrometer often receives the output
from the IF amplifier. The “spectrometer” usually consists of a number of electrical filters tuned
to different frequencies with detectors on their outputs, a digital correlation computer.
4
Cryogenics and Vaccum Systems
Many detectors require cooling for optimum performance. There are several categories of
cooling systems that might be required in astronomical instruments:
1. Thermo-electric coolers and liquid circulation coolers. These systems normally operate over
the range −○C to −○C and are suitable for photomultiplier tubes, certain CCDs which
have low dark currents, and high-speed applications such as telescope-guiding cameras.
2. Liquid and solid cryogens. Dry ice (solid CO) is cheap and readily available. Coming in the
form of a “snow,” it is most often used as the coolant for GaAs PMTs. Temperatures around
−○C (or 197 K) can be achieved with dry ice. Liquid nitrogen (LN) is also relatively cheap
and can cool detectors (and other components) to −○C (77 K), which is the normal boil-
ing point of liquid nitrogen. Liquid helium (LHe) is more expensive, but it is needed to cool
the low band gap semiconductor detectors and bolometers used in infrared instruments to
−○C (4 K). For liquid cryogens, the cooling ability is expressed in terms of the product
of the density (ρ) and the latent heat of vaporization (LV):
(ρLV)LHe = .W hrl−
(ρLV)LN= .W hrl−
For example, a 10 W heat load boils away 1 liter (l) of LHe in 0.07 h, whereas 1 l of LNlasts
4.5 h. By attaching a vacuum pump to the LNvent and reducing the pressure above the
liquid, it is possible to solidify the nitrogen and achieve ∼65 K.
3. Electrical heat engines or closed-cyclerefrigerators. Because LHe is fairly expensive compared
to liquid nitrogen and requires special care in handling, many infrared instruments and
submillimeter/radio receivers employ multistage closed-cycle refrigerators (CCRs). Typical
two-stage Gifford-McMahon systems using 99.999% pure helium gas at about 300 psi as the
working fluid, such as the 350 model from CTI Inc. (now part of Brooks Automation Inc.,
USA), can provide two cold levels, usually 65 and 10 K, and extract heat at a rate of about 20
and 7 W from each stage. Both single-stage and triple-stage versions are available, and the
larger units provide about 100 W of cooling power. If the mass to be cooled is very small, for
example, a single CCD, then much simpler systems such as small Stirling cycle coolers can
be used. Vibration damping is needed, especially for CCR-cooled instruments in sensitive
AO systems, and counterbalance weights may also be required.
4.
He systems. Even lower temperatures are obtained using He systems in submillimeter and
far-infrared bolometers. The basic principle of a He cryostat is to condense helium-3 gas
by bringing it in contact with a pumped helium-4 reservoir (yielding ∼1.2 K). Low temper-
atures below 300 mK are then obtained (for small samples) by reducing the vapor pressure
on top of the liquid helium-3 using an internal sorption pump (charcoal).

536 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
The heat H (J) removed from a mass m (kg) which is cooled from a temperature Th to Tc is
given by
H = mC(Th −Tc)
(12.38)
where C is the specific heat of the material in joule/kg per K (J kg−K−). The specific heat of
a substance usually changes with temperature, and it depends on the conditions under which
the heat is applied (i.e., constant volume Cv or constant pressure Cp), but for solids the differ-
ence is generally small. For aluminum, C is about 900 J/kg⋅K, copper is 385 J/kg⋅K, steel is about
450 J/kg⋅K, and water is 4,190 J/kg⋅K. Specific heat is also tabulated in cal/g⋅K; using the con-
version 4.19 joules per calorie gives 1 cal/g⋅K for water. As an example, to cool a mass of 1 kg
(2.2 lb) of copper from 290 K to 80 K requires the removal of × × = , J and 2.3
times that amount for aluminum. If heat removal is to be accomplished in t = h (3,600 s), then
the average power is H/t = .W.
The rate of transfer of heat QH (in watts) by conduction along a rod of uniform cross-
sectional area (A) and temperature gradient dT/dx is given by
QH = −kAdT
dx
(12.39)
where k is called the thermal conductivity (Wm−K−) and is about 240 for Al, 400 for Cu, and
only 0.9 for glass. In steady state conditions, we can write dT/dxas ΔT/L, where L is the length of
the conductor. If we think of heat flow as “current” and temperaturedifference as “voltage,” then
by analogy with Ohm’s law (V = IR) for electrical circuits, we can define a “thermal resistance”
such that
ΔT = QHR, R = 
k

A/L
(12.40)
Since k is a function of temperature, it is often more convenient to integrate over the required
temperature range and give QH in the form
QH = A
L [ITh −ITc]
(12.41)
where L is the total length of the conductor and Iis a tabulated property for many materials
called the thermal conductivity integral which accounts for the variation of thermal conductiv-
ity (k) with temperature. In this expression, Th and Tc represent the hot and cold temperatures
between which the heat is flowing. If A and L are measured in cmand cm, respectively, then I
is in W/cm. Typical values are shown in >Table 12-1.
In large cryogenic infrared instruments, heat transfer by radiation is the dominant mech-
anism. The power radiated from a body of area A at an absolute temperature T is given by
QH = εσAT
(12.42)
where σ = .× −Wm−K−is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant and ε is the emissivity of
the surface; ε = for a perfectly black surface and is less than 0.1 for a shiny metallic surface.
Polished aluminum foil yields an emissivity of about 0.05 and goldized Kapton gives ∼0.04;
anodizing increases the emissivity by a factor of 10 or more. The net rate of heat transfer by
radiation from a body at temperature Th onto a body at temperature Tc is given by
QH = σAcFhc[T
h −T
c ]
(12.43)
Here, Fhc is an “effective” emissivity which also depends on the geometry of the cryostat (or
dewar) configuration, such as concentric cylinders or plane-parallel plates, both of which are

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
537
⊡Table 12-1
Values of the thermal conductivity integrals in W/cm for four materials
OFHC
6061 aluminum
Stainless
G-10 ﬁberglass
Temperature (K)
copper (W/cm)
(W/cm)
steel (W/cm)
(W/cm)
300
1,520
613
30.6
1.00
250
1,320
513
23.4
0.78
200
1,120
413
16.6
0.55
150
915
313
10.6
0.37
100
700
211
6.3
0.19
77
586
158
3.2
0.11
50
426
89.5
1.4
0.07
10
25
3.6
0.03
0.005
quite realistic. In both cases, when the emissivities of the two surfaces are small (<5%) and
equal, then Fhc ∼ε/.
For a given temperature differential, radiation load is minimized by reducing the surface
area and achieving the lowest emissivity (shiniest) surfaces. It is also possible to add n “floating”
shields which reduce the radiated heat load on the innermost body by a factor of (n + ), but
careful application is critical. Various forms of floating shields are available. One form is called
Multiple Layer Insulation (MLI). Typical emissivities range from 0.03 for polished aluminum
and gold foil to 0.32 for polished anodized aluminum to 0.95 for a matt black surface. A useful
rule of thumb is that if ε = .and the hot and cold temperaturesare 290 and 80 K, respectively,
then the radiation load is ∼10–11 W/m. Note that radiation load is very sensitive to Th.
Air at 20○C and 1 atmosphere of pressure (1 atmosphere = 760 torr and 1 torr = 132 Pa)
contains about .× molecules per cubic centimeter, and the average distance traveled
between collisions, called the mean free path, is about × −cm. In general,
λm f p =

√
nπd
(12.44)
where n is the number density of molecules and d is the diameter of the molecule. A “rough”
vacuum is about 10−torr (mean free path = 5 cm) and a “high” vacuum would be 10−torr
(mean free path ×cm). The capacity of a vacuumpump is specified in terms of the pumping
speed at the inlet, which is just the volume rate of flow S = dV/dt l/s. The throughput of the flow
is Qp = PS (torr-l/s) and the throughput of the pumping line is given by Qp = CΔP, where ΔP
is the pressure gradient and C is called the conductance which depends on gas pressure and
viscosity. Since this equation is also analogous to Ohm’s law (V = IR) for electrical circuits, the
net pumping speed of a pump and a system of pumping lines is given by

S =

Spump
+

Clines
(12.45)
where the net conductance is found by adding the individual conductances like their electrical
counterparts. Two equations are given for C(in l/s). The first corresponds to viscous flow when
the mean free path is small and the other to molecular flow when the mean free path is large
compared to tube dimensions and C is independent of pressure. Both apply to air at 20○C:
C = D
L Pav or C = D
L
(12.46)

538 12
Instrumentation and Detectors
It is assumed that the tube is circular with diameter D and length L in cm and the pressure is in
torr. Finally, the pump down time (in seconds) of a system with volume V from pressure Pto
P assuming a constant net pumping speed S and no outgassing is
t = .V
S ln ( P
P )
(12.47)
Typically, the chamber is rough pumped to about × −torr with a mechanical pump and
then pumped to a lower pressure with a diffusion pump or turbomolecular pump. Typical pump
speeds are 100 l/s at the inlet.
Developing modern astronomical instrumentation requires a broad knowledge of basic
physics, engineering practice, and software. This chapter has touched on some of the back-
ground knowledge needed to appreciate what goes into the designing and building of such
instruments. The design specification flows down from the scientific requirements. Initial opti-
cal, mechanical, and thermal calculations need to be followed by detailed ray tracing and finite
element analysis. Many instruments require vacuum cryogenic systems. Analog and digital
electronics are needed to operate the instrument and detector, and software to control the
entire system must be robust and easy to use. Many other factors come into play when build-
ing astronomical instruments. See McLean (2008) for a more complete review of astronomical
instruments and detectors.
References
Allington-Smith, J., & Content, R. 1998, PASP, 110,
1216
Arribas,
S.,
et
al.
1998,
Proc.
SPIE,
3355,
821
Bacon, R., et al. 1995, A&AS, 113, 347
Baldry, I. K., Bland-Hawthorn, J., & Robertson, J. G.
2004, Volume phase holographic gratings: polar-
ization properties and diffraction efficiency.
Pub. Astron. Soc. Pac., 116, 403–414
Barden, S. C., Arns, J. A., Colburn, W. S., & Williams,
J. B. 2000, Volume-phase holographic gratings
and the efficiency of three simple volume-phase
holographic gratings. Pub. Astron. Soc. Pac.,
112, 809–820
Bland-Hawthorn, J., & Kedziora-Chudczer, L. 2003,
Taurus tunable filter: seven years of observing.
Pub. Astron. Soc. Australia, 20, 242–251
Clarke, D., & Grainger, J. 1971, Polarized Light and
Optical Measurement (Oxford/New York: Perg-
amon Press)
Courtes, G. 1982, ASSL, 92, 123
Garcia, A. A., Rasilla, J. L., Arribas, S., & Mediavilla,
E. 1994, Proc. SPIE, 2198, 75
Garmire, G. P., Bautz, M. W., Ford, P. G., Nousek,
J. A., & Ricker, G. R., Jr. 2003, Proc. SPIE, 4851,
28. X-ray and gamma-ray telescopes and instru-
ments for astronomy, ed. J. E. Trümper, & H. D.
Tananbaum
Gehrels, N., Chincarini, G., Giommi, P., Mason,
K. O., Nousek, J. A., Wells, A. A., White, N. E.,
Barthelmy, S. D., Burrows, D. N., Cominsky, L.
R., et al. 2004, The Swift gamma-ray burst mis-
sion. ApJ, 611, 1005–1020
Guyon, O. 2006, Theoretical limits on extrasolar
planet detection with coronagraphs. Astrophys.
J. Suppl. Ser., 167, 81–99
Hinkley, S., Oppenheimer, B. R., Brenner, D., Parry,
I. R., Sivaramakrishnan, A., Soummer, R., &
King, D. 2008, Proc. SPIE, 7015, 32
Janesick,
J. R. 2001,
Scientific
Charge-Coupled
Devices (Bellingham: SPIE)
Kasdin, N. J., et al. 2003, Extrasolar planet find-
ing via optimal apodized-pupil and shaped-pupil
coronagraphs. Astrophys. J., 582, 1147–1161
Krabbe, A., Thatte, N. A., Kroker, H., Tacconi-
Garman, L. E., & Tecza, M. 1997, Proc. SPIE,
2871, 1179
Larkin, J., et al. 2006, Proc. SPIE, 6269, 42
Lyot, B. 1939, A study of the solar corona and promi-
nences without eclipses. Mon. Not. R. Astron.
Soc., 99, 580–594
McLean, I. S. 2008, Electronic Imaging in Astron-
omy: Detectors and Instrumentation (2nd ed.;
Heidelberg: Springer)
Morrissey,
P., Schiminovich,
D., Barlow, T. A.,
Martin,
D.
C.,
Blakkolb,
B.,
Conrow,
T.,

Instrumentation and Detectors 12
539
Cooke, B., Erickson, K., Fanson, J., Friedman,
P. G., et al. 2005, The on-orbit performance of
the Galaxy Evolution Explorer. ApJ, 619, L7–L10
Murphy, T. W., Matthews, K., & Soifer, B. T. 1999,
PASP, 111, 1176
Palacios, D. M. 2005, An optical vortex coronagraph.
Proc. SPIE, 5905, 196
Rieke, G.H. 2003, The Measurement of Light from
the UV to the Sub-millimeter (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press)
Rouan, D., et al. 2000, The four quadrant phase mask
coronagraph. I. Principle. PASP, 112, 1479–1486
Soummer, R., Aime, C., & Falloon, P. E. 2003, Stel-
lar coronagraphy with prolate apodized circular
apertures. A&A, 397, 1161–1172
Tecza, M., Thatte, N. A., Krabbe, A., & Tacconi-
Garman, L. E. 1998, Proc. SPIE, 3354, 394
Tinbergen, J. 1996, Astronomical Polarimetry (Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press)
Siegmund, O., Vallerga, J., Tremsin, A., and McPhate,
J. 2007, Microchannel plates: recent advances in
performance, Proc. SPIE, 6686, 66860W
Wizinowich, P., Acton, D. S., Shelton, C., Stomski, P.,
Gathright, J., Ho, K., Lupton, W., Tsubota, K.,
Lai, O., Max, C., Brase, J., An, J., Avicola, K.,
Olivier, S., Gavel, D., Macintosh, B., Ghez, A., &
Larkin, J., 2000, First Light Adaptive Optics
Images from the Keck II Telescope: A New Era
of High Angular Resolution Imagery, PASP, 112,
315
Zmuidzinas, J., & Richards, P. L. 2004, Supercon-
ducting detectors and mixers for millimeter
and submillimeter astrophysics. Proc. IEEE, 92,
1597–1616


13
Silicon-Based Image
Sensors
Paul R. Jorden
e2v technologies plc, Chelmsford, Essex, UK
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 543
1.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 543
1.2
Use of CCD and Silicon Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 544
2
The Charge-Coupled Device Image Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
2.2
What Is a CCD? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
2.3
Spectral Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
2.4
Readout Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 549
2.5
The Electron-Multiplying (EM) CCD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 551
2.6
Readout Frequency and Read Times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 551
2.7
Dark Current and Operating Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 552
2.8
Charge Transfer Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 553
2.9
Package Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 554
2.10
Single Devices and Mosaic Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
3
CMOS/APS Imagers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
3.1
Introduction to APS Imagers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
3.2
Why Use an APS Sensor? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 558
3.3
Performance Features of APS Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 558
4
Sensor Types and Application Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 558
4.1
CCD Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 558
4.2
Custom Spectral Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
4.2.1
Sensor Optimization for Different Bands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
4.2.2
Graded AR Coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
4.2.3
Multilayer AR Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
4.2.4
X-ray and Short Wavelengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 560
4.3
Wavefront Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 560
5
Summary and Future Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 560
5.1
Device Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 560
5.2
Pixel Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
5.3
Readout Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_13, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

542 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
5.4
Spectral Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
5.5
Associated Electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 563
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 563

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
543
Abstract:
Silicon image sensors are the dominant detector type used at visible wavelengths
for astronomy. The primary charge-coupled-device (CCD) sensor is described with architec-
ture, performance levels, and applications illustrated. CMOS silicon sensors are also discussed,
with examples given of application areas. Most astronomical sensors require high quantum effi-
ciency and low readout noise, and techniques to achieve these are presented. Silicon sensors
are discussed for applications covering the x-ray through visible to near-infrared wavelengths.
The special requirements of packaging for cryogenic use, close butting, and focal plane mosaic
assemblies are also illustrated.
List of Abbreviations:
APS, Active-pixel sensor; AR, Anti-reflection (coating); CCD, Charge-
coupled device; CMOS, Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor; CTE, Charge transfer
efficiency; ELT, Extremely large telescope; EMCCD, Electron-multiplying CCD; FPA Focal
plane assembly; FPS, Frames per second; IMO, Inverted mode operation; MPP, Multiphase
pinned; PGA, Pin grid array; Pixel, Picture element; QE, Quantum efficiency; WFS, Wavefront
sensor
1
Introduction
1.1 Overview
Astronomy research advances through a synergy of theoretical understanding and observa-
tional measurements. The main requirement for astronomical measurements is the achieve-
ment of high sensitivity for faint signals. Particularly in the last three decades, silicon sensors
have been the dominant optical sensorused on telescopes. Extremelyhigh sensitivityis available
together with large focal plane collecting areas which together deliver highly efficient optical
light detection. Historical information, technical details, and applications to instrumentation
can be found in Janesick (2001) and McLean (2008).
In this chapter, the charge-coupled-device (CCD) characteristics are discussed. This device
is a two-dimensional image array capable of providing a high-precision digital image. Optical
sensitivity, wavelength range, readout noise, formats, and sizes are all important parameters
that define their use in optical instruments. Many other features such as readout time and even
device package design have an influence in astronomical instrument design and are also dis-
cussed here. Quantum efficiency (spectral sensitivity) and readout noise (minimum detectable
signal) are probably the two most important operational parameters.
> Figure 13-1 illustrates a typical modern charge-coupled-device sensor. It has a high
optical sensitivity and very low noise, precision package for cryogenic focal plane mounting,
available in multiple performance variants, and is the heart of many astronomical instruments;
also see e2v (www.e2v.com/imaging) for examples of sensors.
A discussion of optical (silicon) sensors would not be complete without including the
CMOS or APS sensor (see abbreviation list). These devices are very familiar to cell-phone
camera users but have only recently started to be used for astronomy. The specific advantages
and disadvantages of this type of sensor are discussed, particularly in comparison with the
established and widely used CCD.

544 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
⊡Fig. 13-1
The e2v CCD231-84, 4,096 × 4,096 pixel astronomical sensor
1.2 Use of CCD and Silicon Sensors
The CCD is primarily an image sensor and is often used in large focal planes for this purpose,
including many major survey telescope applications. A typical intermediate-sized sensor could
have 2,048 × 2,048 pixels (or 30 × 30 mm) for use as a single square-format imager. Larger
devices are also available although the maximum size is limited by silicon wafer diameterwhich
is 150 mm for most specialist CCD manufacturers. For those telescopes that use a large focal
plane area (e.g., 500 mm diameter), the usual solution is to build a two-dimensional mosaic of
close-butted CCDs.
The CCD also has a significant use as a spectroscopic sensor, with the ability to provide a
large image format and very low readout noise. Particularly for spectroscopy, with signal levels
reduced by dispersion, the attainment of very low readout noise is important. Echelle and mul-
tiobject spectrographs often benefit from large-format sensors, including close-butted mosaics,
where appropriate.
High quantum efficiency is usually required and can be achieved by silicon sensors as dis-
cussed in following sections. The ability to detect small signals requires low readout noise – and
this is also achieved. In astronomical imaging and spectroscopy, exposure times are often in the
range 10–3,000 s, and so rapid data readout is not demanded. This allows modest pixel readout
rates and helps to achieve low read noise.
Other auxiliary function application areas include guide cameras and wavefront sensors,
and these are discussed and demonstrate the versatility of this sensor. In these cases, high frame
rate is often more important than large device size.
While CMOS (or APS) sensors do not have the heritage of CCDs for astronomy, they are
finding specific uses where their features offer advantages, and these are discussed.
Many space instruments utilize CCDs in the traditional “ground” wavelength ranges and
particularly in regions where atmospheric absorption favors space telescopes. CCD use in the
x-ray, and short UV wavelengths are discussed together with visible wavelengths.
Finally, some indications of performance limitations and future directions are discussed.

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
545
2
The Charge-Coupled Device Image Sensor
2.1 Introduction
The charge-coupled device (CCD) is a silicon circuit designed for use as a high-performance
image sensor. The basic device delivers a two-dimensional electronic image that would be stored
and analyzed by a linked electronic and host computer system. The most direct application is
to record images (normally of defined wavelength), although the same sensor is widely used for
spectrographic recording as well as more specialized image sensor uses.
The silicon integrated circuit is familiar as a microcircuit component for laptops, mobile
phones, and many other essential items of the modern world. Standard integrated circuits are
traditionally built for high operating frequency, low power, and low cost – which usually means
that they are designed with the smallest internal dimensions possible. In contrast, the CCD
image sensor for astronomical applications is designed for the highest light detection efficiency,
wide wavelength range, and large spatial format. The CCD considerably exceeds the sensitivity
of the photographic plate and has the huge benefit of direct electrical signal output and well-
calibrated response. Here, we discuss the design and performance features of the CCD that is
designed for use as an astronomical light sensor.
2.2 What Is a CCD?
The standard design of a CCD consists of a two-dimensional matrix of light-sensing elements
(pixels) that are coupled to a readout circuit. Incident photons strike the silicon and are con-
verted into electrical charge. The specific architecture of devices can include variations of this
structure, depending on the required application. The figure below illustrates a typical CCD
architecture (>Fig. 13-2).
A CCD is fabricated using multiple layers of polysilicon gates which create the pixel struc-
tures. The device, in its simplest form, is operated as a frontside-illuminated device – whereby
incident light passes through the semitransparent polysilicon layers.
However, the polysilicon absorbs some of the light, and this limits the total efficiency as
well as cutting off the short wavelength sensitivity. For demanding scientific applications like
astronomy, so-called “backside-illuminated” CCDs are almost universally used. In this case, the
underlying silicon substrate of the device is removed, and the device is inverted so that incident
light strikes the back surface. Charge is now collected very efficiently. >Figure 13-3 illustrates
this mode of use.
Incident photons are absorbed and generate charge which needs to be collected and then
reach the buried channel region – where it can be transferred to the outputs and measured.
2.3 Spectral Response
The most important reason for the dominant use of CCDs in astronomy is their very high
quantum efficiency. Silicon can absorb photons very efficiently and achieve almost 100% quan-
tum efficiency at some wavelengths. Quantum efficiency is the efficiency with which incident

546 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
Charge Coupled Device Array
Image
Section
I∅1
I∅2
I∅3
R∅3
R∅2
R∅1
Single pixel
Electrodes
Charge-to-voltage
Output circuit
Output
Bias etc
Read-out register
⊡Fig. 13-2
Architecture of a typical scientiﬁc CCD
⊡Fig. 13-3
Light detection by frontside- and backside-illuminated CCD

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
547
photons are converted to charge; in an ideal case, each incident photon generates one elec-
tron that would be collected. The backside-illuminated device (as discussed above) allows
high-efficiency sensors.
Silicon has a variable absorption coefficient which determines the efficiency with which
differing wavelengths can be absorbed. The figure below shows how absorption length varies
with wavelength. There is also some temperaturedependence,which can be relevantsince many
astronomical detectors are operated at cryogenic temperatures (e.g., −○C) (>Fig. 13-4).
The varying absorption depth has several consequences for the detection of light. Short
wavelengths (UV) are absorbed in very shallow depths, and such signal can be lost before it
reaches the active (charge collection) region of a sensor; this means that back-illuminated sen-
sors with minimal “dead” layers near the surface are required. Midrange wavelengths (visible)
penetrate and are collected with a depth of about 1 µm and give high QE. Long wavelengths
(>800 nm) require 10 s of microns of silicon for high absorption, and this requires particularly
thick silicon sensors. Silicon has a band gap of about 1.1 eV which prevents detection of photons
beyond about 1,100 nm.
In fact, silicon sensors can be used to directly detect photons over a wide range of wave-
lengths/energies, covering the x-ray to near-infrared range of the electromagnetic spectrum, as
shown in >Fig. 13-5. The quantum efficiency varies as the absorption depth varies at differing
photon energies.
Measured Absorption Length 
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
Optical Wavelength  nm
Absorption Length  µm
293K
77K
Photon Energy eV
5.0
3.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
4.0 3.5
V
B
G
Y
R
O
UV
IR
6.0
⊡Fig. 13-4
Silicon absorption length

548 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
⊡Fig. 13-5
Spectral range of silicon photon absorption
Silicon has a refractive index of about 4 at visible wavelengths and therefore can reflect
approximately 35% of the incident light. It is a standard practice to apply an antireflec-
tion (AR) coating to the CCD to minimize this loss. The result is that over 90% efficiency
can be obtained. The AR coating can be varied to give different peak QE values at chosen
wavelengths.
As discussed above, the silicon thickness has a strong influence on detection efficiency at
longer wavelengths. Standard silicon devices are made of low-resistivity silicon which has a
depletion depth of order 10 µm; this means that devices need to be manufactured with this
thickness for effective charge collection, resulting in a modest or poor QE at long wavelengths.
Increasingly higher resistivity silicon is now used to allow thicker devices with increased red
wavelength QE.
The figures below show examples of spectral response for different CCD types.
> Figure 13-6 shows a typical spectral response of a “deep depletion” device with modern
multilayer AR coating, optimized for the 400–900 nm range. The variation of red sensitivity
with operating temperature is indicated; in most cases, astronomical sensors require cryo-
genic cooling (for low dark signal), and this has the effect of reducing the red wavelength
sensitivity.
> Figure 13-7 shows devices of three different silicon thicknesses, all with an AR coating
optimized for the 500–1,000 nm range. This illustrates the benefit of increasing device thick-
ness at red wavelengths; “deep depletion,” “bulk,” and “high-rho” device types correspond to
increasing silicon depth with nominal thickness of 40, 100, or 200 µm respectively.
CCD QE data for nonvisible wavelengths has been presented by Stern (2004) and Turner
et al. (2001). Development of specialized thick silicon high-rho devices has been described by
Holland, et al. (2007) and Jorden et al. (2010).

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
549
Predicted QE  Deep depletion silicon astro multi-2 AR 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
Wavelength (nm)
QE
 25°C 
−20°C 
−70°C 
−100°C 
⊡Fig. 13-6
“Visible”QE (400–900 nm)
e2v typical QE at -100C for astro multi-9 AR
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
Wavelength (nm)
QE
deep depletion
bulk
high-rho
⊡Fig. 13-7
IR QE for diﬀerent device types
2.4 Readout Noise
In addition to extremely high quantum efficiency, CCDs are capable of measuring very small
electrical signals. This combination of high QE and low noise allows high signal/noise measure-
ments to be recorded. Incident photons are converted to electrical charge when detected and
then converted to a voltage at an output node of the device, represented by the node capacitance
Cn in the >Fig. 13-8.

550 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
Substrate
First stage load
0V
OS
OD
ØSW
OG1
ØR
RD
OG2
Cn
IØ3
External
load
Reset
Clamp
Ø2
SS
⊡Fig. 13-8
Example of low-noise CCD output circuit
The signal is buffered by an output transistor prior to external measurement of the sig-
nal level. Other components of the circuit shown include a second-stage transistor buffer for
improved external drive capability, and reset transistors used to establish a DC signal level as
part of the signal sampling chain.
Output amplifiers are key components of the signal measurement process and may be
designed for various optimizations. For astronomical applications, it is usual to utilize a very
low-noise output amplifier. The read noise is defined as the standard deviation (1 sigma) of the
output signal when no signal charge is present. The noise is a function of readout frequency, and
the figure below illustrates typical performance of a high-performance CCD, with a read-noise
floor of approximately 2 e−rms at low frequencies (>Fig. 13-9).
The lowest noise is obtained at low frequencies, and for very large arrays, this requires a
fairly long read time for the whole array; e.g., 160 s for a 4 K × 4 K sensor, with one output at
100 kHz pixel rate. In some applications, higher frequencies and multiple outputs are used in
order to reduce total read time.
The above examples refer to the commonly used “buried channel” output transistor. This
has the lowest noise and is normally used for astronomical imaging. It is possible to use “surface
channel” transistors which can operate at higherfrequencies (e.g., 40 MHz); however, these have
a higher characteristic noise and are not normally used for low-level imaging applications.
Amplifiers that are designed for lowest noise usually require small transistors which have
limited drive capability and hence poor ability to operate at higher frequencies. Designing for
higher speed operation leads to devices with higher read noise; the electron-multiplying CCD
(see next section) overcomes this problem by providing subelectron equivalent read noise even
at higher frequencies.

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
551
Estimated Read Noise (BI)
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
1.0E+04
1.0E+05
1.0E+06
1.0E+07
Frequency (Hz)
NES electrons (rms)
⊡Fig. 13-9
Typical read noise versus frequency
2.5 The Electron-Multiplying (EM) CCD
A simple CCD (as above) operates by directly transferring the photo-charge (electrons) to the
output circuit where it is measured. The EMCCD includes an extra transfer register which
introduces gain into the signal chain so that the electron signal is amplified before reaching
the output. This means that the effect of amplifier noise is reduced inversely in proportion to
the gain. Typical gain values are X1,000, which means that an amplifier noise of 100 e−rms is
equivalent to a photo-signal charge of 0.1 e−. With almost 100% quantum efficiency, this means
that individual photons can be detected with this type of CCD. Furthermore, it allows operation
at higher pixel frequencies since the level of amplifier noise is now less important.
>Figure 13-10 illustrates the architecture of this device type.
The device operates through charge multiplication which adds stochastic noise to the signal.
This means that at zero signal levels, the read noise can be sub-electron, but with finite signals
the effective noise is normally sqrt()∗signal. The device requires a high-voltage clock (of order
50 V amplitude) which makes it somewhat more complex to operate than a simple CCD. See
Mackay (2012) and Tulloch and Dhillon (2010) for use of such devices in astronomy.
2.6 Readout Frequency and Read Times
As shown above, CCDs read out their signal through a combination of parallel and serial charge
movements. Signal measurement is made through output ports operating at pixel frequencies
in the 10 kHz to 10 MHz frequency ranges for most applications. The total readout time is usu-
ally dominated by the time taken to sample all of the pixels; i.e., read time = total number of
pixels (X∗Y)/(pixel frequency ∗number of outputs). As devices increase in size, it is increas-
ingly valuable to use 4 or 16 outputs to achieve sufficiently low readout times. Furthermore, as

552 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
If1
If2
If3
multiplication
register
Rf2HV
Rf1 Rf2 Rf3
⊡Fig. 13-10
Electron-multiplying CCD
shown in > Sects. 2.4 and >2.5, modern devices offer very low readout noise even at pixel
frequencies in the region of 1 MHz.
In some applications, such as guiders, devices are read out in windowed mode. In this case,
the region of interest is small compared to the total frame size, and time to transfer charge from
one row to the next has more impact on the total readout time.
For other applications, such as large area wavefront sensing, it is necessary to read out a sig-
nificant image size (e.g., 1,000 × 1,000 pixels) in times approaching 1 ms. This proves virtually
impossible with a CCD since a high number of outputs operating at extreme pixel frequen-
cies are required. In this case, the active-pixel sensor (or CMOS device) offers advantages, as
discussed in >Sect. 3 below.
2.7 Dark Current and Operating Temperature
As discussed above, a key feature of the CCD is its very low read noise. However, this benefit is
only valuable if there are no additional sources of background signal. In particular, the silicon
is capable of thermally generating charge known as dark current. The rate of charge generation
is temperature dependent, and in order to allow long exposures with negligible dark current
contribution, it is common to cryogenically cool astronomical CCDs to a temperature in the
region of −○.
In some cases, this degree of cooling is impractical, and it is possible to reduce the dark
current by using so-called inverted mode operation (IMO). This is also known as “multiphase
pinned” (MPP). Devices can be specifically made to allow this mode, with a modified clock
waveform pattern, to reduce dark current by approximately a factor of 100. The disadvantage is
smaller charge handling capacity and slower clocking speeds.
The figure below illustrates typical dark current for these two modes of use as a function of
temperature (>Fig. 13-11).

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
553
Dark Current of e2v CCDs
MAXIMUM VALUES
0
Temperature, °C
e2v TECHNOLOGIES
−120
−100
−80
−60
−40
−20
20
40
Electrons/sec/15 micron pixel
1E6
1E5
1E4
1E3
1E2
1E1
1E0
1E−1
1E−2
1E−3
⊡Fig. 13-11
CCD dark current versus temperature
2.8 Charge Transfer Eﬃciency
CCDs rely on transferring charge from one pixel to the next. This is done in parallel for the
row transfer operations and in serial form for register readouts. It is usual to quote the charge
transfer efficiency (CTE) of this operation in the form 99.999% or 0.99999%, normally quoted
per pixel. It is essential that this efficiency is very close to unity, especially for the larger devices.
Fractional total charge after n transfers is (S/S) =(C)n,
where S= initial charge signal, S = final charge, C = CTE, and n = number of transfers (pixels).
For example, a device with 4,096 rows and CTE = 0.99999 will have 96% remaining charge
after it is transferred from the top of the image to the readout register.
In reality, charge transfer loss is a stochastic process where charge is “lost” at multiple dis-
crete locations as charge transfers through the device; the quoted CTE value is a mean value.
In fact, the charge can be released again later with a characteristic time constant. Thus, CTE
is a complex function of operating temperature, operating frequency, and signal level. A full
description is beyond the scope of this discussion.
Astronomical CCDs are usually characterized by using a Fex-ray source to generate a
known signal level (1,620 e−), with analysis software to determine lost charge. A typical CTE
value of 99.995% can be expected. It is also possible to use a flat field image of known signal
level; in this case, residual signal in overscanned pixels can indicate charge loss.

554 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
2.9 Package Types
Image sensors can be supplied in many different package types. A common style is the simple
ceramic design which is widely used in the electronics industry. The ceramic base has internal
circuit tracks which allow the silicon bond pads to be linked to pins; the ceramic package can
be readily produced in quantity after initial design work and is therefore quite economic to
manufacture. Pins can be arranged on two sides (dual-in-line) or underneath (pin grid array)
formats. >Figure 13-12 illustrates an example of the former type.
However, for mosaic focal planes (as in >Sect. 2.10), it is very desirable to have packages
that have minimal edge gaps in order to achieve a high fill factor of the mosaic. In this case,
two-, three-, or four-side buttable packages are required, as shown previously in >Fig. 13-1.
In these cases, the device bond wires can be connected to flex cables with minimal lost spacing
at the edge. Such devices are fragile to handle and require particular care when assembling
close-packed mosaics.
Common types of package construction include:
Ceramic PGA or DIL
Simple package
Not suitable for close butting
Integrated Peltier
More specialized package
Requires sealed window to avoid
condensation
Kovar/metal tub
Simple package
Not well suited for good ﬂatness
at cryo temperature
Metal package base
Can be customized and buttable
Variant ﬂexi packages
Flex cable facilitates assembly in
mosaics
More complex/expensive
⊡Fig. 13-12
Example of ceramic package

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
555
Most silicon sensors are cooled below ambient in order to establish a low enough level of
dark signal. This means that packages must be designed to allow for any expansion mismatch
between the package material and silicon; stresses must be low enough to prevent damage and
also to minimize distortion that can affect device focal surface flatness. Hybrid packages using
metal and ceramic components together with flex cable connectors may be used for demanding
applications.
Package materials include:
Material
Advantages
Disadvantages
Aluminium oxide (AlO)
Widely used, economical
Limited expansion match to
silicon
Aluminium nitride (AlN)
Good expansion match to silicon
Slightly more expensive than AlO
Silicon carbide (SiC)
Stiﬀ, low mass, good expansion
match to silicon; high thermal
conductivity
More expensive; specialized
manufacture
Invar
Low
expansion
near
ambient
temperature, can be machined
Poor thermal conductivity; does
not match silicon expansion at
low temperatures
Kovar
Simple
Limited expansion match
2.10 Single Devices and Mosaic Arrays
For many applications, a single sensor is sufficient – especially since devices can now be man-
ufactured with a 90 × 90 mm size and 10,000 × 10,000 pixels. The size of a single device
is constrained by two main factors – silicon wafer size (which is normally 150 mm maxi-
mum diameter for specialized sensor manufacturers), and device manufacturing quality/yield
(which is a strong function of device area). In practice this leads to devices of maximum size
approximately 100 mm square or equivalent rectangular sizes. Examples of both are illustrated
in >Fig. 13-13.
However, there are numerous telescopes and instruments that require a focal plane detec-
tion area of larger size, and these require multiple sensors usually constructed as a mosaic
FPA (focal plane assembly). Impressive examples of large mosaics constructed for two space
telescopes can be seen in the > Fig. 13-14; the Kepler and GAIA focal planes used custom
sensors. For ground-based astronomy mosaics vary in size from pairs of sensors up to the
much larger FPAs of Pan-STARRS and LSST. The reader is referred to the web pages for both
projects. See Pan-starrs (http://pan-starrs.ifa.hawaii.edu/public/design-features/cameras.html)
and LSST (http://www.lsst.org/lsst/gallery/camera) for further info.
Acknowledgements: Kepler (courtesy NASA & BATC) and GAIA (courtesy ESA &
Astrium).
3
CMOS/APS Imagers
3.1 Introduction to APS Imagers
The CCD imager (as described above) has been widely used for astronomy. It has the advantage
ofa well-established heritage, verylow readout noise, and is available in a varietyofdesign types.

556 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
⊡Fig. 13-13
92 × 92 mm CCD and 123 × 46 mm CCD
a
b
⊡Fig. 13-14
(a) Kepler and (b) GAIA focal planes
The architecture relies on physically transferring charge internally until it reaches an output
node where it is sensed. For many applications, the CCD remains the preferred sensor type.
However, the CMOS or active-pixel sensor (APS) does offer advantages for several
applications. These devices are manufactured using CMOS (complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor) technology, which is extensively used for most integrated circuits such as

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
557
microcomputers, cell phones, etc. This technology allows a very high degree of integration with
very small features and particularly allows high functionality within each pixel and within the
device as a whole.
For scientific imaging applications, since high-performance image sensing is required, it is
common to develop the devices specifically for this requirement and not necessarily integrate
further functionality (such as digital image processing) into the device. Cell phones, on the
other hand, are designed for maximum functional integration and minimal total size, and so
their specifications differ from those of astronomical APS devices.
>Figure 13-15 illustrates a CCD-imager pixel compared to an APS pixel.
Manyofthe performance features described in >Sect. 2 for CCDs apply also to APSsensors.
The main differences relate to the architecture and readout method.
An APS sensor uses multiple transistors associated with each pixel to allow the signal to
be measured and connected to circuitry at the edge of the device. Device designs can be char-
acterized as 3T, 4T, 5T, etc., – referring to the number of transistors and the degree of internal
functionality. Each pixel is accessed using a row/column address structure, resulting in multiple
tracks across the surface of the imager. If the device is made in back-illuminated form (as for a
CCD), then high quantum efficiency is achieved.
Because the pixels can be accessed in parallel, this allows faster readout of the signal than
usually obtained for CCDs. Thus, the APS device is particularly suited for high frame rate
applications such as high-speed photometry and wavefront sensing of large formats. Another
significant advantage is very low power consumption; this has particular benefits for spaceborne
applications, where power budget is often a constraint.
Since the signal from each pixel is independently sampled, this can give rise to larger
pixel-pixel (sensitivity) variation than is usual for CCDs. However, careful device design and
postcalibration generally prevent this from being a significant issue for astronomy.
CCD imager
(CMOS) Active Pixel Sensor (APS)
Front or back illumination possible
APS devices can be thinned/ back-illuminated
Back-Illumination
Front-Illumination
P+ substrate
RST
VDD 
Col. Bus
P+ substrate
P+ substrate
P+ substrate
R
S
⊡Fig. 13-15
Comparison between CCD and APS sensors

558 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
3.2 Why Use an APS Sensor?
For many applications, such as large area “traditional” imaging, the CCD is adequate. In fact, the
CCD has high performance and is often the best solution since it is well established, with well-
understoodperformance and available in a variety of designs. The APS device has the advantage
when higher speed readout and large area are required. The parallelism of the internal design
allows high-speed readout to a degree not possible with CCDs.
This can be illustrated with the example of the wavefront sensor application for adaptive
optics – which requires approximately 1,000 frames per second (fps) readout. A CCD with
× pixels can achieve this rate with multiple outputs. However, when the frame size
exceeds × pixels, an excessive number of outputs or excessive pixel frequency is needed.
In this case, the APS can do the job, allowing 1,000 fps with parallel readout of many pixels
using internal signal sampling and high bandwidth digital outputs.
3.3 Performance Features of APS Devices
APS devices can now approach the performance of CCDs, especially with regard to the key
parameters of quantum efficiency and readout noise. The silicon can be back-thinned to give
high quantum efficiency. However, the lower operating voltages and the necessity to use thinner
silicon means that red wavelength response will be lower than for CCDs. APS devices can be
made with very small sense node size and hence high responsivity (e−/volt); this translates to
achieving a low readout noise – values down to 1e−have been achieved. However, unlike CCDs,
the performance ofeverypixel can differ, and soit is more important toconsiderthe distribution
of noise levels across all pixels to get a real estimate of the device performance. State-of-the-art
devices can achieve noise levels in the 2–3 e−rms noise level which is competitive with CCDs.
There are other parameters that also need care to ensure good scientific performance, including
linearity, signal lag, and pixel response uniformity.
4
Sensor Types and Application Examples
4.1 CCD Formats
There are several architectures that can be used for CCDs; these include, full frame, split full
frame, frame transfer, split frame transfer and interline transfer. For astronomical imaging, the
demand for high quantum efficiency normally precludes use of the interline transfer type since
this has considerable lost detection area due to the interline transfer columns.
For direct science imaging (including spectroscopy), the full frame type is most commonly
used. In this case, an external electromechanical shutter defines the exposure time, and read out
of image signal is performed after the shutter has been closed. Exposure time is defined by the
shutter, and readout time is defined by the pixel count, pixel frequency, and number of outputs
(see >Sect. 2.6).
A simple variant of the full frame array uses a midsection split so that the device can be read
out through tworegisters; this allows a halving ofthe readout time at the expense ofusing double
the number of output channels. This format halves the number of parallel transfers required
which can minimize CTE losses, especially for large arrays.

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
559
For applications such as autoguiding or high-rate photometry, it is necessary to have a high
continuous cadence of readouts. In this case, the frame-transfer architecture allows exposure to
the “image” section, rapid transfer to the “store” section, and then repetition of this cycle. The
image data can be read out from the store at the same time as the next image is exposed to the
image section. No shutter needs to be used, and the store section has an opaque light shield.
There is the potential for some image smear due to illumination falling on the image area while
this is being transferred to the store; this is minimized if the ratio of FT shift time to image
exposure time is minimized.
It is possible to increase readout speed further by using the split frame-transfer architecture.
Here, the split format halves the readout time and also halves the frame transfer time, which
has the benefit of reducing potential frame transfer image smear.
4.2 Custom Spectral Response
As described above, almost all astronomical sensors would be back-thinned and use an antire-
flection coating for maximum sensitivity. A single layer AR coat provides this to first order, but
will not be perfect at all wavelengths. For applications requiring a wide spectral range on one
sensor, then it is desirable to maximize the response; several examples are discussed.
4.2.1 Sensor Optimization for Diﬀerent Bands
Some instruments divide the wavelength bands into different channels (e.g., multiband pho-
tometers or multiarmed spectrographs). In these cases, it is possible to optimize the sensitivity
by implying a differently optimized sensor for each channel; usually each sensor is of the same
type, but merely with different response characteristics. The simplest example would be to use a
standard silicon CCD with blue/visible AR coating for a “blue” spectrograph arm, and a thicker
deep depletion silicon CCD with red AR coating for a “red” arm.
4.2.2 Graded AR Coating
If a fixed format spectrum is projected onto the sensor, then it is possible to tune the AR coating
in the spatial dimension to match the projected spectrum. This results in an optimized response
at every wavelength. It is possible to design techniques to spatially vary the AR coating to match
the spectrograph design, even with curved cross dispersed formats or nonlinear dispersion. The
design is relatively insensitive to small degrees of mismatch and is generally a useful improve-
ment over a simple coating. >Figure 13-1, as used in the introduction, also shows an example
of a large format (4 K × 4 K) sensor with such a coating.
4.2.3 Multilayer AR Coatings
In many cases, such as wide band imaging, the most useful optimization is to have the highest
possible response across the whole sensor surface. In this case, multilayer coatings are valu-
able. Multilayer coatings are widely used in optical instruments on various glass (or similar)

560 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
components. Silicon sensors require specialized AR coatings for various reasons including high
refractive index of silicon, safe deposition process that does not damage sensor electrical prop-
erties, reliable use in vacuum at cryogenic temperatures and materials that are appropriate for
use with silicon sensor manufacturing processes.
Because CCDs in particular are well established as astronomical sensors, manufacturers
are turning to second-order refinements such as these multilayer coatings. They can offer the
advantages of wider spectral range and can particularly give improvements at the extremes of
the spectral range (such as UV and near-IR) where signal/noise is often poorest.
An efficient AR coating, by definition, gives minimum reflectivity. This enhances spectral
response but has the secondary benefit of reducing ghost image or other instrument reflec-
tions. Furthermore, at red wavelengths, a low reflectivity ensures that fringe magnitudes are
minimized.
4.2.4 X-ray and Short Wavelengths
Silicon sensors have good response to UV wavelengths and x-rays. Good UV response requires
high-performance back-thinning, with minimal dead layer thickness. This also applies to low-
energy x-rays. Medium-energy x-rays are detected well with normal sensor thickness in the
10–40 µm range. At high energies, x-ray absorption efficiency falls and requires thick silicon
for useful response.
4.3 Wavefront Sensors
Astronomical wavefront sensors [WFS] are used for active and adaptive optics systems. Par-
ticularly for the latter, frame rates are high (up to 1,000 frames per second), and signal levels
are low. Large telescopes have a higher number of subapertures and therefore require relatively
large sensor formats which prove challenging to build and achieve the high frame rate with low
read noise. >Figure 13-16 shows an example of a WFS device, the e2v CCD220. This device has
a large format, which demands high pixel rates and more outputs in order to achieve appropri-
ate frame rates. The use of higher pixel rates increases the pixel noise, and so this device uses
EMCCD technology to overcome this limitation.
It should be noted that even larger formats are required for the next generation of extremely
large telescopes [ELT]. A high frame rate, large format CCD would require an excessive number
of outputs and also dissipate a high power which makes it unrealistic for ELT use. An answer to
this problem lies in the use of an active pixel sensor [APS] as described by Dierickx et al. (2011).
5
Summary and Future Trends
5.1 Device Size
The physical size of sensors has been illustrated above. For CCDs, the largest commercial wafer
size that is used in the specialist imaging industry is 6 in. (150 mm). Monolithic devices are
therefore limited to sizes that can fit within this diameter. In practice, the device needs to be

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
561
⊡Fig. 13-16
240 × 240 format WFS CCD

562 13
Silicon-Based Image Sensors
comfortably away from the edge for security of manufacture, handling, and for minimal edge
effects (including those of back-thinned wafers). This means that the maximum size is less than
95 × 95 mm square or 120 × 50 mm. APS sensors on the other hand can be made on larger
wafers, e.g., 8 in. (200 mm). However, options for back-thinning of the larger wafers could then
be limited. In practice for either type of silicon sensor, an important consideration is the oper-
ational yield. The probability of a fatal defect (DC failure) is an exponential function of device
area. High-quality fabrication plants are able to make whole wafer devices with a viable yield,
although the unit device price is high.
5.2 Pixel Size
For astronomical imaging CCD, the most common CCD pixel size is 15 × 15 µm, with others
in the 10–25 µm range also in use. Larger pixels can certainly be designed and made; they have
the advantage of high signal (charge) capacity although low noise output circuits cannot handle
the larger signals. Smaller pixels are limited mainly by the capability of the fabrication plant to
project and process small features. Typical pixels may have three or four electrodes, and this
means that submicron feature sizes need to be used. Pixels down to about 8 µm in size are
considered state-of-the-art at present.
Manufacturing technologycan allow smallerfeatures but the cost ofimplementation is high.
Since the specialist imaging and astronomy market is finite in size, it means that investment
in new equipment limits the more advanced capabilities. Again, CMOS devices can be manu-
factured with extremely small pixels (1 µm pixel cell-phone cameras), but specialist scientific
imager fabrication facilities currently use 0.18 µm features which leads to pixels down to about
5 µm in size. In the case of APS devices, the pixel size depends on how much functionality is
desired in each pixel.
5.3 Readout Noise
CCD readout noise is typically 2 e−rms for a high-performance sensor at low frequencies. The
EMCCD type allows subelectron readout noise to be achieved and is often used at signal levels
below 1,000 e−. Both technologies are well established with only modest improvements likely.
APS devices are being developed rapidly, and subelectron read noise is conceivable. However,
attaining such a high performance probably comes at the expense of more sensitivity to pixel-
pixel performance variation.
5.4 Spectral Response
As discussed above, almost 100% QE is already achieved. Advances in AR coating are allow-
ing the breadth of spectral response to be increased, allowing higher efficiency optimized
instrument designs.

Silicon-Based Image Sensors 13
563
5.5 Associated Electronics
As device sizes increase, the number of readout channels increase and put more demands
on electronics performance. For example, large mosaics of multichannel sensors are being
made, and achieving detector-limited performance for all channels is nontrivial. Local signal
processing and increased digital processing are useful.
Acknowledgments
e2v is acknowledged for many illustrations used here and multiple constructive inputs from
colleagues.
References
Dierickx, B., et al. 2011, International image sensor
workshop proceedings, Hokkaido
e2v. www.e2v.com
Holland, S. E., et al. 2007, Nucl Instrum Method Phys
Res A, 579, 653–657
Janesick,
J.
R. 2001,
Scientific
Charge-Coupled
Devices (SPIE, Bellingham)
Jorden, P. R., et al. 2010, Proc SPIE, 7742–19
LSST. http://www.lsst.org/lsst/gallery/camera
Mackay, C. D. 2012, Proc SPIE, 8453–01
McLean, I. S. 2008, Electronic Imaging in Astron-
omy: Detectors and Instrumentation, (2nd ed.;
Springer, Heidelberg)
Pan-starrs.
http://pan-starrs.ifa.hawaii.edu/public/
design-features/cameras.html
Stern, R. A., et al. 2004, Proc SPIE, 5171, 77
Tulloch, S. M., & Dhillon, V. S. 2010, MNRAS
Turner, et al. 2001, A&A, 365, L27


14
Long-Wavelength Infrared
Detectors
Erick T. Young
Director, SOFIA Science Mission Operations, NASA Ames
Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 566
2
Figures of Merit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3
Thermal Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
4
Photon Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 571
4.1
Photoconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 571
4.2
Impurity Band Conduction Detectors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 574
4.3
Readouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 577
4.4
Detector Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 578
5
Microwave Kinetic Induction Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 582
6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 584
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 584
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_14, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

566 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
1
Introduction
Long wavelength infrared, defined in this review as the range from 5 to 1,000 µm, has proven
to be essential in our understanding of many key topics and processes in astronomy. While
our understanding of the universe has been limited to visual wavelengths for most of human
history, the development of infrared technology has greatly expanded the study of planetary
atmospheres, the interstellarmedium, star formation, stellar evolution, galaxies, and the distant
universe.
With eight octaves of wavelength coverage in the long wavelength infrared, it is not sur-
prising that a wide range of different physical phenomena have been employed to detect the
radiation. The topic of infrared detectors is large, and a number of excellent reviews of the tech-
nology are available. In particular, Rieke (2003, 2007), Amico et al. (2004), and McLean (2008)
provide comprehensive coverage of recent developments.
Infrared detector technology is a particularly fast changing topic, and the traditional astro-
nomical journals are generally not the first place to find papers on the latest developments in
the field. The Proceedings of the SPIE which document papers presented at their topical sym-
posia have become an important source of current information. The symposia combine both
the astronomical and engineering disciplines and allow interaction of both communities. As
Rieke (2009) has pointed out, much of the early development of infrared astronomy was led
by experimental physicists and engineers, and that tradition continues to an extent to this day.
In fact, much of the development in infrared detectors has been driven by fields other than
astronomy, notably military and industrial applications. The notable exception, however, has
been far-infrared and sub-millimeterdetectors. At the longest wavelengths, there have been few
applications other than astronomy, and the key technological advances have been motivated by
astronomy.
The advancement of detector technology is often associated with funding from particular
projects. For astronomy, the NASA and ESA space infrared missions have driven the field to new
levels. While the basic technology usually exists when the projects are formulated, the specific
performance demands of astronomy have usually required significant additional development
to advance the state of the art to the required levels. Key examples have been the operation
of low-background photoconductors for IRAS, the development of large format far infrared
arrays for Spitzer, and the development of very high-performance arrays for the James Webb
Space Telescope.
The evolution of long wavelength detector technology has followed two complemen-
tary themes. First, the inherent sensitivity of detectors has improved dramatically. Thermal
infrared astronomy emerged as an essential technique with the development of the ger-
manium bolometer in the early 1960s by Frank Low (Low 1961). At that point, the key
sensitivity measure, the Noise Equivalent Power or NEP, was in the range 10−W Hz−/.
The current state of the art is nearly eight orders of magnitude more sensitive. The second
theme is the development of multi-pixel arrays. While early infrared astronomers struggled
with single pixel maps, megapixel arrays in the thermal infrared are now available. Array
technology has been a direct beneficiary of the advancements in the semiconductor indus-
try. Although arrays of highly sensitive detectors may seem commonplace to the generation
reading this review, the dual developments have had in fact a truly revolutionary effect on
the field.

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
567
2
Figures of Merit
Depending on the detector type, infrared detectors are subject to different noise sources. Noise
can arise from the detector dark current, phonon noise in thermal detectors, amplifier noise,
and ultimately from the background fluctuations. The goal of all astronomical detector systems
is to be limited by the backgrounds associated with the measurement in question. For ground-
based observations, the huge background associated with the warm telescope and atmosphere
will dominate. In space, the ultimate background limits will be set byscattered sunlight, zodiacal
thermal emission, emission from interstellardust, or the far infrared background depending on
wavelength and direction of observation.
The most commonly used figure of merit in the thermal infrared is the Noise Equivalent
Power (NEP). The NEP is defined as the infrared power that yields a signal to noise ratio in the
sensor of unity in 1 Hz of bandwidth, which is equivalent to /second of integration time.
Another key figure of merit is the detective quantum efficiency ηd. It compares the NEP of
the detector in question with the NEP of an idealized detector only limited by the fluctuations
in the background.
ηd = (NEPBLIP/NEP)
where NEPBLIP is the NEP of the ideal background-limited infrared photodetector and is
given by:
NEPBLIP = (PBGhc/λ)/
where Pbg is the background power on the detector, h is Planck’s constant, c is the speed of light,
and λ is the average wavelength. In the absence of other noise sources, the NEP of a detector in
fact scales as the inverse square root of the efficiency with which it converts photons to electrical
signals, hence the quantum efficiency name.
3
Thermal Detectors
The first infrared detectors were thermal detectors, where the infrared radiation produces a
change in the temperatureof the detector, and this temperaturechange is measured. Among the
early thermal detectors were the thermopile (Coblentz 1914) and the vacuum thermocouple
(Pettit and Nicholson 1922). The first important astronomical measurements in the infrared
were done with thermal detectors. Depending on the sophistication of the temperature sensor,
the sensitivity can be very low (for the case of Herschel’s thermometer) to exquisitely high (for
modern superconducting bolometers).
The most important form of thermal sensor is the bolometer. All bolometers share common
characteristics. >Figure 14-1 illustrates the key elements. Following the simplified bolometer
theory first formulated by Low (1961), there is an absorber of heat capacity C that intercepts
the infrared radiation. It is connected to a cold sink by a link of thermal conductance G. When
radiation hits the absorber, its temperature rises, and this is sensed by the thermometer. In
steady state, the amount of temperature rise ΔT is simply given by P/G, where P is the absorbed
power. Since the temperature rise is inversely proportional to G, utilizing very low conductance
links can lead to high sensitivity. Unfortunately, the time constant of response τ is given by
τ = C / G

568 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
IR
T
ABSORBER
THERMOMETER
HEATER
T
THERMAL  LINK
CONDUCTANCE G 
COLD SINK
T0
⊡Fig. 14-1
Diagram of generic bolometer
Hence, there is a premium to making the heat capacity of the absorber as small as possible to
avoid excessively slow response times.
The fundamental limit on the performance of a bolometer is from the thermal fluctua-
tions in the thermal link between the cold sink and the absorber. Hence, all high-performance
bolometer systems are cooled to very low temperatures, often into the sub-Kelvin regime. Most
of the design effort in bolometers has been in producing the most sensitive thermometers,
the smallest thermal links, and the smallest thermal masses of the absorber and thermometer.
The key figure of merit for a bolometer is the power of the infrared signal equal to the noise of
the bolometer. The Noise Equivalent Power (NEP) of a bolometer is given by
NEP = (kTG)//η
where k is Boltzmann’s constant, T is the temperature, and η is the quantum efficiency. Bolome-
ter theory has been refined in the years since Low’s treatment to include more detailed modeling
of the nonlinear effects of thermal gradients in G as well as the temperature dependence of the
parameters (see, e.g., Mather 1982, 1984, and Richards 1994).
The desire to maximize sensitivity by making the thermal conductance G as small as pos-
sible is complicated by corresponding increase in the thermal time constant τ = C / G of the
bolometer, where C is the heat capacity of the bolometer element. An important improvement
in the response speed of bolometers was realized by making the bolometer part of a thermal
feedback circuit, as illustrated in the figure. The bolometric element is heated slightly above the
bath temperature using a heater. Any required temperature changes due to the absorption of

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
569
infrared radiation are sensed by the thermometer, and a corresponding reduction in the heater
power is applied by the feedback circuit. This electrothermal feedback reduces the effect of the
heat capacity of the bolometer since the temperature is no longer required to change, and the
effective time constant is reduced by the loop gain of the feedback circuit.
Various thermometer elements have been used in astronomical bolometers. The first highly
sensitive bolometers were developed by Low (1961) and utilized gallium-doped germanium as
the sensor. When cooled to liquid helium temperatures, this material exhibits large changes in
electrical conductivity with temperature and was a mainstay of infrared photometers for many
years. Suitable thermometric elements have been produced with both direct doping of germa-
nium and neutron transmutation doping of pure germanium to produce the desired doping
levels (Haller et al. 1994). More recently, doped silicon bolometers have been used on a number
of applications.
At longer wavelengths, the absorbing mass of the bolometer can be significantly reduced by
using the spiderweb design. >Figure 14-2 shows a bolometer that was designed for use on the
Herschel Spectral and Photometric Imaging REceiver (SPIRE) instrument. The absorber is a
dielectric film that has been coated with a thin absorbing metallic layer. As shown in the figure,
most of the film has been etched away, leaving only a suspended web. The neutron transmuta-
tion doped germanium thermistor is located at the center of the web. This design has a number
of significant advantages over previous architectures, particularly for a space application. First,
the reduced mass results in high sensitivity. Second, the resonant mechanical frequency of
the structure is much higher than in a conventional design, an important consideration in the
launch environment. Finally, because the spiderweb bolometer is primarily empty space, the
⊡Fig. 14-2
Spider web bolometer designed for Herschel SPIRE instrument. The absorbing element is the
suspended mesh, and the thermometer element is a neutron transmutation doped germanium
chip in the center (J. Bock, JPL)

570 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
cross section for interaction with cosmic rays is greatly reduced. Spiderweb bolometers have
been flown on both the Herschel SPIRE instrument (Griffin et al. 2010) and High Frequency
Instrument (HFI) on the Planck mission (Holmes et al. 2008; Planck et al. 2011).
The semiconductor thermometers are typically biased at a constant current, and voltage
changes associated with temperature changes are detected. For systems of this type, the signal
levels are usually very low, and J-FET amplifiers have been the only devices with low enough
noise to be useful in the most demanding applications. Since J-FETs cannot operate at the
same sub-Kelvin temperatures required by the detectors, significant engineering is required
to provide both thermal and optical isolation for the bolometer (running at <300 mK) from
the associated amplifier (running at ∼100 K). These complications have generally limited the
application of semiconductor bolometer to modest sized arrays, typified by the 384-element
SHARC-II and HAWC arrays (Moseley et al. 2004).
A much larger semiconductor bolometerarray was used on the PACS instrument (Poglitsch
et al. 2010) on the Herschel Space Observatory. The imaging photometer section of PACS has
two large bolometer arrays of × pixels and × pixels made up of × sub-modules.
Their design has been described in Agnese et al. (2003) and Billot et al. (2007, 2009). The entire
bolometer array is fabricated out of silicon that is micro-machined to for the necessary struc-
tures. The bolometer design is based on a two-dimensional screen situated λ/4 above a metallic
backshort. The standing wave pattern with the backshort results in a maximumamplitude in the
electric field at the screen. The screen is coated with an absorber that matches the impedance
of free space, resulting in highly efficient absorption of the energy. The thermometer for the
detector consists of ion-implanted silicon semiconductor. The other key difference in the PACS
bolometer array is the use of MOSFET amplifiers operating at the detector temperature. Nor-
mally, the voltage noise of MOSFETs is too high to be useful, but this noise is overcome by
making the responsivity of the very high by making the resistance of the ion-implanted ther-
mometer very high, in the 1–10 GΩ range (Agnesse et al. 2002). >Figure 14-3 diagrams the key
elements of the PACS photometer array (Agnese et al. 2002).
An important development in astronomical bolometer detectors has been the use of super-
conducting films to sense the temperature changes caused by photons. These systems take
advantage of the extremely steep dependence of the film resistance with temperature near
the superconducting transition. By sensing the changes in current flow with changes in illu-
mination, these transition edge sensor (TES) bolometers make exceedingly sensitive infrared
detectors. >Figure 14-4 is a functional diagram of a TES bolometer. A superconducting film
that is deposited on the thermal link is the key part of a voltage-biased sensing circuit. The
equilibrium condition has part of the film being warm enough to be a normal conductor and
part of the film superconductive. As a normal conductor, current in that part of the circuit will
dissipate heat, keeping it normal. Input infrared radiation will try to raise the temperature of
the absorber, forcing more of the film to go normal. Since an increase in the amount of normal
film increases the electrical resistance in the circuit, the power dissipation in the film drops to
just compensate for the infrared radiation. Thus, properly designed TES bolometers inherently
have electrothermal feedback.
TES detectors lend themselves naturally to the use of Superconducting QUantum Interfer-
ence Devices (SQUIDs) as the current measuring device in the circuit (e.g., Irwin et al. 2004).
As superconducting devices that operate at the same temperature regime as the TES bolome-
ters, thermal design is straightforward. Recent examples of TES detectors are the Goddard
IRAM Superconducting 2-mm Observer (GISMO) (Staguhn et al. 2008) and the Submillimetre
Common-User Bolometer Array (SCUBA-2) instrument (Bintley et al. 2010).

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
571
Bolometer mesh with
absorptive metal 
Indium bumps
Interconnexion circuit 
Silicon substrate
Metallic reflector
Implanted thermometer
⊡Fig. 14-3
Diagram of PACS photometer bolometer array concept. The etched, metalized silicon mesh sits
1/4 wavelength above the reﬂective backshort. The ion-implanted silicon thermometer (yellow) is
connected to the readout electronics through indium bump bonds (Agnese et al. 2002)
4
Photon Detectors
4.1 Photoconductors
Photoconductors are semiconducting materials that produce free charge carriers when photons
of sufficient energy hit the material. >Figure 14-5 illustrates the simplest photoconductor cir-
cuit. An electrical bias is applied to a photoconductor, and the current is measured by some
electronic means.
The minimum energy to generate free charge carriers is known as the band gap Eg of the
semiconductor and corresponds to the energy between the conduction and valence bands of
the material. The longest wavelength that can be detected by a photoconductor is related to the
band gap by:
λc= hc/Eg= .(µm)/Eg(eV)
where h = Planck’s constant and c = speed of light. For silicon, the band gap is 1.1 eV, meaning
that the longest infrared wavelength that can be detected is just over 1.1 µm. Fortunately, other
semiconductor materials have smaller band gaps. The most important materials for infrared
astronomy have been indium antimonide with a 5.3 µm cutoff and mercury cadmium telluride.
For mercury cadmium telluride, the band gap can be adjusted by varying the fraction x of the
cadmium vs. mercury in the material (Hg(−x)CdxTe). In this way, high-performance detectors
have been built with cutoff wavelengths from as short as 1 µm to beyond 10 µm.

572 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
IR
ABSORBER
T  > Tc
THERMAL  LINK 
CONDUCTANCE G
THERMOMETER
COLD SINK 
NORMAL
SUPERCONDUCTOR
T0 < Tc
⊡Fig. 14-4
Functional diagram of a transition edge superconducting bolometer
⊡Table 14-1
Some important intrinsic infrared detector materials
Intrinsic photoconductors
Material
Cutoﬀwavelength (µm)
HgCdTe
0.8 to >20
Si
1.1
Ge
1.6
InSb
5.5
In addition to utilizing the intrinsic band gap of semiconductor materials, detectors have
employed the energy levels associated with dopants in semiconductors. >Figure 14-6 shows
a schematic band gap diagram for silicon doped with arsenic. The impurity energy levels of
arsenic are only 0.054 eV from the conduction band, meaning that a photon of energy greater
than 0.054 eV (wavelength less than 23 µm) would be energetic enough to ionize a charge car-
rier into the conduction band. This process is called extrinsic photoconductivity. Important

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
573
IR
TRANSPARENT
CONTACT
x
⊡Fig. 14-5
Simple photoconductor circuit
CONDUCTION BAND
DONOR LEVELS
Ei = 0.05 eV for Arsenic  
Eg = 1.1 eV
ACCEPTOR LEVELS
VALENCE BAND
⊡Fig. 14-6
Band gap diagram of silicon showing extrinsic impurity levels of arsenic
reviews of extrinsic photoconductors can be found in the papers by Bratt (1977) and Sclar
(1984). > Table 14-2 lists some of the important extrinsic dopants that have been used in
infrared astronomy.
The photoionization cross section σ(λ) is a measure of the probability that an impurity atom
is ionized by an incoming photon at a given wavelength λ. For an impurity of concentration N
atoms per cm, the absorption coefficient α(λ) just α(λ) = No σ(λ) . The fraction of radiation
that is absorbed in a path length x is then 1−e−αx. Referring back to >Figure 14-5, if Ris the
reflectivity of the first surface of the detector and R2 is the reflectivity of the back surface, the
probability of a photon being absorbed in the detector is (Young 1983)
η = (−R)(−e−ax)(+ Re−ax)
(+ RRe−ax)
.

574 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
⊡Table 14-2
Important extrinsic dopants in silicon and germanium (Data from Bratt 1977)
Extrinsic photoconductors
Material
Dopant
Type
Cutoﬀwavelength (µm)
Photoionization cross section (cm2)
Si
Ga
p
17
5 × 10−16
Si
As
n
23
2.2 × 10−15
Si
B
p
28
1.4 × 10−15
Si
Sb
n
29
6.2 × 10−15
Ge
Be
p
52
Ge
Ga
p
115
1.0 × 10−14
Ge
Sb
n
129
1.6 × 10−14
Ideally, it is highly desirable to have as high an absorption coefficient as possible, to maximize
the absorption of photons in the detector. From >Table 14-2, the typical photoionization cross
sections are 10−cmin germanium and ∼10−cmin silicon. The most straightforward way
of increasing the absorption coefficient is to increase the doping concentration of the extrinsic
species. Unfortunately, there is a limit to the doping concentration because of the formation
of an impurity band in the semiconductor. When this happens, the detector will have unac-
ceptably high dark currents. For gallium-doped germanium detectors, the maximum doping
is × cm−(Wang et al. 1986), which means that germanium photoconductors must have
absorption path lengths of several millimeters for reasonable efficiencies.
An important variation of the bulk germanium photoconductor is the stressed detector.
The long wavelength response of Ge:Ga can be extended by applying uniaxial stress along the
(100) axis (Kazanskii et al. 1977). This technique has been used on both the MIPS instrument
on Spitzer and the PACS instrument on Herschel. With the application of 490 MPa of stress,
the MIPS stressed detectors have useful response out to 200 µm (Young 2000). The design of a
stressed detector focal plane presents a challenging combination of mechanical, thermal, opti-
cal, and electronic design. The methodology used for the PACS instrument has been described
by Rosenthal et al. (2002).
Bulk photoconductors are subject to a number of significant nonlinearities, particularly at
low backgrounds. The fundamental reason is that at the very low backgrounds found in many
astronomical applications (particularly space astronomy), the detectors are essentially insula-
tors, and the time constants associated with reaching electrical equilibrium are large compared
with typical measurement times. These effects have been Bratt (1977) and Sclar (1984). In addi-
tion, bulk photoconductors are subject to large response changes when exposed to ionizing
radiation. Significant effort has been devoted to characterizing and calibrating these effects for
space missions. For the Spitzer MIPS arrays, the calibration strategy included operating in well-
defined time domains and frequent use of internal calibration sources (Gordon et al. 2005, 2007;
Stansberry et al. 2007).
4.2 Impurity Band Conduction Detectors
While in principle it is possible to make sensitive infrared detectors using simple photocon-
ductors, this mode of operation is almost never used. Dark current due to impurities in the

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
575
material will usually limit the performance of these devices. Practical modern direct detectors
use more complicated structures. For the intrinsic photoconductors, the detectors are almost
always made as photodiodes, where n-doped material forms a junction with p-doped material.
By forming a p-n junction, a charge-free region, the depletion region, is formed, and any pho-
toexcited charge carriers formed in this region are swept to the contacts by the electric field in
the region. High-performance photodiodes have been formed in HgCdTe for wavelengths as
long as 10 µm (Bacon et al. 2004). Photodiodes are the most important type of near-infrared
detector, and they are covered by the chapter in this volume by Beletic.
From ∼10 µm to nearly 40 µm, the most sensitive detectors have used the impurity band
conduction (IBC) structure. Also known as blocked impurity band (BIB) detectors, these
devices overcome many of the fundamental limitations of classical bulk photoconductors. The
photon absorption efficiency of a photoconductor is set by the product of the photoionization
cross section of the dopant and the doping concentration of the desired impurity. The latter is
limited by excessively high dark currents when the concentration gets too high.
In IBC detectors, the infrared absorbing layer is doped well beyond the point where an
impurity band forms but not so high that degenerated metallic conduction occurs. In fact,
dopings as high as 100 × greater than possible for bulk photoconductors are typically employed.
Thus, detector structures can be 100 × thinner for comparable absorption efficiencies. To block
the very high dark current, IBC detectors incorporate a very pure undoped “blocking” layer in
series with the doped layer. Since the free carriers in the impurity band cannot reach the con-
tact, the dark current is blocked. Only the carriers that are excited into the conduction band (for
an n-type IBC detector) reach the external circuit. >Figure 14-7 schematically shows band dia-
gram of an IBC detector. With bias, negative charge carriers are injected at the N++ contact and
migrate toward the positive contact via hopping conduction until they reach the undoped layer.
Since there is no impurity band in this layer, the negative carriers are blocked and accumulate at
the interface. This accumulation of charge creates a local field that clears out free charge carriers
in the heavily doped region. For photon-excited carriers in the heavily doped region to reach
the contacts, they must be driven by the electric field in the region, and hence this depletion
region is necessary for the operation of the device. This region has a width “w” and is given by
(Petroff and Stapelbroek 1984, 1986)
w = [єε(Va −Vbi)
eNA
]
/
−b
where ε is the dielectric constant, ε is the permittivity of free space, e is the electron charge, V a
is the applied bias voltage, Vbi is the built-in potential of the undoped active layer junction, and
b is the blocking layer thickness. The width of the depletion region determines how much of the
heavily doped region usefully converts photons to detected charge carriers. For this depletion
region tobe successfullycreated, the background impuritylevel NA ofacceptors (Ain the figure)
must be exceedingly low. Fortunately,the technology of silicon epitaxial growth is up to the task.
An example of the architecture of a modern IBC detector is shown in >Fig. 14-8. A detailed
analysis of the IBC detector has been given by Szmulowicz and Madarsz (1987).
An additional advantage to the high doping in the IR absorption layer is an extension of
the cutoff wavelength beyond the normal extrinsic limit. The finite energy width of the impu-
rity band means that there are energy states closer to the conduction band than in a normal
photoconductor. For Si:As IBC detectors, the cutoff is extended to ∼28 µm, while for Si:Sb IBC
detectors, the cutoff is ∼36 µm.

576 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
IR
IR ABSORBING LAYER
n+
Undoped
blocking
layer
n++
n++
CONDUCTION BAND
IMPURITY BAND
D+
D+
D+
D+
D+
D+
D+
D+
D+
VALENCE BAND
A−
A−
A−
A−
A−
A−
A−
A−
A−
ENERGY
X
a
b
⊡Fig. 14-7
(a) Representative structure of n-type IBC detector, (b) band diagram of the detector (Haller and
Beeman 2002)
High Resistivity Substrate
Active Detector
Layer (As-doped)
Blocking Layer
Buried
Transparent
Implant
Buried
Transparent
Implant
Al Contact to Buried
Transparent Implant
Indium Bump
Contact
Detector Common Contact
Detector Implant
Oxide
⊡Fig. 14-8
IBC detector cross section (Love et al. 2010)

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
577
4.3 Readouts
A key part of the detector system is the method for measuring the photocurrent. A number of
different circuits have been used, and a sample are illustrated in >Fig. 14-9.
One of the earliest circuits was the transimpedance amplifier (TIA). Here, the photocurrent
nulled at the input by a corresponding opposite current that is driven by the voltage across a
resistor in a feedback loop. One advantage of this circuit is that becauseof the negative feedback,
the bias potential across the detector is constant. The output signal is simply
VOUT = idR f
where id is the photocurrent and R f is the feedback resistance. The main limitation of the TIA
is that the feedback resistor produces Johnson noise
Vn,J = (kBTRf )/
where kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the temperature of the resistor. The TIA was used on
the IRAS focal plane array.
+
VOUT
VBIAS
VBIAS
TRANSIMPEDANCE AMPLIFIER
SOURCE FOLLOWER PER DETECTOR
+
VOUT
+
VOUT
+
VBIAS
CAPACITIVE TRANSIMPEDANCE AMPLIFIER
−
−
−
⊡Fig. 14-9
Some representative readout circuits used with photoconductors

578 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
A variant of the TIA substitutes a capacitor for resistor. In the capacitive transimpedance
amplifier (CTIA), the output signal is given by:
VOUT = Q/C f
where Q is the total charge collected on the feedback capacitor C f . Using modern semiconduc-
tor techniques, very small feedback capacitors are possible, making such circuits potentially
very sensitive. Since the charge on the feedback capacitor cannot be built up indefinitely, the
capacitor needs to be occasionally reset using a reset switch. The principal drawback to the
more widespread application of the CTIA is the need to build a high gain, continuously operat-
ing inverting amplifierforeach pixel with its attendant real estate and powerdissipation. Despite
these drawbacks, the CTIA has been successfully used in high-performance astronomical appli-
cations. Most notably, the CTIA was used as the readout for the MIPS 70 and 160 µm arrays on
Spitzer. Forboth applications, the constancy of bias voltage for the germanium photoconductors
was an overriding consideration.
The need for simplicity and low power dissipation, particularly as array formats have
increased, has led to the widespread adoption of the source follower per detector (SFD) circuit.
Here, the voltage is developed across a capacitor that is occasionally reset. The output is
VOUT = AQ/Cin
where A is the voltage gain of the circuit, typically of order unity. The input capacitor Cin now
includes the amplifier input capacitance as well as the detector capacitance. The SFD can be
implemented in very few transistors and has become the most common circuit in very large
arrays. An important power saving characteristic of the SFD is that the amplifier that mea-
sures the voltage on the capacitor only needs to be turned on for the brief time it takes to make
the measurement. For a large array, the effective duty cycle can then be exceedingly low. The
main disadvantage of the SFD is that as charge accumulates on the input capacitor, the voltage
across the detector changes, leading to inevitable nonlinearities. For most detectors, the charge
accumulation is limited so the total voltage change is only a fraction of the applied bias.
4.4 Detector Arrays
Arguably, one of the most important developments in infrared astronomy has been the move
from single detectors to arrays. Increases in overall information gathering power of many
orders of magnitude have been realized over the past few decades. Very much following the
advances semiconductor fabrication technology, infrared detector arrays have seen an expo-
nential growth in array format mimicking Moore’s Law (Moore 1965). A good illustration
of the advances in just three decades is to compare the 63-detector IRAS focal plane array
(> Fig. 14-10) with one of the focal plane arrays which has 16 million pixels for the JWST
NIRCam instrument (>Fig. 14-11). The entire NIRCam instrument has 40 million pixels.
The key to this continuing advance has been, in fact, the utilization of many of the technolo-
gies from the semiconductor industry. >Figure 14-12 illustrates the principal architecture used
on large format detector arrays. Using integrated circuit technology, a readout integrated circuit
(ROIC) is fabricated out of silicon. This circuit typically has a unit cell amplifier for each pixel
and all of the multiplexing circuitry needed to send the signals down a manageable number
of output lines. The inputs to all these amplifiers are arranged in a grid on the top of the inte-
grated circuit. The detector array is constructed out of the appropriate material for infrared
absorption and carrier generation. In some cases, the detector is an array of photodiodes

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
579
⊡Fig. 14-10
IRAS focal plane array consisting of 63 discrete photoconductors
⊡Fig. 14-11
One of two 1–2.5 µm focal plane arrays that will be used on the NIRCam instrument on JWST. It is
a 2 × 2 mosaic of 2, 048 × 2, 048 pixel HgCdTe arrays. The complete instrument has a pair of these
mosaics in addition to two 2, 048 × 2, 048 pixel 2–5 µm focal planes, for a total of 40 million pixels
fabricated out of HgCdTe, and in other cases, the detector could be an array of IBC detectors on
a silicon substrate. The need to connect the outputs of the detectors to the inputs of the ampli-
fiers is accomplished with indium bump bonds. These are exactly matched microscopic indium
bumps that are deposited on both the detector array and the ROIC. When the two sets of bumps
are aligned and pressed together, a robust cold weld is formed in the indium. This technology
has reached the level of a fine art, with as many as four million interconnections being made

580 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
⊡Fig. 14-12
Indium bump bonding of an infrared detector array to a silicon readout integrated circuit is the
principal architecture for detectors in the 1–40 µm range
⊡Fig. 14-13
Spitzer MIPS 70 µm focal plane array (E. Young)
with very high success rate (>99%) and high reliability. This simplistic description, of course,
bypasses many of the difficult engineering development that has been needed to make the whole
process work. In particular, low-temperature operation of the readout, accommodation of the
thermal properties of materials, and the development of good infrared detector materials have
been the work of many scientists and engineers.
At wavelengths beyond the silicon detector range (λ >∼40 µm), the road to larger arrays
has been slower. To date, despite some promising early work (Watson and Huffman 1988;
Rossington 1988), the IBC technology has not been successfully extended to germanium detec-
tors. Instead, bulk photoconductors have been used on Spitzer MIPS instrument and the PACS

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
581
⊡Fig. 14-14
Photoconductor arrays for the PACS instrument (ESA)
⊡Table 14-3
Some representative long wavelength detector arrays
Array
Material
Format
Wavelength
(µm)
Operating
temp (K)
Notable
example
Ref
Teledyne
H2RG
(JWST)
HgCdTe
2, 048 × 2, 048
0.6–5.3
38
JWST
NIRSPEC and
NIRCAM
Smith et al.
2009
Teledyne
H4RG
HgCdTe
4, 096 × 4, 096
0.6–5.3
38
Blank et al.
2011
Raytheon
orion
InSb
2, 048 × 2, 048
0.6–5.5
32
Hoﬀman et al.
2004
DRS
MEGAMIR
Si:As Si:Sb
1, 024 × 1, 024
5–28, 5–38
7
SOFIA
FORCAST
Mainzer et al.
2005
Raytheon
JWST MIRI
Si:As
1, 024 × 1, 024
5–28
7
JWST MIRI
Ressler et al.
2010
CEA Si
bolometer
Si
32 × 16, 64 × 32
60–85,
85–130,
130–210
0.3
Herschel
PACS
Billot et al.
2010
SCUBA-2
bolometer
TES
4 × 32 × 40
850, 450
0.3
SCUBA-2
Bintley
et al. 2010
spectrometer on Herschel. >Figure 14-13 shows the 70 µm ×pixel array, and >Fig. 14-14
shows the stressed photoconductor arrays for PACS. For both developments, custom CTIA
readouts functional at 1.5 K were required. Some representative detector arrays are given
in >Table 14-3.

582 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
5
Microwave Kinetic Induction Detectors
An active area of detector development has opened with the advent of the microwave kinetic
induction detector (MKID). Superconductors below their critical temperature Tc carry super-
current by pairs of electrons known as Cooper pairs. The interaction energy 2Δ of this Cooper
pair is roughly kBTc, where kB is Boltzmann’s constant and Δ is the superconducting energy
gap. >Figure 14-15 illustrates the operating principles of the MKID detector. While a super-
conductor has a zero D.C. impedance, the Cooper pairs in the superconductor present a surface
inductance to A.C. signals due to the inertia of the Cooper pairs. The breaking of the Cooper
pairs by the infrared photons of energy greater than 2Δ creates unpaired electrons or quasipar-
ticles resulting in a change in the kinetic inductance of the film. Microwave kinetic induction
a
c
b
d
⊡Fig. 14-15
MKID operating principles. (a) Energy diagram for an superconducting ﬁlm. A photon breaks the
Cooper pair C into two quasiparticles. (b) Equivalent circuit for the MKID resonator. (c) Change
in output of resonator with creation of quasiparticles as resonant frequency shifts from f0.
(d) Corresponding change in phase of the output signal (Day et al. 2003)

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
583
detectors (MKIDS) utilize this creation of quasiparticles in a superconducting film to detect
photons (Day et al. 2003). A comprehensive review of the physics of MKID detectors can be
found in Zmuidzinas (2012).
To sense these quasiparticles, the superconductor is made part of a highly tuned resonant
microwave circuit that is excited by an external oscillator, typically in the 1–10 GHz range. The
creation of quasiparticles causes an increase in surface inductance, shifting the resonant fre-
quency lower. The change in inductance can be sensed by observing either amplitude or phase
changes in the output. Because resonators made of superconductors can have exceedingly low
losses, very high Q factors are possible (Mazin 2005).
The promise of MKID detectors is that it is possible to frequency multiplex many detectors
on a single output line by having each pixel tuned to a slightly different microwave frequency.
This tuning is accomplished geometrically in the fabrication using standard micro-lithographic
techniques. In operation, each pixel is excited by a tone matched to its resonant frequency as
illustrated in >Fig. 14-16. Hence, each pixel is associated with single microwave frequency that
can be analyzed by a microwave spectrometer.
While >Fig. 14-16 shows individual oscillators for each pixel, they can instead be replaced
by a single high-speed digital to analog converter that puts out a waveform with the necessary
Fourier components to replicate the desired comb spectrum.
CRYOSTAT
hn
….
f1
f2
f3
f4
. . . .
fn
~
f1
f2
OUTPUT
f3
f4
⊡Fig. 14-16
Frequency multiplexed MKID array

584 14
Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors
MKID arrays are an active area of detector work, and a number of cameras for ground-
based telescopes have been developed including the Caltech Submillimeter Telescope (CSO)
(Maloney et al. 2010), APEX (Heyminck et al. 2010), and IRAM (Monfardini et al. 2011).
6
Summary
In the past 40 years, long wavelength infrared detector technology has experienced a continu-
ous, exponential growth in array format. Arrays of 16 million pixels in the near infrared and
10pixels in the far infrared have been attained. This format increase has also been matched
with a nearly eight order of magnitude improvement in sensitivity. This remarkable expansion
in detector performance has enabled fundamentally new insights on all areas of astronomy.
References
Agnese, P., Rodriguez, L., & Vigroux, L. 2002, Far-
IR, Sub-mm & MM Detector Technology Work-
shop, held 1–3 April 2002 in Monterey, CA.
Organized and Sponsored by NASA/Ames &
USRA/SOFIA. Online at http://www.sofia.usra.
edu/det_workshop,id.66
Agnese, P., Cigna, C., Pornin, J.-L., et al. 2003, Proc.
SPIE, 4855, 108
Amico, P., Beletic, J. W., & Beletic, J. E. 2004, Scien-
tific Detectors for Astronomy, The Beginning of
a New Era (Netherlands: Kluwer)
Bacon, C. M, McMurtry, C. W., Pipher, J. L., et al.
2004, Proc. SPIE, 5167, 313
Billot, N., Agnese, P., Augueres, J-L, et al. 2007, Proc.
SPIE, 6275, 62750D
Billot, N., Rodriguez, L., Okumura, K., Sauvage, M.,
& Agnèse, P. 2009, in EAS Publications Series,
37, Astrophysics Detector Workshop 2008, Nice,
ed. P. Kern, 119–125
Billot, N., Sauvage, M., Rodriguez, L., et al. 2010, Proc
SPIE, 7741, 774102
Bintley, D., MacIntosh, M. J., Holland, W. S., et al.
2010, Proc. SPIE, 7741, 7741106
Blank, R., Anglin, S., et al. 2011, ASPC, 437, 383
Bratt, P. R., 1977 in Semiconductors and Semimetals,
Vol. 12, eds. R. K. Willardson, & A. C. Beer (New
York: Academic), 39–142
Coblentz, W. W. 1914, PASP, 26, 169
Day, P., Leduc, H., Mazin, B., Vayonakis, A., &
Zmuidzinas, J. 2003, Nature, 425, 817–821
Gordon, K. D., Engelbracht, C. W., Fadda, D., et al.
2007, PASP, 119, 1019
Gordon, K. D. , Rieke, G. H., Englebracht, C. W., et al.
2005, PASP, 117, 503
Griffin, M. J., Abergel, A., Abreu, A., et al. 2010, A&A,
518, L3
Haller, E. E., & Beeman, J. 2002, Far-Infrared Pho-
toconductors:
Recent
Advances
and
Future
Prospects,
in
Proceedings
of
Monterey
Workshop on FIR, SubMM, and MM Detectors,
NASA/CP-211408
Haller, E. E., Itoh, K. M., Beeman, J. W., Hansen,
W. L., & Ozhogin, V. I. 1994, Proc. SPIE, 2198,
630–637
Heyminck, S., Klein, B., Guesten, R., et al. 2010,
Twenty-First International Symposium on Space
Terahertz Technology, held March 23–25, 2010 at
Oxford University’s Said Business Center and the
STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Oxford,
UK. National Radio Astronomy Observatory
(NRAO), 262
Hoffman, A. W., Corrales, E., Love, P. J., et al. 2004,
Proc. SPIE, 5499, 59
Holmes, W. A., Bock, J. J., Crill, B. P., et al. 2008, Appl.
Opt., 47, 5996
Irwin, K. D., Audley, M. D., Beall, J. A., et al. 2004,
Nucl. Inst. Method Phys. Res. A, 520, 544
Kazanskii, A. G., Richards, P. L., & Haller, E. E. 1977,
Appl. Phys. Lett., 31, 496
Love, P. J., Hoffman, A. W., Lum, N. A., et al. 2010,
Proc. SPIE, 5902, 590209
Low, F. J. 1961, JOSA, 51, 1300
Mainzer, A. K., Eisenhardt, P., Wright, E. L., et al.
2005, Proc. SPIE, 5881, 253
Maloney,
P.,
et
al.
2010,
Proc.
SPIE,
7741,
77410F
Mather, J. C. 1982, Appl. Opt., 21, 1125
Mather, J. C. 1984, Appl. Opt., 23, 3181
Mazin, B. A. 2005, Microwave kinetic inductance
detectors. Dissertation (Ph.D.), California Insti-
tute of Technology. http://resolver.caltech.edu/
CaltechETD:etd-10042004-120707

Long-Wavelength Infrared Detectors 14
585
McLean, I. 2008, Electronic Imaging in Astronomy:
Detectors and Instrumentation (2nd ed.; New
York: Springer)
Monfardini, A., Swenson, L. J., Bideaud, A., et al.
2011, A&A, 521, A29
Moore, G. 1965, Cramming more components onto
integrated circuits. Electronics, 38(April 19),
114–117
Moseley,
S.
H.,
Allen,
C.
A.,
Benford,
D.,
Dowell, C. D., Harper, D. A., Phillips, T. G.,
Silverberg, R. F., & Staguhn, J. 2004, Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Phys. Res. A, 520,
417–420
Petroff, M. D. & Stapelbroek, M. G. 1986, U.S. Patent
No. 4568960
Petroff, M. D., & Stapelbroek, M. G. 1984, Respon-
sivity and noise moadels of blocked impurity
band detectors, in IRIS Specialty Group on IR
Detectors, Seattle, WA, August 15, 1984
Pettit, E., & Nicholson, S. B. 1922, ApJ, 56, 295
Planck HFI Core Team et al. 2011, A&A, 536, A4
Poglitsch, A., Waelkens, C., Geis, N., Feuchtgru-
ber, H., et al. 2010, A&A, 518, L2
Ressler, M. E., Cho, H., Lee, R. A. M., et al. 2010, Proc
SPIE, 7021, 7021O
Richards, P. 1994, J. Appl. Phys., 76, 1
Rieke, G. H. 2003, Detection of Light from the Ultra-
violet to the Submillimeter (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press)
Rieke, G. H. 2007, Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.,
45, 77
Rieke, G. H. 2009, Exp. Astron., 25, 125
Rosenthal, D., Beeman, J. W., Geis, N., et al. 2002,
Far-IR, Sub-mm & MM Detector Technology
Workshop, held 1–3 April 2002 in Monterey,
CA. Organized and Sponsored by NASA/Ames &
USRA/SOFIA. Online at http://www.sofia.usra.
edu/det_workshop,id.9
Rossington, C. S. 1988, Germanium blocked impu-
rity band far infrared detectors. PhD Thesis,
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of
California, Berkeley. LBL-25394
Sclar, N. 1984, Prog. Quantum Electron., 9, 149
Smith, E. C., Rauscher, B. J., et al. 2009, Proc. SPIE,
7419, 741907
Staguhn, J. G., Benford, D. J., Allen, C. A., et al. 2008,
Proc. SPIE, 7020, 702004
Stansberry, J. A., Gordon, K. D., Bhattacharya, B.
et al. 2007, PASP, 119, 1038
Szmulowicz, F. & Madarsz. F. L. 1987, J. Appl. Phys.,
62, 2533
Wang, J.-Q., Richards, P. I., Beeman, J. W., et al. 1986,
Applied Optics, 25, 4127
Watson, D., & Huffman, J. E. 1988, Appl. Phys. Lett.,
52, 1602
Young, E. T. 1983, Adv. Space Res., 2, 59
Young, E. T. 2000, Proceedings of the Space Astro-
physics Detectors and Detector Technologies
Conference held at the STScI, Baltimore, 26–29
June 2000
Zmuidzinas, J. 2012, Ann. Rev. Condens. Matter
Phys., 3, 169


15
Astronomical
Spectrographs
Rebecca A. Bernstein⋅Stephen A. Shectman
Astronomy and Astrophysics Department/UC Observatories, UC
Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
Observatories of the Carnegie Institution, Pasadena, CA, USA
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 588
2
Key Concepts in the Design of a Spectrograph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 588
2.1
Obtaining the Desired Angular Dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 589
2.2
Limitations Due to Pupil Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 590
2.3
Resolution, Wavelength Coverage, and Camera Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 590
3
Optical Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 591
3.1
Collimator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 591
3.2
Dispersing Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 591
3.3
Cameras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 594
4
Echelle Spectrographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 596
5
Wide-Field, Multi-object Spectrographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 602
6
Integral Field Spectrographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 608
7
Near-IR Spectrographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 609
8
Spectrographs for Extremely Large Telescopes (ELTs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
8.1
Echelles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 612
8.2
Wide-Field Optical Spectrographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613
8.3
IR Spectrographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 614
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 614
T.D. Oswalt, I.S. McLean (eds.), Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 1: Telescopes and Instrumentation,
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-5621-2_15, © Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

588 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
Abstract:
While the basic components in optical and near-IR spectrographs havenot changed
significantly in the last 50 years, spectrograph design and fabrication have become significantly
more challenging as telescope apertures grow and the performance goals for the spectrographs
become more ambitious. In this review, we discuss the basic optical layout and components of
modern astronomical spectrographs and review the designs that have been employed for low-
resolution (imaging) spectrographs and high-resolution (echelle) spectrographs on modern
telescopes. We begin with a discussion of strategies for optical layouts, collimator and camera
designs, and the common dispersing elements in use today. Finally, we discuss the challenges
associated with extending these designs to the next generation of instruments needed for the
extremely large telescopes being undertaken today.
Keywords: Echelle spectrographs, Fiber spectrographs, Imaging spectrographs, Infrared spec-
trographs, Integral field units, Spectrographs, Wide-field spectrographs
1
Introduction
There are a variety of ways of thinking about spectrograph performance and design. Reviews
exist in the literature that cover a very broad range of relevant topics from the overall function
of spectrographs and their use to the general scaling laws of single-object spectrographs for a
wide range of telescope diameters (e.g., Bowen 1964). A variety of texts also exist which provide
complete references on the basic optical components of spectrographs, including expressions
for grating dispersion, angle effects, and optical efficiency (e.g., Schroeder 2000). For the most
part, we have tried to avoid repeating those discussions in this review, but concentrate instead
on the current strategies being employed in the design of high-performance spectrographs on
the current 8 m-class and next generation of even larger telescopes, and the considerations that
motivate these designs.
We focus on three general categories of spectrographs currently in use. The first is moder-
ate to high resolution, cross-dispersed spectrographs (echelles and echellettes). These are almost
exclusively single-object spectrographs in which cross dispersion allows the spectrograph focal
planes to be filled with multiple orders rather than multiple objects. The second category is low
to moderate resolution spectrographs. In the last 20years, observational programs at these reso-
lutions have focused on multiplexing for efficient surveys, so that the workhorse spectrographs
on large telescopes at these resolutions are now wide-field, imaging spectrographs. The third
category we discuss is near-IR spectrographs, which share the same optical design principles as
their optical counterparts, but require special considerations to avoid the effects of high thermal
backgrounds. In discussing these instruments, we focus on the general features of the optical
designs that have been successfully executed to date or proposed for the next generation of
telescopes. Specific instruments are discussed as representative or noteworthy examples within
these categories; we do not attempt to present an inclusive record of all successful instruments.
2
Key Concepts in the Design of a Spectrograph
A standard single-object, low-resolution astronomical spectrograph includes five basic compo-
nents. The first is a slit, or perhaps a fiber, which isolates light from an object in the focal plane of
the telescope and rejects the surrounding sky background. The width of the slit defines the size

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
589
of a wavelength resolution element in the final spectrum. The slit width is typically matched in
size to the resolution of the telescope (or seeing disk) in order to maximize the light collected
from the object, the contrast of the object relative to sky background, and the wavelength res-
olution. The second component is a collimator, which renders the diverging cone of light that
emerges from any location in the slit into a parallel (collimated) beam. The third component
is the dispersing element (or elements), which alters the angle of propagation of the collimated
beam as a function of wavelength. The fourth is a camera, which focuses the angularly dispersed
collimated beams into a spatially dispersed image in the spectrograph focal plane. The last is a
detector, which measures the intensity of the dispersed image as a function of position in the
focal plane, where the position in one direction now corresponds to the spatial location along
the slit and the position in the other direction corresponds to wavelength.
For a wide-field spectrograph with a long slit or multiple entrance apertures distributed
over a field of view, the collimated beams from different points in the field of view emerge from
the collimator at different angles. The narrowest point in the ensemble of collimated beams
is the location where the collimator forms an image of the telescope entrance aperture (usually
the primary mirror); this image is the collimator exit pupil. While the dispersing elements can
be placed anywhere in the collimated beam, it is desirable to locate them as close as possible to
the pupil image in order to minimize their size as well as the size of the spectrograph camera.
For seeing-limited spectrographs on large telescopes, the goals of achieving higher spectral
resolution, broader wavelength coverage, and more efficient multiplexing all drive designs to be
larger – to have larger pupils and larger fields of view, while the limitations on cost, mechanical
complexity, and availability of optical materials and coatings all drive designs to be smaller.
There are also constraints that involve basic physical and geometric considerations that impose
more fundamental limits to achieving high spectral resolution, wavelength coverage, and image
quality. The optimization of a spectrograph design typically begins with the consideration of
these more fundamental, physical issues, which we discuss below.
2.1 Obtaining the Desired Angular Dispersion
In most cases, the dispersing element will be a diffraction grating. The intrinsic resolving power
provided by a reflection grating is given by
R = (/θ) tanδ (dcoll/Dtel) = (/θ) sinδ (Lgrat/Dtel),
in which R is the resolving power (λ/Δλ), θ is the angular slit width on the sky in radians,
δ is the blaze angle of the grating, dcoll is the diameter of the collimated beam (or more properly
of the collimator exit pupil), Dtel is the diameter of the telescope, and Lgrat is the length of the
grating illuminated by the collimated beam. Strictly speaking, this formula is exact only when
the grating is used in the Littrow configuration (see below), but it is approximately correct for
a much broader range of applications.
To achieve the same wavelength resolution at the same angular slit width on the sky, θ, a
spectrograph on a 10 m telescope that employs the same design strategy and grating blaze angle
as one on a 4 m telescope will need to be scaled up so that its collimated beam diameter is
2.5 times larger. In practice, this scaling requirement was partly alleviated in going from spec-
trographs for 4 m-class telescopes to spectrographs for 8 m-class telescopes by incorporating
active optics systems in the recent generation of 8 m-class telescopes and building them at the

590 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
best available sites; the resulting improvements in seeing-limited performance of 8 m-class tele-
scopes relative to the previous generation have made it fairly routine to use slits as narrow as
0.7 arcsec (as apposed to 1–1.5 arcsec) without incurring unacceptable slit losses.
The need to increase the beam diameter can be further alleviated if the effective slit width can
be reduced. This might be accomplished by using an optical or a fiber-optic image slicer that
reformats a short and wide slit into a longer and narrower one. Note, however, that the total
slit area cannot be reduced without violating the conservation of optical intensity. In the near-
infrared, further improvement in image quality over significant fields of view may be possible,
for example, by using ground-layer adaptive optics (GLAO). But the limitations imposed by
the coherence properties of atmospheric turbulence limit the practical application of adaptive
optics (AO) correction over any field of view to wavelengths longer than about 8,000 Å.
Finally, note that the scaling of spectrographs with telescope size specifically does not apply
when the telescopes are operated at the diffraction limit using adaptive optics. In this case, the
image size (θ) decreases with increasing telescope aperture (Dtel), and in principle the same
spectrograph will produce the same resolution independent of telescope size.
2.2 Limitations Due to Pupil Magniﬁcation
In a wide-field spectrograph with a field of view on the sky of φ, the range of angles between
collimated beams from different field positions at the collimator exit pupil are increased by
the ratio of the telescope diameter to the collimated beam diameter (φ′ = φ Dtel/dcoll). This
effect is called pupil magnification. For example, a spectrograph with an 80 mm pupil on an
8 m telescope has an angular magnification at the pupil of 100, so that the collimated beams
from a 10 arcmin (0.167○) field of view fill a 16.7○cone at the pupil.
For a given field of view on the sky, the optical design problem for the collimator tends to
become easier for larger collimated beams with smaller pupil magnification. A smaller range of
incident angles onto the grating also tends to result in higher and more uniform efficiency and
dispersion. This is one of the motivations for allowing the pupil to become larger, rather than
simply using larger blaze-angle gratings to achieve the same resolution.
2.3 Resolution, Wavelength Coverage, and Camera Performance
A fundamental conflict exists in spectrograph design between the desire to increase the spec-
tral resolution and wavelength coverage of a spectrograph, and the practical limitations on the
optical performance of spectrograph cameras. The performance of a given camera design might
be characterized by its field of view, spatial resolution, the wavelength range over which good
images are formed, and efficiency. The complexity of a camera design might be characterized
by the number of optical elements or the number of aspheric surfaces it requires. In general,
improvements in performance must be paid for with increases in complexity and cost. Practical
limits exist in these characteristics beyond which feasible designs are unlikely to exist.
Field of view is a particularly critical characteristic of spectrograph cameras. A given camera
has a field of view that can be expressed as the linear diameter of the focal plane over which it
produces acceptable images. The angular diameter of the field of view is the diameter of that
focal plane divided by the camera focal length. The difficulty of the optical design problem
for a spectrograph camera is increased because of the requirement of an external pupil stop

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
591
where the grating can be located; the problem becomes worse as more pupil relief – a larger
distance between the pupil and the first element of the camera – is required in order to provide
enough space for the grating. The highest-performance cameras used in spectrographs for 8 m-
class telescopes have angular fields of view in the range 20–25○. Many groups have expended
considerable ingenuity in designing these cameras, and the prospects are poor for appreciably
increasing the angular field of view that can be obtained.
The angular field of view of the camera must be large enough to accommodate the desired
number of spectral resolution elements across one order of the final spectrum. For large tele-
scopes, this angle becomes large quicklybecause each spectral resolution element spans an angle
equal to the width of the slit on the sky multiplied by the pupil magnification. In a wide-field
spectrograph, part of the angular field of view of the camera must also be allocated to the angu-
lar field of view of the spectrograph on the sky. In order to obtain uniform spectral coverage over
the full spectrograph field of view, the field of the spectrograph camera must be large enough
to cover a rectangle with a length equal to the length of the spectrum plus the projected field
size in the dispersion direction, and a width equal to the projected field size perpendicular to
the dispersion.
The optical design problem for spectrograph cameras also becomes more difficult as the
focal ratio (f-number) decreases. As seeing-limited spectrographs scale up for larger telescopes,
the size of the detector or detector mosaic scales up as well. For practical camera focal ratios and
typical detector pixel sizes (both optical and infrared), the pixels are usually small enough to
adequately sample the slit width. Camera f-ratios and image quality are then critical to achieving
efficient use of the detectors and the best spectrograph performance.
3
Optical Components
3.1 Collimator
In any spectrograph, the collimator design must provide sufficient access to and space around
the pupil for the dispersing elementsto be located in the narrow portion of the collimated beam.
For single objects or small fields of view (<1 arcmin), both refracting and reflecting collimators
can provide sufficient image quality and a sharp pupil on any telescope configuration. Refract-
ing collimators have some appealing advantages over reflecting collimators in that they can
form an exit pupil that is well controlled and externally located without requiring an off-axis
configuration or internal obscurations. They can also be packaged more conveniently and can
potentially provide better image quality. The more difficult problem of designing collimators
for wide-field spectrographs is discussed in >Sect. 5.
3.2 Dispersing Elements
The choice of dispersion strategy is central to the design of any spectrograph. The oldest dis-
persing element is the prism. Light enters and exits a prism at two flat surfaces tilted with
respect to each other by the apex angle. The combined refraction at the two surfaces changes
the direction of propagation by an angle called the deviation angle, which is a function of the
wavelength-dependent index of refraction, n(λ), of the prism material.

592 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
For modern spectrographs, the principal virtue of a prism is that it can have very high trans-
mission as long as the required dispersion is modest. For this reason, prisms are often used
as efficient dispersing elements in very low-resolution spectrographs, or as cross dispersers in
echelle or echellettespectrographs. However, becausethe index of refraction is not a very strong
function of wavelength, the angular dispersion of a prism (the change in deviation angle with
wavelength) is limited. Increasing the apex angle can increase the dispersion, but at some point
the angle of incidence or the angle of refraction at the tilted surfaces becomes very high, and
antireflection coatings become ineffective. If there is sufficient space in the optical train, multi-
ple prisms can be used in series toincrease the dispersion without having toresort toimpractical
angles of incidence. Note also that the index of refraction of optical materials, and hence the
wavelength stability of a prism spectrograph, depends on temperature.
The most dispersive glasses tend to have poor transmission in the blue or ultraviolet, so
that very large prisms or stacks of prisms can have significant transmission losses through the
bulk material. In general, the optical homogeneity of the prism material will not be perfect, and
wavefront errors of a collimated beam propagating through the inhomogeneous material can
result in significant aberrations in the final image.
A prism is said to be operating at minimum deviation if it has been rotated so that light
at a reference wavelength enters and exits at the same angle; at any other orientation the devi-
ation angle will increase. A pair of prisms, one made from a more-dispersive glass and one
made from a less-dispersive glass, can be combined to make a zero-deviation prism at some
reference wavelength. Prisms made from two different materials can be combined to produce
a net angular dispersion with significantly different and, potentially, more uniform wavelength
dependence than can be achieved with a single material.
The circular cross section of a collimated beam is preserved when propagated through a
prism at minimum deviation, but will emerge with an elliptical cross section from a prism where
the entrance and exit angles are different. This effect, called anamorphic beam distortion, can be
significant and can be used to manipulate the optical properties of a spectrograph in favorable
ways. The angular magnification of a beam with anamorphic distortion is different along the
major and minor axes of the elliptical beam profile.
Diffraction gratings were developed in order to achieve greater uniformity, greater stabil-
ity, and higher angular dispersion angular dispersion than is possible with prisms. The basic
principle of a grating is that postive interference occurs for certain angles of propagation where
there is an integer number of wavelengths between regularly spaced features in the grating. The
grating equation gives the relationship between wavelength, λ, and dispersion angle, θ, for a
given groove spacing, d: mλ = d sinθ, in its simplest form. The diffraction order is the number
of wavelengths, m.
Until recently, astronomical gratings have almost always been surface relief gratings, which
are most often madeby cutting equally spaced parallel grooves in a soft aluminum coating using
a diamond stylus. The aluminum coating is generally deposited on a thick optical flat made from
a zero-expansion material that is insensitive to thermal or mechanical deformation. A master
grating can be replicated onto another substratecoated with a thin layer of resin. The resin is left
transparent in order to produce a transmission grating and is aluminized in order to produce a
reflection grating.
In order to achieve high efficiency, a diffraction grating must concentrate most of the
diffracted light at a given wavelength into a single order. A grating with this property is said
to be blazed. For a blazed reflection grating, the grooves are cut at an angle such that the geo-
metric angle of reflection from the surface of each groove is equal to the angle of diffraction in

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
593
the desired order. For a blazed transmission grating, the grooves act as tiny prisms for which
the deviation angle is equal to the diffraction angle. The angle at which the grating facets are
cut relative to the overall plane of the grating is called the blaze angle. For grooves cut at a given
angle, the reflection angle of a mirror is much larger than the deviation angle of a prism. For this
reason, reflection gratings can be efficiently blazed at higher angular dispersion than is possible
for transmission gratings.
To achieve high blaze efficiency, the groove spacing d must not be too small since the blaze
effect essentially operates in the geometric optics limit at each grating facet. The profile of the
grooves must also be controlled. Gradual wear of the diamond stylus during the ruling process
limits the size of gratings that can be produced as a single ruling to about 1,000 cm.
The angle of incidence onto a grating is critical to its performance. Consider a reflection
grating in which the collimated beam is incident to the overall surface of the grating at some
angle. The undispersed “zeroth order” of diffraction will appear at an equal angle on the other
side of the overall surface normal, just like a reflection from a flat mirror. The blaze angle of
the facets can be arranged in order to reflect light back toward the incident beam or beyond
the reflected (zero order) beam. The first case is referred to as using the interior orders of the
diffraction grating, and the second case is referred to as using the exterior orders. When the
diffracted light comes back along the same path that the incident light goes in, the grating is said
to be operating in the Littrow condition. Just as is the case for a prism, diffraction of the beam at
some angle other than Littrow will result in an anamorphic distortion of the cross section of the
diffracted beam. If the beam is diffracted outside of the angle between the incident beam and
the zero-order beam, it will contract in one direction, while if it is diffracted inside the angle
between the incident beam and the zero-order beam it will expand.
A similar condition applies to a transmitting grating, which is said to be operating in Littrow
when the overall plane of the grating bisects the angle between the incident and the diffracted
beams. The overall optical deviation angle of a transmission grating can be controlled by bond-
ing the transmission grating to or replicating it directly onto a prism. Such a combination is
often referred to as a grism.
Volume-phase holographic (VPH) gratings (Barden et al. 2000) are a more recent inno-
vation and are formed by modulating the index of refraction in a thin layer of transmissive
material, typically dichromated gelatin. Permanent changes in the index of refraction of this
material can be created by exposure to light, using a laser-generated interference pattern with
the desired linear fringes. VPH gratings are blazed when they satisfy the Bragg condition for
constructive interference of the reflections from the internal planes defined by the index varia-
tions. VPH gratings can be made with higher line densities than surface-relief gratings and can
exhibit very high blaze efficiencies. The blaze wavelength of a grating can be tuned by changing
the angle at which the grating is illuminated. In principle, very large gratings can be fabricated
if sufficiently large optics are available to produce the laser interference pattern.
Immersion gratings are surface-relief gratings in which the diffraction occurs inside of a
refracting medium instead of in air. The advantage of an immersion grating is that the size of
a grating facet that spans a given number of wavelengths is reduced by a factor of the index of
refraction, n, and hence the angular dispersion is increased by the same factor. A conventional
reflection grating can be used as an immersion grating ifthe substrate is transparent. In this case,
the refracting medium is the replicating resin, which typically has an index of refraction n ∼1.5.
Alternatively, the grooves can be etched directly onto crystalline substrates such as silicon using
photolithographic techniques. In the case of a silicon immersion grating used in the infrared
(where silicon is transparent), the index of refraction is very high (n ∼3.45), and the size of a

594 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
grating and of a grating spectrograph with a given wavelength resolution can be reduced by a
corresponding factor, which is large enough to be highly advantageous,especially in a cryogenic
instrument (Jaffe et al. 2006, 2008).
An echelle grating is a coarse reflection grating that is operated in very high order, typically
near 100. When operated near Littrow, the overall surface of an echelle grating is tilted at an
extreme angle to the incident and diffracted beams, typically as high as 60–80○. The tangent
of this angle is called the R-factor of the grating (the tangent of the blaze angle, tan δ). An R2
grating (tan δ = 2), for example, must be approximately twice as long as it is wide in order to
intersect all of the light from a circular beam. The angular dispersion of a grating operated in
Littrow is proportional to the R-factor, so using such very oblique gratings is one way to achieve
high spectral resolution.
It is a general propertyofall ofthe dispersing elements discussed in this section that the opti-
cal path length for a circular beam propagating through the system changes by a large amount
from one side of the beam to the other. This is the condition that requires light incident on the
prism or grating to be accurately collimated; if the light is not completely parallel, then one side
of the beam will travel further and will be more out of focus than the other side. In this way,
the dispersing element will efficiently convert any focus error of the collimator into coma in the
final image, which cannot be compensated by a simple focus offset of the spectrograph camera.
3.3 Cameras
Because most oftheiroptical powercomes from reflective surfaces, catadioptriccameras (mixed
lens and mirror systems) such as Schmidt cameras have the advantage that they can be readily
achromatized, even well into the ultraviolet and at very fast focal ratios. However, it is hard to
design catadioptric cameras with fields of view larger than about 15○. The principal limitation
on the achievable field of view arises from the requirement that the detector is flat. This has
led some groups to investigate the feasibility of fabricating detector arrays with appreciable net
curvature (e.g., Dumas et al. 2010). For single-object, cross-dispersed spectra, a 15○field of view
is often sufficient, and generalized Schmidt cameras have been used successfully in echelle and
echellette spectrographs such as HiRES on Keck or MagE on Magellan. Although cameras of
this type often have only one reflection and a few air/glass surfaces, they suffer from a central
obscuration that generally blocks 20% or more of the incident light, depending on the strategy
employed for packaging the detector at an internal focal plane or extracting the image to an
external location. Off-axis designs are sometimes used to avoid the obscuration, but only with
a substantial penalty in optical performance.
Dioptric (lens only) systems have the advantage that they avoid the central obscuration that
is characteristic of Schmidt cameras. Refracting cameras can be made compact by placing ele-
ments with substantial optical power as close as possible to the dispersing elements. Good image
quality can be obtained over wide ranges in wavelength (0.4–1.0 μm) with careful selection of
glass types to obtain apochromatic correction over the desired wavelength range. Apochromatic
correction typically involves the use of elements made from crystalline calcium fluoride (CaF2)
or CaF2-like glasses (e.g., S-FPL51, made by Ohara Corp.), which have very low dispersion and
thus can provide a lot of power with minimal chromatic aberration relative to typical optical
glasses.
To achieve high optical efficiency, antireflection (AR) coatings are typically applied to all
air/glass surfaces. Multilayer dielectric coatings can be used to keep reflection losses as low as

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
595
0.5–1.0% per surface over bandpasses of more than an octave (e.g., 400–1,100 nm) and over an
appreciable range ofincident angles. The high-orderinterference ofmultilayercoatings typically
goes bad rapidly outside of the design wavelength range. For even wider bandpasses, better
performance is obtained overall by using single-layer AR coatings, although these will have
losses of up to 2% per surface at the ends of the bandpass. Some improvementhas been achieved
with new hybrid coatings such as SolGel + MgF2 that maybe more widelyavailable in the future.
Alternatively, lenses can be bonded in multiplets to reduce the reflection losses. Hard opti-
cal epoxies and cements are usually avoided when bonding CaF2 or CaF2-like materials (which
have much higher coefficients of thermal expansion) to other types of glass. Compliant optical
cements or RTVs have been used successfully for this purpose. Such RTVs have shear compli-
ance that is adequate to take up the differential thermal expansion coefficients of the bonded
materials, as long as the bond layer is adequately thick and the surfaces are not too strongly
curved. An additional advantage of bonding lenses with RTV is that delicate or humidity-
sensitive optical materials (e.g., CaF2, BaF2, or NaCl) can be permanently isolated in multiplets
where the external materials are more conventional glass. Oil coupling has also been used in
several large camera systems with 250–350 mm diameter lenses. In some cases, the oil has even
been used to create powered, liquid elements to provide thermal focus compensation (see dis-
cussions in Dressler et al. 2011). Because of the extreme range in temperature between the
laboratory and in-service environments, bonded or coupled elements are seldom used in lens
assemblies for cryogenic instruments.
The fundamental design limitation of dioptric cameras is the wavelength dependence of
image quality caused by the change in index of refraction with wavelength. An important com-
ponent of the optical design problem is therefore the careful choice and deployment of different
optical materials in order to compensate for chromatic effects. For this reason, the availability
of materials with a wide range of optical properties, and in large enough sizes, is critical to the
design of high-performance spectrograph cameras for large telescopes. Certain optical mate-
rials can be produced in very large sizes (>1 m diameter× 0.5 m thick) and weights (hundreds
of kg, Jedamzik and Hartmann 2006). However, the most readily available materials in these
sizes tend to cover a small area in the plot of index of refraction vs. wavelength that character-
izes different glass types. A wider range of glass types is available in blank sizes up to roughly
350 mm diameter× 100 mm thick. Many very useful glass types are restricted to even smaller
sizes. Some glasses can be slumped after annealing to produce meniscus lens shapes without
having to produce an initial cylindrical blank that encompasses the full dimensions of the final
lens.
High-quality optical glass is available from only a few vendors and the availability of par-
ticular types of glass in particular sizes changes with time. Typically, it is necessary for the
designer to check the availability of different types of glass in the sizes required, making the
design process highly iterative. In some cases, the limitations on the availability of optical glass
blanks of a given size are physical, such as the allowable cooling time for the glass melt before
the mixture of components separates at a microscopic scale (called devitrification) or the dif-
ficulty of adequately annealing large blanks without causing unacceptable stress and breakage.
It is not evident whether there are significant opportunities to expand the limits of the current
production methods for these materials.
Availability is even more limited for materials with good transmission at wavelengths blue-
ward of 375 nm. The only materials that will not attenuatesignificantly down to the atmospheric
cutoff (300–320 nm, depending on altitude) are calcium fluoride and fused silica. Because of
its high transmission and low dispersion, calcium fluoride is a critical material for cameras

596 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
operating at any wavelength. Its availability at large diameters (>350 mm) and thicknesses
(>50 mm) is therefore critical to the continued use of dioptric cameras on large telescopes.
While the availability of large boules has come and gone over the years, driven most recently by
the photolithography industry for semiconductor fabrication, there is no fundamental physical
limitation to growing larger crystals, and several companies are developing production facilities
aimed at producing 500 mm diameter× 100 mm thick blanks.
4
Echelle Spectrographs
Modern high-dispersion spectrographs achieve high resolution by using echelle gratings, which
have modest line density (30–80 lines/mm) but are blazed at very large angles (tan δ ≥2) and
used in high orders of diffraction, m. The wavelength spacing between orders, or the free spec-
tral range, is equal to λ/m. At this full width, the blaze intensity function for a single order of a
high-quality echelle ruling falls to about 50% of its peak value, so that most of the light at a given
wavelength is concentrated in a single order, or is split between at most two adjacent orders.
Typically, a second dispersing element is used to weakly disperse the light in the direction per-
pendicular to the echelle orders, so that the orders do not overlap and complete coverage over
the desired bandpass can be obtained in a single exposure on a rectangular detector. Cross-
dispersion is not necessary if an order-blocking filter is used to transmit a single order, as is
sometimes the case when fibers are used to obtain a single order from multiple objects rather
than multiple orders from a single object. Illustrative examples of such multi-object instru-
ments include Hectochelle (Szentgyorgyi et al. 2011a) on the MMT, FLAMES + Giraffe and
FLAMES + UVES on the VLT (Pasquini et al. 2002), and MMFS on Magellan (Walker et al.
2006).
Echelle spectrographs for 8 m-class telescopes employ several different design strategies,
with different advantages and disadvantages. The standard layout for a reflecting-grating spec-
trograph uses the grating tilt in the plane of the dispersion to send the diffracted light toward
the camera and away from the incoming beam from the collimator. When this arrangement is
used with the very high blaze angle of an echelle grating, the anamorphic beam expansion can
be as high as a factor of 2 or more. This is true even when the angle between the collimator
and the camera is kept as narrow as possible in order to minimize the anamorphic effect. The
desirable consequence is that the angular slit width is reduced by the anamorphic factor so that
the resolution is correspondingly higher, but the undesirable consequence is that the entrance
pupil of the camera and thus the camera itself must be larger, and the grating is even longer than
would be calculated from the factor tan δ. The HiRES spectrograph on Keck is the most ambi-
tious and successful execution of this basic configuration (Vogt et al. 1994; see >Fig. 15-1). It
uses a second reflecting grating for cross dispersion which requires even more pupil relief and
further increases the size of the camera. The collimator for HiRES is a mirror, and the camera is
a “super Schmidt” design with significant obscuration by the detector and its associated pack-
aging. The exit pupil of the HiRES collimator is 300 mm in diameter, and the echelle grating is
a mosaic of three replica gratings aligned end to end in a mechanical mounting. Even the cross
disperser in this very large instrument is a mosaic of two replica gratings.
Another successful design strategy is called a “white-pupil” configuration, in which the
echelle grating is used at a near-Littrow angle (see Baranne et al. 1974 and references therein).
In such a design, the light from a slit is collimated using a mirror, and the diffracted light from

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
597
Calibration
lamps
FW
FW
TV
image
rotator
hatch
deckers
echelle mosaic
collimators
red
blue
cross-disperser
mosaic
corrector
lenses
dark
cap
camera
mirror
CCD
dewar
shutter
FW2
FW1
iodine
cell
field flattener
lamp
mirror
ADC
LN2
slit
FW
⊡Fig. 15-1
A simpliﬁed, functional schematic of the optical layout of HiRES on Keck is shown to illustrate the
standard conﬁguration for an echelle spectrograph (see Vogt et al. 1994). This graphic is a ver-
sion of the xhires user interface used by observers at Keck to conﬁgure the instrument (see http://
www2.keck.hawaii.edu/inst/hires). Note the anamorphic magniﬁcation that occurs at the echelle
grating (labeled “echelle mosaic”). The echelle grating is tilted about an axis that is perpendicu-
lar to the page in this sketch. Although it is not apparent from the drawing, the cross-dispersing
grating (labeled “cross-disperser mosaic”) is tilted about an axis that is parallel to the page, so that
anamorphic magniﬁcation occurs there as well. This can be used to obtain higher dispersion, as
discussed in the text
.
the grating is directed back to the same mirror, which then re-forms an image of the slit, now
linearly dispersed by the echelle grating. As long as the slit is fairly short, the slit and its dis-
persed image are both narrow, and a small offset of the grating angle is all that is required to
keep the two separate. The light then diverges from the dispersed image and is re-collimated
by a second mirror. The second collimator forms an image of the echelle grating, which is an
undispersed (white) pupil. A cross-dispersing grating or prism is placed at this second pupil

598 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
Primary mirror
Blue pupil
transfer mirror
Blue camera
Red camera
Red pupil
transfer mirror
Dichroic
Entrance slit
Echelle grating
⊡Fig. 15-2
The optical design for the SALT HRS spectrograph is shown to illustrate a white-pupil echelle
conﬁguration. The key elements in this conﬁguration are particularly well illustrated in this ﬁgure
from Barnes et al. (2008). Light comes from the slit near the center of the drawing and is collimated
by the ﬁrst collimatingmirror (labeled “primary mirror”). After it isdispersed by the echelle grating,
the light is refocused to form a dispersed image of the slit at a location shown just above the slit
in the ﬁgure. The beam is then split by a dichroic into a red and blue channel. The mirrors labeled
“pupiltransfermirror”recollimatethebeamineacharm,thistimeatasmallerdiameter.Flatmirrors
fold the beams before they are cross-dispersed by VPH gratings
.
image, and the light is subsequently directed to the camera and detector. An example of this
layout is shown in >Fig. 15-2.
The feature that cross dispersion can occur at the second pupil has several very nice implica-
tions for the optical design of the spectrograph components. First, it minimizes the pupil relief
required at the camera because only the cross disperser must be located in the beam between
that second pupil and the camera. This allows the camera to be smaller. Also, the second colli-
mator does not have to be the same focal length or produce the same collimated beam (pupil)
diameter as the first; lower dispersion is required from the cross disperser and can be achieved
with a smaller grating and a smaller diameter pupil. This again allows the camera to be smaller,
although its angular field of view must be larger because the angular free spectral range of the
echelle orders increases by the same factor that the diameter of the second pupil decreases. This
is another example of pupil magnification, discussed in >Sect. 2.
The white-pupil arrangement has been used in a number of spectrographs, most notably the
UVES spectrograph at the ESO VLT (Dekker et al. 2000). The collimator mirrors must be used
somewhat off-axis in order to separate the slit from the re-formed, dispersed slit image. Also, the
angular field of view of the collimator must be significant to accommodate the dispersed beam
returning from the echelle grating. For this reason, the white-pupil arangement is generally
implemented using fairly slow first and second collimators, with focal ratios of f/10 or more.
Often, one or more small-fold mirrors are required near the slit or the dispersed slit image in
order to create a clear path for light to enter the spectrograph and to place the second collimator
and camera at mechanically favorable positions. There can also be significant field curvature
effects at the dispersed slit image, which must be explicitly compensated in the design of the
camera.

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
599
⊡Fig. 15-3
The optical design of the red arm of the MIKE spectrograph on Magellan is shown to illustrate
an all-refracting, double-pass echelle conﬁguration (The ﬁgure is reprinted from Bernstein et al.
(2003)). The echelle grating is located at the far left and is drawn here as a ﬂat mirror. Light is shown
emerging from the slit at the top of the ﬁgure. In order after the slit, the optical elements include
a dichroic, a ﬁeld lens, a fold mirror, a small triplet, the camera elements (singlet-triplet-singlet), a
prism, and ﬁnally the grating. From the grating, the return beam is slightly oﬀset from the incom-
ing beam to avoid the small triplet on the way to the ﬁeld ﬂattener and detector at the far right
of the ﬁgure. To accomplish this oﬀset, the grating is tilted very slightly to move the beam cross
dispersion direction, rather than in the direction of the echelle orders. This allows the grating to be
used in Littrow. The ﬁeld lens and small triplet comprise the “injection optics.”See text for further
discussion
.
A third configuration for an echelle spectrograph uses an all-refracting camera in double
pass and, like a white-pupil layout, operates very close to Littrow (see >Fig. 15-3). In this con-
figuration, light from the slit is collimated going through the camera on its way to the grating
on the first pass, and the image of the spectrum is formed going back through the same camera
after being dispersedby the echelle grating. A small tilt of the grating separates the images of the
slit and the detector in the camera focal plane. Cross dispersion is accomplished with a prism
(or prisms) placed between the camera and the grating, which are also used in double pass.
The focal ratio of the camera is selected to provide the desired image scale at the detector, and
a set of injection optics must then be used between the telescope focal plane and the camera to
adapt the focal ratio of the telescope to the focal ratio of the camera. This design has the advan-
tage of being compact and cost-effective. Although the available cross dispersion using prisms
is lower than with diffraction gratings, the higher efficiency of the prisms is also a significant
advantage. The double-pass arrangement has been used in a number of spectrographs, most
notably in MIKE at Magellan (Bernstein et al. 2003).
The point of building bigger telescopes is to make fainter targets accessible. On 8 m-class
telescopes, high-resolution spectrographs designed for high throughput have reached bright-
ness limits near V ∼20 AB mag. Good sky subtraction and low scattered light have also been
critical to reaching such faint limits. Respective, these require high quality optical elements
and high image quality, and sufficient slit length for accurate measurement of the sky signal.

600 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
⊡Table 15-1
A representative sample of cross-dispersed optical and near-IR spectrographs (echelles and echellettes) on 8 m-class telescopes. Column 3 indicates the
wavelength range for each available channel. Channels can be exposed simultaneously unless otherwise noted. Column 4 gives the approximate transmis-
sioneﬃciencyofeachchannel.Thesevaluesincludethetelescope unlessotherwise noted.Column 5liststhe availableslitwidthsor the range ifcontinuously
selectable. The slit width in square brackets provides the resolution listed in Column 9; resolution scales linearly with slit width for all instruments. Column
6 indicates the minimum order separation and the kind of cross dispersion used (prism or grating). Column 7 gives the collimated beam diameter at the
echelle grating. Column 8 gives the tangent of the blaze angle (δ) of the echelle grating
Telescope (diam)
λ-range (μm)
Eﬃciency
Slit widths (arcsec)
X-disp (arcsec)
Pupil (mm)
tanδ
R (λ/δλ)
HiRESa
Keck (10 m)
0.36–0.65 (blue)a
0.06–0.15
0.40, 0.57, [0.86], 1.15
6 (g)
300
2.8
49,000
0.38 – 1.10 (red)a
0.02–0.20
0.40, 0.57, [0.86], 1.15
6 (g)
300
2.8
50,000
ESIb
Keck (10 m)
0.39 – 1.1
0.12–0.27
0.3, 0.5, 0.75, [1.0], 1.25, 6
20 (p)
150
0.63
4,050
UVESc
VLT (8 m)
0.3–0.5 (blue)
0.06–0.12
0.15–[1.0]–2.0
10 (g)
200
4
41,400
0.42–1.1 (red)
0.03–0.16
0.15–[1.0]–2.0
12 (g)
200
4
41,400
X-Shooterd
VLT (8 m)
0.3–0.55 (blue)
< 0.22
0.5, 0.8, [1.0], 1.3, 1.6, 5.0
12 (p)
100
0.9
5,100
0.55–1.0 (red)
< 0.22
0.4, 0.7, [0.9], 1.2, 1.5, 5.0
12 (p)
100
1.4
8,800
1.0–2.3 (near-IR)
< 0.2
0.4, 0.6, [0.9], 1, 1.2, 5.0
12 (p)
85
1
5,100

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
601
bHROSe
Gemini (8 m)
0.4–1.0
0.04–0.14f
0.7, 0.9e
7.2 (p)
175
2
150,000e
Phoenixg
Gemini (8 m)
1.0–5.0
0.04
0.17, [0.25], 0.34
14g
200
2
65,000
HDSh
Subaru (8 m)
0.3–0.5 (blue)
0.03–0.08
0.2–[1.0]–4.0
4.4 (g)
270
3
32,000
0.42–0.92 (red)
0.02–0.13
0.2–[1.0]–4.0
4.8 (g)
270
3
32,000
MIKEi
Magellan (6.5 m)
0.32–0.50 (blue)
0.04–0.35f
0.35, 0.5, 0.7, [1.0], 1.5
5 (p)
150
2.4
28,000
0.49–1.0 (red)
0.04–0.20f
0.35, 0.5, 0.7, [1.0], 1.5
5 (p)
150
2
22,000
FIREj
Magellan (6.5 m)
0.82–2.52
0.02–0.27f
0.45, [0.60], 0.75, 1.00
7 (p)
50
1
6,000
MaGEk
Magellan (6.5 m)
0.30–1.02
0.02–0.22f
0.5, 0.7, 0.85, [1.0], 1.2, 1.5, 2, 5
10 (p)
100
0.63
4,100
aSee Vogt et al. (1994) and updated information at http://www2.keck.hawaii.edu/inst/hires. Red and blue conﬁgurations use diﬀerent cross-dispersing gratings and collimators; one
conﬁguration is available at a time. A total of 300–450 nm can be obtained at one time in either conﬁguration. Order-blocking ﬁlters are available for use with a long slit (<28 arcsec)
bSee Sheinis et al. (2002). A low-dispersion (prism), long-slit mode is available. Direct imaging is available over a 2 × 8 arcmin2 ﬁeld of view
cSee Dekker et al. (2000). Blocking ﬁlters can be used with a long slit (<30 arcsec) to obtain a single order
dSee Vernet et al. (2011)
eRetired. See Aderin (2004). The eﬃciency includes ﬁber and telescope losses. The output of the ﬁbers passes through an image slicer to feed the spectrograph with the equivalent of
a 0.14 arcsec wide slit to obtain the resolution in Column 9
fValue indicates the eﬃciency of the spectrograph (slit to detector) only
gRetired. See Hinkle et al. (1998, 2000, 2002). Orders 11–52 are available with blocking ﬁlters to provide one order per exposure
hSee Terada et al. (2008). Red and blue conﬁgurations use diﬀerent cross-dispersing gratings and collimators; one conﬁguration is available at a time
iSee Bernstein et al. (2003)
jSee Simcoe et al. (2010) and Simcoe et al. (2008)
kSee Marshall et al. (2008)

602 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
In a cross-dispersed instrument, the slit length competes with the number of orders that can
fit across the detector or within the camera field of view and therefore creates a trade-off of slit
length against wavelength coverage or resolution. Longer slits also require stronger cross dis-
persion, which may result in lower efficiency when gratings are required rather than prisms.
The point is that slit length can come at a cost, and it is often better to provide only as much slit
length as is necessary for a particular observation.
Because they are typically single-object instruments, echelle and echellette spectrographs
can easily incorporate a dichroic to split the beam, either immediately before or after the slit
(see >Table 15-1). Both the UVES (white-pupil) and the MIKE (double-pass) spectrographs
incorporate dichroic beam splitters to send the light to separate blue and red wavelength-
optimized spectrographs. The X-shooter spectrograph on the VLT uses a pair of dichroics to
send the light to three separate spectrographs for the blue, red, and infrared (Vernet et al. 2011;
Spanò et al. 2006).
In the past 15 years, a class of echelle spectrographs has emerged which is highly opti-
mized for precision radial-velocity (PRV) measurements in order to detect and characterize
extrasolar planets. These PRV spectrographs require high resolution along with highly accu-
rate wavelength calibration and stability. Observing through an iodine absorption cell has been
shown to be capable of producing useful PRV results (Marcy and Butler 1992; Butler et al. 1996)
using existing spectrographs (e.g., HiRES at Keck) or purpose-built spectrographs (e.g., PFS at
Magellan, Crane et al. 2010). Use of an iodine cell results in some loss of efficiency and is also
restricted to the iodine absorption band (500–620 nm).
The HARPS spectrograph at the ESO 3.6 m telescope has shown that it is possible to build
a spectrograph with high enough mechanical and optical stability to obtain excellent radial-
velocity precision without using an iodine cell (Mayor et al. 2003; Udry et al. 2006). The
important technical considerations for obtaining such high stability include temperature con-
trol, vacuum isolation of the entire optical train or at least the dispersing elements, and a stable,
uniformly illuminated slit and pupil. The most effective way to obtain such highly stable and
uniform illumination is using a fiber feed. The fiber feed acts as an image scrambler, either
relying on the properties of the fibers themselves or incorporating explicit scrambling optics.
Recently, octagonal and hexagonal fiber cores have emerged as an extremely convenient way to
obtain even more uniform illumination than can be obtained with cylindrical fiber cores, with-
out requiring any special optics (e.g., Perruchot et al. 2011). A fiber feed can be readily adapted
toa compact white-pupil ordouble-pass design, making it easiertoachieve the required thermal
stability and to enclose the spectrograph in a vacuum chamber.
5
Wide-Field, Multi-object Spectrographs
Spectroscopic surveys place a premium on the ability to observe many objects at the same
time. The field of view of a survey spectrograph should be large in the telescope focal plane,
so that a large number of targets will be available at one time, and also in the spectrograph focal
plane, so that many objects can be observed with high resolution and wavelength coverage in
a single exposure. Thus, the important, and often conflicting, figures of merit for a wide-field
spectrograph are field of view, wavelength coverage, resolution, and (of course) efficiency.
There are two principal approaches to wide-field spectroscopy. The first is to use an imaging
spectrograph in which the full field of view of a wide-field collimator is reimaged at the focal

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
603
plane of the camera after being dispersed by the grating. A custom-made slit mask, with many
small slits chosen so that the resulting spectra do not overlap on the detector, is used to select
the desired objects and to reject sky. The second approach is to use optical fibers placed at the
positions of interesting objects in the telescope focal plane to carry light from each object to a
pseudo-slit (made up of a long row of resolved fibers) at the input of a long-slit spectrograph.
For an imaging spectrograph, the field of view of the camera must be allocated partly to
the reimaged field of view on the sky and partly to the spectroscopic dispersion. To the extent
possible, it is desirable for the wavelength coverage to be uniform for objects that are distributed
across the slit mask, which requires that the angular field of the camera be significantly larger
than the angular field of the collimator. In some cases, it is necessary to restrict the size of
the slit mask in the dispersion direction, to restrict the wavelength coverage, or to accept that
the wavelength coverage will vary to some extent across the field. The size of the slit mask in the
direction perpendicular to the dispersion typically determines the number of objects that can
be observed at one time.
If the camera is designed to avoid lateral color, then the disperser can be removed from the
beam and the spectrograph can be used as an imager. This is often convenient for the purpose of
aligning the slit mask on the sky and sometimes for imaging in general, especially with narrow-
band interference filters or Fabry-Perot etalons (e.g., TAURUS, Atherton et al. 1982, or more
recently MMTF on IMACS, Veilleux et al. 2010).
The optical design problem for the wide-field collimator would seem to be relatively easy
because the focal ratioofthe telescope, and therefore ofthe collimator, is relativelyslow, typically
in the range f/8–f/15. In practice, the problem is difficult because of the need to simultaneously
control the field curvature and the location of the exit pupil. Across a sufficiently wide field of
view, the effect of curvature of the telescope focal plane, and of the collimator itself, is generally
significant. It is not possible to place an arbitrary field flattener near the focal plane of the tele-
scope because the field flattener also acts as a field lens and must produce a pupil image at an
appropriate place to put the grating. The problem of designing very wide-field collimators boils
down to choosing an appropriate configuration so that any required field lens also produces a
pupil image at the desired location while also matching the field curvature of the collimator to
the field curvature of the telescope.
For most Cassegrain telescopes, the field of view as seen from the instrument is convex. The
field of view of a single mirror used as a collimator is also convex (it is easiest to think of the
mirror as a correctorless Schmidt with the usual symmetry about the center of curvature). In
designing the LRIS and later the DEIMOS spectrographs at Keck (Epps 1990; Faber et al. 2003),
Epps realized that the field curvature of the telescope and of a reflecting collimator approxi-
mately matches if the collimated beam diameter is about 150 mm (see >Fig. 15-4). In this case,
no field flattener is required and the exit pupil appears at the usual position, one focal length
away from the collimator mirror. If the optical axis of the collimator mirror is aligned with the
optical axis of the telescope, then the collimator field of view must be displaced to an off-axis
position in the telescope focal plane, so that the pupil is formed adjacent to the targeted field
rather than on top of it.
For a Gregorian telescope, the field of view as seen from the instrument is concave. In gen-
eral, refracting collimators exhibit symmetry about their exit pupils and have fields that are
concave as well, making them particularly well matched to Gregorian telescopes. For refracting
collimators, the location of the exit pupil is convenient, and there are more degrees of freedom
available to compensate for aberrations over a wide field of view. In designing the Magellan tele-
scopes, Shectman (1994) chose a particular value for the focal ratio produced by the secondary

604 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
⊡Fig. 15-4
A sketch of the optical layout for the DEIMOS spectrograph on Keck is shown to illustrate a wide
ﬁeld optical spectrograph layout that uses a mirror collimator (The ﬁgure is reprinted from Faber
et al. (2003)). The slit mask (labeled) indicates the location of the DEIMOS ﬁeld of view in the curved
focal plane of the telescope. Note that the ﬁeld is oﬀset from the telescope’s optical axis, which is
indicated by the long-short dashed line across the middle of the ﬁgure. The collimator reﬂects the
beam back toward the focal plane, so that the pupil would form near the telescope focal plane. The
tent mirror (labeled) folds the beam to allow access to the pupil, which is located at the grating. As
the Keck telescope is a Ritchey-Chrétien design, the focal plane curvature is particularly well suited
to a mirror collimator
.
mirror in order to obtain an exact match to the field curvature of a particular collimator. As
a result, the IMACS spectrograph on Magellan has a very wide field of view with high image
quality (Dressler et al. 2011; see >Fig. 15-5) in comparison to other imaging spectrographs.
There are a number of ways to ameliorate the field curvature problem when such an exact
match is not available. One way is to explicitly restrict the field of view, since the field curvature
mismatch grows with the square of the field diameter. Another way is to redistribute the optical
power between the elements of a compound collimator assembly in order to alter the value of
the field curvature or the position of the exit pupil. These strategies account for the many imag-
ing spectrographs on Cassegrain telescopes with refracting collimators, for example, GMOS
on Gemini (Allington-Smith et al. 2002), MMIRS and Binospec on the MMT (McLeod et al.
2004; Fabricant et al. 1998, 2003), and MOSFIRE on Keck (McLean et al. 2010). Imaging spec-
trographs with reflecting collimators on Gregorian telescopes are also possible, for example,
MODS on the LBT (Pogge et al. 2010), although this configuration does not provide the field
of view that is potentially available on a Gregorian telescope.
A final strategy to increase the field of view is to deploy multiple collimators (together with
their associated gratings and cameras) across the field of a telescope in what is called a fly’s-eye

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
605
Magellan telescope
field
lens
collimator
f/4 camera
1/4° field
f/2.5 camera
1/2° field
8K ¥ 8K “Mosaic2”
CCD camera
8K ¥ 8K “Mosaic1”
CCD camera
f/11 Baade focus:
– Multislit, longslit mask
– Centerfield slit-viewing 
With f/4 camera:
– Reflecting gratings
With f/2 camera:
– Refracting grisms
GISMO
MMTF,
LDP, LDP2
MOE
⊡Fig. 15-5
A sketch of the optical layout for the IMACS spectrograph on Magellan is shown to illustrate a
wide ﬁeld optical spectrograph layout that usesa refractingcollimator (The ﬁgure isreprinted from
Dressler et al. (2011)). The IMACS ﬁeld of view is on-axis in the telescope focal plane. As discussed
in the text, the Gregorian conﬁguration of the Magellan telescopes is particularly well suited to this
collimator design and allows a very wide ﬁeld of view (see >Table 15-2)
arrangement. The VIMOS spectrograph on VLT contains four such assemblies (Le Févre et al.
2003). The designs for DEIMOS and for Binospec include two arms, although the second arm
of DEIMOS has not been implemented. In order to deploy such multiple spectrographs in a
fully independent manner across the field of view, the corrected telescope focal plane should
ideally have the property that the chief ray is always perpendicular to the focal surface. This
is not explicitly the case for any of the multiple spectrographs that have been built to date,
but Shectman has proposed a field corrector with this property for use on the Giant Magellan
Telescope.1
> Table 15-2 shows the field size, resolution, and wavelength coverage that have been
achieved by most of the wide-field spectrographs built for 8 m-class telescopes. The median
seeing-limited image quality delivered by all of the 8 m-class telescopes tends to be in the
0.6–0.8 arcsec range, and the spectrographs are all designed to work at least some of the time
on faint galaxies which are at most partially resolved. Because the choice of efficient and prac-
tical diffraction gratings is also highly constrained, all of the imaging spectrographs tend to
deliver resolution that scales in the expected way with the ratio of telescope aperture to col-
limated beam diameter. Typically, the resolution obtained is 1,000 < R < 5,000, the wavelength
coverage is 370–1,000 nm, and the field area is 25–100 arcmin. Spectrographs with separate
red- and blue-optimized channels have better UV response, which can be extended as far as the
atmospheric cutoff.
1See Chaps. 6 and 13.6 of the GMT Conceptual Design Report (http://www.gmto.org/science-conceptu.html).

606 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
⊡Table 15-2
A representative sample of optical, multi-object, imaging spectrographs on 8 m-class telescopes. Column 3 indicates the wavelength range for all available
channels. Channels can be exposed simultaneously unless otherwise noted. Columns 4 and 9 give the approximate peak transmission eﬃciency of each
channel for spectroscopy and imaging, respectively. These values include the telescope eﬃciency unless otherwise noted. Column 5 lists the ﬁeld of view
for imaging; full wavelength coverage is typically available only for slits located within a narrower ﬁeld of view. Column 6 lists the total ﬁeld area consistent
with Column 5. Column 6 gives the maximum combined slit length possible when multiple slits are used. Column 8 gives the diameter of the collimated
beam at the grating. Column 10 gives the resolution obtained using a 1 arcsec slit
Tel. (diam)
λ−range (nm)
Spec eﬀ.
FOV
(arcmin)
FOV
(arcmin2)
Slit length
(arcsec)
Pupil
diam
(mm)
Imaging
eﬀ.
R (λ/δλ)
LRISa
Keck (10 m)
310–650 (blue)
0.5
5.5 × 7.5
40
450
150
0.6
300–5,000
380–1,100 (red)
0.4
5.5 × 7.5
40
450
150
0.6
300–5,000
DEIMOSb
Keck (10 m)
410–1,100
0.35
16 × 5.0
80c
980
150
0.5
1,200– 8,000
OSIRISd
GTC (10 m)
365–1,000
0.35
8.0 × 5.2
41.6
480
80
0.4
250–2,500
VIMOSe
VLT (8 m)
370–1,000
0.4
7.0 × 8.0[×4]e
224 [×4]e
480 [×4]e
140
0.5
180–2,500
FORSf
VLT (8 m)
330–1,100
0.5
6.8 × 6.8
46
408
90
0.5
260–2,600

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
607
GMOSg
Gemini (8 m)
360–940
0.4
5.5 × 5.5
30
330
100
0.4
670–4,400
FOCASh
Subaru (8 m)
365–900
0.35
6.0 diam.
28
360
90
0.4
500–3,000
MODSi
LBT (8 m)
320–650 (blue)
0.4
6.0 × 6.0
36
360
230
0.4
100–1,500
550–1,100 (red)
0.4
6.0 × 6.0
36
360
230
0.4
100–1,700
IMACSj
Magellan (6.5 m)
390–1,000 (F/2)
0.4
27 × 27
700
1,620
150
0.5
60–650
360–1,000 (F/4)
0.4
15 × 15
225
900
150
0.5
500–4,600 [21,000, 0.6′′]k
aSee Oke et al. (1995) and McCarthy et al. (1998)
bSee Faber et al. (2003)
cThe ﬁeld of view is vignetted so that this area is approximate
dSee Cepa et al. (2000). Updated information is available at http://www.gtc.iac.es/en/pages/instrumentation/osiris.php
eSee Le Févre et al. (2003). Updated information is available at http://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/paranal/instruments/vimos.See also Hammersley et al. (2010) VIMOS has four simulta-
neously exposed ﬁelds of view. The dimensions and area given are for a single ﬁeld
fSee Appenzeller et al. (1998)
gSee Allington-Smith et al. (2002) and Hook et al. (2004)
hSee Kashikawa et al. (2002) and http://www.naoj.org/Observing/Instruments/FOCAS/index.html
iSee Pogge et al. (2010)
jSee Dressler et al. (2011). The performance is listed for the two available cameras (F/2 and F/4, respectively), which provide diﬀerent ﬁelds of view and wavelength ranges. One camera
can be used at a time
kIMACS has a cross-dispersed mode that provides the indicated resolution through a 0.6′′ slit. See Suttin and McWilliam (2003)

608 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
Multi-object fiber spectrographs rely on some means to accurately position a large number
of fibers in the telescope focal plane. Accurately machined plug plates (e.g., Shectman 1993),
individual mechanisms for positioning each fiber (e.g., Hill and Lesser 1986), and robots with
pick-and-place magnetic buttons (e.g., Fabricant et al. 2005a, b) have all been used successfully.
Typically, the angle of the fiber must be controlled as well as the position in order to optimize
the effective focal ratio for light propagating through the fiber. Fibers are more efficient when
fed at faster focal ratios (typically in the range f/3–f/5) and it is often necessary to place a micro-
optic assembly in front of each fiber in order to convert a relatively slow telescope focal ratio to
a more appropriate value.
Collimator design for fiber spectrographs is much simpler than for imaging spectrographs
because the fibers can be arranged along a pseudo-slit for input to the spectrograph. The fibers
can be arranged at any desired angle along the pseudo-slit in order to control the position of
the exit pupil, and at any desired axial position in order to control the field curvature. Camera
designs are still demanding because there is still a premium on the camera field of view to
provide the maximum number of spectral resolution elements across the largest possible range
of wavelength.
When large numbers of fibers are used, they can be sent to more than one spectrograph, as
is the case for SDSS (Uomoto et al. 1999; Castander et al. 2001) and 2DF (Lewis et al. 2002),
for example. Optical losses and focal ratio degradation lead to efficiency losses in fiber systems,
and changes in fiber transmission with time can require special strategies for sky subtraction
and relative flux calibration. However, the use of fibers has advantages as well, especially in the
flexibility with which objects can be chosen across the available field of view and in the number
of objects that can be observed when multiple fibers feed one or more spectrographs.
6
Integral Field Spectrographs
An integral field spectrograph divides an area of the sky into spatial resolution elements, and
then produces a spectrum for each of these “spaxels.” The result is often thought of as a three-
dimensional data cube, with wavelength and the two spatial dimensions varying along the three
axes of the cube. Integral field spectrographs have most typically been used to map the velocity
field and local star-formation properties across the disks of galaxies.
The simplest way to make an integral field spectrograph is to assemble a densely packed
bundle of optical fibers in the telescope focal plane, and then to rearrange the fibers along the
pseudo-slit of a fiber spectrograph. Alternatively, an image slicer can be used to divide a field
into a series of slit images and then optically reformat the individual slices along a single long
slit. A final possibility is to use a lenslet array to create small and separated images of each
spatial element (or of the telescope pupil for each spatial element) at the input to an imaging
spectrograph and to disperse the images in a direction such that they do not overlap. This is the
method used in the instruments TIGER (Bacon et al. 1995) and SAURON (Bacon et al. 2001).
Multiplexing a large number of spatial resolution elements onto the focal plane of a spectro-
graph places the same premium on a wide field of view as occurs for an imaging spectrograph.
In the case of a massive fiber integral field unit (IFU), it is possible to deploy a large number of
independent spectrographs, as is being done for the instruments MUSE (Kosmalski et al. 2011;
Bacon et al. 2004) and VIRUS (Hill et al. 2006). Infrared IFU spectrographs have proven to be

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
609
particularly effective when used with adaptive optics systems (SINFONI at the VLT, Eisenhauer
et al. 2003; NIFS at Gemini, McGregor et al. 2002).
7
Near-IR Spectrographs
The basic optical design considerations for near-IR (1–5 μm) spectrographs are similar to those
for spectrographs working at optical wavelengths. The most important differences arise from
the properties and availabilityofIR optical materials and the cost and availabilityofIR detectors.
Optical materials with good transmission beyond about 1.6 μm are limited to certain crys-
tals, a small number of optical glasses (e.g., S-FPL51, S-FTM16, and S-TIM28 from Ohara
Corp.), and fused quartz. Crystals that are particularly useful for their optical and structural
properties include CaF2, ZnSe, and Al2O3 (sapphire). Of these, sapphire is the strongest and
is useful for making vacuum windows. ZnSe has the highest dispersion and is an important
material for prisms. Because larger crystals are often more difficult to produce, the diame-
ters of IR-transmitting optical assemblies are quite limited. While IR-transmitting fused quartz
(infrasil) can be produced in very large diameters (>1 m), ZnSe is particularly difficult to
produce in diameters larger than about 150 mm.
Detector technology has also been slower to progress in the near-IR than in the optical.
Only in the last decade have detectors become available in formats as large as 2k × 2k × 18 μm
pixels. Previous detectors were small enough that cameras with relatively small focal planes
could cover the available detector area. The correspondingly restricted field of view on the sky
and limited length of spectral orders limited the overall performance of spectrographs, keeping
them smaller and more modest than designs for the optical. The current generation of instru-
ments on 8 m-class telescopes is the first to have large enough detector areas to demand optical
designs with comparable performance to optical spectrographs and to fully exploit the available
sizes of IR optical materials (see >Tables 15-2 and >15-3).
An obvious difference between near-IR and optical spectrographs is the need to provide a
vacuum-cryogenic environment in order to keep the thermal background low. This require-
ment favors smaller and more compact configurations, but the need to suppress the thermal
background leads to other complications as well. Near-IR spectrographs must have places in
the optical train to effectively baffle thermal stray light from the warm structures in the tele-
scope that precede the spectrograph. There are two reasons why it is better to do this before the
light reaches the slit, if possible. One is that the pupil formed by the collimator is likely to be
inaccessible because of the presence of a grating (or prism) and is also likely to be degraded by
optical aberrations or diffraction effects. The other is that allowing the high thermal background
outside of the pupil to enter the spectrograph at all is likely to result in problems with that back-
ground being scattered internally. For these reasons, many near-IR spectrographs reimage the
telescope focal plane onto a cold slit and produce a high-quality intermediate pupil inside of
the cryogenic environment where a cold stop can remove the thermal background. This is often
accomplished by using an Offner relay (Montagnino and Offner 1976), which folds the beam
twice between two spherical mirrors, forming a clean pupil on the second mirror and a new
image of the telescope focal plane with the same scale as the original. An Offner relay is free of
primary aberrations, making it suitable for wide fields, and provides both a convenient location
for the cold stop on the second mirror and a convenient image plane for a cold slit.

610 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
⊡Table 15-3
A representative sampleof near-IR, multi-object, imagingspectrographs on 8 m-classtelescopes. Column 3 indicatesthewavelength range for spectroscopy
and imaging. Columns 4 and 7 give the approximate peak transmission eﬃciency for spectroscopy and imaging, respectively. Values include the telescope
eﬃciency unless otherwise noted, and a range indicates values for diﬀerent bandpasses when available. Columns 5 and 8 list the ﬁeld of view for spec-
troscopy and imaging, respectively. Full wavelength coverage may not be available for slits at all locations in the spectroscopic ﬁeld of view. Column 6 gives
the maximum combined slit length possible when multiple slits are used. Column 9 gives the diameter of the collimated beam at the grating. Column 10
gives the resolution obtained using a 1 arcsec slit.
Tel. (diam)
λ-range
(um)
Spec. eﬀ.
Spec. FOV
(arcmin)
Slit length
(arcsec)
Imaging eﬀ.
Imaging FOV
(arcmin)
Pupil diam
(mm)
R (λ/δλ)
MOSFIREa
Keck (10 m)
0.9–2.45
[0.3]
6.1 × 3
366
[0.3]
6.1 × 6.1
125
2,300
EMIRb
GTC (10 m)
0.9–2.5
…
6 × 4
350
…
6 diam.
150
3,000
KMOSc
VLT (8 m)
1.0–2.5
[0.3]
7.2 diam.
2.8c
50
1,800–4,200c
Flamingos-2d
Gemini (8 m)
0.9–2.5
…
6 × 2
240
…
6 diam.
100
1,150
MOIRCSe
Subaru (8 m)
0.8–2.5
0.24
6 × 4
240
0.31
7 × 4
50
650
Luciferf
LBT (8 m)
0.9–2.5
0.2
4 × 3
240
0.33
4 × 4
100
2,400
MMIRSg
Magellan (6.5 m)
0.9–2.5
0.15–0.35
7 × 4
240
0.22–0.5
7 × 7
100
1,200
aSee McLean (2008, 2010), and http://www2.keck.hawaii.edu/inst/mosﬁre. To be commissioned in 2012
bSee Garzon et al. (2004). To be commissioned in 2013. Eﬃciency not yet known.
cSee Rees et al. (2010) and Sharples et al. (2010). To be commissioned in 2012 KMOS has 24 IFUs each with a 2.8 × 2.8 arcsec ﬁelds of view. An image slicer on each IFU feeds 0.2 arcsec
slices into three spectrographs. The resolution given is for 0.2 arcsec slices
dSee Eikenberry et al. (2008) and Raines et al. (2008). Eﬃciency not known.
eSee Ichikawa et al. (2006) and Tokoku et al. (2006)
fSee Seifert et al. (2003), Ageorges et al. (2010), and Seifert et al. (2010), and links at http://wiki.lbto.org/twiki/bin/view/PartnerObserving
gSee McLeod et al. (2004), http://www.cfa.harvard.edu/mmti/mmirs.html, and http://www.cfa.harvard.edu/mmti/mmirs/Calibration/thru_asbuilt.jpg

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
611
An additional difficulty for near-IR multi-object spectrographs is the fact that multiple slit
masks are typically required during a single night. Several different cryogenic mechanisms have
been developed tomove slit masks in and out ofthe focal plane. These mechanisms must operate
with high reliability because the time required to warm up the instrument in order to service
them is invariably measured in days if not weeks. By isolating the slit mask cassette with a gate
valve and warming up only this portion of the spectrograph, masks can be exchanged on the
instrument MMIRS between the end of one night and the beginning of the next, although all of
the time available is required (McLeod et al. 2004). Recently, configurable slit mechanisms have
been devised that allow on-the-fly configuration of slit masks within the cryogenic environment
(e.g., McLean et al. 2008, 2010). Warm fiber feeds have been used through most of the H-band
(e.g., APOGEE on SDSS, Wilson et al. 2010; FMOS on Subaru, Kimura et al. 2010), but the
thermal background is too high to use fibers at K.
Two advantages for the design of spectrographs working in the near-IR are that mirror coat-
ings tend to have higher reflectivity in the near-IR than at optical wavelengths and refracting
materials have smaller dispersion (dn/dλ). Reflecting collimators and all-reflecting cameras,
such as three-mirroranastigmats (TMAs), can therefore achieve high efficiency, especiallywhen
coated with gold. When used as spectrograph cameras, TMAs are typically used in an off-
axis configuration and can be challenging to align. High-performance, apochromatic refracting
cameras can be designed in the near-IR using a smaller number of elements and material types
than are typically required at optical wavelengths. The camera for the FIRE spectrograph is one
such example (Simcoe et al. 2008). The reduced element count also results in higher throughput
and helps to minimize scattered light.
For work on ground-based telescopes, the forest of atmospheric OH-emission lines that
exist in the near-IR places a premium on achieving sufficient resolution (R >∼4,000) in order
to resolve the atmospheric lines and allow the detection of features from faint astronomical
sources in the darker intervals where the emission is absent (Martini and DePoy 2000). This fact
has motivated the development of a number of near-IR echellette spectrographs on 8 m-class
telescopes (see >Table 15-1). Echellette designs are particularly suitable for ground-based cryo-
genic spectrographs: they do not require high cross dispersion, and they target single objects in
small fields of view on the sky, allowing them to make use of available materials in limited sizes
and to be packaged in compact volumes.
8
Spectrographs for Extremely Large Telescopes (ELTs)
For the next generation of extremely large telescopes (ELTs), the challenge is to design spec-
trographs with performance comparable to the instruments that have been built for 8 m-class
telescopes. Much of the emphasis in the ELT projects is on adaptive optics, where the gain
in collecting area over 8 m-class telescopes is compounded by the gain in resolution. For AO
instruments working at the diffraction limit, the problem of spectrograph design is relatively
straightforward because the smaller size of the entrance aperture (in arcsec) compensates for
the larger size of the telescope. For seeing-limited spectrographs (or for AO instruments which
do not work at the full diffraction limit), the problem is much more difficult. Some of the spec-
trograph designs discussed in previous sections lend themselves to being scaled up to a certain
extent, but quickly tend to encounter either the fundamental limits imposed by the availability
of optical materials or the practical limits of overall instrument complexity and volume.

612 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
A factor of 4 increase in pupil diameterwould suffice to scale up a seeing-limited instrument
from Magellan (6.5 m)tothe Giant Magellan Telescope (∼25m diameter), from an 8m telescope
to the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT, ∼30 m diameter), or from Keck (10 m) to the European
Extremely Large Telescope (∼39 m diameter). Most of the instruments on 8 m-class telescopes
have pupil diameters in the range 100–200 mm. A few are smaller, such as LDSS-3 on Magellan
(70 mm, Osip et al. 2004), and a few are larger, such as HiRES on Keck (300 mm, Vogt et al.
1994). One strategy is to accept that very large pupil diameters, in the range 600–1,000 mm,
will be required. We refer to this strategy below as a “scaled-pupil.” Such large spectrographs
cannot be built using the normal range of transmitting optical materials and are restricted to
designs that rely primarily on very large reflecting optics, including Schmidt cameras. A second
strategy is to increase the pupil diameter to something near the maximum size that can be
accommodated using transmitting materials (about 300 mm) and either accept some level of
compromise in spectrograph performance or devise some means to work around it. We refer
to this strategy below as a “limited pupil.” As is already the case for spectrographs on 8 m-class
telescopes, all proposed spectrographs for ELTs achieve higher resolution by using slits or fibers
that are smaller than 1 arcsec wide.
Many spectrograph designs have been proposed for the ELTs with various degrees of design
development.We do not attemptto include a complete summary of them here. We have focused
instead on a few designs that illustrate the range of proposals that have been considered within
the general strategies of scaled-pupil or limited-pupil designs.
8.1 Echelles
As an illustration of the scaled-pupil strategy, Vogt (2006, private communication) originally
proposed for TMT an extremely large white-pupil spectrograph with separate red and blue
arms, called MTHR. The 1.0 × 3.5 m echelle gratings would require 36-replica mosaics made
from 200 × 400 mm masters. The cross dispersers would require 6-replica mosaics made from
300 × 400 mm masters. The collimator mirrors would be 3 m in diameter, and the Schmidt
corrector lenses 1.3 m in diameter. The instrument would deliver a resolution of 50,000 for a
1 arcsec slit.
Pupil anamorphism and pupil slicing are two ways to mitigate the requirement for very large
grating mosaics for high-resolution spectrographs on ELTs. An anamorphic pupil, which can
be created for a small field of view by using cylindrical optics, is elliptical instead of round. The
spectrograph resolution is always set by the length of the grating mosaic, but an anamorphic
pupil allows the mosaic to be made narrower at the expense of the scale of the final spectrum
perpendicular to the dispersion. The required cross dispersion increases and the available slit
length in arcseconds decreases, but these may be acceptable compromises, especially for single-
object spectrographs.
Pupil slicing is most easily achieved by using a lenslet array to image sections of the telescope
pupil onto an array of optical fibers. Each fiber effectively carries the light from a smaller aper-
ture telescope, and the fibers can be arranged in a pseudo-slit at the input of a smaller spectro-
graph. Again, the penalty is in the required cross dispersion and the available slit length since the
spectrograph (or an array of spectrographs) must accommodate the fibers from all of the pupil
segments, not just one. An alternative method of pupil slicing is to divide the collimator into
two or more segments, with small displacementssuch that the collimator mosaic forms multiple
images of the slit or entrance aperture in the direction perpendicular to the echelle dispersion.

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
613
Two white-pupil spectrographs, Q-Spec (Barnes and MacQueen 2008) and G-CLEF (Szent-
gyorgyi et al. 2010; Jaffe et al. 2010), have been proposed for GMT. The four-armed Q-Spec
design uses an anamorphic pupil on a 300 × 1,700 mm, 4-replica mosaic echelle grating to
achieve a resolution of 30,000 for a 1 arcsec slit. A pupil-slicing mode can double the resolu-
tion to 60,000. The two-arm G-CLEF design is fiber-fed and uses a 300 × 1,200 mm grating to
achieve a resolution of 20,000 for a 1.2 arcsec fiber. A pupil-slicing mode in which each of the
seven 8.4 m-diameter GMT mirror segments is imaged onto a separate fiber triples the resolu-
tion. Both designs have smaller, cross-dispersing, white pupils that enable the use of refracting
cameras, optimized over restricted wavelength ranges.
The proposed high-resolution spectrograph for the E-ELT, CODEX, is a single-object, fiber-
fed, white-pupil echelle (Pasquini et al. 2008). It uses an anamorphic pupil slicer and a TMA
collimator in double-pass with a 415 × 200 mm pupil and a 1,700 mm, R4 echelle grating to
provide resolutions of ∼120,000 in natural seeing conditions. Like G-CLEF, CODEX works over
restricted wavelength ranges (between 350 and 720 nm) and includes a dichroic to enable the
use of wavelength-optimized VPH gratings followed by compact, refracting cameras. The entire
instrument is enclosed in a thermally controlled vacuum vessel,and wavelength calibration will
utilize a laser frequency comb (Murphy et al. 2007).
8.2 Wide-Field Optical Spectrographs
As discussed above, wide-field spectrographs are particularly challenging in that the camera
fields of view must be much larger than for single-object spectrographs, accommodating both
the magnified field of view on the sky and the angular dispersion from the grating. On an ELT,
the very large plate scale at the focal plane makes the collimators very large and increases the
overall scale of the camera.
Several designs have been proposed for wide-field spectrographs for TMT. Among those,
one design explored a four-armed imaging spectrograph with 600 mm-diameter collimated
beams using transmitting VPH or surface-relief grating mosaics to achieve a maximum resolu-
tion of 5,600 for a 1 arcsec slit (Pazder et al. 2006). This pupil-scaling strategy led to beam sizes
that can only be accommodated with reflecting collimators and Schmidt cameras. The overall
scale of a four-armed design would be approximately 8 m in diameter and 8 m long. A smaller
alternative currently being pursued is an imaging echellette spectrograph with a 300 mm diam-
eter beam called MOBIE (Bernstein and Bigelow 2008; Bigelow and Bernstein 2010). The higher
angulardispersion ofthe echellette grating makes it possible toachieve a resolution of6,000 fora
1 arcsec slit. The reduced collimated beam diameter permits the use of red- and blue-optimized
transmitting cameras with wide angular fields of view. The cross-dispersed formats of the echel-
lette gratings on separate blue and red arms allow full wavelength coverage (300–1,000 nm) in
a single exposure.
The baseline optical design for GMT includes a corrector for a 20 arcmin diameter field,
which makes it possible to implement a fly’s-eye design with chief rays perpendicular to the
telescope focal plane as discussed above. The imaging spectrograph concept (Marshall et al.
2012; Jaffe et al. 2010) is a four-armed design with 300 mm diameter collimated beams and
VPH gratings, which can achieve resolutions up to about 4,000 with a 1 arcsec slit. The trans-
mitting VPH gratings allow the cameras to be placed very close to the pupil and can provide
complete wavelength coverage with a 1-arcsec resolution of 800 and 1,600 on the blue and red

614 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
sides, respectively. The GMT field corrector is also suitable for use with a fiber system (MANI-
FEST, Saunders et al. 2010), and the imaging spectrograph can be readily adapted to fiber input,
achieving higher resolution when the fibers are configured as mini-IFUs or image slicers.
Proposals were made for E-ELT instruments that included both fiber-fed and imaging
multi-object spectrographs; however, the designs for these were not developed completely, and
at this time no wide-field optical spectrograph is planned in the first generation of instruments.
8.3 IR Spectrographs
Several near-IR spectrographs are under development for the first generation of instruments on
all three of the ELTs that utilize adaptive optics. In this case, the slits are all smaller than they are
for comparable instruments on 8 m-class telescopes. For these instruments, the optical designs
are relatively straightforward evolutions from their 8 m-class counterparts, but the smaller slits
require greater mechanical complexity and precision, bringing a new array of challenges that we
have not discussed in this review. At least one wide-field, seeing-limited near-IR spectrograph
has also been proposed (NIRMOS for GMT, Fabricant et al. 2006). Because it is seeing-limited,
the design considerations are similar to those for optical instruments with the caveats discussed
in >Sect. 6 above.
References
Aderin, M. E. 2004, bHROS installation and system
performance. Proc SPIE, 5492, 160
Ageorges, N., Seifert, W., Jütte, M., Knierim, V.,
Lehmitz, M., Buschkamp, P., & Polsterer, K.
2010, LUCIFER1 commissioning at the LBT.
Proc SPIE, 7735, 56
Allington-Smith,
J.,
Graham,
M.,
Content,
R.,
Dodsworth,
G.,
Davies,
R.,
Miller,
B.
W.,
Jørgensen,
I.,
Hook,
I.,
Crampton,
D.,
&
Murowinski, R. 2002, Integral field spectroscopy
with the gemini multiobject spectrograph. I.
Design, construction, and testing. PASP, 114,
892–912
Appenzeller, I., Fricke, K., Fürtig, W., et al. 1998,
Successful commissioning of FORS1 – the first
optical instrument on the VLT. ESO Messenger,
94, 1
Atherton, P. D., Taylor, K., Pike, C. D., Harmer,
C.F.W., Parker, N.M., & Hook, R. N. 1982,
TAURUS:
A
wide-field
Imaging
Fabry-
Perot Spectrograph for Astronomy, MNRAS,
201, 661
Bacon, R., Adam, G., Barane, A., Courtes, G.,
Dubet, D., Dubois, J. P., Emseilem, E., Feruit, P.,
Georgelin, Y., Monet, G., Pecontai, E., Rouset, A.,
& Say, F. 1995, 3D Spectroscopy at high spatial
resolution and realization of the intregral field
spectrograph tIGER. A&AS, 113, 347
Bacon, R., Coplin, Y., & Monnet, G. 2001, The
SAURON project – I. The panoramic integral-
field spectrograph. MNRAS, 326, 23
Bacon, R., Devriendt, J., & Djidel, S., et al. 2004, The
second-generation VLT instrument MUSE: sci-
ence drivers and instrument design. Proc SPIE,
5492, 1145
Baranne, A., Carozzi, N., Comte, G., Courtes, G.,
Deharveng, J. M., Duflot, R., Monnet, G., & Pel-
let, A. 1974, Preliminary results of the Baranne
white pupil image tube nebular spectrograph. in
Research Programmes for the New Large Tele-
scopes, Geneva, ed. A. Reiz, 231
Barden, S. C., Arns, J. A., Colburn, W. S., &
Williams, J. 2000, Volume-phase holographic
gratings and the efficiency
of three simple
volume-phase holographic gratings. PASP, 112,
809
Barnes, S., & MacQueen, P. 2008, Q-Spec: a concept
for the Giant Magellan Telescope high resolution
optical spectrograph. Proc SPIE, 7014, 50
Barnes, S. I., Cottrell, P. L., Albrow, M. D., Frost, N.,
Graham, G., Kershaw, G., Ritchie, R., Jones, D.,
Sharples, R., Bramall, D., Schmoll, J., Luck, P.,
Clark, P., Tyas, L., Buckley, D. A. H., & Brink, J.
2008, The optical design of the Southern African
Large Telescope High Resolution Spectrograph:
SALT HRS. Proc SPIE, 7014, 70140K

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
615
Bernstein, R. A., & Bigelow, B. C. 2008, An Optical
Design For A Wide Field Optical Spectrograph
for TMT. Proc SPIE, 7014, 49
Bernstein, R. A., Shectman, S. A., Gunnels, S. M.,
Mochnacki, S., & Athey, A. E. 2003, MIKE: a dou-
ble echelle spectrograph for the Magellan tele-
scopes at las campanas observatory. Proc SPIE,
4841, 1694
Bigelow, B. C., & Bernstein, R. A. 2010, Progress
of the conceptual design for the MOBIE imag-
ing spectrograph for the Thirty Meter Telescope.
Proc SPIE, 7735, 74
Bowen, I. S. 1964, Spectrographs, in Astronomical
Techniques, ed. W. A. Hiltner (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press), 34
Butler, R. P., Marcy, W., Williams, E., McCarthy, C.,
& Dosanjh, P. 1996, Attaining doppler precision
of 3 m s−. PASP, 108, 500
Castander, F. J., Nichol, R. C., & Merrelli, A., et al.
2001, The first hour of extragalactic data of the
sloan digital sky survey spectroscopic commis-
sioning: the coma cluster. AJ, 121, 2331
Cepa, J., Aguiar, M., & Escalera, V. G., et al. 2000,
OSIRIS tunable imager and spectrograph. Proc
SPIE, 4008, 623
Crane, J. D., Shectman, S. A., Butler, R. P., Thom-
spon, C. B., Burley, G. S., & Jones, P. 2010, The
Carnegie Planet Finder Spectrograph: integra-
tion and testing. Proc SPIE, 7735, 773553
Dekker, H., D’Odorico, S., Kaufer, A., Delabre, B., &
Kotzlowski, H. 2000, Design, construction, and
performance of UVES. Proc SPIE, 4008, 534
Dressler, A., Bigelow, B., Hare, T., Sutin, B., Thomp-
son, I., Burley, G., Epps, H., Oemler, A., Bag-
ish, A., Birk, C., Clardy, K., Gunnels, S., Kel-
son, D., Shectman, S., & Osip, D. 2011, IMACS:
The Inamori-Magellan areal camera and spec-
trograph on Magellan-Baade. PASP, 123, 288
Dumas, D., Fendler, M., Berger, F., Marion, F.,
Arnaud, A., Vialle, C., Goudon, V., Primot,
J., Le Coarer, E., & Ribot, H. 2010, Curved
infrared detectors: applications to spectrometry
and astronomy. Proc SPIE, 7742, 77421V
Eikenberry, S., Elston, R., Raines, S. N., Julian, J.,
Hanna, K., Warner, C., Julian, R., Bandyopad-
hyay, E., Bennett, J., Bessoff, A., Branch, M.,
Corley, R., Dewitt, C., Eriksen, J., Frommeyer,
S., Gonzalez, A., Herlevich, M., Hon, D., Marin-
Franch, A., Marti, J., Murphey, C., Rambold,
W., Rashkin, D., Leckie, B., Gardhouse, W. B.,
Fletcher, M., Hardy, T., Dunn, J., & Wooff, R.
2008, FLAMINGOS-2: the facility near-infrared
wide-field imager and multi-object spectrograph
for Gemini. Proc SPIE, 7014, 40
Eisenhauer, F., Abuter, R., & Bickert, K., et al. 2003,
SINFONI – integral field spectroscopy at 50
milli-arcsecond resolution with the ESO VLT.
Proc SPIE, 4841, 1548
Epps, H. W. 1990, Camera designs for Keck Observa-
tory LRIS and HIRES spectrometers. Proc SPIE,
1235, 550
Faber, S. M., Phillips, A. C., & Kibrick, R. I., et al.
2003, The DEIMOS spectrograph for the Keck
II Telescope: integration and testing. Proc SPIE,
4841, 1657
Fabricant, D. G., Fata, R. G., & Epps, H. W. 1998,
Binospec: a dual-beam wide-field optical spec-
trograph for the converted MMT. Proc SPIE,
3355, 232
Fabricant, D. G., Epps, H. W., Brown, W., Fata, R., &
Mueller, M. 2003, The development of Binospec
and its optics. Proc SPIE, 4841, 1134
Fabricant, D., Fata, R., Roll, J., Hertz, E., Caldwell,
N., Gauron, T., Geary, J., McLeod, B., Szentgyor-
gyi, A., Zajac, J., Kurtz, M., Barberis, J., Bergner,
H., Brown, W., Conroy, M., Eng, R., Geller, M.,
Goddard, R., Honsa, M., Mueller, M., Mink, D.,
Ordway, M., Tokarz, S., Woods, D., Wyatt, W.,
Epps, H., & Dell’Antonio, I. 2005a, Hectospec,
the MMT’s 300 optical fiber-fed spectrograph.
PASP, 117, 1411
Fabricant, D. G., Fata, R. G., & Roll, J., et al.
2005b, Hectospec, the MMT’s 300 optical fiber-
fed spectrograph. PASP, 117, 838
Fabricant, D., Hertz, E., Brown, W., McLeod, B.,
Angel, R., & Lloyd-Hart, M. 2006, A wide-field
IR spectrograph for the Giant Magellan Tele-
scope. Proc SPIE, 6269, 64
Garzon, F., Abreu, D., Barrera, S., Correa, S., Diaz, J.
J., Fragoso, A. B., Fuentes, F. J., Gago, F., Gonza-
lez, C., Lopez, P., Manescau, A., Patron, J., Perez,
J., Redondo, P., Restrepo, P., Sanchez, V., & Vil-
legas, V. 2004, EMIR: the GTC NIR multi-object
imager-spectrograph. Proc SPIE, 5492, 1187
Hammersley, P., Christensen, L., Dekker, H., Izzo, C.,
Selman, F., Bristow, P., Bourget, P., Castillo, R.,
Downing, M., Haddad, N., Hilker, M., Lizon, J.-
L., Lucuix, C., Mainieri, V., Mieske, S., Reinero,
C., Rejkuba, M., Rojas, C., Smette, A., Urru-
tia Del Rio, J., Valenzuela, J., & Wolff, B. 2010,
Upgrading VIMOS. Messenger, 142, 8
Hartmann, P., & Jedamzik, R. 2006, Large optical
glass lenses for ELTs. Proc SPIE, 6273, 62730H
Hill, J. M., & Lesser, M. P. 1986, Deployment of the
MX spectrometer. Proc SPIE, 627, 303
Hill, G. J., MacQueen, P. J., & Phillip, J., et al.
2006, VIRUS: a massively replicated integral-
field spectrograph for HET. Proc SPIE, 6269,
79
Hinkle, K. H., Cuberly, R. W., Gaughan, N. A.,
Heynssens, J. B., Joyce, R. R., Ridgway, S. T.,
Schmitt, P., & Simmons, J. E. 1998, Phoenix: a

616 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
cryogenic high-resolution 1- to 5-um infrared
spectrograph. Proc SPIE, 3354, 810
Hinkle, K. H., Joyce, R. R., Sharp, N., & Valenti, J.
A. 2000, Phoenix: operation and performance
of a cryogenic high-resolution 1–5 µm infrared
spectrograph. Proc SPIE, 4008, 720
Hinkle, K. H., Blum, R., Joyce, R. R., Ridgway, S.
T., Rodgers, B., Sharp, N., Smith, V., Valenti,
J., & van der Bliek, N. 2002, The Phoenix
spectrograph
at
Gemini
South.
Proc
SPIE,
4834, 353
Hook, I., Jørgensen, I., Allington-Smith, J. R., Davies,
R. L., Metcalfe, N., Murowinski, R. G., & Cramp-
ton, D. 2004, The Gemini-North multiobject
spectrograph: performance in imaging, long-slit,
and multi-object spectroscopic modes. PASP,
116, 425
Ichikawa,
T., Suzuki,
R., Tokoku,
C.,
Katsuno,
Y., Uchimoto, K., Konishi, M., Yoshikawa, T.,
Yamada, T., Tanaka, I., Omata, K., & Nishimura,
T. 2006, MOIRCS: multi-object infrared cam-
era and spectrograph for SUBARU. Proc SPIE,
6269, 16
Jaffe, D., Mar, D. J., Warren, D., & Segura, P. R. 2006,
GMTNIRS: the high resolution near-IR spectro-
graph for the Giant Magellan Telescope. Proc
SPIE, 6269, 143
Jaffe, D. T., Wang, W., Marsh, J. P., Deen, C. P., Kelly,
D., & Greene, T. P. 2008, Fabrication and test
of silicon grisms for JWST-NIRCam. Proc SPIE,
7010, 104
Jaffe, D., Fabricant, D., & Hinz, P., et al. 2010, Science
instrument development for the Giant Magellan
Telescope. Proc SPIE, 7735, 72
Jedamzik, R., & Hartmann, P. 2006, Large opti-
cal glass blanks for astronomy.
Proc SPIE,
5494, 382
Kashikawa, N., et al. 2002, FOCAS: the faint object
camera and spectrograph for the Subaru Tele-
scope. PASJ, 54, 819
Kimura, M., Maihara, T., & Iwamuro, F, et al. 2010,
The fiber multi-object spectrograph (FMOS) for
the Subaru Telescope. PASJ, 62, 1135
Kosmalski, J., Parés, L., & Seifert, W. et al. 2011, Opti-
cal design of the VLT/MUSE instrument. Proc
SPIE, 8167, 816716
Le Févre, O., Saisse, M., Mancini, D., Brau-Nogue, S.,
Caputi, O., Castinel, L., D’Odorico, S., Garilli, B.,
Kissler-Patig,
M.,
Lucuix,
C.,
Mancini,
G.,
Pauget, A., Sciarretta, G., Scodeggio, M., Tresse,
L., & Vettolani, G. 2003, Commissioning and
performances of the VLT-VIMOS instrument.
Proc SPIE, 4841, 1670
Lewis, I. J., Cannon, R. D., & Taylor, K., et al. 2002,
The Anglo-Australian observatory 2dF facility.
MNRAS, 333, 279
Marcy, G., & Butler, R. P. 1992, Precision radial veloc-
ities with an iodine absorption cell. PASP, 104,
270
Marshall, J. L., Burles, S., Thompson, I. B., Shectman,
S. A., Bigelow, B. C., Burley, G., Birk, C., Estrada,
J., Jones, P., Smith, M., Kowal, V., Castillo, J.,
Storts, R., & Ortiz, G. 2008, The MagE spectro-
graph. Proc SPIE, 7014, 169
Marshall, J. L., DePoy, D. L., & Shectman, S. A.,
et al. 2012, The GMACS spectrograph for the
GMT, in American Astronomical Society Meet-
ing Abstracts, AAS Meeting, 219, #422.13
Martini, P., & DePoy, D. L. 2000, Optimal resolutions
for IR spectroscopy through the OH airglow.
Proc SPIE, 4008, 695
Mayor, M., Pepe, F., & Queloz, D., et al. 2003, Set-
ting new standards with HARPS. The Messenger,
114, 20
McCarthy, J. K., Cohen, J. G., Butcher, B., Cromer, J.,
Croner, E., Douglas, W. R., Goeden, R. M., Gre-
wal, T., Lu, B., Petrie, H. L., Weng, T., Weber, B.,
Koch, D. G., & Rodgers, J. M. 1998, Blue channel
of the Keck low-resolution imaging spectrome-
ter. Proc SPIE, 3355, 81
McGregor, P., Hart, J., Conroy, P., Pfitzner, L., Blox-
ham, G., Jones, D., Downing, M., Dawson, M.,
Young, P., Jarnyk, M., & van Harmelen, J. 2002,
Gemini near-infrared integral field spectrograph
(NIFS). Proc SPIE, 4841, 178
McLean, I. S., Becklin, E. E., & Bendiksen, O., et al.
1998, Design and development of NIRSPEC: a
near-infrared echelle spectrograph for the Keck
II telescope. Proc SPIE, 3354, 566
McLean, I. S., Steidel, C. C., Matthews, K., Epps, H., &
Adkins, S. 2008, MOSFIRE: a multi-object near-
infrared spectrograph and imager for the Keck
Observatory. Proc SPIE, 7014, 99
McLean, I. S., Steidel, C. C., Epps, H., Matthews,
K., Adkins, S., Konidaris, N., Weber, B., Aliado,
T., Brims, G., Canfield, J., Cromer, J., Fucik, J.,
Kulas, K., Mace, G., Magnone, K., Rodriguez, H.,
Wang, E., & Weiss, J. 2010, Design and develop-
ment of MOSFIRE: the multi-object spectrome-
ter for infrared exploration at the Keck Observa-
tory. Proc SPIE, 7735, 47
McLeod, B. A., Fabricant, D., Geary, J., Martini,
P., Nystrom, G., Elston, R., Eikenberry, S. S.,
& Epps, H. 2004, MMT and Magellan infrared
spectrograph. Proc SPIE, 5492, 1306
Montagnino, L., & Offner, A. 1976, Design and test-
ing with a reflective null system. NASA Spec
Publ, 392, 135
Murphy, M. T., Udem, Th., & Holzwarth, R., et al.
2007, High-precision wavelength calibration of
astronomical spectrographs with laser frequency
combs. MNRAS, 380, 839

Astronomical Spectrographs 15
617
Oke, J. B., Cohen, J. G., Carr, M., Cromer, J., Din-
gizian, A., & Harris, F. H. 1995, The Keck low-
resolution imaging spectrometer (LRIS). PASP,
107, 375
Osip, D., Phillips, M., & Bernstein, R. A., et al.
2004, First-generation instruments for the Mag-
ellan telescopes: characteristics, operation, and
performance. Proc SPIE, 5492, 49
Pasquini, L., Avila, G., Blecha, A., Cacciari, C.,
Cayatte, V., Colless, M., Damiani, F., de Pro-
pris, R., Dekker, H., di Marcantonio, P., Farrell,
T., Gillingham, P., Guinouard, I., Hammer, F.,
Kaufer, A., Hill, V., Marteaud, M., Modigliani,
A., Mulas, G., North, P., Popovic, D., Rossetti, E.,
Royer, F., Santin, P., Schmutzer, R., Simond, G.,
Vola, P., Waller, L., & Zoccali, M. 2002, Instal-
lation and commissioning of FLAMES, the VLT
multifibre facility. The Messenger, 110, 1
Pasquini, L., Avila, G., & Dekker, B., et al. 2008,
CODEX: the high-resolution
visual spectro-
graph for the E-ELT. Proc SPIE, 7014E, 51
Pazder, J. S., Fletcher, M., & Morbey, C. 2006, The
optical design of the wide field optical spectro-
graph for the Thirty Meter Telescope. Proc SPIE,
6269, 97
Pogge, R. W., Atwood, B., Brewer, D. F., Byard, P.
L., Derwent, M. A., Gonzalez, R., Martini, P.,
Mason, J. A., O’Brien, T. P., Osmer, P. S., Pap-
palardo, D. P., Steinbrecher, D. P., Teiga E. J.,
& Zhelem, R. 2010, The multi-object double
spectrographs for the Large Binocular Telescope.
Proc SPIE, 7735, 77350A
Perruchot, S., Arnold, L., & Bouchy, F., et al. 2011,
Higher-precision radial velocity measurements
with the SOPHIE spectrograph using octagonal-
section fibers. Proc SPIE, 8151, 815115.P
Raines, S. N., Eikenberry, S., Bandyopadhyay, R.,
Julian, J., Hanna, K., Warner, C., Julian, R., Ben-
nett, J. G., DeWitt, C. N., Frommeyer, S., Gon-
zalez, A., Herlevich, M., & Murphey, C. 2008,
Characterization and testing of FLAMINGOS-
2: the Gemini facility near-infrared multi-object
spectrometer and wide-field imager. Proc SPIE,
7014, 70143
Rees, P., Cirasuolo, M., Lewis, I. J., & Todd, S. P. 2010,
First end-end performance testing and results
for KMOS. Proc SPIE, 7735, 77351
Saunders, W., Colles, M., & Saunders, I., et al.
2010, MANIFEST: a many-instrument fiber-
positioning system for GMT. Proc SPIE, 7735,
205
Schroeder, D. J. 2000, Astronomical Optics (London:
Academic)
Seifert, W., Appenzeller, I., Baumeister, H., Bizen-
berger, P., Bomans, D., Dettmar, R., Grimm, B.,
Herbst, T., Hofmann, R., Juette, M., Laun, W.,
Lehmitz, M., Lemke, R., Lenzen, R., Mandel,
H., Polsterer, K., Rohloff, R., Schuetze, A., Selt-
mann, A., Thatte, N., Weiser, P., & Xu, W. 2003,
LUCIFER: A multi-mode NIR instrument for the
LBT. Proc SPIE, 4841, 962
Seifert, W., Ageorges, N., Lehmitz, M., Buschkamp,
P., Knierim, V., Polsterer, K., & Germeroth, A.
2010, Results of LUCIFER1 commissioning. Proc
SPIE, 7735, 292
Sharples, R., Bender, R., & Berbel, A. A., et al.
2010, Recent progress on the KMOS multi-object
integral-field spectrograph for ESO VLT. Proc
SPIE, 7735, 15
Shectman, S. A. 1993, Fiber-optic spectroscopy at the
las campanas 2.5-meter telescope, in ASP Conf.
Ser. 37, Fiber-Optics in Astronomy II, ed. P. M.
Gray (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 26
Shectman, S. A. 1994, The optical design of the
Magellan project 6.5-meter telescope. Proc SPIE,
2199, 558
Sheinis, A. I., Bolte, M., Epps, H. W., Kibrick, R. I.,
Miller, J. S., Radovan, M. V., Bigelow, B. C., &
Sutin, B. M. 2002, ESI, a New Keck observatory
echellette spectrograph and imager. PASP, 114,
851
Simcoe, R. A., Burgasser, A. J., Bochanski, J. J.,
Schechter, P. L., Fishner, J., Burgasser, A. J., Bern-
stein, R. A., Bigleow, B. C., Pipher, J. L., Forrest,
W., McMurtry, C., & Smith, M. J. 2010, The
FIRE infrared spectrometer at Magellan: con-
struction and commissioning. Proc SPIE, 7735,
773538
Simcoe, R. A., Burgasser, A. J., Fishner, J., Schechter,
P. L., Smith, M., Bernstein, R. A., Bigleow, B. C.,
Forrest, W., McMurtry, C., & Pipher, J. L. 2008,
FIRE: a near-infrared cross-dispersed echellette
spectrometer for the Magellan telescopes. Proc
SPIE, 7014, 701427
Spanò, P., Delabre, B., & Norup Sørensen, A., et al.
2006, The optical design of X-Shooter for the
VLT. SPIE Conf Ser, 6269, 62692
Suttin, B., & McWilliam, A. 2003, Multi-object high-
resolution echellette spectroscopy with IMACS.
Proc SPIE, 4841, 1357
Szentgyorgyi, A., Furesz, G., Cheimets, P., Con-
roy,
M.,
Eng,
R.,
Fabricant,
D.,
Fata,
R.,
Gauron, T., Geary, J., McLeod, B., Zajac, J.,
Amato, S., Bergner, H., Caldwell, N., Dupree,
A., Goddard, R., Johnston, E., Meibom, S.,
Mink, D., Pieri, M., Roll, J., Tokarz, S., Wyatt,
W.,
Epps,
H.,
Hartmann,
L.,
&
Meszaros,
S. 2011a, Hectochelle:
a multiobject
optical
echelle spectrograph for the MMT. PASP, 123,
1188
Szentgyorgyi, A., Furesz, G., & Frebel, A., et al. 2011,
The GMT-CFA-Carnegie-Catolica Large Earth

618 15
Astronomical Spectrographs
Finder (G-CLEF): A Fiber-fed, optical echelle
spectrograph for the Giant Magellan telescope.
Bull Am Astron Soc, 43, #413.07
Terada, H, Yuji, I., Kobayashi, N, Yasui, C., Pyo,
T, Usuda, T, Hayashi, M, & Kawakita, H. 2008,
High Resolution Spectrograph Unit (HRU) for
the SUBARU/IRCS. SPIE, 714, 103
Tokoku, C., Suzuki, R., Omata, K., Konishi, M.,
Yoshikawa,
T.,
Akiyama,
M.,
Tanaka,
I.,
Ichikawa, T., & Nishimura, T. 2006, Infrared
multi-object spectrograph of MOIRCS. Proc
SPIE, 6269, 4
Udry, S., Mayor, M., & Benz, W. 2006, The HARPS
search for southern extra-solar planets. A&A,
447, 261
Uomoto, A., Smee, S., & Rockosi, C., et al. 1999, The
sloan digital sky survey spectrographs. Bull Am
Astron Soc, 31, 1501
Veilleux, S., Weiner, B. J., & Rupke, D. S. N., et al.
2010, MMTF: the Maryland-Magellan tunable
filter. AJ, 139, 145
Vernet, J., Dekker, H., & D’Odorico, S., et al. 2011,
X-shooter, the new wide band intermediate
resolution spectrograph at the ESO VLT. A&A,
536, A105
Vogt, S. S., Allen, S. L., Bigelow, B. C., Bresee, L.,
Brown, B., Cantrall, T., Conrad, A., Couture, M.,
Delaney, C., Epps, H. W., Hilyard, D., Hilyard,
D. F., Horn, E., Jern, N., Kanto, D., Keane, M. J.,
Kibrick, R. I., Lewis, J. W., Osborne, J., Pardeil-
han, G. H., Pfister, T., Ricketts, T., Robinson,
L. B., Stover, R. J., Tucker, D., Ward, J., & Wei,
M. Z. 1994, HIRES: the high resolution echelle
spectrometer on the Keck 10-m telescope. Proc
SPIE, 2198, 362
Walker, G. M., Mateo, M, Olszewski, E. W., Bernstein,
R. A., Sen, B., & Woodroofe, M. 2006, The Michi-
gan/MIKE fiber system of stellar radial veloci-
ties in dwarf spheroidal galaxies: acquisition and
reduction of data. AJSS, 171, 389
Wilson, J. C., Hearty, F., & Skrutski, M. F., et al.
2010, The apache point observatory galactic evo-
lution experiment (APOGEE) high-resolution
near-infrared multi-object fiber spectrograph.
Proc SPIE, 7735, 46

Index
A
Aberrations, 299–301
Acquisition, 6, 29–32
Active control matrix, 113–120
Active control systems, 102
Active cooling, 386, 426
Active optics, 33–36, 154, 156–158, 160, 163, 165,
167, 168, 171–173, 187, 188, 210,
212–225, 228–231, 233–235, 238
Actuators, 102, 105, 108, 109, 112–120, 129–132
Adaptive optics (AO), 25, 26, 35–38,142, 143, 155,
167, 168, 170, 172, 174–177, 187–190,
231, 234, 236, 238
Airy pattern (disk), 19
Alignment, 187, 197–200, 212, 217, 218, 221, 226,
227, 229, 235, 300, 309–310
Alignment of secondary mirror, 127–128
All sky monitor, 52, 56–59, 85
Altitude-azimuth system, 30
Anamorphic magnification, 597
Angular field of view, 11
Anisotropy, 432–435, 442, 443, 445, 449–451,
457–459, 465–471, 476
Antenna, 319, 321, 324–338, 345, 347, 349, 351, 353,
354, 357
cassegrain, 345
G/T value, 329
Hertz dipole, 325
nasmyth, 328, 329
reciprocity, 325
AO. See Adaptive optics (AO)
Aperture
effective, 325
efficiency, 326
geometric, 326–328
Aperture stop, 10, 11, 13, 17
Aperture synthesis, 27, 28
Aplanatic systems, 15
Arcade, 449
Areal density, 409, 410, 413
Artificial wavelength, 124
Asphericity, 102, 106–108
Astatic, support, 203–204
Astronomical detectors for, 509
Astronomical instrumentation, 508, 509, 538
Atmosphere, 187, 190, 191, 197–198, 218, 220, 227,
232–234, 236
refraction, 263
seeing, 243, 248, 249, 268, 269, 275
turbulence, 247, 256
Attitude, 30, 31
Auto-guiding, 32
Autonomous observatory, 47
B
Background, 366–369, 371–376, 378–380, 383, 384,
390, 396, 399, 414, 420, 422,
423, 426
Back-illumination, 547, 557
Basic theory, 243–246, 260
Beam
combination, 176
efficiency, 326
solid angle, 326
width, 327
Black body radiation, 322–323
Blockage, 297, 298, 300, 302
Bolometers, 566–572, 581
Bootstrapping, 255, 278
Borosilicate glass, 140, 141, 145, 150, 152
Brightness temperature, 323, 324, 327, 328, 332
C
Cameras, 508–513, 515, 517, 519, 520, 522, 531, 533,
535, 589–591, 594–596, 598, 599,
602–604, 607–609, 611–613
Cassegrain designs, 299, 301
Catadioptric cameras, 594
Charge-coupled device (CCD), 543–562
camera, 51–53, 57, 59, 60, 62, 63, 65–67, 80
Charge transfer coefficient (CTC), 20
Cherenkov radiation, 492
Chopping, 300–302
Chromatic aberration, 13, 14, 22
Closure phase, 249–251, 263, 264, 268–271
CMOS sensor, 543, 544, 552, 555–558, 562
COBE. See COsmic Background Explorer (COBE)
Coherence time, 24, 26
Coherent, 18
Cold dark matter, 436
Collimator, 589–591, 594, 596–598, 601–605, 608,
609, 611–613
Comatic aberration (coma), 15, 22
Commercial off the shelf (COTS) components, 47,
57, 60
Communication protocol, 45, 85–87
Compton scattering, 484, 485, 488
Contrast, 13, 20–24, 28, 29, 37, 38

620
Index
Contrast transfer function (CTF), 20, 23, 24, 28
Control
closed loop, 213–215
open loop, 213–215
Coronagraphs, 511–512
COsmic Background Explorer (COBE), 435, 437,
446, 467–472, 476
Cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB),
431–473
CTF. See Contrast transfer function (CTF)
Curvature sensing, 125
D
Delay line, 249, 251, 254, 255, 260–267, 270, 271,
275, 276
Delivered image quality, 6, 14, 24, 26, 29, 32, 33, 40
Detectors, 507–538
Differential microwave radiometer (DMR), 470–472
Diffraction effects, 257
Diffraction limit, 142–143, 156, 168, 170, 176, 177,
188, 190, 193, 215, 234, 236–238
Dioptric cameras, 594–596
Dispersion, 9
compensation, 261
DMR. See Differential microwave radiometer (DMR)
Drive system, 30, 32
E
Echelle, 588, 592, 594, 596–602, 611–613
Edge sensors, 102, 109, 112–113, 115, 117, 120,
129–132, 306, 307
E-ELT. See European extremely large telescope
(E-ELT)
Electromagnetic radiation (EMR), 2–10, 14, 17, 18,
21, 22, 28, 33, 38, 40
Enclosure, 6, 7, 11, 35, 38–39
Entrance pupil, 10, 11, 13, 23
Equatorial system, 30
Error budget, 29
Error multipliers for control systems, 113, 117
Error sources
misalignment, 188–190
polishing, 189
temperature, 190
wind, 190
Etendue, 12, 49, 50, 72, 80, 81
European extremely large telescope (E-ELT), 104,
130, 131, 133
Event broker, 87
Exposure time, 373–379, 391, 426
Extensive air shower, 487–490, 494, 496
Extinction, 366–367, 426
F
Fairing, 402–404
Far infrared absolute spectrophotometer (FIRAS),
435, 470, 476
Field aberrations, 192–194, 197, 213, 219, 237
Field of view (FOV), 4, 10, 11, 15, 16, 22, 24, 29, 32,
37, 38
Field stop, 10, 11
Filter, 190, 195, 202, 215, 218, 233, 234
FIRAS. See Far infrared absolute spectrophotometer
(FIRAS)
Flux
density, 322, 324, 332
total, 324
Focal length, 10–14, 16, 20, 21
Focal plane array, 54, 71, 80, 82
Focal ratio, 11, 22
Focus mode, 112, 118, 120
FOV. See Field of view (FOV)
Fraunhofer diffraction, 18
Fried’s parameter (r), 23, 24, 27
Fringe tracking, 243, 255, 275–278
Full width at half maximum (FWHM), 19, 24
Future telescopes, 140, 143, 178–179
FWHM. See Full width at half maximum (FWHM)
G
Galactic emission, 433
Gamma ray, 481–504
Gas fusion, 141, 166
GCN. See GRB Coordinates Network (GCN)
Giant Magellan telescope (GMT), 104, 130–132, 139,
140, 148, 154, 158–160, 162–165,
178–179
Giant segmented-mirror telescope, 101, 104, 111,
127, 130–133
GLAO. See Ground layer AO (GLAO)
GMT. See Giant Magellan telescope (GMT)
Gran Telescopio Canarias (GTC), 103, 127, 128, 131
Gratings, 588–594, 596–606, 609, 610, 612, 613
Gravitational deflection, 300, 303–305
Grazing incidence, 3, 17, 18
GRB Coordinates Network (GCN), 65, 66, 68, 76, 77,
86, 88
GRB follow-up, 56, 62, 67, 68, 76
Gregory designs, 296, 299–302
Gregory system, 328, 329
Ground layer AO (GLAO), 37, 38
GTC. See Gran Telescopio Canarias (GTC)
Gyroscope, 384, 414–417
H
HET. See Hobby-Eberly telescope (HET)
History of segmented-mirror telescopes, 102–104

Index
621
Hobby-Eberly telescope (HET), 103, 117, 119,
128–129
Honeycomb sandwich, 140, 143, 146, 151–154
Hubble space telescope (HST), 7, 22, 30, 369, 370,
376–378, 381–385, 388–390, 392,
394–398, 401, 402, 405–407, 409–411,
413–416, 418, 420, 422–424, 426, 427
Huygens-Fresnel, 18
I
Image quality, 2, 4–6, 14–16, 24–27, 29, 32, 33, 35,
38, 40, 187–192, 200, 210, 212, 215, 218,
219, 224, 226, 227, 229, 234, 236
Imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescope, 494–503
Infrared detectors, 565–584
Instruments, 6, 7, 16, 22, 26, 33, 36–38
Interferometer, 321, 322, 330–332, 334, 335, 337,
338, 340, 347, 351, 356
noise, 330, 332, 508, 509, 521–523
Interferometry, 243, 245, 248, 249, 251, 253, 261,
270–273, 275, 278
Ion beam figuring, 108
Isoplanatic angle, 24
Isoplanatic patch, 24, 36, 37
J
James Webb space telescope (JWST), 101, 125, 128,
130, 367–371, 377, 378, 381, 382,
388–396, 399–402, 404, 405, 407–414,
416–420, 425–427
K
Keck active control system, 114, 117
Keck telescopes, 101, 102, 105, 107, 111, 112, 117,
118, 120, 121, 125, 126, 128
diffraction patterns, 111
L
Large area multi-object spectrographic telescope
(LAMOST), 129
Large binocular telescope (LBT), 140, 143, 145–147,
149, 153, 154, 157–163, 167–180
Laser guide star AO (LGS-AO), 37, 38
Launch vehicle, 381, 390, 392, 393, 396, 397,
400–403, 408, 410, 423
LBT. See Large binocular telescope (LBT)
Lensing, 458
LGS-AO. See Laser guide star AO (LGS-AO)
Lightweight, 384, 388, 400, 404, 408–410, 412,
419, 427
Lightweight optics, 140, 143, 169
Lookup tables, 34
M
Mach-Zehnder interferometer, 125
Magnetic rheological figuring (MRF), 108
Magnification, 10–13, 16, 22
Main beam, 324, 326, 327, 331, 342
MCAO. See Multi-conjugate AO (MCAO)
Metrics for telescope quality, 188
Microwave kinetic induction detectors (MKID),
582–584
Mirror
cells, 34
control, 306–307
meniscus, 204, 206, 212–224, 235
seeing, 141, 143, 173
segmented, 197, 198, 200, 221, 224, 236
structured, 197, 201, 202, 206, 235
support, 144, 155–157, 167, 171–174
force-based, 203–204
position-based, 202–203, 223, 224
MKID. See Microwave kinetic induction detectors
(MKID)
MMT. See Multiple mirror telescope (MMT)
Modes, elastic, 194–200, 202, 210–212, 220–222,
224, 226, 227, 229–234
Modulation transfer function (MTF), 20
Monolithic mirror, 101, 104, 132
Multi-conjugate AO (MCAO), 37, 38
Multiple mirror telescope (MMT), 103, 104, 140,
154, 162, 167–168, 173
N
Natural frequency, 305, 306, 308
Noll coefficients, 27
Nyquist theorem, 323
O
Observatory, 2, 6–7, 17, 37, 39
Off-axis, 297, 298, 300–302
On-axis images, 10, 11, 22
OPD. See Optical path difference (OPD)
Open loop tracking, 32, 35
Optical alignment, 102, 121–126, 128, 132
Optical axis, 10, 12–15, 21, 22, 24–26, 31, 34, 35
Optical delay, 260–262, 265
Optical path, 9, 10, 14
Optical path difference (OPD), 25, 28
Optical telescope assembly (OTA), 381–384, 389,
405–407, 409, 419
Optical testing, 158, 164, 165, 172
Optics, 296–302, 309, 310
Orbit, 381–383, 385, 388, 390, 392–394, 396–403,
405, 406, 408, 410–413, 416, 422–427
OTA. See Optical telescope assembly (OTA)

622
Index
P
Pair production, 483–488, 502
Paraxial optical system, 10
Paraxial rays, 10–12, 21
Passive cooling, 390, 400, 423, 426
Passive telescopes, features, 188, 200, 210–212
Performance, telescope, 191, 210, 212
Phase contrast interferometry, 310
Phased array imaging, 168, 176–177
Phasing, 103, 104, 121–126, 129–131
Photoconductors, 566, 571–575, 577–581
PIXIE, 439, 476
Planck, 435, 437–441, 445, 447, 451, 454, 467, 468,
471, 474–476
Planck function, 323, 349
Plate scale, 12, 20, 300–301
Pointing and control, 415, 419
Pointing error, 303, 305, 308, 309
Pointing model, 31, 32
Point spread function (PSF), 20, 21, 23, 24, 25,
28, 32
Polarimeters, 508, 509, 520–521
Polarization, 256, 257, 275, 432, 433, 438–443, 445,
447, 449–452, 454–459, 461–465, 467,
468, 470, 471, 473, 474, 476
Polishing, 141, 142, 153–155, 159–161, 163, 167,
172, 174, 178
Power normalized pattern, 326, 327
Primary mirror, 140–145, 148, 150, 154, 156–163,
166–175, 178, 179, 369, 381, 383, 385,
388–395, 400–405, 407–414, 418, 422,
426, 427
Prime focus, 15–17, 33, 169, 170, 172
Prisms, 591–594, 597, 599–602, 609
Pseudo-inverse matrix, 116
PSF. See Point spread function (PSF)
Pupil, 589–591, 596–600, 602–604, 606, 608–610,
612, 613
magnification, 590, 591, 598
Pyramid sensing, 125
Q
Quantum efficiency, 543–545, 547, 549, 551,
557, 558
R
Radius of curvature, 11, 15, 16
Rapid follow-up, 46, 51, 54, 74, 86, 94
Rayleigh-Jeans law, 323
Rays, 7, 8, 10, 12–15, 17, 18, 21, 23
Reaction wheel, 382, 384, 388, 390, 414, 416,
418, 419
Readout noise, 543, 544, 549–552, 555,
558, 562
Reflectivity, 8, 9, 17
Reflectors, 14, 29
Refractors, 3, 12–14
Remote telescope markup language (RTML), 86, 94
Remote telescope system (RTS), 47, 56, 86
Resolution angular, 321, 324, 326–328, 330, 334,
335, 339, 343, 345, 347, 351
Robotic telescope, 45–48, 51, 52, 54, 64, 66, 68,
73–75, 83, 85, 86, 90–92, 94
RTML. See Remote telescope markup language
(RTML)
S
Scaling, 195, 206, 222
Scanning, 300–303, 305
SCAO. See Single conjugate AO (SCAO)
Schwarzchild (conic) constant, 15
Secondary support, 297, 300, 302
Seeing, 187, 188, 190, 191, 193, 201, 203, 210, 212,
215, 220, 228, 230–232,
234–236, 238
Seeing-limited, 187, 188, 191, 193, 201, 203, 210,
212, 215, 228, 232, 234, 238
Segment
gaps, 109, 110
polishing, 102, 108
support, 102, 108–109
Seidel aberrations, 21, 22, 26, 34
Sensitivity, 369–374, 379, 389, 391, 395, 417
telescope, 319–321
Servomechanisms, 30, 33
Shack-Hartmann phasing, 122–125
Shearing interferometer, 310
Sidereal rate, 30
Signal-to-noise ratio (S/N), 366, 371–375, 377, 378,
380, 390, 391, 400
Silicon image sensor, 541–563
Single conjugate AO (SCAO), 36–38
Singular value decomposistion, 116–118, 120
Skyalert, 87, 88, 90, 94
S/N. See Signal-to-noise ratio (S/N)
Solar array, 384, 390, 402, 414, 419,
422, 425
Southern African Large Telescope (SALT), 103,
128–129
Spacecraft, 382, 383, 387, 390, 399, 402, 403,
415–419, 424, 425
Space telescopes, 361–427
Spatial filtering, 270, 272, 273, 275, 278
Spatial frequency, 20–24, 27, 28, 33, 36
Spatial interferometers, 3
Speckle imaging, 25
Spectrometers, 508–510, 512–522, 535
Spectrum distortion, 474
Spherical aberration, 14, 21, 22, 26

Index
623
Spin casting, 141, 148
Spitzer space telescope (SST), 369, 381, 382,
385–388, 390–396, 398, 399, 401–403,
405, 406, 409, 411, 413, 416, 418, 420,
423–426
Standard model, 433
Steward Observatory Mirror Laboratory, 141, 150
Stiffness
modes and mirrors, 195, 197, 201, 202, 211,
212, 222
of structures, 187
Strehl ratio (S), 25, 175, 176, 258, 259
Stressed lap, 159, 160
Stressed mirror polishing, 108, 126
Structure-telescope-mirror cell, 221
Submillimeter telescopes, 283–310
Sunshield, 383, 390, 394, 395, 403, 404, 407, 414,
419, 420, 425, 426
Sunyaev-Zel’dovich, 459
Survey telescope, 45, 47, 49, 50, 52, 54,
55, 94
System noise, 329
T
Telescope, 2–40, 137–179
mount, 6, 29–33, 54, 63, 303, 307–309
fast slewing, 51, 63, 69
network, 45, 46, 55, 63, 79, 83–85, 90
structure, 29
Telescope control system (TCS), 6
Temperature
antenna, 324, 327, 328
brightness, 323, 324, 327,
328, 332
fluctuations, 332
noise, 323, 329
Temporal fringe encoding, 267, 270
Thermal deformations, 302–304, 306,
308, 309
Thirty meter telescope (TMT), 104, 115, 117,
130–133
Tracking, 6, 25, 29, 30, 32, 35
U
UV plane, 28, 245
V
Vignetting, 10
Visibility, 20, 28
calibration, 249–251
function, 244, 245, 250
VOEvent, 86, 87, 94
W
Warping harnesses, 109, 126–127
Water Cherenkov telescope (WCT), 490–494, 501
Wavefront
error, 303, 310
sensor, 187, 200, 215–220, 226,
229, 238
WCT. See Water Cherenkov telescope (WCT)
Whiffletree, 109, 126
White pupil, 596–599, 602, 612, 613
Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe (WMAP),
435, 437, 444, 447, 450, 451, 454, 467,
468, 471–475
Wind-induced deformation, 305, 306
Wing buffeting, 6, 25, 35, 39
WMAP. See Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe
(WMAP)
Z
Zernike mode, 26
Zernike polynomials, 26, 27, 107,
117, 127
Zernike/Van Cittert Theorem, 245, 246


