IX
PLATO
IT is in the Seventh Book of the Republic that we find
the most general statement of the attitude of Plato towards
mathematics. Plato regarded mathematics in its four branches,
arithmetic, geometry, stereometry and astronomy, as the first
essential in the training of philosophers and of* those who
should rule his ideal State; 'let no one destitute of geometry
enter my doors', said the inscription over the door of his
school. There could be no better evidence of the supreme
importance which he attached to the mathematical sciences.
What Plato emphasizes throughout when speaking of mathe-
matics is its value for the training of the mind; its practical
utility is of no account in comparison. Thus arithmetic must
be pursued for the sake of knowledge, not for any practical
ends such as its use in trade1; the real science of arithmetic
has nothing to do with actions, its object is knowledge.2
A very little geometry and arithmetical calculation suffices
for the commander of an army; it is the higher and more
advanced portions which tend to lift the mind on high and
to enable it ultimately to see the final aim of philosophy,
the idea of the Good 3; the value of the two sciences consists
in the fact that they draw the soul towards truth and create
the philosophic attitude of mind, lifting on high the things
which our ordinary habit would keep down.4
The extent to which Plato insisted on the purely theoretical
character of the mathematical sciences is illustrated by his
peculiar views about the two subjects which the ordinary
person would regard as having, at least, an important practical
side, namely astronomy and music. According to Plato, true
astronomy is not concerned with the movements of the visible
1 Rep. vii. 525 c, D. 
2 Politicus 258 D.
8 Rep. 526 D, E. 
4 Ib. 527 B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PLATO 
285
heavenly bodies. The arrangement of the stars in the heaven
and their apparent movements are indeed wonderful and
beautiful, but the observation of and the accounting for them
falls far short of true astronomy. Before we can attain to
this we must get beyond mere observational astronomy, 'we
must leave the heavens alone '. The true science of astronomy
is in fact a kind of ideal kinematics, dealing with the laws
of motion of true stars in a sort of mathematical heaven of
which the visible heaven is an imperfect expression in time
and space. The visible heavenly bodies and their apparent
motions we are to regard merely as illustrations, comparable
to the diagrams which the geometer draws to illustrate the
true straight lines, circles, &c, about which his science reasons;
they are to be used as 'problems' only, with the object of
ultimately getting- rid of the apparent irregularities and
arriving at 'the true motions with which essential speed
and essential slowness move in relation to one another in the
true numbers and the true forms, and carry their contents
with them' (to use Burnet's translation of ra kvovra)^
'Numbers' in this passage correspond to the periods of the
apparent motions; the 'true forms' are the true orbits con-
trasted with the apparent. It is right to add that according
to one view (that of Burnet) Plato means, not that true
astronomy deals with an 'ideal heaven' different from the
apparent, but that it deals with the true motions of the visible
bodies as distinct from their apparent motions. This would
no doubt agree with Plato's attitude in the Laws, and at the
time when he set to his pupils as a problem for solution
jbhe question by what combinations of uniform circular revolu-
tions the apparent movements of the heavenly bodies can be
accounted for. But, except on the assumption that an ideal
heaven is meant, it is difficult to see what Plato can mean
by the contrast which he draws between the visible broideries
of heaven (the visible stars and their arrangement), which
are indeed beautiful, and the true broideries which they
only imitate and which are infinitely more beautiful and
marvellous.
This was not a view of astronomy that would appeal to
the ordinary person. 
Plato himself admits the difficulty.
1 Rep. vii. 529 c-530 c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

286 
PLATO
When Socrates's interlocutor speaks of the use of astronomy
for distinguishing months and seasons, for agriculture and
navigation, and even for military purposes, Socrates rallies
him on his anxiety that his curriculum should not consist
of subjects which the mass of people would regard as useless:
' it is by no means an easy thing, nay it is difficult, to believe
that in studying these subjects a certain organ in the mind
of every one is purified and rekindled which is destroyed and
blinded by other pursuits, an organ which is more worthy
of preservation than ten thousand eyes; for by it alone is
truth discerned/1
As with astronomy, so with harmonics.2 The true science of
harmonics differs from that science as commonly understood.
Even the Pythagoreans, who discovered the correspondence
of certain intervals to certain numerical ratios, still made
their theory take too much account of audible sounds. The
true science of harmonics should be altogether independent
of observation and experiment. Plato agreed with the Pytha-
goreans as to the nature of sound. Sound is due to concussion of
air, and when there is rapid motion in the air the tone is high-
pitched, when the motion is slow the tone is low; when the
speeds are in certain arithmetical proportions, consonances or
harmonies result. But audible movements produced, say, by
different lengths of strings are only useful as illustrations;
they are imperfect representations of those mathematical
movements which produce mathematical consonances, and
it is these true consonances which the true apfiovtKos should
study.
We get on to easier ground when Plato discusses geometry.
The importance of geometry lies, not in its practical use, but
in the fact that it is a study of objects eternal and unchange-
able, and tends to lift the soul towards truth. The essence
of geometry is therefore directly opposed even to the language
which, for want of better terms, geometers are obliged to use;
thus they speak of ' squaring', ' applying (a rectangle)',
' adding \ &c, as if the object were to do something, whereas
the true purpose of geometry is knowledge.3 Geometry is
concerned, not with material things, but with mathematical
1 Rep. 527 D, E. 
2 Ib. 531 A-c.
3 Ib. vii. 526 D-527 B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PLATO 
287
points, lines, triangles, squares, &c, as objects of pure thought.
If we use a diagram in geometry, it is only as an illustration;
the triangle which we draw is an imperfect representation
of the real triangle of which we think. Constructions, then,
or the processes of squaring, adding, and so on, are not of the
essence of geometry, but are actually antagonistic to it. With
these views before us, we can without hesitation accept as
well founded the story of Plutarch that Plato blamed Eudoxus,
Archytas and Menaechmus for trying to reduce the dupli-
cation of the cube to mechanical constructions by means of
instruments, on the ground that 'the good of geometry is
thereby lost and destroyed, as it is brought back to things
of sense instead of being directed upward and grasping at
eternal and incorporeal images \ * It follows almost inevitably
that we must reject the tradition attributing to Plato himself
the elegant mechanical solution of the problem of the two
mean proportionals which we have given in the chapter on
Special Problems (pp. 256-7). Indeed, as we said, it is certain
on other grounds that the so-called Platonic solution was later
than that of Eratosthenes; otherwise Eratosthenes would
hardly have failed to mention it in his epigram, along
with the solutions by Archytas and Menaechmus. Tannery,
indeed, regards Plutarch's story as an invention based on
nothing more than the general character of Plato's philosophy,
since it took no account of the real nature of the solutions
of Archytas and Menaechmus; these solutions are in fact
purely theoretical and would have been difficult or impossible
to carry out in practice, and there is no reason to doubt that
the solution by Eudoxus was of a similar kind.2 This is true,
but it is evident that it was the practical difficulty quite as
much as the theoretical elegance of the constructions which
impressed the Greeks. Thus the author of the letter, wrongly
attributed to Eratosthenes, which gives the history of the
problem, says that the earlier solvers had all solved the
problem in a theoretical manner but had not been able to
reduce their solutions to practice, except to a certain small
extent Menaechmus, and that with difficulty; and the epigram
of Eratosthenes himself says,' do not attempt the impracticable
1 Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. viii. 2. 1, p. 718 F.
2 Tannery, La geomitrie grecque, pp. 79, 80
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

288 
PLATO
business of the cylinders of Archytas or the cutting of the
cone in the three curves of Menaechmus \ 
It would therefore
be quite possible for Plato to regard Archytas and Menaechmus
as having given constructions that were ultra-mechanical, since
they were more mechanical than the ordinary constructions by
means of the straight line and circle; and even the latter, which
alone are required for the processes of l squaring',' applying
(a rectangle)' and ' adding', are according to Plato no part of
theoretic geometry. This banning even of simple constructions
from true geometry seems, incidentally, to make it impossible
to accept the conjecture of Hankel that we owe to Plato the
limitation, so important in its effect on the later development
of geometry, of the instruments allowable in constructions to
the ruler and compasses.1 Indeed, there are signs that the
limitation began before Plato's time (e.g. this may be the
explanation of the two constructions attributed to Oenopides),
although no doubt Plato's influence would help to keep the
restriction in force; for other instruments, and the use of
curves of higher order than circles in constructions, were
expressly barred in any case where the ruler and compasses
could be made to serve (cf. Pappus's animadversion on a solu-
tion of a ' plane' problem by means of conies in Apollonius's
Conies, Book V).
Contributions to the philosophy of mathematics.
We find in Plato's dialogues what appears to be the first
serious attempt at a philosophy of mathematics. Aristotle
says that between sensible objects and the ideas Plato placed
'things mathematical' (ra fiadrjparIKOL), which differed from
sensibles in being eternal and unmoved, but differed again
from the ideas in that there can be many mathematical
objects of the same kind, while the idea is one only; e.g. the
idea of triangle is one, but there may be any number of
mathematical triangles as of visible triangles, namely the
perfect triangles of which the visible triangles are imper-
fect copies. A passage in one of the Letters (No. 7, to the
friends of Dion) is interesting in this connexion.2 
Speaking
of a circle by way of example, Plato says there is (1) some-
1 Hankel, op, cit., p. 156. 
2 Plato, Letters, 342 B, C, 343 A, B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE PHILOSOPHY OF MATHEMATICS 
289
thing called a circle and known by that name; next there
is (2) its definition as that in which the distances from its
extremities in all directions to the centre are always equal,
for this may be said to be the definition of that to which the
names 'round' and lcircle' are applied; again (3) we have
the circle which is drawn or turned: this circle is perishable
and perishes; not so, however, with (4) avrbs 6 KVKXOS, the
essential circle, or the idea of circle: it is by reference to
this that the other circles exist, and it is different from each
of them. The same distinction applies to anything else, e. g.
the straight, colour, the good, the beautiful, or any natural
or artificial object, fire, water, &c. Dealing separately with
the four things above distinguished, Plato observes that there
is nothing essential in (1) the name: it is merely conventional;
there is nothing to prevent our assigning the name ' straightJ
to what we now call' round' and vice versa; nor is there any
real definiteness about (2) the definition, seeing that it too
is made up of parts of speech, nouns and verbs. The circle
(3), the particular circle drawn or turned, is not free from
admixture of other things: it is even full of what is opposite
to the true nature of a circle, for it will anywhere touch
a straight line', the meaning of which is presumably that we
cannot in practice draw a circle and a tangent with only one
point common (although a mathematical circle and a mathe-
matical straight line touching it meet in one point only). It
will be observed that in the above classification there is no
place given to the many particular mathematical circles which
correspond to those which we draw, and are intermediate
between these imperfect circles and the idea of circle which
is one only.
(a) The hypotheses of mathematics.
The hypotheses of mathematics are discussed by Plato in
the Republic.
' I think you know that those who occupy themselves with
geometries and calculations and the like take for granted the
odd and the even, figures, three kinds of angles, and other
things cognate to these in each subject; assuming these things
as known, they take them as hypotheses and thenceforward
they do not feel called upon to give any explanation with
1623 
U
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

290 
PLATO
regard to them either to themselves or any one else, but treat
them as manifest to every one; basing themselves on these
hypotheses, they proceed at once to go through the rest of
the argument till they arrive, with general assent, at the
particular conclusion to which their inquiry was directed.
Further you know that they make use of visible figures and
argue about them, but in doing so they are not thinking of
these figures but of the things which they represent; thus
it is the absolute square and the absolute diameter which is
the object of their argument, not the diameter which they
draw; and similarly, in other cases, the things which they
actually model or draw, and which may also have their images
in shadows or in water, are themselves in turn used as
images, the object of the inquirer being to see their abso-
lute counterparts which cannot be seen otherwise than by
thought/ *
(/?) The two intellectual methods.
Plato distinguishes two processes: both begin from hypo-
theses. The one method cannot get above these hypotheses,
but, treating them as if they were first principles, builds upon
them and, with the. aid of diagrams or images, arrives at
conclusions: this is the method of geometry and mathematics
in general. The other method treats the hypotheses as being
really hypotheses and nothing more, but uses them as stepping-
stones for mounting higher and higher until the principle
of all things is reached, a principle about which there is
nothing hypothetical; when this is reached, it is possible to
descend again, by steps each connected with the preceding
step, to the conclusion, a process which has no need of any
sensible images but deals in ideals only and ends in them2;
this method, which rises above and puts an end to hypotheses,
and reaches the first principle in this way, is the dialectical
method. For want of this, geometry and the other sciences
which in some sort lay hold of truth are comparable to one
dreaming about truth, nor can they have a waking sight of
it so long as they treat their hypotheses- as immovable
truths, and are unable to give any account or explanation
of them.3
1 Republic, vi. 510 C-E. 
2 Ib. vi. 510 B 511 A-C.
3 Ib. vii. 5B3 B-E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE TWO INTELLECTUAL METHODS 
291
With the above quotations we should read a passage of
Proclus.
* Nevertheless certain methods have been handed down. The
finest is the method which by means of analysis- carries
the thing sought up to an acknowledged principle; a method
which Plato, as they say, communicated to Leodamas, and by
which the latter too is said to have discovered many things
in geometry. The second is the method of division, which
divides into its parts the genus proposed for consideration,
and gives a starting-point for the demonstration by means of
the elimination of the other elements in the construction
of what is proposed, which method also Plato extolled as
being of assistance to all sciences.'x
The first part of this passage, with a like dictum in Diogenes
Laertius that Plato 'explained to Leodamas of Thasos the
method of inquiry by analysis',2 has commonly been under-
stood as attributing to Plato the invention of the method
of mathematical analysis. But, analysis being according to
the ancient view nothing more than a series of successive
reductions of a theorem or problem till it is finally reduced
to a theorem or problem already known, it is difficult to
see in what Plato's supposed discovery could have consisted;
for analysis in this sense must have been frequently used
in earlier investigations. Not only did Hippocrates of Chios
reduce the problem of duplicating the cube to that of finding
two mean proportionals, but it is clear that the method of
analysis in the sense of reduction must have been in use by
the Pythagoreans. On the other hand, Proclus's language
suggests that what he had in mind was the philosophical
method described in the passage of the Republic, which of
course does not refer to mathematical analysis at all; it may
therefore well be that the idea that Plato discovered the
method of analysis is due to a misapprehension. But analysis
and synthesis following each other are related in the same
way as the upward and downward progressions in the dialec-
tician's intellectual method. It has been suggested, therefore,
that Plato's achievement was to observe the importance
from the point of view of logical rigour, of the confirma-
tory synthesis following analysis. The method of division
1 Proclus, Comm. on End. I, pp. 211. 18-212. 1.
2 Diog. L. iii. 24, p. 74, Cobet.
u 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

292 
PLATO
mentioned by Proclus is the method of successive bipartitions
of genera into species such as we find in the Sophist and
the Politicns, and has little to say to geometry; but the
mention of it side by side with analysis itself suggests that
Proclus confused the latter with the philosophical method
referred to.
(y) Definitions.
Among the fundamentals of mathematics Plato paid a good
deal of attention to definitions. In some cases his definitions
connect themselves with Pythagorean tradition; in others he
seems to have struck oul a new line for himself. The division
of numbers into odd and even is one of the most common of
his illustrations; number, he says, is divided equally, i.e.
there are as many odd numbers as even, and this is the true
division of number; to divide number (e. g.) into myriads and
what are not myriads is not a proper division.1 An even
number is defined as a number divisible into two equal parts2;
in another place it is explained as that which is not scalene
but isosceles3: a curious and apparently unique application
of these terms to number, and in any case a defective state-
ment unless the term ' scalene' is restricted to the case in which
one part of the number is odd and the other even; for of
course an even number can be divided into two unequal odd
numbers or two unequal even numbers (except 2 in the first
case and 2 and 4 in the second). The further distinction
between even-times-even, odd-times-even, even-times-odd and
odd-times-odd occurs in Plato4: but, as thrice two is called
odd-times-even and twice three is even-times-odd, the number
in both cases being the same, it is clear that, like Euclid,
Plato regarded even-times-odd and odd-times-even as con-
vertible terms, and did not restrict their meaning in the way
that Nicomachus and the neo-Pythagoreans did.
Coming to geometry we find an interesting view of the
term ' figure'. What is it, asks Socrates, that is true of the
round, the straight, and the other things that you call figures,
and is the same for all? As a suggestion for a definition
of ' figure', Socrates says, ' let us regard as figure that which
alone of existing things is associated with colour'. Meno
1 Politicus, 262 D, E. 
2 Laws, 895 E.
3 Euthyphro, 12 D. 
4 Parmenides, 143 E-144 A.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DEFINITIONS 
293
asks what is to be done if the interlocutor says he does not
know what colour is; what alternative definition is there?
Socrates replies that it will be admitted that in geometry
there are such things as what we call a surface or a solid,
and so on; from these examples we may learn what we mean
by figure; figure is that in which a solid ends, or figure is
the limit (or extremity, nepas) of a solid.1 
Apart from
' figure' as form or shape, e. g. the round or straight, this
passage makes ' figure' practically equivalent to surface, and
we are reminded of the Pythagorean term for surface, \poid,
colour or skin, which Aristotle similarly explains as ^pco/xa,
colour, something inseparable from 7repa?, extremity.2 
In
Euclid of course opo$, limit or boundary, is defined as the
extremity (nepas) of a thing, while ' figure' is that which is
contained by one or more boundaries.
There is reason to believe, though we are not specifically
told, that the definition of a line as 'breadthless length'
originated in the Platonic School, and Plato himself gives
a definition of a straight line as ' that of which the middle
covers the ends'3 (i.e. to an eye placed at either end and
looking along the straight line); this seems to me to be the
origin of the Euclidean definition ca line which lies evenly
with the points on it', which, I think, can only be an attempt
to express the sense of Plato's definition in terms to which
a geometer could not take exception as travelling outside the
subject matter of geometry, i. e. in terms excluding any appeal
to vision. A point had been defined by the Pythagoreans as
a ' monad having position'; Plato apparently objected to this
definition and substituted no other; for, according to Aristotle,
he regarded the genus of points as being a 'geometrical
fiction', calling a point the beginning of a line, and often using
the term 'indivisible lines' in the same sense.4 
Aristotle
points out that even indivisible lines must have extremities,
and therefore they do not help, while the definition of a point
as ' the extremity of a line' is unscientific.5
The ' round' {arpoyyvXov) or the circle is of course defined
as 'that in which the furthest points (ra ea-yara) in all
1 Meno, 75 A-76 A. 
2 Arist. De sensu, 439 a 31, &c.
3 Parmenides, 137 E. 
4 Arist. Metaph. A. 9, 992 a 20.
5 Arist. Topics, vi. 4, 141 b 21.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

294 
PLATO
directions are at the same distance from the middle (centre) \l
The 'sphere' is similarly defined as 'that which has the
distances from its centre to its terminations or ends in every
direction equal', or simply as that which is' equal (equidistant)
from the centre in all directions \2
The Parmenides contains certain phrases corresponding to
what we find in Euclid's preliminary matter. Thus Plato
speaks of something which is ' a part' but not ' parts' of the
One,8 reminding us of Euclid's distinction between a fraction
which is * a part', i. e. an aliquot part or submultiple, and one
which is 'parts', i.e. some number more than one of such
parts, e. g. f. 
If equals be added to unequals, the sums differ
by the same amount as the original unequals did:4 an axiom
in a rather more complete form than that subsequently inter-
polated in Euclid.
Summary of the mathematics in Plato.
The actual arithmetical and geometrical propositions referred
to or presupposed in Plato's writings are not such as to suggest
that he was in advance of his time in mathematics; his
knowledge does not appear to have been more than up to
date. In the following paragraphs I have attempted to give
a summary, as complete as possible, of the mathematics con-
tained in the dialogues.
A proposition in proportion is quoted in the Parmenides,5
namely that, if a > b, then (a + c): (b + c) < a :b.
In the Laws a certain number, 5,040, is selected as a most
convenient number of citizens to form a state; its advantages
are that it is the product of 12, 21 and 20, that a twelfth
part of it is again divisible by 12, and that it has as many as
59 different divisors in all, including all the natural numbers
from 1 to 12 with the exception of 11, while it is nearly,
divisible by 11 (5038 being a multiple of 11).G
(a) Regular and semi-regular solids.
The 'so-called Platonic figures', by which ^re meant the
five regular solids, are of course not Plato's discovery, for they
had been partly investigated by the Pythagoreans, and very
1 Parmenides, 137 E. 
2 Timaeus, 33 B, 34 B.
3 Parmenides, 153 D. 
4 lb. 154 B.
5 lb. 154 D. 
« Laws, 537 E-538 A.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REGULAR AND SEMI-REGULAR SOLIDS 
295
fully by Theaetetus; they were evidently only called Platonic
because of the use made of them in the Timaeus, where the
particles of the four elements are given the shapes of the first
four of the solids, the pyramid or tetrahedron being appro-
priated to fire, the octahedron to air, the icosahedron to water,
and the cube to earth, while the Creator used the fifth solid,
the dodecahedron, for the universe itself.1
According to Heron, however, Archimedes, who discovered
thirteen semi-regular solids inscribable in a sphere, said that
' Plato also knew one of them, the figure with fourteen faces,
of which there are two sorts, one made up of eight triangles
and six squares, of earth and air, and already known to some
of the ancients, the other again made up of eight squares and
six triangles, which seems to be more difficult.'2
The first of these is easily obtained; if we take each square
face of a cube and make in it a smaller square by joining
the middle points of each pair of consecutive sides, we get six
squares (one in each face); taking the three out of the twenty-
four sides of these squares which are about any one angular
point of the cube, we have an equilateral triangle; there are
eight of these equilateral triangles, and if we cut off from the
corners of the cube the pyramids on these triangles as bases,
we have a semi-regular polyhedron
inscribable in a sphere and having
as faces eight equilateral triangles
and six squares. The description of
the second semi-regular figure with
fourteen faces is wrong: there are
only two more such figures, (1) the
figure obtained by cutting off from
the corners of the cube smaller
pyramids on equilateral triangular bases such that regular
octagons, and not squares, are left in the six square faces,
the figure, that is, contained by eight triangles and six
octagons, and (2) the figure obtained by cutting off from the
corners of an octahedron equal pyramids with square bases
such as to leave eight regular hexagons in the eight faces,
that is, the figure contained by six squares and eight hexagons.
1 Timaeus, 55 D-56 B, 55 c.
2 Heron, Definitions, 104, p. 66, Heib.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

296
PLATO
(/3) The construction of the regular solids.
Plato, of course, constructs the regular solids by simply
putting together the plane faces. These faces are, he observes,
made up of triangles; and all triangles are decomposable into
two right-angled triangles. Eight-angled triangles are either
(1) isosceles or (2) not isosceles, having the two acute angles
unequal. Of the latter class, which is unlimited in number,
one triangle is the most beautiful, that in which the square on
the perpendicular is triple of the square on the base (i. e. the
triangle which is the half of an equilateral triangle obtained
by drawing a perpendicular from a vertex on the opposite
side). (Plato is here Pythagorizing.1) 
One of the regular
solids, the cube, has its faces (squares) made up of the first
kind of right-angled triangle, the isosceles, four of
them being put together to form the square; three
others with equilateral triangles for faces, the tetra-
hedron, octahedron and icosahedron, depend upon
the other species of right-angled triangle only,
each face being made up of six (not two) of those right-angled
triangles, as shown in the figure; the fifth solid, the dodeca-
hedron, with twelve regular pentagons for
faces, is merely alluded to, not described, in
the passage before us, and Plato is aware that
its faces cannot be constructed out of the two
elementary right-angled triangles on which the
four other solids depend. That an attempt was made to divide
the pentagon into a number of triangular elements is clear
from three passages, two in Plutarch2
and one in Alcinous.3 Plutarch says
that each of the twelve faces of a
dodecahedron is made up of thirty
elementary scalene triangles which are
different from the elementary triangle
of the solids with triangular faces.
Alcinous speaks of the 360 elements
which are produced when each pen-
tagon is divided into five isosceles triangles and each of the
1 Cf. Speusippus in Theol. Ar., p. 61, Ast.
2 Plutarch, Quaest. Plat. 5.1, 1003 D ; De defectu Oraculorurn, c. 33, 428 A.
3 Alcinous, De Doctrina Flatoriis, c. 11.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE REGULAR SOLIDS 
297
latter into six scalene triangles. If we draw lines in a pen-
tagon as shown in the accompanying figure, we obtain such
a set of triangles in a way which also shows the Pythagorean
pentagram (cf. p. 161, above).
(y) Geometric means between two square numbers
or two cubes.
In the Timaeus Plato, speaking of numbers ' whether solid
or square' with a (geometric) mean or means between them,
observes that between planes one mean suffices, but to connect
two solids two means are necessary.1 By planes and solids
Plato probably meant square and cube numbers respectively,
so that the theorems quoted are probably those of Eucl. VIII.
11, 12, to the effect that between two square numbers there is
one mean proportional number, and between two cube numbers
two mean proportional numbers. Nicomachus quotes these
very propositions as constituting l a certain Platonic theorem \2
Here, too, it may be that the theorem is called ' Platonic' for
the sole reason that it is quoted by Plato in the Timaeus;
it may well be older, for the idea of two mean proportionals
between two straight lines had already appeared in Hippo-
crates's reduction of the problem of doubling the cube. Plato's
allusion does not appear to be to the duplication of the cube
in this passage any more than in the expression icvficov avgrj,
1 cubic increase', in the Republic? which appears to be nothing
but the addition of the third dimension to a square, making
a cube (cf. rpirrj avgrj, 'third increase',4 meaning a cube
number as compared with Swapis, a square number, terms
which are applied, e.g. to the numbers 729 and 81 respec-
tively).
(8) The two geometrical passages in the MENO.
We come now to the two geometrical passages in the Meno,
In the first5 Socrates is trying to show that teaching is only
reawaking in the mind of the learner the memory of some-
thing. He illustrates by putting to the slave a carefully
prepared series of questions, each requiring little more than
1 Timaeus, 31 c-32 B. 
2 Nicom. ii. 24. 6.
3 Bepublic, 528 B. 
4 1b. 587 D.
5 Meno, 82 B-85 B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

298
PLATO
/
/
\
\
\
c
V
\/
' yes' or l no '• for an answer, but leading up to the geometrical
construction of «/2. Starting with a straight line AB 2 feet
long, Socrates describes a square ABGD upon it and easily
shows that the area is 4 square feet. 
Producing the sides
AB, AD to G, K so that BG, DK are equal to AB, AD, and
completing the figure, we have a square of side 4 feet, and this
square is equal to four times the original square and therefore
has an area of 16 square feet. 
Now, says Socrates, a square
8 feet in area must have its side
1 
greater than 2 and less than 4 feet.
The slave suggests that it is 3 feet
in length. 
By taking JV" the
middle point of DK (so that AN
M is 3 feet) and completing the square
on AN", Socrates easily shows that
the square on AN is not 8 but 9
square feet in area. If L, M be
K 
the middle points of GH, HK and
GL, CM be joined, we have four
squares in the figure, one of which is ABGD, while each of the
others is equal to it. If now we draw the diagonals BL, LM,
MD, DB of the four squares, each diagonal bisects its square,
and the four make a square BLMD, the area of which is half
that of the square AGHK, and is therefore 8 square feet;
BL is a side of this square. Socrates concludes with the
words:
'The Sophists call this straight line (BD) the diameter
(diagonal); this being its name, it follows that the square
which is double (of the original square) has to be described on
the diameter/
The other geometrical passage in the Meno is much more
difficult,1 and it has gathered round it a literature almost
comparable in extent to the volumes that have been written
to explain the Geometrical Number of the Republic. C. Blass,
writing in 1861, knew thirty different interpretations; and
since then many more have appeared. Of recent years
Benecke's interpretation2 seems to have enjoyed the most
1 Meno, 8G E-87 C.
2 Dr. Adolph Benecke, Ueber die geometrische Hypothesis in Platon's
Menon (Elbing, 1867). See also below, pp. 302-3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

TWO GEOMETRICAL PASSAGES IN THE MENO 299
acceptance; nevertheless, I think that it is not the right one,
but that the essentials of the correct interpretation were given
by S. H. Butcher1 (who, however, seems to have been com-
pletely anticipated by E. F.' August, the editor of Euclid, in
1829). It is necessary to begin with a literal translation of
the passage. Socrates is explaining a procedure cby way
of hypothesis', a procedure which, he observes, is illustrated
by the practice of geometers
4 when they are asked, for example, as regards a given area,
whether it is possible for this area to be inscribed in the form
of a triangle in a given circle. The answer might be, " I do
not yet know whether this area is such as can be so inscribed,
but I think I can suggest a hypothesis which will be useful for
the purpose; I mean the following. If the given area is such
as, when one has applied it (as a rectangle) to the given
straight line in the circle [rr)v SoOeTcrav avrov ypajjLfjLrjv, the
given straight line in it, cannot, I think, mean anything
but the diameter of the circle2], it is deficient by a figure
(rectangle) similar to the very figure which is applied, then
one alternative seems to me to result, while again another
results if it is impossible for what I said to be done with it.
Accordingly, by using a hypothesis, I am ready to tell you what
results with regard to the inscribing of the figure in the circle,
namely, whether the problem is possible or impossible."'
Let AEB be a circle on AB as diameter, and let AC be the
tangent at A, Take E any point on the circle and draw
ED perpendicular to AB. Complete the rectangles AGED,
EDBF.
Then it is clear that the rectangle GEDA is 'applied' to
the diameter AB, and also that it' falls short' by a figure, the
rectangle EDBF, similar to the ' applied' rectangle, for
AD:DE = ED:DB.
Also, if ED be produced to meet the circle again in G,
AEG is an isosceles triangle bisected by the diameter AB,
and therefore equal in area to the rectangle AGED.
If then the latter rectangle, ' applied' to A B in the manner
1 Journal of Philology, vol. xvii, pp. 219-25 ; cf. E. S. Thompson's edition
of the Meno.
2 The obvious ' line' of a circle is its diameter, just as, in the first
geometrical passage about the squares, the ypa/z/ujj, the 4 line ', of a square
is its side.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

300
PLATO
described, is equal to the given area, that area is inscribed in
the form of a triangle in the given circle.1
In order, therefore, to inscribe in the circle an isosceles
triangle equal to the given area (X), we have to find a point E
on the circle such that, if ED be drawn perpendicular to .4,8,
the rectangle AD . DEis equal to the given area X (' applying'
to AB a rectangle equal to X and falling short by a figure
similar to the 'applied' figure is only another way of ex-
pressing it). Evidently E lies on the rectangular hyperbola
1 Butcher, after giving the essentials of the interpretation of the
passage quite correctly, finds a difficulty. 
'If, he says, 'the condition'
(as interpreted by him) * holds good, the given x<*PLOV c a n be inscribed in
a circle. But the converse proposition is not true. The \u>piov can still
be inscribed, as required, even if the condition laid down is not fulfilled;
the true and necessary condition being that the given area is not greater
than that of the equilateral triangle, i. e. the maximum triangle, which
can be inscribed in the given circle.3 The difficulty arises in this way.
Assuming (quite fairly) that the given area is given in the form of a rect-
angle (for any given rectilineal figure can be transformed into a rectangle
of equal area), Butcher seems to suppose that it is identically the given
rectangle that is applied to AB. 
But this is not necessary. The termi-
nology of mathematics was not quite fixed in Plato's time, and he allows
himself some latitude of expression, so that we need not be surprised to
find him using the phrase ' to apply the area (x^p'10^) ^° a given straight
line ' as short for' to apply to a given straight line a rectangle equal (but not
similar) to the given area' (cf. Pappus vi, p. 544. 8-10 py nau TO boQiv
irapa rqv 8o$€?<rav TrapafiaKkeo-Qai eWelnop rerpayoovto, ' that it is not every
given (area) that can be applied (in the form of a rectangle) falling short
by a square figure'). If we interpret the expression in this way, the
converse is true; if we cannot apply, in the way described, a rectangle
equal to the given rectangle, it is because the given rectangle is greater
than the equilateral, i. e. the maximum, triangle that can be inscribed in
the circle, and the problem is therefore impossible of solution. (It was
not till long after the above was written that my attention was drawn to
the article on the same subject in the Journal of Philology, xxviii, 1903,
pp. 222-40, by Professor Cook Wilson. I am gratified to find that my
interpretation of the passage agrees with his.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

TWO GEOMETRICAL PASSAGES IN THE MENO 301
the equation of which referred to AB, AC as axes of x, y is
xy = b2
y where b2 is equal to the given area. For a real
solution it is necessary that b2 should be not greater than the
equilateral triangle inscribed in the circle, i. e. not greater than
3 \/3 . a 2/4, where a isvthe radius of the circle. If b2 is equal
to this area, there is only one solution (the hyperbola in that
case touching the circle); if b2 is less than this area, there are
two solutions corresponding to two points E, E' in which the
hyperbola cuts the circle. If AD = x, we have OD = x — a,
DE = \/(2ax — x2), and the problem is the equivalent of
solving t&e equation
or 
x2(2ax — x2) = 64.
This is an equation of the fourth degree which can be solved
by means of conies, but not by means of the straight line
and circle. The solution is given by the points of intersec-
tion of the hyperbola xy = b2 and the circle y2 = 2ax — x2 or
x2 + y* = 2 ax. 
In this respect therefore the problem is like
that of finding the two mean proportionals, which was likewise
solved, though not till later, by means of conies (Menaechmus).
I am tempted to believe that we have here an allusion to
another actual problem, requiring more than the straight
line and circle for its solution,
which had exercised the minds
of geometers by the time of
Plato, the problem, namely, of
inscribing in a circle a triangle
equal to a given area, a problem
which was still awaiting a
solution, although it had been
reduced to the problem of
applying a rectangle satisfying the condition described by
Plato, just as the duplication of the cube had been reduced
to the problem of finding two mean proportionals. 
Our
problem can, like the latter problem, easily be solved by the
• mechanical' use of a ruler. Suppose that the given rectangle
is placed so that the side AD lies along the diameter AB of
the circle. Let E be the angle of the rectangle ADEC opposite
to A. 
Place a ruler so that it passes through E and turn
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

302* 
PLATO
it about E until it passes through a point P of the circle such
that, if EP meets AB and AC produced in T, R, PT shall be
equal to ER. Then, since RE=PT, 
AD=MT, where M is
the foot of the ordinate PM*
Therefore DT = AM, and
AM:AD = DT:MT
= ED:PM,
whence 
PM .MA=ED. DA,
and APM is the half of the required (isosceles) triangle.
Benecke criticizes at length the similar interpretation of the
passage given by E. F. August. So far, however, as his objec-
tions relate to the translation of particular words in the
Greek text, they are, in my opinion, not well founded.1 For
the rest, Benecke holds that, in view of the difficulty of the
problem which emerges, Plato is unlikely to have introduced
it in such an abrupt and casual way into the conversation
between Socrates and Meno. But the problem is only one
of the same nature as that of the finding of two mean
proportionals which was already a famous problem, and, as
regards the form of the allusion, it is to be noted that Plato
was fond of dark hints in things mathematical.
If the above interpretation is too difficult (which I, for one,
do not admit), Benecke's is certainly too easy. He connects
his interpretation of the passage with the earlier passage
about the square of side 2 feet; according to him the problem
is, can an isosceles right-angled tri-
angle equal to the said square be
inscribed in the given circle? This
is of course only possible if the
radius of the circle is 2 feet in length.
If AB, DE be two diameters at right
angles, the inscribed triangle is ADE;
the square ACDO formed by the radii
A0, 0D and the tangents at D, A
is then the ' applied' rectangle, and
the rectangle by which it falls short is also a square and equal
1 The main point of Benecke's criticisms under this head has reference
to TOIOVTCO ^copied olov i n the phrase iXkelneiv 
TOLOVTCO ^<opi(p olov hv avrb TO
napar rafievov jj. He will have it that roiovTto olov cannot mean * similar to',
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

TWO GEOMETRICAL PASSAGES IN THE MENO 303
to the other square. If this were the correct interpretation,
Plato is using much too general language about the applied
rectangle and that by which it is deficient; it would be
extraordinary that he should express the condition in this
elaborate way when he need only have said that the radius
of the circle must be equal to the side of the square and
therefore 2 feet in length. The explanation seems to me
incredible. The criterion sought by Socrates is evidently
intended to be a real Siopio-fAOs, or determination of the
conditions or limits of the possibility of a solution of the pro-
blem whether in its original form or in the form to which
it is reduced; but it is no real Siopio-fios to say what is
equivalent to saying that the problem is possible of solution
if the circle is of a particular size, but impossible if the circle
is greater or less than that size.
The passage incidentally shows that the idea of a formal
SiopLo-jios defining the limits of possibility of solution was
familiar even before Plato's time, and therefore that Proclus
must be in error when he says that Leon, the pupil of
Neoclides,' invented Siopia/jLoi (determining) when the problem
which is the subject of investigation is possible and when
impossible ',*• although Leon may have been the first to intro-
duce the term or to recognize formally the essential part
played by StopLo-fjioim geometry.
(e) Plato and the doubling of the cube.
The story of Plato's relation to the problem of doubling
the cube has already been told (pp. 245-6, 255). Although the
solution attributed to him is not his, it may have been with
this problem in view that he complained that the study of
solid geometry had been unduly neglected up to his time.2
and he maintains that, if Plato had meant it in this sense, he should
have added that the ' defect', although ' similar', is not similarly situated.
I see no force in this argument in view of the want of fixity in mathe-
matical terminology in Plato's time, and of his own habit of varying his
phrases for literary effect. Benecke makes the words mean ' of the same
kind \ e. g. a square with a square or a rectangle with a rectangle. But
this would have no point unless the figures are squares, which begs the
whole question.
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 66. 20-2.
52 Republic, vii. 528 A-c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

304 
PLATO
(£) Solution of x2 + y2 = z2 in integers.
We have already seen (p. 81) that Plato is credited with
a rule (complementary to the similar rule attributed to Pytha-
goras) for finding a whole series of square numbers the sum
of which is also a square; the formula is
(rj) Incommensurables.
On the subject of incommensurables or irrationals we have
first the passage of the Theaetetus record in that Theodorus
proved the incommensurability of \^3, */5 ... */l7, after
which Theaetetus generalized the theory of such 'roots'.
This passage has already been fully discussed (pp. 203-9).
The subject of incommensurables comes up again in the Laws,
where Plato inveighs against the ignorance prevailing among
the Greeks of his time of the fact that lengths, breadths and
depths may be incommensurable as well as commensurable
with one another, and appears to imply that he himself had
not learnt the fact till late (aicovcras oyjri TTOTC), SO that he
was ashamed for himself as well as for his countrymen in
general.1 But the irrationals known to Plato included more
than mere ' surds' or the sides of non-squares; in one place
he says that, just as an even number may be the sum of
either two odd or two even numbers, the sum of two irra-
tionals may be either rational or irrational.2 An obvious
illustration of the former case is afforded by a rational straight
line divided fin extreme and mean ratio'. Euclid (XIII. 6)
proves that each of the segments is a particular kind of
irrational straight line called by him in Book X an apotome;
and to suppose that the irrationality of the two segments was
already known to Plato is natural enough if we are correct in
supposing that' the theorems which' (in the words of Proclus)
' Plato originated regarding the section'3 were theorems about
what came to be called the 'golden section', namely the.
division of a straight line in extreme and mean ratio as in
Eucl. II. 11 and VI. 30. The appearance of the latter problem
in Book II, the content of which is probably all Pythagorean,
suggests that the incommensurability of the segments with
1 Laws, 819 D-820 c. 
2 Hippias Maior, 303 B, C.
3 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 67. 6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INCOMMENSURABLES 
305
the whole line was discovered before Plato's time, if not as
early as the irrationality of V2.
(0) The Oeonietrical Number.
This is not the place to discuss at length the famous passage
about the Geometrical Number in the Republic.1 Nor is its
mathematical content of importance; the whole thing is
mystic rather than mathematical, and is expressed in
rhapsodical language, veiling by fanciful phraseology a few
simple mathematical conceptions. The numbers mentioned
are supposed to be two. Hultsch and Adam arrive at the
same two numbers, though by different routes. 
The first
of these numbers is 216, which according to Adam is the sum
of three cubes 33 + 43 + 53; 23.33 is the form in which
Hultsch obtains it.2
1 Bepublic, viii. 546 B—D. The number of interpretations of this passage
is legion. For an exhaustive discussion of the language as well as for
one of the best interpretations that has been put forward, see Dr. Adam's
edition of the Bepublic, vol. ii, pp. 204-8, 264-312.
2 The Greek is iv (o 7rpa>ro> avi-rjaeis bwdpcpai 
re Kal Svpavrevopepaiy 
Tpeis
dno(TTd(r€LSf rirrapas 
Be opovs 
XaftovcraL 6p.oiovpToap re Kal apop.oiovPT<np Kal
avt-oprcov Kal <f)6ivovrav, 
irdvra 
npoo-Tjyopa Kal pr)ra rrpos aXkrjXa a7T€(f>r]vav,
which Adam translates by 'the first number in which root and
square increases, comprehending three distances and four limits, of
elements that make like and unlike and wax and wane, render all
things conversable and rational with one another1, 
avgrja-eis are
clearly multiplications. 
dvpdpepal re Kal bwacrrevo^pai are explained in
this way. A straight line is said bvvaoOai (' to be capable of') an area,
e. g. a rectangle, when the square on it is equal to the rectangle ; hence
dvpapepr) should mean a side of a square, bvpaarcvophq represents a sort
of passive of bvpap.hr], meaning that of which the dvpapepr) is ' capable';
hence Adam takes it here to be the square of which the 8vpap.hr) is the
side, and the whole expression to mean the product of a square and its
side, i. e. simply the cube of the side. The cubes 33, 43, 53 are supposed
to be meant because the words in the description of the second number
* of which the ratio in its lowest terms 4:3 when joined to 5' clearly
refer to the right-angled triangle 3, 4, 5, and because at least three
authors, Plutarch (De Is. et Os. 373 F), Proclus (on Eucl. I, p. 428.1) and
Aristides Quintilianus (De miis., p. 152 Meibom. = p. 90 Jahn) say that
Plato used the Pythagorean or * cosmic' triangle in
his Number. The * three distances' are regarded
as ' dimensions', and 
the ' three distances and
four limits' are held to confirm the interpretation
'cube', because a solid (parallelepiped) was said to
have 'three dimensions and four limits ' (Theol. Ar.,
p. 16 Ast, and Iambi, in Nicom., p. 93. 10), the limits
being bounding points as A, B, C, D in the accom-
panying figure. ' Making like and unlike' is sup-
posed to refer to the square and oblong forms in which the second
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

306 
PLATO
The second number is described thus:
' The ratio 4 : 3 in its lowest terms (' the base', 7rv6/jirjp9 of
the ratio kiriTpiTos) joined or wedded to 5 yields two harmonies
when thrice increased {rph augrjOeis), the one equal an equal
number of times, so many times 100, the other of equal length
one way, but oblong, consisting on the one hand of 100 squares
of rational diameters of 5 diminished by one each or, if of
number is stated.
Another view of the whole passage has recently appeared (A. G. Laird,
Plato's Geometrical Number and the comment of Proclus, Madison, Wiscon-
sin, 1918). Like all other solutions, it is open to criticism in some
details, but it is attractive in so far as it makes greater use of Proclus
(in Platonis remp., vol. ii, p. 36 seq. Kroll) and especially of the passage
(p. 40) in which he illustrates the formation of the * harmonies' by means
of geometrical figures. According to Mr. Laird there are not two separ-
ate numbers, and the description from which Hultsch and Adam derive
the number 216 is not a description of a number but a statement of a
general method of formation of ' harmonies', which is then applied to
the triangle 3, 4, 5 as a particular case, in order to produce the one
Geometrical Number. The basis of the whole thing is the use of figures
like that of Eucl. YI. 8 (a right-angled triangle divided by a perpendicular
from the right angle on the opposite side into two right-angled triangles
similar to one another and to the original triangle). Let ABC be a
right-angled triangle in which the sides CB, BA containing the right
angle are rational numbers a, b respectively.
K 
Draw AF at right angles to AC meeting CB
produced in F. Then the figure AFC is that of
Eucl. VI. 8, and of course AB2 = CB.BF.
Complete the rectangle ABFL, and produce
FL, CA to meet at K. Then, by similar tri-
angles, CB, BA, FB (=AL) and EL are four
straight lines in continued proportion, and their
lengths are a, b, b2/a, b*/a2 respectively. Mul-
tiplying throughout, by a2 in order to get rid of
fractions, we may take the lengths to be a8,
a2b, ab2, b3 respectively. 
Now, on Mr. Laird's
view, avgrjaeis dwdfievm are squares, as AB2, and
av^r)(T€L9 8vva(TT€v6iA€va.i rectangles, 
as FB, BC> to
which the squares are equal. 
l Making like and
unlike' refers to the equal factors of a3, b3 and the unequal factors of
a2b, ab2; the terms a3, a2b, ab2, bz are four terms (opoi) of a continued
proportion with three intervals (anoaTaveis), and of course are all' con-
versable and rational with one another'. 
(Incidentally, out of such
terms we can even obtain the number 216, for if we put a = 2, b = 3, we
have 8, 12, 18, 27, and the product of the extremes 8.27 = the product
of the means 12.18 = 216). Applying the method to the triangle 3,4,5
(as Proclus does) we have the terms 27, 36, 48, 64, and the first three
numbers, multiplied respectively by 100, give the elements of the
Geometrical Number 3600 2=2700 .4800. 
On this interpretation rpls
avt-r)6eis simply means raised to the third dimension or * made solid' (as
Aristotle says, Politics e (E). 12, 1316 a 8), the factors being of course
3.3.3 = 27, 3.3.4 = 36, and 3.4.4 = 48; and 'the ratio 4:3 joined
to 5 ' does not mean either the product or the sum of 3, 4, 5, but simply
the triangle 3, 4,5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE GEOMETRICAL NUMBER 
307
irrational diameters, by two, and on the other hand of 100
cubes of 3.'
The ratio 4 : 3 must be taken in the sense of ' the numbers
4 and 3 ', and Adam takes 'joined with 5' to mean that 4, 3
and 5 are multiplied together, making 60 ; 60 c thrice increased'
he interprets as ' 60 thrice multiplied by 60', that is to say,
60x60x60x60 or 36002; * so many times 100' must then
be the 'equal' side of this, or 36 times 100; this 36002, or
12960000, is one of the 'harmonies'. The other is the same
number expressed as the product of two unequal factors, an
'oblong' number; the first factor is 100 times a number
which can be described either as 1 less than the square of the
e rational diameter of 5', or as 2 less than the square of
the ' irrational diameter' of 5, where the irrational diameter
of 5 is the diameter of a square of side 5, i.e. \/50, and the
rational diameter is the nearest whole number to this, namely
7, so that the number which is multiplied by 100 is 49 —1, or
50 — 2, i.e. 48, and the first factor is therefore 4800; the
second factor is 100 cubes of 3, or 2700; and of course
4800 x 2700 = 36002 or 12960000. Hultsch obtains the side,
3600, of the first' harmony' in another way; he takes 4 and 3
joined to 5 to be the sum of 4, 3 and 5, i. e. 12, and rph avgrjOek,
1 thrice increased', to mean that the 12 is ' multiplied by three'1
making 36 ; ' so many times 100 ' is then 36 times 100, or 3600.
But the main interest of the passage from the historical
1 Adam maintains that rp\s avgrjQcis cannot mean' multiplied by 3 \ He
observes (p. 278, note) that the Greek for ' multiplied by 3', if we
use avgdvco, would be rpiddt av£r]6eis, this being the construction used by
Nicomachus (ii. 15. 2 Iva 6 6 rpls y &v ira\iv rpidbi eV ak\o did&Tqfia
avgrjOfj KCU yivrjrai 6 K£) and in Theol. Ar. (p. 39, Ast efaSi av£r)0€is). Never-
theless I think that rpls av^rjOds would not be an unnatural expression for
a mathematician to use for * multiplied by 3 \ let alone Plato in a passage
like this. It is to be noted that 7ro\\aTr\a<nd(a> and iroWanXdcrios are
likewise commonly used with the dative of the multiplier; yet lo-dicis
•noWa.7r\d(rios is the regular expression for ' equimultiple \ And alf-dva is
actually found with roa-avrdKis: see Pappus ii, p. 28. 15, 22% where roo-av-
rdkts av^rjcrofiev means * we have to multiply by such a power' of 10000 or
of 10 (although it is true that the chapter in which the expression occurs
may be a late addition to Pappus's original text). On the whole, I prefer
Hultsch's interpretation to Adam's, rpls avi^OeU can hardly mean that
60 is raised to the fourth power, 60*; and if it did, ' so many times 100',
immediately following the expression for 36002, would be pointless and
awkward. On the other hand, ' so many times 100' following the ex-
pression for 36 would naturally indicate 3600.
x 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

308 
PLATO
point of view lies in the terms 'rational' and 'irrational
diameter of 5'. A fair approximation to \/2 was obtained
by selecting a square number such that, if 2 be multiplied by
it, the product is nearly a square; 25 is such a square number,
since 25 times 2, or 50, only differs by 1 from 72; conse-
quently ^ is an approximation to \/2. 
It may have been
arrived at in the tentative way here indicated; we cannot
doubt that it was current in Plato's time; nay, we know that
the general solution of the equations
x2-2y*= ±1
by means of successive ' side-J and ' diameter-' numbers was
Pythagorean, and Plato was therefore, here as in so many
other places, ' Pythagorizing'.
The diameter is again mentioned in the Politicus, where
Plato speaks of ' the diameter which is in square (Swdfjiei)
two feet', meaning the diagonal of the square with side
1 foot, and again of the diameter of the square on this
diameter, i. e. the diagonal of a square 2 square feet in area,
in other words, the side of a square 4 square feet in area,
or a straight line 2 feet in length.1
Enough has been said to show that Plato was abreast of
the mathematics of his day, and we can understand the
remark of Proclus on the influence which he exerted upon
students and workers in that field:
' he caused mathematics in general and geometry in particular
to make a very great advance by reason of his enthusiasm
for them, which of course is obvious from the way in which
he filled his books with mathematical illustrations and every-
where tries to kindle admiration for these subjects in those
who make a pursuit of philosophy.'2
Mathematical 'arts'.
Besides the purely theoretical subjects, Plato recognizes the
practical or applied mathematical 'arts'; along with arith-
metic, he mentions the art of measurement (for purposes of
trade or craftsmanship) and that of weighing 3; in the former
connexion he speaks of the instruments of the craftsman,
the circle-drawer (ropvos), the compasses (SiaPrjrris), the rule
1 Politicus, 266 B. 
2 Proclus on Bud. I, p. 66. 8-14.
3 FhQebus, 55 E-56 E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MATHEMATICAL <ARTS' 
309
and 'a certain elaborate npoo-aycbyiov' (?approxi-
mator). The art of weighing, he says,1 (is concerned with
the heavier and lighter weight', as ' logistic' deals with odd
and even in their relation to one another, and geometry with
magnitudes greater and less or equal; in the Protagoras he
speaks of the man skilled in weighing
' who puts together first the pleasant, and second the painful-
things, and adjusts the near and the far on the balance'2;
the principle of the lever was therefore known to Plato, who
was doubtless acquainted with the work of Archytas, the
reputed founder of the science of mechanics.3
(a) Optics.
In the physical portion of the Timaeus Plato gives his
explanation of the working of the sense organs. The account
of the process of vision and the relation of vision to the
light of day is interesting,4 and at the end of it is a reference
to the properties of mirrors, which is perhaps the first indica-
tion of a science of optics. When, says Plato, we see a thing
in a mirror, the fire belonging to the face combines about the
bright surface of the mirror with the fire in the visual current;
the right portion of the face appears as the left in the image
seen, and vice versa, because it is the mutually opposite parts
of the visual current and of the object seen which come into
contact, contrary to the usual mode of impact. (That is, if you
imagine your reflection in the mirror to be another person
looking at you, his left eye is the image of your right, and the
left side of his left eye is the image of the right side of your
right.) But, on the other hand, the right side really becomes
the right side and the left the left when the light in com-
bination with that with which it combines is transferred from
one side to the other; this happens when the smooth part
of the mirror is higher at the sides than in the middle (i. e. the
mirror is a hollow cylindrical mirror held with its axis
vertical), and so diverts the right portion of the visual current
to the left and vice versa. And if you turn the mirror so that
its axis is horizontal, everything appears upside down.
1 Charmides, 166 B. 
2 Protagoras, 356 B.
3 Diog. L. viii. 83. 
4 Timaeus, 45 B-46 C.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

310 
PLATO
(/3) Music.
In music Plato had the advantage of the researches of
Archytas and the Pythagorean school into the numerical
relations of tones. In the Timaeus we find an elaborate
filling up of intervals by the interposition of arithmetic and
harmonic means1; Plato is also clear that higher and lower
pitch are due to the more or less rapid motion of the air.2
In like manner the different notes in the ' harmony of the
spheres \ poetically turned into Sirens sitting on each of the
eight whorls of the Spindle and each uttering a single sound,
a single musical note, correspond to the different speeds of
the eight circles, that of the fixed stars and those of the sun,
the moon, and the five planets respectively.3
(y) Astronomy.
This brings us to Plato's astronomy. His views are stated
in their most complete and final form in the Tiinaeus, though
account has to be taken of other dialogues, the Pkaedo, the
Republic, and the Laws, He based himself upon the early
Pythagorean system (that of Pythagoras, as distinct from
that of his successors, who were the first to abandon the
geocentric system and made the earth, with the sun, the
moon and the other planets, revolve in circles about the 'cen-
tral fire'); while of course he would take account of the
results of the more and more exact observations made up
to his own time. According to Plato, the universe has the
most perfect of all shapes, that of a sphere. In the centre
of this sphere rests the earth, immovable and kept there by
the equilibrium of symmetry as it were ('for a thing in
equilibrium in the middle of any uniform substance will not
have cause to incline more or less in any direction'4). The
axis of the sphere of the universe passes through the centre of
the earth, which is also spherical, and the sphere revolves
uniformly about the axis in the direction from east to west.
The fixed stars are therefore carried round in small circles
of the sphere. The sun, the moon and the five planets are
also carried round in the motion of the outer sphere, but they
have independent circular movements of their own in addition.
1 Timaeus, 35 c-36 B. 
2 Ib. 67 B.
3 Republic, 617 B. 
* Phaedo, 109 A.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ASTRONOMY 
311
These latter movements take place in a plane which cuts
at an angle the equator of the heavenly sphere; the several
orbits are parts of what Plato calls the 4 circle of the Other',
as distinguished from the * circle of the Same', which is the
daily revolution of the heavenly sphere as a whole and which,
carrying the circle of the Other and the seven movements
therein along with it, has the mastery over them. The result
of the combination of the two movements in the case of any
one planet is to twist its actual path in space into a spiral*;
the spiral is of course included between two planes parallel to
that of the equator at a distance equal to the maximum
deviation of the planet in its course from the equator on
either side. The speeds with which the sun, the moon and
the five planets describe their own orbits (independently
of the daily rotation) are in the following order; the moon is
the quickest; the sun is the next quickest and Venus and
Mercury travel in company with it, each of the three taking
about a year to describe its orbit; the next in speed is Mars,
the next Jupiter, and the last and slowest is Saturn; the
speeds are of course angular speeds, not linear. The order
of distances from the earth is, beginning with the nearest,
as follows : moon, sun, Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn.
In the Republic all these heavenly bodies describe their own
orbits in a sense opposite to that of the daily rotation, i. e. in
the direction from west to east; this is what we should
expect; but in the Timaeus we are distinctly told, in one
place, that the seven circles move ' in opposite senses to one
another5,2 and, in another place, that Venus and Mercury
have 'the contrary tendency' to the sun.3 This peculiar
phrase has not been satisfactorily interpreted. The two state-
ments taken together in their literal sense appear to imply
that Plato actually regarded Venus and Mercury as describing
their orbits the contrary way to the sun, incredible as this
may appear (for on this hypothesis the angles of divergence
between the two planets and the sun would be capable of any
value up to 180°, whereas observation shows that they are
never far from the sun). Proclus and others refer to attempts
to explain the passages by means of the theory of epicycles;
Chalcidius in particular indicates that the sun's motion on its
1 Timaeus, 38 E-39 B. 
2 Ib. 36 D. 
8 Ib. 38 D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

312 
PLATO
epicycle (which is from east to west) is in the contrary sense
to the motion of Venus and Mercury on their epicycles
respectively (which is from west to east)1; and this would
be a satisfactory explanation if Plato could be supposed to
have been acquainted with the theory of epicycles. But the
probabilities are entirely against the latter supposition. All,
therefore, that can be said seems to be this. Heraclides of
Pontus, Plato's famous pupil, is known on clear evidence to
have discovered that Venus and Mercury revolve round the
sun like satellites. He may have come to the same conclusion
about the superior planets, but this is not certain; and in any
case he must have made the discovery with reference to
Mercury and Venus first. Heraclides's discovery meant that
Venus and Mercury, while accompanying the sun in its annual
motion, described what are really epicycles about it. Now
discoveries of this sort are not made without some preliminary
seeking, and it may have been some vague inkling of the
truth that prompted the remark of Plato, whatever the precise
meaning of the words.
The differences between the angular speeds of the planets
account for the overtakings of one planet by another, and
the combination of their independent motions with that of the
daily rotation causes one planet to appear to be overtaking
another when it is really being overtaken by it and vice
versa.2 
The sun, moon and planets are instruments for
measuring time.3 Even the earth is an instrument for making
night and day by virtue of its not rotating about its axis,
while the rotation of the fixed stars carrying the sun with
it is completed once in twenty-four hours; a month has passed
when the moon after completing her own orbit overtakes the
sun (the 'month' being therefore the synodic month), and
a year when the sun has completed its own circle. According
to Plato the time of revolution of the other planets (except
Venus and Mercury, which have the same speed as the sun)
had not been exactly calculated; nevertheless the Perfect
Year is completed ' when the relative speeds of all the eight
revolutions [the seven independent revolutions and the daily
rotation] accomplish their course together and reach their
1 Chalcidius on Timaeus, cc. 81, 109, 112. 
2 Timaeus, 39 A.
3 Ib. 41 E, 42 D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ASTRONOMY 
313
starting-point'} 
There was apparently a tradition that the
Great Year of Plato was 36000 years: this corresponds to
the minimum estimate of the precession of the equinoxes
quoted by Ptolemy from Hipparchus's treatise on the length
of the year, namely at least one-hundredth of a degree in
a year, or 1° in 100 years,2 that is to say, 360° in 36000 years.
The period is connected by Adam with the Geometrical Num-
ber 12960000 because this number of days, at the rate of 360
<days in the year, makes 36000 years. The coincidence may,
it is true, have struck Ptolemy and made him describe the
Great Year arrived at on the basis of 1° per 100 years
as the ' Platonic' year; but there is nothing to show that
Plato himself calculated a Great Year with reference to pre-
cession: on the contrary, precession was first discovered by
Hipparchus.
As regards the distances of the sun, moon and planets
Plato has nothing more definite than that the seven circles
are ' in the proportion of the double intervals, three of each'3:
the reference is to the Pythagorean rerpa/cruy represented in
the annexed figure, the numbers after 1 being
on the one side successive powers of 2, and on
the other side successive powers of 3. This
gives 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 27 in ascending order.
What precise estimate of relative distances
Plato based upon these figures is uncertain.
It is generally supposed (1) that the radii of the successive
orbits are in the ratio of the numbers; but (2) Chalcidius
considered that 2, 3, 4 ... are the successive differences
between these radii,4 so that the radii themselves are in
the ratios of 1, 1 + 2 = 3 , 1 + 2 + 3 = 6, &c.; and again (3),
according to Macrobius,5 the Platonists held that the successive
radii are as 1, 1 . 2 = 2, 1.2.3 = 6, 6 . 4 = 24, 24 . 9 = 216,
216.8 = 1728 and 1728 . 27 = 46656. 
In any case the
figures have no basis in observation.
We have said that Plato made the earth occupy the centre
of the universe and gave it no movement of any kind. Other
1 Timaeus, 39 B-D.
2 Ptolemy, Syntaxes, vii. 2, vol. ii, p. 15. 9-17, Heib.
Timaeus, 36 D. 
4 Chalcidius on Timaeus, c. 96, p. 167, Wrobel
5 Macrobius, In somn. Scip. ii. 3. 14.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

314 
PLATO
views, however, have been attributed to Plato by later writers.
In the Timaeus Plato had used of the earth the expression
which has usually been translated 'our nurse, globed (/XAo-
\ikvr\v) round the axis stretched from pole to pole through
the universe '-1 It is well known that Aristotle refers to the
passage in these terms:
; Some say that the earth, actually lying at the centre (/cat
Keijievqi/ km rod KtvTpov), is yet wound and "moves (iWeo-Bcu
Kal Kivtlo-Qai) about the axis stretched through the universe
from pole to pole.'2
This naturally implies that Aristotle attributed to Plato
the view that the earth rotates about its axis. Such a view
is, however, entirely inconsistent with the whole system
described in the Timaeus (and also in the Laws, which Plato
did not live to finish), where it is the sphere of the fixed
stars which by its revolution about the earth in 24 hours
makes night and day; moreover, there is no reason to doubt
the evidence that it was Heracjides of Pontus who was the
first to affirm the rotation of the earth about its own axis
in 24 hours. The natural inference seems to be that Aristotle
either misunderstood or misrepresented Plato, the ambiguity
of the word iWofiii/rji/ being the contributing cause or the
pretext as the case may be. There are, however, those who
maintain that Aristotle must have known what Plato meant
and was incapable of misrepresenting him on a subject like
this. Among these is Professor Burnet,3 who, being satisfied
that Aristotle understood cXXofi&rji/ to mean motion of some
sort, and on the strength of a new reading which he has
adopted from two MSS. of the first class, has essayed a new
interpretation of Plato's phrase. The new reading differs
from the former texts in having the article rrju after
iWo/JLevrji', which makes the phrase run thus, yr\v 8e Tpo(f)bv
fi\v r]ii€T€pavy IXXofiii/rjv Se TT\V, nepl rov Sia iravros TTOXOV
Terafievov. Burnet, holding that we can only supply with
TJ]V some word like 686v, understands irepioSov or wepicpopdv,
and translates < earth our nurse going to and fro on its path
round the axis which stretches right through the universe'.
1 Timaeus, 40 B.
2 Arist. Be caelo, ii. 13, 293 b 20; cf. ii. 14, 296 a 25.
3 Greek Philosophy, Part I, Thales to Plato, pp. 347-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ASTRONOMY 
315
In confirmation of this Burnet cites the 'unimpeachable
testimony' of Theophrastus, who said that
' Plato in his old age repented of having given the earth
the central place in the universe, to which it had no right31;
and he concludes that, according to Plato in the Timaeus9
the earth is not the centre of the universe. But the sentences
in which Aristotle paraphrases the IWofiivrjj/ in the Timaeus
by the words iWeaOcu Kal KiveiaQai both make it clear that
the persons who held the view in question also declared
that the earth lies or is placed at the centre (Keifihrju km
rod KtvTpov), or c placed the earth-at the centre' (eirl rod fieaov
Sevres). Burnet's explanation is therefore in contradiction to
part of Aristotle's statement, if not to the rest; so that he
does not appear to have brought the question much nearer
to a solution. Perhaps some one will suggest that the rotation
or oscillation about the axis of the universe is small, so small
as to be fairly consistent with the statement that the earth
remains at the centre. Better, I think, admit that, on our
present information, the puzzle is insoluble.
The dictum of Theophrastus that Plato in his old age
repented of having placed the earth in the centre is incon-
sistent with the theory of the Timaeus, as we have said.
Boeckh explained it as a misapprehension. 
There appear
to have been among Plato's immediate successors some who
altered Plato's system in a Pythagorean sense and who may
be alluded to in another passage of the De caelo2; Boeckh
suggested, therefore, that the views of these Pythagorizing
Platonists may have been put down to Plato himself. But
the tendency now seems to be to accept the testimony of
Theophrastus literally. Heiberg does so, and so does Burnet,
who thinks it probable that Theophrastus heard the statement
which he attributes to Plato from Plato himself. But I would
point out that, if the Timaeus, as Burnet contends, contained
Plato's explicit recantation of his former view that the earth
was at the centre, there was no need to supplement it by an
oral communication to Theophrastus. In any case the question
has no particular importance in comparison with the develop-
ments which have next to be described.
1 Plutarch, Quaest. Plat 8. 1, 1006 c; cf. Life ofNuma, c. 11.
2 Arist. De caelo, ii. 13, 293 a 27-b 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

