Page 1 of 4 
                                                                                                                     
NOTATION  AS  THE  CHIEF  BARRIER  
AND  THE  FAILURE  TO  FOCUS  ON  THE 
 PSYCHOLGY  OF  LOGIC   EDUCATION  (PLE) 
Shea  Zellweger 
2009 
     
 
At the present time we do not have any academic communities 
that are taking a full-fledged programmatic interest in what I will 
call the “psychology of logic education.”  The main thrust of my 
presentation will call attention to four key challenges that need to be 
addressed and fully resolved, so that this new area, now known as 
the Psychology of Logic Education (PLE), can come into existence. 
 
The first major challenge comes from the need to introduce a 
repeat of what happened in the history of numbers.  This challenge 
points to the evolution of notation.  Historically, the significant 
major systems used to write numerals looked to the efforts made by 
the Babylonians, the Chinese, the Maya, and the Arabic translators 
who relayed the fundamental insights coming from India.  In effect, 
there would be no Psychology of Mathematics Education (PME), as 
we know it today, if we still used Roman numerals.  Instead, today 
what is done is grounded in fundamental structure.  Fortunately, the  
rock bottom essentials that have been built into the Hindu-Arabic 
numerals that we are now using are such that this structure now 
inhabits an abacus that has been carried to the mental level, a 
mental abacus that is anchored to the real number line. 

Page 2 of 4 
 
 
 
Likewise, the first major step that leads to the existence of PLE 
depends on making a major shift in the notations that are now being 
used for the Propositional Calculus, otherwise called the Logic of 
Atomic Sentences (and, or, if).  These notations are not grounded in 
the deep interrelations that inhabit the fundamental structure.  
Instead and in contrast, the rock bottom essentials that we need are 
found in the Box-X notation devised by Peirce in 1902, a notation 
that today stands under a shadow so large and so dense that it is 
commonly ignored.  Note that the X-stem Logic Alphabet (XLA) 
that I devised is a shape value notation that consists of 16 letter 
shapes.  X-stem is now seen as a direct continuation of Peirce’s 
Box-X.  Like Arabic numerals, X-stem is grounded in fundamental 
structure.  In effect, as required by the needs of the Propositional 
Calculus, X-stem has been coded so that every one of the 16 letter 
shapes is given meaning by always mentally framing it against an 
all-common standard square, itself serving as the root shape that can 
be subjected to interrelations-sensitive symmetry operations. 
 
The second major challenge comes from the need to introduce 
a replay of what has become standard curriculum when the use of 
numbers is taught from K to 12.  This is basic for PME as we know 
it.  The sequence of lessons in the curriculum parallels the main line 
order of the cognitive stages in Piaget.  Sensorimotor games include 
finger counting.  Physical objects are also counted, such as beads, 
trees, whatever.  Dienes Blocks model the decimal system.  Diagrams 
depict assortments of numerals in many ways.  And so forth, as the 
students continue to cover the increasing complexity in the number 
operations introduced across the curriculum. 

Page 3 of 4 
 
Likewise, the second major step that leads to PLE depends on 
constructing a curriculum that will parallel the cognitive stages in 
Piaget.  This is precisely what becomes possible, given the way 
X-stem has been designed. Start very early and include 
sensorimotor finger positions.  Then go to marble boards, followed 
by dot cards.  Now introduce the shapes of the 16 letter shapes, but 
at this stage make no reference to the code that gives logical 
meanings to the letter shapes.  Continue with the hand-held 
symmetry models, namely the logic bug, the flipstick, the clock 
compass, and then the logical garnet.  Note that the far end of what 
is happening here, far beyond the scope of this presentation, is that 
the complexity in the use of these symmetry models can be 
continued all the way to the college level, even to graduate school. 
The third major challenge comes from a need that is nicely 
noted in what happened more than a thousand years ago, when 
Roman numerals still carried the day, but at a time when Arabic 
numerals were slowly being carried into Europe.  Someone named 
Gerbert went to Spain, learned how to write Arabic numerals, 
returned to France, but as long as he lived, he never learned how to 
add and multiply with them.  I call this the “Gerbert Barrier.”  Here 
I am calling attention to a basic assumption that PME takes for 
granted.  We expect our students to do both ---  not only to write the 
Hindu-Arabic numerals but also to be able to operate on them, 
namely, to activate the four standard operations in arithmetic. 
Likewise, the third major step calls on the same assumption 
just mentioned for PME.  PLE also assumes that the student will not 
only write the letter shapes but will also be able to subject these 
symbols to the symmetry operations that perform the logical 
calculations.  This point amounts to a fair warning, because too 

Page 4 of 4 
often I have been told about the uselessness of X-stem, usually by 
someone who knows how to write the letter shapes but who has not 
yet learned how to operate with them  ---  like Gerbert, not even 
knowing that this is possible.  
 
The fourth major challenge does not have a clear parallel in 
the use of Hindu-Arabic numerals, so for this one we cannot look to 
PME for guidance.  On the logic side, standard notations for the 
Propositional Calculus have evolved so that the main concentration 
is now being given to only three of the binary connectives (and, or, 
if), in contrast to the 16 letter shapes in X-stem.  Often reasons 
based on axiomatics are given to justify that this logic can be done 
with as few as only one connective, such as with “Nor” alone, or 
with “Nand” alone.  I call this “Axiomatics in Overdrive.”  Note that 
as long as we continue with this mindset and remain walled in by 
this dead end, fully at the mercy of the misplaced use of the full 
power of axiomatics, there will be no PLE that is worthy of the 
deeply grounded, systemic advantages of the X-stem Logic 
Alphabet. 
 
In summary, I have laid out four conditions that I count as 
minimum to establish a good beginning for PLE.  First, shift to 
another notation, one that, if it is not X-stem, is at least in the same 
class as X-stem.  Second, call on sensorimotor games and the 
hand-held symmetry models to construct the logic curriculum for K 
to 12.  Third, make sure to follow through enough to get on the 
other side of the Gerbert Barrier.  Fourth, explore the full range of 
X-stem.  This is also saying, do not remain both trapped by and 
restricted to a limited notation, much like wearing a straitjacket, 
this one imposed by the full force of Axiomatics in Overdrive.   
 

