
Political Bubbles
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m


Political Bubbles 
Financial Crises and the  
Failure of American Democracy
Nolan McCarty
Pr i nce ton U ni ve r s i t y
Keith T. Poole
U ni ve r s i t y  of  G e or gia
Howard Rosenthal
Ne w Yor k U ni ve r s i t y
P r i n c e t o n  U n i v e r s i t y  P r e s s
Princeton and Oxford
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m

Copyright © 2013 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 
08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, 
Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu
Jacket designed by Marcella Engel Roberts.
Illustration composite by Marcella Engel Roberts using stock diagram © Pincasso; 
Capitol building, Washington DC © Orhan Cam; and bubbles © Marcel Jancovic. 
Jacket photographs courtesy of Shutterstock.
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McCarty, Nolan M.
Political bubbles: financial crises and the failure of American democracy / Nolan  
McCarty, Princeton University, Keith T. Poole, University of Georgia,  
Howard Rosenthal, New York University.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-691-14501-3 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-691-14501-6 (cloth : alk. paper)  1.  Global Financial Crisis,  
2008–2009—Political aspects.  2.  Financial crises—United States—History—21st 
century.  I.  Poole, Keith T.  II.  Rosenthal, Howard, 1939–  III.  Title. 
HB37172008 .M34 2013
330.97390931—dc23    2012041583
British Library Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Sabon
Printed on acid-­free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
1  3  5  7  9  10  8  6  4  2

Contents
Acknowledgments  vii
Introduction  1
Part I: The Political Bubble 
Why Washington Allows Financial Crises to Occur
Chapter 1 
Bubble Expectations  31
Chapter 2 
Ideology  38
Chapter 3 
Interests  71
Chapter 4 
Institutions  90
Chapter 5 
The Political Bubble of the Crisis of 2008  117
Part II: Pops 
Why Washington Delays in Solving Financial Crises
Chapter 6 
Historical Lessons of the Responses to Pops  153
Chapter 7 
The Pop of 2008  184
Chapter 8 
“Pop”ulism  228

vi  •  Contents
Chapter 9 
How to Waste a Crisis  251
Epilogue  275
Notes  283
Bibliography  305
Name Index  327
Subject Index  333

Acknowledgments
At the close of our last book Polarized America: The 
Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches, we speculated about 
what might end the cycle of economic inequality and ideological 
polarization that the United States had witnessed over the past 
thirty years. Having carefully ruled out all the “small ball” solu-
tions (e.g., open primaries, gerrymandering reform, campaign 
finance reform), we tried to go deep. One of the scenarios we laid 
out was a political realignment engendered by a financial crisis 
such as that of the 1930s, which ushered in the transition from a 
laissez-­faire political economy to the New Deal.
We were chided by a few colleagues who found us unduly 
pessimistic. Surely the system could be changed short of finan-
cial calamity. And when the crisis did occur, the smart set was 
convinced that hope, change, and a new politics had arisen from 
it. But history has proven the conclusions of Polarized America 
to be downright Pollyannaish.
We had our crisis, but we didn’t get much for it. This book 
aims to try to explain why we got so much right in Polarized 
America (or at least we think so) but got the conclusion so wrong.
This book was greatly improved by comments on our first 
draft from Adam Bonica, Patrick Bolton, Charles Cameron, 
Jean-­Laurent Rosenthal, Joshua Thorpe, Chris Tausanovich, 
two readers for Princeton University Press, and an economist 
who wished to remain anonymous. Barry Sacks helped on the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act. We also thank Tom 
Romer, who has been our excellent colleague at Carnegie Mellon 

viii  •  Acknowledgments
and Princeton Universities for many years. Several ideas in this 
book were worked out when we collaborated with Tom on a 
2010 article published in Daedalus (and a cheeky op-­ed about 
Russ Feingold in the Huffington Post). None of these people is 
likely to be in complete agreement with the views we express. As 
nonideologues, we welcome debate.
Nolan McCarty would like to thank seminar participants 
at Princeton’s Center for the Study of Democratic Politics for 
feedback on an early version of the book’s arguments. Partici-
pation in a Russell Sage Foundation–­funded collaboration on 
political responses to the crisis, headed by Nancy Bermeo and 
Jonas Pontusson, provided a large amount of feedback as well 
as the opportunity to write the first draft of the case studies 
on the economic stimulus plan and the Dodd-­Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act. McCarty’s discussions 
with Dan Carpenter, David Moss, and other participants in the 
Tobin Project on Regulatory Capture were very helpful in shap-
ing the discussion of the politics of financial regulation.
Keith T. Poole would like to thank his colleagues Scott Ains­
worth, Jamie Carson, and Tony Madonna for many useful conver­
sa­tions about the manuscript. He also received valuable feedback 
from students in two graduate courses and an undergraduate 
course on political polarization.
Howard Rosenthal’s interest in the political economy of finance 
came about from visiting the European Center for Advanced 
Research in Economics and Statistics (ECARES) in Brussels in 
1995. He had an exceptional group of colleagues, most notably 
Erik Berglöf, Patrick Bolton, Mathias Dewatripont, Ailsa Röell, 
and Gérard Roland. Berglöf realized that bankruptcy policy 
was historically a divisive political issue in the United States.  
An investigation of what could be learned about the conflict 
from roll call voting analysis was made possible by the DW-­
NOMINATE model that we had developed. Gérard Roland and 
Abdul Noury, the latter then an ECARES student, began to use 
NOMINATE to study the European Parliament and wound up 
writing, with Simon Hix, a book that won the Richard F. Fenno, 

Acknowledgments  •  ix
Jr. Prize from the Legislative Studies Section of the American 
Political Science Association. Playing off the joint work with 
Berglöf, Bolton and Rosenthal later wrote “Political Intervention 
in Debt Contracts,” a paper that provides a rationale for govern-
ment relief of debtors even in the shadow of moral hazard. The 
Bolton-­Roland model of taxation was later used as a theoretical 
framework for our analysis of the politics of redistribution in 
Polarized America. The stop at ECARES was a career changer 
for Rosenthal.
Patrick Bolton deserves special thanks. He was an organizer 
of the meeting “Preventing Future Financial Crises” at Colum-
bia University in December 2008. When the program was put 
together months before, no one realized that the American finan-
cial system was near collapse. Bolton asked Rosenthal to make a 
brief presentation on the politics of the crisis. Discussions after 
the conference led us to write Political Bubbles. As the book 
evolved, Bolton was always available to provide an economist’s 
reality check to a trio of political scientists. In 2011–­12, Bolton 
served as the first director of the Institute for Applied Social Sci-
ence in Toulouse, France. He invited Rosenthal to give two talks 
drawn from the book manuscript. We thank those who were in 
attendance for numerous comments that influenced the revised 
manuscript.
Between the Columbia meeting and the Toulouse talks, Rosen­
thal was also able to present themes from the book as a plenary 
address at a political economy conference at Università Cattolica 
in Milan, as the William H. Riker Prize Lecture at the University 
of Rochester, and at the Priorat Workshop in Theoretical Political 
Science in Falset, Spain. Participants, particularly Larry Rothen-
berg and Guido Tabellini, are thanked for their comments. In ad­- 
dition to academic colleagues, Rosenthal owes a great deal to the  
undergraduate honors students who have taken his seminar Poli-
tics and Finance at New York University since 2006.
Rosenthal would also like to thank Luca Bocci and Nadia 
Bolognesi, who for the past thirteen years have provided a coun-
try home in Piemonte where a good deal of the work on both 

x  •  Acknowledgments
Polarized America and Political Bubbles was carried out. Every 
year brings a reminder that there are many, many virtues to a 
country with a backward financial system, a corrupt political 
class, no babies, and mountains of debt.
The authors would also like to thank Michelle Anderson for very 
able research and editorial assistance. Our manuscript shares at 
least one similarity with the responses to financial crises: it was 
delayed. So special thanks goes to Chuck Myers, our editor at 
Princeton University Press, who was patient, persevering, and 
insightful.

Political Bubbles
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m


Introduction
Prologue: A Bubble Couple
One of us was unfortunate enough to be caught up in the hous-
ing bubble in southern California. He was relocating to the San 
Diego area in late 2004. He and his wife had owned four homes 
in three states over the previous twenty-­seven years. Typically, 
the couple would negotiate with sellers over price and then seek 
financing from a bank. They would also initiate contact with 
lenders for refinancing.
The couple went house hunting when the North San Diego 
County real estate market was frenetic. Their agent advised them 
to carry cell phones at all times because if anything came on 
the market potential buyers had less than a day to view a prop-
erty and make an offer. Typically houses drew multiple offers. 
When they found a house a few days before Christmas, the agent 
advised making an offer close to the full asking price in hopes 
that the seller would accept it before an open house scheduled 
for two days after Christmas. Their offer was accepted.
The couple’s real surprise came when they met with a mort-
gage broker who had an office in the same building as the real 
estate company. They were offered several different kinds of 
loans, several of which they had never heard of. The idea of 
an “interest only” loan seemed bizarre, and they opted for a 
5-­percent-­down thirty-­year mortgage. The first mortgage was 
with Genesis Mortgage Corporation, which resold it within a 
month to Wells Fargo. The second mortgage was with National 
City Mortgage of Cleveland, Ohio. Within two months National 
City, unsolicited, offered to extend more credit on the house. 

2  •  Introduction
A home equity line was provided that could be drawn on to 
make improvements to the house. Now the lender was throwing 
money at the borrower rather than the borrower trying to get 
a loan. Of course, the couple took the line. Owning a house in 
southern California was one of the best investments you could 
make. If you held on to a house for ten years or so you could sell 
at a big profit—­so went the local lore. Things did not turn out 
that way.
National City was the epitome of the financial bubble. At one 
time a reputable bank dating back to the mid-­nineteenth cen-
tury, it got into subprime mortgages in 1999 by purchasing First 
Franklin Financial Companies.1
National City kept expanding. By 2003 and 2004 it was 
making $1 billion per year on its subprime business. In 2006 
National City sold First Franklin to Merrill Lynch but had to 
hold on to $10 billion in subprime loans that Merrill Lynch did 
not want.2 This was the beginning of the end. National City’s 
subprime holdings tanked. The bank lost $1.8 billion in the sec-
ond quarter of 2008, and it was forced to sell itself to PNC Bank 
in October of that year.3 PNC used government money from the 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) to complete the acquisi-
tion. (Merrill Lynch was to meet its own end, even without that 
extra $10 billion in subprime loans.)
In 2007 the couple switched the second mortgage from Na-
tional City to Wells Fargo. Wells Fargo let them make further 
draws on their “equity” to make improvements to the house. The 
housing bubble, the couple failed to realize, had already popped. 
The country was about to enter the Great Recession. Tax collec-
tions in California collapsed. Something had to give in the erst-
while Golden State, which for years had irreconcilable passions 
for low taxes, a prison gulag, and generous public-­employee 
pensions. The author’s employer, the University of California, 
cut nominal salaries through furloughs—­unpaid vacations with-
out the vacation. Public education, at all levels, became a victim 
of the collapse of the housing bubble. As for the couple, the sal-
ary cut put stress on their mortgage commitments.

Introduction  •  3
The couple was more fortunate than most Americans. One 
day the phone rang. They were able to move to a much better 
job and a much bigger house in Georgia. They did lose a great 
deal of money on the California house. Getting caught up in the 
bubble set back the author’s expected retirement date. But unlike 
National City, the couple survived, and unlike millions of other 
borrowers, they still have a home.
A Nation Bubbles Over
The financial system of the United States was close to collapse by 
the fall of 2008. On September 15, two of the four largest invest-
ment banks failed. One, Lehman Brothers, declared bankruptcy. 
Lehman failed to find a buyer, and the government decided not 
to guarantee some of its underperforming assets in order to facil-
itate a sale. The other, Merrill Lynch, the country’s largest bro-
kerage firm, was sold to Bank of America at a rock-­bottom price.
The next day the Federal Reserve announced an $85 billion 
bailout of the nation’s largest insurance company, American Inter-
national Group (AIG). AIG’s troubles were based on billions of 
dollars in swaps that it underwrote against defaults of mortgage-­
backed securities (MBSs) and collateralized debt obligations 
(CDOs).4 A collapse of AIG would have destroyed the value of 
these securities and generated even greater sell-­offs, losses, and 
insolvencies throughout the entire financial system. Three days 
later, on September 18, Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson 
went to Congress to plead for the enactment of the $700 billion 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). This sketchy plan, a vir-
tual blank check from Congress to the U.S. Treasury, sought to 
reinject capital into the financial system. Government purchases 
of mortgage-­backed securities and other distressed assets would, 
it was claimed, prop up markets and halt the financial crisis.
The dramatic failures of the week of September 15 capped a 
string of financial calamities that had begun with the govern-
ment bailout of Bear Stearns in March 2008. Just a week before 
the collapse of Lehman and Merrill Lynch, the government took 

4  •  Introduction
over the biggest players in the mortgage market, the government-­
sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Be- 
fore the year was out, the federal government would also con-
trol AIG. The ensuing crisis hit an economy already in recession 
after the collapse of the bubble in housing prices. Unemployment 
pushed toward levels not seen since the early 1980s. The auto- 
mobile industry, the traditional symbol of American manufactur-
ing strength, almost collapsed before a government-­orchestrated 
­restructuring in which the American taxpayer became the owner 
of a majority of General Motors’ stock. At the beginning of 2012, 
GM, Ally Financial (the successor to GM’s long-­time finance 
subsidiary GMAC), and AIG remained subject to government 
supervision; the future of Fannie and Freddie remains unresolved.
The financial crisis of 2008 was a truly traumatic event for 
Americans and affected almost everyone else in the global econ-
omy. But the causes of this calamity continue to be hotly debated.
The blame frequently goes to individuals such as investment 
bankers reaping huge bonuses on Wall Street, go-­granny-­go sub-
prime mortgage originators in Pasadena, and house flippers in 
Las Vegas. Others focus on large structural factors such as the 
explosion of financial innovation and global financial imbalances 
that showered the United States and much of the industrialized 
world with cheap credit from China and the Middle East. Still 
others claim that the crisis was just one more instance of mar-
kets gone wild, a mass mania no different from the seventeenth-­
century bubble in the price of Dutch tulip bulbs.5 We, however, 
do not reach a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity.
We focus on the national government in Washington, D.C. To 
be precise, we put much of the responsibility for the crisis and 
the failure to undertake genuine reform of the American finan-
cial system squarely on members of Congress, on Presidents 
Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, 
George W. Bush, and Barack Obama and on those they chose to 
serve in their cabinets and in the Executive Office in the White 
House and to run regulatory agencies, including the Federal 
Reserve and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). 

Introduction  •  5
We contrast their actions with those of the private-­sector actors 
who indulged in “infectious greed” and “irrational exuberance.” 
Political actors failed in their response to the challenges of finan-
cial innovation and the global “savings glut.” They allowed the 
crisis to develop and inhibited response after the crisis was front 
and center in the public eye.
A notable culprit was Federal Reserve chair Alan Greenspan, 
the originator of these catchwords, venerated in his initial Sen- 
ate confirmation vote and four reappointments, two by a Demo-
cratic president. Greenspan pumped up the housing bubble with 
easy credit and failed to exercise his responsibility to investigate 
and regulate deceptive “teaser loans” and outright fraud in the 
origination of subprime mortgages. His successor, Ben Ber-
nanke, when appointed by George W. Bush in 2006, presented 
himself as a Greenspan clone (although one less prone to obtuse 
pronouncements) and was curiously passive until the September 
2008 collapse of the financial sector. Bernanke’s passivity may 
have reflected a Fed that is less “independent” than many imag-
ine. Congress and the financial and housing sector would have 
been up in arms had Bernanke attempted to rock the boat.
The malefactors were bipartisan. They included Republican 
appointees like Greenspan and Republicans in Congress and the 
White House imbued with the mantras of “free markets” and 
“the ownership society”; Democrats were eager to have the poor 
in housing they could not afford. Both Franklin Raines, head 
of the White House Office of Management and Budget under 
Bill Clinton, and James Johnson, adviser to Walter Mondale, 
Al Gore, and Barack Obama, were grossly overcompensated  
as CEOs of Fannie Mae.6 Clinton’s chair of the Council of Eco-
nomic Advisors, Nobel Prize Laureate Joseph Stiglitz, along with 
future Obama adviser and Citigroup employee Peter Orszag 
and Clinton adviser Jon Orszag, wrote a 2001 position paper 
for Fannie Mae claiming that there was only a one in 500,000 
chance that Fannie Mae would go bust.
Perhaps of greater importance than the Democratic preoccu-
pation with low income and minority housing, and with Fannie 

6  •  Introduction
Mae, was the acquiescence of the Democrats in financial dereg-
ulation, most notably by Clinton treasury secretaries Robert 
Rubin and Larry Summers. Rubin was in a Washington transi-
tion between Goldman Sachs and Citicorp; Summers did a stint 
at the hedge fund D. E. Shaw after his government service.
The financial crisis and the Great Recession it spawned have 
led to a spate of books on what went wrong. Ours is a late entry. 
What can we say that has not been said? We are certainly not the 
first to stress the influence of Wall Street on Washington. Others 
go so far as to imply that Wall Street has “captured” Washing-
ton and always gets what it wants and gets it right away. Such an 
account is far too simple.
Politicians and policy makers do often behave in ways that are 
not reducible to carrying water for Wall Street. For example, the 
Bush administration’s Treasury Department, whose top officials 
had strong Wall Street ties, was reluctant to ask for congressio-
nal authority to address the financial crisis in early 2008. Later 
that year, perhaps because of congressional opposition to its role 
in saving the investment bank Bear Stearns, the administration 
allowed Lehman Brothers to go into bankruptcy rather than risk 
congressional reaction from a bailout. (It’s worth noting that nei-
ther heavy campaign contributions from Lehman nor its CEO 
Richard Fuld’s service as a director of the New York Fed saved 
Lehman from bankruptcy.) Possible Treasury Department fears 
about Congress, even Republican controlled, would have been 
well founded. Shortly after Lehman failed, the House of Repre-
sentatives voted down the administration’s first try to pass TARP.
As a second example, consider the difficulty the financial indus-
try faced when it pursued “reform” of personal bankruptcy law. 
It took Visa, MasterCard, and other creditors seven years to force 
through the 2005 legislation that made consumer bankruptcy 
more difficult. The financial services industry is indeed powerful, 
but it does not always get what it wants. Moreover, the industry is 
competitive and not perfectly homogeneous. The demise of Bear 
Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and Merrill Lynch as independent 
firms may have been welcome news to the survivors, Goldman 

Introduction  •  7
Sachs and Morgan Stanley. So it is important to sharpen our 
understanding of exactly how financial interests are represented 
in Washington and when those influences will be the greatest.
Our account provides a more nuanced understanding of the 
channels through which politics exacerbates financial crises. 
Whereas much of the discussion of the political underpinnings 
of the financial crisis has centered on the political interests of the 
financial sector, we stress the Three I’s: ideology, institutions, and  
interests.
The actions of politicians reflect not only pressures from orga-
nized interests but also personal beliefs about the proper role of 
government in regulating the financial sector. As we document  
throughout this book, these ideological beliefs are rigid and  
are largely unresponsive to new information. Undoubtedly the 
Figure I.1. Financial collapse. Ben Bernanke, George W. Bush, Henry Paulson, 
and Christopher Cox after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. 
Source: Official White House Photo by Joyce N. Boghosian.

8  •  Introduction
manifest ideologies reflect some mixture of genuine personal 
belief, constituents’ beliefs, and cronyism linked to personal 
venality.7 What we hold to be important is not so much the 
recipe for this mixture but its rigidity. This rigidity, we argue, 
can impede measures that might prevent bubbles and limit the 
political response in a bust.
Political institutions such as elections, legislative rules and 
procedures, and regulatory structures affect the incentives and 
opportunities of elected politicians to engage in policy making 
that either exacerbates or mitigates financial crises. Our focus is 
on how the fragmented and supermajoritarian structure of U.S. 
political institutions makes it difficult for policy makers to keep 
up with financial innovation and to reform the financial sector 
in the bust.8
Groups and interests are the final ingredient. Well-­organized, 
resourceful groups such as those in the financial sector are often 
able to exploit ideological allies and institutional structures to 
produce policy benefits for themselves. As we will show, power-
ful groups are able not only to push presidents and legislators 
for more favorable policies but also to stave off intruding regula-
tors. Weak regulation, in turn, allows certain actors to push the 
boundaries of legality.
Washington failed to deal with three pillars of the financial 
crisis. The first pillar was the dramatic increase in risky residen-
tial loans known as subprime mortgages in which the borrower 
has an insufficiently good credit or work history to qualify for a 
lower-­interest prime loan. The originators of these high-­interest 
mortgages would often keep little or no “skin in the game” but 
instead would sell the mortgages to other financial firms. Some 
of the nation’s largest financial institutions allegedly produced 
fraudulent documents and resold subprime mortgages as prime 
quality AAA paper.9
The second pillar of the crisis was the securitization of mort-
gages by bundling them into pools of loans that could be sold 
to investors. These mortgage securities were in turn sliced into 
tranches representing various levels of risk. The highest tranches 

Introduction  •  9
maintained first claims on interest payments; the lowest tranche 
owned the lowest-­priority claim, and therefore was the first one 
to feel the effects of defaulting mortgages.
Underwriters sought credit ratings for the various securities 
and their tranches. Despite the low quality of the underlying 
loans, credit rating agencies uniformly issued ratings at AAA, 
as safe as U.S. government debt.10 (After the crisis, Standard & 
Poor’s downgraded U.S. government debt but continues to give 
some MBSs AAA ratings.11) With the blessings of Standard & 
Poor’s, Moody’s, or Fitch, these securities were then marketed 
by financial institutions and peddled to investors around the 
world. Investment banks and large commercial banks such as 
Citigroup not only resold mortgage-­backed securities but con-
tinued to hold many directly. In order to dramatically increase 
their leverage in these investments, they financed the purchase of 
MBSs and other CDOs with low-­interest short-­term loans in the 
“shadow” banking system formed by the overnight repo (sale 
and repurchase) market.
The third pillar was the use of credit default swaps (CDSs) 
to insure these mortgage-­backed securities against default. The 
seller of a swap agreed to pay the buyer a predetermined sum in 
the event that the MBS defaulted. These insurance policies were 
designed to allow the holders of MBSs to hedge against risk. But 
other investors who did not hold MBSs also bought these swaps 
to place a casino-­like bet against the MBS—­the so-­called naked 
credit default swap. The insurer AIG morphed into an invest-
ment bank and ran the biggest casino. Although CDSs are theo-
retically designed to spread risk, AIG’s financial services division 
underwrote so many that a nuclear bomb of concentrated risk 
was created.
These three pillars, along with the easy-­money policies of the 
Federal Reserve and the huge influx of foreign capital, promoted 
a housing market bubble. When the bubble popped, the first pil-
lar collapsed with a wave of defaults on subprime loans. This 
took out the second pillar, as AAA securities based on mortgages 
began to default and lose value. The bank purchasing an MBS 

10  •  Introduction
or CDO would turn around and use it as collateral for a short-­
term loan. When the housing bubble burst and defaults became 
probable, there were large increases in the collateral demanded 
to finance these short-­term loans. Consequently, as mortgage 
defaults increased, holders of MBSs began to have difficulty 
refinancing their operations through the repo market as lenders 
feared defaults on these loans. Eventually, a full-­fledged run on 
the shadow banking system started. Owing to a lack of trans-
parency about holdings of “toxic” assets, the run spread through 
the financial system. Finally, the collapse of the second pillar 
caused buyers of CDSs to try to collect their insurance claims, 
taking out the third pillar and bringing AIG into insolvency.
Clearly, all three of these pillars are based on policy errors of 
commission and omission. Policy makers could have avoided the  
crisis by closely regulating or even prohibiting the products un- 
derlying any one of the three pillars. Subprime mortgages could 
have been curtailed by any number of regulations: interest rate 
regulation, restrictions on the types of mortgages available in 
the market; stricter supervision of lending standards, mortgage 
originators, and real estate agents; or higher total loan-­to-­value 
requirements on loans. The perverse incentives in securitization 
could have been curtailed by forcing mortgage originators to 
retain a substantial interest in the mortgages they sold. Both 
originators and securitizers could have been forced to “cover” 
the underlying securities and derivatives by retaining liability in 
the case of default. The conflicts of interest by ratings agencies 
could have been dealt with. Policy makers could have prohib-
ited accounting gimmicks like special investment vehicles that 
allowed mortgage market investors to magnify leverage. Credit 
default swaps could have been restricted to those with “skin in 
the game,” and issuers could have been required to hold more 
capital to protect against losses.
That regulatory measures might have avoided or ameliorated 
the crisis suggests the deep complicity of the White House, Con-
gress, and federal regulatory agencies. The bubble that led to the 
crisis was stimulated by relaxation of mortgage market regulation 

Introduction  •  11
in the 1980s, government pressure on both the GSEs and on pri-
vate financial institutions to increase lending to low-­income and 
minority borrowers, and by the protection of over-­the-­counter 
derivatives from regulation in the Commodity Futures Mod-
ernization Act of 2000. All these seeds of crisis were planted 
before George W. Bush took office and before the explosion of 
subprime mortgages and private-­sector mortgage securitization. 
Corrective actions were not taken during the Bush administra-
tion despite the presence of many warning signals. The Bush 
administration throttled the SEC with the appointments of Har-
vey Pitt and Christopher Cox as chairs, while Republicans in 
Congress prevented action on attempts by Democrats to regulate 
predatory lending. If mortgages did indeed become Dutch tulips, 
Washington provided a superbly fertile flower bed.
But there is nothing unique about the recent crisis. The same 
types of policy failures occurred in both the savings and loan 
(S&L) crisis and the Great Depression. The S&L crisis was in 
full swing by 1985 and was ended only by the creation of the 
Resolution Trust Corporation in 1989. Similarly, the Great 
Depression was triggered by the stock market crash of Octo-
ber 1929, but major new policies waited for the first hundred 
days after Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s inauguration in March 
1933.12 These policy innovations included the Glass-­Steagall 
Act, signed by the president in June of that year. Glass-­Steagall 
both separated commercial and investment banking and created 
deposit insurance. Notably, it also maintained restrictions on 
interstate branch banking that were lifted only with the Riegle-­
Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. 
Financial market problems in the Great Depression were pre-
ceded by those that led to the Panic of 1907. The Panic, which 
took place in October of that year, drew no response from Wash-
ington. The objective of preventing a future crisis did result in 
the Aldrich-­Vreeland Act of May 30, 1908, but a substantial 
response occurred only with the creation of the Federal Reserve 
in 1913.13 Clearly, there is a recurring pattern of closing the barn 
door after the horses are long gone.

12  •  Introduction
Why do such colossal policy failures and delays occur repeat-
edly? One argument is that recurrent financial crises are simply 
a reflection of capitalism, its cyclical nature and capacity for cre-
ative destruction. In this view, the lag in policy and regulation 
has more to do with the unpredictable nature of financial crises 
than with any political failures. But focusing solely on economic 
dynamics gives an incomplete picture of financial crises.
Many of the underlying causes of financial disorder were in-
deed known in advance. Yet attempts at reform were not just ig- 
nored but actively opposed. Such examples are easy to come by.  
We start with the 1990s.
In 1994, Askin Capital Management, a hedge fund heavily 
invested in MBSs, lost $600 million.14 That December, Orange 
County, California filed for bankruptcy when derivative invest-
ments based on interest rates went south after a sudden rise in 
interest rates. In 1998, Merrill Lynch, which advised the invest-
ments, reached a $400 million settlement with Orange County. 
Congressional hearings on hedge funds and derivative securities 
were held in the aftermath, but no legislative correctives were 
proffered. A decade later, Merrill Lynch failed.15
In the late 1990s, a dozen small subprime lenders went bank-
rupt when, after several years of Ponzi-­style lending, many of  
their outstanding mortgages defaulted.16 In 1999, the hedge fund 
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) failed; the Federal Re- 
serve intervened to avoid further damage to the financial sec-
tor. Also in the late 1990s, Brooksley Born, the head of the 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), sounded the 
alarm about problems associated with the lack of regulation of 
derivative contracts including the CDSs that became central to the 
financial crisis of 2008. Yet her attempt to bring derivatives under 
the jurisdiction of the CFTC was adamantly opposed by Presi-
dent Clinton’s economic team (most notably Robert Rubin and  
Larry Summers), chairman of the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission Arthur Levitt, and congressional heavyweights such as 
Senate Banking Committee chair Phil Gramm.

Introduction  •  13
The new century began with the pop of the dot-­com bubble 
in 2001. Much attention was devoted to the role of misleading 
and fraudulent information that arose from accounting firms 
and market analysts. Merrill Lynch paid a $100 million fine for 
reports issued by its analysts. Citigroup, which later received bil-
lions in TARP funds, paid billions in fines and settlements over 
its role in the Enron and Global Crossing fiascoes. Nonetheless, 
the reforms of the Sarbanes-­Oxley Act failed to prevent wide-
spread accounting misinformation in the financial crisis.17
As the housing bubble got under way, concerns about the risky  
loan portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were repeat-
edly raised in the early part of the decade, but intense lobbying 
by these GSEs and their politically connected executives beat 
back any and all attempts at regulation. In particular, many 
state attorneys general sought to draw Washington’s attention 
to the risks in the complicated mortgage products being mar-
keted. They further sought to pursue predatory lending charges 
against banks but were “preempted” from doing so by national 
regulators.18
By 2005 and 2006, the Federal Reserve had collected unmis-
takable evidence of the mounting foreclosures and defaults on 
subprime mortgages yet it decided not to use its regulatory pow-
ers to raise lending standards. Prominent academics, such as 
Robert Shiller and Nouriel Roubini, were predicting a national 
housing crash. Moreover, policy makers simply ignored history: 
many recent financial crises such as those in Scandinavia, Japan, 
and Thailand were triggered by a collapsed real estate bubble. 
But Washington and Wall Street convinced themselves “This 
Time Is Different.”19
So financial crises are not simply economic phenomena; they 
have a very important political dimension. As we argue in this 
book, behind every financial bubble there is a corresponding 
political bubble. Just as financial bubbles in markets are a combi-
nation of irrational exuberance and greed, political bubbles brew 
in their own mix of ideology, institutions, and private interest.

14  •  Introduction
What Is a Political Bubble?
By political bubble, we mean a set of policy biases that foster 
and amplify the market behaviors that generate financial crises. 
Political bubbles are procyclical. Rather than tilting against risky 
behavior, the political bubble aids, abets, and amplifies it. Dur-
ing a financial bubble, when regulations should be strengthened, 
the political bubble relaxes them. When investors should hold 
more capital and reduce leverage, the political bubble allows the 
opposite. When monetary policy should tighten, the political 
bubble promotes easy credit.
In their causes, political bubbles bear a marked similarity to 
market bubbles. First, both types of bubbles rely on specific sets 
of beliefs. Economists stress the role of expectations in generating 
asset bubbles.20 These beliefs are used to rationalize asset prices 
that depart strongly from their historical levels. For example, 
the belief that the excess returns that investors require for hold-
ing stocks (the so-­called equity risk premium) had permanently 
declined helped fuel the stock market boom of the late 1990s. At 
the same time, the notion that a new information economy was 
emerging led to feverish public offerings. A firm selling dog food 
over the Internet, Pets.com, whose investment banker was none 
other than the bubbly, bullish-­on-­America Merrill Lynch, went 
to fourteen dollars a share after an eleven-­dollar initial public 
offering in February 2000, only to be liquidated in November of 
that year.21 Also in the first decade of the new century, the belief 
that globalization and a savings glut from the developing world 
could drive interest rates to permanently low levels fueled hous-
ing bubbles from Las Vegas to Latvia. Even investors who were 
more skeptical of these changes in fundamentals continued to 
buy inflated assets in hopes of selling them just before the crash.
Just as beliefs fuel a “this dance can go on forever” mentality 
of investors and speculators, the beliefs and ideologies of poli-
ticians and voters sustain political bubbles. First, the fact that 
politicians and voters may share in the investor’s “irrational exu-
berance” makes them loath to support corrective policies. If a 

Introduction  •  15
savings glut reduces the natural level of interest rates, it would 
be folly to use monetary policies to keep them artificially high.  
If the information economy is the wave of the future, it would be 
Luddism to tighten standards for either the public offerings that 
would capitalize the firms of the future or the pricing of stock 
options in accounting statements.
But beyond the beliefs that underpin a particular bubble, basic 
ideological beliefs about the nature of markets and the role of 
government also fuel bubbles. The Oxford English Dictionary 
defines ideology as a “systematic scheme of ideas, usually relat-
ing to politics or society, or to the conduct of a class or group, 
and regarded as justifying actions, especially one that is held 
implicitly or adopted as a whole and maintained regardless of 
the course of events.”22
Of course, ideological beliefs come in various flavors ranging 
from left to center to right. But the belief structure most condu-
cive to supporting political bubbles is what we term free market 
conservatism. Like most ideologies, free market conservatism is 
based on a core set of principles. The absolute simplest form is 
the belief that government intervention in the economy is bad 
per se, no matter what. Markets are always better at allocat-
ing resources than bureaucracies are. Consequently, government 
intervention should be extremely limited. Government should 
engage only in the basic protections of life and property, and 
it should be specifically restricted to functions that cannot be 
provided by the marketplace (even free market conservatives dis-
agree about what these are). Because markets allocate resources 
best, taxes and regulations should be as low as possible.
Beliefs associated with free market conservatism have advo-
cates in both major political parties. Its influence has been 
especially pronounced in the Republican Party in recent years, 
serving as an important catalyst in the party’s shift to the right 
and to the increased polarization of American politics.23 But 
free market conservatism is not confined to the right side of the 
Republican Party. In fact, as we argue later, its adherents include 
many important Democrats.

16  •  Introduction
Nonetheless, in recent years, some Republicans—­especially 
those who have come to be identified with the Tea Party 
movement—­have engaged in a virulent form of free market con-
servatism that we can term fundamentalist free market capital-
ism. The fundamentalist version sees no role for government 
under any circumstance. It can be contrasted with the view of 
earlier, prominent exponents of capitalism, ranging from the 
first treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton, to the famous 
economist Milton Friedman, and even to Alan Greenspan, all 
of whom saw the need for government intervention, at least in 
exceptional circumstances. The fundamentalists severely hin-
dered Treasury Secretary Paulson’s efforts to stabilize financial 
markets, both in forcing the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers 
and in opposing TARP.24
Although economic and political beliefs behave quite simi-
larly in the rise of a bubble, there are important differences in 
the aftermath of the bubble’s pop. Economic expectations can 
change dramatically and decisively over a short period of time 
when actors realize that economic fundamentals can no longer 
sustain the value of appreciated assets. But as the italicized clause 
of the Oxford Dictionary definition reveals, ideologues permit 
no such correction of their worldview. The rigidity of ideological 
beliefs inhibits the rational adaptation of policy to the circum-
stances of a financial crisis. Rather than concede that the old 
orthodoxy may be to blame, the ideologue searches for ways to 
blame perceived deviations from that orthodoxy. For adherents 
of free market conservatism, an apparent market failure is proof 
positive of government interference with the laws of economics. 
This suggests that policy making in the pop will exacerbate the 
crisis. The decisions will be delayed and distorted by ideological 
rigidity. The new policies are likely to contain the seeds of the 
next crisis.
The second commonality of financial and political bubbles is 
that both are strongly influenced by the institutions or the “rules 
of the game.” These rules generate incentives to engage in social 
behavior that may be destructive. The incentives of economic 

Introduction  •  17
actors are shaped by the structure of financial markets, the state 
of financial knowledge, and the presence or absence of govern-
ment oversight and regulation. These factors determine to a 
large degree whether capital flows to society’s most productive 
uses or, in contrast, feeds speculation and manipulation. Insti-
tutions similarly structure political decision making. The elec-
toral system and campaign finance laws affect what policies 
politicians support. The structure of the federal government—­
bicameralism, the presidential veto, the filibuster, and the com-
mittee system in Congress—­poses formidable obstacles to policy 
making. If these obstacles cannot be overcome, the government 
most likely will not be able to provide adequate oversight and 
regulation of financial markets.
In this way the political rules determine the economic rules. 
This political trump is important for understanding financial 
crises, as the entire set of hurdles imposes a status quo bias 
that inhibits governmental responses. The institutional hurdles 
that lead to gridlock are in turn exacerbated by ideological 
polarization.25
The final common feature of financial and political bubbles is 
the role of self-­interest and greed. As we know from the Scottish 
economist Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations and the Amer-
ican political scientist David Mayhew in The Electoral Connec-
tion, a lot of benefits flow from self-­interested behavior in both 
the economic and political realms.26 But, of course, there are 
limitations. Markets need a functioning invisible hand. Com-
petition must be present and information must flow freely via 
the price system. Democracy requires competitive elections, free 
expression, and informed and engaged voters. When these con-
ditions are not met, the social virtue of self-­interest may cease, 
and opportunities for greed emerge.
Greed and interest are often what links finance to the politi-
cal side of the bubble. Opportunist financiers will seek political 
alliances with opportunist politicians and compatible ideologues. 
Together such coalitions will exploit political opportunities to 
advance interests. A striking example of such alliances involves 

18  •  Introduction
former senator Phil Gramm (R-­TX) and his wife Wendy. From 
1995 to 2000, Gramm was the chairman of the U.S. Senate Com-
mittee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. He was an author 
of the Gramm-­Leach-­Bliley Act, which repealed Glass-­Steagall 
in 1999. Moreover, Gramm was instrumental in inserting the  
“Enron loophole” in the Commodity Futures Modernization  
Act of 2000.27 Wendy Gramm was head of the CFTC from 1988 
to 1993, and while she was head, Enron was granted exemp-
tions pertaining to derivatives trading.28 In 1993, Wendy Gramm 
became a member of the board of directors of Enron.29
When Phil Gramm retired from the Senate in 2002, he joined 
the Swiss banking firm UBS as a vice chairman. UBS was clearly 
troubled; in May 2004, the Federal Reserve fined the firm $100 
million for illegally transferring funds to Iran and Cuba. In 2007, 
the SEC successfully pursued an insider trading case against a 
UBS executive.30 In addition, UBS was in deep trouble in the 
financial crisis; it received $5 billion of the funds allocated to the 
AIG bailout. In 2009, UBS paid a $780 million fine for holding 
illegal bank accounts for Americans and agreed to turn over the 
names of 4,400 account holders.31 In 2011, UBS lost $2 billion 
in a rogue trading scandal in its London office. For UBS, hiring 
a well-­connected politician was an inexpensive investment.
Phil Gramm was known as an ardent advocate of free mar-
ket conservatism. His ideology and his self-­interest clearly over-
lapped. Phil and Wendy Gramm were beneficiaries not of com-
petitive, but of crony, capitalism.
The UBS connection illustrates, moreover, that crony capi-
talism runs deep in both the Democratic and Republican Par-
ties. In August 2009, President Obama played golf with one of 
his major fund-­raisers, Robert Wolf, president of UBS North 
America.32 The opportunism of the Gramms, Wolf, and Obama 
is striking. UBS is likely to draw benefits from its bipartisan 
connections. And these connections, we argue, are important 
to political bubbles.
Somewhat sadly, it can be difficult to disentangle the political 
influence of ideology from the influence of venality and greed. 

Introduction  •  19
Phil Gramm’s free market conservatism was richly compensated. 
As free market conservatism has become an acceptable ideol-
ogy to a large enough fraction of the mass electorate, personi-
fied in Joe the Plumber, who was hyped by the John McCain 
campaign in 2008, opportunistic politicians and crony capital-
ists can exploit this mass acquiescence for gain, contributing to 
increasing income inequality: Gramm’s income increases much 
faster than Joe the Plumber’s.33 (Samuel Wurzelbacher, aka 
Joe the Plumber, is a Republican nominee for a House seat in 
2012; if he wins, he may well realize the American dream and 
make his own way into the 1 percent.) Venality and free market 
ideology are complements in promoting a bubble. As Charles 
Kindleberger and Robert Aliber put it, “the supply of corruption 
increases in a procyclical way much like the supply of credit.”34
Free market ideologies are not the only belief systems that can 
contribute to a political bubble. Even politicians on the left who 
subscribed to ideological beliefs rooted in economic and racial 
equality provided crucial support for policies that exacerbated 
the housing crisis. Executives of many real estate and financial 
firms exploited the political push to subsidize homeownership 
for lower-­income and minority groups. In chapter 2, we point 
to a Fannie Mae annual report that establishes a direct link 
between Fannie Mae, Countrywide Financial’s now discredited 
CEO Angelo Mozilo, and redistributive egalitarianism.
In this book, we show that a political bubble was at the 
center of the 2008 crisis. We also show that the dynamics of 
political bubbles played a central role in previous financial cri-
ses. Indeed, just as financial bubbles are endemic to capital- 
ism, political bubbles are a permanent feature of capitalist 
democracy. Neither can be reformed away completely without 
forsaking the benefits of capitalism, of which there are cer-
tainly many.35
Nonetheless, American history has shown that some eco-
nomic and political policies are preferred to others. After the 
Great Depression, the United States, until 2008, did not suffer 
any financial or economic dislocation that generated political 

20  •  Introduction
pressure for substantial government intervention in the economy. 
Indeed, over the past thirty years, Washington has deregulated 
financial markets by law, executive order, budgetary cuts, and 
deliberate neglect. This contrasts with earlier historical experi-
ence. After the “panics” that occurred every twenty years or 
so during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Wash-
ington produced short-­run write-­offs through bankruptcy laws 
and reductions in debts owed to the federal government as well 
as enduring legislation such as the Federal Reserve Act. In the 
wake of the Depression, institutional change occurred in the 
enactment of deposit insurance and the regulation of banking, 
securities markets, and public utilities. In our contemporary glo-
balized, high-­tech economy, the regulatory alphabet soup of the 
1930s may not be reheated easily as the flows of capital and 
financial activity require much greater international coordina-
tion and cooperation. Nevertheless, a strengthening of govern-
ment capacity for monitoring and intervention is clearly needed.
In the crises that have arisen since the New Deal, times have 
indeed been different. The opponents of change succeeded in 
limiting the legislative response to a crisis. Most notably, the 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act 
of 1989, which responded to the savings and loan crisis of the 
1980s, created a weak regulator, the Office of Thrift Super-
vision (OTS), and allowed for regulatory venue shopping by 
financial firms. AIG chose the OTS as its regulator. In the cur-
rent crisis, the Dodd-­Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act passed in July 2010 is a partial and overly com-
plex act. We will see, in part 2, that it leaves ample opportuni-
ties for future bubbles.
We end the book by drawing policy conclusions that reflect 
our understanding of how political and economic bubbles inter-
act. We favor a strong set of simple rules rather than regulatory 
discretion. The thirty-­seven pages of Glass-­Steagall are much to 
be preferred to the nearly three thousand pages of Dodd-­Frank. 
Some may view us as Luddites. But we don’t share their opti-
mism about the benefits of financial innovation. Instead, we 

Introduction  •  21
believe that the ever smaller increases in economic efficiency are 
undermined by ever increasing political risks.
We are skeptical about the unalloyed benefits of financial 
innovation for several reasons. First, economists do not agree 
among themselves. For example, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth 
Rogoff nicely outline the broad academic disagreement about 
the seriousness of the U.S. current account deficit as the hous-
ing bubble grew.36 Second, economists, even the smartest of the 
smart, often do not get it right. Joseph Stiglitz made a wrong 
call on Fannie Mae. Two other Nobel Prize Laureates, Robert 
C. Merton and Myron Scholes, were principals in LTCM, whose 
failure required a private sector bailout organized by the New 
York Fed. Third, judgment reflects financial incentives. The 
film Inside Job exposed how former Fed governor and current 
Columbia Business School professor Frederic Mishkin accepted 
a six-­figure fee to coauthor a 2006 report titled Financial Stabil-
ity in Iceland.37 The Icelandic banking system crashed in 2008. 
Yale University professor Gary Gorton worked as a consultant 
to AIG before the crash, only to write a book later explaining 
how the emergence of a shadow banking system contributed to 
the crisis. The national and global financial systems are complex 
social systems. Within these systems, opportunities for economic 
and political manipulation abound. So it is naive to believe that 
markets always successfully self-­regulate.
More broadly, we distrust arguments made in the name of 
economic efficiency that do not account for the political risks. 
Politics and markets alter new “products,” ostensibly efficient, 
in a way that leads to inefficiency. For example, adjustable-­rate 
mortgages (ARMs), allowed in the United States by the Garn–­St. 
Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982, make sense in that 
they allow lenders to avoid the interest rate mismatch involved in 
accepting short-­term deposits but making long-­term loans. They 
also make sense for assistant professors of finance, at the begin-
ning of their life cycle earnings, to make smaller payments in the 
near term at the risk of making larger payments in the future. 
But the product quickly got distorted into “teaser” loans with 

22  •  Introduction
low introductory interest rates that later reset to usurious levels. 
These loans were often made without verification of income or 
assets. Because Congress failed to sharply delimit the new prod-
uct, the nation might have been better off without any ARMs.
We also argue for strong product regulation with a minimum  
of regulatory discretion because of Wall Street’s ability to lobby 
on regulatory implementation. Until JPMorgan Chase’s $5.8 ­bil- 
lion trading loss in 2012, the implementation of the new ­Volcker 
Rule that prohibited commercial banks from speculating on 
their own account was likely to have been significantly weak-
ened by lobbying by the firm’s CEO, Jamie Dimon. Similarly, as 
the CFTC was deliberating rules for treating client money, Gary 
Gensler, the head of the CFTC, permitted himself to be lobbied 
by MF Global head and former Goldman Sachs colleague Jon 
Corzine. Clients, who are still waiting for their money back, 
deserved better from the former New Jersey senator and gover-
nor. Sharp legislation with severe criminal penalties for misuse 
of client monies might well have protected MF Global clients.
In theory, regulatory implementation after Dodd-­Frank by the 
“best and the brightest” might lead to more market efficiency 
than a set of rules set in stone by legislation. But regulatory imple-
mentation is hardly a technocratic process that can be divorced 
from politics. As journalist David Halberstam recounted, “the 
best and the brightest” were deeply implicated in the American 
failure in Vietnam.38 The elites and experts are no less impli-
cated in our recent financial failures. Whether it was the LTCM 
failure, the Enron scandal, or the subprime crisis, graduates 
and faculty members of our elite educational institutions were 
on the scene.39 The central characters of these debacles serve on 
the boards of America’s leading philanthropies, cultural institu-
tions, and public companies.
The composition of the board of directors of AIG vividly dem-
onstrates the extent to which the American elite is implicated in 
the crisis. The outside directors between 2005 and 2008 included 
Obama-­ and Clinton-­appointed diplomat Richard Holbrooke; 
Clinton defense secretary and former Maine Republican senator 

Introduction  •  23
William Cohen; Reagan White House adviser and Harvard Uni-
versity economist Martin Feldstein; Carla Hills, president Ger-
ald R. Ford’s Housing and Urban Development secretary and 
George H. W. Bush’s trade representative; Ford “energy czar” 
Frank Zarb; American Museum of Natural History president 
Ellen Futter; and public television executive George Miles. Feld-
stein, Futter, Holbrooke, Miles, and Zarb served on the board 
for all or part of the years 2005–­8. Over that period, their indi-
vidual compensations as director ranged from $792,000 to 
$1,136,000. Perhaps those directors who served in government 
at low pay merited a subsequent private sector payout. But the 
AIG board failed to protect the public interest.
The moral of the story is that efficiency in the financial system 
has its limits. Efficiency should not be an end in itself because 
financial firms are inhabited by fallible people. The central goal 
of financial reform should not be efficiency but increasing the 
accountability of the financial system to the American public.


Pa r t  I
The Political Bubble
Why Washington Allows Financial Crises to Occur
Introduction
At first glance, the financial crisis of 2008 appears to be the result 
of egregious, greedy actions in the private economy. The miscre-
ants include the top management of financial firms, including 
Countrywide Financial, Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Mer-
rill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, American International Group, and 
Fannie Mae and of credit rating firms such as Moody’s, Fitch, 
and Standard & Poor’s. The scandalous behavior involved the 
misuse of innovations such as “sliced and diced” collateralized 
debt obligations, credit default swaps, and financially “engi-
neered” strategies embedded in mathematical models. At the 
same time credit agencies with conflicts of interest issued mis-
leading ratings of securities and lowered their credit standards 
for mortgage issuers.
Greed was rewarding. At the beginning of 2007, financial 
stocks were generally well ahead of where they had been in 1999 
when Goldman Sachs became the last big investment bank to 
go public. Among the survivors of the crisis, Citigroup, Bank of 
America, and Morgan Stanley all outperformed the S&P 500 
index during the run from 1997 to 2008 by about 50 percent. 
Goldman Sachs was up more than 150 percent.
The run-­up in financial stocks was echoed by financial sec-
tor wages rising faster than wages elsewhere, by financial sector 
profits becoming a larger share of total corporate profits, and 
by human capital flowing into Wall Street. Ivy League gradu-
ates went into finance rather than into the “real” economy that 
provides health, technology, education, and public and private 

26  •  Part I
infrastructure.1 Little trickled down to Americans working out-
side finance. As we show in chapter 5, as of 2011 the innovations 
did not even benefit investors who bought and held the common 
stocks of the big commercial and investment banks.
Some greed is perfectly legal. Choosing to work on Wall Street 
strictly for the money qualifies. So does investing with Bernard 
Madoff in the belief of safely obtaining higher returns. Legal 
greed is taking a mortgage that one cannot afford in the hope 
of turning a quick profit by “flipping” the house. Legal greed is 
loan originators pushing such mortgages to receive higher fees. 
But greed also provides incentives to engage in illegal behav-
ior. Ponzi schemes like Madoff’s are one example. Another is 
the falsification of mortgage documents by loan originators 
in the hope of getting a better price by offering a risky mort-
gage as a safe one. Another is the “robo-­signing” of foreclosure 
documents.2
Major League Baseball has shown us how large parts of an 
occupational class can engage in illegal activity. Heroes like 
Mark McGwire, Barry Bonds, and Roger Clemens have been 
asterisked. According to ESPN’s counts, the Mitchell Report 
identified eight-­six players, including thirty-­one All-­Stars and 
seven MVPs, as having used steroids or other performance-­
enhancing drugs.3 If misconduct in the financial and real estate 
sectors was as widespread as in baseball, financial steroids and 
performance-­enhancing fraud contributed importantly to the 
crisis. We shall see that there is a political unwillingness to rec-
ognize and punish widespread illegal activity.
Moreover, and more important, there is often a political will-
ingness to facilitate a bubble by expanding the set of legal activi-
ties firms can engage in. Adjustable-­rate mortgages (ARMs), 
once banned, became legal financial products. It was a short step 
from a vanilla ARM to financial innovations of “teaser” loans, 
negative amortization loans, and predatory products that fed 
on the financial naïveté of many borrowers. In the savings and 
loan crisis, Congress relaxed accounting standards to obscure 
the insolvency of thrifts. Barriers between investment banks and 

The Political Bubble  •  27
commercial banks were relaxed by regulators and eventually 
abolished by Congress.
Indeed, if greedy financiers and their suspect innovations and 
business models were to blame, we can only ask, Why didn’t the 
government do something to stop them?
The first element of our explanation is ideology, for which we 
emphasize two components. The first narrowly concerns the role 
of risk in financial markets. Many Americans and their political 
leaders accepted the idea that financial innovation contributed to 
greater prosperity by better managing risk and therefore extend-
ing credit to those who previously could not get it. Public beliefs 
about the benefits of modern finance were perhaps strengthened 
by the proliferation of 401(k) defined-­contribution retirement 
plans that dramatically expanded the number of Americans who 
were directly linked to financial markets. But by 2008 it appeared 
that the touted benefits of risk management went primarily to 
Wall Street, and the 401(k) investors had taken it on the chin.
The second component is more general. Many Americans and 
their political leaders believe that government intervention in pri-
vate markets is at best ineffective and at worst wrong. Why let 
government screw things up? Moreover, government is unnec-
essary because markets self-­correct quickly. So bubbles cannot 
occur because asset prices never deviate from their true values for 
an extended time. This notion of self-­correcting markets found 
no greater champion than Federal Reserve chair Alan Greenspan. 
If the housing market got out of whack, people would bet against 
it. Some individuals, such as John Paulson, did make a great deal 
of money betting against the market in 2007 and 2008, but, 
as we found out, these bets did not prevent a crash of financial 
institutions.4
Our second explanation has to do with interests. The execu-
tives of financial firms at the center of the bubble were getting 
rich. Clearly, they had an incentive to pressure the government 
not to intervene. Real estate developers gorged on the subse-
quent construction boom. The increased volume benefited real 
estate agents, mortgage brokers, title insurance companies, and 

28  •  Part I
construction workers, and, at least until 2008, investors in the 
stocks of financial firms. Loan originators were particularly 
important beneficiaries. They profited from the increased volume 
as relaxed lending standards fueled demand for mortgages. The 
most nefarious originators applied the most pressure through 
their lobbyists.5 Homeowners benefited from the housing bubble 
as the rise in their equity made them richer. Some consumed 
their equity in the form of luxury goods.
Why should anyone in government do anything that would 
make so many Americans poorer? Interests, moreover, are a 
matter of perception. Federal Reserve governor Edward Gram-
lich called attention to the subprime mortgage market early on;6 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission head Brooksley Born 
sought to regulate credit default swaps. In a world of overconfi-
dence, however, government intervention was opposed by bor-
rowers who would eventually be foreclosed upon and especially 
by financial institutions that would eventually be bankrupt.
The final part of our answer has to do with America’s gov-
ernmental institutions. Even if many Americans recognized the 
problem and felt Washington should do something about it, 
it is not clear what the government could have done. Creating 
new regulatory structures requires Congress to pass a law, the 
president to sign it, courts to interpret it, regulators to faithfully 
enforce it, and Congress to continue funding for enforcement. 
Passing legislation is tough. The regulated have rights that the 
courts may protect. The large financial firms have access to tal-
ented attorneys and other legal resources that may overwhelm 
the prosecutorial resources of government. Moreover, faithful 
execution requires not only resources but also the willingness of 
a regulator to be tough on the industry that he may wish someday 
to work for. Even if all of these hurdles are overcome the effort 
may be undermined by other regulators at the federal or state lev-
els. More aggressive intervention in mortgage markets by one or 
more of the fifty states could be undermined by federal preemp-
tion. For example, faced with regulatory action in Illinois, Wells 

The Political Bubble  •  29
Fargo transferred a state-­chartered branch to the supervision of 
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC).7
The Three I’s—­ideology, interests, and institutions—­are im- 
pediments to successful policy making and government perfor-
mance in any number of areas. But as we argue, their effects are 
especially pernicious in the area of financial regulation. To bor-
row a metaphor from economics, the effects of ideology, inter-
ests, and institutions are procyclical. Rather than counteract the  
actions of private economic actors, these factors complement and  
exacerbate their effects. Because the links between the eco-
nomic behavior and the political response are so tight, we argue 
that the political bubble is an intrinsic part of answering what 
went wrong.


C h a p t e r  1
Bubble Expectations
The banks that survived the holocaust of the early 
thirties probably differed from those that went under. 
In addition, and very much likely more important, 
they undoubtedly drew from their experience lessons 
that affected their future behavior. For both reasons, 
the banks that survived understandably placed far 
greater weight on liquidity than the banks in existence 
in 1929.
	
The shift in the liquidity preferences of banks was 
destined to be temporary. To judge by the experience 
of earlier episodes, the passage of time without any 
extensive series of bank failures would have dulled the 
fears of bank managers. . . . 
—Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, 
A Monetary History of the United States, 
1867–­1960
An economist defines a “bubble” as any situation in which 
the price of an asset exceeds its “fundamental” value.1 There-
fore, bubbles pose a puzzle for standard economic theory. Why 
would investors continue to purchase assets at prices for which 
they are certain to lose money when the asset’s price returns to 
normal? Why wouldn’t the market be flooded by offers to sell 
the asset at the inflated price?
The “no-­duh” answer is simple: investors believe that the fun-
damental value of the asset has increased. But where do such 

32  •  Chapter 1
beliefs come from, and how are they propagated? How do the 
beliefs become so widespread that buyers continue to buy and 
sellers won’t sell as asset prices spike?
Economists are divided on the answers to these questions.2 
Behavioral economists like Richard Thaler, George Akerlof, and 
Robert Shiller have stressed the psychology of decision making. 
They argue that most investors are only boundedly rational.3 In 
particular, they are not very good at distinguishing between fluc-
tuations in prices and changes in underlying values. So if they see 
the price of an asset increase, they are likely to assume that its 
value has increased. Contrary to economic theory, they may buy 
more and sell less as the price increases. If most investors respond 
this way, asset prices may greatly exceed the underlying values—­
that is, until the price starts to drop and the same psychology 
leads to plummeting values.
Other economists are less likely to stress the irrational aspects 
of the bubble. After all, because the value of an asset is what 
someone is willing to pay for it, it is not irrational to pay the 
market price for an asset whose price has risen. One only needs 
to expect to be able to sell later for a higher price. As former Citi-
group chair Chuck Prince put it, “when the music stops, in terms 
of liquidity, things will be complicated. But as long as the music 
is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing.”4 
But the musical chairs explanation just moves the question back 
one level: why do investors believe that other investors believe 
that the fundamentals have changed?
So, regardless of whether one views a bubble as a reflection of 
rational or irrational behavior, the driving force is overoptimistic 
beliefs about the value of assets. The consequences of such exu-
berance are far reaching. First, investors overinvest in the bubble 
asset, diverting resources from assets whose price-­to-­true-­value 
ratio may be lower. Just as market capitalizations for Internet 
start-­ups skyrocketed during the dot-­com tech boom, there were 
huge increases in residential real estate investment that could not 
be justified by an increasing demand for housing. Second, inves-
tors borrow additional funds to buy more of the bubble asset, 

Bubble Expectations  •  33
using the asset as collateral. Investors also borrow to take cash 
out to finance consumption. Because the asset prices are inflated, 
these loans are naturally highly leveraged (the ratio of the loan 
to the true value of the asset is very high). But the belief that the 
price of the bubble asset will rise even further leads to even laxer 
lending standards, magnifying leverage and risk even further.
What happens when the bubble pops? The economy survived 
the pop of the dot-­com bubble without a great recession. The pop 
of the housing bubble was different. When the residential real 
estate bubble popped, falling prices led to increased expectations 
that underwater borrowers would not pay the basic mortgages. 
This led to a fall in the price of securitized mortgage loans. Finan-
cial institutions became less willing to accept these securities as 
collateral. Highly leveraged owners of these assets were forced to 
seek liquidity by selling other assets, spreading the crisis through-
out the economy. The crisis is worse if optimism is replaced by 
pessimism and asset prices fall below fundamental values.
Because beliefs and expectations are crucial, the most obvious 
government intervention would be to cool down these expecta-
tions or to counteract their effects. But that is much easier said 
than done. The biggest hurdle is that key government officials 
and regulators often share the beliefs on which the bubble is sus-
tained.5 For example, one of the principal beliefs that sustained 
the recent housing bubble is that innovations for securitizing 
mortgage debt could be used to package together bits and pieces 
of the very risky subprime mortgages into almost riskless securi-
ties that could be sold to investors in exchange for a reasonable 
rate of interest. Consequently, lending standards could be low-
ered, more buyers would be brought into the market, and rising 
home prices would be the natural response to this shift in the 
way that risk was “spread out.” This innovation made it appear 
that high-­risk securities were “diluted” by being poured into an 
“ocean” of low-­risk securities.
Did this view justify the complex and far from transparent 
instruments that were created in the bubble? On the one hand, 
there are sharply diminishing returns to risk management by 

34  •  Chapter 1
diversification. In his famous book A Random Walk Down  
Wall Street, Burton Malkiel makes the point that one gets almost 
as much diversification by owning twenty stocks as by owning 
two thousand.6 On the other hand, massive defaults of purport-
edly “dilutable” no-­income-­verification loans are economically 
harmful—­perhaps even more so when risk management strate-
gies carve up the original loan into pieces owned by a multitude 
of owners.
Nonetheless, there was, in the expression of Warren Buffett, 
a “mass delusion” about the benefits of financial innovation in 
the mortgage market.7 Market actors were by no means the only 
ones who believed that securitization of subprime mortgages 
could sustain large growth in the housing sector.
Politicians of all stripes shared the industry’s enthusiasm for 
financial innovation. Upon signing the Gramm-­Leach-­Bliley Act 
that repealed the Glass-­Steagall firewall between commercial 
and investment banking, President Bill Clinton declared, “This 
historic legislation will modernize our financial services laws, 
stimulating greater innovation and competition in the financial 
services industry. America’s consumers, our communities, and 
the economy will reap the benefits of this act. . . . Removal of 
barriers to competition will enhance the stability of our financial 
services system. Financial services firms will be able to diver-
sify their product offerings and thus their sources of revenue. 
They will also be better equipped to compete in global finan-
cial markets.”8 Alan Greenspan told a Federal Reserve Confer-
ence in 2005, “Innovation has brought about a multitude of new 
products, such as subprime loans and niche credit programs for 
immigrants. Such developments are representative of the mar-
ket responses that have driven the financial services industry 
throughout the history of our country. . . . The mortgage-­backed 
security helped create a national and even an international mar-
ket for mortgages, and market support for a wider variety of 
home mortgage loan products became commonplace.”9
Put simply, when the policy makers share the bubble beliefs, 
they must also believe there is no rationale for intervention. 

Bubble Expectations  •  35
Willem Buiter, now the chief economist at Citigroup, has dubbed 
this phenomenon the “cognitive capture” of financial regulators: 
“It can be called cognitive regulatory capture (or cognitive state 
capture), because it is not achieved by special interests buying, 
blackmailing or bribing their way towards control of the legisla- 
ture, the executive, or some important regulator, like the Fed, 
but instead through those in charge of the relevant state entity 
internalizing, as if by osmosis, the objectives, interests and per-
ception of reality of the vested interest they are meant to regu-
late and supervise in the public interest instead.”10 That private 
investors and policy makers share beliefs is not terribly surpris-
ing. There are tight social and professional links between the 
regulators and the regulated. In many cases, today’s regulator is 
tomorrow’s regulated. Moreover, government officials are influ-
enced by the same economic research and financial journalism 
that informs market actors.
Even if government officials did not share the enthusiasm of 
the market participants, it would have been politically difficult 
to intervene given that the bubble euphoria extended well beyond 
Wall Street to the general public. According to the Gallup Orga-
nization, in May 2005, 70 percent of Americans believed that 
the average price of houses in their area would increase over the 
coming year.11 This follows a decade in which housing prices 
grew at astronomical rates.12 Even at the top of the market in 
2006, 60 percent still believed that prices would push higher.13 
Given such beliefs, it is little wonder that millions of Americans 
bought new homes and refinanced existing mortgages in the 
hope of profiting from increasing home values.
As we now know all too well, the consequences for popping the 
bubble were traumatic: defaults, foreclosures, and huge financial 
losses. Yes, these losses would have been mitigated if the govern-
ment had intervened in 2005, 2004, or 2003. But in a democracy, 
one can hardly expect elected officials to take direct responsibil-
ity for costly actions running so counter to public opinion. To 
paraphrase Abraham Lincoln, most people fool themselves most 
of the time. Career politicians, even if they know better, have to 

36  •  Chapter 1
go along. They want to be reelected. There are not enough “pro-
files in courage.” Most are loath to “take away the punch bowl 
during the party.” It is much better for them politically to let the 
bubble run its course.
Governments are often themselves the cause of bubble beliefs. 
Asset values may inflate simply because market participants 
believe that government will step in to offset the losses if things go 
bad. For example, during the bubble, many market participants 
believed that their downside risk was hedged by the “Greenspan 
put.” In other words, there was a widespread belief among inves-
tors that if financial markets were in trouble, the Federal Reserve 
would use its various policy tools to calm the markets and pre-
vent losses. Thus, government policy worked exactly like a put 
option in which the investor has the right to unload a security 
at a prespecified price if its value declines too far. Such beliefs 
clearly promote risk taking by investors. Another example of pol-
icy beliefs inflating a bubble was the widely believed, but never 
explicit, government guarantee of the debt of Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac. This belief substantially lowered the government-­
sponsored enterprises’ cost of borrowing and allowed them to 
dramatically ratchet up their holdings of mortgage-­backed secu-
rities. It is hard to count on government to counter bubble beliefs 
when it is often the underlying source of them.
When the bubble pops, there will be greater divergence in 
beliefs between the financial services industry and government 
officials. Policy makers and their constituents are naturally going 
to be more suspicious of information and analysis coming from 
the industry. Similar to investors whose pessimism deepens, pol-
icy makers and voters may become overskeptical of the benefits 
of unregulated financial markets and practices. As we discuss in 
chapter 8, busts often lead to populist backlashes against finan-
cial services firms.
A prime example is the firestorm that erupted over the pay-
ments of retention bonuses to many American International Group 
(AIG) employees after the government bailed out the firm follow-
ing its losses on credit default swaps. Government-­selected CEO 

Bubble Expectations  •  37
Edward Liddy argued that the retention bonuses were necessary 
to keep key personnel in place to liquidate AIG’s positions at 
minimal cost to the taxpayer.14 But voters and their representa-
tives in Congress were outraged that bonuses would be paid by a  
firm that had received a bailout of well over $100 billion of tax-
payer money. They believed that the bonus payments were essen-
tially a looting of the U.S. Treasury; they did not accept that 
the bonuses were a business necessity given the compensation 
practices in the financial services industry and the need to retain 
expertise in a company now owned by the taxpayers. The House 
quickly passed legislation (of dubious constitutionality) taxing 
the bonuses at a 90 percent rate. The House engaged in cheap 
populist theater, knowing the Senate would never go along. And 
the Senate did not.
Although the malleable and procyclical expectations of inves-
tors and politicians play a very important role in generating 
financial crises, we argue that they are far from the only beliefs 
that matter. As we discuss in chapter 2, the rigid and inflexible 
beliefs emanating from political ideologies are perhaps even more 
important in generating and sustaining the political bubble.

C h a p t e r  2
Ideology
There are no atheists in foxholes and no ideologues in 
financial crises.
—­Ben Bernanke, quoted in Peter Baker,  
“Administration Is Seeking  
$700 Billion for Wall St.”
Although bubble expectations are important for generat-
ing the public and private sector behavior that leads to financial 
crises, there is another more important source of the beliefs that 
influence the government response to the bubble and its collapse: 
ideology. An ideology is a set of basic beliefs about how the world 
works and about what is right or wrong. We distinguish ideolo-
gies from bubble expectations primarily in terms of the rigidity 
of the beliefs. Because they are deeply held and often rooted in 
basic principles, ideological beliefs are much less responsive to 
new information, persuasion, or context. Consequently, we dis-
tinguish the ideologue from a pragmatist, who would be more 
open to information and arguments. The pragmatist agrees with 
Lord Keynes’s famous quip, “when the facts change I change 
my mind.”1
To see the differences between ideologues and pragmatists, 
consider beliefs about the appropriate level of tax rates. In cer-
tain contexts, pragmatists and ideologues alike might agree 
that lowering tax rates is a good idea. But a pragmatist would 
want assurances that such a policy change would deliver specific  
benefits, such as more incentives to work, invest, or save, and 

Ideology  •  39
minimize unwanted costs such as deficits and reductions in gov-
ernment services. After taxes were lowered, a pragmatist would 
want to see actual evidence that benefits were delivered and costs 
avoided. The pragmatist would also understand that context 
matters. Lowering taxes when taxes are high is quite different 
from lowering them when they are low. Conversely, an ideologue 
may want to lower taxes simply because she believes that lower-
ing taxes is inherently a good thing to do. Of course, she may 
argue that lower taxes stimulate more work, investment, and 
savings and that tax cuts pay for themselves. But ultimately, her 
position is unlikely to change if in fact the tax cut leads to declin-
ing investment and runaway deficits. She is just as likely to sup-
port tax cuts the next time they are offered. And context doesn’t 
matter. The fifth tax cut is just as valuable as the first four.
Even when they respond to new information, the way ideo-
logues adjust their views is tempered by their preexisting beliefs. 
In other words, ideologies are also the framework for how peo-
ple interpret new data.2
Consider an example of this phenomenon. To ameliorate the 
recession brought on by the financial crisis, President Barack 
Obama and the Democratic majorities in Congress passed a 
$787 billion stimulus plan with little support from Republicans. 
The administration’s economic team forecast that this stimulus 
plan would prevent the unemployment rate from exceeding 8 
percent. But by July 2009, the unemployment rate was at 9.5 
percent and showed no signs of retreat. Democratic leaders and 
advisers interpreted the news as an indication that the stimu-
lus plan had not been large enough. Laura Tyson, a member 
of President Obama’s Economic Recovery Advisory Board, said 
that the unemployment situation proved that the stimulus plan 
was “a bit too small.”3 Democratic majority leader Steny Hoyer 
declared “[W]e need to be open to whether we need additional 
action [on economic stimulus].”4 The Republican response was—­ 
no surprise—­sharply different. Republican House leader John 
Boehner complained on Fox News that “[the stimulus plan] was 
supposed to be about jobs, jobs, and jobs. And the fact is, it 

40  •  Chapter 2
turned into nothing more than spending, spending, and more 
spending on a lot of big government bureaucracy.”5
So the new information revealed in the employment numbers 
led to far less, rather than more, consensus on the effects of the 
stimulus package. This was all the more true of academic econo-
mists. Nobel Prize winners could be found on both sides of the 
debate, predictably located by their inflexible positions on gov-
ernment intervention in the economy.6
A strong ideological challenge to free market capitalism did 
not follow the pop of 2008. On the contrary, the financial crisis 
and the Obama administration’s response were followed by, as 
we said in the introduction, the flourishing of fundamentalist 
free market conservatism, embodied in the Tea Party.
Of course, all policy makers and citizens must rely on ideology 
to some degree. Without a preexisting belief structure, it is hard 
to make sense of the world. Alan Greenspan told a congressional 
panel that “ideology is a conceptual framework . . . the way peo-
ple deal with reality. Everyone has one. You have to. To exist, you 
need an ideology.”7 We do not disagree with Chairman Greens-
pan; but we also sympathize with Representative Betty McCol-
lum (D-­MN), who responded, “if we need an ideology, if we need 
a philosophy to govern, as Mr. Greenspan suggested, I would 
suggest we give pragmatism a try, we give common sense a try.”8
Ideologies and doctrines are a poor substitute for intelligence, 
reason, and evidence. Beliefs in socialism and Marxism impeded 
economic development in much of the world for most of the 
twentieth century. But more recently, doctrinal beliefs that gov-
ernment regulation is always inappropriate and that markets are 
infallible abetted the crisis of 2008, much as the same beliefs did 
in 1929. In the introduction, we defined these doctrines as free 
market conservatism.
The role of ideology in the political response to crises was rec-
ognized by Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke in a 2002 
testimonial address in honor of Milton Friedman. In describ-
ing President Herbert Hoover’s administration’s reaction to the 
onset of the Great Depression, then professor Bernanke wrote, 

Ideology  •  41
“The problem within the Fed was largely doctrinal: Fed officials 
appeared to subscribe to Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon’s 
infamous ‘liquidationist’ theory that weeding out ‘weak’ banks 
was . . . harsh but necessary.”9
Mellon’s views in the early 1930s were echoed in the financial 
crisis by former Senate Banking Committee chair Phil Gramm 
(R-­TX). Gramm was present when President Bill Clinton signed 
the Gramm-­Leach-­Bliley Bill in 1999. He celebrated the sign-
ing by proclaiming, “We have learned government is not the 
answer.”10 Later, when the financial markets failed in 2008 and 
housing foreclosures exploded, Gramm, at the time a campaign 
adviser to John McCain, appeared not to update his beliefs about 
government. In Mellonesque fashion, he famously declared that 
the United States was a “nation of whiners.”11
The rigidity of ideological beliefs contributes to the procyclical 
nature of political bubbles. After the collapse of Wall Street, Alan 
Greenspan confessed that his strong belief in the self-­regulation 
of financial markets had prevented him from intervening in the 
early days of the bubble.12 His exchange with House Oversight 
and Government Reform Committee chair Henry Waxman is 
illustrative:
Greenspan: I made a mistake in presuming that the self-­interests of 
organizations, specifically banks and others, were such as [sic] 
that they were best capable of protecting their own sharehold- 
ers and their equity in the firms. . . .
Waxman: In other words, you found that your view of the world, 
your ideology, was not right, it was not working.
Greenspan: Absolutely, precisely. You know, that’s precisely the 
reason I was shocked, because I have been going for 40 years 
or more with very considerable evidence that it was working 
exceptionally well.13
We argue, in contrast, that over Greenspan’s forty-­year period, 
“evidence” was pretty useless because of the toxic changes that 
intertwined deregulation and financial innovation. Looking at 
the past would fail to anticipate the unintended consequences 
of freeing up markets. Greenspan had the good fortune to leave 

42  •  Chapter 2
the Fed before his “shock” arrived. He reportedly collected a 
$250,000 fee for meeting with Lehman clients just a couple 
of weeks after leaving the Fed; the Lehman stint was followed 
by a long string of post-­Fed affiliations with Wall Street firms. 
Free market conservatism indeed worked exceptionally well for 
Chairman Greenspan.14
Before the crisis of 2008, free market conservatism had 
plenty of support from Democrats as well as Republicans. Bill 
Clinton twice reappointed Alan Greenspan as Fed chair,15 and 
signed—­with the endorsements of Larry Summers and Rob-
ert Rubin—­Gramm-­Leach-­Bliley. Only eighty-­six representa-
tives opposed passage of the bill in the House, although a large 
majority of Democrats did oppose passage in the Senate. Only 
a handful of the most liberal Democrats voted against Green­
span’s reappointments.
We are far from the first to suggest that free market conser-
vatism contributed to the financial crisis. Nobel Prize Laureate 
Joseph Stiglitz went so far as to claim that this ideology was the 
root cause of the crisis of 2008. In January 2009 he wrote in 
Vanity Fair, “Was there any single decision which, had it been 
reversed, would have changed the course of history? . . . The 
truth is most of the individual mistakes boil down to just one: a 
belief that markets are self-­adjusting and that the role of govern-
ment should be minimal.16
Free market conservatism had been reinforced by “the great 
moderation,” a period that roughly corresponds to the forty 
years when Greenspan’s ideology worked—­a period in which 
central banks tended to become independent and limited their 
policy interventions to targeting inflation. Theoretically, limited 
intervention was reinforced by the rational expectations school 
in economics that led to the efficient markets hypothesis in 
finance. Rational expectation models predicted that government 
intervention has no beneficial long-­term effects on markets.
Free market conservatism’s belief in market efficiency, 
though, was far from the only ideological doctrine related to the 
2008 crisis. A related set of beliefs concern the extent to which 

Ideology  •  43
government bailouts and moratoriums promote moral hazard. 
The basic idea of moral hazard is that insurance leads people 
to engage in riskier behavior. For example, insuring someone 
against all medical costs dulls his incentives to refrain from 
smoking, overeating, and bungee jumping. In financial markets, 
the concern is that financial institutions who expect to be bailed 
out, either because they are “too big” or “too politically con-
nected” to fail, take on excessive risks knowing that taxpayers 
will pick up the tab on the downside. Ideologues concerned with 
moral hazard may want some firms to fail in order to signal to 
others that they will not be bailed out in similar circumstances.
This book’s introduction noted that congressional beliefs 
about moral hazard may have led Treasury secretary Henry 
Paulson to let Lehman Brothers file for bankruptcy. Similarly, 
some Republican officials opposed government assistance to 
struggling mortgagees for fear that government assistance would 
exacerbate moral hazard in the mortgage market. Although 
moral hazard is certainly a valid concern for policy makers under 
a number of circumstances, we argue in later chapters that rigid 
adherence to a “no bailout” policy can be counterproductive.
Strong ideological commitments to markets and fears of moral 
hazard explain the behavior of politicians on the right, but the 
egalitarian ideology on the left was also important in setting the 
stage for the crisis. Specifically, egalitarianism fueled some of the 
excess in the mortgage market. Subprime and prime mortgage 
lending, especially to racial and ethnic minorities, was seen by 
many as an effective tool for redistributing income and wealth.
The administrations of both Bill Clinton and George W. Bush 
pushed the idea of maximizing homeownership (though for 
rather different reasons). In doing so, each promoted policies that 
further distorted the incentives away from renting and toward 
owning. One of the major pushes during the Clinton administra-
tion was to require that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac increase 
the share of their loan portfolios dedicated to mortgages for low-­ 
and middle-­income families. In 2000, Andrew Cuomo, then 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) 

44  •  Chapter 2
secretary with oversight responsibility for these government-­
sponsored enterprises (GSEs), increased the required percentage 
of low-­ and middle-­income mortgages from 42 percent to 50 
percent of the portfolios. Moreover, he dramatically increased 
requirements for the GSEs to buy mortgages from underserved 
areas and those of “very-­low-­income.”17 Partly as a result of 
this policy, Fannie Mae’s portfolio of subprime loans grew to 
$15 billion in 2002 from a level of just $1.2 billion in 2000. To 
diffuse any potential political backlash against GSE purchases 
of risky loans, Cuomo’s HUD also exempted the GSEs from 
additional reporting requirements on their high-­risk loans.18 
The GSEs also purchased private-­label subprime and close-­to-­
subprime Alt-­A residential mortgage–­backed securities to the 
tune of $253 billion.19
These policies were continued during the administration of 
George W. Bush, but with different ideological objectives. For 
President Bush, increasing homeownership rates was a central 
component of his “ownership society,” the philosophical thrust 
of which was that homeownership and asset accumulation pro-
moted less reliance on the government. The more government pol-
icy could be used to promote investing and homeownership now, 
the less demand there would be for government in the future.20
The congruence of “egalitarian” and “ownership society” 
ideologies was encapsulated in Fannie Mae’s 2003 annual 
report, which featured a full-­page color photograph of Angelo 
Mozilo, the later-­to-­be-­discredited CEO of Countrywide Finan-
cial. Mozilo is quoted as stating, “Everybody wins if we can 
increase minority homeownership, so together we’re taking on 
the challenge of getting more people into homes.” The report 
stated directly, “So as long as there is a gap in minority and non-­
minority homeownership rates, Fannie Mae and Countrywide 
will continue to make sure all Americans have the chance to 
realize the dream of homeownership.”21 The policy was a com-
plete bust. In the first quarter of 2012, the homeownership rate 
for whites was 73.5 percent, while for blacks it was 46.3 percent 
(see fig. 5.1).

Ideology  •  45
As problems mounted in the early years of the new century, 
competing commitments to free market conservatism and egali-
tarianism generated a polarized debate over reining in the GSEs. 
Conservatives argued that the GSEs represented an unwarranted 
government intrusion into the housing market. Moreover, they 
argued that the belief in the implicit government guarantee 
lowered Fannie and Freddie’s capital costs and gave them an 
unfair advantage in the mortgage securitization market. Liber-
als viewed any attack on the GSEs as an attempt to undermine 
homeownership for the poor.22 The result was a severely delayed 
and tepid response that was not sufficient to stave off the col-
lapse of the GSEs in 2008 and the subsequent government take-
over. The bailout cost for Fannie and Freddie is likely to be on 
the order of $300 billion.23 This is large in comparison to $162 
billion, the estimated cost to taxpayers of ending the savings and 
loan crisis of the 1980s.24
Tracking Ideology
To flesh out our argument that ideological rigidity was central to 
the financial crisis and its aftermath, we need to explain how we 
conceptualize and measure ideology.
Although our discussion of ideology has emphasized attitudes 
and beliefs, we are unable to measure these systematically for 
individual policy makers. Instead, we work with a behavioral 
definition of ideology. The most important feature of our defini-
tion is consistency. Ideological behavior of an individual is mani-
fest in consistency over time and across issues. In other words, 
a politician who maintains consistent positions year after year 
and whose position on each issue is strongly related to positions 
on other issues is ideological. One whose positions change with 
some regularity or who takes unpredictable positions is not.
To make these definitions concrete, consider the primary 
ideological division in American politics: liberalism and con-
servatism.25 Most observers of American politics recognize that 
members of Congress can be thought of as occupying a position 

46  •  Chapter 2
on a liberal-­conservative spectrum. Bernie Sanders is a liberal, 
Dianne Feinstein a moderate Democrat, Ben Nelson even more 
so; Olympia Snowe is a moderate Republican and Jim DeMint 
is a conservative Republican. Few would quibble with these 
characterizations.
The reason that perceptions of liberalness and conservative-
ness are commonly shared is that politicians’ behavior is pre-
dictable. “Roll call” is congressional lingo for votes on bills and 
amendments to bill. Ted Kennedy consistently voted for liberal 
positions on roll calls over the course of a forty-­seven-­year career 
in the Senate. Jim DeMint can likewise be predicted to vote as a 
conservative. Moderates like Nelson and Snowe may split their 
votes between conservative and liberal positions, but they are 
also consistent in that they do so year after year. Moreover, mod-
erates who are ideologically close will tend to split their votes 
identically. So when Democratic moderate Max Baucus (MT) 
voted on the conservative side on a Senate roll call, Blanche Lin-
coln (AR) and Ben Nelson (NE) typically did so as well.
Consistency across issues is also important. If we know a sen-
ator or representative’s position on tax cuts, we can make fairly 
confident predictions about her positions on financial regula-
tion, fiscal stimulus, the minimum wage, and cap and trade. We 
may also have a fairly good idea where she stand on abortion, 
gay marriage, and federal funding for stem cell research.
It is not hard to discern that Bernie Sanders is more liberal 
than Dianne Feinstein, who is in turn more liberal than Jim 
DeMint, but we would like to have more objective and refined 
measures. One approach is represented by the ratings of inter-
est groups such as Americans for Democratic Action (ADA), 
the League of Conservation Voters (LCV), or the U.S. Cham-
ber of Commerce. Groups construct ratings by choosing the roll 
call votes that are important to their legislative agendas and by 
determining whether a yea or nay vote indicates support for the 
group’s goals. Indices are then constructed from the proportion 
of votes a member casts in favor of the group. These indices 
are highly similar across groups.26 The similarity reflects two 

Ideology  •  47
factors. The first is that members’ votes are quite consistent 
across different policy areas, and the second is that the interest 
groups themselves are polarized along liberal-­conservative lines. 
Any two liberal groups, such as the ADA or LCV, have ratings 
that are highly correlated, and their ratings are mirror images of 
any conservative group such as the Chamber of Commerce or 
the National Taxpayers Union.
Interest group scores are limited in that they assess differences 
among the legislators only in a single congressional term. There-
fore, they do not provide any direct information about the differ-
ences between legislators serving at different times, or even the 
behavior of the same legislator over the course of her career. An 
additional problem is that all group ratings are based on small, 
selective samples of roll calls that, in particular, tend to clump 
lots of legislators at the extreme scores of 0 or 100. This clump-
ing tends to obscure real differences among legislators.
Given these problems, we can create much better measures 
of ideology from a method that uses all of the roll call votes. 
The method assumes that legislators make their choices in accor-
dance with the spatial model of voting. To understand the spatial 
model, the analogy of a geographic map is helpful. We com-
monly think of Boston in the Northeast, Miami in the South-
east, Seattle in the Northwest, Los Angeles in the Southwest, 
and Kansas City somewhere in the middle of the United States. 
Thinking in the two dimensions of north-­south and east-­west is 
fine for automobile drivers, but perilous for space shuttle pilots 
docking with a three-­dimensional object rotating and orbiting 
through space. But this book is not rocket science (nor is it finan-
cial engineering). We are car drivers. We seek a simple represen-
tation that helps us to understand political processes. We ignore 
higher-­dimensional, less important, complexities.
Indeed, American politics is not two-­dimensional, like the 
United States, but nearly one dimensional, like Chile, with Arica 
in the north, Punta Arenas in the south, and Santiago in the 
middle. Chile is a long, narrow strip, and for some purposes 
one can regard east-­west differences as of negligible importance. 

48  •  Chapter 2
Our analogy to a one-­dimensional map of Chile is the liberal-­
conservative continuum in American politics. In political science 
jargon, we use a spatial model. The spatial model is a representa-
tion of political conflicts and preferences where the positions of 
not only politicians but also policies are presented as points on a 
map, technically a geometric space.
The SAT test that American high school students take fur-
nishes another analogy that is useful in understanding how we 
measure ideology. Being a math whiz may involve many differ-
ent facets of neural activity, but the SAT math score assumes that 
math ability can be reduced to a single, unidimensional score. 
The test is designed to differentiate students (or in our case, leg-
islators) by ability, and the test items (roll calls) are chosen to 
have different levels of difficulty. The best students answer all 
the items correctly and get that elusive 800 score. Middling stu-
dents answer some relatively easy items correctly but miss the 
more difficult ones. And low-­ability students get only the very 
easiest questions right. So the test runs from low ability to high 
ability. In our roll call “test,” low, negative numbers are associ-
ated with liberals and high positive ones with conservatives, but 
we intend no aspersions on the ability of liberals.
In the liberal-­conservative continuum, politicians can be ar-
rayed on a horizontal line from liberal to conservative. Liberals 
like Bernie Sanders and Nancy Pelosi would be placed on the 
left end, moderates like Olympia Snowe and Ben Nelson in the 
middle, and conservatives like Jim DeMint and Rand Paul on 
the right. We call each member’s position on the line his ideal 
point. Policies can be similarly arrayed with single-­payer health 
care on the left, employer mandates for health coverage in the 
middle, and health care savings accounts on the right. More 
simply, a twenty-­dollar minimum wage might be on the left, 
an eight-­dollar minimum wage in the middle, and no minimum 
wage on the right.
In principle, we could draw one such map or line for each 
political issue. Some politicians might be liberal on abortion, 
moderate on labor relations, and conservative on taxes and 

Ideology  •  49
minimum wages. Indeed, American politics might not be one-­
dimensional, like Chile, or even two-­dimensional, like the 
United States, but very highly dimensional. Nevertheless, our 
research has shown that, for most of American history, just one 
liberal-­conservative line can account for a very large proportion 
of congressional roll call voting.27 There were times at which 
race and sectionalism generated important second dimensions 
of political conflict. These regional conflicts were clearly subor-
dinate to the liberal-­conservative or left-­right conflict, with the 
exception of the Era of Good Feelings and the Civil War. Since 
1980, it’s all left-­right conflict.
How do we find the left-­right line and where politicians are 
located on it? Think of the 111th Senate, during which the Dodd-­
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was 
passed. We observe that Bernie Sanders and Tom Coburn always 
(or almost always) cast opposing roll call votes. Whenever Sand-
ers voted yea, Coburn voted nay, or vice versa, so it is natural 
to think of them as anchoring the ends of a dimension. Arbi-
trarily and innocuously we can label Sanders as left or liberal 
and Coburn as right or conservative. We also observe that Rus-
sell Feingold, although usually voting with Sanders, voted a bit 
more with Coburn (and other conservatives) than did Sanders. 
So Feingold is placed slightly to the right of Sanders. Dianne 
Feinstein voted even more with Coburn than did Feingold, so 
Feinstein is placed to the right of Feingold. And Feinstein is still 
to the left of Olympia Snowe, who frequently, but not always, 
voted with Coburn. And Snowe is to the left of Jim DeMint, 
who almost always voted with Coburn.
Our method, the widely used DW-­NOMINATE procedure,  
actually takes into account the entire voting pattern of a sena- 
tor—­not just how she stands relative to Coburn. Moreover, it 
accounts for mistakes or errors. Feingold, as was the case with 
his vote on Dodd-­Frank, votes with Coburn at times when Fein-
stein and DeMint cast opposing votes. This kind of mistake 
causes us to move Feingold’s position just a bit toward the right. 
How much so depends on whether the mistake is a big one or a 

50  •  Chapter 2
little one. If Feingold votes with the Republicans on what is oth-
erwise a party-­line vote, he moves less than if he votes with the 
minority on a 90–­10 split in which the other nine voters in the 
minority are the most conservative Republicans.
We can also see how Feingold and other legislators change their 
liberal-­conservative positions over time. To simplify, if Feingold 
voted more frequently with Coburn in the 110th Congress than 
in the 109th, we would find that he has become less liberal. But 
our main finding is that individual legislators have remarkably 
stable ideologies over time. Their liberal-­conservative positions 
change very little. The one exception is that the position shifts if 
the legislator shifts party affiliation.
We can link all the Congresses because legislators overlap. 
The overlap allows us to compare the positions of Barry Gold-
water and Rand Paul even though they never served together. 
Goldwater overlapped with Strom Thurmond, who overlapped 
with Dianne Feinstein, who now serves with Rand Paul. These 
overlaps in congressional service allow us to claim that Congress 
has become more polarized over the past forty years.28 (A brief 
chapter appendix provides a bit more of the intuition behind our 
measures of positions on the liberal-­conservative scale.)
During most of the period treated in this book, a single liberal-­
conservative dimension does an excellent job of accounting for 
how members vote, be it on minimum wages or the shopping list 
of issues represented in party platforms or a presidential State of 
the Union address. One way of directly measuring the predictive 
power of the liberal-­conservative dimension is to compute the 
percentage of votes on which a legislator actually votes for the 
roll call alternative located closer to her on the dimension. This 
classification success exceeds 87 percent across all Congresses 
since 1980.
Over the past thirty years, the explanatory power of the ideo-
logical model has increased dramatically. Consider figure 2.1. 
For each chamber and each biennial session, it plots the percent-
age of roll call vote choices that can be accounted for by a single, 
liberal-­conservative dimension. For comparison purposes, we 

Ideology  •  51
plot the average votes on the winning side. The figure shows 
that our liberal/conservative model is very good at predicting 
congressional voting behavior. In the most recent Congresses, 
the model accounts for more than 90 percent of the votes cast. 
Moreover, this success is not merely a consequence of more lop-
sided votes that increase the size of the winning coalition. Over 
the past two decades, the number of legislators voting on the 
winning side has declined, while the classification success of the 
spatial model has increased. In a nutshell, there is less consensus 
and more ideology.
Percentage
100
90
80
70
60
1947
1955
1963
1971
1979
Year
House Classiﬁcation
Senate Classiﬁcation
House Majority Vote
Senate Majority Vote
1987
1995
2003
2011
Figure 2.1. The predictive power of the ideological model. The figure 
shows that a liberal-­conservative dimension correctly classifies about 
90 percent of all individual roll call decisions although the percentage 
voting on the majority side is typically below 70 percent. Moreover, 
the classification percentage has increased steadily since 1980 while the 
majority percentage has been decreasing. That is, ideological voting is 
increasing and consensual voting is decreasing.

52  •  Chapter 2
It is also important to stress that we are picking up far more 
than the simple effects of more disciplined parties. Although we 
do find that fewer Democrats vote with Republicans over time, 
our method does a very good job of identifying exactly who are 
the most likely moderate Democrats to cross over and support 
conservative measures. Similarly, the method does a very good 
job of distinguishing moderate from conservative Republicans.29
Our liberal-­conservative placements allow us to identify those 
legislators who are most likely to support or oppose particular 
financial regulatory policies as well as those moderates whose 
support would be pivotal. To illustrate, table 2.1 lists for each 
chamber the most liberal legislators, the most conservative, and  
the moderates. Roughly speaking, negative numbers large in 
magnitude go with liberals, positive ones with conservatives, and  
numbers near zero with moderates. Not surprisingly, all the lib-
erals are Democrats, and all the conservatives are Republicans. 
Even the moderates are now split on party lines, with the Demo-
crats being somewhat more liberal (lower scores) than Republi-
cans. The table shows that we place Mike Enzi as slightly more 
conservative than John Barrasso, but they are in a virtual tie; the 
small difference is not of statistical significance. Just as Enzi is  
adjacent to Barrasso, James Inhofe is adjacent to John ­Ensign. 
But the difference between Ensign and Inhofe is more significant. 
Of course, the difference between a conservative like ­Ensign and 
a liberal like Barbara Boxer is very large.
Table 2.1 contains few surprises to close observers of Ameri-
can politics and thus illustrates how well our technique can cap-
ture the underlying ideological divisions. As the table shows, 
there is now no ideological overlap between the parties. The 
most conservative Democrat is more liberal than the most lib-
eral Republican. This has not always been the case. In the 1960s, 
Southern Democrats like Georgia senators Richard Russell and 
Herman Talmadge compiled considerably more conservative 
voting records than liberal Republicans like New York’s Jacob 
Javits or Massachusetts’s Edward Brooke.
President Obama and several members of his administration 
served in Congress. Their ideology scores are shown in table 2.2. 

Ideology  •  53
Table 2.1. 
Ideology scores from the 111th (2009) Congress
The House, 2009
The Senate, 2009
Representative
Party
State
Ideology 
Score
Senator
Party
State
Ideology 
Score
The Liberals
McDermott
D
WA
–0.83
Sanders
I
VT
–0.69
Stark
D
CA
–0.76
Kaufman
D
DE
–0.66
Kucinich
D
OH
–0.76
Boxer
D
CA
–0.60
Miller
D
CA
–0.71
Feingold
D
WI
–0.58
Woolsey
D
CA
–0.69
Burris
D
IL
–0.58
Lee
D
CA
–0.69
Gillibrand
D
NY
–0.57
Waters
D
CA
–0.68
Merkley
D
OR
–0.57
Filner
D
VA
–0.68
Brown
D
OH
–0.57
Olver
D
MA
–0.68
Lautenberg
D
NJ
–0.56
Conyers
D
MI
–0.66
Durbin
D
IL
–0.56
The Moderates
Griffith
D
AL
–0.01
Carper
D
DE
–0.27
Bright
D
AL
  0.02
Landrieu
D
LA
–0.24
Hill
D
IN
  0.02
Bayh
D
IN
–0.22
Childers
D
MI
  0.02
Baucus
D
MT
–0.20
Minnick
D
ID
  0.11
Nelson
D
NE
–0.04
Jones
R
NC
  0.24
Snowe
R
ME
  0.01
McHugh
R
NY
  0.29
Collins
R
ME
  0.05
LoBiondo
R
NJ
  0.29
Voinovich
R
OH
  0.24
Smith
R
NJ
  0.30
Lugar
R
IN
  0.24
Lance
R
NJ
  0.30
Murkowski
R
AK
  0.25
The Conservatives
Hensarling
R
TX
  0.84
Burr
R
NC
  0.58
Deal
R
GA
  0.85
Barrasso
R
WY
  0.62
McClintock
R
CA
  0.86
Enzi
R
KY
  0.62
Franks
R
AZ
  0.87
Bunning
R
KY
  0.63
Shadegg
R
AZ
  0.90
Kyl
R
AZ
  0.64
Broun
R
GA
  0.91
Vitter
R
LA
  0.65
Lummis
R
WY
  0.94
Ensign
R
NV
  0.69
Flake
R
AZ
  0.97
Inhofe
R
OK
  0.76
Sensenbrenner
R
WI
  0.98
DeMint
R
SC
  0.81
Paul
R
TX
  1.30
Coburn
R
OK
  0.87

54  •  Chapter 2
Note that almost all of these people have ideal points considerably 
more moderate than the liberal wing of the Democratic Party. 
This fact is notable given our discussion below of the intraparty 
conflict generated by Obama’s response to the financial crisis.
An important question, however, is to what extent we can char-
acterize our estimated positions as reflecting ideology. If these 
positions reflect ideological commitments, we would expect them 
to be very stable across issues and over time. That there is consis-
tency across issues is clear. Despite the fact that the congressional 
agenda contains hundreds of issues spanning economic, social, 
and environmental policy domains, a single left-­right dimension 
accounts for 90 percent of the voting behavior. This is precisely 
because positions on taxes are very good predictors of prefer-
ences about regulation, which are good predictors of views on 
welfare, global warming, and so on.
A related question asks which of the many issues confront-
ing Congress is most closely related to our left-­right continuum. 
While many observers might stress the importance of racial atti-
tudes and social issues as the defining cleavages of American 
politics, our own research documents that it is economic issues 
and debates about the role and scope of the federal government 
that map most closely onto our continuum.30 Therefore it can be 
expected that financial regulation will be a liberal-­conservative 
battleground. The explanatory power of the ideological model 
has increased because positions on racial and social issues have 
Table 2.2.
The Obama administration
Officials with Past Congressional Service
Ideology 
Score
Hilda Solis, Sec. of Labor
–.45
Hillary Clinton, Sec. of State
–.36
Barack Obama, President
–.34
Joseph Biden, Vice-President
–.33
Rahm Emanuel, White House Chief of Staff
–.32
Ken Salazar, Sec. of the Interior
–.22
Ray LaHood, Sec. of Transportation
+.27

Ideology  •  55
become more like the divisions on economic issues, not the other 
way around.31 That racial issues morphed into economic policy 
conflicts is strikingly illustrated by our quote from the Fannie 
Mae annual report concerning minority housing.
Ideological positions are also quite stable for politicians 
throughout their careers. Of course, there are a few prominent 
examples of politicians whose positions changed, such as the 
right-­to-­left movements of Oregon’s Wayne Morse or the left-­
to-­right movements of Richard Schweiker (R-­PA) or the right-­
to-­left-­to-­right meandering of John McCain. A very, very small 
number of politicians have been erratic, such as William Prox-
mire (D-­WI). But for the most part, legislators’ positions on our 
scale move significantly only if, like Morse and South Carolina’s 
Strom Thurmond, they switch parties (though, of course, party 
switching is quite rare).32 Even a member whose constituency 
changes quite dramatically, either by elevation to the Senate or 
through major redistricting, rarely changes positions in a sig-
nificant way. The assumption that legislators maintain the same 
ideological position throughout their careers performs just as 
well statistically as the assumption that legislators are able to 
change positions in each biennial term.33
Moreover, the behavior of legislators deviates in large and sys-
tematic ways from the preferences of their average or median 
constituent. For example, senators from the same state do not 
vote identically. Most obviously, senators from the same state 
but different parties, such as John Kerry (D) and Scott Brown (R)  
of Massachusetts, pursue very different policy goals. The differ-
ence is picked up in their polarized ideology scores. If the two 
senators are from the same party, they are, of course, more simi-
lar. Even here, however, there are differences. Consider Califor-
nia Democrats Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer. They not 
only represent the same state but were first elected by exactly the 
same electorate on the same day in 1992.34 In the most recent 
Senate term, Boxer’s ideology score of –0.60 makes her the third 
most liberal member of the Senate. By contrast, Dianne Fein-
stein’s –­0.38 score makes her the thirty-­seventh most liberal. 

56  •  Chapter 2
Moreover, this California duo is not unusual. Four other states 
had pairs of senators from the same party in 2009 with at least 
as great a difference in their ideology scores.35
House districts, being single-­member, do not allow the natural 
experiment that is possible for the Senate. It is possible, however, 
to compare the voting behavior of a member to her successor. 
Even the same-­party replacements of House members can have 
ideology scores that are different from those of their predecessors. 
True, a liberal Democrat is likely to be replaced by another liberal 
Democrat. But the variation in the scores between same-­party 
predecessor and replacement is quite large. It is about half as 
large as the total variation of positions within the party.36 In other 
words, the ideological score of the outgoing incumbent is at best 
a crude predictor of the position of the new member even if they 
are in the same party. The takeaway is that a representative has a 
great deal of latitude in either building a coalition of supporters or 
expressing his or her personal ideology. Of course, the scores do 
pick up many factors other than personal ideology; these include 
some constituency effects, interest group influence, and pressure 
from party leaders and activists. Moreover, the ideological scores 
are not perfect predictors of behavior on a given decision so these 
other factors may be especially important in some contexts. Just 
how much these other factors matter—­especially for regulation 
of financial markets—­is an issue we take up below.
This consistency of ideological behavior has important conse-
quences for the timing of policy changes. Because the individual 
behavior of legislators is so stable, political shifts in ideology 
occur mainly through the replacement process of elections. This 
feature of American politics had important ramifications in pre-
vious financial and economic crises. During the Panic of 1907 the 
American financial system was saved primarily ­because J. Pier-
pont Morgan had the power and influence to act as a de facto 
central banker. Morgan’s personal achievement, however, was 
hardly evidence that the private sector on its own would head 
off or resolve future crises. But in the aftermath of the Panic, 
ideological opposition to a federal government central bank 
precluded its establishment. Congress did no more than pass  

Ideology  •  57
the modest and temporary Aldrich-­Vreeland Act whose only 
substantive reform was to allow groups of national banks to 
issue emergency currency.37 Only after the Democrats picked up 
a net gain of 118 seats in the House, 19 Senate seats, and the 
presidency in the elections of 1910 and 1912 was there a ma-
jority sufficient to pass the Federal Reserve Act. Similarly, the 
market-­oriented and “associationalist”—­voluntary cooperation 
of private individuals and groups—­ideologies of President Her-
bert Hoover and the Republican Party limited the use of federal 
authority in response to the stock market crash of October 1929. 
Consequently, the most significant policy changes (summarized 
in chapter 4) occurred only after Franklin Delano Roosevelt 
took office over three years later, in March 1933.
Ideologically driven politics continues to shape responses to 
financial crises. Much of the response of the George W. Bush 
administration, particularly with regard to the bankruptcy of 
Lehman Brothers and to the handling of the $700 billion Trou-
bled Asset Relief Program (TARP) fund reflected ideological 
biases in Congress related to fears of moral hazard and opposition 
to direct government intervention in banks. The 2008 elections 
resulted in the Obama presidency and the increased Democratic 
congressional majorities. These events were followed both by the 
stimulus package and the Dodd-­Frank Wall Street Reform Bill. 
The midterm elections of 2010, however, resulted in numerous 
replacements, with the Republicans gaining sixty-­three House 
seats. The ideological change suggests that any policy changes 
engendered by the crisis are likely to be curtailed. In contrast, 
the Roosevelt era changes, such as Glass-­Steagall, were ideo-
logically consolidated by the midterm elections of 1934. Policy 
change under Roosevelt was also facilitated by an absence of 
ideological polarization.
Polarized Politics
As politics became more ideological over the past few decades 
(recall figure 2.1), the ideological gap between the political par-
ties widened. In figure 2.2, we plot the average difference in 

58  •  Chapter 2
ideological scores between Democrats and Republicans in the 
House and Senate going back to the end of Reconstruction. As 
one can see, this difference, which we label polarization, has 
recently reached an all-­time high, exceeding even that found in 
the original Gilded Age of the 1890s.
There are many reasons to believe that it is not mere coin-
cidence that ideological polarization in our own Gilded Age 
looks like that of the 1890s. Both periods featured little regula-
tion, overheated economies, substantial immigration of unskilled 
labor, and increasing concentrations of income and wealth. In 
both eras, the Republican Party was the defender of the free mar-
ket gospel and limited government regulation of markets. It was 
Polarization
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
1879
1895
1911
1927
1943
1959
1975
1991
2007
Year
Polarization in House
Polarization in Senate
Figure 2.2. Polarization in Congress. The two graphs trace the difference in 
the position of the average Republican and the average Democrat. The graphs 
for the House and Senate are largely parallel, indicating that the substance of 
politics, not the institutional rules of the chambers, determines polarization. 
The liberal-­conservative dimension is constructed to have a minimum value of 
–1 and a maximum value of +1. Consequently, the recent differences between 
the parties cover about half the length of the dimension.

Ideology  •  59
also an era of frequent financial crises and panics with major 
crises in 1893 and 1907.
In Polarized America: The Dance of Ideology and Unequal 
Riches¸ we argued that there are strong linkages between eco-
nomic inequalities and political polarization.38 There are at least 
two mechanisms at work. The first is a causal effect of economic 
inequality on political polarization. As we have argued, the pri-
mary ideological dimension of American politics is the role of 
the state in regulating the economy. So in periods in which there 
are huge economic rewards to unfettered markets, support for 
free market conservatism increases—­especially among those 
individuals and groups who benefit the most. The political scien-
tist E. E. Schattschneider argued that the moneyed interests rule 
as long as an issue fails to become salient with the mass public, 
proclaiming, “Since the contestants in private conflicts are apt 
to be unequal in strength, it follows that the most powerful spe-
cial interests want private settlements because they are able to 
dictate the outcome as long as the conflict remains private. . . .  
It is the weak who want to socialize conflict. . . .”39 That is, if 
the arena is Congress and regulatory agencies, money prevails 
unless the conflict is viewed as having become sufficiently public 
to engender electoral consequences.
What if, however, the losers attempt to use the power of the 
state to capture some of those economic rewards outside the 
market? Yet, as we argue in more detail below, the structure 
of American political institutions makes it difficult to create 
new laws to regulate economic behavior. This effect leads to 
the second mechanism whereby political polarization increases 
inequality and the concentration of wealth. As we discuss, politi-
cal polarization leads to political gridlock that makes economic 
reform difficult. Not only can the economic losers not form a 
coalition to redirect the allocation of resources, but the govern-
ment cannot effectively respond to those economic shocks and 
crises which in turn further increases polarization.
Polarized America did not specifically address financial poli-
cies and regulations, but there is plenty of evidence to support 

60  •  Chapter 2
links between political polarization and the concentration of 
wealth and resources in the financial sector. The economists 
Thomas Philippon and Ariell Reshef have compared the wages 
of employees of the financial sector relative to the wages of 
equally skilled workers in other sectors of the economy from 
1908 to 2006. The wage ratios ranged from a low in the 1970s 
of 1.05 indicating financial workers enjoyed a 5 percent premium 
to 1.7 in 2006 when financial workers made 70 percent more 
than comparable workers in other parts of the economy.40 In 
their statistical analysis, Philippon and Reshef find that the main 
determinants of the financial sector wage premium are finan-
cial deregulation and corporate activities related to initial public 
offerings and credit risk.41 Similarly, Jon Bakija, Adam Cole, and 
Bradley Heim have found that the finance sector employed twice 
as many of the top 1 percent of earners in 2005 as it did in 1979. 
Moreover, among the top 1 percent of earners, incomes from 
the financial sector grew the fastest.42 Consequently, finance has 
played a very large role in the dramatic increase in the share of 
national income going to top earners.43
Consistent with our previous arguments about polarization 
and inequality, the cycles in financial sector wages closely match 
our measure of polarization over the past century. In figure 2.3, 
we plot the wage premium in finance and polarization in the 
House. Both polarization and wages in finance are high at the 
beginning and end of the twentieth century. But both indicators 
are at a low for much of the middle of the century following 
financial market reforms and the middle-­class political economy 
created by the New Deal.
There are important differences in the timing of the series. In 
particular, political polarization appears to be a leading indica-
tor of rising wages in the financial sector. (Although the con-
temporaneous correlation between polarization and wages is 
only 0.65, the correlation with polarization lagged ten years is 
0.90.) This is consistent with the argument we develop below: 
government gridlock (i.e., the inability of government regulation 

Ideology  •  61
to keep up with financial innovation) was a driving force behind 
the crisis of 2008.
That polarization has had such effects on policy making 
might be less troubling if politicians were simply responding 
to greater and greater divisions among the public. But political 
scientists have found little evidence that mass polarization can 
account for polarization of the magnitude we see in Congress. 
Although Alan Abramowitz and Morris Fiorina debate whether 
voters have polarized at all, there is little evidence that the public 
has polarized as much as the elites.44 It is true that voters who 
identify with the Democratic Party have policy preferences that 
are increasingly distinct from Republican identifiers. But much 
Polarization in House
Relative Wage in Finance
1
.8
1.6
1.8
1.4
1.2
1
.6
.4
1909 1917
r = .65
1925 1933 1941 1949 1957 1965 1973 1981 1989 1997 2005
Year
Polarization in House
Relative Wage in Finance
Figure 2.3. Polarization and wages in the financial sector. Polarization and 
wages in the financial sector follow similar paths through time, with changes 
in polarization preceding those in wages by 10 years. Relative wage shows 
financial wages with respect to wages elsewhere in the economy. Source: 
Philippon and Reshef (2009). Source for House polarization: authors’ com- 
putations from DW-­NOMINATE scores posted at voteview.com.

62  •  Chapter 2
of this effect is the response of voters sorting themselves into 
increasingly distinctive partisan camps.45
Ideology and Voting on Financial Issues
We now turn to a demonstration of the extent to which our mea-
sures of ideology can explain the voting behavior of members of 
Congress on financial legislation. Our illustrations in this chap-
ter pertain to votes during the bubble. In the second part of the 
book, we discuss votes in the “pop” period that followed the 
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy.
We illustrate the impact of ideology on financial regulation 
roll calls with three histograms of votes taken in the House of 
Representatives before the collapse of Lehman Brothers in Sep-
tember 2008. The horizontal axis in each figure represents the 
liberal-­conservative positions of the representatives. Histogram 
bars on the left end represent liberals, the middle moderates, and 
the right end conservatives. Each plot also shows the “cutting 
line” for the bill. If a bill fell perfectly on the liberal-­conservative 
dimension, the cutting line would separate those members who 
voted yea from those who voted nay. For example, if there was a 
roll call where the eight most liberal senators in table 2.1 voted 
yea and the ninth most liberal, Frank Lautenberg (D-­NJ), and 
the other ninety-­one senators all voted nay, the cutting line 
would be between Sherrod Brown (D-­OH) and Lautenberg. 
More generally, the cutting line corresponds to the point on 
the liberal-­conservative dimension where a legislator should be 
indifferent between voting yea and nay. The spatial model often 
makes incorrect vote predictions for legislators with ideal points 
close to the cutting line. Because their ideology leaves them close 
to indifferent, they are more likely to be swayed by constituency 
pressures and other factors.
The first histogram, figure 2.4, shows the House vote to pass 
the bill to regulate accounting firms sponsored by House Finan-
cial Services Committee chairman Michael Oxley (R-­OH). The 
House passed Oxley’s bill (H.R. 3763) on April 24, 2002, by 

Ideology  •  63
a vote of 334 to 90. (The House named the bill the Corporate 
and Auditing Accountability, Responsibility, and Transparency 
Act; this bill was then merged with a bill sponsored by Sena-
tor Paul Sarbanes (D-­MD) and the result became the Sarbanes-­
Oxley Act.) The vote shows a liberal-­conservative split with the 
division within the Democratic Party. Liberals viewed Oxley’s 
bill as an inadequate response to the Enron and other account-
ing scandals. The dark shading shows Democrats who voted 
“correctly” and the light shading shows Republicans who voted 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Democrats
Cutting Line
Errors = 48
PRE = 0.47
Yea
Nay
Republicans
House: Regulation of Auditors
24 April 2002, Yea = 334   Nay = 90
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 2.4. House passage of the Oxley Bill. The cutting line divides the Demo-
crats, with the most liberal members voting against the bill. Prediction errors for 
the liberal-­conservative dimension appear in white. The errors are concentrated 
near the cutting line. There are also two errors at the conservative end of the 
dimension. The two representatives, Flake and Paul, were likely voicing a funda-
mentalist free market conservatism objection to regulation in any form.

64  •  Chapter 2
“correctly.” The white areas at the bottom of the bars are cases 
where the spatial model makes erroneous predictions. We call 
these “voting errors” or “mistakes.” The cutting line shows the 
point that best divides the nays from the yeas. On the histogram 
we indicate where the yeas and nays are predicted to locate. In 
figure 2.4, the nays are predicted to be to the left of the cutting 
line and the yeas to the right. Conversely, the white portions of 
the bars to the left of the cutting line indicate yea votes, and to 
the right nay votes.46
The spatial model makes two big “mistakes” on the Oxley 
vote. Two extremely conservative Republicans, Jeff Flake of Ari-
zona and Ron Paul of Texas, voted against the bill. Ron Paul is 
such an extreme conservative that he is one of two representa-
tives in the rightmost bar. His nay vote is the white portion of 
the bar. The white portion of the second rightmost bar in the 
histogram represents Flake’s nay vote.
The two conservative votes against Oxley’s bill are a case 
where the congressmen were likely to have genuinely preferred 
not to move the status quo to the weak form of regulation 
offered by Oxley. The eighty-­eight negative Democrats stood on 
principle and rejected Oxley’s bill as an insufficient change from 
the status quo. Such odd cases of “both ends against the middle” 
are very rare in practice and rarely generate more than a few 
“mistakes” that are inconsistent with a liberal-­conservative split.
The second histogram, figure 2.5, shows a November 15, 
2007, roll call on legislation designed to further regulate mort-
gage lending.47 Note that the voting patterns are very consistent 
with the liberal-­conservative positions of the representatives. All 
Democrats voted in favor of the new reforms but the roll call 
divided moderate Republicans from conservatives. All of  the 
“mistakes” of the model are moderate Republicans near the cut-
ting line. Voting on this bill was not “both ends against the mid-
dle.” Out of the 421 representatives who cast a vote on the bill, 
only 32 were incorrectly classified.
The third histogram, figure 2.6, shows a roll call vote on July 
23, 2008, to pass the American Housing Rescue and Foreclosure 

Ideology  •  65
Prevention Act of 2008. The bill responded to spiraling foreclo-
sure rates on home mortgages, and provided $300 billion for 
refinancing mortgages and an unlimited line of credit to Fan-
nie and Freddie. This vote, like the previous illustration, split 
the Republicans internally. These internal party splits allow us 
to measure the shades of liberalism or conservatism that exist 
within each party.
The takeaway from these examples is that ideology is a pow-
erful predictor of legislative action in financial and economic 
crises. Our estimates of ideal points, which are generated from 
voting across the whole panoply of congressional votes, do an 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 32
PRE = 0.75
Yea
Nay
House: Reform Mortgage Lending
15 November 2007, Yea = 291   Nay = 127
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 2.5. A roll call on mortgage lending reform. On this vote, the Demo-
crats are unanimous and are joined by moderate Republicans. As in figure 2.4, 
the classification errors cluster around the cutting line.

66  •  Chapter 2
exceptional job of explaining congressional behavior in three 
very distinct aspects of financial regulation. This might not 
always be the case. The bankruptcy bill died in 2001 when the 
House rejected the conference report with “both ends against 
the middle” voting. The report included the amendment from 
Charles Schumer (D-­NY) designed to protect abortion clinics. 
Liberals voted against it because they saw the bill as anticon-
sumer. Conservatives voted against it because they saw it as pro-­
choice. Similar failures of a one-­dimensional model occurred 
more frequently in the mid-­twentieth century when the grant-
ing of civil rights for African Americans was a distinct issue 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 47
PRE = 0.70
Yea
Nay
House: Pass Foreclosure Prevention Act
23 July 2008, Yea = 272   Nay = 152
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 2.6. The passage vote for the American Housing Rescue and Foreclo-
sure Prevention Act. This vote shows a high degree of support among Demo-
crats and a high degree of opposition among more extreme Republicans. More 
moderate Republicans are split.

Ideology  •  67
from economics. Our examples illustrate, however, that a single 
ideological dimension accounts for many varieties of financial 
regulation.
Of course, ideology can hardly account for every vote cast. 
Legislators often defy the predictions on account of any num-
ber of factors ranging from constituency interests to party pres-
sure to interest group influence. These factors not only result in 
deviations from pure ideological voting but also influence the 
content of the legislation that is put to a vote. Lobbyists were 
active in formulating the TARP stimulus package and Dodd-­
Frank. Moreover, what legislation is voted on and what becomes 
law reflect not only ideologies and interests but also the way 
agenda control is exercised and whether legislation can clear the 
hurdles inherent in bicameralism and the presidential veto. Con-
sequently, we take up the impact of interests on political bubbles 
in chapter 3 and of institutions in chapter 4.
We pause to end this chapter with a caveat, obvious but worth 
stressing: sometimes ideology cannot be differentiated from ve- 
nality. Did Phil Gramm really believe “government is not the 
­answer,” or was he influenced by the lucre from UBS and Enron? 
Was Angelo Mozilo a committed egalitarian, or just implement-
ing part of his corrupt business model for Countrywide Finan-
cial? Sometimes ideology is just a smoke screen for the crony 
capitalists. In chapter 3 we turn to the cronies.
Chapter Appendix: Estimating the Ideological Map
This appendix provides a few more details and more intuition 
behind our estimates of legislator ideology.
Given the locations of legislators and outcomes on the ideo-
logical map, the underlying assumption of the spatial model is 
that each legislator votes yea or nay depending on which out-
come location is closer to his or her ideal point. Think of the yea 
and nay as two stores and the ideal point as the residence of a 
shopper. The shopper should normally shop at the closer store. 
If the more distant store has cheaper prices or some desirable 

68  •  Chapter 2
exclusive items, the shopper may make a “mistake” and go to 
the more distant store. Similarly, the legislator may make “mis-
takes” and depart from what would usually be expected, as a 
result of pressures from campaign contributors, constituents, 
courage of conviction, or just plain randomness.
But if we assume that legislators generally vote on the basis of 
the spatial map and that errors are infrequent, we can estimate 
the ideal points of the members of Congress directly from the 
hundreds or thousands of roll call choices made by each legislator.
To understand better how we calculate these locations, con-
sider the following three-­senator example. Suppose we observed 
only the following roll call voting patterns from Senators Sand-
ers, Feinstein, and DeMint.
Roll Call	
Sanders	
Feinstein	
DeMint
1	
YEA	
NAY	
NAY
2	
YEA	
YEA	
NAY
3	
NAY	
YEA	
YEA
4	
NAY	
NAY	
YEA
5	
YEA	
YEA	
YEA
6	
NAY	
NAY	
NAY
Notice that all of these votes can be explained by a simple model 
in which all senators are assigned an ideal point on a left-­right 
scale and every roll call is given a cutting line that divides the 
senators who vote yea from those who vote nay. For example, if 
we assign ideal points ordered by Sanders to the left of Feinstein 
and Feinstein to the left of DeMint, the first vote can be perfectly 
explained by a cutting line between Sanders and Feinstein, and 
the second vote can be explained by a cutting line between Fein-
stein and DeMint. In fact, all six votes can be explained in this 
way. Note that a flipped scale with DeMint to the left of Fein-
stein to the left of Sanders works just as well. But, a single cut-
ting line cannot explain votes 1–­4 if the ideal points are ordered 
with either Feinstein left of Sanders left of DeMint or Feinstein 
left of DeMint left of Sanders, DeMint left of Sanders left of 

Ideology  •  69
Feinstein, or Sanders left of DeMint left of Feinstein. Therefore 
none of these orderings is consistent with a one-­dimensional spa-
tial model.
As two orderings of ideal points work equally well, which 
one should we choose? Given that Sanders espouses liberal (left-­
wing) views and DeMint is known for his conservative (right-­
wing) views, Sanders left of Feinstein left of DeMint seems like 
a logical choice.
The real world, however, is rarely so well behaved as to gener-
ate the easy patterns of the first six votes. What if we observed 
that DeMint and Sanders occasionally vote together against Fein-
stein, as in votes 7 and 8 below? Such votes cannot be explained 
by the ordering Sanders left of Feinstein left of DeMint.
Roll Call	
Sanders	
Feinstein	
DeMint
7	
YEA	
NAY	
YEA
8	
NAY	
YEA	
NAY
If there are only a few votes like 7 and 8 (relative to votes 1–­6), 
it’s reasonable to conclude that they are generated by more or 
less random factors. If there are many more votes like 1–­6 than 
there are deviant votes, all common scaling procedures generate 
the ordinal ranking Sanders left of Feinstein left of DeMint.
In this book, we use our DW-­NOMINATE procedure for 
measuring ideology.48 To match the common-­language desig-
nation of liberals to the left and conservatives to the right, we 
adjust the DW-­NOMINATE scores so that each member’s aver-
age score lies between –­1 and +1, with –­1 being the most liberal 
position and +1 the most conservative.
In DW-­NOMINATE, the frequency of the deviant votes pins 
down the location of the ideal points. For example, if there are 
few votes pitting DeMint and Sanders against Feinstein, we 
place DeMint and Sanders far apart, to mimic the improbability 
that random events lead them to vote together. Alternatively, if 
the DeMint-­Sanders coalition were common, we would place 

70  •  Chapter 2
them closer together, consistent with the idea that small random 
events can lead to such a pattern.
It is easy to measure the success of the one-­dimensional spa-
tial model. In our example, the “classification success” is simply 
the proportion of explained votes (i.e., types 1–­6) compared to 
the total number of votes. Notice, however, that classification 
success will be inflated if there are lots of unanimous votes like 
5 and 6, because any ranking of the senators can explain them. 
Therefore, the proportionate reduction in error is a useful mea-
sure of classification success.49
Sometimes there are so many votes like 7 and 8 that it becomes 
unreasonable to maintain that they are simply random. An 
alternative is to assume that a DeMint-­Sanders coalition forms 
because there is some other policy dimension on which they are 
closer together than they are to Feinstein. We can accommodate 
such behavior by estimating ideal points on a second dimension. 
The spatial political map then becomes more like the map of the 
United States and less like the map of Chile. In this example, a 
second dimension in which DeMint and Sanders share a position 
distinct from Feinstein’s will explain votes 7 and 8. Both dimen-
sions combined will explain all of the votes. Obviously, in a 
richer example with one hundred senators rather than three, two 
dimensions will not explain all the votes, but the second dimen-
sion may add explanatory power. In fact, in the twenty-­first cen-
tury, congressional roll call voting is so highly one-­dimensional 
that we need not consider a second dimension. In this book, we 
capture ideology as a liberal-­conservative scale.

C h a p t e r  3
Interests
Dishonest dealing and speculative enterprise are 
merely the occasional incidents of our real prosperity.
—­President Theodore Roosevelt to George 
B. Cortelyou, October 25, 1907
Despite recent abuses of the public’s trust, our econ-
omy remains fundamentally sound and strong, and the 
vast majority of business people are living by the rules. 
Yet, confidence is the cornerstone of our economic sys-
tem, so a few bad actors can tarnish our entire free 
enterprise system. We must have rules and laws that 
restore faith in the integrity of American business. The 
government will fully investigate reports of corporate 
fraud, and hold the guilty parties accountable for mis-
leading shareholders and employees. Executives who 
commit fraud will face financial penalties, and, when 
they are guilty of criminal wrongdoing, they will face 
jail time.
—­President George W. Bush, weekly radio 
address, June 29, 2002
Never again should we let the schemes of a reckless 
few put the world’s financial system—­and our people’s 
well-­being—­at risk.
—­President Barack Obama, address to  
G20 Summit, September 25, 2009

72  •  Chapter 3
In the epigraphs given here, Presidents Roosevelt, Bush, 
and Obama were doing their best to reassure financial markets 
when miscreants were in full public view. Roosevelt’s remarks 
came just after the unraveling of the corner on United Copper 
and three weeks before the suicide of the banker Charles Bar-
ney, who was caught up in the scandal. Bush’s radio address 
came the week before WorldCom’s recently resigned CEO Ber-
nard Ebbers was to testify before the House Financial Services 
Committee. (“Bad actor” Ebbers is now serving a twenty-­five-­
year sentence in a federal prison.) Obama was speaking at the 
time of a widespread populist reaction to the federal bailout of 
financial firms and to the large bonuses received by the execu-
tives of these firms.
Of course, few would challenge these presidents’ assertions 
about how a majority live by the rules. It is a taboo to express 
an opinion that almost everyone is, in fact, dishonest, or, at best, 
highly self-­interested. This taboo is politically relevant because 
it legitimizes weak legal and regulatory standards and weak 
enforcement of those standards that do exist.
But the “few bad apples” theory invoked by the three leaders 
and others almost certainly understates the role of legally and 
ethically dubious behavior in generating the current and past 
financial crises. In the introduction to part I, we mentioned the 
steroid scandal in major league baseball. Baseball players typify 
the behavior of Americans. From jaywalking, to hiring illegal 
gardeners and nannies, to not paying social security taxes on 
legal domestics, to doing drugs, to cheating on taxes, to get-
ting disability benefits when there is no disability, to speeding, to 
insurance fraud, and so on, most Americans engage in some law-
breaking on a daily basis. We should not expect business people 
and financiers to behave any differently.
With specific reference to the financial crisis, former hedge 
fund manager Michael Burry has expressed a position quite oppo-
site to that of the presidents: “The salient point about the mod-
ern vintage of housing-­related fraud is its integral place within 
our nation’s institutions.”1 And President John F. Kennedy once 

Interests  •  73
privately proclaimed, “My father always told me that all busi-
nessmen were sons of bitches.”2
After his statement went viral, 1962 style, Kennedy did some 
public backtracking. In public, politicians must stick with the 
bad apples theory. This claim, however, invokes only half of the 
metaphor. The other half concerns spoiling the whole barrel. 
Competitive pressures in the marketplace force businesses and 
firms to push legal and ethical barriers simply to keep up with 
those firms that breach them. This was clearly the case in major 
league baseball as the pressure to keep up lured many more ath-
letes into using banned substances. Bernard Madoff’s ability to 
lure billions away from other investment funds with his Ponzi 
scheme may not have led other firms to directly emulate his 
lawbreaking, but it is likely to have led others into more risky 
investments so as not to lose even more investors. Similarly, com-
petitors of Bernie Ebbers and WorldCom may have made poor 
investments in an attempt to emulate the false profits shown in 
WorldCom accounting statements.3 The example most germane 
to the financial crisis is how the profits of investment banks in 
the first decade of the new century induced commercial banks to 
take on more risk to boost earnings.
Politics is also an important channel for the spread of rot. In 
some cases, market participants use political connections and 
influences to legalize and legitimate their currently illegal behav-
ior. Our discussion of Phil Gramm in this book’s introduction 
drew attention to one of the most important examples of this 
phenomenon: Enron’s lobbying to exempt energy trades from 
government regulation.4 The lobbying was rewarded with the 
infamous “Enron loophole” in the Commodity Futures Mod-
ernization Act of 2000. We also saw, in chapter 2, how Fannie 
Mae’s 2003 annual report drew attention to that government-­
sponsored enterprise’s connections to Angelo Mozilo of Coun-
trywide Financial. “Friends of Angelo” loans were received by 
Senators Chris Dodd (D-­CT) and Kent Conrad (D-­ND); George 
W. Bush’s Housing and Urban Development (HUD) secretary 
Alphonso Jackson; Clinton HUD secretary Donna Shalala; 

74  •  Chapter 3
diplomat Richard Holbrooke; and James Johnson, former Fan-
nie Mae head and adviser to Walter Mondale, John Kerry, and 
Barack Obama.5 (The Mozilo connection ended Johnson’s for-
mal participation in the Obama presidential campaign, but it has 
not kept him from a directorship at Goldman Sachs.) In 2010, 
Mozilo agreed to a $67.5 million settlement with the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC) to avoid trial on fraud and 
insider trading charges. Most of the settlement will be paid by 
Bank of America, which acquired Countrywide in 2008.6
Firms taking questionable risks, like Countrywide, may seek 
political protection from government intervention. Deniz Igan, 
Prachi Mishra, and Thierry Tressel show that it was the most 
risky lenders who lobbied against tightened lending rules in the 
subprime crisis.7 Thomas Romer and Barry Weingast indicate 
that it was the least solvent savings and loan (S&L) institutions 
that were the strong advocates for regulatory forbearance in the 
S&L crisis.8 These were cases where firms fought against tighter 
regulatory standards.
Disadvantaged firms might seek government relief from the 
effects of questionable activities. But often the relief they seek 
is not for the government to clarify or enforce existing law but 
for it to impose weaker standards. They seek changes to the law 
so that they can engage in the behavior causing the harm. This 
dynamic led to the 1999 repeal of the Glass-­Steagall Act’s sepa-
ration of investment and commercial banking. Many financial 
holding companies began exploiting loopholes in the law and 
its regulatory framework that allowed them to begin breaking 
down barriers between the two forms of banking. But rather 
than lobby for stronger laws and better enforcement, most of 
the companies who lost market share to the more integrated 
firms simply sought repeal so that they could compete. Similarly, 
the JOBS Act passed by Congress in 2012 weakened disclosure 
requirements for “emerging growth” companies. Appeals for lax 
regulation are facilitated by the “bad apples” taboo expressed in 
the reassuring words we cited from Presidents Roosevelt, Bush, 
and Obama at the beginning of this chapter. If fraud and other 

Interests  •  75
agency problems are rare and sporadic rather than epidemic, the 
financial elite can indulge in the self-­serving belief that markets 
can self-­regulate.
What explains the taboo? Politicians are much less reluctant 
to claim that ghettos are full of earned income tax credit fraud-
sters, welfare queens, drug dealers, and violent criminals. Politi-
cians observe no taboo against singling out some categories of 
Americans as having a proclivity for crime; why not the finan-
cial services industry? Undoubtedly because the industry packs 
political power and can deliver rewards to the Phil and Wendy 
Gramms. We emphasize that the Gramms were far from unique. 
As we indicated in this book’s introduction, the board of Ameri-
can International Group (AIG) was stocked with former officials 
from both Republican and Democratic administrations. In addi-
tion, White House advisers including Larry Summers, Franklin 
Raines, Peter Orszag, and Rahm Emanuel found their way to 
Wall Street or Fannie Mae at one time or another.
Our point here is that although overtly illegal behavior is 
important for understanding financial crises, even more focus 
should go to activities that qualify as legal. It’s the “honest graft” 
of special interest politics that packs a real punch.
The Power of Special Interests
How do special interests such as those in the financial services 
industry influence political decision makers? Political scientists 
tend to focus on three different channels of influence: mobiliz-
ing constituencies, direct political expenditures in the form of 
campaign contributions, and the production and provision of 
information through lobbying. We consider each of these chan-
nels in turn.
Mobilizing Constituencies
As we discussed in the previous chapter, members of Congress 
do not simply channel the views of their average constituent into 
the legislative process. More often than not they bring their own 

76  •  Chapter 3
beliefs and ideologies to bear on the decisions they make. But 
this is not to say that constituency preferences are not important 
in many circumstances. In particular, on highly salient issues 
toward which active constituents have strong, well-­informed 
preferences, politicians are quite likely to heed such views.
Unlike such interest groups as the National Rifle Association 
(NRA) or the AARP (formerly the American Association of 
Retired Persons), the power of the financial sector does not arise 
from the raw numbers of voters it commands. Indeed, employ-
ment in the financial sector is small, but concentrated in certain 
regions: New York City, New Jersey, and Connecticut. As one 
can see from table 3.1, no congressional district has more than 
14 percent of its labor force working in the financial or insur-
ance sectors.9 The real estate sector (see table 3.2) is smaller 
and less concentrated, but it is overrepresented in places like 
Florida, California, and Nevada, where the housing bubble was 
the greatest.
But despite the small size of these groups, members of Con-
gress are very responsive to their views. First, as we saw above, 
employees in the financial sector are quite well-­to-­do. In a recent 
book, Larry Bartels argues that senators are considerably more 
responsive to the opinions of high-­income than middle-­income 
constituents, and not responsive at all to the views of low-­income 
citizens.10 Also (as is true for many industries) workers in the 
financial sector are well informed about how various laws and 
regulations affect their industry. They are likely to know when a 
legislator or regulator makes a decision adverse to those interests 
(and plenty of industry groups are ready to inform them if any 
decision escapes their attention).
The political influence of the big banks has grown in recent 
years as a consequence of the ending of restrictions on inter-
state branch banking and on brokerage activities by commer-
cial banks. Just as defense contractors have long benefited from 
lobbying by subcontractors scattered throughout the country, 
Bank of America, Citibank, JPMorgan Chase, and Wells Fargo 

Interests  •  77
now have branches in most congressional districts. McBank has 
replaced the Bailey Building and Loan of It’s a Wonderful Life.
In many ways, the political influence of the financial services 
industry is similar to that of other sectors of the economy. If 
financial services lobbying had undue influence on the Dodd-­
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and 
its subsequent implementation, the same could be said for the 
health care industry with regard to both Bush’s prescription 
drug plan and Obama’s health care bill. The retail drug industry 
Table 3.1
Top 25 House districts for finance and insurance employment in 2000
Incumbent (2008–9)
State
District
Party
Percentage 
Employment 
in Finance and 
Insurance
Carolyn Maloney
NY
14
D
13.97%
Jerrold Nadler
NY
  8
D
11.95%
Michael McMahon
NY
13
R
11.92%
John Larson
CT
  1
D
11.92%
Christopher Shays
CT
  4
R
10.60%
Leonard Boswell
IA
  3
D
10.38%
Sue Myrick
NC
  9
R
10.37%
Lee Terry
NE
  2
R
10.10%
Michael Castle
DE
  1
R
  9.99%
Ander Crenshaw
FL
  4
R
  9.69%
Eric Cantor
VA
  7
R
  9.42%
Rush Holt
NJ
12
D
  9.38%
Anthony Weiner
NY
  9
D
  9.34%
Patrick Tiberi
OH
12
R
  9.19%
Nita Lowey
NY
18
D
  9.13%
Carolyn McCarthy
NY
  4
D
  8.95%
Peter King
NY
  3
R
  8.90%
Leonard Lance
NJ
  7
R
  8.86%
Rodney Frelinghuysen
NJ
11
R
  8.85%
Erik Paulsen
MN
  3
R
  8.67%
Tom Tancredo
CO
  6
R
  8.63%
Danny Davis
IL
  7
D
  8.55%
John Shadegg
AZ
  3
R
  8.43%
Stephen Lynch
MA
  9
D
  8.41%
Mark Kirk
IL
10
R
  8.38%
U.S. Average
  5.00%

78  •  Chapter 3
and the hospital industry have, like retail banking, become more 
concentrated.
One area where the financial sector excels and is distinct is 
political participation. Reflecting the importance of politics to 
their industry, employees of the financial sector are actively en-
gaged in politics. One aspect of this engagement is heavy par-
ticipation in electoral politics. In the 2004 American National 
Election Study (ANES), 88 percent of those employed in finance 
Table 3.2. 
Top 25 districts for real estate employment in 2000
Incumbent (2008–9)
State
District
Party
Percentage 
­Employment in 
Real Estate
Connie Mack
FL
14
R
4.48%
Ron Klein
FL
22
D
4.17%
John Campbell
CA
48
R
4.10%
Jose Serrano
NY
16
D
3.99%
Charles Rangel
NY
15
D
3.93%
Debbie Schultz
FL
20
D
3.89%
Henry Waxman
CA
30
D
3.85%
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen
FL
18
R
3.73%
Robert Wexler
FL
19
D
3.61%
Pete Sessions
TX
32
R
3.49%
Ric Keller
FL
  8
R
3.38%
Vernon Buchanan
FL
13
R
3.33%
Mazie Hirono
HI
  2
D
3.33%
Joseph Crowley
NY
  7
D
3.29%
John Shadegg
AZ
  3
R
3.23%
Harry Mitchell
AZ
  5
D
3.22%
John Culberson
TX
  7
R
3.17%
Tom Price
GA
  6
R
3.15%
Carolyn Maloney
NY
14
D
3.14%
Dana Rohrabacher
CA
46
R
3.12%
Henry Brown
SC
  1
R
3.06%
John Lewis
GA
  5
D
3.04%
Dina Titus
NV
  3
R
2.98%
Gary Ackerman
NY
  5
D
2.96%
Anthony Weiner
NY
  9
D
2.96%
U.S. Average
1.88%

Interests  •  79
and insurance reported voting in the presidential election com-
pared to just 76 percent of the other respondents.11 Employees in 
the financial sector are also more likely to
• Try to influence the votes of others (53 percent to 
48 percent)
• Attend a campaign meeting, rally, or speech (13 per-
cent to 7 percent)
• Work on a campaign (5 percent to 3 percent)
Not surprisingly, the political engagement of the financial ser-
vices industry is even stronger in the area where money counts: 
campaign contributions. A full 25 percent of the ANES financial 
services industry respondents report making a campaign contri-
bution in 2004, compared to just 8 percent of those who worked 
outside the sector. However, as we discuss below when we pre­- 
sent the sheer magnitude of financial services campaign contribu- 
tions, this seventeen-­point gap radically understates the political 
mobilization of this sector.
Another factor that works in favor of the financial industry 
is that legislators are not likely to feel much cross-­pressure from 
other constituents on matters related to finance. Such matters are 
technically complex and not very interesting to most voters. Vot-
ers whose stock portfolios and homes are appreciating in value 
may be hard to convince of a need for more financial regulation. 
Consider the mutual fund scandals that came to light in 2003. 
Mutual fund traders had a practice of executing “late trades” 
at the previous day’s closing price. This practice essentially rep-
resents an illegal transfer from the accounts of regular mutual 
fund clients to the late traders.12 Although the practice violates 
security laws, it appears to have been widespread before New  
York attorney general Eliot Spitzer and the SEC began their 
investigations.13 These illegal trades were facilitated by regula-
tions that in principle allowed after-­hours trades to be executed 
at the closing price only if the order was made prior to clos-
ing. But lax enforcement led to rampant cheating of individual 

80  •  Chapter 3
investors in favor of institutions. The complexity of the regula-
tions surrounding these practices and the fact that individual 
mutual fund investors were still making money (though perhaps 
not as much) meant that there was little political pressure to 
investigate before Spitzer stepped in. Afterward the SEC pro-
posed a “hard close” rule that prohibited executing any orders at  
the previous closing price after 4 p.m. But after extensive indus- 
try lobbying the rule was abandoned.
Political pressure against the financial sector builds substan-
tially only during a crisis and in its aftermath. For example, 
Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi find that high fore-
closure and delinquency rates among Republican constituents 
led many Republican legislators to support the Housing and 
Economic Recovery Act of 2008, which contained government 
subsidies for renegotiating mortgages.14 But in many cases, the 
cross-­pressure emerges not as well-­informed opposition to finan-
cial market deregulation or executive compensation practices 
but as a populist anti–­Wall Street reaction. Constituency pres-
sure to rein in executive compensation and bonuses was obvi-
ously an important factor in the House of Representatives’ vote 
to tax AIG retention bonuses at a punitive rate of 90 percent. In 
chapter 7 we show that Republican House members running for 
reelection in 2008 were less likely to support Secretary Paulson’s 
initial Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP I) than were those 
Republicans who had announced their retirement.
Financing Campaigns
The second weapon in the arsenal of financial interests is direct 
political expenditure through campaign contributions to legisla-
tors, presidential candidates, and political parties.
The importance of campaign contributions in determining 
policy outcomes may be exaggerated.15 Lehman Brothers is a 
particularly salient example. From 2004 to 2008, Lehman em-
ployees made substantial contributions, less than those of Gold-
man Sachs, Citibank, and JPMorgan Chase, but ahead of Bank 

Interests  •  81
of America.16 These contributions did not save Lehman from 
bankruptcy. It is, moreover, often the case that there is conflict 
within the financial services industry over policy change. Ran-
dall Kroszner and Thomas Stratmann argue that Glass-­Steagall 
survived for sixty-­six years in large part because the financial 
services industry, split into securities, commercial banking, 
and insurance sectors, could not agree on the nature of reform. 
Each sector, in turn, used contributions to compete for influ-
ence against the other two sectors.17 Outside of the financial 
sector, the importance of interindustry competition has recently 
been highlighted by the conflict between entertainment and In-
ternet organizations over the regulation of Internet piracy. But 
greater consolidation of different business lines into large finan-
cial holding companies has muted these intrafinance conflicts 
over policy.
On the other hand, even if no firm or sector wins all the time, 
there is little doubt that the campaign cash the financial industry 
contributes in each election cycle boosts its clout in Washington. 
When the industry “has its act together,” coordinated contribu-
tions can change policy. An example is the change in bankruptcy 
law in 2005 brought about by the stealthily named National 
Consumer Bankruptcy Coalition, which coordinated contribu-
tions for major creditors.18
Using data provided by the Center for Responsive Politics 
(CRP),19 we can examine in some detail the extent of the cam-
paign fundraising undertaken by the financial sector. Figure 3.1 
reveals that campaign contributions from the financial sector 
increased almost threefold between 1992 and 2008, even after 
adjusting for inflation. This growth exceeds that of all of the 
industrial sectors tracked by the CPR with the exception of the 
legal profession.
The current magnitudes of giving are also astonishing. Four 
subsectors of the industry are in the top ten of all industry con-
tributors (securities and investments, real estate, insurance, and 
miscellaneous finance). Combined, the industry contributions 
swamp the second-­place industry—­the legal profession.20

82  •  Chapter 3
Figure 3.1 also reveals that the growth in financial industry 
contributions has been concentrated in two sectors: securities 
and investments, and real estate. Securities and investments, in 
contrast to commercial banking, is the sector that Philippon and 
Reshef identify as accounting for most of the wage increases in 
financial services relative to other sectors of the economy.21 It is 
certainly no coincidence that financial services and real estate 
played such a big role in the 2008 financial crisis.
Moreover, a few firms and trade associations account for the 
bulk of the contributions. The largest political action committee 
(PAC) contributor in the 2010 election cycle in the commercial 
banking sector was the American Bankers Association. The board 
of this association is basically controlled by the four big national 
banks, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup, and Wells 
Fargo. The big four and the association donated $4.9 million of 
the total $9.0 million contributions from the commercial bank-
ing sector PACs. Goldman Sachs, Credit Suisse, and UBS had 
the fourth-­, fifth-­, and sixth-­largest PACs in the securities and 
Total Industry (millions 2010 $)
Sub-sectors (millions 2010 $)
500
300
400
200
200
150
100
50
0
100
1990
1992
1994
2002
1996
2004
1998
2006
2000
2008
2010
Year
Commercial Banking
Securities and Investment
Real Estate
Insurance
Total Industry
Figure 3.1. Campaign contributions from the financial sector. Campaign con-
tributions from the financial sector have increased sharply, especially from 
securities, investment banking, and real estate, the sectors most involved in the 
subprime mortgage crisis.
Securities and Investment
Commercial Banking

Interests  •  83
investments category. In total campaign contributions, which 
include money given directly to political parties as well as to can-
didates, Goldman Sachs, at $38.3 million, and Citibank, at $29.5 
million, were the second-­ and third-­largest corporate contribu-
tors from 1989 to 2012. (AT&T was the largest.)
Of course, it is not simply the magnitude of the contributions 
that matter but the way they are allocated. Figure 3.2 demon-
strates how different financial sectors allocated their money 
across the two political parties since 1990. Two features stand 
out. The first is the importance of majority party control of 
Congress. The financial industry tends to shift its contributions 
based on which party controls Congress. Before 1994, a major-
ity of the money went to the Democratic Party, which controlled 
the House and the Senate. Following the 1994 elections, contri-
butions shifted dramatically in favor of the newly empowered 
Republicans. This is especially true of the contributions from 
insurers and commercial banks. Following the Democratic take-
over in 2006, the money switched back to about where it had 
been in the early 1990s. It shifted back to the Republicans again 
after the 2010 midterm elections.
The second important point is how well the Democratic Party 
has done with the securities and real estate industries even dur-
ing the period when it had little power in Washington. Although 
it may seem inconsistent with the Democratic Party’s liberal 
ideological orientation, the financial sector has become a very 
important constituency for the party. Indeed, it has become 
the “money” wing of the party that helps compensate for the 
increasingly downscale “votes” wing of the party. Many factors 
helped seal this alliance. The first is that much of the financial 
sector is located on the socially liberal coasts—­in New York, 
Boston, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.22 It is not surprising 
that these areas would support liberal social and cultural causes 
through the Democratic Party. Perhaps not all of the money is 
intended to influence the Democrats on financial matters, yet 
clearly, the level of these contributions heightens the party’s sen-
sitivity to those interests.

84  •  Chapter 3
From the party’s perspective, high finance makes an ideal 
money wing almost as good as Hollywood. Unlike many other 
industries, hedge funds and banks do not directly pollute the 
environment and do not have especially tendentious labor rela-
tions. Thus, the industry has relatively little conflict with other 
Democratic constituencies such as environmentalists and labor 
unions.23 Goldman Sachs is notably welcoming to gay men and 
lesbians.24 Criticism of hedge funds, in particular, by other 
Democratic constituencies is difficult due to the light disclosure 
requirements for their activities. Of course, as we will see, what 
was an ideal alliance during the boom is not necessarily one that 
can survive the bust.
Perhaps more important than how the industry allocates funds 
across parties is how it supports individual legislators. Consider 
table 3.3, which outlines average financial industry contribu-
tions to various groups of House incumbents for the 2007–­8 
election cycle.
Democratic Share
.6
.5
.4
.3
1990
1992
1994
2002
1996
2004
1998
2006
2000
2008
2010
Year
Commercial Banking
Securities and Investment
Real Estate
Insurance
Total Industry
Figure 3.2. Democratic share of contributions. The Democrats have always 
received a substantial share of the contributions from the financial services 
industry. Their share is greatest when they control Congress. The figure shows 
contributions over each two-­year election cycle. The period 1995–­2006 rep-
resents years when the Republicans controlled the outgoing Congress. The 
Democrats controlled in 1989–­94 and 2007–­10.

Interests  •  85
The partisan differences are quite small. Only $9,000 sepa-
rates the average Democrat from the average Republican. This 
allocation reflects the bipartisan strategies that these industries 
pursued.
The ideological differences are somewhat more substantial. 
The more conservative wing of each party (moderate Demo-
crats and conservative Republicans) garners substantially more 
contributions than the more liberal factions. The emphasis on 
the Financial Services Committee, with its role in oversight and 
new legislation, is clear. The typical committee member receives 
almost twice as much as the average nonmember. Contributions 
do at least correlate with voting decisions. Contributions made 
during the 2007–­8 election cycle appear to have paid off when 
the bubble popped. The members who supported the Paulson 
TARP bailout received substantially more contributions than 
those who opposed it.
Information and Lobbying
Because legislators often lack the time or expertise to master 
complex policy areas, they must naturally turn to others for 
information or advice. While members can rely on congressio-
nal and committee staffs to some degree, most of the time they 
depend on outside lobbyists and interest groups for information 
Table 3.3.
Financial industry contributions to house incumbents, 
2007–8 election cycle
Group
Contribution
All members
$157,900
Democrats
$153,921
Republicans
$162,686
Financial Services Committee members
$297,883
Yes on TARP I
$187,586
No on TARP I
$131,789
Liberal Democrats
$140,374
Moderate Democrats
$169,085
Moderate Republicans
$156,780
Conservative Republicans
$169,462

86  •  Chapter 3
about the consequences of policy choices. This political fact of 
life is true across almost all policy domains, but it is especially 
important in financial regulation.
Finance, banking, and insurance are very complex industries. 
This has only become truer with the proliferation of derivatives, 
swaps, and other complex financial instruments. One has to be 
a rocket scientist (or at least on par with one mathematically) 
to understand much of what has gone on in the financial sector 
over the past generation.25 Moreover, this expertise is lucrative. 
Someone who truly knows the ins and outs of the financial sec-
tor could make far more money working for a financial firm (or 
lobbying for it) than working as a staffer on Capitol Hill. Conse-
quently, the “information asymmetry” between financial sector 
lobbyists and legislators is unusually large. The informational 
advantage of the financial sector should work to its advantage 
when its members participate in the political process and lobby.
This political information gap works much the same way 
that it works in private markets. Just as stock jobbers sell near 
worthless securities to unsophisticated buyers, financial sector 
lobbyists monger dubious “reforms” to legislators. The lobbyists 
have little incentive to push policies that contribute to the long-­
run economic welfare of the nation. Their focus is on short-­term 
profits and competitive advantage. When times are good, the 
message that unregulated financial markets enhance the general 
welfare sells especially well.
The information asymmetry between the financial sector and 
policy makers is also a source of “negative” power for the indus-
try. The period of the past thirty years has been one of vast inno-
vation in the financial sector. New products routinely exploit 
previously unknown loopholes in securities law and regulation. 
A recent, relatively simple example is Goldman Sachs’s creating 
a pool of investors to buy an interest in Facebook in 2011; the 
product allowed Facebook to raise capital while escaping the 499 
investor limit that would force it to become a public company. 
(Facebook finally held its initial public offering in 2012.) After a 
public outcry, Goldman restricted the investment to a loophole 

Interests  •  87
for foreign investors who “do not count.”26 But careful regula-
tory oversight of the many less-­transparent innovations requires 
intensive knowledge of the new practices and their effects. Not 
only is this information concentrated within the industry but the 
industry may have little incentive to provide it to policy makers. 
Indeed, a claim of “business secrets” may make it impossible 
for regulators to obtain it on their own. Consequently, policy 
makers are presented with a Morton’s Fork between bad out-
comes arising under laissez-­faire and stifling innovation through 
regulation.
As an example, consider “high frequency algorithmic” trad-
ing.27 The idea is to have powerful computers analyze, within 
fractions of a second, every blip and dip of markets and execute 
trades. The use of these algorithms may be efficiency-­enhancing, 
but there are legitimate concerns about a destabilizing effect. 
What if thousands of these algorithms sold at the same dip? 
Might that not turn a dip into a crash? A flash crash related 
to high-­frequency trading occurred on May 6, 2010. The inci-
dent illustrates how both the SEC and the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission (CFTC) lack the capacity and information 
for monitoring financial transactions and innovation. The joint 
report of these agencies accounting for the crash was issued only 
on September 30 of that year.28 Consequently, this lack of capac-
ity has left regulation largely to the industry itself.29
Lobbying is extremely important for the financial sector. It 
spends roughly the same amount on lobbying as on campaign 
contributions. Since 1998, lobbying expenditures are subject to 
public disclosure. We cannot break out expenditures on lobby-
ing specific legislators or political parties, but we can look at the 
total amounts. These are indicated for securities and investments, 
commercial banks, and real estate in figure 3.3.30 Lobbying 
expenditures rose sharply in the first decade of the twenty-­first 
century, particularly in the securities and investments sector.
Among commercial banks, the big four survivors of the crash, 
Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase, Wells Fargo, and Citibank, 
account for about one-­third of all commercial banking lobbying 

88  •  Chapter 3
expenditures. They are also, as previously noted, on the boards 
of the American Bankers Association and the Consumer Bank-
ers Association. The two associations are the biggest single lob-
byists in the commercial bank category. The two trade groups, 
the four big banks, and Barclays represent more than half of 
all commercial banking lobbying expenditure. It should be no 
surprise that Goldman Sachs makes the highest lobbying expen-
diture among securities and investments firms.
As the housing bubble popped, lobbying by the real estate 
sector declined. The details tell a story. The largest real estate 
lobbying organization is the National Association of Realtors, 
which accounts for about one-­third of all lobbying expenses in 
the sector, spending more than $22 million in 2011. This was 
not a decline, but a new record, as indicated by OpenSecrets.org. 
Even as home sales fell and association membership fell from 
1.36 million in 2007 to 1.07 million in 2011, lobbying by the 
association increased.
Millions 2010 $
100
80
60
40
20
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
Year
Real Estate
Commercial Banking
Securities and Investment
Figure 3.3. Lobbying expenditures by financial and real estate firms. Expendi-
tures soared during the bubble and continued to grow after the pop, with the 
exception of real estate.

Interests  •  89
Where, then, did the decline in real estate sector lobbying 
come from? A huge chunk came from Fannie and Freddie, which 
ended their lobbying after being nationalized in 2008. They 
had been the second-­and third-­largest lobbying organizations 
in the real estate sector. The National Association of Mortgage 
Brokers also reduced its expenditures dramatically: the group 
spent $2,319,485 in 2009 but only $210,000 in 2011. Mortgage 
brokering collapsed as the lenders turned to in-­house mortgage 
origination with stiffer standards. Home building also col-
lapsed. This sector, kept separately by OpenSecrets.org, showed 
a decline from $9.8 million in 2009 to $4.6 million in 2011. 
The drop would appear to be related to the large oversupply of 
housing after the bubble. With low expectations that Washing-
ton would favor even more building and with many builders in 
financial distress, the sector downsized its political activity.
Political expenditures, informational asymmetry, and constit-
uent pressures mix into ideology as influences on the individual 
behavior of members of Congress and on the White House. In 
chapter 4 we explore how individuals interact within the politi-
cal system.

C h a p t e r  4
Institutions
[I]n our capital markets—­in general, innovation  
precedes regulation, and that’s generally been good ­ 
because we grow quicker because of it.
—­Henry Paulson, quoted in Todd Purdum, 
“Henry Paulson’s Longest Night”
The final prong of our explanation is the shortcomings of 
America’s policy-­making institutions. We have already discussed 
how interests work to impede adequate and efficient regulation 
of financial markets. Legislators and regulators are susceptible 
to special-­interest appeals from the financial services industry. 
Moreover, the industry benefits from information asymmetries 
with the government. But interests are far from the only road-
blocks. Indeed, even if campaigns were publicly financed and all 
regulators and congressional staffers held PhDs in financial engi-
neering, the American political system would still have consider-
able difficulty establishing and maintaining the sort of financial 
regulatory structure that would prevent the recurrence of finan-
cial crises.
Another difficulty is that policy making is approached through 
ideology that is resistant to the incorporation of new informa-
tion. In chapter 2, we showed how ideology can be summarized 
as a position on a liberal-­conservative dimension. Politics, in-
creasingly organized in polarized liberal-­conservative positions, 
must create policies within institutions that are resistant to pol-
icy change.

Institutions  •  91
The problem is that political power in the United States is so 
fragmented, separated, and checked that policy change requires 
extraordinary consensus and mobilization. It’s the story those of 
us who grew up in America should have learned in high school. 
Power is separated into executive, legislative, and judicial func-
tions. Congress and courts check the president and the executive 
branch. Authority is divided and shared by the states and the 
federal government. And so on.
Of course, limits on federal power were exactly what our 
founders hoped to achieve. Our constitutional blueprint has 
served us well for more than two hundred years, but its liabilities 
and weaknesses are all too apparent in rapidly changing policy 
domains such as financial regulation.
A second important feature of our political system and culture 
is our frequent national elections. The House of Representatives 
is elected every two years along with a third of the Senate. Every 
four years we hold a presidential election. Consequently, the next 
election is always just around the corner. No other advanced 
democracy has such frequent regularly scheduled legislative elec-
tions.1 Since its first national election in 1788 the United States 
has never canceled an election. Elections were held even during 
the Civil War (1861–­65).
Just as the quarterly earnings cycle is said to unduly influ-
ence the executives of public companies, the compression of the 
American electoral cycle causes a number of distorted incentives 
that complicate policy making generally, and financial regula-
tion specifically. Biennial elections put a premium on short-­run 
fixes over long-­term solutions. They induce delay and paralysis 
in even-­numbered years. And frequent elections exacerbate par-
tisan divisions as policy disagreements get turned into campaign 
fodder.
Another important feature of the American electoral system 
is its heavy reliance on geography as a basis for representation. 
Members of the House of Representatives are elected from rel-
atively small single-­member districts. Consequently, they have 
strong incentives to represent the narrow interests of locally 

92  •  Chapter 4
important constituents and firms. This is also true of senators, 
but to a lesser degree.
Although Americans probably find nothing unusual or objec-
tionable about geographic representation, the United States is 
somewhat unusual in its use of it. Many other advanced democ-
racies use some form of proportional representation in which 
parties are allocated seats based on the share of votes they receive 
nationwide. Such systems reduce localism because the electoral 
success of a politician is determined by how well his or her party 
does nationally. Consequently, the incentives to cater to local 
interests are greatly reduced. Proportional systems also tend 
to be associated with greater degrees of party discipline which 
reduces the opportunities of individual legislators to promote 
the interests of local constituencies. Other advanced democra-
cies, even if they do not use proportional representation, exert 
party discipline through the power of the government to dis-
solve parliament and call for elections.2 In many other countries, 
including those with single-­member, plurality districts, national 
parties control candidate selection, with the “personal vote” 
being of less importance than in the United States. Of course, 
other nations have their own, severe problems in managing their 
financial systems, but catering to narrow local constituencies is 
generally not one of them.
Historically, the importance of localism to finance is shown 
by the prohibition on interstate banking contained in the McFad-
den Act of 1927. Prohibitions were a complication in the pas-
sage of the Glass-­Steagall Act in 1933 (which we discuss later 
in this chapter), were reaffirmed in the National Banking Act 
of 1956, and were fully repealed only in the Riegle-­Neal Act of 
1994.3 Even within states, branch banking was often sharply 
curtailed to protect small local banks. In Pennsylvania, no bank 
could operate in more than three counties. Illinois completely 
banned bank branches,4 and only ten states permitted statewide 
branch banking.5 The history of branch banking is a compelling 
demonstration of the effect of political institutions on financial 

Institutions  •  93
structures. Most other countries, including Canada, enjoyed 
nationwide banking in the nineteenth century.6
More recently, as we noted in chapter 2, financial sector 
employment is concentrated in a handful of legislative districts. 
In the U.S. system, the representatives from these districts have 
strong incentives to promote the interests of the industry even 
if this puts them at odds with their party. In the current era the 
tension has been particularly acute within the Democratic Party 
given that financial interests are concentrated in Democratic dis-
tricts. A notable example is how the otherwise reliably liberal 
senator Charles Schumer (D-­NY) defends the “carried interest” 
provision in the tax code that allows hedge fund managers to 
pay only capital gains taxes and not (higher) income taxes on 
their earnings.7
Localism also plays an important role in the regulatory pro-
cess. Legislators are keen to intervene with regulators on behalf 
of local economic elites. A dramatic example of this phenom-
enon is the so-­called Keating Five scandal. Five senators were 
accused of improperly intervening with the Federal Home Loan 
Bank Board on behalf of Charles Keating, chairman of the Lin-
coln Savings and Loan Association. Keating built “Your Premier 
Luxury Resort,” the Phoenician, in Scottsdale, Arizona. Not 
surprisingly, two of the Keating Five were Arizona senators Den-
nis DeConcini and John McCain. Less sensationally but more 
consequentially, legislative pressure for regulatory forbearance 
was a powerful factor in the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s.8
Not only is representation in the United States geographi-
cally based but change is often blocked by the sharp differences 
in the geographic basis of representation in the two chambers 
of Congress. The House of Representatives is reapportioned 
every decade on the basis of population. In contrast, each state, 
no matter how sparsely populated, has two Senate seats. This 
is the singular provision of the Constitution that is not sub-
ject to amendment. There is thus a permanent institutional 
tension between the two houses. Alaska gets as much Senate 

94  •  Chapter 4
representation as California. Currently, eleven states have popu-
lations so small that they have only one or two House members; 
yet these states fill twenty-­two of the one hundred Senate seats. 
A senator from nowhere can indeed command resources for a 
bridge to nowhere. Among senators, those from states with small 
populations are likely to be particularly narrowly focused.9
The population imbalances in Senate representation coupled 
with the staggered, six-­year terms of the Senate, often mean that 
the two chambers exhibit different preferences on an issue. These 
bicameral differences often lead to policy delays and gridlock.10 
The consumer bankruptcy legislation discussed earlier illus-
trates the point. The National Consumer Bankruptcy Coalition 
representing credit card issuers pushed for a change in consumer 
bankruptcy law in the late 1990s. No bill was forthcoming in 
1998 because the Senate failed to act; in 2000 a bill was pro-
duced so late that President Bill Clinton was able to pocket veto 
it; in 2001 a bill was killed when the House voted against a con-
ference report that included a Senate provision that barred the 
use of bankruptcy by abortion clinic protesters. Only in 2005 
did the two chambers, both Republican controlled, agree on a 
bill that was then signed by a Republican president.11
Pivotal Politics
To better understand the effect of checks and balances and the 
separation of powers on financial policy making, a simple ana-
lytical framework is helpful.
Consider what policy choices the simple one-­dimensional 
hypothetical legislature that we discussed in chapter 2 might 
make. A majoritarian chamber, such as the House of Represen-
tatives, acting on its own would vote on alternatives according 
to majority rule. A proposal preferred by a simple majority (218 
of 435 if everyone votes) to an alternative wins. If the agenda is 
open in the sense that any legislator can make a proposal at any 
time, the final outcome must be one that no majority prefers 
to overturn. When the legislator’s ideal policies can be arrayed 

Institutions  •  95
along a single line (as our DW-­NOMINATE results from chap-
ter 2 suggest), we can apply the median voter theorem—­the win-
ning policy must be the ideal point of the median legislator.12 
The median legislator, of course, is the one for whom half the 
ideal points are to the left and half are to the right. Any attempt 
to move policy away from her ideal point to the right would 
be opposed by this legislator and the 217 members with ideal 
points to her left. Similarly, any attempt to move policy to the 
left would be defeated by the median legislator and the 217 col-
leagues to her right. Any policy that is not the most preferred of 
the median legislator can be defeated by a simple majority. If the 
minimum wage is seven dollars and the median wants it to be 
eight, a majority composed of the median and all those legisla-
tors who desire a higher one will vote to increase it.
When a financial crisis hits, policy would be very responsive 
in a majoritarian, unicameral legislature. Any change in the 
median legislator’s preferences results in a swift policy change. 
There are two channels for this response. First, a shock may 
change how policy maps onto the liberal-­conservative dimen-
sion. If a financial crisis causes legislator preferences to shift 
in the direction of increased regulation, the legislature would 
immediately vote to abandon a lax regulatory regime for deriva-
tives and implement new, tougher regulations that now corre-
spond to the policy preferred by the median legislator. Ideology, 
however, limits the force of this channel. A crisis may not make 
a substantial change in preferences. The second channel is elec-
tions. Policy changes only when elections create a new median 
legislator with preferences that are very different from those of 
the old median. If a legislature is responsive to voters, policy will 
be so as well.13
Of course, our hypothetical majoritarian legislature serves the 
same purpose as the frictionless plane in physics: as a bench-
mark to assess the importance of deviations from ideal condi-
tions. There are many ways in which an otherwise majoritarian 
legislature fails to act as described. Political parties are one 
potentially important friction in the legislative process.14 An 

96  •  Chapter 4
important assumption in our idealized legislature is that any 
counterproposal can be made at any point in the process. If pol-
icy strays from the median ideal point, a proposal can be made 
that brings policy back to the median. But in actuality, party 
leaders have a great deal of control over the agenda. They may 
use agenda powers to keep policy from moving too far from 
their own preferences or those of the majority of their party. 
One way of accomplishing this goal is to assert negative agenda 
control—­that is, to disallow votes on issues in which the median 
legislator would like to coalesce with members of the minority 
party to move policy away from the position of the majority 
party and its leaders.
Negative agenda control reached its apotheosis in the cur-
rent climate of polarized politics. In 2004, House Speaker Den-
nis Hastert announced his rule that legislation could proceed 
only if it was supported by a majority of the Republican Party. 
But Hastert was only articulating a long-­standing and ongoing 
practice in the House.15 The Hastert rule increases legislative 
paralysis, or gridlock. If the median legislator and the major-
ity party leaders cannot agree on a policy change, the major-
ity party keeps the policy off the agenda and policy remains 
unchanged. Policy is no longer so responsive. Changes in the 
status quo or in the preferences of the legislature must be sub-
stantial in order to end the stalemate. Indeed, as we will see, 
this was the case for financial reform. Policies can drift in one 
direction or another for extended periods of time before there is 
a legislative correction.
The DW-­NOMINATE estimates of legislator ideal points 
provide some measure of the extent of this problem. In figure 4.1 
we illustrate the gap between the liberal-­conservative score for 
the majority party median and the score for the median House 
member for congresses of the recent past as well as that for 
some congressional terms from the much less polarized 1960s. 
For example, in 2005–­6, when the Republicans were the major-
ity party, the party median was a quite conservative 0.55. The 
House as a whole was more moderate, with a median of 0.36. 

Institutions  •  97
The gap between the two medians is 0.19. When the gap is large, 
negative agenda control can be important.
Figure 4.1 raises two important points. The first is that the 
gaps between the medians can be substantial. For the 2009–­10 
term, Rick Boucher (D-­VA) is the estimated House median;16 
John Yarmuth (KY) and Jim Langevin (RI) tied for the median 
House Democrat. So if we take the negative agenda control 
–.6
–.4
–.2
0
.2
.4
.6
Liberal
Conservative
Interval between House Median and Majority Party Median
63−64
67−68
03−04
07−08
11–12
Figure 4.1. The position of chamber and majority party medians for several 
congressional terms, 1960s and 2000s. The length of the interval indicates the 
extent to which “negative agenda control” can block policy change. H shows 
the House median, D or R the majority party median.

98  •  Chapter 4
model seriously, successful policy change would be limited to 
issues that these three members could agree on. That is, a bill 
will not pass unless the House median (Boucher) supports it, and 
there will be no vote on a bill that is not supported by the major-
ity party median member.
The gap between the party median and the chamber median 
mainly reflects the lack of homogeneity in the majority party. 
When the two parties have no ideological overlap, as in recent 
years, both the majority party median and the House median 
must belong to the majority party. In this case, minority party 
ideal points have no influence on the gap. As the parties have 
polarized, they have also become more homogeneous, so the 
gap today is less than it was in the 1960s. In earlier times, the 
gap could run from the majority party into the moderates on 
the minority side. The Eighty-­Ninth House of Representatives 
(1965–­66) was a rare exception to this regularity. A pure major-
ity gap was produced by the large Democratic delegation fol-
lowing that party’s landslide victory in the 1964 elections when 
the presidential contest was between Lyndon Johnson and Barry 
Goldwater. There were so many liberal Democrats that moder-
ate Democrats and overlapping Republicans did not draw the 
House median away from the party median. Otherwise, rela-
tive to the 1960s, negative agenda control has diminished in 
importance. Although internal party divisions may substantially 
inhibit policy change in general and financial reform in particu-
lar, the effects are not as large as those caused by other features 
of our legislative institutions.
The Filibuster
Perhaps the largest deviation from the majoritarian ideal is the 
institution of cloture in the Senate. Ostensibly to protect its tra-
dition of unfettered and unlimited debate, the Senate requires 
the support of three-­fifths of the duly chosen and sworn sena-
tors (60 senators if all 100 members are sworn in) for a cloture 
resolution before debate can be terminated and roll call votes 

Institutions  •  99
taken on the measure in question. Because opponents of legisla-
tion always have the option to keep talking until cloture is suc-
cessfully invoked, 60 votes has become the de facto threshold 
for passing legislation through the Senate.17 Rather than using 
majority rule, as in the House, the Senate uses supermajority 
rule that requires 60, instead of 51, of the 100 members to pass 
legislation.
To assess the importance of cloture rules for legislative respon-
siveness,18 we again assume that the ideal points of senators can 
be arrayed from left to right. Given the cloture rules, we can 
characterize what a successful coalition must look like. Because 
60 votes are required for passage, the senator with the 60th most 
liberal ideal point must support cloture. Let’s call her Senator 
60. Suppose the alternative for consideration was too liberal for 
Senator 60. Then it would also be too liberal for the 40 sena-
tors with ideal points to her right. These 40 senators and Sena­
tor 60 would vote against cloture and the bill would fail.19 In 
a world of liberal-­conservative voting Senator 60 is pivotal for 
policy change. If a policy is too liberal for this senator, it is too 
liberal for 40 more conservative senators and no change occurs. 
But if the policy appeals to the senator, she can push through 
the policy by voting with the 59 senators who are more liberal. 
In this sense, Senator 60 is pivotal. Just knowing the vote of this 
senator allows us to know if a new policy that is more liberal 
than the status quo will pass. Senator 41 (the 41st most liberal) is 
similarly pivotal. If the bill is too conservative for him, it is also 
too conservative for the 40 senators to his left and cloture can-
not be obtained. For this reason, we refer to Senators 41 and 60 
as the filibuster pivots.
Because the consent of both pivots is necessary for cloture—­
the new bill can be neither too liberal for Senator 60 nor too 
conservative for Senator 41—­ it is easy to see that no bill can be 
passed that would alter a status quo located between the piv-
ots. Imagine that before the financial crisis, both Senators 41 
and 60 supported no regulation of derivatives. If after the crisis, 
Senator 41 came to favor more regulation but Senator 60 was 

100  •  Chapter 4
opposed, Senator 60 could use the cloture requirement to block 
any change. The distance between Senator 41 and Senator 60’s 
ideal point is a rough gauge of the Senate’s propensity to stale-
mate due to the cloture rule.
The Presidential Veto
The difficulties of policy change and reform do not end on Capi-
tol Hill. Bills that survive the legislative process face the presi-
dential veto. Certainly, presidents can from time to time use the 
bully pulpit to force bills through the roadblocks posed by par-
tisan agenda control and filibusters. But for the most part, the 
president’s formal legislative powers are negative.20 The veto is a 
tool for blocking change rather than propagating it. A success-
ful bill requires a presidential signature or a two-­thirds vote on 
an override motion. Using logic exactly similar to that for the 
filibuster, Senator 34 becomes pivotal on the override motion 
for a leftist president’s veto and Senator 67 becomes pivotal for 
a rightist veto. But because the override motion must carry both 
chambers, Representatives 146 and 290 are similarly empow- 
ered in the House. The more extreme of the pivotal representative  
and the pivotal senator on the president’s side of the ideological 
spectrum is known as the veto pivot. If the veto pivot votes to 
sustain a presidential veto, the status quo cannot be changed. 
Because adding new pivotal actors always makes changing the 
status quo more difficult, the propensity for gridlock expands.21
The president has more power if Congress adjourns within 
ten days (excluding Sundays) of passing a law. In that case, the 
president can pocket veto a bill. The pocket veto is not subject 
to override. President Clinton pocket vetoed the bankruptcy bill, 
favorable to credit card issuers and unfavorable to debtors, in 
2000. President Reagan, in 1981, pocket vetoed a bill amending 
the 1978 Bankruptcy Act.22
Combining the effects of the filibuster and the veto pivots, 
we can compute the gridlock interval. This interval is the policy 
gap between the leftmost pivot and the rightmost pivot. One or 

Institutions  •  101
the other of these senators could block the change of any status 
quo in this interval by failing to vote to override the veto of the 
president. Therefore, the longer this interval the more likely that 
policy change can be blocked.23
Although we do not focus on the response to the crisis until 
part 2 of the book, it is helpful to illustrate these concepts on 
the 111th Senate, which was responsible for addressing the recent 
financial crisis. When Arlen Specter switched parties on April 
28, 2009, and moved his position to the left, the gridlock inter-
val was the policy spectrum between a veto pivot on the left 
and a filibuster pivot on the right. The veto pivot on the left 
was California Senator Dianne Feinstein, located at –­.38, and 
the filibuster pivot was Nebraska Senator Ben Nelson at –­.02. 
The gridlock interval therefore ranged from –­.38 to –­.02. After 
Scott Brown was elected in January of 2010, Olympia Snowe 
became the right pivot and the gridlock interval expanded up 
to her ideal point of .04.24 After Brown was seated, the set of 
possible policy changes became those that Feinstein and Snowe 
could agree upon.
The first two years of President Barack Obama’s administra-
tion followed eight years of George W. Bush, with the first six of 
those years having a Republican-­controlled Congress. The sta-
tus quo on financial policy was likely to be either in the gridlock 
interval or to the right of the interval. The only policies that 
could be changed would be those to the right of the interval. The 
new policies could be to the left of Ben Nelson or Scott Brown, 
but they would have to be moderate changes that the filibuster 
pivot preferred to the status quo. Dianne Feinstein’s pivot posi-
tion would be irrelevant. But, let’s say the Republicans were to 
gain complete control of Congress in 2012. In this case, the veto 
pivot, perhaps still Feinstein, could be relevant. Obama could 
veto any attempts to repeal his legislative achievements and be 
sustained by Feinstein and the thirty-­three senators to her left. 
The sustained veto would keep policy in the gridlock interval.
The Senate does have procedures that can be used to circum-
vent the supermajority requirement. The most important of these 

102  •  Chapter 4
is the budgetary reconciliation process. Under these procedures, 
legislative debate can be limited so that measures cannot be fili-
bustered. But there are important practical and political obstacles 
to using this mechanism. First, it can be used only on budgetary 
matters—­measures that change spending or revenue. It cannot be 
directly applied to regulatory matters. The so-­called Byrd Rule 
places additional, important, limits. Reconciliation can be used 
only on measures that change spending or revenue within the 
window (usually ten years) of the most recently passed budget 
resolution. This is why Bush’s 2001 tax cuts, which were passed 
using reconciliation, were originally set to expire at the end of 
2010. Finally, the internal politics of the majority party makes 
the reconciliation process controversial. By instituting majority 
rule, the majority party can move policy toward the median of 
the majority party and away from the party’s moderate mem-
bers. Thus, relative to the situation with supermajority cloture, 
reconciliation hurts party moderates.25 Because the Democrats 
are more ideologically heterogeneous than the Republicans, they 
generally find it more difficult to use reconciliation, although they 
successfully employed it in the passage of the Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare) in 2010.
Figure 4.2 illustrates the location and length of the gridlock 
interval for a selected set of congressional terms going back to 
the 1960s. First, note that the gridlock intervals are much larger 
than the intervals due to negative agenda control.
Second, figure 4.2 shows that the gridlock interval shrank 
a fair bit following the 2008 elections, when the Democrats 
reached fifty-­nine seats in the Senate. Without this shrinking, 
as we detail in part 2, it is unlikely that there would have been 
a credit card bill, the Dodd-­Frank Wall Street Reform and Con-
sumer Protection Act, a stimulus package, or a health care bill. 
The many concessions in the legislation passed in 2009 and 2010 
reflect the fact that the interval was nonetheless fairly large by 
historical standards. It was larger than it was in the 1980s and 
slightly larger than when Clinton took over in 1993. It is about 
the same width as it was in the 1960s despite the rules for cloture 

Institutions  •  103
having been made less onerous. Until 1975, cloture required 
support of two-­thirds of all senators present and voting. If all 
senators voted, Senators 34 and 67 were the pivots leading to 
larger gridlock intervals. Even then, the gridlock intervals for the 
1960s were considerably smaller than those from the earlier part 
of the 2000s. Polarization has increased gridlock.
The change in the cloture rule in 1975 did compensate some-
what for the increase in polarization. But another aspect of the 
–.6
–.4
–.2
0
.2
.4
.6
Brown (R–MA) Elected
Conservative
Liberal
Gridlock Interval between Veto and Filibuster Pivots
1960s to 2000s
63−64
83−84
95−96
07−08
09–10
Figure 4.2. The gridlock interval in selected congressional terms. The interval, 
shown as the thick line, is the gap between the pivots. Gridlock increases as 
the line gets longer.

104  •  Chapter 4
filibuster both reflects the effect of polarization and amplifies 
gridlock. With the (important) exception of civil rights legisla-
tion, the filibuster was rarely used as a tactic for defeating legisla-
tion before the 1970s.26 So the gridlock intervals from the 1960s 
are somewhat exaggerated measures of the difficulty in passing 
legislation during that era. Clearly the situation has worsened in 
recent decades.
The polarization of the political parties we discussed in chap-
ter 2 has meant that the difference between the pivots (who are 
almost always members of different parties) has grown. This 
difference has increased relevance as the propensity to use the 
filibuster to defeat legislation has grown.27 Certainly these two 
factors are related. The increased ideological polarization made 
it more difficult to sustain a norm of only using the filibuster 
only on big national issues. Of course, as polarization increases 
and policy consensus vanishes, everything becomes big stuff. As 
the filibuster norm broke down, the Senate became a more sol-
idly supermajoritarian institution.
When the big-­issues-­only norm was in force, the majority 
leadership in the Senate forced filibusters to be carried out, and 
the Senate would be tied up for days. When Carter Glass’s bank-
ing bill reached the Senate at the end of Herbert Hoover’s presi-
dency, Huey Long (D-­LA) led a ten-­day filibuster.28 Now the 
threat of lengthy filibusters on almost everything has generated 
a de facto requirement for supermajority rule in which filibusters 
are never carried out.
Polarization of preferences makes it more likely that there will 
be a filibuster by senators who prefer the status quo to a proposal 
by the president. This hurdle has been daunting to the Obama 
administration, even before the 2010 midterm “shellacking.” In 
the Great Recession, Obama found policy change far more dif-
ficult than did Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the Great Depres-
sion.29 Polarization was falling when Roosevelt took office; he 
obtained a Democratic majority larger than the filibuster hurdle 
only in the midterm elections of 1934. But the lower level of 

Institutions  •  105
polarization helped passage of financial regulatory legislation. 
Roosevelt’s first two years saw the passage of
• the Emergency Banking Act
• the joint resolution nullifying gold clauses in bond 
contracts30
• the Glass-­Steagall Act, which separated commercial 
and investment banking and which, at the insistence  
of Representative Henry B. Steagall, created deposit 
insurance
• the Securities Act of 1933
• the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which created 
the Securities and Exchange Commission
The Roosevelt years re-­created the financial sector in America. 
In contrast, we argue in chapter 7, the first three Obama years 
resulted in small tweaks to derivatives trading rules, commercial 
banking, and the way large financial bankruptcies are handled.
Strategic Disagreement
The gist of the framework we have outlined is that ideological 
differences can produce gridlock when there are no policy alter-
natives that pivotal actors prefer to the status quo. But another 
mechanism that transforms polarization into legislative paralysis 
is strategic disagreement, which describes a situation in which 
a president, party, or other political actor refuses compromise 
with the other side in an attempt to gain an electoral advantage 
by transferring the blame for the stalemate to the other side. 
Classical instances include attempts to bring up controversial 
legislation near an election in the hopes that a president will 
cast an unpopular veto. Congressional Democrats did this with 
the Family and Medical Leave Act in 1992, and Republicans 
did it with the Partial-­Birth Abortion Ban bill before the 2000 
election. Such electoral grandstanding not only lowers legislative 

106  •  Chapter 4
capacity by diverting resources into an unproductive endeavor 
but also makes both sides less willing to engage in the compro-
mises required by successful legislation.31
An example closer to our focus on financial regulation is Pres-
ident Clinton’s veto of the Private Securities Litigation Reform 
Act in 1995. This bill, originally part of the Republican “Con-
tract with America,” was designed to end “frivolous” securities 
litigation. The bill passed both chambers with large bipartisan 
majorities, but the Republican-­dominated conference committee 
made several changes that further protected defendants against 
claims by investors. These changes provoked Clinton’s veto.32 
The veto gave Republicans an opportunity to accuse President 
Clinton of being captured by the trial lawyers. Moreover, the 
veto helped the Republicans drive a wedge between the president 
and his supporters in the high-­tech sector who strongly backed 
the bill. Congressman Bill Paxson (R-­NY) attacked the president 
on the House floor, saying, “The President’s decision to veto this 
legislation, I believe, is a serious blow to economic opportunity, 
job creation and entrepreneurship in our Nation. The goal of 
this bipartisan legislation is to provide some protection from 
frivolous securities lawsuits filed against businesses, often small 
cutting-­edge technology companies. . . . Unfortunately, this pro-­
growth reform legislation fell victim to some of the Nation’s 
most powerful special interests. A win for these special interests 
is unfortunately a loss for the American economy.”33 Because the 
veto was ultimately overridden, the Republicans won on both 
the policy and the politics.
There are several reasons polarization exacerbates the incen-
tives to engage in this type of “blame-­game” politics. As the 
parties have become more extreme relative to voters, making 
the other side appear to be the more extreme party becomes 
more valuable. Grandstanding has become ubiquitous in debates 
about responses to the financial crisis. Republicans tried to depict 
Democratic proposals as leading the country down the Road 
to Serfdom—­or worse, European-­style socialism. Meanwhile, 

Institutions  •  107
Democrats insist that Republicans are simply water carriers for 
the plutocrats.
Exacerbating these incentives further is the contemporary 
media environment of politics. Especially since the Watergate 
Scandal and the Vietnam War, the media covers policy mak-
ing much as it would a heavyweight boxing match, scoring the 
winner and loser round by round. During the period that con-
gressional polarization has increased, the media have under-
gone substantial change. Television news has moved from the 
old network triopoly of ABC, CBS, and NBC to the entry of a 
host of news channels—­especially Fox News on the right and 
MSNBC on the left. Radio has also polarized, most notably 
with Rush Limbaugh. More recently, the entrants, older broad-
cast media, and especially print media have all suffered from a 
loss of advertising revenue as Google and other Internet opera-
tions have surged. Sensationalism has perhaps been a matter of 
survival. With the media noting every punch and counterpunch, 
both sides are loath to make any compromises for fear of hav-
ing it scored as a losing round. The result is policy stagnation.34
The Courts
The courts also generate hurdles for financial regulation. Al-
though the role of judges is certainly quite different from that 
of legislators and presidents, ideology and even partisanship 
loom large in judicial decision making.35 Consequently, judges 
may well strike down legislation and regulations on policy, rather 
than legal, grounds.
Ideological currents in the judiciary complicate attempts to reg-
ulate financial markets. The most important is the judicial corol-
lary to free market conservatism. Conservative judges steeped in 
the Federalist Society and the law and economics movement have 
become increasingly supportive of expansive notions of property 
and contract rights.36 Because financial regulation invariably 
involves restrictions on how financial assets may be used and 

108  •  Chapter 4
what sorts of contracts can be issued and enforced, fundamen-
talist free market conservative views of the sanctity of property 
and contracts are incompatible with any serious regulation of the 
financial sector. Moreover, as we argue later in the book, the 
abrogation of certain debt contracts can be an important and 
efficient response to financial crises.
A second impediment is commitment of certain jurists to 
federalism. Many banks and insurers that operate under state 
charters are under the supervision of state regulators. Ideological 
commitments to federalism have proven to complicate efforts to 
bring such institutions under federal supervision. Lax state regu-
lation contributed to the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s.37 
But, from the viewpoint of the financial sector, state’s rights can 
go either way. When the state regulators are laxer, as in bank 
charters, the financial sector—­or part of it—­will support feder-
alism. But if the state regulators are tough, the financial sector 
will push for federal regulation. Wall Street was delighted with 
the downfall of Eliot Spitzer, who used New York’s Martin Act 
to pursue Wall Street practices that went unchallenged by the 
Bush administration.
But unlike institutions such as the veto and filibuster, the court 
is not exclusively an agent of gridlock. Court decisions triggered 
important financial deregulation. Wall Street was delighted when 
the Supreme Court in Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis 
v. First of Omaha Service Corp. ruled that nationally chartered 
banks could issue credit cards that would be exempt from the 
usury law of the state where the cardholder resided.38 Citibank 
persuaded South Dakota to repeal its usury law, then moved its 
credit card operations there. Of course, Congress could in prin-
ciple pass legislation that would reverse the court’s decision. The 
court, however, is able to take advantage of gridlock in Congress.39
Ideology may also work differently in the courts and in Con-
gress. Occasionally, judicial conservatives do reach conclusions 
that do not support the financial sector. Recently, Wall Street 
was surprised and annoyed when Justice Antonin Scalia turned 

Institutions  •  109
a liberal minority on the Supreme Court into a majority in the 
Cuomo v. Clearing House case,40 which reinforced state regula-
tory powers with regard to predatory lending.
The Effects of Gridlock
The most direct effect of gridlock is that it precludes legislative 
adjustments to policies that are ineffectual and outdated. This 
problem was particularly acute in the financial domain. Begin-
ning in the 1970s, all sorts of financial products and services 
emerged that were never contemplated by the New Deal’s regu-
latory framework. In 1990, less than 5 percent of mortgage debt 
was held in private-­label mortgage-­backed securities. By 2004, 
the share had soared to nearly 25 percent.41 In 1996, less than 
$40 billion in nonprime residential mortgage–­backed securi-
ties were issued; by 2005, that market had grown to more than 
$800 billion.42 Similarly, commercial mortgage–­backed securi-
ties and nonmortgage asset–­backed securities rose at a far faster 
rate in this period than did traditional corporate debt. The total 
assets of unregulated broker-­dealer banks rose from a little over 
5 percent of those of regulated, traditional banks in 1990 to 30 
percent in 2007.43
Agencies could not fit these innovations neatly under their reg-
ulatory umbrellas or were simply blocked, as when Clinton ad- 
ministration officials and Federal Reserve chairman Alan Green­
span overruled Commodity Futures Trading Commission head 
Brooksley Born. The Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 
2000 ruled out the regulation of derivatives. As the new century 
started, the status quo for these products was close to laissez-­faire. 
There was no midcourse correction of the casinos of the lawless 
Wild West of twenty-­first-­century financial markets. Even if some 
in Washington saw warning signals in the market, gridlock posed 
a formidable hurdle to action. Consequently, gridlock greatly 
benefited the financial sector, as acknowledged by this chapter’s 
epigraph. And maintaining it was relatively straightforward: a 

110  •  Chapter 4
special interest group need find only one pivot agent, the legisla-
tive, executive, or judicial branch, to block change.
The pop in which Enron, WorldCom, Adelphia, Global Cross-
ing, and other firms went bankrupt triggered a policy response 
that would deal with accounting scandals and scandals in mis-
leading reports by analysts. But another problem emerged: many 
employees lost heavily in the bankruptcies because their 401(k) 
funds were concentrated in the stock of the bankrupt firms. One 
reform on the table involved restricting the ability of a 401(k) 
plan to invest in and hold stock of the firm whose employees are 
covered by the plan. The Employee Retirement Income Secu-
rity Act (ERISA) of 1974 contained strict rules on such holdings 
for traditional defined-­benefit and some (but not all) defined-­
contribution plans. These rules came about as part of the overall 
fiduciary responsibility requirements of ERISA, which include 
a “diversification” requirement. ERISA itself came about as a 
result of the Studebaker bankruptcy, in which workers at the 
fourth-­largest domestic automaker lost their defined benefit pen-
sions when the company entered bankruptcy.44
So how did American companies create pension plans that 
had the effect of turning Enron into a rerun of Studebaker? 
Companies moved away from traditional defined benefit plans. 
ERISA contained a provision that allowed a firm with a “profit 
sharing” plan to invest the plan’s money in the firm’s own stock. 
The 401(k) plans were an innovative financial product developed 
when benefits consultant Ted Benna recognized a loophole in 
Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code added by the 1978 
Tax Reform Act. Benna’s original plans were quite simple, but 
foreshadowing the innovations in derivatives, investment aspects 
of these plans became increasingly complex over time.45 Many 
Americans working at Enron and other firms took a hit to their 
retirement plans with the accounting scandals bankruptcies (as 
did Lehman Brothers employees in 2008).
Politics, however, changed between 1974 and 2001. Polariza-
tion occurred. The new president, George W. Bush, was more 
conservative than Richard Nixon; the House was controlled 

Institutions  •  111
by the Republican Party. Free market conservatism was trium-
phant. No surprise, a reform of 401(k) plans did not appear in 
the Sarbanes-­Oxley Act, undoubtedly not as a matter of pub-
lic pressure but of special interest pressure. For 401(k)s, Henry 
Paulson’s explanation was perversely incorrect. Innovation did 
not just precede regulation; regulation never came. Similarly, as 
we explain in chapter 5, the new exotica that ruled financial 
markets in the bubble went unregulated. And in chapter 7, we 
will see that Dodd-­Frank is at best weak regulation, in large part 
as a result of concessions to pivotal legislators such as Massachu-
setts senator Scott Brown.
The other consequence of polarization-­induced gridlock is that 
policy making is channeled away from Congress toward execu-
tive and regulatory arenas. As we discuss below, these arenas were 
generally much more favorably inclined toward deregulation than 
was Congress. Consequently, deregulation occurred without con-
gressional involvement or sanction. Such was the story behind 
the evisceration of Glass-­Steagall preceding its eventual repeal. 
Executive and regulatory discretion in the 1980s permitted:
• national banks to sell mutual funds and investment 
trusts
• national banks to sell securities and operate dis-
count brokerages through a subsidiary (notably, the 
Mellon-­Dreyfus merger)
• member banks to affiliate with underwriters of com-
mercial paper, municipal revenue bonds, and securi-
ties backed by mortgages and consumer debts, as 
long as the affiliate did not get more than 10 per-
cent of its revenue from underwriting
• subsidiaries to provide brokerage and investment 
advice to institutional customers
• affiliates to offer retail discount brokerage service
• securities firms to offer money market checking
• all firms to engage in underwriting overseas without 
restrictions

112  •  Chapter 4
The executive agencies and regulatory agencies made these 
changes. Because of gridlock, the changes might never have been 
passed by Congress. But gridlock also meant that the deregula-
tors need not fear being overruled by Congress.
By the time Glass-­Steagall was officially repealed by Congress, 
market participants and regulators knew full well that its terms 
would not be enforced. Most notably, the Citicorp-­Traveler’s 
merger was approved with the tacit understanding that required 
asset sales would never take place because Glass-­Steagall would 
be repealed.46
Regulatory Agencies
Although the policy-­making roles of legislators and presidents are 
important, the nuts and bolts of policy are delegated to regula-
tors. Often these delegations are justified, in that regulators have 
better information than legislators.47 But Congress has incentives 
to delegate that are not a simple matter of a regulator being better 
informed than a politician. If policies go wrong, the politicians 
can blame the regulator.48 Regulatory discretion also gives politi-
cians the ability to appear as ombudsmen who will fix things for 
constituents.49 Charles Keating’s five senators are a notorious ex-
ample of attempted intervention by “fixers.” So not only is policy 
delegated, it tends to be overdelegated; the ultimate job of super-
vising the financial sector and preventing financial crises falls to 
regulators. Indeed, much of the political discussion following the 
financial crisis centered on how to provide regulators with enough 
tools to prevent the next crisis. Unfortunately, the problem with 
the financial regulatory regime may not be a simple lack of tools.
In an ideal setting, regulators would have the resources and 
expertise to closely monitor developments in the regulated sector 
and the incentive to promulgate and implement policies that are 
in the public interest. The conditions for such regulatory per-
formance are hard to meet in any domain, but the problem of 
regulatory capacity is particularly acute in the case of financial 
regulation.

Institutions  •  113
The most obvious difficulty stems from the complexity of mod-
ern finance. Armies of rocket scientists are employed to develop 
and implement increasingly complicated financial products and 
trading strategies. Many of the products are not well understood 
by Wall Street executives, much less by outside regulators.
This problem might be mitigated somewhat if the regulatory 
agencies could easily draw from the same talent pool as Wall 
Street. But the salary differentials make competitive hiring dif-
ficult. The highest-­paid financial regulators (the president of the 
New York Fed and the chairman of the Fed) make a fraction of a 
middling trader’s annual bonus. Even where regulatory agencies  
can hire people with the background to understand the intri-
cacies of modern finance, such individuals are usually coming 
through the revolving door from Wall Street. For example, the 
New York Times reported that many former top officials of the 
Resolution Trust Corporation created after the savings and loan 
crisis engaged in lucrative consulting arrangements with firms 
seeking Troubled Asset Relief Program funding.50 The revolving 
doors undermine the autonomy of regulatory agencies from the 
industry they are supposed to regulate. Even if regulators are 
not motivated by a future Wall Street payout, they may still be 
inclined to share Wall Street’s worldview.51 Moreover, outside 
expertise from academic financial economists may also not be 
immune from conflicts of interest.52
The most direct implication of low regulatory capacity is that 
it undermines the informational rationale for delegation of dis-
cretionary authority to regulators, and it will be hard to sustain 
a regulatory regime that depends too heavily on the delegation 
to regulators. This concern speaks directly to the debate about 
whether a council of “superregulators” can monitor the financial 
sector for emerging systemic risks and react effectively with new 
capital requirements, leverage limits, or conversion of contingent 
bonds to equity stakes. Such a system requires that regulators 
have very high levels of information and expertise as well as 
the incentive to act in ways that may be adverse to the financial 
services industry. The recognition of low capacity argues against 

114  •  Chapter 4
sophisticated discretionary regulatory management of the indus-
try and in favor of blunter approaches such as banning the most 
systematically dangerous products and practices or capping the 
size of financial institutions.
Beyond the technical problems that plague low-­capacity agen-
cies, there is important political feedback to consider. Low capac-
ity makes it harder to hold agencies accountable to congressional 
and presidential oversight because it is harder to distinguish 
between bad policies and poor implementation. This problem 
may cause elected leaders to be reluctant to endow agencies they 
cannot control with substantial discretionary power.
Reformers often strive to mitigate these problems by strength-
ening the informational capabilities of regulators or by beefing 
up accountability mechanisms (such as congressional and judi-
cial oversight). But there are strong reasons to believe that these 
reforms by themselves will not significantly improve financial 
regulation. Better information and policy analysis can go only 
so far if agencies lack the resources to act effectively on that 
information and analysis. But the lack of expertise and infor-
mation also reduces the value of increasing regulatory capacity. 
Why increase the ability of an agency to implement uninformed 
policies? Thus, expertise and capacity are complements; this cre-
ates a bureaucratic reform trap in which reforming capacity is 
eschewed because of low expertise and enhancing expertise is 
undermined by low capacity.53
A reform trap also exists with respect to improving oversight 
and accountability. Investing in greater oversight of agency deci-
sions is most valuable when the links between agency policy 
and outcomes are the most transparent, because it is then eas-
ier to detect policies of which the Congress does not approve. 
Because low capacity distorts the relationship between policies 
and outcomes, more oversight is not very helpful. Conversely, 
when oversight mechanisms are poor, raising capacity is not very 
valuable, because the political overseers do not benefit from the 
increased transparency of the policy-­outcome link.

Institutions  •  115
The structural problems that regulatory agencies face make 
them prone to capture. That is, policy making often becomes 
dominated by the interests that an agency was created to regulate. 
As the agency increasingly comes to depend on the industry for 
information, expertise, and human capital, the agency becomes 
hard pressed to maintain its autonomy. Ultimately, its decisions 
become biased toward the interests of the dominant industry. 
Moreover, these biases are reinforced as the dominant firms in an 
industry adapt to the regulatory regime and become its primary 
defender.54 Such cozy relationships have been all too apparent in 
the regulatory decisions leading up to the crisis of 2008.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we outlined the roadblocks to financial regu-
lation and reform that are thrown up by pivotal politics and 
strategic disagreement in the interactions within and between 
the executive and legislative branches of the government. These 
roadblocks are exacerbated by the increase in political polariza-
tion that has been marked by increasing acceptance of free mar-
ket conservatism within the executive and legislative branches. 
Free market ideology has also become more prevalent in the 
courts. Regulatory agencies lack the capacity to form a strong 
counterweight.
Of course, many countries with different configurations of po-
litical institutions also suffered a housing bubble followed by a 
financial collapse. Our focus on American institutions is not in- 
tended to suggest that institutional arrangements in other coun-
tries are necessarily better at regulating the financial sector or  
preventing crises. Power can be diffused and fragmented in many 
different ways. In this regard, the United States may be relatively 
healthy. Otherwise, the nation would have been less likely to 
become the economic superpower it is. But we do argue that in 
general, the institutional impediments to financial regulation are 
relatively more severe in the United States than elsewhere. In any 

116  •  Chapter 4
event, dysfunction in the United States has far more impact than 
that elsewhere. Arguably, Iceland’s financial sector was engaged 
in far more outrageous behavior than anything that has occurred 
on Wall Street. But Iceland could never export its problems as 
a worldwide recession. Many countries experienced substantial 
stress as the result of investments in American financial innova-
tions based on U.S. housing markets. Others were stressed sim-
ply because of the fall in global demand for their products. The 
worldwide recession was the consequence of Wall Street’s presence  
as the eight-­hundred-­pound gorilla. We quite deliberately restrict 
this book to politics and finance in the United States.
In chapter 5, we show how ideology, interests, and institutions  
combined to produce the bubble that popped in 2008.

C h a p t e r  5
The Political Bubble  
of the Crisis of 2008
Rising home values have added more than $2.5 tril-
lion to the assets of the American family since the start 
of 2001. The rate of homeownership in America now 
stands at a record high of 68.4 percent. Yet there is 
room for improvement. The rate of homeownership 
amongst minorities is below 50 percent. And that’s not 
right, and this country needs to do something about it.
—­President George W. Bush, remarks  
at the signing of the American Dream  
Downpayment Act of 2003
I’m delighted to be here, along with Frank Raines, my 
OMB Director, who used to spend some time with some 
of you, and Gene Sperling and others on our staff. . . . 
Now, we are seeing a remarkable increase in the circle 
of opportunity. In addition to reaching the highest level 
of homeownership in history, millions of Americans 
have been able to refinance their mortgages, which has 
amounted to billions and billions of dollars in tax cuts 
for families, putting more money in their pockets, free-
ing up more for investment and savings. Access to capi-
tal has spread to minorities who for years have been 
locked out of the economy. . . . We do see increasing 
homeownership rates for minorities now and I hope it 
will continue. Our capital markets are the strongest in 
the world, and clearly, they have played a major role in 
helping us to do well in this new economy.
—­President Bill Clinton, remarks to  
the Mortgage Bankers Association  
of America, 1998

118  •  Chapter 5
The Three I’s—­ ideology, institutions, and interests—­
combined to inflate the bubble that led to the financial crisis of 
2008 and the ensuing Great Recession. The caldron was stirred 
for forty years, going back to the privatization of Fannie Mae 
in 1968. The last major ingredient was the 2000 addition of 
the Commodity Futures Modernization Act. We now recount 
how the Three I’s resulted in errors of commission in the form 
of deregulation and poor regulatory structures, and errors of 
omission in the form of failure to regulate new products and to 
enforce existing law. We emphasize that the bubble grew because 
egalitarian ideology, the “ownership society” side of free market 
conservatism, converged with crony capitalism to produce a rare 
but dysfunctional instance of bipartisan policy consensus.
When the giant bubble emerged at the turn of the new century, 
the main stirrers were the Time magazine–­designated “Commit-
tee to Save the World” of Alan Greenspan, Robert Rubin, and 
Larry Summers. The committee played the role of Macbeth’s 
witches: they turned boundless prosperity and McMansions into 
worthless eyes of newt and toes of frog. The multi-­trillion-­dollar 
creation of wealth cherished by President Bush quickly evapo-
rated. Homeownership rates in the United States were no higher 
in early 2012 than in 1996, and for blacks they were slightly 
lower. Hispanics fared somewhat better, but their homeowner-
ship rate nonetheless fell back to its 2001 level. In broad catego-
ries of American society, no group benefited from the policies of 
the Clinton and Bush years. (See figure 5.1.)
Another notion of the investor society was that Americans 
would prosper by investing in equities.1 How would Americans  
have done by making buy-­and-­hold investments in the nation’s  
largest insurance company, its largest commercial banks, its  
largest investment banks, or the two very large privatized gov- 
ernment-­sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac? These would have appeared to be safe investments. After 
all, their directors and executives included some of the nation’s 
most esteemed public servants, such as Robert Rubin, Richard 
Holbrooke, Franklin Raines, and Martin Feldstein. Of course, 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  119
except for some of the 1 percent, Americans cannot participate 
in private equity and hedge funds. So the big financial firms 
would appear to be the way into the financial sector for Joe the 
Plumber.
In table 5.1, we benchmark these investments in two ways. 
First, we compare returns between the end of 1999—­just after 
Goldman Sachs, the last of the major investment banks to go 
public did so—­and the end of 2011. Second, to give investors a 
longer-­run perspective, we moved the start date back a decade 
to the end of 1989. We measured returns in two ways. First, 
Percent
1994.1
1996.1
1998.3
2000.4
2003.1
2005.1
2007.3
2009.4
2012.1
U.S. Total
Whites
Blacks
Hispanics
40
50
60
70
80
Figure 5.1. Homeownership rates by race and ethnicity, 1994–­2012. Home-
ownership rates have continued to decline beyond the end of the 2007–­9 
recession. Homeownership rates in 2012 are lower for all groups than the 
rates in 2002. African American homeownership rates have had a particularly 
steep decline and have fallen back to the level of the mid-­1990s. 
Source: Current Population Survey/Housing Vacancy Survey, Series H-­111, 
Bureau of the Census.

120  •  Chapter 5
we computed the total percentage increase in the price of com-
mon stock. This, of course, can be negative. Negative returns 
are bounded by –­100, which corresponds to a total wipeout, 
as was the case for Washington Mutual (WAMU). Second, we 
added in dividends. We assumed no reinvestment of dividends. 
If, of course, the investor had reinvested the dividends in the 
stock, the returns would have been much worse for most of the 
firms. The table accounts for all stock splits, including the ten-­
for-­one reverse split of Citigroup, necessary to keep that firm 
from becoming a penny stock.
If the investments were made at the end of the 1990s, they 
would have been a disaster, with the exception of Wells Fargo. 
All the other firms had negative stock returns, typically far more 
negative than the S&P 500 index, shown for comparison. Even 
with dividends, the returns are negative, with the exception of 
Table 5.1. 
Returns for selected financial firms
12/31/1989–12/31/2011
12/31/1999–12/31/2011
Firm
% Increase 
Common 
Stock Price
% Increase, 
Stock Plus 
Dividends
% Increase 
Common 
Stock Price
% Increase, 
Stock Plus 
Dividends
Amer. International  
  Group (AIG)
–84
    –7
–98
–92
Bank of America  
  Corp. (BAC)
–52
  128
–78
–17
Citigroup Inc. (C)
  19
  604
–93
–64
JPMorgan Chase &  
  Co (JPM)
234
  440
–36
–10
Wells Fargo & Co  
  (WFC)
879
1256
36
  80
Wachovia Corp. (WB)
  –46**
    187**
  –83**
  –40**
WAMU (WM)
–100**
    315**
–100**
  –30**
Goldman Sachs  
  Group (GS)
n.a.
n.a. 
–4
   7
Morgan Stanley (MS)
–44*
  265*
–74
–56
S&P 500
256
n.a.
–14
n.a.
Notes: *Morgan Stanley 12/31/1993–12/31/2011; **WAMU, Wachovia until 2008.

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  121
Wells and Goldman Sachs. The latter’s return of 7 percent was 
a paltry .75 percent on an annualized basis. So where did the 
money go? Goldman Sachs’s partners made money in the initial 
public offering. The partners and other employees also had sub-
stantial income and bonuses over the period. So the “investor 
society” member would have provided financing to the 1 percent 
member inside Goldman Sachs. Morgan Stanley was worse than 
Goldman. Two other major investment banks, Bear Stearns and 
Lehman Brothers, and the two GSEs, not shown in the table, 
were, of course, much worse.
Over the longer period, from 1989, things look better, largely 
because of the better performance in the 1990s. Even over this 
extended period, the firms lagged the S&P 500, again with the 
exception of Wells Fargo. Dividends, with the exception of those 
of American International Group (AIG), overcame the fall in 
stock price to lead to positive total returns. But the returns were 
not huge. An annualized return of 9.28 percent is implied by the 
640 percent total for Citigroup. For Bank of America, it was 
only 3.82 percent.
As the large financial firms grew since the 1990s, they gener-
ally performed poorly for the investor society. The firms have 
largely survived intact as organizations even if their equity hold-
ers have taken it on the chin. Why have they survived? Their 
executives and board members surely know the answer.
Thus, after the crash, long-­term investors in the big financial 
firms were crushed. Homeownership regressed back to the level 
of the mid-­1990s. Average Americans might have benefited in 
some other way if they were better able to consume goods other 
than housing. But this was not the case.
From 1972 to 1999, median household income (adjusted for  
inflation) grew steadily, with hiccups, as shown in figure 5.2.  
Income inequality increased dramatically in the last two decades 
of the twentieth century as the income of the top quintile grew 
much faster than the median. But income gains were generally 
widespread. From 1972 to 1999, median household income, 

122  •  Chapter 5
adjusted for inflation, increased from about $45,000 to $53,000. 
But the first decade of the new century was a lost one. By 2010, 
median income had not returned to the 1999 level and was 
below $50,000.
Just as incomes increased across the board until the new mil-
lennium, the stagnation and loss of the last decade has been 
broad. Even the core constituency of the Republican Party—­
upper-­income whites2—­suffered from the decade’s experiment 
Real Household Income
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
Whites Only (Top Fifth)
Real Household Income 1972–2010
(2010  $)
Whites Only (Median)
All Households (Median)
100,000
90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
Figure 5.2. Median household income and average income of top quintile, 
1972 to 2010 (in 2010 dollars). Income never recovered to the level it reached 
at the end of the twentieth century under President Clinton. During the eight 
years of the Bush presidency (2001–­8) it recovered somewhat but then fell 
sharply during the first two years of the Obama presidency. 
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, Annual Social and 
Economic Supplements.

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  123
with unfettered financial capitalism. Incomes among top-­quintile 
whites collapsed with the crisis and ensuing recession. Yet, as 
indicated by the results of the 2010 congressional elections, the 
losses did little to undermine the commitment of those voters to 
the Republican Party and free market conservatism.
The lethal concoction that destroyed the investor society and 
the broader standard of living had five components—­all rooted 
in our Three I’s. The first was deregulation that permitted inno-
vative new financial instruments, such as exotic mortgage prod-
ucts, collateralized debt obligation tranches, and credit default 
swaps to emerge without meaningful regulation. The second 
was deregulation that permitted financial firms to engage in a 
riskier range of activities. The third was a reduction in the moni-
toring capacity of regulators, either through deliberate neglect, 
as reflected in the tenures of Alan Greenspan at the Federal 
Reserve and Harvey Pitt and Christopher Cox at the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC), or as a result of the failure 
of staffing and budgets to expand at the same rate as the mar-
kets they were supposed to regulate. The fourth was the shifts in 
competition policy that allowed the creation of financial institu-
tions that were too big (and too politically powerful) to fail. The 
fifth component was the privatization of government financing 
of mortgages through Fannie and Freddie, which created two 
additional too-­big-­to-­fail institutions.
We can tell much of our story about the lethal concoction 
that devastated the economy from 2007 to 2009 by relating the 
history of a single bank account. In 1993, one of us moved to 
Princeton, New Jersey. Out of convenience he opened a check-
ing account at the bank with a branch closest to his office, New 
Jersey National. Given the insurance of deposits and the lack 
of banks with national ATM networks, there was no need to 
shop carefully. In 1994, the Riegle-­Neal Act initiated a wave of 
bank mergers. Subsequently, New Jersey National, locally based 
in Trenton, was acquired by CoreStates, based in Philadelphia. 
CoreStates was later acquired by First Union, which in turn 
was gobbled up by Wachovia in 2001. The account at tiny New 

124  •  Chapter 5
Jersey National became an account at the fourth largest com-
mercial bank in the country.
Wachovia also acquired firms from outside of commercial 
banking, such as Prudential Securities. But its biggest trouble 
started in its mortgage business. Wachovia’s acquisition of Gol- 
den West Financial exposed it to tremendous risks in the mort-
gage market, as Golden West was the innovator of the so-­called 
pick-­a-­payment mortgage with a negative amortization option 
(through which the borrower could pay less than the interest 
owed, and the principal would increase).
Wachovia sought profits in many ways other than acqui-
sitions. It facilitated check cashing in identity theft cases and 
money laundering by international drug cartels. It rigged bids 
for municipal bonds.3 It engaged in illegal practices with tele-
marketers.4 Of course, the top executives at Wachovia claimed 
that they bore no responsibility for these activities. The malfea-
sance was just the work of a few “rotten apples” or “reckless 
few” among thousands of hardworking and honest employees. 
The firm was slapped on the wrist with fines or settlements, and 
the federal government accommodated. But by growing as it 
did, moreover, Wachovia became too big to fail. As is typical 
of the ever-­spinning revolving door, Paulson’s undersecretary at 
the Treasury, Goldman Sachs alumnus Bob Steele, presided over 
the last six months of Wachovia’s existence. Unlike the smaller 
bank Washington Mutual, whose equity holders lost everything, 
Wachovia’s shareholders received $7 a share when Wachovia 
was acquired by Wells Fargo in 2008. The acquisition price was 
just a sop, as Wachovia had been selling for more than $37 at the 
beginning of the year and more than $56 a share in early 2007. 
Quite a haircut, but not WAMU’s beheading.
The acquisition of Wachovia by Wells Fargo echoes the cir-
cumstances of the acquisition of National City by PNC that was 
discussed in the introduction. Part of what made Wachovia an 
attractive target for Wells Fargo was that the Internal Revenue 
Service, with Paulson’s blessing, made an on-­the-­spot change in 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  125
the taxation of inherited losses.5 The account at tiny New Jersey 
National is now a Wells Fargo account.
Wachovia’s fall and subsequent rescue might have been 
avoided either if firms like Golden West had not been allowed 
to issue the dubious adjustable-­rate interest-­only mortgages or 
if the acquisition of Golden West had been blocked by regula- 
tors. Perhaps if regulators had prevented the acquisition of First  
Union, Wachovia might have been small enough to fail. If there 
had been better monitoring of Wachovia, there might have 
been less identity theft and money laundering. At least, the firm 
should have paid a higher price for lacking the necessary inter-
nal controls. Wrist slaps only abet the culture that makes such 
incidents far too common. Ultimately Wachovia failed as the 
bub­ble popped and politics, not the market, determined that 
Wachovia was to be allocated to Wells Fargo and not to another 
suitor, Citigroup.
There was nothing special about Wachovia. The same chro-
nology could be repeated for dozens of other financial firms. Just 
as Wachovia was crippled by Golden West, Bank of America 
was badly wounded by its acquisitions of Countrywide Financial 
and Merrill Lynch. When an industry becomes populated with 
Wachovias and Bank of Americas, the case for relying solely on 
market discipline and self-­regulation unravels.
How did politics fuel Wachovia and other firms in the bubble?
Debate over the origins of the bubble and the financial crisis 
has quickly become, consistent with our findings in Polarized 
America: The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches, ideo-
logically driven as much as based on fact. The findings of the 
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, created by Congress and 
the president to “examine the causes of the current financial and 
economic crisis,” typify the ideological debate. The Democratic-­
appointed majority blamed the failure of private sector markets 
in mortgage origination, securitization, and swaps—­that is, 
firms like Wachovia. The minority report by Republican appoin-
tees downplayed the role that deregulation played in the crisis, 

126  •  Chapter 5
stressing instead global fiscal imbalances that lowered the cost 
of credit. In a separate dissent, Republican minority commission  
member Peter Wallison blamed the government-sponsored enter-
prises (GSEs) Fannie and Freddie, as well as liberal policies such 
as the Community Reinvestment Act.
Our own view is that there is certainly more than enough 
blame to go around, but that Wall Street should be nailed to the 
highest pole. However, to understand the bubble one does need 
to consider all the changes in government policy that affected 
the housing market. So we begin there.
The Housing Market’s Off-­Budget Subsidy
Roughly speaking, the government can support housing for its 
citizens in two ways. First, it can do so directly by building and 
then selling or leasing its own housing units. Second, it can do 
so by subsidizing the private sector. One way to subsidize hous-
ing would be direct transfers to individuals as we do for welfare, 
food stamps, social security, and unemployment insurance. These 
expenditures would be on budget. Congress would have to appro-
priate the funds. Another way would be to make off-­budget sub-
sidies both to individual home buyers and to firms involved in the 
construction, mortgage lending, and rental markets. From time 
to time, the U.S. government has used both mechanisms. But by 
and large policy has moved away from public housing toward 
private subsidies. Private subsidies have, in turn, largely been of 
the off-­budget variety, given public aversion both to redistribution 
and to taxation. No doubt some of this shift reflects the major 
shortcomings of government-­run housing projects. But the shift 
toward a subsidy-­based system with an emphasis on ownership 
has important political underpinnings. Not only was the policy 
shift responsive to the economic interests of the housing sector but 
it was sustained by the marriage of egalitarian ideology and the 
“ownership society” offshoot of free market conservatism.6
The housing industry, which includes not only those directly 
involved in housing finance but also real estate agents and de-

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  127
velopers, has long been politically powerful. It has succeeded 
in obtaining huge direct and indirect support from the govern-
ment. The largest housing subsidy is the income tax deductibility 
of home mortgage interest payments and property taxes. Dem-
onstrating its political clout, the housing industry was able to 
preserve the home mortgage interest deduction in the Tax Re-
form Act of 1986 when the deductibility of all other consumer 
interest was eliminated.7 Not surprisingly, this continued sub-
sidy spawned new financial products such as home equity loans 
and lines of credit. The debt acquired from home equity loans 
was responsible for many homeowners “going underwater” (i.e., 
having mortgage debt that exceeded their home equity) when the 
bubble burst.
An important source of the housing industry’s political power 
is that there is little transparency about the nature and magni-
tude of off-­budget subsidies.8 The power of the housing lobby 
is not limited to the federal level. For example, some state gov-
ernments, notably those of Texas and Florida, further subsidize 
housing by exempting home equity from creditors in personal 
bankruptcies. In states that exempt large amounts of equity, the 
real estate lobby has fought hard against a national bankruptcy 
standard. Just as the mortgage interest tax subsidy does, the 
home equity bankruptcy exemption distorts the housing market 
by making homeownership relatively more attractive than other 
equity investments and renting.9 The industry was also well 
served by the taxpayer revolt that occurred in many American 
states, starting with Proposition 13 in California in 1978, closely 
followed by Proposition 2½ in “Taxachusetts.” These revolts 
resulted in limitations on property taxes. The subsequent shift 
from property taxes to sales taxes provided yet another subsidy 
for homeownership.
Other government policies also increased the demand for 
housing in the lead-­up to the crisis. Monetary policies targeting 
low interest rates, per the Fed’s response to the 2001–­2 reces-
sion, reduced the cost of mortgages. The reduction in income and 
loan-­to-­value standards for qualifying for a mortgage increased 

128  •  Chapter 5
the number and size of mortgages. But the most debated policy 
link to the crisis concerns the role played by the so-­called gov-
ernment-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 
These entities, which we discuss in more detail below, subsidized 
the housing market by purchasing certain qualifying mortgages 
from lenders. Lenders in turn used the proceeds of these sales to 
issue more mortgages, which lowered borrowing costs and stim-
ulated housing demand. The subsidy embedded in Fannie and 
Freddie was enhanced by the ultimately correct perception that 
the government guaranteed their debt. This guarantee reduced 
their borrowing costs below those of other corporate borrow-
ers.10 So the mortgage industry, as symbolized by Countrywide 
Financial’s CEO Angelo Mozilo’s full-­page color photograph in 
the 2003 Fannie Mae annual report, provided crucial political 
support for the GSEs.
In short, a variety of government policies favor housing. Inter-
ests fight for these policies.
Government housing policy also reflects ideology. One strand 
stems from the egalitarian ideologies typically associated with 
the political left. Egalitarians view adequate housing as an enti-
tlement, like nutrition, schooling, and medical care. Of course, 
housing could be provided directly through publicly owned rental 
housing or on-­budget rent subsidies. That was the initial federal 
response to housing problems. The first federal housing programs 
originated in the Great Depression when tax rates were relatively 
high, political polarization was low, and the belief in government 
effectiveness was very high. In the last thirty years, however, real 
federal on-­budget housing expenditures have remained relatively 
constant in inflation-­adjusted dollars despite large increases in 
the American population.11 The lack of growth of the on-­budget 
housing subsidies reflects both the decline in support for tax rates 
that would generate the required revenue and the association of 
many public housing projects with violence and drug use, as illus-
trated by the notorious Cabrini-­Green project in Chicago.12
A second ideological strand, this one from the right, also fostered 
the shift in federal policy toward the support of homeownership. 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  129
Many conservatives believe that homeowners are better citizens 
than renters because they have a higher stake in their communi-
ties.13 So advocates of an “ownership society” such as the late 
Jack Kemp (Bob Dole’s vice presidential running mate in 1996 
and a former secretary of Housing and Urban Development) 
argued that government should aggressively support homeown-
ership and the privatization of public housing projects.
There is no logical reason for government housing subsidies to 
take the form they did. In principle, a switch from public rental 
housing to owner-­occupied housing could have been accom-
plished transparently and on budget. For example, every citi-
zen could be given a once-­in-­a-­lifetime $50,000 down payment 
grant that, coupled with strict loan-­to-­value standards, would 
largely eliminate incentives for strategic default. But the aversion 
to direct redistribution left federal policy directed at off-­budget 
policies that primarily supported homeownership through a 
loosely regulated mortgage market. As we will see, the decision 
to promote homeownership off budget helped foster the creation 
of the Byzantine sorts of financial products that opened the road 
to the crisis.
The Government-Sponsored Enterprises
The move to off-­budget housing subsidies began in 1968 when 
Fannie Mae was fully privatized. The motivation was not a 
strong belief that a privately run Fannie would be more efficient. 
Rather it was an accounting trick perpetrated by the administra-
tion of president Lyndon Johnson. The privatization of Fannie 
removed its debt from the books of the federal government.14
Initially, Fannie was limited to the repurchase of government-­
insured Federal Housing Administration (FHA) mortgages. But 
by 1970 the government permitted Fannie to buy mortgages 
directly from private issuers. At the same time, Congress created 
Freddie Mac to compete with Fannie Mae.
The goal of better access to mortgage credit for minorities 
led to the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) of 1977, passed 

130  •  Chapter 5
under President Jimmy Carter. The act required institutions 
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
to stop redlining, a banking practice that discriminated against 
loan applications from minority neighborhoods. But the CRA 
did not require either the GSEs or other financial institutions to 
make high-­risk loans to minorities.
In the 1990s Congress began pushing the GSEs into financ-
ing low-­income housing. The Housing and Community Devel-
opment Act of 1992 passed under George H. W. Bush and was 
expanded during the Clinton administration. This act required 
the Housing and Urban Development secretary to establish goals 
for each of the GSEs for the purchase of mortgages for low-­ and 
moderate-­income families. Title VIII of that act (known as the 
Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness 
Act) encouraged a greater number of loans where only 5 percent 
down payments were required.15 Again, we emphasize that this 
expansion was completely off the federal budget. Over time, the 
loan portfolios of Fannie and Freddie became increasingly risky. 
Numerous warnings were disregarded in part because the GSEs 
hid the risks by manipulating their accounting. The combination 
of implicit government guarantees and too-­rosy accounting num-
bers drew large numbers of private investors to the GSEs. Fannie 
Mae’s stock rose to more than $86 a share in 2000, before its 
accounting deceptions became public. Although the stock never 
fully recovered, its price was as high as $67 in 2007. But now 
that Fannie is in government receivership, its remaining private-­
sector stock trades over the counter for less than a quarter.
Many observers argue that Fannie and Freddie, for all their 
problems, took on less risk than did many non-­GSE firms that 
were into mortgage origination and securitization.16 But the 
privatization of Fannie and Freddie abetted the crisis in several 
ways. First, they were open to holdings by other financial com-
panies. Citigroup held 6.3 percent of Fannie’s common stock in 
2006 and 2007.17 SEC filings do not disclose whether this invest-
ment represented client holdings or a direct investment, but any 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  131
direct investment would not have provided liquidity to Citigroup 
as both firms went down.
Second, even if Fannie bought only relatively good mortgages 
from Angelo Mozilo’s Countrywide and others, the purchases 
provided resources for these firms to originate more loans that 
could then be foisted off on the private mortgage-­backed securi-
ties (MBS) market.
Third, resources were also freed up for the private MBS mar-
ket as the GSEs increasingly bought back their own MBS issues. 
The profits of the two GSEs originally came from the guarantee 
fees they charged on the MBSs that were privately held. But, 
as time progressed, the profits were largely generated by the 
spread between the interest on the repurchased MBSs and the 
low borrowing costs enjoyed from the government guarantee. 
As Dwight Jaffee pointed out in 2003, the strategy exposed Fan-
nie and Freddie to interest rate risk.18 The gamble contributed to 
the two firms’ collapse and subsequent nationalization. Future 
taxpayer costs are to be determined.
Fourth, Fannie’s lower borrowing costs, abetted by its implicit 
government guarantee, gave it a competitive advantage over pri-
vate MBS issuers when it came to purchasing less risky mort-
gages. This competitive advantage did not extend to the riskier 
subprime mortgages that the GSEs were not allowed to buy, 
which in turn may have encouraged the private label securitizers 
to focus on that part of the market.19
In the good times, Fannie and Freddie were also preserved and 
protected by institutions, most likely fostered by future inter-
ests embedded by crony capitalism. Not surprisingly, Demo-
crats were opposed to reform. But Newt Gingrich (R-­GA), the 
Speaker of the House, and Michael Oxley (R-­OH), the chair of 
House Financial Services, used their institutional power to block 
reform in Republican-­controlled Congresses. Speaker Gingrich 
kiboshed a mid-­1990s attempt to levy fees on the GSEs to pay  
for the costs of the savings and loan (S&L) bailout. As a result 
those costs were passed on to general taxpayers.20 In 2002, House 

132  •  Chapter 5
Financial Services Subcommittee on Capital Markets chair Rich-
ard Baker (R-­LA) introduced a reform bill. This legislation got 
nowhere, after it failed to gain Oxley’s support.21 In 2005, the 
House and Senate made attempts at reform, but no legislation 
reached the president’s desk. In retirement, Oxley became a lob-
byist for NASDAQ and the private sector’s “self-­regulator,” the 
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. Gingrich’s 2012 Re-
publican presidential nomination bid was damaged by the rev-
elation that his Gingrich Group had previously received a $1.6 
million fee from Freddie Mac.
Interests within the GSEs were also active in maintaining 
gridlock. Fannie, during the 1991–­2004 reigns of James John-
son and Franklin Raines, was a money machine for career Dem-
ocrats. Replacing Raines with Daniel Mudd did not result in 
a clean house. Mudd, two other Fannie executives, and three 
Freddie executives were charged with securities fraud by the SEC 
in December 2011.22 Although the GSEs were most entrenched 
within the Democratic Party, they always sought bipartisan sup-
port by cultivating ties to important Republican policy makers.
Support of Fannie and Freddie extended beyond elected policy 
makers to the academic policy community. Three career Demo-
crats, Nobel Prize Laureate Joseph Stiglitz and Peter and Jon 
Orszag, wrote a 2002 Fannie Mae report in which they claimed 
there was less than a 1 in 500,000 chance that Fannie could fail. 
The report was published twice, once with a foreword by FDIC 
chief Sheila Bair and again with a foreword by Fannie senior 
vice president Paula Christiansen. The two forewords were iden-
tical, word for word.23 Fannie also blessed itself with a study 
by Glenn Hubbard, chair of the Council of Economic Advisors 
under George W. Bush and now dean of the Columbia Business 
School, and adviser to presidential candidate Mitt Romney.24
These reports need not have been disingenuous. Indeed, they 
were based on state-­of-­the art economic analysis. (On the other 
hand, the paper from Stiglitz and the Orszags was quickly criti-
cized by UC–­Berkeley Haas Business School professor Dwight 
Jaffee.25) Rather, our concern with these kinds of studies is that 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  133
they ignore the political context. The blue-­ribbon endorsements 
emboldened the GSEs to pursue their course more aggressively 
as they were inoculated further from political interference. The 
groupthink forewords only added to these political risks.
The semiprivate status of Fannie and Freddie has long been a 
source of political risk. When Fannie was privatized, free mar-
ket conservatism and deregulation had not taken root—­Barry 
Goldwater’s brand of free market conservatism was soundly 
rejected at the polls in 1964. The privatization was just part of 
taking the housing subsidy off the books. But once the GSEs 
were created, gridlock rendered reforming them very difficult. 
Although the pop of the bubble forced the GSEs back into the 
public sector, their ultimate status is unclear as the Dodd-­Frank 
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act left the issue 
untouched. Effective reforms will be unlikely in the current 
polarized environment.
Deregulation and Innovation in the Private Sector
Despite the complicity of housing policies, the bubble would not 
have happened without the substantial deregulation of financial 
markets that took place over the past several decades. The main 
deregulatory actions centered on relaxing constraints on home 
mortgage products—­most notably the lifting of interest rate 
caps and allowing adjustable rate mortgages; permitting merg-
ers and acquisitions that concentrated the banking industry; 
and the complete deregulation of derivatives markets including 
mortgage-­backed securities and swaps. At the same time, regu-
latory monitoring was diminished and new products were not 
proactively vetted.
There is an ideological aspect to this movement toward finan-
cial deregulation. Consider the electronics market, which is un-
regulated and works well. Consumers appear to make decisions 
without great harm. If competition results in the failure of cer-
tain firms (Digital Equipment, Gateway, RCA, etc.), there is no 
lasting loss to the economy. The idea that competition benefits 

134  •  Chapter 5
consumers, central to free market conservatism, was applied—­
starting in the Carter years—­to deregulate many markets, nota-
bly in transportation and telecommunications. Moreover, even if 
deregulation led to only a few large firms, the efficiency benefits  
might exceed the costs of monopoly power. Deregulation of the  
railroad industry, accomplished by the Staggers Rail Act of 1980, 
is seen as a great success, even if the United States today has only 
two major railroads in the east and two in the west. Conserva-
tive ideology, already in place before the presidency of Ronald 
Reagan, held that deregulated markets were good and that in-
dustry concentration was not bad per se.26
Now contrast the electronics industry with health care. We 
might allow consumers to make their own decisions: prescrip-
tions would not be necessary, and drug manufacturers would 
not be monitored. The Food and Drug Administration would be 
abolished and anything could be sold. Megafirms, say Hospital 
of America or Citihealth, could operate facilities that any quack 
could rent to carry out surgery. Schools would not require that 
children be vaccinated. Extreme libertarians might support such 
an unfettered market like this but most Americans would not. 
First, information about quality is difficult to obtain, so most of 
us would like a reliable, disinterested party to inform us about 
the safety of a drug or the competence of a surgeon. Second, 
bad individual decisions, if they resulted in epidemics, generate 
“systemic risks.”
Deregulation of energy markets is instructive. The Energy 
Policy Act of 1992 (EPACT) effectively repealed the Public Util-
ity Holding Company Act (PUHCA) of 1935, the electric-­power 
equivalent of the Glass-­Steagall Act. Its repeal generated large po-
litical risk. Under the PUHCA, most utilities were vertically inte-
grated, generating, transmitting, and distributing electric power. 
EPACT permitted the industry to be restructured; whereby these 
three activities could be separated and run by independent firms.
The California “restructuring,” supported by Republican gov-
ernor Pete Wilson and Democrats in the legislature, proved to be  
unworkable. Local utilities, such as the Pacific Gas and Electric 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  135
Corporation (PG&E), were forced to sell off their generating ca-
pacity. But politics increased risk by not allowing the distribut-
ing firms to make long-­term contracts for power. They could 
only buy power from wholesale generators on the instant, “spot” 
market. The distributors were also forced to hold rates low. The 
now infamous Enron Corporation moved into wholesale genera-
tion. In the absence of effective monitoring of the deregulated 
market, Enron deliberately manipulated the spot market for 
electricity by selectively shutting down power plants for “main-
tenance.”27 Blackouts ensued (but the vertically integrated “so- 
cialist” public power operations of Los Angeles and Sacramento  
were spared). PG&E filed for bankruptcy. Polarized blame-­game 
politics, as outlined in chapter 4, came to the fore. Conserva-
tives blamed Democratic governor Gray Davis, who only inher-
ited the restructured market. Liberals blamed Enron. After the 
California fiasco, states put restructuring on hold. Restructured 
states rarely rolled back their deregulation plans. Those who had 
not restructured did not go forward. The outcome attests to the 
power of the status quo with American political institutions.
Financial markets appear to us to be closer to health care 
and electric power than to electronics. In a home purchase the 
consumer is making a decision of far greater economic import 
than is involved in the purchase of a smartphone. In making a 
decision about knee surgery or a home mortgage, the consumer 
has far less opportunity to learn than when she makes frequent 
purchases of paper towels. Choosing the wrong product offered 
by a greedy lender parallels receiving unnecessary surgery from 
a quack. Failure in financial markets can lead to systemic risk. 
Just like the power grid, the entire economy can black out.
When Congress, the White House, and the independent regu-
latory agencies turned to the deregulation of financial markets, 
it appears that they had electronics more than health care in 
mind. Moreover, as an ideology, free market conservatism does 
not fully admit the differences in these markets. And when these 
ideas were pushed by powerful interests, deregulated financial 
markets were the inevitable outcome.

136  •  Chapter 5
One of the first regulatory changes that facilitated the bubble 
was, like the privatization of Fannie, motivated by a desire to 
shift a big problem off the federal budget. In this case, the prob-
lem was the crisis in the savings and loan industry. The thrifts, 
as S&L banks were known, were highly regulated. When the 
industry developed, S&Ls were largely nonprofits that were 
restricted to making fixed-­rate residential mortgages and accept-
ing deposits. The interest rates for both of these transactions 
were tightly regulated. But by the late 1970s, most thrifts were 
for-­profit firms faced with increased competition for deposits, 
primarily from money market mutual funds. At the same time, 
the profitability of the thrifts was jeopardized when the Federal 
Reserve under Paul Volcker pursued tight money policies to end 
the inflation of the 1970s. When interest rates spiked, the S&Ls 
were forced to pay high rates on their deposits while receiving 
low rates on their existing loan portfolios.
The federal government did not respond with prudential re-
form of the industry. That reform would have involved the in-
dustry’s deposit insurer, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation (FSLIC), shutting down insolvent thrifts and pay-
ing off the depositors. But when the industry became insolvent, 
the FSLIC lacked the sufficient funds. Appropriating the funds 
would have been a politically unpopular addition to the federal 
budget deficit. So Congress and the president decided it was bet-
ter to deregulate the industry and allow the thrifts to “gamble 
for resurrection.”
The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Con-
trol Act of 1980 was the first important step toward deregulation. 
This legislation sailed through the House of Representatives, 
with only thirty-­nine members voting against final passage and 
fourteen voting against the conference report. The opponents 
were ideologically scattered. Similarly, only nine senators op-
posed passage.
The 1980 Act did reflect the tensions between local constitu-
encies, described in chapter 4, and Wall Street. On the one hand, 
the Senate incorporated an amendment that promoted moral 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  137
hazard for some federally insured institutions. The amendment 
striped the Fed of authority to impose reserve requirements on 
banks, largely small and local, that were not members of the 
Federal Reserve system. On the other hand, the 1980 act deregu-
lated interest rates and overrode all related state regulations.
Deregulated interest rates allow risky lenders to attract depos-
its by paying more than their competitors. But because these 
deposits were insured, depositors were shielded from the risks. 
The insurance created the opportunity for the insolvent “zombie 
thrifts” to use their new deposits to make even riskier invest-
ments. Absent proper supervision, the interest rate deregulation 
increased the moral hazard of federal deposit insurance. At the 
same time, deregulated lenders had incentives to make loans at 
high interest rates to risky borrowers. Consequently, home mort-
gage providers had more in common with payday lenders than 
they did with the conservative institutions of the era of interest 
rate regulation.
The reregulation of interest rates is not a popular idea, but 
rate ceilings and usury laws may serve two important economic 
purposes. First, these regulations promote credit rationing when 
low-­income, high-­risk borrowers simply do not participate in the 
home mortgage market. Of course, this rationing may hurt the 
poor, but there are far better policy responses to poverty than 
promoting credit and debt. Second, as economists Edward Glae-
ser and Jose Scheinkman have pointed out, interest rate ceilings 
and usury laws represent a form of social insurance for the poor. 
If the demand of the poor for loans increases in an unregulated 
market, interest rates increase as the poor compete against each 
other for loans. Usury laws limit this competition and put a brake 
on high interest rates.28 The motivation for deregulating interest 
rates under President Carter was more of a matter of helping 
an industry than of carefully thinking through the implications 
for consumer welfare. The legislation likely increased risk in the 
S&L industry. As in the S&L crisis, risky investment of feder-
ally insured deposits was central to the crisis of 2008. The 1980 
legislation was a first step down the road to the subprime crisis.

138  •  Chapter 5
As the S&L crisis grew, the thrifts (and other lenders) received 
new opportunities in the Garn–­St. Germain Act of 1982. Perhaps 
the biggest one with respect to the bubble of 2008 was the new 
power for financial institutions to make adjustable-­rate mort-
gages (ARMs). In principle, ARMs are win-­wins. An indexed 
mortgage removes the risk that the lender will end up paying 
more on deposits that it receives from long-­term loans—­the so 
called interest-­rate mismatch. A borrower willing to accept the 
risk of rising interest rates receives a lower expected interest rate 
over the duration of the mortgage.
But because there has been little regulation and supervision of 
adjustable-­rate mortgage (ARM) contracts, lenders have devised 
a dizzying array of complex mortgage products. Much of the 
razzle-­dazzle in ARM contracts seems designed more to con-
fuse unsophisticated borrowers than to perfect a risk-­sharing 
arrangement. For example, many ARMs locked in low “teaser” 
rates for two or three years before adjusting to a much higher 
rate. These teasers might be attractive for professionals who 
are “sure” that their salary will increase over time; they also 
make sense for strategic buyers intent on flipping houses in a 
rising market—­at least until the market crashes. But they make 
little sense for unsophisticated borrowers unable to deal with 
the long-­term consequences of such a loan contract. The same 
could be said for the so-­called pick-­a-­payment loans innovated 
by Golden West. Moreover, by the 1990s, it became apparent 
that some lenders were simply defrauding borrowers by incor-
rectly applying the adjustments.
Teaser loans were certainly not the only toxin in mortgages in 
the bubble caldron. Loans were made without income or asset 
verification. Loans were also made with insufficient down pay-
ments so that loan-­to-­value ratios were too high to prevent strate-
gic default when housing prices declined.29 But the teaser aspect 
of low or no interest payments initially suckered some people 
into buying homes. Without the more exotic ARMs, much of the 
damage of the subprime crisis could have been avoided.

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  139
Although the increasing complexity of mortgage contracts 
may be the change of the 1980s that had the greatest impact on 
the bubble, other changes contributed to the regulatory climate 
of the bubble:
1. 	In order to pretend that the S&Ls were solvent and 
keep the whole mess off budget, accounting stan-
dards for the industry were loosened.
2. 	So that they could “gamble for resurrection” the 
S&Ls were allowed to make investments outside 
of their traditional business of home mortgages. By 
the end of the 1980s, it was “anything goes.”
3. 	Private sector participation in mortgage-­backed se-
curities was encouraged. State regulation of these 
securities was preempted.30
4. 	When the government finally dealt with the S&L 
crisis by passing the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) of 1989, 
it created a regulator that turned out to be extraor-
dinarily weak, the Office of Thrift Supervision 
(OTS). Washington Mutual, IndyMac, and AIG 
were able to dodge regulation by the Federal Re-
serve by choosing the OTS as their regulator.
The deregulatory, nonpunitive climate of the S&L crisis and 
its aftermath continued with the governmental response to 
the accounting scandals of the early years of the new century. 
Although Enron’s accounting firm Arthur Andersen was bank-
rupted and forced out of business, the other four major account-
ing firms, far from blameless in those scandals, became too big 
to fail. The legislative response, the Sarbanes-­Oxley Act, was 
weak. Sarbanes-­Oxley was not motivated by problems in the 
financial sector, as the biggest scandals involved Enron, World-
Com, and other nonfinancial firms. Still, legislators might have 
imposed tighter standards for corporations, including those in 

140  •  Chapter 5
financial services. Enron’s problems were related to hiding losses 
in off-­balance-­sheet “special purpose entities.” Similarly, in the 
bubble, banks invented off-­balance-­sheet vehicles that created 
leverage without violating the Basel I capital requirements. Wall 
Street innovated; Washington acquiesced.
In addition to deregulation, financial innovation was central 
to the crisis. The problems in the home mortgage market would 
not have produced a crisis bubble without important changes in 
how these loans were securitized. The innovations involved the 
development of three new products: privately issued mortgage-­
backed securities, the tranching of the securities, and the swaps 
market that insured the securities. But perhaps the most impor-
tant innovation involved the extent to which these investments 
were leveraged. In other countries such as Germany and the 
Netherlands, securitization of mortgages comes in the form of 
covered bonds. Unlike the securitization that took place in the 
United States, the issuers of covered bonds are required to post 
sufficient capital to cover losses on the underlying mortgages. 
Moreover, in case of default, investors have a general claim on 
the issuing bank and can seize the underlying mortgages.31
Before we discuss these innovations in detail, it is important 
to stress that they owe as much to the interaction of ideology, 
interests, and institutions as they do to the cleverness of the Wall 
Street quants. In chapter 3 we discussed how campaign contribu-
tions from the financial services industry, particularly the sectors 
concerned with the new products, increased dramatically in the 
decade of the bubble. We noted that the Democrats have become 
dependent on the money wing of the party. We also showed that 
the purveyors of risky financial products were particularly active 
in lobbying. When Bill Clinton, Bob Rubin, and Larry Summers 
prevented Brooksley Born from regulating derivatives, they were 
reflecting some mixture of faith in the self-­regulatory frame-
work of free market conservatism and support of their allies 
on Wall Street. All three did well financially after the Clinton 
administration—­the latter two directly on Wall Street.

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  141
The derivatives that led to the bubble were in part fed by pred-
atory mortgage lending. Some states—­even a mostly red state, 
North Carolina—­moved to regulate mortgage lending. But by 
2005, forces were moving in opposite directions within Con-
gress. Republican Bob Ney and Democrat Paul Kanjorski in-
troduced a bill to preempt all state predatory lending laws, and 
Democrat Brad Miller made a proposal that would essentially 
impose North Carolina’s tough standard nationally. Gridlock 
blocked the passage of both bills. The Miller Bill was one of six-
teen congressional efforts between 2000 and 2006 to curb preda-
tory lending; none made it into law. Lobbying, especially by risky 
lenders, ensured that the institutional hurdles were formidable.32
In an age when Wall Street could safely assume that Wash-
ington would be incapable of further regulation, new financial 
products proliferated. Indeed, with weak reactions to each warn-
ing signal—­LTCM, Enron, WorldCom, Amaranth, the Orange 
County bankruptcy—­Wall Street saw a green light for financial 
“development.”
Lewis Ranieri is credited with the invention of the private 
mortgage-­backed security, first issued by Salomon Brothers and 
Bank of America in 1977. At the time of the innovation, the 
product was a legal investment in only fifteen states.33 With suc-
cessful lobbying the innovation went viral at the beginning of 
the new century.
When investors buy a private mortgage-­backed security, they 
want some assurance of the quality of the underlying invest-
ments. But there are at least three channels for misrepresentation 
in a deregulated market. First, if the originators of the mortgages 
have no obligation to “keep skin in the game” by maintaining an 
interest in the mortgages they underwrite, they have incentives 
to misrepresent the quality of loans and to present fraudulent 
loan documents. Second, if the creators of the mortgage securi-
ties sell the bonds, they have weak incentives to conduct due 
diligence on the documents prepared by the originators.34 Third, 
credit ratings agencies that that are hired to bless the bonds have 

142  •  Chapter 5
incentives to keep clients happy and understate the riskiness of 
the investment.
The problems with a privately issued MBS were compounded 
when the process of tranching emerged. In 1997, the credit deriv-
atives team at JPMorgan came up with two innovations. First, 
corporate bonds could be pooled into a security; the security in 
turn could be cut up into pieces known as tranches. The lowest 
tranche took the highest risk on defaults of bonds in the port-
folio and was last in line for cash flow. That tranche has rights 
to cash flows but no claim on assets. Collateralized debt obli-
gations (CDOs) based on subprime tranches suffered the great-
est problems with inaccurate ratings.35 The highest tranche was 
most protected from a decline in the value of the mortgage secu-
rity. Thus, the top tranche was viewed as essentially riskless. 
But to make the investment truly riskless, AIG agreed to issue 
credit default swaps (CDSs) that insured these investments for a 
pittance. By 1999, the innovation extended into consumer debt, 
most notably into mortgage debt. But JPMorgan saw mortgages 
as riskier than corporate bonds, so the firm barely got into the 
business of the slicing and dicing of mortgages.36 But others were 
more than willing to pick up the ball and keep running.
How does Washington handle product innovation in financial 
markets? Almost not at all, as long as no current laws are vio-
lated. And if current laws are inconvenient, lobbying typically 
gets a fix. This process fits well with free market conservatism. 
All products are welcome in the marketplace. If people are nuts 
enough to buy tickets to see Charlie Sheen or products endorsed 
by “reckless few” members like Roger Clemens and Martha 
Stewart, de gustibus non est disputandum; the products have 
little potential to inflict harm. New drugs, however, cannot sim-
ply be marketed where consumers have the “freedom to choose.” 
For drugs there is a complicated approval process that requires 
testing and strict procedures. And if pseudoephedrine hydro-
chloride gets remanufactured into crystal meth, sale require-
ments are toughened. Although many might carp at the specifics 
of how new product introduction in health care is regulated, 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  143
few would want to get rid of the process entirely. Product fail-
ures can have irreversible consequences. Thalidomide, which led 
to deformed babies, is not an Apple Newton that had no bite. 
Unfortunately, free market conservatism treats financial prod-
ucts like consumer electronics rather than like drugs.
Worse, whatever regulation existed with regard to derivatives 
was largely eliminated by the Commodity Futures Modern-
ization Act (CFMA) of 2000. And worst, the CFMA favored 
derivative owners over debt holders in bankruptcy. Speculative 
investment bankers had higher priority than bondholders. After 
Bill Clinton put his signature on this bill and on the Gramm-­
Leach-­Bliley Act, the frenzy of the Bush years followed. A recent 
Dallas Federal Reserve working paper shows that the markets 
in nonprime residential mortgage-­backed securities and in credit 
default swaps soared after passage of the CFMA.37
While Washington was deregulating the derivatives that were 
fundamental to the bubble, Congress also passed some minor mea-
sures that facilitated mortgage origination. The American Home-
ownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 2000—­directed at 
easing financing of mortgages, including reverse mortgages, and 
at increasing financial assistance for homeownership by the poor, 
elderly, and disabled—­was passed by voice vote in the House and 
unanimous consent in the Senate. The American Dream Down-
payment Act of 2003 was passed by unanimous consent in the 
Senate and without objection in the House.38 It was enthusiasti-
cally signed into law by President Bush as a measure that would 
build the “ownership society” by providing “$200 million per 
year in down payment assistance to at least 40,000 low-­income 
families.”39 In an era of polarized politics, egalitarians and free 
market conservatives could come together at least over housing.
The budgetary implications of these overhyped pieces of legis-
lation were minimal. The Congressional Budget Office estimated 
the net budgetary costs of the 2000 act at under $100 million.40 
Although the 2003 legislation authorized $200 million annu-
ally in down payment assistance, the most Congress ever appro-
priated was $87 million in 2004. By 2008, the appropriation 

144  •  Chapter 5
was down to $10 million.41 What Washington was prepared to 
spend on homes for the poor was a pittance compared to what 
Goldman Sachs and John Paulson were to make by the former’s 
promoting and the latter’s shorting the Abacus CDO based on 
residential MBSs. Both “American” acts relaxed standards for 
lenders and they provided a bit more hot air for bubble products.
The development of new products was largely facilitated by the 
introduction of computer technology and the Internet to financial 
markets. When Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) col-
lapsed in 1998, the New York Fed found it necessary to intervene 
because of potential systemic risk. The business model pursued 
by LTCM required mathematical models and trading strategies 
that would have been infeasible without high-­speed computing. 
The “flash crash” of May 2010 was caused by high-­frequency 
trading strategies that high-­speed computing made possible. Yet 
government permitted such strategies to be used without vetting 
them, and as SEC chair Mary Schapiro has acknowledged, the 
government did not even have the ability to get a quick grasp on 
what happened.
The Internet and high-­speed computing also contribute to 
the globalization of finance. A substantial chunk of the bailout 
money for AIG ultimately landed in foreign banks, including 
Deutsche Bank, Credit Suisse, Barclays, and UBS. That is, the 
systemic risk initiated by subprime mortgage products extended 
to the global economy and not just the United States. The impli-
cations of globalization for U.S. markets have generally led to 
political arguments that regulation must be relaxed or business 
activity will relocate abroad. Arguments that the United States 
would one day bail out foreign banks were hard to find.
Concentration and Regulatory Retrenchment
Systemic risk is also heightened when a few large financial firms 
dominate markets. Regulators paid little attention when the 
nation’s largest insurance company, AIG, came to dominate the 
credit default swap market. Commercial banks became larger 
and larger by acquiring risky assets, Countrywide in the case 

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  145
of Bank of America and Golden West in the case of Wachovia. 
Consolidation was facilitated both by free market conserva-
tive opposition to government intervention and by its antitax 
sentiment limiting the government’s ability to shut down fail-
ing banks. In 2005, Global Finance listed eight American 
banks among the fifty largest in the world: Citigroup, JPMor-
gan Chase, Bank of America, Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, 
Wachovia, Wells Fargo, and Lehman Brothers. By 2009, three 
of the eight no longer existed. Wachovia was the fourth largest 
commercial bank in the United States in 2005. The sixth larg-
est, Washington Mutual, is also gone.
Concentration made it more likely that the failure of one or 
more of the mega-institutions would cripple the economy. This 
problem was accentuated by the historical evolution of the mort-
gage market from one in which a large preponderance of mort-
gages was held by dispersed, small institutions to one in which 
mortgages went through the MBS pipeline. Mortgage originators 
everywhere participated in the national and international mar-
kets created by securitization. Based on historical correlations, 
the mathematical models used to price these securities assumed 
that geographic variation in real estate prices would be low. But 
the models failed to consider how the market was fundamentally 
altered by the securitization assembly lines.
Part of the assembly line was the rating of the securities. The 
ratings were the product of only three firms: Moody’s, Standard 
& Poor’s, and Fitch. If these agencies all produced biased reports, 
the bad information would be highly correlated across MBSs, so 
when one went sour it would be highly likely that others would 
follow. Moreover, even though securitization was predicated on 
the notion of diversifying risk across mortgages, the end result 
was to create millions of CDOs that were not only correlated 
but nearly statistically equivalent. So any firm that invested in 
large numbers of mortgage-­backed securities was concentrating, 
rather than diversifying, its risk.
As the bubble inflated, Washington allowed increased concen-
tration in financial services and failed to control new financial 
products and new financial market structures. Part of the failure 

146  •  Chapter 5
was a sheer lack of regulatory resources. As the new markets 
grew explosively, regulatory resources failed to keep pace. The 
pattern appears in the budgets and staffing of the FDIC, the Fed, 
the SEC, and the CFTC.
The problem is illustrated by figure 5.3, which we have repro-
duced from the CFTC’s 2012 budget statement. The CFTC noted 
that during the bubble, “The agency had shrunk from a staffing 
level of 567 FTE in 1999 to 437 FTE in FY 2007—­a 23 percent 
decline in staff while during the same period the futures and 
options markets increased five-­fold.”42 This decline reflects both 
2000
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
2008 2009 2010
CFTC Employees (FTE) and Contracts (in Millions)
Number CFTC Employees
Contract Trading Volume
(Millions)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Figure 5.3. Growth of volume of futures and options contracts and CFTC full-­
time equivalent employees. Trading volume in futures and options contract 
trading expanded rapidly. The CFTC had practically no increase in staff. The 
figure plots the number of full-­time equivalent (FTE) CFTC employees and the 
number (in millions) of futures and options contracts. 
Source: Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2011).

The Political Bubble of 2008  •  147
the self-­regulatory and antitax beliefs of free market conserva-
tism. The SEC and the CFTC together had about 4,400 employ-
ees in 2010, while the FDIC had 7,000. In contrast, the Food 
and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention have more than 25,000 employees. Yet “toxic 
assets,” the tag applied to the new financial products, proved 
exceedingly dangerous to the nation’s health. The nation saw the 
full bore of toxicity only when the bubble popped.
Time line of deregulation of financial markets
1978	
Supreme Court deregulates consumer interest rates on credit 
cards; Maine allows entry of out-­of-­state banks. Similar laws 
passed in all states except Hawaii by 1992.
1980	
Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control 
Act. Eliminates regulation of interest rates.
1982 	
Garn-St. ­Germain Act. Allows for adjustable rate mortgages 
and interstate acquisitions of troubled banks.
1983 	
Federal Reserve. Bank holding companies allowed to acquire 
discount ­securities brokers.
1984 	
Secondary Mortgage Market Enhancement Act. Facilitates 
­private issuance of mortgage-­backed securities. Preemption of 
state ­regulation.
1987, 1989,  	Fed expands securities underwriting capacity of banks.
1996
1989 	
FIRREA passed to resolve savings and loan crisis, weak 
­regulatory structure implemented.
1994 	
Riegle-­Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 
1994, interstate acquisitions and branching permitted.
1999 	
Gramm-­Leach-­Bliley, Financial Services Modernization Act. 
­Repeals Glass-­Steagall separation of investment and commer-
cial banking.
2000 	
Commodity Futures Modernization Act. Deregulates derivatives 
markets. American Homeownership and Economic Oppor­
tunity Act.
2003 	
American Dream Downpayment Act.
2004	
SEC allows investment banks to expand leverage.
2005 	
Congressional impasse on predatory lending. Republicans 
seek to eliminate state regulation, Democrats seek stronger 
­regulation.
Sources: Santomero (2001); Strahan (2002); Atlas (2007).

148  •  Chapter 5
Time line of minority and low-­income housing legislation
1977	
Community Reinvestment Act. Bans redlining. Used to increase low-­
income loans of banks seeking merger approval.
1990	
Cranston-­Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (the HOME 
Investment Partnerships Act).
1992	
Housing and Community Development Act—­Section VIII: Federal 
Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act, lowered 
down-­payment requirements.
1996	
Housing Opportunity Program Extension Act of 1996.
2000	
American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act.
2003	
American Dream Downpayment Act.
Source: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, “Affordable Housing,” 
http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/; authors’ notes.

Pa r t  I I
Pops
Why Washington Delays in Solving Financial Crises
Introduction
As we saw in part I, government rarely acts to keep a bubble 
from getting out of hand. But surely when the bubble ultimately 
pops, governments do better? If only they did.
Many observers, including us, have been dismayed at how 
little and how poorly the financial system has been reorganized 
in the aftermath of the crash of 2008. Ideology, interests, and 
institutions all moved in the wrong direction.
As we show in chapter 7, the ideological positions of members 
of Congress elected before 2008 went virtually unchanged. The 
midterm elections of 2010 brought about not only a Republican 
majority but a movement of that party to the right after an influx 
of Tea Party members. As we show in chapter 8, the ideological 
response, in the form of populism, was weak. While Occupy 
Wall Street largely fizzled on the left, whereas the Tea Party on 
the right was quickly provided with direction and resources by 
elite fundamentalist free market conservatives, such as former 
Texas congressman Richard Armey and the Club for Growth.
A new set of dangerous interests was created in the pop by the 
government bailout and government-­directed mergers and acqui-
sitions. In the introduction we touched on PNC’s acquisition of 
National City Corporation with funds from the Troubled Asset 
Relief Program. In chapter 5, we showed how an account at a 
small bank in New Jersey eventually wound up at Wells Fargo 
after the latter acquired the failing Wachovia. More generally, 
the financial sector has become more concentrated, as further 

150  •  Part II
indicated by JPMorgan Chase’s acquisition of Bear ­Stearns and 
Washington Mutual, and by Bank of America’s acquisition of 
Countrywide Financial and Merrill Lynch. Many of Lehman 
Brothers’ viable operations were acquired by Barclays. The 
upshot is a less competitive industry that is now bigger than too 
big to fail.
After the Supreme Court’s decision in Citizens United v. Fed-
eral Elections Commission,1 the financial sector has new oppor-
tunities to use its resources to influence political campaigns.2 
And because the concentration has eliminated all the old cleav-
ages among commercial banks, investment banks, and insurance 
companies, the industry has better aligned political preferences 
and can lobby with one voice.3
Institutions sharply limited legislative response to the pop. In 
chapter 7 we show in some detail how pivotal politics played 
out, in the form of a Senate filibuster threat, to limit the con-
tent of both President Barack Obama’s stimulus package and the 
Dodd-­Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
on financial regulation. Dodd-­Frank, in our opinion, was far too 
complex and left far too much to the discretion of regulators. The 
costs of this regulatory discretion have been exemplified by the 
unseemly lobbying, most notably by MF Global’s CEO Jon Cor-
zine of his former Goldman colleague, Commodity Futures Trad-
ing Commission head Gary Gensler, and by JP­Morgan Chase  
CEO Jamie Dimon’s efforts to limit the regulation of deriva-
tives and swaps. Institutions have also played out in Republi-
can attempts to limit or repeal parts of Dodd-­Frank. A filibuster 
threat torpedoed any possible nomination of Elizabeth Warren to 
head the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and forced 
Obama to circumvent the Senate by appointing Richard Cordray 
as bureau head during a Senate recess.4 Lack of consensus has 
left the future of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac up in the air.
That the Three I’s—­ideology, institutions, and interests—­
combined to render Washington an ineffective responder to the 
pop is not surprising. This time is no different. In chapter 6, 
we show how the Three I’s have shaped historical responses to 

Pops  •  151
pops, and argue that the Three I’s help explain some regulari-
ties about how American government deals with financial crises. 
Then in chapter 7 we demonstrate how the Three I’s reproduced 
these regularities in response to the events of 2008 and beyond. 
Chapter 8 explores why the populist responses to the crisis were 
insufficient to push politicians through the hurdles created by 
the Three I’s. Chapter 9 concludes.


C h a p t e r  6
Historical Lessons of the  
Responses to Pops
[L]iquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate farmers, 
liquidate real estate . . . [a panic] will purge the rotten-
ness out of the system. High costs of living and high 
living will come down. People will work harder, live a 
more moral life. Values will be adjusted, and enterpris-
ing people will pick up from less competent people.
—­Andrew Mellon, quoted in Herbert 
Hoover, Memoirs
American history suggests four common characteristics of 
government responses to pops:
1. 	Legislative responses to financial crises and eco-
nomic downturns have generally been limited and 
delayed.
2. 	The response often awaits a transition in political 
power. This partisan delay reflects the idea that the 
cause of the crisis is generally rooted in the ideology 
of the incumbent party.
3. 	Future change in political power often reverses the 
initial legislative response. The reversal contributes 
to the next crisis. This point is central to the inevita-
bility of future financial crises.
4. 	Short-­term reelection concerns undermine the 
search for longer-­term solutions.

154  •  Chapter 6
All these characteristics are direct byproducts of the Three 
I’s. Institutions, ideological rigidity, and interest-­group opposi-
tion produce delays and limits. Ideological rigidity plus polar-
ized parties means that transitions are required for reform and 
that future transitions often lead to retrenchment. Short time 
horizons are induced by our penchant for frequent elections.
The regularities suggest two important hypotheses. First, delay 
appears to be inherent in democracy, or at least in American 
democracy. The same incentives for gridlock that we argue under-
mine government intervention in bubbles do not simply disappear 
when the financial system comes crashing down. If anything these 
incentives get worse, as blame-­game politics become paramount.
Second, the importance of political transitions, as from Her-
bert Hoover to Franklin Delano Roosevelt or from George W. 
Bush to Barack Obama, suggests that ideology is an important 
impediment to a response. If politicians were pragmatic problem 
solvers, policy should easily adjust according to the best available 
evidence about the causes of the financial crisis. But, as ideologi-
cal commitments make common interpretations of that evidence 
unlikely, adjustments are impeded. Either the new policies vio-
late core beliefs or switching course would be interpreted by vot-
ers as an admission of the liabilities of the incumbent ­party’s 
ideological positions.
We regard the four regularities as fairly universal in the Ameri-
can experience, but we also note that the magnitudes of these 
negative consequences are directly related to the extent of party 
polarization. During periods of low polarization such as the one 
from the 1930s to the 1970s (recall figure 2.2), the tendency 
toward delayed and inadequate responses is muted. Once a transi-
tion occurs, the response is substantial and relatively permanent. 
But during an era of high polarization such as the late nineteenth 
century and today, those problems are magnified.
Unwinding Pops: A Political History
Before presenting the historical evidence of the regularities iden-
tified above, we begin with a brief overview of credit markets 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  155
in the United States and the available policy instruments for 
handling pops in the markets. Both the markets and the policy 
instruments in earlier episodes were quite different from those in 
the subprime bubble.
Early Credit Markets and Politics
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the federal govern-
ment engaged in very little macroeconomic policy making. The 
population was primarily agrarian. Agrarian interests were rep-
resented by the Democrat-­Republicans and their successors, the  
Democrats, who held the presidency for all but eight years be- 
tween the inauguration of Thomas Jefferson in 1801 and that of  
Abraham Lincoln in 1861. The primary policy goal of the agrar-
ians, as exemplified by Jefferson and Andrew Jackson, was to 
limit the reach of the federal government.1 Most important, 
Jackson prevented the development of a national banking sys-
tem and a central bank. Today, of course, interests have flipped; 
the interventionists are the Democrats.
From George Washington’s first inaugural in 1789 until 1900, 
the United States endured many severe economic downturns, 
known as panics. Leaving aside those associated with the Civil 
War and its aftermath, panics occurred in 1792, 1797, 1819, 
1837, 1857, 1873, and 1893.
Credit markets in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were 
markedly different from the shadow banking system that crashed 
in 2008. No firms were too big to fail. In the second half of the 
nineteenth century, the development of railroads introduced an 
exception. If a railroad collapsed, its clients would be without 
practical transportation alternatives. The economic impact would 
be severe. In the absence of the modern Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
provisions for corporate reorganization, a defaulting railroad 
was in danger of a run by creditors. Individual secured credi-
tors could seize piecemeal portions of the railroad’s locomotives, 
rolling stock, and track. Preserving the railroad in its entirety 
was in “the public interest.” True, railroad reorganizations were 
privately handled, largely presided over by J. P. Morgan and his 

156  •  Chapter 6
competitor Jacob Schiff at Kuhn, Loeb.2 Morgan and Schiff, 
however, needed a way to force recalcitrant creditors to accept 
a reorganization plan. Federal courts were used to push through 
reorganization.3 So in effect, Morgan needed government inter-
vention in private contracts to allow him to favor some private 
investors at the expense of others. Of course, private rent seeking 
undermined the public interest as stakeholders in the railroad 
bickered over the reorganization. So if Morgan broke eggs, his 
omelets may have served the greater good.
Most early credit markets, unlike railroads, were centered on 
relatively small, short-­term transactions that often did not involve 
financial intermediaries. Parallel to 2008, real estate speculation 
had some part in the crises, particularly in 1797, 1819, and 1837. 
Credit contracts in real estate were short-­term and did not involve 
intermediaries. The contracts were either between private parties 
or between a private borrower and the federal government. No 
big financial institutions concentrated the market by buying up 
mortgages from originate-­and-­sell shysters.
Similarly, business and consumer credit appeared as trade 
credit. Trade credit took the form of short-­term loans from 
importers or manufacturers to wholesalers, wholesalers to retail-
ers, and retailers to consumers. Consumers had no credit card 
debt to a financial intermediary but would owe money directly 
to their grocery and hardware stores. When there were wide-
spread defaults on short-­term debt, the whole economy could 
lock up, just as the run on the overnight repo market in 2008 
threatened to bring down the whole economy.
Even though there were no too-­big-­to-­fail firms in the trade 
credit and mortgage markets, a macroeconomic crisis would 
lead governments, federal and state, to implement policies that 
ignored moral hazard. After three of these crises, Congress 
enacted a bankruptcy law that allowed debtors as individuals to 
wipe out debt.4
Bankruptcy law was not the only policy instrument employed 
when the early bubbles popped. In 1819, real estate debtors were  
concentrated among those who had bought federal land on 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  157
credit. The Democrat-­Republicans, with James Monroe as presi- 
dent, had no taste for exercising the bankruptcy powers the Con-
stitution gave to the federal government. They did seek, however, 
to relieve their voter base of debt. Congress did something that 
has been proposed (albeit with little success) for private cred-
itors today. It jiggered the debt contract either to give debtors 
extended payment terms or to allow for immediate repayment  
at a 37.5 percent discount.5 That is, Congress voted that the fed-
eral government take a haircut. The measure generated sharp 
divisions in Congress. Representatives of states with few land 
debtors (mostly on the Atlantic Seaboard) and with individuals 
holding federal obligations opposed these measures and were 
able to limit them. Specifically, by banning future government 
sales of land on credit, Congress ended the federal role in real 
estate finance until the Great Depression (the Homestead Act of 
1862 simply made land available for free).
In the absence of federal policy to address the problem of pri-
vate debt in the Panic of 1819, state governments intervened. 
Specifically, many states, predominantly on the frontier, enacted 
stay laws—­that is, debt moratoriums—­and other measures to 
grant relief to debtors. These measures were ruled unconstitu-
tional (but only after the panic was well past) by the Supreme 
Court.6 When the Panic of 1893 hit, neither the states nor the 
federal government were capable of rapid intervention.
In summary, major policy responses to pops in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries included the passage of national bank-
ruptcy laws; state measures of debtor relief, including moratori-
ums; and federal restructuring of real estate debt. Pops resulting 
from a potential collapse of the transportation system were 
averted by judicial innovation in railroad reorganization.
Some of these policies reappeared during the Great Depres-
sion. Twenty-­five states passed moratoriums on farm mort-
gages.7 At the federal level, the Farm Credit Administration 
refinanced one-­fifth of all farm mortgages. By 1939, federal 
land banks held 40 percent of all farm mortgage debt. The fed-
eral government acquired and directly refinanced one million 

158  •  Chapter 6
residential mortgages.8 These restructured mortgages took place 
in a nation with only thirty million households and a homeown-
ership rate below 50 percent. A very different type of debt relief 
also appeared in the Depression. Before the Depression, almost all 
industrial bonds contained gold clauses that allowed the creditor 
to demand payment in gold rather than in dollars. Such clauses 
would have dramatically increased corporate indebtedness when 
FDR devalued the dollar. When Congress acceded to his request 
to cancel the gold clauses in debt contracts, it greatly reduced, on 
the order of 31 percent, the real value of corporate debt.9
None of these policy instruments used before World War II 
have been used since. Demands for farm mortgage moratoriums 
fell on deaf ears during the 1981 recession, at the time the larg-
est downturn since World War II. (The Agricultural Credit Act 
of 1987 was a very belated attempt at relief.) During the 2008 
presidential campaign, Barack Obama advocated a three-­month 
moratorium on mortgage foreclosures. He did not, however, 
push for legislation after he took office. Senate Democrats were 
unsuccessful in passing legislation to allow bankruptcy courts 
to prevent foreclosures. Consequently, the restructuring of home 
mortgages was largely left to the private sector. As we show in 
chapter 7, relatively few mortgages have been restructured. In 
the pop of 2008, Washington rushed to bail out the commercial 
and investment banks and American International Group (AIG), 
but did little to relieve small debtors.
Opponents of mortgage relief draw on moral hazard argu-
ments made by free market conservatives. They contend that if 
mortgage holders are let off the hook now for houses they could 
never afford, they are less likely to feel an obligation to pay debts 
they incur in the future. But the earlier government interven-
tions in the economy did not cause the economic collapse of the 
United States. Political intervention in debt contracts after spec-
ulative bubbles in real estate and equities did not, obviously, per-
manently impair credit markets. The canceled debt provided a 
fresh start to the debtors and to the economy as a whole.

Historical Responses to Pops  •  159
The reset button was pressed for the entire economy by the 
1841 bankruptcy law. The number of filings was equal to 1 per-
cent of the adult male white population. Because bankruptcy 
was unavailable to the 69 percent of the labor force in agriculture 
and rarely pursued by wage earners, that 1 percent represents an 
important segment of the business community. Similarly, with 
21 percent of the labor force still in farming in 1930, farm mort-
gage relief hit a large segment of the population. Fundamental-
ist adherents of “do nothing because of moral hazard” can find 
little evidence in the American experience that would support 
their belief. Home mortgage relief, as we indicated earlier, was 
also significant. Moreover, when the federal government bought 
up home mortgages in the Depression, the bailout did not go 
primarily to Wall Street. Only about 5 percent of home mort-
gages in the 1930s were held by commercial banks, and com-
mercial banking was far less concentrated than today. Federal 
intervention in the housing market in the 1930s saved rather 
than killed the mortgage market. Similarly, the corporate bond 
market, rather than failing, actually strengthened after the gold 
clauses were canceled.10 Investors may dislike haircuts, but they 
abhor the threat of a collapsed economy. There are no atheists in 
foxholes, and there should be no ideologues in financial crises.
Mortgage haircuts, canceled clauses in corporate bond con-
tracts, and temporary bankruptcy laws that erased debt across 
the economy were used only in financial crises before and during 
the Great Depression. Another policy intervention, however—­
government purchase of banking securities—­was used well before 
it was adopted by Henry Paulson and Ben Bernanke. In the very 
first panic after ratification of the Constitution, the first Trea-
sury secretary, Alexander Hamilton, made similar purchases, 
most notably in securities of the Bank of New York.
The history of government intervention in pops might be sur-
prising to true red twenty-­first-­century free market conservatives 
such as Senator Jim Bunning of Kentucky. Bunning thought he 
“woke up in France” after the Federal Reserve intervened in the 

160  •  Chapter 6
purchase of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase and in the federal 
takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.11 But earlier Kentucky 
politicians had no problem in intervening in the free market. The 
Kentucky legislature passed a stay law that made it difficult to 
collect debts following the Panic of 1819.
In contrast, when Congress contracted credit in the response 
to a popped bubble, economic development was often hindered. 
After the Panic of 1819, the federal government stopped selling 
land on credit and sold it only for cash. In the ensuing years, 
federal land sales slowed considerably; the 1818 level was never 
again reached in the South and was passed in the West only in 
1835. Movement to the frontier also slowed considerably. After 
the admission of Maine and Missouri in 1820, no new states 
entered the Union until Michigan and Arkansas in 1837. With 
the exception of the 1821 restriction on future federal land sales 
on credit, the response to macroeconomic crisis in the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries was typically friendly to debt-
ors. Debtor friendliness in a crisis did not prevent the United 
States from becoming the largest economy in the world by 1892 
and remaining so into the twenty-­first century.
Response to Pops: Delayed and Limited
Delays
At the federal level, the responses to crisis were generally delayed, 
per our first regularity. The bankruptcy laws were enacted sev-
eral years after an economic collapse. The Panic of 1797 began 
in 1796; a bankruptcy law was passed only in 1800. The bank-
ruptcy law of 1841 followed the Panic of 1837 by four years; 
that of 1898 followed the Panic of 1893 by five years. The delays 
continued into the twentieth century. The Panic of 1907 was 
followed by the Aldrich-­Vreeland Act in 1908. But this response 
was quite limited, as monetary policy coordination was left in 
private hands. Significant reform in the form of a central bank 
waited until 1913 and the passage of the Federal Reserve Act.

Historical Responses to Pops  •  161
The response to the Great Depression is the starkest case of 
delay. The stock market crashed in October 1929, just seven 
months after the inauguration of Herbert Hoover. Hoover’s 
Treasury secretary, Pittsburgh banker Andrew Mellon, did little 
more than hope that the Depression would weed out inefficient 
firms. The major legislative responses awaited Roosevelt, includ-
ing the Banking Act of 1933 (the official name of the Glass-­ 
Steagall Act), which separated commercial and investment bank- 
ing and created deposit insurance, the creation of the Securities 
Exchange Commission, the Public Utility Holding Company Act 
(PUHCA), and the Investment Act of 1940. Two closely related 
factors helped the Roosevelt presidency to make these changes. 
First, the Depression was exceptionally severe. By the time Roos-
evelt took office in 1933 a prolonged decline of the economy and 
a run on the traditional banking system had created a sense of 
urgency similar to that surrounding the passage of the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP) in 2008 and the stimulus package  
in 2009. Second, Roosevelt enjoyed huge partisan majorities. In 
the four Congresses following Roosevelt’s first inaugural (1933–­
41), the Republicans never held more than 169 of the 435 House 
seats.12 In the last three of these Congresses, they never held 
more than 25 of 96 Senate seats.13
The first of these Congresses, the Seventy-­Third, was that of 
the 100 days. In addition to financial legislation, the Seventy-­
Third Congress also enacted many “stimulus” programs, ranging 
from the Tennessee Valley Authority to the Civilian Conservation 
Corps. Roosevelt got this legislation through Congress despite the 
absence of the filibuster-­proof majorities that he was able to com-
mand beginning in 1935. In 1933, Roosevelt faced 36 Republi-
can senators in a 96-­seat Senate, a two-­thirds filibuster threshold, 
and no possibility of using the reconciliation process—­a tougher 
hurdle than Barack Obama’s facing 40 GOP members, a three-­
fifths hurdle, and reconciliation available to pass some legisla-
tion with bare majorities.14 How was FDR able to accomplish so 
much compared to Obama?

162  •  Chapter 6
A first explanation might be that the financial sector was 
much more politically influential in 2009 than in 1933. After 
all, the reforms in 1933 came in the fourth year of a financial 
slump. The prolonged crisis diminished the clout of the finan-
cial industry whereas the recession that started in 2007 had 
ended and U.S. banks were earning record profits by the time 
the ink dried on the Dodd-­Frank Act. In addition, the clout of 
the industry in the Depression was diminished when its pub-
lic image was harmed by evidence of malfeasance produced by 
the Pecora Commission.15 But other indicators suggest that the 
financial industry was still a political force. The financial wages 
data (see figure 2.3) suggest that the premium to finance did 
not peak until 1936. So the industry’s relative economic posi-
tion seems not to have deteriorated before the New Deal reforms 
were enacted. Moreover, the influence of finance on the Demo-
cratic Party in 1933 seems to be roughly similar to 2009. The 
Obama administration has been criticized for close ties to Wall 
Street, and FDR relied heavily on financiers such as Bernard 
Baruch, Joseph Kennedy, and Herbert Lehman. (Yes, Lehman 
was a partner at Lehman Brothers.) Campaign finance records 
from the predisclosure era are sketchy, but there is evidence that 
Roosevelt and the Democratic Party raised large sums from the 
financial sector in the 1932 election.16
The Supreme Court, a quite conservative body at the time, 
provides another, more promising clue. Creditors were affected 
not only by Roosevelt’s voiding of the gold clauses but also by 
the farm mortgage moratoriums passed by twenty-­five states.17 
State farm mortgage moratoriums appear to violate the con-
tracts clause of the Constitution; indeed, the court in the nine-
teenth century held moratoriums to be unconstitutional. Yet the 
court—­albeit hostile to Roosevelt on the National Industrial 
Recovery Act and other measures—­went along, deciding that a 
macroeconomic emergency trumped a strict construction of the 
founders’ intent.18 Undoubtedly, the emergency of the Depression 
made Republicans, who paid dearly for the follies of Hoover and 
Mellon, accommodative.

Historical Responses to Pops  •  163
The sense of emergency was complemented by the absence of 
political polarization in the Senate. The difference between the 
Democrat and Republican mean ideological scores, our measure 
of polarization, had been declining since the start of the twenti-
eth century and reached its historical low in the sixteen years of 
FDR and Harry Truman. The collapse of polarization reflected 
not only Northern and Southern Democrats becoming less 
liberal (and less populist) but also Republicans, all Northern, 
becoming less conservative. These were long-­run trends, abet-
ted by the emergence of the progressive wing of the Republican 
Party. They were not a direct consequence of the Depression.
To the extent that there were disputes about financial reform, 
they tended to revolve around cleavages within the financial sec-
tor. Consider Glass-­Steagall. When Congress passed this bill, 
the most controversial provision was not the separation of com-
mercial and investment banking but issues like the branching of 
national banks, the establishment of deposit insurance, and the 
eligibility of banks to participate in deposit insurance. A bank 
bill first reached the Senate in the lame duck session that fol-
lowed the 1932 elections. The bill allowed national banks to 
open branches in states that allowed branching of state banks; 
this provision led populist Democrat Huey Long to direct a fil-
ibuster of the bill for ten days in early 1933.19 After the new 
Congress was seated in March of 1933, conservative Republi-
can Arthur Vandenberg successfully amended the reintroduced 
bill to speed up the creation of the deposit insurance fund. The 
Vandenberg amendment provoked a veto threat from FDR; his 
Republican Treasury secretary William Woodin opposed deposit 
insurance.20 Long threatened to oppose the final bill until state 
banks were allowed to participate in the deposit insurance pro-
gram. Unlike the divisions over Dodd-­Frank, the conflicts were 
not structured so heavily around party and ideology. This lack 
of structure facilitated the compromises necessary to move the 
legislation forward. FDR was able to do business with practical, 
compromising politicians. In contrast, as we documented in part 
I, Obama is faced with a pack of ideologues.

164  •  Chapter 6
A half century after the Great Depression, delayed policy 
responses characterized the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s 
(discussed in chapter 5).21 Recall that as a consequence of the 
abrupt increase in interest rates initiated by the Federal Reserve 
under Paul Volcker and the ensuing severe recession of 1981–­82, 
the mismatch between the rates at which the thrifts could bor-
row in the short term and what they earned on their long-­term 
loans critically undermined their financial situation. To the fur-
ther detriment of the thrifts, real estate values collapsed, espe-
cially in the oil patch and the farm belt. Thus, savings and loans 
(S&Ls) not only lost money on their good mortgages but also 
ran into a blizzard of defaults. By 1982 more than two-­thirds 
of the thrifts were unprofitable. Based on the regulatory capi-
tal standards of the time, the aggregate S&L industry liabilities 
exceeded aggregate assets—­the industry as a whole was insol-
vent. The industry’s regulator, the Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board (FHLBB) was well aware of the situation. The problem, 
however, was that the deposit insurer, the Federal Savings and 
Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), had insufficient funds to 
shut down the insolvent S&Ls and pay off depositors.
Rather than recapitalize the FSLIC and face politically unpop-
ular thrift closures, the political response was to relax regula-
tory standards and to expand the set of assets that thrifts were 
allowed to own. That the FSLIC was not granted additional 
funding authority ensured a policy of regulatory forbearance 
against failing thrifts.
The profitability of some S&Ls temporarily improved. But 
the extra risk taking encouraged by regulatory forbearance soon 
took its toll. By 1987, the magnitude of the industry’s insolvency 
problem had increased dramatically. Yet the Thrift Industry 
Recovery Act of 1987 enshrined continued regulatory forbear-
ance by extending the use of lenient accounting rules and weak-
ened capital standards. At the same time, Congress reaffirmed 
the “full faith and credit” government backing of FSLIC-­insured 
deposits, without providing the agency the additional financing 
authority to move aggressively against the owners of bankrupt 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  165
S&Ls.22 Equity holders and management in the insolvent firms 
bore virtually no downward risk. In a classic case of moral haz-
ard, as long as these thrifts were allowed to operate, they would 
benefit from any success of risky gambles that restored profit-
ability but be insulated from losses.23 The “zombie thrifts” made 
increasingly risky bets as they gambled for resurrection.
By early 1989, shutting down failed S&Ls and recapitalizing 
the deposit insurance fund could no longer be delayed. Congress  
passed the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforce-
ment Act of 1989 (FIRREA), which President George H. W. 
Bush signed that August. Insured deposits were paid off. The 
assets of the failed thrifts were disposed of by a new entity, the 
Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC), and part of the financing 
of the bailout came from debt issued by the RTC.24 Twenty per-
cent of the net income of Federal Home Loan Banks today goes 
to paying the interest on that debt.25 The costs of delay in the 
1980s have extended well into the twenty-­first century.
Limits
Our first regularity also indicated that responses were often 
limited in that they stopped short of fundamental reorganiza-
tion of parts of the economic system. The Great Depression 
provides a partial exception. Glass-­Steagall separated commer-
cial and investment banking and introduced deposit insurance. 
The PUHCA broke up the investor-­owned electric power indus-
try in the United States into a large number of relatively small 
firms that were generally barred from mergers and acquisitions. 
But the response to most other crises falls well short of these 
standards.
Consider the accounting scandals from the early years of the 
new century that resulted only in the very mild reforms of the 
Sarbanes-­Oxley Act. A dramatic reform on the order of Glass-­
Steagall or the PUHCA after Enron/WorldCom might have 
restructured the accounting industry. Instead the status quo was 
enshrined, and the industry, as chapter 5 pointed out, became 
more concentrated.

166  •  Chapter 6
Another missed reform opportunity in the accounting scan-
dals concerned 401(k) plans. As discussed in chapter 4, Congress 
might have restructured 401(k)s to sharply limit the stock held in 
the corporation itself. No changes were made.
Not surprisingly, the accounting firms of the investment banks 
did not blow the whistle during the subprime crisis. Ironically, 
one of the big four, Ernst & Young, worked for the government 
as a contract auditor for TARP.26 In 2010, it was charged with 
doctoring Lehman Brothers’ balance sheet.27 And Lehman froze 
its pension plan as it went down.
We contend that reforms like Sarbanes-­Oxley are the norm 
and those like Glass-­Steagall are exceptions. Limitations in leg-
islative changes were certainly found in early bankruptcy law. 
Farmers were protected from involuntary bankruptcy.28 The 
1800 Bankruptcy Act contained a sunset provision.29 The 1898 
act reserved the power to set exemptions and priorities to the 
states and left litigation over fraudulent conveyance (transfer 
of assets designed to put them outside the reach of a creditor) 
in the hands of state courts.30 Although fraudulent conveyance 
laws were eventually federalized, priority (who is first in line) and 
exemption (what assets cannot be seized by creditors) policies 
are anachronisms. States such as Florida and Texas, where home 
equity is totally shielded from creditors, respond to their local 
real estate industry, which has, along with their congressional 
delegations, successfully fought to maintain these state exemp-
tions. States where creditors controlled politics in 1900 continue 
to restrict the exemption of home equity. In those states, if you do 
not pay your credit card bill, your home is not your castle. Both 
the absence of a national exemption policy and the diversity of 
state policies largely reflect economic and political conditions in 
the late nineteenth century. This observation is mighty testimony 
to the combined power of local economic interests and institu-
tional gridlock to create status quo bias in economic policy.
Local interests also managed to limit the development of na-
tional regulations for banking during the creation of the Federal 
Reserve after the Panic of 1907 and of the mortgage market after 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  167
the onset of the Great Depression. Unlike the Social Security Ad-
ministration, which operates effectively as a single national orga-
nization, the Fed was set up as twelve regional banks. Power was 
transferred to Washington only with the creation of the Board 
of Governors in the National Banking Act of 1935. The FHLBB 
established under Hoover also comprised twelve regional banks; 
only six of the twelve cities are common both to the Fed and the 
FHLBB, an indication that pork barrel jockeying influences loca-
tion decisions. (Carter Glass, then a House member from Vir-
ginia, managed the Federal Reserve Act in the House in 1913. 
Today there is a Federal Reserve Bank, but no Federal Home 
Loan Bank, in Richmond.)
Empowering the regional Feds rather than a national central 
bank was a dose of pork barrel and another dose of populist 
(1913-­style) mistrust of Washington and Wall Street. But the 
New York Fed was no populist creation. It served the purpose of 
giving Wall Street direct influence.
The role of the New York Fed reflects political tensions that 
arose in the wake of the Panic of 1907. The go-­to person in the 
Senate after the Panic was Nelson Aldrich (R-­RI), the father-­
in-­law of John D. Rockefeller Jr. Rockefeller was the largest 
shareholder in the largest bank in the world, Chase National 
(the predecessor of Chase Manhattan Bank and subsequently 
JPMorgan Chase). His uncle, William Rockefeller, held a large 
interest in James Stillman’s National City Bank (the predecessor 
of Citibank). Not surprisingly, Aldrich sought to further limit 
monetary policy by leaving it in the hands of private bankers. 
Aldrich’s proposal, fleshed out at the 1910 Jekyll Island meeting 
of the nabobs of Wall Street, never became law.31 The Fed was 
set up as a government institution in 1913.
The Fed was established in a period when political polariza-
tion was extremely high, at a level that went unmatched until 
recent years. Not surprisingly, the Democrats’ plan for a cen-
tral bank as a public sector institution drew opposition from 
conservative Republicans. When the House approved the con-
ference report on December 12, 1913, all but two Democrats 

168  •  Chapter 6
voted in favor, and a majority of Republicans opposed. The vote, 
as shown in figure 6.1, was strongly along liberal-­conservative 
lines. Conservative Republicans were against it, whereas moder-
ate Republicans voted with the Democrats. The Senate approved 
the conference report on December 23 in close to a straight 
party-­line vote with all Democrats but only three Republicans 
in favor. Representative Ron Paul, the self-­appointed harasser of 
the Fed today, would have happily joined the minority in 1913. 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 26
PRE = 0.57
Yea
Nay
House: Pass Federal Reserve Act
22 December 1913, Yea = 298   Nay = 60
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 6.1. The conference report vote in the House of Representatives approv-
ing the Federal Reserve Act. The vote divides conservative Republicans, who 
opposed the act, from moderate Republicans and Democrats, who voted in 
favor. Note that Republicans on the yea side of the cutting line who voted as 
predicted voted yea. The white portions of the histogram bars are the predic-
tion errors—­nay voters on the yea side of the cutting line, and yea voters on 
the nay side.

Historical Responses to Pops  •  169
The split on reform after the Panic of 1907 foreshadows the 
polarized ideological splits that would occur a century later.
With the Banking Act of 1935 and the establishment of the 
Board of Governors in Washington, the Fed became firmly es-
tablished as an independent regulatory agency of the national 
government. Although central banking authority has shifted to 
Washington, the New York Fed retained a special status as the 
only regional bank with a guaranteed slot on the Open Market 
Committee. Aldrich’s plan still reflects how the boards of the re-
gional Feds are organized today. They continue to have directors 
from financial institutions with conflicts of interests commensu-
rate with Aldrich’s a century ago.
Aldrich might be particularly pleased with the New York Fed 
board. Lehman Brothers CEO Dick Fuld was a Fed board mem-
ber until just before the firm’s demise.32 Current New York mem-
bers include Jamie Dimon, whose JPMorgan Chase obtained 
government assistance in acquiring Bear Stearns. Former board 
members include Sandy Weill of Citigroup and Stephen Fried-
man and John Whitehead of Goldman Sachs. In board seats 
reserved for representatives of nonprofit organizations, Colum-
bia University, New York University, Princeton University, and 
the Metropolitan Museum of Art have all been represented by 
administrators and other worthies; these institutions are depen-
dent on donations from the financial firms and their executives.
Today, regulation remains hampered by the limited response 
to the Panic of 1907 and the failure to establish a central bank 
that is more independent of Wall Street and regional banking 
interests. Moreover, Congress passed entirely on the regulation 
of securities markets after the Panic of 1907. One of the root 
causes of the Panic of 1907 was securities speculation. Charles 
Barney of Knickerbocker Trust had attempted to corner shares 
in the United Copper Company. Beginning in the 1890s, trust 
companies, which were created to serve as trustees for large 
individual investors, corporations, and estates, began to act 
like banks and accept commercial deposits. Because they faced 
more relaxed reserve requirements, trust companies paid higher 

170  •  Chapter 6
returns on deposits than did banks. Moreover, unlike national 
banks at that time, trust companies could directly hold secu-
rities.33 Something like Glass-­Steagall would have prevented 
effects of such security speculation from spilling over into com-
mercial banking. A Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
might have monitored transactions. None of this seemed neces-
sary until the far more severe crisis that began with the stock 
market crash of 1929.
Although major changes were brought about by Glass-­ 
Steagall and the PUHCA, other responses to the Depression 
were limited. The SEC, unlike the Fed, does not have a source of 
funding that is independent of Congress. The SEC never secured 
authority over futures markets because the agricultural commit-
tees, rather than the banking committees, in Congress histori-
cally had jurisdiction over trading in agricultural commodities. 
Pork bellies stayed in the pork barrel. The SEC does not have 
the power to pursue criminal charges without going through 
the Justice Department. The SEC was made a participant in the 
bankruptcy proceedings of publically owned corporations by 
the Chandler Act of 1938, but corporations quickly found chap- 
ters of the law and work-­arounds that excluded the SEC. The 
Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 removed all SEC powers.34 
The SEC deferred to the securities industry and its advocates in  
Congress by allowing the New York Stock Exchange to fix prices 
on brokerage commissions until 1975.35 If Bernard Madoff’s cli-
ents believed that the SEC would protect them, they were very 
unsophisticated investors.
The next financial crisis after the Depression, the meltdown 
of the S&Ls, saw even more limited changes. FIRREA folded 
up the FHLBB and put in a new regulator, the Office of Thrift 
Supervision (OTS), which represented a soft reform. By the 
beginning of the twenty-­first century it was a regulatory venue 
of choice for mortgage institutions seeking to escape the stricter 
regulatory arm of the Fed. A concession to the industry in 1989, 
OTS in more recent years accommodated the likes of Wash- 
ington Mutual, IndyMac, AIG, and many others. That is, the 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  171
changes represented by FIRREA were worse than limited; they 
contributed to the next financial crisis.
What was true of FIRREA was even truer of the earlier policy 
changes of the forbearance period of the 1980s—­deregulating 
interest rates, allowing adjustable rate mortgages, and per-
mitting S&Ls to trade commercial real estate, junk bonds, 
and other more exotic investments. Deregulated interest rates 
encouraged subprime products with higher interest rates for 
riskier consumers. Adjustable rate mortgages became ever more 
complex. The crony capitalism of the 1980s, shrouded in the 
virtues of free market conservatism, led directly to the blowup 
of 2008. Inadequate responses to previous crises can make a 
future crisis much worse.
After the S&L crisis, the failure of Long Term Capital Man-
agement (LTCM) in 1998 created a mini-­crisis. In a nutshell, the 
LTCM cocktail contained most of the economic and political 
ingredients that were to form the lethal Kool-­Aid of 2008. On 
the economic side, LTCM made highly leveraged bets involving 
derivatives. The firm employed some of the best and the bright-
est quants, including Nobel Prize Laureates Myron ­Scholes and 
Robert Merton. Five of the partners, including Scholes and Mer-
ton, had been professors at Harvard or Stanford Universities. But 
big brains sometimes make big mistakes. LTCM’s trades were 
conducted through Bear Stearns, and investors were recruited by 
Merrill Lynch; both firms went under in 2008. The LTCM cri-
sis reveals behavior that was at best ethically dubious. LTCM’s 
CEO, John Meriwether, was chased from Salomon Brothers 
when that firm was found to have violated government rules 
about bidding on Treasury securities. Yet Wall Street and pri-
vate investors quickly gave him a fresh start and backed him and 
LTCM. The firm wound up blowing $4.6 billion. Partner Scholes 
was upbraided by a federal judge in New Haven for tax strategies 
pursued by LTCM.
On the political side, former assistant Treasury secretary and 
Fed vice chair David Mullins became an LTCM partner, push-
ing the revolving door before the end of his term to join LTCM. 

172  •  Chapter 6
Before LTCM’s collapse, Mullins was often mentioned as a pos-
sible successor to Fed chairman Alan Greenspan.36
What was the response to the pop of LTCM? Although the 
New York Fed brought together major Wall Street firms to 
organize and finance an orderly liquidation, the legislative and 
regulatory response in this case was less than limited. Nothing 
happened. In contrast to the subprime crisis, in which many 
large investment and commercial banks made bad bets, LTCM 
was just a single firm that failed.
It should have been a warning about potential systemic risk 
arising from the use of derivatives. But no new regulations of 
consequence ensued. Specifically, one of the reasons the New 
York Fed was so eager to organize a bailout is that derivative 
contracts are exempt from the automatic stay provisions of 
bankruptcy.37 When this exemption was put into law, Republi-
can senator and future presidential candidate Bob Dole touted 
the exemption as a means of preventing systemic risk, but expe-
rience proved to the contrary, as acknowledged by Fed chairman 
Greenspan and New York Fed president William McDonough.38 
Bankruptcy would not have prevented a mad rush of counter-
parties trying to seize collateral. The automatic stay exemption 
could have exacerbated, not diminished, the problem of systemic 
risk.39 But no legislative attempt to remedy this problem followed 
the failure of LTCM. Possible changes could have eliminated the 
automatic stay exemption or increased regulation of derivative 
markets, including moving over-­the-­counter derivative trades 
onto exchanges. The International Swaps and Derivatives Asso-
ciation lobbied heavily against any change.40 Even after collat-
eral runs took down Lehman and others in the 2008 crisis, the 
financial reform of Dodd-­Frank did not alter the automatic stay 
exemption for derivative contracts.41
So business as usual prevailed. Five months after LTCM 
failed, a Time cover designated Greenspan, Rubin, and Summers 
the “Committee to Save the World.” Free market conservatism, 
with a little help from the New York Fed, stayed the course. 
Meriwether, like P. T. Barnum, knew that suckers are born every 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  173
day. So he and four of the nonacademic partners went on to set 
up a new, much smaller hedge fund. This fund, JWM Partners, 
tanked in the financial crisis and was shuttered in 2009.
The pop of the dot-­com equity bubble in 2001 is our final 
example of delay. At times a response can occur only when 
events are so bad as to force the hands of free market advo-
cates. The equity bubble was associated both with misleading 
ratings and analyst recommendations, and with accommodat-
ing accounting and audits. These events presented a warning 
of the effect of bogus information on financial markets. After 
the Enron scandal broke, Maryland Democrat Paul Sarbanes, 
the chair of the Senate Banking Committee in 2001–­2, sought 
to increase regulation. The House Financial Services Commit-
tee, however, was headed by free market conservative advocate 
Michael Oxley. Oxley blocked any change until the WorldCom 
bankruptcy created additional public pressure for action. World-
Com was the largest bankruptcy in American history and held 
the record until the failure of Lehman Brothers.42 WorldCom 
forced Oxley’s reluctant hand to move, if only an inch or two.
Transitions
Limitations and delay in legislation regulating securities, deriva-
tives, and credit markets have their roots in politics. This brings 
us to our second regularity, that a transition in power is often 
needed to act to resolve a crisis. This is likely to reflect the fact 
that incumbents’ ideological commitments block action. Politi-
cians rarely adjust to new information about structural problems 
in the financial sector; gridlock is broken only when the voters 
throw some of the incumbents out of office.
Nowhere were political preferences more important than with 
respect to bankruptcy law. The first four bankruptcy acts were 
passed when the business party—­the Federalists in 1800, the 
Whigs in 1841, and the Republicans in 1867 and 1898—­controlled 
both houses of Congress and the presidency. Unified control was 
necessary because the agrarian Democrats were opposed to fed-
eral intervention per se. In the antebellum era, the Democratic 

174  •  Chapter 6
opposition reflected the Jeffersonian ideology of small govern-
ment, Jefferson’s interest in seeing British creditors unable to 
collect his personal debts through federal courts, and an unwill-
ingness to set any precedent for federal intervention that might 
lead to intervention on slavery.
The opposition of the Jeffersonian Democrat-­Republicans 
and their successors the Jackson Democrats prevented the pas-
sage of bankruptcy laws following the Panics of 1819 and 1857. 
The passage of the 1841 and 1898 acts occurred not at the outset 
of the 1837 and 1893 Panics but only after transitions of party 
control. In 1840, the Whigs gained unified control of the federal 
government. Republicans were able to pass the 1898 act only 
after they gained unified control following McKinley’s victory 
in the 1896 election.
The Panic of 1893 hit with the Democrats in control of the 
executive and legislative branches of the federal government. 
The Panic contributed to the Republicans securing large gains 
in the midterm elections of 1894, obtaining a large majority in 
the House but only a thin plurality in the Senate.43 Moreover, 
Cleveland remained in the White House. The Bailey Bill of 1894 
was a serious attempt at bankruptcy legislation, but it failed to 
become law. Moreover, it was limited in that it contained a sun-
set provision. It mimicked all previous laws that functioned as 
purely temporary measures to write off the bad debts incurred in 
a macroeconomic crisis. The Democrats, always wary of bank-
ruptcy as a permanent institution, tried unsuccessfully to attach 
a sunset provision to the 1898 law.
The 1898 law, advocated by trade creditors, passed mainly 
with the votes of ideological conservatives.44 A second dimension, 
no longer present in American politics, also intervened. Moder-
ate “Wall Street” Democrats from the Middle Atlantic region 
supported the bill; agrarian Republicans were against it. Interest 
group politics also was manifest. Representatives from constitu-
encies in forty-­three cities that were banking centers, as identified 
by Dun and Bradstreet, were more likely to support the bank-
ruptcy bill.45 The ideological lines on bankruptcy reproduced 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  175
the same divisions found on economic policy throughout the 
late nineteenth century. When the Interstate Commerce Act was 
passed in 1887 to regulate the railroads, a liberal and agrarian 
bloc in Congress opposed a conservative and urban one. The 
South at the time represented the left wing of the Democratic 
Party. The Interstate Commerce Act was managed in the House 
by Judge John Reagan of Texas, the former postmaster general 
of the Confederacy.46 As political power transited from one bloc 
to another, economic policy changed.
Why then did no later transition back to the Democrats 
undo the 1898 law, as happened in 1803? Why has bankruptcy 
become a permanent fixture? The eminent bankruptcy scholar 
David Skeel has argued that sixteen years of Republican gov-
ernment allowed the creation of a bankruptcy bar whose inter-
ests supported a permanent law. By the time the Democrats 
returned to power with Woodrow Wilson as president in 1913, 
the law had become an institution. As polarization declined, 
institutionalization meant that bankruptcy policy became a 
noncontroversial issue. A major revision to the 1898 act, the 
Chandler Act of 1938, and a complete replacement of the 1898 
act by the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 both became law 
without recorded roll call votes on passage in either the House 
or the Senate.
The importance of political transitions to bankruptcy law 
reappeared in a more polarized era with the innovation of credit 
cards. In the 1990s, credit card issuers flooded mailboxes with 
card offers and erected enticing booths on college campuses and 
in airports. When consumers found they could use Chapter 7 of 
the bankruptcy code to walk away from credit card debt, finan-
cial institutions became adamant about “reform,” just as they 
are adamant today about not allowing NINJA (no income, no 
job, no asset) mortgagees to shelter their homes from foreclo-
sure. Although two successive Republican-­controlled Houses 
passed “reform” during President Bill Clinton’s second term, 
neither became law. Legislation also failed when the Democrats 
controlled the Senate in the first two years of the George W. 

176  •  Chapter 6
Bush presidency. The bill finally passed, with unified Republican 
control, in 2005.
The delay forced by the need for a transition in enacting the 
early bankruptcy laws was costly. Bankruptcy law has two main 
purposes. One is composition, which prevents creditors from 
engaging individually in a run on the debtor. The other is the 
fresh start, which allows the debtor to resume entrepreneurial 
activity. Failure at one time should not, as is recognized in ven-
ture capital markets, entail a permanent ban from borrowing, 
let alone imprisonment. Not having a permanent legal mecha-
nism for bankruptcy meant foregoing these benefits. The ben-
efits might, for the macroeconomy, be especially useful at the 
beginning of a crisis. Having to wait several years is costly.
The costs are exacerbated when delay and lack of perma-
nence further imply that cases must be resolved by officials who 
are both inexperienced and deluged with the defaults that have 
accumulated in a crisis. Government is limited in capacity and 
expertise and is open to corruption, all the more in a financial 
crisis. The historian Edward Balleisen studied the application of 
the 1841 Bankruptcy Act; he found a judicial system that was 
overwhelmed by filings. People who had filed for bankruptcy 
provided legal counsel to those about to file; fraudulent convey-
ance was rife, as were payoffs to printers and court officials.47
The 1841 bankruptcy experience testifies to the moral hazard 
implicit in anticipated government intervention. Abuse was par-
ticularly prominent under the 1841 law. Yet the United States 
appears to have prospered even if its bankruptcy laws were not 
only inefficient but also regarded as particularly debtor-­friendly 
when compared to those of European nations. And if govern-
ment intervention makes sense, we should tackle it earlier rather 
than later.
Political transition was necessary for policy change in the 
twentieth century, too. The Panic of 1907 was largely redressed 
by the personal efforts of J. P. Morgan. Government was periph-
eral. As mentioned earlier, the major response to the Panic, 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  177
the Federal Reserve Act, was passed only in 1913, after power 
passed to the Democrats.
The Great Depression is, of course, the quintessential illus-
tration of our claim that responses to pops await transitions 
in political power. The delayed policy response was much less 
limited than prior responses, and was truly a New Deal. The 
response reflected a severe crisis, a strongly unified government, 
and the absence of polarization. Earlier in the chapter we sum-
marized the New Deal changes. The Hoover administration 
did make some efforts to deal with the crisis, establishing the 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the FHLBB. Neither 
of these measures went far enough to stem the crisis, and neither 
dealt with the collapsing banking system. Roosevelt was forced 
to declare a bank holiday when he took office.
Under Hoover, Treasury secretary Mellon was a deficit hawk. 
He advocated that the federal response should be like what state 
governments would later be forced to do in the Great Reces-
sion of 2007–­9: cut spending to offset decreased tax revenues. 
The effect was the absence of any fiscal stimulus. Budget bal-
ance, a constitutional commitment for American states, became 
an ideological commitment for the Hoover administration. The 
ideology extended beyond the administration. Budget balance 
was part of Roosevelt’s platform in the 1932 election campaign. 
Deficit aversion also is said to have caused Roosevelt to damage 
the recovery in 1937.
The ideology of budget balance in the 1930s illustrates a more 
general point. The core ideology of one party can often pull the 
other party in the same direction and limit the impact of a transi-
tion. This may be particularly true when polarization is relatively 
low, as was the case in the 1930s. Even as polarization grows, 
such pulls, attentive to mass beliefs rather than evidence, could 
result. The antideficit message of Ross Perot in the 1992 presi-
dential campaign may have led Bill Clinton to push tax increases 
that gave Congress to the Republicans in the 1994 midterm elec-
tions.48 Tax increases run smack into fundamentalist free market 

178  •  Chapter 6
conservative ideology—­tax increases, no matter what, are bad. 
For fundamentalists, low taxes appear to trump budget balance, 
and deficits can grow. Similarly, the deregulatory aspect of free 
market conservatism can sweep over both parties, abetting the 
savings and loan crisis, the accounting scandals at the turn of the 
twenty-­first century, and the implosion of 2008.
Although transitions appear to lead to the most significant pol-
icy shifts in response to crises, when things get bad enough some 
response is necessary even in the absence of transition. A real 
response to the savings and loan crisis could be delayed through-
out the divided government that prevailed for the entire Reagan 
presidency. A divided government in Washington could no longer 
put off a response once George H. W. Bush assumed the presi-
dency. The muted response of FIRREA failed to strengthen the 
regulatory environment. Similarly, the Sarbanes-­Oxley Bill can 
be viewed as a minimal concession to public opinion as a result 
of the accounting scandals. The legislation might have looked 
different if the Democrats had had unified control when the scan-
dals broke. Such a scenario would have required not only a presi-
dential victory on the part of Al Gore in 2000 but the Democrats 
taking control of the House in the same elections and Barney 
Frank taking control of the House Financial Services Committee.
Our main point, however, does not concern relatively minor 
adjustments to policy that occur in the absence of transition. 
What should be stressed is that major changes follow financial 
crises only after transitions in power, as evidenced by the adop-
tion of bankruptcy laws in the nineteenth century and, in the 
twentieth, by the Federal Reserve Act and the several innova-
tions of the New Deal.
Reversals
Our third regularity was that policies instituted when there is 
a transition in power are often reversed after subsequent shifts. 
Few of these reversals take place immediately, but there is one 
example of a very rapid reversal. The 1841 bankruptcy bill was 
passed in August of that year. This delayed response to the Panic 

Historical Responses to Pops  •  179
of 1837 was later repealed by the very Congress that had enacted 
the legislation. Repeal attempts in 1842 may have been motivated 
by electoral concerns, but repeal passed only in a lame duck 
session, in February 1843. Earlier support for the law may have 
been undermined by corruption and inefficiency in court pro-
cessing of bankruptcy claims. Bad experiences with the bill did 
not keep the most conservative members of Congress, New Eng-
land and Middle Atlantic Whigs, from voting against repeal. Re- 
peal resulted when more agrarian—­Southern and Midwestern—­
Whigs switched sides. For these members, as the economic crisis 
wound down, states’ rights considerations may have been stron-
ger than the arguments for a permanent federal law. Both pas-
sage and repeal were straightforward left-­right votes, but events 
moved the cutting line to the right, increasing the votes of the 
left faction.
To our knowledge, the 1841 Bankruptcy Act is the only in-
stance of any legislation being repealed by the enacting Con-
gress.49 Changes in power are generally required. The 1800 
bankruptcy bill, enacted by the Federalists in 1800 was quickly 
repealed by the Jeffersonians in 1803. More common is an in-
terplay of the Three I’s that leads to a long process of undoing, 
in which a shift in power in Congress, the presidency, and the 
courts; a shift in beliefs; and administrative and judicial inter-
vention all combine to alter the landscape of financial regula-
tion. We summarized, in chapter 5, how shifts beginning in the 
late 1970s altered the regulatory landscape in a way that laid  
the conditions for the crisis of 2008. Here we draw attention to 
the shifting control of federal institutions that occurred.
In table 6.1, we have divided the eighty years since Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt became president into four twenty-­year blocks 
of time. For each block we have indicated the number of years 
with a Democratic president, a Democratic-­controlled House, 
a Democratic-­controlled Senate, and the number of years a 
majority of the sitting Supreme Court justices were appointees 
of Democratic presidents. We also note the number of years that 
the Democrats had a filibuster-­proof majority in the Senate.

180  •  Chapter 6
In the first period, the Democrats were firmly in control. 
By 1939, Roosevelt had been able to appoint a majority on 
the Supreme Court. For half of the period, starting in 1935, 
he enjoyed filibuster-­proof majorities. In the Eightieth Con-
gress (1947–­48), control of both houses did revert briefly to 
the Republicans but otherwise the Democrats were dominant. 
The same was largely true of the next twenty-­year period, from 
1953 to 1972. Republican appointees formed a Supreme Court 
majority only in 1972 after Nixon made two appointments. The 
Democrats, however, had largely lost the ability to block filibus-
ters. It would have been increasingly easy for conservatives to 
block any financial regulation that moved away from free mar-
ket conservatism. Republican power to block continued there-
after, even though the number of votes needed for cloture was 
cut from sixty-­seven to sixty in 1975. In the last period, which 
takes us from Clinton to Obama, the Democrats did have more 
success in presidential elections. This success should not mask 
Table 6.1.
Democratic control of federal government, 1933–2012
1933–1952
1953–1972
1973–1992
1993–2012
Years  
  Democratic 
  Presidency
20
  8
  4
12
Years  
  Democratic  
  House Majority
18
18
20
  6
Years  
  Democratic  
  Senate Majority
18
18
14
  9
Years Filibuster  
  Proof Majority  
  Democrats
10
  2
  2
  0
Maj. of Supreme  
  Court Dem.  
  Appointments
14
19
  0
    0*
Note: *The Democrats did have a filibuster-proof majority for a portion of the 111th 
Congress.

Historical Responses to Pops  •  181
the continued hold of Republicans on the Supreme Court. An 
equally important observation is the continuation of declining 
Democratic fortunes in congressional elections. Although there 
may be some use in crabbing about the unpopularity of health 
care reform, the Tea Party, and continued unemployment in the 
2010 midterm elections, the resurgence of House Republicans 
is unsurprising in the longer perspective provided by the table.
The Republicans, moreover, enjoyed these electoral successes 
while moving in a conservative direction more strongly than the 
Democrats moved in a liberal direction. This movement by the 
Republicans became the driving force in increasing polarization. 
Their move to the right further tilted the scales against any gov-
ernment intervention in financial markets. If voter preferences 
had remained constant from the 1960s onward, the Republican 
move to the right should have been an electoral disaster, continu-
ing the Barry Goldwater debacle of 1964. Au contraire. In chap-
ter 9 we return to this topic and discuss the political shift to free 
market conservatism. For the moment, we note that the trend 
away from the Democrats fully matches the numerous acts that 
undid the financial regulatory landscape of the 1930s and the 
many failures to take regulatory action as new financial prod-
ucts were developed.
Electoral Concerns
Our final regularity is that the response to pops is delayed 
and influenced by short-­run electoral concerns. The executives 
of financial sector firms are often criticized for responding to 
incentives that generate a short-­term focus and excessively risky 
investments. Politicians also have a short-­term focus. Just as an 
executive may care only about his firm’s stock price a year out, 
politicians may care only about winning the next election.
Short-­term reelection concerns were clearly evident in how the 
response to the savings and loan crisis was delayed until after the 
1988 elections. Dealing with the crisis required a large recapital-
ization of the FSLIC. The insurance premiums collected by the 
FSLIC from the S&Ls would not suffice were it to shut down the 

182  •  Chapter 6
failed S&Ls and pay off their insured depositors. To make up 
for this shortfall, Congress needed to make a substantial appro-
priation. Unlike most other government inefficiencies, such as 
defense procurement and bridges to nowhere, which are parts 
of the normal annual budget cycle, recapitalization would have 
required a large, exceptional expenditure. Incumbents of both 
parties were concerned that dealing with the crisis would look 
like a bailout and be unpopular with the voters in November 
1988. Any recapitalization could be seen as the failure of the 
banking deregulation and regulatory forbearance that had been 
supported by both parties. Even though the gravity of the S&L 
industry’s situation was widely recognized by experts both inside 
and outside the Beltway, discussion of the crisis by the candidates 
was essentially absent from the campaign. In a period of divided 
government, with a Republican president and a Democratic 
Congress, incumbent protection was valuable all around. The 
response to the S&L crisis foreshadowed the flight from respon-
sibility of many members of Congress following the demise of 
Lehman Brothers and the government takeover of AIG.
Electoral concerns, as in the S&L crisis, can arise directly 
when the response to a pop is likely to be sufficiently salient that 
it evokes a response in the mass public. But an indirect chan-
nel can be of even greater importance: campaign contributions. 
In chapter 4 we presented evidence that campaign contributions 
by the financial sector have risen in importance. They are also 
bipartisan. Members of Congress are likely to be aware that 
when the pop is over they will still need financial sector dol-
lars for their campaigns. As a result, they may do only what is 
needed to resolve the current crisis without putting any teeth 
into legislation that would make a future crisis less likely to 
occur. We saw such an outcome when FIRREA was passed to 
resolve the S&L crisis. Money was appropriated to write off that 
crisis but a very lax regulatory structure was left in place. The 
new regulatory approach was, as we indicated earlier, a limita-
tion that permitted regulatory venue shopping and contributed 
to the subprime mortgage crisis.

Historical Responses to Pops  •  183
Worse, short-­termism among those in the executive branch 
and Congress reflects not only electoral imperatives but oppor-
tunities upon exiting government service. Republicans Phil and 
Wendy Gramm went from Washington to UBS and Enron, 
respectively. Robert Rubin just made a stop at the Treasury 
Department on his way from Goldman Sachs to Citicorp. Rahm 
Emanuel and Larry Summers both did stints on Wall Street 
after the Clinton administration. Peter Orszag went to Citigroup 
from the Obama White House. Both the opportunity to raise 
campaign funds and the opportunity to enjoy some of the Wall 
Street rents are, at the least, likely to cloud judgments about the 
appropriate response to not only a financial bubble but also a 
financial pop.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have indicated how politics delays and lim-
its the response to a pop. Changes in political power and the 
short-­term incentives of political actors combine to condition 
the timing and the extent of the response. In the ensuing chap-
ters, we return to these themes as we detail their impact on the 
pop of 2008.

C h a p t e r  7
The Pop of 2008
Introduction
We have seen that, historically, responses to pops have been 
limited and delayed. This pattern continued in the recent crisis. 
Housing prices began to slide in 2006 and market bubbles began 
popping in 2007 but serious government intervention through 
legislation was delayed until American International Group 
(AIG) collapsed the day after Lehman Brothers fell in September 
2008. In April of that year Treasury officials Neel Kashkari and 
Phillip Swagel had developed a plan to recapitalize the banks 
in the event of a meltdown.1 Before AIG collapsed, giving the 
force of legislation to such a plan was unthinkable. Congress 
was populated not only by free market conservatives but also 
by liberals opposed to any sort of Wall Street bailout, especially 
one proposed by a Republican administration. After AIG’s col-
lapse, the plan became imperative. It was taken off the shelf and 
turned into the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). Regu-
latory reform of the financial system was delayed until after a 
partisan transition in power.
Even after the transition, the administration of President 
Barack Obama gave several indications that any change in finan-
cial regulation would be limited. The administration likely was 
cautious so as to reassure financial markets. Despite the passage 
of TARP in September 2008, markets were edgy well into the 
first months of the new administration. The Dow Jones Indus-
trial Average, still over 9000 at the beginning of 2009, plunged 
as low as 6600 in early March. Whether to assure markets, to 
appease the “Money Wing,” or because of ideological sympa-
thies, the Obama administration restored the ancien régime, 

The Pop of 2008  •  185
former officials who had presided over deregulation and previ-
ous bailouts in the administration of Bill Clinton in the 1990s. 
Former Treasury secretary Lawrence Summers was brought into 
the White House; Timothy Geithner became Treasury secretary. 
Geithner had been Summers’s undersecretary, and then, as New 
York Federal Reserve president, he participated in organizing 
the Bear Stearns takeover, the AIG bailout, and other responses 
of the administration of George W. Bush to the near collapse 
of the financial system in 2008. Summers and Geithner were 
protégés of Clinton’s first Treasury secretary and Citigroup vice 
chair Robert Rubin, as was Peter Orszag, who became head of 
the Office of Management and Budget.2 Obama’s team deserves 
credit for stabilizing the markets. Stress tests were imposed on 
nineteen large banks. The tests, conducted with rigor, indicated 
Figure 7.1. The ancien régime. Former Clinton economic advisor Gene Sper-
ling and Robert Rubin—dynasty members Peter Orszag, Tim Geithner, and 
Larry Summers at the White House, February 9, 2009. Source: Official White 
House photo by Pete Souza.

186  •  Chapter 7
better than expected health. The results most likely made an 
important contribution to recovery in the financial markets. At 
the same time, the presence of the team undoubtedly signaled 
that no major structural change was planned.
President Obama’s political ties to figures in the financial 
sector did not suggest that the administration would discipline 
individuals and firms whose behavior had been inappropriate. 
During the 2008 campaign, Obama appointed James Johnson, a 
former Fannie Mae CEO and currently a member of the board at 
Goldman Sachs, as head of his vice presidential selection team. 
After the election, in the summer of 2009, Obama allowed him-
self to be photographed playing golf on Martha’s Vineyard with 
UBS North America CEO Robert Wolf, a major fundraiser. UBS 
had received billions in funds through the AIG rescue after pay-
ing a $780 million fine for providing hidden bank accounts to 
thousands of Americans. Obama also appointed Steven Rattner, 
a partner in the investment firm Quadrangle Group, to preside 
over the auto industry bailout. Rattner was later forced out of 
Quadrangle as a result of a scandal involving the New York State 
Common Retirement Fund. Rattner also agreed to pay a civil 
fine and to be barred from the securities industry for two years.
We stress Obama’s ties to the financial sector and his chosen 
advisers not to question the competence or expert knowledge 
or contacts of these people. We suggest only that Obama failed 
to promote the high ethical standards and fundamental reform 
of financial markets that he promised during his presidential 
campaign. His calculation was that replacing the “reckless few” 
with some semireckless savvy would reassure Wall Street.
The Obama administration also signaled policy preferences 
inconsistent with substantial reform. In March 2009, Obama 
continued the Bush administration’s support of the big banks in 
Cuomo v. Clearing House.3 This position placed the administra-
tion in opposition to the four liberal justices on the Court, con-
sumer organizations, and the former Democratic attorney general 
of New York, Eliot Spitzer, and his successor, Andrew Cuomo. 
The administration initially sided with Wall Street by opposing 

The Pop of 2008  •  187
the Volcker Rule until pressure from congressional Democrats 
made that position untenable. Finally, the administration kept 
its distance from reform advocate Elizabeth Warren, whom 
Congress had charged with oversight of TARP. Again under 
pressure from congressional Democrats, the administration did 
give Warren the lead in setting up the Consumer Financial Pro-
tection Bureau that was established by the Wall Street Reform 
and Consumer Protection Act, better known as the Dodd-­Frank 
Bill after its primary authors, Connecticut Senator Christopher 
Dodd and Massachusetts Representative Barney Frank.
Dodd-­Frank was the main piece of regulatory legislation re-
sponding to the pop. President Obama signed the bill into law on 
July 21, 2010, well over two years after the Federal Reserve was 
forced to finance the sale of Bear Stearns to JPMorgan Chase, 
and nearly two years after Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were 
Figure 7.2. Economic reform. Elizabeth Warren, Barack Obama, and Timothy 
Geithner at the White House. This appears to be the only White House website 
photo of Ms. Warren. Source: Official White House photo by Pete Souza.

188  •  Chapter 7
placed in government conservatorship. Even though the legis-
lation was thousands of pages long, Dodd-­Frank left much to 
rule making by federal agencies, introducing even further delays. 
Many of these rules are yet to be promulgated (as of this writing 
at the end of 2012).
Rules on credit risk retention are an example of the delay. 
Only on March 28, 2011, did agencies announce initial regula-
tions for how much “skin in the game” mortgage originators 
and securitizers would be required to retain.4 The regulations 
will not become final until after a period for public comment—­
where, of course, the “public” means financial industry lobby-
ists. A final rule is not expected until 2013; it would be effective 
only one year later. This pattern of delay appears endemic. A 
report from the law firm Davis Polk indicates that as of June 1, 
2012, regulators had missed statutory deadlines on 67 percent 
of the required rules under Dodd-­Frank.5
The final disposition of Fannie and Freddie will be even 
more delayed. The fate of the government-­sponsored enterprises 
(GSEs) was not dealt with by Dodd-­Frank and remains unde-
cided at the end of 2012.
The delay in financial reform reflects, as has historically been 
the case, partisan politics. Dodd-­Frank was passed after two sets 
of elections, in 2006 and 2008, moved the United States from 
unified Republican control of the executive and legislature to 
unified Democratic control. Dodd-­Frank undoubtedly is quite 
different from what would have resulted if the Republicans had 
retained power. The best evidence for this counterfactual sce-
nario is the eagerness of House Republicans to undo parts of 
Dodd-­Frank after regaining control in the 2010 midterm elec-
tions. As a corollary, Wall Street has largely shifted its support 
away from Barack Obama and toward Mitt Romney for the 
2012 presidential election. Pressure to undo the reform is pres-
ent even though Dodd-­Frank was limited.
Reforms were limited by giving regulators extensive rule-­
making authority. Regulators will be under considerable pressure 
from the industry (and the Republican House of Representatives) 
to accommodate Wall Street interests. Consider again the example 

The Pop of 2008  •  189
of “skin in the game” rules for mortgage originators and secu-
ritizers. In the March 2011 proposed rule, financial institutions 
would not be required to retain a share of all mortgages and 
would be permitted considerable flexibility in how they meet 
the requirement for other mortgages. Another example of lax 
implementation of Dodd-­Frank is Treasury Secretary Geithner’s 
decision to remove foreign exchange swaps from clearing and 
exchange requirements that Dodd-­Frank imposed on other de-
rivatives contracts.6 An ideal reform would have limited the scope 
of regulator discretion in order to stem the inevitable drift toward 
outcomes preferred by Wall Street. But such a bill was unobtain-
able because the Democrats lacked a filibuster-­proof majority in 
the 111th Senate. Moreover, several Democrats, such as Senator 
Ben Nelson of Nebraska, could hardly be classified as “progres-
sives.” On critical amendments, ten or more moderate Demo-
crats often peeled off from the progressives and voted with the 
Republicans.
Two other limits to the government’s response to the financial 
crisis are as important as the limitations of Dodd-­Frank. First, as 
just mentioned, the future of the giant GSEs Fannie and Freddie 
remains up in the air. Second, little has been done to stem the 
tide of mortgage foreclosures.
Congress passed a mortgage modification bill, the American 
Housing Rescue and Foreclosure Prevention Act (AHRFPA) in 
2008. Because AHRFPA relied on private sector participation 
and did little to change private incentives, it was ineffective. Then 
in February 2009, the president announced the Home Afford-
able Modification Program (HAMP). This effort, as outlined by 
former TARP inspector general Neil Barofsky, has also been inef-
fective.7 By the end of 2011, in a nation in which two-­thirds of 
117 million households own homes, only 600,000 mortgages had 
been renegotiated through a government-­sponsored program.
The low number of renegotiated mortgages is hardly surpris-
ing; HAMP relied on the same private financial intermediaries 
that sought profits through subprime mortgages and their 
derivatives.8 In refinancing, these lenders may have the ben-
efit of lowering the probability of default, but hampering the  

190  •  Chapter 7
refinancing allows the holder of the mortgage to continue to 
receive payments at higher interest rates than would be paid in a 
restructured mortgage. The government accommodated lenders 
by signing watered-­down consent agreements with mortgage ser-
vicers on foreclosures and loan modifications.9 As of April 2011 
6.7 million homes had been foreclosed, and another 3.3 million 
foreclosures were expected through 2012.10 Another version of 
the program, the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP 
2.0), finally appears to have led to increased restructuring in the 
first quarter of 2012.11 But by the summer of 2012, foreclosures 
began to rise again after legal uncertainties were resolved by a 
legal settlement between banks and state attorneys general over 
mortgage abuses.12 Foreclosures are a primary factor in the drop 
in homeownership shown in figure 5.1.
Ideology Remained Unchanged in the Pop
Despite the shortcomings of Dodd-­Frank and other policy initia-
tives undertaken by the Obama White House and the Democratic-­ 
controlled Congress, the shift to unified government was an im-
portant factor in the response to the pop. As we document below, 
this power shift was far more important than any shift in ideol-
ogy at the level of individual politicians. Things changed because 
of electoral victories, not because of a change in the beliefs of 
legislators. Few, if any members of Congress, expressed a change 
in conviction about free market conservatism similar to that of 
Richard Posner, chief judge of the Seventh Court of Appeals and 
faculty member at the University of Chicago Law School,13 or even  
as much as Alan Greenspan, who testified to Congress that he had  
been misled by his ideology (see chapter 2).
To document the ideological stability in Congress, we compute 
two new sets of ideology scores to capture a shift induced by the 
financial crisis.14 The two scores are fully independent measures 
of ideology. The first set is based on all roll call votes in the 110th 
Congress before September 15, 2008, the date of Lehman Broth-
ers’ bankruptcy. The second set is based on the remaining roll 
calls in the 110th Congress and all roll calls in the 111th, which 

The Pop of 2008  •  191
passed Dodd-­Frank in 2010.15 Figure 7.3 displays the results as 
scatter plots. Each legislator is described by a token, with D for 
Democrats and R for Republicans.16 The horizontal axis in the 
figure captures ideology before the date of Lehman Brothers’ 
bankruptcy; the vertical, after that bankruptcy.
In the House there is no indication of important change. The 
tokens pretty much sit on a line. If the pre-­Lehman and post-­
Lehman scores were unrelated, the correlation would be 0. If 
they sat perfectly on a line, the correlation would be 1.0. The 
actual correlation is 0.99. Even within each party, the correla-
tions are greater than 0.92. In other words, Republicans did 
not change their liberal-­conservative positions relative to one 
another. Neither did Democrats.
The Senate story is the same, except for a lower correlation 
for Democrats. This looser relationship is due in large part to the 
aberrant behavior of Russ Feingold, whose estimated position 
moved from that of a very liberal to that of a moderate member 
of the Democratic delegation. Feingold’s move partly reflects his 
vote against the Dodd-­Frank Bill. Without Feingold, the cor-
relation increased from 0.74 to 0.79. Some of the discrepancy 
arose because the Senate scores are based on far fewer votes (641 
before Lehman and 712 after) than those for the House (1,765 
and 1,747, respectively).
That we did not find a major reordering of positions pre-­ and 
post-­Lehman suggests that the financial crisis and high unem-
ployment did not dramatically change the degree to which free 
market conservatism is internalized in Congress. This is espe-
cially true of the Republicans. Of course, it is technically pos-
sible that financial regulation’s mapping onto ideology changed. 
Perhaps all the legislators moved to the left—­away from pure 
free market conservatism. This is very unlikely, though, given 
the 2011 efforts of House Republicans to undo major portions 
of Dodd-­Frank.
The stability shown in figure 7.3, moreover, masks important 
political changes, as it is based only on legislators who served 
in both the 110th and 111th Congresses. When the Democrats 
gained in the 2008 elections, free market conservatives did not 

192  •  Chapter 7
exit to be replaced by liberals of the Ted Kennedy and Russ Fein-
gold stripe. On the contrary, the Democrats gained by recruit-
ing moderate candidates to run in constituencies that were more 
“purple” than “blue.”
In contrast, when the Republicans gained in the 2010 elections, 
the party moved in a sharply conservative direction. For example, 
Pat Toomey, a staunch proponent of free market conservatism  
After 15 September 2008
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
0.0
Before 15 September 2008
r = 0.992
r = 0.930 (Democrats)
r = 0.931 (Republicans)
House: Before Lehman vs. after Lehman
Ideology Scores
–1.0
–0.5
0.5
1.0
Figure 7.3. Ideology scores before and after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
Each token represents a member of Congress. Each token plots the member’s 
pre-­ and post-­Lehman ideological score. The points fall nearly on a line, indi-
cating that the financial crisis did not change the ideological alignment in 
either chamber.

The Pop of 2008  •  193
and a former president of the Club for Growth, replaced Penn-
sylvania senator Arlen Specter, a moderate whose support was 
important to the passage of both the stimulus package and Dodd-­
Frank. Perversely, free market conservatism has been strength-
ened by the financial crisis and the ensuing recession. Ideology, as 
figure 7.3 shows, exhibited no reordering at the individual level.
Our conclusion that beliefs did not change is buttressed by 
studying two votes on a proposal by Brad Miller (D-­NC) to 
regulate predatory lending. The first vote took place in 2007 
After 15 September 2008
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
0.0
Before 15 September 2008
r = 0.983
r = 0.735 (Democrats)
r = 0.942 (Republicans)
Senate: Before Lehman vs. after Lehman
Ideology Scores
–1.0
–0.5
0.5
1.0
Figure 7.3. (cont.)

194  •  Chapter 7
(pre-­Lehman), the second in 2009 (post-­Lehman). We discuss 
the legislation in more detail later in this chapter. The natural 
experiment that we focus on here is that the Miller Bill (see chap-
ter 5) was essentially the same in both years. Because predatory 
lending was identified as a major source of subprime mortgages, 
one might expect a strong shift in favor of the bill. In fact, there 
was almost no shift; the cutting points (a concept described in 
chapter 2) are statistically indistinguishable.17 All Democrats 
supported the bill on both votes, as did a number of moderate 
Republicans. Extremely conservative Republicans opposed the 
bill both times. What switching occurred took place in the ideo-
logical middle of House Republicans. There were 23 switchers 
among the 132 Republicans who voted both in 2007 and 2009, 
but there was a net increase of only 5 Republican votes in favor. 
The overall increase in votes for the Miller Bill occurred because 
the Democrats had a large increase in seats as a result of the 
2008 elections. The pop of 2008 did not persuade Republicans 
that predatory lending needed regulation.
Congress as a whole failed to move in a direction strongly 
favoring increased government regulation of markets. Neither 
did President Obama. Therefore, in our discussion of the pol-
icy response to the pop, we are justified in focusing on electoral 
shifts and the institutional structure of American government 
and in downplaying the role of any ideological shift.
Legislation after the Pop
The legislative reaction to the pop consisted primarily of the 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), passed in October 2008; 
the Economic Recovery Act (the “stimulus package”), passed in 
February 2009; and the Dodd-­Frank Act, passed in July 2010. 
These three pieces of legislation illustrate the problems of delay, 
limits, transition, and electoral incentives. In our discussion we 
make use of the theoretical approach we presented in chapters 2 
through 4. That framework focused on one-­dimensional liberal-­
conservative politics in which agenda setters need to obtain the 
support of actors such as the filibuster and veto pivots.

The Pop of 2008  •  195
Candidate Barack Obama campaigned on a model of the 
legislative process that is quite different from the pivotal poli-
tics model. As a candidate, Obama asserted that “Americans 
of every political stripe were hungry for . . . a new kind of poli-
tics,” one in which reasonable public policy compromises could 
be worked out with the opposition.18 But polarization precludes 
that sort of new bipartisan politics. Obama might have been bet-
ter served by accepting from the get-­go that he would never get 
more than sixty votes in the Senate.19 Broad-­based compromises 
never happened. The pivots ruled.
For both the stimulus package and Dodd-­Frank, the pivotal 
politics model provides a nearly complete accounting of the out-
come. The roll call votes on passage nearly perfectly divide lib-
erals and conservatives. In each case the successful Democratic 
proposal is one that just barely satisfied the filibuster pivot in 
the Senate. For the stimulus package, the filibuster pivot was 
Olympia Snowe of Maine. She demanded and received impor-
tant concessions that trimmed $200 billion from the bill. The 
death of Edward Kennedy resulted in Scott Brown of Massa-
chusetts becoming the filibuster pivot on Dodd-­Frank. Brown 
also received an important concession—­the elimination of a $19 
billion tax on banks. The pivotal politics story does poorly in 
explaining votes on Henry Paulson’s TARP, however. Voting on 
TARP reflected electoral concerns in the shadow of a failed pres-
idency, blame-­game politics, and the proposal going against core 
elements of Republican ideology, because TARP represented not 
only government intervention but also government expenditure. 
We begin by applying the pivotal politics model to the stimulus 
package and Dodd-­Frank and then return to claim that TARP is 
truly an exception that proves the rule.
Economic Stimulus and Financial Regulation 
in the 111th Congress
The 111th Congress closely followed the pivotal politics script. 
The legislative coalitions that passed the administration’s three 
major pieces of legislation—­the stimulus package, health care 

196  •  Chapter 7
reform, and financial reform—­were all of minimal winning size. 
That is, they controlled just enough votes to avoid a filibuster in 
the Senate. Not only were these coalitions of minimal size, they 
were essentially the same. Nearly the same sixty votes were used 
to pass the two pieces of legislation related to the financial crisis 
and the Senate version of the health care bill that was passed 
before the election of Scott Brown. Not surprisingly, the splits 
pitted liberals against conservatives. A small deviation from this 
pattern occurred when Russ Feingold, a very liberal member of 
the Senate, voted against the Dodd-­Frank Bill on the principle 
that it did not go far enough. But by and large the playbook for 
the first two years of the Obama presidency was to persuade 
sixty Senate liberals and moderates to take on forty conserva-
tives. The House of Representatives also divided into liberal and 
conservative blocs. In that chamber, which has no filibuster, the 
Democrats held large majorities. A few members could vote out 
of line without endangering passage of the legislation.
The Mapping of Complex Legislation: An Aside
Before we show how roll call voting on these major bills con-
formed to the pivotal politics model, we pause to ask how it 
would be possible to take issues as complex as economic stimu-
lus and financial regulation and shoehorn them into a simple 
battle along a single liberal-­conservative dimension.
Legislation is far from a simple yes-­no decision like “credit 
card late payment fees are limited to a maximum of ten dol-
lars per month,” which might be thought to provoke a liberal-­
conservative split. Quite the opposite: rhetoric, framing, and 
manipulation—­that is, plain old wheeling and dealing—­are 
important for holding a coalition together. As a result, acts of 
Congress now are hundreds or thousands of pages long, each 
sentence representing a bit of persuasion for someone. Not only 
do we, as citizens, not want to know what is in these rotten 

The Pop of 2008  •  197
sausages, we don’t have the time to know. Coalition mainte-
nance tends to benefit from a lack of transparency.
These lengthy bills clearly involve many dimensions. At first 
glance, the coalitions that support them might be thought to be 
unstable. Opponents could tweak a proposal that would buy 
off a legislator. For example, on the stimulus package, Olympia 
Snowe demanded and received a large cut in funds that were to 
be used to preserve jobs for state and local public employees. 
Could members more liberal than Snowe be led into opposi-
tion by a proposal to cut highway construction funding as well? 
Unlikely. Could they be led into opposition by a proposal to 
increase the highway construction portion? Not credible. The 
many components of a bill may in fact stabilize it into a liberal-­
conservative alignment. Snowe could be brought on board more 
easily by allowing her to cut a portion of the bill she strongly 
disliked rather than restricting her to making an across-­the-­
board cut.
The complexity of the bills, moreover, may not arise from 
additions to the pork barrel. These provisions may be directed 
at broadening the bill to incorporate the core ideology of the 
agenda-­setting party, thereby helping to define the bill as a 
liberal-­conservative choice. The financial crisis led to the Dodd-­
Frank Bill. On the financial side, the central issue was certainly 
how to solve the problem of systemic risk.
Systemic risk is hardly a liberal-­conservative issue. Each regu-
latory piece involves complex regulatory trade-­offs. For example, 
mandates about down payments and loan-­to-­value may limit 
risk by making default less likely. The same mandates, however, 
would exclude lower-­income people from the mortgage market. 
As another example, large financial institutions may well want 
to know that in the future they can gamble with impunity, but in 
the larger society neither liberals nor conservatives are gunning 
for another TARP.
On the one hand, there is a danger of overregulation. How 
does one deal with systemic risk when building, as was nec-
essary with Dodd-­Frank, a coalition of liberals? Building this 

198  •  Chapter 7
coalition was very difficult given the complexity of the trade-­offs. 
On the other hand, the core ideological belief of the liberals—­
egalitarianism—­calls for redistribution, especially targeted to 
ascriptive identities of race, ethnicity, and gender. So it is not 
surprising that the legislation created a Consumer Financial Pro-
tection Bureau with a dedicated budget outside congressional 
control. It is also not surprising that this is the portion of the bill 
most contested by the new Republican House majority.
Furthermore, the bill, at the urging of Maxine Waters (D-­CA), 
an African American congresswoman, included the new Offices 
of Minority and Women Inclusion in regulatory agencies. It 
also includes provisions aimed at ending human rights viola-
tions connected to armed conflict and trade in minerals from the 
Republic of the Congo. All these provisions likely increased lib-
eral support for the bill as a whole and may well have decreased 
conservative support.
In summary, lengthy bills may readily induce splits on the 
liberal-­conservative dimension, and making a bill longer may in 
fact reinforce how well the bill maps onto the dimension.
The Politics of Stimulus: Getting Along with Pivots
Following a noticeable slowdown in the economy at the end of 
2007, the Bush administration proposed an economic stimulus 
package in January 2008. The centerpieces of this proposal were 
one-­time income tax rebate checks and business tax breaks. 
Although discretionary fiscal policy had long fallen out of favor 
among conservatives, the focus on tax cutting minimized the 
break with ideological orthodoxy.
Democrats also supported an expansionary fiscal program, 
but they did not support the Bush plan’s sole reliance on tax relief. 
Democratic legislators argued strongly that the package should 
also include increased spending especially on unemployment 
insurance, aid to states, and public works. Leading Democratic 
presidential candidate Hillary Clinton put forward a plan for 
$70 billion in spending for housing, heating subsidies, state aid, 
and $40 billion in tax rebates if conditions worsened. Another 

The Pop of 2008  •  199
point of ideological conflict was the refusal of the administra-
tion and Republicans to support rebate checks for workers who 
did not pay federal income tax, essentially arguing that rebates 
for non–­income tax payers constituted a form of welfare.
In formulating their response to the president’s plan, Demo-
cratic leaders faced two problems. First, the 2006 elections that 
had provided them with their legislative majority also added a 
large number of fiscal conservatives to their caucus who were 
more likely to oppose expansions of social spending to stimu-
late the economy. Second, the leadership was concerned with the 
party’s fiscal image. The Democratic Party had used the spiral-
ing deficits of the Bush years to put itself forward as a party of 
fiscal responsibility. This new reputation solidified the support 
not just of independent voters but of the party’s “money” wing. 
Consequently, Democratic leaders were wary of getting so far in 
front of the president that they might once again be branded as 
big spenders. A further complication was that any stimulus plan 
would involve the Democratic Congress waiving the “pay as you 
go” budget rules that they reinstituted when they regained con-
trol of Congress.20
So despite important partisan and ideological differences over 
the structure of a stimulus plan, the House of Representatives 
quickly passed a $164 billion package that more or less hewed to 
the Bush administration’s priorities. But the Democratic leader-
ship of the Senate pushed for a much more extensive plan that 
cost $204 billon, which included extensions of unemployment 
insurance, subsidies for home heating, and subsidies for the coal 
mining industry.21 Although the larger measure earned the sup-
port of eight Republican senators (including several in tough 
reelection situations), Democratic leaders failed to obtain cloture 
and the measure failed.22 The Senate tacked payments to Social 
Security recipients and disabled veterans onto the House bill and 
passed the measure 81–­16. The House then adopted the Senate 
version with a vote of 380–­34.23 President Bush signed the final 
$168 billion package.
Although an unusual level of bipartisanship (especially for the 
House) led to very quick passage of the first stimulus bill, the 

200  •  Chapter 7
necessary political expedients minimized its effectiveness. The 
insistence on rebate checks rather than adjusted tax withhold-
ing meant that it took several months for the money to hit the 
economy.24 Moreover, because the rebates came in the form of 
income tax credits rather than offsets to payroll taxes, many 
low-­income Americans (those most likely to spend the refunds) 
did not receive assistance. The lack of aid to states and support 
for unemployment extensions also allowed the financial situa-
tion of states and the unemployed to deteriorate. Moreover, the 
polarized debate over making the Bush tax cuts permanent pre-
cluded discussions of any durable changes in tax law that might 
have had stronger economic effects.25
The bill heralded the end of bipartisan cooperation on fiscal 
stimulus. As the 2008 elections approached, Democrats increas-
ingly called for a second round of stimulus, which Republicans 
were just as adamant in resisting. The shape of the next fiscal 
program would be delayed, to be determined by the presidential 
and congressional elections that fall. The partisan debate fol-
lowed the traditional ideological pattern: John McCain and the 
Republicans argued that any future stimulus ought to focus on 
personal and business income tax cuts (by making the Bush-­era 
tax cuts permanent) while Barack Obama and the Democrats 
argued for more spending targeted toward those of low income, 
the unemployed, and struggling homeowners. The Democrats 
also stressed the need to boost infrastructure spending by fund-
ing “shovel-­ready projects.”
After Obama won the election in November 2008, many 
thought that he might encourage a lame duck congressional ses-
sion to pass stimulus measures. But it was determined that any 
such measures might be limited by opposition from President 
Bush. Consequently, stimulus legislation was further delayed 
until the new Congress convened in January, with the expecta-
tion that passage would not occur until after the inauguration.26
While candidate Obama campaigned on behalf of a $175 bil-
lion stimulus plan, spiraling job losses and cuts in production 
suggested that a much more expensive package would be neces-
sary. By the end of November, Democratic leaders were pushing 

The Pop of 2008  •  201
for a package closer to $300 billion. By December, the target 
number had reached $600 billion. Some economists, both Dem-
ocrat and Republican, argued that the package should be twice 
that large.
Several factors complicated the formulation of the 2009 stimu- 
lus package, formally designated the American Recovery and 
Investment Act. The first is that the urgency of the situation 
and the exigencies of a presidential transition (much of the eco-
nomic team was not yet in place) meant that the administration 
would have to defer to Congress on many of the details in the 
package. This opened the door to funding many congressional 
pet projects that were hard to justify on purely macroeconomic 
grounds.27
In some sense, the loading up of pork was unavoidable. Most 
economists were pushing for a very large number, and the money 
had to be spent on something. This outcome, however, helped 
foster an image of the new administration as fiscally undisci-
plined. That Republicans were able to exploit this image under-
mined any hopes of the Obama administration for a bipartisan 
pact. Cross-­party cooperation was considered important both 
because Obama had promised to foster a postpartisan environ-
ment in Washington and because it would have better insulated 
him against charges of pursuing a left-­wing agenda.
By January, the size of the proposed package had reached 
$775 billion. It grew to $825 billion by the end of the month. 
But it remained much smaller than what even some Republican 
economists were advocating. (This advocacy had little effect on 
Republican politicians, however.) Moreover, fissures within the 
Democratic Party emerged over the size of the tax cut provisions 
relative to social spending and investment in infrastructure.28 
For their part, the Republicans began to attack the program 
as too large and too light on tax cuts. Concerns about deficits 
and debt began to be expressed openly by both Republicans and 
moderate Democrats.
The two houses of Congress approved the conference report 
on the stimulus package on February 13, 2009. We begin with 
the House vote, shown in figure 7.4. Because the House operates 

202  •  Chapter 7
by majority rule without a filibuster, 255 Democrats, in a cham-
ber of 435 members, had a relatively easy time passing legisla-
tion in the lower house. The conference report was approved by 
a lopsided vote of 246 to 183.29
The vote went strict along party lines with the exception of 
seven Democrats who voted against the stimulus package.30 
None of the seven—­Bobby Bright (AL), Peter DeFazio (OR), 
Parker Griffith (AL), Walt Minnick (ID), Collin Peterson (MN), 
Heath Shuler (NC), and Gene Taylor (MS)—­held a safe seat. Four 
were defeated for reelection in 2010; the other three obtained 
55 percent of the vote or less. With one exception, DeFazio, all 
seven had ideological positions close to the vote’s cutting line. In 
other words, they were estimated to be nearly indifferent on the 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 9
PRE = 0.95
Yea
Nay
House: Pass Stimulus Package
13 February 2009, Yea = 246   Nay = 183
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 7.4. The House and Senate votes on the conference report for the 
Stimulus Package. In the Senate vote, the single prediction error represents 
Voinovich (R-­OH).

The Pop of 2008  •  203
issue. One may have already been tilting conservative. In Sep-
tember 2009, Parker Griffith of Alabama continued a pattern, 
started by Strom Thurmond, of Southern Democrats switching 
to the Republican Party. When Griffith switched parties his DW-­
NOMINATE score jumped all the way from moderate center to 
conservative (the numerical change was from –­0.01 to +0.54). 
Griffith was far from pivotal. Party discipline was not necessary 
to bring him or other defectors into line.
The Senate vote on the stimulus package conference report, 
shown in figure 7.4, is a different story. To get to sixty votes, 
the administration needed all fifty-­six voting Democrats as well 
as Bernie Sanders, the Independent. (Ted Kennedy was too ill 
to vote, and Minnesota’s Al Franken had not yet been seated 
following a contested election.) The administration also needed 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 1
PRE = 0.97
Yea
Nay
Senate: Pass Stimulus Package
13 February 2009, Yea = 60   Nay = 38
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 7.4. (cont.)

204  •  Chapter 7
three votes from Republicans. It got the votes of the three who 
are by our estimates the most liberal—­Olympia Snowe and 
Susan Collins of Maine and Arlen Specter (who later switched to 
the Democratic Party) of Pennsylvania.31 The result was a mini-
mal winning coalition that fit perfectly onto a one-­dimensional 
liberal-­conservative map. The vote is shown in figure 7.4. The 
only prediction error is that of George Voinovich (R-­OH), whose 
ideological score was to the right of Specter’s but is statistically 
indistinguishable. The Democrats did obtain the votes of the three 
most moderate Republicans. Voinovich’s vote against the stimu-
lus package represents a small error for our statistical model.32
How were these sixty votes cobbled together? Media atten-
tion focused on Senator Snowe’s demand for a $200 billion 
reduction in the package in exchange for her vote. One suspects 
that many other supporters had their demands met, with the 
result that more than three thousand changes were made to the 
bill between initial House passage and final enactment. Each 
one of these changes contained a little bonbon for someone. The 
vote turns out to be liberal-­conservative simply because fewer 
bonbons were needed for liberals than for conservatives.
Upon signing the $787 billion bill, President Obama did not 
rule out a second stimulus package.33 But public support for the 
package was never very strong. At the time of passage, a bare 
majority supported it.34 But strong majorities felt that tax cuts 
rather than spending increases were the most effective part of 
the package.35
When joblessness failed to decline, not only did the Recovery 
Act decline in popularity but voters increasingly split on partisan 
lines. Most important, independent voters who had been crucial 
to Obama’s election began to accept the Republican narrative that 
the stimulus package had harmed the economy. Table 7.1 provides 
partisan breakdowns for two questions asked in July 2009:
So far, do you think the government’s stimulus package has 
made the economy better, made the economy worse, or has it 
had no impact on the economy so far?

The Pop of 2008  •  205
In the long run, do you think the government’s stimulus 
package will make the economy better, will make the econ-
omy worse, or will it have no impact on the economy in the 
long run?
The polls also found that 65 percent of the public opposed a new 
stimulus package, and strong majorities prioritized deficit reduc-
tion.36 When public opinion turned against additional stimu-
lus, it became more difficult to sell a new package to moderate 
Democrats. Those facing tough reelection contest in 2010 were 
especially reluctant to support more spending.37 Consequently, 
the administration rejected calls from the left for a second round 
of fiscal expansion.
Some individual elements of the stimulus package were mod-
estly popular with voters—­especially the extension of unem-
ployment benefits. So the administration strategy shifted from a 
focus on macroeconomic stimulus to targeted social and infra-
structure spending as well as tax breaks designed to subsidize 
job creation.38 But even these more modest approaches were 
contentious. Republicans filibustered a bill to extend unemploy-
ment benefits for several weeks. The bill passed only when newly 
elected moderate Republican Scott Brown switched his vote in 
favor.
Table 7.1. 
Voter attitudes about the impact of the Obama stimulus plan on the 
­economy as of July 2009
Partisan ­Identification
Better
Worse
No Impact
All Voters—So Far
24.7
12.5
57.3
All Voters—Long Run
44.3
21.9
28.1
Republican—So Far
15.1
26.2
51.6
Democrat—So Far
35.6
  3.7
55.5
Independent—So Far
22.0
12.4
61.0
Republican—Long Run
22.7
37.4
33.7
Democrat—Long Run
59.7
10.2
25.6
Independent—Long Run
44.1
22.2
  6.6

206  •  Chapter 7
Assessing the extent to which ideology and polarization 
inhibited the U.S. fiscal response is somewhat complicated. The 
United States did have one of the largest discretionary stimulus 
bills among developed economies.39 This does not mean that the 
highly polarized U.S. political environment had no impact on 
the passage of the stimulus bill.
First, because the financial crisis that precipitated the world-
wide recession was focused on the United States, one would ex-
pect the need for a compensatory fiscal response to be higher, 
ceteris paribus. Second, although political constraints were im-
portant in the United States, economic and financial ones were 
less so. The status of the dollar as the international reserve cur-
rency and the flight to the security of U.S. treasuries during the 
crisis made deficit spending much cheaper in the United States. 
The Europeans were more concerned with the impact of spend-
ing on the value of their common currency, a concern that con-
tinued into 2012 with the government and bank debt crises of 
Ireland, Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Italy. Third, the $787 bil-
lion price tag vastly overstates the stimulative effect of the bill. 
Much of the package was used to offset declines in state and 
local spending.40
Many provisions in the package would have passed as stand-­
alone legislation. For example, 10 percent of the package was 
an adjustment to the alternative minimum tax, like those Con-
gress has repeatedly made over the past decade. As even Presi-
dent Obama now admits, the infrastructure spending was very 
delayed in getting into the economy.41 Finally, the size of the U.S. 
package needed to be larger because it was delayed for several 
months due to the presidential election and transition. By com-
parison, most of the other stimulus packages in the Organisation 
for Economic Co-­operation and Development countries were 
passed in November 2008.
Ultimately, the size, delay, and composition of the stimulus 
bill limited its impact. Stanford University economist Robert 
Hall, affiliated with the generally conservative Hoover Institu-
tion think tank, estimates that the stimulus package reduced the 

The Pop of 2008  •  207
shortfall in gross domestic product during the recession by 2 
percent, from 10.2 percent to 8.2 percent.42
In summary, the U.S. fiscal response to the crisis was affected 
in important ways by the ideological and constituency structure 
of the party system. Although modest bipartisanship was pos-
sible at the beginning of the recession, the window for coopera-
tion closed quickly as the crisis deepened and the 2010 election 
neared. A quick and coherent response was undermined both 
by the divergent ideological commitments across the parties and 
divisions within the Democratic Party.
Financial Market Reform
Between passage of the stimulus bill and the Dodd-­Frank Bill, 
Congress passed and the president signed a bill imposing new 
regulations on the financial services industry. The Credit Card 
Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 be­- 
came law in May 2009. This legislation was low-­hanging fruit, 
proconsumer regulation that had been on the Democrats’ agenda  
for years.43 Abusive practices, such as repeated penalties for 
small overdrafts on debit cards, had received widespread atten-
tion. The bill passed easily in the House, with only seventy votes 
against it, all but one coming from Republicans, generally the 
most conservative members. The bill was then modified and 
approved in a near unanimous 90–­5 vote in the Senate.
One Senate modification, Section 512, put the bill in poten-
tial danger when the House took a vote on accepting the Senate 
bill. Section 512 allowed private individuals to carry weapons 
on public lands such as national parks. If the Senate bill were 
voted on as a whole in the House, it might have been killed, with 
liberals voting against guns and conservatives voting against 
economic regulation. The House leadership deftly split the Sen-
ate bill into two votes. The first, on everything but Section 512, 
passed with only sixty-­four votes against, again all but one 
coming from Republicans. Then Section 512 was adopted. On 
this roll call, Democrats cast the vast majority of the negative 

208  •  Chapter 7
votes, 145 of 147. Consequently the bill passed, to the delight of 
both the consumer lobby and the gun lobby. The votes indicated 
that a liberal-­conservative split was likely on the larger issues of 
financial reform to be addressed in the Dodd-­Frank Bill.
The major push on financial reform began in June 2009 when 
the Obama administration released an eighty-­nine-­page outline 
of its reform priorities. The plan focused on four principal areas: 
the creation of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, which 
would help coordinate regulatory agencies and provide macro-
prudential oversight, a modest revamping of the structure of 
banking regulation, enhancement of the government’s ability to 
take over and unwind failed financial firms, and the creation of a 
new regulatory structure for consumer and investor protection. 
The proposal was immediately attacked from the left and right 
ends of the ideological spectrum.
The criticism from the left focused on what was missing from 
the bill. In particular, the administration had not proposed 
enough to regulate executive compensation practices that many 
felt were responsible for excessive risk taking. Moreover, the 
administration’s proposal was seen as having a light touch in reg-
ulating derivative and securitization markets. The proposal also 
did little to reform credit rating agencies whose AAA certifica-
tions of subprime securitizations helped trigger the crisis.
Conservatives focused on two other aspects. First, there was 
general opposition to more regulation, especially in the area of 
consumer and investor protection. Second, conservatives feared 
that the creation of a resolution pool for unwinding failed finan-
cial firms would perpetuate moral hazard and lead to more 
government bailouts. This fear was previously manifested in 
conservative opposition to TARP. One area where the Left and 
the Right converged was in the criticism of the expanded role 
of the Federal Reserve, which the Left blamed for ignoring the 
crisis and the Right blamed for being too quick with bailouts. 
The convergence, as we show in chapter 8, appeared in the thirty 
negative votes against Ben Bernanke’s reappointment to a sec-
ond term as Fed chairman in January 2010.

The Pop of 2008  •  209
In the fall of 2009, House and Senate committees began work 
on legislation. Despite concerns that progressives in the House 
would try to pull the bill to the left, the bill that emerged from 
the House Financial Services Committee hewed closely to the 
administration’s blueprint. When the bill came to the floor, the 
two most substantial amendments came from Bart Stupak (D-­
MI), to tighten rules for central clearing of derivative contracts 
and for securitization.44 These amendments were supported 
overwhelmingly by the left wing of the Democratic Party and 
allowed those members to go on the record as supporting much 
more stringent regulation of Wall Street. Ultimately, House Bill 
4173 passed on December 11, 2009, by a margin of 223–­203. 
All Republicans voted against the bill, as did 27 Democrats. As 
would be expected, the Democratic defectors were heavily con-
centrated in the moderate wing of the party (as measured by 
DW-­NOMINATE scores). Some liberal members did oppose the 
bill, claiming it did not go far enough.
The main Senate proposal was unveiled in November 2009. 
Senate Banking Chairman Chris Dodd proposed sweeping 
changes in the power of the Federal Reserve to regulate banks. 
The changes would have given the Fed little role in consumer 
protection and systemic risk regulation. Consequently, the Dodd 
proposal was seen as considerably more ambitious than the 
administration proposal or the House bill. Dodd and his staff 
probably felt that the bill would appeal to the populist, anti-­Fed 
Republicans.45
But Republican opposition to Dodd’s original plan was sub-
stantial. Following Brown’s victory in the special Senate election 
in Massachusetts, it became clear that some Republican sup-
port would be necessary to secure the sixty votes needed for 
cloture. Consequently, Senator Dodd spent several weeks try-
ing to negotiate with some of the panel’s Republican members 
in hopes of securing some level of bipartisanship. After nego-
tiations with ranking minority member Richard Shelby (R-­AL) 
collapsed, Dodd engaged Republican senator Robert Corker 
of Tennessee. The primary sticking point in these negotiations 

210  •  Chapter 7
was the structure of the proposed Consumer Financial Protec-
tion Agency (CFPA).46 The CFPA’s backers insisted that for the 
agency to be effective it must be totally independent, with full 
rule-­making and enforcement power. Republican opponents 
wanted any new powers vested in an existing agency, preferably 
the Federal Reserve. But these negotiations collapsed.
Senator Dodd unveiled his final plan on March 15, 2009. 
In many ways, the plan moved much closer to the House bill 
and scaled back many of its earlier provisions. It adopted some 
Republican demands in the hopes of ultimately attracting GOP 
support but it did include the so-­called Volcker Rule banning 
proprietary trading by deposit-­taking banks.47 Although such a 
prescription had been pushed by former Fed chair Paul Volcker, 
it was not endorsed by the administration until early in 2010. 
This endorsement was at least in part a response to criticism 
from the left that the administration’s proposals were toothless.
The Senate version moved in a considerably proregulation 
direction when a measure backed by Arkansas Democrat Blanche 
Lincoln was added to the bill. Lincoln’s provision called for the 
largest commercial banks to spin off their lucrative derivatives 
trading operations.48 Initially, the proposal engendered opposi-
tion not only among Republicans but also within the adminis-
tration and among Democrats from New York.
The resulting financial reform bill fit into pivotal politics 
along the same lines as the economic recovery package, not only 
in falling along liberal-­conservative lines but also in squeaking 
through with just enough votes on the conference report to beat 
a Senate filibuster. The House agreed to the conference report on 
June 30, 2010, by a vote of 237–­192. Again, with a large House 
majority, the Senate was the pivotal chamber. There were, in 
comparison to the stimulus package, more partisan defections in 
the House, with 19 Democrats voting against the bill.
The number of prediction errors was twenty-­one, including 
three Republicans who voted in favor (see figure 7.5). Two of 
these were among the most moderate Republicans, Walter Jones 

The Pop of 2008  •  211
of North Carolina and Joseph Cao of Louisiana.49 The third yea 
vote came from Michael Castle of Delaware, the second ranking 
Republican on the House Financial Services committee. Castle 
was closer to the center of the party.50 His attempt to move on 
to the Senate was derailed in the Republican 2010 primary by 
Tea Party candidate Christine O’Donnell. Cao was a freshman 
representative who had defeated the corruption-­tainted William 
Jefferson in New Orleans. By 2010 Cao’s district returned to its 
usual status by electing an African American Democrat, so Cao 
did not return to the House in 2011.
Of the three House Republicans who deviated from free 
market conservatism and supported Dodd-­Frank, two are no 
longer in Congress. These small changes in representation are 
part of the larger process of increasing polarization, a process 
that will also increase the vulnerability of Dodd-­Frank if the 
Republicans ever reassert unified control of the White House 
and Congress. Castle’s defeat at the hands of the Tea Party was 
far from Obama’s fantasy about politicians of all stripes engag-
ing in compromise.
The Senate vote on the conference report for the Dodd-­Frank 
financial reform bill paralleled action on the stimulus pack-
age. Again the Democrats needed three Republican votes, even 
though Al Franken had by now been sworn in and Arlen Specter 
had switched parties. One difficulty the Democrats faced was 
that Robert Byrd had died, leaving a West Virginia seat vacant.
The Senate vote had four exceptions to a perfect liberal-­
conservative split. The interesting exception was Russ Feingold 
of Wisconsin. Feingold’s “error” is shown as the leftmost white 
block in figure 7.5. Feingold, previously one of the most liberal 
Democrats, decided to stand on principle and refused to vote 
for cloture. So a third Republican vote, in the person of Scott 
Brown, was needed.
As it turns out, there were real consequences to Feingold pro-
moting Brown into the pivot position. One of the provisions to 
come out of the House-­Senate conference was a levy on large 

212  •  Chapter 7
financial firms to pay for the costs of financial regulation. This 
provision was quickly dubbed a “bank tax.” As a result, Brown, 
who had supported the earlier Senate version, began to waver. 
The provision not only ran counter to his ideological opposi-
tion to anything resembling a tax increase, but would have been 
costly to large financial firms in Brown’s home state.
In the aftermath of Byrd’s death, a defection by Brown would 
necessitate picking up the two Democrats who had opposed the 
original Senate bill, Feingold of Wisconsin and Maria Cantwell 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 21
PRE = 0.89
Yea
Nay
House: Dodd-Frank Financial Reform
30 June 2010, Yea = 237   Nay = 192
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 7.5. The conference report votes on the Dodd-­Frank Bill. For the Sen-
ate, the prediction errors shown represent Feingold to the left and Voinovich, 
Murkowski, and Lugar in the center. The errors in the center are close to the 
cutting line, indicating that the senators were nearly indifferent on the bill. 
Feingold’s error is far more substantial.

The Pop of 2008  •  213
of Washington. Cantwell did switch her vote, but Feingold did 
not, necessitating the removal of the bank tax. This shifted $19 
billion in costs from the banks to taxpayers. Feingold performed 
the legislative equivalent of a liberal voting for Ralph Nader in 
Florida in the 2000 presidential election: standing on principle 
only to get an outcome he couldn’t possibly have wanted.51
The other three errors shown in figure 7.5 are trivial exceptions. 
Republican senators George Voinovich (OH), Lisa Murkowski 
(AK), and Richard Lugar (IN) voted against the bill when their 
ideology score called for a vote in favor. Their ideal points are 
so close to the cutting line that these are very minor errors for 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 4
PRE = 0.90
Yea
Nay
Senate: Dodd-Frank Financial Reform
15 July 2010, Yea = 60   Nay = 39
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 7.5. (cont.)

214  •  Chapter 7
the spatial model. The split was, except for a tad of randomness 
in the center and Feingold’s hiccup on the left, a pure liberal-­
conservative division.
The 110th Congress: The Passage of TARP
In contrast to the stimulus package and Dodd-­Frank, the pas-
sage of TARP does not fit into our model of liberal-­conservative 
voting. Why? Several explanations complement each other.
1. 	In the 110th Congress TARP was an emergency 
measure that went against the core ideology of the 
agenda-­setting party, the Republicans. The agenda 
setters were Bush appointees, Treasury secretary 
Paulson and Fed chair Bernanke. Bernanke, who 
intensely studied the Great Depression as an aca-
demic, almost certainly was motivated to avoid a 
second collapse of the economy. The bill permit-
ted additional spending of $700 billion, with at 
least the first $350 billion at the total discretion of 
Paulson—­a slap in the face to free market conserva-
tives. The week before Lehman failed, when Fannie 
and Freddie were effectively nationalized, “Doc-
tor Doom,” Nouriel Roubini, keying off economist 
Willem Buiter, wrote of “comrades Bush, Paulson, 
and Bernanke.”52 The absence of support in core 
ideology is a factor that led TARP not to fit into the 
standard pivotal politics story.
2. 	Presidential leadership was absent; Paulson and Ber-
nanke, not Bush, were the agenda setters. Following 
Lehman’s collapse and the AIG bailout, Bush’s job 
approval fell into the low 20s.53 Presidential candi-
date McCain and Republican congressional candi-
dates were loath to mention Bush’s name. In fact, 
McCain undercut the White House; following the 
AIG bailout, he announced that he was suspending 

The Pop of 2008  •  215
his campaign to return to Washington to work on 
the financial crisis. Two days later, Paulson proposed 
TARP. Bush’s appeals to congressional Republicans 
to support TARP in the national interest fell on deaf 
ears in the context of his failed presidency.
3. 	With elections only weeks away, legislators in close 
races feared a populist backlash were they to vote 
for the bailout.
4. 	Support for the bailout reflected the local interests 
of representatives from New York and campaign 
contributions.
These four factors combined to fracture the usual ideologi-
cal splits. Before we indicate the nature of this fracture, we will 
show that, before Lehman, the 110th Congress did vote on finan-
cial services matters along ideological lines. Post-­TARP, Con-
gress also voted ideologically on the bailout of the auto industry. 
The force of ideology before and after TARP indicates that the 
TARP episode was a deviation that arose in dire circumstances, 
starting with the collapse of the housing market.
The housing market meltdown began in 2006, and Wash-
ington was unresponsive to the fall in housing prices. Fed chair 
Alan Greenspan had indicated that the Fed would not intervene 
in asset market bubbles. Bush appointed Bernanke to succeed 
Greenspan near the start of the meltdown. At Bernanke’s Senate 
confirmation hearing on November 15, 2005, he said what the 
Republican-­controlled Congress wanted to hear: “I will make 
continuity with the policies and policy strategies of the Green­
span Fed a top priority.”54 In the summer of 2007, a St. Louis Fed 
document claimed, “The [Bernanke] Fed has been successful in 
preserving continuity with the Greenspan era.”55 Neither the Fed 
nor the executive branch nor Congress was eager to address the 
consequences of the bursting housing bubble.
The Democrats, having won the 2006 midterm elections, 
were in control of Congress for the first time since 1994. 
They made some attempt to control the worst practices of the 

216  •  Chapter 7
subprime market. In the House, Representative Brad Miller, a 
North Carolina Democrat, introduced the Mortgage Reform and 
Anti-­Predatory Lending Act of 2007.56 Patterned after similar leg-
islation in Miller’s state that had been enacted in 1999, this bill 
strengthened the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act 
of 1994 (HOEPA). By 2007, some thirty states and the District 
of Columbia had enacted their own legislation. Miller’s bill was 
aimed at a federal strengthening of consumer protection in the 
mortgage market. It passed the House on November 15, 2007, 
by a vote of 291–­127, with all Democrats and 64 Republicans in 
favor. The vote was highly ideological, with the more moderate 
Republicans joining the Democrats. There were, as shown in fig-
ure 2.5, only thirty-­two prediction errors, all Republicans close 
to indifference, as shown by the cutting line. At that time, less 
than a year before the political pop, the Senate failed to act on a 
bill. The bill was reintroduced in the 111th Congress and passed, 
on May 7, 2009, by a vote of 300–­114, with only 3 Democrats 
voting against it. Again, Republican moderates split from con-
servatives. And again the Senate failed to act. Miller’s bill would 
eventually become legislation as Title XIV of Dodd-­Frank.
The previous antipredatory lending statute was extremely 
weak. The interest rates and fees that would trigger HOEPA 
protection were so extreme that they would apply only to 1 
percent of subprime loans.57 Presidents of both political parties 
preempted the more stringent state regulations. In 1996, under 
Clinton, the Office of Thrift Supervision, that weak regulator 
created by FIRREA, exempted all federally chartered savings 
and loans from state regulation. In 2004, under Bush, the Office 
of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) exempted all national 
banks. Representatives Bob Ney (R-­OH) and Paul Kanjorski (D-­
PA) tried to go one step further in 2005 by introducing a bill that 
would preempt all state regulation. The bill never made it to the 
floor, perhaps because Ney got caught up in the Jack Abramoff 
scandal and eventually served seventeen months in prison.
The Supreme Court, regulators, and legislators also addressed 
the issue of federal preemption of state regulations. The OCC 

The Pop of 2008  •  217
had fought state level prosecutions of national banks for violat-
ing state fair-­lending laws. This led to the Cuomo v. Clearing 
House Supreme Court case discussed earlier in this chapter. In a 
surprise decision, Justice Antonin Scalia voted with court liber-
als to strengthen state intervention.58 The role of the states was 
reinforced only after the pop, not only by the court but also 
by Dodd-­Frank, which set federal regulations in this area, like 
minimum wages, as a floor rather than a ceiling.
If the predatory lending issue failed to gain political traction 
before the pop, the fall in housing prices created political pres-
sure in the 110th Congress to provide relief to homeowners who 
were being forced into foreclosure. Some homeowners engaged 
in strategic default, but others simply lacked the resources to 
make their monthly payments, either because they had become 
unemployed or because their mortgages had reset from a teaser 
rate to a higher rate or because they had never from the start had 
enough income to make payments.
Former Treasury official Phillip Swagel observed that there was  
no spike in mortgage defaults around the reset dates of specific 
types of adjustable rate mortgages (the so-­called 2-­28 and 3-­27 
mortgages.)59 He thus concluded that the problem was the initial 
lack of income and credit worthiness of the borrowers.60 Some 
of these borrowers had been led into the loans by shady origina-
tors. Regardless, just as Wall Street and the automobile industry 
expected a bailout, households in foreclosure were looking for 
government assistance. Many borrowers were in the low-­income 
minority electorate that supported the Democrats.
A limited response to foreclosures finally took place in the 
summer of 2008. On July 30, President Bush, withdrawing an 
earlier veto threat, signed the Housing and Economic Recovery 
Act. The bill is better known by its House title, the American 
Housing Rescue and Foreclosure Prevention Act (AHRFPA), a 
measure designed to reduce foreclosures by securing reductions 
both in the principal amount of a home mortgage and in penal-
ties. Because lender participation in the program was voluntary, 
the bill packed little punch. The bill also opened a blank check 

218  •  Chapter 7
extending credit to Fannie, Freddie, and other federal housing 
institutions and it contained legislation designed to improve 
mortgage disclosure and to license mortgage originators.
At the time AHRFPA passed, a foreclosure relief program 
with sharp government mandates and haircuts imposed on lend-
ers was unthinkable, particularly because President Bush was 
pivotal. Also unthinkable was that the credit subsidies to the 
privatized GSEs would be small potatoes in a government take-
over of Fannie and Freddie, an event less than two months away.
Because AHRFPA was both pre-­Lehman and prior to the 2008 
elections, any options were limited to tweaks that were consistent 
with the free market conservative perspective. Before the finan-
cial crisis, the mortgage market was almost entirely privatized. 
The activity of the government was reduced, as we explained in 
chapter 5, to subsidizing the private sector off budget. Through 
the regulatory implementation of the Community Redevelopment 
Act, the government also pushed private firms into targeting more 
loans to the poor and minorities. All of these government policies 
were indirect, and nearly all mortgage contracts were written by 
for-­profit financial intermediaries. Depression Era–­style morato-
riums or government takeovers of the servicing of these privately 
held mortgages were off the table. The proposed legislation con-
tinued to rely on the private market. Nonetheless, Bush opposed 
the bill when it was introduced in April.
The agenda for foreclosure relief was set by the Democrats, 
who held majorities in both the House and the Senate. In April 
2007, the Senate transformed what originally had been an energy 
bill, HR 3221, into a foreclosure prevention act. Throughout the 
legislative process, the Senate always voted for passage by large 
margins. The bill passed the Senate by an 84–­12 vote on April 
10. After the amended bill had been returned by the House, the 
Senate, between June 25 and July 11, acted and returned the bill 
to the House with votes that were no closer than 79–­16. The 
Senate then passed the final bill by a 72–­13 margin and sent it 
to the president for signature on July 26. In April 2007 Senator 
Richard Durbin (D-­IL) had proposed an amendment directed at 

The Pop of 2008  •  219
allowing bankruptcy judges to prevent foreclosure. This mea-
sure, which was much more than a tweak on free market con-
servatism, might have kept many homes from foreclosure, but 
it was opposed by all Republicans. The amendment was tabled 
in a 58–­36 vote in which 11 Democratic moderates voted with 
the Republicans (see figure 7.6). The versions of the bill accepted 
by the Senate, however, always drew large, bipartisan support 
with limited Republican opposition. Only a minority of Senate 
Republicans opposed the bill.
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 6
PRE = 0.83
Yea
Nay
Senate: Bankruptcy Judges Stop Foreclosures
3 April 2008, Yea = 58   Nay = 36
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 7.6. The Senate vote on the Durbin Amendment to allow bankruptcy 
judges to block foreclosures. The vote is liberal-­conservative, with the errors 
symmetric about the cutting line. The vote is a further indication that Con-
gress divided ideologically on financial reform before the failure of Lehman 
Brothers. The vote also indicates that Democrats would not be a solid majority 
in favor of progressive financial reforms.

220  •  Chapter 7
The House was far more divided. On May 8, 2007, the House 
modified the Senate bill to include $300 billion in loan guaran-
tees for lenders willing to renegotiate the principal amount of 
mortgages. The House modification was met by a veto threat 
from the president. The modification was approved on a 266–­
154 vote, with all Democrats voting for the guarantees and 
the Republicans opposing, 154–­39. Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and 
Francesco Trebbi have shown that Republican opposition was 
stronger among conservatives,61 where conservatism is mea-
sured by our DW-­NOMINATE scores. As indicated above, DW-­
NOMINATE makes some errors on the AHRFPA vote. Mian, 
Sufi, and Trebbi explain that Republicans were more likely to 
support AHRFPA if they were from districts with high foreclo-
sure rates, especially if foreclosure rates were high in Republican 
parts of the district. Roll call voting by the Democrats showed 
no sensitivity to foreclosure rates because ideology alone pro-
moted support for mortgage modifications. Republicans were 
cross-­pressured; they had constituents, even Republican con-
stituents, who would benefit from mortgage resets, but a federal 
program ran against the grain of free market conservatism.
The voting patterns present on the May 2007 vote were 
repeated on the final vote in the House on July 23. The vote 
was 272–­152, with only 3 Democrats voting against it and only 
45 Republicans in favor. When the roll was called, fidelity to 
free market conservatism dominated. Fewer than one-­fourth of 
House Republicans voted for AHRFPA. (The vote is illustrated 
in figure 2.6.) Even though it took place less than two months 
before the fall of Lehman Brothers, the vote remains highly ide-
ological but contains somewhat more error than earlier votes. 
The increased voting prediction errors relate, as shown by Mian, 
Sufi, and Trebbi, to increased foreclosure rates in congressional 
districts. For a few, constituent interests trumped ideology.
In contrast to Obama and the Democrats with the stimulus 
and Dodd-­Frank, George W. Bush was not part of the agenda-­
setting process on foreclosure legislation. The demand to change 
the status quo came from the Democrats. A Senate filibuster was 

The Pop of 2008  •  221
not in the cards, perhaps because many constituents in most  
senators’ states had problems with foreclosure. Because the 
Democrats were not even close to a veto override majority, the 
president’s support, not that of the sixtieth senator, was pivotal. 
Bush appears to have come on board for two reasons. First, 
between April and July 2008 the housing crisis worsened con-
siderably. Presidents, as well as Republican House members, can 
be sensitive to foreclosure rates. In September 2008, Fed chair 
Ben Bernanke was reported to have said, “There are no atheists 
in foxholes and no ideologues in financial crises.”62 The Repub-
lican supporters of AHRFPA are indicative of Bernanke’s claim. 
Second, as indicated earlier in this chapter, AHRFPA had no 
bite. The president’s support was largely a symbolic acknowledg-
ment of the foreclosure crisis. Even with the loan guarantees in 
place, Senate Republicans did not make a fuss and Bush signed 
the bill. When real money was on the line, as was the case with 
TARP, Republican ideologues in Congress would not be helpful 
to Bernanke.
After Bush signed, in a rare sign of media bipartisanship, both 
the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal touted it as the 
most significant housing legislation since the New Deal. That 
the elite media failed to see that the legislation would do little 
about foreclosures is indicative of how uninformed most of the 
nation was about the impending collapse of Wall Street. By 2011, 
Washington was still unable to solve the foreclosures problem, 
in part because of the complexity of securitization and servicing 
that had doomed the shadow banking system.63 People in homes 
facing foreclosure are stuck between a rock and a hard place. If 
banks were to take haircuts and reduce the principal amount of 
large numbers of mortgages quickly, they would have to take a 
huge accounting hit, which would reveal that they were badly 
wounded paper tigers. Foreclosing in dribs and drabs spreads 
out the accounting losses. If the government were to pay for a 
haircut it would have to raise the revenue or increase the deficit. 
In chapter 8 we show that bailing out homeowners had become 
politically unthinkable.

222  •  Chapter 7
Although the pop of financial markets is often identified as 
the Panic of 2007,64 the political pop—­delayed, of course—­
occurred only in September 2008. The pop resulted in the rather 
chaotic voting on TARP, which we discuss below. To complete 
our story of the force of ideology in the 110th Congress, however, 
we first jump to the bailout of the automobile industry. This epi-
sode shows how quickly the standard liberal-­conservative con-
flict reasserted itself after TARP. When the lame-­duck House 
passed a bailout bill for the automobile industry on December 
10, 2008, the vote was more normally liberal-­conservative, with 
only fifty-­four prediction errors. The vote was largely along 
party lines. Salvatore Nunnari has shown that the location and 
ownership of automobile manufacturing plants was important 
to this vote.65 Nonetheless, ideology is the primary determinant 
of roll call voting behavior. The Senate cloture vote failed by a 
52–­35 margin, with only eleven prediction errors. With a lame-­
duck president, Congress could not develop a coalition capable 
of supporting the auto industry. Gridlock forced a Republican 
president to turn against the foxhole ideologues in his own party 
and prop up Detroit on a short-­run basis with TARP funds. The 
reappearance of a liberal-­conservative split in the 110th Con-
gress foreshadowed the legislative history of the 111th Congress.
Between AHRFPA in July 2008 and the auto bailout votes in 
December, the standard liberal-­conservative division fell apart 
over TARP. After Lehman failed on September 15 and AIG was 
bailed out a day later, Congress had to be dragged, kicking and 
screaming, with both liberal and conservative ideologues object-
ing, into approving the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act 
(EESA), which included the Troubled Asset Relief Program fund.
President Bush was largely absent. Liberals were reluctant to 
bail out the too-­big-­to-­fail firms on Wall Street. Conservatives, 
even in a financial crisis, were reluctant to support government 
intervention in the economy. (The word nationalization became 
taboo in describing both the takeovers of Fannie and Fred-
die and the considerable government investment in AIG, Citi-
group, General Motors, and other firms.) Populist outrage made 

The Pop of 2008  •  223
legislators reluctant to support EESA, with the $700 billion 
TARP fund. Moreover, congressional elections were only weeks 
away. Indeed, the initial September 29 vote on TARP failed. On 
that day, the Dow lost nearly 800 points.
The votes on TARP were only weakly related to the liberal-­
conservative scale. The House votes, shown in figure 7.7, indicate 
that a liberal-­conservative cutting line model fails to discriminate 
between supporters and opponents. There are 197 prediction 
errors on the failed September 29 vote and 151 on the October 
3 passage vote, in contrast to only 9 on the stimulus plan, 21 on 
Dodd-­Frank, and 47 on AHRFPA. In the Senate, there were 23 
errors on passage on October 1, as against 1 on the stimulus, 4 
on Dodd-­Frank, and 6 on the Durbin amendment to AHRFPA.
The breakdown of the typical liberal-­conservative alignment 
is nicely illustrated in the graph shown as figure 7.8. The graph 
plots the probability of House members voting for the bailout 
(TARP) as a function of the DW-­NOMINATE score. There are 
three curves: one for safe seats, another for vulnerable seats, 
and another for seats where the representative had previously 
announced retirement. Those with vulnerable seats tended to 
cave in to populism and were the most likely to oppose the bill. 
Those with safe seats and especially those retiring were more 
likely to support the bill.
Why weren’t the Republicans running for reelection especially 
likely to vote for TARP? Would they have not wanted the party 
to escape the blame for an economic meltdown on the scale of 
the Great Depression? The answer is that when TARP was voted 
on, elections were only thirty-­two days away. It might have been 
difficult to see either the benefits of approving or the costs of 
disapproving TARP within that time span. After all, even after 
TARP was enacted, the stock market continued to decline and 
unemployment rise for months. So it was easy, given the time 
frame, to cater to populist rage.
Very conservative Republicans voted consistently with their 
free market conservative ideology. They would have been more 
comfortable had Andrew Mellon’s ghost been Treasury secretary 

224  •  Chapter 7
rather than Henry Paulson. Very liberal Democrats also were 
more likely to be against than for. Their egalitarian, redistrib-
utive ideology made them loath to bail out Wall Street firms, 
whose executives were royally compensated. There turned out 
to be more than a few ideologues in financial crises. The bill 
was supported mainly by moderates in safe seats, and even these 
members were not solid in their support. More detailed analy-
ses that we and Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi have conducted indicate 
a small influence for other factors, such as receiving campaign 
contributions from the financial services industry.66
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 151
PRE = 0.12
Yea
Nay
House: Passage of TARP Succeeds
3 October 2008, Yea = 263   Nay = 171
Percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 7.7. The two House votes on TARP. Neither vote is a good fit to a 
liberal-­conservative model. There are almost as many prediction errors as 
votes on the minority side of each vote.

The Pop of 2008  •  225
The rejection and subsequent passage of TARP reflected, in 
summary, several forces. The most conservative Republican 
members played ideologues, even in a financial crisis. So did the 
most liberal Democrats. The Right was unwilling to go against 
its beliefs that government intervention in the economy was bad 
per se, particularly so if it confirmed moral hazard. The Left was 
unwilling to support an upward redistribution to financial firms 
and their executives. Past campaign contributions of the finan-
cial sector were associated with just a slight marginal willingness 
to favor the bailout.67 Thus, ideological extremism trumped the 
supposed “capture” of Washington by Wall Street. On the other 
hand, members were more likely to help Paulson and Bernanke 
1.1
.9
.7
.5
.3
.1
–.1
–.3
–.5
–.7
–.9
–1.1
Conservative
Liberal
Democrats Correct
Republicans Correct
Errors Either Party
Cutting Line
Errors = 197
PRE = 0.04
Yea
Nay
House: Passage of TARP Fails
19 September 2008, Yea = 205   Nay = 228
Percent
81
72
63
54
45
36
27
18
9
0
Figure 7.7. (cont.)

226  •  Chapter 7
avoid a meltdown if they were not facing a reelection challenge 
in November.
One might have been wary that the TARP vote indicated 
political instability, such as that which preceded the Civil War 
after the Compromise of 1850 unraveled. Alternatively, there 
may have been a permanent political realignment similar to the 
replacement of the Whig-­Democrat system with the Republican-­
Democrat system around the time of the Civil War.68 The Civil 
War events, as Nobel Prize Laureate Robert Fogel has stressed, 
were not ones of economics but ones in which, in the North, a 
moral aversion to slavery emerged.69 Financial panics are differ-
ent. Not even the Great Depression led to realignment in con-
gressional ideology. So it is not surprising that congressional 
Democrats and the Obama administration would be forced to 
form coalitions along the liberal-­conservative dimension.
Probability of Voting for TARP
1
.6
.8
.4
.2
0
–1
–.5
0
.5
1
DW-NOMINATE
Vulnerable Democrat
Safe Republican
Retiring Democrat
Vulnerable Republican
Retiring Republican
Safe Democrat
Figure 7.8. The first House vote on TARP. Incumbents running for reelection 
in vulnerable seats were very unlikely to vote for TARP. Incumbents in safe 
seats were somewhat more likely to vote for it. Retiring incumbents were by 
far the most likely supporters. Moderates showed greater support than either 
extreme liberals or extreme conservatives. Note that the curves for retiring 
and vulnerable incumbents do not extend to the extremist ends of the graph 
(–­1 and +1). This is because extremists are found only in safe seats.

The Pop of 2008  •  227
Conclusion
In this chapter we have argued that ideology largely reduces to 
one dimension. This ideology, with the exception of the tur-
moil in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, proved 
very stable. On particular issues, specific economic interests 
can run counter to ideology. The influence of interest groups on 
roll call voting, however, does not generate a systematic second 
dimension. Mortgage foreclosures were significant to votes on 
AHRFPA but not on TARP or on the auto industry bailout. Sim-
ilarly, financial services contributions affected only the TARP 
vote. Domestic auto manufacturer employment mattered only 
on the auto bailout. Currently, there is not an important, system-
atic second dimension in American politics beyond the liberal-­
conservative continuum. Highly polarized liberal-­conservative 
politics and the power of pivots in American institutions made 
up the framework that generated the response to the pop of 
2008. The configuration within which the president and Con-
gress operate is determined by the influence of campaign contri-
butions, lobbying, and elections.
In the short run, the behavior of financial markets can break 
the configuration. Intervention in the rotten market of subprime 
mortgages, bogus collateralizations, overleveraged banks, and 
incorrectly priced credit default swaps was long delayed because 
of ideological rigidity and interest-­group pressures. After Bear 
Stearns, bailouts were taboo. Once Lehman went over the cliff, 
however, AIG was bailed out the very next day. TARP was 
quickly brought to Congress. Initially, ideology and electoral 
pressures led the House of Representatives to reject the proposal. 
The stock market then plunged off another cliff. Days later, 
Congress acquiesced. Once the worst was avoided, Washington 
returned to business as usual. Pivots ruled within established 
liberal-­conservative ideology.

C h a p t e r  8
“Pop”ulism
This is America! How many of you people want to pay  
for your neighbor’s mortgage that has an extra bath-
room and can’t pay their bills?
—­Rick Santelli, on CNBC
A striking puzzle of the 2008 financial crisis and the ensuing 
Great Recession is the very restrained and short-­lived public out-
rage against the financial sector. The absence of public outrage 
explains why we have focused on the Three I’s—­ideology, insti-
tutions, and interests—­up to this point. The fact that the public 
did not press for reforms contributed, in our view, to the failure 
of American democracy in the financial crisis. True, outrage was 
expressed over the bailouts in 2008. Outrage over his member-
ship in “the friends of Angelo,” a group that benefited from very 
favorable mortages from Countrywide Financial under then 
CEO Angelo Mozilo, played a part in Chris Dodd’s announcing 
his retirement.1 (It was a bit of chutzpah for Dodd to coauthor 
the “reform” bill.) The outrage was manifest in the difficulty in 
passing the TARP legislation, as we discussed in chapter 7.
A small aftershock arose with the Senate vote on Ben Ber-
nanke’s reappointment as Federal Reserve chair on January 
28, 2010. Bernanke drew thirty votes not to confirm, a record 
negative vote for a Fed chair confirmation. Like that of the 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) this vote was not a  
liberal-­conservative split. The Left was enraged with Bernanke 
for his inaction before the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the 

“Pop”ulism  •  229
Right by his interventionist actions through Fed policies after 
Lehman fell. Figure 8.1 shows our estimates of a vote to confirm 
as a function of ideology score.2 Moderates were virtually cer-
tain to vote for Bernanke. Extremists, especially very conserva-
tive Republicans, were likely to oppose. But the rage on Capitol 
Hill in January 2010 had little echo in the American public. By 
2009 and certainly by 2010 the outrage had fizzled, to return, 
via the Occupy Wall Street demonstrations, only in the late sum-
mer of 2011.
Where was the outrage in the first years following the cri-
sis? After all, the crisis was associated with dramatic losses to 
wealth and income. Millions lost their homes. Private retirement 
Probability of Supporting Bernanke Renomination
1
.6
.8
.4
.2
0
–1
0
1
DW-NOMINATE Score
Figure 8.1. Estimated probability of a vote to reappoint Ben Bernanke as Fed 
chair, January 28, 2010. Each token represents 1 of the 100 senators, with D 
for Democrats and R for Republicans. Moderates, with scores near zero, were 
very likely to support Bernanke. Extremists on both sides of the aisle opposed.

230  •  Chapter 8
accounts went south. Retirement income from defined-­benefit 
pensions became endangered as the fund portfolios took a hit. 
The low interest rates set by the Fed caused a drop in income for 
owners of certificates of deposit. Fixed-­income investments also 
fell as corporations were able to call in their bonds. The “own-
ership society” embraced by President George W. Bush was in 
shambles.
Who could blame the voters if they had demanded the dis-
mantling and reorganization of the entire financial sector? 
Who would have been surprised if a Huey Long had emerged, 
demanding to share the wealth? But the paroxysms of populist 
rage against the financial sector scarcely materialized. True, the 
crisis may well have influenced the 2008 elections, as Barack 
Obama pulled ahead of John McCain only in late September. 
On the other hand, Obama won only 53 percent of the popu-
lar vote when the crisis should have perhaps led to a landslide 
like those of Franklin D. Roosevelt, Lyndon Johnson, or Richard 
Nixon. Moreover, organized protests, such as those engendered 
by the prospect of Obamacare, were largely absent.
Why?
One exception may prove a general observation. In March 
2009, it came to light that employees of the financial products 
division of American International Group (AIG), the unit whose 
trading caused the firm’s collapse, were to receive $165 million 
in bonuses. The response to this disclosure was swift and fierce. 
Cable talk shows went crazy, congressional hearings were tele-
vised, and the House even voted to tax the bonuses at a rate of 
90 percent. Yet the rage did not focus generally on Wall Street’s 
bonus culture but specifically on the AIG bonuses and bonuses 
to other firms that had received bailouts, including TARP money. 
The policy response correspondingly focused on ways to undo 
the relevant AIG compensation contracts and to place limita-
tions on compensation at TARP firms. But general reform to 
executive compensation was not in the offing. One reason that 
the response was focused in this way is that the issue quickly 
became one of “paying bonuses with taxpayers’ money.” This 

“Pop”ulism  •  231
framing redirected the rage from what Wall Street had done to 
what the government had done.
In addition to pummeling the ownership society, the cri-
sis resulted in levels of unemployment not seen since the early 
1980s. Long-­term unemployment, particularly of younger work-
ers, rose. In October 2011 the unemployment rate for Americans 
ages 20 to 24 was 14.0 percent, compared to 7.8 percent for 
those 25 and over. People 55 and over had an unemployment 
rate of 7 percent.3 The unemployment situation makes Occupy 
Wall Street understandable, but the movement came late. The 
occupiers were largely people without a financial stake.
At its heart, the populist impulse, both in the reaction to 
bonuses and in Occupy Wall Street, arises from mistrust of 
elites and the institutions they govern. Populism comes in dif-
ferent flavors depending on where that mistrust is directed. As 
in many other countries, the United States is home to populism 
of a left-­wing variety rooted in a deep distrust of big business, 
finance, and concentrated economic power. But in contempo-
rary America, that kind of populism runs a distant third to two 
more common forms: cultural and antistatist populism. Cultural 
populism, honed by George Wallace and Richard Nixon and  
perfected by Sarah Palin and Michele Bachmann, is based on 
distrust of cultural elites in the media, entertainment, and aca-
demia. Since this form of populism became disengaged from the 
left-­wing flavor in the 1970s, its adherents have not been partic-
ularly hostile to businesses except to those with Hollywood zip 
codes. Cultural populism has much more in common with the 
right-­wing, antistatist variety that has had a profound impact on 
American politics over the past thirty years.
Americans don’t trust their government. On the eve of the 
financial crisis “trust in government” was almost as low as it had 
been at any point since survey researchers started asking about it 
in the late 1950s.4 In 2007, only about 20 percent of the Ameri-
can public trusted the government to do what is right “just about 
always” or “most of the time.” Conversely, before the Watergate 
scandal, strong majorities trusted government.

232  •  Chapter 8
When the bubble popped in 2008, even voters willing to 
blame Wall Street for the damage were unable to turn their anger 
into calls for tighter government regulation and scrutiny. They 
believed that government was inherently ineffectual, or worse, 
complicit in a coconspiracy with financiers. So the mantle of 
“the People” was picked up initially not by the Left but by the 
Tea Party, which called for a return to “constitutional first prin-
ciples” to prevent big government from selling out to big finance. 
Only much later, after the policy decisions outlined in chapter 
7 were settled and the Democrats were routed in the midterm 
elections, did the populist Left occupy Wall Street. But as we 
discuss below, the Occupy movement combined opposition to 
Wall Street and concentrated economic power with extreme mis-
trust in American political institutions and processes. This near-­
anarchic mix meant that the movement was slow to translate 
its concerns into concrete policy proposals or to mobilize in the 
arena of electoral politics.
The undercurrent of mistrust in government helps us to under-
stand the specifics of public opinion toward the crisis. Notably, 
it helps us to understand why public opinion played such a lim-
ited role in shaping the policy response to the pop. It was not 
because the public was divided, even along partisan lines, over 
the causes of the crisis or the need to reregulate the financial 
services industry. Instead, it appears that the public’s engage-
ment with the issue was dampened both by skepticism that the 
government would succeed in restraining the industry and by 
uncertainty about the best course of action.
These conclusions are based on several observations about 
public opinion drawn from polls taken during the crisis and dur-
ing the lead-­up to the passage of the Dodd-­Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act. A range of opinion sur-
veys reveals the following patterns.
• The public did blame the financial sector for the 
crisis. This was true across the political spectrum, 
with Republicans only slightly less likely than  

“Pop”ulism  •  233
Democrats to believe that Wall Street’s behavior 
was responsible.
• Citizens did believe that deregulation of the finan-
cial sector was an important cause. Again, at least 
during the early part of the crisis, this view was held 
by self-­identified Republicans and conservatives as 
well as by Democrats and liberals.
• The public was not opposed to government inter-
vention during the crisis. The public initially sup-
ported both assistance to financial firms and aid to 
homeowners facing foreclosure. This support, how-
ever, declined as concerns about the government 
rewarding bad behavior increased. The concerns 
about moral hazard subsequently polarized the 
public on partisan and ideological grounds.
• The public generally supported financial reform. 
But this support was undercut by the belief that the 
industry itself would be the primary beneficiary.
The Public Blamed the Financial Sector
A Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll asked voters in September 
2008 whether they blamed President George W. Bush, Congress, 
or Wall Street for the financial crisis. Thirty-­two percent blamed 
Wall Street; only 26 percent pointed to Bush and 11 percent to 
Congress.5 Only Democratic respondents were more likely to 
blame Bush than Wall Street. The difference between Republi-
cans and Democrats here undoubtedly does not reflect favorable 
views of Wall Street by Democrats but a projection by Demo-
crats of their intense dislike of Bush arising as a result of other 
issues such as the Iraq War and his inept response to Hurricane 
Katrina.
The public continued to blame the financial sector well after 
the worst had passed. As late as February 2010, more vot-
ers blamed Wall Street for the bad economy than blamed the 
Obama administration.6 In a separate poll that month, only 

234  •  Chapter 8
about a quarter of voters indicated that they were confident that 
bankers and executives at financial institutions would make the 
right decisions for the economy. Voters were more confident in 
labor union leaders, the Obama administration, Republicans in 
Congress, and Democrats in Congress. Only automobile execu-
tives inspired less confidence than did financiers.7
The Public Blamed Deregulation
Public opinion polls generally show that Americans blame lax 
regulations for the financial crisis. In a CNN poll taken at the 
height of the fallout after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, a 
slim majority said that financial institutions were not regulated 
enough (only 41 percent said this about business in general).8 In 
October 2008, 73 percent in a Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg 
poll agreed that the lack of regulation is partly responsible for 
the current financial and housing crisis.9 Even healthy plurali-
ties of Republicans and “very conservative” voters agreed. By 
December 2008, 87 percent felt that deregulation of the banking 
and financial institutions had contributed at least somewhat to 
the crisis.10
The Public Was Not Overwhelmingly against Intervention 
at the Height of the Crisis
It is widely believed that the Treasury’s TARP proposal imme-
diately unleashed populist rage. But a closer examination of the 
polling data suggests a much more ambivalent response. On the 
eve of the TARP proposal (September 19–­21, 2008) a CNN poll 
asked whether citizens supported the “millions in aid” that had 
already been provided to financial firms.11 Almost 55 percent 
of citizens responded affirmatively. In the same poll, a stronger 
majority agreed that the government should step in to address 
the problems in financial markets.
Notably, the public was not exceptionally polarized along 
party lines. Fifty-­eight percent of Democrats and 50 percent 
of Republicans supported aid for the financial sector. Despite 

“Pop”ulism  •  235
the effect of reelection incentives we found in legislative voting 
on TARP, only 14 percent of voters said that they would vote 
against their member of Congress if she had voted for TARP, 
17 percent said they were more likely to vote for her if she had 
supported TARP, and 60 percent said her vote would have no 
effect.12 This support was despite the fact that voters were not 
confident that TARP would work. Slightly more voters were “not 
too confident” or “not confident” than were very or somewhat 
confident that TARP would stabilize the market.13 Moreover, 
three quarters of respondents reported feeling very or somewhat 
worried about the “possibility that the people who caused these 
problems in the first place will benefit if the federal government 
takes action to address these problems.”14
So it appears that the initial resistance to TARP was driven 
not by majoritarian political considerations but by the opposi-
tion of vocal minorities on both the right and left (abetted by 
sectors of the media and the blogosphere). Once the TARP votes 
were cast, citizens took their cues from the opponents, and soon 
after the height of the crisis support for intervention began to 
drop. In a CNN poll taken on October 3–­5, 2008, approval 
of TARP registered at 46 percent. By October 17, support was 
down to 40 percent.15 This turn came about as voters began to 
view TARP as more a “bailout for Wall Street” than a “rescue 
of the economy.” Opposition to further assistance was running 
better than three to one. CNN asked voters how TARP would 
work.16 Their responses are summarized in table 8.1.
The patterns of support and opposition were fairly consis-
tent across the political spectrum. Republicans and Democrats 
nearly equally supported the program, a pattern that was largely 
repeated in several polls through the end of 2008. By December, 
voters preferred letting financial firms fail rather than be res-
cued by the government by a thirteen-­point margin.17 Support 
for financial bailouts did not bottom out until early in 2009, 
after President Obama successfully secured the second tranche 
of TARP funding. In polls taken in February 2009, support for 
aid to the financial sector had fallen to the mid-­30s. The drop 

236  •  Chapter 8
corresponds to increased disillusionment with TARP’s effective-
ness. In January 2009, 85 percent of respondents said TARP has 
“not done what it was supposed to do to help the economy.”18 It 
was only after President Obama’s inauguration that a partisan 
gap appeared, with Democrats 20 percentage points more likely 
than Republicans to support bailouts.19
Mistrust of the government’s ability to manage the bailouts 
was a major contributor to the decline in support and the parti-
san gap. In February 2009, only a bare majority of respondents 
said that they trusted the federal government more than the 
financial sector when it came to using TARP money. The par-
tisan gap on this question was large, with Democrats 20 points 
more likely than Republicans to trust the government more.20 
Poll respondents also strongly tended to subscribe to the belief 
that financial executives were primarily using government aid 
to pad their salaries rather than to stabilize their firms before 
returning to lending.
During the financial crisis, policy makers were obsessed with 
the problem of moral hazard in the mortgage market. The public 
was less so. Majorities routinely favored financial assistance to 
homeowners facing foreclosure, and support grew as the crisis 
deepened. In December 2007, a slim majority of those polled 
Table 8.1. 
Public opinon on TARP
TARP Will . . .
Agreement*
Treat American taxpayers fairly
40%
Make sure that money that is supposed to help the economy 
doesn’t go to the businesses and individuals who caused these 
problems in the first place
 
 
53%
Help ordinary Americans who have mortgage problems keep 
their homes
 
51%
Make sure that the government’s money is spent properly and 
not wasted
 
47%
Note: *“Likely” and “somewhat likely” responses.

“Pop”ulism  •  237
by CNN had supported “special treatment that would prevent 
[homeowners] from defaulting on their mortgages.”21 By the end 
of April 2008, this number had grown to 59 percent. Support 
for policies against foreclosures expanded even further when the 
full-­blown crisis erupted. In a survey fielded by the Los Angeles 
Times and Bloomberg in October of that year, a strong majority 
responded favorably to the “federal government providing assis-
tance to individual homeowners who are facing foreclosure.”22 
A CNN poll about the same time also found strong support in 
favor of assistance to homeowners facing foreclosures.23 Both of 
these polls revealed substantial partisan gaps. Poll respondents 
were far more sensitive to inducing moral hazard among banks. 
An overwhelming majority opposed special treatment for finan-
cial institutions that would prevent them from losing money on 
mortgages.24
The Public Supported Financial Regulation 
but Worried about Capture
Voters generally supported increasing regulation of the finan-
cial sector. In an April 2009 CBS/New York Times poll, more 
than 70 percent of respondents, including 60 percent of Repub-
licans, said that they supported increased regulation of banks 
and financial institutions.25 But support slipped and polarized 
over time. By March 2010, a slight majority supported financial 
reform, but the difference between Democrats and Republicans 
was more than 30 percent.26 Overall support rebounded slightly 
in May with the partisan gap holding firm, possibly in response 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission filing civil charges 
against Goldman Sachs over its Abacus collateralized debt obli-
gations.27 (As we discussed in the introduction to Part I, Gold-
man Sachs sold long positions to clients who were unaware that 
the company had permitted the hedge fund manager John Paul-
son to take a short position.) The level of support for reform and 
the partisan gap persisted through the passage of Dodd-­Frank.28

238  •  Chapter 8
Throughout the pop, support for reform was tempered by 
concerns about whether government could regulate the financial 
sector in ways that promoted the public interest. In the same 
CBS/New York Times poll, only 47 percent felt that new regula-
tions would help all Americans. Almost 40 percent said that new 
regulations would mainly “benefit the bankers.” Certainly this 
degree of mistrust was stoked by the unfolding AIG scandal. A 
whopping 86 percent of respondents had heard or read about 
the bonuses lavished on its executives.29 The public also felt that 
“big financial institutions such as major banks and insurance 
companies” had too much influence over decisions made by the 
Obama administration.30 Democrats were almost as likely as 
Republicans to agree.
These concerns about interest-­group influence and capture 
help explain the substantial decline in support for new regula-
tion. By February 2010, support for increased regulation had 
fallen to 56 percent.31 Not surprisingly, the biggest drop was 
among Republicans. By July 2009, only a bare majority thought 
the government “should exert more control” over the financial 
system.32 The partisan gap on this question was almost forty 
points. Income began to emerge as a predictor of support as well 
with low-­income voters preferring more control 54 percent to 33 
percent and high income voters opposing more control 52 per-
cent to 46 percent. Support for financial regulation continued to 
fluctuate in the mid-­50s with large partisan differences.
The polling evidence indicates support for treating the banks 
and their executives more aggressively than the Obama adminis-
tration did. About two-­thirds of those who proffered an opinion 
in April 2009 said that financial firms who received government 
loans should be forced to restructure their management as had 
the automakers who received loans.33 This view was shared in 
equal measures among Democrats and Republicans.
In the lead-­up to Dodd-­Frank, there was some support for 
more interventionist measures, although many voters professed 
ignorance of the specifics. For example, in February 2010, vot-
ers supported the administration’s bank tax proposal but most 

“Pop”ulism  •  239
said they had not heard enough about it to make a decision.34 
Lack of information by the voters relates to the growing hostility 
to government intervention. Although by November 2010 more 
than half of the TARP bailout money had been repaid, more 
than a quarter of those interviewed responded “don’t know” on 
a repayment question asked by the Pew Research Center, and 
more than half the respondents incorrectly stated that less than 
half or none of the money had been repaid.35 Democrats and 
Republicans were equally likely to be inaccurate. Public beliefs 
were clearly more correlated with the messages of antigovern-
ment ideologues than with those of the Obama administration.36
As further evidence of the unease about a greater government 
role, public opinion was downright hostile to more extreme 
governmental responses. Only 14 percent of those polled (and 
only 22 percent of self-­described liberals) supported government 
ownership and control of the banks.37 Not surprisingly, the 
government had called its takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac “conservatorship” rather than “nationalization.” No one in 
either the Bush or Obama White House wanted more wake-­up 
calls from Jim Bunning in France.
The Tea Party
The origins of the Tea Party movement can be traced to several 
events, including those organized by the Ron Paul presidential 
campaign in 2008 and antistimulus package protests in early 
2009.38 But the birth of the movement is generally thought to be 
CNBC reporter Rick Santelli’s rant from the floor of the Chi-
cago Mercantile Exchange on February 19, 2009. The Obama 
administration had proposed spending $75 billion to subsidize 
the refinancing of mortgages for homeowners who had negative 
equity but were current on their payments. Calling such under-
water homeowners “losers,” Santelli argued that their homes 
and cars should go into foreclosure so that they could be bought 
and used by those “who could carry the water instead of drink 
the water.” When nearby traders began shouting their applause, 

240  •  Chapter 8
Santelli continued “This is America! How many of you people 
want to pay for your neighbor’s mortgage that has an extra bath-
room and can’t pay their bills?” And then he gave the movement 
its meme: “We’re thinking of having a Chicago Tea Party in July. 
All you capitalists that want to show up to Lake Michigan, I’m 
gonna start organizing.”
The right-­wing populist movement that roiled American poli-
tics through the 2010 elections and the August 2011 debate on 
raising the debt ceiling began in earnest as a diatribe against 
a government program to refinance underwater mortgages. 
The setting for the occasion was ironic: the floor of a deriva-
tives exchange before an audience of commodity traders—­who 
Santelli suggested represented “a pretty good statistical cross-­
section of America, the silent majority.” Santelli’s screed made 
no admission of the culpability of the financial sector other than 
to joke that he would be throwing derivative securities into Lake 
Michigan.
Santelli’s rant hit all of the right-­wing populists’ hot buttons. 
First, the government was not to be trusted, and all politicians 
were compromised.39 Second, elite policy analysts and academ-
ics have crazy ideas.
As Santelli posited at the time, “If the multiplier that all of 
these Washington economists are selling us is over one . . . we 
never have to worry about the economy again. The government 
should spend a trillion dollars an hour because we’ll get 1.5 tril-
lion back.”40
Third and most important, Santelli stressed that the main 
motivation of government was to take from the “responsible,” the 
“deserving,” and the “working” and give it to the “irresponsible,” 
the “underserving,” and the “freeloaders.” As Theda Skocpol 
and Vanessa Williamson have demonstrated in their study of the 
Massachusetts Tea Party, this notion became the unifying theme 
among the party rank-­and-­file.
Although born at the Merc, the emergent Tea Party was 
relatively unengaged on financial reform issues. The hundreds 

“Pop”ulism  •  241
of “Tax Day” protests on April 15, 2009, centered primarily 
on opposition to taxes and to the stimulus package that Con-
gress had passed in February.41 By the time Congress went on 
recess in August, the Tea Party had begun to focus primarily on 
opposition to health care reform. During that recess, Tea Party 
activists packed several town hall meetings held by members of 
Congress to discuss health care reform. In several instances, the 
protesters shouted down the legislator. By the time consideration 
of Dodd-­Frank rolled around, the Tea Party was fully engaged 
in electoral politics as it attempted to defeat several incumbents 
in Republican primaries. Very little effort was exerted either to 
defeat Dodd-­Frank or to push for tougher measures to prevent 
the risks of “too big to fail” financial institutions. In a further 
touch of irony, Scott Brown, who owed his Senate election to 
the mobilization of the Tea Party and other conservative groups, 
cast the pivotal vote for cloture on Dodd-­Frank.
To establish a crude indicator of Tea Party priorities and activi-
ties, we conducted Google searches on November 29, 2011 using 
the terms “Tea Party” paired with other search terms including 
“financial reform,” “stimulus,” and “immigration.” Table 8.2 
shows the number of hits for each search.
Table 8.2.
Google hits on selected topics
Topic
Hits (millions) Joint with 
Tea Party
Immigration
96
Unions
78
Welfare
64
Stimulus
42
Bailout
33
Health care reform
20
Obamacare
18
Budget deficit
  8
Public employees
  4
Financial reform
  3
Dodd-Frank
  2

242  •  Chapter 8
The table clearly demonstrates that on the Internet, the Tea Party 
was far less often associated with words related to the financial 
crisis and reform than with words related to other parts of their 
agenda such as immigration, welfare, public sector unionization, 
and health care reform.
Given that the Tea Party was born of the anger and anxi-
ety of the financial crisis and recession, why did it play such 
a muted role in the politics of financial reform? The first fac-
tor is that certain political and ideological entrepreneurs who 
channeled the Tea Party movement were hostile to reform. Ini-
tially, after Santelli’s rant went viral, the Tea Party membership 
was a legitimate grassroots movement, and many of its activ-
ists had never been involved in politics before. But well-­heeled 
conservative and libertarian organizations and donors provided 
plenty of Astroturf to fill in the bare patches. Elite ideology 
and interests worked hard to point the Tea Party in the “right”  
direction.
One of the most important of these elite benefactors was 
FreedomWorks, a libertarian group that was spun off from Citi-
zens for a Sound Economy, founded by the libertarian billionaire 
brothers Charles and David Koch in the 1980s. FreedomWorks 
is led by former House majority leader Richard Armey, a conser-
vative Republican (with a DW-­NOMINATE score of 0.601 in 
the 107th Congress). Armey passionately crusaded against corpo-
rate welfare and crony capitalism while in Congress but worked 
as a pharmaceutical lobbyist until the conflict between being a 
Washington lobbyist and populist crusader became untenable.  
Also undermining his bona fides as a populist, Armey was cru-
cial for the passage of the Commodity Futures Modernization 
Act and its inclusion of the “Enron loophole.” So Armey and 
FreedomWorks were never likely to try to move the Tea Party 
in the direction of reforming Wall Street. Indeed, in April 2010, 
three months before Dodd-­Frank passed, Armey said that 
FreedomWorks had not “had a chance to study it.”42 The other 
groups who took up leadership and coordinating roles were 
equally hostile or uninterested in financial market reform.

“Pop”ulism  •  243
Of course, these groups might have mobilized the Tea Party 
against Dodd-­Frank with the same ferocity that they turned on 
Obamacare. But other than the dubious notion that Dodd-­Frank 
was a “bailout bill,” there were few populist memes that could 
rally the movement in the same way that “death panels,” “gov-
ernment takeover,” and “individual mandates” generated pas-
sion on health care reform.
Public opinion surveys of Tea Party supporters and sympa-
thizers underscore the lack of engagement and interest in finan-
cial reform on the part of the rank and file. In April 2010, CBS 
News and the New York Times conducted a poll with a large 
oversample of Tea Party supporters. Reflecting the ambivalence 
of the movement to financial reform, there were no direct ques-
tions about Dodd-­Frank or other proposals for reform. The 
only question related to finance was a question about whether 
TARP and other bailouts of financial reform were necessary 
for the economy’s health. An overwhelming majority—­74 per-
cent of Tea Party supporters—­felt that the economy would have 
improved on its own without bailouts of financial firms, whereas 
only 51 percent of all respondents answered this way.
The survey did ask several questions that provide clues to the 
relative inactivity of the movement on financial issues.
• Eighty-­nine percent thought Obama had expanded 
government too much (37 percent of all respon-
dents thought so).
• Nineteen percent of Tea Party supporters said gov-
ernment never does the right thing. Only 6 percent 
of the supporters said government would do the 
right thing always or most of the time. Among all 
respondents to the poll only 8 percent said govern-
ment never does the right thing, whereas 20 percent 
said that it always or mostly does the right thing.
• Tea Party supporters were no less confident in the 
Federal Reserve’s ability to promote financial stabil-
ity than were other respondents.

244  •  Chapter 8
• Tea Party supporters were no more likely to feel 
that Obama supported the rich but were twice as 
likely to believe he favored the poor. This response 
suggests the movement was considerably less con-
cerned about upward redistribution than it was 
about redistribution to the poor.
Although the survey results clearly reflect the overwhelm-
ing antigovernment sentiment of the Tea Party, it appears that 
two of the conservative arguments about financial reform failed 
to resonate. The first is the culpability of the Federal Reserve’s 
monetary policies and its bailouts of banks. The second is that 
Dodd-­Frank was the Democrats’ attempt to expand government 
for the benefit of rich Wall Street bankers. The echo here is that 
repeal of Obamacare was a far more strident theme in the 2012 
Republican nomination contest than was repeal of Dodd-­Frank. 
In summary, the Tea Party was mainly concerned about prevent-
ing an expansion of government to favor the poor.
But there is another, even more troubling, view. The Tea Party 
largely represented people who benefited little from government 
policy and who objected to those who did benefit. For example, 
in his essay on the Tea Party in the New Yorker, Ben McGrath 
interviewed a party supporter who had lost his Chrysler dealer-
ship and was not benefiting from the auto industry bailout.43 
The people who would benefit were those who had bought 
speculatively and were underwater or those who were ill-­advised 
(or were the victims of predatory lending) and did not have the 
income to make their monthly payments. Although they were 
not the poorest of the poor, these mortgagees were poorer than 
average Americans. In addition to opposing foreclosure relief, 
the Tea Party objected to the stimulus package, much of which 
was aimed at maintaining government employment at the state 
and local levels. Public sector employees have had, on the whole, 
decent jobs and benefits and are not the poorest of the poor. 
But they are, unlike the traders who applauded Santelli, dispro-
portionately African American.44 Those who would benefit from 

“Pop”ulism  •  245
Obamacare were at the tail end of the income distribution but 
they were also disproportionately African American and His-
panic citizens, and disproportionately immigrants. In contrast, 
the Tea Party is disproportionately made up of white citizens. So 
the Tea Party not only attracted people with principled objec-
tions to big government but also drew support from those moti-
vated by racial and ethnic animus. Given its primary focus on 
limiting redistributive social policy, the Tea Party was not an 
active player in the writing of the Dodd-­Frank Bill.
The Tea Party was, however, a large factor in the midterm 
elections, and its supporters were decisive in many Republican 
primary contests. The movement forced Arlen Specter to switch 
parties, defeated Senator Robert Bennett in Utah, and denied a 
Senate nomination to longtime Delaware House member Michael 
Castle. Pushing the party far to the right undoubtedly cost the 
Republicans some seats, but these losses were hardly a ripple in 
the “shellacking” given to President Obama and the Democrats. 
The Tea Party’s impact is apparent in that seventeen of the eighty-­
four House Republican freshmen were affiliated with the move-
ment. These seventeen plus forty-­three returning Republican 
incumbents formed the Tea Party Caucus. As table 8.3 shows, 
the Tea Party affiliates are overrepresented in the conservative 
wing of the party and have discernibly moved the party to the 
right. The Tea Party freshmen are considerably more conserva-
tive than the other first-­term Republicans, and the returning 
members who identify with the movement are much less likely 
to be in the moderate wing of the party. So even if the grassroots 
movement was not directly engaged on Dodd-­Frank, the elec-
tion of so many more Republican conservatives will undoubtedly 
shape implementation even if Republican attempts to repeal fail.
After the passage of Dodd-­Frank and the midterm elec-
tions of 2010, there were some efforts to mobilize the move-
ment in support of repeal. Tea Party caucus chair Representative 
Michele Bachmann (R-­MN) and member senator Jim DeMint  
(R-­SC) introduced repeal bills in Congress in 2011. (DeMint’s 
2010 campaign drew heavy support from the Club for Growth, 

246  •  Chapter 8
a fundamentalist free market conservative group whose former 
president was Senator Pat Toomey [R-­PA]. DeMint had endorsed 
the Tea Party candidate Christine O’Donnell against Michael 
Castle in Delaware.)
A new group called Dodd-­Frank Exposed was created by 
Robert Bork Jr. (the son of the failed Supreme Court nomi-
nee) and Gary Marx, a vice president at Ralph Reed’s lobbying 
firm. (Reed is best known as former executive director of the 
Christian Coalition.) In February 2011, representatives of this 
organization attended the Tea Party Patriots American Policy 
Summit and conducted a poll of the attendees about Dodd-­
Frank. According to the survey, 42 percent indicated that they 
had heard little about Dodd-­Frank or were not at all familiar 
with it. Of those who were familiar with it, nine out of ten sup-
ported repeal. Dodd-­Frank Exposed did not disclose their sur-
vey instrument, but their press release leads one to believe that 
the survey was conducted after the group provided attendees 
with one-­sided information against Dodd-­Frank.
Occupy Wall Street
Following the collapse of Lehman, the populist left led a number 
of anti–­Wall Street protests. This burst of street activism was 
sporadic and short-­lived. By Inauguration Day, it had almost 
petered out. Throughout the course of the development and 
Table 8.3. 
Ideology of House Republicans 
Tea Party 
First Term
Other 
First Term
Tea Party 
Returning
Other 
­Returning
Moderate 
DW-NOMINATE less than .33
  1
  (6%)
13
(19%)
  0
  (0%)
29
(26%)
Conservative 
DW-NOMINATE between .33 and .67
12
(70%)
44
(64%)
36
(84%)
61
(55%)
Extreme 
DW-NOMINATE greater than .67
  4
(23%)
12
(17%)
  7
(16%)
21
(19%)

“Pop”ulism  •  247
passage of financial reform legislation, left-­wing populists and 
unions were relatively quiet. Most of the progressive criticism 
of the administration’s approach to financial reform came from 
elites such as the New York Times, Vanity Fair, George Soros, 
Paul Krugman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Simon Johnson.
It was over a year after the passage of Dodd-­Frank before 
this quiescence would end. In the summer of 2011, Kalle Lasn, 
the publisher of the anticonsumerist and proenvironmentalist 
magazine Adbusters, devised a marketing campaign for an anti–­
Wall Street protest movement that would make the ad execu-
tives on TV’s Mad Men happy. A simple one-­page advertisement 
announced a protest in lower Manhattan with a simple premise: 
Occupy Wall Street and bring a tent.45
Unlike the Tea Party, which mobilized in opposition to spe-
cific policy proposals (stimulus spending and Obamacare) and 
on symbolic dates (Tax Day, the Fourth of July), the Occupy 
Wall Street protests were not targeted at any policy agenda, and 
the kickoff date of September 17 was selected to coincide with 
the birthday of Lasn’s mother.
The Occupy Wall Street (OWS) movement was unable to 
coalesce around an agenda. The movement, with its anarchist 
roots, was unwilling to adopt any form of hierarchical organiza-
tion or leadership structure. No one, not even Lasn, was to speak 
on behalf of the movement. Instead, each Occupy encampment 
was governed by a general assembly composed of all partici-
pants. The assemblies made decisions by consensus after open-­
ended discussion. Any participant could block a decision subject 
to an override of nine-­tenths of those present. As a result many 
participants, often the most unreasonable ones, filibustered like 
U.S. senators. Clearly, this requirement precluded the setting of 
an agenda and the formulation of a common political strategy.46 
Although many ideas floated in OWS circles, ranging from a 
financial transactions tax to campaign finance reform to student 
debt relief, no set of official demands emerged.47
Whereas Tea Party activists were somewhat amenable to receiv-
ing support and direction from existing partisan and ideological 

248  •  Chapter 8
groups, the Occupy movement was much more resistant. Some 
financial and logistical support came from labor unions but there 
was resistance on both sides to greater cooperation. In Novem-
ber, Occupy Oakland called for a general strike following the 
shutdown of its encampment that resulted in critical injuries to 
a protesting Iraq War veteran. But not a single Oakland union 
local joined in the strike. Relations with the Democratic Party 
were also at arm’s length. Many party leaders endorsed the goals 
of OWS, but any collaboration was precluded by the strong dis-
appointment of many of the activists in the record of the Obama 
administration as well as by the opposition of the anarchist fringe 
to any sort of engagement with electoral or party politics.48
Of course, no movement is entirely leaderless, and a leader-
ship cadre did form. But the group maintained few ties to the 
institutional Left such as the Democratic Party or labor unions.49 
By the end of November 2011, mayors concerned about public 
sanitation and safety had ordered the closure of the encamp-
ments. Because the encampments formed the primary organiza-
tional structure, the future political success of the movement is 
in question. The first anniversary of OWS in New York fizzled.
To assess the future impact of OWS on American politics, it 
is important to understand the views and motivations of those 
involved in the movement. But there have been few efforts at 
systematic opinion surveys of the activists. In one study, pollster 
Douglas Schoen conducted 198 face-­to-­face interviews in Zuc-
cotti Park, the site of the OWS encampment in Manhattan, on 
October 10 and 11, 2011.50 The Tea Party was overwhelmingly 
middle-­aged and older, whereas Schoen’s respondents were quite 
young, with a near majority under age thirty. Schoen’s sample 
also reveals a very high degree of disengagement with party poli-
tics. Although 32 percent identified as Democrats, more (33 per-
cent) identified with no political party, and the remaining third 
were scattered among anarchists, libertarians, and members of 
New York’s leftist Working Families Party. Only 56 percent had 
voted in the 2008 presidential election, a rate slightly lower than 
that of the general population.51 And 100 percent agreed that 
they were turned off by the current political system.

“Pop”ulism  •  249
Schoen’s poll results do contain some suggestion that many 
activists would like to see the movement more engaged in parti-
san politics. The respondents were asked an open-­ended question 
about what they would like to see the movement achieve. A strong 
plurality of 35 percent said that they would like the movement to 
have the same degree of influence on the Democratic Party that 
the Tea Party has on the Republicans. The second highest total 
(11 percent) said that they would like the movement to break the 
“two-­party duopoly,” presumably by building a third party.
Just as many Tea Party supporters took positions on issues 
that belied their reputation as an antigovernment movement, 
the same may be true about OWS activists. Thirty percent of 
Schoen’s respondents suggested that there should be the same 
or a lower level of regulation of the financial sector. Moreover, 
35 percent disagree that the government has a responsibility 
to provide health care. The respondents split almost evenly on 
the financial sector bailouts. Twenty-­two percent said the rich 
already paid their fair share of taxes, and most were against 
raising taxes for everyone.52 So it appears that ideological het-
erogeneity may also be an impediment to further mobilization. 
OWS is characterized by a lack of structured organization and a 
common ideology, factors that kept elite interests away.
Conclusion
It would hardly be an overstatement to say that Occupy Wall 
Street has increased the salience of inequality and the power 
of the financial sector as political issues. The movement was 
remarkably effective in highlighting the divergence between the 
1 percent and the 99 percent and has brought attention to the 
“heads Wall Street wins, tails citizens lose” nature of our finan-
cial regulatory regime.
But OWS was better at marketing than at movement. Its slogans 
are effective, but political change requires mobilization within 
the political system or overturning it. Americans do not want the 
latter. The main impediment to the former is that the intellectual 
origins of the movement are not only deeply suspicious of our 

250  •  Chapter 8
existing institutions but also hostile to any hierarchical form of 
organization that might be necessary to make the movement a 
political force.53 This is quite a contrast to the Tea Party move-
ment. The Tea Party shares much of OWS’s hostility toward 
our political elites and institutions as well as some of the anger 
toward Wall Street. But it does not share the animus toward 
hierarchical organizations. The Tea Party built organizations 
and a political infrastructure and were able to influence Repub-
lican primary elections and a few general elections.
The contrast between OWS and the Tea Party illustrates how 
popular outrage can be channeled and built upon by elites. It 
suggests a different scenario for the Obama administration and 
the Democrats. After taking office, Obama failed to keep ham-
mering on the regulatory failures of the George W. Bush–­Alan 
Greenspan–­Ben Bernanke team from 2001 to 2008. He dis-
tanced himself from strong advocates of reform. These included, 
at least initially, both Paul Volcker and Elizabeth Warren, and—­
permanently, it appears—­the successful but reformist financier 
George Soros.54 The White House failed to build support for 
financial reform when it was hot, and instead chose to move on 
health care.
Congress had its own problems. The two chairs of the finance 
committees were compromised by questionable activities during 
the bubble. This was especially true of Chris Dodd in the Sen-
ate, who was tarnished by the disclosure that he had benefited 
from a “friends of Angelo [Mozillo]” loan, matters related to 
his acquisition of a country home in Ireland, and ties to AIG. 
Both Dodd and House chair Barney Frank were avid supporters 
of Fannie Mae during the subprime loan period; Frank’s part-
ner worked at Fannie Mae.55 So what went on at opposite ends 
of Pennsylvania Avenue was not a confidence builder for pub-
lic support for regulatory reform. Public support for regulatory 
reform was never mobilized.

C h a p t e r  9
How to Waste a Crisis
You never want a serious crisis to go to waste. What I 
mean by that is that it is an opportunity to do things 
you think you could not do before.
—­Rahm Emanuel, Comments to Wall 
Street Journal’s “CEO Council” ­Conference,  
November 19, 2008
Rahm Emanuel was not alone in believing that the financial 
crisis of 2008 and the Great Recession would usher in an era of 
fundamental reform. Liberals were certain that the crisis had 
proven them right about the inherent dangers of unregulated 
financial capitalism and that the voters would finally see things 
their way. A charismatic new leader and progressive legislative 
majorities would lead the country toward a newer and fairer 
deal. Not only would the financial system be restructured but 
the tax system would be made more progressive, there would be 
health care for all, there would be immigration reform, and the 
planet would be saved from climate change.
Well, that ain’t the way American politics works.
Just as financial markets are not self-­regulated by superra­
tional traders who optimally revise their expectations on the 
basis of new information, politics is not driven by purely ratio- 
nal actors updating beliefs about the best policies. Ideology mat- 
ters. The crisis did not prove the liberals correct to anyone but  
liberals. The conservatives believed that their warnings about 
government intervention in the housing sector were vindicated.  

252  •  Chapter 9
Market-­oriented liberals, such as those who led the administra-
tion’s reform efforts, believed that a little more regulation was 
needed before the crisis, and that’s exactly what they believed 
afterward.
Of course, preferences may not have shifted because the dam-
age from the crisis, in retrospect, was fairly contained. Within 
a year after Lehman Brothers had failed, the financial system 
appeared to have been rescued by the Troubled Asset Relief Pro-
gram (TARP) and Federal Reserve policies, the National Bureau 
of Economic Research had declared the recession over, and 
unemployment had been contained at levels far below those of 
the Great Depression.
Given the stickiness of ideology, any opportunities afforded 
by the crisis were those generated in the elections of 2008 that 
replaced the obstacle of a Republican president and produced 
an exceptionally liberal Congress.1 The median member of the 
House was the most liberal median in the history of Congress. 
But in our polarized era, the supermajoritarianism of the U.S. 
Senate radically narrowed those opportunities. Nevertheless, 
presidents are not completely powerless. Even in such a challeng-
ing environment, the president still possessed many advantages 
that could be used to shape the congressional agenda, to lead 
his own party, and to mold public opinion.2 Successfully taking 
advantage of the crisis to reform the financial sector, therefore, 
would require focus, leadership, and mobilizing the public.
Unfortunately, the administration of Barack Obama provided 
none of these ingredients. First, it clearly prioritized the Dem-
ocratic shibboleth of health care reform over financial market 
reform. We need not take a position on the merits of Obam-
acare to see that its passage was not as time-­sensitive as financial 
reform. In addition, given the lack of urgency that might have 
been applied to financial reform, the nature of pivotal politics 
guaranteed that any health care bill would be at best a com-
plicated and flawed compromise and that the process would 
use up valuable time on the agenda. The president signed the 
health care bill fourteen months after his inauguration. The 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  253
new administration did not have its Rooseveltian one hundred 
days. By the time the administration began to focus on finan-
cial reform, the banks had returned to profitability, had paid off 
their TARP loans, and were once again politically potent. Ironi-
cally, the bank bailouts engineered by Ben Bernanke and Henry 
Paulson worked too well, curing the financial sector so quickly 
that it bounced back strong enough to fight real reform.
The administration was also not predisposed to leading reform 
efforts. Its primary economic policy makers were the architects 
of financial deregulation a decade earlier. Their views were likely 
tempered by the substantial sums they had made on Wall Street 
in the years between the administration of Bill Clinton and that 
of Obama, as was true of Larry Summers and Rahm Emanuel, 
or by future opportunities, as illustrated by Peter Orszag’s move 
from the White House to Citigroup. Not surprisingly, few in the 
inner circle seemed willing to concede that their previous views 
were mistaken.
As the Dow Jones Industrial Average continued to plummet 
in the first months of his administration, Obama chose to reas-
sure Wall Street rather than pursue an aggressive reform agenda. 
Given the dominance of the ancien régime inside 1600 Pennsyl-
vania Avenue, the early administration proposals avoided major 
restructuring of financial services and relied primarily on mac-
roprudential supervision of the industry as it existed. Only later, 
when pressed from the left, did the administration endorse the 
Volcker Rule against proprietary trading by commercial banks.
Little was done to mobilize the public in favor of reform. As 
we showed in chapter 8, the public was generally sympathetic 
to reform, especially in 2009. Even the conservative opposition 
represented by the Tea Party never mobilized specifically for or 
against financial regulation. If reform had been a priority, the 
field was clear for President Obama to rally the public for larger 
reforms. Early in his administration, at the Pittsburgh G20 
summit, Obama failed to address widespread moral, civil, and 
criminal corruption on Wall Street but spoke out only against a 
“reckless few.” As late as October 2011, President Obama still 

254  •  Chapter 9
maintained that “on the issue of prosecutions on Wall Street, 
one of the biggest problems about the collapse of Lehman’s and 
the subsequent financial crisis and the whole subprime lending 
fiasco is that a lot of that stuff wasn’t necessarily illegal, it was 
just immoral or inappropriate or reckless.”3 So other than a few 
toe-­dipping explorations of criticism against the financial sector 
(for which his surrogates immediately apologized), Obama never 
tried to mobilize public opinion in favor of reform. Much as his 
predecessor did, he continued to maintain that few if any laws 
were broken. In December 2011 he told 60 Minutes, “Some of 
the most damaging behavior on Wall Street—­in some cases some 
of the least ethical behavior on Wall Street—­wasn’t illegal.”4
Claims that few laws were broken just do not stand up to 
the numerous civil settlements reached since the crisis. Goldman 
Sachs paid $550 million to settle charges that it misled investors.5 
Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Ally Financial, Citigroup, and 
JPMorgan Chase entered into a $25 billion agreement to settle 
mortgage loan servicing and foreclosure abuses.6 Bank of Amer-
ica agreed to pay $1 billion to settle mortgage fraud charges and 
$335 million to settle minority discrimination charges.7 Angelo 
Mozilo reached a $67.5 civil settlement regarding charges of 
securities fraud and insider trading while at the helm of Coun-
trywide Financial.8 The behavior was illegal, just not criminal or 
at least too difficult or costly to prosecute as criminal.
As of this writing at the end of 2012, there have been no 
criminal prosecutions of the leading figures in the crisis.9 A true 
reform would make criminal prosecutions easier and would turn 
immoral or unethical behavior into crimes.
Although the Dodd-­Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act does contain some important new provisions 
for regulating the financial services industries, many holes and 
uncertainties remain.
Too Big to Fail. Ultimately Dodd-­Frank does not eliminate 
the problem of “too big to fail.” In fact, it does almost noth-
ing about “big.” Few of its provisions are certain to shrink the 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  255
largest financial firms. The principal irony of the crisis is that 
the largest financial firms are even larger now than they were 
before the crisis. Although there are provisions in Dodd-­Frank 
to slow down mergers, the bill allows major banks to buy strug-
gling banks. Large banks can still grow just as Wachovia, Bank 
of America, and other banks were allowed to grow before the 
pop (see chapter 5).
The crisis has received too much of the blame for financial con-
centration. Concentration took place after it was green-­lighted 
by the Riegle-­Neal Bill in 1994, as illustrated by our tracing of 
the New Jersey National Bank account in chapter 5. In Septem-
ber 2003, the four largest commercial banks held 33 percent of 
all commercial bank assets. By March 2008, on the eve of the 
financial meltdown, the figure had already risen to 45 percent. 
It grew further to 48 percent in March of 2012.10 Concentra-
tion may have been valuable in the crisis. It allowed Secretary 
Paulson to assemble the largest banks in a Washington meeting 
and force a coordinated acceptance of TARP funds.11 But any 
such ex post advantage in a crisis must be viewed against the 
disadvantage of the egregious ex ante behavior of the big banks.
The big banks were too big to fail well before the crisis. They 
were, however, for all intents and purposes allowed to gamble 
using the public purse. The crisis resulted in nonbank institu-
tions, including Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley, being 
given many of the advantages enjoyed by commercial banks, 
so the concentration percentages presented above understate 
the problem. Most perniciously, Dodd-­Frank identifies a set of 
“systemically important” financial institutions that the govern-
ment would protect in the event of a financial crisis. This implicit 
government protection will lower these firms’ borrowing costs 
and better allow them to leverage up and grow. In effect, Dodd-­
Frank turned all of the major financial firms into government-­
sponsored enterprises (GSEs).
Having banking in the private sector has all the usual pluses 
that go with market incentives. But because these banks are 
essentially GSEs, they have a responsibility to stakeholders rather 

256  •  Chapter 9
than to their executives, shareholders, and bondholders. This 
responsibility includes transparency—­no Abacus deals by Gold-
man Sachs for John Paulson, no predatory lending, no “robo-­
signing,” no accounting gimmicks about leverage, no bogus 
ratings, no money laundering, and so forth. At best, Dodd-­Frank 
dealt with these issues in a very limited fashion.
Even if the Dodd-­Frank approach of strengthening the regula-
tion of ever larger financial institutions were to reduce the likeli-
hood of future crisis, it still will have done precious little to rein 
in the political clout of the industry.
The Government-­Sponsored Enterprises. Although the gov-
ernment spent billions to bail out Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 
these firms remain completely intact. The only difference is that 
the once implicit guarantees of their debt are now quite explicit. 
The firms have been nationalized, so the taxpayers will at least 
enjoy any profits. Given past political manipulation of Fannie 
and Freddie by Congress and the executive branch, however, 
we are dubious that taxpayers will see significant returns to the 
Treasury anytime in the immediate future; in June 2012, they 
were in hock for $147 billion.12
Consumer Financial Protection. Among the most important 
reforms of Dodd-­Frank was the creation of the Consumer Finan-
cial Protection Bureau. Political pressure from the Republicans 
prevented Obama from nominating its architect, Elizabeth War-
ren, to lead the agency. Senate Republicans were just as adamant 
in opposing Richard Cordray, who was nominated in place of 
Warren, and they blocked his nomination. The directorship was 
filled only through Cordray’s controversial recess appointment.
Regulatory Complexity and Discretion. The Glass-­Steagall 
Act was a thirty-­seven-­page document. Dodd-­Frank is almost 
three thousand pages long, and most of the details are still to be 
worked out in regulatory rule making in various agencies. There 
is little doubt that these regulatory processes will be dominated 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  257
by financial lobbyists, and certainly not by anyone from the 
Occupy Wall Street movement. For example, as of this writing, 
there is no final rule on credit retention or “skin in the game” 
covered by Section 941 of Dodd-­Frank. Moreover, Section 941 
does not apply to GSEs.
On March 29, 2011, the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion (SEC) did issue a draft of rules for comments. Rather than 
drawing a bright line where, say, the issuer of a mortgage or 
a mortgage-­backed security must retain a 5 percent interest in 
the security, Dodd-­Frank allowed for the exemption of quali-
fied residential mortgages (QRMs). The rules for QRMs, such 
as the credit score of the borrower or the loan to value, and the 
like, are to be defined by a regulator. The definition of QRMs 
and the treatment of mortgage pools that included a mixture 
of QRMs and non-­QRMs immediately drew commentary from 
financial institutions such as JPMorgan Chase and from legisla-
tors. Republican senator Johnny Isakson attacked the SEC pro-
posal as being market unfriendly.13 As a continued testament to 
ideology and interests over experience, Isakson represents Geor-
gia, a state that far outpaced every other state in bank failures in 
the crisis. Although the discretion allowed by Section 941 might 
make for a more efficient market than a bright-­line rule, it opens 
the door to regulatory forbearance that could eventually lead to 
the same practices that arose in the subprime mortgage crisis.
A broad summary of the delay in implementing Dodd-­Frank 
has been provided by the law firm Davis Polk:
• As of June 1, 2012, a total of 221 Dodd-­Frank rule-­
making requirement deadlines have passed. This is 
55.5 percent of the 398 total rule-­making require-
ments, and 78.9 percent of the 280 rule-­making re-
quirements with specified deadlines.
• Of these 221 passed deadlines, 148 (67.0 percent) 
have been missed and 73 (33.0 percent) have been 
met with finalized rules. Regulators have not yet re-
leased proposals for 21 of the 148 missed rules.

258  •  Chapter 9
• Of the 398 total rule-­making requirements, 110 
(27.6 percent) have been met with finalized rules 
and rules have been proposed that would meet 
144 (36.2 percent) more. Rules have not yet been 
proposed to meet 144 (36.2 percent) rule-­making 
requirements.14
Unless there is a spate of rule making in the coming months, the 
next presidential election occurred, more than four years since 
the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, with most of Dodd-­Frank 
unimplemented thanks to complexity, discretion, and the resul-
tant lobbying.
Executive Compensation. Almost nothing has been done to 
modify executive compensation practices that lead to excessive risk 
taking. Reasonable people can disagree about the extent to which 
there should be ex ante curbs on executive pay. But the continued 
limitations on the ability of regulators, shareholders, and courts to 
claw back compensation from executives who looted their com-
panies and left taxpayers holding the bag are unconscionable.
Perhaps the highest-­level financial executive to face civil pros-
ecution was Angelo Mozilo of Countrywide Financial. As previ-
ously noted, Mozilo’s case was resolved with a penalty of $67.5 
million. Mozilo was off the hook for all but $22.5 million of the 
penalty. The rest was paid, as a contractual obligation, by Bank of 
America after it acquired Countrywide.15 And any pension assets 
of Angelo (and his friends) are fully exempt from civil litigation.
Would it be amiss to limit the ability of corporations to cover 
damages from suits filed by government agencies? Would it be 
wrong to protect, say, the first $5 million of pension assets from 
litigation but to make the rest available for claw back? No and 
no, but the 0.001 percent won’t let the 99.999 percent even think 
about such a remedy.
Complexity. The authors of Dodd-­Frank ignored one of the cen-
tral drivers of the financial meltdown: complexity. As the financial 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  259
sector was steadily deregulated in the 1980s and ’90s, complex 
financial instruments emerged. The creators of these instruments 
had better information than the rating agencies, the regulatory 
agencies, and Congress. In addition, the stupefying profits enabled 
the financial sector to hire the best and the brightest from the Ivy 
League to devise ever more complex instruments thereby further 
increasing their information advantage. The rating agencies had 
the Wall Street securitizers as clients. They were too willing to 
issue AAA ratings on these securities no matter how complex 
they were or what their true underlying values were.16 The SEC 
and the Fed ignored the warnings, and Congress did nothing.
Dodd-­Frank simply creates a dense kudzu of regulations that 
does not deal with the central issue of asymmetric information. 
Regulations need to be as straightforward as possible, with 
bright red lines. The long Glass-­Steagall regime may not be eco-
nomically efficient in theory but it prevented serious banking 
problems until the deregulation craze of the 1980s and ’90s.
So this is the status quo postcrisis. It fits the historical pattern  
we established in chapter 6. The new regulations came with a 
transition in power, were further delayed (while the party base 
was rewarded with Obamacare), were limited, and now risk 
being at least partly reversed with a new transition to Republi-
can control.
The return to normal, noncrisis politics is unlikely to improve 
the situation. As the famous political scientist E. E. Schattschnei-
der once observed, it is the “moneyed interests” that dominate 
politics when the public is not aroused.17 Perhaps the Occupy 
movement will keep the public focused on these issues, but will 
it direct it to arcane regulatory rule-­making procedures?
For much of the past hundred years, the notion that “what’s 
good for General Motors is good for the country” has been an 
important, if controversial, part of America’s public philosophy. 
Unfortunately, it appears that over the past thirty years Gold-
man Sachs and other financial firms have supplanted GM at the 
core of that creed. But at least when GM was the exemplar of 
American economic might, we were celebrating a firm and an 

260  •  Chapter 9
industry that helped generate broad prosperity responsible for 
pulling millions of Americans into a steadily expanding middle 
class. But in the thirty years that financialization has replaced 
industrialization, America has seen prosperity, but it has not 
been widely shared. And as we know all too well, the “what’s 
good for Goldman Sachs” philosophy has wrought financial 
insecurity for millions.
American prosperity requires deep, liquid, and active capital 
markets, but these markets should be a means and not an end. 
How to restore financial services to its proper place in the politi-
cal economy is not simply a question of economics. An increas-
ingly dysfunctional politics lies at the heart of the problem. No 
regulatory regime can succeed without the underlying support 
of elected officials. As long as American politics remains polar-
ized, such support seems unlikely. New bubbles will continue to 
effervesce.
The First Sign of a Wasted Crisis: MF Global
In fact, it did not take long for the reappearance of the type of 
shenanigans that went on before the financial crisis. MF Global 
failed in October 2011. Somehow $2.1 billion of clients’ money 
was missing and, as of mid-­2012, had yet to be recovered. MF 
Global was headed by Jon Corzine, who went through the revolv-
ing door from Goldman Sachs on Wall Street to the Senate and 
the governorship of New Jersey and back out again to MF Global.
Dodd-­Frank might have provided a bright-­line rule for the 
handling of client funds. The rule might have included substan-
tial criminal penalties for malfeasance. Instead Dodd-­Frank left 
enormous discretion to the Commodity Futures Trading Com- 
mission (CFTC), which was headed by Gary Gensler—­like Cor-
zine a Democrat and Goldman Sachs alum. Although Gensler 
has generally been well regarded as an active regulator, he 
allowed himself to be lobbied by Corzine. As reported in a Wall 
Street Journal editorial, their postpop interaction was facilitated 
by Ivy League connections when Gensler guest-­lectured for a 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  261
Princeton University course taught by Corzine.18 The ethical 
action would have been for Gensler to recuse himself from con-
tact with Corzine.
MF Global failed because the firm made bad bets on Euro-
pean securities. If sophisticated investors were making the same 
bets through MF Global, their losses would just be part of the 
give and take of capitalist markets. MF Global was too small 
to pose systemic risk. And at the time that Corzine was betting 
his ranch and those of many others, most financial institutions 
were conservative after the pop. But MF Global’s clients were 
not making bets that had gone belly up. Someone at MF Global 
stole their money to do so.
A fundamentalist free market conservative might simply say 
caveat emptor: if you don’t trust Jon Corzine with your money, 
don’t invest in MF Global. Markets work better, however, with 
rules that aim to guarantee transparency, reduce the risk of 
embezzlement, and produce a level playing field for investors at 
an informational disadvantage and without connections to the 
best and the brightest, such as Gary Gensler. Ideology and inter-
ests combined, within the context of institutions—­particularly 
the filibuster rule in the Senate, to make Dodd-­Frank too weak 
to put a firewall between the interaction of interests that brought 
Corzine and Gensler together. Moreover, given limitations free 
market conservatives have placed on staffing regulatory agencies 
(see figure 5.3), it was cheap for Gensler to take Corzine’s call, 
and costly for him to monitor MF Global’s books. MF Global is 
a symptom of potential problems that we seek to confront with 
our broader recommendations.
Recommendations
At the core of our analysis is our belief that boom-­and-­bust 
cycles are endemic to democratic capitalism. But certain reforms 
can deflate the bubbles a bit without forgoing the benefits of 
modern finance. Few if any of these recommendations originate 
with us, and many other good ideas are floating around. We 

262  •  Chapter 9
focus on the ones below because of their linkages to the political 
foundations of modern finance. We start with economic reforms 
that could be implemented. We then turn to political reforms 
that might make the economic reforms possible.
Use Simple Regulatory Rules
When Paul Volcker first unveiled his eponymous rule, it was a 
short bright-­line rule: commercial banks shall not trade securi-
ties on their own account. But after Dodd-­Frank let regulators 
formulate rules that would allow for “legitimate trading activi-
ties,” the Volcker Rule became anything but simple. The initial 
proposed rule came in at more than three hundred pages and 
solicited input on 1,347 different questions.
Of course, the simple bright-­line rule would impose economic 
costs. It would limit the products that commercial banks could 
offer their customers, and limitation might lead to less diversifi-
cation and some lost economies of scope. Yet the political bene-
fits outweigh the costs. Enforcement and compliance monitoring 
of the simple rule is much easier than that for a three-­hundred-­
page rule. Legal and regulatory complexity always works in the 
favor of the industry that can devote significant resources into 
turning loopholes into tunnels.
Simple rules also act as important ex ante brakes on financial 
excesses. They leave less room for financial firms to lobby later 
to weaken reform. But the overarching principle of Dodd-­Frank 
is the reliance on ex post mitigation—­that is, let the market oper-
ate freely, monitor for systemic risks, and then intervene. We 
remain skeptical that regulators have either the technical capac-
ity or the political will to intervene when the necessity arises.
Set Rules That Account for Political Risk
As we mentioned in chapter 5, Joseph Stiglitz, Peter Orszag, and 
Jon Orszag placed the odds of a Fannie Mae collapse at 1 in 
500,000 given the capital standards of that time. So what hap-
pened? It could have been one unbelievably unlucky draw. After 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  263
all, even low probability events can occur. But more likely it was 
the failure of their analysis to account for all of the things that 
Fannie could do to subvert the enforcement of that capital stan-
dard. It failed to account for the fact that Fannie’s accountants 
could make their accounting capital look bigger than their true 
capital—­and that they would do this precisely when the prob-
ability of collapse increased. It failed to account for the fact that 
big firms like Fannie could press ratings agencies for favorable 
risk assessments of their assets (which in turn lowers their capi-
tal requirements). It failed to account for the fact that Fannie and 
Freddie used their political leverage to intimidate their regula-
tors and Congress into turning a blind eye.
In our view, political risks grow proportionately (if not expo-
nentially) with the size of financial firms. The modern finan-
cial megafirm is a magnificent collection of conflicts of interest 
housed under one roof. Self-­regulation of these conflicts through 
the creation of internal controls and “Chinese walls” is not likely 
to succeed. In July 2012, both the chairman and the CEO of 
Barclays were forced to resign after it was revealed that employ-
ees in the bank’s treasury department were manipulating the 
London Interbank Offered Rate and sharing that information 
with traders who profited from it.19 A more segmented financial 
sector would certainly lose economies of scale and scope, but it 
would also certainly be less prone to such flagrant fraud.
In general, when policies for the financial sector are estab-
lished, it must be assumed that they will not be perfectly enforced. 
Consequently, the standards must be set so that the outcomes 
are satisfactory even with less than perfect compliance. Think 
about speed limits. When she evaluates a change in speed limit 
from 55 to 65 miles per hour on an interstate highway, a regula-
tor should not assume that drivers adjust by going from 55 to 65. 
A better assumption would be that drivers are already going 65 
and that they will go 75 after the change.
Our argument about compliance goes further. Automotive 
innovation evolves relatively slowly. If anything, government 
regulations made cars safer, something that might argue for 

264  •  Chapter 9
higher speed limits. Finance is different. In chapter 4, we quoted 
Henry Paulson as arguing that it was a good thing that regula-
tors could not keep up, because the lag in regulation allowed 
financial innovation to proceed. Paulson was dead wrong. The 
past decade has witnessed a lot of harm and very little good 
that has come from such “innovation.” The innovation did not 
produce strong growth in the economy, except in the financial 
sector. Compare the twenty-­first century to the 1950s, a time of 
high growth and the peak of regulation of financial markets.20 
What’s worse, the innovation of the 1980s and beyond occurred 
during a period of rising income inequality. Virtually nothing 
trickled down to the bottom half of the income distribution 
(again, see figure 5.2). Foreclosures led to a decline in the frac-
tion of households in owner-­occupied housing. To paraphrase 
Ronald Reagan, “Are you better off than you were before finan-
cial markets were deregulated?”
Limit the Activities of Taxpayer-­Insured Financial Firms
With federal deposit insurance, commercial banks gamble with 
house money. For this reason, it is especially important to treat 
insured commercial banks as public utilities. Just as rates of the 
local power utilities were regulated in exchange for a monop-
oly franchise, insured commercial banks should be subject to 
more restrictions because of the implicit subsidy on their depos-
its. Although it appears that reerecting the firewalls of Glass-­
Steagall is not in the political cards, a stronger Volcker Rule 
would go a long way toward getting commercial banks to focus 
on their core function.
Reform Compensation Practices
High compensation to financial executives and traders is often jus-
tified as compensation for risk. But as we now know, the risks 
they took were very asymmetric: the potential for gain was always 
much, much greater than the threatened losses. Limits on personal 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  265
and corporate liability always create these asymmetries. The asym-
metries are compounded when financial firms own the equivalent 
of a put by which the government picks up some losses in order 
to avoid a crash. It was disheartening to see so many people walk 
away after destroying their companies with their bubble gains bol-
stered by their boom-­time severance contracts and pensions.
To prevent a bonanza for malfeasance from happening again, 
legal and regulatory mechanisms must be established to ensure 
that financial gamblers have to cover a larger share of their 
own losses. Courts and regulators should be able to claw back 
bonuses and compensation obtained when the bad bets looked 
good. Notably, executives should not be able to shield these 
gains by having them appear as pension benefits. The pension 
exemption for civil liability should be capped.
There is an ongoing debate about the extent to which current 
compensation practices contributed to the bubble. Many execu-
tives with the largest stakes in their own companies made the 
biggest bets. This suggests that the common proposal of forc-
ing executives to hold their companies’ stock over longer peri-
ods may have little effect. Richard Fuld let his Lehman Brothers 
shares go down with the ship. But even if compensation reform 
is not a silver bullet for bubble avoidance, standard notions of 
fairness and equity require it.
Prevent “Too Big to Fail” by Preventing “Big”
Dodd-­Frank deals with the notion of “too big to fail” by sub-
jecting large firms to greater regulatory scrutiny along with the 
requirement to create a “living will” that will facilitate orderly 
resolution in case of failure. Of course, this approach is at odds 
with our plea for simple, ex ante, politically feasible rules. To 
us, the only approach to “too big to fail” that meets these cri-
teria are limits on the size or autonomy of financial firms. Even 
Alan Greenspan has expressed concern about the size of finan-
cial institutions.21 Mervyn King, the governor of the Bank of 

266  •  Chapter 9
England, and Joseph Stiglitz have argued that “a bank that is too 
big to fail is too big to exist.”22 We may not go that far, but at 
the very least, large financial institutions should be heavily and 
effectively regulated. A living will is great as long as the taxpay-
ers don’t have to pay for the coffin and the funeral. Moreover, 
the federal government and regulatory agencies should not act 
in a way that encourages ever-­increasing bigness. One example 
is the acquisition of Wachovia by Wells Fargo. Another is the 
acquisition of National City by PNC, which we discussed in 
chapter 4. Both the Wachovia and National City acquisitions 
were determined by government policies.
Increase Regulatory and Prosecutorial Capacity
Even if simple and tough rules were to be promulgated, regulators 
and prosecutors must have the tools and resources necessary to 
enforce them. As we discussed in chapter 5, regulatory resources 
were drawn down just as the bubble was expanding. This should 
not happen again. To riff on an old Warren Buffett line, bubbles 
occur when more people are swimming naked. That’s the time to 
either beef up the beach patrol or drain the pool.
There are some other aspects to regulatory capacity beyond 
simple resources. Financial regulators are often disadvantaged by 
extreme informational asymmetries with respect to the industry. 
First, regulators should be given more power to obtain informa-
tion about financial products as well as to enforce greater levels 
of transparency. Second, financial regulatory agencies should 
strive to develop more independent expertise about the financial 
marketplace so that they are less dependent on the Wall Street 
in-­and-­outers.
Third, we should strengthen not just federal regulatory capac-
ity but also that of state governments. During deregulation, 
state laws and regulations were regularly preempted by federal 
statute in the name of creating a uniform national marketplace. 
But federalism still has a place in financial regulation. Just as 
the federal minimum wage is a floor and not a ceiling, states 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  267
should be able to regulate activities such as insurance and mort-
gage lending more strenuously than the federal minimums dic-
tate. Although financial firms would like the economy of scale 
inherent in uniform national regulatory standards, the political 
benefits of intervention by the states, given the influence of Wall 
Street in Washington, outweigh the economic costs.
Having better enforcement and monitoring would be great, 
but we realize that it may be a chimerical goal. Taxpayers and 
free market conservatives are reluctant to pony up the funds 
needed for enforcement. Financial firms, as we saw in Scott 
Brown’s opposition to the bank tax, are unwilling to support a 
tax on their industry for enforcement. Taxpayers and firms are 
also reluctant to pay bureaucrats the salaries needed to attract 
top talent. Therefore the door will not stop revolving. Five years 
in Washington is just a career investment.
In addition to the economics of government careers, another 
factor rightfully restrains regulatory capacity. This is Ameri-
cans’ reluctance to have Big Brother looking over their shoulder. 
Power does corrupt and can easily be abused. But the answer is 
not laissez-­faire and caveat emptor; it is transparency and public 
accountability for regulators. These are best achieved by simple 
rules and limited discretion.
Political Reforms
There is now a cottage industry of would-­be reformers who offer 
solutions to America’s dysfunctional politics. Their pet projects 
range from public financing of campaigns to banning gerryman-
ders, instituting open or nonpartisan primaries, and creating 
third parties. But there is little hard evidence to suggest that any 
of these weapons in the reformers’ tool kit will be very effective. 
After all, polarization was low in the middle of the twentieth 
century even though campaign finance was mostly unregulated, 
districts were ruthlessly gerrymandered, party bosses controlled 
nominations, and serious third-­party presidential candidates 
were on the ballot in 1948, 1968, and 1980.

268  •  Chapter 9
Reform agendas also run aground because of the political 
forces they attempt to change. Reforms are never politically neu-
tral and are sure to be challenged by the status quo’s winners. 
Today’s winners, fundamentalist free market conservatives, will 
surely make reform difficult. Moreover, removing the gridlock 
from which they benefit will be exceptionally difficult because it 
is deeply embedded in the Constitution.
For example, as we discussed in chapter 4, the difference in 
preferences induced by a bicameral legislature with alternative 
forms of apportionment is an important source of gridlock. 
This feature is the one part of the Constitution that cannot be 
amended. Moreover, amending other features of the Constitu-
tion is incredibly hard. Should a majority of Americans believe 
that campaign spending should not be protected as free speech 
and want to reverse Supreme Court rulings, a two-­thirds major-
ity would be required in both chambers of Congress, making 
the gridlock zone much larger than it is for ordinary legislation. 
Moreover, the requirement for ratification by three-­fourths of 
the states could doom an amendment passed by Congress. Rati-
fication by the states failed for the Equal Rights Amendment. 
Polarization makes amendment more difficult. We are likely to 
be stuck indefinitely with the Constitution we have and the court 
that interprets it.23
One aspect of gridlock that could be changed without a con-
stitutional amendment is the cloture rule in the Senate.24 The 
cloture rule was certainly constraining, as we showed in chap-
ter 7, to the Obama administration’s actions after the pop. But 
there are risks to changing it in the current era of polarization. 
A momentarily electoral triumph for free market conservatives 
could easily move deregulation back to the prepop status quo 
and beyond.
Another seemingly impervious aspect of American democ-
racy is our two-­party system, with the major fault line between 
Democrats and Republicans that was established with the end 
of Reconstruction in 1876. Forming new major parties has not 
succeeded in well over 120 years, despite popular dissatisfaction 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  269
with the current division. Sentiment against both the Democrats 
and Republicans is indicated in polling: Wall Street Journal/
NBC polls have shown that a majority of Americans prefer 
divided government to unified control. Divided government may 
be their best chance of obtaining moderate policies.25 Sentiment 
against the major parties was also evident when an oddball can-
didate, Ross Perot, with an even odder running mate,26 obtained 
19 percent of the vote in the 1992 presidential election. Yet one-­
off presidential candidacies can only influence the outcome of 
the current election, not alter the system. The Bull Moose, Theo-
dore Roosevelt, found this out when he was dissatisfied with 
his successor, William Howard Taft. To alter the system, a new 
party must have a base that contests congressional as well as 
presidential elections. The separation of powers in the Constitu-
tion creates a huge obstacle to political entry.
Another vehicle for reform is ideological change that is not 
rooted in narrow self-­interest. Such a change occurred when the 
abolitionist movement initiated the political realignment of the 
Civil War era.27 It also occurred with the progressive movement 
of the turn of the last century, most identified with President 
Theodore Roosevelt and Robert La Follette in the Senate. This 
was primarily a middle-­class reformist movement that had sup-
porters in both political parties.28 Progressives were concerned 
with corruption and injustices issuing from the rise of industrial 
capitalism in the United States. They supported the Sixteenth 
Amendment that legalized federal income taxation, direct elec-
tion of senators with the Seventeenth Amendment, Prohibition 
with the Eighteenth Amendment, and women suffrage with the 
Nineteenth Amendment. They were not anticapitalist per se. 
They viewed themselves as modernizers and reformers.29 In par-
ticular, Theodore Roosevelt was surely a capitalist. When he vis-
ited Pittsburgh he stayed at the home of Henry Clay Frick, the 
man who broke the Homestead Steel Strike. Yet Roosevelt was 
a trust buster and was not averse to government regulations that 
he considered in the public interest. And, as the founder of the 
national park system, he was not averse to public goods.

270  •  Chapter 9
The progressives contributed to the long arc of moderation 
of the Republican Party from the early twentieth century to the 
presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower, who, credited with the 
interstate highway system, supported public goods. The Bank 
Holding Company Act of 1956, which was the apex of finan-
cial regulation, was passed during his presidency.30 Even though 
Eisenhower signed it, he did not think the act went far enough to 
constrain the banks and to preserve market competition.31
Eisenhower, however, was the last gasp of moderation. Free 
market conservatism was already incipient, and it found its first 
national expression in the candidacy of Barry Goldwater in 
1964.32 The ideological pendulum swung back. Although crony 
capitalists and free market ideologues would later bond, convic-
tion independent of interest was part of the story. Many of the 
market-­oriented ideas developed as an intellectual response to 
the government failures and economic sluggishness of the 1960s 
and ’70s. Many innovative proposals emerged to use markets 
and incentives to solve pressing problems such as “cap and trade” 
environmental regulation and the earned income tax credit.
On the other hand, free market conservatism became as much 
a matter of near religious conviction, inspired by writers includ-
ing Ayn Rand, as a matter of policy analysis of the American 
economy. For more classical conservatives like George H. W. 
Bush and his economic adviser Paul McAvoy, Reaganomics was 
“voodoo economics.”33 After Reagan won the 1980 nomina-
tion, running mate Bush then kowtowed to the voodoo. Free 
market conservatism grew in acceptance, and its public philos-
ophy morphed into one in which all taxes were evil, govern-
ment should be shrunk for the sake of shrinking, all markets 
should be unregulated, and public goods, including education, 
should be privatized. Unfortunately, this extreme form of free 
market conservatism came to be embraced by a sufficiently large 
segment of the American public that free market conservatives 
could dominate electoral politics.
The best hope to stabilize our economic system, given the sta-
bility of the political system, is to begin to build a new public 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  271
philosophy for dealing with the challenges of our time, not for 
those of the 1970s. That philosophy should recognize that, 
although they are far from perfect, the policies brought about 
in the years that spanned the Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Harry 
Truman, and Dwight D. Eisenhower presidencies produced an 
economic system that, for the first time in history, enjoyed a 
“Great Moderation,” a period of more than sixty years without 
a major financial crisis.
But this new public philosophy should be much more than a 
restoration of Great Society liberalism or egalitarianism. Govern-
ment, too, has its limits. When politicians try to stretch beyond 
those limits by creating government-­sponsored enterprises, spon-
soring public-­private partnerships, and governing by subsidy, 
crony capitalism is the result just as surely as it is in the hands of 
the free market conservatives. Government—­federal, state, and 
local—­should be effective, efficient, transparent, and on budget. 
The concentration of authority in Washington, D.C., has been 
essential to deal with many important issues, such as civil rights 
for minorities. But a dose of old-­style Jeffersonianism—­with 
more authority in the hands of local and state governments—­in 
many areas would be beneficial and would reduce the influence 
of powerful rent-­seeking national interest groups.
The progressivism of Theodore Roosevelt took root in no small 
part because new professional and academic elites emerged with 
views and interests distinct from those of the financial and indus-
trial elites. Unfortunately, such an elite counterbalance to finan-
cial interests appears to no longer exist. The meritocracy that has 
been trusted to run our governmental and financial institutions 
has failed. Many of the graduates of elite institutions are honest 
and engaged in productive pursuits in the nonfinancial economy. 
We cannot help but note, however, what appears to be a dismal 
record of many who have engaged in politics and finance.
The last four presidents all had Ivy League degrees. The 
Supreme Court that produced Citizens United is now made up of 
all Ivy Leaguers. The Harvard Business School has contributed 
the COO of Enron, two professors who were principals in Long 

272  •  Chapter 9
Term Capital Management, and a Yale University legacy admit 
who presided over the bubble. Another Harvard MBA was con-
victed of insider trading after serving as CEO of Mc­Kinsey, 
director of Goldman Sachs, and other corporations, as well as 
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and many other charitable 
and educational (including Ivy League) institutions. A future 
president of Harvard celebrated the Gramm-­Leach-­Bliley and 
the Commodity Futures Modernization Acts while ignoring 
the warnings of the chairwoman of the CFTC. As president of 
Harvard, he presided over the university’s settlement in a federal 
government civil suit filed for inappropriate behavior in Russian 
financial markets by a faculty economist.34 That president also 
did a rewarding tour of duty on Wall Street. Another Harvard 
economist sat on the board of American International Group 
(AIG), alongside a star diplomat, also an Ivy League graduate, 
and other A-­list members. AIG’s financial products’ risk model 
was designed by a Yale University professor. A brilliant Har-
vard undergrad and MBA who served under the future Har-
vard president in the Treasury Department became the COO of 
Facebook. She and another Ivy League graduate, the CFO, most 
likely had a good deal to do with the botched initial public offer-
ing of Facebook.35 The current CFTC chair who interacted with 
Jon Corzine is a Wharton School MBA. A story, perhaps apoc-
ryphal, is that when Michael Milken was sentenced to prison 
in the 1980s, Wharton students scrawled “Hall of Shame” over 
the “Hall of Fame” where Milken’s name appeared. Our elite 
universities should stop turning a blind eye to what is going on 
in the Wall Street casinos. Padding the endowment in the short 
run can bring national ruin in the long run.
We have subtitled this book “The Failure of American Democ-
racy.” By now the reader can see why we chose these words. 
American democracy has failed the ordinary citizenry in the 
Great Recession. Neither political party has risen to the occa-
sion and advocated true institutional reform that would reduce 
the stupefying concentration of money and power in the finan-
cial sector. No champion like Theodore Roosevelt has emerged 

How to Waste a Crisis  •  273
to blast the “Malefactors of Great Wealth” and speak for the 
devastated communities throughout America. Instead, the elites 
glower across an ideological divide constructed around the  
conflicts of the 1960s and ’70s and do little toward meaningful 
reform of institutions and markets that have clearly failed. No, 
Presidents Bush and Obama; the “reckless” are not those “few.” 
Lest our democracy become a kleptocracy, we need a redo of 
financial regulation.


Epilogue
Kicking the Can
In the fall of 2012, Americans once again had an opportunity to 
elect a president and change Congress. But those who hoped that 
the election would provide an opportunity for the nation and its 
leaders to engage in a discussion about the unfinished business 
of financial reform must surely be disappointed.
President Obama and his opponent Mitt Romney avoided 
the topic of financial regulation. The topic drew just one brief 
engagement in the three presidential debates. When pressed in 
the first debate by moderator Jim Lehrer to name examples of 
excessive regulation, Governor Romney blamed Dodd-Frank 
for perpetuating banks’ too-big-to-fail protection and suggested 
that the delay in defining a qualified residential mortgage for 
purposes of securitization made banks reluctant to make loans 
(see our discussion in chapter 9). When Lehrer asked whether 
he would repeal Dodd-Frank, Romney said he would “repeal 
and replace” it. On his turn, Obama defended Dodd-Frank and 
attacked Romney for wanting to repeal it. The whole exchange 
lasted about four minutes. Romney never specified exactly what 
he would replace Dodd-Frank with. Obama never gave any indi-
cation of second thoughts or how he might pursue additional 
reforms were he reelected.
In some ways it is strange that the government’s response to 
a calamity that affected and continues to affect millions of peo-
ple would have drawn so little attention in an election poised to 
be a referendum on the president’s economic record. It is not as 
if employment or the housing market had rebounded robustly 
enough to distract the public from the past four years. It is not as 
if the financial reform has accomplished its goals. The banking 

276  •  Epilogue
sector is now concentrated among big firms to a level significantly 
greater than at the onset of the crisis, aided in part by the continu-
ing struggles of small community banks. In particular, the mort-
gage market has become concentrated, reducing competition for 
borrowers. In the third quarter of 2012, Wells Fargo originated 29 
percent of all mortgages and the top five originators 55 percent.1
Our political system just kicked the can down the road when 
it comes to regulation of mortgage and other important financial 
markets. Most of the regulations to be promulgated under Dodd-
Frank have yet to be written, and several face legal challenges from 
financial firms. The D.C. Court of Appeals has already struck 
down the SEC’s attempt to implement Dodd-Frank provisions to 
empower shareholders to oust management. Three challenges to 
CFTC rules are winding their way through the federal courts.2 In 
echoes of the litigation over the Affordable Care Act, the attorneys 
general of Michigan, Oklahoma, and South Carolina have joined 
a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of several provisions of 
Dodd-Frank.3 Four years have passed since the crisis of 2008, yet 
the futures of the GSEs, Fannie and Freddie, are still up in the 
air. Attempts to reform money market mutual funds, a key source 
of instability in 2008 when the Reserve Primary fund “broke the 
buck,” gridlocked in the Securities and Exchange Commission.4 
As of January 2, 2013, the law firm of Davis Polk (cited in chapter 
9) reported that 142 out of 237 deadlines for rule making have 
been missed. Four years after the crisis, one-third of the required 
rules have been proposed but not finalized, and another third have 
not even been proposed.5 After the crisis, high-frequency trading 
(HFT) (chapter 5) became visible as a potentially dangerous finan-
cial innovation. While many other countries throughout the world 
are moving to regulate HFT, Washington has given it a pass.
But most importantly, bad bets by too-big-to-fail banks, finan- 
cial malfeasance, and scandal have not receded from view.  
JPMorgan Chase’s “London Whale” has grown to $5.8 billion. 
MF Global’s clients still await the return of much of their money as 
similar thefts of supposedly segregated customer money have come 
to light at other financial firms.6
The banks are now facing as much as $300 billion in losses from 
civil suits related to the subprime crisis.7 With their “heads we win, 

Epilogue  •  277
tails you lose” attitude, the banks are arguing that having to pay 
for bad behavior will cripple the housing market.
Fines of financial institutions have continued. As mentioned in 
chapter 9, in February 2012, five major banks reached a $25 billion 
settlement with 49 state attorneys general as a result of fraudulent 
foreclosure processing practices. The same practices appear likely 
to generate an additional $10 billion settlement with the federal 
government from 14 banks.8 HSBC paid a $1.92 billion fine for 
money laundering.9 The Libor rate setting scandal blew open when 
Barclays paid a fine of $453 million to U.S. and U.K. regulators and 
its chairman and CEO both resigned. Barclays was let off relatively 
lightly—regulators even gave Barclays a 20 percent “discount” on  
its fines in exchange for its cooperation. Total fines over Libor man- 
ipulation are expected to be $8.7 billion.10 As we write, the biggest 
fine, $1.5 billion, has been levied on UBS. While a couple of lower 
level employees of UBS’s Japanese affiliate have been criminally 
charged, the big kahunas are so far unscathed. In announcing the 
supposedly “tough” treatment of UBS, Lanny Breuer, head of the 
criminal division of the Justice Department, was quoted as pro-
claiming, “Our goal here is not to destroy a major financial institu-
tion.”11 So the approach is the exact opposite of how other forms 
of organized crime are prosecuted where every effort is made to 
link each offense to the organization and its leaders. Given that 
the effects of financial crime are as pernicious as the effects of the 
sale of illegal drugs, we fail to see how the different approach is 
warranted.  Perhaps UBS should have been the test case for Dodd-
Frank’s vaunted new resolution authority.
We were not surprised that UBS was central to the Libor scan-
dal. In the introduction, we highlighted both its connections to the 
Republican Phil Gramm and the Democrat Barack Obama and its 
$780 million fine for helping a “reckless few” Americans avoid 
income taxes. In May 2012, the PBS program Frontline included 
claims by UBS executive Robert Wolf that he served as a conduit of 
information from the Treasury to Obama during the 2008 crisis. 
So we are also not surprised that the firm is “too big to jail” or to 
be excluded from doing business in the United States. “Cheat and 
pay the fines” appears entrenched as a business strategy for UBS 
and many other financial firms.

278  •  Epilogue
This business strategy profits from the lack of regulatory capac-
ity that we discussed in chapter 4. The Libor rate fixing began in 
2005. Although the story made it into the media, notably the Wall 
Street Journal, in 2008, national and international regulators were 
in denial, so no fines were assessed until 2012. Had there been vig-
orous prosecution in 2008 or 2009, the scandal may have led to a 
tougher Dodd-Frank. By the time the Libor fuel could have been 
added to the fire, the fire was out. Public outrage was past. The 
billion-dollar wrist slaps did not draw attention in the presidential 
debates.
So the lack of campaign attention was not due to any shortage 
of headlines.
From the angle of politics, it is easy to see why the candidates 
spent their time on other issues. President Obama learned very early 
that there were political costs attached to a populist position. His 
early attacks on Romney’s record as the head of the private equity 
firm Bain Capital created almost as much division within his party 
as it hurt Romney. Even Newark’s African American Democratic 
mayor Cory Booker professed to be “nauseated” by the campaign 
attacks on Bain.12 Polling analysis suggests that the Bain Capital 
attacks did not move public opinion.13
The combination of the Bain ads and Obama’s modest touting 
of Dodd-Frank appears to have led to a mass exodus of donations 
to his campaign from the financial sector. Even as late as the 2010 
midterm elections, the Democratic Party received about as much 
financial support from the financial sector as did the Republicans. 
But that all changed in 2012. Wall Street’s money flew to Romney 
and other Republican candidates. According to data compiled by 
the Center for Responsive Politics, the Democrats received almost 
$60 million less from finance, insurance, and real estate interests 
than did the Republicans (Democrats received $27 million more 
than Republicans in 2008). The gap among the presidential candi-
dates was even more glaring. Romney outraised Obama from this 
group by more than 3 to 1 (Obama had outraised McCain almost 
2 to 1 in 2008).14 After such a huge defection by the “money wing,” 
the message was clear: to staunch the outflow, don’t talk about 
Bain and soft-pedal Dodd-Frank. And never suggest going further 
than Dodd-Frank.

Epilogue  •  279
Romney had no stronger incentives to campaign on financial 
issues. As a candidate who struggled mightily with his plutocratic 
image, he could scarcely afford to make repealing or even reform-
ing Dodd-Frank an important part of his campaign. As we docu-
mented in chapter 8, regulating Wall Street was not an issue that 
captivated the energized Tea Party segment of his base. Bailouts, a 
shibboleth of conservative congressional Republicans such as Jim 
Bunning, had largely been removed as a political issue by substan-
tial repayments of TARP money. The recovery of the auto industry 
had resulted in Romney’s incurring political damage from his ear-
lier criticisms of the auto bailout.
With the elections over, Washington had no time for corrections 
to Dodd-Frank or solutions for the GSEs. Instead, it struggled to 
avoid going over the “fiscal cliff”: a doomsday device manufactured 
by our polarized, failed democracy. The cliff was the product of a 
decades-long failure to settle on an income tax code that is predict-
able, efficient, and fair. It reflected the inability of our leaders to 
find a way to stimulate the economy in the short run while paving 
the way for long-term deficit reductions. It is the victory of gim-
micks and position taking over the hard work of genuine policy 
making and compromise.  
The climb to our nefarious precipice began with George W. Bush’s 
tax cuts in 2001 and 2003. As a direct consequence of polariza-
tion, these bills had to be passed under reconciliation to avoid a fili-
buster, resulting in a ten-year limit expiring at the end of 2010. Of 
course, a smaller, but more durable, tax cut could have passed, had 
the Bush administration been willing to accommodate the views 
of moderate Democrats to reach cloture. Bush might have limited 
his tax initiatives to something similar to what Congress passed 
in extremis on January 2, 2013—Clinton-era rates on the top 2 
percent, cuts for everyone else, and an estate tax only on estates 
valued greater than $5 million. Such a proposal would now have 
been a permanent feature of our tax code and would have allowed 
us avoid the negative economic effects of a decade of tax policy 
uncertainty. But restraint of this form would have been anathema 
to both the ideology and the interests of the contemporary Repub-
lican Party. Fiscal policy was too polarized for such a compromise. 
Following the 2010 elections, with the country economically weak 

280  •  Epilogue
and the Obama administration politically shellacked, there was 
little choice but to extend the Bush tax cuts for two more years (in 
exchange for a bit more stimulus).
We reached the edge of the cliff with the Tea Party–inspired bat-
tle over raising the federal debt limit in 2011. In order to reach an 
agreement to raise the debt ceiling and avoid a default, the presi-
dent and Republican leaders agreed to a sequester of approximately 
one trillion dollars over 9 years should a “supercommittee” of six 
Republican and six Democratic legislators fail to agree to a long-
term deficit reduction package. The sequester was to be split evenly 
between defense and domestic spending and was to take effect on 
January 2, 2013. From the moment the supercommittee failed to 
reach an agreement, both parties doubleddown on the bet that they 
could win the 2012 election decisively enough to avoid the cliff on 
their own terms.
But 2012 was a status quo election putting neither party in full 
control. Obama’s victory and polling numbers favorable to tax 
increases on high-income earners have put the free market con-
servatives back on their heels but got their dander up. When push 
came to shove, the Republicans acquiesced in allowing a House 
vote on a moderate tax increase—far less than the one Obama 
campaigned for reelection on. A majority of Republican House 
members voted against the bill, from either gratuitous ideological 
posturing or strategic fear of being “primaried” in 2014.15 And 
after all of this, Congress and the president scheduled a rematch in 
two months to deal with the federal debt limit.
While ideology and institutions combined to put fiscal and enti-
tlement policy at a breaking point, interests made any adjustments 
minor. Income tax rates on the highest 1 or 2 percent of earners 
will go back only to Clinton rates. No one will wake up in anything 
remotely close to France and the 75 percent top marginal tax rate 
advocated by President François Hollande. Similarly the country 
kicked the can on tough choices on entitlements that will inevi- 
tably be forced by changes in birth rates, death rates, and medical 
technology. Republican plans for privatization of social security 
(George W. Bush) and Medicare vouchers (Paul Ryan) have proven 
politically unpopular. Reducing benefits within the current system 
is anathema for Democrats, nearly to the same extent tax increases 

Epilogue  •  281
are among Republicans. While Bill Clinton could reform “welfare 
as we knew it” in 1996 with little backlash at the polls, a short-
sighted middle class makes dealing with Medicare and Social Secu-
rity much more difficult.
It is also unthinkable to go back to 1960s regulation of financial 
markets. The reforms of Dodd-Frank will be located in the gridlock 
zone for the foreseeable future. The Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau is likely to become institutionalized and permanent under a 
Democratic president for its first five years. The Republicans most 
likely gave up a Senate seat in Massachusetts because fundamen-
talist free market capitalism led them to reject Elizabeth Warren as 
head of the Bureau. She will now be its protector in the Senate. The 
institutional permanence of the Bureau notwithstanding, its dis-
cretionary policies will be subject, like those of the National Labor 
Relations Board, to an ongoing political tug-of-war. In addition to 
the Bureau, the old alphabet soup agencies, mainly the FRB, the 
SEC, the CFTC, the OCC, and the FDIC, have retained so much 
discretion that Dodd-Frank can be thought of as a gigantic new 
edifice, built with many revolving doors, for lobbyists and officials. 
And the FSOC (Financial Stability Oversight Council) has been 
layered on top of the old structure. Its ability to designate banks as 
well as non-banks as “Systematically Important Financial Institu-
tions” may end up transforming such institutions into GSEs. New 
risks in the insurance industry and in state government pension 
plans will never be addressed proactively but will await a major 
crisis.
Of course, the continued hold of the Republican Party over the 
House and the sway of free-market conservatism over its mem-
bers will remain an obstacle to correcting the many remaining 
holes in our financial regulatory framework and righting our fiscal 
ship. But the limited opportunities for financial and fiscal reform 
also reflect the fact that the Democratic Party is, as we stressed in 
chapter 3, conflicted between its money wing and its votes wing. 
Despite all the touting that the 2012 elections empowered everyone 
except white males and despite the Democratic Party’s success in 
mobilizing turnout among its base, support from wealthy donors 
remains essential. Those supporters are more likely to favor the 
Democrats not because they support a sharp increase in regulation 

282  •  Epilogue
and redistribution but because of their concern about global warm-
ing, gay rights, abortion, and similar “lifestyle” issues. 
Will, then, the financial industry reform itself? Following numer-
ous scandals and exposés about tainted food and medicine around 
the turn of the twentieth century, the food and drug industry gen-
erally backed efforts toward government regulation of the indus-
try in order to restore consumer confidence in its products. The 
financial sector is also ultimately dependent on the confidence of 
investors. There are signs that confidence in the sector’s products 
is deteriorating. Since April 2007, ordinary investors have pulled 
about $380 billion out of U.S. stock mutual funds. Public and 
private pension funds have also been net sellers over the past five 
years. Many Americans have adopted the view of a former finan-
cial analyst who provides this justification for dumping his stocks: 
“You have to trust your government. You have to trust other gov-
ernments. You have to trust Wall Street. And I don’t trust any of 
these.”16 If these trends continue, perhaps the industry will find 
that its collective self-interest depends not only on reforms that will 
enhance confidence in markets but also on the government’s ability 
to regulate them in the public interest.
Two related forces work against this hope for internal reform. 
First, investors have to go somewhere other than under the mat-
tress. Their alternatives have been diminished by increased con-
centration in the financial sector. The major accounting firms, the 
ratings agencies, and the banks are all too big to fail. So the indus-
try will have only modest incentives to police itself in the name of 
promoting investor confidence. It has little motivation to eliminate 
rent seeking by its largest firms. Second, as we move away from the 
crisis, bankers and investors will forget “last time” and go back to 
“this time is different.” Financial amnesia was noted a half century 
ago by the great economists Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, 
cited in the epigraph to chapter 1. Just as Jesus said of the poor, the 
reckless few are always with us.
Our political leaders wasted a crisis and kicked the can down the 
road. Democracy has failed ordinary Americans. 

Notes
Introduction
	
1.	 See Dodosh (2008).
	
2.	 See Roguski (2008).
	
3.	 See Sims (2008).
	
4.	 An asset-­backed security is one whose value is based on returns from 
some underlying asset. In the case of mortgage-­backed securities, the value is 
derived from cash flows generated by interest payments on an underlying pool 
of mortgages.
	
5.	 See Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012).
	
6.	 On Raines’s compensation, see Bebchuk and Fried (2005).
	
7.	 In a research article, Steven Levitt (coauthor of Freakonomics) estimates 
that personal ideology represented about 50 percent of the mix. See Levitt 
(1996).
	
8.	 Our focus will be on U.S. financial crises, so we are concerned primarily 
with the particular structure of U.S. policy-­making institutions.
	
9.	 See “In the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylva-
nia, Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh v. J.P. Morgan Securities Inc., J.P. 
Morgan Chase & Co., Moody’s Corporation, Moody’s Investor Services, Inc., 
and the McGraw-­Hill Companies, Inc.,” Complaint No. GD 09-­016593, filed 
October 23, 2009. See also “In the State Court of Fulton County, State of Geor-
gia, Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta v. Countrywide Financial Corpora-
tion (n/k/a Bank of America Home Loans, Inc.); Bank of America Corporation 
(as successor to the Countrywide Defendants); J.P. Morgan Securities, LLC 
(f/k/a J.P. Morgan Securities, Inc. and Bear Stearns & Co., Inc.); UBS Securities, 
LLC; and John Doe defendants 1–­50,” filed on January 18, 2011.
	
10.	 Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) indicate that the ratings problem 
centered on CDOs constructed from risky tranches. AAA rated MBS were cor-
rectly rated.
	
11.	 See Faux and Shenn (2011).
	
12.	 The Twentieth Amendment changed the presidential inauguration date 
to January 20 and the starting date of the new Congress to January 3. The 
amendment was ratified January 23, 1933, but did not take effect until October 
of that year.
	
13.	 See Bruner and Carr (2007).

284  •  Notes to Introduction
	
14.	 See Hansell (1994); Mallaby (2010); and Partnoy (2009).
	
15.	 In another securitization scandal of 1994, Procter and Gamble and 
other companies successfully sued Banker’s Trust for providing customers with 
inaccurate information about their exposure in interest rate swaps.
	
16.	 See Lewis (2010).
	
17.	 For example, in the lead-­up to the crisis, Lehman Brothers used a ques-
tionable accounting practice known as Repo 105 to goose its balance sheet just 
in time for quarterly earnings reports. Using Repo 105 transactions, Lehman 
loaned assets collateralized at 105 percent in the overnight repo market. These 
loans were counted as sales on the firm’s balance sheet. See De la Merced and 
Werdigier (2010).
	
18.	 See Berner and Grow (2008).
	
19.	 See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).
	
20.	 See chapter 1.
	
21.	 See Abelson (2000).
	
22.	 Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed., s.v. “ideology.” Although we con-
sider it the most important clause, the third edition of the OED drops the final 
clause. See Benabou (2008) for a formal model of ideological rigidity.
	
23.	 See McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2006).
	
24.	 See Sorkin (2009: 284, 302, 535–­36) and Paulson (2010: 152–­53, 285–­
86). Without congressional pressure, Paulson may well have preferred a bailout 
for Lehman.
	
25.	 See McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (2006: chap. 6).
	
26.	 See Smith (1904) and Mayhew (1974).
	
27.	 This provision exempted all over-­the-­counter electronic trading of 
­energy securities from government regulation. The primary beneficiary of the 
restriction on regulatory jurisdiction was Enron, which operated the main trad-
ing platform for these securities. See Lipton (2008).
	
28.	 See Public Citizen’s Critical Mass Energy and Environment Program 
(2001).
	
29.	 Ibid.
	
30.	 See Morgenson (2012).
	
31.	 See Browning (2010).
	
32.	 See Shear (2009).
	
33.	 To complicate our distinction between ideology and greed a bit more, 
few advocates of free market conservatism are pure libertarians of the Ron 
Paul mode. Most are willing to tolerate or support government interventions 
that benefit business or higher-­income voters even when they violate free 
market or small government principles. For example, many voters who iden-
tify with the Tea Party and its support for free market conservatism ­oppose 
­reductions of Social Security or Medicare benefits for high-­income beneficia-
ries (see chapter 8). So while ideology is more than simply a mask for private 
interest, the belief systems of politicians and citizens may be shaped by pri-
vate interest.
	
34.	 See Kindleberger and Aliber (2005: 165).

Notes to Chapter 1  •  285
	
35.	 Even democracies in which the government is far more engaged in 
the economy have suffered significant financial crises. Sweden and Japan are 
­notable examples from the 1990s.
	
36.	 See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009: 210–­13).
	
37.	 See Mishkin and Herbertsson (2006).
	
38.	 See Halberstam (1969). One of us experienced this failure firsthand. 
However, the GI Bill may have made him one of “the best and the brightest” 
after the fact.
	
39.	 LTCM was truly elite. Its CEO was a University of Chicago MBA; its 
partners included two Nobel Prize Laureates, six MIT economics PhDs, and 
three Harvard professors.
Introduction to Part I
	
1.	 See Goldin and Katz (2008).
	
2.	 “Robo-­signing” is the practice of mortgage company employees signing 
foreclosure affidavits without reviewing the accuracy of the underlying docu-
mentation. Several mortgage lenders were sued over this practice, resulting in a 
$26 billion settlement. That money was intended to provide relief to struggling 
homeowners to avoid foreclosure. But the standards for what qualified for such 
assistance were diluted. See Dewan and Silver-­Greenberg (2012).
	
3.	 See Mitchell (2007). Another baseball hero, Sandy Koufax, may not 
have popped pills on the mound, but got scammed by Madoff, through his high 
school teammate and New York Mets owner Fred Wilpon.
	
4.	 Moreover, Paulson’s collusion with Goldman Sachs to create MBSs that 
he could bet against, suggests that this faith in short sellers to correct markets 
may be naive and entirely misplaced.
	
5.	 See Igan, Mishra, and Tressel (2009).
	
6.	 Gramlich (2007) summarizes his actions.
	
7.	 See Streitfeld and Rudolf (2009).
Chapter 1
	
1.	 Economists define the fundamental value of an asset as the net present 
value of payments (e.g., dividends or interest) over time. Consequently, errone-
ous beliefs either about the flow of payments or the time value of money can 
drive a wedge between the price and the fundamentals.
	
2.	 For a sampling of the economic arguments about bubbles, see Shiller 
(2000); Meltzer (2003); and Blanchard and Watson (1982). See also Kindle-
berger and Aliber (2005).
	
3.	 The term bounded rationality is usually attributed to Herbert Simon; 
see Simon (1957).
	
4.	 See Nakamoto and Wighton (2007).

286  •  Notes to Chapter 2
	
5.	 For empirical evidence on distorted beliefs in the housing market, see 
Cheng, Raina, and Xiong (2012).
	
6.	 See Malkiel (1990: 227).
	
7.	 See Buffett (2010). See Benabou (2012) for a formal model of delusion 
in financial markets.
	
8.	 See Clinton (1999).
	
9.	 See Greenspan (2005).
	
10.	 See Buiter (2008); emphasis in the original. See also Johnson and Kwak 
(2010).
	
11.	 See Jacobe (2008).
	
12.	 In May 2005, the Case Shiller Ten City Index was 206 (where an index 
of 100 equals prices in January 2000). In May 1995, the index was just 77. 
Data accessed June 5, 2011, at http://www.standardandpoors.com/indices 
/sp-case-shiller-home-price-indices/en/us/?indexId=spusa-cashpidff--p-us----.
	
13.	 See Jacobe (2008).
	
14.	 Some government officials, namely Treasury Secretary Geithner, were 
somewhat sympathetic to this line of argument. See Calmes (2009).
Chapter 2
	
1.	 See Malabre (1994: 220).
	
2.	 See Dixit and Weibull (2007).
	
3.	 See Shamim (2009).
	
4.	 See Reuters (2009).
	
5.	 Comments on Fox News Sunday, July 5, 2009, quoted in Holden 
(2009).
	
6.	 See Brooks (2012).
	
7.	 See The Financial Crisis and the Role of Federal Regulators (2008).
	
8.	 Ibid.
	
9.	 Ben S. Bernanke, “Remarks,” quoted in Friedman and Schwartz (2008: 
243). Mellon also, in an extreme precedent for the current Republican infla-
tion bugaboo, advocated price deflation that would adversely affect nominally 
denominated industrial and farm debt. In contrast, Franklin Roosevelt, in 
devaluing the dollar and canceling gold clauses in debt contracts, forced a 31 
percent haircut on industrial debt; see Kroszner (1999).
	
10.	 See Gramm (1999).
	
11.	 See Hill (2008).
	
12.	 As we shall see, Greenspan is one of the few free market devotees to 
publicly adjust their views about the role of regulation.
	
13.	 See The Financial Crisis and the Role of Federal Regulators (2008).
	
14.	 See “Greenspan Pockets $250k for Speech” (2006).
	
15.	 Ronald Reagan replaced Paul Volcker with Greenspan in 1987, with 
only two votes against confirmation in the Senate. When Volcker was ­appointed 
by Jimmy Carter in 1979, he was confirmed unanimously. But when reap-

Notes to Chapter 2  •  287
pointed by Reagan in 1983, there were sixteen negative votes. These included 
the two most liberal Democrats (Howard Metzenbaum and Edward Kennedy) 
who most likely objected to the Volcker hike in interest rates. Volcker was also 
opposed by three of the four most conservative Republicans (Jesse Helms, Ste-
ven Symms, and Gordon Humphrey), who probably objected to his regulatory 
stance. Reagan probably concurred with conservative opposition in 1987. In 
the two Clinton reappointments, Greenspan drew seven negative votes from 
liberals in 1996 and four in 2000.
	
16.	 See Stiglitz (2009a: 51).
	
17.	 See Barrett (2008).
	
18.	 Ibid. Cuomo’s actions may not have been entirely ideologically driven. 
He also had close political connections with real-­estate finance lobbyists who 
wanted the GSEs to tie up more of their portfolios in subprime mortgages so 
that they would have to stay out of the high-­end market.
	
19.	 See Frame (2008).
	
20.	 Many analysts agree that ultimately the role of the GSEs in the sub-
prime market played only a limited direct role in the housing and credit crises. 
Yet the GSEs’ participation in that market may well have added legitimacy 
to the huge expansion of this market and the unsavory practices of mortgage 
lenders.
	
21.	 See Fannie Mae (2003: 18–­19).
	
22.	 See Slack (2010).
	
23.	 See Lucas (2011).
	
24.	 See Curry and Shibut (2000).
	
25.	 That there are many flavors of liberalism and conservatism and that 
there is contestation over the meanings of these terms will not detain us here. 
As we argue below, a single liberal-­to-­conservative continuum has an ability to 
explain much of contemporary American politics.
	
26.	 See Poole and Rosenthal (1997: chap. 8). Of course, the index of a 
liberal group will just be a flip of a conservative index. A legislator who gets a 
100 score from the Americans for Democratic Action is likely to get a 0 from 
the National Taxpayers Union.
	
27.	 See Poole and Rosenthal (1997) and McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal 
(1997). Although many have suspected that this was a Congress-­specific 
artifact, the finding of near one-­dimensional politics has been replicated in 
dozens of national parliaments, the European Union parliament, and Amer-
ican state legislatures. Our historical findings are largely supported by an 
alternative methodology (Heckman and Snyder 1997). It is fair to say that 
there is now a professional consensus that current American politics is largely 
one-­dimensional.
	
28.	 See Hare, McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2012).
	
29.	 On the effects of party discipline, see McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal 
(2001).
	
30.	 See Poole and Rosenthal (1997, 2007) and McCarty, Poole, and Rosen-
thal (1997, 2006).

288  •  Notes to Chapter 3
	
31.	 For contrary views, see Carmines and Stimson (1989) and Mendelberg 
(2001).
	
32.	 See McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2001) and Nokken and Poole 
(2004).
	
33.	 See Poole (2007).
	
34.	 Boxer was elected to Alan Cranston’s seat upon his retirement, and 
Feinstein won a special election to replace Pete Wilson, who had become gov-
ernor of California.
	
35.	 In order of increasing differences, these are Vermont (independent 
Sanders caucuses as a Democrat), Arizona, South Carolina, and Delaware.
	
36.	 See Poole and Romer (1993).
	
37.	 The act also created the National Monetary Commission, whose ­reports 
became the basis of the Federal Reserve Act.
	
38.	 See McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2006).
	
39.	 See Schattschneider (1960: 38).
	
40.	 See Philippon and Reshef (2009). This financial wage premium is also a 
major determinant of the overall level of income inequality in the United States; 
see Kaplan and Rauh (2007).
	
41.	 See Philippon and Reshef (2009).
	
42.	 See Bakija, Cole, and Heim (2010: tables 2 and 6).
	
43.	 See Piketty and Saez (2003).
	
44.	 See Abramowitz (2011) and Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope (2010).
	
45.	 See Levendusky (2009).
	
46.	 The histograms also show the proportionate reduction in error (PRE). 
If our after-­the-­fact prediction was that everyone voted with the majority on a 
roll call, our prediction errors would be the number of votes on the minority 
side. The minority votes are used, therefore, to benchmark the spatial model. 
If the spatial model makes no errors, the PRE is 1.0. If the spatial model does 
no better than the benchmark, the PRE is 0.0. If the spatial model reduces the 
errors in the benchmark by half, the PRE is 0.5.
	
47.	 This bill included federal licensing of mortgage lenders, fines for inap-
propriate subprime loans, limits on fees and on balloon payments, and liability 
for firms creating mortgage-­backed securities. Many tougher provisions, such 
as allowing defaulters to use bankruptcy court, were eliminated from the bill.
	
48.	 See McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (1997). Other techniques include 
optimal classification (Poole 2000), the factor analytic method (Heckman and 
Snyder 1997), and Bayesian MCMC (Clinton, Jackman, and Rivers, 2004). 
DW-­NOMINATE scores are used in media reports, as in Stolberg (2009a) and 
Lizza (2012).
	
49.	 For an explanation of the proportionate reduction in error, see note 46, 
above.
Chapter 3
	
1.	 Michael Burry, quoted in Lewis (2010: 55).
	
2.	 See Schlesinger (1965: 635).

Notes to Chapter 3  •  289
	
3.	 See Lieberman and Asaba (2006).
	
4.	 On Enron’s lobbying success, see Ismail (2003).
	
5.	 See Beckel (2011).
	
6.	 See Morgenson (2010).
	
7.	 See Igan, Mishra, and Tressel (2009).
	
8.	 See Romer and Weingast (1991).
	
9.	 Because these data are taken from the 2000 decennial census, they are 
very likely to understate levels of employment in these sectors at the top of 
the boom. For example, the National Association of Realtors had its member-
ship grow from 776,580 members in 2000 to 1,338,001 in 2007. See National 
Association of Realtors (2011).
	
10.	 See Bartels (2008: chap. 9). See also Bhatti and Erikson (2011) and 
Tausanovitch (2011) for more nuanced views of Bartels’s claims.
	
11.	 Data on industry of employment from the 2008 ANES have not been 
released as of this writing. Because people routinely lie about voting, both of 
these are inflated estimates. There is little reason to believe that employees in 
the financial sector would be any more truthful than the average respondent.
	
12.	 Eric Zitzewitz (2006) estimates that late trading costs mutual fund 
investors $400 million per year.
	
13.	 Zitzewitz (2006) finds statistical evidence consistent with late trading 
for thirty-­nine of the sixty-­six mutual fund families in his study.
	
14.	 See Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2010).
	
15.	 See Ansolabehere, de Figueiredo, and Snyder (2003). It is also worth 
pointing out that campaign contributions are only part of the total amount 
of money spent on politics. Direct lobbying expenditures are also substantial. 
According to the Center for Responsive Politics, lobbying expenditures for the 
financial industry since 1998 include $1.3 billion by insurance interests, $746 
million by real estate interests, and $636 million by securities and investments 
firms. See our discussion of lobbying below.
	
16.	 Computations provided by Adam Bonica, Stanford University (corre-
spondence with the authors).
	
17.	 See Kroszner and Stratmann (1998).
	
18.	 See Nuñez and Rosenthal (2004).
	
19.	 The data was downloaded from various pages at http://www.open 
secrets.org/industries; accessed July 11, 2011.
	
20.	 Lawyers and law firms contributed $126 million in 2008. A big chunk of 
these contributors may also have had interests in financial industry regulation.
	
21.	 See Philippon and Reshef (2009).
	
22.	 The argument is amplified in Toobin (2010: 50–­57).
	
23.	 In fact, former Goldman CEO and Treasury secretary Henry Paulson is 
an avid environmentalist. See Sorkin (2009).
	
24.	 See Wachtel (2012).
	
25.	 On Wall Street’s rocket scientists, see Overbye (2009).
	
26.	 See Sorkin (2011).
	
27.	 See Wilmott (2009) and McGinty and Scannell (2009).
	
28.	 See U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission and U.S. Securities 
and Exchange Commission (2010).

290  •  Notes to Chapter 4
	
29.	 For a more formal elaboration of these arguments, see McCarty (2013).
	
30.	 The insurance industry is omitted, as much of its recent lobbying has 
been directed at health care rather than financial services.
Chapter 4
	
1.	 Parliamentary democracies can in principle hold elections more fre-
quently. The regular term for a parliamentarian is typically five years, but it can 
be as low as three years (Australia). Presidential systems such as those in East 
Asia and Latin America have fixed legislative terms, but none elect the entire 
lower house every two years.
	
2.	 See Diermeier and Feddersen (1998).
	
3.	 On local interests in the McFadden Act, see Rajan and Ramcharan 
(2011).
	
4.	 See Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation (2013).
	
5.	 See Preston (1927).
	
6.	 See Bank of Canada (2012).
	
7.	 See Hernandez and Labaton (2007).
	
8.	 See Romer and Weingast (1991) and McCarty, Poole, Romer, and 
Rosenthal (2010a).
	
9.	 The U.S. Constitution cannot be amended to eliminate equal represen-
tation of states in the Senate (Article V). It is permanent. For evidence of its 
importance for policy outcomes, see Lee (1998) and Lauderdale (2008).
	
10.	 See Binder (2003).
	
11.	 See Labaton (2005).
	
12.	 See Black (1958).
	
13.	 For evidence of the responsiveness of politicians and policies to voter 
preferences, see Erikson, MacKuen, and Stimson (2002).
	
14.	 See Cox and McCubbins (2005).
	
15.	 Cox and McCubbins (2005) argue that the majority party was able 
to exercise such agenda control beginning with the establishment of the Reed 
Rules in the 1890s.
	
16.	 A caveat is in order. Because of estimation error in DW-­NOMINATE 
scores, we are more certain that the median is around –­.197 than we are that 
Boucher is actually the median.
	
17.	 See Sinclair (2002).
	
18.	 See Krehbiel (1998).
	
19.	 If the bill was too conservative, at least sixty would oppose it and it 
wouldn’t pass even if cloture were obtained.
	
20.	 See McCarty (1997); Cameron (2000); and Cameron and McCarty 
(2004). Presidents’ informal agenda-­control powers are considerable in their 
ability to frame issues and originate legislation in executive branch agencies.
	
21.	 If the president is sufficiently moderate (i.e., located between the filibus-
ter pivots) the presidential veto does not increase the gridlock interval. If the 

Notes to Chapter 4  •  291
president is sufficiently rightist, the gridlock interval ranges from Senator 41’s 
ideal point to the larger of Senator 66 and Congressperson 285’s ideal point. 
The interval for a leftist is the minimum of Senator 34 and Congressperson 146 
to Senator 60.
	
22.	 See Senate Library (1992).
	
23.	 Of course, the House of Representatives affects the veto pivot. But in 
the current Congress, the veto pivots are senators, and so we refer to them as 
such.
	
24.	 Other Senate personnel changes that occurred before the 2010 elections 
had no impact on the gridlock intervals.
	
25.	 See Wawro and Schickler (2006) for an elaboration of these arguments.
	
26.	 See Binder and Smith (1997), Wawro and Schickler (2006), and Koger 
(2010).
	
27.	 McCarty (2007) shows statistically that the width of the gridlock inter-
val can be well accounted for by the degree of polarization and changes to the 
cloture rule.
	
28.	 Senator Long opposed provisions that would allow national banks to 
open branches, a policy that would threaten small state-­chartered banks. Even-
tually, his objections were accommodated. See Williams (1969) and Kennedy 
(1973: 72–­73).
	
29.	 During the first one hundred days of Roosevelt’s presidency, Congress 
passed Glass-­Steagall; passed the Economy Act, which cut government salaries; 
suspended the gold standard; started the Public Works Administration; passed 
the Farm Security Act to raise farmers’ incomes; and established the Tennessee 
Valley Authority. This is just a partial list. In contrast, President Obama passed 
his controversial stimulus package.
	
30.	 The gold clauses are discussed in more detail in chapter 6.
	
31.	 See Gilmour (1995) and Groseclose and McCarty (2000).
	
32.	 See Clinton (1995).
	
33.	 Congressional Record (104th Congress), p. H15219.
	
34.	 See Prior (2007, and forthcoming) for a discussion of the relationship 
between changes in the media environment and polarization.
	
35.	 See Sunstein, Schkade, and Ellman (2004); Segal and Spaeth (2002); 
and Martin and Quinn (2002).
	
36.	 See Teles (2008).
	
37.	 See Romer and Weingast (1991).
	
38.	 Marquette Nat. Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., 
439 U.S. 299 (1978).
	
39.	 See Ferejohn and Shipan (1990) and Spiller and Gely (1992).
	
40.	 Cuomo v. Clearing House Association, L.L.C., 557 U.S. 519 (2009).
	
41.	 See Duca, Muellbauer, and Murphy (2012: fig. 1).
	
42.	 See Duca, Muellbauer, and Murphy (2012: fig. 2).
	
43.	 See Gorton (2010a).
	
44.	 See Wooten (2001).
	
45.	 See Olshan (2011).

292  •  Notes to Chapter 5
	
46.	 The situation was chronicled by Mitchell Martin in the New York 
Times on April 7, 1998:
Sanford Weill, the Travelers chairman, said he expected the Fed to 
quickly approve his company’s application to become a bank holding 
company and added: “I don’t think we have to spin anything off to make 
this happen.” Current law, he said, allows at least two and as many as 
five years for prohibited assets to be divested. “We are hopeful that over 
that time the legislation will change,” he added. He said the companies 
had already had talks with the Fed about specific legal impediments and 
said, “We have had enough discussions to believe this will not be a prob-
lem.” As well as having had discussions with the Fed and the Treasury, 
[Citicorp chairman John] Reed said President Bill Clinton was briefed on 
the announcement Sunday night.
See Martin (1998).
	
47.	 See Epstein and O’Halloran (1999) and Huber and Shipan (2002).
	
48.	 See Fiorina (1989).
	
49.	 See McCubbins and Schwartz (1984).
	
50.	 See Lipton and Kirkpatrick (2008).
	
51.	 See Kwak (2013).
	
52.	 This unfortunate fact is most vividly revealed in Charles Ferguson’s 
documentary film The Inside Job (2010). See Zingales (2013) for quantitative 
evidence.
	
53.	 See Huber and McCarty (2004). See also McCarty (2013).
	
54.	 On theories of regulatory capture, see Huntington (1952); Bernstein 
(1955); Noll (1971); and Stigler (1971).
Chapter 5
	
1.	 Duca and Saving (2008) have claimed that the increase in equity invest-
ments since the 1970s is an explanation of increased support for the Republi-
can Party.
	
2.	 See McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2006: chap. 3).
	
3.	 A $148 million settlement was paid in 2012 by Wachovia’s acquirer, 
Wells Fargo. See Isidore (2012).
	
4.	 See “Wachovia Settlement Checks Real” (2012).
	
5.	 For the details of the Wachovia case, see Subramanian and Sharma 
(2010).
	
6.	 Our view about the role of housing policy thus falls in the middle of 
a debate that has engaged two prominent economists. Chicago professor and 
former International Monetary Fund chief economist Raghuram Rajan (2010) 
sees the bubble as part of a political response to rising income inequality. Rajan’s 
position has been critiqued by MIT professor and Clark Medal winner Daron 
Acemoglu. Acemoglu (2012) emphasizes policy shifts as industry driven.

Notes to Chapter 5  •  293
	
7.	 Moreover, unlike most tax deductions, it is not subject to the alterna-
tive minimum tax (though the property tax deduction did not receive the same 
preferential treatment).
	
8.	 See Arnold (1990) and Coate and Morris (1995) for discussions of how 
the lack of transparency facilitates certain types of policy decisions.
	
9.	 See Gropp, Scholz, and White (1997) and Bahchieva, Wachter, and War-
ren (2005).
	
10.	 See Acharya et al. (2011: 27–­30).
	
11.	 Public housing has hardly gone away. More than 600,000 residents of 
New York City live in public housing. See New York City Housing Authority 
(2011).
	
12.	 See Lemann (1991).
	
13.	 Advocates also calculated a political advantage based on their belief 
that homeowners would be more likely than renters to support conservative 
policies.
	
14.	 See Acharya et al. (2011: 17–­19).
	
15.	 The Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (Public Law 
No. 102-­550), Title XIII: Government Sponsored Enterprises, Subtitle A: Super-
vision and Regulation of Enterprises—­Part 3, Miscellaneous Provisions. See 
Acharya et al (2011: 31–­36) for a discussion of the impact of these provisions.
	
16.	 See Madrick and Partnoy (2011).
	
17.	 From Fannie filings at http://www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/browse-edgar?company 
=fannie+mae&match=contains&action=getcompany. Capital Research held a 
much larger stake, averaging 20 percent. AXA, the French insurance giant, was  
a major investor in Freddie Mac.
	
18.	 See Jaffee (2003).
	
19.	 See Acharya et al. (2011) for a discussion of how the GSE capital mar-
ket advantages triggered a regulatory “race to the bottom.”
	
20.	 See Lichtblau (2012).
	
21.	 See Morgenson and Rosner (2011).
	
22.	 The SEC complaint was a civil, not criminal, action. Not only does the 
government fail to take strong action—­criminal prosecution—­against financial 
executives involved in the crisis but also the private sector appears to welcome 
second acts. Mudd, after the disaster at Fannie, was able to recycle himself 
as the cohead of Fortress Investment Group, a private equity firm. The other 
cohead was Randal Nardone, who had roots at UBS. When Mudd took a “leave 
of absence” on December 21, 2011, Fortress, selling on the New York Stock 
Exchange for over $31 a share in 2007, closed at $3.37. (Share prices accessed 
September 21, 2012 at Fidelity Investments, http://www.fidelity.com). A prede-
cessor of Mudd, James Johnson, has had his own second acts. He remained (as 
of September 2012) on the boards of Goldman Sachs and Target; see Goldman 
Sachs (2012).
	
23.	 See Stiglitz, Orszag, and Orszag (2002, 2004).
	
24.	 See Morgenson and Rosner (2011: 75–­76).
	
25.	 See Jaffee (2003).

294  •  Notes to Introduction to Part II
	
26.	 Of course, the political cost of concentration stressed by the Jefferso-
nian tradition in American politics was the impetus behind traditional antitrust 
policy developed in the late nineteenth century.
	
27.	 See McLean and Elkind (2003: chap. 17).
	
28.	 See Glaeser and Scheinkman (1998).
	
29.	 See Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen (2008).
	
30.	 Congress passed the Secondary Mortgage Market Enhancement Act 
in 1984, at a time when 95 percent of the MBS market was in government 
and GSE issues. Remarkably, Bleckner (1984) accurately anticipated all the 
problems that would arise with privatization of this market, including the use 
of private ratings agencies as the source of information that would safeguard 
investors. The push to deregulate was so strong that the 1984 Act was passed 
by voice vote in both the House and Senate. See http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin 
/bdquery/z?d098:SN02040:@@@R (accessed February 8, 2012).
	
31.	 See Acharya et al. (2011: 118).
	
32.	 See Igan, Mishra, and Tressel (2009).
	
33.	 See McNamee (2004).
	
34.	 In early 2012, three traders at Credit Suisse were indicted for fraud 
related to MBSs. The alleged motivation for the fraud was that the traders 
sought to pump up their annual bonuses. This is again a “skin in the game” 
problem: the traders’ compensation is based on short-­run benchmarks and not 
the long-­run performance of the securities. See Lattman and Eavis (2012).
	
35.	 See Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012).
	
36.	 See Tett (2009) and MacKenzie (2009).
	
37.	 See Duca, Muellbauer, and Murphy (2011).
	
38.	 Some conservative groups, such as the Heritage Foundation, opposed 
the bill as “fiscally irresponsible.” See Utt (2003).
	
39.	 See Bush (2003).
	
40.	 See Congressional Budget Office (2001).
	
41.	 See U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2011).
	
42.	 See Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2011: 4).
Introduction to Part II
	
1.	 Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission, 558 U.S. 50 (2010).
	
2.	 As of July 2012, however, financial firms and other corporations have 
not extensively used their newfound opportunity to spend corporate treasury 
money on independent electoral expenditures. By assuming that all undisclosed 
independent political expenditure was corporate, Adam Bonica estimates an 
upper bound for corporate independent expenditure in 2010 of $205 million, or 
just 5.6 percent of the total federal campaign expenditures. See Bonica (2012).
	
3.	 Clifford (2009) finds that after the repeal of Glass-­Steagall the campaign 
contributions of various financial industry subsectors became more aligned.
	
4.	 See Cooper and Steinhauer (2012). The Constitution allows the presi-
dent to make appointments to positions that otherwise would require Senate 
confirmation during periods in which that body is in recess.

Notes to Chapter 6  •  295
Chapter 6
	
1.	 See Gerring (1998).
	
2.	 Kuhn, Loeb was eventually absorbed by Lehman Brothers.
	
3.	 See Tufano (1997).
	
4.	 See Warren (1935). See Bolton and Rosenthal (2002) for a theoretical 
argument that, when debt contracts are incomplete, political intervention in 
debt contracts is optimal, even when economic agents are fully rational and 
anticipate that the government will intervene in exceptional circumstances.
	
5.	 See Rothbard (1962).
	
6.	 Bronson v. Kinzie, 41 U.S. 311, 1 How. 311 (1843).
	
7.	 See Alston (1983).
	
8.	 See Wheelock (2008: 133).
	
9.	 See Kroszner (1999).
	
10.	 Ibid. The finding is all the more credible because of the author’s politi-
cal affiliations: Randall Kroszner was a member of the Council of Economic 
Advisors in the George W. Bush administration and a Bush appointee as Fed-
eral Reserve governor. His paper finds that cancellation of the gold clauses in 
industrial bond contracts had widespread economic benefits. After the cancel-
lation was upheld by a 5–­4 Supreme Court decision, prices of bonds as well as 
equities rose. There was a disconnect between the later reaction of markets and 
ideology in Congress. Republicans in Congress strongly opposed cancellation.
	
11.	 See Sorkin (2009: 200).
	
12.	 See U.S. House of Representatives (2012).
	
13.	 See U.S. Senate (2012).
	
14.	 Under the 1974 Budget Act, some budgetary legislation (subject to a 
few limitations) may be considered under a set of procedures known as recon-
ciliation. The primary benefit of these reconciliation procedures is that the time 
period for debate is limited, and therefore legislation considered in this way 
may not be filibustered.
	
15.	 See Perino (2010). Of course, there was no shortage of damaging allega-
tions against the industry in 2009 and 2010; the most politically important was 
the SEC case against Goldman Sachs over its Abacus mortgage-­backed CDOs.
	
16.	 John J. Raskob, a financial executive and the builder of the Empire 
State Building, was head of the Democratic National Committee from 1928 
to 1932. In the 1928 and 1932 elections, the DNC received nearly 25 percent 
of its funds from “bankers and brokers.” The Republican National Committee 
received approximately the same share from these sources (Overacker 1932). 
With retaliation for the New Deal reforms, the Democrats found themselves 
able to raise only 3.3 percent of their funds from the industry in 1936 (Over-
acker 1937).
	
17.	 See Alston (1983).
	
18.	 The mortgage case was Home Building & Loan Association v. Blais-
dell, 290 U.S. 398 (1934). The gold clause cases were Norman v. Baltimore 
and Ohio Railroad, 294 U.S. 240 (1935); United States v. Bankers Trust Co., 
294 U.S. 240 (1935); Perry v. United States, 294 U.S. 330 (1935); and Nortz v. 
United States, 294 U.S. 317 (1935).

296  •  Notes to Chapter 6
	
19.	 See Kennedy (1973: 73). Although Long claimed to be defending small 
state banks, Senator Glass charged that Long was doing the bidding of the New 
York bankers. See “Glass Links Banks to Attack by Long” (1933).
	
20.	 See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (1984); and “Glass Links 
Banks to Attack by Long” (1933).
	
21.	 Our discussion of the S&L crisis reflects McCarty, Poole, Romer, and 
Rosenthal (2010a), which draws on Romer and Weingast (1991).
	
22.	 The Thrift Industry Recovery Act was Title IV of the Competitive Bank-
ing Equality Act. See http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d100:HR00027: 
@@@D&summ2=m& (accessed June 12, 2012).
	
23.	 See Pyle (1995).
	
24.	 The RTC is now generally thought to have done a good job, though it 
had some rocky years. In disposing of the assets of failed thrifts, the RTC faced 
conflicting political mandates (including social policy objectives such as minor-
ity contracting and affordable housing, as well as getting the highest value for 
the assets). See Davison (2006).
	
25.	 See Federal Home Loan Banks (2012) and see Standard & Poor’s (2011).
	
26.	 See Schaefer (2010).
	
27.	 See Rappaport and Rapoport (2010). Hurtado and Sandler (2012) report 
that in 2009, Ernst and Young “paid $109 million to settle investor claims that 
it failed to find a $2.7 billion fraud at HealthSouth Corp.”
	
28.	 See Skeel (2001) and Warren (1935).
	
29.	 See Mann (2001) and Berglöf and Rosenthal (2006: 396–­414).
	
30.	 See Skeel (2001).
	
31.	 On the meeting, see Whitehouse (1989) and Wicker (2005).
	
32.	 Before the financial crisis, Fuld was named number one CEO by Insti-
tutional Investor; see Prince (2007). After Lehman failed, he was named the 
worst CEO of all time by CNBC; see “The Worst American CEOs of All Time” 
(2009).
	
33.	 See Bruner and Carr (2007: 67).
	
34.	 On the role of the SEC in corporate bankruptcy, see Skeel (2001).
	
35.	 See Weingast (1984). Notably, the end of monopoly profits in the trad-
ing of stocks is said to be a factor in Wall Street’s gravitation toward excess risk 
taking in collateralized debt. See Gapper (2008).
	
36.	 See Lowenstein (2000: 37).
	
37.	 The automatic stay prevents creditors from seizing assets of the bank-
rupt firm.
	
38.	 See Edwards and Morrison (2005).
	
39.	 Ibid .
	
40.	 See Morgan (2008).
	
41.	 See Skeel (2011).
	
42.	 See New Generation Research (2012).
	
43.	 Populists and Silverites served alongside the major parties.
	
44.	 See Hansen (1996).
	
45.	 See Berglöf and Rosenthal (2005).

Notes to Chapter 7  •  297
	
46.	 On the Interstate Commerce Act, see Poole and Rosenthal (1994).
	
47.	 See Balleisen (1996).
	
48.	 See Brady, Canes-­Wrone, and Cogan (2000).
	
49.	 There are cases of widespread public protest against a law. The Medi-
care Catastrophic Coverage Act, passed in June 1988, resulted in protests over 
increased premiums for middle-­ to high-­income seniors. The headliner was the 
pounding on the car of Dan Rostenkowski, the Ways and Means Committee 
chair, by members of the “Gray Panthers.” Yet repeal was voted on only by a 
new Congress in November 1989. More recently, a firestorm of protests was 
set off by a provision in the 2009 health care law mandating IRS form 1099 
reporting of business expenditures over $600. The provision was repealed in 
April 2011. Neither of these examples pertains to financial markets.
Chapter 7
	
1.	 See Sorkin (2009).
	
2.	 See “The Rubin Connection” (2008).
	
3.	 Cuomo v. Clearing House Association, L.L.C., 557 U.S. 519 (2009). See 
Stohr (2009).
	
4.	 The proposed rules will implement Dodd-­Frank, Section 941. These 
delays may have had adverse effects on the mortgage market. The definition of 
“qualifying residential mortgages” that would be exempted from the retention 
requirement is an example of this. The uncertainty about which loans are the 
easiest to securitize may have impeded home lending.
	
5.	 See Davis Polk (2012).
	
6.	 See U.S. Department of the Treasury (2011).
	
7.	 See Barofsky (2011). Prominent Yale economist John Geanakoplos 
made a very public push to get the administration to push harder on mortgage 
relief but was largely unsuccessful. See Geanakoplos and Koniak (2008, 2009).
	
8.	 See Milbank (2010).
	
9.	 See Collins (2011).
	
10.	 See “Banks Are Off the Hook Again” (2011).
	
11.	 See Elmer (2012).
	
12.	 See Sussman (2012).
	
13.	 See Posner (2009).
	
14.	 Technical note: these scores were computed with W-­NOMINATE. See 
http://voteview.com/wnominate_in_R.htm for details.
	
15.	 We estimate these measures on all roll call votes rather than just ones 
related to financial measures. Below we detail specifically that, with the excep-
tion of TARP, voting on financial measures was largely unaffected by the crisis.
	
16.	 Comparisons are made only for those legislators who voted on at least 
twenty-­five roll calls pre-­Lehman and at least twenty-­five post-­Lehman. This 
choice implies the exclusion of legislators who served only in the 111th Con-
gress and not in the 110th.

298  •  Notes to Chapter 7
	
17.	 They were 0.544 in 2009 and 0.536 in 2007.
	
18.	 See Obama (2008).
	
19.	 Obama’s early overtures toward bipartisanship might possibly have 
been strategic. Consistent with the blame-­game bargaining described in chap-
ter 4, he may have been attempting to out the Republicans as extremists by 
offering compromises that he knew they would not accept. But if this was the 
strategy, the outcome of the 2010 elections suggests that it did not work. See 
McCarty (2009).
	
20.	 See Weisman and Herszenhorn (2008). “Pay as you go” rules require 
that any new expenditure be matched with a spending cut somewhere else.
	
21.	 Another fissure within the Democratic Party is that it is home to both 
committed environmentalists and to coal-­state “porkers.” State senator and 
U.S. senator Barack Obama was a strong supporter of coal. See Dilanian 
(2008).
	
22.	 See Herszenhorn (2008b). Some observers suggested that Senate Major-
ity Leader Harry Reid’s main rationale for pushing the bigger program was to 
put Republican senators on record as opposing specific provisions in an elec-
tion year.
	
23.	 See Herszenhorn (2008a).
	
24.	 See Cooper (2010). By contrast, the personal tax cuts in the 2009 stimu-
lus package were implemented through changes in the withholding schedule. 
But this mechanism seems to have denied President Obama political credit for 
the cuts.
	
25.	 See Weisman and Andrews (2008).
	
26.	 This delay resulted in the United States implementing a stimulus pro-
gram several months after most other nations had done so.
	
27.	 See Lizza (2012).
	
28.	 See Baker and Herszenhorn (2009).
	
29.	 Six members did not vote.
	
30.	 We do not have 111th Congress ideology estimates for two Democrats 
who voted in favor.
	
31.	 When Specter switched parties, his ideology score went from +0.11 to 
–­0.39—­from the moderate center to the right flank of the Democrats.
	
32.	 A perceptive reader will see that we could eliminate the Voinovich 
“error” by moving the cutting line to the left. This would be cheating. For 
technical details, see Poole and Rosenthal (1997: appendix A).
	
33.	 See Stolberg (2009b).
	
34.	 CBS News poll, February 2–­4, 2009; available at the Roper Center Poll 
Archive, http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu/.
	
35.	 Ibid. In response to “In your opinion which will do more to get the 
U.S. out of the current recession: increasing government spending, or reducing 
taxes?” only 16 percent said increase spending, whereas 63 percent favored 
lower taxes.
	
36.	 CBS News/New York Times poll, July 24–­28, 2009 available at the 
Roper Center Poll Archive, http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu/.

Notes to Chapter 7  •  299
	
37.	 See Chan (2010a).
	
38.	 See Stolberg (2010) and Calmes (2010a; 2010b).
	
39.	 See Ansell (2011).
	
40.	 Hall (2010) calculates that by the first quarter of 2010, total purchasing 
by federal, state, and local governments had fallen around $25 billion below its 
trend level.
	
41.	 See Baker (2010). Of course, other countries’ packages may be over-
stated in a variety of ways as well.
	
42.	 See Hall (2010). Estimates by the Congressional Budget Office are in 
the same ball park; see Congressional Budget Office (2010).
	
43.	 Amendments dealing with credit card practices were proposed by Sen-
ate Democrats as the Senate passed a bankruptcy bill in 2001. See Nuñez and 
Rosenthal (2004).
	
44.	 Central clearing refers to a requirement that derivatives counterparties 
engage a clearing house that would guarantee each party’s performance on the 
contract.
	
45.	 Seventeen such Republicans voted against the reconfirmation of Chair-
man Bernanke in January 2010. See chapter 8.
	
46.	 In the final legislation, the Consumer Financial Protection Agency 
became the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
	
47.	 See Dennis (2010b); Chan (2010b); and Appelbaum (2010b).
	
48.	 See Dennis (2010a); Appelbaum (2010a); and Wyatt (2010).
	
49.	 Cao and Jones were also errors on the stimulus package conference 
report, but in an opposite sense. They voted against the stimulus package when 
they were predicted to have voted for it.
	
50.	 Castle’s primary loss appears not to be closely linked to his vote on 
Dodd-­Frank but to be more a matter of a Tea Party purge—­supported by con-
servative Republican senators such as Jim DeMint—­of moderate members of 
Congress.
	
51.	 The Feingold story is elaborated in McCarty, Poole, Romer, and Rosen-
thal (2010b).
	
52.	 See Roubini (2008).
	
53.	 See “President Bush Overall Job Rating” (2012).
	
54.	 See Bernanke (2005).
	
55.	 See Hauke and Nelson (2007).
	
56.	 Our analysis of predatory lending draws heavily on DeBold (2010).
	
57.	 See Bostic et al. (2008).
	
58.	 Conservative jurists often argue that states should be afforded a high 
degree of deference. Scalia’s vote is consistent with that position. The votes of 
the other conservative justices appear to have accommodated the interests of 
the financial sector at the expense of ideological purity.
	
59.	 A 2-­28 is a thirty-­year adjustable-­rate mortgage with a fixed interest 
rate for the first two years. A 3-­27 resets after three years.
	
60.	 See Swagel (2009). See also Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012).
	
61.	 See Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2010).

300  •  Notes to Chapter 8
	
62.	 See Baker (2008). Another piece of evidence echoes Mian, Sufi, and 
Trebbi’s (2010) findings. On a vote just prior to the AHRFPA votes in May, 
the House passed the Neighborhood Stabilization Act of 2008, introduced by 
liberal representative Maxine Waters (D-­CA). This program would have done 
little for Republican voters; only eleven Republicans voted for passage. The 
Senate never considered the bill.
	
63.	 Piskorski, Seru, and Vig (2010) found that foreclosure was substantially 
less likely on loans that were held directly by banks than on loans that had been 
securitized.
	
64.	 See Gorton (2010b).
	
65.	 See Nunnari (2011).
	
66.	 See Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2010).
	
67.	 Indeed, among Republicans, those receiving the most financial industry 
cash were more likely to vote against the bill. This indicates that precrisis finan-
cial firms often supported free market conservatives with commitments against 
government intervention of any form. But when the industry needed interven-
tion, its hand was bit by the ideology that it had been promoting.
	
68.	 See Poole and Rosenthal (2007).
	
69.	 See Fogel (1989).
Chapter 8
	
1.	 See Cilliza (2012).
	
2.	 These probabilities were estimated using probit separately for each party.
	
3.	 See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011).
	
4.	 See Pew Research Center (2011).
	
5.	 Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll, September 19–­22 and 26–­28, 2008. 
All polls cited in this chapter’s notes are available at the Roper Center Poll 
Archive, http://www.ropercenter.uconn.edu/.
	
6.	 CBS/New York Times poll, February 5–­10, 2010. Twenty-­three percent 
blamed Wall Street and 6 percent Obama. A plurality blamed President Bush 
(31 percent). However, 13 percent blamed Congress.
	
7.	 CNN poll, February 18–­19, 2009. The exact numbers are: labor lead-
ers, 47 percent; Obama, 73 percent; Republicans in Congress, 53 percent; Dem- 
ocrats in Congress, 66 percent; auto executives, 25 percent.
	
8.	 CNN poll, September 19–­21 2008.
	
9.	 Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll, October 10–­13, 2008.
	
10.	 Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg News, December 6–­8, 2008.
	
11.	 Because the survey was in the field when TARP was announced, 
responses probably reflect attitudes about TARP as well as prior bailouts (e.g., 
Bear Stearns).
	
12.	 Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll, October 10–­13, 2008. Even among 
Republican voters, only 18 percent said they would vote to punish a TARP 
supporter.

Notes to Chapter 8  •  301
	
13.	 Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll, October 10–­13, 2008.
	
14.	 CNN poll, September 19–­21, 2008.
	
15.	 CNN poll, October 17–­19, 2008.
	
16.	 CNN poll, October 3–­5, 2008.
	
17.	 Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll, December 6–­8, 2008.
	
18.	 CNN poll, January 12–­15, 2009.
	
19.	 CNN poll, February 18, 2009.
	
20.	 CBS News poll, February 2–­4, 2009.
	
21.	 CNN poll, December 6–­9, 2007. Slightly more than 50 percent blamed 
the homeowners for their problems; only 45 percent blamed predatory lending, 
however.
	
22.	 Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll, October 10–­13.
	
23.	 Seventy-­one percent of Democrats, but only 43 percent of Republicans, 
supported such assistance. CNN poll, October 17–­19, 2008.
	
24.	 The margin was 72–­26 percent. CNN poll, December 6–­9, 2007.
	
25.	 CBS News/New York Times poll, April 1–­5, 2009. The Los Angeles 
Times/Bloomberg poll from December 6–­8, 2008, provides almost identical 
results.
	
26.	 CNN poll, March 19–­21, 2010.
	
27.	 CNN poll, May 21–­23, 2010.
	
28.	 CNN poll, July 16–­21, 2010. Overall support ran 58 to 39 percent. 
Democrats favored at 78 percent and Republicans at 42 percent.
	
29.	 CNN poll, March 19–­21, 2010.
	
30.	 The gap was 61 percent to 35 percent. CNN poll, December 16–­19, 2009.
	
31.	 Support depended on how questions were framed. When asked “Do 
you favor or oppose Congress passing a law that would give the federal gov-
ernment new powers to regulate large banks and major financial institutions?” 
support fell as low as 46 percent. Gallup poll, April 17–­18, 2010.
	
32.	 CBS News poll, July 9–­12, 2009.
	
33.	 CBS News/New York Times poll, April 1–­5, 2009. Forty-­one percent 
supported restructuring, but 31 percent answered “don’t know.” In the same 
survey, a third of the respondents agreed that financial firms were treated bet-
ter than the auto manufacturers; only 6 percent said the automakers got a 
better deal.
	
34.	 Twenty-­seven percent favored, 14 percent opposed, 56 percent had not 
heard enough. CBS News/New York Times poll, February 5–­10, 2010.
	
35.	 Pew Research Center for the People and the Press poll, November 11–­
14, 2010.
	
36.	 As of June 18, 2012, 65 percent of all bailout funds had been returned 
or paid back as interest. Most of the funds outstanding represent the bailout of 
Fannie and Freddie. See Kiel and Nguyen (2012).
	
37.	 CBS News poll, February 2–­4, 2009. In December 2008, however, 50 
percent thought “government’s partial ownership of banks and other industries 
is a necessary step to save the private sector” Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg 
poll, December 6–­8, 2008.

302  •  Notes to Chapter 9
	
38.	 The history and background of the Tea Party Movement is detailed in 
Rasmussen and Schoen (2010); Zernike (2010); and Skocpol and Williamson 
(2011).
	
39.	 When one of the producers suggested that Santelli run for Senate, he 
retorted, “Do you think I want to take a shower every hour? The last place I’m 
ever gonna live or work is D.C.” For a transcript of Santelli’s remarks, see “Rick 
Santelli, Tea Party” (2009).
	
40.	 “Rick Santelli, Tea Party” (2009).
	
41.	 See Robbins (2009) and Fox News (2009).
	
42.	 See Sarlin (2010). Up to that point the only observed Tea Party action 
was directed at Republican Senator Bob Corker for cooperating with the Dem-
ocrats. See also Weigel (2010).
	
43.	 See McGrath (2010).
	
44.	 See Williams (2011).
	
45.	 See Schwartz (2011).
	
46.	 As an experiment for the forms of “deliberative democracy” advocated 
by many political scientists, OWS was a failure.
	
47.	 Lasn and Adbusters senior editor Micah White drafted a letter to Presi-
dent Obama specifying demands including greater financial regulation, a ban 
on high-­frequency trading, and stepped-­up prosecution of those responsible 
for the financial crisis, but the letter was not adopted by the General Assem-
bly. Instead, the General Assembly drafted a “Declaration of Occupation” that 
Schwartz (2011) describes as “more worldview than a list of demands.” Instead 
of policy goals, the document contains a long laundry list of grievances and a 
brief in favor of deliberative and participatory democracy.
	
48.	 See Heilemann (2011).
	
49.	 Ibid.
	
50.	 This study was controversial. It had a relatively small sample size, and 
the details of how the poll was conducted and the sample was generated have 
not been released.
	
51.	 Generally, poll respondents overreport voting, but it is possible in this 
context of a protest against the political system that voting may have been 
underreported.
	
52.	 Somewhat surprisingly, Schoen (2011) uses these same data to con-
clude that OWS “comprises an unrepresentative segment of the electorate that 
believes in radical redistribution of wealth.”
	
53.	 Heilemann (2011) reports the frustration of one of the more reformist 
activists: “I don’t want to live in a fucking commune. I don’t want to blow shit 
up. I want to get stuff done.”
	
54.	 See Soros (2010).
	
55.	 See Morgenson (2011).
Chapter 9
	
1.	 Other Congresses have had larger Democratic majorities, but the con-
servative and moderate blocks of the Democratic Party were much larger. See 
McCarty (2008).

Notes to Chapter 9  •  303
	
2.	 For a discussion of these other presidential strategies, see Beckmann 
(2010).
	
3.	 See Tapper (2011).
	
4.	 See “Obama’s Take on Wall Street Prosecutions” (2011).
	
5.	 See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2010b).
	
6.	 See U.S. Department of Justice (2012).
	
7.	 See U.S. Attorney, Eastern District (2012) and Pelofsky and Vicini 
(2011).
	
8.	 See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2010a).
	
9.	 Recently, a federal judge admonished the SEC for its practice of quickly 
reaching no admission of fault in out-­of-­court settlements with banks instead 
of vigorous prosecution; see Lattman (2011). Perhaps this rebuke finally moti-
vated the SEC to go after six Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac executives for lying 
to investors about the amount of their subprime holdings in the lead up to the 
meltdown. See “SEC Brings Crisis-­Era Suits” (2011).
	
10.	 The percentages pertain to banks with more than $300 million in assets. 
For the top ten banks, the corresponding percentages are 50 percent, 60 per-
cent, and 62 percent. Authors’ computations from data available at http://
www.federalreserve.gov/releases/lbr/, accessed June 16, 2012.
	
11.	 See Sorkin (2009: chap. 20) and Paulson (2010: 362–­68).
	
12.	 See Kiel and Nguyen (2012).
	
13.	 This discussion draws from Chao (2011).
	
14.	 See Davis Polk (2012).
	
15.	 See Morgenson (2011).
	
16.	 See Lowenstein (2008); Lewis (2010: chaps. 4 and 6); and Morgenson 
and Rosner (2011: chap. 15, esp. 279–­89).
	
17.	 See Schattschneider (1960).
	
18.	 See “The Talented Mr. Gensler” (2011).
	
19.	 See Scott and De la Merced (2012).
	
20.	 Per the financial regulation index in Philippon and Reshef (2009).
	
21.	 See McKee and Lanman (2009).
	
22.	 See Stiglitz (2009b) and Treanor (2009).
	
23.	 And even if campaign contributions lost free speech protections, what 
about money spent on lobbying and issue advocacy?
	
24.	 Many scholars have concluded that the cloture rule is unconstitutional 
and have urged the courts to intervene. We think that it is highly unlikely that 
the courts would do so. Other scholars have argued that a sufficiently deter-
mined majority could change the cloture rules by a simple majority vote. But 
because a party’s moderates benefit from the current rules, such an attempt 
might engender intraparty conflict. See Wawro and Schickler (2006).
	
25.	 See Alesina and Rosenthal (1995).
	
26.	 Rear Admiral James B. Stockdale won the medal of honor for his hero-
ism as a prisoner of war in Vietnam. His exemplary military service did not 
translate into politics very well.
	
27.	 See Fogel (1989).
	
28.	 The movement began to fade after 1920 and should not be confused 
with current liberals who also use the “progressive” label.

304  •  Notes to Epilogue
	
29.	 On the progressives, see Hofstadter (1955, chap. 4) and Hofstadter, 
Miller, and Aaron (1959, chap. 32).
	
30.	 See Philippon and Reshef (2009).
	
31.	 See Eisenhower (1956).
	
32.	 See Perlstein (2001) and Kabaservice (2012).
	
33.	 See “Faculty Profile of Paul MacAvoy” (2012).
	
34.	 See McClintick (2006).
	
35.	 See Bates, Zennie, and Durante (2012) and Reuters (2012).
Epilogue
	
1.	 See Maxfield (2012). 
	
2.	 See Protess (2012). 
	
3.	 See State National Bank of Big Spring et al. v. Geithner et al. (2012) and 
Stephenson (2012). 
	
4.	 Money market mutual funds (MMFs) generally try to sustain a net asset 
value (NAV) of $1 to provide security to investors. A run on the Reserve Pri-
mary Fund, triggered by its exposure to Lehman Brothers, left it unable to 
redeem its shares at that price. This forced the Treasury to insure $1 NAV for 
MMFs. To prevent a replay, the SEC considered new rules that would force 
MMFs to “float” (i.e., not guarantee $1 NAV) or to hold a larger capital buffer. 
These proposals failed to generate support from a majority of commissioners 
and were then tabled by Chair Mary Schapiro.
	
5.	 See Davis Polk (2013).
	
6.	 See McKenna (2012). 
	
7.	 See Silver-Greenberg (2012a).
	
8.	 See Silver-Greenberg (2012b).
	
9.	 See Comfort (2012).
	
10.	 Ibid.
	
11.	 Puzzanghera (2012).
	
12.	 See Hernandez (2012).
	
13.	 See Sides (2012).
	
14.	 Not many Wall Streeters who contributed to Obama in 2008 switched 
to Romney in 2012. Typically these donors decreased their contributions in 
2012 or sat out the election. Romney’s money came largely from those who 
had not contributed to Obama in 2008. Many who had contributed to Repub-
licans in the past increased their contributions in 2012, to Romney’s benefit. 
(Personal communication from Adam Bonica, Stanford University.)
	
15.	 The gratuitous posturing hypothesis is supported by the fact that almost 
all House Republicans who voted against the tax increase voted in favor of the 
rule that brought the legislation to the floor.
	
16.	 See Condon (2012).

Bibliography
Abelson, Reed. 2000. “Pets.com, Sock Puppet’s Home, Will Close.” New York 
Times, November 8.
Abramowitz, Alan. 2011. The Disappearing Center: Engaged Citizens, Polar-
ization, and American Democracy. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2012. “Thoughts on Inequality and the Financial Crisis.” 
Accessed February 7, 2012, at http://econ-www.mit.edu/files/6348.
Acharya, Viral V., Matthew Richardson, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Law-
rence J. White. 2011. Guaranteed to Fail: Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the 
Debacle of Mortgage Finance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal. 1995. Partisan Politics, Divided Gov-
ernment, and the Economy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Alston, Lee J. 1983. “Farm Foreclosure Moratorium Legislation: A Lesson 
from the Past.” American Economic Review 74: 445–­57.
Ansell, Ben. 2011. “The Political Economy of Ownership: Housing Markets 
and the Welfare State.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, John M. de Figueiredo, and James Snyder. 2003. “Why 
Is There So Little Money in Politics?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 
17(1): 105–­30.
Appelbaum, Binyamin. 2010a. “Lawmakers at Impasse on Trading.” New York 
Times, June 23.
Appelbaum, Binyamin. 2010b. “Six Key Points of the Financial Regulation Leg-
islation.” Washington Post, March 16.
Arnold, R. Douglas. 1990. The Logic of Congressional Action. New Haven, CT:  
Yale University Press.
Atlas, John. 2007. “The Conservative Origins of the Subprime Mortgage Cri-
sis.” American Prospect, December 17. Accessed January 22, 2012, at http://
prospect.org/article/conservative-origins-sub-prime-mortgage-crisis-0.
Bahchieva, Raisa, Susan M. Wachter, and Elizabeth Warren. 2005. “Mortgage 
Debt, Bankruptcy, and the Sustainability of Homeownership.” In Credit 
Markets for the Poor, ed. Patrick Bolton and Howard Rosenthal. New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation.
Baker, Peter. 2008. “Administration Is Seeking $700 Billion for Wall St.; Bailout 
Could Set Record.” New York Times, September 21.
Baker, Peter. 2010. “Education of a President.” New York Times Magazine, 
October 12.

306  •  Bibliography
Baker, Peter, and David M. Herszenhorn. 2009. “Senate Allies Fault Obama on 
Stimulus.” New York Times, January 8.
Bakija, Jon, Adam Cole, and Bradley Heim. 2010. “Jobs and Income Growth of 
Top Earners and the Causes of Changing Income Inequality: Evidence from 
U.S. Tax Return Data.” Unpublished manuscript, Williams College.
Balleisen, Edward. 1996. “Vulture Capitalism in Antebellum America: The 1841 
Federal Bankruptcy Act and the Exploitation of Financial Distress.” Busi- 
ness History Review 70: 473–­516.
Bank of Canada. 2012. “History.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www 
.bankofcanada.ca/about/who-we-are/history/.
“Banks Are Off the Hook Again.” 2011. Editorial. New York Times, April 9.
Barofsky, Neil M. 2011. “Where the Bailout Went Wrong.” Op-­ed, New York 
Times, March 29.
Barrett, Wayne. 2008. “Andrew Cuomo and Fannie and Freddie.” Village Voice, 
August 5.
Bartels, Larry. 2008. Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New 
Gilded Age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bates, Daniel, Michael Zennie, and Thomas Durante. 2012. “Facebook Chief 
Operating Officer Begs Students to ‘Click an Ad or Two’ on Social Network 
as IPO Woes Continue.” Daily Mail, May 24. Accessed June 17, 2012, at 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2149443/Facebook-IPO-Sheryl 
-Sandberg-asks-Harvard-students-click-ads.html#ixzz1y3fs4Lz8.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Jesse M. Fried. 2005. “Executive Compensation at 
Fannie Mae: A Case Study of Perverse Incentives, Nonperformance Pay and 
Camouflage.” Journal of Corporation Law 30: 807–­22.
Beckel, Michael. 2011. “Ex-­Countrywide Chairman Angelo Mozilo, Namesake 
of Controversial VIP Mortgage Program, Once Aided Pols.” Accessed Sep-
tember 20, 2012, at http://www.opensecrets.org/news/2011/02/ex-country 
wide-chairman-angelo-mozilo.html.
Beckmann, Matthew N. 2010. Pushing the Agenda: Presidential Leadership in 
U.S. Lawmaking 1953–­2004. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Benabou, Roland. 2008. “Ideology.” Journal of the European Economic Asso-
ciation 6(2–­3): 321–­52.
Benabou, Roland. 2012. “Groupthink: Collective Delusions in Markets and Or- 
ganization.” Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University.
Berglöf, Erik, and Howard Rosenthal. 2005. “The Political Origin of Finance: 
The Case of U.S. Bankruptcy Law.” Unpublished manuscript.
Berglöf, Erik, and Howard Rosenthal. 2006. “Power Rejected: Congress  
and Bankruptcy in the Early Republic.” In Process, Party, and Policy Mak-
ing, vol. 2: Further New Perspectives on the History of Congress, ed. David 
W. Brady and Mathew D. McCubbins. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. “Testimony of Ben S. Bernanke.” Accessed on Septem-
ber 20, 2012, at http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/testimony/2005 
/20051115/default.htm.

Bibliography  •  307
Berner, Robert, and Brian Grow. 2008. “They Warned Us about the Mortgage 
Crisis.” Bloomberg Businessweek, October 8. Accessed June 28, 2012, at 
http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/08_42/b4104036827981 
.htm.
Bernstein, Marver. 1955. Regulating Business by Independent Commission. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bhatti, Yousef, and Robert Erikson. 2011. “How Poorly Are the Poor Repre-
sented in the U.S. Senate?” In Who Gets Represented? ed. Peter Enns and 
Christopher Wlezian. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Binder, Sarah A. 2003. Stalemate: The Causes and Consequences of Legislative 
Gridlock. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Binder, Sarah A., and Steven S. Smith. 1997. Politics or Principle: Filibustering 
in the U.S. Senate. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Black, Duncan. 1958. The Theory of Committees and Elections. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Mark W. Watson. 1982. “Bubbles, Rational Expecta­
tions, and Speculative Markets.” In Crisis in Economic and Financial Struc- 
ture: Bubbles, Bursts, and Shocks, ed. Paul Wachtel. Lexington, MA: Lexing- 
ton Books.
Bleckner, David J. 1984. “Section 106 of the Secondary Mortgage Market 
Enhancement Act of 1984 and the Need for Overriding State Legislation.” 
Fordham Urban Law Journal 13: 681–­721.
Bolton, Patrick, and Howard Rosenthal. 2002. “Political Intervention in Debt 
Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy 110(5): 1103–­34.
Bonica, Adam. 2012. “Data on Money Flows.” Accessed September 20, 2012 at 
http://www.ssireview.org/pdf/bonica_cu_data.pdf.
Bostic, Raphael W., Kathleen C. Engel, Patricia A. McCoy, Anthony Pennington-­
Cross, and Susan M. Wachter. 2008. “State and Local Anti-­predatory 
Lending Laws: The Effect of Legal Enforcement Mechanisms.” Journal of 
Economics and Business 60(1–­2): 47–­66.
Brady, David W., Brandice Canes-­Wrone, and John F. Cogan. 2000. “Differ-
ences in Legislative Voting Behavior between Winning and Losing House 
Incumbents.” In Continuity and Change in House Elections, ed. David W. 
Brady, John F. Cogan, and Morris P. Fiorina. Stanford, CA: Stanford Uni-
versity Press.
Brooks, David. 2012. “Is Our Adults Learning?” New York Times, April 26.
Browning, Lynnley. 2010. “U.S. Drops Criminal Charges against UBS.” New 
York Times, October 22.
Bruner, Robert F., and Sean D. Carr. 2007. The Panic of 1907: Lessons Learned 
from the Market’s Perfect Storm. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Buffett, Warren E. 2010. “Pretty Good for Government Work.” New York Times,  
November 16.
Buiter, Willem H. 2008. “Lessons from the North Atlantic Financial Crisis.” 
Paper presented at the conference The Role of Money Markets, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, May 29–­30, 2008.

308  •  Bibliography
“Bum Rap For Rahm.” 2011. Accessed on September 20, 2012, at http://www 
.factcheck.org/2011/01/bum-rap-for-rahm/.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011. “Labor Force Statistics from the Current Pop-
ulation Survey.” Accessed November 25, 2011, at http://bls.gov/web/empsit 
/cpseea10.htm.
Bush, George W. 2003. “Remarks on Signing the American Dream Down-
payment Act.” The American Presidency Project, December 16. Accessed 
September 20, 2012, at http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid 
=64935.
Calmes, Jackie. 2009. “AIG Uproar a Test for Geithner.” New York Times, 
March 18.
Calmes, Jackie. 2010a. “Obama to Propose Tax Write-­off for Business.” New 
York Times, September 6.
Calmes, Jackie. 2010b. “Obama Pushes Transportation Spending.” New York 
Times, October 11.
Cameron, Charles. 2000. Veto Bargaining: Presidents and the Politics of Nega-
tive Power. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, Charles, and Nolan McCarty. 2004. “Models of Vetoes and Veto 
Bargaining.” Annual Review of Political Science 7: 409–­35.
Carmines, Edward J., and James A. Stimson. 1989. Issue Evolution: Race and the 
Transformation of American Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chan, Sewell. 2010a. “Democrats Are at Odds on Relevance of Keynes.” New 
York Times, October 18.
Chan, Sewell. 2010b. “Reform Bill Adds Layers of Oversight.” New York 
Times, March 16.
Chao, Justine. 2011. “The Dodd Frank Act: Section 941: Improvements to the 
Asset-­backed Securitization Process: Credit Risk Retention.” Unpublished 
manuscript, New York University. Accessed September 7, 2012, at http://
voteview.com/ChaoCRR_Final_Paper.pdf.
Cheng, Ing-­Hae, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong. 2012. “Wall Street and the Hous-
ing Bubble: Bad Incentives, Bad Models, or Bad Luck.” Unpublished manu-
script, University of Michigan. Accessed September 24, 2012 at http://aida 
.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/behfin/2012-04-11/Cheng_Raina_Xiong.pdf.
Cilliza, Chris. 2012. “Connecticut Sen. Christopher Dodd Won’t Seek Reelec-
tion, Will Retire at End of Term.” Washington Post, January 6.
Clifford, Matthew P. 2009. “Congress and the Financial Services Industry 
1989–­2008.” Masters thesis, Department of Political Science, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.
Clinton, Joshua D., Simon D. Jackman, and Douglas Rivers. 2004. “The Sta-
tistical Analysis of Roll Call Data: A Unified Approach.” American Political 
Science Review 98: 355–­70.
Clinton, William J. 1995. “Veto Message Re Private Securities Litigation Re- 
form Act.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.lectlaw.com/files 
/leg22.htm.

Bibliography  •  309
Clinton, William J. 1999. “Statement on Signing the Gramm-­Leach-­Bliley Act, 
November 12, 1999.” Accessed June 15, 2011, at http://www.presidency 
.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=56922#axzz1PMR0bS3f.
Coate, Stephen, and Stephen Morris. 1995. “On the Form of Transfers to Spe-
cial Interests.” Journal of Political Economy 103(6): 1210–­35.
Collins, Brian. 2011. “Servicers Sign ‘Watered Down’ Consent Agreements.” 
American Banker, April 7. Accessed December 6, 2011, at http://www 
.americanbanker.com/news/servicer-settlement-1035663-1.html.
Comfort, Nicholas. 2012. “UBS Fine Brings European Bank Levies to $6.1 Bil-
lion.” Bloomberg, December 18. Accessed December 23, 2012, http://www 
.bloomberg.com/news/2012-12-19/ubs-fine-brings-european-bank-levies 
-to-6-1-billion.html. 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission. 2011. President’s Budget and Per-
formance Plan, Fiscal Year 2012. Washington, DC: Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission.
Condon, Bernard. 2012. “Ordinary Folks Losing Faith in Stocks.” Associated 
Press, December 27. Accessed December 28, 2012, http://news.yahoo.com 
/ap-impact-ordinary-folks-losing-faith-stocks-181042940--finance.html.
Congressional Budget Office. 2001. “Pay-­As-­You-­Go Estimate, H.R. 5640: 
American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 2000.” Ac- 
cessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles 
/ftpdocs/27xx/doc2722/hr5640.pdf.
Congressional Budget Office. 2010. “Estimated Impact of the Stimulus Package 
on Employment and Economic Output.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at 
http://www.cbo.gov/publication/25099.
Cooper, Helen, and Jennifer Steinhauer. 2012. “Bucking Senate, Obama Ap- 
points Consumer Chief.” New York Times, January 4.
Cooper, Michael. 2010. “From Obama, the Tax Cut Nobody Heard Of.” New 
York Times, October 18.
Cox, Gary, and Mathew D. McCubbins. 2005. Setting the Agenda: Responsible 
Party Government in the U.S. House of Representatives. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Curry, Timothy, and Lynn Shibut. 2000. “The Cost of the Savings and Loan 
Crisis: Truth and Consequences.” FDIC Banking Review 13(2): 26–­35.
Davis Polk. 2012. “Dodd-­Frank Progress Report.” Accessed September 20, 
2012, at http://www.davispolk.com/files/Publication/867cc356-a624-49e9 
-b1fc-529db6946e6e/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/97a3eb90-7d31 
-41fe-a2a7-815c28e874f5/Jun2012_Dodd.Frank.Progress.Report.pdf.
Davis Polk. 2013. “Dodd Frank Progress Report.” January. Accessed January  
2, 2013, http://www.davispolk.com/files/uploads/FIG/Jan2013_Dodd.Frank 
.Progress.Report.pdf.
Davison, Lee. 2006. “The Resolution Trust Corporation and Congress, 1989–­
1993. Part II: 1991–­1993.” Accessed November 24, 2011, at http://www.fdic 
.gov/bank/analytical/banking/2007apr/article1/index.html.

310  •  Bibliography
DeBold, Elizabeth. 2010. “Title XIV—­The Mortgage Reform and Anti-­
predatory Lending Act: The Past, Present, and Future of Anti-­predatory 
Lending Protections.” Unpublished manuscript, New York University.  
Accessed September 7, 2012, at http://voteview.com/DeBold_Predatory 
_Lending.pdf.
Diermeier, Daniel, and Timothy Feddersen. 1998. “Cohesion in Legislatures 
and the Vote of Confidence Procedure.” American Political Science Review 
92(3): 611–­21.
De la Merced, Michael J., and Julia Werdigier. 2010. “The Origins of Lehman’s 
‘Repo 105.’ ” New York Times, March 12.
Dennis, Brady. 2010a. “Sen. Blanche Lincoln’s Derivatives-­spinoff Plan Gains 
Support in Congress.” Washington Post, June 15.
Dennis, Brady. 2010b. “Sen. Dodd to Introduce Plan to Overhaul Financial 
Regulatory System.” Washington Post, March 15.
Dewan, Shaila, and Jessica Silver-­Greenberg. 2012. “Foreclosure Deal Credits 
Banks for Routine Efforts.” New York Times, March 27.
Dilanian, Ken. 2000. “Obama Shifts Stance on Environmental Issues.” USA 
Today, July 18.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Jorgen W. Weibull. 2007. “Political Polarization.” Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104: 7351–­56.
Dodosh, Mark. 2008. “National City’s Failed Strategy Threatens Fate: Woes  
That May Lead to Bank’s Takeover Rooted in Decisions Nearly a Decade  
Old.” Crain’s Cleveland Business. Accessed September 7, 2012, at http:// 
www.crainscleveland.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080317/FREE 
/590006312/1099#.
Duca, John V., John Muellbauer, and Anthony Murphy. 2011. Shifting Credit 
Standards and the Boom and Bust in U.S. House Prices. Federal Reserve Bank 
of Dallas Working Paper no. 1104. Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Duca, John V., John Muellbauer, and Anthony Murphy. 2012. “Shifting Credit 
Standards and the Boom and Bust in U.S. House Prices: Time Series Evidence 
from the Past Three Decades.” Unpublished manuscript, Southern Methodist 
University.
Duca, John V., and Jason L. Saving. 2008. “Stock Ownership and Congressio-
nal Elections: The Political Economy of the Mutual Fund Revolution.” Eco-
nomic Inquiry 46(3): 454–­79.
Edwards, Franklin R., and Edward R. Morrison. 2005. “Derivatives and the 
Bankruptcy Code: Why the Special Treatment?” Yale Journal of Regulation 
22: 91–­122.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 1956. “Statement by the President upon Signing the Bank 
Holding Company Act of 1956.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://
www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=10799#axzz1xyK2NNY8.
Elmer, Vickie. 2012. “Increased Interest in Expanded HARP.” New York Times, 
June 21.
Epstein, David, and Sharyn O’Halloran. 1999. Delegating Powers: A Transac-
tion Cost Politics Approach to Policy Making under Separate Powers. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.

Bibliography  •  311
Erikson, Robert S., Michael B. MacKuen, and James A. Stimson. 2002. The 
Macro Polity. New York: Cambridge University Press.
“Faculty Profile of Paul MacAvoy.” 2012. Accessed September 20, 2012 at 
http://mba.yale.edu/faculty/profiles/macavoy.shtml.
Fannie Mae. 2003. Fannie May Annual Report 2003. Accessed June 20, 2011, at 
http://www.fanniemae.com/ir/pdf/annualreport/2003/2003annualreport.pdf.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 1984. The First Fifty: A History of the 
FDIC 1933–­1983. Accessed January 27, 2011, at http://www.fdic.gov/bank 
/analytical/firstfifty/.
Federal Home Loan Banks. 2012. “The Federal Home Loan Banks.” Accessed 
September 20, 2012, at http://www.fhlbanks.com/assets/pdfs/sidebar/FHL 
BanksWhitePaper.pdf.
Ferejohn, John, and Charles R. Shipan. 1990. “Congressional Influence on 
Bureaucracy.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 6: 1–­20.
The Financial Crisis and the Role of Federal Regulators. 2008. Hearing before 
the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, House of Represen-
tatives 110th Congress, Second Session, October 23, 2008. Serial No. 110-­
209. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Fiorina, Morris P. 1989. Congress: Keystone of the Washington Establishment. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Fiorina, Morris P., with Samuel J. Abrams and Jeremy C. Pope. 2010. Culture 
War? The Myth of a Polarized America. 3rd ed. Boston: Longman.
Fogel, Robert. 1989. Without Consent or Contract: The Rise and Fall of Ameri-
can Slavery. New York: Norton.
Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher S. Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. 2012. Why 
Did so Many People Make so Many Ex Post Bad Decisions? The Causes 
of the Foreclosure Crisis. NBER Working Paper 18082. Cambridge, MA: 
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fox News. 2009. “Thousands of Anti-­Tax ‘Tea Party’ Protesters Turn Out 
in U.S. Cities.” Foxnews.com, April 15. Accessed September 7, 2012, at 
http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2009/04/15/thousands-anti-tax-tea-party 
-protesters-turn-cities/.
Frame, W. Scott. 2008. “The 2008 Federal Intervention to Stabilize Fannie Mae 
and Freddie Mac.” Journal of Applied Finance 18: 124–­36.
Friedman, Milton J., and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the 
United States, 1867–­1960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Friedman, Milton J., and Anna J. Schwartz. 2008. The Great Contraction, 
1929–­1933. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gapper, John. 2008. “After 73 Years: The Last Gasp of the Broker-­Dealer.” 
Financial Times, September 15.
Geanakoplos, John D., and Susan P. Koniak. 2008. “Mortgage Justice Is Blind.” 
New York Times, October 29.
Geanakoplos, John D., and Susan P. Koniak. 2009. “Matters of Principal.” New 
York Times, March 4.
Gerardi, Kristopher S., Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen. 2008. Sub-
prime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and  

312  •  Bibliography
Foreclosures. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper 07-­15. Boston: 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Gerring, John. 1998. Party Ideologies in America, 1822–­1996. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gilmour, John. 1995. Strategic Disagreement: Stalemate in American Politics. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Jose Scheinkman. 1998. “Neither a Lender nor a Bor-
rower Be: An Economic Analysis of Interest Restrictions and Usury Laws.” 
Journal of Law and Economics 41: 1–­36.
“Glass Links Banks to Attack by Long.” 1933. New York Times, December 6.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and 
Technology. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Goldman Sachs. 2012. “Board of Directors: James A. Johnson.” Accessed Sep-
tember 20, 2012, at http://www.goldmansachs.com/who-we-are/leadership 
/board-of-directors/07-james-a-johnson.html.
Gorton, Gary B. 2010a. “Questions and Answers about the Financial Crisis.” 
Unpublished manuscript, Yale University, prepared for the U.S. Financial 
Crisis Inquiry Commission.
Gorton, Gary B. 2010b. Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007. New  
York NY: Oxford University Press.
Gramlich, Edward M. 2007. Subprime Mortgages: America’s Latest Boom and 
Bust. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
Gramm, Phil. 1999. “Gramm’s Statement at Signing Ceremony for Gramm-­
Leach-­Bliley Act.” Accessed January 2, 2011, at http://banking.senate.gov 
/prel99/1112gbl.htm.
Greenspan, Alan. 2005. “Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan at the Federal 
Reserve System’s Fourth Annual Community Affairs Research Conference, 
Washington, D.C.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.federal 
reserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/20050408/default.htm.
“Greenspan Pockets $250K for Speech.” 2006. Accessed September 20, 2012, 
at http://archive.newsmax.com/archives/articles/2006/2/13/211758.shtml.
Gropp, Reint, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle J. White. 1997. “Personal Bank-
ruptcy and Credit Supply and Demand.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
112: 217–­51.
Groseclose, Tim, and Nolan McCarty. 2000. “The Politics of Blame: Bargaining 
before an Audience.” American Journal of Political Science 45(1): 100–­19.
Halberstam, David. 1969. The Best and the Brightest. New York: Random 
House.
Hall, Robert E. 2010. “Fiscal Stimulus.” Daedalus 139: 83–­94.
Hansell, Saul. 1994. “Markets in Turmoil: Investors Undone: How $600 Mil-
lion Evaporated—­A Special Report; Fund Manager Caught Short By Crude 
and Brutal Market.” New York Times, April 5.
Hansen, Bradley. 1996. “Commercial Associations and the Creation of a Na- 
tional Economy: The Demand for a Federal Bankruptcy Law.” Business His-
tory Review 72: 86–­113.

Bibliography  •  313
Hare, Christopher, Nolan McCarty, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 
2012. “Polarization Is Real (and Asymmetric).” Accessed September 7, 2012, 
at http://voteview.com/blog/?p=494.
Hauke, Justin P., and Edward Nelson. 2007. “Recalling Ben Bernanke’s First 
Year as Fed Chairman.” Central Banker, Summer 2007. Accessed March 31, 
2011, at http://www.stlouisfed.org/publications/cb/articles/?id=743.
Heckman, James, and James Snyder. 1997. “Linear Probability Models of the 
Demand for Attributes with an Empirical Application to Estimating the Pref-
erences of Legislators.” Rand Journal of Economics, special issue, S142-­89.
Heilemann, John. 2011. “2012 = 1968?” New York Magazine, November 
27, 2011. Accessed December 14, 2011, at http://nymag.com/print/?/news 
/politics/occupy-wall-street-2011-12/.
Hernandez, Raymond, and Stephen Labaton. 2007. “In Opposing Tax Plan, 
Schumer Breaks with Party.” New York Times, July 30.
Hernandez, Raymond. 2012. “Surrogate for Obama Denounces Anti-Romney 
Ad.” New York Times, May 20.
Herszenhorn, David M. 2008a. “Congress Votes for a Stimulus of $168  
Billion.” New York Times, February 7.
Herszenhorn, David M. 2008b. “Senate G.O.P. Blocks Additions to Stimulus 
Bill,” New York Times, February 7.
Hill, Patrice. 2008. “McCain Advisor Talks of Mental Recession.” Washington 
Times, July 9.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1955. Age of Reform: From Bryan to FDR. New York: 
Knopf.
Hofstadter, Richard, William Miller, and Daniel Aaron. 1959. The American 
Republic, vol. 2. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-­Hall.
Holden, Jeremy. 2009. “Wallace Let Boehner Falsely Claim No Stimulus Con-
tracts Awarded in Ohio.” Accessed July 3, 2011, at http://mediamatters.org 
/mobile/research/200907050004.
Huber, John D., and Nolan McCarty. 2004. “Bureaucratic Capacity, Delega-
tion, and Political Reform.” American Political Science Review 98: 481–­94.
Huber, John D., and Charles R. Shipan. 2002. Deliberate Discretion: The Insti- 
tutional Foundations of Bureaucratic Autonomy. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press.
Huntington, Samuel. 1952. “The Marasmus of the ICC: The Commission, the 
Railroads, and the Public.” Yale Law Journal 61(4): 467–­509.
Hurtado, Patricia, and Linda Sandler. 2012. “Ernst & Young Suit over Lehman 
Fees Sent to N.Y. State Court.” Bloomberg News, March 22. Accessed June 
21, 2012, at http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-03-22/ernst-young-suit 
-over-lehman-fees-sent-to-n-y-state-court-1-.html.
Igan, Deniz, Prachi Mishra, and Thierry Tressel. 2009. A Fistful of Dollars: 
Lobbying and the Financial Crisis. Paper presented at the Tenth Jacques 
Polak Annual Research Conference, Washington, DC, November 5–­6, 2009. 
Accessed September 7, 2012, at http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/seminars 
/2009/arc/pdf/igan.pdf.

314  •  Bibliography
Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. 2012. “Illinois 
Bank Branching History.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.idfpr 
.com/Banks/cbt/STATS/BR-HIST.ASP.
Isidore, Chris. 2012. “Wells Fargo to Pay 148M Fine for Wachovia Misdeeds.” 
CNN Money, January 6. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://money.cnn 
.com/2011/12/08/news/companies/wells_fargo_settlement/index.htm.
Ismail, M. Asif. 2003. “A Most Favored Corporation: Enron Prevailed in Fed-
eral, State Lobbying Efforts 49 Times.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at  
http://www.publicintegrity.org/2003/01/06/3160/most-favored-corporation 
-enron-prevailed-federal-state-lobbying-efforts-49-times.
Jacobe, Dennis. 2008. “Pessimism Clouds Housing Market: Most Americans 
No Longer Assume Local Housing Prices Will Increase.” Gallup Organiza-
tion, February 11. Accessed September 7, 2012, at http://www.gallup.com 
/poll/104287/pessimism-clouds-housing-market.aspx.
Jaffee, Dwight. 2003. “The Interest Rate Risk of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.”  
Journal of Financial Services Research 24(1): 5–­29.
Johnson, Simon, and James Kwak. 2010. 13 Bankers: the Wall Street Takeover 
and the Next Financial Meltdown. New York: Pantheon Books.
Kabaservice, Geoffrey A. 2012. Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation 
and the Destruction of the Republican Party from Eisenhower to the Tea 
Party. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh. 2007. Wall Street and Main Street: What 
Contributes to the Rise in High Incomes? NBER Working Paper 13270. 
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kennedy, Susan Estabrook. 1973. The Banking Crisis of 1933. Lexington: Uni-
versity of Kentucky Press.
Kiel, Paul, and Dan Nguyen. 2012. “Bailout Tracker.” Accessed September 20, 
2012, at http://projects.propublica.org/bailout/main/summary.
Kindleberger, Charles P., and Robert Aliber. 2005. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: 
A History of Financial Crises. 5th ed. New York: Wiley.
Koger, Gregory. 2010. Filibustering: A Political History of Obstruction in the 
House and Senate. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Krehbiel, Keith. 1998. Pivotal Politics: A Theory of U.S. Lawmaking. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Kroszner, Randall S. 1999. “Is It Better to Forgive Than to Receive? Repudia-
tion of the Gold Indexation Clause in Long-­Term Debt during the Great 
Depression.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.
Kroszner, Randall S., and Thomas Stratmann. 1998. “Interest Group Compe-
tition and the Organization of Congress: Theory and Evidence from Finan-
cial Services Political Action Committees.” American Economic Review 88: 
1163–­87.
Kwak, James. 2013. “Cultural Capital in the Financial Crisis.” In Preventing 
Capture: Special Interest Influence and How to Limit It, ed. Daniel Carpen-
ter and David Moss. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bibliography  •  315
Labaton, Stephen. 2005. “Bankruptcy Bill Set for Passage; Victory for Bush.” 
New York Times, March 9.
Lattman, Peter. 2011. “Judge in Citigroup Mortgage Settlement Criticizes 
S.E.C.’s Enforcement.” New York Times, November 9.
Lattman, Peter, and Peter Eavis. 2012. “3 Former Credit Suisse Traders Charged 
with Bond Fraud.” New York Times, February 1.
Lauderdale, Benjamin E. 2008. “Pass the Pork: Measuring Legislator Shares in 
Congress.” Political Analysis 16(3): 235–­49.
Lee, Frances E. 1998. “Representation and Public Policy: The Consequences of 
Senate Apportionment for the Geographic Distribution of Federal Funds.” 
Journal of Politics 60: 34–­62.
Lemann, Nicholas. 1991. The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and 
How It Changed America. New York: Knopf.
Levendusky, Matthew. 2009. The Partisan Sort: How Liberals Became Demo-
crats and Conservatives Became Republicans. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.
Levitt, Steven D. 1996. “How Do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of 
Voter Preferences, Party Affiliation, and Senator Ideology.” American Eco-
nomic Review 86(3): 425–­41.
Lewis, Michael. 2010. The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine. New 
York: Norton.
Lichtblau, Eric. 2012. “Gingrich’s Deep Ties to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.” 
New York Times, February 3.
Lieberman, Marvin B., and Shigeru Asaba. 2006. “Why Do Firms Imitate Each 
Other?” Academy of Management Review 31(2):366–­85.
Lipton, Eric. 2008. “Gramm and the ‘Enron Loophole.’ ” New York Times, 
November 14.
Lipton, Eric, and David D. Kirkpatrick. 2008. “Veterans of ’90s Bailout Hope 
for Profit in New One.” New York Times, December 28.
Lizza, Ryan. 2012. “The Obama Memos: The Making of a Post-­post-­partisan 
Presidency.” New Yorker, January 30.
Lowenstein, Roger. 2000. When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-­
Term Capital Management. New York: Random House.
Lowenstein, Roger. 2008. “Triple-­A Failure.” New York Times Magazine, April 
27. Accessed September 7, 2012, at http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/27 
/magazine/27Credit-t.html?adxnnl=1&adxnnlx=1347048185-Q9s2X 
/MCvVd+sW/aUif/QQ.
Lucas, Deborah. 2011. The Budgetary Cost of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac 
and Options for the Future Federal Role in the Secondary Mortgage Market. 
Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office.
MacKenzie, Donald. 2009. “All Those Arrows.” London Review of Books 
31(12): 20–­22.
Madrick, Jeff, and Frank Partnoy. 2011. “Did Fannie Cause the Disaster?” 
New York Review of Books 58(16): 48–­52.

316  •  Bibliography
Malabre, Alfred L. 1994. Lost Prophets: An Insider’s History of the Modern 
Economists. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Malkiel, Burton G. 1990. A Random Walk Down Wall Street: Including a Life-­
cycle Guide to Investing. 5th ed. New York: Norton.
Mallaby, Sebastian. 2010. More Money than God: Hedge Funds and the Mak-
ing of a New Elite. New York: Penguin.
Mann, Bruce. 2001. Republic of Debtors: Bankruptcy in the Age of American 
Independence. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Martin, Andrew D., and Kevin M. Quinn. 2002. “Dynamic Ideal Point Estima-
tion via Markov Chain Monte Carlo for the U.S. Supreme Court, 1953–­
1999.” Political Analysis 10: 134–­55.
Martin, Mitchell. 1998. “Citicorp and Travelers Plan to Merge in Record $70 
Billion Deal: A New No. 1: Financial Giants Unite,” New York Times, April 7.
Maxfield, John. 2012. “The 5 Biggest Mortgage Originators in 3Q 2012.” The 
Motley Fool, November 28. Accessed December 21, 2012, http://www.fool 
.com/investing/general/2012/11/28/the-5-biggest-mortgage-originators-in 
-3q12.aspx. 
Mayhew, David. 1974. Congress: The Electoral Connection. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press.
McCarty, Nolan. 1997. “Presidential Reputation and the Veto.” Economics and 
Politics 9: 1–­26.
McCarty, Nolan. 2007. “The Policy Effects of Political Polarization.” In The  
Transformation of American Politics: Activist Government and the Rise of 
Conservatism, ed. Paul Pierson and Theda Skocpol. Princeton, NJ: Prince­
ton University Press.
McCarty, Nolan. 2008. “The Most Liberal Congress in History.” Accessed Sep-
tember 20, 2012, at http://blogs.princeton.edu/mccarty/2008/12/the_most 
_liberal_congress_in_history.html.
McCarty, Nolan. 2009. “On the Virtues of Strategic Bipartisanship.” Accessed 
September 20, 2012, at http://blogs.princeton.edu/mccarty/2009/02/on_the 
_virtues_of_strategic_bipartisanship.html.
McCarty, Nolan. 2013. “Complexity, Capacity and Capture.” In Preventing 
Capture: Special Interest Influence and How to Limit It, ed. Daniel Carpen-
ter and David Moss. New York: Cambridge University Press.
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, Thomas Romer, and Howard Rosenthal. 
2010a. “Political Fortunes: On Finance and Its Regulation.” Daedalus 139 
(4): 61–­73.
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, Thomas Romer, and Howard Rosenthal. 
2010b. “The Price of Principle,” Huffington Post, July 20. Accessed Decem-
ber 5, 2011, et http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nolan-mccarty/the-price-of 
-principle_b_652606.html.
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Income Redistri-
bution and the Realignment of American Politics. Washington, DC: AEI Press.
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2001. “The Hunt 
for Party Discipline in Congress.” American Political Science Review 95(3): 
673–­87.

Bibliography  •  317
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2006. Polarized 
America: The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches. Cambridge, MA: MIT  
Press.
McClintick, David. 2006. “How Harvard Lost Russia.” Institutional Investor, 
January 24.
McCubbins, Mathew D., and Thomas Schwartz. 1984. “Oversight Overlooked: 
Police Patrols versus Fire Alarms.” American Journal of Political Science 28(1): 
165–­79.
McGinty, Tom, and Kara Scannell. 2009. “SEC Plays Keep-­up in High-­Tech 
Race.” Wall Street Journal, August 20.
McGrath, Ben. 2010. “The Movement: The Rise of Tea Party Activism,” New 
Yorker, February 1.
McKee, Michael, and Scott Lanman. 2009. “Greenspan Says U.S. Should Con-
sider Breaking Up Large Banks.” Bloomberg News, October 15. Accessed 
June 27, 2012, at http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive
&sid=aJ8HPmNUfchg.
McKenna, Francine. 2012. “Auditors All Fall Down; PFGBest and MF Global 
Frauds Reveal Weak Watchdogs.” Forbes, July 16. Accessed December 28,  
2012, http://www.forbes.com/sites/francinemckenna/2012/07/16/auditors-all 
-fall-down-pfgbest-and-mf-global-frauds-reveal-weak-watchdogs/.
McLean, Bethany, and Peter Elkind. 2003. The Smartest Guys in the Room: The  
Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of Enron. New York: Portfolio.
McNamee, Mike. 2004. “Lewis S. Ranieri: Your Mortgage Was His Bond,” 
Business Week, November 29.
Meltzer, Allan H. 2003. “Rational and Nonrational Bubbles.” In Asset Price 
Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory, and International Poli-
cies, ed. W. C. Hunter, George G. Kaufman, and Michael Pomerleano. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mendelberg, Tali. 2001. The Race Card: Campaign Strategy, Implicit Messages, 
and the Norm of Equality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. 2010. “The Political Economy of 
the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” American Economic Review 100: 1967–­98.
Milbank, Dana. 2010. “Behind the Foreclosure Crisis, Big Banks’ Reign of Er- 
ror.” Washington Post, March 6.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Tryggvi Thor Herbertsson. 2006. Financial Stability 
in Iceland. Reykjavik: Iceland Chamber of Commerce.
Mitchell, George J. 2007. “Report to the Commissioner of Baseball of an Inde-
pendent Investigation into the Illegal Use of Steroids and Other Performance 
Enhancing Substances by Players in Major League Baseball.” Accessed Sep-
tember 20, 2012, at http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/news/mitchell/report.jsp.
Morgan, Glen. 2008. “Market Formation and Governance in International 
Financial Markets: The Case of OTC Derivatives.” Human Relations 61: 637.
Morgenson, Gretchen. 2010. “Leading Magnate Settles Fraud Case.” New York  
Times, October 10.
Morgenson, Gretchen. 2011. “Case on Mortgage Official Is Said to be Dropped.”  
New York Times, February 19.

318  •  Bibliography
Morgenson, Gretchen. 2012. “Is Insider Trading Part of the Fabric?” New York 
Times, May 20.
Morgenson, Gretchen, with Joshua Rosner. 2011. Reckless Endangerment: 
How Outsized Ambition, Greed, and Corruption Led to Economic Arma-
geddon. New York: Times Books/Henry Holt.
Morison, Elting E., ed. 1952. The Letters of Theodore Roosevelt. Vols. 1–­8. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nakamoto, Michiyo, and David Wighton. 2007. “Citigroup Chief Stays Bullish 
on Buy-­outs.” Financial Times, July 9.
National Association of Realtors. 2012. “Membership: Historic Report.” Accessed 
September 20, 2012, at http://www.realtor.org/membership/historic-report.
New Generation Research, Inc. 2012. 20 Largest Public Company Bankruptcy 
Filings 1980–­Present. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.bank 
ruptcydata.com/Research/Largest_Overall_All-Time.pdf.
New York City Housing Authority. 2012. “About NYCHA: Fact Sheet.” Ac- 
cessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.nyc.gov/html/nycha/html/about 
/factsheet.shtml.
Newsome, Sunsierre, Matthew Albrecht, and Daniel E. Teclaw. 2011. “Federal  
Home Loan Banks.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.fhlb-of 
.com/ofweb_userWeb/resources/SandPCreditReport071911.pdf.
Nokken, Timothy P., and Keith T. Poole. 2004. “Congressional Party Defection 
in American History.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 29: 545–­68.
Noll, Roger G. 1971. Reforming Regulation: An Evaluation of the Ash Council 
Proposal. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Nuñez, Stephen, and Howard Rosenthal. 2004. “Bankruptcy ‘Reform’ in Con-
gress.” Journal of Law Economics and Organization 20: 527–­57.
Nunnari, Salvatore. 2011. “The Political Economy of the U.S. Auto Industry 
Crisis.” Unpublished manuscript, California Institute of Technology.
Obama, Barack. 2008. “One Week to Go: Speech in Ohio.” Accessed Sep-
tember 20, 2012, at http://www.presidentialrhetoric.com/campaign2008 
/obama/10.27.08.html.
“Obama’s Take on Wall Street Prosecutions.” 2011. New York Times, Decem- 
ber 12. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2011 
/12/12/president-obamas-take-on-wall-street-prosecutions/.
Olshan, Jeremy. 2011. “ ‘Father’ of the 401(k)s Tough Love.” Accessed June 
5, 2012, at http://blogs.smartmoney.com/encore/2011/11/22/father-of-the 
-401ks-tough-love/.
Overacker, Louise. 1932. Money in Elections. New York: Macmillan.
Overacker, Louise. 1937. “Campaign Funds in the Presidential Election of 
1936.” American Political Science Review 31: 473–­98.
Overbye, Dennis. 2009. “They Tried to Outsmart Wall Street.” New York Times,  
March 9.
Partnoy, Frank. 2009. Infectious Greed: How Deceit and Risk Corrupted the 
Financial Markets. New York: Public Affairs Press.

Bibliography  •  319
Paulson, Henry M. 2010. On the Brink: Inside the Race to Stop the Collapse of 
the Global Financial System. New York: Business Plan.
Pelofsky, Jeremy, and James Vicini. 2011. “BofA’s Countrywide to Pay $335 mil-
lion over Bias Case.” Reuters, December 21. Accessed September 20, 2012, at 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/12/21/us-boa-countrywide-idUSTRE7 
BK1UW20111221.
Perino, Michael. 2010. The Hellhound of Wall Street: How Ferdinand Pecora’s 
Investigation of the Great Crash Forever Changed American Finance. New 
York: Penguin.
Perlstein, Rick. 2001. Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of 
the American Consensus. New York: Hill and Wang.
Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. 2011. Fewer Are Angry at 
Government, But Discontent Remains High. Accessed September 20, 2012, 
at http://people-press.org/files/2011/03/711.pdf.
Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef. 2009. Wages and Human Capital in the 
U.S. Financial Industry: 1909–­2006. NBER Working Paper 14644. Cam-
bridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United 
States, 1913–­1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1–­39.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2010. “Securitization and Dis-
tressed Loan Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis.” 
Booth School of Business Research Paper no. 09-­02. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Booth School of Business.
Poole, Keith T. 2000. “Non-­parametric Unfolding of Binary Choice Data.” 
Political Analysis 8: 211–­327.
Poole, Keith T. 2007. “Changing Minds? Not in Congress!” Public Choice 131: 
435–­51.
Poole, Keith T., and Thomas Romer. 1993. “Ideology, ‘Shirking’ and Represen-
tation.” Public Choice 77: 185–­96.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1993. “The Enduring 19th Century 
Battle for Economic Regulation: The Case of the Interstate Commerce Act 
Revisited.” Journal of Law and Economics 26: 837–­60.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1994. “Railroad Regulation and Con-
gress, 1847–­1887.” In The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to 
Political Economy, ed. Claudia Goldin and Gary Libecap. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1994.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-­economic 
History of Roll Call Voting. New York: Oxford University Press.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 2007. Ideology and Congress. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Posner, Richard. 2009. A Failure of Capitalism: The Crisis of ’08 and the Descent 
into Depression. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
“President Bush Overall Job Rating.” 2012. Accessed September 20, 2012, at 
http://www.pollingreport.com/BushJob.htm.

320  •  Bibliography
Preston, H. H. 1927. “The McFadden Banking Act.” American Economic 
Review 17(2): 201–­18.
Prince, C. J. 2007. “Staying Power.” Institutional Investor, January 10. Accessed 
September 20, 2012, at http://www.institutionalinvestor.com/Article.aspx? 
ArticleID=1117671&PositionID=11151.
Prior, Markus. 2007. Post-­broadcast Democracy: How Media Choice Increases 
Inequality in Political Involvement and Polarizes Elections. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Prior, Markus. Forthcoming. “Media and Political Polarization.” Annual Re- 
view of Political Science.
Protess, Ben. 2012. “As Wall Street Fights Regulation, It Has Backup on the 
Bench.” New York Times, December 29.
Public Citizen’s Critical Mass Energy and Environment Program. 2001. Blind 
Faith: How Deregulation and Enron’s Influence over Government Looted Bil-
lions from Americans. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.citizen 
.org/documents/Blind_Faith.pdf.
Puzzanghera, Jim. 2012. “U.S. Says UBS Was Motivated by ‘Sheer Greed’ in Libor 
Rigging.” Los Angeles Times, December 19. Accessed December 23, 2012, 
http://www.latimes.com/business/money/la-fi-mo-ubs-libor-fine-justice 
-20121219,0,4663488.story.
Purdum, Todd. 2009. “Henry Paulson’s Longest Night.” Vanity Fair, October.
Pyle, David H. 1995. “The U.S. Savings and Loan Crisis.” In Handbooks in 
Operations Research and Management Science, vol. 9: Finance, ed. Robert 
A. Jarrow. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rajan, Raghuram G. 2010. Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten 
the World Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Rodney Ramcharan. 2011. “Constituencies and Leg-
islation: The Fight over the McFadden Act of 1927.” Unpublished manu-
script, University of Chicago.
Rappaport, Liz, and Michael Rapoport. 2012. “Auditors Face Fraud Charge: 
New York Set to Allege Ernst & Young Stood By as Lehman Cooked Its 
Books.” Wall Street Journal, December 20.
Rasmussen, Scott, and Douglas Schoen. 2010. Mad as Hell: How the Tea Party 
Movement Is Fundamentally Remaking our Two-­party System. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: 
Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Reuters. 2009. “U.S. Should Be Open to Second Stimulus—­Congressional 
Leader.” Accessed, April 17, 2012, at http://blogs.reuters.com/financial-regula 
tory-forum/2009/07/07/us-should-be-open-to-second-stimulus-congres 
sional-leader/.
Reuters. 2012. “Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook COO, Ducks Questions about IPO  
Debacle.” Accessed September 7, 2012, at http://www.huffingtonpost.com 
/2012/05/24/refile-facebook-exec-duck_n_1543089.html.

Bibliography  •  321
“Rick Santelli, Tea Party.” 2009. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://free 
domeden.blogspot.com/2009/02/rick-santelli-tea-party.html.
Robbins, Liz. 2009. “Tax Day Is Met with Tea Parties.” New York Times, April 16.
Roguski, Randy. 2008. “Ten Ways National City Could Have Avoided Trou-
ble.” Plain Dealer, April 20.
Romer, Thomas, and Barry R. Weingast. 1991. “Political Foundations of the 
Thrift Debacle.” In Politics and Economics in the Eighties, ed. Alberto Ale-
sina and Geoffrey Carliner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rothbard, Murray B. 1962. The Panic of 1819: Reactions and Policies. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Roubini, Nouriel. 2008. “Comrades Bush, Paulson and Bernanke Welcome 
You to the USSRA (United Socialist State Republic of America).” September 
9, 2008. Accessed April 11, 2009, at http://www.roubini.com/roubini-moni 
tor/253529/comrades_bush_paulson_and_bernanke_welcome_you_to_the 
_ussra_united_socialist_state_republic_of_america.
“The Rubin Connection.” 2008. New York Times, November 24.
Santomero, Anthony M. 2001. “The Causes and Effects of Financial Modern-
ization.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Accessed January 22, 2012, 
at http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/publications/business 
-review/2001/q4/brq401as.pdf.
Sarlin, Benjamin. 2010. “Why the Tea Party Isn’t Touching Financial Reform.” 
Daily Beast, April 20.
Schaefer, Steve. 2010. “Survey Says: Cuomo Should Slap Ernst & Young with  
Lehman Fraud Charge.” Forbes, December 21. Accessed September 20, 2012,  
at http://www.forbes.com/sites/steveschaefer/2010/12/21survey-says-cuomo 
-should-slap-ernst-young-with-lehman-fraud-charge/.
Schattschneider, E. E. 1960. The Semi-­sovereign People: A Realist’s View of 
American Politics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., 1965. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the 
White House. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Schoen, Douglas. 2011. “Polling the Occupy Wall Street Crowd.” Wall Street 
Journal, October 18.
Schwartz, Matthias. 2011. “Pre-­Occupied: the Origins and Future of Occupy 
Wall Street.” New Yorker, November 26.
Scott, Mark, and Michael J. De la Merced. 2012. “Chairman of Barclays 
Resigns.” New York Times, July 1.
“SEC Brings Crisis-­Era Suits.” 2011. Wall Street Journal, December 17.
Segal, Jeffrey A., and Harold J. Spaeth. 2002. The Supreme Court and the Atti-
tudinal Model Revisited. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Senate Library. 2002. Presidential Vetoes, 1789–­1988. Washington, DC: Gov-
ernment Printing Office.
Shamim, Adam. 2009. “Obama Adviser Says U.S. Should Mull Second  
Stimulus.” Bloomberg News, July 7. Accessed April 17, 2012, at http://www 
.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aStWHJXsvePA.

322  •  Bibliography
Shear, Michael D. 2009. “Senior UBS Official, Key Donor Shares Some of 
Obama’s Down Time.” Washington Post, August 24.
Shiller, Robert. 2000. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton, NJ: University Press, 2000.
Sides, John. 2012. “Were Obama’s Early Ads Really the Game Changer?” Five  
Thirty Eight, December 29. Accessed January 2, 2013, http://fivethirtyeight 
.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/12/29/were-obamas-early-ads-really-the-game 
-changer/?hp
Silver-Greenberg, Jessica. 2012a. “Mortgage Crisis Presents a New Reckoning 
to Banks.” New York Times, December 9.
Silver-Greenberg, Jessica. 2012b. “Settlement Expected on Past Abuses in 
Home Loans.” New York Times, December 30.
Sims, Damon. 2008. “PNC-­National City Bank Deal Draws Criticism.” Plain 
Dealer, November 16.
Simon, Herbert. 1957. “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice.” In Models of 
Man, Social and Rational: Mathematical Essays on Rational Human Behav-
ior in a Social Setting. New York: Wiley, 1957.
Sinclair, Barbara. 2002. “The 60-­Vote Senate.” In U.S. Senate Exceptionalism, 
ed. Bruce I. Oppenheimer. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
Skeel, David. 2001. Debt’s Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in  
America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Skeel, David. 2011. The New Financial Deal: Understanding the Dodd-­Frank 
Act and Its (Unintended) Consequences. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Skocpol, Theda, and Vanessa Williamson. 2011. The Tea Party and the Remak-
ing of American Conservatism. New York NY: Oxford University Press.
Slack, Donovan. 2010. “Stance on Fannie and Freddie Dogs Frank.” Boston 
Globe, October 14.
Smith, Adam. 1904. Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations. New York: T. Y. Cromwell.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2009. Too Big to Fail: The Inside Story of How Wall 
Street and Washington Fought to Save the Financial System from Crisis—­
and Themselves. New York: Viking.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2011. “Goldman Limits Facebook Investment to Foreign 
Clients,” New York Times, January 17.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2012. “The Man Behind Facebook’s I.P.O. Debacle.” 
New York Times, September 3.
Soros, George. 2010. “The Real Danger to the Economy.” New York Review of 
Books, November 11.
Spiller, Pablo T., and Rafael Gely. 1992. “Congressional Control or Judicial 
Independence: The Determinants of U.S. Supreme Court Labor-­Relations 
Decisions, 1949–­1988,” RAND Journal of Economics 23(4): 463–­92.
Standard & Poors. 2011. Federal Home Loan Banks. Accessed November 24,  
2011 at http://www.fhlb-of.com/ofweb_userWeb/resources/SandPCredit 
Report071911.pdf.
State National Bank of Big Spring et al. v. Geithner et al. Accessed December  
28, 2012, http://cei.org/sites/default/files/Complaint,%20First%20Amended 
,%209-20-2012.pdf. 

Bibliography  •  323
Stephenson, Emily. 2012. “Three States Join Lawsuit Challenging Dodd-Frank  
Law.” Reuters, September 9. Accessed December 28, 2012, http://www.reuters 
.com/article/2012/09/21us-financial-regulation-lawsuit-idUSBRE88K0WA2 
0120921.
Stigler, George. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of 
Economics and Management Science 2(1): 3–­21.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2009a. “Capitalist Fools.” Vanity Fair, January.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2009b. “Too Big to Exist.” Accessed June 18, 2012, at http://
www.policyinnovations.org/ideas/commentary/data/000158/:pf_printable.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Jonathan M. Orszag, and Peter Orszag. 2002. “Implications of 
the New Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Risk-­based Capital Standard.” Housing 
Matters 1(2): 1–­10.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Jonathan M. Orszag, and Peter Orszag. 2004. “Implications 
of the New Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Risk-­based Capital Standard.” In 
Housing Matters: Issues in American Housing Policy, ed. Franklin Raines 
and Sheila Bair. Washington, D.C.: Fannie Mae.
Stohr, Greg. 2009. “Obama Backs Banks, Seeks to Block Fair-­lending Probe 
(Update 1).” Bloomberg News, March 26. Accessed December 5, 2011, at 
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aCdEKIwb
iPzQ.
Stolberg, Sheryl Gay. 2009a. “Senate Has Changed in Kennedy’s Time.” New 
York Times, August 27.
Stolberg, Sheryl Gay. 2009b. “Signing Stimulus, Obama Doesn’t Rule Out More.” 
 New York Times, February 17.
Stolberg, Sheryl Gay. 2010. “Obama Calls Jobs Bill a First Step.” New York Times,  
March 18.
Strahan, Philip E. 2002. The Real Effects of U.S. Banking Deregulation. Ac- 
cessed September 7, 2012, at http://research.stlouisfed.org/conferences/policy 
conf/papers/Strahan.pdf.
Streitfeld, David, and John C. Rudolf. 2009. “States Are Pondering Fraud Suits 
against Banks.” New York Times, November 3.
Subramanian, Guhan, and Nithyasri Sharma. 2010. “Citigroup–­Wachovia–­
Wells Fargo.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, MA.
Sunstein, Cass R., David Schkade, and Lisa M. Ellman. 2004. “Ideological 
Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation.” Virginia 
Law Review 90: 301.
Sussman, Anna Louie. 2012. “U.S. Foreclosures Up for 2nd Straight Month.” 
Reuters, July 12. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://in.reuters.com 
/article/2012/07/12/usa-housing-realtytrac-idINL2E8IBG6F20120712.
Swagel, Phillip. 2009. “The Financial Crisis: An Inside View.” Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity 40(1): 1–­78. Accessed December 8, 2011, at http://
www.brookings.edu/~/media/Files/Programs/ES/BPEA/2009_spring_bpea 
_papers/2009a_bpea_swagel.pdf.
“The Talented Mr. Gensler: Jon Corzine’s Regulator Wants You to Know He’s 
Been Very Busy.” 2011. Wall Street Journal, December 12.

324  •  Bibliography
Tapper, Jake. 2011. “Wall Street Corruption, Solyndra, and Fast & Furious: 
 Today’s Q’s for O.” ABC News, October 6. Accessed September 20, 2012, at  
http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2011/10/wall-street-corruption 
-solyndra-and-fast-furious-todays-qs-for-o-1062011/.
Tausanovitch, Chris. 2011. “Income and Representation.” Unpublished manu-
script, Stanford University.
Teles, Steven M. 2008. The Rise of the Conservative Legal Movement: The 
Battle for Control of the Law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tett, Gillian. 2009. Fool’s Gold: How Unrestrained Greed Corrupted a Dream, 
Shattered Global Markets and Unleashed a Catastrophe. London: Little Brown.
Toobin, Jeffrey. 2010. “The Senator and the Street: Chuck Schumer, His Finan-
cial Constituents and the Next Move.” New Yorker, August 2.
Treanor, Jill. 2009. “King Calls for Banks to Be ‘Cut Down to Size.’ ” Guardian, 
June 17.
Tufano, Peter. 1997. “Business Failure, Judicial Intervention, and Financial In- 
novation: Restructuring U.S. Railroads in the Nineteenth Century.” Business 
History Review 71: 1–­40.
U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of New York. 2012. “$1 Billion to Be Paid by 
Bank of America to United States.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://
www.justice.gov/usao/nye/pr/2012/2012feb09.html.
U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission and U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission. 2010. Findings Regarding the Market Events of May 6, 2010: 
Report of the Staffs of the CFTC and SEC to the Joint Advisory Commitee 
on Emerging Regulatory Issues. Accessed September 16, 2012, at http://
www.sec.gov/news/studies/2010/marketevents-report.pdf.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2012. “American Dream 
Downpayment Initiative.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.hud 
.gov/offices/cpd/affordablehousing/programs/home/addi/index.cfm.
U.S. Department of Justice. 2012. “Federal Government and State Attorneys 
General Reach $25 Billion Agreement with Five Largest Mortgage Servicers 
to Address Mortgage Loan Servicing and Foreclosure Abuses.” Accessed Sep-
tember 20, 2012 at http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2012/February/12ag-186 
.html.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2011. Fact Sheet: Notice of Proposed Deter-
mination on Foreign Exchange Swaps and Forwards. Accessed September 
20, 2012, at http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/wsr/Documents/Fact%20
Sheet%20-%20Notice%20of%20Proposed%20Determination%20
on%20Foreign%20Exchange%20Swaps%20and%20Forwards.pdf.
U.S. House of Representatives, Office of the Clerk. 2012. “Party Divisions of 
the House of Representatives (1789 to Present).” Accessed September 20, 
2012, at http://artandhistory.house.gov/house_history/partydiv.aspx.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2010a. “Former Countrywide CEO 
Angelo Mozilo to Pay SEC’s Largest-­ever Financial Penalty against a Public 
Company’s Senior Executive.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www 
.sec.gov/news/press/2010/2010-197.htm.

Bibliography  •  325
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2010b. “Goldman Sachs to Pay Re- 
cord $550 Million to Settle SEC Charges Related to Subprime Mortgage 
CDO.” Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2010 
/2010-123.htm.
U.S. Senate. 2012. “Party Division in the Senate, 1789 to Present.” Accessed 
September 20, 2012, at http://www.senate.gov/pagelayout/history/one 
_item_and_teasers/partydiv.htm.
Utt, Ronald. 2003. “American Dream Downpayment Act: Fiscally Irrespon-
sible and Redundant to Existing Homeownership Programs.” Accessed 
September 20, 2012, at http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2003/12 
/american-dream-downpayment-act-fiscally-irresponsible-and-redundant 
-to-existing-homeownership-programs.
“Wachovia Settlement Checks Real, Better Business Bureau Says.” 2008. 
CNN.com, December 28. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.cnn 
.com/2008/US/12/25/wachovia.checks/index.html#cnnSTCText.
Wachtel, Katya. 2012. “Goldman CEO: Support for Gay Rights ‘Not without 
Price.’ ” Reuters, May 2. Accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.reuters 
.com/article/2012/05/02/goldmansachs-blankfein-criticism-idUSL1E8G28N 
C20120502.
Warren, Charles. 1935. Bankruptcy in American History. Cambridge, MA: Har- 
vard University Press.
Wawro, Gregory J., and Eric Schickler. 2006. Filibuster: Obstruction and Law-
making in the U.S. Senate. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Weigel, David. 2010. “Tea Party Groups Protest Financial Reform.” Washing-
ton Independent, March 4.
Weingast, Barry R. 1984. “The Congressional-­bureaucratic System: A Principal-­
agent Perspective (with Applications to the SEC).” Public Choice 44: 147–­77.
Weisman, Steven R., and Edmund L. Andrews. 2008. “Economists Debate the 
Quickest Cure.” New York Times, January 19.
Weisman, Steven R., and David M. Herszenhorn. 2008. “Bush and Congress 
Seen Pushing for Stimulus Plan.” New York Times, January 12.
Wheelock, David C. 2008. “The Federal Response to Home Mortgage Dis-
tress.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, May–­June, 133–­48.
Whitehouse, Michael A. 1989. “Paul Warburg’s Crusade to Establish a Central 
Bank in the United States.” Accessed June 27, 2012, at http://www.minne 
apolisfed.org/publications_papers/pub_display.cfm?id=3815.
Wicker, Elmus. 2005. The Great Debate of Banking Reform: Nelson Aldrich 
and the Origins of the Fed. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
Williams, T. Harry. 1969. Huey Long. New York: Knopf.
Williams, Timothy. 2011. “As Public Sector Sheds Jobs, Blacks Are Hit Hard-
est.” New York Times, November 28.
Wilmott, Paul. 2009. “Hurrying into the Next Panic?” New York Times, July 29.
Wooten, James A. 2001. “ ‘The Most Glorious Story of Failure in Business’: The 
Studebaker-­Packard Corporation and the Origins of ERISA.” Buffalo Law 
Review 49: 683–­39.

326  •  Bibliography
“The Worst American CEOs of All Time.” 2009. CNBC.com, April 30. Ac- 
cessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.cnbc.com/id/30502091/Portfolio 
_s_Worst_American_CEOs_of_All_Time.
Wyatt, Edward. 2010. “Veto Threat Raised over Derivatives.” New York Times, 
April 16.
Zeke Faux and Jody Shenn. 2011. “Subprime Mortgage Bonds Get AAA Rat-
ing S&P Denied to U.S.” Bloomberg, August 31. Accessed September 20, 
2012, at http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-08-31/subprime-mortgage 
-bonds-getting-aaa-rating-s-p-denies-to-u-s-treasuries.html.
Zernike, Kate. 2010. Boiling Mad: Inside Tea Party America. New York: Henry 
Holt, 2010.
Zingales, Luigi. 2013. “Preventing Economists’ Capture.” In Preventing Cap-
ture: Special Interest Influence and How to Limit It, ed. Daniel Carpenter 
and David Moss. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Zitzewitz, Eric. 2006. “How Widespread Was Late Trading in Mutual Funds?” 
American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 96(2): 284–­89.

Aaron, Daniel, 304n29
Abelson, Reed, 284n21
Abramowitz, Alan, 61, 288n44
Abrams, Samuel J., 61, 288n44
Acemoglu, Daron, 292n6
Acharya, Viral V., 293n10, 
293nn14–15, 293n19, 294n31
Alesina, Alberto, 303n25
Aliber, Robert, 19, 285n2
Alston, Lee J., 295n7, 295n17
Andrews, Edmund L., 298n25
Ansell, Ben, 299n39
Ansolabehere, Stephen, 289n15
Anthony Murphy, 291nn41–42, 
294n37
Appelbaum, Binyamin, 299n47, 
299n48
Arnold, R. Douglas, 293n8
Asaba, Shigeru, 289n3
Atlas, John, 147
Bahchieva, Raisa, 293n9
Baker, Peter, 38, 298n28, 299n41
Bakija, Jon, 60, 288n41
Balleisen, Edward, 176, 297n47
Barofsky, Neil M., 189, 297n7
Barrett, Wayne, 287n17
Bartels, Larry, 76, 289n10
Bates, Daniel, 304n35
Bebchuk, Lucian A., 283n6
Beckel, Michael, 289n5
Beckmann, Matthew N., 303n2
Bénabou, Roland, 284n22, 286n7
Berglöf, Erik, 296n29, 296n45
Bernanke, Ben S., 299n54
Berner, Robert, 284n18
Bernstein, Marver, 292n54
Binder, Sarah A., 290n10, 291n26
Black, Duncan, 290n12
Blanchard, Olivier J., 285n2
Bleckner, David J., 294n30
Bolton, Patrick, 295n4
Bonica, Adam, 289n16, 294n2, 
304n14
Bostic, Raphael W., 299n57
Brady, David W., 297n48
Brooks, David, 286n6
Browning, Lynnley, 284n31
Bruner, Robert F., 296n33
Buffett, Warren E., 34, 266, 286n7
Buiter, Willem H., 34–35, 286n10
Bush, George W., 294n39
Calmes, Jackie, 286n14, 299n38
Cameron, Charles, 290n20
Canes-Wrone, Brandice, 297n48
Carmines, Edward J., 288n31
Carr, Sean D., 296n33
Chan, Sewell, 299n37, 299n47
Chao, Justine, 303n13
Cheng, Ing-Hae, 286n5
Cilliza, Chris, 300n1
Clifford, Matthew P., 294n3
Clinton, Joshua D., 288n48
Clinton, William J., 286n8, 291n32
Coate, Stephen, 293n8
NAME index
Page numbers in italics refer to figures and tables.

328  •  Name Index
Cogan, John F., 297n48
Cole, Adam, 60, 288n42
Collins, Brian, 297n9
Comfort, Nicholas, 304n9, 304n10
Condon, Bernard, 304n16
Cooper, Helen, 294n4
Cooper, Michael, 298n24
Cox, Gary, 290nn14–15
Curry, Timothy, 287n24
Davison, Lee, 296n24
Davis Polk, 276, 297n5, 303n14, 
304n5
DeBold, Elizabeth, 299n56
Diermeier, Daniel, 290n2
De la Merced, Michael J., 284n17
Dennis, Brady, 299n47, 299n48
Dewan, Shaila, 285n2
Dilanian, Ken, 298n21
Dixit, Avinash K., 286n2
Dodosh, Mark, 283n1
Duca, John V., 291nn41–42, 292n1, 
294n37
Durante, Thomas, 304n35
Eavis, Peter, 294n34
Edwards, Franklin R., 296n38
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 304n31
Elkind, Peter, 294n27
Ellman, Lisa M., 291n35
Elmer, Vickie, 297n11
Epstein, David, 292n47
Erikson, Robert S., 290n13
Faux, Zeke, 283n11
Feddersen, Timothy, 290n2
Ferejohn, John, 291n39
Figueiredo, John M. de, 289n15
Fiorina, Morris P., 61, 288n44
Fogel, Robert, 226, 300n69
Foote, Christopher L., 283n5, 
294n35, 299n60
Frame, W. Scott, 287n19
Fried, Jesse M., 283n6
Friedman, Milton J., 31, 286n9
Gapper, John, 296n35
Geanakoplos, John D., 297n7
Gely, Rafael, 291n39
Gerardi, Kristopher S., 283n5, 
294n29, 294n35, 299n60
Gerring, John, 295n1
Gilmour, John, 291n31
Glaeser, Edward L., 137, 294n28
Goldin, Claudia, 285n1
Goldman Sachs, 293n22
Gorton, Gary B., 21, 291n43, 300n64
Gramlich, Edward M., 28, 285n6
Gramm, Phil, 286n10
Greenspan, Alan, 286n9
Gropp, Reint, 293n9
Groseclose, Tim, 291n31
Grow, Brian, 284n18
Halberstam, David, 22, 285n38
Hall, Robert E., 206, 299n40, 
299n42
Hansell, Saul, 284n14
Hansen, Bradley, 296n44
Hare, Christopher, 287n28
Hauke, Justin P., 299n55
Heckman, James, 287n27, 288n48
Heilemann, John, 302n48, 302n53
Heim, Bradley, 60, 288n42
Herbertsson, Tryggvi Thor,  
285n37
Hernandez, Raymond, 290n7, 
304n12
Herszenhorn, David M., 298n20, 
298n22, 298n23, 298n28
Hill, Patrice, 286n11
Hofstadter, Richard, 304n29
Holden, Jeremy, 286n5
Huber, John D., 292n47, 292n53
Huntington, Samuel, 292n54
Hurtado, Patricia, 296n27

Name Index  •  329
Igan, Deniz, 74, 294n32
Isidore, Chris, 292n3
Ismail, M. Asif, 289n4
Jackman, Simon D., 288n48
Jacobe, Dennis, 286n13
Jaffee, Dwight, 131, 293n18, 
293n25
Johnson, Simon, 247, 286n10
Kabaservice, Geoffrey A., 304n32
Kaplan, Steven N., 288n40
Katz, Lawrence F., 285n1
Kennedy, Susan Estabrook, 291n28, 
296n19
Kindleberger, Charles P., 19, 285n2
Kirkpatrick, David D., 292n50
Koger, Gregory, 291n26
Koniak, Susan P., 297n7
Krehbiel, Keith, 290n18
Kroszner, Randall S., 81, 289n17, 
295nn9–10
Kwak, James, 286n10, 292n51 
Labaton, Stephen, 290n7, 290n11
Lanman, Scott, 303n21
Lattman, Peter, 294n34, 303n9
Lauderdale, Benjamin E., 290n9
Lemann, Nicholas, 293n12
Levendusky, Matthew, 288n45
Levitt, Steven D., 283n7
Lewis, Michael, 284n16
Lichtblau, Eric, 293n20
Lieberman, Marvin B., 289n3
Lipton, Eric, 284n27, 292n50
Lizza, Ryan, 298n27
Lowenstein, Roger, 296n36,  
303n16
Lucas, Deborah, 287n23
MacKenzie, Donald, 294n36
MacKuen, Michael B., 290n13
Madrick, Jeff, 293n16
Malabre, Alfred L., 286n1
Malkiel, Burton G., 34, 286n6
Mallaby, Sebastian, 284n14
Mann, Bruce, 296n29
Martin, Andrew D., 291n35
Martin, Mitchell, 292n46
Maxfield, John, 304n1
Mayhew, David, 17, 284n26
McCarty, Nolan, 59–60, 125, 
287n28, 288n32, 288n48, 
290n20, 290n27, 290n29, 
291n31, 292n2, 292n53, 296n21, 
298n19, 299n51, 302n1
McClintick, David, 304n34
McCubbins, Mathew D.,  
290nn14–15, 292n49
McGinty, Tom, 289n27
McGrath, Ben, 244, 302n43
McKee, Michael, 303n21
McKenna, Francine, 304n6
McLean, Bethany, 294n27
McNamee, Mike, 294n33
Meltzer, Allan H., 285n2
Mendelberg, Tali, 288n31
Merced, Michael J. De la, 303n19
Mian, Atif, 80, 220, 224, 289n14, 
299n61, 300n62, 300n66
Milbank, Dana, 297n8
Miller, William, 304n29
Mishkin, Frederic S., 21, 285n37
Mishra, Prachi, 74, 294n32
Mitchell, George J., 26, 285n3
Morgan, Glen, 296n40
Morgenson, Gretchen, 284n30, 
289n6, 293n21, 293n24, 302n55
Morris, Stephen, 293n8
Morrison, Edward R., 296n38
Muellbauer, John, 291nn41–42, 
294n37
Nakamoto, Michiyo, 285n4
Nelson, Edward, 299n55
Nokken, Timothy P., 288n32

330  •  Name Index
Noll, Roger G., 292n54
Nuñez, Stephen, 299n43
Nunnari, Salvatore, 222, 300n65
Obama, Barack, 298n18
O’Halloran, Sharyn, 292n47
Olshan, Jeremy, 291n45
Orszag, Jonathan M., 293n23
Orszag, Peter, 293n23
Overacker, Louise, 295n16
Overbye, Dennis, 289n25
Partnoy, Frank, 284n14, 293n16
Paulson, Henry M., 284n24, 303n11
Pelofsky, Jeremy, 303n7
Perino, Michael, 295n15
Perlstein, Rick, 304n32
Philippon, Thomas, 60, 61, 82, 
288nn40–41, 289n21, 303n20, 
304n30
Piketty, Thomas, 288n43
Piskorski, Tomasz, 300n63
Poole, Keith T., 59–60, 125, 
287nn26–28, 287n30, 288n32, 
288n33, 288n36, 288n48,  
292n2, 296n21, 297n46,  
298n32, 299n51, 300n68
Pope, Jeremy C., 288n44
Posner, Richard, 190, 297n13
Preston, H. H., 290n5
Prince, C. J., 32, 296n32
Prior, Markus, 291n34
Protess, Ben, 304n2
Puzzanghera, Jim, 304n11
Purdum, Todd, 90
Quinn, Kevin M., 291n35
Raina, Sahil, 286n5
Rajan, Raghuram G., 290n3, 292n6
Ramcharan, Rodney, 290n3
Rapoport, Michael, 296n27
Rappaport, Liz, 296n27
Rasmussen, Scott, 302n38
Rauh, Joshua, 288n40
Reinhart, Carmen M., 21, 285n36
Reshef, Ariell, 60, 61, 82, 288nn40–41, 
289n21, 303n20, 304n30
Rivers, Douglas, 288n48
Robbins, Liz, 302n41
Rogoff, Kenneth S., 21, 285n36
Roguski, Randy, 283n2
Romer, Thomas, 74, 288n36, 289n8, 
296n21, 299n51
Rosenthal, Howard, 59–60, 125, 
287nn26–27, 287n28, 287n30, 
288n32, 288n48, 292n2, 295n4, 
296n21, 296n29, 296n45, 
297n46, 298n32, 299n43, 
299n51, 300n68, 303n25
Rosner, Joshua, 293n21, 293n24
Rothbard, Murray B., 295n5
Roubini, Nouriel, 214, 299n52
Rudolf, John C., 285n7
Saez, Emmanuel, 288n43
Sandler, Linda, 296n27
Santomero, Anthony M., 147
Sarlin, Benjamin, 302n42
Saving, Jason L., 292n1
Scannell, Kara, 289n27
Schaefer, Steve, 296n26
Schattschneider, E. E., 59, 288n39, 
303n17
Scheinkman, Jose, 137, 294n28
Schickler, Eric, 303n24
Schkade, David, 291n35
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., 288n2
Schoen, Douglas, 248–49, 302n38, 
302n52
Scholz, John Karl, 293n9
Schwartz, Anna J., 31, 286n9
Schwartz, Matthias, 302n45
Schwartz, Thomas, 292n49
Scott, Mark, 303n19
Segal, Jeffrey A., 291n35

Name Index  •  331
Seru, Amit, 300n63
Shamim, Adam, 286n3
Shapiro, Adam Hale, 294n29
Sharma, Nithyasri, 292n5
Shear, Michael D., 284n32
Shenn, Jody, 283n11
Shibut, Lynn, 287n24
Shiller, Robert, 285n2
Shipan, Charles R., 291n39, 292n47
Sides, John, 304n13
Silver-Greenberg, Jessica, 285n2, 
304n7, 304n8
Sims, Damon, 283n3
Simon, Herbert, 285n3
Sinclair, Barbara, 290n17
Skeel, David, 175, 296n28, 296n30, 
296n34, 296n41
Skocpol, Theda, 240, 302n38
Slack, Donovan, 287n22
Smith, Adam, 17, 284n26
Smith, Steven S., 291n26
Snyder, James, 287n27, 288n48, 
289n15
Sorkin, Andrew Ross, 284n24, 
289n26, 297n1, 303n11
Soros, George, 302n54
Spaeth, Harold J., 291n35
Spiller, Pablo T., 291n39
State National Bank of Big Spring et 
al. v. Geithner et al., 304n3
Steinhauer, Jennifer, 294n4
Stephenson, Emily, 304n3
Stigler, George, 292n54
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 5, 287n16, 
293n23, 303n22
Stimson, James A., 288n31, 290n13
Stohr, Greg, 297n3
Stolberg, Sheryl Gay, 288n48, 
298n33, 299n38
Strahan, Philip E., 147
Stratmann, Thomas, 81, 289n17
Streitfeld, David, 285n7
Subramanian, Guhan, 292n5
Sufi, Amir, 80, 220, 224, 289n14, 
299n61, 300n62, 300n66
Sunstein, Cass R., 291n35
Sussman, Anna Louie, 297n12
Swagel, Phillip, 299n60
Tapper, Jake, 303n3
Tausanovitch, Chris, 289n10
Teles, Steven M., 291n36
Tett, Gillian, 294n36
Toobin, Jeffrey, 289n22
Treanor, Jill, 303n22
Trebbi, Francesco, 80, 220, 224, 
289n14, 299n61, 300n62,  
300n66
Tressel, Thierry, 74, 294n32
Tufano, Peter, 295n3
Utt, Ronald, 294n38
Vicini, James, 303n7
Vig, Vikrant, 300n63
Wachtel, Katya, 289n24
Wachter, Susan M., 293n9
Warren, Charles, 295n4, 296n28
Warren, Elizabeth, 293n9
Watson, Mark W., 285n2
Wawro, Gregory J., 303n24
Weibull, Jörgen W., 286n2
Weingast, Barry R., 74, 289n8, 
296n35
Weisman, Steven R., 298n20, 
298n25
Werdigier, Julia, 284n17
Wheelock, David C., 295n8
White, Michelle J., 293n9
Whitehouse, Michael A., 296n31
Wicker, Elmus, 296n31
Weigel, David, 302n42
Wighton, David, 285n4
Willen, Paul S., 283n5, 294n29, 
294n35, 299n60

332  •  Name Index
Williams, T. Harry, 291n28
Williams, Timothy, 302n44
Williamson, Vanessa, 240, 302n38
Wilmott, Paul, 289n27
Wooten, James A., 291n44
Wyatt, Edward, 299n48
Xiong, Wei, 286n5
Zennie, Michael, 304n35
Zernike, Kate, 302n38
Zingales, Luigi, 292n52
Zitzewitz, Eric, 289nn12–13

AAA rated securities, 8–10, 208, 
259, 283n10
abortion, 282
ADA (Americans for Democratic 
Action), 46–47
adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs), 
21–22, 26, 138, 217, 299n59
African Americans (blacks), 44, 66, 
118, 119, 198, 211, 244–45
agrarian interests (farmers and 
farms), 153, 155, 157–59, 162, 
164, 166, 173–76, 179, 291n29
AHRFPA (American Housing 
Rescue and Foreclosure Preven-
tion Act) of 2008, 64–65, 66, 189, 
217–21, 219, 223, 300n62
AIG (American International Group): 
bonuses and, 36–37, 80, 230–31, 
238; CDOs and, 3; CDSs and, 9, 
142; directors of, 36–37; elites 
and, 272; equity investment returns 
and, 119, 120; federal investment 
and supervision of, 3, 4, 36–37, 
158; federal supervision of, 222; 
global economy and, 125–26; 
insolvency of, 9–10; MBSs and, 3; 
mobilization against bonuses and, 
80; OTS as regulator and, 139; 
populist backlashes against finan-
cial services industry and, 36–37, 
286n14; public interest protection 
and, 23, 158; TARP and, 3
Aldrich, Nelson, 167, 169
Aldrich-Vreeland Act of 1908, 11, 
56–57, 160, 288n37
American Bankers Association, 82, 
87–88
American Dream Downpayment Act 
of 2003, 117, 143, 144, 147, 148, 
148, 294n38
American Recovery and Investment 
Act (stimulus package) of 2009. 
See stimulus package (American 
Recovery and Investment Act) of 
2009
American Homeownership and Eco-
nomic Opportunity Act of 2000, 
143, 144, 147, 148
American International Group 
(AIG). See AIG (American  
International Group)
Americans for Democratic Action 
(ADA), 46–47
ARMs (adjustable-rate mortgages), 
21–22, 26, 138, 217, 299n59
authority: in government, 6, 57, 91, 
137, 271; of regulatory agencies, 
113, 164, 169, 188; state govern-
ments and, 271
auto industry bailouts, 279
automatic stay exemption, 172, 
296n37
automobile industry, 4, 217, 222, 
234, 259–60, 263–64
subject index
Page numbers in italics refer to figures and tables.

334  •  Subject Index
Bain Capital, 278
Banking Act (Glass-Steagall Act) 
of 1933. See Glass-Steagall Act 
(Banking Act) of 1933
Banking Act of 1935, 169
Bank of America: acquisitions of, 3, 
74, 125; campaign finance and, 
80–81, 82; crisis of 2008 survi-
vors and, 25; equity investment 
returns and, 119, 120, 121; politi-
cal power of, 87–88; power of, 
76–77; settlements and, 254
bankruptcy: agrarian interests and, 
159, 166; automatic stay exemp-
tion and, 172, 296n37; Bank-
ruptcy Act of 1800, 160, 166, 173, 
179; Bankruptcy Act of 1841, 
159, 160, 173–74, 176, 178–79; 
Bankruptcy Act of 1867, 173; 
Bankruptcy Act of 1898, 159, 
160, 166, 173–76; Bankruptcy 
Reform Act of 1978, 100, 170, 
175; derivatives and, 143, 172, 
296n37; moral hazard and, 156, 
159, 176; Orange County, CA, 
12, 141; panics and, 155–57, 159, 
160, 173–74; responses to laws 
on, 156, 159, 179, 295n4; transi-
tions of power and, 173–75
banks. See financial services indus-
try; specific businesses
Barclays, 88, 144, 155, 263, 277
Barney, Charles, 72, 169
Bear Stearns: equity investment 
returns and, 121; failure of, 6–7; 
federal bailout of, 3–4; political 
reasons for crisis of 2008 and, 6
Bernanke, Ben: appointment and 
confirmation to Fed and, 208, 
215, 228–29, 229, 299n42; ideol-
ogy and, 38, 40–41, 221; photo-
graph of, 7; policies and, 40–41, 
159, 215; political reasons for 
crisis of 2008 and, 5; TARP and, 
214, 221, 253. See also Federal 
Reserve
bipartisanship, 5, 18, 85, 106, 118, 
132, 182, 195, 298n19
blacks (African Americans), 44, 66, 
118, 119, 198, 211, 244–45
Bonica, Adam, 304n14
bonuses: financial industry and, 23, 
121; opportunities for reform and, 
258, 264–65; populist responses 
to, 36–37, 72, 80, 230–31, 238; 
Wall Street and, 4, 113, 230–31. 
See also private sector; self-interest
Booker, Cory, 278
Born, Brooksley, 12, 28, 109, 140
bounded rationality, 32. See also 
psychology
Breuer, Lanny, 277
bubbles: bounded rationality and, 
32; cognitive regulatory capture 
and, 34–35; definition of, 31, 
285n2; delays in policy response 
and, 35–36; financial innovation 
and, 33–34; policy responses and, 
33–35; pop of, 33, 35–36; popu-
list backlashes against financial 
services industry and, 36–37, 
286n14; populist responses to, 
36–37, 286n14; predatory mort-
gage lending and, 26; psychology 
of decision making and, 32–33, 
35–36. See also specific bubbles
Bunning, Jim, 279
Bush, George H. W., 4, 23, 130, 165, 
178, 270
Bush, George W.: AHRFPA of 2008 
and, 64–65, 66, 189, 217–21, 219, 
223, 300n62; foreclosures and, 
220–21; free market conserva-
tism and, 5, 281; homeownership 
and, 43–44, 117, 143, 294n38; 
ideology and, 57; on interests, 
71–72; median household incomes 
and, 121–22, 122; “ownership 

Subject Index  •  335
society” and, 5, 44, 126, 129, 143, 
231, 293n13; photograph of, 7; 
political reasons for crisis of 2008 
and, 4–5, 218; populist responses 
to crisis of 2008 and, 233, 300n6; 
privatization of social security and, 
280; risky loan portfolios and, 
43–44; stimulus plan of 2008 and, 
198–201, 298nn20–22, 298n24; 
tax cuts, 279–80; Wall Street and, 
72, 74; weak regulations and, 216
campaign finance, 78–85, 82, 84, 85, 
225, 277–78, 289n15, 289n23, 
300n67, 304n14
capitalism (free market capitalism), 
16, 19, 40, 177–78, 269. See also 
crony capitalism; free market 
conservatism
Carter, Jimmy, 4, 129–30, 133–34, 
137, 286n15
CDOs (collateralized debt obliga-
tions), 3, 9, 142, 145, 283n10, 
295n15
CDSs (credit default swaps), 9, 10, 
142
Center for Responsive Politics, 278
CFMA (Commodity Futures Mod-
ernization Act) of 2000, 11, 73, 
109, 118, 143, 147, 242, 272
CFPA (Consumer Financial Protec-
tion Agency), 209–10, 299n46. See 
also Consumer Financial Protec-
tion Bureau
CFTC (Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission), 12, 18, 22, 87, 146, 
146–47, 260, 272, 276, 281
Chandler Act of 1938, 170, 175
Citibank, 76–77, 80–81, 83, 87–88, 
108
Citicorp, 3, 112, 183, 292n46
Citigroup: board members of, 183; 
campaign finance and, 82; CDOs 
and, 9; crisis of 2008 survivors 
and, 25; employees as political 
advisors and, 5; equity investment 
returns and, 121; Fannie Mae 
stock and, 130; federal investment 
and supervision of, 222; MBSs 
and, 9; misinformation and, 13; 
settlements and, 254; TARP funds 
and, 13
Citizens United v. Federal Elections 
Commission (2010), 150, 271
Clinton, Bill: delays in policy 
responses and, 109; Fed chair 
appointments and, 42; finan-
cial industry and, 106; financial 
innovation and, 34, 140; gridlock 
interval and, 102; homeownership 
and, 43, 117; median household 
incomes and, 121–22, 122; politi-
cal advisors to, 5, 117, 184–85, 
185; political reasons for crisis of 
2008 and, 4–6; presidential pocket 
veto and, 94, 100; presidential 
veto and, 106; risky loan portfo-
lios and, 43–44; weak regulations 
and, 216; welfare reform and, 
280–81
cloture rules: institutions’ regulatory 
responses and, 98–100, 102–4, 
290n19, 291n27; opportunities 
for reform and, 268, 303n24; 
political responses and, 180; pop 
of 2008 and, 199, 209, 211, 222
Club for Growth, 149, 192–93, 245
cognitive regulatory capture (cogni-
tive state capture), 34–35, 115, 238
collateralized debt obligations 
(CDOs), 3, 9, 142, 145, 283n10, 
295n15
Commodity Futures Modernization 
Act (CFMA) of 2000, 11, 73, 109, 
118, 143, 147, 242, 272
Commodity Futures Trading Com-
mission (CFTC), 12, 18, 22, 87, 
146, 146–47, 260, 272

336  •  Subject Index
compensation packages. See bonuses
concentration in industries, 134, 
144–47, 146, 255, 294n26
Consumer Bankers Association, 
87–88
Consumer Financial Protection 
Agency (CFPA), 209–10, 299n46
Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau, 150, 187, 198, 209–10, 
256, 281, 299n46
Consumer Protection Act of 2010, 
49, 77, 133
Corzine, Jon, 22, 260–61, 272. See 
also MF Global
Council of Economic Advisors, 5, 
132, 295n10
Countrywide Financial, 19, 44, 
73–74, 128, 131, 228, 254, 258
courts: elites and, 271; federal versus 
state governments and, 108–9, 
186, 216–17, 299n58; policy 
role and, 107–9, 162, 294nn2–3, 
295n18; predatory mortgage lend-
ing and, 108–9, 162, 295n18; Wall 
Street and, 108–9
Cox, Christopher, 7, 11, 123
CRA (Community Reinvestment 
Act) of 1977, 126, 129–30, 148
Credit Card Accountability Respon-
sibility and Disclosure Act of 
2009, 102, 207
credit cards, 6, 94, 100, 108, 166, 
175, 196, 207, 299n43
credit default swaps (CDSs), 9, 10, 
142
credit markets, in historical context, 
155–60, 162, 164, 295n4, 295n10
Credit Suisse, 82, 144, 294n34
criminal prosecutions, 254, 266–67
crisis of 2008: summary of, 3–13; 
financial innovation and, 4, 
285n2, 285nn2–3; free market 
conservatism and, 42–43; gridlock 
and, 60–61; historical context 
for, 11; ignored information and, 
12–13, 156, 208, 258–59, 272; 
institutions in context of, 28–29; 
interests in context of, 27–28; 
moral hazard and, 42–43, 136–37; 
self-interest and, 4, 25–26, 285n3; 
self-regulation and, 27, 42; stimu-
lus plan of 2008 and, 198–201, 
298nn20–22, 298n24; weak regu-
lations and, 8, 20, 26–27. See also 
political bubble of crisis of 2008; 
political reasons for crisis of 2008; 
pop of 2008; populist responses to 
crisis of 2008; specific laws
crony capitalism, 8, 18–19, 67, 
131–32, 242, 270–71, 293n22. 
See also capitalism (free market 
capitalism)
Cuomo, Andrew, 43–44, 109, 
186–87, 217, 287n18
Cuomo v. Clearing House Associa-
tion (2009), 108–9, 186, 217
Davis Polk, 276
D.C. Court of Appeals, 276
debt ceiling, 279–80
deficit reduction, 279–80
delays in policy responses: bubbles 
and, 35–36; derivatives and, 
10–12, 18, 99, 109, 140; Enron 
Corporation and, 110, 139–41; 
Federal Reserve and, 13; finan-
cial industry and, 109–11; Great 
Depression and, 11; historical con-
text for, 160–65; ideology and, 16, 
43; institutions and, 91, 94, 109; 
Lehman Brothers and, 16, 43, 
284n24; Merrill Lynch and, 12; 
political reasons for crisis of 2008 
and, 11–12; pop of 2008 and, 16, 
149–51, 161, 188, 194, 200, 206, 
297n4, 298n26; TARP and, 16

Subject Index  •  337
democracy, 17, 19, 35, 154, 228, 247, 
268–69, 272–73, 302nn46–47. See 
also elections; specific political 
parties
Democratic Party: summary of,  
268–69; agrarian interests and, 
155, 173–74, 179; bankruptcy 
laws and, 173–74; campaign 
finance and, 83–84, 84, 162, 
289n23, 295n16; campaign 
finance from financial industry to, 
277; credit markets and politics 
in historical context and, 155; 
debt ceiling and, 279–80; egali-
tarianism and, 43; elections and, 
252, 302n1; entitlement changes 
and, 280; financial industry 
and, 83–84, 84, 85, 93; financial 
industry in context of politics and, 
162; financial regulation and, 279; 
financial supporters and, 280; 
foreclosures and, 218–21, 219, 
301n21; free market conservatism  
and, 15, 42; gridlock interval and,  
101; ideology and, 39–40, 224–25,  
225; ideology scores and, 163, 
190–94, 192, 193, 297nn14–16, 
298n17; moral hazard and, 43; 
negative agenda control and, 
96–98, 97; OWS and, 249; policy 
responses and, 238, 301n28; polit-
ical reasons for crisis of 2008 and, 
5–6; populist responses to crisis 
of 2008 and, 233–34, 300n7; 
predatory mortgage lending and, 
11, 147; private sector failure 
and, 125; reversals of power and, 
179–81; self-interest and, 18; stra-
tegic disagreement and, 105, 107; 
tax increases and, 280. See also 
liberal-conservative politics
Democrat-Republicans, 155, 157, 
174, 226. See also Jeffersonianism
Depository Institutions Deregulation 
and Monetary Control Act  
of 1980, 136, 147
deregulation: summary of, 133–37; 
financial industry and, 41, 60, 
108, 111–12, 139, 143–44, 147, 
292n46; Gramm, Phil, and, 41, 
73; health care industry regula-
tions versus, 134, 135; home-
ownership and, 137–39, 294n30; 
political bubble of crisis of 2008 
and, 123; populist responses to 
crisis and, 234; subprime and, 171
derivatives: automatic stay exemp-
tion and, 172, 296n37; bank-
ruptcy and, 143, 172, 296n37; 
delays in policy response and, 
10–12, 18, 99, 109, 140; deregula-
tion and, 133, 143, 147; infor-
mation from lobbyists and, 86; 
limited policy responses and, 
171–72, 296n37; policy responses 
and, 105, 189, 209, 210, 299n44; 
predatory mortgage lending and, 
141
Dimon, Jamie, 22, 150, 169. See also 
JPMorgan Chase
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act of 2010: 
summary of, 20, 187–88, 194, 
254; cloture and, 241; complexity 
of, 259; complexity of regula-
tions and, 188, 256–58; delays in 
policy response and, 188, 257–58, 
297n4; derivatives and, 209, 
299n44; filibuster and, 195–96, 
210, 261; financial regulations 
and, 275; financial services indus-
try and, 77, 187–88; grid- 
lock interval and, 102; GSEs 
reform and, 133; implementation 
of, 275; legal challenges to, 275; 
liberal-conservative politics 

338  •  Subject Index
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act of 2010  
(continued) 
and, 49–50, 57, 195–98, 208–14, 
275, 299n45; Libor scandal and, 
278; limited policy responses and, 
187–89, 255–56, 261; lobbyists 
and, 67, 77, 258, 281; Miller Bill 
of 2007 and, 141, 193–94, 216; 
pivotal politics and, 150, 195, 
208–14, 212, 213, 299nn46–50; 
post-election, 281; public support 
for, 237; reforms of, 281; Romney 
and, 275, 278–79; “skin in the 
game” and, 257; “too big to fail” 
and, 254–55, 265–66, 275; UBS 
and, 277; Volcker Rule and, 210
dot-com bubble of 2001, 13, 32–33, 
173
drug industry, regulation of, 282
Ebbers, Bernard, 72, 73
EESA (Emergency Economic Stabili-
zation Act) of 2008, 222–23. See 
also TARP (Troubled Asset Relief 
Program) of 2009
egalitarianism: summary of, 19, 
43–45, 287n18, 287n20; Fannie 
Mae and, 19, 44; homeownership 
and, 19, 44, 126, 128–29, 292n6
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 270, 271
elections: campaign finance and, 
304n14; Dodd-Frank and, 
277–78; electoral cycle and, 91, 
290n1; financial industry and, 
277–78; financial sector and, 
78–79, 289n11; mobilization of 
constituencies and, 75–80, 77, 
78, 80, 279, 289n9; opportunities 
for reform and, 252; pop of 2008 
and, 80, 194–95, 203–6, 205, 
215, 223, 225–27, 226; popu-
list responses to crisis and, 230; 
presidential debates, 275; regula-
tory responses and, 91, 290n1; 
short-termism and, 181–83; taxes 
and, 279–80; third-party politics 
and, 249, 267–69, 303n26
electric power (energy) markets, 73, 
134–35, 143, 165, 218, 284n27
electronics industry, 133–35, 143
elites, and financial industry, 22–23, 
74–75, 242, 271–73, 285nn38–39
Emanuel, Rahm, 54, 75, 183, 251, 253
Emergency Economic Stabilization 
Act (EESA) of 2008, 222–23
Employee Retirement Income Secu-
rity Act (ERISA) of 1974, 110
employment, 275
energy (electric power) markets, 73, 
134–35, 143, 165, 218, 284n27
Enron Corporation: board mem-
bers of, 18, 183; concentration 
in industries and, 173; delays in 
policy response and, 110, 139–41; 
elite as implicated in financial 
bubbles and, 22; elites and, 271; 
energy industry and, 135; energy 
markets and, 284n27; “Enron 
loophole” and, 18, 73, 110, 242; 
misinformation and, 13; regula-
tions and, 18, 63, 73, 242; scandal 
and, 22, 173
entitlements, changes to, 280
environment, 282
equity: dot-com, 173; equity invest-
ments and, 41, 118–21, 120, 158, 
292n1, 295n10; homeownership 
and, 2, 28
ERISA (Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act) of 1974, 110
Ernst & Young, 166, 296n27
estate tax, 279
Europe, 206, 287n27, 299n41
executive branch: appointments 
and, 150, 294n4; elites and, 271; 

Subject Index  •  339
formal/informal legislative powers 
of, 100, 290n20; opportunities 
for reform and, 252–53, 302n1; 
pocket veto and, 94, 100; politi-
cal reasons for crisis of 2008 and, 
4–5; populist responses to crisis 
and, 233–34, 300n6; veto and, 
100–105, 103, 290n21
executive compensation. See bonuses
Facebook, 86, 272
Fannie Mae: bipartisanship and, 
132; directors of, 5, 186; egali- 
tarianism and, 19, 44; equity 
investment returns and, 121;  
federal supervision of, 4, 188, 
222; future of, 276; interests 
within, 132–33, 293n22; misin-
formation and, 5, 13, 36, 262– 
63, 303n9; opportunities for 
reform after crisis and, 256; 
policy responses and, 217–18; 
privatization of, 118, 123, 
129–33, 136, 222, 239, 293n17; 
regulatory measures and, 10–11; 
risky loan portfolios and, 13, 
43–45, 130, 287n18, 287n20
farmers and farms (agrarian inter-
ests), 153, 155, 157–59, 162, 164, 
166, 173–76, 179, 291n29
Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-
tion (FDIC), 130, 132, 146, 147, 
281
federal government: authority in, 6, 
57, 91, 137, 271; bailouts by, 3–4; 
corporation supervision by, 3, 4, 
36–37, 158; financial innovation 
and, 142–44, 294n38; populist 
responses to intervention of,  
234–39, 236, 300nn11–12, 
301n21, 301nn23–24, 301n28, 
301n31, 301nn33–34, 301nn36–37; 
power of, 91–92, 94, 96; regula-
tory capacity and, 266; trust in, 
282. See also specific branches of 
government
Federal Home Loan Bank Board 
(FHLBB), 164, 167, 170, 177
Federalists, 107, 173, 179
Federal Reserve: delays in policy 
response and, 13, 160; Federal 
Reserve Act of 1913 and, 11, 20, 
57, 160, 166–69, 168, 176–78, 
288n37; housing bubble and, 9; 
intervention by, 12; polarization 
and, 167–69; political reasons for 
crisis of 2008 and, 4–5, 139. See 
also specific chairmen
Federal Reserve Bank (FRB), 281
Feldstein, Martin, 22–23, 118
FHLBB (Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board), 164, 167, 170, 177
filibuster: institutions and, 98–100, 
102–4, 103, 291nn27–28; pop of 
2008 and, 189, 194–96, 205, 210, 
220–21, 261
financial bubbles: democracies and, 
19, 285n35; elite as implicated 
in, 22–23, 285nn38–39; gridlock 
and, 17, 59; ideology and, 16; 
institutions and, 16–17; political 
bubbles as compared with, 16–19; 
self-interest and, 17–18
financial crises. See crisis of 2008; 
panics
financial industry: authority of  
regulatory agencies and, 169;  
bipartisanship and, 18, 85, 106,  
182; campaign finance and,  
81–82, 82, 84, 85, 150, 162,  
225, 277–78, 294nn2–3, 295n16,  
300n67, 304n14; complexity  
of, 113, 258–59; complexity of 
regulations and, 80, 197, 256–57;  
concentration of, 280; confidence 
in, 282; courts and, 107–8, 277; 

340  •  Subject Index
financial industry (continued) 
crime and, 277; delays in policy 
response and, 109–11; Demo-
cratic Party and, 83–84, 84, 85, 
93; deregulation and, 41, 60, 
108, 111–12, 139, 143–44, 147, 
292n46; elites and, 22, 271–73; 
enforcement and, 282; executive 
branch regulatory responses to, 
111–12; federal versus state gov-
ernments and, 216–17, 299n58; 
financial amnesia and, 282; fines 
of, 277; liberal-conservative poli-
tics and, 62–67, 195–98; localism 
and, 92–93; market regulations 
and, 279; as the “money-wing” 
and, 278; opportunities for 
reform and, 251–53; OWS and, 
249; politics and, 162, 295n15; 
populist responses to crisis and, 
233–34, 300n6; power of interests 
and, 78–80, 81–82, 82, 289n20, 
289nn11–13; reform of, 207–14, 
212; reforms and, 163, 281–82, 
296n19; regulatory capacity and, 
112–15, 292n52; Republican Party 
and, 80, 83–85, 85; self-interest 
and, 282; settlements and, 254; 
state governments and, 59, 108–9, 
216–17, 299n58; strategic disagree-
ment and, 106; “too big to fail” 
and, 43, 123–24, 139, 150, 241, 
254–55, 265–66, 282, 303n10; 
weak regulations and, 64, 74, 141. 
See also self-regulation; Wall Street; 
specific laws and industries
financial innovation: summary of, 
20–23, 294n38; bubbles and, 
33–34; crisis of 2008 and, 4, 
285n2, 285nn2–3; homeowner-
ship and, 140–42; housing bubble 
and, 5, 9–10, 13; ideology and, 
140–44, 285nn38–39, 294n34, 
294n38; institutions and, 140–44, 
294n34, 294n38; interests and, 
140–44, 294n34, 294n38; politi-
cal reasons for crisis of 2008 and, 
8; self-regulation and, 21
financial regulations: Dodd-Frank 
and, 275; implementation of, 276; 
market regulations and, 279
financial services industry: campaign 
finance and, 83, 84; credit cards 
and, 6, 94, 100, 108, 166, 175, 
196, 207, 299n43; credit markets 
in historical context and, 155–60, 
162, 164, 295n4, 295n10; 
financial innovation and, 34; 
foreclosures and, 221, 300n63; 
GSEs and, 255–56; limited policy 
responses and, 166, 296n27; limits 
on, 264; localism and, 166; moral 
hazard and, 237; power of, 6–7, 
76–78, 77, 81; shadow banking 
system and, 9–10, 21, 155, 221; 
“too big to fail” and, 124, 150, 
255, 265–66, 303n10; weak regu-
lations and, 20, 22, 74, 111, 164, 
216, 261. See also savings and 
loan crisis (S&L) of 1985
Financial Stability Oversight Council 
(FSOC), 281
FIRREA (Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement 
Act) of 1989, 20, 139, 147, 165, 
170–71, 178, 182, 216. See also 
OTS (Office of Thrift Supervision)
fiscal cliff, 279
fiscal policy: polarization of, 279; 
reform, 280
food industry, regulation of, 282
foreclosures: bankruptcy and, 158, 
218–19, 219; crisis of 2008 and, 
35, 41; fraudulent processing 
of, 277; limited policy responses 
and, 189–90; limits on finan-

Subject Index  •  341
cial services industry and, 264; 
MBSs and, 221, 300n63; policy 
responses and, 64–65, 66, 189, 
217–21, 219, 223, 300nn62–63; 
populist responses to crisis and, 
233, 236–37, 301n21; predatory 
mortgage lending and, 244; “robo-
signing” of, 26, 256, 285n2; settle-
ments and, 254; statistics on, 190; 
subprime mortgages and, 13. See 
also homeownership
France, 280
FRB. See Federal Reserve Bank
Freddie Mac: bipartisanship and, 
132; CEOs of, 5, 73–74, 185; 
equity investment returns and, 
121; federal supervision of, 4, 
188, 222; future of, 276; history 
of, 129; interests within, 132–33, 
293n22; misinformation and, 13, 
36, 262–63, 303n9; opportunities 
for reform after crisis and, 256; 
policy towards, 133; privatization 
of, 123, 130–31, 133, 222, 239, 
293n17; risky loan portfolios and, 
13, 43–45, 130, 287n18, 287n20
free market capitalism (capitalism), 
16, 19, 40, 177–78, 269
free market conservatism, 281; crisis 
of 2008 and, 42–43, 193; home-
ownership and, 43–44; ideology 
and, 40, 41, 42–43, 270, 286n12; 
limited government responses and, 
15, 42, 58; moral hazard and, 
208, 225; “ownership society” 
and, 5, 44, 126, 129, 143, 231, 
293n13; political bubbles and, 
15–16, 18–19
Friedman, Milton, 16, 282
Frontline, 277
FSLIC (Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corporation), 136, 
164–65, 181–82
FSOC. See Financial Stability Over-
sight Council
Fuld, Richard, 6, 169, 265, 296n32
fundamentalist free market capital-
ism, 16, 177–78
Garn-St. Germain Depository Insti-
tutions Act of 1982, 21, 138, 147
gay rights, 282
Geithner, Timothy, 185, 185, 187, 
189, 286n14
General Motors (GM), 4, 222, 
259–60
Gensler, Gary, 22, 150, 260–61
geographical representation, and 
institutions’ regulatory responses, 
92–94, 290n9
Glass, Carter, 104, 167, 296n19
Glass-Steagall Act (Banking Act) 
of 1933: summary of, 11, 256, 
259, 291n29; filibuster and, 104, 
291n28; financial services industry 
and, 81, 105, 163, 165–66, 170; 
ideology and, 57; localism and, 
11, 92; repeal of, 18, 34, 74, 
111–12, 147, 292n46, 294n3.  
See also Gramm-Leach-Bliley  
Act of 1999
Global Crossing, 13, 110
global economy, 125–26, 144
GM (General Motors), 4, 222, 
259–60
Goldman Sachs: board members  
of, 74, 183, 186, 293n22;  
bonuses and, 121; campaign 
finance and, 80–81, 82–83, 84, 
289n23; crisis of 2008 survivors 
and, 25, 144; elites and, 272; 
equity investment returns and, 
119–21, 120; financial innova-
tion and, 86–87, 144; information 
from lobbyists and, 88; settle-
ments and, 254

342  •  Subject Index
Gore, Albert, 5, 178
government regulations, of food and 
drug industries, 282
Gramm, Phil: connections to UBS, 
277; deregulation and, 41, 73; as 
political advisor, 12, 183; private 
sector and, 183; self-interest and, 
17–19
Gramm, Wendy, 17–18, 75, 183
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, 
18, 34, 41–42, 143, 147, 272. See 
also Glass-Steagall Act (Banking 
Act) of 1933
Great Depression: credit markets 
and politics in historical context 
and, 157, 159, 295n10; delays in 
policy response and, 11, 161–63; 
financial industry in context of 
politics and, 162; government 
housing programs and, 128; legis-
lation after, 11, 161–63, 291n29; 
policy responses to, 19–20, 40–41, 
165; transitions of power and, 177
Great Recession of 2007 to 2009, 2, 
6, 104, 118, 177, 228, 251, 272
greed. See self-interest
Greenspan, Alan: delays in policy 
response and, 109; Fed chair 
appointment of, 42, 286n15; 
financial innovation and, 34; free 
market conservatism and, 16, 
41–43, 286n12; limited policy 
responses and, 172; political 
bubble of crisis of 2008 and, 118; 
political reasons for crisis of 2008 
and, 5; regulatory capacity and, 
123; self-regulation and, 27, 41; 
“too big to fail” and, 265. See also 
Federal Reserve
gridlock (paralysis): crisis of 2008 
and, 60–61; financial bubbles 
and, 17, 59; gridlock interval 
and, 100–103, 103, 291nn23–24; 
institutions’ regulatory responses 
and, 91, 94, 96, 100–101, 109–12, 
290n15, 290n21, 291nn23–24, 
292n46; pop of 2008 and, 102
GSEs (government-sponsored enter-
prises), 3–4, 255–56; future of 
and, 276; post-election, 281. See 
also Fannie Mae; Freddie Mac
Hamilton, Alexander, 16, 159
HAMP (Home Affordable Modifica-
tion Program) of 2009, 189–90
HARP (Home Affordable Refinance 
Program) of 2012, 190
health care industry: health care 
reform and, 181, 241, 241–43, 
252; lobbyists and, 290n30; 
Obamacare of 2010 and, 102, 
230, 241, 243–45, 247, 259; OWS 
and, 249; populist responses to 
laws on, 297n49; power of inter-
ests and, 76, 77; reforms in, 48, 
181, 195–96, 241, 241–43, 250, 
251–52; regulations and, 142–43; 
regulation versus deregulation 
and, 134, 135
high-frequency trading (HFT), 276
Hispanics, 118, 119
HOEPA (Home Ownership and 
Equity Protection Act) of 1994, 216
Holbrooke, Richard, 22–23, 73–74, 
118
Hollande, François, 280
Home Affordable Modification Pro-
gram (HAMP) of 2009, 189–90
Home Affordable Refinance Pro-
gram (HARP) of 2012, 190
homeownership: summary of, 
117–18, 119, 190; bankruptcy 
and, 158, 166; credit markets 
and politics in historical context 
and, 157–59; deregulation and, 
137–39, 294n30; egalitarianism 

Subject Index  •  343
and, 19, 44, 126, 128–29, 292n6; 
equity and, 2, 28; financial inno-
vation and, 140–42; free market 
conservatism and, 43–44; Great 
Depression and, 128; income 
tax deductions and, 127; insti-
tutions and, 131–32; interests of 
real estate industry and, 126–28, 
131, 292n6; minorities and, 43, 
44, 117, 118, 119, 130, 148; 
off-budget subsidies and, 126–33; 
“ownership society” and, 5, 44, 
126, 129, 143, 231, 293n13; the 
poor and, 5, 45, 137, 143–44, 
218; predatory mortgage lending 
and, 141; private sector and, 126; 
redlining and, 130, 148; securiti-
zation and, 8–9; state governments 
and, 13, 127, 137, 139, 141. See 
also foreclosures; mortgages; 
political bubble of crisis of 2008; 
predatory mortgage lending; spe-
cific mortgage products
Home Ownership and Equity Pro-
tection Act (HOEPA) of 1994, 216
Hoover, Herbert, 40–41, 57, 153, 
161, 162, 167, 177
Housing and Community Develop-
ment Act of 1992, 130, 148
Housing and Economic Recovery 
Act of 2008. See AHRFPA (Ameri-
can Housing Rescue and Foreclo-
sure Prevention Act) of 2008
housing bubble, 275–76; summary 
of, 1–3, 35, 286n12; equity and, 
28; financial innovations and, 5, 
9–10, 13; ideology and, 215–21; 
liberal-conservative politics and, 
218–21, 219, 300n62; pop of, 
9–10, 33, 215–21; predatory 
mortgage lending and, 193–94, 
216–17, 299n59, 301n21; psy-
chology of decision making  
and, 33. See also real estate 
industry
HSBC, 277
ideal points, 48, 52, 53, 54, 62, 
65–70. See also ideology scores
ideology: summary of, 38–45; 
behavioral definition of, 45; 
capitalism and, 40; crisis of 2008 
and, 228; crony capitalism and, 
67; definition of, 38, 39, 45; 
delays in policy response and, 
43, 154; Democratic Party and, 
39–40; financial bubbles and, 16; 
free market conservatism and, 40, 
41, 42–43, 286n12; impact of, 
280; limited regulations and, 154; 
moral hazard and, 42–43, 57; 
opportunities for reform and, 257, 
269–70; OWS and, 249; partisan 
overlap and, 50, 52, 98; polariza-
tion and, 47, 50, 53, 54, 57–62, 
58, 61, 288n37; policy response 
and, 40–41; political bubble of 
crisis of 2008 and, 118, 123; polit-
ical bubbles and, 15–16, 18–19, 
284n22, 284n33; political reasons 
for crisis of 2008 and, 7–8, 29, 
283n7; political responses and, 
150–51; pop of 2008 and, 39–40, 
57, 67, 196–98, 215–27, 219, 
224–25, 226, 227; Republican 
Party and, 39–40, 279; reversals 
of power and, 179; self-regulation 
and, 41, 42, 286n12; tracking 
techniques and, 69, 288n48; Wall 
Street and, 27, 113, 124. See also 
ideal points; liberal-conservative 
politics; specific ideologies
ideology scores: Bernanke’s reap-
pointment to Fed and, 208, 228–29, 
229, 299n42; Democratic Party 
and, 163; liberal-conservative 

344  •  Subject Index
ideology scores (continued) 
politics and, 47–49, 52–58, 53,  
54, 61, 69, 288n48; pop of  
2008 and, 190–94, 192, 193, 
297nn14–16, 298n17; Republi- 
can Party and, 163. See also  
ideal points; ideology
ignored information, and crisis of 
2008, 12–13, 156, 208, 258–59, 
272
inaccurate information (misinfor-
mation), 5, 12–13, 25, 36, 239, 
262–63, 284n15, 284n17, 303n9
income tax code, 277–79
institutions, 280; summary of, 
90–94, 115–16; authority in 
government and, 91; cloture rules 
and, 98–100, 102–4, 290n19, 
291n27; cognitive regulatory 
capture and, 115, 225; courts 
and, 107–9; crisis of 2008 and, 
228; crisis of 2008 in context 
of, 28–29; delays in policy 
response and, 91, 94, 109, 154; 
electoral cycle and, 91, 290n1; 
filibuster and, 98–100, 102–4, 
103, 291nn27–28; financial 
bubbles and, 16–17; geographi-
cal representation and, 92–94, 
290n9; gridlock and, 91, 94, 
96, 100–101, 109–12, 290n15, 
290n21, 291nn23–24, 292n46; 
gridlock interval and, 100–103, 
103, 291nn23–24; homeown-
ership and, 131–32; limited 
policy responses and, 150; limited 
regulations and, 154; localism 
and, 91–92, 136–37; negative 
agenda control and, 96–98, 97, 
102, 290n15; pivotal politics and, 
94–100, 97, 105, 111; polariza-
tion and, 90, 104, 110–11; politi-
cal bubble of crisis of 2008 and, 
118, 123; political bubbles and, 
16–17; political reasons for crisis 
of 2008 and, 7, 8, 29, 283n8; 
political responses and, 150–51; 
power of federal government and, 
91–92, 94, 96, 100; power of 
regulatory agencies and, 108–9, 
114; power to block reforms in 
homeownership and, 131–32; 
presidential formal/informal leg-
islative powers and, 100, 290n20; 
presidential pocket veto and, 
94, 100; presidential veto and, 
100–105, 103, 290n21; reform 
trap and, 114; regulatory capacity  
and, 112–15, 292n52; regulatory 
responses and, 20, 111–12, 292n46; 
reversals of power and, 179; strate-
gic disagreement and, 105–7; weak 
regulations and, 20, 139
insurance industry, 77, 78–79, 
81–82, 82, 290n30; campaign 
contributions and, 277; risk, 281. 
See also specific companies
interests: summary of, 71–75; 
crisis of 2008 and, 27–28, 228; 
delays in policy response and, 
154; entitlement changes and, 
280; within Fannie Mae, 132–33, 
293n22; financial innovation and, 
140–44, 294n34, 294n38; within 
Freddie Mac, 132–33, 293n22; 
information from lobbyists and, 
87; limited regulations and, 154; 
lobbyists and, 73; OWS and, 249; 
policy response and, 73; political 
bubble of crisis of 2008 and, 118, 
123; political reasons for crisis of 
2008 and, 7, 8, 29, 74–75; politi-
cal responses and, 150–51; real 
estate industry and, 126–28, 131, 
292n6; Republican Party, 279; 
reversals of power and, 179

Subject Index  •  345
Jefferson, Thomas, 155, 173–74
Jeffersonianism, 173–74, 179, 271, 
294n26
Jesus Christ, 282
Johnson, James, 5, 73–74, 132, 186, 
293n22
JPMorgan Chase, 276; acquisitions 
of, 149–50, 159–60; authority 
of regulatory agencies and, 169; 
campaign finance and, 80–81, 82; 
CDOs and, 142; CDSs and, 142; 
complexity of regulations and, 
257; directors of, 22; elites and, 
22; political power of, 76–77, 
87–88; settlements and, 254
Keating, Charles, 93, 112
Kennedy, John F., 72–73
League of Conservation Voters 
(LCV), 46–47
legal profession, 81, 289n20
Lehman Brothers, 304n4; bank-
ruptcy and, 3, 6, 16, 43, 57, 166, 
173; campaign finance and, 6, 
80–81; delays in policy response 
and, 16, 43, 284n24; equity 
investment returns and, 121; fail-
ure of, 3, 6–7, 16, 43, 57, 284n24; 
misinformation and, 284n17; 
political reasons for crisis of 2008 
and, 6
Lehrer, Jim, 275
liberal-conservative politics: sum-
mary of, 45–47, 287nn25–27; 
financial issues voting records 
and, 62–67, 63, 65, 288nn46–47; 
ideal points and, 48, 52, 53, 54, 
62, 65–70; ideological map and, 
67–70, 68, 69; ideology scores 
and, 47–49, 52–58, 53, 54, 61, 
69, 163, 288n48; one-dimensional 
politics and, 49; opportunities 
for reform and, 251–52; patterns 
in voting and, 49–52, 51, 53, 54, 
54–57, 288n37, 288nn34–35;  
pop of 2008 and, 52, 54, 54, 57, 
195–207, 202, 203, 205, 208, 
222–26, 224–25, 226, 298nn29–32; 
spatial model of voting and, 
47–48, 51, 62–68, 63, 65, 66, 
288nn46–47; tracking ideology 
techniques and, 45, 49, 61; weak 
regulations and, 64, 111. See also 
ideology
Libor scandal: Barclays and, 277; 
fines and, 277–78; media attention 
and, 277; UBS and, 277–78; Wall 
Street Journal and, 278
limited policy responses: opportu-
nities for reform and, 255–56; 
political bubble pop and, 160, 
165–73, 168; pop of 2008 and, 
184–89, 194, 200, 217
lobbyists: Dodd-Frank and, 281; 
financial industry, 87–89, 88, 
291n30; information from, 85–87; 
insurance industry and, 291n30; 
interests and, 73; pop of 2008 
and, 67
localism, 244, 264, 271; institutions’ 
regulatory responses and, 91–92, 
136–37; political responses and, 
166–67; pop of 2008 and, 215
Long Term Capital Management 
(LTCM), 12, 21, 22, 141, 144, 
171–72, 285n39
Madoff, Bernard, 26, 73, 170, 285n3
Marquette National Bank of Min-
neapolis v. First Omaha Service 
Corp. (1978), 108
MBSs (mortgage-backed securities): 
AAA rated, 9, 283n10; summary 
of, 4, 283; foreclosures and, 221, 
300n63; housing bubble pop and, 

346  •  Subject Index
MBSs (mortgage-backed securities) 
(continued) 
9–10; private sector and, 131, 
139, 141–42, 218, 294n34; self-
interests and, 141–42, 294n34; 
“skin in the game” and, 141, 
188–89, 294n34
McCain, John, 19, 41, 55, 93, 200, 
214, 230, 277
median household incomes, 121–23, 
122
Medicare: reform, 281; vouchers, 
280
Mellon, Andrew, 41, 153, 161, 162, 
177, 223–24, 286n9
Meriwether, John, 171, 172–73
Merrill Lynch: acquisition of, 3, 125, 
149–50; delays in policy response 
and, 12; failure of, 6–7, 12, 171; 
investors and investments, 14, 
25, 171; on largest bank list, 145; 
misinformation and, 12, 13, 25
Merton, Robert C., 21, 171
MF Global, 22, 150, 260–61, 276
Miller, Brad, 141, 193–94, 216
Miller Bill (Mortgage Reform and 
Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 
2007), 141, 193–94, 216
minorities, and homeownership, 43, 
44, 117, 118, 119, 130, 148
misinformation (inaccurate infor-
mation), 5, 12–13, 25, 36, 239, 
262–63, 284n15, 284n17, 303n9
MMFs. See money market funds
mobilization of constituencies, 
75–80, 77, 78, 289n9
Mondale, Walter, 5, 73–74
money market funds (MMFs), 276, 
304n4
moral hazard: bankruptcy and, 156, 
159, 176; bankruptcy laws and, 
176; crisis of 2008 and, 42–43, 
136–37; financial services industry 
and, 237; free market conserva-
tism and, 208, 225; ideology and, 
42–43, 57; mortgages and, 158, 
236; populist responses to crisis 
and, 233; TARP and, 57
Morgan, J. Pierpont, 56, 155–56, 176
Morgan Stanley, 25, 119–21, 120
mortgage-backed securities (MBSs). 
See MBSs (mortgage-backed 
securities)
Mortgage Reform and Anti-Preda-
tory Lending Act of 2007 (Miller 
Bill), 141, 193–94, 216
mortgages: complexity of contracts 
for, 139, 221; limited policy 
responses and, 189–90; market 
concentration of, 276; moral haz-
ard and, 158, 236; opportunities 
for reform and, 257; private sector 
and, 125–26, 158, 189, 218; tax 
deductions and, 127, 294n26. See 
also homeownership; MBSs (mort-
gage-backed securities); preda-
tory mortgage lending; subprime 
mortgages and crisis
Mozilo, Angelo, 19, 44, 73–74, 128, 
131, 228, 254, 258
Mullins, David, 171–72
mutual funds, 282
National Banking Act of 1956, 92, 
167
National City Corporation, 1–3, 
124, 149, 233
National Consumer Bankruptcy 
Coalition, 81, 94
nationalization, 131, 222, 239
NAV. See net asset value
negative agenda control, 96–98, 97, 
102, 290n15
net asset value (NAV), 304n4
New York Federal Reserve, 6, 21, 
113, 144, 167–69, 172, 185

Subject Index  •  347
Obama, Barack: Bain Capital and, 
278; bipartisanship and, 195, 
298n19; campaign finance and, 
278, 304n14; Congressional ser-
vice, 54; connections to UBS and, 
277; debt ceiling and, 278; Dodd-
Frank and, 278; elections and, 
279; filibuster hurdle and, 104–5, 
205; financial industry and, 
72, 74, 162, 186, 238, 295n15, 
301n30; financial regulation and, 
275; on interests, 71–72; legisla-
tion hurdles under, 161, 163, 
291n29; opportunities for reform 
after crisis and, 252–53; polariza-
tion and, 195; policy responses 
and, 105, 291n29; political advi-
sors and, 184–86, 185; political 
battles of, 277; political reasons 
for crisis of 2008 and, 4–5;  
populist responses to crisis of 
2008 and, 233–34, 300n6; self- 
interest and, 18; Wall Street and,  
253–54. See also stimulus package 
(American Recovery and Invest-
ment Act) of 2009
Obamacare (Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act) of 2010, 102, 
230, 241, 243–45, 247, 259, 276
OCC (Office of the Comptroller of 
the Currency), 28–29, 216–17, 281
Occupy Wall Street (OWS), 149, 
231–32, 246–50, 257, 259, 
302n43, 302nn51–53
off-budget subsidies, 126–33, 218, 
271
Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency (OCC), 28–29, 216–17
Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB), 5, 117, 185
one-dimensional politics, 49, 287n27
opportunities for reform after 
crisis: summary of, 260, 261–62; 
bonuses and, 258, 264–65; clo-
ture rules and, 268, 303n24; 
complexity of financial industry 
and, 258–59; criminal prosecu-
tions and, 254, 266–67; elections 
and, 252; executive branch and, 
252–53, 302n1; financial indus- 
try and, 251–53; GSEs and,  
255–56; ideology and, 257, 
269–70; liberal-conservative poli-
tics and, 251–52; limited policy 
responses and, 255–56; limits on 
financial services industry and, 
264; MF Global failure, 260–61; 
mortgages and, 257; political 
reforms and, 267–73, 303nn23–24, 
303n28; political risk factor and, 
262–63; regulatory capac- 
ity and, 266–67; settlements  
and, 254; simplification of regula-
tions and, 262; state governments 
and, 266, 271; “too big to fail” 
and, 265–66; Wall Street and, 
253–54
Orszag, Jonathan, 5, 132, 262
Orszag, Peter, 5, 75, 132, 183, 185, 
262, 291
OTS (Office of Thrift Supervi-
sion), 20, 139, 170, 216. See also 
FIRREA (Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforce-
ment Act) of 1989
“ownership society,” 5, 44, 126, 129, 
143, 231, 293n13
OWS (Occupy Wall Street), 149, 
231–32, 246–50, 257, 259, 
302n43, 302nn51–53
Oxley, Michael, 62–63, 173. See also 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
panics: Panic of 1907 and, 11, 
56, 160, 166–69, 176; political 
responses and, 153, 155, 156–57, 

348  •  Subject Index
panics (continued) 
160; as recurrent, 11–12, 58–59; 
transitions of power and, 174, 
176–77
paralysis (gridlock). See gridlock 
(paralysis)
Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (Obamacare) of 2010, 
102, 230, 241, 243–45, 247, 259, 
276
Paulson, Henry: delays in policy 
response and, 16, 111, 284n24; 
financial industry and, 214–15, 
223–26, 253, 289n23; financial 
innovation and, 90, 111, 144, 
264; moral hazard and, 43; policy 
responses and, 159, 255; politi-
cal bubble of crisis of 2008 and, 
7, 125–26; self-regulation and, 
90, 111, 285n4. See also TARP 
(Troubled Asset Relief Program) 
of 2009
Paulson, John, 27, 144, 256
“pay as you go” rules, 199, 298n20
PBS. See Public Broadcasting Service
pension funds: public and private, 
282; state government, 281
personal bankruptcy law, 6, 66, 81, 
94, 100
Pitt, Harvey, 11, 123
pivotal politics: institutions’ regula-
tory responses and, 94–100, 97, 
105, 111; pop of 2008 and, 150, 
195, 198–207, 202, 203, 205, 
210–14, 212, 213, 299nn46–50
PNC Bank, 2, 124, 149, 233, 266
polarization: of fiscal policy, 279; 
ideology and, 47, 50, 53, 54, 
57–62, 58, 61, 288n37; institu-
tions’ regulatory responses and, 
90, 104, 110–11; pop of 2008 
and, 133, 195, 200, 206; transi-
tions in politics and, 154
policy-making institutions. See 
institutions
policy responses: bubbles and, 
33–35; complexity of, 80, 188, 
196–97, 204, 256–57; executive 
branch and, 111–12; financial 
industry and, 111–12; free market 
conservatism and, 15, 27, 42; 
Great Depression and, 19–20, 
40–41, 128; gridlock and, 154; 
historical context and, 159–60; 
ideology and, 15, 27, 40–41, 57; 
interests and, 73; political reasons 
for crisis of 2008 and, 10–11; 
predatory mortgage lending and, 
11, 13, 108–9, 147; simplifica- 
tion of, 262. See also delays in 
policy response; institutions;  
weak regulations; specific laws 
and regulations
political bubble of crisis of 2008: 
summary of, 29, 117–26, 292n1; 
bipartisanship and, 5, 118; con-
centration in industries and, 134, 
144–47, 146, 255, 294n26; crony 
capitalism and, 131–32, 293n22; 
deregulation and, 123; equity 
investments and, 41, 118–21, 
120, 292n1; global economy and, 
125–26; homeownership and, 
117; median household incomes 
and, 121–23, 122; private sector 
and, 4–5, 125, 301n37; regulatory 
capacity and, 123, 145–47, 146; 
self-regulation and, 125; self-­
regulatory financial market and, 
140; whites’ median household 
incomes and, 122, 122–23. See 
also crisis of 2008; deregulation; 
homeownership; political reasons 
for crisis of 2008
political bubbles, 14–19, 284n22, 
284n33. See also ideology; institu-

Subject Index  •  349
tions; interests; political bubble of 
crisis of 2008
political elections. See elections
political reasons for crisis of 2008: 
summary of, 29; capitalism 
and, 19; CDSs and, 9, 10; crony 
capitalism and, 8; delays in policy 
response and, 11–12; democracy 
and, 19; financial innovation and, 
8; ideology and, 7–8; ideology in 
context of, 29, 283n7; ignored 
information and, 12–13; institu-
tions, 7, 8, 283n8; institutions 
and, 7, 8, 29, 283n8; interests and, 
7, 8, 29, 74–75; misinformation 
and, 12–13, 284n17; opposition 
to reforms and, 12–13; preda-
tory mortgage lending and, 11; 
recurrent financial crises, 11–12; 
regulatory measures and, 10–11; 
securitization and, 8–9. See also 
crisis of 2008; political bubble of 
crisis of 2008
political responses: summary of, 
150–51, 183; bankruptcy laws 
and, 156, 159, 295n4; cloture 
rules and, 180; credit markets in 
historical context and, 155–60, 
295n4; delays in historical context 
and, 160–65; historical evidence 
for, 58, 153–54; limited policy 
responses and, 160, 165–73, 168; 
localism and, 166–67; panics and, 
153, 155, 156–57, 160; reconcili-
ation process and, 161, 295n14; 
reversals of power and, 178–81, 
180; short-termism and, 181–83; 
transitions in politics and, 173–78
politics: bipartisanship and, 5, 18, 
85, 106, 118, 132, 182, 195, 
298n19; bubbles and, 14–19, 
284n22, 284n33; political reforms 
and, 267–73, 303nn23–24, 303n28; 
political risk factor and, 262–63. 
See also ideology; institutions; 
interests; political bubble of crisis 
of 2008; political reasons for crisis 
of 2008; political responses
the poor, and homeownership, 5, 45, 
137
pop of 2008: summary of, 149–51,  
184–90, 222, 227; bipartisan-
ship and, 195, 298n19; campaign 
finance and, 85, 225, 300n67;  
cloture rules and, 199, 209, 211, 
222; delays in policy response and, 
16, 149–51, 161, 188, 194, 200, 
206, 297n4, 298n26; elections  
and, 80, 194–95, 204–6, 205, 215, 
223, 225–27, 226; Europe and, 
206, 299n41; filibuster and, 189, 
194–96, 205, 220–21; funds for  
acquisitions, 2; gridlock interval 
and, 102; ideology and, 39–40, 
57, 67, 196–98, 215–27, 219,  
224–25, 226; ideology scores and, 
190–94, 192, 193, 297nn14–16,  
298n17; liberal-conservative poli-
tics and, 52, 54, 54, 57, 195–207, 
202, 203, 205, 208, 222–26,  
224–25, 226, 298nn29–32; lim-
ited policy responses to, 184–89, 
194, 200, 217; lobbyists and,  
67; localism and, 215; mobiliza- 
tion of constituencies and, 80; 
“pay as you go” rules and, 199, 
298n20; pivotal politics and, 150, 
195, 198–207, 202, 203, 205, 
210–14, 212, 213, 299nn46–50; 
polarization and, 133, 195,  
200, 206; populist responses 
to, 204–5, 298n35; predatory 
mortgage lending and, 193–94, 
216–17, 301n21; state govern-
ments and, 206, 216, 299n40; 
stimulus plan of 2008 and, 

350  •  Subject Index
pop of 2008 (continued) 
198–201, 298nn20–22, 298n24; 
taxes and, 298n24; transitions 
in politics and, 194, 201, 206; 
Wall Street and, 184, 186. See 
also crisis of 2008; opportunities 
for reform after crisis; political 
responses; populist responses to 
crisis of 2008; TARP (Troubled 
Asset Relief Program) of 2009; 
specific laws
populist responses to crisis of 2008: 
summary of, 149, 151, 228–33, 
229, 249–50; bonuses and, 36–37, 
72, 80, 230–31, 238; bubbles 
and, 36–37, 286n14; cognitive 
regulatory capture and, 238; 
Congress and, 233–34, 300n6; 
deregulation and, 234; elections 
and, 230; equity investments and, 
158, 295n10; executive branch 
and, 233–34, 300n6; federal 
intervention and, 234–39, 236, 
300nn11–12, 300n21, 301nn23–24, 
301n28, 301n31, 301nn33–34, 
301nn36–37; financial industry 
and, 233–34, 300n6; foreclo-
sures and, 233, 236–37, 301n21; 
moral hazard and, 233; OWS 
and, 149, 231–32, 246–50, 257, 
259, 302n43, 302nn51–53; pop 
of 2008 and, 204–5, 298n35; 
predatory mortgage lending, 244, 
256; TARP and, 234–37, 236, 
300nn11–12; Wall Street and, 
230–33, 235, 300n6. See also 
crisis of 2008; Tea Party
power: of federal government, 
91–92, 94, 96, 100; of regulatory 
agencies, 108–9, 114; reversals 
of, 178–81, 180; transitions in 
politics and, 154, 173–78, 194, 
201, 206
power of interests: summary of, 75; 
campaign finance and, 80–85, 82, 
84, 85, 225, 289n15, 289n23, 
300n67; financial industry and, 
78–80, 81–82, 82, 289n20, 
289nn11–13; financial services 
industry and, 76–78, 77, 81; 
health care industry and, 76; 
information from lobbyists and, 
85–87; legal profession and, 81, 
289n20; lobbyists from financial 
industry and, 87–89, 88, 291n30; 
mobilization of constituencies and, 
75–80, 77, 78, 289n9; real estate 
industry and, 76, 78, 81–82, 82; 
retail drug industry and, 76–77. 
See also power
predatory mortgage lending: bubbles 
and, 26; courts and, 108–9; Dem-
ocratic Party and, 11, 147; deriva-
tives and, 141; homeownership 
and, 141; policy responses and, 
11, 13, 108–9, 141, 147, 193–94, 
216; political reasons for crisis of 
2008 and, 11; pop of 2008 and, 
193–94, 216–17, 301n21; populist 
responses to crisis and, 244, 256; 
Republican Party and, 11, 147; 
state governments and, 13, 108–9; 
teaser loans and, 5, 21–22, 26, 
138, 217. See also homeowner-
ship; mortgages
presidential debates, 275
president(s). See executive branch; 
specific presidents
private sector: crises resolution by, 
56; crony capitalism and, 294n22; 
MBSs and, 131, 139, 141–42, 
218, 294n34; mortgages and, 
125–26, 158, 189, 218; off-budget 
subsidies and, 126–33, 218, 271; 
political advisors’ experience in, 
6, 183; political bubble of crisis 

Subject Index  •  351
of 2008 and, 4–5, 125, 301n37; 
self-regulation and, 132. See also 
bonuses
progressivism, 269–70, 271
psychology of decision making, and 
bubbles, 32–33, 35–36
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), 
277
Public Utility Holding Company Act 
(PUHCA) of 1935, 134, 161, 165, 
170
Raines, Franklin, 5, 75, 117, 118, 132
Reagan, Ronald: concentration in 
industries and, 134; delays in 
policy response and, 178; deregu-
lation and, 134; Fed appointments 
and, 286n15; free market conser-
vatism and, 270; political reasons 
for crisis of 2008 and, 4; presiden-
tial pocket veto and, 100
real estate industry: bankruptcy laws 
and, 127; campaign contributions, 
277; campaign finance and, 81, 
82; financial innovations and, 19; 
information from lobbyists and, 
88; interests and, 27–28, 126–28, 
131, 292n6; lobbyists from, 87, 
88, 88–89, 289n9; power of 
interests and, 76, 78, 81–82, 82; 
psychology of decision making 
and, 32; self-interests and, 26; 
state governments and, 141, 147. 
See also financial industry; hous-
ing bubble
reconciliation process, 101–2, 161, 
295n14; political responses and, 
161, 295n14
redistributive egalitarianism, 19. See 
also egalitarianism
redlining, 130, 148
reforms: financial industry and,  
281–82; fiscal policy, 280; health 
care industry, 48, 181, 195–96, 
241, 241–43, 250, 251–52; Medi-
care, 281; of MMFs, 275, 304n4; 
opposition to, 12–13; reform trap 
and, 114; Social Security, 281; 
welfare, 280–81. See also Dodd-
Frank
regulatory agencies: authority of, 
113, 164, 169, 188–89; regulatory 
capacity and, 112–15, 292n52; 
responses of, 20, 111–15, 292n46, 
292n52; salaries and, 23. See also 
specific agencies
regulatory capacity: federal gov-
ernment and, 266–67; financial 
industry and, 112–15, 292n52; 
Greenspan and, 123; institutions 
and, 112–15, 292n52; opportu-
nities for reform and, 266–67; 
political bubble of crisis of 2008 
and, 123, 145–47, 146; regulatory 
agencies and, 112–15, 292n52; 
SEC and, 105, 123, 147; state gov-
ernments and, 266
Republican-Democrats, 155, 157, 
174, 226. See also Jeffersonianism
Republican Party: summary of, 
268–70; agrarian interests and, 
174; bankruptcy laws and, 
173–74; campaign finance and, 
83, 277; debt ceiling and, 279–80; 
financial industry and, 80, 83–85, 
85; financial regulation and, 
279; financial sector contribu-
tions and, 277; foreclosures and, 
218–21, 219, 300n62, 301n21; 
free market conservatism and, 5, 
15–16, 18–19, 42, 281; global 
economy and, 125–26; gridlock 
interval and, 100–101; ideology 
and, 39–40, 224–25, 225–26, 279; 
ideology scores and, 163, 190–94, 
192, 193, 297nn14–16, 298n17; 

352  •  Subject Index
Republican Party (continued) 
interests and, 279; limited gov-
ernment responses and, 57, 58; 
mobilization of constituencies and, 
80; negative agenda control and, 
96–98, 97; “ownership society” 
and, 5; polarization and, 110–11, 
181; policy responses and, 238, 
301n28; political reasons for 
crisis of 2008 and, 5, 6; populist 
responses to crisis of 2008 and, 
233–34, 300n7; predatory mort-
gage lending and, 11, 147; reversals 
of power and, 179–81, 180; self-
interest and, 18; strategic disagree-
ment and, 105–7; tax increases, 279; 
whites’ median household incomes 
and, 122, 122–23. See also liberal-
conservative politics; Tea Party
Reserve Primary fund, 276, 304n4
Resolution Trust Corporation 
(RTC), 11, 165, 296n24
reversals of power, 178–81, 180
Riegle-Neal Act of 1997, 11, 92, 
123, 147, 255
“robo-signing,” 26, 256, 285n2
Romney, Mitt: Bain Capital and, 
278; campaign finance and, 278,  
304n14; campaign strategy of, 
279; on Dodd-Frank, 275, 278–79; 
financial regulation and, 275
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 11, 57, 
104–5, 161–63, 177, 180, 230, 
291n29
Roosevelt, Theodore, 71–72, 74, 
269, 271
Roubini, Nouriel, 13, 214
RTC (Resolution Trust Corpora-
tion), 11, 165, 296n24
Rubin, Robert, 6, 12, 42, 118, 140, 
172, 183, 185
“rules of the game,” 16–17. See also 
institutions
Ryan, Paul, 280
Salomon Brothers, 141, 171
Santelli, Rick, 228, 239–40, 242, 
244, 302n39
Sarbanes, Paul, 63, 173
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 13, 
62–64, 63, 111, 139, 165–66,  
178, 288n46
savings and loan crisis (S&L) of 
1985: cost of, 45, 131; delays in 
policy response and, 11, 74, 93, 
164–65; deregulation and, 139, 
147; elections and, 181–82;  
FIRREA response, 20; institu- 
tions and, 26, 131, 136; limited 
policy responses and, 170–71, 
296n24; policy responses and,  
11, 147; state governments and, 
108; transitions in politics and, 
178
Schapiro, Mary, 304n4
Scholes, Myron, 21, 171
Schwartz, Anna, 282
SEC (Securities and Exchange 
Commission). See Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC)
Secondary Mortgage Market 
Enhancement Act of 1984, 147, 
294n30
Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion (SEC): crisis of 2008 and, 4; 
delays in policy response and, 12; 
enforcement of regulations and, 
18, 74, 79–80, 132, 237, 293n22, 
303n9; financial innovation and, 
144; gridlock and, 276; implemen-
tation of financial regulations and, 
276; information from lobbyists 
and, 87; limited policy responses 
and, 170, 296n34; MMFs and, 
304n4; opportunities for reform 
after crisis and, 257; policy control 
and, 279; regulatory capacity and, 
105, 123, 147; rule making, 276, 
304n4; settlements and, 303n9

Subject Index  •  353
securities and investments industry 
(securitization): campaign finance 
and, 82, 82, 289n15; lobbyists 
and, 87–88; misinformation and, 
284n15; political reasons for crisis 
of 2008 and, 8–9; subprime mort-
gages and, 33–34. See also MBSs 
(mortgage-backed securities); 
specific types of securities
self-interest: crisis of 2008 and, 4, 
25–26, 285n3; financial bubbles 
and, 17–18; political bubbles and, 
17–18, 284n33; weak regulations 
and, 72. See also bonuses
self-regulation: crisis of 2008 and, 
27, 41–42; elite and, 74–75; of 
financial industry, 27, 42; financial 
innovation and, 21; ideology and, 
41, 42, 286n12; political bubble 
of crisis of 2008 and, 125, 140; 
political risk factor and, 263; 
private sector and, 132
sequestration, 280
shadow banking system, 9–10, 21, 
155, 221
Shiller, Robert, 13, 32
short-termism, 181–83. See also 
elections
“skin in the game,” 8, 10, 141, 
188–89, 257, 294n34
S&L (savings and loan crisis) of 
1985. See savings and loan crisis 
(S&L) of 1985
Social Security: privatization of, 280; 
reform, 281
special interests. See interests
Sperling, Gene, 117, 185
Spitzer, Eliot, 79–80, 108, 186
state governments: bankruptcy laws 
and, 166; complexity of regula-
tions and, 257; credit markets in 
historical context and, 157; federal 
deference to, 108–9, 186, 216–17, 
299n58; financial industry and, 
59, 108–9, 163, 186, 216–17, 
296n19, 299n58; homeowner-
ship and, 13, 127, 137, 139, 141; 
opportunities for reform and, 266, 
271; pensions, 281; pop of 2008 
and, 206, 216, 299n40; predatory 
mortgage lending and, 13, 108–9, 
190, 216–17, 244; regulatory 
capacity and, 266; stimulus pack-
age of 2009 and, 206; stimulus 
plan of 2008 and, 198, 200; taxes 
and, 177
Stiglitz, Joseph, 5, 21, 42, 132, 247, 
262, 265–66
stimulus package (American 
Recovery and Investment Act) of 
2009: summary of, 39–40, 194, 
206–7, 299n42; delays in policy 
response and, 161, 206; elections 
and, 204–5, 205, 206; filibus-
ter and, 205; gridlock interval 
and, 102; ideology and, 39–40; 
liberal-conservative politics and, 
52, 54, 54, 57, 195–207, 202, 203, 
205, 298nn29–32; mobilization 
of constituencies and, 80; per-
sonal tax cuts in, 298n24; pivotal 
politics and, 150, 195, 198–207, 
202, 203, 205; polarization and, 
206; populist responses to, 204–5, 
298n35; state governments and, 
206, 299n40; transitions in poli-
tics and, 206
stimulus plan of 2008, 198–201, 
298nn20–22, 298n24. See also 
stimulus package (American Recov-
ery and Investment Act) of 2009
stock market crash of 1929, 11, 31, 
40, 57, 161, 170
strategic disagreement, 105–7
subprime mortgages and crisis: sum-
mary of, 2, 5, 172; CDOs and, 142; 
civil lawsuits related to and, 277; 
complexity of regulations and, 

354  •  Subject Index
subprime mortgages and crisis  
(continued) 
257; deregulation and, 171; egali-
tarianism and, 43–44; elites and, 
22; Fannie Mae and, 44, 287n18, 
303n9; financial loss, 276–77; 
Freddie Mac and, 287n18, 303n9; 
global economy and, 144; limited 
policy responses and, 166, 172, 
182; policy responses and, 28, 
74, 137–38, 182, 194, 216–17, 
288n46; political reasons for crisis 
of 2008 and, 8–13; predatory 
mortgage lending and, 189–90, 
194; securitization and, 33–34; 
settlements and, 254; “skin in the 
game” and, 8
Summers, Lawrence: financial inno-
vation and, 140; Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act and, 42; limited policy 
responses and, 172; opportunities 
for reform after crisis and, 253; 
policy responses and, 6, 12; as 
political advisor, 12, 75, 185, 185; 
political bubble of crisis of 2008 
and, 118; private sector and, 6, 183
TARP (Troubled Asset Relief 
Program) of 2009: summary of, 
3, 6, 184, 194, 214–15; bonuses 
and, 230–31; campaign finance 
and, 85, 225, 300n67; cloture 
rules and, 222; delays in policy 
response and, 16, 161; elections 
and, 80, 195, 215, 223–26, 226; 
financial services industry and, 
255; funds for acquisitions, 2; 
gridlock and, 222; ideology and, 
57, 67, 222–24, 224–25; liberal-
conservative politics and, 208, 
222–26, 224–25, 226; lobbyists 
and, 67; localism and, 215; mobi-
lization of constituencies and, 80; 
moral hazard and, 57; populist 
responses to crisis and, 234–37, 
236, 300nn11–12; repayments to, 
279. See also Paulson, Henry
taxes: Bush, G. W. and, 279–80; elec-
tions and, 279–80; estate tax and, 
279; fiscal cliff and, 279; French, 
280; fundamentalist free market 
capitalism and, 177–78; income, 
277–79; increases and, 280; 
interests and, 280; legislation, 
280–81; mortgage deductions 
and, 127, 294n26; negative policy 
effects and, 279; pop of 2008 and, 
298n24; Tax Reform Act of 1978, 
110; Tax Reform Act of 1986, 127
Tea Party: summary of, 232, 239–40, 
241, 250; debt ceiling and, 279–80; 
elections and, 245–46; elite 
benefactors and, 242; financial 
industry and, 240–44, 302n42; 
free market conservatism and, 
40, 284n33; fundamentalist free 
market capitalism and, 16; health 
care reform and, 241, 241–43; 
ideology and, 149, 242, 245–46, 
246; interests and, 242; opportu-
nities for reform after crisis and, 
253; pivotal politics and, 299n50; 
as a political base, 279; the poor 
and, 240, 244–45; stimulus pack-
age of 2009 and, 240–41; taxes 
and, 240–41
teaser loans, 5, 21–22, 26, 138, 217
third-party politics, 249, 267–69, 
303n26
Thrift Industry Recovery Act of 
1987, 164–65, 296n22
“too big to fail,” 43, 123–24, 139, 
150, 241, 254–55, 265–66
“too big to jail,” 277
transitions in politics, 154, 173–78, 
194, 201, 206

Subject Index  •  355
Troubled Asset Relief Program 
(TARP) of 2009. See TARP (Trou-
bled Asset Relief Program) of 2009
UBS, 18, 67, 82–83, 125–26, 144, 
183, 186, 277–78, 293n22
United Copper Company, 72, 169
U.S. Congress: debt ceiling and, 
279–80; legislation compromises 
under FDR and, 11, 161–63, 
291n29; legislation hurdles under 
Obama and, 161, 163, 291n29; 
polarization and, 50, 53, 54, 55, 
57–62, 58, 61, 288n37; polariza-
tion of fiscal policy in, 279; politi-
cal reasons for crisis of 2008 and, 
4–5; populist responses to crisis of 
2008 and, 233–34, 300n6; recon-
ciliation process and, 101–2, 161,  
295n14; TARP and, 3; tax legisla- 
tion, 280–81. See also liberal- 
conservative politics; voting in 
Congress; specific parties
U.S. Treasury: insuring MMFs and, 
304n4; UBS and, 277
Volcker, Paul, 136, 164, 210, 250, 
262, 286n15
Volcker Rule, 22, 186–87, 210, 253, 
262, 264
voting in Congress: financial issues 
and, 62–67, 63, 65, 288nn46–47; 
liberal-conservative politics and, 
49–52, 51, 53, 54, 54–57, 288n37, 
288nn34–35; spatial model and, 
47–48, 51, 62–68, 63, 65, 66, 
288nn46–47. See also U.S. Congress
Wachovia Corp. (WB), 119–21, 
120, 123–25, 145, 149, 255, 266, 
292n3
Wall Street: bailouts, 279; bank-
ruptcy laws and, 159; bonuses 
and, 4, 113, 230–31; campaign 
finance and, 277; cognitive regula-
tory capture and, 225; courts and, 
108–9; crisis of 2008 and, 126, 
217; financial innovation and, 
140–41; government employee 
experience on, 75, 113; housing 
bubble and, 13; human capital 
and, 25–26; ideology and, 27, 
113, 124; influence of, 6, 167, 
169, 171–72, 174; lobbyists from, 
22, 162; opportunities for reform 
and, 253–54; pop of 2008 and, 
184, 186; populist responses to 
crisis and, 230–33, 235, 300n6; 
self-interest and, 4, 26; trust in, 
282. See also financial industry; 
self-regulation; specific laws
Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act of 2010. See Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act of 2010
WAMU/WM (Washington Mutual), 
119–20, 120, 124, 139, 145, 150
Warren, Elizabeth, 150, 187, 187, 
250, 256, 281
Washington Mutual (WM/WAMU), 
119–20, 120, 124, 139, 145, 150
WB (Wachovia Corp.), 119–21, 
120, 123–25, 145, 149, 255, 266, 
292n3
weak regulations: crisis of 2008 and, 
8, 20, 26–27; financial industry 
and, 64, 74, 141; financial services 
industry and, 20, 22, 74, 111, 164, 
216, 261; institutions and, 20, 
139; liberal-conservative politics 
and, 64, 111; pivotal politics and, 
111; self-interest and, 72
welfare reform, 280–81
Wells Fargo: acquisitions by, 124–25, 
149, 266, 292n3; campaign finance 
and, 82; equity investment returns 

356  •  Subject Index
Wells Fargo (continued) 
and, 119–21, 120; largest banks 
list and, 82, 145; mortgage share 
of, 276; political power of, 76–77, 
87–88; settlements and, 254; under-
mined regulations and, 28–29
Whigs/Whig-Democrats, 173–74, 179
whites, and finances, 122, 122–23, 
159
WM/WAMU (Washington Mutual), 
119–20, 120, 124, 139, 145, 150
Wolf, Robert, 18, 186, 277
WorldCom, 72, 73, 110, 139, 141, 
165, 173

