Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio Careers: 
How to optimise and manage them 
 
 
 
This workbook is designed to help you to think through: 
 
• the practicalities of establishing a portfolio of professional activities 
• strategies to maintain and grow your preferred portfolio  
 
Enabling you to: 
 
• make informed choices 
• play to your strengths 
• make success and fulfilment more likely 
 
 
 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
2 
The sections marked with an asterisk are adapted (with kind permission) from the book And What 
Do You Do? Ten Steps to Creating a Portfolio Career, by Barrie Hopson and Katie Ledger (listed at 
the end and located in the Careers Service resource room).  
 
If you find these exercises helpful, we recommend you read the book for a fuller set of self-
appraisal tasks to work through, covering areas like personal values, multiple selves, your brand, and 
coping with change, as well as the topics dealt with in this workbook. You could also explore 
http://portfoliocareers.net, where Barrie and Katie blog around the subject.  
Contents 
 
PORTFOLIO CAREERS: HOW TO OPTIMISE AND MANAGE THEM .................................................. 1 
YOUR FINANCES ............................................................................................................................................. 3 
WHAT YOU MIGHT EXPECT TO EARN ................................................................................................... 4 
WHAT EMPLOYERS WANT ......................................................................................................................... 5 
YOU AND OTHER PEOPLE .......................................................................................................................... 6 
DEVELOPING YOUR PROFESSIONAL NETWORK ................................................................................ 6 
YOUR PORTFOLIO .......................................................................................................................................... 9 
TELLING YOUR STORY ...............................................................................................................................14 
MAKING YOUR TIME WORK FOR YOU .................................................................................................15 
YOUR FEARS, FAILURES, AND SUCCESSES .........................................................................................18 
LEARNING FROM REJECTION ..................................................................................................................19 
RESOURCES ....................................................................................................................................................23 
 
FOUR MAJOR CAREER TYPES 
 
1. Single-track: the traditional ‘career for life’ (increasingly rare) 
2. Serial: a single-track career that shifts periodically to new, often related, areas 
3. Lifestyle: a career built around a lifestyle, rather than vice versa—often balancing work and 
family roles 
4. Portfolio: a simultaneous mixture of (often freelance) professional roles 
This workbook will focus on the last of these models, and the world is changing in ways that may 
soon make it a mainstream choice rather than a niche option: 
 
The job market is undergoing an unprecedented shakeup. Jobless claims topped 20 million in the 
U.S. since the start of the COVID-19 shutdown and month-to-month activity on freelance 
platforms nearly doubled in some industries. 
 
To ride out the storm, professionals of all generations appear to be turning to “portfolio careers” to 
earn their living through a mix of contracted freelance jobs, consulting gigs, short-term projects, 
board membership, and other engagements that allow them to apply their expertise under flexible 
conditions. 
 
“This is how each generation can freelance during and after the pandemic”, Sunshine Farzan; also 
blogged about by Barrie Hopson here) 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
3 
 
You should give some thought to how the other career models relate to your current situation and 
aspirations. But if a portfolio seems like it could be right for you at the moment, read on…  
 
YOUR FINANCES 
 
Financial factors are one of the main sources of appeal for the single-track career: the simplicity of 
regular salary payments can seem hard to give up. But many people decide that the opportunities 
are greater, and the personal and/or professional costs less, with a mixed model. Building up 
freelance income streams takes time, but their medium- and long-term growth potential is high. 
 
* Basic ways to fund a portfolio start-up 
Save several months’ money to see you through set-up, work at a part-time job and/or rely on 
someone else to shoulder some of your living costs while getting going, or try the riskier “leap and 
the net will appear” approach. 
 
Which of the above are you doing now? What might you consider doing in future? What are the 
primary risks you need to mitigate? Where are your safety nets? 
 
Income and outgoings 
How do things look in general? Are you earning more than you’re spending? Take a couple of hours 
to complete the Money Saving Expert budget planning exercise (listed in the Resources section), 
entering in all your annual income and outgoings. You will then be instantly in a much stronger 
position to assess your current situation.  
 
Expenditure: Try separating it out into ‘essential’, ‘nice to have’, and ‘could painlessly eliminate’. 
What falls into the last category? Get rid of it! 
 
Income: Based on the above reflections, and any planned future changes in circumstances, how 
much do you really need to earn through your portfolio? Giving yourself a rough figure to aim for 
can be a relief. 
 
We strongly encourage you not to skip this task; it may feel unpleasant to contemplate, but the 
practice is less painful than the idea, and there is no substitute for translating vague unease into 
specifics. 
 
If you’re willing to consider a more fundamental shake-up of your personal finances, we 
recommend Ramit Sethi’s I Will Teach You To Be Rich, which offers a six-point plan for designing a 
your “rich life” and setting up a system to support it (including credit cards, banking, saving, 
investing, and conscious spending): “Most people are asking £3 questions. This book will show you 
how to ask £30,000 questions.” Some of the book’s recommendations may be usefully 
implemented before or during your career restructuring; some will best be left until you’ve found a 
new stability. (And yes, p. 1 has an acknowledgement of how scammy the title sounds.) 
 
Self-employment 
 
Simply Business have a helpful guide to “going self-employed in the UK”, covering advantages and 
disadvantages, the basics of registering as a sole trader, paying tax, and tracking tax-deductible 
expenses. Meticulous record-keeping for all income and expenses is crucial (you may find business 
accounting software useful; see a roundup of some options here). You should also consider 
whether you need to take out professional indemnity insurance in case of claims made against you 
by clients or others (see the guide here). 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
4 
WHAT YOU MIGHT EXPECT TO EARN 
Revenue potential clearly varies with the economic climate and supply/demand, which is in radical 
flux right now, but if you’re considering branching out into new activities, below is a rough guide to 
incomes for a range of professional activities in November 2020. 
 
Role 
Approximate rates  
Dependent on experience and seniority 
Editing/copyediting  
£9-£30 per hour 
Technical/general writing e.g. 
news outlets, magazines 
Note: the trend is towards 
procuring free content  
£8-£48 per hour 
While average pay has increased recently, fewer opportunities 
are advertised. This follows an earlier slashing of rates across the 
board to: £350-£450 per article (1500-word major article plus 
pull-out boxes) for senior, established writer with editorial 
experience in high-end publication (up to £1,000 for Daily Mail 
features) [1] 
Scriptwriting 
£30-£60 per hour, extremely variable rate of pay largely based 
on prior experience 
Market/fundraising research 
£8-£21 per hour for those with less experience, can be £25+ 
per hour with a minimum of 1-year experience 
Interpreting 
£10-£20 per hour (liaison roles advertised through agencies) 
With more experience a half day can be £200-£350 (for in -
person jobs). Pay is better in conference interpreting than 
telephone interpreting and rates are higher for work outside of 
standard working hours 
Translating  
£8-£30 per hour, largely dependent on requested language(s) 
Freelance roles are often priced per word so a 1000-word 
document would earn between £80-£160 
CV writing  
£50-£250 per CV, depends on amount of client’s experience  
Photography (general)  
£150-£300 for an event, £400-£600 per day [2] 
Photography (commercial) 
£500-£1,600 per day [2] 
Can also include additional image licensing fees for reproduction 
Infographic design  
£8-£28 per hour 
Pay is often based on the complexity of the project 
Producer of audio-visual material £8-£35 per hour (depending on the public profile of the 
company you are producing A/V material for and also how 
they would broadcast it e.g. internally/Internet/Radio/TV). 
Voiceover / voice acting 
£150-£500 per session [3] 
Production assistant 
£7-£11 per hour 
Social development research and 
technical consultancy 
£8-£80 per hour 
£300 - £420 per day (for longer periods and charities or smaller 
organisations) 
£450-£650 per day (for up to 5 days’ work for companies or 
larger civil society organisations) 
Consultant researcher in 
education  
£250-£500 per day 
(up to £750 for senior professor) 
Consultant author in education 
£300-£500 per day 
Coaching 
£50- £150 per hour (more for executive coaching). 
 
[1] Some recent advice from a former magazine editor now freelance writer:  
 
“The only advice for people thinking about magazine journalism really is—don’t! No-one’s 
job is secure, people are rewarded less and less as managers try to find ever more ways to 
save money, and the future looks uncertain. My successor (as editor) now has little to do 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
5 
with journalism—she has handed the magazine to someone else and spends most of her 
time trying to sell insurance and an online entry system for competitions. Consider it as 
something you could do in parallel with another career. It would be better to do a Brian Cox 
and get into TV!” 
 
[2] Photographers typically charge for “contact time” and must therefore estimate the time 
required to process and edit the pictures (often at home). One of the challenges here is that 
processing time depends on the number of photographs taken (which may range from around 300 
to 1,000 shots in a day). 
 
[3] Voiceovers are normally paid by session, and in the case of being paid per word, most have a 
minimum pay for the day.   
 
If you’re transitioning from a salaried position to charging freelance rates, a useful rule of thumb is 
as follows: 
 
1. Take your most recent annual salary and divide by 50 weeks and then divide again by 40 
hours. 
2. Multiply this by 3 (to account for costs no longer covered by employment, e.g. admin, sick 
leave and annual leave, etc.) 
 
This gives you a reasonable £/hour rate. 
 
WHAT EMPLOYERS WANT 
 
If your portfolio includes part-time employment as well as freelance work, you may wish to 
consider the 6 major competencies that employers and contractors will generally be looking for: 
 
• 
Initiative/problem-solving 
• 
Communication 
• 
Teamwork 
• 
Organisation and planning 
• 
Commercial/sector awareness 
• 
Self-management 
For consultancy roles with policy/practice/research organisations who see the relationship with you 
as a partnership, one could also add: 
 
• 
Responsiveness to organisational priorities, procedures, and style of working 
• 
Evidence of shared values with regard to the organisation’s purposes 
 
Which areas do you feel most confident about? Why? Are you communicating these strengths 
effectively via your CV, website, or other communications with potential employers/contractors? 
Are there areas where you have skills that may not be immediately evident, and that you could 
usefully highlight more explicitly? Asking someone to take a look and tell you what they take from 
these texts can be a great way to establish how well aligned your readers’ impressions may be with 
what you want readers to take away from your marketing materials. 
 
Are there areas in which you aren’t as strong as your competitors? Could anyone in your 
professional network (see the next exercise) help you develop those sides of yourself and your 
skills? Or can these points be effectively offset by doubling down on any of your strengths? 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
6 
YOU AND OTHER PEOPLE 
Nothing we do happens without other people. Think about the people who currently play important 
roles in your personal and professional life. Put a name to every role, if you can—but also note 
where there are gaps, or where you depend on one person for numerous kinds of support. 
 
* My support networks 
 
 
Current people 
Possible people 
EMOTIONAL SUPPORTS 
Confidant 
 
 
 
Crisis manager 
 
 
 
Validator 
 
 
 
Escapist 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT SUPPORTS 
Mentor 
 
 
 
Challenger 
 
 
 
Fixer 
 
 
 
Expert 
 
 
 
Collaborator 
 
 
 
Future predictor (on the 
“inside” and able to see 
emerging trends) 
 
 
PROMOTIONAL SUPPORTS 
Connector 
 
 
 
Marketer 
 
 
 
OTHER? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How broad and balanced is your support network? How and when might you approach the people 
on your possibles list to enhance it in specific areas? If you already have multiple career strands or 
ideas for future possibilities, you could try repeating the task for each sector. How much overlap is 
there, and what can you learn from the convergences or divergences about what you need to help 
you combine these elements into a successful portfolio? 
Developing your professional network 
The 6 Rs of Good Networking:  
What might each of these mean for you and your portfolio? 
1. Relationships are at the core; build and maintain them 
(Consider what relationships you have and how you cultivate them, especially in a time of 
primarily online interactions.) 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
7 
2. Reciprocate (think “what can I offer?” rather than “what do I want?”) 
What you have already shared with people in your network and how you could continue to 
do so with existing and potential contacts, e.g. sending links to your blog posts or other 
publications when they’re relevant to a specific person.) 
3. keep Records  
(How are you taking notes from meetings or other communications with people in your 
network, to help you derive maximum benefit from them? What do you do with the notes 
afterwards? Could they be incorporated in any way into your thank-you messages, into 
plans for your week?) 
4. make Recommendations 
(Sharing online articles you come across can be a great way of keeping connections warm 
and demonstrating that you have this person in mind—but only if they’re genuinely 
something relevant!) 
5. Relay information  
(Again, sharing valuable content can be a positive here. This may also include take-homes 
from an event you attended that your contact didn’t. Anything that saves the other person 
work or gives them “something for nothing” is likely to go down well.) 
6. Reconnect at appropriate intervals 
(Different frequencies of contact make sense for different connections. Having a rough 
sense of what might be ideal for a given connection and finding ways to sustain that can be 
useful. Making this explicit with the other person can help too! Look out for low-cost ways 
to connect, e.g. at a conference you’re both attending.) 
 
Use this set of prompts to health-check your professional network and plan accordingly: 
 
Reflect on whether you are developing a resilient network with flexibility for growth. 
 
For example, does your professional network include: 
 
• 
Diversity: e.g. in the scale of connections (individuals, small/large groups), or the rhythms of 
your contact (e.g. some weekly, some much more rarely), or their roles in your career?  
• 
Redundancy or fragility: are certain functions performed by multiple individuals or groups, 
or are you over-dependent on certain individuals or organisations to meet multiple needs? 
• 
Creative upscaling: e.g. by cultivating connectivity amongst contacts to generate value 
beyond the sum of their individual parts? 
• 
Future-facing element: e.g. contacts to nurture your “back-burner” career ideas or 
encourage you in unfamiliar or uncomfortable directions? 
Choose communication methods carefully, to suit you and those you wish to connect with, and to 
further your aims in doing so: 
 
• 
Cultivate both face-to-face/video-chat/phone conversations and follow-up 
emails/messages at key intervals. 
• 
Sign up to the appropriate professional websites / alumni networks to generate new 
contacts and sustain existing ones in light-touch ways. 
• 
Create a personal blog, social-media account(s), and/or public-facing web profile, either 
alongside or combined with your academic web presence, and make sure it has space to 
grow and change as your portfolio does (e.g. don’t narrow down your blog topic too far; 
choose a web hosting package that’s flexible enough to allow for additions or template 
changes later). 
• 
Consider search engine optimisation (select keywords carefully, include video to boost your 
rankings, use backlinks and forward-linking from/to high-ranked sites), use graphics and 
simple audio(visual) podcasts to increase appeal and engagement. 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
8 
Consult guidelines on using social media for professional networking. Choose media that best suit 
your purposes, inclinations, and commitments so that you can sustain what you start. Make explicit 
decisions about which media you’re not going to use and why. 
 
LinkedIn tips include: update your profile fully and frequently, use the “Save to PDF” option to get 
an easy overview of what your profile currently covers and what’s missing, join groups to increase 
profile views, thank people for endorsing your skills and return the favour, and request 
informational interviews. 
 
Twitter tips include: write a strong bio, follow recruiting organisations, use search tools to listen for 
opportunities (using keywords in your field), follow key people in your field, share interesting 
articles, tweet frequently, use @mentions, link to the rest of your online presence, and 
retweet/share strategically to build a centre of gravity and clear focus of expertise for your 
account. 
 
Capitalise on your support networks at Oxford. Identify peers and senior colleagues in your 
department, college, or social circles with whom you can: 
 
• 
Practise your elevator pitch for someone within or outside your area. Can you succinctly 
and convincingly convey your motivation, relevant expertise, and top questions? 
• 
Share advice on getting more from social media: what worked well and why? 
• 
Share experiences in approaching senior academics or professionals in your sector. 
• 
Help each other identify new ways to add value to the work or broader lives of those in 
your network; brainstorm how to do so for the connections you most want to make. 
Participate in online academic networking sites, for both academic career connections and 
springboards beyond academia: 
 
• 
researchgate.net and academia.edu are social networking sites for sharing papers and 
projects, monitoring analytics on shared research, asking and answering questions, tracking 
others’ activity, and finding collaborators. 
• 
Google Scholar lets you create a public author profile, import your publications, follow the 
work of key authors, and track your citations. 
See the Resources for more links. 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
9 
YOUR PORTFOLIO 
You may have a form of portfolio already but feel it could do with some optimisation, or find appeal 
in the structural possibilities of a portfolio without knowing quite how to populate one for yourself. 
The following sequence of prompts is designed to help you explore what an ideal portfolio mixture 
might consist of for you.  
 
First take a moment to reflect on the composition of your current portfolio, or a portfolio you can 
imagine having in the near future. This is just a starting point, so if you’re imagining the composition 
don’t worry about getting If you keep records of hours spent on your different activities, they’ll be 
useful here, as will financial records of income and expenses. The realities are often different from 
our image of them. 
 
* Portfolio constituents 
PORTFOLIO ACTIVITY (in current / prospective 
portfolio) 
% of (work) 
TIME 
ENJOYMENT  
(0-10) 
% of (net) 
INCOME 
PA1 
 
 
 
 
PA2 
 
 
 
 
PA3 
 
 
 
 
PA4 
 
 
 
 
PA5 
 
 
 
 
PA6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Write down your reaction to the results above. Does anything surprise you? Which ratios seem 
good, which less so? If this were someone else’s portfolio, what would you tell them? 
 
Now take a step back to start evaluating how your portfolio could be optimised for you. 
 
* Think about your achievements: the things you believe you did well, enjoyed doing, and are proud 
of having done. List seven life achievements, great or small. 
 
Did you… learn something, help others, teach others, manage or lead others, create something, 
perform, communicate well, persist with something, surprise yourself…? 
 
A1.  
 
A2. 
 
A3. 
 
A4. 
 
A5. 
 
A6. 
 
A7. 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
10 
* My achievements and skills 
What skills did you use to achieve these things? Put ticks in all the relevant boxes, and add your 
own skill descriptions at the end of the list if you need to. Then add up the number of achievements 
to which each skill has contributed and insert the relevant numbers in the final column. 
 
MOTIVATED SKILLS 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
A6 
A7 
MS 
Totals 
Solving problems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Motivating and leading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being adaptable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reviewing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working creatively 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selling 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Giving credit to others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being sensitive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Managing time 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being innovative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teaching  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organising people 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working with others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thinking strategically 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Helping others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Managing money 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improvising 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being practical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being curious 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being physically skilful 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Networking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being assertive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Having high energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Being persistent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communicating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Your top seven motivated skills  
Use the totals column above to rank your motivated skills in order with MS1 as the most important. 
If there are ties, which do you value most?  
 
MS1. 
 
MS2. 
 
MS3. 
 
MS4. 
 
MS5. 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
11 
MS6. 
 
MS7. 
 
These are the skills that, when you use them, make you feel good, fulfilled, and alive, and from 
which success will result. 
 
* My portfolio activities and my motivated skills (scoring from 0 to 10) 
 
Now it’s time to assess how fully your current (or prospective) portfolio makes use of these skills. 
Turn back to your list of portfolio activities (PAs) and score each according to which of your 
motivated skills it lets you practise, and to what degree. Give the skill 10 if you use it to its 
maximum extent in that activity, and 0 if you don’t use it at all, then calculate the total to work out 
how much each activity deploys your motivated skills. The maximum possible score is 280. 
 
MY MOTIV-
ATED SKILLS 
PA1 
PA2 
PA3 
PA4 
PA5 
PA6 
MS1 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
MS2 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
MS3 
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 = 
MS4 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
MS5 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
MS6 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
MS7 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Does the resulting ranking align with your intuitions about which of your portfolio activities is most 
fulfilling and successful, or does it surprise you? Thinking about the everyday reality of doing these 
forms of work and the rewards they currently bring you, and perhaps turning back to the portfolio 
constituents table for guidance, do fulfilment and success seem to correlate for you at the moment, 
or are there activities where, for example, you’re enjoying the work but being badly paid for it? If so 
could anyone in your support network help you improve the extrinsic rewards, financial or 
otherwise?  
 
* Hobbies or other life activities as jobs 
 
If some of your current or prospective activities score fairly low for the use they make of your 
motivated skills, are there other things you do that are currently not part of your professional life, 
but could be, and might play better to your strengths? Consider things you enjoy doing in your 
spare time, or things you used to do and might like to pick up again. Make a list in the left-hand 
column, followed by an enjoyment ranking, and then be creative with the right-hand column. Use 
the internet to give you ideas for “careers with…”.  
 
 
ACTIVITY 
ENJOYMENT (1-10) 
POSSIBLE JOB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
12 
 
If you know enough about them, you could try to generate a similar total (out of 280) for 
motivated skill usage in things you’re not doing professionally yet but which seem appealing to 
consider. 
 
MY MOTIV-
ATED SKILLS 
Possible 
activity 1 
Possible 
activity 2 
Possible 
activity 3 
Possible 
activity 4 
Possible 
activity 5 
Possible 
activity 6 
MS1 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
__ x 7 = 
MS2 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
__ x 6 = 
MS3 
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 =  
__ x 5 = 
MS4 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
__ x 4 = 
MS5 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
__ x 3 = 
MS6 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
__ x 2 = 
MS7 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
__ x 1 = 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How do these totals compare to those for your current portfolio activities? 
 
What have you learned about the combination of things in your life now and what might be in it? Do 
you feel you now have a better sense of how to go about optimising the ingredients of your 
professional life? If not, where could you turn for more inspiration or advice? Your Challenger, 
Mentor, or Connector might be able to help.  
 
 
Diversification/specialisation 
 
Not everything will pay brilliantly instantly, but some riskier activities are nonetheless worth 
speculating on for potential future reward. Unlike in the gym, a portfolio may therefore benefit 
from an imbalanced barbell: 
 
How many weight plates do you have on the bar now? Which end are they closer to? What do 
these two simple facts tell you about yourself and/or the combination of roles you have chosen (or 
drifted into)? If you were going to add one speculative element into your current portfolio, what 
might it be: a less-safe extension of something you’re doing already, or a new departure? How 
might you take the first step? If you don’t know, who would? 
 
 
 
Now it’s time to put everything together and sketch out your optimised portfolio and a plan for 
achieving it. 
 
* Populating your ideal portfolio 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
13 
 
If you already have a portfolio, include activities you’re already doing and want to keep and ones 
you’d like to build in. If not, use the ideas you’ve generated through the course of these exercises. 
 
Activity 
Motivated 
skills  
Training 
£££     
(spend) 
Lead 
time 
£££  
(earn) 
First step 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You may not be able to fill in all the columns with confidence, but for any activity you’re not already 
engaged in, have a go at sketching out what skills or qualifications you would need to acquire 
(listing the motivated skills involved should give you a reference point here); how much money and 
time this might take before you could begin seeking clients; and what you might reasonably expect 
to earn once you were operating at full capacity (say 6 months after starting to operate 
professionally). The earnings category could include a projected hourly rate and ideal number of 
hours per month. Finally, articulate a first step you would need to take to make this a professional 
reality for you. How does setting this out make you feel? 
 
For any portfolio elements that are already up and running, you may also like to give thought to 
whether they could be enhanced by additional training or self-investment of any kind, and if so 
what the costs, time, and steps would be, as well as the likely increase in earning potential. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
14 
TELLING YOUR STORY 
 
Making an unconventional career work depends partly on being able to explain to other people 
what it is you do and why. This can feel more difficult for a multistranded portfolio than for a 
single-track career, but can also be more interesting. 
 
In this simple exercise, first write three descriptions ranging from ultra-short to somewhat more 
detailed for each of your three main portfolio activities, or for your prospective components if you 
don’t yet have a portfolio. For each, try to convey something of both the “what” and the “why”. The 
why might include either why you care about doing this thing as an intrinsic good (helping people, 
enriching the world in some way), or why you’re doing it as a means to an end (developing your 
skills in order to do something else, or just bankrolling some other activity!). Speak your headlines 
out loud with a timer to check their length and how they sound; does this really convey some of the 
reality of this activity and why you’re giving time and effort to it? 
 
When you have your 5 second, 15 second, and 60 second soundbites for your three main portfolio 
strands, look for neat convergences or resonances, intriguing divergences or contrasts, and any 
other ways of stitching the pieces together into a coherent and compelling narrative—even if you 
feel the coherence is an artifice! You’ll have to lose individual detail to keep the macronarratives 
short and snappy, but this may be surprisingly easy once you’ve reduced each activity to its 
what/why essence. 
  
* Constructing your portfolio narrative 
 
 
Portfolio Activity 1 
Portfolio Activity 2 
Portfolio Activity 3 
5 s 
head
-line 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 s 
lead
-in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 s 
rep-
ort 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
15 
 
 
Your portfolio story 
5 s 
head
-line 
 
 
 
 
15 s 
lead
-in 
 
 
 
 
60 s 
rep-
ort 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once you have your three portfolio stories, again speak them out loud. Ideally also record them so 
you can play them back to yourself, and/or find someone else to try them out on. If you’re listening 
to yourself, what’s the overall impression you create? How do you sound when talking about this 
career of yours? If telling your stories to someone else, how do they respond? Is there anything 
they find unclear, or especially interesting or compelling?  
 
If you’ve completed this task for a current portfolio, how much and in what ways would your story 
change if you changed your portfolio according to your new plan? If you redo the task to include 
the prospective elements, do you feel anything different when you talk about it? What can you 
learn from that? 
 
MAKING YOUR TIME WORK FOR YOU 
 
Perhaps the single most crucial skill for the portfolio professional is making effective use of time. 
And as with your finances, it helps to have an accurate idea of how you’re managing things now 
before you start to make improvements.  
 
As a starting point, try a time-tracking exercise that is always revealing. Track everything that you 
do for an entire waking day, splitting the day up into 15-minute chunks. For example:  
 
Time 
Activity/ies 
00:00-00:15 
 
00:15-00:30 
 
00:30-00:45 
 
00:45-01:00 
 
… 
 
 
Make sure you’re prepared the day before. If you have a printer, you can print out a template like 
this. If not, just use a piece of paper or a notebook. Whatever you do, keep your records by hand 
and in real time. First thing, start by filling in the time you were asleep, and then do your best to 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
16 
include everything you do in each 15-minute chunk, even if it’s just checking WhatsApp for a 
moment. It’s less infuriating than it sounds! 
 
This task will probably feel strange to complete. You may find that tracking what you’re doing itself 
changes what you’re doing. That’s fine. The point is simply to generate as accurate a sense as 
possible of what you are actually doing with your time: it’s from this starting point that useful 
change comes (if it’s desired). So resist the urge to change, improve, or sugarcoat anything. By not 
doing so, you have the chance to learn something about yourself. 
 
Ultimately, a day’s activity tracking is a data-gathering exercise. Getting a glimpse into the patterns 
of your current reality is an invaluable starting point for thinking about how to initiate meaningful 
change, if and where it’s needed. 
 
Once you have your 24 hours of data, set aside some time to investigate your results. Start by 
asking yourself first whether any patterns emerge: attend to both the macroactivities (the major 
things you’re giving time to in your day) and the microactivities (the little in-between things, like 
phone/email/internet use, making food/drinks, talking to people, moving between places…). What 
can you learn about the dynamics of your day and the way its components are stitched together? 
Thinking back to how you felt and what you achieved in the different parts of the day, what 
hypotheses can you formulate about how the macro- and microactivities affect each other and 
your mood, energy levels, concentration, and so on? For example, was your email-checking habit 
more compulsive after lunch when you were sleepier, and did your afternoon get derailed as a 
result? Or did your short walks or coffee breaks provide nice punctuation for the day, and could be 
better timed to support particularly demanding activities that require a more refreshed body and 
mind?  
 
Next, ask a different question about how your time is divided up: how much of my time is sold time 
(the time I sell to an employer or client), maintenance time (the time spent on essentials, like eating 
and sleeping), and discretionary time (the time left over for me to choose what to do with)? How 
do these proportions strike you? Identifying the portions of your day and week that are your 
discretionary time can be helpful in coming to value and protect them more. Ensuring “essentials” 
time isn’t getting squeezed out by other things may also be important for you: if so, your activity 
tracking may give you clues as to where savings could be made to dedicate to sleep or good meals. 
For the sold time, how much of it does each of your portfolio elements (if applicable) get relative to 
the others? How do these proportions strike you, relative to the rewards (intrinsic or extrinsic) 
each generates?  
 
Was this a typical day? If not, or if you’re not sure, you could repeat the exercise for a different 
type of day. 
 
 
One of the most common ways that time management goes astray is that urgent things disguise 
themselves as important (email is a classic culprit here). For your activity-tracked day, try filling in 
this matrix to categorise your activities by their urgency/importance status. Which of your 
activities fall where? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
17 
Time management matrix: Urgency and importance 
 
I Quadrant of action 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Important, Urgent) 
II Quadrant of quality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Important, Not Urgent) 
III Quadrant of deception 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Not Important, Urgent) 
IV Quadrant of waste 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Not Important, Not Urgent) 
 
Where are you spending your time? How much of it is spent in the Quadrant of Quality, where 
you’re doing things that are important to you before they’re urgent? How easy did you find it to 
categorise things according to importance? How are you splitting your time between your different 
portfolio activities, and between your portfolio and other things? What could you change to ensure 
the most important rather than merely the most urgent things take precedence in your working 
days? 
 
When it comes to making changes to how you spend your time, it may help to think of what you’re 
doing as making more time for the things that matter, rather than trying to find more time for 
them. Making time first thing in the day before other things start sapping your energy can be a 
powerful strategy: before you even log into your email, spend a timed hour working on something 
you care about. The earlier you do something in the day, the less contingent it is on everything else 
you’ve done. As James Clear, author of Atomic Habits, puts it: “Do the most important thing first 
each day and you’ll never have an unproductive day.” Timed work sessions can work well at other 
times of day too: get rid of phone, email, and social media, make a defined and realistic plan for the 
session, work concertedly on what you decided to, then assess how you got on, take a short break 
from your screen and your chair, and repeat for this or another task (adding in email slots if 
necessary). It’s remarkable how much difference even just a couple of sessions a day of this kind 
can make to what you get done and how you feel about your capacity to reliably work well on the 
things that matter. 
 
So, what one thing will you do to spend your time wisely tomorrow? 
 
 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
18 
YOUR FEARS, FAILURES, AND SUCCESSES 
 
Every adventure holds the risk of failure, and embarking on a portfolio career—or admitting that 
you already have one and you want to make it work better for you—is an adventurous professional 
step.  
 
The idea of a CV of failures has attracted a lot of attention in academia, with two high-profile 
examples offered by Johannes Haushofer (http://bit.ly/1TaFEN4) and Bradley Voytek 
(http://bit.ly/1tplGbF). Like publishing negative results in science, being open about our failures lets 
us learn from what didn’t go to plan, and lets others see that no career is a neat progression from 
success to success. 
 
This openness starts best closest to home, so you could have a go at writing your own CV of 
failures; it can be surprisingly satisfying, even if you don’t include it in the CV you use publicly. You 
may also like to explore the podcast series and workbook generated from an event on “Overcoming 
a sense of academic failure”, which involved early-career and senior academics from across the 
University, as well as two portfolio-career professionals who have left mainstream academia: 
http://www.careers.ox.ac.uk/overcoming-failure/  
 
For a more self-contained and portfolio-focused task, you might ask yourself the following 
questions. Write down your answers, or talk through them with a friend or colleague. 
 
* Turning failure on its head 
 
What scares you about having a portfolio career?  
 
 
What is the worst that could happen? 
 
 
What would you do if that did happen? 
 
 
What is the best that could happen? 
 
 
What would you do if that happened? 
 
 
What is your greatest professional failure? 
 
 
What did you learn from it? 
 
 
What did you fail at last week? 
 
 
What did you learn from it? 
 
 
Have you ever failed at anything from which you learnt nothing? If so, or if not, what can you learn 
from that? 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
19 
Learning from rejection 
 
Being pragmatic about failure doesn’t mean that you should never try to improve, of course. 
Indeed, failure is one of the best opportunities for improvement: “I’ve always had the view that 
how successful you are is really a function of how you deal with failure. If you deal with failure well 
and you persist, you have a high probability of being successful” (investor Bill Ackman). If, for 
example, you are getting invited to interview or receiving positive feedback from early 
conversations about freelance work, you can safely assume that, on paper, employers or 
commissioners consider you to be a strong prospective candidate. However, if you’re not 
receiving offers or getting work, there a number of ways that you can review and enhance your 
performance. 
▪ 
Are you using the correct medium for your applications/proposals/pitches/self-marketing? 
For example, if recruitment/commissioning in your chosen profession or industry operates 
through a network of contacts, have you started trying to build these? (See our tips on 
networking above.) If competitors in your area are using specific social media or other 
channels for attracting clients, should you too? A little online research may give you a rapid 
sense of whether there are opportunities you might be missing. 
▪ 
Are you able to substantiate in person the messages you have given in your applications, 
initial approaches, or marketing materials? 
▪ 
Are you presenting a professional, confident image at interview/proposal or with prospective 
clients? Ask for feedback wherever possible—whether formally, or by reviewing your 
experiences with a colleague or mentor, with a focus on aspects you’re least sure about. 
▪ 
Bear in mind the possibility that you may need more training or other experience before 
being competitive in this sector or role—and that it may not be for you. If this is something 
you’ve drifted into rather than actively choosing, is it really a good fit? Beware the sunk costs 
fallacy! 
▪ 
If it still isn’t obvious how you can improve your approach/performance, you can: 
▪ 
book a one-to-one meeting with a Careers Adviser  
▪ 
attend an employer-led Mock Interview session run by the Careers Service 
▪ 
review the applications section of the Careers Service website 
(https://www.careers.ox.ac.uk/job-search-and-application) for expert advice  
▪ 
have your applications reviewed by a Careers Adviser at the Careers Service, 
and discuss what you can do to improve them. 
In all matters of both failure and success, being open with yourself, and setting time aside regularly 
to take a clear and honest look at your ups and downs, is the best basis for psychological balance 
and resilience—and hence for effective performance. We recommend three further structures for 
putting this pragmatism into practice: first, a weekly review to keep your working life actively 
guided and responsive; second, a success journal to keep track of what you’re achieving and 
celebrate it; and third, a periodic personal review, ideally conducted with someone else, to reflect 
on your aims, your progress, and your plans for the next review period. 
 
Weekly review 
 
The regular progress review is a standard recommendation of high-performance professionals in 
most fields. Weekly is a good frequency for ensuring your recall is reliable and your adjustments 
timely. Some questions you may like to consider using: 
 
1. How has the past week been overall? 
2. What have I achieved? 
3. What things did I plan to do but didn’t, or have I neglected entirely? 
4. Did anything unexpected come up to take my time, energy, or focus away from what I 
planned? 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
20 
5. How has the balance of professional elements been? 
6. How has the personal/professional balance been? 
7. What have I learned? 
8. What am I scared of right now? 
9. What am I excited about? 
10. What do I have to do next week? [activities in the calendar or firmly committed to] 
11. What do I want to do next week? [activities that are important and not yet scheduled] 
12. What specific strategies will help me do what I need and want to do? (As a starting point: 
what habits do I want to change or keep the same from last week?) 
13. How do I feel about this plan for the coming week? 
 
See further guidance from Ryan Hildebrandt here. 
 
Regular personal review template 
 
Less frequently than your weekly review, it’s useful to set aside a regular review slot to assess your 
personal and professional aims and how they related to your actual achievements during the review 
period. You can do this on your own or ideally with someone you have a good and trusting 
professional relationship with, perhaps writing out your answers beforehand to share and discuss. 
(If there’s no such person in your life right now, make seeking one out a priority.) A review period 
may be e.g. 3 or 6 months. 
 
1. Looking back 
What did you aim to achieve in the last review period? 
What have you achieved in the last review period? 
What affected your ability to achieve what you aimed to (for good or ill)? 
2. You now 
How do you feel about your life and work, right now and on average this week? What does that 
tell you? 
 
 
If the coming x months were exactly like the past x months, how would that make you feel? 
 
 
3. Looking forwards 
Which of the last review period’s aims will you maintain in the coming period (either because 
they are incomplete “outcome” aims or because they’re ongoing “process” aims)? 
 
 
 
What are your new aims (discrete and ongoing/recurring) for the coming review period? (Be 
SMART: specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and time-bound.) 
 
 
 
What challenges do you foresee? (Check your calendar for upcoming commitments; consider 
potential personal or broader social/global changes on the horizon.) 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
21 
 
What planning, support, and/or training will help you meet them? (What worked or didn’t in the 
last review period; what haven’t you tried that might be useful now?) 
 
 
 
When will you have your next review? (Set a date.) 
 
 
 
4. Listen to your review partner (if you have one) 
What does your partner think about your achievements and aims? 
What are they surprised, curious, impressed, or unsure about? 
If they could make one recommendation for the coming review period, what would it be? 
 
Well done for completing your personal review. Make sure you take time in the coming week 
(ideally today or tomorrow) to update your CV using what you’ve covered here, and your 
success journal if you’re keeping one (see below), so you don’t forget the great stuff you’ve 
achieved.

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
22 
Portfolio Careers Success Journal 
 
Don’t risk forgetting about the things that go well; keep a diary like this one and use it to impress others (e.g. to mine for evidence when preparing proposals or 
pitches) and to bask in your own achievements. 
 
Start & 
end dates 
 
Tasks, duties, projects 
(what you did) 
Results/outputs  
Training / professional 
development (undertaken to 
support this, or acquired during) 
Others’ testimony about your 
performance (highlights from 
feedback filed elsewhere) 
Your comments (how you 
felt before, during, and after; 
what you learnt) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
23 
We hope that this workbook has helped you orientate yourself for your next career steps, and that 
you have fun taking them. Please let us know (by emailing courses@careers.ox.ac.uk) if you have 
feedback on this workbook—whether things that were helpful, things that didn’t work, or things 
you think we should add. Meanwhile, here are some links to resources that may provide other kinds 
of information or support. 
 
RESOURCES 
 
Books: 
Hopson, Barrie, and Katie Ledger. 2009. And What Do You Do? 10 Steps to Creating a Portfolio 
Career. London: Bloomsbury. http://portfoliocareers.net/ 
 
Sethi. Ramit. 2010. I Will Teach You To Be Rich. London: Yellow Kite / Hodder & Stoughton. (UK 
edition. See also US 2nd edition 2019. https://www.iwillteachyoutoberich.com/products/  
 
Clear, James. 2018. Atomic Habits. https://jamesclear.com/atomic-habits  
 
Strategy and psychology: 
Protean career strategies: The barbell: 
https://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1031&context=ami 
 
Resilience (in and post-academia): http://earlycareerblog.blogspot.com/search/label/Resilience  
 
Personal and professional development for researchers: 
https://www.ox.ac.uk/research/support-researchers/personal-and-professional-
development?wssl=1  
 
Handling rejection http://www.careers.ox.ac.uk/handling-rejection/ and overcoming a sense of 
failure: https://www.careers.ox.ac.uk/change-setbacks/  
 
Why and how to do a weekly review: https://growthlab.com/the-weekly-habit-thats-helped-
me-launch-my-business-travel-through-53-countries-and-make-a-balloon-dog/  
 
Networking and marketing: 
Academic networking: https://www.jobs.ac.uk/careers-advice/working-in-higher-
education/573/how-to-develop-successful-networking-skills-in-academia 
 
Top tips for networking in general: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-
business/11037202/Networking-for-work-and-business-9-tips-to-help-you-work-the-
room-like-a-pro.html  
 
Natural networking: https://www.iwillteachyoutoberich.com/blog/video-how-to-use-natural-
networking-to-connect-with-people/ 
 
Informational interviews: https://www.lynncareercoach.com/blog/2017/5/8/info-interview-
questions-to-ask  
 
 
LinkedIn cheat sheet: https://www.leisurejobs.com/staticpages/18285/the-ultimate-linkedin-
cheat-sheet/ 
 
How to create an online portfolio to showcase your work, your brand, and your expertise: 
https://websitesetup.org/make-online-portfolio/ or 
https://startups.co.uk/websites/creating/how-to-make-online-portfolio/  
 

Humanities Division, Social Sciences Division, The Careers Service, University of Oxford 
Emily Troscianko and Rachel Bray 
Created 2016; last updated November 2020 
 
 
24 
Perfect your elevator pitch: https://thefreelancehustle.com/how-to-perfect-elevator-pitch/ 
 
Finances: 
Salary comparison: https://www.payscale.com/research/UK/Country=United_Kingdom/Salary 
 
A general guide to keeping records for your tax return, HMRC: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/377656/rk-
bk1.pdf 
 
Self-assessment tax returns: https://www.gov.uk/self-assessment-tax-returns/overview 
 
Invoicing and taking payment from customers: 
https://www.gov.uk/invoicing-and-taking-payment-from-customers/overview  
 
Invoicing guidance and free invoice templates: http://jf-financial.co.uk/2014/12/05/self-
employed-invoice-template-freelance-invoice-template/  
 
Newly self-employed—the basics: Record-keeping case study: 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140109143644/http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/bst/a
dvice-team-events/newly-self-employed-handout.pdf (includes sample spreadsheet for 
recording income and expenses) 
 
Detailed budget planner for income and outgoings:  
https://www.moneysavingexpert.com/banking/Budget-planning/ 
 
 
Add your own discoveries, ideas, and questions here… 

