Michael A. Peters
Sharon Rider
Mats Hyvönen
Tina Besley    Editors 
Post-Truth, 
Fake News
Viral Modernity & Higher Education

Post-Truth, Fake News

Michael A. Peters
• Sharon Rider
Mats Hyvönen
• Tina Besley
Editors
Post-Truth, Fake News
Viral Modernity & Higher Education
123

Editors
Michael A. Peters
WMIER
The University of Waikato
Hamilton, Waikato
New Zealand
Sharon Rider
Department of Philosophy
Uppsala University
Uppsala
Sweden
Mats Hyvönen
Uppsala University
Uppsala
Sweden
Tina Besley
WMIER
The University of Waikato
Hamilton, Waikato
New Zealand
ISBN 978-981-10-8012-8
ISBN 978-981-10-8013-5
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018930116
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
part of Springer Nature
The registered company address is: 152Beach Road, #21-01/04Gateway East, Singapore189721,Singapore

Foreword: A Vision Unspeakable
Introduction
History is, of course, littered with such tales: the curious and scarcely acceptable
behaviour of individuals who suddenly set out to juggle the views of the rest, be
they voters, victims or the marginally disinterested. The consequences of such
creativity or strained imagination, call it what you will—Post-Truth, the Epoch of
Alternative Facts, ‘fake news’ even—are devastating for the fundamental values
that underpin the way a nation deﬁnes and operates its democracy as the Essays in
this book point out.
Regardless of the particular thinking, deeds and sometimes downright squalor
that accompanied a nation’s advance—the political philosophies and values that
brought individuals ﬁrst into communities, later into nations and later still into
emancipated nations—rested on a modicum of honesty and veriﬁable authenticity
as central values, subscribed as much by those moulding the nation’s institutions as
they were held to be shared by those called from time to time to endorse or to reject
them by national vote.
Substitutions Amazing
Honesty, accuracy or reference to events that can be checked and veriﬁed, as the
essays in this book relate—mainly from the standpoint of political philosophy—are
swapped for plausibility and immediate apparent acceptability. These are increas-
ingly the prime features that are bruited abroad in lieu of a veriﬁable political
programme to identify where society is apparently bound. The citizen is no longer
asked to put her—or his—personal interests aside. Rather, she—or he—is asked to
consider the collective consequence of varying degrees of sloganizing and gestic-
ulation. Later, acts as yet unknown in extent or application, will be grafted on. To
an increasing degree, citizens are being called to believe what they are told is
v

plausible by well-entrenched interested parties and by ‘those having—or claiming
to have—authority’ in politics.
The latest Presidential elections in the United States are redolent of this way of
thinking. They are, however, not alone. Nor, some argue, are they without prece-
dent. (La Post-Vérité a une histoire. Le Monde, 2017, March 4) Indeed, the rise of
European ‘populism’, if bolstered by antics trans-Atlantic, has slightly older—
though hitherto largely unsuccessful—origins, few of which so far have found an
evident place in Europe’s various systems of higher education. This does not mean,
however, that that ‘state of mind’ which lies at the base of European populism will
not turn its attention to this institution.
Post-Truth, as the authors of this highly insightful study argue, and they range from
Sweden, Britain, New Zealand, Hong Kong and Rumania not least, derives its
power from an unprecedented instrumentality. That instrumentality is the social
media, its speed and the access it provides to all who have the time to give tongue
from President downwards, sometimes in amazingly illiterate forms, to their con-
cerns, views, proposed priorities and personal opinions—or prejudice. This they
can do without undue let or hindrance and can do so in 140 signs!
The Punter’s Perspective
From a positive viewpoint—The Life of Brian reminds us ‘always (to) look on the
bright side of life’—such an individualization of social exchange has enormous
potential to bring together people of like-minded or dissenting views. But social
media operate at a speed sometimes well beyond the capacity of political institu-
tions, alignments and parties to respond adequately to them. And such tortoise-like
grip has, it would seem, two effects. First, there is the impact it has upon the
individual citizen whose opinion is no longer necessarily drawn to the ofﬁcial
political agenda, so much as to his or to her personal and often passing concern.
Second and a consequence of the ﬁrst, the reference point of the voter is no longer
the collective interests of that institution, but rather the extent to which the national
vision hawked around by parties reﬂects—or contains—some reference to her or his
immediate and pressing concerns.
…and the Political Agency
So far, we have dealt with the voter’s perspective. This may, of course, be inter-
preted as a reluctance to put aside personal interest and replace it with the collective
vision, which formally the act of voting entails. But there are also the collective
interests as conceived by the political agency. Faced with growing dissent or with
what are conceived as unacceptable measures aired beneath by lobbies or by the
social media, those engaged in ‘selling’ a political programme will seek to have it
vi
Foreword: A Vision Unspeakable

reinterpreted. Or to dismiss it as ‘fake news’, preferring their own version of things.
Thus, they seek an advantageous plausibility, ‘adjusting that plausibility’ in an
attempt to have their programme echo the personal interests of their one-time
supporters. In short, what was drawn up in the name of the collectivity by leaders,
advisers, consultants and their like—decision-making by members of ‘the political
class’ from above—adjusts and reinterprets the vision unspeakable, now made more
plausible as taking into account the more spectacular and enduring disagreements
expressed through those who have come together from beneath via the social
media. The vision ‘goes viral’.
Opinion, Dissent and Interested Parties
The ‘creation’ of opinion and dissent is not only more speedy than ever it has been.
What starts off inside social media may also be taken up by interests other than the
distraught potential voter. They may equally be ampliﬁed and given further
tweaking by lobbies and by the popular press, which occupy an intermediary
position between political party stricto sensu and public opinion. Here in full shape
is the anatomy of present-day ‘European’ populism. In effect, one has only to think
back to the forces that lay behind the United Kingdom’s policy of Brexit and in
particular to the role of the tabloids, to see how this mechanism functions.
In espousing a perspective that draws heavily and resolutely on political theory,
‘Post-Truth’ reminds us, however, that the dismal stage of political development
towards which we are all apparently engaged in rushing headlong indeed stands
evident. But, its history is rather longer than the events of the past 2 years alone
would have us believe, though they draw our attention to them spectacularly. In this
book, the impact of ‘Post-Truth’ society is examined primarily in terms of the
consequences it may have upon the individual, an exercise in the interplay between
individual and social values, which lies at the heart of political philosophy since the
days of the ancient Greeks. It is then not surprising that one measure to counter the
rise of ‘Post-Truth society’ should involve adjusting the university undergraduate
courses to sharpen up such contemporary capacities as objective analysis, classi-
ﬁcation of source and content so that a corrective may be taken into full account
when weighing up the outpourings of the social media and those who seek to have
such outpourings tied to their chariot wheels!
A Complementary Perspective
Whilst none would gainsay such a proposal—quite on the contrary—two remarks
are worth the making. The ﬁrst is that there is little sense in conﬁning such courses
to the humanities and the social sciences alone. Indeed, if the purpose of the
University is to impart a greater sensitivity and awareness to what is now being
Foreword: A Vision Unspeakable
vii

spewed forth as part of the present-day democratic process in contrast to merely
providing those skills (sic) that secure a job, such courses are imperative for all
undergraduates, regardless of their ambition or lack of it! The second unkindness
has to do with the social standing of graduates. One of the under-riding or tacit
assumptions of this proposal appears to be that graduates still feed into what the
American political scientist, Robert Dahl once termed ‘the value-allocating bodies’
in society (Dahl 1966): the law, the church, the education system broadly speaking,
the medical profession, the tax system and, occasionally, the military.
Dahl coined the concept in 1966. Since then and above all in Western Europe,
higher education has become a mass phenomenon. Portugal’s higher education
system, for instance, caters for over half the age cohort (Neave and Amaral 2011).
True, the orientation, administration and ﬁnancing of the ‘higher education enter-
prise’ have evolved mightily this quarter-century past. Still, it is safe to say that not
all graduates by dint of being graduates can lay claim today to the essential status of
being part of the value-allocating bodies in society or have access to such employ.
There is, on the contrary, a growing stratum for which temporary jobs, precarious
employment, are the common lot. Naturally, which courses these are, will depend
for better or for worse on the nation’s economic health and which nation one is
concerned with. In short, though Dahl’s classiﬁcation still holds a general validity,
it applies only to a varying segment—perhaps even a minority—within today’s
graduate corps. Whether such precariousness stands as a form of graduate ‘im-
poverishment’ is a matter of personal judgement!
A Major Watershed
By any other term, this process is a major watershed, a departure from the late 70s
when the German sociologist of higher education, Ulrich Teichler detected an
absence of contest for jobs between town and gown. The University, he noted, did
not threaten the jobs of school-leavers. There was, effectively he argued, no sub-
stitution—no replacement—by better-qualiﬁed graduates for the jobs ﬁlled by the
less-well qualiﬁed coming straight from secondary school. The University was
complimentary, not a rival to the school. This is no longer so. Indeed, the down-
ward substitution of the higher qualiﬁed is one of the major dimensions in the
marginalization of the non-qualiﬁed. And this, in turn, feeds both European pop-
ulism and, in varying guises, is a subject of anguish, debate and dissent—to say the
least—on the Internet.
viii
Foreword: A Vision Unspeakable

The Rise of Counter Value-Allocating Bodies
and Commodiﬁcation
Growth of that stratum of the ‘university qualiﬁed’ has not, so far, undermined the
traditional liberalism of that institution’s cross-national values. Agreed, the com-
modiﬁcation of higher knowledge poses a doughty challenge to the historic
value-allocating bodies. Not least amongst the challengers are the ﬁrm, the multi-
national corporation, the international mobility of the qualiﬁed and the possession
of rare and certiﬁed ability that may carry the lucky to qualify in one Nation and
ﬁnd employment in another. They are powerful counter-inﬂuences indeed to the
historic nation-state institutions Dahl originally equated with this function.
But the commodiﬁcation of higher education has consequences other than
simply its taking on the status of a purchasable and tradable good. More than ever
before, commodiﬁcation underlines not necessarily the beneﬁts of higher study, or
provides as it did in Higher Education’s Golden Age from the early 60s through to
the early 90s, an opportunity for talent to be given a chance, regardless of origin. It
still does, though to a marginal extent. Rather, the current situation underscores the
penalty of not taking up a university place. It underlines as never before the need for
the individual to be qualiﬁed. Moreover, it alters and stratiﬁes student exchange.
From building a Europe that was attractive to its young people—its original intent
(Neave 1984), today, student exchange has partially mutated its function, particu-
larly in countries where the economy is weak and the ﬁght for employment is
ferocious. What was once lauded as ‘getting to know one’s neighbours’ by dint of a
few months study in their universities, polytechnics and Instituts Universitaires de
Technologie is now seen as providing an initial opportunity for getting to know the
‘local labour market’ (Sinn et al. 2016) with a view to emigration later.
Dismal Prospects
Thus, despite the emergence of precarious employ for graduates, the university
retains, comparatively speaking, a relative advantage in the qualiﬁcation stakes.
This condition probably also explains its relative immunity—so far—to forms of
European populism or to the ravages of ‘Post-Truth’ society. It is, in fact, well
worth noting that both in the United States and in Europe generally, support for
‘populism’ within the Nation is most evident amongst unqualiﬁed members of what
once would have been identiﬁed with—and organized by—syndicates, trades
unions, centre of Left political parties in Europe or the diploma-less inhabitants of
‘rust belt’ states in North America. The proposal to readjust the undergraduate
curriculum to counter the Siren song of populism in higher learning might certainly
be argued is a necessary prophylactic. Whether it will succeed is another matter.
Much depends on higher learning retaining its relative advantage and, most
important of all, what can be done to get rid of the spiralling disillusion amongst
Foreword: A Vision Unspeakable
ix

wide swathes of what is nothing less than the growing ranks of an unqualiﬁed and
marginalized working class whose principal characteristic is precisely lack of work,
absence of status and precious limited prospects.
What is very clear—and it is dissected in detail by those contributing hand-
somely to this volume—is that the advantages of some, even if not always as visible
as they have been in the recent past, are taken to be the disadvantage or the
deliberate stepping aside from the growing concerns of others. The policy of
economic austerity, upheld by the European Commission despite the recommen-
dations of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, is by no manner of
means alien to this way of thinking. Increasingly, it appears to account for what the
French term la dimension identitaire, which goes hand in ﬁst with the ‘alternative
policy’ of restoring a measure of economic independence to the nation-state and
bringing to a halt Bruxelles’ ‘creeping competence’ (Amaral 2009).
Envoi and a Sobering Thought
Put succinctly, and seen from the populist perspective, what will be the shape
Europe might take, once it has sobered up from celebrating the 60th anniversary of
signing the Treaties of Rome? Time, as this book illustrates to the full, is not always
the Great Healer. Like Tide itself, Time also waits for no man. Nor does its mere
passing always provide a template for how we should do things today. It is all very
well to sing the praises of a European trading community created to avoid war over
the coalﬁelds of the Franco-German-Belgian frontiers. It is no less an ‘alternative
fact’, however, that European society has seen the spectacular forging ahead on
nigh-on all fronts of social and ﬁnancial inequality in the course of the past 5 and 20
years. In a society, which is in process of becoming more and more economical
with the Truth, this latter fact remains equally and obdurately as a Truth
Undeniable, though rarely admitted by Europe’s political class. That which is done
in the name of the citizen can today be commented upon publicly and precisely by
the individual, who may now reach out to endorse, reject, and/or suggest alterna-
tives or register personal disapproval. This phenomenon has but one precedent in
the history of Political Thought—the advent of universal suffrage. With the
emergence of Post-Truth society, not only do we have to be alert to the uses and
abuses to which it is often made to serve. We have also for better or for worse
earnestly to consider, as the authors of this collection do, with clarity and fore-
thought to see what the implications are for the embedding of democracy more
solidly in the values the individual citizen wants to have preserved and protected.
St. Germain-en-Laye, France
Guy Neave
February 2017
x
Foreword: A Vision Unspeakable

References
Amaral, A. (2009). On Bologna, weasels and creeping competence. In A. Amaral, G. Neave,
C. Musselin, & P. Maassen (Eds.), European integration and the governance of higher
education and research (pp. 281–300). Heidelberg/ London/ New York: Springer Verlag.
Dahl, R. (1966). The political system. New York: Knopf.
Le Monde (2017, March 4). La post-vérité a une histoire.
Neave, G. (1984). The EEC and education. Stoke on Trent: Trentham Books Ltd.
Neave, G., & Amaral, A. (2011). A nation, a generation: Higher education in Portugal 1974 to
2009. Dordrecht: Springer Verlag.
Sinn, C., Tavares O., & Neave, G. (2016). Student mobility in Portugal: Grappling with adversity.
Journal of Studies in International Education, 16(1).
Foreword: A Vision Unspeakable
xi

Contents
Part I
Philosophy in a Post-Truth World
Post-truth, Fake News: Viral Modernity and
Higher Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Sharon Rider and Michael A. Peters
What Can Philosophy Teach Us About the
Post-truth Condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Steve Fuller
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Sharon Rider
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean
Pragmatist Tactics for the Epistemic Long Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Catherine Legg
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the
Contemporary University . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Jeff Malpas
Part II
Politics, the Papers and the Public
The History and Practice of Lying in Public Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Michael A. Peters
Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Douglas Kellner
Post-truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
Petar Jandrić
Post-truth and the Journalist’s Ethos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
George Lăzăroiu
xiii

As a Matter of Fact: Journalism and Scholarship in the
Post-truth Era . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
Mats Hyvönen
Don’t Bring Truth to a Gunﬁght: Pedagogy, Force, and
Decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
Derek R. Ford
Part III
Pedagogy and Postmodernity
Education in a Post-truth World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
Michael A. Peters
A Level Playing Field? Complicit Meritocracy in a
Post-truth Era . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
Liz Jackson and Charles Bingham
Beyond Truth and Non-truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161
Nesta Devine
Changing the World One Premise at a Time: Argument,
Imagination and Post-truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
169
Tracy Bowell
The Complexity of Post-truth in Research: An Indigenous
Speculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
187
Carl Te Hira Mika and Jacoba Matapo
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the
Age of Fake News? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
197
Henry A. Giroux
Afterword: Viral Modernity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217
xiv
Contents

Contributors
Tina Besley University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
Charles Bingham Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada
Tracy Bowell University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
Nesta Devine Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
Derek R. Ford DePauw University, Indiana, USA
Steve Fuller Warwick University, Coventry, England, UK
Henry A. Giroux McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada; Toronto, Canada
Mats Hyvönen Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Liz Jackson University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong
Petar Jandrić Zagreb University of Applied Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia
Douglas Kellner UCLA, Los Angeles, USA
Catherine Legg Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia
George Lăzăroiu Spiru Haret University, Bucharest, Romania
Jeff Malpas University of Tasmania, Tasmania, Australia; Latrobe University,
Melbourne, Australia
Jacoba Matapo The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Carl Te Hira Mika University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
Michael A. Peters University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
Sharon Rider Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
xv

Part I
Philosophy in a Post-Truth World

Post-truth, Fake News: Viral Modernity
and Higher Education
Sharon Rider and Michael A. Peters
Then verily, child I will tell you the truth.
Introduction: The Deep Cultural Roots of Truth
in the Western Tradition
Outside of philosophy department seminar rooms, truth would seem to be an
obvious and everyday affair. We do not need it explained to us; in our way of life,
truth and its cognate concepts (right, correct, accurate, real) and truth-telling
activities are central to our institutions of science, politics, law, and education. But
more fundamentally, it is part of the cultural infrastructure within which we exist
and make sense of the world. It is one of a handful of abstract concepts that serve as
a kind of intellectual scaffolding in our civilization. But has the scaffolding been
undermined by the movement of history? How we think and talk about truth has,
after all, changed from, say, the oral tradition in Ancient Greece to the basis for
digital logic in the twenty-ﬁrst century. We still attach to it great signiﬁcance and
value, but “truth” has a time and a place, which is to say, a history: it has evolved
both as a concept and cultural practice. To take an example from philosophy, while
the notion of truth in the philosophical tradition up until the medieval period was
associated with “saving the phenomena”, that is, with evidence for what was known
about natural world, it has since Galileo come to be understood in terms of
underlying causes that have little or nothing to do with how the world appears to us.
In “Pre-Philosophical Conceptions of Truth in Ancient Greece”, Corazzon
(2016) tracks the Homeric use of Aletheia, noting that the formulaic ritual sentence
“Then verily, child, I will tell you the truth” occurs ﬁve times in the Odyssey. He
S. Rider (&)
Department of Philosophy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
e-mail: sharon.rider@ﬁlosoﬁ.uu.se
M. A. Peters
Wilf Malcom Institute of Educational Research, University of Waikato,
Hamilton, New Zealand
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_1
3

maintains that Homer’s use of this stylistic device “suggests that the sentence is one
that has come down in the tradition as a ready-made formula which Homer
inherited.” The word Aletheia also often appears in the phrase “the whole truth”,
meaning, Corazzon says, to give an account or “to tell the whole story.” He con-
cludes with the remarkable statement:
The Homeric notion of Aletheia which emerges from examining its uses is precisely the
same, with the same force and ﬂavour, as that enshrined in the traditional oath or solemn
afﬁrmation required of a witness in court proceedings: to tell the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. (Corazzon 2016)
Whether Homer is to be seen as a single poetic genius or as a tradition, the Illiad
and the Odyssey are thought to have been composed in the late eighth or early
seventh centuries BCE. The poems, which were sung from memory, constituted a
shared source of moral and practical understanding for the ancients. They also were
a common reference point for the telling of what happened, of “giving an account”.
Wolenski (2004, pp. 340–341) afﬁrms that “Aletheia is the most important Greek
counterpart of our ‘truth’; alethes (true), alethos (truly) and alethein (to speak the
truth) are related words. However, the Greek ‘truth-family’ is much more com-
prehensive and consists of 14 words, among others (adjectives): atrekes, nemertes,
adolos, ortos, apseudos, etymos and etetymos.” He maintains that “the philo-
sophical usage of a term (in the present case, the counterpart of ‘truth’ in archaic
and ancient Greek) was related to the archaic one”. The “remarkable” element
alluded to above is that a notion of aletheia as truth has an historical lineage in the
oral tradition that represents almost 3000 years of use, and originates in the time
before the poetry of Homer (or the Homeric tradition) in ordinary life. There is here
a stability of use, a traceable passage from the pre-philosophical to the philo-
sophical stage.
In contrast, “theories of truth”, in the academic philosophical sense, are of a
much later vintage, most of them ﬁrst formulated in the late nineteenth and early
part of the twentieth century. George Pitcher writes: “the great philosophers of
history, although they had something to say about the concept of truth, said sur-
prisingly little: they were far more interested in truths than in ‘truth’” (Pitcher 1964,
p. 1). Pitcher suggests that the interest in theories of truth was developed in
response to German Idealism. Yet it seems odd that a concept so central to phi-
losophy was not properly “theorized” earlier. One plausible explanation was that
prior to the late nineteenth century, truth was not itself considered a problem to be
solved, but rather where you arrived when you had solved your problem. That
theories of truth have received so much attention in the last century suggests then
that truth has itself become increasingly problematic. It cannot serve as a
self-evident touchstone for the adjudication of disputes, since it has come to be
commonly understood as a theoretical concept, a construction, and, as such open to
negotiation and revision. Yet the need and desire to distinguish between true
accounts and false ones remains. We do in fact rely on certain statements and not on
others; calling a claim or an explanation true and another one false does something;
it makes its mark on the world as a ground for our words and deeds.
4
S. Rider and M. A. Peters

The Organization of This Collection
The editorial starting point for work on the volume has been to follow Chesterton’s
admonition in his biography: “The object of opening the mind, as of opening the
mouth, is to shut it again on something solid.” The present volume consists of
essays concerned with the truth as a real problem, not a purely theoretical one.
While a number of the articles will refer to philosophical notions of adequacy,
coherence, reference, and so forth, the emphasis throughout is on our present
condition, that is, the state of affairs that the idea of truth has become not simply
confused but in point of fact, like “art” or “justice”, an “essentially contested
concept” (Gallie 1956). At the same time, while the anthology is not intended as a
contribution to theoretical philosophy (philosophy of language, metaphysics or
epistemology), neither do we have the ambition to engage with methodological
problems in political or moral philosophy. The problems addressed here have to do
with how we are to understand the pragmatics of truth in education and higher
learning, with special attention to the political dimension, since what would appear
to be at the heart of the cultural convulsions we are undergoing is the sense that our
modern institutions of truth-telling (the courts, the press, universities, and labora-
tories) no longer serve as a touchstone for a common understanding of the world, a
universally acknowledged and hence binding store of reliable knowledge. In
Western liberal societies, it is up to the individual to select, on the basis of interest
and inclination, her own sources of information and interpretative frameworks. It is
natural to think in terms of the World Wide Web (social media and alternative news
sites, etc.) here, but we should also bear in mind that there are academic disciplines
and departments, even colleges and universities, that have speciﬁc orientations
(often, but not necessarily, stemming from religious or ideological afﬁliations).
Because universities are our main institutions for the training and certiﬁcation of
professions, the consequences of an array of alternatives for what is considered the
“knowledge” necessary to become a teacher, lawyer, doctor, or engineer have
repercussions far beyond the academy. The consequences of the multiplication of
truths, one for every taste, are vast.
Thus, our goal at the outset has been to put together an arena for the free
exchange of very different perspectives. Moreover, the authors have been encour-
aged to speak their minds. That means that while the collection contains papers by a
number of preeminent scholars, the volume is to be read as explicitly and quite
intentionally normative, even if the norms in play in the individual essays are rather
wide-ranging. The resulting book thus contains contributions from across a wide
spectrum of disciplines and theoretical orientations; some of the pieces are
polemical, while others are more meditative. Certain names crop up in several of the
essays (George Orwell, naturally, but also Erich Fromm, Hannah Arendt, Richard
Rorty, and Michel Foucault), and a number of terms recur (“alternative facts”,
“democracy”, “citizenship”, “critical thinking, “objectivity”, parrhesia, and so on),
but there is no superstructure or basic unifying premise (aside perhaps from Donald
Trump, who is either center-stage or a conspicuous offstage presence throughout).
Post-truth, Fake News: Viral Modernity and Higher Education
5

In order to avoid chaos, the work has been organized thematically, according to
broad characterizations, which, it has to be admitted, do not always do justice to the
contributions. In numerous cases, the papers cover several aspects of the problem of
the complex relationship between truth, politics, media, social and cultural life,
scientiﬁc practice, professional norms and ethical values, and selecting which
chapter heading is most appropriate has been no easy task.
If there is a clear trajectory to the different contributions, it is in the direction
toward restoring our conﬁdence in truth, not as a given, but as a viable social
endeavor or achievement. Truth-seeking and truth-telling require a certain degree of
skepticism to conventional accounts, but not cynicism toward the endeavor itself.
Vulgar relativism is as much of a danger as self-satisﬁed dogmatism, since it means
that there is no recourse to a mutually acknowledged point of reference. Many of
the articles end on a self-critical note, with the challenge of recognizing that we
have a problem, “we” here meaning not some vague notion of “society”, nor “we,
the enlightened” as opposed to “ordinary people”, but rather speciﬁcally referring to
those of us who take our professional tasks as having to do with formulating,
establishing, or negotiating the grounds for distinguishing the true from the false
(educators, philosophers, judges, journalists, etc.).
In the ﬁrst section, Philosophy in a Post-Truth World, Steve Fuller wages a
frontal attack against the presuppositions that undergird most mainstream academic
philosophy in general, and its epistemic assumptions in particular. Describing
“Truth” as a “brand name in need of a product that everyone is compelled to buy”,
Fuller points out that it was only very recently in human history that philosophers
began to distinguish a purely fact-based conception of evidence from personal
revelation and authoritative testimony. He ties the concept of evidence to the
secularization of knowledge, and the modern conception of truth to the idea of
being loyal or faithful to the object of inquiry. The history of the philosophers’
Truth is a complex and heterogeneous one, which means that there is no one idea of
“Truth” which we are now “post”. Inspired by Hans Vaihinger’s Kantian philos-
ophy of the “as-if”, he sees contemporary analytic epistemology as a genre of
ﬁction, ﬁlled with brains-in-vats and Chinese rooms, and consisting of “spurious
reasoning, fake philologies, eccentric histories, obscurantism and hyperbole”.
Following Vaihinger, he rejects the idea of a one-Truth-ﬁts-all epistemology, and
suggests that we understand truth as decided from case to case, as in a court of law.
Reviewing contrasting takes on the role of the philosopher in deciding what is true,
Fuller sees a conﬂict running through the history of Western thought from Plato to
Wittgenstein, between the “democrats” (sophists, poets and other public intellec-
tuals) and “authoritarians” (philosophers, priests and scientists). With regard to the
status of “truth” in the post-truth era, Fuller reminds us that to deny that there is
some justiﬁcation for the truth of facts outside of or beyond the process of securing
them is not to deny either the facts themselves nor their “objectivity” (which, as it
turns out, is not so very far aﬁeld from Carnap’s or Popper’s respective positions).
One can view consensus among scientists “rhetorically”, Fuller proposes, that is,
with an eye toward the mix of epistemic and material considerations involved in its
formation. Taking his cue from that notorious whistle-blower on fake philosophy,
6
S. Rider and M. A. Peters

Richard Rorty, he embraces the label “post-truther” to the extent that it signiﬁes
someone who is engaged in the struggle to undo present power structures by
knocking down the pulpit from which Truth is preached, that is, in a project of
epistemic democratization.
Sharon Rider’s piece, “On Knowing How to Tell the Truth”, also concerns what
one might call “epistemic politics”, but she ties it to the observation that all politics,
even of the epistemic kind, is local. Reﬂecting on the assumptions built into the
reaction of scientists, journalists, and pundits to notions such as “alternative facts”
and “post-truth”, she attempts to capture the deep grammar of the central terms,
noticing in particular how arguments tend to revolve around being “within” (the
consensus of scientists, the expertise of professionals) or “without” (the position of
the layman, the epistemic outcast from the community of experts, who lacks the
“right” or “correct” understanding). Inspired by Arendt, Ortega y Gasset, and the
turn-of-the-century Swedish philosopher Hans Larsson, Rider argues that genuinely
“free” thinking, as opposed to the “bourgeois” or institutionalized form of thought
that expresses itself in consensus, is actually a prerequisite for any relevant sense of
the notion of truth. At the same time, to admit this is to sacriﬁce the status of being a
member of the community of those “in the know” in moral, political, and social
questions, and relegated to the position of engaged and informed citizens talking to
each other about matters of mutual concern in the agora.
Taking a somewhat more epistemologically optimistic tone, Cathy Legg works
out the implications of Charles Sanders Peirce’s epistemology of inquiry, and its
understanding of knowledge as a process of ﬁxing belief. The virtue of Peirce’s
ideas, she thinks, is that they offer methods for making the process more efﬁcient.
Legg show that each part of the process, tenacity, authority, a priori reasoning, and
science, which may exist simultaneously, has its own virtues as well as deﬁciencies,
except the last which is a kind of culmination of the ﬁrst three in the collective
actions of the community of inquirers. She ﬁnds in Peirce helpful strategies for
“weathering out epistemic storms” such as that of what we might baptize Hurricane
Post-Truth. Borrowing Jayson Harsin’s term “regime of post-truth” as a term of art
to describe current trends in contemporary politics, Legg describes the way people’s
emotions and motivations are systematically cultivated to yield desired opinions.
Arguing that the ivory tower has hitherto provided perhaps too much shelter from
the storm, she suggests that academics are perhaps overreacting to the situation, and
admonishes us to take a step back to better understand what is happening. This need
for understanding, she maintains, cannot be met with the tools of mainstream
epistemology. The beneﬁt of a Peircean approach is that it addresses the motiva-
tional side of epistemology and the lived context of truth-seeking. Legg demon-
strates that given a processual understanding of truth, it makes no sense to label a
set of human behaviors as “post-truth”, since truth is nothing but the endpoint of
inquiry. She warns against the inclination of scientists and academics to consider
themselves “knowers” with the institutional power to “ﬁx belief” for the rest of the
community of inquiry. Legg asks academics to be more self-critical, and rather than
regarding our present condition as “post-truth”, to see that in the process of ﬁxing
truth, the community of inquirers can move back and forth when set truths become
Post-truth, Fake News: Viral Modernity and Higher Education
7

unsettled. At this point, we ﬁnd ourselves in an epistemic “pre-truth” period, in
which “the [only] solution to poor opinions is more opinions”.
Jeff Malpas has the ﬁnal say in this section, going for the conceptual jugular. In
“Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University”, Malpas
addresses the central issue of cognitive fragility and epistemic failure. Taking as his
point departure John Smith’s The Theory of Moral Sentiments, he proposes that in
considering the mission of the university today, we begin with the fact that human
reason is limited, and our powers of comprehension, in the end, narrow. This
insight, the recognition that we don’t really “know” all that much, is central to the
conception of wisdom from Socrates onward. Analyzing the current state of edu-
cational policy in advanced industrialized nations, characterized as they are by
careful attention to utility, employability, marketability, and competition, Malpas
asks where, if at all, the pursuit of wisdom has a place at the university. He then
contrasts these goals with the idea of the university famously formulated by John
Henry Newman, the notion that cultivation of the mind, knowledge and under-
standing institutionalized in the work of the university are ends in themselves, not
merely means to practical ends. Malpas argues for the valuing of truth and
knowledge for their own sake, as intrinsic goods in Newman’s spirit, and draws a
parallel to Michael Sandel’s argument in What Money Can’t Buy that value is
separate from price. Importantly, for Malpas, the recognition of the limits of human
understanding is not merely an epistemic question, but also an ethical one. It is here
that the theme of failure comes in. To acknowledge the possibility, even
inevitability, of failure in our projects and enterprises is to recognize the essentially
limited character of human life and activity as such. The technocratic notion of
“continuous improvement” through “quality management” is then a dangerous
delusion. The emphasis on problem-solving tends to make us notice successes,
while failures remain hidden. Yet seeing that there is no success without the failure
that necessarily precedes it, the problem to be solved, means admitting the limits of
human action. Wisdom consists in recognizing this constitutive role of limits and
failure. Similarly, the idea of education as an accumulation of results (information,
facts and competencies) conceals the intellectual activity, the actual work of
thinking, of which they are products. In contrast, Malpas offers the idea of edu-
cation as a striving toward wisdom, that is, knowledge that grasps its own
boundaries. Malpas ties this notion of wisdom as mastery not only of the skills and
knowledge within one’s own area of expertise, but of the world in which that
expertise is to function effectively, to the classical idea of critique, insofar as both
are committed to the pursuit of truth. A key task for the university is thus to ﬁnd
ways to allow and even to encourage dissent, based on the idea of the fallibility of
claims to know, or better, on a recognition of the limits within which knowledge is
itself constituted.
The stage of the second section, Politics, the Papers and the Public, is set in
Michael Peter’s essay, “The History and Practice of Lying in Public Life”. There
Peters argues that in order to balance the emphasis on truth and truth-telling, we
need also to consider the other side of the binary, that is lies and lying, more
carefully. With his starting point in Foucault’s lectures on truth-telling (parrhesia),
8
S. Rider and M. A. Peters

he goes on to analyze the relationship between a “culture of lying” and public life in
light of the political thought of Hannah Arendt. He arrives at the unsettling con-
clusion that we may be witnessing the advent of a culture in which lying becomes
the sole philosophical principle of culture, and true political action is impossible.
The suspicion that we have already arrived at the frightening dystopian picture
that ends Peters’ essay is the starting point for Doug Kellner’s powerful polemic in
his assessment of the political aftermath of the Trump campaign and early presi-
dency in “Trump and the Politics of Lying”. He argues that the view that the current
President of the United States is, in the words of the former President, both “un-
qualiﬁed and unﬁt”, rests on a misunderstanding. According to Kellner, Trump is
both qualiﬁed and ﬁt to take the ofﬁce such as he and his supporters understand it,
namely, as that of autocratic despot. Making use of Erich Fromm’s diagnosis of the
authoritarian personality, Kellner makes the case that deception and lying are not
something added on to an agenda, but rather constitute it. He concludes that the
only resistance that can succeed in undermining an agenda of deception is an
educated citizenry, which is why the appointment of Betsy DeVos as Secretary of
Education is central to the Trump administration. The dismantling of public edu-
cation is an essential element in the overall plan of government by mendacity.
In “Post-Truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust”, Petar Jandric turns the focus of
attention from the question of the necessary political conditions for true statements
to the ethical question of the necessary conditions for trust. He argues that the
Internet introduces an entirely different set of problems than we are accustomed to
addressing in the theory of knowledge, challenges connected to the anonymity and
immediacy of online communication, but also stemming from the very infrastruc-
ture of digital information. He concludes with a reminder that our suspiciousness
toward the accuracy of information, at the very heart of “post-truth”, is rational. At
the same time, an exaggerated mistrust undermines the very possibility of collective
deliberation and action. What is required to combat the ill effects of post-truth is not
clinging on to a dogmatic ideal of sovereign objectivity, but a fully developed
critical pedagogy of trust.
The question of what the Internet does with our ideas about authentic sources
and reliable practices is a central theme for George Lazariou’s paper, “Post-Truth
and the Journalist’s Ethos”. Stressing the effects of globalized reporting, he suggests
that trustworthy news is not merely a matter of professional methods and standards,
but ﬁrst and foremost a matter of the ethos of the journalist. In the attempt to bring
in all and only relevant and reliable information, there is a tendency to emphasize
accuracy and fact-checking at the expense of a global perspective, in which balance
and fairness are achieved not simply by presenting all sides, but by actively seeking
out stories that are often disregarded by mainstream media and acknowledging that
what constitutes “the news” is a matter of professional discretion that makes moral
demands on the journalist.
Mats Hyvönen discusses the role of the press in public deliberation in his paper,
“As a Matter of Fact: Journalism and Academic Scholarship in the Post-Truth Era”,
and points to similarities in the effects of marketization and meditization on jour-
nalism and on the academy. He argues that we should distinguish between the
Post-truth, Fake News: Viral Modernity and Higher Education
9

activities of truth-seeking and the exercise of professional judgment, on the one
hand, and the medium in which those activities are conducted, on the other. The
newspaper and the traditional university are probably on their way to obsolescence,
he cautions, but that does not mean that the values they have incarnated or the
purposes that they have served no longer apply. To the contrary, the challenge for
both journalism and academic scholarship is to ﬁnd new forms of instantiation and
public service. He concludes with concrete suggestions about how to get moving on
the long hard road ahead.
The social and material mechanisms by which the truth (news, facts, knowledge)
is produced and disseminated are the focus of Derek Ford’s “Don’t Bring Truth to a
Gunﬁght: Pedagogy, Force and Decision”. Borrowing the term “democratic com-
municative capitalism” from Jodi Dean to describe how the democratic ideals of
access, participation, inclusion, diversity, and critique become actualized through
capitalist technological infrastructure, Ford argues that Trump and the right wing
have understood something about our contemporary networked society that the Left
has yet failed to realize, namely, that critique and analyses with the aim of securing
truth, accuracy and understanding miss the mark in the political sphere. He pro-
poses that the Left adopt a stance that requires commitment, self-sacriﬁce, risk, and
responsibility, that is, adherence to a program of action. Such a position, to be
politically effective, requires organization; Ford sees in the Communist Party the
potential to engage the whole personality in the movement, as means of mobilizing
the forces of both intellect and desire so that political engagement doesn’t degen-
erate into a reiﬁed, abstract system of rights and duties. Instead of continuing the
debate ad inﬁnitum about what the truth is or isn’t, the aim of the Left should be “a
truth that would do justice to our Earth and all its inhabitants”.
The last section, Pedagogy and Postmodernity, contains essays which, in one
way or another, embrace a pedagogy of epistemic indeterminacy, while at the same
time trying to ﬁnd ways of avoiding the potentially calamitous consequences, for
science, school and society, of a post-truth culture. In his brief essay, “Education in
a Post-Truth World”, Michael Peters considers the power of the lie, especially as
instanced in the election campaign and presidency of Donald Trump. He argues that
in the era of post-truth, it is not enough to revisit standard notions or theories of
truth, or rely on accounts of “evidence” and forms of epistemic justiﬁcation to guide
us. We need to understand the broader social and cultural implications of post-truth
in politics, science, and education; but we also need an operational strategy to
combat “government by lying,” and its role in a global order that accepts and even
encourages the subordination of truth to emotional appeals and irrational personal
inclinations.
Inspired by Jacques Rancière’s ideas about the implications of linguistic arbi-
trariness for political matters, Liz Jackson and Charles Bingham problematize the
conception of truth that is commonly assumed to be the point and purpose of
education, namely, that of a collective or shared understanding. In particular, they
study how this ideal is tied up with notions of merit as an integral part of the idea of
schooling. They examine how such basic academic notions as “work”, “rigor”, and
“quality” are built into even critical pedagogical projects, at the same time as the
10
S. Rider and M. A. Peters

latter eschew the supposition that these terms are ideologically neutral. The authors
suggest that educators, following Rancière, should see the poetic and constructive
powers of language as a possibility rather than a threat to a genuinely democratic
order, both in and out of school.
Arriving at a conclusion reminiscent of Ford’s but with similar considerations as
Jackson and Bingham’s as her point of departure, Nesta Devine attempts to
negotiate between post-structuralist skepticism toward meta-narratives about truth
and objectivity, on the one hand, and the need to move forward and not remain
stuck in perpetual, but politically ineffectual critique, on the other. She proposes an
ecological and posthuman take on ideology critique, in which the claims of the
environment be understood as claims made on human beings in the interests of the
planet.
Tracy Bowell addresses the question of what, concretely, we as educators are to
do with the problem of deeply held beliefs that seem to be immune to conceptual or
factual modiﬁcation or revision. In “Changing the World One Premise at a Time:
Argument, Imagination and Post-Truth”, drawing on the work of Moira Gatens and
Genevieve Lloyd and Iris Marion Young, she proposes a new way of teaching
critical thinking, which focuses on establishing common grounds through real
confrontation with a multiplicity of forms of life and the voices to which they give
rise.
The question of different life forms and the conceptual frameworks belonging to
them is central to the discussion in “The Complexity of Post-Truth in Research: An
Indigenous Speculation”. Mika and Matapo question humanist assumptions with
regard to truth, in particular, those baked into most social and educational science
research. They argue that assuming truth to be an epistemological term already
undermines the possibility of another understanding of “truth”, namely, as an
ontological term. Their case in point is indigenous Pasiﬁka cultures, in which
knowledge is inherently collective, and where the past is present in the collective,
and the collective is part of the world, not a spectator on it. From this perspective,
objectivity as it is commonly construed in philosophical debates is not a contrast to
post-truth, but an early form of it. The authors seek a path for educational and social
science research that will, on the one hand, be based on a common frame of
reference that is not merely local or personal, but which, on the other hand,
acknowledges difference with regard to truth. The ideal they propose is to “put
objectivity its place without entirely denying it”.
Finally, bringing together the central themes of the book as a whole, Henry
Giroux poses the fundamental question: “What is the Role of Higher Education in
the Age of Fake News?” Using Trump’s use of “fake news” as a prime example of a
“weaponized policy for legitimating ignorance and civil illiteracy”, he describes the
current government in the US as a “powerful disimagination machine”, and
develops a plan of critical action for disassembling it. According to Giroux, edu-
cation is central to politics because it is always implicated in the struggle over
values and agency. In particular, he stresses that we are now witnessing a new form
of illiteracy, one which is not simply an absence of learning or knowledge, nor
merely a symptom of the digitalization of everything, but is the result of conscious
Post-truth, Fake News: Viral Modernity and Higher Education
11

goals and willful practices of depoliticization and desocialization. Giroux proposes
a strategy for counteracting this deliberate policy of manufactured illiteracy, under
the rubric of “thinking dangerously” on the part of academic staff and students.
Echoing Arendt, Giroux sees education as a fundamentally future-oriented moral
and political practice, and pedagogy as a site-speciﬁc and self-reﬂective and
self-critical project of education rather than as a set of methodological quick ﬁxes to
be applied willy-nilly to any and all classroom situations. In the current context, the
method of “thinking dangerously” means, among other things, freeing faculty and
students from harness of corporate demands or the needs of the welfare state. It also
implies a more critical attitude toward the language of commodiﬁcation, while at
the same time opening itself to new venues for intellectual development in the
public sphere, and requires that the professoriate engage in these rather than
ensconce themselves within their chosen ﬁelds of specialization. Higher education
must utilize common sense while at the same time subjecting it to scrutiny. It must
connect “reading the word with reading the world”, if it is to produce citizens
capable of governing rather than being governed.
References
Corazzon, R. (2016). Pre-philosophical conceptions of truth in Ancient Greece. Theory and
History of Ontology. https://www.ontology.co/aletheia-prephilosophical.htm. Accessed 24
September.
Gallie, W. B. (1956). Essentially contested concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 56,
167–198.
Pitcher, G. (1964). Introduction. Truth (pp. 1–15). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice- Hall.
Wolenski, J. (2004). Aletheia in Greek thought until Aristotle. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
127(1–3), 339–360.
12
S. Rider and M. A. Peters

What Can Philosophy Teach Us About
the Post-truth Condition
Steve Fuller
A Post-truth History of Truth
Philosophers claim to be seekers of the truth but the matter is not quite so
straightforward. Another way to see philosophers is as the ultimate experts in a
post-truth world. They see ‘truth’ for what it is: the name of a brand ever in need of
a product that everyone is compelled to buy. This helps to explain why philoso-
phers are most conﬁdent appealing to ‘The Truth’ when they are trying to persuade
non-philosophers, be they in courtrooms or classrooms. In more technical terms,
‘truth’—and the concepts surrounding it—are ‘essentially contested’ (Gallie 1956).
In other words, it is not simply that philosophers disagree on which propositions are
‘true’ or ‘false’, but more importantly they disagree on what it means to say that
something is ‘true’ or ‘false’.
If you ﬁnd my judgement too harsh or cynical, consider the careers of the key
philosophical terms in which knowledge claims are transacted, not least ‘evidence’
and ‘truth’ itself. ‘Evidence’ is a good place to start because it feeds directly into the
popular image of our post-truth world as ‘post-fact’, understood as a willful denial
of solid, if not incontrovertible, pieces of evidence, whose independent standing
sets limits on what can be justiﬁably asserted about the world.
Yet it was only in the early modern period that philosophers even began to
distinguish a purely fact-based conception of evidence from personal revelation and
authoritative testimony. The break only became clean in the mid-nineteenth century
when logic books regularly started to classify people-based claims to evidence
among the ‘informal fallacies’, unless the people had direct acquaintance with the
speciﬁc matter under dispute (Hamblin 1970). The concept of ‘expert’, a late
nineteenth-century juridical innovation based on a contraction of the participle
‘experienced’, extended the idea of ‘direct acquaintance’ to include people with a
S. Fuller (&)
Department of Sociology, Warwick University, Coventry, England, UK
e-mail: S.W.Fuller@warwick.ac.uk
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_2
13

speciﬁc training by virtue of which they are licensed to inductively generalise from
their past experience to the matter under dispute. In this way, the recently pro-
scribed ‘argument from authority’ made its return through the backdoor (Turner
2003).
This slow crafting of the concept of evidence was part of the general seculari-
sation of knowledge. At the same time, it would be a mistake to think that today’s
concept was purpose-made for scientiﬁc inquiry. Rather, it was an adaptation of the
inquisition, the procedure used on the European continent to identify heretics and
witches. Its English importer was Francis Bacon, King James I’s lawyer, who
believed that nature itself was a fugitive from the law, hiding its secrets from
humanity for much too long. Special trials were thus required to force nature from
its normally equivocal stance to decide between two mutually exclusive options
(Fuller 2017).
Bacon called such trials ‘crucial experiments’, which Karl Popper turned into the
gold standard of the scientiﬁc method three centuries later. To be sure, Bacon and
Popper were under no illusions that the facts produced under such ‘extraordinary
rendition’, as we would now say, were nature’s deliverances in more relaxed set-
tings. On the contrary, Popper went so far as to call facts ‘conventions’, by which
he meant convenient waystations in a never-ending inquisition of nature. After all,
what made experiments ‘crucial’ was that their outcomes hastened knowledge of a
future that otherwise would only unfold—for good or ill—on nature’s timetable,
which would provide humanity little opportunity to plan a response, let alone steer
nature’s course to human advantage.
As for ‘truth’, it harks back to an older English word, ‘troth’, which harbours all
of the concept’s philosophical difﬁculties. ‘Troth’ means faithfulness—but to what
exactly: the source or the target?
Originally ‘truth’ meant ﬁdelity to the source. It was about loyalty to whoever
empowers the truth-teller, be it the Christian deity or a Roman general. In this
context, it was associated with executing a plan of action, be it in the cosmos or on
the battleﬁeld. One remained ‘true’ by following through on the power-giver’s
intention, regardless of manner or outcome. It is this sense of ‘true’ that enabled the
Jesuits, a Counter-Reformation Catholic order founded by a soldier, Ignatius
Loyola, to do God’s work by operating on the principle that ‘the end justiﬁes the
means’.
However, thanks to another Catholic, Thomas Aquinas, truth came to be seen in
the modern period as loyalty to the target—speciﬁcally, the empirical objects
already in the ﬁeld of play. His own Latin turn of phrase was adequatio ad rem,
whose crude English translation, ‘adequacy to the thing’, captures the disempow-
ering character of the concept, which philosophers continue to dignify as the
‘correspondence theory of truth’. Aquinas, writing at a time of considerable heresy
in the late thirteenth century, was reasserting conﬁdence that the world as it nor-
mally appears is close enough to God’s plan that the faithful should stop trying to
second-guess God’s intentions and focus instead on getting the empirical details of
Creation right. Today Aquinas is the ofﬁcial philosopher of the Church, a secure
guide to the accommodation of science to faith.
14
S. Fuller

These contrary pulls on the concept of truth—the source vis-à-vis the target—
have persisted to this day. When Newton famously declared ‘Hypotheses non ﬁngo’
(‘I feign no hypotheses’) in the second edition of Principia Mathematica, he was
diverting suspicious religious readers who feared that he might be trying to get into
‘The Mind of God’ rather than simply providing a perspicuous account of nature’s
order. Of course, there is no doubt—given his voluminous private theological
writings—that Newton was indeed aiming to second-guess the deity in which he
believed. He was going for the source, not merely the target of all knowing. Against
this backdrop, it is ironic that an avowedly ‘atheist’ physicist such as Stephen
Hawking, successor to Newton’s Cambridge mathematics chair, managed to parlay
‘The Mind of God’ as the driving metaphor of that popular science classic, A Brief
History of Time. Newton and Hawking differ not only in terms of details of exe-
cution but also degree of self-awareness. Newton was deliberately concealing what
by Hawking’s day had been formally disowned if not long forgotten.
One philosopher who offers guidance in navigating through the somewhat sur-
real post-truth intellectual environment is Hans Vaihinger, the person most
responsible for turning Immanuel Kant into a ﬁxture of scholarly interest, by
founding Kant Studien. Vaihinger also developed an entire world view around
Kant’s repeated use of the phrase ‘als ob’ (‘as if’). Much of the normative force of
Kant’s philosophy comes from thinking or acting ‘as if’ certain things were true,
even though you may never be able to prove them and they may even turn out to be
false. Vaihinger (1924) called the resulting world-view ‘ﬁctionalism’ and it epito-
mises the post-truth sensibility. And seen through Vaihinger’s eyes, philosophy
appears to be the most post-truth ﬁeld of them all.
A good way to see Vaihinger’s point is to consider contemporary philosophy’s
notorious schism between ‘analytic’ and ‘continental’ schools. The analytics accuse
the continentals of having picked up all of Nietzsche’s worst habits. The result is a
trail of spurious reasoning, fake philologies, eccentric histories, obscurantism and
hyperbole. This is quite a list of offenses to the truth, yet it is striking that analytic
philosophy’s most lasting contributions have been a series of thought experiments,
which are no more than ﬁgments of the imagination—such as Putnam’s ‘brains in a
vat’ or Searle’s ‘Chinese room’—that are passed off as heroic abstractions from
some hypothetical reality. The rest of analytic philosophy is basically just scholastic
wrangling about the wording of these thought experiments and the conclusions one
is licensed to draw from them, leavened by occasional moments of high dudgeon,
as well as displays of ignorance, narrow-mindedness and bias vis-à-vis other,
typically more ‘continental’ or ‘postmodern’ modes of reasoning.
Vaihinger could make sense of what is going on here. He divided our approach
to the world into ﬁctions and hypotheses. In a ﬁction, you don’t know that you
inhabit a false world, whereas in a hypothesis you know that you don’t inhabit a
false world. In either case, ‘the true world’ doesn’t possess any determinate epis-
temic standing. On the contrary, you presume ‘a false world’ and argue from there.
From this standpoint, continental philosophers are purveyors of ﬁctions, and ana-
lytic philosophers of hypotheses. What we colloquially call ‘reality’ moves between
these two poles, never really honing in on any robust sense of truth. Here, one needs
What Can Philosophy Teach Us …
15

to think of ‘ﬁctions’ on a sliding scale from novels to plays to laws (‘legal ﬁctions’)
and ‘hypotheses’ on a sliding scale from what Euclid was talking about to what
scientists test in a lab to what people do when they plan for the future.
Does this mean that truth is a redundant concept altogether? That there is a
‘redundancy theory of truth’, proposed by the logician Frank Ramsey nearly a
hundred years ago, suggests as much. Moreover, the theories of truth that have
followed in its wake—alternatively called ‘deﬂationary’, ‘disquotational’, ‘ex-
pressive’ and even ‘honoriﬁc’ (to recall Richard Rorty’s reappropriation of Dewey)
—can be added to the post-truth repertoire of analytic philosophy. But ‘in fact’
(permitting the locution), Vaihinger would say—and I agree—that truth turns out to
be whatever is decided by the empowered judge in the case at hand. In other words,
Francis Bacon was right, after all, which perhaps explains why Kant dedicated the
Critique of Pure Reason to him. And that’s the post-truth of it.
Embodying Truth/Post-truth: Of Plato’s Dialogues
and Wittgenstein’s Two Halves
Many accounts of Greek etymology observe that theory and theatre share a com-
mon ancestry in theos, the Greek word for God. Implied here is a conception of the
deity whose supremacy rests on being able to see both inside and outside its own
frame of reference, a double spectator, or theoros. In logic, this is called second-
order awareness: One not only plays a language game but also knows that the game
is only one of many that she might be playing. In what follows, I associate this
awareness with the post-truth mentality. In Plato’s dialogues, the sophists are
clearly trying to cultivate just such a mentality in their clients, which in principle
would give them a god-like discretion to decide which game they play in the open
space of the agora. Socrates pushes back from this arch sense of self-awareness,
arguing that there is ultimately only one game in town, truth, adherence to which
would keep everyone playing by the same rules and thereby stick to what logicians
would call a ﬁrst-order awareness.
Perhaps the most straightforward example of Socrates’ approach appears in
chapter 20 of Protagoras, in which he manages to get his sophistic opponent to
admit that all virtues are one because they all have the same contrary, aphrosyne,
which is normally translated as ‘lack of proportion or perspective’. In the process of
persuading Protagoras of this thesis, Socrates gradually removes the sense of the
virtues as something skill-like, each possessing its own gradient along which one
may perform better or worse. This serves to neutralise the image of the citizen that
the sophists presupposed, namely, one whose competence consists in playing the
virtues off each other as the situation demands, very much in the spirit of a modern
economic ‘optimiser’ who decides to act after having traded off her various inter-
ests. In its place, Socrates proposes that to think that there are separate virtues is to
reﬂect one’s ignorance of what virtue is. Thus, the just, the good, the beautiful, etc.,
16
S. Fuller

are all simply aspects of virtue as such. ‘Virtue’ in this univocal sense is identiﬁed
with the truth, in that everything is understood in its rightful place. From this
standpoint, by proliferating virtues as skills, Protagoras is selling parts as if they
were the whole. Socrates’ argument, as ﬁltered through Plotinus, would exert
profound inﬂuence in the Middle Ages, as the Abrahamic deity came to stand for
what Socrates had identiﬁed as the one truth behind all its virtuous appearances.
The ultimate difference between Socrates and the sophists is not the dialectical
capacities of the two sides, which are basically the same. In this respect, Plato’s
coinage of ‘philosophy’ for Socrates’ argumentative style and ‘rhetoric’ for the
sophistic style is itself a rhetorical diversion. Rather, the difference lay in Socrates’
objection to the free-wheeling—some might say ‘democratic’, others might say
‘commercial’—way in which the sophists deployed these common capacities. To
render the premises of arguments pure inventions of the arguer is potentially to turn
any human into a deity if enough people are persuaded to regard his or her premises
as the rules of the game by which they all subsequently play. And as Plato knew
from ﬁrst-hand experience, the sophists did succeed in persuading enough citizens
of their ‘dialectical divinity’, so to speak, that Athenian democracy ended up
reproducing the chaotic sociability of the gods of Greek mythology. Unfortunately,
in the real world this led to the defeat of Athens at the hands of Sparta in the
Peloponnesian War, the beginning of Athens’ terminal decline.
In Plato’s telling, Socrates stands for the need to play just one game, which
explains why the sophists and the ‘poets’ are put in the same basket. I put ‘poets’ in
scare quotes because the term should be understood in its original Greek sense of
poiesis, the productive use of words to conjure up worlds. In Plato’s day, play-
wrights were the poets of chief concern, but in our own day those adept at computer
coding—‘hackers’—might be the main source of comparable subversion (cf. Wark
2004). Whereas Plato believed that only philosopher-kings in training should cul-
tivate a second-order imagination—shades of Hermann Hesse’s The Glass Bead
Game—his enemies were keen to distribute this capacity as widely as possible. At
stake was modal power. In other words, whatever the rules of the game happen to
be—or seem to be—they could be otherwise. From the post-truth standpoint, truth
looks like an extreme disciplining of the imagination, which accounts for the
authoritarian—and even totalitarian—feel of Plato’s positive proposals for gov-
erning the polity in the Republic.
At the same time, it is easy to see how Augustine and other early Christian
thinkers found Plato attractive as a metaphysical backdrop for their own
monotheistic views, since the dialogues brought into sharp relief the perils of
humans trying to behave like gods in a polytheistic cosmos. However, Christianity
is also a religion that claims that believers have some sort of direct contact with
their one deity. Indeed, since humans are biblically created in imago dei, a phrase
Augustine himself popularised, the prospect that each person might not merely
imitate a god—as in the Greek case—but actually instantiate divinity proved to be
an endless source of heresies. It culminated in the Protestant Reformation, which
arguably has reproduced the sophistic situation that the early Christians were trying
What Can Philosophy Teach Us …
17

to avoid by embracing Plato. Of course, Augustine’s own original solution was to
strengthen the authority the established church of his day, which over time has
turned out to be inadequate, to say the least.
Let me now shift gears and tell the same story from the standpoint of the
twentieth century by using the two phases of Ludwig Wittgenstein’s philosophical
career—in particular, his attempt to determine what is true in his early (e.g.
Tractatus) and later (e.g. Philosophical Investigations) writings. The early writings
were ﬁxated on the idea of a truth-functional logic into which all meaningful
statements might be translated and evaluated. If a statement was deemed ‘mean-
ingful’, then one could determine straightforwardly—perhaps even mechanically—
whether it was true or false. In contrast, the later writings were concerned with the
fact that the same string of data, be they quantitative or qualitative, may be sub-
sumed or interpreted under any number of rules that would render them meaningful.
In that case, the form of inference required is closer to abduction than deduction.
The early Wittgenstein captures the ‘truth’ orientation, whereby the rules of the
knowledge game are sufﬁciently well understood by all players that appeals to
‘evidence’ mean the same thing to everyone concerned. This is the world of
Kuhnian paradigms, whose knowledge game is called ‘normal science’ (Kuhn
1970). To be sure, depending on the state of play, some evidence may count more
than others and may even overturn previous evidence. However, the uniformity of
epistemic standards means that everyone recognises these moves in the same way
and hence there is a common understanding of one’s position in the epistemic
tournament, including which teams have made the most progress.
The later Wittgenstein captures the ‘post-truth’ orientation, whereby the
knowledge game is not determined by the rules; rather determining the rules is what
the knowledge game is about. Emblematic of this approach is the duck-rabbit
Gestalt that appears not only in this period of Wittgenstein’s work but also in
Thomas Kuhn’s account of the psychology of the ‘paradigm shift’ that characterises
a scientiﬁc revolution. The idea is that the same evidence can be weighted differ-
ently depending on the frame of reference adopted, which may result in a radical
shift in world view. Both Wittgenstein and Kuhn agreed that whichever frame
prevails is not preordained but a contingent matter, one which tends to be covered
up after the fact by the justiﬁcatory narrative that the community concerned tells
itself in order to go forward collectively. Kuhn notoriously dubbed this narrative
‘Orwellian’, after the work done in 1984s Ministry of Information, whereby a
regular rewriting of history to match the current direction of policy subtly erases
any memory that policies had been otherwise—and might also be otherwise in the
future.
Where the later Wittgenstein and Kuhn differed was that the former appeared to
think that the rules of the game might change at a moment’s notice, depending on
who is in the room when a binding decision needs to be taken. Thus, in principle,
the number series that begins 2, 4,… may continue with 6, 8 or 16, depending on
whether the implied rule is agreed to be n + 2, n2 or n2. Usually there is precedent
for settling the matter, but that precedent amounts to no more than a ‘convention’.
The alternative rules for going forward on such an occasion are comparable to the
18
S. Fuller

alternative dialectical framings of a situation that the sophist juggles at any given
time until an opportunity presents itself (Kairos). Indeed, this interpretation served
to make the later Wittgenstein the darling of ethnomethodologists in the 1970s and
‘80s, including within the nascent ‘sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge’, who laun-
ched STS. In contrast, Kuhn believed that the decisive moments require a speciﬁc
prehistory, the logic of which effectively forces a decision that is then taken only
with great reluctance and may involve a de facto rejection of those who had been
previously part of the relevant community. This ‘logic’ is characterised by the
accumulation of unsolved puzzles in the conduct of normal science, which then
precipitates a ‘crisis’, resulting in the paradigm shift that imposes new rules on the
science game. In this respect, Kuhn might be seen to strike a balance between the
two Wittgensteins, or Socrates and the sophists.
How Truth Looks to Post-truth
It is worth stressing that a ‘post-truther’ does not deny the existence of facts,
let alone ‘objective facts’. She simply wishes to dispel the mystery in which the
creation and maintenance of facts tend to be shrouded. For example, epistemolo-
gists have long tried to make sense of the idea that ‘correspondence to reality’
explains what makes a particular statement a ‘fact’. On the most ordinary reading,
this sounds a bit mysterious, since it suggests a strange turn of events. Take the case
of scientiﬁc facts: (1) Scientists do whatever they do in a lab. (2) They publish
something that convinces their learned colleagues that something happened there,
which sets off a train of actions which starts by imprinting itself on the collective
body of scientiﬁc knowledge and ultimately on the world at large as an ‘expert’
judgement. (3) Yet—so the ‘truthers’ tell us—in the end what confers legitimacy on
the fact (i.e. makes it ‘true’) is something outside this process, a reality to which it
‘corresponds’.
To someone not schooled to ‘know better’ (i.e. in the ‘truth’ mode), (3) seems to
be quite an arbitrary conclusion to reach, just given (1) and (2). Unsurprisingly
then, the twentieth century has been largely a story of philosophers gradually falling
out of love with this scenario, which in turn has animated the post-truth sensibility.
Indeed, there is a fairly direct line of intellectual descent from the logical positivists
and the Popperians to contemporary social constructivism in the sociology of sci-
entiﬁc knowledge, contrary to their textbook representation as mutual antagonists.
I have gone so far as to call science and technology studies (STS) ‘postmodern
positivism’—in a non-pejorative sense (Fuller 2006)!
The tell-tale sign is that they all deﬁne ‘truth’ as something inside—not outside
—the terms of a language game. Put another way, ‘truth’ shifts from being a
substantive to a procedural notion. Speciﬁcally, for them ‘truth’ is a second-order
concept that lacks any determinate meaning except relative to the language in terms
of which knowledge claims can be expressed. (This is known as the ‘Tarski con-
vention of truth’.) It was in this spirit that Rudolf Carnap thought that Thomas
What Can Philosophy Teach Us …
19

Kuhn’s ‘paradigm’ had put pragmatic ﬂesh on the positivists’ logical bones (Reisch
1991; cf. Fuller 2000: Chap. 6). (It is worth emphasising that Carnap passed this
judgement before Kuhn’s fans turned him into the torchbearer for ‘post-positivist’
philosophy of science.) At the same time, this orientation led the positivists to
promote—and try to construct—a universal language of science into which all
knowledge claims could be translated and evaluated.
More to the point, the positivists didn’t presuppose the existence of some uni-
vocal understanding of truth that all sincere inquirers will ultimately reach. Rather,
truth is just a general property of the language that one decides to use—or the game
one decides to play. In that case ‘truth’ corresponds to satisfying ‘truth conditions’
as speciﬁed by the rules of a given language, just as ‘goal’ corresponds to satisfying
the rules of play in a given game.
To be sure, the positivists complicated matters because they also took seriously
that science aspires to command universal assent for its knowledge claims, in which
case, science’s language needs to be set up in a way that enables everyone to
transact their knowledge claims inside it; hence, the need to ‘reduce’ such claims to
their calculable and measurable components. This effectively put the positivists in
partial opposition to all the existing sciences of their day, each with its own
parochial framework governed by the rules of its distinctive language game. The
need to overcome this tendency explains the project of an ‘International
Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed Science’. In this respect, logical positivism’s objective was
to design an epistemic game—called ‘Science’—that anyone could play and
potentially win.
How Truth Looks Back at Post-truth: Veritism as ‘Fake
Philosophy’
Perhaps the most elaborate ‘fake philosophy’, so to speak, that has been designed to
counteract the post-truth sensibility is called veritism, which reasserts the ‘outside’
conception of truth by declaring it a necessary constraint if not the primary goal of
any legitimate inquiry. Veritism is popular, if not dominant, among theorists of
knowledge and science in contemporary analytic philosophy (e.g. Goldman 1999).
Its extramural admirers include those keen on shoring up the epistemic authority of
‘scientiﬁc consensus’ in the face of an increasing multitude of dissenters and
sceptics (e.g. Baker and Oreskes 2017). The ‘fakeness’ of this philosophy comes
from both its studied refusal to engage with the ‘essentially contested’ nature of
‘truth’ and related epistemic concepts, which results in a conﬂation of ﬁrst- and
second-order concerns.
20
S. Fuller

Here’s an example of the fakeness of veritism in action:
On the contrary, truth (along with evidence, facts, and other words science studies scholars
tend to relegate to scare quotes) is a far more plausible choice for one of a potential plurality
of regulative ideals for an enterprise that, after all, does have an obviously cognitive
function. (Baker and Oreskes 2017, p. 69)
The sentence prima facie commits the category mistake of presuming that ‘truth’ is
one more—albeit preferred—possible regulative ideal of science alongside, say,
instrumental effectiveness, cultural appropriateness, etc. However, ‘truth’ in the
logical positivist sense is a feature of all regulative ideals of science, each of which
should be understood as specifying a language game that is governed by its own
validation procedures—the rules of the game, if you will—in terms of which one
theory is determined (or ‘veriﬁed’) to be, say, more effective than another or more
appropriate than another.
As an epistemic policy, veritism says that whatever else inquiry might seek to
achieve in terms of the inquirers’ own aims, it must ﬁrst serve ‘The Truth’. The
result has been some strange epistemological doctrines, including ‘reliabilism’,
which argues that there are processes that generate truths on a regular basis even if
their possessors lack epistemic access to them. On the surface, such a doctrine is
designed to dissociate truth from any subjective states, which would otherwise
make it difﬁcult to generalise truth claims from an individual’s own version of
‘justiﬁed belief’, let alone personal experience. However, to the post-truther, reli-
abilism looks simply like a pretext for individuals to outsource their own judge-
ments to experts in, say, cognitive, brain and/or behavioural science—those
unelected masters of what remains unknown to us about ourselves.
Indeed, on closer inspection, when veritists say that truth is a ‘regulative ideal’ of all
inquiry, they are simply referring to a social arrangement whereby the self-organising
scientiﬁc community is the ﬁnal arbiter on all knowledge claims accepted by society at
large. To be sure, the scientiﬁc community can get things wrong—but things become
wrong only when the scientiﬁc community says so, and they become ﬁxed only when
the scientiﬁc community says so. In effect, veritists advocate what I have called
‘cognitive authoritarianism’ (Fuller 1988: Chap. 12). From a post-truth standpoint,
veritism amounts to a lightly veiled moral crusade, as exempliﬁed by such
pseudo-epistemic concepts as ‘trust’ and ‘reliability’, in which ‘scientiﬁc’ attaches to
both a body of knowledge and the people who produce that knowledge. I say ‘pseudo’
because there is no agreed speciﬁcally epistemic measure of these qualities. Judgements
about people are invariably used as proxies for judgements about the world.
For example, trust is a quality whose presence is felt mainly as a double absence,
namely, a studied refusal to examine knowledge claims for oneself, the result of
which is then judged to have had non-negative consequences—presumably because
some ‘trusted party’ (aka scientists) did the requisite validation work. I have called
trust a ‘phlogistemic’ concept for this reason, as it resembles the pseudo-element
phlogiston (Fuller 1996). Indeed, my general opposition to this sensibility has led
me to argue that universities should be in the business of ‘epistemic trust-busting’.
Here is my original assertion:
What Can Philosophy Teach Us …
21

In short, universities function as knowledge trust-busters whose own corporate capacities
of “creative destruction” prevent new knowledge from turning into intellectual property
(Fuller 2002, p. 47; italics in original).
By ‘corporate capacities’, I mean the various means at the university’s disposal to
ensure that the people in a position to take forward new knowledge are not simply
part of the class of those who created it in the ﬁrst place. Of course I had in mind
ordinary teaching that aims to express even the most sophisticated concepts in terms
ordinary students can understand and use, thereby deconstructing the rather his-
torically speciﬁc—or ‘path-dependent’—ways that innovations tend to become
socially entrenched, which in turn create relationships of trust between ‘experts’
and ‘lay people’. But also I meant to include ‘afﬁrmative action’ policies that are
speciﬁcally designed to incorporate a broader range of people than might otherwise
attend the university. Taken together, these counteract the ‘neo-feudalism’ to which
academic knowledge production is prone—‘rent-seeking’, if you will—and to
which veritists are largely oblivious.
As for the veritists’ core truth criterion, reliability, its meaning depends on
specifying the conditions—say, in the design of an experiment—under which a
pattern of behaviour is expected to occur. Outside of such tightly deﬁned condi-
tions, which is where most ‘scientiﬁc controversies’ happen, it is not clear how
cases should be classiﬁed and counted, and hence what ‘reliable’ means. Indeed,
STS has not only drawn attention to this fact but it has gone further—say, in the
work of Harry Collins—to question whether even lab-based reliability is possible
without some sort of collusion between researchers. In other words, the social
accomplishment of ‘reliable knowledge’ is at least partly an expression of solidarity
among members of the scientiﬁc community—a closing of the ranks, to put it less
charitably. This is a less ﬂattering characterisation of what veritists claim as the
epistemically luminous process of ‘consensus formation’ in science.
An especially good example of the foregoing is what has been dubbed
‘Climategate’, which was triggered by the hacking of the computer server of the
UK’s main climate science research group in 2009, which was followed up with
several Freedom of Information requests. While no wrongdoing was formally
established, the e-mails did reveal the extent to which scientists from across the
world effectively conspired to present the data for climate change in ways that
obscured interpretive ambiguities, thereby pre-empting possible appropriations by
so-called ‘climate change sceptics’. The most natural way to interpret this situation
is that it reveals the micro-processes by which a scientiﬁc consensus is normally
and literally ‘manufactured’. Nevertheless, veritists are unlikely to regard
Climategate as their paradigm case of a ‘scientiﬁc consensus’. But why not?
The reason lies in their refusal to acknowledge the labour and even struggle that
are involved in securing collective assent over any signiﬁcant knowledge claim. For
veritists, informed people draw the same conclusions from the same evidence. The
actual social interaction among inquirers carries little cognitive weight in its own
right. Instead, it simply reinforces what any rational individual is capable of
inferring for him- or herself in the same situation. Other people may provide
22
S. Fuller

additional data points but they don’t alter the rules of right reasoning. The con-
trasting post-truth view of consensus formation is more explicitly ‘rhetorical’
(Fuller and Collier 2004). It appeals to a mix of strategic and epistemic consider-
ations in a setting where the actual interaction between the parties sets the
parameters that deﬁne the scope of any possible consensus. Even Kuhn, who
valorised consensus as the glue that holds together normal science puzzle-solving,
clearly saw its rhetorical and even coercive character, ranging from pedagogy to
peer review.
Finally, a word should be said about a ‘politically correct’ form of veritism that
is popular among feminists and multiculturalists: epistemic justice—or rather,
epistemic injustice (Fricker 2007). The nuance matters. One might think that
‘epistemic justice’ is about doing justice to knowledge, in response to which var-
ious theories of justice might be proposed that weigh the competing demands of
equality, fairness, desert, cost, beneﬁt and so forth in the production, distribution
and consumption of knowledge. This captures the post-truth spirit of my own
‘social epistemology’ because it presumes that the norms governing knowledge and
knowers need to be forged simultaneously: Who knows and what is known are
always mutually implicated. Identities are not ﬁxed in stone (or in the genetic or
historical record, for that matter). In contrast, ‘epistemic injustice’ presupposes that
the rules of the epistemic game are already set, and so the objective is to identify
and correct violations of play. These typically relate to members from socially
discriminated groups who are prevented from contributing their unique ‘data points’
to an agreed sense of inquiry. And without denying the historic neglect of women
and minority voices, which has damaged both them and any greater sense of human
inquiry, one wonders whether this strict sense of ‘epistemic injustice’ can survive
the ongoing ‘trans-’ revolution (i.e. transgender, transrace, transhuman, etc.) which
promises an unprecedented level of identity mobility and its attendant changes in
the rules of the knowledge game.
Conclusion: Settling the Score Between Truth
and Post-truth
Richard Rorty became such a hate ﬁgure among analytic philosophers in the last
two decades of the twentieth century because he called out the veritists on their
fakeness. Yes, philosophers can tell you what truth is, but just as long as you accept
a lot of contentious assumptions—and hope those capable of contending those
assumptions aren’t in the room when you’re speaking! Put another way, Rorty
refused to adopt what might be called a ‘double truth’ doctrine for philosophy
(comparable to the various ‘double truth’ doctrines promulgated in the Middle Ages
to save religious faith from critical scholarship), whereby amongst themselves
philosophers
adopt
a
semi-detached
attitude
towards
various
conﬂicting
What Can Philosophy Teach Us …
23

conceptions of truth while at the same time presenting a united front to
non-philosophers, lest these masses start to believe some disreputable things.
As Rorty (1979) had explained, his own post-truth vision had been shaped by his
encounter with Sellars’ (1963) distinction between the ‘manifest’ and ‘scientiﬁc’
images of the world. Sellars’ point was that the two images were ‘incommensu-
rable’ in the sense that Kuhn would popularise. In other words, they cross-classify
the same world for different purposes, in which case any straightforward ‘reduction’
or even evaluation of one image by the other is arguably question-begging. In other
words, to say that a common-sense observation is contradicted by scientiﬁc ﬁndings
is to tacitly assume that the observations should be held accountable to ﬁndings—
or, more bluntly, that the ordinary person should be playing the scientist’s language
game. Thus, positivism—both in its original Comtean and later Carnapian forms—
always carried a strong sense of trying to reform the world. My own social epis-
temology is also informed by this sensibility.
Sellars’ distinction inﬂuenced a range of philosophers who otherwise stand on
opposite sides of key issues in epistemology and philosophy of science, including
Bas van Fraassen (scientiﬁc antirealist), Paul Churchland (scientiﬁc realist) and most
relevant for our purposes, the self-styled ‘anarchist’ philosopher of science
Feyerabend (1981). Feyerabend was an avowed enemy of ‘methodolatrists’, namely,
those philosophers (and scientists, of course) who place great store by particular
rituals—demonstrations of methodological probity—which are said to increase the
likelihood that the resulting facts enjoy the desired state of ‘correspondence to
reality’. As in the days of the Pharisees and the Puritans, a rigorous demeanour is
made a proxy for access to truth. But Feyerabend (1975) revealed the rhetorical
strength and weakness of this ‘truther’ strategy by mobilising the case of Galileo, a
sloppy and perhaps fraudulent wielder of the scientiﬁc method by modern standards.
Here was someone who didn’t understand the optics behind the ‘telescope’, a
pimped up periscope to the naked eye, including the eyes of his Papal Inquisitors.
Yet, we would say that Galileo’s methodologically rigorous Inquisitors—perhaps by
virtue of their own rigour—rendered themselves blind to the ‘full truth’ of his claims.
To be sure, Feyerabend leaves the moral of his story tantalisingly open.
Nevertheless, the post-truther is clear that we know that Galileo was right because
the rules of the science game had changed within a few decades of his death to
allow his original knowledge claims to be re-established on new and improved
grounds, courtesy of Isaac Newton and his followers. Galileo’s interlocutors had
overlooked that while failing to meet their standard of evidence, he was predicting
something about the future of science itself that would make them obsolete and
enable his knowledge claims to become facts. Galileo’s sloppiness and duplicity
was thus a risky epistemic investment that paid off in the long term but of course
not in the short term. He was trying to play by the rules of a game other than the one
to which he was being held to account. Galileo’s trial displayed the difﬁculties of
trying to change the rules of a game from within the game while the players think
that the rules are ﬁne. This last gloss helps to motivate Kuhn’s claim that scientists
will not shift to a new paradigm until the old one has accumulated enough unsolved
problems.
24
S. Fuller

As we have seen, the post-truther plays two games at once: Of course, s/he plays
the knowledge game in which s/he is situated, in which s/he may have little prima
face ‘room for manoeuvre’ (Spielraum). But s/he also plays—at least in his/her own
mind—a second and more desirable game, into which s/he would like to convert the
current game. This explains that the value that the sophists placed on Kairos, the
opportunity to argue a speciﬁc case. It amounts to a search for the dialectical tipping
point, a moment that the Gestalt might just switch from ‘duck’ to ‘rabbit’. In that
respect, the post-truther is an epistemic ‘double agent’ and hence open to charges of
hypocrisy in a way that the truther is not. I have associated this sense of double
agency with ‘bullshit’, as incensed veritists have applied the term to postmodernists
for nearly four decades now (Fuller 2009: Chap. 4). However, a relatively neutral
settling of the scores between truthers and post-truthers would conclude that
post-truthers aim to weaken the fact/ﬁction distinction—and hence undermine the
moral high ground of truthers—by making it easier to switch between knowledge
games, while the truthers aim to strengthen the distinction by making it harder to
switch between knowledge games. In short, the difference turns on the resolution of
a struggle over what I earlier called ‘modal power’.
Acknowledgements I
would like to acknowledge
the
support of the
Russian
Science
Foundation, project number 14-18-02227, ‘Social Philosophy of Science’, with which I’m asso-
ciated as a Research Fellow in the Russian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Philosophy.
References
Baker, E., & Oreskes, N. (2017). Science as a game, marketplace or both: A reply to Steve Fuller.
Social Epistemology Review and Reply Collective, 6(9), 65–69.
Feyerabend, P. (1975). Against method. London: Verso.
Feyerabend, P. (1981). Realism, rationalism and the scientiﬁc method. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Fricker, M. (2007). Epistemic injustice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fuller, S. (1988). Social epistemology. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Fuller, S. (1996). Recent work in Social Epistemology. American Philosophical Quarterly, 33,
149–166.
Fuller, S. (2000). Thomas Kuhn: A philosophical history for our times. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Fuller, S. (2002). Knowledge management foundations. Woburn: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Fuller, S. (2006). The philosophy of science and technology studies. London: Routledge.
Fuller, S. (2009). The sociology of intellectual life. London: Routledge.
Fuller, S. (2017). The social construction of knowledge. In L. McIntyre & A. Rosenberg (Eds.),
The Routledge companion to philosophy of social science (pp. 351–361). London: Routledge.
Fuller, S., & Collier, J. (2004). Philosophy, rhetoric and the end of knowledge (2nd edn.). (Orig.
by Fuller 1993). Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gallie, W. B. (1956). Essentially contested concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 56,
167–198.
What Can Philosophy Teach Us …
25

Goldman, A. (1999). Knowing in a social world. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hamblin, C. L. (1970). Fallacies. London: Methuen.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions (2nd edn.) (Orig. 1962). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Reisch, G. (1991). Did Kuhn kill logical positivism? Philosophy of Science, 58, 264–277.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sellars, W. (1963). Science, perception and reality. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Turner, S. (2003). Liberal democracy 3.0. London: Sage.
Vaihinger, H. (1924). The philosophy of ‘as if’ (Orig. 1911). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Wark, M. (2004). A hacker manifesto. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
26
S. Fuller

On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
Sharon Rider
Introduction
Stones are hard, water is wet, objects unsupported fall towards the earth’s center […]
Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two makes four. If that is granted, all else
follows. Orwell (1949)
For several years now, we have been confronted with a number of developments
that we sense may be quite dangerous, but the contours of which are still unclear.
One of the ﬁrst (and still best) attempts at ﬁnding a single word for this phe-
nomenon was made, not by a philosopher or poet, but by the comedian Stephen
Colbert, who coined the neologism “truthiness” (or “veritasiness”). The term is
used to describe the quality of seeming, or more importantly, being felt to be true,
regardless of the actual state of affairs in question. The word designates the pref-
erence for what one wishes to be true, rather than factual or conceptual validity.
Colbert concludes the debut of his show by saying: “I know some of you may not
trust your gut, yet. But, with my help, you will. The truthiness is, anyone can read
the news to you. I promise to feel the news ‘at’ you” (Meyer 2006; Peyser 2006).
A closely related Colbertism is “wikiality”, a statement considered to be true
because the majority of people agree on it, rather than because of established facts.
It is the sense of reality that arises when enough people are brought to assent to
something made up. More recently, in connection with the tumult surrounding the
mediatization of the political sphere, the use and abuse of social media for ideo-
logical indoctrination in particular, other terms have been coined to capture this
now all-too-familiar condition: “fake news” and “post-truth” are the most current.
Yet the phenomena covered by these terms have much in common with a
S. Rider (&)
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
e-mail: sharon.rider@ﬁlosoﬁ.uu.se
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_3
27

quintessentially twentieth-century thought-form described by Erich Fromm in his
Afterword to George Orwell’s 1984. He refers here to an American writer, Allan
Harrington, whose book, Life in the Crystal Palace, gives an account of the
workaday world of a major corporation. Harrington coins the phrase “mobile truth”
to capture how loyalties forged out of vested interests rather than ideals, values or
critical assessment of facts are moved freely and easily when circumstances change.
Thus, an agent for a corporation can earnestly believe in, and testify passionately to,
the superiority of the product he is selling over the competitor’s, and turn around
almost immediately with equal conviction and fervor to proclaim the supremacy of
the competitor’s product the day he loses his job at the ﬁrst company and takes up a
position with the second. Fromm notes that what this entails is this: the question of
whether or not the claim is justiﬁed, or if its truth is at all ascertainable, is irrelevant.
What matters is that, if I am working for a certain company, their “truth” becomes
mine. If I change employers, the new company’s truth will replace the former
employer’s as “my truth”, since the truth of the claims follows with my interests as
employee. The claims are equivalent in terms of their value or function. “Mobile
truth” can thus be seen as a precursor to Counselor to the President of the United
States Kellyanne Conway’s own indelible contribution to American English, on
Meet the Press, when she coined the phrase “alternative facts” in her defense of
White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer’s claims about the number of people in
attendance at Donald Trump’s Presidential Inauguration.
Reﬂecting on “mobile truth”, Fromm concludes: “It is one of the most charac-
teristic and destructive developments of our own society that man, becoming more
and more of an instrument, transforms reality more and more into something rel-
ative to his own interests and functions” (Fromm 1961, p. 321). This is how we
should understand the preponderance of “truthiness”, “wikiality”, “fake news”,
“alternative facts”, and so on. They are symptoms of something much more pro-
found than a simple loss of accuracy or honesty in public discourse. The problem is
that words cannot be relied upon to do the work they are supposed to do; we really
can’t be sure about what is meant by terms and distinctions such as “true” and
“false”, “real” and “fake”, “fact” and “opinion”, “truth” and “lie”, “reason”, and
“excuse”, because their employment is tied to goals and aims that are not apparent
to all. What is occurring is a change in the conditions for human understanding and
communication, in the epistemic atmosphere in which we think, discuss, and
deliberate. Some, perhaps most famously Richard Rorty (1989), think that we
should be less concerned with Truth than with freedom and justice. Others want to
see freedom and truth as two sides of the same coin: “Freedom is the freedom to say
that two plus two makes four”, and conversely, “Two and two makes four if and
only if we are free to think that two and to make four.” In this paper, I wish to ﬁnd
another way of considering the problem of “post-truth”, one that neither focuses on
technical epistemological issues nor stays at the level of present-day politics. In
what follows, I will discuss the family of notions that are at stake (“truth”, “lie”,
“fact”) in terms of the work they do for us, and this in light of the very basic
distinction between inside and outside, in hopes of getting clearer on what we want
to say when we are inclined to talk about someone “being in the right”.
28
S. Rider

In the Know and on the Outs
What is required for a shared recognition of when and in what contexts we need
words such as “fact” or “falsehood”? When a situation arises in which we cannot
assume that we can trust that our use of such words as something belonging to all of
us in the same measure and by and large in the same way, then it is as if the
scaffolding upon which properly human things (culture, science, the rule of law) are
built founders. Some political observers have expressed the pessimistic view that
what we are witnessing are the ﬁrst tremors of precisely this sort of social and
political collapse.
It has been argued that the best means we have for the protection and preser-
vation of a stable and ﬂourishing society are our educational institutions. But there
is a fundamental assumption at work in such hopes, which should not go unnoticed.
It is quite simply this: “higher education” is as vulnerable to the situation described
by “truthiness”, “wikiality”, and “alternative facts” as any other institution for
assessing the validity of claims, including courts of law, laboratories, and the
investigative journalism of the press with legally responsible publishers. My con-
cern here will be with the connection between our use of this vocabulary, and the
political and social conditions in which they have or make sense. I will argue that
the problem is that a picture has gotten hold of us in which social, ethnic, economic,
and other divisions encourage the thought that commonality in our way of life is a
pernicious delusion, rather than a sine qua non for the choice to live and to continue
living together. Important for this context is the division between what is often
termed “educated elites” and “uneducated masses”, which suggests somehow a
straightforward divide between intelligent, open and informed opinion and dog-
matic, narrow-minded prejudice. Were the matter so simple, then the answer to the
question, “how are we to reconstitute and sustain the polity for the future good of
man and the world?” would be relatively straightforward. But I would suggest that
it is not.
If one believes in the autonomy of reason, as did Enlightenment thinkers, then
“higher education” would be the training and cultivation of that capacity.
Liberal-mindedness has been seen as both a means and an end of education, and it
is likely this liberal ideal that inclines some to place such faith in it. The hope is that
intellectual inquiry and the free exchange of beliefs and ideas manifest, perpetuate,
and improve the exercise of human reason in the settling of disagreements as to
what is, in fact, the case. A more contemporary version of this ideal formulates it in
terms of a “widening the range of consensus about how things are”, as opposed to
an “appeal to reality, apart from any human need” (Rorty 1998, p. 35). A classical
liberal theme is thus, on the one hand, institutionalized rights and constitutional
checks on power that might inhibit the exercise of reasoned discourse; on the other,
but closely related to this necessary condition of a liberal polity, is the conﬁdence
that every citizen will acknowledge that his right to think and speak freely is
conditioned on the recognition of that right for others, and further, that he must, in a
sense, actively will the possibility of disagreement as an absolutely necessary
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
29

component of the free exercise of his reason, that is, as a fundamental requirement
for the kind of interchange that will increase the power of reason in all.
The expectation that the unimpeded use of reason will lead to the attainment of
universally recognized truths is now considered by many, not just philosophers and
intellectuals, to be naïve, and deeply problematic, at least with regard to matters
concerning the political, social, and cultural sphere. The recurrent calls in certain
quarters of the student body and faculty for No Platform-activism, safe zones, and
trigger warnings attest to this mistrust. On the other hand, the very notion of
academic freedom rests on the premise that thoughts are not dangerous, deeds are.
The liberal conﬁdence in education as a remedy for societal ills rests on the intuition
that the most dangerous deeds are those performed without thought, i.e., that
thoughtlessness in action is the same as stupidity, which is never a good thing and
which, at worst, undermines the very capacity for intelligence. Since thinking
requires communication for its vitality, rectiﬁcation, and enhancement, the fear that
certain thoughts about the nature of politics or the ethical are in themselves hurtful,
insulting or intimidating, militates against their rectiﬁcation through higher edu-
cation, since what is at stake is exactly what truths are, and how truth claims are to
be investigated, validated, valorized, or discredited. The political problem of how to
maintain social cohesion, or, more dramatically, how to prevent the dissolution of
the polity into an inchoate mass of belligerent particularism and conﬂicting inter-
ests, applies also to the university.
One thing that has become clear from the popularity of climate change denial,
“birtherism” and other conspiracy theories and the like is that the more that “ex-
pertise” or “knowledge” is merged with the appropriation and dissemination of
certain values, the less it will be associated with impartiality. The consequence of
the turn to values, in turn, is that authority in the sense of “authoritative” evidence,
for instance, is undermined and loses its democratic legitimacy; it is replaced with
the perception that the institutions that evolved to ensure unbiased and balanced
expert analyses have become authorities in another sense, that is, something like
“state agencies with the authority to discipline, with or without basis in impartial
scrutiny of facts or argumentation,” which is to say dictatorial, authoritarian
regimes. The sense that the search for truth has been replaced by the invention of
truthiness is shared on both sides of the political spectrum.
Since the election in November, Richard Rorty’s William E. Massey Lectures in
American Civilization at Harvard in 1997 have been cited frequently. In particular,
a seemingly prescient diagnosis of the state of the nation at the time concerning the
effects of neoliberalism on American democracy received great attention after the
election of Donald Trump:
[M]embers of labor unions, and unorganized unskilled workers, will sooner or later realize
that their government is not even trying to prevent wages from sinking or to prevent jobs
from being exported. Around the same time, they will realize that suburban white-collar
workers — themselves desperately afraid of being downsized — are not going to let
themselves be taxed to provide social beneﬁts for anyone else.
30
S. Rider

At that point, something will crack. The nonsuburban electorate will decide that the system
has failed and start looking around for a strongman to vote for—someone willing to assure
them that, once he is elected, the smug bureaucrats, tricky lawyers, overpaid bond sales-
men, and postmodernist professors will no longer be calling the shots […]
One thing that is very likely to happen is that the gains made in the past forty years by black
and brown Americans, and by homosexuals, will be wiped out. Jocular contempt for
women will come back into fashion. […] All the sadism which the academic Left has tried
to make unacceptable to its students will come ﬂooding back. All the resentment which
badly educated Americans feel about having their manners dictated to them by college
graduates will ﬁnd an outlet. (Rorty in Senior 2016)
Notice here the depiction of the problem: there is an “in-crowd” of educated,
suburban elites engaged in a project of doing away with the bad “manners” and
“sadism” of those on the outs, i.e., uneducated, exurbanites, through their roles as
professionals and members of the “creative class”. In their professional capacity,
they have apparently had an important role to play in the gains made by women, the
LGBT community, and ethnic minorities. With their inﬂuence diminished by a
populist regime that does not respect their expertise and professionalism, all hell
will break loose. The Vandals are storming the gates; the Wildings are about to
scale the Wall. This picture is largely how the problem of post-truth, fake news,
alternative facts is usually framed. It were as if there really were a gate or wall
dividing civilized society from the onslaught of an untamed and untamable mass,
which, as it happens, is the wall dividing experts, propagators of the true (whether
understood in terms of universalism or in terms of “good in the way of belief”),
from the attack of the false (i.e., factually or politically incorrect or, alternatively,
“bad in the way of belief”). But, historically speaking, this is surely a striking
reversal of political positioning.
Less than a century ago, the schism between progressive and conservative
thinkers was to a considerable extent a question of what to do about the advent of
mass society, where progressives believed in the capacity of everyman to become
enlightened and participate equally, fully and with sound judgment; among more
radical thinkers, it was suggested further that this was something that could not be
achieved “top down”, but would have to be the work of the working classes
themselves. This is the original idea of the social movement that was to become
Continuing and Adult Education (Hållén 2016). The more conservatively minded,
for their part, doubted that that democracy could lead to anything but political
turmoil, cultural decline and social dissolution. For this reason, the running of the
polity should be left to elites, the proper education of whom was seen as vital to
civilization: “Liberal education is the necessary endeavor to found an aristocracy
within democratic mass society. Liberal education reminds those members of a
mass democracy who have ears to hear, of human greatness” (Strauss 1968, p. 5).
Thus, the ostensibly “progressive” position in our day is Leo Strauss turned inside
out. That is to say, the Left today is more or less arguing for an aristocracy of
opinion, it is just that the aim is not to remind the elites of cultural greatness, but
rather of their responsibility toward an emancipatory project of social justice
understood as identity formation and recognition. Further, there is an implicit
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
31

anti-universalist assumption, sometimes made explicit, that certain groups, due to
historical injustices, are ideologically more clear-sighted than others, a supposition
presumably inherited from an application of Lukac’s idea of the standpoint of the
proletariat now applied to ethnic, religious and sexual minorities, the disabled, etc.
In any case, whether we follow Rorty or Strauss, those who “belong” to the
enlightened elite are demarcated from those who do not. What I will do in the rest
of this paper is pay attention to this divide, wall, division, barrier, or whatever we
wish to call it, and ask what it means with regard to the discourse of true and false,
both for politics and for education.
In the Know and on the Outs
I’ve chosen to discuss the problem at hand in terms of the most basic words I could
think of: “within” and “without”. The reason is that I want to be able to start from
scratch. If I were to begin with, say, “subjectivity” and “objectivity”, “inner
experience” and “the outer world”, “internal concepts” and “external objects”,
“intrinsic qualities” and “extrinsic properties”, “intelligibility” and “sensuous
experience”, and so forth, both the author and the reader would be at once poised to
think in certain terms and make speciﬁc associations, due to how this cluster of
notions have developed over time, especially in philosophy. Similarly, terms such
as “inclusion” and “exclusion”, “center” and “periphery”, have become linked with
a variety of scholarly and political positions and projects. I want to avoid these
associations in an attempt to say something very basic, even banal, about how these
terms work for us, and, at times, seemingly against us.
What is within?1 The preposition designates being inside (of some thing, say,
“a ﬁre within the building”), or in the range of an area or boundary (for instance,
“within town limits”), but also in the scope of a speciﬁc action of perception (“the
lighthouse was now within view from the ship”). In each case, there is a notion of
inclusion within bounds, which makes possible also more abstract uses of the word
(“within the law”, “within the terms of the contract”). Similarly, “within” is used to
indicate proximity in time or space (“the tickets were sold out within a few hours”,
“he lives within thirty kilometers from Uppsala”). “Without” is a somewhat more
1One might object that what follows has more to do with the idiomatic peculiarities of the English
language than with a way of thinking that belongs to the deep grammar of the language of modern
thought. But here one might think of the inﬂuential discussion of le dehors et le dedans in Jacques
Derrida’s De la grammatologie (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit 1967, p. 46 ff). At any rate, if one
considers the use of say, innerhalb and außerhalb in German, or innanför and utanför in Swedish,
we ﬁnd a constellation of words which, taken together, contain elements of what I describe here. In
particular, I am thinking of how, for instance, utanför (outside of) simply juxtaposes the parts that
make up förutan (without, in both senses of exclusion implied by the word). This is due to the
preﬁx, -ut, which, depending upon what root it combines with, can indicate spatial division or
deﬁciency, i.e., absence from, in the one case, and absence of, in the other. So too with the—auß in
außer, etc.
32
S. Rider

suggestive word. Its primary use is to denote absence of someone or something (“he
hated being without her”), but also the non-occurrence of some action (“they ate
their meal without talking to one another”). It is also commonly used to describe a
lack of access (“they were without electricity for weeks after the storm”). But the
meaning that would seem to be parallel to the general sense of inclusion, that is, the
one having to do with exclusion beyond boundaries as opposed to inclusion within
them, formerly common and quite literal, is now considered archaic, dialectal or
literary. I’m thinking of such usages as “the enemy without”, for instance, where the
word means just “on the outside”. Here I want to examine the “within”, the inner or
enclosed or delimited, in terms of both senses of “without”, that is, of being on the
“outs”, of both lacking and being off limits or out of bounds. What I want to say is
that this binary distinction, perfectly useful and in order in everyday speech (as in
the examples above), tends to enthrall us when it reaches the level of “the concept”,
especially when we theorize the political. One aspect that I want to draw particular
attention to is the stasis inherent in the distinction, the limit or boundary by which
we determine that something is either in or out, having or lacking. It seems to me
that we have here in many cases a kind of optical illusion, caused by our forgetting
that most boundaries are constructed for a purpose; they do something. Inclusion or
exclusion, being within or without, are not simply passive traits or positions, but
processes and products. This insight is fundamental to the hermeneutic project, but
it is not my aim or ambition to position what I have to say now within the intel-
lectual tradition. I’m most concerned here with what is happening now.
Let us now reconsider the terms in question, within and without, more closely.
The idea of “the inner” has taken different, even contrasting, forms in the history of
thought as well as in what is called “the popular imagination”. For someone like St.
Augustine, the inner was the sphere “within” in which the voice of conscience, that
is, God, could hold sway, whatever the “external” circumstances. As Arendt and
others have pointed out, the germ of what was to become the philosophical
proposition of a “free will” is one in which the actual experience of freedom serves
as a model for an uninhibited inner life when the body is in chains. In the last
century, in large part due to the dominance of the marriage of psychological tropes
to liberal politics, the inner has become a theater of drives, desires, and inclinations
which constitute the satisfactions and happiness of the individual, so long as their
expression is kept within the rule of law, and does no self-evident harm. The
“within” as a realm of emotion or “psychological states” is here not the reasoned
dialogue between a man and his God or conscience, but primarily a point of
contingent uniﬁcation of immediate responses to what is “without”, the result of
external pressures and excitements, and spontaneous inner compulsions. The inner
is free at best in the sense of “free for all”, in contrast both to the Christian tradition
and the sense of autonomy or unfettered self-disciplined thought that was the ideal
of Enlightenment thinkers. In the hyper-liberalism of our epoch, whatever I “be-
lieve”, for whatever reason I believe it, is in order just as it is insofar as it is my
belief. On the other hand, since everyone has the right to his or her reasons, or to
have no reason at all, it is thought that such belief must be respected as “true for
me”, while entailing no consequences in the world. One might say that not only the
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
33

word but the very experience of “experience” today collapses Erfarenheit into
Erlebnis. So much for the “within” of inner life.
Regarding the “without”, one might distinguish between two general ways of
describing the proximate, delimiting sense. One is as a border, limitation, or
boundary: in the case of the individual, it would be what is beyond my body, which
is the horizon of my experience. The “without” is then everything that directs,
impinges upon, impresses, or effects me without coming from within myself. The
other way is to view the “without” as a kind of inﬁnite beyond, where I am, or my
body (including my thoughts, appetites and emotions) is, not so much a horizon as a
ﬁxed point at which discrete experiences arise at the juncture of the movements of
the world and other people. One might say that the ﬁrst case is more “idealistic”
insofar as the “outer” can only be formulated within the horizon of possible
experience, the life-world, whereas the latter depiction, construing the inner in
terms of what “science” tells us about the dynamics of the universe and laws of
biological life, is rather “materialist”.
There is also, I said, a second sense of “without”, that of “lack”, deprivation, and
impediments to achievement or obstacles to access, which is today the more
standard usage. But what is the connection between exclusion, externality, being
out of bounds or off limits, on the one hand, and lack, absence, deﬁciency,
deprivation, need, want, insufﬁciency, on the other? I would suggest that it has to do
with the perspective from which something or someone is within or without. From
the point of view of an assumed center, the without is characterized by negation or
lack, by what is missing. Hence, the without is peripheral insofar as it is determined
by its not being what is “central”. But the limit which determines what is central
and what is peripheral must be drawn somewhere. It is established at some point in
time and at some place. Furthermore, the line has to be generally recognizable to be
a limit or limitation. That means, among other things, that in our efforts to
acknowledge the “without”, we fall immediately into a kind of remediation mode,
in which what is on the periphery becomes a kind of passive recipient of the work
of agency at the center. Even if the explicit intention is to enhance autonomy, the
assumption is that (a) only agency is productive; (b) autonomous action is possible
and necessary, a sine qua non, for a truly and fully human life.2 To call into
question such assumptions is often to be understood as denying the value of
autonomy, reason, and liberty, i.e., as falling into a facile and destructive relativism.
This reaction is due, I think, to our being “thwarted by a kind of Weltenschauung”,
to borrow a phrase from Wittgenstein (1969, §422).
2One might think here of Martha Nussbaum (see, for instance, 2013) as a case in point with respect
to how attempts at respectful recognition of otherness and difference as a political resource can’t
help but assume the centrality of their own starting points.
34
S. Rider

Politics Inside/Out
Many theorists have called attention to how basic dichotomies dissolve upon closer
inspection. They emphasize that, as a matter of practical fact, the starting point for
all our epistemic or ethical endeavors is a kind of productive vulnerability, the state
of affairs that we all ﬁnd ourselves at any given moment within a state of affairs, and
without another. What we call “limitations” are often at the same time preconditions
for action or thought. To begin with, our primary access to the world, in both
chronological and logical order, is through our ﬁrst language, into which we enter
rather than which we create. In the case of language acquisition (which is, at the
same time, acquisition of a world in common with others), one could say that what
is without, the periphery, is absolutely central; without the without, there is no
within. Lack is the unrealized (and perhaps unrealizable) possibility of sufﬁciency
or autonomy. Limit, or negation, is the condition of possibility of any position. The
without is what makes the within appear at all; it provides the contours of salience
and meaning. In this respect, it makes sense to say that the without constitutes the
within. But what does all this mean, concretely, for how we are to understand the
role of truth in politics, or the role of education for the polity? I want to conclude by
suggesting a number of consequences to be drawn for politics, education and the
politics of education from what has been said thus far.
Arendt (1968) argues that the two fundamental requirements for engaging in
such a project as the political are imagination and judgment, rather than “knowl-
edge” (in the sense of subsuming some particular fact under a universal). She
applies Kant’s idea of “disinterested judgment” to the sphere of politics, and points
to the necessity of withdrawing into the position of the “spectator” of events, of
seeing things from the “without”, when considering a critical situation. The view of
those within the ﬁeld of action, the participants in these events, is always, almost
axiomatically, “What shall I do?”, since the essence of a “crisis” (from the Greek
krinein, “to decide”) is the need to make a decision. The actors, as actors, are in
medias res. The view from without, that of the spectator as opposed to that of the
agents, is on all the actors moving about in their various positions, from a distance,
since the spectator qua spectator is not herself an actor. The result is not objectivity
in sense of generality or scientiﬁc validity, but that of “impartiality”. The spectator
has no vested interest in the events portrayed in the spectacle; she has no role to
play, no function to ﬁll, nothing to win or lose, and, qua spectator, she is loyal to no
character or plot. As soon as we withdraw from the scene of action and consider
ourselves at a critical distance, we are ourselves spectators. To think meta-
politically is to regard our own actions at such a distance, not so as to objectify
them, but rather as to be able to perceive the situation from the various perspectives
of all the actors on stage, to see what our actions and speeches do, what effects they
produce on the other players and the scene as a whole. To see our own actions and
opinions as on an equal footing with those of the other actors, to recognize that the
centrality of our own perspectives has to do with our position and place in a
complex and
dynamic
ﬂow
of events,
requires
great
moral as well as
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
35

intellectual effort. In The Life of the Mind, Arendt (1978) calls this broadened
perspective “thinking”, which is not some characteristic quality possessed by the
human species in the way that having a “sting” is a quality attached to being a
wasp. It is not something we “have” at all. Rather, thinking, the capacity for sound
judgment, clarity of ideas and attentive and intelligent action, must always and
everywhere be achieved, fought for, upheld.
In a similar vein, Ortega y Gasset criticizes the intellectualist ideal of man as res
cogitans, as already “thinking” insofar as he is human, which presupposes that
intellectual resources are just there at our disposal when we need them. The danger
of this attitude, he argues, is that it leads to complacency, obliviousness, and
negligence.3 The desire to know is most certainly indispensable for actually
knowing, but hardly sufﬁcient. As distinct from other animals, whose lives consist
of unceasing responsiveness to their current environment, who are, in effect, steered
by it, man can from time to time withdraw “into himself”, and ignore everything
around him except that which is the object of his concern. While animals are by and
large “without”, man is at once without and within. Or, in Ortega’s formulation, he
can make the move to “pay attention”.
What is it that he is paying attention to? Himself: his ideas, thoughts, hopes,
plans, and aims. But, importantly, these things are not just there in the individual,
but come to him from “without”, that is, from the world of which he is a part: the
talk he has heard, the words he has read, the patterns of social life into which he was
born, the very language he speaks. Thus, paradoxically, in order to retreat into
myself, I have to be exposed to others. Without the without, there is no “inner
world” into which to retreat, and no thoughts to think. We are all always already
inner and outer, inside out, and each of us must keep up the business of achieving
our language, our civilization, our knowledge, through considered common action.
Through our speeches and actions, we constitute the human world. Every time one
of us returns to the ﬁeld of action, as we must, we leave our imprint on it by leaving
traces in the speeches and actions of others. Thought and its manifestations (sci-
ence, art, law, philosophy, commerce) are not the aim and purpose of human life,
but action in isolation from thought, for Ortega as well as for Arendt, is by deﬁ-
nition unreﬂective—quite literally thoughtless (or, as Ortega says, “stupid”).
Liberality (broadmindedness, generosity, fairness, tolerance) as a way of thinking
and liberalism as a form of political life go hand in hand.
When a human being is constantly responding to threats, risks, and real or
perceived dangers, when she is incessantly reacting to preoccupations that prevent
her from withdrawing to collect her thoughts, she will follow her impulses. The
pivotal issue is not lacking or having education; it is rather that her concerns with
biological life are so real and so pressing that they consume her. If she is not at
leisure to pause and say, “Wait, let me think”, neither can she be “herself”. She
simply “is”: “one”, “das Man”, “mass man”, everyone, and no one. But that means
3What follows in this section is for all intents and purposes a paraphrase of José Ortega y Gasset,
Revolt of the Masses (1957a) and Man and People (1957b).
36
S. Rider

that she can be someone else; her thoughts will, recalling Harrington, follow the job
description, the role she has to play in any given situation. When will and direct
action dominate an epoch (“strong leadership”, as we say today), Ortega warns, the
ﬁrst thing to do is run and lock all your doors. Where there is no time and place for
thinking, the stage is set for thoughtless action, or, to use Ortega’s technical term,
“stupidity”.
In a bee society, all the bees do what they must. They have no reasons, and they
don’t need them. But as the animal with logos, human beings are fated to reasons,
for themselves and for others. In order to decide if I have “good reasons”, have
thought rightly, I have to confer and compare with the reasons and thoughts of
others. Yet to do that means that we have already some kind of sensus communis, a
common ground to stand on. If we reject at the outset the possibility of achieving
such a common ground, we deny with it the possibility of living together peacefully
and purposefully. Every opinion or judgment about a state of affairs is a kind of
movement back and forth between myself and others: in order to examine my
reasons for making the judgement “X is good”, I have to be able to explain or at
least relate those thoughts to someone else. This is because thinking requires
communicability for its performance and enlargement. Where there are no reasons,
there are no judgments, but only expressions of something—a preference, a visceral
reaction, a feeling. The very notion of judgement implies a movement into myself
(my reasons) and outward (accounting for the grounds for my decision or choice),
suggesting that there must be some common standard or point of reference, i.e., a
shared human world. That world, as we said, is just our joint efforts at paying
attention and taking each other into consideration in thought and deed. This is what
we try to do when we say that we are seeking the truth, trying to eliminate false-
hood, or working to establish the facts. Another word for this shared effort to take
responsibility for establishing common ground is “education”, properly understood,
which is not something that some “possess”, while others do not, but something that
we are always, ideally, “working on”.
Learning and Knowing How to Tell the Truth
When Aristotle introduces his critique of the Platonic doctrine of ideas regarding
the Idea of the Good as a guide to morals, he reﬂects upon his relationship to his
former mentor and the latter’s disciples in the Academy. Thus he begins Chap. 6 of
book I of the Nichomachean Ethicswith a confession:
We had perhaps better consider the universal good and discuss thoroughly what is meant
[legetai] by it, although such an inquiry is made an uphill one by the fact that the Forms
have been introduced by friends of our own. Yet it would perhaps be thought to be better,
indeed to be our duty, for the sake of maintaining the truth even to destroy what touches us
closely, especially as we are philosophers or lovers of wisdom; for, while both are dear,
piety requires us to honour truth above our friends. (Aristotle 1966)
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
37

One might see this admission in light of an important Aristotelian distinction,
one which itself can be seen as a sort of confession, given Aristotle’s overall
ambition of laying down guidelines for what we would today call proper scientiﬁc
procedure. In a famous passage in the Metaphysics (1952, 1004b), he asserts that
the difference between sophistry, dialectics, and philosophy rests not in their
respective methods, but in the role the reasoning plays in one’s life:
[D]ialecticians and sophists appear to be philosophers; for sophistry is but apparent wis-
dom, and dialecticians converse about any and all affairs on the ground that being is
common to all. But, evidently, they converse about all these matters because all are
appropriate to philosophy. Sophistry and dialectic, indeed, revolve about the same kind of
concerns as philosophy; but philosophy differs from dialectic in degree of power, and from
sophistry in kind of life. For dialectic puts questions about matters which philosophy
knows, and sophistry appears to be, but is not, philosophy. (Aristotle 1952, emphasis
added)
According to Aristotle, what the sophist says instrumentally in order to give the
appearance of wisdom, and the dialectician treats as an exercise, the philosopher is
really trying to understand or know. The distinction Aristotle draws in this passage,
and the notion of truth formulated in the earlier quote from the Nichomachean
Ethics, can be read together, as highlighting an aspect of human thinking that seems
to have been largely forgotten today: the desire for truth or wisdom is ultimately an
attitude or orientation in one’s life, a moral demand that the individual makes on
himself. But here we ﬁnd the paradox discussed earlier: the need to get clear on
things, to understand how things really are, is something that arises in the individual
precisely because she is of necessity part of the world, which, for the human being,
means being a member of a greater collective, a tradition or community. Being a
member of a community, one ﬁnds oneself positioned not only within that com-
munity, but also and at the same time “on the outs” with it, or aspects of it. One can
very well imagine a community in which such a need cannot arise, or is stiﬂed as
soon
as
it
shows
itself.
Indeed,
that
scenario
is
a
recurrent
theme
in
twentieth-century dystopian literature.4 What seems to be occurring today is that in
their search for “true facts”, reliable sources of information, correct analyses, and
diagnoses, not only individuals but entire communities are “on the outs”, not just
with other communities, but with themselves. They do not converse on affairs on
the grounds that “being is common to all.”
What constitutes the collective or community, then? It can be a shared theo-
retical position or philosophical doctrine, an ideological stance, or engagement in a
given project, organization, or institution. As a proponent or representative of a
certain standpoint or enterprise, the individual is faced with a difﬁculty. The dis-
tinction Aristotle makes between philosophy and dialectics can be understood, in
modern terms, as the difference between free thinking and thinking that is
4George Orwell’s Nineteen eighty-four, as mentioned, is perhaps the most inﬂuential in this genre,
making terms such as doublethink, Newspeak, thoughtcrime and Thought Police common par-
lance. But Koestler’s (1940) Darkness at noon and Huxley’s (1932) Brave new world are, of
course, also important representatives of this genre.
38
S. Rider

characterized by its adoption of, or submission to, the collective standards, evalu-
ations, norms, methods, and vocabulary of a given community of thought. This
does not mean that in order to develop and maintain intellectual integrity, one must
distance oneself from one’s family, teachers, friends, employers, or colleagues. It
might very well be the case that after long and hard thinking, one is all the more
resolute in a common point of view. What is at issue here is something else: the
attitude one has to one’s own stance or point of view, or the relationship between a
thinking person and her thoughts.
Not so very long ago, the academic ideal was to strive toward free thought, in
contrast to “bourgeois thought”, in a respect resembling the distinction drawn
above. Naturally, this is not to say that all or even most academics ever realized this
ideal, or even reﬂected upon it. To the contrary, some of the most eloquent defenses
of that ideal were formulated as complaints about its erosion or neglect. But the
attacks on dogmatism, scholasticism or bourgeois thinking were articulated on the
basis of the assumption that the ideal itself was a shared ideal, if only implicitly and
however poorly heeded. As recently as the turn of the twentieth century, the
Swedish philosopher Hans Larsson wrote:
Because of Socrates’ struggle against wrong opinions, we easily forget his struggle against
true ones. An opinion that is simply correct, which one has not understood and come to one
one’s own, is, for the friends of wisdom, nothing; even a correct opinion that leads to just
action; without insight, on the basis of habit or authority, to act or think rightly, this was in
the eyes of Socrates and Plato no virtue. Academic life begins, historically speaking,
precisely when true opinion is set aside in favor not only of genuine knowledge, but also in
favor of the free search for truth. (Larsson 1921, my translation)
In Larsson’s view, free thought, at least as much as correct thought, is an ideal
toward which we ought to strive. Larsson did not mean that academic training
guarantees that graduates are freer from misconceptions or delusions than the
populace at large, but that they, as learned men, ought to strive to be. Academic
studies, according to Larsson, oblige one to enter adult life with more deeply
considered reﬂections than one had before. Larsson’s idea of academic freedom is
this: when one is allowed and allows oneself to think freely, it is ultimately in order
to be able to think rightly. It is not so simple a thing as to be achieved merely
through legislation. Academic freedom is an obligation in the ﬁrst instance: free-
dom of thought entails an obligation to take personal responsibility for one’s ideas,
opinions, and habits of mind.
In other words, academic freedom is not in the ﬁrst instance to be understood as
applying to the results of one’s thinking, but rather to one’s approach and attitude
toward thinking. The desire to think freely entails that one also desires to think
rightly, not for conceptual or psychological reasons, but for moral ones. The desire
to think whatever one likes with no restrictions is the desire toward irrationality and
illiberality, since there is no limit to what one can choose to think, and without the
possibility of reference to an arbiter beyond one’s own inclination or preference, the
arbiter of ﬁnal resort is force. Again, it might very well be the case that, having
thought something through, the opinion one arrives at is very much in harmony
with, or even identical to, what everyone else says. But that has to do with where
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
39

one has arrived, not how one arrived there, which is what is at stake here. Larsson
rails against the disposition to “think freely” tout simple, without any regard for
where that thought is leading: “a bourgeois liberalism that has lost, or still not
matured to, a warm sensitivity to things and to what is right” (Larsson 1921, p. 55).
There are, however, also many who are disposed toward thinking rightly without
thinking freely. In this respect, the desire to think rightly in Larsson’s sense (which
is to say, freely), and social, political, ideological, and professional norms and
standards, on the other, may well stand in conﬂict with one another. The individual
who tries his best to think rightly, regardless of the opinions and convictions of his
community, thus bestows upon himself the right to think for himself (for who else
can bestow that right upon him?). Giving oneself the right to think things through
for oneself is, I take it, what Larsson is aiming at in his distinction between the
results of one’s thinking and the thinking itself. Clearly, demanding that thinking
itself be “right” or “correct” according to some set of preestablished norms, values,
or conventions can only lead to restricted thought, the opposite of a way of thinking
that does not assume at the outset what sorts of results and consequences are
“good”, “desirable”, “acceptable”, or “useful”.
Consider now education toward enlightened thought in the broad sense, as
sketched above, and our contemporary notions about higher education. One may
reasonably question whether education today can be free in anything but the
“bourgeois liberal” sense that Larsson contrasts with what he calls “academic” or
“scientiﬁc” thinking (Larsson 1921, p. 53). The university today is largely char-
acterized by its “bourgeois” social and economic functions, the point of which is to
be useful for society (as if we already knew, in advance of any serious reﬂection,
what we need and who, as a society, we are or want to be). Teaching is to be
conducted in and through de facto institutions developed in accordance with what is
deemed progress and utility from the perspective of society as it is, not as it might
or even should be. If the university is to be something other than a subcontractor for
agendas set by political and economic elites, then we must acknowledge that the
demands we make for academic freedom come with a responsibility to seek actively
to bring as many as possible into the community of truth-seeking and truth-telling,
not as some preexisting institution to which we belong and into which we invite
others to partake (i.e., to have a share in what we, as it were, “have” in our
possession), but to loosen the bonds that we impose on our own thinking, for fear of
where it might lead. If we who are given the task of propagating truth, not only
through what we arrive at, but ﬁrst and foremost, by way of example, how to get
there, by showing what the unfettered and unafraid search for answers looks like,
are perceived by those on the “outside” as faithful functionaries in the Ministry of
Truth, we might need to ask ourselves why. For the point of Orwell’s novel is that
“doublethink” and “Newspeak” are unnatural. They require great effort and control
on the part of the Party to achieve. If we ﬁnd ourselves today in an epistemic
atmosphere of doublethink, it might well be because we have had a part in creating
it. And in that case, the best way to oppose it will not be to buttress the wall
dividing “the experts” from “the laymen”, “the educated” from the “ignorant”,
those “in the know” and those who are “out of touch”, but to tear it down.
40
S. Rider

That would mean in part foregoing some of the privilege of our status as profes-
sionals and experts, but it might also enhance our credibility as moral and epistemic
agents. In any case, the entitlements of the bureaucrats in the Ministries in 1984, all
of them members of the Outer Party, were not much more than the luxury of being
just a step above the poverty, ﬁlth, and disease that plagued the proles; the proles,
however, were not as constrained in their thought or actions, since they had no
political signiﬁcance. Freedom of thought is only dangerous where thought has the
potential to become intelligent and realized in action, i.e., effective. If academic
faculty were as liberally minded as we take ourselves to be, we would welcome the
opportunity to enhance and expand our potential for genuinely free thought, which
would mean recognizing our own assumptions and commitments as being as much
a part of our epistemic frameworks and social functions as the prejudices and
loyalties are for those outside the seminar rooms and lacking academic credentials,
those who are “without education” in both senses. We would welcome controversy
and disputation, eschew claims to expertise on moral matters, dismiss “excellence”-
initiatives as an organized hindrance to free intellectual exchange, acknowledge
how “selectivity” preserves and reinforces preexisting social and class divisions,
and admit to ourselves that working in the ﬁelds of human understanding does not
make us denizens of a higher sphere of moral and intellectual reﬁnement. Such an
attitude does not require “research”, but it does take effort. It means perhaps that we
should concern ourselves less with the production and dissemination of facts, and
more with thinking.5
Acknowledgements I would like to acknowledge the generous support of the Swedish Research
Council, project number 2013–2317, ‘What Should a Swede Know?’.
References
Arendt, H. (1968). Between past and future: Eight exercises in political thought. New York:
Penguin.
Arendt, H. (1978). The life of the mind. New York: Harvest.
Aristotle, (1952). Metaphysics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Aristotle, (1969). Nichomachean ethics. Oxford: W. D. Ross.
Derrida, J. (1967). De la grammatologie. Paris: Éditions de Minuit.
Fromm, E. (1961). Afterword. In G. Orwell (Ed.), Nineteen eighty-four (pp. 313–326). New York:
Signet Books.
Hållén, E. (2016). Adult and continuing education in the Nordic countries: Folkbildning.
In M. A. Peters (Ed.), Encyclopedia of educational philosophy and theory. Singapore:
Springer.
Harrington, A. (1959). Life in the crystal palace. New York: Alfred Knopf Inc.
5Portions of this paper have been adapted from material published in other contexts. In particular,
elements of the section on Ortega have appeared in slightly different form in Rider (2017a, b),
respectively. The section on Aristotle and Hans Larsson contains a modiﬁed version of a few
passages in Rider (2006).
On Knowing How to Tell the Truth
41

Huxley, A. (1932). Brave new world: A novel. London: Chatto & Windus.
Koestler, A. (1940). Darkness at noon. New York: MacMillan.
Larsson, H. (1921). Två akademiska valspråk (Two academic adages). In H. Larsson (Ed.),
Reﬂexioner för dagen. Stockholm: Bonniers.
Meyer, D. (2006, December 12). The truth of truthiness. CBS News. https://www.cbsnews.com/
news/the-truth-of-truthiness/. Accessed September 18, 2017.
Nussbaum, M. (2013). Political emotions: Why love matters for justice. Cambridge: Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press.
Ortega y Gasset, J. (1957a). The revolt of the masses. New York: Norton.
Ortega y Gasset, J. (1957b). Man and people. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Orwell, G. (1949). Nineteen eighty-four. New York: Signet Books.
Peyser, M. (2006, February 13). The truthiness teller. Newsweek.
Rider, S. (2006). Reﬂections on the discipline of philosophy and its history. In Lychnos, Swedish
yearbook for the history of ideas.
Rider, S. (2017a). Little mister satisfaction: Ortega’s challenge to European man. In A. Stagnell,
L. S. Thorkildsen, & M. Rosengren (Eds.), Can a person be illegal? Refugees, migrants and
citizenship in Europe (pp. 128–136). Uppsala: Studia Rhetorica Uppsaliensis.
Rider, S. (2017b). Truth, democracy and the mission of the university. In R. Barnett, &
S. S. E. Bengtsen (Eds.), The thinking university: A philosophical examination of thought and
higher education. Springer, Berlin.
Rorty, R. (1989). Contingency, irony and solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rorty, R. (1998). Achieving our country: Leftist thought in twentieth-century America. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Senior, J. (2016, November 20). Richard Rorty’s 1998 book suggested election 2016 was coming.
New York Times.
Strauss, L. (1968). What is liberal education? In L. Strauss (Ed.), Liberalism: Ancient and modern.
New York: Basic Books.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On certainty. Oxford: Blackwell.
42
S. Rider

‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More
Opinions’: Peircean Pragmatist Tactics
for the Epistemic Long Game
Catherine Legg
Introduction
Certain recent developments in mendacious manipulation of public discourse seem
horrifying to the academic mind. The term post-truth newly describes a climate
where, as deﬁned by (no less than) the Oxford Dictionary, ‘objective facts are less
inﬂuential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief’
(OED 2016). In such a context, strong opinion is considered to be worth more than
facts, precisely due to its (apparent) strength. Allegedly, humanity is experiencing,
‘a crash in the value of truth, comparable to the collapse of a currency or a stock’
(D’Ancona 2017).
Should we panic at having reached a new epistemic low in human history? Is
truth disappearing from human culture and public life, never to return? And if so,
what should we do about it? In this paper, I will ﬁrst suggest that these are
long-standing tendencies in human history, so there is no need to panic at the
present time. Next, I will note that we might expect aid with these problems from
philosophers, given their self-professed love of wisdom (or as it is more often put
these days, ‘critical thinking’). The relevant branch of philosophy would seem to be
epistemology, which sets itself the task of studying belief, truth and knowledge.
But I shall argue that it is difﬁcult to ‘make ends meet’ between mainstream
epistemology and the raft of problems falling under the heading ‘post-truth’, so
such problems constitute a profound philosophical challenge to business as usual in
that discipline.
By contrast, I argue that one epistemology is able to help us understand these
troubling developments: the pragmatist philosophy of Charles Peirce. Unlike
epistemologies in the analytic philosophical tradition, which largely organize
around the study of knowledge, understood as some kind of idealized end point of
C. Legg (&)
Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia
e-mail: c.legg@deakin.edu.au
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_4
43

human thought, Peirce’s epistemology focusses on inquiry, understood as the
process of ‘ﬁxing belief’. This focus enables useful questions to be raised, such as:
How can we make that process more effective? Peirce’s famous paper ‘The Fixation
of Belief’ is directed at precisely this question. It presents a taxonomy of four
methods for ﬁxing belief: tenacity, authority, a priori reasoning and science. In the
last of these, the four methods culminate in a deﬁnition of truth in terms of the
speciﬁc actions of a ‘community of inquiry’, which gives the deﬁnition real prac-
tical heft. In the order stated, this taxonomy of methods charts an evolutionary arc
through human thought, from the least to the most logically sophisticated and
effective method of eliminating doubt. Peirce does note, however, that at any given
point in time all four methods can be observed in practice, as they also identify
basic human personality types. He also warns that our general culture has a ten-
dency to slip backwards from time to time in its evolutionary development. These
claims will be further explored in ways that throw light on our current
politico-intellectual climate.
Finally, I will draw on Peirce’s philosophy to suggest certain ‘pragmatic’
strategies (and corresponding responsibilities on the part of us educators) for
weathering the ‘epistemic storms’ that Western culture would currently appear to be
experiencing. For not just presenting how things are, but suggesting what we can
and should do about them—is the distinguishing goal of pragmatist philosophy.
A New ‘Post-truth Regime’?
The term post-truth was apparently ﬁrst coined in 1992 in discussion by Steve
Tesich in the Nation of reactions to political scandals such as Watergate and
Iran-Contra by the American people. He writes:
All the dictators up to now have had to work hard at suppressing the truth. We, by our
actions, are saying that this is no longer necessary […] In a very fundamental way we, as a
free people, have freely decided that we want to live in some post-truth world.
Here, Tesich signals a shift in political distortion of the truth, from the traditional
active suppression of important information by political leaders to apparent prob-
lems in accepting important information in ordinary people. (As such it offers an
interesting challenge to the American pragmatist philosophy that informs this paper,
insofar as its Deweyan strand places great faith in democratic processes emerging
naturally in all problem-solving contexts. But we shall see that the Peircean strand
of American pragmatism provides a considerably more complex analysis of ‘group
inference’.)
However, it is just in the past 2–3 years that discussion of, and concern with, the
post-truth concept has exploded. In 2015, media and politics scholar Jayson Harsin
inﬂuentially launched the term regime of post-truth to encompass many aspects of
contemporary politics. Harsin deliberately chose the term ‘regime’ to signal that this
epistemic turn is newly systematic, unlike past lying such as Watergate, however
44
C. Legg

egregious and far-reaching its impact may have been. This systematicity has a
number of dimensions. Harsin points to ways in which politically motivated agents
now use cognitive science, micro-targeting and other sophisticated manipulations
(often drawing on Big Data) to inﬂuence the emotions and motivations of ordinary
people, and to coarsen and thereby control public debate and opinion. It seems that
to the extent to which we now live in an attention economy, the full force of human
acquisitive ingenuity has been unleashed on ‘hacking’ this new source of value, to
the point where, as Matthew Crawford has astutely observed, one is assailed by
advertisements even when putting one’s shoes in the crate to go through an airport
scanner, and at slot machine manufacturing conferences experts boast of being able
to manipulate their users to ‘play to extinction’ (Crawford 2016).
The regime also manifests remarkably in a deliberate, continued repetition of
talking points even when they have been clearly rebutted by easily veriﬁable facts.
Consumers of the talking points are often even aware that these rebuttals exist, but
don’t seem to care. The government of US President Donald Trump has engaged
particularly blatantly in such behaviour; infamously, Trump’s inauguration crowd
was described by White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer as ‘the largest audience
ever to witness an inauguration’ in the entire world, and when it was put to the
White House that President Barack Obama’s crowd was far larger (a question easily
resolvable by inspecting photos of both events) staffer Kellyanne Conway notori-
ously remarked that the Press Secretary didn’t lie but merely offered ‘alternative
facts’. Astoundingly, according to the respected fact-checking website Politi-Fact
(http://www.politifact.com), fully 69% of Trump’s public statements are ‘Mostly
False’, ‘False’ or ‘Pants on Fire’.
To many professional intellectuals, such behaviour seems maddeningly immoral.
Philosopher A. C. Grayling has warned of the ‘corruption of intellectual integrity’
and damage to ‘the whole fabric of democracy’ inherent in such developments. He
blames growing economic inequality for inﬂaming many people’s anger to the point
where they care little for reasoned argument. He also blames the rise of social media
for making it too easy to publish, so that ‘a few claims on Twitter can have the same
credibility as a library full of research’ (Coughlan 2017), and the role of
society-wide trusted authorities to distinguish between truth and lies dwindles to the
point where the authorities themselves become fewer. Paradoxically, at the same
time, new social media enable people to much more aggressively ﬁlter what they
consume, to the point where they avoid encountering any viewpoints or arguments
that contradict their own. This has effectively produced a slew of parallel media
ecosystems, organized around a landscape of incompatible naive opinions. Finally,
the information overload created by the vastness of the system (even within a
particular preferred ideological position) encourages a degraded forcing of attention
in so-called ‘clickbait’ headlines on any number of highly popular websites such as
Buzzfeed, many of which are eye-wateringly preposterous. As noted above, these
headlines often grab attention by playing on people’s emotions in vivid ways
(regarding which, new ‘dark arts’ are developing in certain professional contexts).
Although the ivory tower remains (in my opinion) relatively sheltered from the
regime, it has nonetheless been felt there in ominous ways. More and more ‘junk’
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean …
45

publications are appearing in fraudulent journals and conferences that masquerade
as ‘genuinely academic’ (Culley 2017)—more signiﬁcantly, the very line between
genuinely academic and junk publications seems to need renewed deﬁnition and
defence. The past 5 years or so has seen an alarming rise in ﬂagrant bullying of
academics who work on politically and ethically sensitive issues (such as gender
and race) spilling across the social media interfaces which many academics have
been encouraged by their institutions (and themselves sought) to cultivate.1 Cuts to
university-funding, combined with newly conﬁdent metrics of control by many
governments of how the remaining money is spent in order to target so-called
‘outcomes’, have also produced a number of effects that are arguably demoralizing
for the research profession. A ‘crisis of peer review’ is developing as the burdens of
the refereeing gift economy become unmanageable for ever more time-poor aca-
demics. In the empirical sciences, there is a ‘reproducibility crisis’ as no one has the
time merely to repeat another researcher’s experiments, and it is career suicide to
publish ‘negative results’. As university-funding for pure research is undermined,
industry-sponsored research moves in, which is increasingly biasing results in key
areas such as biomedical research (Edmond 2008), and seeking to block govern-
ment action in, for instance, public health initiatives and climate change
remediation.
Meanwhile, the academy’s very notion of ‘expert’ opinion seems to be
increasingly treated with distrust and disdain by wider society. A key leader of
Britain’s recent campaign to leave the European Union (Justice Secretary Michael
Gove) famously declared, ‘people in this country have had enough of experts!’
(Mance 2016). This comment was viewed by many not as a scandal but rather as a
trenchant observation. As D’Ancona (2017, p. 2) writes, ‘The notion of science as a
conspiracy rather than a world-changing ﬁeld of inquiry used to be conﬁned to
cranks. No longer. It seems to me intolerable that this should be so’.
It is worth considering that at least some of the apparent decay in academic
mores described above may have been developing for some time. For instance,
back in 1996, philosopher Susan Haack diagnosed a growing ‘preposterism’ in our
profession whereby ‘incentives and rewards encourage people to choose trivial
issues where results are more easily obtained, to disguise rather than tackle prob-
lems with their chosen approach, to go for the ﬂashy, the fashionable, and the
impressively obscure over the deep, the difﬁcult and the painfully clear’, and where,
‘the effective availability of the best and most signiﬁcant work is hindered rather
than enabled by journals and conferences bloated with the trivial, the faddy, and the
carelessly or deliberately unclear’, and, ‘mutual scrutiny is impeded by fad, fashion,
1In 2016, Professor George Yancy of Emory University received a torrent of hate mail for
comments he made in his research area of philosophy of race: https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.
com/2016/04/18/the-perils-of-being-a-black-philosopher/.
A
graduate
student
instructor
at
Marquette University was targeted for abuse by a professor in her own institution for remarks in
the classroom concerning sexual orientation, resulting in her personal details, such as her home
address,
being
made
public:
http://dailynous.com/2017/05/05/judge-upholds-marquettes-
suspension-prof-smeared-philosophy-phd-student/
46
C. Legg

obfuscation, and fear of offending the inﬂuential’. (Haack, pp. 191–192). 15 years
later, Haack reprised this discussion, concluding that the situation had become even
worse. In her estimation, scholars pursuing research with ethical conduct appro-
priate to the task are now likely to ﬁnd themselves seriously at odds with their
employer (Haack 2012). And criticisms can be found going much further back than
that (e.g. Anderson 1935).
Are These Developments Unprecedented?
All of this is of course deeply worrying to me as a philosopher and a professional
educator, and I believe that we should treat these problems with the utmost seri-
ousness. In order to do this, we ﬁrst need to understand them clearly. In this regard,
I think it’s worth noting the way in which the academic-theoretical mind is geared
for criticism, perfectionism. In my view, this makes us prone to a particular cog-
nitive bias towards the view that ‘the sky is falling’ and things of great value are
about to be ruined irrevocably. Yet is this the ﬁrst time in human history that a great
many ordinary people have shown ﬂagrant disregard for evidence or the opinions of
thinking people? It is very sobering to examine the relationship between power and
truth in the ancient world, which was considerably less constrained by the rule of
law than contemporary Western society (for all the latter’s failings). For instance, a
number of vignettes in the Stoic philosophy of Epictetus instruct the reader how to
approach a tyrant who cares for no higher value than imposing his own will. Such
an encounter can turn deadly at any moment for the independent thinker, yet
Epictetus argues that this does not leave the philosopher with no choices:
[…] it is a man’s own opinions which disturb him: for when the tyrant says to a man, “I will
chain your leg,” he who values his leg says, “Do not; have pity:” but he who values his own
will says, “If it appears more advantageous to you, chain it.” Do you not care? I do not care.
I will show you that I am master. You cannot do that. Zeus has set me free: do you think
that he intended to allow his own son to be enslaved? But you are master of my carcass:
take it […] (Epictetus 1890, 1.19)
More recent examples of power abusing truth (or the search for it) abound: the
medieval Catholic Church’s burning of ‘heretics’; the behaviour of Italian city
rulers as described by Machiavelli in The Prince; the fascism of Hitler; the com-
munism of Stalin and Mao. Therefore, we will not panic, but we will nevertheless
begin to look for solutions that are continuous with the past, whilst acknowledging
that today’s technologically enhanced epistemic situation offers some new twists.
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean …
47

Why Mainstream Epistemology Arguably Cannot Help Us
Consider the ﬁrst few lines of the entry ‘Epistemology’ in the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, a deeply respected source that arguably plays a can-
onizing role in current mainstream philosophy:
Deﬁned narrowly, epistemology is the study of knowledge and justiﬁed belief. As the study
of knowledge, epistemology is concerned with the following questions: What are the
necessary and sufﬁcient conditions of knowledge? What are its sources? What is its
structure, and what are its limits? As the study of justiﬁed belief, epistemology aims to
answer questions such as: How we are to understand the concept of justiﬁcation? What
makes justiﬁed beliefs justiﬁed? Is justiﬁcation internal or external to one’s own mind?
(Steup 2005)
What guidance can we draw from the discipline thus deﬁned for dealing with a
‘post-truth regime’? The ﬁrst part of the deﬁnition concerns knowledge. It assigns
epistemology the task of deﬁning knowledge, and assumes that this deﬁnition must
take the form of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions (for something being knowl-
edge). So we see a signiﬁcant literature in mainstream epistemology discussing
particular candidate sets of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for knowledge, and
their counterexamples. A particularly thoroughly explored candidate is that some-
thing is knowledge if it is a belief, and true and justiﬁed. But it is widely discussed
that this deﬁnition is subject to counterexample (Gettier 1963). For instance, if one
is driving along the highway and sees some barns in a ﬁeld (which are in fact
cardboard replicas of barns), and on that basis concludes that there are barns in the
ﬁeld (which there in fact are, but not positioned where one can see them), such a
belief is both true and justiﬁed, but we would not want to call it knowledge
(Goldman 1976).
But why is it useful for philosophers to seek necessary and sufﬁcient conditions
for knowledge? Presumably in order to enable human beings to recognize instances
of knowledge when we manage to produce them (and the debate’s structure pre-
supposes without argument that this recognition will be essentially the same
whether it concerns fake/real barns or, say, new particles in quantum physics, or a
politician’s true intentions). But how do we produce instances of knowledge? Little
explicit guidance is given on this. One might argue that the second part of the
deﬁnition, concerning justiﬁcation, addresses this. Justiﬁcation is often understood
broadly as any process of supporting belief with reasoned arguments and evidence.
Yet we have seen that one of the post-truth regime’s most characteristic features is
that talking points continue to be repeated after reasoned arguments and evidence
have been presented against them, and are nonetheless avidly embraced. Against
this behaviour, studies of rational justiﬁcation would appear to be of little help.
It’s also worth noting that this disciplinary deﬁnition makes no mention of
people. Although knowledge is discussed, knowers are not—except right at the end
of the quote, where a (single) ‘mind’ is invoked. This disembodiment and
methodological individualism in epistemology is a legacy of modern (i.e.
post-Cartesian) philosophy, and it points to further ways in which epistemology so
48
C. Legg

characterized cannot help us to confront the current post-truth regime. The regime’s
savvy manipulation of people’s emotions for epistemic victory in the public arena
lies outside the purview of this disciplinary deﬁnition because the deﬁnition says
nothing about emotions, and because it says nothing about the public arena. One
dimension of human emotion which it would be particularly useful to consider
epistemologically in the light of the post-truth regime is human motivation, since
one of the regime’s salient features is that people no longer seem to care about
getting things right. Why do they not care about something that we intellectuals
consider to be so important? Is there anything that could be done to encourage them
to care? And why should we attempt to change this, exactly?
By contrast to this mainstream characterization of epistemology, then, we need
to know more than just what knowledge is. We also need guidance on how to ﬁnd
and keep it, how to call out its many pretenders, and on how to encourage people
who are currently neglectful to care about it. In short, as one public commentator
has quipped: What is the opposite of post-truth? It’s not as simple as ‘the facts’
(Poole 2017).
Peirce’s Epistemology
We will see that, by contrast, Peirce’s characterization of truth and knowledge is
public, and it addresses the motivational side of epistemology and the lived context
of truth-seeking.
Developing his ideas shortly after Darwin’s landmark Origin of Species, Peirce
pursued
a
consciously
naturalistic
approach
to
epistemology,
examining
truth-seeking’s use in the life of human beings as biological organisms making their
way in a complex and often dangerous world. What understandings might ﬂow
from that? First, Peirce suggested certain deﬁnitions of belief and doubt. Peirce
deﬁnes belief as habit. Belief is a settled state where one knows how to act in a
given respect. For instance, if one believes that one’s car is in good working order,
then one will reliably get in and turn the key in order to go somewhere. This settled
state feels comfortable to the human organism. Peirce then deﬁnes doubt as missing,
or disrupted habit. This is an unsettled state in which one no longer knows how to
act in a given respect. This state is intrinsically irritating to human beings, and we
naturally (have evolved to) seek to resolve this mental irritation, just as we naturally
scratch our physical itches. In this way, the effect of doubt on us is more immediate
than that of belief.
These deﬁnitions lead Peirce to distinguish two importantly different kinds of
doubt. The ﬁrst Peirce calls genuine or ‘living’ doubt. This can be recognized in
that it actually disrupts action. An example is a sudden realization that I cannot
remember locking my car before leaving it parked in the street, where the associated
concern that my car might be stolen will not leave me in peace until I go and check.
The second kind of doubt Peirce calls pretend or ‘paper’ doubt. This doubt does
not actually disrupt action. Examples include classical scenarios of ‘extreme’
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean …
49

Cartesian scepticism, for instance: ‘Could there be an evil demon producing every
one of my “experiences” for me?’; ‘Could the entire world have been created only
5 min ago, including all of my memories?’ If the entire world were created only
5 min ago, along with all my memories, what would I do differently? This is not
clear. Peirce advises that concerning oneself too much with such questions, insofar
as one is not moved to act on them in any way, is actually intellectually corrosive.
This analysis leads Peirce to reject a certain foundationalism—which he diag-
noses as Cartesian—that has been highly inﬂuential in mainstream philosophy.
Thus Moritz Schlick, although a member of the positivist Vienna Circle and in that
sense an avowed naturalist, famously wrote:
All important attempts at establishing a theory of knowledge grow out of the problem
concerning the certainty of human knowledge. And this problem in turn originates in the
wish for absolute certainty. (Schlick 1934, p. 207)
Peirce claims that this ‘quest for certainty’ is an antinaturalistic and damaging
illusion, due to a peculiar feature of truth. Although often greatly desired, truth is
opaque to us in that we can never know for sure that we have it, and there is no
criterion by which we can infallibly recognize it. For our methods of inquiry
themselves are part of what we must correct as inquiry develops. Putting one’s
belief-deriving method into the epistemological frame along with one’s beliefs has
already been noted as characteristic of pragmatist epistemology. In my view, it is
surprising that other epistemologies have not attended to this matter as it is obvious
in our history that, as Peirce puts it, ‘each chief step in science has been a lesson in
logic’ (Peirce 1877, p. 1).
If truth is opaque, then we cannot take it as an explicit goal. So what should we
search for? What motivates us to inquire? Merely this: avoiding the intrinsic irri-
tation of doubt. Peirce claims, ‘The most that can be maintained is, that we seek for
a belief that we shall think to be true. But we think each one of our beliefs to be true,
and, indeed, it is mere tautology to say so’. (Peirce 1877, p. 3). Peirce calls this goal
the ‘settlement of opinion’, or (as his paper title says) ‘the ﬁxation of belief’. He
notes that this process is what we must call inquiry, for want of other options,
although in some cases this designation is ‘not very apt’. So how do we ﬁx our
beliefs (as we in fact do, every day)? Peirce claims that there are four basic
methods.
The ﬁrst is the method of tenacity. Here, you personally decide what you want to
believe. You dwell on and ‘constantly reiterate’ to yourself that belief, and if
anyone offers reasoned argument or evidence against it, you refuse to consider it.
We may not like to admit it, but this method is used by all of us in many real-life
situations. Peirce gives an example that is still strikingly relevant today, concerning
free-trade (i.e. globalization):
I remember once being entreated not to read a certain newspaper lest it might change my
opinion upon free-trade […]You might […] if you read this paper, be led to believe in
protection. But you admit that free-trade is the true doctrine; and you do not wish to believe
what is not true. (Peirce 1877, p. 7)
50
C. Legg

The method has signiﬁcant advantages in situations where decisiveness is wanted.
If you are a soldier serving in Iraq, for instance, then to decide never to question the
rightness of your country’s declaring war on Iraq might literally keep you alive. Yet
the method also creates problems, since human beings are social creatures with a
common ‘form of life’, so that we naturally inﬂuence each other’s beliefs. So,
Peirce claims, this method will not eliminate all your doubt unless there is some-
thing wrong with you:
The man who adopts [the method] will ﬁnd that other men think differently from him, and it
will be apt to occur to him, in some saner moment, that their opinions are quite as good as
his own, and this will shake his conﬁdence in his belief. This conception, that another
man’s thought or sentiment may be equivalent to one’s own, is a distinctly new step, and a
highly important one. It arises from an impulse too strong in man to be suppressed, without
danger of destroying the human species. Unless we make ourselves hermits, we shall
necessarily inﬂuence each other’s opinions; so that the problem becomes how to ﬁx belief,
not in the individual merely, but in the community. (Peirce 1877, p. 7)
In short, the method of tenacity is internally unstable and leads on naturally to the
next method.
The second method is the method of authority. Here, you get some group of
people to ﬁx your belief for you. Human history has not lacked examples of
organizations willing to assume such a role, from churches, to political parties, to
professional guilds. In order to enforce the preferred beliefs, such institutions must
take certain steps. They will ‘reiterate them perpetually, and teach them to the
young; having at the same time power to prevent contrary doctrines from being
taught, advocated, or expressed’ (Peirce 1877, p. 8). So, for instance, in the med-
ieval period, the Christian Bible served across Western Europe as an ultimate
authority for belief, and, in 1277, the Bishop of Paris, incensed by philosophical
discussions taking place in the University of Paris, banned 217 propositions!2
Peirce notes that this method has ‘immeasurable mental and moral superiority’
over the previous one, and consequently it produces a marvellous stability in
society. Yet it too has serious problems. As a method of ‘ﬁxing belief’ so that
people are not disturbed by doubt’s intrinsic irritation, it never quite lasts. No
matter how powerfully a belief system is enforced, there will always be some
people who notice a certain randomness in the way that the intellectual leaders have
formed the group’s beliefs, and this raises genuine doubt in their minds concerning
those beliefs:
[…] in the most priest-ridden states some individuals will be found who are raised above
that condition. These men possess a wider sort of social feeling; they see that men in other
countries and in other ages have held to very different doctrines from those which they
themselves have been brought up to believe; and they cannot help seeing that it is the mere
accident of their having been taught as they have […] that has caused them to believe as
they do […] Nor can their candour resist the reﬂection that there is no reason to rate their
2These included, That the absolutely impossible cannot be done by God, That the world is eternal
[i.e. not created as the Bible says], and That the only wise men of the world are philosophers(!).
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean …
51

own views at a higher value than those of other nations and other centuries; thus giving rise
to doubts in their minds. (Peirce 1877, p. 8)
In short, the method of authority is internally unstable and leads on naturally to the
next method.
The third method is the a priori method, whereby the kinds of people who
naturally resist having their opinions ﬁxed arbitrarily by institutions will seek a
‘new method of settling opinions must be adopted, that shall not only produce an
impulse to believe, but shall also decide what proposition it is which is to be
believed’ (Peirce 1877, p. 9). Through discussion, such people decide on the beliefs
that seem to them most ‘agreeable to reason’. Of course, this method has been very
popular with philosophers. And, once again, it is greatly intellectually superior to
what went before, since for the ﬁrst time reasoning is employed in deciding what to
believe. Yet Peirce claims that this is actually the worst method of all for ﬁxing
belief! For it exposes our beliefs to the vagaries of individual taste and fashion,
making them ﬂuctuate wildly:
metaphysicians have never come to any ﬁxed agreement, but the pendulum has swung
backward and forward between a more material and a more spiritual philosophy, from the
earliest times to the latest […]. (Peirce 1877, p. 9)
This method’s methodological individualism also means that each individual’s false
assumptions and epistemic blind spots are never corrected. So if we perform a
scientiﬁc induction over this method, we are forced to conclude that it really doesn’t
work.
Finally, we come to the method that Peirce prefers—the method of science.
Peirce here understands ‘science’ extremely broadly. He explains the method as a
public investigation (open to any interested parties) that is organized around a
particular hypothesis:
Its fundamental hypothesis […] There are Real things, whose characters are entirely
independent of our opinions about them; those Reals affect our senses according to regular
laws, and, though our sensations are as different as are our relations to the objects, yet, by
taking advantage of the laws of perception, we can ascertain by reasoning how things really
and truly are; and any [person], if he have sufﬁcient experience and he reason enough about
it, will be led to the one True conclusion. (Peirce 1877, p. 11)
Peirce claims that only in this method does a full-blooded concept of truth ﬁrst
emerge, since only under this method is there a distinction between a ‘right’ and
‘wrong’ way of inquiring:
This is the only one of the four methods which presents any distinction of a right and a
wrong way. If I adopt the method of tenacity, and shut myself out from all inﬂuences,
whatever I think necessary to doing this, is necessary according to that method. So with the
method of authority: the state may try to put down heresy by means which, from a scientiﬁc
point of view, seem very ill-calculated to accomplish its purposes; but the only test on that
method is what the state thinks […] So with the a priori method. The very essence of it is to
think as one is inclined to think […] But with the scientiﬁc method […]the test of whether I
am truly following the method is not an immediate appeal to my feelings and purposes, but,
52
C. Legg

on the contrary, itself involves the application of the method. Hence it is that bad reasoning
as well as good reasoning is possible […]. (Peirce 1877, p. 11)
Implicit here is the reason why Peirce thinks the method of science is superior to all
the others at ﬁxing belief: only in this method does the reappearance of doubt not
produce a breakdown in the method itself, but rather is folded back into the method
and used as fuel for self-correction.
We’ve seen that only the method of science allows an object entirely indepen-
dent of human thought, which it is appropriate to call reality, to determine what our
beliefs should be. But that reality cannot be approached directly since, as noted,
truth is opaque to us. So how is Peirce, as a naturalist pragmatist epistemologist
who wants to locate his theory of inquiry in human lived context, to give an account
of such an opaque concept? Ingeniously, he ‘triangulates’ truth via the community
of inquiry, writing famously in his paper ‘How to Make our Ideas Clear’ that, ‘the
opinion that would be agreed to by all who investigate is what we mean by
the truth’ (Peirce 1931–1958). This deﬁnition of truth is often summarized in the
slogan: Truth is the end of inquiry. It’s important to note that this is not ‘end’ in the
sense of ﬁnish: some utopian future time where all questions are settled. It is ‘end’
in the teleological sense of aim or goal (Misak 2004, 2008).
Meanwhile, a commitment to fallibilism is ‘operationalized’ in the way Peirce
deﬁnes the community of inquiry as containing indeﬁnitely many inquirers and
stretching across indeﬁnite time. This inﬁnite scope has been criticized as an ide-
alization that renders truth unattainable, and engages in excessive optimism (how do
we know there will be such a thing?) (see for instance Russell 1939; Rorty 1995).
Yet every argument that Peirce can never know that there is an end of inquiry is
equally an argument that the sceptic can never know that there isn’t. We just don’t
know. That is the human condition. It is worth noting how the inﬁnite framework
elegantly allows that no matter how wide a consensus exists on a given belief, it is
always possible that another inquirer will come along, at a later time, and manage to
overturn it. Thus, we might say that in Peirce’s epistemology: The solution to poor
opinions is more opinions (and, given truth’s opacity, there can be no other solution).
I shall now argue that this philosophy, with its teleological arc, long horizon and
rare combination of strong realism and contrite fallibilism, points towards ways that
we might weather the epistemic storms of our current sociopolitical regime, and
perhaps even come to see them as inevitable in our intellectual and political
development.
Analysis of the Post-truth Regime
The ﬁrst thing to note is that under the Peircean epistemology, labelling a set of
human behaviours ‘post-truth’ doesn’t make much sense. As the postulated end of
inquiry, truth comes ‘post-‘ everything else in human discourse. Yet, there is much
in Peirce’s framework that we can make use of to discuss our current regime.
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean …
53

We saw that one characteristic (and disturbing) phenomenon of the regime is a
repetition of talking points that seems immune to counter-evidence or logical
argument. In at least some respects, this ﬁts squarely with Peirce’s method of
tenacity. We saw Peirce noting that a key part of practicing this method is reiter-
ating to oneself the beliefs one wishes to hold. (At this point, it might be interesting
to ask why the talking points need to be repeated over and over. It seems as though a
concerted effort is required to block out something further that exists in oneself,
such as some potential for rational reﬂection perhaps.) Yet the ﬁt between these
practices of repeating talking points and Peirce’s method of tenacity is not quite
exact, because the practices seem to be to some degree communal, forming public
crowds that frequently behave like mobs (Ronson 2015). In its group character,
then, the behaviour seems to fall under the method of authority. And with respect to
this method also, we saw Peirce noting that repetition of the belief (this time by
relevant institutions) was an important feature. Yet, at the same time, the behaviour
lacks much of the stability in belief for which Peirce praised the method of authority
—noting that ‘except the geological epochs, there are no periods of time so vast as
those which are measured by some of [the] organized faiths’ (Peirce 1877, p. 9). In
its ever-shifting kaleidoscope quality, whereby the current media landscape seems
comprised of countless incompatible perspectives at war with one another, the
current regime also seems to resemble Peirce’s a priori method, in its giving over of
our beliefs to taste, fashion and a spurious consistency largely untried by real
experience with the beliefs’ objects.
What all of these methods (and, correspondingly, our current regime) lack is
humble deference to an object that is external to human opinion—deference that
naturally leads one to seek further information about that object before behaving as
if one has certainty about it. Such arrogant assumed certainty is a dismaying feature
of our current regime. In that sense, our current situation, in its heady mix of
Peirce’s ﬁrst three methods, might be best described as a degeneration to a pre-truth
scenario. It’s worth noting again that this state of affairs is something that main-
stream epistemology cannot see. With its abstracted, non-human perspective
granting its concept of knowledge a spurious universality, it cannot see that it takes
a great deal of philosophical work, and certain social structures, to even get onto the
page of developing a concept of truth, and so beginning to inquire. Philosophers
such as Brandom and Habermas have done much useful work lately in charting this
‘normative pragmatics’ underlying our assertions of truth. But Peirce did valuable
work much earlier in showing that there are ‘assumptions involved in the logical
question’ (Peirce 1877, p. 5).
Analysis of Ourselves
By ‘ourselves’ here I mean those of us concerned enough about the current regime
to write and read papers about it, such as this esteemed volume. Many Western
intellectuals proudly self-conceive as living in a ‘scientiﬁc age’. But do we practice
54
C. Legg

the method of science, as Peirce described it? I shall now make some suggestions—
offered in the spirit of Peircean fallibilism—about some ways in which we may
currently fall short.
(1) We have a strong tendency to treat the misbehaviour of governments as a
harbinger of epistemic doom. In this respect, we arguably remain trapped in the
authoritarian modes of thinking that Peirce identiﬁed with the medieval age,
although modernity is increasingly quickening around us in information-
sharing practices that transgress national and institutional boundaries in order to
deliver mutual aid (Shirky 2009). The epistemic space is ours by professional
designation, if not always in practice. How much are we willing to commu-
nicate with one another across the boundaries of powerful institutions and
genuinely inquire together, in order to claim that space and show epistemic
‘tyrants’, by way of example, that there is another path to ﬁx belief?
(2) Conversely, we have a strong tendency to treat ourselves as the epistemic
saviours of the rest of humanity, in the sense of imagining that ordinary people
should simply listen to our expertise, and use it, for their own good. In this
respect, we arguably risk practicing the method of authority again—this time
with ourselves at the head of belief-ﬁxing institutions. Here, it would be helpful
to take an honest look at our own guild behaviour and careerism. (Consider our
systems of ranking ourselves, for instance.)
(3) We don’t want to engage with ‘those people’, with their ‘deplorable’ views. But
don’t we believe in rational argument?
Weathering the Epistemic Storm
The post-truth regime challenges us academics to return to the vital question: Why
do we care about truth? (Even: do we care about truth? And we need to be rig-
orously honest here.) Today’s academics, in their highly specialized institutional
setting with its relative freedom to write and think, also exist in a specialized
community with its own assumptions. We have embraced this institutional isolation
extremely uncritically (for an excellent recent critique, see Frodeman and Briggle
2016). Of course, who doesn’t want as much paid time as possible to do very
important work? But in so doing, we have created an environment where we never
have to genuinely engage with the many ordinary people who, it would appear,
have been developing genuine (‘living’) doubts on a number of the beliefs that we
have been taking for granted (liberalism being one key example, the value of a
University education being another).
If we are regressing to something of a ‘pre-truth regime’ in the West—and I have
given some reasons to suppose that we are—we might like to look correspondingly
backwards in philosophical history for advice. I believe that there are some useful
resources for our current discussion in Plato. Plato came to maturity in a world that
was (for obvious reasons) ‘pre-Academic’. Charles Griswold has offered useful
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean …
55

insights into what Plato might have to teach us today in a discussion of Plato’s use
of dialogue in his philosophy, a choice that Griswold argues was not merely
ornamental, but epistemological. The reason, he suggests, is that Plato himself was
confronting
a
pre-truth
regime,
against
which
discursive
reasoning
(i.e.
non-dialectical philosophy) is largely ineffective. In such a context, he notes:
The real debate is not between the proponents of dialectic and those of nondialectical
epistemology, but
between
the
dialecticians
and
critics
of
philosophizing,
or
“reason-giving” as such. (Griswold 1988, p. 151)
Griswold’s important insight is that the argument between reason-giving as such
and its enemies cannot be settled nondialectically. He claims, ‘[i]t is not possible to
successfully attack or defend philosophy directly’ (Griswold 1988, p. 154), since to
argue against philosophy is already unavoidably to engage in it. (Rorty 1982, has
put the same point, but with respect to attacking rather than defending philosophy,
by claiming that ‘edifying’ philosophers such as himself have no view.)
This essential dialectic character means that the defence of philosophy cannot be
successfully constructed in the absence of fundamental objections to philosophy
(Griswold 1988, p. 156). Here, epistemologists have to back away from disputes
between positions, which beg the question emptily in favour of doing philosophy,
since only a philosopher can frame a position, to disputes between persons, which
do not so beg the question, since philosophy is something that persons may or may
not choose to engage in. Griswold claims that such conversations between persons
who do and persons who do not choose to engage in philosophy are always
occasional, never conclusive, never ending. Yet they are vital. Thus ‘[t]he origi-
nation of philosophy itself out of the medium of opinion is the most comprehensive
theme in Plato’s dialogues’ (Griswold 1988, p. 153). Philosophical rhetoric is
pedagogical in its original etymology of ‘leading the soul’. We’ve seen how, in our
current regime, the repetition of the talking points is somewhat obsessive, as if
something else is being prevented from happening. Perhaps, then, a useful service
for a twenty-ﬁrst century epistemologist might consist in leading souls away from
such repetition. (And this is surely just one of many possible approaches.)
We have seen that in this human life, truth is unavoidably opaque to us. We
cannot prove that it even exists—particularly to those proﬁting by (or ensnared in) a
pre-truth regime. But, Griswold notes, we can learn ourselves, and we can help and
encourage others to learn. The deed of learning is the ultimate proof that truth
exists. In this way, philosophical discourse exhibits irony—but not of the easily
dismissive Rortyan kind. This paper has been written in the pragmatist belief that in
order to confront the current regime, we professional thinkers and writers would do
well to pay more attention to our own actions. This includes listening well to those
with contrary opinions—even those who promote them most aggressively—since,
in the epistemic as opposed to the political space, as ever, ‘the [only] solution to
poor opinions is more opinions’.
56
C. Legg

References
Anderson, J. (1935). University reform. Australasian Journal of Psychology and Philosophy,
13(3), 215–222.
Coughlan, S. (2017). What does post-truth mean for a philosopher? http://www.bbc.com/news/
education-38557838. Accessed January 12, 2017.
Crawford, M. (2016). The world beyond your head: On becoming an individual in an age of
distraction. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Culley, T. (2017, January 24). Beall’s list: Gone but not lost. Publons. https://publons.com/blog/
bealls-list-gone-but-not-lost/. Accessed September 19, 2017.
D’Ancona, M. (2017). Post-truth: The new war on truth, and how to ﬁght back. London: Ebury
Press.
Edmond, G. (2008). Judging the scientiﬁc and medical literature: Some legal implications
of changes to biomedical research and publication. Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 28(3),
523–561.
Epictetus, (1890). The discourses of Epictetus, with the Enchiridion and fragments. London:
George Bell and Sons.
Frodeman, R., & Briggle, A. (2016). Socrates tenured: The institutions of 21st-century philosophy.
Lanham: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
Gettier, E. L. (1963). Is justiﬁed true belief knowledge? Analysis, 23(6), 121–123.
Goldman, A. I. (1976). Discrimination and perceptual knowledge. Journal of Philosophy, 73,
771–791.
Griswold, C. (1988). Plato’s metaphilosophy: Why plato wrote dialogues. In C. Griswold (Ed.),
Platonic writings, Platonic readings (pp. 143–167). New York: Routledge.
Haack, S. (1996). Preposterism and its consequences. Social Philosophy and Policy, 13(2),
296–315.
Haack, S. (2012). Out of step: Academic ethics in a preposterous environment. https://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2135732. Accessed August 27, 2017.
Harsin, J. (2015). Regimes of posttruth, postpolitics, and attention economies. Communication,
Culture & Critique, 8(2), 327–333.
Mance, H. (2016, June 3). Britain has had enough of experts, says Gove. The Financial Times.
https://www.ft.com/content/3be49734-29cb-11e6-83e4-abc22d5d108c. Accessed September
19, 2017.
Misak, C. (2004). Truth and the end of inquiry: A Peircean account of truth. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Misak, C. (2008). Pragmatism on solidarity, bullshit, and other deformities of truth. Midwest
Studies in Philosophy, 32(1), 111–121.
Oxford English Dictionary. (2016). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1877). The ﬁxation of belief. Popular Science Monthly, November 12, pp. 1–15.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1958). Collected papers (Vol. 1–6). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Poole, S. (2017, May 18). What’s the opposite of post-truth? It’s not as simple as “the facts”. New
Statesman.
http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/2017/09/sean-spicers-emmys-love-shows-
how-little-those-power-fear-donald-trump. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Ronson, J. (2015). So you’ve been publically shamed. New York: Riverhead Books.
Rorty, R. (1995). Is truth a goal of enquiry? The Philosophical Quarterly, 45(180), 281–300.
Rorty, R. (1982). Consequences of pragmatism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Russell, B. (1939). Dewey’s new logic. In P. A. Schilpp (Ed.), The philosophy of John Dewey
(pp. 135–156). Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Schlick, M. (1934). The foundation of knowledge. Erkenntnis, 4, 370–387.
‘The Solution to Poor Opinions Is More Opinions’: Peircean …
57

Shirky, C. (2009). Here comes everybody: The power of organizing without organizations.
London: Penguin.
Steup, M. (2005). Epistemology. In Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. https://plato.stanford.
edu/entries/epistemology/. Accessed August 1, 2017.
Tesich, S. (1992) A government of lies. The Nation.
58
C. Legg

Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure
and the Contemporary University
Jeff Malpas
Towards the end of The Theory of Moral Sentiments, a book that deserves to be
much more widely read than it actually is, Adam Smith argues in favour of a certain
modesty that ought to belong to human reason—a modesty of focus as well as of
capacity:
The happiness of the great system of the universe, however, the care of the universal
happiness of all rational and sensible beings, is the business of God and not of man. To man
is allotted a much humbler department, but one much more suited to the weakness of his
powers, and to the narrowness of his comprehension: the care of his own happiness, of that
of his family, his friends, his country […] The most sublime speculation of the contem-
plative philosopher can scarce compensate the neglect of the smallest active duty. (Smith
1969, p. 386)
What Smith asks us to attend to here is a conception of thinking and the respon-
sibility that attends upon it that recognises the necessary limits of thinking as well
as the grounding of thinking in the domain established by those limits.
Signiﬁcantly, one might say that what Smith is actually alluding to is itself a form
of wisdom—a sense of what constitutes the proper exercise of reason undertaken
with regard to the capacities of human beings, the place in which they ﬁnd
themselves, and the rightful objects of their concern. Yet it is wisdom understood in
terms of a notion of limit that belongs to wisdom itself, as well as to reason wisely
deployed.1 Wisdom seems the right term to use here precisely because what is at
issue is no mere knowing, but rather an attentiveness to ignorance as well as to the
possibility of failure, and so also an attentiveness to the essentially bounded and
J. Malpas (&)
University of Tasmania, Tasmania, Australia
e-mail: jeff.malpas@utas.edu.au
J. Malpas
Latrobe University, Melbourne, Australia
1Smith’s concern is with the ethical, but one might say that the concern with the limits of reason
that is at issue here adumbrates Kant’s later concern with the limits or bounds of reason in an
epistemological and ontological sense.
© Jeff Malpas, under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore,
part of Springer Nature 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_5
59

localised character of our capacities and concerns (the latter in the sense that those
concerns take their force and meaning from the concrete situations in which we
already ﬁnd ourselves). It is on this idea of wisdom as it stands in relation to limit,
speciﬁcally as both might be relevant to the contemporary university, and also,
though indirectly, to philosophy, that I want to focus.
Smith makes no connection, in The Theory of Moral Sentiments, between what I
have here called ‘wisdom’ and the university. He does talk elsewhere, namely, in
The Wealth of Nations, about university education, along with education more
generally (Smith 1999, pp. 348–403), and his comments have been taken to support
a largely market-oriented model of the university (Teixeira and Dill 2011, p. viii).
Yet not only does Smith’s conception of the market diverge in many respects from
contemporary conceptions, as does his overall approach to both economics and
society, but his discussion of education makes little attempt to offer an account of
education as such, and certainly involves no real reﬂections on the nature of the
university as such (though he does consider the development of the philosophical
curriculum and different historical systems of education). Smith’s comments are
mostly focused around, and are heavily determined by, what he perceived to be the
deﬁciencies of the educational institutions of his time and the need to bring about
reform. He complains especially of the poor quality of teaching, which he puts
down to what we might think of as the lack of connection between payment and
performance. Of what underpins the university, and how that might be connected
with the structure of such institutions, Smith has, however, little to say, and one
cannot assume that he would have been any less critical of the corporatized uni-
versities of today than of the universities of his own time. It is not Smith’s com-
ments on education in The Wealth of Nations that seem to me to be most instructive
or most relevant to the situation of the university today, but rather that notion of
limit and its connection to what I have termed ‘wisdom’ that appear in The Theory
of Moral Sentiments (although both limit and wisdom can, it seems to me, be
brought into important connection, as will be evident below, with some of the other
ideas that are at work in The Wealth of Nations).
So far as wisdom itself is concerned, outside of its commonplace appearances
within new age and self-help literature, the notion is not one that commands much
attention in contemporary thinking.2 And although it is sometimes adverted to in
educational discussions, there is relatively little recent literature that takes up the
idea of wisdom as part of any genuinely critical engagement with contemporary
higher education.3 Moreover, on some of the few occasions when wisdom is taken
2Although, as I note in the discussion below, it might be argued that it is taken up, if sometimes
problematically, in the idea of phronesis or practical wisdom.
3Though see Ozolinš’ (2013, 2015) work. In the latter publication, Ozolinš (2013) argues for
similarities in the views of Peters and Newman on education and speciﬁcally for both as com-
mitted, in spite of the fact that neither uses the term, to a conception of education as essentially
oriented to the cultivation of wisdom. Ozolinš aside, there is a larger body of work on wisdom in
higher education, but little that has appeared in the last decade—in relation to that older body of
work see, e.g. Barnett (1994).
60
J. Malpas

up, it is often in ways that assimilate it to an existing utilitarian and vocational
discourse—as it was in an Australian discussion in 2012 when it was treated as
something like an additional competency or skill relevant because of its importance
to the employability of graduates.4 The most famous discussion of higher education
of the last hundred or more years, Newman’s The Idea of the University (Newman
1927), though it makes no explicit mention of wisdom, nevertheless seems to
assume something like that notion in its emphasis on education and knowledge as
tied to the formation of character. Newman argues that knowledge is its own end
that there is no other good to which it is subordinated—nothing else to which it is
accountable—and that, therefore, the basis of the University is not any practical
utility to which it may give rise, but its commitment to knowledge as a simple and
fundamental good. For this reason, Newman regards education, which he distin-
guishes from the training or the gaining of skill, as also without utility—education,
like knowledge, accounts for itself.5 Certainly, education is essential to sociability
and to the formation of a society, but this is not to be construed as one of the uses of
education. Instead, education and sociability are already bound together—the one
does not serve the other, so much as being already part of the other (and the
reciprocity here goes both ways—something suggested by the hermeneutic notion
of conversation as central to any and all forms of understanding). The university
can thus be understood, through the focus on education, as given over to the
cultivation of wisdom—the pursuit of knowledge turns out to be one of the ways in
4See Schwartz (2012). Although Schwartz shows no awareness of the potential tension in his
championing of wisdom as an ‘employability’ skill, elsewhere (2006) he argues for the importance
of values, rather than any utilitarian purpose, as necessary to underpin the role and mission of the
university. At the time of his comments on wisdom, Schwartz was Vice-Chancellor of Macquarie
University, and prior to that had developed a reputation as an aggressively ‘reformist’
Vice-Chancellor at Murdoch University, in Western Australia, and then at Brunel University, in
the UK—here ‘reform’ means, of course, the promotion of a corporatist and market-oriented
conception of higher education. One might thus argue that not only is there an odd tension internal
to Schwartz’s position (especially his championing of wisdom as an employability skill), but that
this reﬂects a tension between some of his public commentary and his actual practice as a
university administrator—a practice that led, during his time at Brunel, to his being one of the top
ten highest-paid Vice-Chancellors in the UK and his nomination by the academic teaching union
as the ‘UK’s worst boss’. Such tensions, and the superﬁciality of discourse that accompanies them,
seem characteristic of much of the rhetoric that comes from contemporary university adminis-
trators, politicians and governments with regard to the nature and role of universities, and uni-
versity teaching and research. One conclusion that might be drawn from this is that the rhetoric is
just that—mere rhetoric—and that it both reﬂects an emptying out of genuine discourse as well as
being a means to conceal or promote quite different agendas and directions.
5Newman’s position was one shared by Mathew Arnold and, as I note below, by John Stuart Mill,
but opposed by Thomas Huxley—see Silver (2003, pp. 4–5). To side with Newman et al. on the
issue of the fundamental non-utility of knowledge or wisdom is not, of course, to take sides with
Newman and against Huxley with respect to all of the points in dispute between them. Indeed,
Huxley also emphasised the independence of the pursuit of knowledge from all practical con-
siderations: ‘the primary business of universities is with pure knowledge and pure art—inde-
pendent of all application to practice; with progress in culture, not with wealth’ (Huxley, quoted in
Halsey 1958, p. 148).
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University
61

which wisdom is developed, and, indeed, the pursuit of knowledge cannot be
undertaken except against that background.
Although Newman pays no attention to the university as a research institution,
the idea of knowledge as intrinsically rather than merely instrumentally valuable
can be applied to knowledge in a research as well as educational context (and that
idea can be afﬁrmed even if one does not accept the entirety of Newman’s ‘idea’ of
the university). Such a view of knowledge, and so also of wisdom, stands in clear
contrast to the more commonplace contemporary treatment of for their valuation as
based in utility—including employability. Indeed, although often derided, the
emphasis on the pursuit of knowledge, of education or of wisdom for their own
sake remains a key point in the understanding of the nature of the sort of work that
universities undertake or ought to undertake.
The pursuit of knowledge, and the promotion of education and wisdom, cannot
be maintained by focusing on any system of rewards or punishments that lie outside
the enterprise of knowledge or wisdom as such. In his own discussion of education,
however, this is something that Smith (1999, pp. 348–349) himself seems more or
less to reject, and indeed, there is a widespread view, shared by many in business
and government today, that ﬁnancial incentives, and the competition associated
with those, are the only means to ensure performance in any ﬁeld of endeavour. Yet
as many empirical studies show, motivation, even outside of an academic context,
is actually more complex than this sort of commonplace thinking assumes (see, e.g.
Pink 2009). Systems of ﬁnancial incentive and disincentive, taken on their own,
have little effect in relation to those modes of performance in which the emphasis is
on qualitative rather than mere quantitative results, and the imposition of targets
often has the effect of depressing achievement rather than raising it. In the case of
academic work, the effect of extrinsic motivation of the sort afforded by ﬁnancial
incentives or disincentives seems especially diminished in comparison with the
intrinsic motivation associated with academic work itself (something reﬂected in
the fact that so many academics continue to be productive researchers even after
retirement). Part of that intrinsic motivation comes from the pleasure associated
with intellectual work when undertaken in the right environment. Yet it is
undoubtedly also true that genuine academic industry is driven, and primarily so, by
the valuing of knowledge, truth and wisdom in and of themselves, and the valuing
of the critical engagement that is intrinsic to them and that is the only genuine
means by which their pursuit can be promoted. To attempt to drive it by any other
means is likely to distort, to mislead and ultimately to undermine. This general
conclusion has the important additional consequence that the one thing that matters
in the valuation of epistemic success is epistemic success itself, and the only proper
gauge of such success is the epistemic community in which it arises. The argument
here is, I would say, parallel to the argument that operates in the ethical domain in
which any justiﬁcation for ethics can only come from the ethical itself: even where
prudential considerations converge with ethical concerns, such prudential consid-
erations are strictly irrelevant to any ethical imperative whose force is absolute. The
ethical, in this sense, is entirely separate from the realm of the useful. To put matters
slightly differently, in terms Sandel (2012) can be seen to employ in What Money
62
J. Malpas

Can’t Buy, value is separate from price.6 An analogous point, I would argue, applies
to the understanding of wisdom.
Of course, the way of thinking to be found in Newman, and more generally, the
idea that knowledge or wisdom might account for themselves is a way of thinking
that goes against almost all of the thinking that drives contemporary university
management, policy and structure. Such thinking is not driven by considerations of
knowledge, wisdom or truth, but by a much more utilitarian calculation, and one
that also assumes the pure monetization even of utility. This is true whether or not
one looks to the contemporary university’s treatment of research as valuable only if
it delivers outputs that are relevant to university ranking exercises (no matter how
well-founded or relevant those exercises may be to underlying academic values) or
the reduction of contemporary university education to what is little more than
vocational training, itself measured in terms of the acquisition of discrete ‘com-
petencies’. This way of thinking comes from one source and one alone, not from
philosophy, nor even from economics, but from a sector of society that, although it
is often assumed to drive economics, is actually driven by it, namely, business and
government—the latter being now so tied to the interest of the business sector as to
be little more than a servant of it and a mouthpiece for its interests. It is a situation
made even worse by the fact that so many contemporary politicians are themselves
personally invested in the business sector both ﬁnancially and socially—the Trump
presidency, not unlike that of Silvio Berlusconi in Italy, providing one of the blatant
and extreme exempliﬁcations of this phenomenon.7
Leaving aside the questionable nature of the source from which the demand for
the accountability of knowledge and wisdom in terms of their utility comes (a
source that is both partisan and self-interested), the very idea that there is a limit to
the relevance and applicability of utilitarian conceptions invokes the same idea of
limit that I have suggested is at issue in the idea of wisdom. Only the fool (and I use
this term in that speciﬁc sense of one who is ‘unwise’) would fail to recognise such
a limit. The idea that the understanding of limit, whether in this speciﬁc case or
more generally, is what lies at the heart of wisdom is not, of course, new or
unprecedented. It is already suggested by the idea of Socratic ignorance—‘I know
6To some extent, this distinction may also be seen to mirror that between ‘substantive’ and
‘formal’ rationality—see, e.g. Weber (1947, pp. 184–186) who argues for the limitations of
markets as instances only of formal rationality.
7Here, as in so much else, contemporary practices and conventions operate entirely against the
advice of Adam Smith. With respect to any public proposal that comes from what we would now
think of as the business sector—what Smith refers to as the ‘dealers’ or the order of men who ‘live
by proﬁt’—Smith urges that such proposals ‘ought always to be listened to with great precaution,
and ought never be adopted till after having been long and carefully examined, not only with the
most scrupulous, but with the most suspicious attention’. This is for the simple reason that, as
Smith says, the interest of the ‘dealers’ is not the same as the interest of the public, and the former
have indeed ‘an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public, and … accordingly have, upon
many occasions, both deceived and oppressed it’ (Smith 1999, p. 359).
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University
63

only that I do not know’.8 If Socrates is in any sense an exemplar of wisdom, it is
because he is so acutely aware of the limits of his knowledge. In a somewhat a more
brutal form, the same point appears in an old joke that the quality of mind most
likely to lead to happiness is ‘stupidity’, since if you are stupid, you won’t have the
wit to know it, and so will not be made unhappy by it—or by any of the other things
that your stupidity will prevent you from recognising.
The importance of limit here—of the limit that belongs to wisdom, and the
failure to grasp limit that is the essence of foolishness—derives from the simple
truth that no matter how much knowledge one possesses, there is always more to
know—even if it is simply knowledge of the particularities of one’s own peculiar or
idiosyncratic situation. Yet such limit is not merely epistemic. The ubiquity, indeed
inevitability, of failure in practical matters—whether at the governmental level or at
the level of personal affairs, provides a different example of the absolute centrality
of limit. In all our efforts to control or manage the world, and aspects of it, the fact
that any part of the world, let alone the world itself, will always exceed our capacity
to manipulate or even represent it means that all such efforts are doomed, in any run
other than the short, to fail. Failure is the rule, not the exception, although much of
our activity is predicated on the reverse holding true (see Malpas and Wickham
1997, 1995). The fact that we often fail to notice the failing character of our
enterprises and projects is simply a function of the fact that we constantly readjust
our measures of success according to the realities of our failures. Failure is thus
avoided by the redeﬁnition of success, and yet failure is thereby also obscured,
hidden, denied. Yet failure is the inevitable accompaniment of all human activity.
As Samuel Beckett (1999, p. 7) understood, it is not a matter of failing and then
trying until one succeeds, but of failing, failing again, failing better.9 To recognise
the inevitability of failure is to recognise the essentially limited character of human
life and activity.
The refusal of such limitation, and the assumption of the ever-present possibility
of success, is, I would argue, one of the key features of modernity. Modern tech-
nology, in particular, presents itself as a source of solutions, rather than of prob-
lems, and technological development appears as a steady progression—a process of
‘continuous improvement’, as the language of ‘quality management’ would have it.
Yet as technological systems become more complex, the failure of those systems
8See Plato (1966), 23b. Socrates also comments on the wisdom assumed by the craftsman who,
‘because of practicing his art well… thought he was very wise in the other most important matters’
(Apology, 22d)—an observation that today probably applies best to the contemporary CEO,
though in this case, it is probably less the capacity to practice one’s craft well that leads to the
presumption of wisdom, than the mere possession of wealth and status.
9Becket’s line, ‘Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter. Try Again. Fail again. Fail better’, is often
quoted as if all Beckett intended was a sort of rephrasing of the old saying ‘if at ﬁrst you don’t
succeed, try, try again’, which would suggest that the emphasis is on failure as a pathway to
eventual success, but this is clearly not Beckett’s intention. Indeed, if anything, the line aims to
subvert the original saying to which it perhaps alludes, the emphasis being on the inevitability of
failure, and the recognition of that inevitability as nevertheless founding action. The human life is
thus a failing life, but a life whose failure does not entail surrender.
64
J. Malpas

becomes an increasing problem. The simpler the technology, the more easily can
breakdowns within that technology be coped with—the more complex the tech-
nology, the more even small failures give rise to difﬁculties. At the same time, the
increasing complexity of technological systems—their very character, in fact, in
drawing more and more elements into their sway—also increases the possibilities
for failure, often requiring the development of new technologies designed to deal
speciﬁcally with such possibilities.10 This is not to say that technology is unsuc-
cessful, but that its success is always faltering, and always brings new problems,
new difﬁculties, in its train. Yet technology hides its own failing character, in this
regard, viewing its failures as an indication of the need for greater technological
perfection, of a more encompassing grasp of the elements that comprise the tech-
nological system, and shifting the focus on the ‘problem space’ in which it operates,
so that technological success is always measured with respect to just those aspects
in relation to which technology is successful, while neglecting or ignoring those
aspects in relation to which it fails. The limit is most often understood as a nega-
tivity; yet in reality, it is the opposite: it is the very source of positivity, since it is
the source of that which is valuable. The limit is that which allows things to appear
as salient in the same way that the wall constitutes the room at the same time that it
also delimits it. In this sense, the limit is not, to quote Martin Heidegger, ‘that at
which something stops but… that from which something begins its presencing’
(Heidegger 1971, p. 154).11 The limit is constitutive rather than merely restrictive.
This is as true of the human propensity to failure as it is of fragility and beauty.
Wisdom is not merely a matter of an understanding of limit, then, but of an
understanding that recognises its productivity.
Inasmuch as education can indeed be understood as a matter of the getting of
wisdom, so it is thus also about coming to an understanding of limit. In this respect,
Newman’s own emphasis on knowledge, even when taken as tied to wisdom, is
perhaps misleading or, at least, potentially so. If education, the getting of wisdom,
is what the university aims at, then it cannot be an education that consists in the
mere accumulation of knowledge. Knowledge as simply a body of things known—
of ‘information’ or ‘facts’—is truly useless. It is the recognition of this point that
might be said to underpin the idea of wisdom as a certain sort of practical under-
standing—so that wisdom is what is needed if theoretical knowledge is to be given
application, if it is indeed to be useful. This is a way of thinking of wisdom that is
supported by some of Aristotle’s comments regarding phronesis, and it is also an
idea present in the widespread contemporary appropriation of the idea of wisdom as
10Although some of their discussions are now a little dated (especially in relation to computing
technologies), two books that still provide useful and important analyses of the relation between
technology and failure are Tenner (1996) Why Things Bite Back: Technology and the Revenge of
Unintended Consequences and Perrow (1999) Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk
Technologies.
11The same idea is repeated at several other places in Heidegger’s writings.
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University
65

practical expertise exempliﬁed in the work of Hubert Dreyfus.12 Such a conception
might, however, be taken to suggest a different conception of wisdom from that
which I have emphasised in terms of the focus on limit, and so as offering an
alternative and competing account (and one that might be more congenial to util-
itarian construal). On this basis, rather than taking wisdom to be centred on limit,
wisdom would be identical with the sort of practical understanding that enables the
genuine exercise of skill and expertise in a speciﬁc ﬁeld, domain or art or perhaps as
some generalizable form of this. One might worry that such a conception of wisdom
as tied to speciﬁc forms of practical expertise turns wisdom into a generic term for
what are actually different modes of practical skill that are valuable, not necessarily
in themselves, but because of their practical utility—as the skills of an experienced
carpenter or ﬁnancial advisor might be thought valuable, not so much in them-
selves, but more because of the improvements they can bring to our lives. It might
also be taken as a sense of wisdom that transforms wisdom into little more than
prudence (itself a not uncommon translation of phronesis), and so as essentially
geared towards practical concerns that are nevertheless founded independently of it.
The latter are surely legitimate worries that should indeed caution us against any
reduction of wisdom to mere practical expertise. Yet independently of such con-
siderations, it seems to me that there are other reasons for taking the idea of limit
still to be a key idea in the notion of wisdom. I would argue, ﬁrst, that even with
respect to forms of practical understanding that operate in relation to a speciﬁc ﬁeld,
domain or art, those forms of understanding cannot consist simply in concatena-
tions of otherwise discrete capacities or competencies. Instead, they must be
properly uniﬁed capacities that operate appropriately in relation to the entirety of
the ﬁeld, domain or art in question—it is this capacity to operate in a uniﬁed fashion
that marks such understanding off as genuinely an instance of practical wisdom. As
it is indeed oriented towards that ﬁeld of expertise as a whole, so any such wisdom
or expertise must also possess a genuine grasp of its own boundaries. There may be
a question as to how those limits are indeed grasped, but the mastery of the ﬁeld at
issue can be viewed as a mastery constituted through a mastery of the ﬁeld or art as
it arises within those limits (notice how this conception of expertise is at odds with
the competency approach that is so widespread and that itself has little or no basis in
any empirical or theoretical understanding of expertise). On these grounds alone,
then, even an account of wisdom as a matter of practical expertise need not be
inconsistent with an account of wisdom as based in an understanding of limit.
Moreover, even if it were allowed that this is one sense of wisdom, the fact that
there is such a sense would not rule out the idea of a more basic sense of wisdom of
the sort associated with the idea of a fundamental sense of limit that encompasses
all our activities—a sense of wisdom that is not tied to any particular ﬁeld, domain
12Dreyfus’s ﬁrst detailed account of practical wisdom or expertise is in Hubert Dreyfus and Stuart
Dreyfus, Mind over Machine: The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the
Computer (New York: Free Press, 1988), but the ideas are repeated and developed over many
other publications over the course of Dreyfus’ career both earlier and later—see, e.g. Hubert
Dreyfus, On the Internet (London: Routledge, 2001).
66
J. Malpas

or art, and rather relates to the mode of our being in the world as human or, if it is to
be said to be tied to some art, a sense of wisdom as tied to the ‘art of living’.
Here, the idea of wisdom as a fundamental capacity for the governance of one’s
life and activities as a whole through a grasp of the proper limits of that life, and the
activities associated with it, connects with another idea that, while not always
associated with wisdom, is very often associated with the idea of the university—
the idea of critique, and together with this also, in terms that are more commonly
associated with wisdom, the idea of the commitment to truth. In pursuit of this idea,
let me return once again to Smith. It is sometimes pointed out that what Smith
argues against in the Wealth of Nations is the imperialistic mercantilism exempliﬁed
by the developing British Empire as well as by the Dutch. Such mercantilism was
associated with the centralised governmental control of markets and trade in the
interests of the nation state. In opposition to such mercantilism, Smith argued for a
more open and diverse economic system—and with it a more diverse and open
social and economic system also. It is the insistence on diversity and openness that
lies at the heart of Smith’s emphasis on the market and the importance of com-
petition (and so his abhorrence of monopolies and the need for regulation to ensure
the proper functioning of the market). Allied to this, for Smith, was also the idea
that the virtues that underpinned a healthy economy and society were not those of
consumption and the satisfaction of desire, but rather of frugality and industry—of
care in the proper use of resources as well as a commitment to real achievement.
Although he does not do so himself, Smith’s emphasis on diversity and openness
in economic systems can be applied analogously to the enterprise of knowledge, of
education, and so also to the understanding of wisdom as tied to limit. There is a
strong tendency for the enterprise of knowledge, like the enterprise of wealth, to
become monopolistic. This is something that the philosopher of science Thomas
Kuhn discusses in his account of the structure of scientiﬁc theory and practice.
Although emphasising the importance of the ‘paradigm’ or ‘disciplinary matrix’ in
making scientiﬁc endeavour possible, Kuhn (1970) also argues for the necessity,
even within such ‘paradigms’, of allowing for divergence and innovation.13 For
Kuhn, more radically for Paul Feyerabend, and later for Richard Rorty also, a key
task is to maintain the diversity and openness of science, which means ﬁnding ways
to allow and even to encourage dissenting views, to ensure a multiplicity of
approaches and to counter the almost inevitable tendency towards scientiﬁc
monocultures. Something like this idea can also be seen in the work of J. S. Mill. In
On Liberty, Mill (1974) argues for the importance of ensuring diversity in ideas,
which means not allowing the most popular or prevalent ideas and viewpoints to
dominate over all others. From Mill’s perspective, the attempt to constrain ideas can
only have the effect of constraining and distorting the search for knowledge and
13In the ‘Postscript’ to The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions Kuhn (1970, pp. 184–187) argues
that this is achieved through the way shared values within a disciplinary matrix nevertheless allow
for differences in individual judgments of value—see also D’Agostino (2005, pp. 201–209). The
title of Kuhn’s (1977) The Essential Tension refers to just the dynamic relation between tradition
and innovation, convergence and divergence, that is at issue here.
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University
67

truth. Hence the importance of freedom of ideas and expression, and tied to this
also, of freedom to choose one’s own way of life (with the important caveat that it
should not unreasonably constrain the freedom of others to so choose) (Mill
1974).14 Mill’s argument, like that of Kuhn, can be seen to be based on the idea of
the fallibility of claims to know, or better, on a recognition of the limits within
which knowledge is itself constituted. The importance of maintaining diversity and
openness in the search for knowledge and truth, in Mill and in Kuhn, mirrors
Smith’s emphasis on diversity and openness, instantiated in the operation of the
market, as the basis for any genuine and common wealth—not because the former
ensures the latter, but because it is partly enabling of it.15
In the university setting, this commitment to diversity and openness has—or
ought to have—several obvious consequences. If Kuhn’s point about the diversity
of evaluative judgment is heeded, then one will refrain from the imposition of
measures or frameworks that try unduly to constrain judgment or to impose uniform
evaluative structures from above. In keeping with this, one will look to ensure a
reasonably diverse ﬁeld for academic engagement—resisting the tendency towards
monopolistic regimes of publication as well as the coercing of academic production
into some standardised set of forms, styles or genres. One will also aim to retain of a
breadth of disciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches—diversity means diversity
across as well as within disciplines. Above all, and following the analogous point in
Smith, one will resist any attempt to impose the equivalent of the mercantilist
(which is to say the corporatist) system in research and higher education that would
centralise control of epistemic enterprise and impose systems of tariffs that stiﬂe the
free and open movement of ideas. It is not just a form of university-directed
mercantilism that is the problem here, but any form of interventionism that seeks to
second-guess the way knowledge will develop, or that thinks it can direct knowl-
edge in general in ways that will gear it to national or extra-epistemic interests.16
Whether mercantilist or communist, such epistemic interventionist must always fail.
In the Soviet Union, Lysenkoism was the most spectacular example of the folly of
such an approach (Resnik 2009, pp. 67–69), but sadly Lysenkoism remains alive
and well today, since it consists in little more than the familiar idea, widespread in
contemporary Anglo-Saxon societies, that one should align scientiﬁc research, not
with scientiﬁc interests, but with perceived national interests. The latter are most
14An important inﬂuence on Mill here is the work of Wilhelm von Humboldt, and especially
Humboldt’s (1854) The Sphere and Duties of Government. An epigram from Humboldt appears at
the beginning of On Liberty: ‘The grand, leading principle, towards which every argument
unfolded in these pages directly converges, is the absolute and essential importance of human
development in its richest diversity’ (von Humboldt 1854, p. 65).
15On the inappropriateness of taking Mill to suggest a direct modelling of epistemic endeavour on
the operation of the market, see Gordon (1997, pp. 235–249).
16On the problems relating to political interference in research, see Resnik (2009). He makes the
interesting comment that ‘The most likely explanation of US success in science and technology is
that scientists in the United States have greater autonomy than in almost any other country in the
world’ (p. 66).
68
J. Malpas

often reﬂections of the personal interests and prejudices of those in power (so are
essentially political interests), which often means, in the current climate, the
interests and prejudices of business, and especially big business. Not only does such
Lysenkoism depend on the valuing of knowledge for its instrumental usefulness,
but also on the idea that the pursuit of knowledge is something that can itself be
deployed and directed instrumentally. Once again, what appears here is a failure to
understand the proper limits within which the pursuit of knowledge itself operates,
and so an instance of the very hubris—a hubris that is tied to the desire for power
and control—that Smith counsels against.
Smith emphasised the need for competition in the economic realm, a competition
regulated by the market. In the world of ideas, this idea of competition is often
assumed to translate into competition for funding or students, but in fact, it can only
mean competition for truth, and allied to that, though essentially secondary to it, the
reputational beneﬁts of honour and recognition that go with the achievement of
truth. This is the real currency that drives the enterprise of knowledge. To some
extent, this can be connected with Smith’s emphasis on the importance of frugality
and industry. Smith’s focus on these ideas is partly based on the moral character
associated with such qualities, but we might also say that it involves the valuing of
the work of production, of making, which is why I talked about the value of
achievement. This is especially important when it comes to knowledge. Sometimes,
of course, a deep commitment to some extra-epistemic value—the relief of suf-
fering, for instance—will drive an individual’s pursuit of a scientiﬁc project or
career. But such extra-epistemic values are not always present, nor as they always
operative in motivating and sustaining scientiﬁc pursuits. In a university or higher
education setting, this ought to mean that a key objective should be the formation
and sustenance of epistemic communities that will embody and so also support the
qualities of diversity and openness, and genuine commitment to epistemic excel-
lence, that are essential to successful epistemic work and production—what we
might think of as communities that are themselves oriented towards wisdom as a
primary concern. This must apply not only to research but also to university
teaching—certainly to that form of teaching on which Newman focuses, and that is
not merely about the inculcation of technical skill or informational mastery, and
probably to all teaching to a greater or lesser extent.
Such a view of the nature of the academic communities that ought to constitute
universities can be seen to be suggested, if not by Smith’s own account of the
universities of his time, then by his preferred form of economic, political and social
order. Smith famously says, and the passage has become so often quoted and
misquoted that its original meaning has been almost entirely obscured, that we
cannot rely on the beneﬁcence of other economic actors to ensure our own welfare
(Smith 1982, p. 119). That is certainly true; we cannot and should not expect others,
in the normal course of affairs, to act in our interests rather than their own. Yet this
does not mean that selﬁshness, as opposed to self-love, is to be encouraged or
endorsed, and nor does it mean that we should take any sort of self-interested action
on the part of others as the proper basis on which the welfare of all can be ensured.
Smith is quite clear on this point, largely rejecting the view of Bernard de
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University
69

Mandeville, for instance, that private vice gives rise to public virtue (see Smith
1976).17 Moreover, the possibility of economic activity itself depends, as Smith
emphasised, on the prior commitment of all of us to a moral order to which not only
are we already given over in virtue of relations of sympathy, but in which we can
and do rely upon others to be, for instance, generally trustworthy and truthful. This
moral order embodies the same sense of limit that underpins the idea of wisdom,
since it depends on the idea of both the interdependence of human life, its essential
relationality and also the character of such life as always operating in a way that is
delimited by the actions, concerns and needs of others as well as our own essential
fragility and fallibility. In this sense, the moral life, which must also be a life
grounded in a certain human wisdom, is a life that always rests on the recognition of
essential human limitation—and so on the need for attentiveness and responsive-
ness to the particularities of our situation as the only basis for actions. One of the
lessons Smith teaches—a lesson that is underlined by the various crises in which we
now ﬁnd ourselves—is that the economic order is not independent of the moral
order that underpins human life as such. When that moral order breaks down, when
wisdom is lost, then so too does the economic and social order also begin to
disintegrate. This is why Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments is not to be construed
as a work that is separate from his The Wealth of Nations, but as the essential
accompaniment to it.
It is perhaps worth noting, once again, the way in which the idea of limit
reappears here—the moral order is itself based in a recognition of our own limited
capacity, and in a sense of the way in which our own existence is interdependent
with that of others. In this respect, the enterprise of knowledge or wisdom is itself
based on an ethical order that enshrines basic principles of trust and fairness, and
does so because of the way these principles are themselves tied to an understanding
of the limits within which human life and activity operate. One of the consequences
of this in the university is that it ought not only to lead to a different conception of
teaching and research but also a different mode of organisation and management—
to one that is decentralised, more ﬂexible and more efﬁcient, since it will not depend
on the vain attempt to ‘manage’ from above through systems of coercion and
control, but will rather operate through the internalisation of values and commit-
ments that are themselves derived from the very activities that lie at the heart of the
University’s existence and that are integral to its operation. It will operate through
the internalisation of wisdom in its very structures as well as in those who take
responsibility for the leadership and management of the institution. Signiﬁcantly,
this means the relinquishing of a certain conception of what leadership and man-
agement might be, and associated with that, a recognition of the way in which
critique and truth must indeed stand at the core of university life.
The commitment to critique, and through critique to truth (since without truth
there can be no critique), as central to wisdom derives directly from an
17In respect of De Mandeville, Smith (1976) writes: ‘the notions of this author are in almost every
respect erroneous’ (p. 487).
70
J. Malpas

understanding of wisdom as tied to limit and the recognition of limit. But it is worth
exploring this commitment to critique and truth more closely—in particular,
through the way in which it can be understood in terms of an idea that appears in
the late work of Michel Foucault. In his seminar on Fearless Speech, Michel
Foucault develops a genealogy of the practice of truth-telling, parrhesia, and the
associated questions that surround this practice. Foucault says at the end of these
lectures that:
[…] the problematization of truth which characterizes both the end of Presocratic philos-
ophy and the beginning of the kind of philosophy which is still ours today […] has two
sides, two major aspects. One side is concerned with ensuring that the process of reasoning
is correct in determining whether a statement is true (or concern itself with our ability to
gain access to the truth). And the other side is concerned with the question: what is the
importance for the individual and for the society of telling the truth, of knowing the truth, of
having people who tell the truth, as well as knowing how to recognize them. With that side
which is concerned with determining how to ensure that a statement is true we have the
roots of the great tradition in Western philosophy which I would like to call the “analytics
of truth”. And on the other side, concerned with the question of the importance of telling
the truth, knowing who is able to tell the truth, and knowing why we should tell the truth,
we have the roots of what we could call the “critical” tradition in the West. (Foucault 2001,
p. 170)
It is this critical tradition that properly lies, not only at the heart of the idea of the
university, so that we might say that the university is based on the idea of parrhesia,
truth-telling, as a discipline and practice, but also at the heart of the idea of wisdom
as I have outlined it here. Of course, in focussing on parrhesia, I am also focussing
on wisdom as associated with that particular form of action that is speech, but this is
an especially crucial mode of wisdom in the university setting. Such parrhesia is, it
seems to me, something exhibited in a pre-eminent way by Socrates, even when he
seems to speak in ways that are imprudent or unwise—as at his famous trial before
the Athenian Assembly. Signiﬁcantly, the parrhesiast about whom Foucault talks
may not always appear as careful or mild, since the parrhesiast is above all a critic
—one prepared to challenge, to be a troublemaker, even, when that is needed.
If the idea of critique that is at issue here seems to jar with some of our
traditional assumptions concerning wisdom, then perhaps that only shows that we
have not been sufﬁciently critical in our engagement with the idea of wisdom itself.
Moreover, as I noted earlier, critique is itself bound up with the idea of truth, and
the lover of wisdom is also a lover of truth. Truth and wisdom are themselves
bound together, and this is made especially clear through an understanding of the
essential relation of wisdom to limit. Moreover, if we take wisdom to have a central
role in the university, then this must also bring wisdom into close connection with
critique, since the idea that critique is central to the life of the university is one that
is certainly well-founded within our own tradition. Even if we think of the uni-
versity as based around knowledge, then such knowledge itself rests on a practice of
truth-telling and on the discipline this requires. In this regard, what is most dis-
tressing about the situation of the contemporary university is the threat to this
critical tradition. As Terry Eagleton writes:
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University
71

What we have witnessed in our own time is the death of universities as centres of critique.
Since Margaret Thatcher, the role of academia has been to service the status quo, not
challenge it in the name of justice, tradition, imagination, human welfare, the free play of
the mind or alternative visions of the future. We will not change this simply by increasing
state funding of the humanities as opposed to slashing it to nothing. We will change it by
insisting that a critical reﬂection on human values and principles should be central to
everything that goes on in universities, not just to the study of Rembrandt or Rimbaud.
(Eagleton 2010)
Arendt (2000, pp. 555–556) says that truth has always been hated by tyrants, and
the reason is, she says, that truth itself has something tyrannical about it: truth
demands our acquiescence; it does not allow us to choose.18 Wisdom lies in
respecting the power that belongs to truth—a power over which we can exercise no
control. In this respect, truth is not itself democratic, and yet, precisely because truth
tolerates no tyranny but its own, truth is also a powerful force for democratisation—
indeed, the freedom demanded by truth, which is freedom for the truth and also for
the human and the humane is very closely related to the sort of freedom that Smith
argues underpins the market and is manifest in the democratic polity he associates
with it. In this respect, the threat to the critical tradition is also a threat to the very
structures that underpin the wealth about which contemporary politicians, business
and economists so often speak, and of which Smith talks in The Wealth of Nations.
What I have set out here, then, is not just an account of wisdom within the
context of higher education, but of wisdom as it applies within a society. The
society at issue is one that is founded upon a conception of its own limit—a limit
that has its end in truth and in the human. In the passage from The Theory of Moral
Sentiments with which I began, Smith counsels against the seductions of philo-
sophical speculation, and in favour of attentiveness to the duties of care that lie
immediately before us. Such counsel is not a counsel of the parochial or the selﬁsh,
but arises simply from recognition of what Smith calls ‘the weakness of [our]
powers, and […] narrowness of [our] comprehension’. Signiﬁcantly, Smith does
not suggest, contrary to many recent and contemporary economists and political
theorists, and the politicians and business leaders who follow them, that the market
itself offers any solution to this problem of limit. Indeed, the idea, promoted by von
Hayek (1982)19 and others, that the market provides an information-processing
machine that can overcome human fallibility and ignorance might be seen as a
variation on that universalising speculation against which Smith warns us—though
a speculation that has taken real and concrete form in contemporary ‘economistic’
thought and practice. The market becomes the machine that calculates what we
individually cannot, producing, so we are constantly promised, a better world for all
18See Arendt (2000, pp. 555–556): ‘Seen from the view-point of politics, truth has a despotic
character. It is therefore hated by tyrants, who rightly fear the competition of a coercive force they
cannot mo-nopolize, and it enjoys a rather precarious status in the eyes of governments that rest on
consent and abhor coercion’. See also Malpas (2010).
19See von Hayek (1982, p. 54): ‘[…] the only possibility of transcending the capacity of individual
minds is to rely on those super-personal “self-organizing” forces which create spontaneous orders.’
72
J. Malpas

—and so the machine of the market becomes that which will supposedly ensure ‘the
happiness of the great system of the universe’ at the same time absolving us of
attending to (even counselling us against) those ‘active duties’ that Smith urges
upon us. Smith has no such extreme conﬁdence in the power of the market to do
what we cannot, instead arguing for a more limited capacity that belongs even to the
market (and thus arguing for legislative controls to ensure that markets are not
corrupted in their operation and that substantive moral constraints and obligations
are not ignored). For Smith, the market is implicitly, like all artefacts of human
activity and design, an imperfect, even a failing, structure—which is why we must
remain attentive to it, rather than allow ourselves to be simply determined by it.
Here, we are returned once more to consideration of the inevitability of failure,
the importance of critique, and so to the notion of wisdom with which this dis-
cussion began, and the limit that belongs to it. The society that would embody
wisdom is also the society that embodies a sense of its own limit, and, therefore, a
sense of its own humanity. Such a sense of limit is only properly expressed in the
willingness to engage with the irreducible complexity of the world that presents
itself to us in the light of our own failing endeavours and the obligations that derive
from our substantive commitments in and to that world. It is in the service of such
wisdom that the proper task of the university, indeed, of teaching and research in
general, is to be found. It is not a task that can be based merely in the harnessing of
the university to any economic or merely utilitarian mechanism.
References
Arendt, H. (2000). The portable Hannah Arendt. New York: Penguin.
Barnett, R. (1994). The limits of competence: Knowledge, higher education and society. Bristol:
Open University Press.
Beckett, S. (1999). Worstward Ho. London: John Calder, 1999.
D’Agostino, F. (2005). Kuhn’s risk-spreading argument and the organization of scientiﬁc
communities. Episteme, 1(3), 201–209.
Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. (1988). Mind over machine: The power of human intuition and
expertise in the era of the computer. New York: Free Press.
Dreyfus, H. (2001). On the Internet. London: Routledge.
Eagleton, T. (2010, December 18). The death of universities. The Guardian. https://www.
theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/dec/17/death-universities-malaise-tuition-fees. Accessed
January 12, 2018.
Foucault, M. (2001). Fearless speech. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e).
Gordon, J. (1997). John Stuart Mill and the “marketplace of ideas”. Social Theory and Practice,
23(2), 235–249.
Halsey, A. H. (1958). British universities and intellectual life. Universities Quarterly, 12(2),
141–152.
von Hayek, F. (1982). Law, legislation, and liberty: A new statement of the liberal principles of
justice and political economy. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Heidegger, M. (1971). Poetry, language, thought. New York: Harper & Row.
von Humboldt, W. (1854). The sphere and duties of government. London: John Chapman.
Wisdom’s Limit: Truth, Failure and the Contemporary University
73

Kuhn, T. (1970). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Kuhn, T. (1977). The essential tension. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Malpas, J., & Wickham, G. (1995). Governance and failure: On the limits of Sociology. Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, 31(3), 37–50.
Malpas, J., & Wickham, G. (1997). Governance and the world: From Joe DiMaggio to Michel
Foucault. The UTS Review, 3(2), 91–108.
Malpas, J. (2010). Truth, politics and democracy: Arendt, Orwell and Camus. In A. Schaap,
D. Celermajer, & V. Karalis (Eds.), Power, judgment and political evil: In conversation with
Hannah Arendt (pp. 133–145). Franham: Ashgate.
Mill, J. S. (1974). On liberty. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Newman, J. H. (1927). The idea of a university. Chicago: Loyola University Press.
Ozoliņš, J. (2015). Reclaiming paedeia in an age of crises: Education and the necessity of wisdom.
Educational Philosophy and Theory, 47(9), 870–882.
Ozoliņš, J. (2013). R. S. Peters and J. H. Newman on the aims of education. Educational
Philosophy and Theory, 45(2), 153–170.
Perrow, C. (1999). Normal accidents: Living with high-risk technologies. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Pink, D. (2009). Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us. New York: Riverhead
Books.
Plato. (1966). Plato in twelve volumes, Vol. 1. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Resnik, D. B. (2009). Playing politics with science: Balancing scientiﬁc independence and
government oversight. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sandel, M. J. (2012). What money can’t buy: The moral limits of markets. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.
Schwartz, S. (2012, May). Employability skills—Where is wisdom? The Guardian, Higher
Education Network Blog. https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/
may/02/wisdom-as-an-employability-skill. Accessed Januray 12, 2018.
Schwartz, S. (2006). Values, ethics and teaching. In Values and ethics: Managing challenges and
realities in higher education. Paris: IMHE/OECD. https://www.oecd.org/site/imhe2006bis/
37477545.pdf. Accessed Januray 12, 2018.
Silver, H. (2003). Higher education and opinion making in twentieth-century England. London:
Woburn Press.
Smith, A. (1969). The theory of moral sentiments. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics.
Smith, A. (1982). The wealth of nations, books I-III. Harmondswoth: Penguin.
Smith, A. (1999). The wealth of nations, books IV-V. London: Penguin Books.
Teixeira, P. N., & Dill, D. D. (2011). Introduction. In P. N. Teixeira & D. D. Dill (Eds.), Public
vices, private virtues? Assessing the effects of marketization in higher education (pp. vii–xxiii).
Dordrecht: Springer.
Tenner, E. (1996). Why things bite back: Technology and the revenge of unintended consequences.
New York: Vintage.
Weber, M. (1947). Theory of social and economic organization. New York: Oxford University
Press.
74
J. Malpas

Part II
Politics, the Papers and the Public

The History and Practice of Lying
in Public Life
Michael A. Peters
To lie is a horrible ﬁlthy vice; and which an ancient writer setteth forth very shamefully,
when he saith that whosoever lieth witnesseth that he contemneth God and therewithall
feareth men. It is impossible more richly to represent the horrour, the vilenesse and the
disorder of it: for, what can be imagined so vile and base as to be a coward towards men
and a boaster towards God? (Montaigne).
The deliberate falsehood and the outright lie, used as legitimate means to achieve political
ends, have been with us since the beginning of recorded history. Truthfulness has never
been counted among the political virtues, and lies have always been regarded as justiﬁable
tools in political dealings (Arendt 1971).
Introduction: Lying and Public Life
Malpas (2008) begins his reﬂection on “Truth, Lies, and Deceit: On Ethics in
Contemporary Public Life” by documenting the way truth and deceit in public life
have become a major issue in the West. He rightly mentions the huge concern over
the deceit and deception by leading politicians involved in the invasion of the Iraq
war and notes that the public focus on lying and deceit has not been restricted to
politics. CEOs of major companies and bank managers (particularly since the
Global Financial Crisis) have been involved in systematic fraud, insider trading,
and deliberate manipulations of the Libor exchange rate. Not only have these
This article has been previously published as Peters, M. A. (2015). The history and practice of
lying in public life. Review of contemporary philosophy, 14, 47–62.
M. A. Peters (&)
Wilf Malcom Institute of Educational Research, University of Waikato,
Hamilton, New Zealand
e-mail: michael.peters@waikato.ac.nz
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_6
77

corporate players not abided by regulatory obligations and responsibilities, but after
being charged, they have actively lied, falsiﬁed, and deceived their clients and the
public at large with the result that people have lost their trust in the leading political
and business institutions. Untruthfulness, deceit, and lying are not restricted to these
twin spheres, as recent cover-ups in relation to institutional child abuse in the
church, in schools, and other related institutions reveal.1 Malpas takes the public
uproar and controversy as evidence that we still care about truth and truthfulness,
and yet he canvases the view that our commitment to truth (Nyberg 1993; Bailey
1991), given the extent of deceit and lying in public and personal life, itself might
based upon a lie. He goes on to maintain the central signiﬁcance of truth and
truth-telling to questions of self and society:
The question concerning the role and signiﬁcance of truth and truth-telling lies at the heart
of our understanding of ourselves—how we think about truth makes a huge difference to
the sort of life we understand ourselves as living, the sort of society we take ourselves to be
part of, the sort of relationship we have to the world. (Malpas 2008, p. 2)
Malpas clearly holds that truth, and the commitment to truth, is at the very heart of
both ethical practice and the practice of democracy.2
In a conference on “Law and Lies” held by the University of Alabama School of
Law, the question of deception and lying is raised concerning their ubiquity in
public life:
From the noble lie of Plato’s Republic to the controversy about former President Clinton’s
“lying” in the Monica Lewinsky case, from the use of secrecy in today’s war against
terrorism to the endless spinning of political campaigns, from President John Kennedy’s
1See
the
Australian
Royal
Commission
into
Institutional
Child
Abuse
at
http://www.
childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/. The Interim Report was released on June 30, 2014. I am
reminded of the comments of Michael Ignatieff (2001) made in The Guardian: “Since its report
came out in 1998, the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission has become a model
for other societies seeking to rebuild their ethical order and ﬁnd healing and justice after periods of
war or tyranny.” And we might add “systematic institutional child abuse”. He continues: “There
are many ways to do this: the de-Naziﬁcation of West Germany after 1945 followed by the
de-Stasiﬁcation of East Germany after 1989, the Chilean, Salvadorean and Argentine truth com-
missions, the international tribunals in The Hague and Arusha, the indictment of Pinochet. In all
these processes, the essential problem is how to balance peace and justice, forgetting and for-
giving, healing and punishment, truth and reconciliation.” And now to the central point, he makes
relevant to my inquiry: “you cannot create a culture of freedom unless you eliminate a speciﬁc
range of impermissible lies. I put it this way—a range of impermissible lies—because all societies,
and all human beings lie to them selves all the time. Citizens of liberal democracies are fooling
themselves if they think we live in truth. None of us can support very much truth for very long. But
there are a few lies that do such harm that they can poison a society just as there are a few lies in
private life that can destroy a life.”
2See the inspired review essay “Mendacious Flowers” by Jay (1999), reviewing George
Stephanopoulos’ All too Human: A Political Education and Christopher Hitchens’ No One Left to
Lie to: The Triangulations of William Jefferson Clinton.
78
M. A. Peters

behavior during the Cuban missile crisis to cover ups concerning pedophile priests in the
Catholic church, from Freud’s efforts to decode the secrets beneath civilized life to con-
temporary exposés of the private lives of politicians, lying and deception seem ubiquitous
in our public life.3
In a prominent example, the conviction of Lord Archer, one-time chairman of
the Conservative party in the United Kingdom, and the many media biographies
that quickly followed his downfall, brought home a host of questions about the
question of lying, not just in public life but also, more generally, in our private
lives. With Lord Archer’s successful prosecution, listening to the report of his trial,
it seems that among his peers—conservative politicians, leaders of the party,
friends, and even his wife—lying was considered to be much more heinous than
anything to do with his sexual immorality. Indeed, even his wife seemed to tolerate
his many affairs outside marriage. As she publicly acknowledged in a TV interview,
sexual inﬁdelity was only moderately important to her. Far more important to her,
and Archer agreed, was loyalty. Archer’s one-night stands with prostitutes were
also, it seems, easily forgiven. Sexual “indiscretions” are tolerated in both public
and private morality, but lying is not. Is this because our sexual mores and morality
have changed whereas the morality of lying has remained more or less the same?
Does this speak to the stability of some ethical practices and the relative change-
ability of others?
Archer’s crime was ofﬁcially perjury, a concept in jurisprudence that refers to
the intentional act of swearing a false oath or falsifying an afﬁrmation to tell the
truth. Perjury is a statutory offense in England under the Perjury Act of 1911, which
states:
If any person lawfully sworn as a witness or as an interpreter in a judicial proceeding
willfully makes a statement material in that proceeding, which he knows to be false or does
not believe to be true, he shall be guilty of perjury, and shall, on conviction thereof on
indictment, be liable to penal servitude for a term not exceeding seven years, or to
imprisonment … for a term not exceeding two years, or to a ﬁne or to both such penal
servitude or imprisonment and ﬁne. (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo5/1-2/6)
Perjury is the act of a person’s deliberately making false or misleading statements
while under oath, sometimes termed “false swearing” or “false oath”, or, in archaic
language, “forswearing”.
Archer was convicted of three charges of perverting the course of justice and one
of perjury (committed at the 1987 trial) that centered on allegations he had sex with
3See http://www.law.ua.edu/programs/symposiums/law-and-lies/. The rest of the quotation insofar
as it concerns the law runs: “And what is true in our public life is also true in our legal life. While
the law recognizes deceit as a cause of action in torts, as the late Arthur Leff famously noted, the
law tolerates a lot of deception in 60 market transactions. In addition, while law condemns lying
under oath, it condones deceptive silence. While law condemns entrapment, it condones deception
and decoys as acceptable tools in the enforcement of the criminal law. While the law values truth it
defends the right to lie as an aspect of freedom of speech. This conference will investigate the way
law responds to lying and deception. When and where are they tolerated? When and where are
they condemned? What can we learn about law by examining its attitude toward lies?”
The History and Practice of Lying in Public Life
79

a prostitute. He was cleared of one charge of perverting the course of justice. Archer
also was accused of lying and creating false diaries to win £500,000 in libel
damages from the Daily Star newspaper in 1987. He took the tabloid to court and
won after it alleged that he paid prostitute Monica Coghlan for sex in September
1986. This is how the BBC News reported the charges facing Archer:
Lord Archer faced dishonesty charges arising from his successful 1987 libel action, in
which he won £500,000 damages from the Daily Star over allegations that he slept with a
prostitute. He was accused of asking his former friend Mr. Francis, 67, to provide him with
a false alibi for a night relating to the libel case and of producing fake diary entries to back
up his story. Lord Archer was found guilty of two charges of perjury and two of perverting
the course of justice. The ﬁrst charge was that he perverted the course of justice by asking
Ted Francis to give him a false alibi. The second guilty verdict was on a charge that he
perverted the course of justice by using a fake diary in the libel trial. He was found to have
perjured himself in an afﬁdavit to the High Court for the libel action. He was also found to
have perjured himself on oath during the libel trial. He was cleared of a ﬁnal count of
perverting the course of justice in relation to a diary used in the libel case, in which he was
awarded £500,000 after the Daily Star claimed he slept with a prostitute. (http://www.
legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo5/1-2/6)
On reﬂection, one might argue that truth and the absence of lies are at the very basis
of jurisprudence as it is in public life. Or perhaps we might say that the method-
ology for determining the facts of the case and the systematic elimination of lies or
lying is close to the heart or spirit of the enterprise. Indeed, one of the objects of the
law of evidence is to ensure that witnesses tell the truth; in the past, when religious
faith was stronger the oath, swearing on the Bible was deemed to be an effective
and appropriate way of ensuring that witnesses told the truth.
Certainly, the religious view in the Christian tradition has taken a very dim view
of lying and lies. From the Old Testament, and from Augustine through to
Montaigne, lying has been viewed as a sin that admits no reservations. The Old
Testament references concern both the issue of false witness, for example, “you
shall not bear false witness against your neighbor” (Exodus, 20:16), and how lying
is wicked and against the Lord in the following proverbs: “a worthless person, a
wicked man […] one with a false mouth” (Proverbs, 6:12); “lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord” (Proverbs, 12:22). Similar sentiments are expressed in the
New Testament through the use of the Greek words for “false” or “lie” (pseudes,
pseudomai, pseudos, pseustes) and Greek words for “deceitful” or “false” (dolios,
dolioo, dolos, doloo). The Greek word for truth is aletheia, meaning “not hidden”.
To lie, then, is to hide the truth.
In De Mendacio, Augustine takes a hard line on lying; all lies, no matter what
form, are wrong.4 That lies are sinful, not surprisingly, is also the view of the
Catholic Church. In Retractions, Augustine suggests that his discussion is “useful
for the mind”, “proﬁtable for morals”, and, most importantly, its signiﬁcance lies in
“inculcating the love of speaking the truth” (Schaff 1887). It is this broad
4Augustine starts his inquiry with the question of the innocent or charitable lie and whether it is
right in any circumstances to tell a lie, see http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/1312.htm.
80
M. A. Peters

theological position that is echoed by Montaigne and seems to indicate both that
lying is in some sense a deformation of meaning and language, and that it is harmful
to society. Bok (1999, p. 31), as one of the ﬁrst modern commentators to revive
academic interest in lying, adopts a similar view that lying is detrimental to society
because it erodes trust as the very foundation of relations among human beings that
sustains our institutions. It is argued that truth and truthfulness is a precondition for
society.
General introductions to ethics generally emphasize that lying is morally wrong
because it breaches and erodes trust as a habitual way of being that exempliﬁes the
very ethos of society. Rachels and Rachels (2011), for instance, writing about
subjectivism in ethics, ﬁrst discuss the basic idea of ethical subjectivism and the
evolution of the theory from simple subjectivism to emotivism in order to introduce
“moral facts”. Rachels then discusses “proofs” in ethics in terms of the process of
giving reasons and explaining why reasons matter by offering the following
example: once we know that Jones is a bad man because he is a habitual liar, then
we can go on to explain why lying is bad. In other words, we can support our
judgments with good reasons.
Lying is bad, ﬁrst, because it harms people. If I give you false information, and you rely on
it, things may go wrong for you in all sorts of ways. Second, lying is bad because it is a
violation of trust. Trusting another person means leaving oneself vulnerable and unpro-
tected. When I trust you, I simply believe what you say, without taking precautions; and
when you lie, you take advantage of my trust. That is why being given the lie is such an
intimate and personal offense. And ﬁnally, the rule requiring truthfulness is necessary for
society to exist – if we could not assume that other people will speak truthfully, commu-
nication would be impossible, and if communication was impossible, society would be
impossible. (Rachels and Rachels 2011, pp. 42–43)
This rationalist approach echoes Baier’s (1958) The Moral Point of View, which
constructs a justiﬁcation for morality anchored in rationality and reason-giving
practices grounded in practical reason that “saves” the enterprise from forms of
subjectivism and egoism. The approach does not recognize, however, the
genealogical approach to truth-telling or to lying.
Foucault on Truth-Telling
On truth-telling as a practice, I have been greatly inﬂuenced by Foucault’s
genealogical approach. Foucault himself was strongly inﬂuenced by his readings of
both Friedrich Nietzsche and Martin Heidegger, and was indebted to them for ideas
that led him to emphasize the close conceptual and historical relations between the
notions of truth, power, and subjectivity in his genealogical investigations.
Nietzsche’s work in particular provided Foucault with novel ways to retheorize and
conceive anew the operations of power and desire in the constitution and
self-overcoming of human subjects. It enabled him to analyze the modes by which
human beings become subjects without according either power or desire conceptual
The History and Practice of Lying in Public Life
81

priority over the other, as had been the case in the discourses of Marxism (with its
accent on power) and of Freudianism (with its accent on desire).
From Nietzsche’s On The Genealogy of Morals (1967), Foucault also intellec-
tually inherited the concept and method of genealogy, a form of historical analysis
that inquires into the formation and structure of value accorded Man, Reason, and
Truth, through a variety of techniques, including both etymological and linguistic
inquiry alongside the investigation of the history of concepts.5 For Foucault, as for
Nietzsche, genealogy replaces ontology. Foucault’s investigations into the modes
by which human beings are made into subjects are, above all, historical investi-
gations of constellations of practices. For Foucault, as for Nietzsche, there are no
essences of human beings and, therefore, also there is no basis for universalist
theories concerning the nature of human beings. Given that there is no human
nature, ﬁxed once and for all—no essential or universalizable nature—there is no
question of a science of human nature (à la Hobbes or Hume) or the possibility of
building or deriving theories of morality, politics, or law on the grounds of this
alleged nature. All questions of ontology, in the hands of Nietzsche and Foucault,
become radically historicized. There is no sovereign individual or transcendental
subject, but only human beings that have been historically constituted as subjects in
different ways at different times through constellations of practices.
Foucault did not deny either the classical ideal of truth as correspondence to an
independently existing world or the contemporary correspondence theory of truth.
The early Nietzsche, by contrast, cast doubt precisely on this ideal. For the early
Nietzsche, truth is a convenient ﬁction, merely a belief about the possession of
truth.
In “On Truth and Lies in an Extra-Moral Sense” Nietzsche famously writes that
“truth” is:
A mobile army of metaphors, metonyms, and anthropomorphisms – in short, a sum of
human relations which have been enhanced, transposed, and embellished poetically and
rhetorically, and which after long use seem ﬁrm, canonical, and obligatory to a people:
truths are illusions about which one has forgotten that this is what they are; metaphors
which are worn out and without sensuous power; coins which have lost their pictures and
now matter only as metal, no longer as coins. (Nietzsche 1976, pp. 46–47)
This deceptively simple position is based on the understanding that concepts are
human inventions, and, as metaphors, do not correspond to reality. After inventing
them, we forget that they are only metaphors and treat them as “true”, believing that
they correspond to and picture reality (see Glenn 2004). There is no match between
language and the thing-in-itself. And yet, although based on illusions, “truth” is still
useful for practical purposes. It is essentially a part of aesthetics, a mythical work of
the imagination that, through a web of concepts, describes the world through art.
While Nietzsche’s view might strike the reader as idiosyncratic, Simpson (2007)
makes the case that there are striking parallels between Nietzsche and Plato on truth
5See Nietzsche’s famous and, apparently, only footnote in the entire corpus of his work, which
appears after the ﬁrst essay of the Genealogy of Morals.
82
M. A. Peters

and truthfulness and, as a consequence, they share similar views on the nature of
philosophy and its possibilities.
Foucault’s innovation was to historicize “truth”, ﬁrst, materially, in discourse as
“regimes of truth” and, second, in practices as “games of truth”. He gave six
lectures entitled “Discourse and Truth: The Problematization of Parrhesia” at
Berkeley during the months of October–November in 1983. In these lectures,
Foucault outlines the meanings and the evolution of the classical Greek word
“parrhesia” and its cognates as they enter into and exemplify the changing practices
of truth-telling in Greek society. In particular, Foucault (2001, p. 107) investigates
“the use of parrhesia in speciﬁc types of human relationships” and “the procedures
and techniques employed in such relationships”.
Foucault claims that the word parrhesia occurs for the ﬁrst time in Euripides (c.
484–407 BC) and then is used in the Greek world of letters from the end of the ﬁfth
century BC. The word is normally translated into English as “free speech” and
parrhesiastes, the person who uses parrhesia, is the one who speaks the truth.
Indeed, the meaning of the word, as it evolves in Greek and Roman culture,
develops ﬁve major characteristics. First, it is associated with frankness: parrhesia
refers to a special type of relationship between the speaker and what he says.6
Unlike rhetoric, which provides the speaker with technical devices to help him
persuade an audience, covering up his own beliefs, in parrhesia, the speaker makes
it manifestly clear what he believes. Second, parrhesia is linked with truth. In the
Greek, parrhesia is a speech activity where there is an exact coincidence between
belief and truth. Foucault (2001, p. 15) claims: “The ‘parrhesiastic game’ presup-
poses that the parrhesiastes is someone who has the moral qualities which are
required, ﬁrst, to know the truth, and secondly, to convey such truth to others.”
Foucault (2001, pp. 19–20) provides a summary of his discussion of parrhesia:
Parrhesia is a kind of verbal activity where the speaker has a speciﬁc relation to truth
through frankness, a certain relationship to his own life through danger, a certain relation to
himself or other people through criticism […] and a speciﬁc relation to moral law through
freedom and duty. More precisely, parrhesia is a verbal activity in which a speaker
expresses his personal relationship to truth, and risks his life because he recognizes
truth-telling as a duty to improve or help other people (as well as himself). In parrhesia, the
speaker uses his freedom and chooses frankness instead of persuasion, truth instead of
falsehood or silence, the risk of death instead of life and security, criticism instead of
ﬂattery, and moral duty instead of self-interest and moral apathy.
This new kind of philosophical truth called parrhesia that arises in Greco-Roman
culture, Foucault (2001, p. 106) characterizes, ﬁrst, “a practice which shaped the
speciﬁc relations that individuals have to themselves.” Much of the philosophy that
emerged with Socrates and Plato, and shaped the philosophical tradition that is still
ours today and which deﬁnes the roots of our moral subjectivity, involved the
playing of certain games of truth.
6I use the male pronoun here on purpose as the parrhesiastes must know his own genealogy and
status, and is usually a male citizen (see Foucault 2001, p. 18).
The History and Practice of Lying in Public Life
83

The Culture of Lying
In my view, Foucault’s genealogical analysis of truth-telling requires a supple-
mentary analysis of the practices of lying. After all, the concepts of true and false,
truth and falsity, are strictly binary concepts that take their purchase from the
contrast with each other, especially in the development of two-value logics or the
truth table calculus. As Urchs (2006) points out, while lying is a ubiquitous element
of communication, it is almost completely ignored by traditional logic. There is a
deep-seated tendency dating from early Christian sources to assume that lying is a
defective function of language, and that its structure deforms communication to the
harm of society generally, even although this normative view is not accompanied
by a formal or logical analysis. Urchs (2006, p. 69) suggests that:
In many types of communication, lying is an important element [and] Deceptive speech acts
have some characteristic internal structure. Moreover, in order to be efﬁcient they must
respect certain requirements of rationality. A formal analysis of lying is very difﬁcult.
He concludes:
To sum up the […] hindrances for an adequate formal analysis of lies we put together the
main points.
•
lies produce inconsistencies;
•
whether an utterance is a lie or not heavily depends on context;
•
according to background knowledge there may occur a ﬂic-ﬂac-effect;
•
causal and intentional aspects are indispensable in an analysis of lies.
To be sure, all these topics are handled by modern logic. And yet, to merge them into one
formal framework, which remains practically feasible seems hard enough. So it is not
surprising that a satisfactory logic of lying is still to come. (Urchs 2006, p. 88)
Urchs (2006) demonstrates the difﬁculty of proposing a formal account of lying. In
the informal sense (in ordinary language as opposed to logical notation), Mahon
(2008) provides the standard deﬁnition of lying following Bernard Williams’
formulation:
I take a lie to be an assertion, the content of which the speaker believes to be false, which is
made with the intention to deceive the hearer with respect to that content” (Williams 2002,
p. 96); or, more formally: To lie = df to make an assertion that is believed to be false to some
audience with the intention to deceive the audience about the content of that assertion.
Mahon modiﬁes the deﬁnition as:
To lie = df to make a believed-false statement to another person with the intention that that
other person believe that statement to be true.
He unpacks four necessary conditions:
First, lying requires that a person make a statement (statement condition). Second, lying
requires that the person believe the statement to be false, that is, lying requires that the
84
M. A. Peters

statement be untruthful (untruthfulness condition). Third, lying requires that the untruthful
statement be made to another person (addressee condition). Fourth, lying requires that the
person intend that that other person believe the untruthful statement to be true (intention to
deceive addressee condition).
This logical analysis is useful, but lying is also a complex cultural practice that
varies across history and cultures and is open to a genealogical analysis. Some idea
of its complexity can be gauged both from the difﬁculty of treating it in a formal
system and also in terms of the overlapping network of concepts involving a range
of different practices from the white lie, (Plato’s) noble lie, ﬁbbing, the barefaced
lie, to bullshit, blufﬁng, deceit, deception, and pathological lying.7 This list does not
mention associated forms of dissimulation, dissembling, propaganda, newspeak,
deliberate bias, and so on. These associated practices demonstrate how pervasive
lying is. If we were to take in these and other forms of behavior, then it would help
explain how pervasive lying is in public and personal life. To recognize these
associated forms and practices points to the demand for an “anthropology of lying”,
although I have found no such study or literature. (Ethnography itself seems
dependent on “true” narratives of informants and is famously open to distortions, as
Margaret Mead’s experience in recording Paciﬁc stories demonstrates.)8
I am encouraged to think of lying as a set of cultural practices partly through the
inﬂuence of Foucault’s genealogy. Wittgenstein’s (1953) language-game analysis is
also very helpful in understanding lying as yet another language game. Wittgenstein
writes: “Lying is another language game that needs to be learned like any other
one” (§ 241). Lying is not a misuse of language, it is just another language game.
The simulation would seem to be one of the basic features of language games of
emotions. Buzar et al. (2010, p. 34) take up this point to apply speech act theory to
lying:
“to lie” is a speech act like any other and it should be performed properly (satisﬁed, happy,
etc. similar as “to pretend”, Austin, 1961:201–20), and “lying is a language-game that
needs to be learned like any other one” (it should be learned and practiced properly,
Wittgenstein, 2001 §:249). “Being truthful” and “being lying” or to tell the truth and to tell
a lie are practically irrelevant for understanding lying. What seems to be much more
interesting are cases where these two are hard to differentiate because there are lies which
do not include previous intent to deceive and there are truths which are in fact half-truths,
incomplete truths, or avoidances of the truth.
Buzar and his colleagues explore the many intermediate cases between lying and
truth-telling to conclude:
7See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lie that mentions 30 “types” of lying though it is doubtful if
these are discreet types.
8It is reported that Americans and Europeans share stereotypical beliefs about the way liars act:
characteristically they avert their gaze, turn away, and pause while giving implausible accounts.
Yet these beliefs are “probably false”. See Global Deception Research Team (2006). On Mead’s
alleged hoaxing, see Freeman (1999).
The History and Practice of Lying in Public Life
85

we lie much more than we in fact believe we do (this rationalisation is part of good practice
of various professions like business, legal, political, medical etc. as well as our daily life in
which habitual lying, is part of upbringing, customs and culture). (Buzar et al. p. 38)
It is a substantial argument that brings us back to lying and its ubiquity in public
life, and also to Hannah Arendt’s insightful essay “Lying in Politics” with which
this paper began.
Arendt’s article consists of a series of reﬂections on the Pentagon Papers, and
she bases her assessment on the history of the lie in political culture. In “Truth and
Politics” (1967) and “Lying in Politics” (1971), Arendt reﬂects on the fundamental
relationship between lying and politics. She explains the nature of political action in
the context of lying with surprising consequences that run against modern intuitions
and threaten to change our understanding of the history of politics. In “Lying in
Politics”, Arendt provides an account of political imagination that draws inter-
connections between “the ability to lie, the deliberate denial of factual truth, and the
capacity to change facts, the ability to act.” She writes:
when we talk about lying, and especially about lying among acting men, let us remember
that the lie did not creep into politics by some accident of human sinfulness; moral outrage,
for this reason alone, is not likely to make it disappear. The deliberate falsehood deals with
contingent facts, that is, with matters which carry no inherent truth within themselves, no
necessity to be as they are; factual truths are never compellingly true. The historian knows
how vulnerable is the whole texture of facts in which we spend our daily lives; it is always
in danger of being perforated by single lies or torn to shreds by the organized lying of
groups, nations, or classes, or denied and distorted, often carefully covered up by reams of
falsehoods or simply allowed to fall into oblivion. Facts need testimony to be remembered
and trustworthy witnesses to be established in order to ﬁnd a secure dwelling place in the
domain of human affairs. From this, it follows that no factual statement can ever be beyond
doubt—as secure and shielded against attack as, for instance, the statement that two and
two make four. (Arendt 1971)
She continues in a Nietzschean vein:
It is this fragility that makes deception so easy up to a point, and so tempting. It never
comes into a conﬂict with reason, because things could indeed have been as the liar
maintains they were; lies are often much more plausible, more appealing to reason, than
reality, since the liar has the great advantage of knowing beforehand what the audience
wishes or expects to hear. He has prepared his story for public consumption with a careful
eye to making it credible, whereas reality has the disconcerting habit of confronting us with
the unexpected for which we were not prepared. (Arendt 1971)
The pervasive role of lying in modern politics requires a historical analysis. Cathy
Caruth (2010, p. 79) explains that in her earlier work, The Human Condition,
Arendt had elaborated the concept of political action that arose in the Greek polis
“when words and deeds replaced the mute force of violence and created a public
sphere in which men appeared before each other and created the world anew in
unpredictable and unexpected ways.” Caruth (2010, p. 80) points out “the public
realm has become a realm of deception” and, in a world where there is such a
conﬂict between factual truth and politics, it is a short step to the denial of history
86
M. A. Peters

and to the systematic political lying that invests itself in the public realm and creeps
into the history books and into the culture more generally.
The real danger, Caruth (2010) maintains, is when the lie loses its traditional role
within politics as an alternative means for determining true political action to
become an all-consuming activity that replaces action and history altogether to deny
history and constructing, in Arendt’s words, an “entirely ﬁctional world”, a pos-
sibility hugely enhanced in a world based more and more on PR and “image
making” (p. 82). How much more forbidding is Arendt’s analysis when it is viewed
at the end of the ﬁrst couple of decades of the twenty-ﬁrst century when the Internet
has become the ﬁrst truly global medium, the image has become supreme, and
ﬁnance culture has penetrated and percolated to heart of government.
Examining lying and deception in political culture, Markland (2012) demon-
strates that there have been signiﬁcant historical differences in the moral assessment
of lying in political culture in the West. Adopting a Nietzschean and Foucauldian
perspective, he argues that lying can serve to shore up and maintain culture:
With the rise of political realism and secular-positivism, the focus of politics shifted from
maintaining the moral and psychological well-being of citizens (and the values they live
by), to the maintenance of political power and stability for as long a duration as possible
(which was central in the works of Machiavelli and Hobbes). Lying, in turn, was then
justiﬁed as a useful political tool for sustaining political power. By examining the
re-conceptualization of lying (for the Greeks it could be morally necessary and politically
expedient, for the Christians it was morally prohibited) for purposes of merely maintaining
power, I attempt to elucidate a crucial way in which lying serves life. Speciﬁcally, lying can
be used to create the stability of society and the political state that is necessary for main-
taining culture and values more generally (p. 14).
There are, as far as I can see, two saving graces and checks: ﬁrst, as Markland
remarks, we should be concerned if lying becomes the province of a one-party state
and, second, drawing on Arendt, the individual lie or even the tissue of lies is only
tolerable in the name of true political action. If it ever becomes the singular
philosophical principle, we are lost.
References
Arendt, H. (1971, November 18). Lying in politics: Reﬂections on the Pentagon papers. The New
York review of books.
Austin, J. L. (1961). Pretending. In J. L. Austin (Ed.), Philosophical papers. Oxford Clarendon
Press.
Baier, K. (1958). The moral point of view. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Bailey, F. G. (1991). The prevalence of deceit. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Bok, S. (1999). Lying: Moral choice in public and private life. New York: Vintage Books.
Buzar, S., Jalšenjak, B., Krka, K., Lukin, J., Mladi, D., & Spaji, I. (2010). Habitual lying.
Philosophical Papers and Reviews, 2(3), 34–39.
Caruth, C. (2010). Lying and history. In R. Berkowitz, J. Katz, & T. Keenan (Eds.), Thinking in
dark times: Hannah Arendt on ethics and politics (pp. 79–92). New York: Fordham University
Press.
The History and Practice of Lying in Public Life
87

Foucault, M. (2001). Fearless speech. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e).
Freeman, D. (1999). The fateful hoaxing of Margaret Mead: A historical analysis of her Samoan
research. Boulder: Westview Press.
Glenn, P. F. (2004). The politics of truth: Power in Nietzsche’s epistemology. Political Research
Quarterly, 57(4), 575–583.
Ignatieff, M. (2001, October 13). Something happened. The Guardian.
Jay, M. (1999). Mendacious ﬂowers. London Review of Books, 21(15), 16–17.
Mahon, J. E. (2008). The deﬁnition of lying and deception. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/lying-deﬁnition/.
Accessed September 19, 2017.
Malpas, J. (2008). Truth, lies, and deceit: On ethics in contemporary public life. Journal of Applied
Philosophy, 22(1), 1–12.
Markland, A. (2012). The genealogy of lying and deception in political theory. A thesis submitted
to the Faculty of Wesleyan University in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the Degree
of Bachelor of Arts with Departmental Honors in Government, at http://wesscholar.wesleyan.
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1784&context=etd_hon_theses. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Montaigne, The Second Booke, XVIII, “Of giving the lie”, at http://ww.w.mises.ch/library/
Montaigne_Essays_Florio_Translation.pdf. Accessed September 19, 2017 [Translation by
John Florio, 1603].
Nietzsche, F. (1967). On the genealogy of morals and ecce homo. New York: Vintage.
Nietzsche, F. (1976). On truth and lies in an extra-moral sense. In The portable Nietzsche.
New York: Penguin.
Nyberg, D. (1993). The varnished truth: Truth telling and deceiving in ordinary life. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Rachels, J., & Rachels, S. (2011). The elements of moral philosophy (7th ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Schaff, P. (1887). Nicene and post-nicene fathers, ﬁrst series (Vol. 3). Buffalo, NY: Christian
Literature Publishing.
Simpson, D. (2007). Truth, truthfulness and philosophy in Plato and Nietzsche. British Journal for
the History of Philosophy, 15(2), 339–360.
The Global Deception Research Team. (2006). A world of lies. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 37(1), 60–74.
Urchs, M. (2006). Just lying. Logic and Logical Philosophy, 15(1), 67–89.
Williams, B. (2002). Truth and truthfulness: An essay in genealogy. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (2001). Philosophical investigations. 1953 Oxford Blackwell revised edition
2001.
88
M. A. Peters

Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying
Douglas Kellner
Donald Trump is probably the biggest liar in the history of the modern US presi-
dency. He tells repeated Big Lies despite empirical evidence and well-documented
media reports contracting his lies. When confronted with contrary evidence, Trump
and his handlers dismiss any critical claims about Trump as “fake news” and
“alternative facts”. Echoing Chairman Mao and Comrade Stalin, Trump calls the
media “the enemy of the people” and rarely does a day go by without a barrage of
attacks and rants on his Twitter account. Trump is also the biggest bullshitter to
inhabit the modern presidency, constantly bragging about himself and his mag-
niﬁcent accomplishment, never failing to BS to the nth about his amazing
achievement and fabulous presidency. Thus, the Trump Regime can be seen as
“post-truth” and hyper-Orwellian in its use of blatant lies, propaganda, and pure
bullshit.
In an article on “Bushspeak and the Politics of Lying” written during the Bush/
Cheney era, I distinguished between Big Lies that were endlessly repeated until they
had the ring of truth, like the claim that Saddam Hussein was hiding “weapons of
mass destruction” and was in alliance with al Qaeda (a favorite whopper of Dick
Cheney and his minions), contrasted to Bold Lies that made claims that people
knew were not true (such as the Saddam-al Qaeda connection), and Brazen Lies
where the lying liar as well as those being lied to knew were not true, but that the
spin patrol repeated anyway. In this study, I want to argue that Donald Trump
continued this tradition of Big, Bold, and Brazen Lies during his 2016 presidential
campaign and from the beginning of his presidency to the present.
D. Kellner (&)
Philosophy of Education, UCLA, Los Angeles, USA
e-mail: kellner@ucla.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_7
89

The Trump Campaign, Birtherism, and Donald’s Daily Lies
Donald Trump began his political career as a gadﬂy of the right-wing swamps of
the Internet with his promotion of the lie that President Barack Obama was not born
in the United States. Indeed, Trump was one of the most assiduous promoters of the
“birther” myth, erroneously claiming that Barack Obama was born in Africa and
thus not eligible to serve as President of the United States, hence grounding his
political career in a Big Lie about the ﬁrst African-American President (for a
biography of Trump that documents his role in promoting the “birther myth”, see
D’Antonio 2015, p. 283ff). In the 2008 presidential election, Trump made a big
show of insisting that Obama present his birth certiﬁcate to prove that he was born
in the USA, and although the Obama campaign provided photocopies of the
original birth certiﬁcate in Hawaii and notices of his birth in Honolulu newspapers
at the time, Trump kept insisting they were frauds. Many of his followers continue
to this day to believe the myth that Obama was not born in the USA.
In Trump’s presidential campaign kickoff speech on June 16, 2015, when he
announced he was running for President, Trump and his wife Melania dramatically
ascended down the stairway at Trump Towers, and the Donald strode up to a gaggle
of microphones and dominated media attention for days with his drama. The
opening speech of his campaign included typically inﬂammatory and arguably
mendacious remarks that held news cycles in thrall for days when he stated: “The
U.S. has become a dumping ground for everybody else’s problems. [Applause]
Thank you. It’s true, and these are the best and the ﬁnest. When Mexico sends its
people, they’re not sending their best. They’re not sending you. They’re not sending
you. They’re sending people that have lots of problems, and they’re bringing those
problems with us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists.
And some, I assume, are good people.”
This comment ignited a ﬁrestorm of controversy and a preview of Things to
Come concerning vile racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia, blatant lies, and the other
hallmarks of Trump’s Cacophony of Hate and Mendacity. Debate over Trump’s
assault on undocumented immigrants and Trump’s immigration proposals would
come to dominate daily news cycles of the Republican primaries and would con-
tinue to play out in the general election in Fall 2016 and into his presidency. Early
in his campaign, Trump promoted the Big Lie that he was going to build a wall
along the border with Mexico, and the chant “Build the Wall! Build the Wall!”
became a regular feature of his frenzied campaign rallies. Adding to the Big Lie, he
insisted that Mexico would pay for the wall and, in a call and response with his
audience, Trump would bark, “Whose going to pay for the wall?” and the crowd
would scream: “Mexico! Mexico!”
Former Mexican President Vicente Fox insisted that Mexico would not pay for
the wall. Critics pointed out that immigration authorities noted that illegal immi-
gration from Mexico to the USA was on the decline, and that more Mexicans were
90
D. Kellner

returning to their country than crossing the border into the USA,1 a condition that
would continue through the election and into Trump’s presidency. Further, once it
was clear how expensive the wall would be, and that there was little congressional
support for it, as of the ﬁrst year of Trump’s presidency, there was no serious effort
to build the Great Wall of Mexico, although Trump continued to promise his
audiences that he was going to “build that wall!”
In the lead up to the ﬁrst Republican primary debate in Fall 2015, Donald Trump
got the majority of media time, and his daily campaign appearances and the
Republican primary debates became media spectacle dominated by Trump. Every
day that Trump had a campaign event, the cable news networks would hype the
event with crawlers on the bottom of the TV screen proclaiming “Waiting for
Trump”, with airtime on cable TV dominated by speculation on what he would talk
about. Trump’s speeches were usually broadcast live, often in their entirety, a boon
of free TV time that no candidate of either party was awarded.
The rest of the day after the Trump event, the pundits would dissect what he had
said and his standing vis-à-vis the other Republican candidates. If Trump had no
campaign event planned, he would ﬁre off a round of Tweets against his opponents
on his highly active Twitter account—which then would be featured on network
cable news discussions as well as social media. From the beginning of his campaign
and into his presidency, his speeches, tweets, and off-the-cuff remarks would be
ﬁlled with a remarkable number of lies, although only a few contentious media
critics documented and dissected the candidate’s Daily Lies.2
Hence, Trump’s orchestration of media spectacle and a compliant mainstream
media were crucial in thrusting Trump ever further into the front-runner status in the
Republican primaries, winning for him the overwhelming amount of media atten-
tion and, eventually, the Republican nomination. The ﬁrst major quantitative study
released notes that from mid-June 2015, after Trump announced that he was run-
ning through mid-July, Trump was in 46% of the news media coverage of the
Republican ﬁeld, based on Google news hits; he also got 60% of Google news
searches. Forthcoming academic studies may reveal how Trump dominated all
media from newspapers to television to Twitter to social networks during the
Republican primaries and then during the general election (Somaiya 2015).
Like other authoritarians, Trump uses Big Lies to mobilize his base, but no
previous politician has founded his campaign and then presidency so exclusively on
Big Lies nor lied so fulsomely; neither has any major presidential candidate in
recent memory relied so heavily in his campaign on media spectacle. While Donald
1Trump’s vision of Latin American immigrants pouring over the border into the USA is a fantasy,
as studies have shown that more Mexicans are returning to Mexico after working in the USA than
coming into the country, illegal or not; see Ana Gonzalez-Barrera, “More Mexicans Leaving Than
Coming to the U.S. Net Loss of 140,000 from 2009 to 2014; Family Reuniﬁcation Top Reason for
Return” (Gonzalez-Barrera 2015).
2For examples of Trump’s Daily Lies during the primary campaign, see Lippman et al. (2016) and
Berrien (2016). For analysis of Trump’s lie-based and post-factual 2016 election campaign, see
Kellner (2016a, b).
Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying
91

Trump does not have a party apparatus or ideology as did the Nazis, his lies being
ad hoc and situational rather than programmatic, parallels between Trumpism and
authoritarian populism nonetheless can be fairly made. Trump’s August 21, 2015,
mega-rally in Mobile, Alabama, for example, was televised by cable news networks
broadcasting nothing but Trump, hyping up his visit to a stadium where he was
expecting 30–40,000 spectators, the biggest rally of the season. Although only
some 20,000 showed up, which was still a “huge” event in the heat of summer
before the primaries had even begun in earnest, Trump’s ﬂight into Alabama on his
own TrumpJet, and his rapturous reception by his admirers became the main story
of the news cycle, as did many such daily events in what the media called “the
summer of Trump”.
Watching the TV footage of the event, one cannot help but notice how the
networks repeatedly showed images of Trump ﬂying his airplane over and around
the stadium before landing and then cut away to big images of the TrumpJet every
few minutes. This media spectacle is naturally reminiscent of Leni Riefenstahl’s
Triumph of the Will—the chillingly effective German Nazi propaganda ﬁlm of
1934. Triumph focuses on Hitler ﬂying in his airplane through the clouds, looking
out the window at the crowds below, landing and driving through the streets of
Nuremberg for a mass rally. The crowds along the way and in the stadium greet
Hitler with rapture as he enters the spectacle of a highly orchestrated Nazi rally so
brilliantly recorded by Riefenstahl’s ﬁlm.
I do not know if the Trump operatives planned this parallel, or if it was just a
coincidence, but it is clear that Trump, like Hitler, has organized a fervent mass
movement outside of the conventional political party apparatuses. Like followers of
European fascism in the 1930s, Trump’s supporters over the years have suffered
economic deprivation, political alienation, humiliation, and a variety of hard times,
and they appear to be looking for a political savior to help them out with their
problems and to address their grievances. Like Hitler, Trump built his campaigns on
Big Lies and found compliant media to promote them.
Certainly, Trump is not Hitler and his followers are not technically fascists.
Nonetheless, the terms authoritarian populism and neofascism accurately describe
Trump and his supporters. Erich Fromm’s theories provide an analysis of author-
itarian populism that helps explicate Trump’s character and his appeal to his fol-
lowers (Kellner 2016a, b). Authoritarian movements ranging from German and
Italian fascism to the movement led by Franco in Spain to other dictatorships in
Latin America and throughout the world have all featured authoritarian leaders and
followers ready to submit to their demands. Donald Trump is similarly an
authoritarian leader who has mobilized an authoritarian populist movement
grounded in a politics of lying.
Trump proposes magical solutions like a wall along the Mexican border that will
keep out the armies of immigrants who, he claims, are taking away “American”
jobs, as well as committing waves of crime—claims that have been called into
question by empirical studies. Trump claims he will create millions of “great” jobs
without giving speciﬁc plans. Meanwhile, his own problematic business record
includes many bankruptcies, the hiring of foreign workers to toil on his projects
92
D. Kellner

(many of whom he does not pay) and failures to pay many subcontractors who
worked on his projects.
Trump thus presents himself as a superhero who will magically restore the USA
to greatness, provide jobs and create incredible wealth, and restore the USA to its
rightful place as the world’s superpower. In this fairy tale, the billionaire king will
ﬁght and destroy all the nation’s domestic and foreign enemies; the superman will
triumph and provide a happy ending for the American people.
While Trump plays the role of the Übermensch celebrated by the Nazis and
embodies their Führerprinzip, Trump is a very American form of the superhero and
lacks the party apparatus, advanced military forces, and disciplined cadres that the
Nazis used to seize and hold power. Like other right-wing American populists,
Trump bashes the Federal Reserve, the US monetary system, Wall Street hedge
fund billionaires, and neoliberal globalization, in the same fashion as Hitler attacked
German monopoly capitalism. Yet even as he ranted against monopoly capitalists,
Hitler accepted large donations from German industrialists—a fact brilliantly
illustrated in the famous graphic by John Heartﬁeld, “The meaning of the Hitler
salute”, which showed Hitler with his hand up in the Nazi salute to receive money
from German capitalists. Just as Hitler denounced allegedly corrupt and weak party
politicians in the Weimar Republic, Trump decries all politicians as “idiots”,
“stupid”, or “weak”—some of the would-be strongman’s favorite words. In fact,
Trump even attacked lobbyists, claiming that he was beyond corruption, since he
self-ﬁnanced his campaign (the truth of which is doubtful, but sends the right
signals to his supporters).
Like the alienated and angry followers of European fascism, many of Trump’s
admirers have suffered under the vicissitudes of capitalism, globalization, and
technological revolution. For decades, they have watched their jobs being moved
overseas, displaced by technological innovation, or lost through unequal economic
development amid increasing divisions between rich and poor. With the global
economic crisis of 2007–08, many people lost jobs, housing, savings, and suffered
through a slow recovery under the Obama administration. The fact that Obama was
the ﬁrst black president further outraged many white Americans, their racism and
prejudices inﬂamed by 8 years of attacks on the Obama administration by
right-wing media and the Republican Party.
Yet, unlike classic dictators who are highly disciplined with a ﬁxed ideology and
party apparatus, Trump is chaotic and undisciplined, viciously attacking whoever
dares criticize him in his daily Twitter feed or speeches, thus dominating the daily
news cycles with his outrageous attacks on Mexicans, Muslims and immigrants,
politicians of both parties, and media commentators who dare to criticize him.
Trump effectively used the broadcast media and social media to play the powerful
demagogue who preys on his followers’ rage, alienation, and fears. Indeed, by
March 2015, media companies estimated that Trump received far more media
coverage than his Republican Party contenders, and by June, MarketWatch esti-
mated that he had received $3 billion worth of free media coverage. The free
coverage continued into the election. Yet, at whim, Trump bans news media from
Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying
93

his rallies, including The Washington Post or CNN, if they publish or broadcast
criticisms that he doesn’t like.
Like followers of European fascism, Trump’s authoritarian populist supporters
are driven by rage: they are really angry with the political establishment, the media,
the economic, and other elites. They are eager to support an antiestablishment
candidate who claims to be an outsider (which is only partly true, as Trump,
following in his father’s footsteps, has been a member of the real estate industry for
decades) (on Trump’s business failures, see Barrett 2016; D’Antonio 2015; Kranish
and Fisher 2016). Trump provokes their rage with classic authoritarian propaganda
techniques like the “Big Lie”, when he repeats over and over again, that immigrants
are pouring across the border and committing crime, that all his primary opponents,
the media, and Hillary Clinton are “big liars”, and that he, Donald Trump, is the
only one telling the truth—clearly the biggest lie of all.
Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric and his xenophobic nationalism play into a
violent racist tradition in the USA and activate atavistic fears of other groups among
his white followers. Like European fascists, Trump draws on restorative nostalgia
and promises to make his country “great again”. This plays to the vile side of the
American psyche and the long tradition of nationalism, America First-ism, and
plain prejudice, i.e., the desire to keep minorities and people of color in their place
and potential immigrants outside of the country.
Like fascists and authoritarian populists, Trump thus presents himself as the
superhero leader who can step down from above and solve the problems that
Washington and politicians have created, and his followers appear to believe that
Trump alone can stop the decline of America. Trump supporters say that Trump is
the only one who talks straight about issues such as immigration, problems with
Washington, and the role of money in politics. In late August 2016, Trump
increasingly used the term “the silent majority” to describe his followers, a term
Richard Nixon used to characterize his white conservative followers who felt
marginalized in the ﬁerce racial, political, and cultural battles of the 1960s—a
coded phrase to appeal to aggrieved white voters.
Trump promotes himself as the tough guy who can stand up to ISIS, the Chinese,
and “America’s enemies”. In the Republican primaries, he presented himself as “the
most militarist” guy in the ﬁeld and promised to build up the US military and to
destroy ISIS and radical Islamic terrorism utterly, restoring the USA to its super-
power status (which he says was lost by the Obama administration). With his
bragging, chest-pounding, and hypermacho posturing, Trump promises a restora-
tion of white male power and authority, and with it America’s greatness. Trump
will make “America First” once again and vanquish all its enemies.
“America First” was the slogan of an anti-interventionist movement in the early
1940s to keep the USA out of World War II that was associated with Charles
Lindbergh and American fascist and anti-Semitic forces. Trump doesn’t stress this
connection, but it serves as a dog whistle to some of his extreme right-wing fol-
lowers. “America First” was also highlighted in the Republican National
Convention, and Trump has said it will be a major theme of his administration. To
Trump, this means disconnecting from other countries: more barriers to trade,
94
D. Kellner

tougher negotiations with long-standing allies in NATO, and a more restrictive
immigration policy. Trump’s “America First” discourse is thus an important part of
his “Make America Great Again” discourse and links Trump’s isolationism with his
anti-NATO and pro-Putin discourse. Trump has continued to complain that the
USA is paying too much of NATO’s expenses and is prepared to dismantle the
organization that has helped provide more than 60 years of European and American
peace and prosperity after the two terrible World Wars of the twentieth century.
Also disturbing is how Trump continues to speak favorably of his favorite
authoritarian strongman, Vladimir Putin. And Trump has even made favorable
remarks about Saddam Hussein, who was “so good at killing terrorists”. Trump is
obviously attracted to authoritarian dictators and makes it clear that he is prepared
to be the United States’ savior, redeemer, and strongman.
At the Republican convention, Trump insisted that “you won’t hear any lies
here”, which was, of course, a laughable lie (for documentation of Trump’s Big and
little lies, see the compilation up to the present, Leonhardt and Thompson 2017). In
his closing speech at the Republican National Convention, Trump repeated at least
four times that he was the law and order candidate, replaying a major theme in the
1968 Nixon campaign. When he deployed his America First motif, it was inten-
siﬁed by his storm troopers chanting “USA! USA! USA!” After the gloom and
doom vision of a declining America and a rigged system, in a highly pessimistic
take on the USA and its “broken” system, Trump declared in Fuhrer-fashion: “I
alone can ﬁx it”. Hence, his crowd was led to believe that he, Donald J. Trump, a
self-proclaimed billionaire who has bankrupted many companies, defaulted on bank
loans, failed to pay contractors for service and is the very epitome of capitalist
greed, is The One who is going to ﬁx the system and “Make America Great
Again”—a slogan he puts on the baseball caps that he sells to his supporters.
The baseball hat makes it appear that Trump is an ordinary fellow and links him
to his followers as one of them—a clever self-presentation for an American
authoritarian populist. Sporting a hat on the campaign trail is especially ironic,
given that Trump appears to have borrowed this fashion from award-winning,
progressive
documentary
ﬁlmmaker
Michael
Moore,
who
is
perhaps
the
quintessential anti-Trump in the American political imaginary. Further, in his
speech at the Republican convention, this shouting, red-faced demagogue presented
himself as the “voice of the forgotten men and women”—a Depression-era phrase
of the Roosevelt administration, which Trump inﬂects toward his white con-
stituency. In his speeches and on the campaign trail, Trump uses the crisis discourse
deployed by classic fascist and authoritarian regimes to describe the situation in the
USA and the need for a savior. In contrast to the Nazis, however, Trump tells his
followers that it’s his deal-making skills as a supercapitalist billionaire that cre-
dential him to be the President, and he induces his followers to believe that he will
“Make America Great Again” by making a “great deal” for it and them.
Trump’s campaign replicates in some ways the submission to the leader and the
cause found in classic authoritarian movements. Yet at the same time, Trump also
embodies the recent trends toward celebrity politics and the increasing conﬂuence
of politics and entertainment in the USA. Further, Trump is a master at promoting
Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying
95

his image; he would even call up journalists pretending to be a PR agent to get
gossip items about himself planted in newspapers.
In The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness (1973), Erich Fromm engages in a
detailed analysis of the authoritarian character as sadistic, excessively narcissistic,
malignantly aggressive, and vindictively destructive. These are personality traits
that are arguably applicable to Trump. Think, for instance, of the disturbing footage
of Trump mockingly mimicking a disabled reporter. Hence, the threats we face in
his presidency raise the issue of what it means to have an aggressive, destructive,
and authoritarian individual like Trump as President of the United States. What
would a foreign and domestic policy governed by a malignantly aggressive leader
look like? How we deal with these threats will determine the future of the United
States and trajectory of world history.
The Trump Presidency, Fake News, and Bullshit
Trump began his presidency with a Big Lie concerning the numbers of people
attending the Obama versus Trump inaugurations, claiming that his was the biggest
ever. When TV pictures showed that there were many more people at the 2008
Obama inauguration, with comparative pictures of crowds on the mall and lining
parade routes, Trump sent out his hapless press secretary Sean Spicer to read a
carefully and nastily written attack on the media for misrepresenting the number of
people who had attended Trump’s inauguration, and threatened that the media
would be held responsible for their lies and distortions. Spicer correctly argued that
the Federal Parks Service did not do crowd estimates, but falsely claimed that many
more people took the Metro the day of Trump’s inauguration than on Obama’s
inauguration, and provided what turned out to be completely false numbers in his
false claim that Trump’s inauguration was the biggest in history.
The D.C. Metro quickly released inauguration day rider statistics for the Trump
and Obama events, and reported that many more took the Metro the day of
Obama’s inauguration, thus leading CNN and other media to report that the Trump
administration began its reign with bald-faced lies on its ﬁrst day in ofﬁce, and had
launched an attack on the media for allegedly lying, while available statistics and
facts indicated that the media had in fact been in the main truthful in its reporting
about comparative crowd size and Metro usage. The comparative pictures of the
Obama and Trump administration inaugurations showed clearly that many more
attended the former.
On Sunday morning of inauguration weekend, more evidence emerged that the
Trump administration had gone full out post-factual as the President of the United
States tweeted: “Wow, television ratings just out: 31 million people watched the
Inauguration, 11 million more than the very good ratings from 4 years ago!” The
still functioning media quickly pointed out, however, that: “Nielsen reported
Saturday that 30.6 million viewers watched inaugural coverage between 10 a.m.
and 6 p.m. on Friday. That ﬁgure is higher than Obama’s second inauguration in
96
D. Kellner

2013, which drew 20.6 million viewers. But it’s lower than that of Obama’s ﬁrst
inauguration in 2009, when 38 million viewers tuned in, according to Nielsen. The
record is held by Ronald Reagan, when 42 million watched his inaugural festivities
in 1981” (Battaglio 2017).
The same morning, on Meet The Press, the Trump administration’s multiple and
multiplying by the minute misrepresentations of inauguration numbers were cited
by moderator Chuck Todd who asked Kellyanne Conway, counselor to the presi-
dent: “Why put him [i.e. Press Secretary Sean Spicer] out there for the very ﬁrst
time, in front of that podium, to utter a provable falsehood? It’s a small thing, but
the ﬁrst time he confronts the public, it’s a falsehood?” Conway responded: “Don’t
be so overly dramatic about it, Chuck. You’re saying it’s a falsehood, and they’re
giving—our press secretary, Sean Spicer, gave alternative facts to that. But the
point really is—Todd jumped in and retorted: “Wait a minute. Alternative facts?
Alternative facts! Four of the ﬁve facts he uttered … were just not true. Alternative
facts are not facts; they’re falsehoods.”
The Trump staffers have obviously come to believe that they can deﬁne facts and
mold reality as they like. If the media doesn’t validate their truths, Trump and his
post-factual media brigade will take them on, challenging the press to subject every
word of Trumpspin to rigorous scrutiny and, if necessary, critique. Trump spinster
Kellyanne Conway will evermore be remembered in the Post-Truth Hall of Infamy
as “alternative facts” Conway, and Sean Spicer earned the title of 4L4 M Spicer (as
in “four lies four minutes”); everything they say should be subjected to the same
rigorous scrutiny and criticism that should be applied to the ultimate source, who is,
of course, Trump himself.
During the early days of the Trump presidency, Spicer riled the media by his
aggressive hectoring tone, threats that the press would be held responsible for their
lying reporting. After loudly and aggressively repeating his litany of lies, he
shouted: “And that’s what you should be reporting!” The press does not like to be
told what to report any more than politicians and their spinners like to be confronted
with real facts that trump their “alternative” ones. Democracy requires a separation
of powers, and the press serves classically as the “fourth estate” to provide part of a
system of checks and balances against excessive, misused, or corrupt state power.
The inestimable political value of a free press, we must remind ourselves, is that it
can speak truth to power.
In the ﬁrst full day of the Trump administration, Trump bragged of his “running
war against the media” in front of CIA employees before the fabled CIA “Wall of
Fame”, and sent his ﬂunkeys out to battle the press in the media for the next few
days, but the barrage of ridicule, criticism, and anger they stirred up suggest that the
White House lost the battle of Day One. Of course, Trump’s daily twitters, which
continued despite advice to the contrary, and his “running” war with the media,
might be a smokescreen for the real war to push through a right-wing and militarist
agenda while the press is distracted chasing down the Daily Lies and shooting down
the “fake news” and alternative facts. To this day, Trump and his staff continue to
dismiss reporting they don’t approve of as “fake news”. The Trump base have
labeled the mainstream and increasingly anti-Trump press as “false news” tout
Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying
97

court, marking the ﬁrst time that a president has so broadly delegitimized the
mainstream media.
The State of the Union was not good as the Donald J. Trump White House
Reality Show moved into its ﬁrst weeks in ofﬁce. The stock market had declined for
5 days straight before the inauguration and lost all of its gains for the year and
continued to go down, although there would no doubt be roller coasters to come;
indeed, by summer 2017, Wall Street indexes were at an all-time high as ﬁnance
capital speculated in an orgy of irrational exuberance, as if they were entering the
Last Days. The Earth’s temperature had risen to all-time highs for the third year in a
row, and a Trump administration full of climate deniers contemptuous of science
continued to heat things up, ultimately shocking the world with the announcement
that the USA was leaving the Paris Climate Accords.
Inauguration weekend had seen extreme weather events from coast to coast as
heavy rain continued to pound California after a severe drought and rational minds
were undergoing trauma at the unthinkable thought of a Trump presidency. Yet as
in classic authoritarian movements, the followers accepted the pronouncements of
the leader as gospel; although Trump lied more outrageously than any candidate in
recent US history, his supporters turned out in droves throughout the country
shouting hateful slogans, repeating Trump’s lies. Like classical authoritarian
demagogues, Trump produced scapegoats to mobilize his followers. The scapegoats
Trump projected were not only Muslims and immigrants but also “the establish-
ment” and a shadowy cabal of global capital identiﬁed Hillary Clinton, successfully
portraying her as part of the enemy against which Trump railed. Trump played the
“forgotten men and women” card effectively and presented himself as the people’s
chosen leader, although it was not clear what he would actually deliver to his
followers.
The lack of critical thinking and disregard for facts and truth in Trump’s fol-
lowers demonstrates failures of the education system in the USA and the need for a
reconstruction of education if US democracy is to survive. Democratic elections
require an informed electorate, capable of distinguishing between true and false,
and seeing through lies and deception. Donald Trump had been a celebrity con man
for decades; his skills in bamboozling the public helped him enormously in the
election. He is positioning himself as the ﬁrst aggressively post-factual president,
and citizens, with better education and the aid of a free and vital press, must become
capable of holding him accountable.
An informed electorate means an educated electorate, and good jobs in the
current economy require higher education, or specialized skills, to level the playing
ﬁeld. This, in turn, requires federal, state, and local government to expand the sector
of higher education, and to provide access, training, and ﬁnancial support to those
sectors of the society, including or perhaps especially Trump’s base, to help them
better their own lives. Trump, however, chose charter school advocate and enemy
of public education Betsy DeVos his nomination for Secretary of Education. DeVos
appeared before the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee for
her conﬁrmation hearing January 17, 2017, and demonstrated that she knows next
to nothing about current debates concerning the evaluation of student performance,
98
D. Kellner

knew even less about disability provisions in public education, and that she was in
general unqualiﬁed to run the Education Department. DeVos, a right-wing bil-
lionaire champion of vouchers and charter schools, revealed that she didn’t really
know anything about public education at all. When asked about her positions on
guns in schools, she referred to previous testimony that guns in a certain school
district were needed to protect students and teachers from grizzly bear attacks; when
reporters questioned ofﬁcials in the school in question, they claimed that they had
no grizzly bear problems, and no guns in their schools.
DeVos’ written statement was revealed to be heavily plagiarized, and testimony
indicated that the charter schools DeVos had championed in Michigan were fail-
ures, yet she squeaked through the Senate committee questioning her, and barely
made it through a full Senate vote that required Vice President Mike Pence to cast
the tie-breaking vote. This was the ﬁrst time in history in which the Veep had to
break a tie to conﬁrm a cabinet member, linking Pence to DeVos forever.
In her ﬁrst foray into the public after her conﬁrmation, protesters blocked DeVos
from entering a Washington D.C. Middle School. The protesters shouted: “You do
not represent anything that they stand for,” referring to DeVos’ attacks on public
schools. Demonstrators held signs attacking her position on public education and
her support for vouchers and charter schools, expressing fears that DeVos would
undermine public education, which John Dewey and so many others have argued is
essential for a democracy and the opportunity for equal advancement for all its
citizens.
As the Trump presidency passed its 100 days mark, the lies continued to mul-
tiply (see Cillizza 2017; Kellner 2017), a condition that persists to the present day.
There is speculation that Trump simply does not know the difference between truth
and lies, does not care, and says whatever pops into his mind at the moment, or
whatever serves his purpose at the time. Others speculate that Trump is a classic
case of the bullshitter, who makes things up as he goes along and fabulates,
exaggerates, dissembles, lies, and bullshits as a mode of discourse and way of life.3
In any case, Donald J. Trump serves as a poster child for the post-truth presidency
and makes recovering postmodernists nostalgic for truth, rationality, and sanity.
References
Barrett, W. (2016). Trump: The greatest show on earth: The deals, the downfall, the reinvention.
New York: Regan Books.
Battaglio, S. (2017, January 19). Trump’s inauguration is watched by 30.6 million viewers—7
million fewer than Obama’s ﬁrst ceremony. Los Angeles Times.
Berrien, H. (2016, April 11). Lyin’ Donald: 101 of Trump’s greatest lies. Dailywire.
3See Frankfurt (2005). Several commentators noted the relevance of Frankfurt’s concept of bullshit
to Trump’s discursive habits. See Heer (2015) and Kuns (2016).
Donald Trump and the Politics of Lying
99

Cillizza, C. (2017, February 21). Donald Trump’s streak of falsehoods now stands at 33 days. The
Washington Post.
D’Antonio, M. (2015). Never enough: Donald Trump and the pursuit of success. New York:
Thomas Dunne Books.
Fromm, E. (1973). The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Frankfurt, H. G. (2005). On bullshit. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gonzalez-Barrera, A. (2015, November 19). More Mexicans leaving than coming to the U.S. Pew
Research
Center.
http://www.pewhispanic.org/2015/11/19/more-mexicans-leaving-than-
coming-to-the-u-s/. Accessed August 3, 2017.
Heer, J. (2015, December 1). Donald Trump is not a liar. He’s something worse: A bullshit artist.
New
Republic.
https://newrepublic.com/article/124803/donald-trump-not-liar.
Accessed
August 28, 2016.
Kellner, D. (2016a). American nightmare: Donald Trump, media spectacle, and authoritarian
populism. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Kellner, D. (2016b). Donald Trump as authoritarian populist: A Frommian analysis. Logos, 15(2–3).
Kellner, D. (2017). The American horror show: Election 2016 and the ascendency of
Donald J. Trump. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Kranish, M., & Fisher, M. (2016). Trump revealed: An American journey of ambition, ego, money
and power. New York: Scribner.
Kelly, M., Kessler, G., & Lee, M. Y. H. (2017). President Trump’s list of false and misleading
claims tops 1,000. The Washington Post. August 17,2017 at https://www.washingtonpost.com/
news/factchecker/wp/2017/08/22/president-trumps-list-offalse-and-misleading-claims-tops-
1000/?utm_term=.a685e9f2e85c (accessed January10, 2018).
Kuns, K. (2016, August 8). Fareed Zakaria explains in detail why he considers Trump a “bullshit
artist.” Crooks and Liars. http://crooksandliars.com/2016/08/fareed-zakaria-explains-detail-
while-he. Accessed August 28, 2016.
Leonhardt, D., & Thompson, S. A. (2017, July 21) Trump’s lies. The New York Times.
Lippman, D., Samuelsohn, D., & Arnsdorf, I. (2016, March 13). Trump’s week of errors:
Exaggerations and ﬂat-out falsehoods. Politico.
Somaiya, R. (2015, July 24). Trump’s wealth and early poll numbers complicate news media’s
coverage decisions. The New York Times.
100
D. Kellner

Post-truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust
Petar Jandrić
Introduction
Deception is an omnipresent and pervasive feature of human interactions—in
everyday lives, we all tell numerous white (and not so white) lies in order to show
our best side to the world. Public personae such as actors and singers present
themselves using highly mediated images and videos in order to look young,
beautiful and desirable; politicians send carefully crafted messages that show them
in (what they believe is) the best possible light. Looking at individuals, the psy-
chologists Whitty and Joinson argue ‘lying is a part of daily life. The Internet has
simply provided a new place for individuals to lie’ (2008, p. 56). However, the
Internet has not merely enhanced individual human tendency for deception. Deﬁned
as ‘circumstances in which objective facts are less inﬂuential in shaping public
opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief’ (Oxford Dictionaries 2016),
post-truth is a far-reaching social concept which threatens the traditional concepts
of knowledge, decision-making and politics.
According to Rider (2017), ‘in order to understand the idea of “post-truth” or
“post-fact” politics, it is tempting to focus on the lie. I think there is reason to resist
this temptation. There are a plenty of utterances that fall in between’. This chapter
examines such utterances and deﬁnes post-truth as a curious phenomenon that
resides in between truth and lie, emotion and reason. Based in a philosophy of trust
and analyses of digital trust, it deﬁnes post-truth as a poisonous public pedagogy
and seeks response in a new, whole-rounded critical pedagogy of trust.
P. Jandrić (&)
Zagreb University of Applied Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia
e-mail: petar.jandric@tvz.hr
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_8
101

The Curious Divorce of Truth and Trust
Hancock (2007) deﬁnes digital deception as ‘the intentional control of information
in a technologically mediated message to create a false belief in the receiver of the
message’. This deﬁnition consists of three important parts: (1) deception needs to be
deliberate, (2) deception needs to be addressed at someone, and (3) deception needs
to be technically mediated. Hancock furthermore classiﬁes digital deception into
identity-based deception, which consists of faking identities, and message-based
deception, which consists of faking the content of communication. Using these
helpful classiﬁcations, he studies the psychology behind various forms of online
deception from fake e-mails to fake online dating proﬁles.
Let us apply Hancock’s deﬁnition to a recent example of post-truth. On 18
February 2017, ‘Donald Trump appeared to invent a terrorist attack in Sweden
during a campaign-style rally in Florida on Saturday, inviting questions that he may
have confused the Scandinavian country with a city in Pakistan’ (Topping 2017).
Trump’s deception is clearly message-based, because it consists of providing false
content of communication. However, it is impossible to determine whether the
deception was deliberate and who is the exact addressee of the deception. The act of
deception took place in a public talk, yet the majority of its recipients received
information through one or another technically mediated medium such as television
and the Internet. Now let us take a brief look at the consequences of Trump’s talk.
On the one hand, the video recording clearly shows that Trump’s deception has
produced the desired emotional response from the audience. On the other hand,
many people read news reports revealing the deception, and some of them may
have formed different opinions based on that revelation (see, for instance, readers’
comments under the article which reveals the deception) (Topping 2017).
The majority of people received Trump’s message online, so a possible route for
analysis is the psychology of online deception. Drawing from Hancock (2007),
Whitty and Joinson describe the truth-lies paradox:
If the technology itself is both an enabler of honesty and deceit, one needs to look beyond
explanations rooted in technological determinism in order to fully understand people’s
behaviour online. Speciﬁcally, we would argue that to understand the nature of truth and
lies online, one needs to look at the context in which people act alongside the person
themselves. We would also argue strongly that truth and lies are not mutually exclusive,
and that in much online interaction people are strategically managing their online identity to
meet both their own goals and the expectations of the other. While doing this, they are also
balancing their actions with the norms for the site or community in which they are active
(Whitty and Joinson 2008, p. 143).
Finally, Whitty and Joinson place ‘trust as central to the truth-lies paradox’ (Whitty
and Joinson, p. 143).
For Hancock (2007) and Whitty and Joinson (2008), truth is dialectically
intertwined with trust: I trust you, because I expect that you are telling the truth. In
the context of post-truth, however, it is almost completely irrelevant whether the
alleged terrorist attack in Sweden really happened. Appealing to emotion and the
102
P. Jandrić

personal beliefs of his audience, Trump reinforced their widespread fear of Islamic
terrorism as a rising threat to the Western world. Then, Trump used the emotional
resonance with his audience in order to create trust that he is the right person for
resolving that problem—in this context, ‘minor’ issues such as truthfulness of his
claims are secondary.
What caused this curious divorce between truth and trust? In her insightful
explanation, Sharon Rider takes as her point of departure Peter Thiel’s remarks at a
meeting of the National Press Club in Washington DC: ‘I think one thing that
should be made distinguished here is, the media always is taking Trump literally. It
never takes him seriously, but it always takes him literally. I think a lot of the voters
who vote for Trump take Trump seriously, but not literally’ (cited in Rider 2017).
Rider’s conclusion is not simply that voters are willing to ‘forgive’ a lie or two to
their favourite candidate. Rather, she argues that post-truth creates an intellectual
universe wherein the message conveyed is that evaluation according to criteria of
truthfulness is irrelevant.
If Thiel’s analysis is correct, Trump’s victory is not due primarily to the unleashing of
hitherto suppressed sexist, racist, homophobic, anti-Semitic sentiment among white male
voters, but in an intuition that Trump’s bombastic and seemingly incoherent statements are
not statements at all. (…) Lying assumes that what is being conveyed is content, but on
Thiel’s interpretation, Trump is not conveying content. He’s not talking about policy, but
rather about an attitude toward policy (Rider 2017).
Obviously, this fundamental rejection of truth results in stark consequences. ‘When
we retreat from the responsibility of establishing and recognizing a minimal
common ground for debate and decision, we implicitly dismiss the possibility of
democratic forms and processes’ (Rider 2017). By divorcing truth from trust,
post-truth does not bring about yet another form of the lying politician modelled in
the image of Donald Trump. Instead, it fundamentally threatens traditional con-
ceptions of knowledge, decision-making and politics.
Post-truth and the Philosophy of Trust
The post-truth divorce of truth and trust, combined with the rejection of truth,
brings into foreground the questions of trust. In the following discussion, therefore,
I will examine the relationships between truth and trust using four main themes:
(i) the nature of trust and trustworthiness, (ii) the epistemology of trust, (iii) the
value of trust and (iv) trust and the will (McLeod 2015).
(i) Trustworthiness is a human property, while trust is an attitude towards other
people. Based on that distinction, Macleod identiﬁes four main requirements for
establishing trust.
Trusting requires that we can (1) be vulnerable to others (vulnerable to betrayal in par-
ticular); (2) think well of others, at least in certain domains; and (3) be optimistic that they
Post-truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust
103

are, or at least will be, competent in certain respects. Each of these conditions for trust is
relatively uncontroversial. There is a further condition which is controversial, however: that
the trustor is optimistic that the trustee will have a certain kind of motive for acting
(McLeod 2015).
In the age of the digital reason, we are more vulnerable to betrayal than ever—
information can be easily manipulated; identities and messages can be easily fal-
siﬁed. At the same time, however, we are less vulnerable to other forms of attacks;
for the most part, technology-mediated hate messages are less hurtful than physical
violence.
People strategically, and often unconsciously, manage their online identities in
order to meet social expectations (Whitty and Joinson 2008, p. 143), so thinking
well of others and believing in their competence can be based on dubious infor-
mation. Furthermore, even the most correct information is useless without correct
interpretation. For instance, my colleague from information services lists the fol-
lowing abbreviations in his e-mail signature: MCP, MCTS, MCSA, MCITP and
MCT. The abbreviations look impressive, so I took the effort and found out that
they represent a list of Microsoft’s certiﬁcates (Microsoft 2017). This indicates that
I should trust my colleague’s competence—after all, he is certiﬁed by one of the
largest information technology companies in the world. Being a technological
novice, however, I do not really understand the meaning of these certiﬁcates, so I
still do not know whether they will help my colleague to resolve the problem with
my computer. Macleod’s fourth requirement for trusting, the trustee’s motive for
acting, is also problematic. In my work environment, I can trust that my colleague is
motivated to resolve my computer problem because he gets paid for the job.
However, if I seek help from an online company, I have no idea who sits behind the
other screen and why. Trust and trustworthiness have never been easy, yet it is safe
to say that the digital age has brought about an additional level of complexity—the
age of widespread information has brought about increasing difﬁculties in trusting
that information.
(ii) The central question of traditional epistemology of trust is: ‘Ought I to trust or
not?’ (McLeod 2015). Since the dawn of humankind, the philosophical branch
of scepticism has brought about valuable insights into this question. In
scepticism, however, trust is dialectically intertwined with truth—and
post-truth explicitly rejects this relationship. In a post-truth environment,
therefore, pragmatist and rationalist approaches focused on problem-solving
and action provide a much better ﬁt. For instance, I can meet my brother and
unconditionally believe what he told me in person—these things happen
between siblings. However, Faulkner shows that trusting and being trust-
worthy cannot be explained merely by reference to ‘person’s beliefs and
desires’ or teleological considerations, and claims that ‘in trusting one takes on
commitments, not merely to act in certain way, but also to premise one’s
practical reasoning on a trust-based view of the interaction situation’ (Faulkner
2014, p. 1795). Depending on the context, my trust-based view can change.
I unconditionally believe my brother, yet I can never be completely sure about
104
P. Jandrić

truthfulness of his Facebook posts and e-mails because his accounts might
have been hacked. It is easier (and more common) to hack social media
accounts than e-mails, so my trust in brother’s Facebook post is lesser than my
trust in brother’s e-mail. As this example illustrates, rationalist context-speciﬁc
approaches to traditional epistemology of trust are suited to the age of the
digital reason.
Traditional epistemology of trust is primarily concerned with the individual.
However, post-truth is an inherently social phenomenon, so it should be examined
using the approach of social epistemology. For instance, advocates and deniers of
climate change often use the same empirical datasets in order to arrive at opposing
‘scientiﬁc truths’ (Gleick 2007). Certainly, the question whether human beings
cause global warming has only one true answer—so one of these groups uses
pseudoscience to prove own ideological positions. However, what happens when
both sides of the debate possess certiﬁed ‘experts’ with proper degrees and cre-
dentials? And what happens if we cannot easily identify political, economic and
other interests behind the competing ‘truths’? According to Goldman and
Blanchard (2016),
A fundamental problem facing the layperson is that genuine expertise often arises from
knowledge of esoteric matters, matters of which most people are ignorant. Thus, even when
a layperson listens carefully to someone professing great expertise, the layperson may be at
a loss to decide whether the self-professed expert merits much trust.
For laypersons faced with stark disagreement between the experts, Goldman and
Blanchard list several strategies for ﬁnding the truth: (1) ‘to arrange a “debate”
between the self-professed experts’; (2) ‘to inquire which position endorsed by one
of them is most common among all (professed) experts’; and (3) to compare ‘their
respective track-records: how often has each expert correctly answered past ques-
tions in the domain?’ (ibid). However, these methods are sometimes indecisive and
sometimes hard to convey, so laypersons naturally incline to scientiﬁc ‘truths’
which provide a better ﬁt to their overall emotion, personal belief and underpinning
motifs and interests.
The testimony of experts is just one possible spin-off of a more general problem
of testimony. Social epistemology inquires into the epistemic nature of collective
agents, issues pertaining to scientiﬁc knowledge, democracy, free speech and eth-
ics. While traditional epistemology illuminates post-truth within a rationalist
framework, social epistemology provides various useful tools for analysing the
collective production of knowledge and its social consequences.
(iii)
Trust is the bread and butter of human civilisation. According to Macleod,
‘without trusting or being trusted in justiﬁed ways, we could not have
morality or society and could not be morally mature, autonomous, knowl-
edgeable, or invested with opportunities for collaborating with others’
(McLeod 2015). In the age of the digital reason, many traditionally indi-
vidual activities are increasingly transforming into the realm of collective
thinking and the social production of knowledge (the transition from
Post-truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust
105

traditional humanities to digital humanities is a typical case in point) (Wark
and Jandrić 2016; Peters and Jandrić 2017; Jandrić 2017a, b). Thus, trust
becomes increasingly important
for almost
all kinds of knowledge
development.
(iv)
Trust is cultivated through a history of interactions between the trustees—
one cannot wake up one morning and decide to trust someone. Therefore,
philosophers have deﬁned trust in terms of belief, emotion and various
combinations thereof (McLeod 2015). A decisive take on the relationships
between trust and the will is far beyond the scope of this paper, yet the
non-voluntarily nature of trust as belief and the complexity of trust as
emotion are essential for understanding the nature of post-truth. Post-truth
does
not
care
about
truth,
because
it
is
emotional.
Post-truth
is
non-predictable, because it is not rational. Post-truth strongly inﬂuences
people, because it appeals to basic human instincts. As can easily be seen
from Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, the emotional, the irrational
and the instinctive cannot be counterbalanced with truth and reason. This
conclusion does not imply that truth and reason are unimportant—in the face
of blatant lies and stupidity, most people will respond negatively. But this
negative response is often instinctive and emotional, which is to say, irra-
tional. Thus, the response conﬁrms the content of the post-truth message,
namely, that emotion and instinct are often more powerful than truth and
reason.
Post-truth and Digital Trust
Digital information and knowledge heavily depend on trust—they require us to trust
the machine, the people behind the machine and the logic within the machine.
Digital machines require input information, which can be true or false. With ade-
quate input information, their inner workings consist of numerous adding opera-
tions between two distinct electronic states described as zero and one. However,
human beings are physically unable to comprehend long lines of numbers, so
computers execute many levels of translation between the source code and pro-
gramming languages. Some computer programs, called algorithms, have certain
abilities for personalised, autonomous-like action. For instance, recommender
engines such as Amazon.com use buyer’s history of browsing and purchases in
order to advertise products that might be of interest. This automatic translation and
algorithmic manipulation is generally straightforward, and does not raise signiﬁcant
trust issues. For as long as computer programmers do not purposefully implement
malicious code, such systems are generally safe to use.
As of recently, however, algorithms are becoming increasingly complex;
moreover, the computer industry is strongly oriented towards the integration of
various algorithms. For instance, browsing the Internet using Google collects data
106
P. Jandrić

about our interests; data from Google Mail reveal our communications; buying on
Amazon.com reveals our shopping habits; participating on Facebook reveals our
social networks; using Google Maps reveals the history of our physical movement;
and using porn websites reveals our sexual fetishes. When cross-referenced, this
data ceases to be innocent, and this brings about the emerging ﬁeld of algorithm
studies. The integration of algorithms poses signiﬁcant challenges, especially
regarding the ownership of data and the manipulation of data.
Scientists of the past believed their books and logarithmic tables; scientists of
today believe their journal databases and calculators. Arguably, there is no sig-
niﬁcant difference between publishing an ill-informed book on paper and an
ill-informed article online. However, this is where similarities end. In the case of
physical books, one could be reasonably sure that the presented text is original; in
the case of online articles, one can never be sure whether the content was manip-
ulated by a third party on the long road between publishing and reading.
Furthermore, non-manipulated articles can contain true or false statements,
authentic or misleading statistics, diagrams or images. Given that most people today
ﬁnd their information online, the trustworthiness of our online searches deserves
more focused attention.
Analysing Trump’s talk in Florida (Topping 2017), it is easy to check whether a
terrorist attack indeed happened in February 2017 in Sweden—such an event would
surely provoke wide media coverage. Using standard online search tools, however,
some truths are much more difﬁcult to verify. For instance, Adolf Hitler’s
Propaganda Minister in Nazi Germany Joseph Goebbels allegedly said: ‘If you
repeat a lie often enough, people will believe it, and you will even come to believe
it yourself’. A simple Google search on this sentence returns an astonishing number
of 9,570,000 pages; as an exact quote, it returns 937 results.1 Reviewing more than
9 million websites is practically impossible for a single person, so the best thing
one can do is to look into the ﬁrst few web pages and hope that Google has picked
the most relevant ones. However, we probably do not need all the results anyway:
even a brief look at the most popular web pages indicates a serious lack of evidence
that Goebbels really made that statement. To the contrary, it is attributed Goebbels,
Hitler and others in the randomly revised websites.
The majority of researched pages quote the sentence without questioning its
factual correctness. However, some of the found pages do question its validity. For
instance, author of ‘Think Classical’ (2016) blog claims that the quote ‘is apoc-
ryphal, and there is no evidence that he ever articulates such a principal. It is high
irony indeed that the apocryphal quote has been falsely attributed to so Goebbels so
many times that people have come to believe it’. Symptomatically, the blog does
1This search was conducted on 21 November 2016 at www.google.com. In the ﬁrst instance
(simple Google search), the sentence ‘If you repeat a lie often enough, people will believe it, and
you will even come to believe it yourself.’ was entered into the search engine without quotation
marks, and Google returned ca 9,570,000 web pages. In the second instance (exact quote), the
sentence was entered with quotation marks, and Google returned 937 web pages.
Post-truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust
107

not reveal the full identity of its author and does not list (all) the used sources—
therefore, this assertion is also far from a proven fact.
Another famous adage with unclear source(s), Segal’s law, says: ‘A man with a
watch knows what time it is. A man with two watches is never sure’.2 On the
Internet, Segal’s law multiplies to stunning proportions. Answering my simple
query, Google has offered 9,570,000 answers—but none of the web pages I was
able to review have provided actual ‘facts’. So how do I determine whether
Goebbels really made that statement? Perhaps, using more sophisticated search
methods, I would eventually ﬁnd an answer in a reliable source such as an academic
book or article. However, if the topic has not been covered in reliable sources, my
only recourse is to do my own research on primary data, which could of course take
years.
There is no such thing as digital trust—only a mash-up of visible and
not-so-visible data and algorithmic functions. Therefore, the trustworthiness of
digital sources is always established in relation to the nondigital. Online credit card
frauds are resolved by tracing physical goods, online identity theft is resolved by
tracing physical documents and trust in online documents (such as journal articles)
is established by the reputation of their publishers. The complexity and murkiness
of digital technologies widen the ambiguous space between truth and lie, thus
providing fertile ground for post-truth. However, the problem of post-truth is not
exclusively digital, and understanding it takes us beyond the digital realm.
Post-truth as a Public Pedagogy
In information sciences, the content of the human mind is commonly classiﬁed
according to the so-called data–information–knowledge–wisdom (DIKW) hierar-
chy (Fig. 1). ‘Data are symbols that represent the properties of objects and events.
Information consists of processed data, the processing directed at increasing its
usefulness’ (Ackoff 1999, p. 170). ‘Knowledge builds on information that is
extracted from data’ (Boddy et al. 2005, p. 9); depending on philosophical tradi-
tions, it can take numerous shapes and deﬁnitions. Finally, ‘wisdom is the ability to
act critically or practically in any given situation. It is based on ethical judgement
related to an individual’s belief system’ (Jashapara 2005, p. 17–18).3
According to Rowley, ‘There is a consensus that data, information and knowl-
edge are to be deﬁned in terms of one another, although data and information can
both act as inputs to knowledge. This consensus reafﬁrms the concept of a hierarchy
that links the concepts of data, information and knowledge’ (Rowley 2007, p. 174).
2The origin of this quote is also unclear. For more detail, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Segal’s_law.
3These concepts have numerous deﬁnitions, which are meticulously collected and analysed in
Rowley (2007).
108
P. Jandrić

As can easily be seen from various analyses in this chapter, post-truth ignores truth
at all levels: data is falsiﬁed, information is misprocessed and knowledge is dis-
torted. Post-truth data, post-truth information and post-truth knowledge inevitably
lead to post-truth wisdom. This conclusion has an important temporal dimension.
Data, information and knowledge describe what was and what is—they are focused
on past and present. However, wisdom provides guidelines for human behaviour—
it looks straight into the future. Therefore, post-truth is a poisonous public peda-
gogy oriented towards raising future generations of people with distorted world-
views, opinions and ethical judgements.
The current critical media response to post-truth predominantly seems to consist
of revealing lies and fallacies (Rider 2017). However, this study indicates that
post-truth fundamentally rejects the criterion of truth, and thrives in the curious
space between truth and lies; based on trust, it easily absorbs factual discrepancies
and even blatant lies. The complex relationships between truth and trust can be
analysed using Choo’s analysis of transformations between signals, data, infor-
mation and knowledge. According to Choo (2006: 132), physical structuring of
signals and data precedes cognitive structuring of information, which in turn pre-
cedes structuring of belief. Each of these stages provides more opportunity for
human agency, which closes the loop between the structures. Some scenarios for
this loop are as follows:
1. False data will produce false information will produce false knowledge—in turn,
false knowledge will produce false interpretation of new (correct and false)
information and data.
2. Correct data will produce false information will produce false knowledge—in
turn, false knowledge will produce false interpretation of new (correct and false)
information and data.
3. Correct data will produce correct information will produce false knowledge—in
turn, false knowledge will produce false interpretation of new (correct and false)
information and data.
4. Correct data will produce correct information will produce correct knowledge—
in turn, correct knowledge will produce correct interpretation of new (correct
and false) information and data.
Fig. 1 The data–
information–knowledge–
wisdom (DIKW) hierarchy
Post-truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust
109

The loop needs to be expanded by two improbable, but possible scenarios: false
knowledge can produce correct interpretation of information and data, and correct
knowledge can produce false interpretation of information and data.
The loops listed are based on linear relationships between data, information and
knowledge; in reality, however, relationships between these elements are bidirec-
tional and networked. Furthermore, the analysis could be reﬁned by adding ques-
tions pertaining to signals and agency. However, even this simpliﬁed analysis of
relationships between truth and trust clearly explains the futility of typical responses
to post-truth focused on revealing lies and fallacies. In order to counterbalance the
poisonous post-truth pedagogy, we need a critical pedagogy of trust that pays equal
attention to data, information and knowledge.
Conclusion
Post-truth is a complex mashup of signals, data, information, knowledge and
wisdom; truth and deceit; fact and emotion; reason and instinct. These concepts and
forces have always marked human existence, yet the digital age made their mutual
relationships increasingly complex. Truth and reason are as important as ever, yet
post-truth thrives in an ambiguous space between truth and lie, reason and instinct
—in this space, truth gets replaced by trust. Mainstream analytic philosophy seeks
individual solutions in rationalist approaches to trust, and social epistemology seeks
collective solutions in areas such as the problem of testimony, social epistemology
of science, ethics and democracy.
The era of post-truth came alongside the era of digital reason, yet the trust-
worthiness of digital sources can be established only in relation to the nondigital.
Trust is the main prerequisite for digitally enabled collective intelligences, yet the
inherent untrustworthiness of digital technologies indicates that we should place
more value on trust in other human beings. Trust is cultivated from emotion and
belief, yet it results in decisions about objective truth. Trust links our past and
present (represented by data, information and knowledge) and our future (repre-
sented by wisdom). In this way, post-truth becomes a poisonous public pedagogy
that can be counterbalanced only by a fully developed critical pedagogy of trust.
References
Ackoff, R. L. (1999). Ackoff’s best. New York: Wiley.
Boddy, D., Boonstra, A., & Kennedy, G. (2005). Managing information systems: An
organizational perspective. Harlow: Prentice Hall.
Choo, C. W. (2006). The knowing organization: How organisations use information to construct
meaning, create knowledge, and make decisions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Faulkner, P. (2014). The practical rationality of trust. Synthese, 191(9), 1975–1989.
110
P. Jandrić

Gleick, P. H. (2007). The political and selective use of data: Cherry-picking climate information in
the White House. Oakland (CA): Paciﬁc Institute. http://pacinst.org/app/uploads/2013/02/
selective_use_climate_update3.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2017.
Goldman, A., & Blanchard, T. (2016). Social epistemology. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/
entries/epistemology-social/. Accessed March 7, 2017.
Hancock, J. T. (2007). Digital deception: Why, when and how people lie online. In A. Joinson,
K. McKenna, T. Postmes, & U.-D. Reips (Eds.), Oxford handbook of internet psychology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jandrić, P. (2017a). Learning in the age of digital reason. Rotterdam: Sense.
Jandrić, P. (2017b). Lies, damned lies, and the Web. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 49(6),
578–579.
Jashapara, A. (2005). Knowledge management: An Integrated approach. Harlow: Prentice Hall.
McLeod, C. (2015). Trust. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall
2015 Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/trust/. Accessed March 7,
2017.
Microsoft.
(2017).
Microsoft
Certiﬁcation.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/learning/
certiﬁcation-overview.aspx. Accessed 7 March 2017.
Oxford Dictionaries. (2016). Word of the Year 2016 is… https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-
of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016. Accessed March 7, 2017.
Peters, M. A., & Jandrić, P. (2017). The digital university: A dialogue and manifesto. New York:
Peter Lang.
Rider, S. (2017). Response to the editorial “Education in a post-truth world”. Online First:
Educational Philosophy and Theory.
Rowley, J. (2007). The wisdom hierarchy: representations of the DIKW hierarchy. Journal of
Information Science, 33(2), 163–180.
Think Classical (2016). Did Hitler ever say “whoever wants to understand National Socialist
Germany must know Wagner”?. http://thinkclassical.blogspot.hr/2014/02/did-hitler-ever-say-
whoever-wants-to.html. Accessed 21 November 2016.
Topping, A. (2017, February 17). “Sweden, who would believe this?”: Trump cites non-existent
terror attack. The Guardian.
Wark, M., & Jandrić, P. (2016). New knowledge for a new planet: critical pedagogy for the
Anthropocene. Open Review of Educational Research, 3(1), 148–178.
Whitty, M., & Joinson, A. (2008). Truth, lies and trust on the internet. London and New York:
Routledge.
Post-truth and Critical Pedagogy of Trust
111

Post-truth and the Journalist’s Ethos
George Lăzăroiu
Introduction
Determining what precisely constitutes “news” is challenging. One reason for this is
that the social mechanisms involved in that constitution are often ignored or
misunderstood. On a basic level, the news is often seen as certain construal of a
sequence of events, packaged in such a way as to be interesting and intelligible, and,
importantly, identiﬁable as news. Even if the ideal of neutrality remains at the core
of journalism, values and convictions are unavoidable in the selection and priori-
tization of material. Moreover, there are issues of capacity and impact, i.e., that are
must be taken into consideration in any discussion of the role of mass media (Peters
2017a). An accurate reporting of events may well avoid explicit ethical assessments,
but it cannot help but depend on judgments about what is out of the ordinary
(“newsworthy”) or signiﬁcant. Thus, a given report of events can be both true and
factual, at the same time as the choice to report those events is born out of interests
having to do with a political agenda, or, more likely, an economic one on behalf of
the publisher. But the picture becomes more complicated and the issue of objectivity
more complex with the advent of the Internet, social media, and the like. Here, one
is tempted to rely on method is evidence of good practice with respect to neutrality.
In other words, the aim of objective reporting, even if it is always inevitably a matter
of negotiating between competing functions of journalism, must remain a core value
(Berry 2016). Ethical norms are thus an essential component of routine journalism.
At the same time, reporting is not merely a reﬂection of occurrences and tendencies
in society, but also an important inﬂuence on those events and movements (Mihăilă
et al. 2016). The public, monitoring the main topics in the press, becomes cognizant
of their collective and opposing values. In and through journalism, a society
disputes how to restructure its organizations (Lăzăroiu 2010a) and confront the
G. Lăzăroiu (&)
Spiru Haret University, Bucharest, Romania
e-mail: phd_lazaroiu@yahoo.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_9
113

future. The vitality of the public realm of the postindustrial society is directly
affected by the caliber of its media and the expertise of its journalists. Democratic
self-governance relies on organized form of relaying events accurately to the public.
Thus, the question of objectivity or neutrality ultimately involves the issue of how
journalists are trained, since they produce narratives that shape the public realm.
Accuracy, comprehensiveness, neutrality, and autonomy are considered normative
standards essential to that training (Ward 2015).
Journalistic Norms and Social Relevance
The ethic of impartiality is a benchmark of good journalism. It affects the character
of reporting and regulates the professional performance. But the ideal of objectivity
is concretized in different ways. The traditional focal point of impartiality in
journalism is the narration of facts; this focus assumes a given perspective on the
world and a truthful approach to the representation and communication of facts.
This perspective has been fragmented by online platforms, and the multiplicity of
forms that it engenders. News blogs and citizen journalism have brought about a
reassessment of objectivity as an approach to managing facts, and even as a norm
for truthfulness, in an ever-changing setting of variegated usage and consumption
(Maras 2013). The question is, then, whether there can or should be generally
accepted means of control and, if so, according to which criteria?
The goal of objectivity functions as a mechanism of rational self-control within
journalism understood as a pragmatic enterprise. The duties tied to the virtue of
neutrality emerge out of agreements. Thus, to identify the responsibilities of jour-
nalism is to seek agreement on the appropriate standards for regulating the social
routine of journalism. The social contract between the public and the publicist
requires journalists to be neutral and autonomous in their work. Traditional jour-
nalism is the systematized, socially established undertaking of communicating to
the audience, from the detached view of the public good. The newsperson’s
function is to endeavor to differentiate, amid the dispute of opinions and positions
(Lăzăroiu 2010a), what is consistent and accurate and how such pieces of infor-
mation may impact the public good. Journalism is then the distribution and eval-
uation of the most relevant facts for an independent polity. Trust, integrity, and
consistency are the foundation of this connection (Ward 2015).
By its very nature, the news aims at the novel or extraordinary. In that respect,
the news is inherently relative to the status quo. When retelling the course of events,
the journalist recreates that course on the basis of subsequent conversations,
observations, and/or retrieval of documents. Best practice requires that quotations
or secondhand information are corroborated according to standard source criticism.
Thus, the further disconnected the reporter is from the occurrence reported, the
114
G. Lăzăroiu

greater the responsibility for him to follow assiduously the norms constituting
“objective reporting”. Proper acknowledgment must be granted to opposing per-
spectives. Fact-checking is a precondition, especially for the numerous narratives
that do not constitute breaking news. The perceived legitimacy of established media
outlets would be considerably enhanced if, when sifting through the evidence in
their reporting, journalists standardized their selection of authorities and made
sure that their sources are not only perceived as reliable sources of information
but also see to it that they convey what makes their testimony authoritative
(Goldstein 2007).
Journalism is in the end a matter of how journalists reconcile, conceive, and
interpolate events and issues, i.e., in how they constitute an intelligible order, on the
basis of which the public understands the occurrences in question. In this sense,
journalists have a role in establishing apprehensions, propensities, and objectives in
the minds of the public. One could say that in clarifying the world in terms of the
agenda they set and the order they make, they tell the public who it is. Journalists
serve as an elucidatory community (Lăzăroiu 2011a), supplying information and
explanations, within particular routines and established practices, which then
become integral to the public’s interpretation of events. Thus, the public is indi-
rectly but powerfully inﬂuenced by the nature of the norms and routines that
journalists follow. As targets of attempts to shape news on the basis of particular
interests, agendas on the part of media organizations to generate material according
of a certain length and in given subject categories stipulated by the owners, etc., the
work of journalists is mired in potential conﬂicts of interest and values. The need
for a scoop may lead to a disregard of the requirement to check sources, for
instance. Decisions regarding reliability of sources, consistency of information, and
news values may have to be made swiftly (Sanders 2003).
Journalism has an underexploited capacity to shore up the status of seeking the
truth as a starting point for political discussion (Lăzăroiu 2017). The best way of
doing this would be to look for stories that are relevant for the public without
merely following the dictates of novelty, economic, or political interests. Rather, the
goal would be to turn the tables on established truisms, by bringing to the public
eye perspectives and situations that force people to question what they take for
granted. The ideal here is to give the audience occasion not merely to scrutinize
“power”, but also to scrutinize themselves, and their own position. Importantly, this
approach may at times require that the journalist himself detach himself from his
own self-understanding. It may require, for instance, that he reconﬁgure his own
assumptions about what is important, signiﬁcant, interesting, or relevant in pursuit
of the truth. In the relentless quest for truth, objectivity may require new practices,
especially given the new media landscape (Blank-Libra 2017).
Post-truth and the Journalist’s Ethos
115

The Quest for Truthfulness and the Vagueness of Factual
Accuracy
The core question regarding ethics in journalism concerns both production, i.e.,
approaches to the collection of information, and the manner in which news is
shaped for use. To address this question seriously means looking closely at the
system of duties and privileges involved in the task. Media ethics is a ﬁeld
developed to address the decline of criteria and the adverse of impact that an
unregulated commercial market may have on the press. Journalists need to be made
aware of their setting, position, and challenges in the production of news (Lăzăroiu
2011b). Market-driven journalism is grounded on commercial priority rather than
professional norms like consequence neutrality, or ethical considerations, such as
fairness. Hence, there is a personal moral issue at stake for the journalist, who is at
one and the same time engaged in an effort to do well by his paper or journal, and,
at the same time, follow the ethics of journalism as a calling (Berry 2016).
Journalism ethics deals with how criteria and values actually affect the complex
routine of the press. Journalism produces factual material and establishes views that
become components of a social debate that affects public policy. News is used as
evidence by various interests and as information by individuals. Journalists are both
investigators struggling to ﬁnd out the truth regarding events, and communicators
involved in the discussion. Thus, the journalist is both agent and effect of the
system of dissemination of information; his work both inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced
by it. The role of the individual journalist, his professional ethos, demands that he
assist in making the dispute on public matters as sound, comprehensive, and
impartial as possible, i.e., his role is to elucidate what the issues are, account for
different perspectives, and investigate questionable assertions (Nica 2017). He
should unmask and combat the forces that stage-manage public discussion, and be a
useful instrument in a society’s examination of its disorders. Finally, he should
expedite the delayed arrival of crucial insights and valuable information. But, as
was noted, investigation and assessment in journalism take place in the framework
of an economic reality and a media-imbued infosphere, where self-interest,
unwarranted beliefs, and group advocacy are the context in which these high aims
are to be achieved (Ward 2015).
Journalists have always depended greatly on gossip. If unfettered, the abuse of
unsubstantiated information deprives the audience of the means to form
well-founded opinions. The public may not be able to identify the source or judge
the veracity of his testimony. It is often assumed that the initial answers to jour-
nalists’ inquiries are more accurate than ones formulated after the interviewee has
had the chance to reconsider his answers. For this reason, journalists often will not
allow interview subjects to amend their opinions after the fact. At the same time,
while this rule of thumb has its virtues, it also has its limitations. While the job of a
journalist is to gather and double-check material to ensure credibility, the Internet
has created public pressure to disseminative information before it is corroborated,
since the latter is a time-consuming task and the social media incline toward
116
G. Lăzăroiu

immediacy (Goldstein 2007). So while truth and accuracy are at the center of the
journalistic undertaking, it is not clear that they can remain untouched by current
demands. One way of dealing with this paradox is to acknowledge that numerous
narratives may be constructed from the same information, assimilating a variable
degree of truth. Thus, a journalist’s activity entails a persistent conﬂict between
cultivating trust (Mihăilă 2017) and preserving skepticism. While trust is the entire
foundation upon which the reporting structure is established and legitimated, it can
be allowed that a certain degree of suspicion is in order “as the story develops”, in
real time. But such reporting is only acceptable, again, where it is not invalidated by
the goals of impartiality and exactness (Sanders 2003).
The Shifting Nature of Journalism and the Notion
of Objectivity
Ordering truthful accounts may involve levels and dissimilarities of representation.
Inaccurate representations may be the outcome of (i) value judgments, assumptions,
and stereotypes that deform messages intentionally or inadvertently; (ii) conscious
efforts to establish an unsubstantiated public agenda and to inﬂuence public opin-
ion; and (iii) failure to follow professional standards and procedures for investi-
gation and reporting. In each case, the truth as the primary purpose of investigation
and reporting is not undermined in principle, even if it is in fact. Objectivity
remains the paragon value in an ethical attitude toward journalism: to be impartial
is to satisfy ethical criteria that constitute the starting point of the profession
(Berry 2016).
The classical ideal of journalism as a steady gathering of facts that commences as
a clutter of unsubstantiated narratives or persuasive claims by unreliable sources is
still alive. All ﬁrst-rate journalism and reporting entail dynamic analysis, inspecting
and construing, checking and questioning, comparing and assessing, and portraying
and discerning. This may also be said of science and scholarship, but in the case of
journalism, the preferred method of veriﬁcation is a non-systematic mélange of
good judgment, disbelief, and off-the-record rules that newsrooms adhere to with
unsteady coherence. The ideal of professional journalism is thus a synthesis of an
idealistic inclination, a fascination for stimulating narratives and meaningful dis-
closures (Lăzăroiu 2014), and a disposition toward unbiased thinking, i.e., the
carefulness to double-check what the idealistic inclination discovers and to prove
that it is impartial. The mechanism of truth-seeking in journalism, ideally, pro-
gressively removes incorrectness or misrepresentation from the preliminary
accounts of events. The mechanism of truth-seeking works to separate fact from
insinuation, detect bias, and focus on what is factual and relevant for the audience.
But that means that journalists begin by assembling, combining, and reassessing
facts, opinions, probabilities, conjectures, and background knowledge. Pragmatic
Post-truth and the Journalist’s Ethos
117

impartiality in journalism is nothing more than the attempt at a comprehensive,
unreliable, balanced assessment of reports.
Nearly all journalists wish to achieve balance, even when the basic facts obvi-
ously point clearly in one direction. But harmonizing conﬂicting statements may
not generate veracity. One does not come closer to the truth of the matter by
reiterating falsehoods and inaccuracies as a matter of “opinion”. In the infosphere,
among bloggers and on social media, likelihood is produced jointly (Peters 2016),
not via a pecking order of fact-seekers and veriﬁers. The material may not be
investigated before it is distributed, but it is dispersed through manifold perspec-
tives. The blogging movement has persistently called into question the established
values of journalism, which places the highest premium on objectivity. Blogging is
determined considerably by the public’s appetite to cooperate, a craving that
mainstream journalism was slow to realize (Goldstein 2007). Yet again, one might
consider that this development is just an extension of practices that have been in
place for years. Journalists integrate events into a narrative that is concluded and
consolidated. This totality is assembled out of disorganized events. Pictures are
frequently truncated, and television reports and documentaries employ recon-
structions in which digital technology assists in stage-managing text and image.
Staged shots and reconstructions constitute an established component of televisual
language. The convenient utilization of televisual reconstruction (or falsiﬁcation) is
as much a part of traditional journalism (Lăzăroiu 2010b) as is unequivocal
responsibility to truthfulness. The practices that have been developed around news
reporting have the consequence that the pictures accompanying the material are not
intended to be visual examples or samples of events. But what are they, then?
Where distortion is unreservedly used and not indicated, visual messages lose their
role of conveying facts or reliable information (Sanders 2003).
An objective journalist, responsible to the principle of truth (Popescu 2017),
would be self-aware and self-critical about his use of word and image. In doing so,
he could achieve a higher degree of impartiality by disproving conventions, per-
forming crafty investigations to achieve contextual precision, and concentrating
meticulously on the imbalances that disarrange society and the lives of individuals
in it. An ethic of responsiveness tied to responsibility could be a facilitator of strong
probity.
Conclusions
Debating on the link between journalism and news necessitates a grasp of what
signiﬁes news and why it is signiﬁcant for society’s democratic demands.
Journalism is a social mechanism of conveying news and moderating their reporting
through professional standards. In some cases, the focus on cool detachment
actually leads to exaggeration, distortion, and even bias (Peters 2017b), as is wit-
nessed by the critique of “old media” on the Internet for the latter’s lack of trust-
worthiness. The chief justiﬁcation offered for fact-based news reporting is still and
118
G. Lăzăroiu

always the notion that truth is the fundamental goal of journalism. News should
perform a particular purpose: to supply the audience with trustworthy content on
which informed appraisals concerning events may be formulated. The standard of
objectivity is synonymous with the integrity of news organizations. Accomplishing
balance is an ethical issue for the reporter, and intimately bound up with the quest
for truth. But the news has an exchange value as well as a use value (Lăzăroiu
2012), for the consumer as well as for the producer. Half-truths based on uncor-
roborated gossip has less value on both scores (Berry 2016). Journalists participate
in public life both as individuals with private agendas and as representatives for
autonomous investigation of public matters. Journalism, as a profession, is a
truth-directed kind of investigation. Objectivity is the gold standard for determining
how satisfactorily the inquiry, and the narratives that it generates, conform to shared
criteria for epistemic legitimacy. Fairness is an indispensable norm for trustworthy
journalistic reporting (Lăzăroiu 2011c) in the public interest. But fairness is an
ethical category, although in this case one tied to impartiality as the epitome of
communicating knowledge without bias from a global position. Objective accounts,
to be precise and unprejudiced, should comprise all signiﬁcant sources and views.
Global neutrality requires that the news media be more attentive and responsive to a
global standpoint, and bring these considerations to the fore in their reporting
decisions within a truly global news agenda (Ward 2015).
References
Berry, D. (2016). Journalism, ethics and society. London and New York: Routledge.
Blank-Libra, J. (2017). Pursuing an ethic of empathy in journalism. London and New York:
Routledge.
Goldstein, T. (2007). Journalism and truth: Strange bedfellows. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2010a). Contemporary mainstream web journalism and the interactive nature of the
online news experience. Analysis and Metaphysics, 9, 101–107.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2010b). Conceptualizing the changing dynamics of mediated communication and
the ﬂow of mass-mediated realities. Geopolitics, History, and International Relations, 2(1),
176–184.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2011a). Knowledge communities in digital democracy and the interaction-based
nature of journalism. Economics, Management, and Financial Markets, 6(3), 172–178.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2011b). Media knowledge and journalism’s mission in democratic polity.
Contemporary Readings in Law and Social Justice, 3(2), 205–211.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2011c). The role of communication in shaping the conduct of politics and the
interactive production of personalized information. Geopolitics, History, and International
Relations, 3(2), 241–247.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2012). Democratic responsibilities of news media. Economics, Management, and
Financial Markets, 7(3), 145–153.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2014). The social construction of participatory media technologies. Contemporary
Readings in Law and Social Justice, 6(1), 104–109.
Lăzăroiu, G. (2017). The routine fabric of understandable and contemptible lies. Educational
Philosophy and Theory, 49(6), 573–574.
Maras, S. (2013). Objectivity in journalism. Cambridge and Malden: Polity Press.
Post-truth and the Journalist’s Ethos
119

Mihăilă, R. (2017). The lying epidemic. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 49(6), 580–581.
Mihăilă, R., Popescu, G. H., & Nica, E. (2016). Educational conservatism and democratic
citizenship in Hannah Arendt. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 48(9), 915–927.
Nica, E. (2017). Political mendacity and social trust. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 49(6),
571–572.
Peters, M. A. (2016). Educational web science. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 48(11),
1093–1099.
Peters, M. A. (2017a). Education in a post-truth world. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 49(6),
563–566.
Peters,
M.
A.
(2017b).
From
state
responsibility
for
education
and
welfare
to
self-responsibilisation in the market. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of
Education, 38(1), 138–145.
Popescu, G. H. (2017). Is lying acceptable conduct in international politics? Educational
Philosophy and Theory, 49(6), 575–576.
Sanders, K. (2003). Ethics and journalism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ward, S. J. A. (2015). The invention of journalism ethics: The path to objectivity and beyond (2nd
ed.). Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
120
G. Lăzăroiu

As a Matter of Fact: Journalism
and Scholarship in the Post-truth Era
Mats Hyvönen
Introduction
“Post-truth” was chosen in 2016 as Oxford Dictionaries’ Word of the Year. When
the term is used as an adjective, the “post”- preﬁx does not simply mean “after” but
also “beyond”, in the sense that “truth” is no longer relevant. As a noun, post-truth
indicates the state of being post-truth, an epoch or situation in which “facts have
become less important than emotional persuasion” (Horsthemke 2017, p. 274).
The problem with using post-truth as an indication of an era is that it assumes a
historical development where we have moved from “the good old days” to the
present not so good state of things. Used this way, post-truth risks becoming an
epoch-making concept that suggests a shift from an assumed “era of truth” that is
now disappearing (Corner 2017). Schlesinger (2017) has pointed out that the rise of
post-truth as an idea “has signaled a perception of change both in how the public
domain is
constituted and in
the conduct of major
protagonists
in the
media-political sphere” (p. 603). Most of us would agree that a change does indeed
seem to be occurring, and that many aspects of that change are unquestionably
disturbing. The surge in fake news and the rise in sentimental rather than reasoned
responses to political questions, as opposed to reasoned analysis, are perhaps the
most salient examples. But the more closely one focuses on the media-political
sphere, “perhaps the less the sense of shock that should be delivered by the phrase
given the long and amply documented history of strategic deception here” (Corner
2017, p. 1100).
Not everything is new in today’s post-truth society, and the good old days were
perhaps not always that good. Historically, there have been many other periods
when deliberate falsehoods and emotions prevailed over facts and reason, and
media played a major part in those earlier periods as well (radio and cinema, for
M. Hyvönen (&)
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
e-mail: mats.hyvonen@antro.uu.se
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_10
121

example, were indispensable parts of the Nazi propaganda machine). Nonetheless,
digitization and the rapidly changing media environment have undeniably, and not
without reason, been the focus of attention. In particular, the crisis in the news
media in general and the newspaper industry in particular is often invoked as
contributing to the present situation.
Other important societal institutions are, of course, also implicated. Universities
are often mentioned in discussions about the post-truth society—sometimes as the
cause of problems, and sometimes as the solution to them. In post-truth society,
universities and traditional news media, professors and journalists, are targets of
populist propaganda. In “alt-right” communities as well as in President Donald
Trump’s tweets, academics and journalists are portrayed as part of an elitist clique
that produce fake news for their own interests and ends, with disdain but no concern
for “ordinary people”.
In this chapter, I will discuss the consequences of mediatization and marketi-
zation for public discourse and debate, and offer a proposal for how the academy
and the media can work together to meet the challenges that we face. In the next
section, on higher education, I will refer to a number of well-known phenomena
regarding the effects of marketization and mediatization of university. In so doing, I
want to lay the ground for drawing comparisons with similar effects on journalism
and the free press. The purpose of this comparison is to show certain important
similarities with regard to professions that one might call truth-seeking or
truth-establishing.
The Mediatization and Marketization of the University
Arendt argues that a fundamental precondition for political action is commonality,
the sharing of a common public world, the objectivity of which “relates and sep-
arates men at the same time” (1958, p. 52). Plurality (a genuine diversity of per-
spectives on the same phenomenon), a prerequisite for all political action, presumes
a minimum of agreement in judgments, practices, and facts. Or, as Horsthemke
(2017, p. 275) puts it: “A democratic debate requires provable facts about which
there exists agreement. The debate then concerns what actually follows from these
facts.”
It is often said that modern media is characterized by an abundance of infor-
mation and a scarcity of attention (Asp 1986). In today’s evolving media landscape,
there is an overabundance of facts: “there are too many sources, too many methods,
with varying levels of credibility, depending on who funded a given study and how
the eye-catching number was selected” (Davies 2016). Not only have the experts
and agencies involved in producing facts multiplied, so have the communicative
fora for their dissemination. In a “mediatized society”, the growing importance of
the media, old as well as new, in circulating facts and thus shaping public opinion
and perceptions, has a considerable impact on other institutions. Private as well as
public organizations and institutions are involved in a constant struggle to get
122
M. Hyvönen

people’s attention. Mediatization, then, results from the construction of “public
attention as a speciﬁc institutional power resource and its consequent distinct
meaning in the coordination of institutional action” (Kunelius and Reunanen 2016,
p. 381). In short, mediatization describes a process in which institutions become
more dependent on, and vulnerable to, public attention.
The university is a societal institution that has generated a considerable amount
of attention in recent years, both in research and in media reporting. In particular,
there has been a focus on evaluation in general, and rankings in particular. League
tables are produced at the global, regional, and national level. New “facts” about the
quality and standing of universities are thus produced, disseminated, and consumed
almost daily.
This steady manufacturing and communication of facts cannot be ignored by
universities, since they are considered, and consider themselves, vital social sectors.
But the attention comes at a price. In order to make matters of research and higher
education suitable for public consumption, the media have to formulate the very
complex and multifaceted activities and operations of universities so as to render
them comprehensible and relevant for a broader audience. In other words, the media
need to “translate” academic norms and standards into media logic, that is, the
institutionalized norms and standards that guide the media in their own operations
(Altheide and Snow 1979). Since the media need to emphasize and explain speciﬁc
aspects of organizations or events, the mediation of research and higher education
tends toward oversimpliﬁcation. These simpliﬁed images can only convey a very
limited picture of what universities are and what they do; it would be impossible to
mediate the work of entire universities or university systems, in all their complexity
and diversity. This work of translation, while necessary, runs the risk of under-
mining the legitimacy of universities as a social institution by weakening the
normative grounds that support them. The phenomenon of mediatization makes
universities dependent on the media for their recognition and legitimacy in the
public sphere. In order to attract students and funding, for instance, universities
must meet the expectations placed on them based on the public, which is to say
mediated, version of what a university fundamentally is and does. In this respect,
the media not only publicize higher education and research but also make them
“public” in more profound ways (Hyvönen 2016).
The mediatization of university is intimately tied up with the marketization of
the university. Global university rankings, many of which are themselves products
created or sponsored by media outlets, are perhaps the prime examples of this
connection. In contrast with what is actually involved in ascertaining quality and
relative merits in different educational and research contexts, rankings are very
simple and straightforward: they seem to provide an objective comparison and
evaluation with respect to a limited number of discrete and neutral variables or
indicators. The simplicity is itself a consequence of media logic, the aim of which is
to produce a coherent and easily grasped image. Thus, “excellence” in teaching or
research is whatever the rankings, that is, the framework for the mediation of
universities, say it is. From the perspective of mediatization theory, the rankings can
be said to produce “excellence” through their effects on regional and national
As a Matter of Fact: Journalism and Scholarship …
123

policy, university management, and even the choices of the individual. The image
produced in the rankings, disseminated through media and consumed by the public,
becomes the basis for decision-making at all levels. The subsequent reorganizing of
systems and institutions of higher education constitutes a shift from a traditional
academic organization with collegial autonomy and control over curricula and
research toward an organization in which every section is assessed in relation to the
university’s status in the rankings, that is, how “excellent” it is. This devotion of
attention and resources to branding and media benchmarking weakens traditional
academic values, criteria, and structures of quality control, which are usurped by the
principles and practices of corporate management.
The application of market norms and managerialism on academic organizations
has had far-reaching negative consequences, such as the widespread practice of the
sloppy and often unintelligent use of bibliometrics even where it is inapplicable or
misleading, and the massive zeal for commercialization and collaboration with
industry. The overall tendency is to assess and control science and scholarship
quantitatively, mechanically, and instrumentally. This state of affairs has been
described as a Breakdown of Scientiﬁc Thought (Rider et al. 2013). According to
Rider et al. (p. 11), the breakdown can be understood in terms of four basic
elements: (1) as a breakdown of the division between politics and policy, on the one
hand, and education and research, on the other; (2) as a breakdown of the division
between market and innovation models, on the one hand, and academic norms, on
the other; (3) as a breakdown of academic character in research and scholarship and,
lastly, (4) as a breakdown of the academic character of higher education. These
breakdowns transform science and scholarship in profound ways. Rider et al.
(2013) analyze a variety of forces behind the transformations that we have seen, two
of which belong under the heading of “marketization”: ﬁrst, there is “the political
ambition to make the university more like the economic landscape depicted in a
certain model of the market” (p. 201). Second, there is the inﬂuence that comes
directly from commerce and industry, “which have interests in directing research
and higher education to meet the speciﬁc needs of globally interdependent business
networks” (p. 201). The marketization of science and scholarship is itself, in turn, a
force to be reckoned with for the inner life of the university, as well as for the
society of which it is a part.
In the light of the mediatization and marketization of the university, there is
reason to doubt that academic research and higher education henceforth will serve
the different knowledge interests of society as a whole on the grounds that
knowledge is a public good. For when market values and functions colonize the
academy, they undermine the speciﬁc epistemic norms and professional values that
constitute its special standing, which is the source of its legitimacy, namely, those
grounded on the pursuit of knowledge as something belonging to everyone. The
challenge arising out of the mediatization and far-reaching integration of univer-
sities and business is how to balance service in the name of universality and the
common good with a market model of education and knowledge production, where
beating the competition is the aim and crowning achievement of academic labor.
124
M. Hyvönen

The quantiﬁcation of academic quality in terms of productivity and impact is
related to the invasion of political and economic interests in the inner workings of
the academy. At the increasingly businesslike universities, students are treated as
consumers and academics are “subject to the same accountability and incentives as,
say, a call-center worker” (Roelofs and Gallien 2017). Productivity is measured in
terms of how many publications are published per year. Quality is measured by
citations. This kind of quantiﬁcation of quality with the help of indexing platforms
like Web of Science and Scopus is not just a poor way to measure impact (for
example, citations can be both positive and negative, the latter of which is partic-
ularly common in the humanities and social sciences), it also contributes to what
Giacalone (2009) has called the problem of “metricality”. He argues that academics
are forgetting their responsibilities and instead conforming to logics that have
nothing to do with rigorous academic work:
An unfortunate effect of our professional amnesia is a disconnection with the realities of our
world and all that preceded us. Having forgotten the assumptions that were the under-
pinning of our profession, we redirected our focus from producing quality work toward
succeeding within a metrics-based reality, a metricality, where quality is narrowly and
artiﬁcially deﬁned. (Giacalone 2009, p. 124)
These recent changes in the academy have been so extensive that it is justiﬁed to
ask whether serious scholarship still has a place in today’s mediatized, marketized,
and micromanaged university. Can they still be trusted as institutions trying to live
up their own traditional ethical standards as truth-seeking institutions? And more
importantly, what resources do universities have to mobilize in resistance to the
anti-intellectualism of the post-truth society?
Serious journalists might ask themselves similar questions regarding the news
media institutions and organizations that have historically been important platforms
for ﬁnancing and protecting journalism. In a fragmented media environment, the
traditional news media companies are themselves becoming mediatized. Their
relative monopoly in controlling public attention is disappearing in a hybrid media
environment in which both traditional media and social media, along with different
kinds of commercial and activist media, interact and compete to capture and control
public attention (Chadwick 2013).
The Mediatization and the Crisis of News Media
In February 2017, The New York Times announced that it would launch a new
brand campaign to underline the importance of facts and encourage the support of
independent journalism. The campaign was ambitious, spanning digital platforms,
social media, outdoor, and print advertising; it was ﬁrst aired on television during
the Academy Awards on ABC. The objective of the campaign’s central message,
“The Truth is… Hard… Hard to ﬁnd… Hard to know… More important now than
ever”, was to show that producing independent quality journalism requires
As a Matter of Fact: Journalism and Scholarship …
125

resources, expertise, and commitment, and that it is important that people support it
(The New York Times 2017). In an e-mail to his subscribers, Arthur O. Sulzberger
Jr, the publisher of The New York Times, wrote that the campaign “is based on a fact
—that the truth matters, now more than ever. The truth, as our journalists can attest,
is also incredibly hard to get to. We remain undeterred in our efforts to reveal and
report the facts with integrity and courage” (Guaglione 2017).
The press release from The New York Times explained that the campaign, their
ﬁrst major brand campaign in decades, was a direct response to research conducted
by the newspaper company itself—research that suggested that people are not fully
aware of how quality journalism is produced. However, most commentators saw the
campaign as a response to President Donald Trump’s attacks on the newspaper, one
of the many news outlets he claims spreads “fake news”. In a tweet a week before
the launch of the campaign, Trump even called the news media the enemy of the
people: “The FAKE NEWS media (failing @nytimes, @NBCNews, @ABC,
@CBS, @CNN) is not my enemy, it is the enemy of the American People!” (Trump
2017). Donald Trump’s unceasing denunciation of the news media is without
historical precedent; never has a president or prime minister of a liberal democracy
openly attacked news media and journalists so combatively. Besides being so
pugnacious, Trump is also unique in that he has almost completely bypassed the
traditional news media by using Twitter as his main channel for communicating
with the world.
With Donald Trump and his tweets, public reason seems ﬁnally to have plunged
into a state of emergency with dishonesty, non sequiturs, and distortions of fact as
the most pronounced disorders (Gitlin 2017). It is easy to see why so many regard
his presidency as a repudiation of everything that both journalism and scholarship
stand for: free speech, open inquiry, logic, reason, and the pursuit of truth. Maybe
that was why the New York Times invested so much money into communicating to
the public its raison d’être, what it does, how, why, and for whom it does it, and
what knowledge and resources are required to do what it does. But this kind of
public self-promotion or self-legitimation by news media companies is not a new
phenomenon, nor is it something that only large global media companies such as
The New York Times engage in. Campaigns arguing for the democratic importance
of traditional news media outlets and for independent journalism are going on
everywhere. There is a sense of there being a crisis of trust in accurate information
throughout much of the world, a crisis that is felt particularly acutely in the
newspaper industry.
In the United States, the number of newspapers per one hundred million people
dropped from 1800 in 1945 to 400 in 2014. Over that same period, circulation per
capita declined from 30% in the mid-1940s to under 15% (Kamarck and Gabriele
2015). In the last 20 years, the newspaper workforce has shrunk by about 20,000
jobs, or 39%. Digital revenue makes up an increasingly large portion of newspaper
companies’ ad revenue, but this has more to do with the decline of print revenue
than the growth of digital. In other words, gains in digital ad revenue have not made
up for the continued decline in print revenue (Barthel 2016). Other traditional news
media have also suffered. Since 1980, television networks have lost half their
126
M. Hyvönen

audience for evening newscasts. During the same period, the audience for radio
news shrunk by 40% (Kamarck and Gabriele 2015).
These long-term trends are in no way speciﬁc to the United States. The rate and
speed of the decline in readership, employed journalists, and revenues may vary
between different countries and regions, but the general malaise is international.
Internet, the digitization of the media and the public sphere, together with the
advent of smartphones and social media, are usually pointed out as catalysts of the
crisis. Social media sites are overtaking both newspapers and television as a source
for news for young people, at the same time as news organizations have become
increasingly reliant on social media platforms for reaching their audiences and
generating trafﬁc to their own websites.
It is sometimes said that social media have affected the media ecology more than
anything before in the last 500 years. The use of media has changed fundamentally
in a short span of time, and public willingness to pay for journalism has dramati-
cally decreased. Newspaper readers have become social media users, and the
newspapers have followed their readers by increasingly distributing their journal-
istic content on Facebook. Thus, publishers have become more and more dependent
on Facebook to reach their audiences. One consequence is that the newspaper
publishers have lost control over a major part of the distribution of their own news.
In social media, the content is broken up into pieces and disconnected from the
original content producers’ brands. The move to social media has other palpable
effects: the data generated by social media users reading the newspaper’s articles—
the hard currency of a digitized media business—are owned by the social media
companies, and not the newspaper publishers.
Digitization has given global actors access to local national markets. While these
global actors lack the journalistic ambitions of the local and regional newspapers
(Facebook takes little or no responsibility for the content published and distributed
through the platform), they are taking an increasing share of the advertising rev-
enues. The advertising revenues that used to ﬁnance local journalism now go to
global giants such as Facebook and Google. This shift in inﬂuence from local to
global actors leads to the local actors having a hard time ﬁnancing the traditional,
self-imposed tasks of serving the public, perhaps the most important of which is
investigative journalism that scrutinizes those in power.
The changes in technology and society that have led to newspapers losing paid
circulation and advertising pose a threat to the survival of the print media that have
traditionally been the heart of journalism. This ultimately constitutes a threat to
society at large, since the traditional media companies have been the most important
platforms for ﬁnancing journalism. Starr (2012) writes that economic pressures
undermine the newspapers’ capacity for original reporting, while at the same time,
they can no longer amass on a daily basis the broad audience that they were able to
create in the past. Consequentially, newspaper publishers will have fewer resources
and less inﬂuence over public opinion, and hence have a weaker position against
powerful interests, be they public or private. According to Starr (2012, p. 240), this
“deterioration in institutional capacity” constitutes the primary problem that the
news media crisis poses for democracy.
As a Matter of Fact: Journalism and Scholarship …
127

The critical situation described above can be seen from two perspectives. First,
the new business models in the news industry threaten more than the ﬁnancial
foundations of journalism. They threaten also public legitimacy, journalism’s
privileged position throughout much of the twentieth century as the so-called fourth
estate. As the publishers developed their services and proﬁtability (or were sus-
tained through public subsidies), they became solid institutions within which
journalism could develop its professionalism autonomy:
Journalists distinguished themselves as a special part of the media labor force that held up
particular values and practices. They also distinguished themselves from other social
institutions such as politics, on which they reported. Journalists defended their right and
public duty to make independent professional judgments about what kind of media
attention those other institutions deserve. (Kunelius and Reunanen 2016, p. 373)
The era when professional journalists held a monopoly on news and on the dis-
tribution of public attention is coming to an end and. Even if this were to mean a
“democratization” of the news industry insofar as many more people can engage in
journalistic work, it also constitutes a challenge to the legitimacy and authority of
journalism as an independent institution in society. Second, in this fragmented
media environment, it is already becoming increasingly difﬁcult to imagine com-
monality. According to Harsin (2015), the problem is that in a digitized media
landscape there is “no main venue in which a trusted authority can deﬁnitively
debunk truths by suturing multiple audience/market/network segments, since
reaching most of them […] in a short amount of time is very difﬁcult” (p. 332).
Neither the traditional news media nor Facebook or Google will be able to
reestablish any ultimate gatekeeping and truth-telling authority now that free speech
has met digital platforms and the social media. The changes that have taken place in
the media environment during the last two decades are of course irreversible—there
is no going back to the “good old days”. This means that journalists and academics
who are serious about free speech, open inquiry, logic, reason, and the pursuit of
truth must ﬁnd ways of doing what they are supposed to do in a world that has in
the blink of an eye changed beyond recognition.
Journalism Without Newspapers, Scholarship Without
an Academy?
In many nineteenth- and twentieth-century societies, the newspaper was “almost
sanctiﬁed” as a medium; even if its form and content changed more or less dra-
matically over the course of time, it was consistently thought to perform an essential
democratic function (Barnhurst and Nerone 2001, p. 1; Lundell 2008). At a time
when most media content “came from a limited number of synchronized central
sources”, and the opportunities for media production “were very limited and tied to
the operation and gatekeeping power of those central sources” (Couldry and Hepp
2017, p. 52), a simple transmission model could be applied to imagine a
128
M. Hyvönen

unidirectional circuit: “the world makes news, the newspaper reports it, the public
consumes it” (Barnhurst and Nerone 2001, p. 2). Modern electronic mass media
made possible simultaneous transmission of media content across vast spaces;
through their cyclical production, they generated “shared rhythms of simultaneous
experience and new narratives of commonality” (Couldry and Hepp 2017, p. 47).
From a historical perspective, it is obvious that the material limits of the
newspaper (the costs of running a newspaper company, in particular) or the radio
(spectrum scarcity and regulation, most notably) played an important part in the
emergence of the nation-state with a mediated national “public sphere” (Habermas
1989) that was essential to the creation of the nation as an “imagined community”
(Anderson 1991). It was in this historical setting that the newspaper became, like no
other medium, associated with democratic, deliberative, and civic values.
Newspapers were, and still are to a certain extent, considered something essentially
good (consider, for example, the fact that newspaper consumption is used as a
measure of the level of democracy and civilization). The fact that individual
newspapers and their journalists fail to live up to these ideals, and that they, as
for-proﬁt companies, have other aims besides promoting democracy, is commonly
acknowledged. The content is rightfully criticized for concealed structures of
power, ideological bias, and sensationalism; nonetheless, even the most vocal
critics of these failures have not seriously called into question the assumption that
the medium serves a “true”, and vital, purpose. According to Lundell (2008, p. 6),
The medium […] supplies the standard against which the content is measured. The standard
is, in other words, considered eternal, absolute and universal. The history of the press is,
accordingly, often told as a gradual fulﬁlling of these ideals (in the critical version, to a
certain point when a decline begins): from naive forms, it develops towards its true mission
(and perhaps its decline).
In recent years, when challenged by changing patterns of media consumption, it has
become obvious that speciﬁc traditional mass media, be it newspapers, radio, or
television, have no given, timeless, roles to play in society, and that no preset goals
for their activities have ever existed. It has also become clear, in the light of the
developments in the media environment, that the medium and journalism are not
the same thing. In both public and academic debate, however, journalism and
medium are regularly conﬂated. Just think of all the debates in which the demise of
the newspaper medium is made synonymous with the death of journalism. This
confusion has been productive for the traditional media companies, who, “by virtue
of their historical roles, ideas and ideological myths, have legitimized themselves as
representatives and custodians of the news institution” (Allern and Blach-Ørsten
2011, p. 94).
Picard (2010) argues that journalism is not “a form of media; it is not a distri-
bution platform; it is not an industry; it is not a company; it is not a business model;
it is not a job. Journalism is an activity, a body of practices by which information
and knowledge is gathered, processed and conveyed” (p. 366). Similarly, Kovach
and Rosenstiel (2001) urge us not to ask whether someone is called a journalist, but
whether or not this person is doing journalism; does the work that he or she
As a Matter of Fact: Journalism and Scholarship …
129

performs “proceed from a respect for an adherence to the principles of truthfulness,
an allegiance to citizens and community at large, and informing rather than
manipulating—concepts that set journalism apart from other forms of communi-
cation?” (p. 98). They emphasize that the meaning of freedom of speech is that it
belongs to everyone: “But communication and journalism are not interchangeable
terms. Anyone can be a journalist. Not everyone is. The decisive factor is not
whether they have a press pass; rather, it lies in the nature of the work” (p. 98).
In a digitized media environment where, with relatively inexpensive devices,
anyone with a modicum of technical know-how can gather, formulate, and dis-
seminate information, the ﬂow of news is likely to broaden, deepen, and accelerate.
Entrepreneurs and nonproﬁts have not only begun to ﬁll in whatever blind spots the
traditional media have missed, but also to compete with them at their own game. In
other words, there is no risk that there will be a decrease in news due to the changes
in the media environment. The problem is not the supply of news, but the future of
journalism. As Stephens (2014, p. xiii) puts it: “The future of news […] appears
reasonably secure. It is the future of journalism that is looking grim.”
Perhaps we ought to consider the crisis of the universities in a similar way. If we
view the university as a medium, the same could then perhaps be said about it as
about the newspaper: universities are, by virtue of their historical roles, considered
something essentially good. The medium supplies the standard against which the
content is measured. But just as for journalists, the times are gone when just being a
professional in the medium itself gave status and authority to the work one pro-
duced. To the contrary, in our current environment, journalists and academics are
regarded with suspicion and disdain before they have even presented any.
This situation puts demands on those journalists and academics who take their
work seriously. In this era of fake news and post-truth, when political nihilism
eclipses reason and power scorns thoughtfulness, journalists and academics have to
stand up for the values that are at the core of their professions. Or, at least, in the
words of Gitlin (2017), “they don’t have time to wallow in self-pity”.
Conclusion
The precarious situation of journalism and academic scholarship will not go away.
Instead of turning our backs on our age of unreason and sealing ourselves inside the
protecting walls of the university, we should regard this situation as a potentially
productive one, a situation that makes demands on us to engage with the world in
new, creative ways. We are in a state of emergency that demands a response. In a
nutshell, it is time to come up with the goods.
If universities are as essential, as fertile, as entrepreneurial, as brimming with intelligence,
as eager to think outside the box, inside the box, or plain without the box, as we claim to be
when we are shaking the cup for donors, we need to exercise our imaginations to step up in
what is not only an emergency for the republic but also an emergency for the future of
public reason itself. (Gitlin 2017)
130
M. Hyvönen

Gitlin (2017) calls for a “forward strategy” through which the university should
broaden its ambitions. As part of this strategy, he offers a number of suggestions
about what can be done. One of these proposals is particularly germane to the
present context, namely, the suggestion that universities should start cooperating
with, and even sponsor, ambitious nonproﬁt journalism. In his argumentation for
this idea, Gitlin poses a justiﬁed question: “If state universities operate agricultural
research stations to help farmers make improvements, why not journalistic research
stations?” If journalism is really “the fourth estate”, then the development of its
products should be considered as important as the development of the farmers’
products. There is a great deal of middle ground to be covered between journalism
and academic scholarship, and concrete cooperation projects could contribute to the
development of both.
Another argument for more cooperation between scholars and journalists is that
they are both in the attention business, and, in the age of post-truth, they have to
play to win. Or as Kaufman (2017) puts it: “We who produce knowledge are also in
the attention business—competing against everything else for time and place on the
screens that we carry around and shuttle to and from every few minutes. To direct
attention to the real knowledge that we produce, publishing our material online for
free use and reuse is the ﬁrst step.” The key words here are “for free”; by using
them, Kaufman points to perhaps the greatest obstacle for scholarship truly being an
important part of the resistance against the development of a post-truth society.
Scholars and scientists are judged by where they have published, and publishing in
the right journals is important when competing for jobs, promotions, tenure, and
grant money. But, as an act of resistance, maybe we should start focusing more on
what we publish instead of where? The ﬁrst step, for scholars as well as for
journalists, might be to start publishing beyond the paywalls of both scholarship
and journalism.1
References
Allern, S., & Blach-Ørsten, M. (2011). The news media as a political institution: A Scandinavian
perspective. Journalism Studies, 12(1), 92–105.
Altheide, D. L., & Snow, R. P. (1979). Media logic. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Anderson, B. R. O. (1991). Imagined communities: Reﬂections on the origin and spread of
nationalism. London: Verso.
Arendt, H. (1958). The human condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Asp,
K.
(1986).
Mäktiga
massmedier:
Studier
i
politisk
opinionsbildning.
Stockholm:
Akademilitteratur.
Barnhurst, K. G., & Nerone, J. (2001). The form of news: A history. New York: Guilford Press.
Barthel, M. (2016). Newspapers: Fact sheet. In State of the news media 2016. Pew Research
Center, June, 2016.
1Portions of this paper have been adapted from material published in Hyvönen (2016).
As a Matter of Fact: Journalism and Scholarship …
131

Chadwick, A. (2013). The hybrid media system: Politics and power. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Corner, J. (2017). Fake news, post-truth and media–political change. Media, Culture and Society,
39(7), 1100–1107.
Couldry, N., & Hepp, A. (2017). The mediated construction of reality. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Davies, W. (2016, August 24). The age of post-truth politics. The New York Times.
Giacalone, R. A. (2009). Academic rankings in research institutions: A case of skewed mind-sets
and professional amnesia. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 8(1), 122–126.
Gitlin, T. (2017, March 9). Promoting knowledge in an age of unreason. The Chronicle of Higher
Education.
Guaglione, S. (2017, February 24). “NYT” launches “truth” campaign, will air in Oscars.
MediaPost. https://www.mediapost.com/about/. Accessed September 1, 2017.
Habermas, J. (1989). The structural transformation of the public sphere: An inquiry into a
category of bourgeois society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Harsin, J. (2015). Regimes of posttruth, postpolitics, and attention economies. Communication,
Culture & Critique, 8(2), 327–333.
Horsthemke, K. (2017). ‘#FactsMustFall’?—education in a post-truth, post truthful world. Ethics
and Education, 12(3), 273–288.
Hyvönen, M. (2016). Rankings and mediatization of University. In M. A. Peters (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of educational philosophy and theory. Singapore: Springer.
Kamarck, E. C., & Gabriele, A. (2015, November 10). The news today: 7 trends in old and new
media. Washington: Center for Effective Public Management at Brookings.
Kaufman, P. B. (2017, April 2). In the post-truth era, colleges must share their knowledge. The
Chronicle of Higher Education.
Kovach, B., & Rosenstiel, T. (2001). The elements of journalism: What newspeople should know
and the public should expect. New York: Three Rivers Press.
Kunelius, R., & Reunanen, E. (2016). Changing power of journalism: The two phases of
mediatization. Communication Theory, 26(4), 369–388.
Lundell, P. (2008). The medium is the message: The media history of the press. Media History,
14(1), 1–16.
Picard, R. (2010). The future of the news industry. In J. Curran (Ed.), Media and society. London:
Bloomsbury Academic.
Reolofs, P., & Gallien, M. (2017, September 20). Clickbait and impact: How academia has been
hacked [Blog post]. http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2017/09/19/clickbait-and-
impact-how-academia-has-been-hacked/. Accessed September 20, 2017.
Rider, S., Hasselberg, Y., & Waluszewski, A. (Eds.). (2013). Transformations in research, higher
education and the academic market: The breakdown of scientiﬁc thought. Dortrecht: Springer.
Schlesinger, P. (2017). Book review: The media and public life: A history. Media, Culture and
Society, 39(4), 603–606.
Starr, P. (2012). An unexpected crisis: The news media in postindustrial democracies. The
International Journal of Press/Politics, 17(2), 234–242.
Stephens, M. (2014). Beyond news: The future of journalism. New York: Columbia University
Press.
The New York Times. (2017). The New York Times to launch brand campaign on the search for truth
and the importance of independent journalism (Press release). http://www.businesswire.com/
news/home/20170223005954/en/New-York-Times-Launch-Brand-Campaign-Search. Accessed
September 1, 2017.
Trump, D. J. [realDonaldTrump]. (2017, February 17). The FAKE NEWS media (failing
@nytimes, @NBCNews, @ABC, @CBS, @CNN) is not my enemy, it is the enemy of the
American People! [Tweet]. https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/832708293516632065.
Accessed September 19, 2017.
132
M. Hyvönen

Don’t Bring Truth to a Gunﬁght:
Pedagogy, Force, and Decision
Derek R. Ford
Many are in shock that today in politics truth doesn’t seem to matter. This analysis
misses the mark: politics was never about a correspondence with an existing truth,
but about the formulation of a new truth. The contemporary moment thus offers up
an important opportunity to reclaim the nature of the political, to develop new
political positions on that basis and, most importantly, to assert those politics. This
is a deeply pedagogical task, but it is one to which critical forms of education aren’t
suited. Critical education is really good at denouncing the present moment. There is
no shortage of articles and blog posts condemning our political scene in near
apocalyptic terms. At best, these writings end with a vague call for action. This is
not sufﬁcient. Those of us in education who want to ﬁght for a better world need to
move from critique to politics, from politics to movement. It is to this end that I
offer this chapter, in which I diagnose our present moment of the “post-truth” and
propose a way out: a pedagogy of clarity, imagination, organization, and force. The
task is not to return to some “truth era,” but to organize in order to vindicate a new
truth, a just truth.
Postmodern Democracy
To be “post-truth” is not to be “anti-truth” or “without-truth.” The relationship
between the truth and the post-truth, I want to suggest, should be read the way that
Jean-François Lyotard formulated the relationship between the modern and the
postmodern. For Lyotard, the postmodern is not a negation, annihilation, or
supersession of the modern. There is no dialectic of or between either. The post-
modern doesn’t come after the modern, for such a progression would itself be
D. R. Ford (&)
DePauw University, Indiana, USA
e-mail: derekford@depauw.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_11
133

decidedly modern. No, the postmodern “is undoubtedly part of the modern,”
Lyotard (1992, p. 12) tells us. The postmodern inhabits the modern, interrupting it:
The postmodern would be that which in the modern invokes the unpresentable in pre-
sentation itself, that which refuses the consolation of correct forms, refuses the consensus of
taste permitting a common experience of nostalgia for the impossible, and inquires into new
presentations—not to take pleasure in them, but to better produce the feeling that there is
something unpresentable. (p. 15, emphasis added)
The modern is that which offers up a narrative of understanding, cohesion, and
unity. The modern itself isn’t the narrative, but instead takes the form of narrative,
and also of institutions, philosophy, science, art, and so on.
The postmodern is that for which the narrative can’t account, it’s an excess of
thought, feeling, and being. At one point Lyotard (1992) writes that “postmodernity
is also, or ﬁrst of all, a question of expressions of thought: in art, literature, phi-
losophy, politics” (p. 79). The postmodern is the surplus of the modern that cannot
be tamed, but that certain modes of politics and forms of government attempt to
suppress and regulate. While Lyotard is certainly concerned with the Nazi project to
annihilate difference, he is just as concerned with liberal democracy, and his cri-
tique of liberal democracy is no less damning than that of fascism. With the help of
the concept of communicative capitalism, it also, as I show below, helps us make
sense of our “post-truth” era.
Writing after the overthrow and dissolution of the Soviet Union and the socialist
bloc in Eastern Europe, Lyotard labels liberal democracy as “the system.” Liberal,
imperialist democracy emerges triumphant not because it is the most enlightened
system, but because it is the most effective one, the system that adheres best to the
performativity criterion. As he writes in one of his fables, “The Intimacy of Terror:”
It does not permit peace, it guarantees security, by means of competition. It does not
promise progress, it guarantees development, by the same means. It has no others. It
arouses disparities, it solicits divergences, multiculturalism is agreeable to it but under the
condition of an agreement concerning the rules of disagreement. This is what is called
consensus. The intrinsic constitution of the system is not subject to radical upheaval, only to
revision. (Lyotard 1997, p. 199)
Liberal democracy is based on principles of dialogue, deliberation, transparency,
and communication. It is an open system that not only accommodates, but also
actively solicits differences and disagreements. To be sure, there are limits, not any
sort of difference will be acceptable, especially not one that refuses or cannot
acknowledge the system and its rules. But differences, in general, are to be vari-
ously reconciled, accommodated, tolerated, or tamed.
There is something deeper that democracy cannot tolerate, however, something
that betrays all of its principles. Lyotard (1997) calls this “the secret life.” The
secret life is opposed to the public, democratic life, the life that is visible and open.
The secret life in an internal region, an inhuman region that exceeds knowledge,
discourse, and representation. The secret life is the realm of the incommunicable
and the opaque, a place you go—alone and with others—to “encounter what you
are unaware of” (p. 117). Democracy can’t condone any secrets, and wages a war
134
D. R. Ford

on this region. “Heavy pressures are put on silence, to give birth to expression”
(p. 120). Democracy works to produce us as subjects that babble endlessly, express
ourselves constantly, who feel that if we are not exposed then we do not exist. In
this way, democracy works hand in glove with capitalism, for only once things are
expressed can they be exchanged.
Democratic Communicative Capitalism
This brings us to another coalescing of democracy and capitalism that pushes us
toward post-truth: communicative capitalism. This is the name Jodi Dean (who got
the term from Paul Passavant) gives to our contemporary networked society. The
democratic ideals of access, participation, inclusion, diversity, and critique become
actualized through capitalist technological infrastructure. Capitalism is the answer
to the lack of, or deﬁciency in, the practice of democracy. New forms of com-
munication technology increase the possibility of democratic participation and
discussion by bringing more people into conversation with each other. Anyone with
access to a computer or smartphone can start a blog, vlog, Tumblr, Facebook, or
Twitter account, gain followers, state their opinions on any debate. We can com-
ment endlessly on others’ posts, news stories, pictures, videos, and more. We can
post about or ﬁle complaints with private entities or government ofﬁces across the
globe in an instant (in fact, tweeting at a company is the surest way to have your
complaint addressed these days). If someone posts something racist or sexist, we
can screenshot it, and tweet it at their bosses. Not enough access to information or
avenues to voice your participation? There’s an app for that!
The proliferation of technologies may enable faster and more expansive com-
munication and deliberation, but it works to solidify the inequality of capitalism.
Networked capitalism “coincides with extreme corporatization, ﬁnancialization, and
privatization across the globe” (Dean 2009, p. 23). Increased participation in
communicative capitalism enriches the coffers of the global elite at the expense of
the global poor. There is not only the massive conglomeration of technologies and
gadgets, like data servers, databases, computers, smartphones, cables, and satellites
(and the energy that goes into powering them and keeping them cool), but there is
also the expropriation of information, data, and social relations generated through
the use of such technologies.
Just as importantly, it has done the ideological work of erasing the antagonism
that is fundamental to political organization. The constant circulation of ideas,
memes, blog posts, and so on contributes “to the billions of nuggets of information
and affect trying to catch and hold attention, to push or sway opinion, taste, and
trends in one direction rather than another” (Dean 2009, p. 24). The “search for the
truth” is crucial to this operation. There is always something more to ﬁnd out,
another angle to consider, another source to pursue, another link to follow. And as
we are in our search for the truth about one thing, another tragedy starts circulating,
another hashtag starts trending, and we are off again. There is always more to learn.
Don’t Bring Truth to a Gunﬁght: Pedagogy, Force, and Decision
135

The need to constantly express that Lyotard gives us has a ﬂipside: the need to
constantly seek out others’ expressions. It’s not enough for us to tell our secrets, we
need to know everyone else’s secrets too. We need to comment on them, rank them,
share them. This is the ethos of social media. Democracy produces the subject
compelled to express, and communicative capitalism provides the circuits to cap-
ture and enthrall that expression and the implacable pursuit of the truth, which,
while we may insist is knowable, is eternally deferred. This is how the post-truth
relates to the truth: the post-truth is the truth not “at its end, but in a nascent state,
and this state is recurrent” (Lyotard 1992, p. 13).
The crisis of symbolic efﬁciency accelerates the tempo of what I’ll call demo-
cratic communicative capitalism. Put simply, symbolic efﬁciency is that which ﬁlls
in the gaps between signiﬁcation and substance, allowing for the mobility and
transmission of information and meaning. This crisis “designates the fundamental
uncertainty accompanying the impossibility of totalization: that is, of fully
anchoring or pinning down meaning” (Dean 2011, p. 6). Democracy isn’t a master
signiﬁer that can tie up these loose ends, but rather a name that gives political form
to the drive of communicative capitalism, that provides the ideological belief that
makes our contradictory actions and knowledge cohere.
In this scene, to demand democracy is to demand more capitalism, and vice
versa. What’s more, even anti-capitalist critiques and resistances are ﬂattened and
dulled in this conﬁguration. To insist on the pursuit of the truth is a trap that keeps
us stuck in the reﬂexive circuits of democratic communicative capitalism. The right
wing knows this. It doesn’t make appeals to the truth. It makes appeals to beliefs
and convictions. If those beliefs and desires contradict some set of evidence, then
that evidence is fake. That is what Donald Trump means when he tweets “FAKE
NEWS!” It isn’t an assertion of what the truth really is (as if the news had some
innate relationship to truth and constituted “the real”); it’s an assertion of belief of
what should be, a performative utterance meant to organize and intensify one side
—his side—of the political. To reply that the news isn’t fake, that the fake news
designation only applies to the news that he doesn’t like, news that makes his side
look bad, misses the point completely.
This is why the right wing is winning: they know they have enemies and they
want to defeat those enemies. To defeat those enemies, they mobilize and organize.
They imagine the future they want. They talk to each other, they create their own
ideological bubbles from which to act, resist, and take swings. They capture the
state and wield it toward their ends. In sum, the right wing has broken out of the
drive of democratic communicative capitalism through their embrace of politics.
Left Paranoia and Critical Education
Meanwhile, the Left has retreated from politics, from the antagonism that politics
names, and from the force by which politics changes. State power has been off the
agenda for a while now. Any actually existing alternatives to neoliberalism have
136
D. R. Ford

been ridiculed, demeaned, and denounced. This has been the case with the “edu-
cational left” or “critical education” sectors as well. In general, it seems that the
educational left has contented itself with repeating the age-old critiques of
neoliberalism and capitalism. We pat ourselves on the back when we engage in
“public pedagogy,” which often means writing a different version of the same blog
post over and over again, posts that always end with a few sentences to rouse the
masses into action. We embody the prototypical paranoid academic that Sedgwick
(2003) diagnosed as we place our full faith in the act of exposure:
Like the deinstitutionalized person on the street who, betrayed and plotted against by
everyone else in the city, still urges on you the ﬁnger-worn dossier bristling with his
precious correspondence, paranoia for all its vaunted suspicion acts as though its work
would be accomplished if only it could ﬁnally, this time, somehow get its story truly
known. (p. 138)
If we just keep on listing—and publicly!—the bad things about neoliberalism (or, in
the case of Marxist educational theory, the bad things about capitalism), then things
will get better. How can we lose? The truth is on our side! At the same time,
however, we insist that we have to keep critiquing: there is always something we
are missing, an angle we didn’t account for, something out there that can explain
why we are in the situation we are.
Merriﬁeld (2011) has made a related criticism of the Marxist Left. He contends
that there is a “residual Marxism” that reigns supreme today, one “reduced to a
rather effete framework for analyzing bourgeois political economy” (p. 3). This is a
Marxism that goes on critiquing, shining light on the operation of the law of value
at the heart of everything; it’s “a Marxism that’s systematic yet sterile, rigorous yet
stilted” (p. 3). Merriﬁeld wants to make Marxism magical, and he insists that magic
is a materialist process. Such a Marxism
is no longer a Marxist “science,” a science of exposing real truth hiding behind false
appearance; it’s rather about inventing other truths, about expanding the horizons of pos-
sibility, about showing how people can turn a project of life into a life-project that
blooms… about invention not discovery, about irrationality not rationality. (p. 18)
This is certainly not to say that critique, explanation, or accounting aren’t important.
Indeed, that’s largely what I have done thus far in this chapter. I’ve argued for a
particular understanding of the post-truth era, an understanding that the post-truth is
the truth in its continuously intermittent state, and sought to locate these dynamics
within the logic of democracy and the conﬁguration of communicative capitalism.
And I am yet to ﬁnd a route out of this impasse for the Left. To get out of this
impasse, however, I am not going to prove a truth, but assert one: what the Left
needs right now is clarity, organization, imagination, and force. And the generation
of each of these is, at heart, a pedagogical task. Thus, while we needn’t set facts
aside—nor, necessarily, the quest for the truth—we must resolutely abandon the
myth that the truth, whether existing or invented, is the only or the most effective
weapon. Rather, I would posit that critique, or the search for the fugitive of truth—
Don’t Bring Truth to a Gunﬁght: Pedagogy, Force, and Decision
137

is useful primarily insofar as it helps us to produce clarity, organization, imagi-
nation, and force. Each of these elements can’t just be harnessed, in general, but
must be deployed in some direction: for something(s) and against something(s).
Transition
For one, we have to move from critique to the taking of actual political positions. It
is not enough to analyze some social phenomena from a few different angles only to
state that there are “productive tensions” between such angles, or that we have to
wait until the next article to parse through the different valences. This puts us right
back into the democratic-capitalist loop. If there is anything that doesn’t threaten
the current order of things, it’s the demand for more analysis. It doesn’t matter that
we make that endless analysis public. The myth of the hero of the public intellectual
is dead. Public intellectuals have proven completely ineffectual against neoliber-
alism—although they have proﬁted quite nicely from it.
Our political positions have to be imaginative, forward-looking, and inventive.
Political positions have to culminate in political programs. This is the lifeblood of
struggle, what generates conviction, what gathers together desire and melds it to
action. Political programs are the ultimate form of praxis. They will be partial,
incomplete, imperfect, subject to continuous revision and amendment. Completion
and perfection are not prerequisites for political action but barriers to it. Political
programs bind us together and forge links of commitment and discipline, as they are
products of collective struggle, the artworks of organization. Through critique we
can ﬁnd like minds, but through imagination we ﬁnd like spirits. We become
comrades not by denouncing the present, but by collectively dreaming of the future.
In so doing, we gain a critical distance from the present. Whereas critique makes the
present seem detestable, imagination makes the present feel foreign, producing an
affective disjointedness and sense of possibility that is key to any political struggle
(Ford 2017b).
There are all kinds of political organizations around on the Left today. Pick your
cause, pick your strategy, pick your tactic, pick your action, and pick your
group. We create afﬁnities that are ﬂeeting and based on the momentary intersection
of interest. They don’t require any real responsibility, risk, or sacriﬁce. If we don’t
commit too much we can’t lose too much. But we also can’t win. We can’t generate
enough force to assert our imaginations. The assertion of force requires disciplined
organizations. This means not just organizations that demand discipline from
members, but also organizations that are disciplined by their members. What the
Left needs is not better arguments, more inquiry, deeper critique, increased access
to information and communication, or heightened dialogue with our opponents.
Each of these only serves to defer the possibility of another element that the Left is
lacking and that is fundamentally connected to the question of organization and
force: political decision. Antonio Negri connects organization and decision in the
following way. Organization, he says, has two components:
138
D. R. Ford

On the one hand, it is the positive, material and innovative capacity to build—a capacity
that insists on the ontological dimensions of the process of transformation and afﬁrms its
hold there. On the other, simultaneous to the opening of organization towards the future, it
is the capacity to destroy and to deny everything that diffuses death and asphyxiates the old
world. It is in the midst of this extremely violent dynamics that decision and organization
are afﬁrmed. (Negri 2008, p. 156)
Negri actually helps us thread clarity, imagination, and force through the question
of organization. The problem is that his conception of organization is a nebulous
network of multitudinous subjects that disavows the fundamental antagonism that
constitutes the political. It could be said, then, that Negri’s multitudinous organi-
zation is of a social, and not a political, character. In the last part of this chapter, I
want to propose a speciﬁc type of organization that is well suited to intervene
decisively in our contemporary moment: the Communist Party.
The Communist Party: Feeling, Fighting, and Force
The Communist Party is a disciplined organization that binds together subjects
along the lines of a common political project, that insists on the enactment of
imagination, and that generates the force necessary to assert a new truth. The
Communist Party is an organizational form founded on discipline. As Lukács
(2009) puts it, Lenin’s position was that “it was essential for members to take part
in illegal activity, to devote themselves wholeheartedly to party work, and to submit
to the most rigorous party discipline” (p. 25). And this is the crux of the whole
debate and the whole purpose of the Party itself: “Other questions of organization—
that of centralization, for instance—are only the necessary technical consequences
of this… Leninist standpoint” (p. 25). This was not just a theoretical conviction for
Lukács, who embodied this ethos of revolutionary discipline throughout his life,
always being willing to denounce his work and actions when they betrayed the
Party line (including his participation in the right-wing Nagy government in
Hungary in 1956). As he saw it, the relationship that the Party institutes in the
revolutionary mass movement is not between spontaneity and organization, but
between spontaneity and discipline. Why is discipline necessary? Because the Party
is nothing except the vehicle for working-class power in the revolutionary period,
and revolutions are events: they are necessarily confusing, chaotic, and unpre-
dictable. There are two reasons for this: one, because of the varying social and class
forces that participate in revolutions and, two, because of the complicated nature of
the composition of the proletarian class itself.
Discipline is necessary in and before the time of insurrection. The Party member
submits to the will of the Party, but this will is not some abstract program; it’s
instead a living, breathing organism of which the member is a full part. The member
and the Party do not relate in a reiﬁed way; it is not as if the organization “is divided
into an active and a passive group” (Lukács 1971, p. 318). Instead, the Party
requires “active participation in every event,” and this “can only be achieved by
Don’t Bring Truth to a Gunﬁght: Pedagogy, Force, and Decision
139

engaging the whole personality” (Lukács 1971, p. 319). The Party engages the
entirety of subjectivity, mobilizing all of the forces of intellect and desire, and in
this way, the Party is subjected to the discipline of the proletarian class. Lukács
(1971) goes so far as to equate the “discipline of the Communist Party” to “the
unconditional absorption of the total personality in the praxis of the movement”
(p. 320). This relationship is the key to the Communist Party, and without it
membership “degenerate[s] into a reiﬁed and abstract system of rights and duties”
(p. 320). The Party is not just another organization or coalition; when one joins one
makes a commitment to prioritizing revolutionary organizing in their life. This is
what Maggie McConnell emphasizes as she recalls her involvement with the
Communist Party USA in the 1930s and 1940s. When she was sent to organize in a
union, she says:
What did I know about organizing? Nothing! It was a holding action. I was scared shitless,
but the Party said go, and I went. It was always like that, from the very beginning.
I believed in the discipline, I believed in the revolution, I believed I was at the center of the
world. I’ve been scared always, but I pulled myself together always, and I pulled myself
together for my Party. From the very beginning, the Party came ﬁrst. (Gornick 1977,
p. 127)
The discipline of the Party literally allowed McConnell to cohere (i.e., to pull
herself together), overcome her fear, and act regardless of her own presumed
incompetence.
The Communist Party unites critique and ideology with affective possibility (see
Ford 2016, 2017a). It enhances our imaginations and ampliﬁes our collective
desires. McConnell, a working-class woman from a small town in Massachusetts,
was able to view herself as a revolutionary “at the center of the world,” as an agent
of world-historical transformation who was bound to action. Hosea Hudson also
locates himself in this nexus of force-program-affect as he recalls his earliest days in
the Communist Party. Hudson was a Black sharecropper who joined the Party in
1929 and immediately became an organizer. In the Jim Crow south, Hudson and his
comrades risked their lives daily in the organization. He tells one story about the
classes he took with his organizing unit while he was in Alabama, where they read
the Liberator, the Party’s newspaper speciﬁcally for the Black nation within
the U.S.:
We would read this paper and this would give us great courage. We had classes, reading
these articles and the editorials in the Liberator. We’d compare, we’d talk about the right of
self-determination. We discussed the question of if we established a government, what role
we comrades would play, then about the relationship of the white, of the poor white, of the
farmers, etc., in this area. (Painter 1994, p. 102)
Hudson is in a class with ﬁve other comrades. They are in someone’s house in a
racist, apartheid dictatorship enforced by military and paramilitary alike. Hudson
never went to school. Yet the Party’s newspaper and its program gave him and his
comrades the force to imagine what their government will look like once they have
overthrown Jim Crow. This isn’t an intellectual exercise for them, nor is it hypo-
thetical. They are dead serious in their imagination and their commitment. Hudson
140
D. R. Ford

says of the Party, “it was freedom in it for me” (Painter 1994, p. 94). This freedom
is not just the goal of the Party, but is rather generated in the Party itself (Dean,
2016). The freedom is the freedom to imagine what their government will look like,
what their truth will be.
The Communist Party as a Truth Bubble
The Communist Party doesn’t seek to build bridges between antagonists, but rather
to amplify one side of the antagonism. Instead of talking with our enemies, we have
to talk to each other. In Leftist circles, this is often derided as “preaching to the
choir.” But it is precisely this that we have to do. For one, of course, we have to do
this because we have to debate amongst ourselves in order to forge unity. For two,
however, we have to do this because we have to make ourselves stronger, bolder,
more forceful, individually and collectively. The Party is a sphere, a bubble, that
produces an enabling and protective force from which to act in the world. The Party
is an oppositional interior in bourgeois society that is generated by the cadre that it
protects, that works on the workers who produce it. It’s a shared interior that isn’t
hitched to any particular place or time. Fighting against the domination of capital
and the state requires a strong oppositional interior, one that protects and enhances
its inhabitants, that produces a shared language, a common outlook.
Finally, I want to propose that David Backer’s activist theory of language is
helpful as we ﬁnd our way out of the current impasse. Backer develops his active
linguistic theory from the ashes of the post-truth era, when political speech is
divorced from truth and oriented toward gaining power. Gaining power, he con-
tends, contains within it a theory of truth. He develops, on this basis, “a theory of
language whose paradigm stipulates that ‘what’s true and what’s not’ are precisely
those statements which successfully vindicate one’s position or vision of the world
under a speciﬁc set of political circumstances” (Backer 2016, p. 4). Statements are
not true or false, they are proven true or false, vindicated through struggle. Backer
gives the example of the ﬁght over the length of the working day that Marx details
in the ﬁrst volume of Capital:
The capitalist maintains his rights as a purchaser when he tries to make the working-day as
long as possible, and to make, whenever possible, two working-days out of one. On the
other hand, the peculiar nature of the commodity sold implies a limit to its consumption by
the purchaser, and the labourer maintains his right as seller when he wishes to reduce the
working-day to one of deﬁnite normal duration. There is, therefore, an antinomy, right
against right, both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges. (Marx 1967, p. 255)
The worker says “the working-day is eight hours!” as the boss says “the
working-day is twelve hours!” Which statement is true depends on which group is
able to force the truth, to make their statement correct.
There are strong and weak versions of this theory. The strong version, which
Backer calls “simple,” demands clear proof and vindication, such as in the struggle
Don’t Bring Truth to a Gunﬁght: Pedagogy, Force, and Decision
141

over the working day. The weak version, which he calls “inclusive,” allows us to
appreciate “one or a combination of naming, condensation, embodying, or calling
for appropriate action in a conjunctural struggle when it comes to correctness”
(Backer 2016, 1967, p. 8). Through the weak version we can view the advances we
make in the war of maneuver, when we are able to frame discourse and the terms of
the discussion.
Backer’s theory is founded on Marxist analysis, and thus rests on force and
struggle, but he doesn’t consider the question of organization. The Communist
Party is an organization that puts forward political positions so as to advance and
vindicate them. It connects ideology and feeling with the organization necessary for
strengthening ourselves so that we can formulate an imaginative program, a world
that we want to live in, and so that we can act to institute that world. Let’s stop all
this critiquing, all this debating about what the truth is or isn’t, and let’s ﬁght for a
new truth, a truth that would do justice to our Earth and all of its inhabitants.
References
Backer, D. (2016). Toward an activist theory of language. In J. Hannon (Ed.), Truth in the public
sphere (pp. 3–22). Lanham: Lexington.
Dean, J. (2009). Democracy and other neoliberal fantasies: Communicative capitalism and left
politics. Durham: Duke University Press.
Dean, J. (2011). Blog theory: Feedback and capture in the circuits of drive. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Dean, J. (2016). Crowds and party. New York: Verso.
Ford, D. R. (2016). Joining the Party: Critical education and the question of organization. Critical
Education, 7(15), 1–18.
Ford, D. R. (2017a). Studying like a communist: Affect, the Party, and the educational limits to
capitalism. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 59(5), 452–461.
Ford, D. R. (2017b). Making Marxist pedagogy magical: From critique to imagination, or, how
bookkeepers set us free. Critical Education, 8(9), 1–13.
Gornick, V. (1977). The romance of American communism. New York: Basic Books.
Lukács, G. (1971). History and class consciousness: Studies in Marxist dialectics. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Lukács, G. (2009). Lenin: A study on the unity of his thought. London and New York: Verso.
Lyotard, J.-F. (1992). The postmodern explained: Correspondence 1982–1985. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Lyotard, J.-F. (1997). Postmodern fables. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Marx, K. (1967). Capital: A critical analysis of capitalist production (Vol. 1). New York:
International Publishers.
Merriﬁeld, A. (2011). Magical Marxism: Subersive politics and the imagination. London: Pluto
Press.
Negri, A. (2008). The porcelain workshop: For a new grammar of politics. Semiotext(e): Los
Angeles.
Painter, N. I. (1994). The narrative of Hosea Hudson: The life and times of a Black radical. New
York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Sedgwick, E. K. (2003). Touching feeling: Affect, pedagogy, performativity. Durham: Duke
University Press.
142
D. R. Ford

Part III
Pedagogy and Postmodernity

Education in a Post-truth World
Michael A. Peters
The Oxford Dictionaries Word of the Year 2016 is post-truth deﬁned as “relating to
or denoting circumstances in which objective facts are less inﬂuential in shaping
public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief” (The Oxford
Dictionaries 2016). In their brief history of the concept, Oxford Dictionaries notes a
spike after a decade of use in relation to Brexit and Trump’s election as US
president and the rise of the compound noun post-truth politics as a description for
our times. Oxford Dictionaries also notes earlier formations with the Post stem like
post-national (1945) and post-racial (1971) and they trace its incidental use in a
variety of media before it became a general description and characteristic of our
age. It ought not to be a surprise that the 2016 shortlist also included both Alt-right
—“An ideological grouping associated with extreme conservative or reactionary
viewpoints, characterized by a rejection of mainstream politics and by the use of
online media to disseminate deliberately controversial content” and Brexiteer—“A
person who is in favour of the UK withdrawing from the European Union.”
The concept of post-truth has certainly been picked up and anchored quickly in
mainstream media. Time magazine deliciously states as a headline, “It describes a
situation in which feelings trump facts.” Time quotes Casper Grathwohl, president
of Oxford Dictionaries as saying “It’s not surprising that our choice reﬂects a year
dominated by highly-charged political and social discourse. Fueled by the rise of
social media as a news source and a growing distrust of facts offered up by the
establishment, post-truth as a concept has been ﬁnding its linguistic footing for
some time” (Steinmetz 2016).
The Economist devoted two articles to the issue—“Post-truth politics: Art of the
lie” (The Economist 2016a) and “The post-truth world: Yes, I’d lie to you”
(The Economist 2016b) beginning the latter with the sentence “When Donald
Trump, the Republican presidential hopeful, claimed recently that President Barack
Obama ‘is the founder’ of Islamic State and Hillary Clinton, the Democratic
M. A. Peters (&)
Wilf Malcom Institute of Educational Research,
University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
e-mail: michael.peters@waikato.ac.nz
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_12
145

candidate, the ‘co-founder’, even some of his supporters were perplexed.” Trump
has repeatedly told and retold “big lies”, such as
• that “The Birther Movement Was Started by Hillary Clinton In 2008,” when he
both iterated and championed the birther claims.
• that he “was totally against the war in Iraq.”
• that “real unemployment rate is 42%.”
• that “It Could Be 30 Million” undocumented immigrants currently residing in
the United States.
• that because his taxes are under audit, he “can’t” make them public.
• that then Secretary of State Clinton “soundly slept in her bed” during the 2012
attack In Benghazi, Libya.
• that “inner-city crime is reaching record levels.”
• that Clinton wants to “abolish the Second Amendment.”
• that he is “really the friend of” the LGBT community, while supporting
anti-LGBT legislation (Fernandez 2016).
• that “the concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order
to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive” (Dickinson 2016).
Trump has also, as is well known, made multiple false claims concerning
immigration and mass deportations (Sargent 2016). These are just the “big lies”.
The New York Times (2016) commented on Trump’s technique:
Donald Trump has come up with something new, which we can call the “big liar” tech-
nique. Taken one at a time, his lies are medium-size—not trivial, but mostly not rising to
the level of blood libel. But the lies are constant, coming in a steady torrent, and are never
acknowledged, simply repeated. He evidently believes that this strategy will keep the news
media ﬂummoxed, unable to believe, or at least say openly, that the candidate of a major
party lies that much. (Krugman 2016)
Taken together, Trump’s triumph in the US elections and Brexit indicates a decided
turn against the global liberal internationalist order. It is fueled by the rise of both
extreme right and left fractions—a coincidence of older neoconservative values,
anti-immigration sentiments, and the plight of white working-class people, espe-
cially men, who populate the deindustrialized areas in the US and got left behind
when American manufacturing went East in search of cheap labor. Arguably, this
group is less educated, more open to conspiracy theories, and less likely to change
their deeply seated beliefs in the face of evidence. The style of Trump campaigning
and the turn to anti-globalization protectionist policies as a rejection of the liberal
global order has led to what has been called “post-truth politics” based mainly on
appeals to emotion without any detailed policy speciﬁcs, delivered through video
and social media, especially Twitter, which are not the fora most suited for argu-
mentation, disputation, reﬂection and fact-checking. Post-truth politics is a devel-
opment of an increasingly privatized and fragmented public news that began with
the “sound bite” and “photo opportunity” to bypass public discussion in the regime
of the 24-h news cycle, whereby news channels take on the mantle of party ide-
ologies often deliberately distorting the truth.
146
M. A. Peters

Old Testament accounts of lying viewed it as a sin that admits no reservation, as
to lie is deliberately to hide the truth. In De Mendacio, Augustine takes a hard line
on lying; modern philosophical accounts hold that lying is detrimental to society
because it erodes trust as the very foundation of relations among human beings that
sustain our institutions (Bok 1999, p. 31). Truth, truthfulness, and truth-telling are
seen as a necessary precondition for society. Lying is bad because it harms people
through false information and because it is a violation of trust (Rachels and Rachels
2011, p. 42–43). It interferes with the process of self-understanding and perverts
our relationship to the world and to other people. In his lectures at Berkeley in the
early 1980s, Foucault (2001) investigated the use of truth-telling [parrhesia] in
speciﬁc types of human relationships, as well as the techniques employed in such
relationships. In the Ancient Greek, parrhesia is a speech activity where there is an
exact coincidence between belief and truth, and truth-telling is “a practice which
shaped the speciﬁc relations that individuals have to themselves” (Foucault 2001,
p. 106) (see Peters 2003).
The classic account of “Lying in Politics” is Arendt’s (1971) account of political
imagination as a reﬂection on the Pentagon papers that draws interconnections
between “lie, the deliberate denial of factual truth, and the capacity to change facts,
the ability to act.” She argues “the lie did not creep into politics by some accident of
human sinfulness; moral outrage, for this reason alone, is not likely to make it
disappear.” As she argues, “factual truths are never compellingly true”; as con-
tingent facts, they carry no guarantee of truth: “no factual statement can ever be
beyond doubt.” Arendt goes on to argue, “Facts need testimony to be remembered
and trustworthy witnesses to be established in order to ﬁnd a secure dwelling place
in the domain of human affairs” (Peters 2015). Arendt maintains that lying and
deception in public life are easy “up to a point”, and they do not necessarily come
into conﬂict with truth to the extent that facts could always be otherwise (Arendt
1971). One major consideration about the shift to post-truth is the “truth carrying
capacity” of new social media and the propensity to disseminate fake news through
Facebook, Google, and Twitter, and thereby to create a “bubble world” where
algorithmically selected news sources simply reinforce existing prejudices thus
compromising the capacity for moral thinking. Does the new social media under-
mine our ability to recognize truth?
In his article “Regimes of Posttruth, Postpolitics, and Attention Economies”,
Harsin (2015) follows a Foucauldian line of argument, arguing that we have moved
from “regimes of truth” to “regimes of posttruth”. In the new regime that charac-
terises postpolitics and postdemocracy, “power exploits new ‘freedoms’ to
participate/produce/express (as well as consume/diffuse/evaluate),” where “resource
rich political actors attempt to use data-analytic knowledge to manage the ﬁeld of
appearance and participation, via attention and affect.”
As an experienced star of the reality game show TV series, The Apprentice,
which ran for 14 seasons and made him a household name, Donald Trump
understands contemporary media better than his opponents. He utilizes the same
media strategies in his politics: he gets attention; he isn’t polished; he promotes
unﬁltered feelings; he follows a tried-and-true storyline; he encourages a subjective
Education in a Post-truth World
147

interpretation of the truth (Goldhill 2016). Trump has mastered Twitter as the ideal
medium “unleashing and redeﬁning its power as a tool of political promotion,
distraction, score-settling and attack” (Barbaro 2015).
In this new media political landscape, the liberal media and pollsters have fared
very badly indeed. How could they be so wrong? How could they consistently
overrate Clinton’s chances over Trump’s? The robust New York Times gave Clinton
an 85% chance of winning! (Katz 2016) They bought into Trump’s politics of
mediatization, responding emotionally to his taunts and bullying, desperately
wanting to point out his failings and losing their objectivity. They contributed to his
success by overestimating Hillary’s prospects of success, dismissing Trump’s
chances, and misunderstanding the electorate and their hatred of the professional
political elite.
In this post-truth political environment, Gay Alcorn (2014) notes, “facts are
futile”. Post-truth is often taken to mean “post-fact”. It’s not so much that facts are
futile, it’s just that they take a while to collect and marshal into a knockdown
argument. By the time the facts are gathered, the media moment has passed, the
headline has been grabbed, and the lie can be modiﬁed, apologized for or replaced
by another. A leader in the New Scientist (2016) comments on the revolutionary
results when free speech meets social media:
the right to free speech has morphed into the ability to say and spread anything, no matter
how daft or dangerous. Hence the buzz around the idea of “post-truth politics” – although a
cynic might wonder if politicians are actually any more dishonest than they used to be.
Perhaps it’s just that ﬁbs once whispered into select ears are now overheard by everyone.
There have been some important historical precursors in the lead-up to the
post-truth Zeitgeist, most recently in the “science deniers”, especially the climate
change deniers; in the neoconservative attacks by Lynn Cheney on US history
teachers over the rewriting of the American past, the Holocaust and genocide
deniers; the Sokal hoax involving Social Text and the older “science wars;” and
furore that greeted Funtowicz and Ravetz’s (1990) “post-normal science” where
quality assurance systems replace the search for truth. Ravetz explains the line of
argument thus: “We argue that the quality-assurance of scientiﬁc inputs into policy
processes requires an ‘extended peer community’, including all the stakeholders in
an issue. This new peer community can also deploy ‘extended facts’, including
local and personal experience, as well as investigative journalism and leaked
sources” (Ravetz 2005).
It takes little imagination to draw some conclusions from this melange of past
examples to understand that the notion of “facts” and “evidence” in a post-truth era
not only affects politics and science, but also becomes a burning issue for education
at all levels. Education has now undergone the digital turn, and to a large extent
been captured by big data systems in administration as well as teaching and
research. Criticality has been avoided or limited within education, and substituted
by narrow conceptions of standards and state-mandated instrumental and utilitarian
pedagogies. There have been attacks on the professional autonomy of teachers as
arbiters of truth. If education is equated almost solely with job training rather than a
148
M. A. Peters

broader critical citizenship agenda for participatory democracy, we can expect the
further decline of social democracy and the rise of populist demagogue politicians
and alt-right racist parties. In the era of post-truth, it is not enough to revisit notions
or theories of truth, accounts of “evidence” and forms of epistemic justiﬁcation as a
guide to truth; we need to understand the broader Orwellian epistemological
implications of post-truth politics, science, and education. More importantly, we
need an operational strategy to combat “government by lying”, and its role in a
global society prepared to accept cognitive dissonance and the subordination of
truth to Twittered emotional appeals and irrational personal beliefs. Rather than
speaking truth to power, Trump demonstrates the power of the lie.
References
Alcorn, G. (2014, February 28). Facts are futile in an era of post-truth politics. The Age. http://
www.theage.com.au/comment/facts-are-futile-in-an-era-of-posttruth-politics-20140227-
33m70.html. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Arendt, H. (1971, November 18). Lying in politics. New York Review of Books.
Barbaro, M. (2015, October 5). Pithy, mean and powerful: How Donald Trump mastered Twitter
for 2016. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/06/us/politics/donald-
trump-twitter-use-campaign-2016.html. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Bok, S. (1999). Lying: Moral choice in public and private life. New York: Vintage Books.
Dickinson, T. (2016, September 27). Trump’s big debate lie on global warming. RollingStone. http://
www.rollingstone.com/politics/features/trumps-big-debate-lie-on-global-warming-w442167.
Accessed September 19, 2017.
Fernandez, N. (2016, September 21). Trump’s 12 biggest lies that debate moderators should be
prepared to address. Media Matters. https://www.mediamatters.org/research/2016/09/21/
trump-s-11-biggest-lies-debate-moderators-should-be-prepared-address/213234#Birtherism.
Accessed September 19, 2017.
Foucault, M. (2001). Fearless speech. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e).
Funtowicz, S., & Ravetz, J. (1990). Uncertainty and quality in science for policy. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Goldhill, O. (2016, November 6). Five reality TV show strategies Donald Trump has used
throughout his campaign. Quartz. https://qz.com/828700/2016-presidential-election-donald-
trump-has-used-reality-tv-strategies-throughout-his-campaign/. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Harsin, J. (2015). Regimes of posttruth, postpolitics, and attention economies. Communication,
Culture and Critique, 8(2), 327–333.
Katz, J. (2016, November 8). Who will be president? The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.
com/interactive/2016/upshot/presidential-polls-forecast.html. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Krugman, P. (2016, September 9). Donald Trump’s ‘big liar’ technique. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/09/opinion/donald-trumps-big-liar-technique.html?_r=0.
Accessed September 19, 2016.
New Scientist. (2016, June 1). Free speech has met social media, with revolutionary results.
Anonymous editorial.
Peters, M. (2003). Truth-telling as an educational practice of the self: Foucault, parrhesia and the
ethics of subjectivity. Oxford Review of Education, 29(2), 207–223.
Peters, M. (2015). The history and practice of lying in public life. Review of Contemporary
Philosophy, 14, 47–61.
Rachels, J., & Rachels, S. (2011). The elements of moral philosophy. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Education in a Post-truth World
149

Ravetz, J. (2005, June). Jerry Ravetz Philosopher at large. http://www.jerryravetz.co.uk/work.
html. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Sargent, G. (2016, August 29). One of Trump’s biggest lies is falling apart. So naturally, he’s
blaming the media for it. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/plum-
line/wp/2016/08/29/one-of-trumps-biggest-lies-is-falling-apart-so-naturally-hes-blaming-the-
media-for-it/?utm_term=.9e9a442c3790. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Steinmetz, K. (2016, November 15). Oxford’s word of the year for 2016 is “Post-truth”. Time.
http://time.com/4572592/oxford-word-of-the-year-2016-post-truth/. Accessed September 19,
2017.
The Economist. (2016a, September 10). Post-truth politics: Art of the lie. Anonymous editorial.
https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21706525-politicians-have-always-lied-does-it-matter-
if-they-leave-truth-behind-entirely-art. Accessed September 19, 2017.
The Economist. (2016b, September 10). The post-truth world: Yes, I’d lie to you. Anonymous
editorial.
https://www.economist.com/news/brieﬁng/21706498-dishonesty-politics-nothing-
new-manner-which-some-politicians-now-lie-and. Accessed September 19, 2017.
The Oxford Dictionaries. (2016). Word of the Year is Post-Truth. https://en.oxforddictionaries.
com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016.
150
M. A. Peters

A Level Playing Field? Complicit
Meritocracy in a Post-truth Era
Liz Jackson and Charles Bingham
When US President Donald Trump announced on 1 June 2017 that the United
States would no longer participate in the Paris Climate Accord, he used words that
many educators have themselves used implicitly or explicitly, words that ﬁt with a
discourse of fairness and meritocracy: ‘My job as President is to do everything
within my power to give America a level playing ﬁeld and to create the economic,
regulatory and tax structures that make America the most prosperous and pro-
ductive country on Earth…’ (Trump 2017). While these words may signal to many
what might be called a Trumpist, post-truth doublespeak, we note in these words a
cue that educators may have been setting the tone for such post-truth for quite some
time. On the one hand, it is easy to note the duplicity of calling for a level playing
ﬁeld in order for one country to trounce others. On the other hand, though, many
educators have themselves, ourselves, long been involved in reproducing merito-
cratic ideology even though it is common knowledge that such an ideology does not
always, if ever, level the ﬁeld or create fairness.
In this chapter, we investigate two aspects of post-truth in education. The ﬁrst
derives from the philosophical work of Jacques Rancière, and the second derives
from an analysis of meritocratic ideology in contemporary education. In both cases,
we ﬁnd that education has been producing a certain ‘truth’ about truth. Rancière’s
work contrasts the hidden explanatory function of education, which presupposes a
collective or shared sense of truth, with the arbitrariness of language as the social
mechanism for understanding or determining such truth. This understanding is
useful when applied to the case of meritocracy, as we discuss in the second part of
this essay, as meritocratic ideology lays a framework in schools for the production
L. Jackson (&)
University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong
e-mail: lizjackson@hku.hk
C. Bingham
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada
e-mail: charles_bingham@sfu.ca
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_13
151

of truth. Schooling bolsters, explains and emulates a meritocratic view of the world.
In doing so, truth itself gets linked to meritocracy. We conclude this chapter by
returning to the example of Donald Trump’s notion of the level playing ﬁeld, brieﬂy
commenting on how the persistence and strength of meritocratic ideology in edu-
cation are tied to a post-truth order.
Jacques Rancière and Education’s Truth Production
Jacques Rancière has detailed in his major work on pedagogy, The Ignorant
Schoolmaster, that it is possible to reconstruct pedagogy not as subservient to
Enlightenment truth, but as a form of ‘ignorant’ intersubjectivity leading to a radical
form of intellectual emancipation (Rancière 1991). To get at Rancière’s analysis of
truth in school, it is most helpful to look at his more general analysis of the school’s
explanatory function. Arguably, Rancière’s most important contribution to educa-
tional theory lies not in the more obvious description of ‘universal teaching’ one
ﬁnds in The Ignorant Schoolmaster, but in his attention to the form of the school in
the context of Western democracies and Western political philosophy. The
importance of this contribution can be restated succinctly by saying that the school,
and by extension pedagogy in general, has a function that commonly goes unno-
ticed in educational theory. It has an explanatory function. That is to say, the school
does something by the very fact of being a school at the same time as it affords an
opportunity for teaching and learning.
The school, Rancière argues, promulgates a model described in Plato’s Republic.
The republic ‘is a city in which legislation is entirely resumed in education—
education, however going beyond the simple instruction of the schoolmaster and
being offered at any moment of the day in the chorus of what is visually and aurally
up for grabs’ (Rancière 1999, p. 68). The republic runs smoothly because it
establishes schools that explain an ‘archipolitical’ order (Rancière 1999, p. 65). The
school, in Western democracies, continues this explanatory function. It thus has a
double role according to Rancière. The school not only educates citizens—whether
that education be traditional, progressive or critical. It also performs, in the arena of
knowledge acquisition, an ordering that echoes the political ordering of society. As
Rancière points out, ‘… the idea of a master who transmits knowledge to a student
or a learner who is in front of the master, and who doesn’t know something, this
idea is in reality a cosmology and not simply a method’ (Rancière 2004). The
school gives order by performing explanations.
Rancière’s work on the explanatory order is best linked to the concept of truth by
noting that when one uses explanation, one assumes that truth can be arrived at by a
sequence of propositional statements. During the explanation, one uses language to
present the truth. One establishes a certain linguistic relation with truth. When one
uses language to explain something, one draws a direct line from the word to truth,
from the word that explains, to the truth of the thing explained. For Rancière, this
direct line from language to truth is the basis of an explanatory folly that drives
152
L. Jackson and C. Bingham

every form of the school. The propensity to explain ignores a central aspect of
language, an aspect that Rancière emphasizes in many of his writings, not only in
his educational work—that language is arbitrary. Because language is arbitrary, one
can never draw a direct line from the word to truth. ‘Truth is not told’, writes
Rancière, ‘It is whole, and language fragments it; it is necessary, and languages are
arbitrary. It was this thesis on the arbitrariness of languages—even more than the
proclamation of universal teaching—that made Jacotot’s teaching scandalous’
(1991, p. 60). The folly of the school is that it misconstrues the relation between
language and truth. This is because the school ignores the arbitrary nature of
language, treating language as if words cement signiﬁer to signiﬁed in some
steadfast way.
In order to more clearly understand the folly of the school’s educational/
explanatory relation to truth, it is useful to juxtapose it to Ranceire’s unschooled
analysis of language’s arbitrary relation to truth. Rancière’s work in political theory,
in aesthetics, as well as in education are committed to this understanding of lan-
guage’s arbitrary nature, and thus to language’s incommensurable relation to the
truth. With regard to political theory, in On the Shores of Politics, Rancière posits
the arbitrary nature of language as an ‘unreality of representation’ (1995, p. 51).
This is to say that language cannot directly represent reality. It cannot say truth. But
far from being disappointed with the arbitrariness of language, Rancière uses
representation’s unreality as a hopeful point of departure for those who would truly
aspire to participate in a democratic order. Thus, ‘the democratic man’ is ‘a being
capable of embracing a distance between words and things that is not deception, not
trickery, but humanity’ (Rancière 1995, p. 51). While language is too arbitrary to
access truth directly, this fact is not cause for dismay for one who would participate
in a true democracy. It is instead a point of hope.
That language is arbitrary means that there is always hope to reconﬁgure the
sensible. If language were not arbitrary, if words were already ﬁxed to truth, then
there would be little space for human beings to insert themselves differently into the
sensible’s distribution. There would be no opportunity for subjectiﬁcation
(Bingham and Biesta 2010, p. 33). Thus, Rancière notes in On the Shores of
Politics that the arbitrariness of language ‘turns both every utterance and every
reception into an adventure which presupposes the tense interaction of two wishes:
a wish to say and a wish to hear, each threatened at every moment by the danger of
falling into the abyss of distraction, above which is stretched the tightrope of a will
to meaning’ (p. 81). People can ignore the arbitrariness of language’s relation to the
truth. But in doing so, they ignore the possibility of true democratic interaction that
reconﬁgures the social order.
Rancière notes that each person who participates in politics, as opposed to
‘policing’, actually acknowledges, either wittingly or unwittingly, this arbitrariness
of language. For, the person who participates in politics knows that language entails
two levels: one that ostensibly connects language directly to truth, and one that
proves just the opposite, that language is not ﬁxed to truth. The second level of
language is invoked every time a political subject acknowledges that the terms for
understanding another are subject to redistribution rather than being ﬁxed. Thus, in
A Level Playing Field? Complicit Meritocracy in a Post-truth Era
153

Disagreement, Rancière writes, ‘In any social discussion in which there is actually
something to discuss, this structure is implicated, a structure in which the place, the
object, and the subjects of discussion are themselves in dispute and must in the ﬁrst
instance be tested’ (p. 55). The political actor is not a person who takes language to
be ﬁxed to truth. Rather, such an actor is one who understands that utterances are
always contestable rather than tethered to particular truths. The political actor has
‘this second-degree understanding’ (Rancière 1999, p. 46). Such an understanding
entails ‘the constitution of a speciﬁc speech scene in which it is a matter of con-
structing another relationship by making the position of the enunciator explicit’
(Rancière 1999, p. 46). The political actor knows that language is arbitrary, and he
or she will make such arbitrariness understood.
Rancière also insists that the arbitrariness of language is a matter of aesthetics. It
makes poets of those who would accept its arbitrariness. ‘The democratic man is a
being who speaks, which is also to say a poetic being’, writes Rancière in On the
Shores of Politics (p. 51). This is so because one who accepts the arbitrariness of
language, yet who goes on to communicate certain truths nevertheless, such a
person must engage in the sort of translation that is both the joy and the burden of
the artist. The artist knows how difﬁcult yet necessary it is to convey truths that one
takes to be universal, truths that have never been precisely articulated before. As
Rancière notes in The Ignorant Schoolmaster, the poet works ‘in the gap between
the silent language of emotion and the arbitrariness of the spoken tongue’ (p. 68).
Yet Rancière also generalizes this artistic element of arbitrary language. Such work
is also no different than the work of any reasonable being who must struggle with
the arbitrariness of language in an effort to convey one’s thoughts to another. He
notes that ‘Each one of us is an artist to the extent that he carries out a double
process; he is not content to be a mere journeyman but wants to make all work a
means of expression, and he is not content to feel something but tries to impart it to
others’ (1991, p. 70). When one conveys one’s thoughts to others through language,
one must give order anew to a handful of signs. These signs will form a work that
will be interpreted by another. This order-giving, this work and this interpretation
indicate the extent to which each person is an artist.
Once again, only this time in an aesthetic rather than a political sense, an
insistence on language’s arbitrariness is cause for celebration rather than remorse.
This is because language’s arbitrariness pushes the poet to demonstrate his or her
conﬁdence in the commonality of human experience, a demonstration that will be
cobbled out in spite of language’s inadequacies. While language is not naturally
attached to this or that truth, the poet attempts to translate truth from one person’s
experience to the experience of an interpreter, all the while knowing that language
is never up to the task of such a translation. Language is thus seen to be arbitrary in
the sense that it is not ﬁxed directly to the truth, but this does not mean that
language is destined to be the solitary assignation of one’s own personal, and
random, experience. As Rancière puts it in The Ignorant Schoolmaster, the poet
‘strives to say everything, knowing that everything cannot be said, but that it is the
unconditional tension of the translator that opens the possibility of the other tension,
the other will…’ (pp. 69–70). In this way, ‘we understand what Racine has to tell
154
L. Jackson and C. Bingham

us, that his thoughts are not different from ours, and that his expressions are only
achieved by our counter-translation’ (Rancière 1991, p. 70). The poet asks us to
prove, through our own translation of the work, that while language may be arbi-
trary, it can still be cause for a commonality based on the translations and
counter-translations of the poet and those who read the poem.
Truth in Schooling
The school as it generally functions cannot allow language’s arbitrariness to be
exposed because such exposure would undermine its explanatory teachings on
truth. For education to function smoothly, and for its various methods to be
employed according to the latest innovative research, the school insists that truth
must be accessible through language. For the school, it cannot be the case that ‘truth
is not told. It is whole, and language fragments it, it is necessary, and languages are
arbitrary’ (Rancière 1991, p. 60). If such were the case, then the school would be
relegated to an unhappy mutism. Neither could subject matter be explained, nor
could there be explanations of how to avoid, how to make experiential, or how to
demystify, explanations of subject matter. It cannot be the case that ‘truth settles no
conﬂict in the public place’ (Rancière 1991, p. 90). If this were the case, then the
pedagogical improvements that are recounted ad nauseam in newspapers and in
journals would need to be stricken from the record. On the contrary, the school
must, and does, teach something about truth, something that keeps the school apart
from political actors and poets. The school must explain things, thus demonstrating
that truth is accessible through language, and that folly resides not in front of this
curtain but behind it. The school, because it is believed to be the most effective
place for teaching and learning to happen, stands as proof positive that the truth can
be explained and that language is not arbitrary.
Informed by Rancière’s insights, it is reasonable to conclude that no form of
education has a linguistic path to truth. Rather, education itself, as an explanatory
form of social order, compels one to talk about truth in such a way. Rancière
presents an account of truth that is immanent to education. In contrast, Rancière’s
own perspective on truth is connected to his understanding of the arbitrariness of
language, dependent upon language’s inability to access truth directly. On the ﬂip
side of this linguistic non-approachability of truth, stands Rancière’s presentation of
truth itself, and of truth’s indifference to people: ‘Truth doesn’t bring people
together at all. It is not given to us. It exists independently from us and does not
submit to our piecemeal sentences’ (1991, p. 58). And as noted earlier, ‘Truth
settles no conﬂict in the public place’ (Rancière 1991, p. 90). Such an agnostic
understanding of truth once again underscores the folly of explanation. It under-
scores the truth-folly of traditional, progressive and critical education. School does
not lead to truth, in spite of popular and theoretical claims to the contrary.
A Level Playing Field? Complicit Meritocracy in a Post-truth Era
155

Truth and Meritocracy
Because meritocratic ideology in contemporary schooling is ubiquitous, it stands to
reason that the school’s version of truth is shored up, if not reinforced, by merit. An
analysis of meritocracy thus adds to the explanatory insights on truth and language
in education provided by Rancière. First, at the broadest level, the commonplace
self-contradictory use of meritocratic discourse by educators today suggests the
potential advent of a post-truth era (Jackson and Bingham 2018). Widespread
recognition can be observed among liberal and left-wing thinkers in Western
societies that meritocracy, as the earning of social rewards based on merit, is not,
nor has it ever been, a functional, effective working system (McNamee and Miller
2004; Kozol 2012). Instead, the ideal of meritocracy around the world arguably
remains hindered by ongoing unjust inequities that retrace lines of historical
advantage and disadvantage, of gender, race, socioeconomic and national status,
and more. Yet educators and others continue to use meritocracy to explain the
workings of society and to undergird education, while knowing the current
schooling system and society are far from standards of meritocracy.
Sociologists and critical educators tend to concur that meritocracy is not the way
any society functions. Speaking from an American context about meritocracy,
McNamee and Miller (2004) note that ‘there are a variety of social forces that tend
to suppress, neutralize, or even negate the effects of merit in the race to get ahead’,
including education. Kozol’s work (2012) exposing impoverished schools in the
United States is cited by sociologists as proof that education is a non-merit aspect of
society. In critical educational scholarship, this may be taken as something to work
against or ﬁght, while in critical pedagogy meritocratic discourse itself might be
problematized, in a class in educational foundations, for example.
Yet at the same time, in academics’ individual affairs, this truth of meritocracy’s
precarious standing to social reality is neglected, and a myth of meritocracy is taken
as a more useful explanatory point of departure in guiding personal behaviour
(Jackson and Bingham 2018). Here we are reminded, for instance, of critically
minded university colleagues who conduct strong work in social justice education,
yet fall back on a discourse of meritocracy when talking about their own students.
Such colleagues want to attract the ‘best and brightest’ students, even among early
scholars who are purportedly canvassed to ameliorate the inequities of meritocracy.
As another example, teachers and professors must give grades, however loathsome
this requirement may be to many critical educators. That meritocracy explains
societal functioning is seemingly accepted or believed here at the personal level,
while it is seen at the abstract level as not yet tenable, problematic and ideological.
Several other signiﬁcant aspects of meritocratic discourse which intersect with
notions of truth and objectivity in philosophy and society are worth systematic
analysis. First, there is the notion that educators can know quality student work, and
that words such as learning outcomes, standards, competencies, performance,
achievement and the like—even quality and work—have a universal and singular
meaning which is objectively veriﬁable. Educators, indeed a society which takes an
156
L. Jackson and C. Bingham

educational system to be valid and based on merit, are relationally bound to treat
this as truth, and to regard educational judgements of passing or failing work
thereby as valid truth claims. Yet each of these words can be deconstructed in ways
that illuminate the precariousness of schooled truth as indicated by Rancière. Is it
student work that is wanted—apparent effort or labour? Or is work to denote instead
some kind of product, such as a piece of paper or a speech, which may or may not
correlate to a determination of work by the former standard?
As academics, we are familiar with the arbitrariness of standards at a higher level
of scholarship, in the case of peer review. It is hardly uncommon, but today more or
less typical, to receive contrasting reviews of one’s paper for submission to a
journal or conference from his or her appropriately qualiﬁed peers: for example, one
reviewer may deem the work worthy of publication only after minor revisions,
while another considers it much less publishable. The encouragement of grade
moderation in higher education, wherein assignments such as dissertations and
theses are marked by more than one reader, is another clue that while each of us
may well have in mind something called standards of quality, notions like ‘ex-
cellence’, ‘rigour’, ‘contribution’, and the like are arbitrary rather than ﬁxed across
individuals even within a single ﬁeld or context. The ideology of meritocracy
shores up the supposed truth about standards and quality in education. If we
understand such notions as arbitrary rather than ﬁxed, this exposes a weakness to
the explanatory value of meritocracy in understanding the current social system.
A second, related aspect of meritocratic discourse intersecting with ideas of truth
and objectivity is that willpower, determination and hard work frame the contem-
porary social order. In schools, the unequal structure of society is explained in
traditional educational discourse as essentially caused by differential applications of
hard work by individuals, despite aforementioned sociological ﬁndings to the
contrary. This can be seen as reﬂected in discourse in schools on such topics as the
American Dream (as an ongoing phenomenon), and the importance of grit, resi-
lience, persistence and more in such areas as civic and moral education and edu-
cation for personal or social development. As we have personally found in a recent
conference presentation, even anxiety is seen in Western society as a positive
motivator of excellence in education, with many educational researchers regarding
it as useful and productive in the ﬁrst case, within a framework where educational
achievement or performance has as its prerequisite student work, physical, intel-
lectual and even emotional.1
There are two variants of this claim: The ﬁrst, traditional structuralist view, is
that hard work leads to wealth accumulation. This is the basic societal view of
meritocracy which, as suggested above, has been shown to be far from evidenced
1At the Philosophy of Education Society Annual Conference of 2017, we presented a paper on
relational affect and meritocracy, which addressed the negative and positive feelings expected of
(taught to?) students by educators in relation to educational achievement and mediocrity (Jackson
and Bingham 2018). Some members of the audience suggested that anxiety and stress at the
thought of meritocratic failure can serve as motivational to students. Emotional strain was thus
articulated as a positive part of the ‘work’ of education.
A Level Playing Field? Complicit Meritocracy in a Post-truth Era
157

while it nonetheless continues to strongly inﬂuence personal behaviour. Though
critical scholars, such as those with a Marxist orientation, may work against this
claim as educators, this view is strongly endorsed in neo-liberal orientations. For
instance, the fame and worldwide recognition given in recent decades to Bill Gates
and Steve Jobs, both famously known to be university dropouts, supports the view
that you can work hard to be wealthy, within or outside education. United States
Republican Presidential contenders over the last few election cycles who competed
to distinguish themselves as less elite-educated than others also reﬂect widespread
attitudes that wealth stems from hard work, regardless of education or knowledge.
One might argue that this tenant of meritocratic discourse is taught only in
traditional schooling, and that it is far from being the focus of progressive
schooling. Or that in critical schools, the false claim of meritocracy is de-bunked.
Yet even in a critical school, it is an implication of the persistent commitment to
meritocratic quality that there is rigour and a standard to truth claims, and that
critical claims are thus those claims that are most truthful, certainly not to be
understood as arbitrary. This is the second variant of the meritocratic assumption
that work leads to power: that rigour steers one correctly and, in the philosophy of
Freirean praxis, can culminate in a shared truth and shared understanding that leads
to beneﬁts and empowerment of all. As Freire describes in Pedagogy of the
Oppressed, one should have faith that despite the challenges, people have power
through dialogue to constantly recreate the world through naming it (1970). Thus,
critical or emancipatory education is seen not only to explain inequity, but to create
equity at the same time, through a search for and conscientious, labour-intensive
reconstruction of truth and reality.
Although some progressive and critically minded educators may be sceptical
about notions like ‘evidence’ and ‘rigour’, which are increasingly seen by leftist
thinkers as problematic buzzwords of neo-liberalism, their work implies a dedica-
tion to scholarly notions of consistency and coherency, and a sense of commitment
to forms of truth, particularly about understanding power and oppression in society
(Peters 2015). For instance, educational researchers with a critical orientation have
described as resistant, denying or ignorant those young people who do not approach
or appreciate a critical orientation to societal problems related to labour, justice and
power, and they often elaborate what is needed for understanding reality properly in
terms of students working through resistance, denial, ignorance (which is often
claimed as false), and the like (see for instance Applebaum 2007, 2015; Steinberg
and Kincheloe 2009). To achieve powerful discourse, according to a critical edu-
cational perspective, takes hard work; it may be unpopular or painful; and it may
require a speciﬁc kind of labour on or disciplining of self, rather than more obvious
or simple action (for instance, Warren and Hytten 2004). In this sense, the paradox
is reversed from traditional to critical schooling: while traditionalists may teach
meritocracy (for example, the American Dream) knowing well that it is far from
precise or truthful as a description of society, critical educators may teach that
(elite) power is disconnected from work, all the while working hard and asking their
students to work hard, to create and internalise powerful counter discourses.
158
L. Jackson and C. Bingham

A ﬁnal major aspect of meritocratic discourse that intersects with truth and
objectivity in society is that education without a basis in meritocracy is impossible.
Considered historically, this view obscures the very idea of what makes a ‘school’ a
‘school’. More speciﬁcally the view that education requires meritocracy is tauto-
logical, in the sense that ‘schooling’ or ‘formal education’ is deﬁned in Western
societies against the forms of education that have and do exist outside of Western
schooling, which are described as nonformal or informal education, such as adult
education, community education, apprenticeship and the like. In these latter sys-
tems, education is not for certiﬁcation, sorting or for comparison and accounting
purposes; it has intrinsic or other pragmatic instrumentalist aims, such as learning to
farm or engage in a valued craft or trade. In this sense, education has been deﬁned
as requiring meritocracy, and the individualism and competitiveness essential
within it. This view makes it difﬁcult to imagine what is possible, lacking allegiance
to
the
ideology
of
meritocracy
in
education,
without
appearing
to
be
backwards-looking or desiring a so-called ‘primitive’ utopia.
Reﬂecting once more on the individual and relational implications of the dis-
course, imagine a professor walking into a program meeting announcing their desire
to do away with all grades. Colleagues might be sympathetic, and yet note that they
are as educators accountable to students, parents and funding bodies of the insti-
tution that have demands to understand what they have achieved with students, and
diverse students speciﬁcally. The best example of formal education doing away
with grades is Montessori education. Yet these schools nonetheless rely upon
standards, and most parents cannot remove the school from the society of which it
is, and seemingly must be, one echoing part: Ultimately, they feel responsible for
their children succeeding in a multi-tiered society which is described, even arbi-
trarily, as meritocratic. Teachers likewise cannot escape this discourse but are
pressured through relations with each other, supervisors, parents and children, to
appeal to and pledge allegiance to meritocracy despite its serious deﬁciencies,
which arguably negate its status as a functional system (Jackson and Bingham
2018). Thus, the truth that meritocracy is not the system tracing the relationship
between educational experiences and societal outcomes is obscured by the arbi-
trariness of language, which in this case conﬂates formal schooling with meritoc-
racy to preclude the possibility of a truly just form of education.
Conclusion
Rancière’s insights are helpful in understanding the challenge educators face in a
post-truth era increasingly marked by relativism, intersubjective mediation of reality,
and subjectivity and emotional appeal, in contrast with democratic participation and
the autonomy of scholarship (Peters 2017). As our analysis here indicates, meri-
tocracy is clung to in society today due to intersubjective relations as an ideology in
education, serving explanatory and mirroring functions, in ways that appear to deny
the many ways that the system is lacking and inoperable today. The insight from
A Level Playing Field? Complicit Meritocracy in a Post-truth Era
159

Rancière that schools serve to explain and enact truth can hardly be divorced from
the problematic workings of meritocracy, which is presumed rather than justiﬁed,
through appeals to themes such as hard work, power, quality, rigour, excellence and
the like. That we are not encouraged to play with these themes in an aesthetic or even
political sense today is one signiﬁcant indicator of the way we now ﬁnd ourselves in
a post-truth era, wherein powerful forces discourage us from questioning whether the
‘truth’ presented by schools, and promulgated by meritocracy, is in any way just.
Returning to the words of Donald Trump, one might now make the following
observation: Certainly, Trump stands accused, and rightly so, of fostering a
post-truth regime. The words we cited at the beginning are nothing if not contra-
dictory and misleading. Yet it may be no coincidence that his populist, nationalist
rhetoric in this case shows more than it tells. Might Trump’s version of truth have
something to do with the school’s claim to truth? At the very least, both employ
merit, with its conceit of creating a level playing ﬁeld, to double down on truth.
Perhaps Trump learned this technique in school.
References
Applebaum, A. (2007). Engaging student disengagement: Resistance or disagreement? In B.
S. Stengel (Ed.), Philosophy of education. Urbana: Philosophy of Education Society.
Applebaum, A. (2015). Needing not to know: Ignorance, innocence, denials, and discourse. In E.
Duarte (Ed.), Philosophy of education. Urbana: Philosophy of Education Society.
Bingham, C., & Biesta, G. (2010). Jacques Rancière: Education, truth, emancipation. New York:
Continuum.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Jackson, L., & Bingham, C. (2018). Precarious meritocracy: On the affective structure of
meritocracy in education. In A. Chinnery (Ed.), Philosophy of education 2017. Urbana:
Philosophy of Education Society.
Kozol, J. (2012). Savage inequalities. New York: Broadway Books.
McNamee, S., & Miller, R. (2004). The meritocracy myth. Sociation Today, 2(1).
Peters, M. A. (2015). Western models of intercultural philosophy. In T. Besley & M. A. Peters
(Eds.), Interculturalism, education and dialogue. New York: Peter Lang.
Peters, M. A. (2017). Education in a post-truth world. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 49(6),
563–566.
Rancière, J. (1991). The ignorant schoolmaster: Five lessons in intellectual emancipation.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Rancière, J. (1995). On the shores of politics. London/New York: Verso.
Rancière, J. (1999). Disagreement: Politics and philosophy. Minneapolis/London: University of
Minnesota Press.
Rancière, J. (2004). The politics of aesthetics. London: Continuum.
Steinberg, S., & Kincheloe, J. (2009). Smoke and mirrors: More than one way to be diverse and
multicultural. In S. Steinberg (Ed.), Diversity and multiculturalism: A reader. New York: Peter
Lang.
Trump, D. J. (2017, June 7). Statement by President Trump on the Paris Climate Accord. The
White
House.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-ofﬁce/2017/06/01/statement-president-
trump-paris-climate-accord. Accessed June 7, 2017.
Warren, J., & Hytten, K. (2004). The faces of whiteness: Pitfalls and the critical democrat.
Communication, 53(4), 321–339.
160
L. Jackson and C. Bingham

Beyond Truth and Non-truth
Nesta Devine
The insistence on the validity of ‘alternative facts’ can be seen as simply lying, and
lying in the support of a particular form of interest—or it can be seen as a more
signiﬁcant reﬂection on the status of truth in a world that is neither entirely modern,
nor entirely post-modern: a world in which education, science, economics and
religion have all failed to deliver on their promised truths.
To the certainty of these various truths, the post-structuralist narrative of scep-
ticism towards meta-narrative offered critique but not content, or much of a way
forward except by juxtaposing ‘one truth’ against another.
Is it possible to think beyond these binaries of truth and non-truth, perhaps with
the growing literature of post-humanism? How would education look if the
emphasis shifted away from the conventional subject of humanist thought, which is
foundational both to the liberal way of thinking, as epitomised by the Obamas and
Clintons, and to Trump and both his corporate and blue-collar supporters?
Government, Truth, Power
Contemporary journalism has taken a very uncompromising line towards Donald
Trump, Sean Spicer and Kelly-Anne Conway with regard to their disregard for
truth, with some (huge) justiﬁcation, as they have shown huge disregard for ‘fact’
and have presented a view of world events which is at the least strange, and at its
wildest, dangerous. Yet I am going to argue, in a contrarian way, that there is some
N. Devine (&)
Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
e-mail: nesta.devine@aut.ac.nz
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_14
161

justiﬁcation for their ignoring of scientiﬁc and historical evidence, and that edu-
cation, in forms of commission or omission, has some responsibility for their
stance, and for the public success of their stance.
To go back in time somewhat, it can be argued that before the fourteenth century—
before the printing press actually—there was, in the ‘European’ world, at least,
only one truth, usually a form of revealed truth, and that its probity was both protected
and guaranteed by local and trans-local forms of government—whether in the forms
of chieftains, monarchs, republics or tyrants. This is clearly the case in the ‘western
world’ after the fall of the Roman Empire and the rise of the Holy Roman Empire, and
its various successor forms. No matter how much disrepute the Papacy fell into, the
Word of God was understood to be Truth, and its interpretation was in the hands of
priests. Much of our subsequent respect for Truth, in my opinion, can be seen to be
derived from that medieval certainty, from a time when the truth was singular,
indisputable and guarded both by a huge (papal and later governmental) bureaucracy
and the inculcated belief systems of the population at large.
The imbrication of Government, monarchy and ‘truth’ is not accidental.
Charlemagne’s deal with Rome in 800 (Painter 1968) brought about an association
so advantageous that subsequent governments to some extent still utilise it. By
aligning himself with the Pope, Charlemagne abrogated to monarchy the religious
guarantee of the Church’s privileged access to God and truth. Despite the claimed
secularism of the Western democratic state in modern times, there is still that extra
frisson of anger/fear when the state and its ofﬁce holders are exposed as liars.
Subsequently, of course, Revealed Truth has been replaced by more contested
truth: that of science in both its positive and its social forms. Since it is inherent to
modern science to be sceptical of ‘truth’ that is to say, to demand evidence, to test
efﬁcacy, to try out other theories, in fact, to expect ‘progress’ in relation to truth as
to other things, the nature of truth in a scientiﬁc world must be always changing. It
might be said then that scientiﬁc truth fails the great test of absolute truth, in that it
is always provisional, not permanent, eternal, ﬁxed, certain—and yet this element
of permanence is still a kind of popular desire. Popular expectations of truth as an
absolute reﬂect the heritage of revealed truth.
We could argue that the phrase ‘Research says’ has replaced the Word of God,
but problematically, Research is always saying something different. The hold on the
popular imagination of what Research says can be seen in the anxious tenacity of
the Anti-Vaxxers, who hold onto discredited research and claim more substantiation
than is the case to support their view. Although scientists may be able to move on
easily from one form of truth to another, it is not so easy for those who do not
understand the provisional nature of science and who become invested in a par-
ticular truth-claim to do so.
162
N. Devine

Post-structuralism and Its Embrace of the Impossibility
of Knowing the Truth
It is common for opponents of post-structuralism to take a sneering attitude towards
post-structuralists and their distance from the truth. From a post-structural view-
point, there may indeed be a truth, even an absolute truth, but no one can get
sufﬁciently outside their own context to be able to see it. We are driven back,
therefore, on a perspectival world, to use Nietzsche’s term, in which it is essential
that speakers identify their own positionality in order to allow the listener to make
allowances for that in their own personal effort to winnow ‘truth’ from a necessarily
biased perspective.
But in a political world where there is still a belief that truth per se is possible,
revealing positionality is precisely what politicians and lobbyists cannot do, for fear
of discrediting themselves. If it is revealed that advice came from ExxonMobil, or
from the Russian Embassy, or from the Adam Smith Institute, then reporters tend to
regard this as an admission of weakness or venality—which it well may be, but
rather than examining the advice itself for its weakness it becomes a moral attack on
the politician for not, somehow, being able to formulate ideas and policies without
any input at all.
Educational Culpability and Exculpation
Education is not innocent of a certain culpability in this state of affairs. When
History is taught either as a list of signiﬁcant events without acknowledgement of
the writers who positioned those events as signiﬁcant in a particular story, or as a
contest between points of view of equal value, and Science is taught for the purpose
of training technicians rather than scientists, then the tentative, provisional nature of
these forays into knowledge is lost. I have seen high-school students abandon their
laboratory results and copy down some one’s results—because the ‘someone else’
got the ‘right’ results. In other words, the laboratory exercise is not an experiment,
since deviant results are not permitted or acknowledged, but an illustration of a kind
of revealed truth. Good teachers, of course, are aware of these issues and do their
best to teach beyond them but high stakes testing, with its emphasis on right
answers, makes their efforts more difﬁcult.
Given these practices—and history and science are chosen as illustrative, not
exhaustive examples of the problem, our students grow up believing still that there
is a truth, a form of validated knowledge, beyond all doubt.
This might have been an acceptable state of affairs when knowledge was
mediated through the priestly ﬁgures of experts. But given high levels of literacy
and widespread access to media (not all of it social) in which veracity or justiﬁ-
cation has little place and tentativeness none at all, then the ﬁltering effect, for good
or bad, is lost, and the unﬁltered intentions of individuals, organizations, politicians,
Beyond Truth and Non-truth
163

and even states have immediate potency. This is not altogether a bad thing as it can
allow for the voices of those seldom heard to be raised, but to a large extent, such
voices are drowned out by the urgency of greed, narcissism and political advantage.
Teaching a level of ability to critique may be possible, but is probably no
competition for the desire to align with the like-minded: the need for friendship and
conﬁrmation for many people would outweigh the somewhat masochistic desire for
discomﬁture in the shape of a challenge to beliefs and assumptions.
The Problem with Facts
‘Facts’ are innumerable, inconceivably numerous: they are created at every instant
in their millions. Big data reduces facts to manageable generalisations, algorithms
create a logic out of factoids that enable their productive recruitment to other
purposes, imposing their own forms of truth as they do so. But ‘facts’ as popularly
understood are the standout events and the processed statistics which alter public
opinion and history.
The notion of ‘fact’ as being beyond question is a ﬁne one, and fact-checking of
the Trump speeches and tweets is undoubtedly a useful public service. But the
whole purpose of the spin industry, or public relations, is to assemble facts into a
different order so as to create a different form of knowledge, a story that will have
predictable and desirable consequences rather than adverse ones. There is a sub-
stantial difference between spin and post-truth precisely in that post-truthers simply
ignore facts (or create new ones), while spinners reconstruct their signiﬁcance.
Spinners might take a fact—let us say the United States’ failure to win the Vietnam
War—and reconstruct this as evidence of the interference of other states, or the
perﬁdy of Asian allies; but only a post-truther can demand to see a US birth
certiﬁcate, and having seen it continue to proclaim that the owner was born else-
where. Nonetheless, the line between spin and post-truth is thin, and it is no wonder
that people who have become inured to, accepting of, spin, should readily accept
being lied to.
Post-truth
I object, profoundly, to the use of ‘post’ to mean ‘anti’ or ‘un’ here: it reﬂects a real
misunderstanding of the particle ‘post’ in post-structuralism or post-modernism
which means something like ‘beyond but built upon’. Post-truth, or the application
of alternative facts, is generally an unapologetic delivery of statements that are not
true (in the sense then they have no justiﬁcation) in order to sway opinion. The
practice, in terms of mass communications, goes back to Bismarck’s careful editing
of the Ems telegram, an innocuous message reporting the Prussian King’s con-
versation with the French Ambassador. Bismarck was able, by judicious deletion, to
164
N. Devine

convert this into a message inﬂammatory enough, given the geopolitical context of
the time, to start a war between Prussia and France (Taylor 1954, pp. 204–206).
Russian government-endorsed trolling and fake news production can be seen as
having similar patriotically inspired foundations, perhaps even similar purposes
(Sanovic 2017).
Alongside these colossi, Trump, because he is so easily fact-checked, looks like
a novice, yet, for those already inclined to believe him, Trump’s comments are true,
and fact-checking reveals only the strength of the conspiracy to discredit him. There
is no easy way out of this conundrum.
Impeaching, sidelining, even voting Trump out at the next election will not
change the fact that one-third of the US voting public ﬁnd his ‘alternative facts’
more cogent than ‘mainstream facts’ aka ‘fake news’. We can speculate endlessly
as to why, but my preferred argument is that—with some justice—they feel that
‘mainstream facts’ have let them down: they have not shared in the predicted
prosperity that was to come from the neo-liberal reworking of the economy: people
have not been able to move easily from sunset industries to the new technological
scenarios; free trade has not trickled down to them in the form of higher wages or
better conditions. Indeed to a large extent they quite rightly see that their jobs have
been exported. So, political promises and economic nostrums have both failed to be
honest or successful, and Trump, with almost complete disregard for facts, is able to
satisfy his own egoistic needs and the needs of his Base for comfort and hope
without any recourse to justiﬁcation or veriﬁcation. He can offer plenty of recourse
to emotional energy, rejection of what appears to be the common foe, and appeal to
nostalgia for a shared, more benevolent past.
But there seems to be something more to this than nostalgia and shared
dog-whistles. There is, in fact, some theoretical basis for believing that Trump
might—truthfully—be the perfect President. The architects of Public Choice
Theory argue for the primacy of markets in politics, and in doing so they point out
that
collective
decision-making
is
inefﬁcient:
the
most
efﬁcient
form
of
decision-making is the sole individual making decisions, without the impediments
of discussion, debate, vote-gathering and so on (Buchanan and Tullock 1965,
pp. 97–116; Devine 2004, pp. 25, 75–92). And clearly, the person best able to
operate a government modeled on the market is a businessman/CEO. To the extent
that this extreme form of neo-liberalism has permeated contemporary political
thought, Trump, clearly not a person to whom consultation or negotiation comes
easily, is its ideal manifestation. If the test of government is not honesty, efﬁcacy, or
equity but efﬁciency in decision-making, then at one level, Trump passes that test.
To the extent that the test concerns being a certain kind of person (businessman) or
making decisions in a particular way (top-down decision-making), truth-telling is
irrelevant.
Beyond Truth and Non-truth
165

The Binary Problem
By characterising the beliefs of those he does not agree with as ‘fake news’, Trump
sets up a dichotomy: there is news that is ‘true’ or ‘real’, and news that is fake. To a
certain extent, this maps onto a view of the world in which there are truth and
non-truth, i.e. a binary conception of truthfulness.
What further makes the Trumpian conception of truth interesting is that he has
no respect for what are commonly regarded as ‘facts’. So is Trump denying the
correspondence between truth and reality, which is the position that seems to be
held by many of his critics? I suspect not: if Trump’s adherence to ‘truths’ which do
not square with ‘facts’ can be shown, at least in part, to relate not to a sophisticated
rejection of a one-to-one relation between utterance and reality, but to actual
ignorance of reality, then we are looking at a different philosophical (and educa-
tional problem).
And I think we can do that, without overlooking the family tradition of pref-
erence for extreme right politics and racist positions. Some of Trump’s statements
simply show a disregard, born of ignorance, for history. One commentator points
out that North Korean policies and positions can only be understood in the light of
the US carpet-bombing of North Korea 50 years ago (Cummings 2017): Trump
would not know that. His lack of knowledge is often made public with the preface
‘No one knows’ or ‘They don’t tell you’ meaning he did not know.
So, in this case, we have both a disposition to prefer a certain view of events,
which has a tenuous connection with reality, as in the view that the Charlottesville
riots were attributable to both alt-right and a neologistic ‘alt-left’, and an expression
of ignorance that precludes a kind of ‘knowing’ that would frame the world in a
historically accurate and explanatory way.
An epistemological lack becomes an ontological lack: because a person does not
know the history of the present circumstances, s/he can comfortably ignore those
inconvenient truths. Yet it is simply not possible to educate all persons about all the
historical evidence s/he might need to act responsibly in the present world.
A shortcut must be found to educate the person without recourse to all the available
historical and sociological material which might (ever) impact on his or her life.
This then becomes something similar to the problem of self that Foucault dis-
cusses in the History of Sexuality. There he draws attention to two techniques: the
confessional and the diary, i.e. speaking and writing with reference to the self.
I think we could draw on this for teaching purposes: if the student can be
encouraged to see a sample of historical/sociological circumstances in relation to
self, both through discussion and scribing, in a context of the application of
something like a Kantian imperative to conceive of others as having value unto
themselves, perhaps we might be able to break through the carapace of blind
self-interest and inherited prejudice. Certainly, lecturing will not do it, but rather
drive young people into evasion, both physical and mental.
‘Alternative facts’ are a way of framing an epistemology that is acceptable to
Trump, and lead us to a possible philosophical blind. So incensed do we become
166
N. Devine

that we want to shout back ‘No! We have the real facts: you have the alternative
facts’, so that we become embroiled in a binary from which there is no easy escape.
We run the risk of claiming the ability to know what the facts are: the hubristic
position of modernity. Ethically speaking, this leads us to become Trumpian our-
selves, shouting at the world that we have the corner on truth. Our forms of ‘truth’
may correlate better to the facts as we see them: they don’t correlate better to a
world permeated with conﬂicts about racial privilege and economic advantage
corresponding to a certain range of beliefs (Huang 2017).
Beyond the Binary
So how do we get beyond this binary position? Clearly, we would like a situation in
which we had better educational systems, which would preclude some of the claims
based on a lack of historical knowledge, but in general the kind of students we
would most like to educate historically either leave school early or go to schools
which conﬁrm their world-views. Moreover, inherited racism, bolstered with junk
science, is difﬁcult to undo by teaching real science. But in most cases, where
there’s a will, there’s a way. Unfortunately, neo-liberal economics with its inevi-
table divisions into richer and poorer, tends to reinforce the conditions of depri-
vation, whether absolute, relative or just anticipated, thus reinforcing the anxiety
that underpins the insistence on racial entitlement.
To think beyond the binaries of truth and non-truth means abandoning the
privileged position of being able to adjudicate what truth is. It does not mean,
however, abandoning a proper respect for interrogating truths and demanding
justiﬁcation.
To
the
certainty
of
these
various
dichotomous
truths,
the
post-structuralist narrative of scepticism towards meta-narrative offered critique but
not content, or much of a way forward except by juxtaposing one ‘truth’ against
another. To some extent, we are dragged down by our own willingness to concede
that others may have insights that we lack, in that we have lost the kind of adamant
conviction in our own rightness that allows for crusading correctness. But this
crusading correctness leads to antagonism, and even war. On the other hand, we do
not want to allow the ‘alternative facts’ to overwhelm us because we are not
prepared to rule out possibilities.
To extricate myself from this difﬁculty I want to appeal to the Marxist/Leninist,
or more properly, the Cicerian principle of looking to see ‘who stands to gain from
this?’ It is a relatively easy way to teach critical thinking, to evaluate truth-claims.
But we need now to go beyond looking at competing claims of personal and group
factions to the claims of a struggling planet, as well as to the claims of non-human
forms of life. What implications does this claim have for ecology? The claims of the
environment might be a reasonable way of rethinking the Marxist question. There is
no point in righting human wrongs in a dying world, and Trump, perversely, may
have strengthened this argument precisely by not so much ignoring it as defying it.
Beyond Truth and Non-truth
167

References
Buchanan, J. M., & Tullock, G. (1965). The calculus of consent. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Cummings, B. (2017, August 13). Americans once carpet-bombed North Korea. It’s time to
remember that past. The Guardian.
Devine, N. (2004). Education and public choice: A critical account of the invisible hand in
education. Westport: Praeger.
Huang, E. [Alternative facts]. (2017, August 15). Dinner with a white nationalist part 2. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=fFD7eZJ5Tyo. Accessed August 26, 2017.
Lenin, V. I. (1913, April 11). Who stands to gain? Pravda. https://www.marxists.org/archive/
lenin/works/1913/apr/11.htm. Accessed August 28, 2017.
Painter, S. (1968). A history of the middle ages, 284–1500. London: Macmillan.
Sanovic, S. (2017). Computational propaganda in Russia: The origins of digital misinformation
(Computational Research Project No. 2017.3). University of Oxford. http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.
uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/89/2017/06/Comprop-Russia.pdf. Accessed August 28, 2017.
Taylor, A. J. P. (1954). The struggle for mastery in Europe 1848–1918. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
168
N. Devine

Changing the World One Premise
at a Time: Argument, Imagination
and Post-truth
Tracy Bowell
Introduction
The dangers of giving ground to a new, post-truth, order of discourse are recognised
in former President Obama’s recent call to arms:
If we are not serious about facts and what’s true and what’s not, if we can’t discriminate
between serious arguments and propaganda, then we have problems. (e.g. Solon 2016)
On the face of it, there is an urgent need, in response to such a call, to reassert the
value of good argument and of critical thinking. In the present environment, in
which governments present alt facts, and mainstream journalism is disparaged by
some politicians, critical thinking is being seen by some as a form of activism.
Indeed, when I teach and write about critical thinking, I often present critical
thinking as transformative and as a source of empowerment, a means of acquiring
knowledge and habits of mind that enable one to speak truth to power. But the echo
chamber of social media sourced news and current affairs coverage makes it harder
to acquire and employ the skills and habits of mind of which responsible and
critical inquiry are comprised. In critical thinking instruction, we emphasise that
reaching the true or most likely belief involves examining candidate claims against
a background of evidence, testing whether you would be justiﬁed in holding them.
But if the evidence is sourced solely from within our own echo chamber, it is likely
simply to reinforce our beliefs. And thus the oft-cited goal of what Paul (1992) calls
“deep sense” critical thinking, that of taking and performing a critical stance
towards our own deeply held beliefs, is undermined by the echo; within the
chamber we encounter only those claims that resonate with us.
Another issue that this new political order brings into relief is a need to
acknowledge the role of emotion as part of our response to the world and of our
T. Bowell (&)
University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
e-mail: tracy.bowell@waikato.ac.nz
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_15
169

lived experiences of it. Many of the responses that we have when thinking about
and discussing socio-political issues are both cognitive and affective. The need to
acknowledge and accommodate this contrasts with the traditional approach to
argument and to standard critical thinking instruction, according to which emotion
has no place in critical thinking, but is instead the preserve of rhetoric. This does not
mean that we should also become teachers of rhetoric. Rather, instead of simply
identifying and calling out falsehoods and teaching others to do the same, we need
to harness the potential of emotion and the facts of lived experiences as a route to
reason—as a means of opening up the mind to considering alternative ways of
thinking and of being. Fiction and story-telling, in general, have historically pro-
vided us with the means both to make sense of our experiences and to countenance
possibilities other than the realities of our actual lives. Moreover, socially shared
ﬁctions can play a constitutive role in binding a group of individuals together,
enabling us both to maintain existing and to create new ways of being.
In this essay, I address the challenges to good argumentation and reasoning
posed by the post-truth order and argue that there is an acute need for argumentation
theory to re-present ways in which emotion and reason work together to form,
scrutinise and revise deeply held beliefs. I begin by considering deeply held beliefs,
discussing the types of beliefs that tend to be deeply held and the ways in which
they are acquired. Focussing on deeply held beliefs that are relevant to our
socio-political imaginaries, beliefs that are prone to prejudice, bias and stereotyping
associated with gender, race, sexuality, disability, class and other markers of dif-
ference and marginalisation, I consider the ways deeply held beliefs play a
framework role in reinforcing our ways of being within the world.
With inspiration from Moira Gatens’ and Genevieve Lloyd’s Spinozistic take on
the role of the imagination in changing our ways of being, as well as from Iris
Marion Young’s work on asymmetrical reciprocity, in what follows I will discuss
approaches to critical thinking that involve showing rather than stating alternatives
to deeply held beliefs. In particular, I will focus on those involving narratives that
provide alternative pictures and make epistemic use of lived experiences to shift and
transform our imaginations by offering insights into the lives of others. I argue that
such approaches offer more effective means of opening deeply held beliefs up to
critical scrutiny and possible revision than approaches that seek simply to state the
truth of contrary beliefs.
Deeply Held Beliefs
It is compelling to think that argument can be transformative, that it can work in the
service of social justice, that we can, if you like, change the world through argu-
ment. Indeed, many of us who teach and write about argument and critical thinking
not only hope for transformative outcomes, but also tell our students that they are
possible. Some of us have written to that effect:
170
T. Bowell

It is a good reﬂection of the importance of the skills you are developing that those in power
sometimes fear the effects of those who can think critically about moral, social, economic
and political issues. The ability to think critically, then, is essential if one is to function
properly in one’s role as a citizen. (Bowell and Kemp 2015, p. 6)
While I don’t reject these claims outright, I have come to the view that what it takes
to think critically and to experience and interact with the world in a way that can be
transformative is a good deal more challenging and complex than standard critical
thinking textbooks and courses may lead us, and more importantly, those who read
them, to believe. We have entered an era of post-factual public discourse in which
experts are spurned—see, for instance, the 2016 Brexit referendum campaign and
its ongoing aftermath in the UK, or the 2016 US and 2017 UK election campaigns.
Lies and misrepresentations of the facts are ignored even when they are demon-
strated to be such. It seems to me crucial therefore that we come up with ways to
encourage intellectually responsible participation in socio-political discourses and
in democracy more generally.
Of course, there is emotional and social comfort in holding onto beliefs shared
by those around us and with whom we regularly interact. If friends, both actual and
digital, neighbours, family and colleagues express and share the view that migrants
are stealing jobs, pushing wages down, engage in crime and terrorist acts, and so
on, then that position is entrenched in our social interactions and understanding of
the world; we thus take an emotional and social risk if we attempt to challenge that
view. Moreover, our beliefs and opinions are reinforced in the echo chambers of our
social media feeds. These echo chambers shelter us from socio-cultural and political
difference; their digital (dis)locatedness shields us from an encounter with the
distant other, who is demonised in the absence of any challenge to our prejudices
and fears that could be gained from the experience of an actual, embodied,
encounter. As Plato reminded us, the illusions of the cave offer more comfort than
the confrontations of reality. Lorraine Code’s Aristotelian characterisation of the
intellectually virtuous person shows the epistemic ﬂaws inherent in our tendency to
remain within the shelter of the cave.
The intellectually virtuous person […] is one who ﬁnds value in knowing and under-
standing how things really are. S/he resists the temptation to live with partial explanations
where fuller ones are attainable, the temptation to live in fantasy or in a world of dreams or
illusion, considering it better to know, despite the tempting comfort and complacency that a
life of fantasy or illusion (or well-tinged with fantasy or illusion) can offer. (Code 1984,
p. 44)
Although critical thinking pedagogy does often emphasise the need for a properly
critical thinker to be willing (and able) to hold up their own beliefs to critical
analysis and scrutiny, and be prepared to modify or relinquish them in the face of
appropriate evidence, it is has been recognised that the type of critical thinking
instruction usually offered at ﬁrst-year level in universities frequently does not lead
to these outcomes for learners. Paul (1992) uses the term “strong sense critical
thinking” to refer to a level of criticality at which a person is able to apply the
processes and principles of argumentation assessment to their own beliefs and
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
171

commitments, particularly towards their own deeply held beliefs, and to remove
any bias towards their own beliefs, turning critical thinking inwards, if you will.
Taking critical thinking to this level is important if it is to become a real-life skill
and to equip us to participate in our communities in the ways we hope (and tell
students) it will, that is if it is properly to become an aspect of our ability to reason
practically.
It seems there are no necessary or sufﬁcient conditions for a belief’s being
deeply held (Kingsbury and Bowell 2016). Deeply held beliefs are acquired in
various ways, and their content is diverse. Some markers may be present, but are
not necessarily. Thus a deeply held belief may be held passionately and defended
dogmatically, and it may play a fundamental role in the way we represent the world
to ourselves. It can form part of our symbolic framework and of our ways of being
in the world and with others, inﬂuencing our social and political actions. By way of
example, all and any of the following beliefs could be candidates for deeply held
status:
• This building is not about to fall down.
• Here is a hand.
• Jesus died for our sins.
• Women are equal to men in all respects.
• Immigration is a threat to our way of life.
• Human activity is not a principal cause of climate change.
• The left is soft on terrorism.
• Conservatives are heartless and don’t care about social inequality.
We are often emotionally attached to our deeply held beliefs. This may be
because of the way they have been acquired and reinforced via our upbringing and
by people who have been inﬂuential in our lives—parents and other family
members, teachers, religious and cultural leaders, our social or professional peers,
or because they have been formed on the basis of our own lived experiences that
serve consistently to reinforce them. They are part of the mythology that provides
the narrative environment within which our cognitive and affective development
takes place (Wittgenstein 1969, §s95, 97). Thus, we often feel invested in such
beliefs, and they form part of our identity. Unsurprisingly, given the ways in which
they tend to be acquired and our unwillingness to subject them to critical scrutiny,
deeply held beliefs are prone to prejudice, implicit bias, conﬁrmation bias, and
stereotypes. They are also easily manipulated, since we are often unaware that we
have them. Our tendency to cling tightly to them, coupled with an unwillingness or
inability to subject them to reﬂection, demonstrates a lack of open-mindedness, that
is to say, a resistance to different points of view, and, consequently, a resistance to
change.
My experience as a critical thinking teacher is that it is difﬁcult to bring students
to a place where they are able and willing to reﬂect critically on their own beliefs.
The difﬁculty involves broader issues than critical thinking pedagogy itself. It is
partly a question of the right motivation, partly of students’ understandings and
172
T. Bowell

expectations of themselves as learners. In a small research project by Goldberg et al.
(2015), students who had taken our ﬁrst-year, one-semester critical thinking course
were interviewed about the extent to which their thinking had become more critical
after having completed the course. They were then asked about the extent to which
their reﬂection on their own deeply held beliefs had become more critical. This
question was explored in more depth by setting up conversations with the inter-
viewer in which they were encouraged to use critical thinking skills to reﬂect on and
defend their own deeply held beliefs. The result was that, overwhelmingly, par-
ticipants thought they had become more critical, yet very few were able or willing
to reﬂect critically, properly speaking, on their own beliefs. They tended to defend
their beliefs fallaciously, often with appeals to tradition or employing the natural-
istic fallacy. This result was troubling, of course. It seemed to indicate that our
course (and textbook) failed in its task to help students to develop this kind of
practical wisdom. More profoundly, in light of these results, the expectation that
transforming deeply held beliefs can be achieved via standard critical thinking
methods and approaches appears unreasonable and naive. Several participants
talked about beliefs that they had “imbibed with their mother’s milk”, i.e. beliefs
that formed part of the framework from within which they thought about and sought
to understand the world. In short, such beliefs constituted part of the ethos with
which they engaged with the world and with others—they were their habitus.1
These kinds of admissions make clear that the genealogy of certain of our deeply
held beliefs, involving family and other inﬂuential ﬁgures in our early lives, are
often so embedded in our ways of being that they go unremarked and unreﬂected
upon. Thus, we may be inclined to defend such notions emotionally when chal-
lenged—they are associated with our relation to people we love, respect and
admire. They form part of our intimate identity.
Argument and Emotion
In philosophy generally, and in argumentation theory more speciﬁcally, as a rule,
emotion and identity are considered out of place in good reasoning; indeed, emotion
(bad) is usually represented as juxtaposed to reason (good). In argumentation
theory, we see a family of these juxtapositions: mythos versus logos, emotion
versus reason, rhetoric versus argument, convincing versus persuading (as others
have noted, these oppositions are also conceived of along gendered lines, e.g. Lloyd
1984; Jaggar 1989; Gilbert 2004; Linker 2015). Recently, however, theorists such
as Michael Gilbert and Maureen Linker have recognised and argued for the
1David Lodge’s 1980 novel, How far can you go? (published in the USA as Souls and bodies)
traces the lives of a group of Catholic university students through the decades of the 50s, 60s and
70s. The novel conveys a strong sense of the pervasiveness of deeply held beliefs about contra-
ception, the lived effects of those beliefs, and what happens when they are challenged. See
especially pp. 142–143.
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
173

legitimacy of emotion within reasoning and argument, and against the standard
conception of emotion as opposed to reason and a hindrance to good reasoning. On
such a view, emotion is considered a legitimate part of reasoning rather than a
response that replaces reason. So, for example, while on the one hand, fear and
anger can be stoked to an extent that reﬂective assessment is difﬁcult and judgement
is clouded, on the other, fear and anger can be warranted and can have a role to play
within effective practical reasoning. As Linker (2015, pp. 71–72) notes, for
example, indignation plays an important and justiﬁed role in our responses to social
injustices. Indeed, anger or indignation is often the rational response to social
realities in such cases, and can be a trigger for taking appropriate actions or
changing the way we think about the world and about others. For Gilbert (2004),
when evaluating someone’s reasoning or making a judgement call on their route to
a particular conclusion, emotion is just one of several factors that it is rational to
consider.
As I have acknowledged, there is some truth in the traditional view that emotion
can impede clear and productive reﬂection and judgement. The affective aspects of
our cognitive schema also mean that our deeply held beliefs can be prey to con-
ﬁrmation bias. Linker’s example makes the problem clear: imagine two young
children learning the concept “dog”, but from within different cognitive schema.
One child grows up in a family of dog lovers. She experiences a great deal of
contact with dogs, dogs are talked about positively, and her experiences of dogs are
the main happy ones. Once she has grasped the concept “dog”, that is, once she is
able to distinguish dogs from all the other, non-dog, things she encounters, and can
discern relevant similarities between the dog things—her understanding of dogs,
reinforced by her experiences and the behaviour of her family, is of something
positive. The other child grows up in a family in which one (or more) of the adults
have had a traumatic experience with dogs, perhaps having been attacked as a child.
While she acquires the concept and is able to use it properly, distinguishing dog
things from non-dogs and so on, her experience of dogs and all that she learns about
dogs develop within a negative cognitive schema; she comes to understand dogs as
a negative thing. Her beliefs about dogs—that they are frightening and to be
avoided, say, have been reinforced by her family and her upbringing. In order to
modify her understanding of dogs, she would need to be exposed to dogs in more
favourable circumstances, which would, ideally, result in more positive experi-
ences. These new experiences provide opportunities for her to revise her
long-standing beliefs that dogs are dangerous and to be avoided (Linker 2015,
pp. 36–38).
This example can be applied to the sorts of deeply held beliefs that someone may
form and hold about socio-political issues. Someone whose upbringing and broader
social contacts engender and reinforce an understanding of people from a different
background—people who are a different race or ethnicity, have different religious
beliefs, are from a different social class, are richer or poorer, are disabled, whose
sexuality is different—as people to be feared and mistrusted will likely form neg-
ative deeply held beliefs. They may well be emotionally attached to those beliefs,
which are conﬁrmed by their experiences and are understood within the cognitive
174
T. Bowell

framework of their upbringing. By contrast, someone whose upbringing and
broader social contacts are characterized by positive exposure to difference is less
likely to develop the same sort of fears toward others. Someone raised in a com-
munity in which the variety of people and ways of living are just part of everyday
life will be less inclined in general to think in terms of “us” and “the others”.
Without a framework of “us” and “them” already in place, the idea of treating
individuals as representatives of groups would likely be foreign, even incompre-
hensible. It seems probable that deeply held beliefs such as these, which clearly
guide our social interactions, are not held consciously. They play a guiding role in
the way we live our lives, but they are not something we call to mind on a regular
basis; to the contrary, we are likely ﬁrst aware of them when they are called into
question or become the subject of reﬂection in some other way, just as the
assumptions that underpin our interactions with the physical world, such as “the
building is not about to fall down”, go unnoticed and unchallenged in the normal
course of our lives. They only come to the fore when in unusual situations, such as,
in this case, in the immediate aftermath of an earthquake.
There are, then, several features that may be displayed by deeply held beliefs that
make us less likely to hold them up to critical scrutiny so that inconsistencies and
relevant evidence can be brought to light. Because they are so much a part of our
way of thinking about and experiencing the world, revising them might cause
reverberations throughout the web of our beliefs and practices. Since they are
formed within a particular, enduring framework, they are often prey to conﬁrmation
bias, to being reinforced by the shared beliefs of our communities and by our
experiences within that cognitive schema, even in the face of evidence that dis-
conﬁrms them. As a consequence, when we encounter challenges to our deeply held
beliefs, and when we question those of others, we often do so in a less than
open-minded way, engaging in the call and response of adversarial assertion and
denial, rather than actually listening to what others are saying.
Maureen Linker’s work on intellectual empathy offers a starting point for a way
out of this impasse for argumentation and for critical thinking pedagogy. In her
book, Intellectual Empathy: Critical Thinking for Social Justice (2015), she draws
on her own practice as an educator negotiating methods for effective and potentially
transformative discussions of socially divisive issues often taking place across often
extensive social, cultural and political difference.2 As her case studies demonstrate,
when critical thinking is performed in the way that Linker argues for, it manifests
traits and practices that realise intellectual responsibility: it is virtuous inquiry.
Whereas the adversarial practice of argument in which we ﬁre contesting facts at
one another or question each other’s moral or intellectual capacity does not lead to
the opening of hearts and minds, what Linker calls “intellectual empathy”, which is
2Linker teaches at the University of Michigan—Dearborn. Dearborn, close to Detroit, is the home
to the largest Muslim community in the USA. For a short documentary featuring the diverse voices
of
Dearborn
residents
see
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/aug/04/
dearborn-michigan-divided-muslim-american-donald-trump-documentary.
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
175

the soul and substance of her approach, has both cognitive and affective appeal.
Linker characterises intellectual empathy thus:
Intellectual empathy, then, assumes that reason and understanding must be supplemented
with emotion and experience so that we can know in the fullest possible sense. This means
knowing about ourselves and knowing as much as we can about other people’s circum-
stances, particularly people whose circumstances are different from our own. In this way,
intellectual empathy is not a psychological prescription for changing individual beliefs. It is
a means of examining both the wide scope of social institutions and social inequality and
the narrow scope of our own beliefs. When we employ intellectual empathy in our rea-
soning about social differences, we are not so much interested in gathering information
about people and their respective beliefs as we are in looking at situations people face
through their eyes. (Linker 2015, p. 13)
Traits such as these are absolutely necessary for a fuller understanding of complex
social issues. Argument that is disconnected from the reality of lived experiences,
where social position and power relations are neglected, ignored or obscured, lacks
the nuance that is the hallmark of deeper comprehension. When deeply held beliefs
are radically different, or even directly opposed, there is often a failure to see
anything in common and differences are foregrounded instead. Linker’s approach is
thus in the ﬁrst place to seek commonality.
She also points to the way in which many of the responses that we have in
inquiry about social issues are both cognitive and affective, as is intellectual
empathy itself. This contrasts with the traditional approach to argument and critical
thinking (and standard critical thinking pedagogy), according to which emotion has
no place in critical thinking and argumentation, but belongs rather to the preserve of
rhetoric.
Asymmetric Reciprocity
In the remainder of this chapter, I want to consider how we might start to develop
an understanding that takes proper account of the other; how we might come to be
able to understand empathetically in a manner that does not undermine our ability to
reason critically, but rather improves our criticality. But ﬁrst I draw on the resources
offered by Iris Marion Young’s notion of Asymmetrical Reciprocity to consider
some of the limitations we face in working to understand each other empathetically
across socio-cultural and political differences. I then draw on the resources offered
by Genevieve Lloyd and Moira Gatens’ Spinozistic picture of the social imaginary
and the possibilities that offers for our coming to imagine different ways of being in
the world and with others. These may be different ways in which the world is for
others, or they may be different ways in which the world could be for us, and for
others. That is, there are prospects here both for better understanding the realities of
the lives of others as well as prospects for imagining different, and better, lives for
ourselves with others.
176
T. Bowell

Young (1997, p. 38) reminds us that an injunction to practice symmetrical
reciprocity is common in ordinary moral practice. In the course of moral practices,
we are often questioned or enjoined in the following ways:
• Look at it from his position.
• Try to walk in her shoes.
• How would you like it if someone did that to you?
• There but for the grace of God, go I.
Often these and similar propositions form the content of deeply held beliefs about
behaving morally. Morality does seem to demand of us that we show respect to others
in part by considering their standpoint, and doing so is a way of performing
open-mindedness, humility and empathy. Empathy and reciprocity feature in our
deeply held beliefs about how we should behave towards each other, beliefs that we
could say are commonly part of a moral imaginary. Young doesn’t deny the role of
empathy and reciprocity, but she does dispute the morphology of reciprocity, prob-
lematizing the extent to which it is really possible to imagine ourselves into the lived
experiences of another. Learning from others’ experiences, she argues, is central to
moral engagement (and to deliberative discourse in the context of democracies), but it
is not achieved through the imaginative move of imagining oneself in the other’s
position. Instead, we should seek to learn from them what it is like for them, rather
than trying to imagine what it would/could be like for ourselves. So we should try to
focus on a third-person perspective rather than slipping into a ﬁrst-person perspective.
We can’t imagine ourselves as others, only as other versions of ourselves and there is
much in the literature on conceivability and possibility and on the phenomenon of
imaginative resistance that supports Young’s position in this respect (e.g. Gendler
2000; MacKenzie 2006; Scarry 1998). So rather than trying to imagine ourselves into
the position of the other, we should commit to learning as much as we can about the
lived realities of other people from their own testimonial accounts of how they
experience, negotiate and live their lives; how they live their gender, race, class,
disability, sexuality, culture and religion. This requires that we listen properly and
take seriously others’ testimony in order to learn about their lived experiences and
about how it is to be them in this world.
For example, my husband is deaf. Together we negotiate the practical, moral and
emotional tensions of his lived reality every day in our own relationship and
interactions, and in those with others both within and outside of our immediate
family. I have no real sense of what it is like to be him in his position, to experience
the isolation and exclusion and frustrations that he does. Recently, I was tem-
porarily deaf in one ear. For a short while I gained some insight into what it is like
not to be able to hear properly, and I think it’s fair to say that my sympathy for his
position expanded slightly (at least for a while), although I couldn’t legitimately
claim to know deafness from his position or to have walked in his shoes. Rather, I
have to take his word for it with respect to what it’s like for him to live as a deaf
person. Thus, encountering and listening to the other are placed front and centre of
attempting empathetically to understand and know the other properly.
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
177

Linker recounts an instance of productive encounter that occurred when she was
leading a project for students who wanted to make some kind of positive contri-
bution to the lives of the homeless in their area of Michigan. It was approaching
winter, and the students assumed that homeless people would need mittens. They
set out to collect mittens that could be donated to a local shelter, but Linker
reminded them that they hadn’t contacted anyone to check that their assumption
was correct. As it turned out, the shelter had plenty of warm winter clothing which
had been donated by others who had reasoned in the same way as the students; what
the shelter needed was help sorting the clothing into sizes, and so on. The students
duly volunteered for that task, and in the process had the opportunity to visit the
shelter and work there for the day, gaining the chance to learn directly about its
programmes and the lives of its clients (Linker 2015, pp. 178–179).
Linker’s story illustrates the limitations of understanding others’ needs on the
basis of our own perspective, as well as how direct encounter with the other offers a
way of correcting and overcoming misunderstandings. But direct, embodied
encounter is often not possible, which is where imagination can come into play.
Young points to the ways in which different histories and positionalities bear on,
and place limitations on, the ways in which we both experience the world and each
other, and in which we interact with and try to understand each other. For example,
all other things being equal, given my privileged and safe life as a professional in
New Zealand, it is unlikely that I would experience what it is like to be so desperate
to escape war or poverty, that I would abandon my home and my way of life, gather
up my family and trek across dangerous terrain or use my life savings to buy
passage on a crowded vessel that may or may not make it to safer shores. Moreover,
unless I actively seek out opportunities for direct encounter with people who have
had these kinds of experiences, such as becoming involved as a volunteer with an
organisation that works with refugees, it is unlikely that I can come to know and
understand the realities of their lives via direct encounter.
Young emphasises the need to listen across the distance of difference, recog-
nising that while crossing boundaries can lead to productive understanding, we
must still respect those boundaries. In striving to understand others, I never really
transcend my own experience; I can never be out of my own skin, but I can learn
something new, while acknowledging that there will always be conceptual residues
and resistances to understanding despite overlaps in interests and understandings.
So while there are commonalities that may form a starting point for transformative
dialogue, we should attend to particularity and avoid eliding differences in back-
ground, life histories, lifestyles and positionalities. Young emphasises the impor-
tance of questions. Questioning demonstrates respect, acknowledges ignorance and
demonstrates a desire to learn from others. Contrast this with argument which tends
to proceed by the making of assertions rather than the posing of questions. Dialogue
that recognises the asymmetry of others in this way offers two possibilities for
extending and deepening our understanding and knowledge: it enables me better to
understand myself because my own assumptions and point of view become rela-
tivized when positioned reﬂectively in relation to those of others. It enables me
178
T. Bowell

better to understand others, because I put myself in a position where I can learn how
their lives are and how the world is for them.
Asymmetric reciprocity requires sympathetic imagining, a trying to see what it is
like for them, while acknowledging that one does so from within the limits of one’s
own positionalities. Sympathetic imagining can offer a means of extending our
third-person perspective on the lives and experiences of others. The experience of
properly encountering others often involves attentively listening to and engaging
with their stories. Narratives, both real and ﬁctional, offer a way of overcoming
imaginative resistance.
Thus far I have considered the way in which asymmetric reciprocity might be
performed through encounter with the real-life stories of others. In the remainder of
the paper, I want to extend that thinking by drawing on the resources of the idea of
the social imaginary to consider a way in which engaging critically with ﬁctions can
also offer a way of coming to understand other ways of being in the world and with
others. I also want to highlight the role of lived experiences in (re)shaping social
imaginaries, creating new, and better, ﬁctions.
Re-imagining the (Social) World: The Imaginary
An imaginary is a loosely connected set of images embedded in social practices, or
throughout texts. It consists of
imaginary forms that are constitutive of our experience of the world, bearers of effective
signiﬁcance, the means by which we not only think, but feel our way around the world
(Gatens and Lloyd 1999, p. 111)
It can serve as a device for changing perceptions and understandings of others’
experiences and ways of being in the world. Our socially shared ﬁctions play a
constitutive role in binding a group of individuals together; they are constitutive of
our identities. Thus, the ﬁctions of which our imaginary is comprised maintain and
create a way of life. Despite some of the connotations associated with the term in its
standard use and with the notion of a ﬁction, the imaginary is not illusory. Rather,
the central tenet of the concept of the imaginary is that the imagination is both
structured by and includes the symbolic. This symbolic framework includes
socio-cultural and political representations, including stereotypes and biases, and
our deeply held beliefs are part of those representations. It thus determines social
and political action and the ways we are perceived and perceive others. The world
we encounter comes to us always already represented. It has an imaginary form that
yields the salience and signiﬁcance that the world has for us. The imaginary, then, is
our way of making cognitive and affective sense of the world.
These sense-making thought patterns are perspectival and embodied, and thus
shaped and potentially altered by our experiences and our positionalities. As Gatens
and Lloyd (1999, p. 25) explain, experiencing something via a different image or
form can give rise to a different mode of feeling and a different response. A simple
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
179

example is provided by Spinoza: a horse’s hoof prints in the sand lead a soldier to
think of horsemen and of war, a farmer of ploughs and ﬁelds. The meaning and
salience we attribute to our experiences and to the aspects of the world with which
we interact is a consequence of the social and cultural mediation of our responses.
Thus, in our encounters with each other, salience is often afforded to difference—to
bodies that look different, be they black, pregnant, or with a disability, to bodies
that sound different by dint of accent or language, to lives that are lived in ways that
differ from ours.
The resources of the idea of the imaginary offer transformative potential because
they offer the possibility of dislodging false and misleading representations, cre-
atively replacing them with better ones, thus creating images that open up alter-
native ways of being in the world. For instance, while we cannot modify damaging
representations of women simply by claiming they are false or by asserting their
negation (women can reason, women can carry heavy loads), if the way women are
imagined can be changed, responses to female bodies open up to the potential for
change.
Changes might be brought about by the experience of concrete, embodied
examples of alternatives to the status quo. For instance, I was recently involved in
interviewing young women who were candidates for scholarships for refugee
daughters (young women who are either refugees themselves or the daughters
thereof). A young Muslim woman, originally from Afghanistan, talked about her
ambition to be a pilot. She had seen media coverage of a recent ﬂight from Brunei
to
Saudi
Arabia
on
which
the
entire
ﬂight
crew
were
women.
The
stereotype-challenging images of these women had enabled her to imagine the
possibility of a career as a pilot for herself. In similar vein, the courageous Saudi
women who, ﬁrst, dare to drive cars themselves and then, even more transgres-
sively, ﬁlm themselves doing so and upload the videos to the internet, offer new,
alternative memes—alternative imaginary forms—that shift thinking about what
women can do, and should not be prevented from doing. While they show the
far-from-normal, they offer possibilities for what could become normalised. To
reinforce the point, as we go to press, King Salman has issued a decree permitting
driver’s licences to be issued to women and allowing women to drive without a
male guardian present.
Stories and other texts—ﬁlms, plays, visual art, songs—also carry socio-cultural
transformative potential through their ability to bring about shifts in the social
imaginary by offering glimpses of different lives and ways of being, be they actual
lives of others that we better understand through those stories and images or pos-
sibilities manifested via ﬁctional narratives. Take Virginia Woolf’s example of the
“angel in the house” that appears in her essay “Professions for Women” (cited in
Lloyd 1998, p. 170). The angel is a phantom that visits as she writes; a ﬁction
governing the interactions between men and women. The angel is sympathetic,
charming, utterly unselﬁsh and self-sacriﬁcing. She takes the leg of the chicken, she
sits in the draft. Woolf’s imagery enables us to recognise something that is
embedded, but not clearly visible, in our social practices. The ﬁction brings it to
light, enabling us to see it more clearly, but rather than stating these truths as such,
180
T. Bowell

it shows them, by making certain aspects of the scenario pertinent and salient to us,
precipitating a process of coming to see and better to understand. Moreover, stories
and images such as these evoke affective reactions—Woolf’s readers feel justiﬁed
anger or irritation (or resignation?) as they ﬁrst encounter and then recognise these
aspects of our social practices. The recognition then prompts cognitive responses:
it’s wrong that women are expected, and expect themselves, to make these sacri-
ﬁces. Finally, on the basis of such reﬂections, we can eventually move towards
changing such practices.
The narratives and characters in Loach’s (2016) ﬁlm about living with unem-
ployment and negotiating the beneﬁts system, I Daniel Blake, play a similar role of
ﬁrst making certain truths perspicuous by evoking emotional responses and then
triggering a better understanding of lives such as these. The ﬁlm shows what it is
like to be a mother trying to bring up two children on her own in a city to which she
has been relocated by the beneﬁts agency and where she knows no one; or a
widower who has a chronic health condition that is deemed insufﬁciently severe to
prevent him from working, but who cannot ﬁnd a job in part because he isn’t
healthy enough to work. The portrayals dislodge the ﬁction of the lazy, feckless,
beneﬁts scrounger who wants something for nothing and is not deserving of our
empathy or our care and consideration. When viewing the ﬁlm, we get a sense of
the frustration, indignity and eventual despair that is experienced by its characters.
The shame of the mother caught eating baked beans straight from the can at the
food bank to assuage the hunger that has built up from foregoing meals to give her
children all the food she can afford is made so perspicuous through image and
narrative that we feel a justiﬁed, a righteous, anger at the way she is treated by a
state and a system that should be helping and supporting her. Of course, a text
won’t affect every viewer or reader in the same way and, indeed, I, Daniel Blake
will have had none of these effects on any number of viewers. But for some, those
who may have tended to think of beneﬁt claimants not as individual humans with
similarities to themselves, the narrative, characters and images can provide a means
by which it is possible to reimagine beneﬁt claimants and dislodge the grip of
stereotypes and unconscious biases, replacing their (mis)understandings with a
conception of people as actual individuals with life histories, relationships, interests,
loves and hates not dissimilar to their own. By depicting the characters as indi-
viduals—by ﬁlling them out—the ﬁlm rehumanises them, giving the audience the
opportunity to imagine the world in the ways it really is for them and thus to see and
come to understand the reality of the lives depicted more clearly. Moreover, in
gaining this clarity of vision and understanding, and reacting with anger, the viewer
may be moved to some kind of action aimed at improving people’s lives, or to
working for socio-political change.
Stories, then, provide us with a way into understanding the realities of the lives
of others and can work to modify and change our imaginaries. Furthermore, we can
become part of stories. Stories help us to imagine ourselves in situations similar to
those depicted, and energise our non-cognitive responses in ways that can be
productive within contexts involving not just the affective, but also reason and
judgement. Stories are a means of changing minds in terms of how we come to
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
181

understand the world and others, as well as in terms of the way we then come to
make judgements about them. They can also offer up possibilities for coming to
imagine different ways of being in the world and with others.
In Gatens’ and Lloyd’s development of the Spinozistic idea of the imaginary, we
can ﬁnd the resources for a harmonising of emotion and argument. Rational
reﬂection on the imaginary is possible. The appropriateness of images can be
challenged and ﬁctions can be changed or replaced by better ﬁctions. This process
is not one of checking ﬁctions against the real, but rather of seeing if the world and
subject can bear this signiﬁcation. Through that assessment, we gain the opportu-
nity to confront “different ways of inhabiting our world and living affectively and
effectively within it” (Gatens and Lloyd 1999, p. 120).
The challenge is not to transcend them [ﬁctions], but to use reasons to see through, improve
and replace, destructive, oppressive ﬁctions with others judged better able to sustain
individual and collective conatus. (Lloyd 1998, p. 166)
Reason and imagination, then, are not conceived of as related via an ascending
hierarchy as in Plato’s account, according to which there is epistemic and meta-
physical ascent from the world of appearances to the world of forms. Instead,
imagination is seen as coexisting with reason to generate uniﬁed pictures of the
world. If ﬁctions structure both individual behaviour and social practices, then,
argues Lloyd, identifying and confronting them is the core of education. It is this
critical intelligence that serves as the critical element of proper critical thinking,
schooling both the imagination and our ability to reason so as not to allow ﬁctions
to lead us astray. While one of Spinoza’s own targets was religious superstition, the
contemporary challenge lies in confronting the ﬁctions perpetuated by all manner of
ideologies that inﬂuence deeply held beliefs and the ways in which we conduct
ourselves and our relationships with others. In particular, genuinely fake news
stories, as distinct from ones that we simply disagree with or wish were not true, are
concocted speciﬁcally to discredit the opposition and deliberately mislead the
audience, rendering common ground utterly impossible.
In Practice
I end this essay with a brief discussion of how these ideas might translate in an
educational context. A recent article in the New York Times offers a case study of
how a teacher might successfully negotiate a situation in which learners’ beliefs on
a topic that is being studied are deeply held, yet false (Harmon 2017). A science
teacher in Wellston, Ohio, found that almost his entire class of 17 senior students in
biology were climate change sceptics. Wellston is a coal-mining district, and many
of the students come from families in which parents, uncles and other relatives,
friends and neighbours had lost jobs in the mines. The students’ deeply held beliefs
that the emissions from burning coal and other fossil fuels were not causally
responsible for climate change had been formed in the environments of their
182
T. Bowell

families and their communities. At ﬁrst, the teacher used scientiﬁc evidence to
demonstrate the falsity of the students’ beliefs, but loyalty to family meant that their
affective response was stronger than any cognitive response elicited by the data and
other evidence they were shown. They felt that it would be disloyal to distance
themselves from or question the consensus opinion of their upbringing. Realising
the source and role of the students’ deeply held beliefs, the teacher switched from
trying to work directly against those beliefs by disproving them with statistical
evidence. Instead, he appealed to their lived experience of the local climate, ﬁrst as
the winter produced fewer snow days and the spring brought ﬂoods. He then
reinforced that by creating a new lived experience for his students, taking them to
the woods close to the school where they observed the destructive effects of an
invasive insect that used to die off in the winter but now survives because of the
warmer weather. By recognising and acknowledging the emotional weight of the
students’ deeply held beliefs about climate change and their suspicion toward
scientists and the evidence they produce, the teacher found a way to disrupt those
beliefs, not by exposing them to yet more statistical evidence, as though they might
eventually bow to authority under its weight, but rather by enabling them directly to
experience the effects of climate change in their immediate environment.
I emphasised earlier the value of narrative and ﬁctional characters in enabling
people to encounter the realities of lives other than their own and in dislodging
misleading ﬁctions about the lives of others and replacing them with more faithful
representations. In the tertiary education sector, some teachers are using story
worlds and games to provide digitally enhanced experiential learning that appeals to
and engages learners who have grown up and have their habitus in digital spaces.
A story world might be built around a narrative involving complex social or
environmental situations that encourage critical enquiry and working towards
practical and policy solutions. A story world can involve a ﬁctional community in
which learners take on roles and become characters within the story world.
Augmented and virtual reality tools offer the possibility for digitally (re)creating
environments that resemble real worlds, giving students a richer experiential
learning environment that promotes both a cognitive and an affective response.
Learning about environmental politics and activism, for example, could be
enhanced if, through the use of augmented reality tools, learners could be immersed
within the communities and worlds of the Dakota Access Pipeline activists and the
Standing Rock Sioux tribe.
I
have
argued
that
transformational
learning
experiences
that
involve
open-mindedness with respect to one’s own shibboleths require more than devel-
oping good reasoning skills and dispositions; they require acknowledgement that
deeply held beliefs can be motivated by emotional responses that are not unjusti-
ﬁed, and that our affective responses to certain situations can, themselves, be rea-
sonable responses. In order better to make space for emotion as part and parcel of
transformative social enquiry and critique in the educational context, it seems to me
that we should be offering learners more opportunities for encounter with the other,
for experiential and immersive learning that both ampliﬁes and challenges the
theoretical approach, while calling into question some of the received attitudes and
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
183

assumptions produced and disseminated by media and advertizing. Students
studying economics, for instance, can complement their theoretical studies by being
confronted ﬁrst hand with the negative consequences of the theory’s application,
say, by meeting and talking to laid-off factory workers, whose jobs were sent
overseas to low-wage countries. Students learning about social policy could be well
served as learners if given the opportunity to encounter eventual beneﬁciaries (or
victims) of policy, learning about the effects it has had for them, and so forth.
While we should indeed remain serious about facts and about what’s true and
what’s not, this moment of post-truth—and let’s work as educators, scholars and
activists to ensure that it is just a moment—requires us also to take affective
responses as seriously as cognitive ones, and to ﬁnd ways to elicit new imaginative
responses that confront misrepresentation, dissembling and lies.
References
Bowell, T., & Kemp, G. (2015). Critical thinking: A concise guide. London and New York:
Routledge.
Code, L. (1984). Toward a responsibility epistemology. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 45(1), 29–50.
Gatens, M., & Lloyd, G. (1999). Collective imaginings: Spinoza past and present. London and
New York: Routledge.
Gendler, T. S. (2000). The puzzle of imaginative resistance. Journal of Philosophy, 97(2), 55–81.
Gilbert, M. (2004). Emotion, argumentation and informal logic. Informal Logic, 24(3), 245–264.
Goldberg, I., Kingsbury, J., Bowell, T., & Howard, D. (2015). Measuring critical thinking about
deeply held beliefs: Can the California critical thinking dispositions inventory help? Inquiry:
Critical Thinking Across the Disciplines, 30(1), 40–50.
Harmon, E. (2017, June 4). Climate science meets a stubborn obstacle. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/04/us/education-climate-change-science-class-students.html?
mcubz=1&_r=0&mtrref=undeﬁned&gwh=185371858BE2BC584DF84A42A4A21A90&gwt=
pay. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Jaggar, A. (1989). Love and knowledge: Emotion in feminist epistemology. Inquiry, 32(2),
151–176.
Kingsbury, J., & Bowell, T. (2016). Thinking critically about beliefs it’s hard to think critically
about. In L. Benacquista & P. Bondy (Eds.), Proceedings of the Ontario Society for the study of
argumentation conference: Argumentation, objectivity and bias, Vol. 11 (pp. 1–6). University of
Windsor. http://scholar.uwindsor.ca/ossaarchive/OSSA11/papersandcommentaries/88. Accessed
September 19, 2017.
Linker, M. (2015). Intellectual empathy: Critical thinking for social justice. Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press.
Lloyd, G. (1984). The man of reason: Male and female in Western philosophy. London and New
York: Routledge.
Lloyd, G. (1998). Spinoza and educating the imagination. In A. O. Rorty (Ed.), Philosophers on
education: New historical perspectives (pp. 157–172). London and New York: Routledge.
Loach, K. (Director). (2016). I, Daniel Blake [Motion picture]. UK: Sixteen Films.
Lodge, D. (1980). How far can you go? London: Secker and Warburg.
Mackenzie, C. (2006). Imagining other lives. Philosophical Papers, 35(3), 293–325.
184
T. Bowell

Paul, R. (1992). Teaching critical reasoning in the strong sense: Getting behind worldviews.
In R. A. Talaska (Ed.), Critical reasoning in contemporary culture (pp. 135–156). Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press.
Scarry, E. (1998). The difﬁculty of imagining other people. In E. Weiner (Ed.), The handbook of
interethnic coexistence (pp. 40–62). New York: Continuum Publishing.
Solon, O. (2016, November 18). Barack Obama on fake news: “We have problems” if we can’t tell
the
difference.
The
Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/barack-
obama-fake-news-facebook-social-media. Accessed September 19, 2017.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On certainty. Oxford: Blackwell.
Woolf, V. (1942). The death of the moth and other essays. London: Hogath Press.
Young, I.M. (1997). Asymmetrical reciprocity: On moral respect, wonder and enlarged thought, in
her. Intersectin voices: Dilemmas of gender, political philosophy and policy. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Changing the World One Premise at a Time …
185

The Complexity of Post-truth in Research:
An Indigenous Speculation
Carl Te Hira Mika and Jacoba Matapo
It seems that most academics take issue with post-truth because it appeals to the
masses through style, not substance. This demise of truth places research in danger,
because veriﬁable and correspondence notions of truth are meant to be absolutely
crucial for its objectivity and its continued survival. If post-truth really is so radical
a departure, then, we would be on the brink of an utterly new—and possibly painful
—set of discourses that threaten to force us to describe the world as one rather large
celebrity, not as an intra-dependent entity with its own integrity.
We bring into relief two discussions of post-truth from Samoan and Maori
perspectives. The Samoan writer indicates that post-truth in research actually
consists in the denial of more than one way of conducting research. A grand truth is
a post-truth to the extent that ‘truth’ through a Samoan lens is the ability to hear the
world as an interconnected phenomenon, and to respond in synchronicity with the
non-human world: post-truth is thus a latecomer through colonisation. Where
research in the social and educational sciences denies this complexity and instead
opts for entrenched humanistic approaches, it is post-truth. The Maori writer also
acknowledges that this sophisticated relationship between world and self exists for
the Maori researcher, but argues for a research method of ‘oblique response’ that
does not dispense with academic objectivity and yet rejects the Western ontology of
presence that exists in the practice of referencing another’s utterance.
C. T. H. Mika (&)
Faculty of Education, University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
e-mail: mika@waikato.ac.nz
J. Matapo
Faculty of Education and Social Work, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
e-mail: j.matapo@auckland.ac.nz
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_16
187

Introduction
At what point does truth become a pale version of itself, as if the former never
possessed aspects of its facsimile? For some indigenous peoples, truth and
post-truth are never far away from each other, and we may be just as sceptical of the
former as we are of the latter, although for different reasons. Most academics, it
seems, are especially critical of post-truth because it threatens a perceived notion of
objectivity and privileges ‘what-I-feel-at-this-moment’. If it is indeed attaining the
status that it appears to be in the media, it signals danger to established truth: the
two cannot work together, as if they are merely different voices that can never-
theless add to one another. A side must be taken, where one is either with or against
truth, and at issue here is the livelihood of the academic.
Indigenous academics, however, have to consider whether the issue is so
clear-cut. In an ontological sense, ‘truthful’ Samoan research is that which works
within the full interplay of the world. The Samoan contributor argues that coloni-
sation, however, delivers a notion of research that is human-governed, that privi-
leges a foreclosure of all things in the research method and outcome. The Maori
author agrees and notes that there must be a space for objectivity in the research
process, which at the same time must indeed approximate the full world, or at least
grapple with its possibilities. To completely eschew objectivity would be to give
way to the self’s desires, which seems to be the crux of post-truth in its more
conventional form. He suggests that there is a place for a sort of research that reacts
to another’s utterances but does not yield to the grand truth of referencing that
initial voice. He advocates that there are other ways to denote the initial utterance
(or text, or theorist) within one’s own indigenous writing that do not interrupt the
current process of thinking but that still validate it. To put it most brieﬂy: the
indigenous academic must deal with two types of post-truth and must navigate both
in order to avoid allegations of post-truthism.
A matter of style: throughout the discussion, we are aware of the backdrop of
recent events and phenomena (the advent of Trump as American president and
Brexit loom large in our minds here) and their potential for satire, and we
acknowledge that some of our propositions are coloured by these larger-than-life
phenomena and that our writing is sometimes inﬂuenced by absurdities as we
explore this nevertheless important theme.
Speculations on Post-truth: Its Connections
and Manifestations
Post-truth appears to be intimately connected with spectacle and audience. While
the hermetic post-truth advocate might indeed be post-truthful, s/he is unlikely to be
recognised as such unless there is a willing onlooker. Quantity is also quality for the
post-truthist, and post-truth is especially effective when it has a large group in its
188
C. T. H. Mika and J. Matapo

thrall—when it stands before the seeing or listening other. It is here that sensa-
tionalism steps in; we see its role most clearly in recent times, with such telling
comments as that of Banks’, that ‘[t]he remain campaign featured fact, fact, fact,
fact, fact. It just doesn’t work. You have got to connect with people emotionally.
It’s the Trump success’ (Worley 2016). In many cases, the commentator is a
powerful individual who has the capacity to make outrageous statements that are
especially seductive because they try to counter orthodoxy. Conventional wisdom
has always had it that only those trained and educated in the tools and ideology of
(ostensible) objectivity can make a statement about a discipline or concern, but the
Banks and Trumps can overturn that expectation through both their status and their
massive and powerful reaches. Post-truth does introduce an antidote to the stiﬂing
impact of fact. Moreover, it can often be associated with a rise to popularity, with a
world in which glitz outdoes substance. With Gare’s (2006) book, Triumph of the
Airheads in mind, we suspect that it is the ‘ohmigods’ and ‘wotevs’ that have a
particular afﬁnity with emotional utterances, because post-truth deliberately
apotheosises how one feels at the time.
These remarks and others of their kind clearly have huge repercussions as they
are played out on powerful fronts, but they are not necessarily limited to members
of the G7, with sensational audiences also having their place in New Zealand. We
speak anecdotally but quite conﬁdently (and thus begin our own post-truth jour-
ney!) in our observation that Maori and Pasiﬁka have been as deeply inﬂuenced by
the celebrity fad as any other group. The effect of the media-enhanced ‘Famous
Person’ on both Maori and Pasiﬁka is understudied, but it is reasonable to assume
that the New Zealand Idol/Masterchef/Bachelor phenomenon has just as much
allure for the indigenous person as it does for Pakeha/Palagi, providing an audience
much more readily than ‘It’s in the Bag’ ever could have. The lure of the big-time
and its potential to solve instantly any socioeconomic problems that the contestant
and his or her family may be constantly confronted with, would surely contribute to
the drive to attain quick fame. One can see a certain kind of precedence in the Maori
showbands of the 50s and 60s, but the lack of Internet and social media never
promised them the sort of fame that is held out to current winners. The immediate
circulation of the self in these forums holds the thrill of overnight success; it is
unsurprising, then, that Maori and Pasiﬁka do put themselves forward in these
glamorous settings—often with a fruitful outcome, it should be noted. There is also
something deeply seductive about instant stardom, with its capacity to endow the
winner not just with money and the promise of being the toast of the town, but also
potential access to a hitherto expert domain. In modern times in New Zealand, the
celebrity has been given an audience on serious matters, to the extent that they have
become experts on cancer treatment, life insurance and so on. For just a while at
least, the common man gets to have a say on a cause célèbre.
We are aware that stardom and instant fame are not realistic outcomes for most
academics, and in any case we have to look at other ways post-truth could take its
form here. We are also aware that the broadest parameters of post-truth itself need
rethinking from indigenous perspectives. This reconsideration of the problem runs
the risk of itself being labelled a post-truth exercise, because it has the potential to
The Complexity of Post-truth in Research …
189

throw into doubt that most exalted entity in dominant Western scholarship—truth.
Truthfulness in indigenous thought may be an ability to step away from what has
become an apparently ‘truthful’ method of research, through well-worn techniques
or simply by a dominant epistēme. By this second notion of ‘truthful’ here, we
mean ‘default research method’; this default has not simply appeared incidentally
and it may have arisen through a conﬂuence of events that are beyond the scope of
this chapter. But any implication that it is superior is in fact a post-truth because it
closes off other, in numerous ways more authentic and truthful, encounters with the
world. Fully engaging with the world, even in research, also sits well with an
overall indigenous metaphysics of interconnection (Mika 2017). The concern here
is primarily not so much with a particular research method as with challenging a
threatening dogmatism as itself a post-truth, so that the fullness of the world can be
considered in all its complexity and variety.
Post-truth in its unadulterated, celebrity form has not yet taken hold in research
in New Zealand, but its milder and more post-modern version certainly has. This
latter does not profess to govern by emotion, but it might encourage an unorthodox
encounter with a statement or an utterance in research—and, perhaps paradoxically,
it has given us the means to identify that there is a post-truth at work in the ﬁrst
instance (see e.g. Jones 2016). In universities, there now seems to be more openness
in some disciplines to students describing their feelings in their answers, with some
assignments speciﬁcally calling for a student’s emotional response to a question or
situation. Many academics might resist the incursion of that sort of thinking, yet
employ research methods that cannot help but rely on their own instinctive reac-
tions. These points of distraction (Charteris 2014) quite often form the mainstay of
much post-qualitative research, which contain method components such as
embodied approaches and new materialism. It’s not quite post-truth; it is rather
more postmodern, and it saves itself from post-truth by still grounding itself in some
aspect of rigour—perhaps by referring to other published material as a form of
justiﬁcation, or by simply offering a very well-considered argument, and remaining
faithful in certain respects to correspondence notions of truth, broadly construed.
For the Maori author of this chapter, it is important to avoid post-truth accusations
by grounding any research that could otherwise be considered post-truth in at least
one of those established modes of scholarship. Thus, one can indeed react to text or
data in an emotional or associative way; however, this reaction is then brought into
the context of a published Maori ontology and can be argued within the inﬂuence of
that predetermined basis. Or it could be moored by a subtext of facts or published
material that is strategically placed so it doesn’t undermine the voice or reaction of
the Maori researcher but simply signals a form of support. We recognise that,
without some form of anchor, any ‘emotional research’ simply slides off into
self-indulgence. We turn now to these two interpretations of, and at times
ambivalent reactions to, the problem of post-truth within research from two Maori
and Samoan perspectives.
190
C. T. H. Mika and J. Matapo

Post-truth in Research: Maori and Samoan Perspectives
What is truth and what is the relationship between truth and knowledge for an
indigenous Samoan/Pasiﬁka social or educational scholar? At the centre of
knowledge, the power of truth presents as epistemic: What does it mean to know?
What are the criteria for determining valid knowledge for an indigenous researcher?
What or whose knowledge matters, or matters most? There remains a privileging of
knowledge over being and becoming, to the extent that knowledge is more
important than the desire to know and the processes of concept creation (Matapo
2016). Tamasese (2005), a Samoan indigenous philosopher, has argued this in his
own theorising of Samoan knowledge systems, with particular reference to the
signiﬁcance of coming to know as an ontological position that is never static or
ﬁxed. There is a regard for the unknown; what is unknown is inextricably impli-
cated in the known. In Pasiﬁka and Samoan thinking, knowledge is not value free
and universal, yet the ethics, forms and procedures of social and educational
research in and by Pasiﬁka seem to assume a certain universality in how researchers
must engage with Pasiﬁka people(s). This universalising of methods, protocols and
practices suggests a return to master narratives, while celebrating difference
(Braidotti 2005), identity, religion and culture. In short, from a Samoan perspective,
this ﬁxed approach itself is an instance of post-truth.
The replacement of the diversity of local knowledge cultures with universalizing
truth regimes can be tied to both the evolution of academic research and the
consequences of colonisation. In that light, one might also question how religion
and theology have inﬂuenced Pasiﬁka research methodology and notions of truth in
research, and how the politics of truth are historically situated. The erasure of
traditional indigenous knowledge(s) systems for some Paciﬁc Island nations
includes the loss of language and traditional social structures. This is not to say that
Pasiﬁka researchers are concerned with a return to traditional ‘truths’; rather, as Tui
Atua (2009) advocates, Paciﬁc and Pasiﬁka researchers must be open to critical
appraisal of Paciﬁc traditions and the direct inﬂuence of Christianity upon Paciﬁc
values and beliefs systems (Rakuita 2014). Many Paciﬁc indigenous research
frameworks and methodologies foreground Paciﬁc values, knowledge and ethics in
an attempt to decolonize indigenous Paciﬁc studies (Thaman 2016). Critical theory
presented in both Pasiﬁka and Paciﬁc indigenous research—by way of decolonizing
power-structures,
regimes
of
colonisation
and
truth—tends
to
emphasise
marginalisation and social justice from within a human-centred position (Matapo
2016). What is being called into question here is the position of the human subject
in Pasiﬁka research. As Tui Atua (2008) has explained in his Samoan reference,
Paciﬁc peoples are not, strictly speaking, individuals; there is a shared divinity with
ancestors—including the waters, land and skies, all integral parts of the cosmos.
The challenge of Pasiﬁka research lies in how to think collectively in our relation to
the
world,
while
regarding
the
knowing
subject
as
affective,
open
to
inter-relationality, including forces, ﬂows and locations (Braidotti 2006).
The Complexity of Post-truth in Research …
191

Pasiﬁka methodologies have gained inﬂuence in recent scholarship. The
Ministry of Education has drawn attention to the increasing success of Pasiﬁka
learners in policy documents, and values-based engagement continues to be
encouraged in Pasiﬁka education and Pasiﬁka education research (Airini et al. 2010;
Ministry of Education (MoE) 2012). A Pasiﬁka framework that encourages the
coming together of Pasiﬁka research and education policy is teu le va, which again
encourages the uniﬁcation of shared values in Pasiﬁka research (Airini et al. 2010).
Common Pasiﬁka values presented in research frameworks are spirituality,
reciprocity, respect and belonging (MoE 2012). While the term Pasiﬁka is highly
contested and engagement in Pasiﬁka research, as stipulated by Pasiﬁka education
research guidelines (Anae et al. 2001), encourages ethnic speciﬁc values and cul-
turally appropriate practices, one might ask if, or to what extent, values presented in
Pasiﬁka methodologies have become new ‘truths’ in determining researcher
engagement. If Pasiﬁka researchers are limited by a notion of agency that centres
upon transcendental ideals (of objectivity, for instance), then the outcomes of
research risk closing off opportunities for difference, emergence and becoming. The
world is not particularly acknowledged as a valid contributor to the research process
or its outcome, and the Pasiﬁka research is engaging, as a fully present and priv-
ileged self, with a post-truth idea of the world.
We argue in what follows for an approach to research engagement and ethics
based on a notion of truth that is ‘ontological’ rather than ‘epistemological’, i.e. that
is based on forms of life rather than ideas and ideals of universality. In this
spatio-temporal (past, present, future) unfolding, the aim is wisdom, not knowledge,
which is to say that the moral and the epistemic are not distinct. Coming to know
the self in relation to the others past and present, the cosmos, the land, seas and
skies, is something done within a collective that understands itself as part of a
greater whole (Meyer 2014). Within and for the collective, thinking is not syn-
onymous with agency, i.e. it is not something performed by individual human
beings; entrenched research regimes, on the other hand, privilege the latter epis-
temic model.
In evoking wisdom and contesting post truths by way of present past thinking
collective, we conclude this section with a poem of Konai Helu Thaman (2003,
p 14–15):
Thinking
you say that you think
therefore you are
but thinking belongs
in the depths of the earth
we simply borrow
what we need to know
these islands the sky
the surrounding sea
192
C. T. H. Mika and J. Matapo

the trees the birds
and all that are free
the misty rain
the surging river
pools by the blowholes
a hidden ﬂower
have their own thinking
they are different frames
of mind that cannot ﬁt
in a small selﬁsh world
Post-truth in Research: Maori and an Indigenous
Speculation on the Response
Post-truth for the indigenous scholar may hence relate to the ascendancy that comes
with one way of doing research and its narrow focus on human agency. In this
section, we are also keen to address its more conventional guise and note that this
version is valid, as indigenous researchers do need to retain some aspect of
objectivity in their work. There is a balance at stake here: Thaman’s poem alerts us,
as indigenous writers, to the possibility that our responses are not entirely our own
and that they may approximate an initial idea in a faint way. We are not a static and
discrete ‘we’, so much as a ‘we as elements in the vast interplay that is the world’,
and this complexity should be reﬂected in our research. But research in the social
and educational sciences normally consist of data collection—primarily through
interviews—followed by a thematic analysis. This method can, of course, yield
useful information, but it has become so dominant that it has closed off alternative
fruitful paths to the research terrain, and blocked off the view of indigenous
practices related to the truth (see Cooper 2012). The problem we pose thus concerns
both the object of study, i.e. the nature of the external phenomena (data) and the
assumptions in place in the researcher when studying the phenomena.
In a world that is in signiﬁcant turmoil, one can feel as if the sort of misreading
that characterises post-truth is becoming increasingly frequent and normal. What is
called post-truth thinking, conventionally at least, may be just a more extreme or
honest version of subjectivism that academics revert to from time to time. Can we
as indigenous interlocutors be more deliberate in research—purposely misread
another’s ‘truthful’ utterances, for instance, and submit them to something else on
the basis of our own indigenous truths? The pressing question is: is it becoming
preferable? If misinterpretation or misreading is taken seriously as worthy on its
own merits, we have undoubtedly entered a post-truthful era. We might balk at the
nonsense of a world where an individual interpretation or reaction to a speciﬁc
The Complexity of Post-truth in Research …
193

element of an utterance is given overriding importance, but such deliberate
misunderstandings have underpinned momentous events—tortuous interpretations
of the Treaty of Waitangi, for example, by which the Maori version has been
consistently covered over or even denigrated in favour of its English counterpart,
despite the doctrine of contra preferentem, which should, theoretically, endow the
Maori version with greater currency. To Maori, the disregard of their version of the
Treaty, along with other instances, is post-truth writ large; it invokes a jarring
silliness that has exempliﬁed Maori experience since colonised contact, sometimes
propelling them into a Pythonesque parallel universe.
Despite these concerns—or perhaps because of them—it is the role of the
indigenous academic to deliberately un-conform and dislodge themselves from a
dominant research method, but to do so in a way that puts objectivity in its place
without entirely deleting it. Thus, our summation of post-truth draws on our
scepticism towards any idea that there is a total truth, but it also takes into account
that objectivity must have a place in research. What to do with objectivity is key in
this exercise and is indeed equally as important as the novelty of the method. For
instance, a Maori researcher could lay the grounds of their thinking on a single
theorist’s work, but how would they respond in their own way, rather than having
their thinking constantly punctuated by that theorist—and yet show that an anchor
exists through that other thinker? A kind of silent or oblique referencing happens
here, and it is up to the reader to discern the inﬂuence of that thinker. It is not
unusual in indigenous settings to hear a response to another’s korero without the
initial speaker or his/her thinking (what we call here the ‘previously-said’) being
directly addressed, and yet to also be able to discern vestiges in the subsequent
work. It is presently not enough in academic rigour, however, to simply assume the
reader can trace the original source, and the writer must be able to show quite
clearly the inﬂuence of the informing theorist, so that it can be reasonably assumed
there is a logical connection between them. We are not saying that indigenous
settings promote completely ignoring the initial impetus. Rather, we are arguing
that subsequent utterances build on the ﬁrst, with an unstated connection which, if it
were made explicit, would meet the requirements of a logical discussion. For the
indigenous academic, it may be a matter of strategy: for instance, devising a visible
‘subtext’ that sits at the bottom of the page, containing the informing theorist’s
works where appropriate as footnotes but not allowing them to interrupt the
indigenous academic’s register. While this might seem an ordinary way of doing
things in scholarship—simply a form of justiﬁcation for an argument—for the
indigenous academic, it is most important as an approach because it does separate
out his or her philosophical development from what are sometimes quite inimical
sources: an opposing philosopher, for instance, who is extremely useful but as an
indirect device.
The question does nevertheless arise: could a type of response that evolves in
traditional meeting places be credible in academic circles without attracting the
label ‘post-truth’? In a sense, in those traditional forums, any subsequent utterance
relies on a philosophy that highlights what is, for the moment, unsaid: the previous
utterances. Thus, the latter are certainly highly visible without being alluded
194
C. T. H. Mika and J. Matapo

to—possibly more so because they have been settled over. What may be key here is
an indigenous academic philosophy that focuses on carrying the previously said
(visibly hidden) through into the currently said, and the challenge would be to make
the hidden thoroughly visible whilst maintaining its obscurity. If a subtext or similar
device weren’t utilised, then it may well be up to the group to decide if the
previously said was present. Currently, academic treatises, including graduate and
postgraduate theses, are self-contained, standalone pieces of work and accorded
merit on that basis; the previously said is directly referenced therein. In the
approach we are proposing, however, the validity of the unspoken is decided on by
a group familiar with an overall indigenous philosophy of obscurity and hiddenness
in language.
Making visible the obscure meaning and intention of the original impetus for
thinking, the Maori/indigenous scholar would certainly have to establish the
legitimacy of the random response through some rigorous theorising before simply
reacting to another’s utterance in whatever way feels right at the time.
Conclusion
The subject of post-truth can be amusing but it is also hugely consequential, and we
would be missing the point if we simply dismissed it as a blight affecting the
airheads or the stuff of satire. It looks as if an indigenous notion of post-truth has
already impacted research, with its mythical attempt at promoting a truthful
approach to research. The role of the critical indigenous researcher is to suggest
methods that destabilise the certainty that comes with human-centred research,
while preserving some forms of objectivity. Proposing something against truthful
research (which, as we have noted, is actually post-truthful) demands a degree of
courage from the indigenous scholar, as s/he may be awakening the old stereotypes
of the irrational native. Indigenous discussions about post-truth offer another point
of access to rethinking research and its tendency to narrow the inﬂuence of the
world, but always within the context of the colonised self who must rethink tra-
dition. Post-truth, therefore, opens up far more extensive parameters of debate than
simply ignoring what is taken to be ‘truth’.
References
Airini, A. M., Mila-Schaaf, K., Coxon, E., Mara, D., & Sanga, K. (2010). Teu Le
Va—Relationships across research and policy in Pasiﬁka education: A collective approach
to knowledge generation & policy development for action towards Pasiﬁka education success.
New Zealand: Prepared for the Ministry of Education by Auckland Uniservices, The University
of Auckland. http://www.educationcounts.govt.nz/__data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0009/75897/944_
TeuLeVa-30062010.pdf. Accessed September 10, 2017.
The Complexity of Post-truth in Research …
195

Anae, M., Coxon, E., Mara, D., Wendt-Samu, T., & Finau, C. (2001). Pasiﬁka education research
guidelines. Report to the Ministry of Education, Auckland Uniservices. Wellington, New
Zealand:
Pasiﬁka
Education
Research
Division,
Ministry
of
Education.
http://www.
educationcounts.govt.nz/__data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0010/7669/pacrsrch–guide.pdf. Accessed September
10, 2017.
Braidotti, R. (2005). A critical cartography of feminist post-modernism. Australian Feminist
Studies, 20(24), 169–180.
Braidotti, R. (2006). The ethics of becoming imperceptible. In C. V. Boundas (Ed.), Deleuze and
philosophy (pp. 133–159). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Charteris, J. (2014). Epistemological shudders as productive aporia: A heuristic for transformative
teacher learning. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 13(1), 104–121.
Cooper, G. (2012). Kaupapa Māori research: Epistemic wilderness as freedom? New Zealand
Journal of Education Studies, 47(2), 64–73.
Gare, S. (2006). The triumph of the airheads: And the retreat from commonsense. Double Bay:
Park Street Press and Media 21 Publishing.
Jones, A. (2016, November 21). Want to better understand ‘Post-Truth’ politics? Then study
postmodernism.
Huffpost.
http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.co.uk/andrew-jones/want-to-better-
understand_b_13079632.html. Accessed September 10, 2017.
Matapo, J. J. (2016). Becoming posthuman: Navigating paciﬁc epistemology in Pasiﬁka research.
Paper presented at PESA Conference 2016 Knowledge Ecologies. Warwick Hotel, Coral
Coast, Fiji. Conference Proceedings 8 Dec–12 Dec 2016 Knowledge Ecologies (pp. 169–180).
Meyer, M. A. (2014). Indigenous epistemology: Spirit revealed. Enhancing Matauranga Maori
and global indigenous knowledge. Wellington, New Zealand: New Zealand Qualiﬁcations
Authority.
http://www.nzqa.govt.nz/assets/Maori/Te-Rautaki-Maori/Publications/Enhancing-
Mtauranga-Mori-and-Global-Indigenous-Knowledge.pdf. Accessed September 10, 2017.
Mika, C. (2017). Indigenous education and the metaphysics of presence: A worlded philosophy.
Oxon: Routledge.
Ministry of Education. (2012). Pasiﬁka education research priorities using research to realise our
vision for Pasiﬁka learners. Wellington: Ministry of Education.
Rakuita, T. (2014). And the word was god: Disentangling language games in Oceania. In T.
M. Suaalii-Sauni, M. A. Wendt, V. Mo’a, N. Fuamatu, U. L. Vai’ai, R. Whaitiri, & S. L. Filipo
(Eds.), Whispers and vanities, Samoan indigenous knowledge and religion (pp. 159–165).
Wellington: Huia Publishers.
Tamasese, T. A. T. (2005). Clutter in indigenous knowledge, research and history: A Samoan
perspective. Social Policy Journal of New Zealand, 25, 61–69.
Thaman, K. H. (2003). Decolonizing Paciﬁc studies: Indigenous perspectives, knowledge, and
wisdom in higher education. Contemporary Paciﬁc, 15(1), 1–17.
Thaman, K. H. (2016). Culture matters in teaching and learning. The educational journey of a
Tongan woman. New Zealand Aronui Lecture for the Royal Society of New Zealand. Lecture
presented at Auckland museum (November 29, 2016).
Tui Atua, T. T. T. E. (2009). Bioethics and the Samoan indigenous reference. International Social
Science Journal, 60(195), 115–124.
Tui Atua, T. T. T. (2008). Tupualegase: The eternal riddle. Paper presented at the Faculty of Arts
Maori and Paciﬁc Leadership Programme Dinner. March 11, 2008. University of Auckland,
Centre for Paciﬁc Studies, Fale Pasiﬁka, Auckland, New Zealand.
Worley, W. (2016, June 30). Donald Trump inspired Brexit campaign because facts don’t work,
says Leave founder Arron Banks. Independent.
196
C. T. H. Mika and J. Matapo

What Is the Role of Higher Education
in the Age of Fake News?
Henry A. Giroux
Donald Trump’s ﬁring of James Comey as the director of the FBI caused a ﬁrestorm
around the United States, but for the wrong reasons. Rather than see Trump’s
actions as another example of the unraveling of a lawless and crooked government,
the mainstream press largely focused on the question of whether Trump or Comey
are lying, in spite of Trump’s long standing history of producing falsiﬁcations and
maligning the truth. Even worse, the debate in some quarters has degenerated into
the personal issue and question of whose side one is on regarding the testimony.
Testifying before a Senate Intelligence Committee, Comey claimed that in meetings
with the president, Trump had not only asked him if he wanted to keep his job, but
also demanded what amounted to a loyalty pledge from him. Comey saw these
interventions as an attempt to develop a patronage relationship with him and viewed
them as part of a larger attempt to derail an FBI investigation into National Security
Adviser Michael Flynn’s links to Russia. What Comey implies but does not state
directly is that Trump wanted to turn the FBI into the loyal arm and accomplished
agent of corrupt political power.
Comey also stated that he did not want to be alone with the president, going so
far as to ask Jeff Sessions, the Attorney General to make sure in the future that such
meetings would not take place because he did not trust Trump. Comey also accused
Trump of lying about the FBI being in disarray, slandering him, and misrepre-
senting the reasons for his ﬁring. And most importantly, Trump had possibly
engaged in an obstruction of justice. In fact, Comey was so distrustful of Trump
that he took notes of his exchanges with him and leaked the content of some of the
memos to a friend at Columbia University who passed on the contents to a reporter
at the New York Times. Comey stated outright he leaked the information because
he thought Trump would lie about their conversations and that he wanted to prompt
the appointment of a special counsel.
H. A. Giroux (&)
English and Cultural Studies Department, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
e-mail: girouxh@mcmaster.ca
H. A. Giroux
Toronto, Canada
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5_17
197

Suffering from what appears to be malignant narcissism and a pathological con-
tempt for the truth, Trump has tweeted that Comey’s testimony had vindicated him
and that Comey was a liar and a leaker. Of course, Trump made no mention of the fact
that Comey leaked non-classiﬁed information because he did not trust anyone at the
Department of Justice, especially because it was lead by Trump’s crony, Jeff Sessions.
Since it goes without question that Trump is a serial liar, there is a certain irony in
Trump accusing Comey, a lifelong Republican and highly respected director of the
FBI, of lying. As Mehdi Hasan, appearing on Democracy Now, observes:
From a political point of view, we know that one of the biggest ﬂaws in Donald Trump’s
presidency, his candidacy, his ability to be president, is that he’s a serial fabricator. Now you
have the former top law enforcement ofﬁcer of this country going in front of the Senate,
under oath, saying he—that, you know, “Those are lies, plain and simple,” he said, referring
to Trump’s description of his ﬁring. He said, “I was worried he would lie.” He says, “I was
worried about the nature of the man.”…And there was a quite funny tweet that went viral last
night, which said, you know, “Trump is saying he’s a liar. Comey is saying Trump’s a liar.
Well, who do you believe? Do you believe an FBI director who served under two—who
served under three presidents from two parties? Or do you believe the guy who said Obama
was born in Kenya?” And, you know, that’s what faces us today. (Goodman 2017)
Trump cannot be trusted because he not only infects political discourse with a
discourse of hate, bigotry, and lies, but also because he has allowed an ideology to
take over the White House built on the use of a species of fake news in which the
truth is distorted for ideological, political, or commercial reasons. Under the Trump
administration, lying and fake news have become an industry and tool of power. All
administrations and governments lie, but under Trump lying has become normal-
ized, a calling card for corruption and lawlessness, one that provides the foundation
for authoritarianism. What is crucial to remember is that state violence and ter-
rorism starts with words and under Trump language is undergoing a shift: it now
treats dissent, critical media coverage and scientiﬁc evidence as a species of “fake
news”. This is language in the service of violence and is more characteristic of
fascist states than democracies.
A democracy cannot exist without informed citizens and public spheres and
educational apparatuses that uphold standards of truth, honesty, evidence, facts, and
justice. Under Trump, fake news has become a weaponized policy for legitimating
ignorance and civic illiteracy. Not only has Trump lied repeatedly, he has attacked
the critical media, claimed journalists are enemies of the American people, and
argued that the media is the opposition party. There is more at stake here than the
threat of censorship or the normalization of lying, there is also an attack on tra-
ditional sources of information and the public spheres that produce them. Trump’s
government has become a powerful disimagination machine in which the distinc-
tion between fact and ﬁction, reality and fantasy are erased. Trump has democra-
tized the ﬂow of disinformation and in doing so has aligned himself with a culture
of immediacy, sensationalism, and theater where thoughtful reading, informed
judgments, and a respect for the facts disappear. Trump’s propagation of fake news
as a way to discredit facts, if not thinking itself, operates in the service of violence
because it infantilizes and depoliticizes the wider public creating what Viktor
198
H. A. Giroux

Frankl has called in a different context, “the mask of nihilism” (McWilliam 2015,
p. 41). Trump capitalizes on a digital culture of immediacy and short attention spans
in which complexity collapses in a barrage of tweets and the need for a narrative
that offers a sense of consistency, a respite from fear, and a vision of the future in
which people no longer experience a sense of invisibility.
Trump’s attack on Comey goes beyond a personal insult and act of egregious
lying if not an obstruction of justice, it is also a register of his attempt to discredit
criticism and the shared public reality among institutions that is central to a
democracy. In an age in which the dissolution of public goods and the public sphere
have been underway since the late 1970s, Trump attempts to both depoliticize and
bind the American people through a kind of dystopian legitimacy in which words
no longer matter and anything can be said functions largely to undermine the
capacity for truth telling and political speech itself. Under the Trump regime,
consistent narratives rooted in forms of civic illiteracy and a deep distrust of the
truth and the ethical imagination has become the glue of authoritarian power. All of
which is reinforced by a disdain for measured arguments, an embrace of the
spectacle, and an alignment with a banal theater of celebrity culture. In these
contexts, rumors are more important than truth telling and in this theater of the
absurd society loses its auto-immune system as a safeguard against lies, corruption,
and authoritarianism. In a culture of short-attention spans, Trump provides the lies
and theater that offer up a tsunami of misrepresentations and values in which
thinking is done by others, power is exercised by a ruling elite, and people are urged
to dispense narrating their own experiences and give up their ability to govern
rather than be governed. Trump offers his followers a world in which nothing is
connected, diversion functions as theater, destabilized perceptions reinforce a
politics that turns into a pathology and community becomes dystopian, unconnected
to any viable democratic reality.
Roger Berkowitz in a critical analysis of Trump and his followers that draws
upon the work of Hannah Arendt argues that his supporters don’t care about his lies
or immunity to facts. What they prefer is a consistent narrative of a reality of which
they are a part. Berkowitz is worth citing at length. He writes:
The reason fact-checking is ineffective today — at least in convincing those who are
members of movements — is that the mobilized members of a movement are confounded
by a world resistant to their wishes and prefer the promise of a consistent alternate world to
reality. When Donald Trump says he’s going to build a wall to protect our borders, he is not
making a factual statement that an actual wall will actually protect our borders; he is
signaling a politically incorrect willingness to put America ﬁrst. When he says that there
was massive voter fraud or boasts about the size of his inauguration crowd, he is not
speaking about actual facts, but is insisting that his election was legitimate. ‘What con-
vinces masses are not facts, and not even invented facts, but only the consistency of the
system of which they are presumably part.’ Leaders of these mass totalitarian movements
do not need to believe in the truth of their lies and ideological clichés. The point of their
fabrications is not to establish facts, but to create a coherent ﬁctional reality. What a
movement demands of its leaders is the articulation of a consistent narrative combined with
the ability to abolish the capacity for distinguishing between truth and falsehood, between
reality and ﬁction. (Berkowitz 2017)
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
199

As important as the Trump–Comey affair is, it repeats a patter in the Trump
administration of running the risk of both turning politics into theater and rein-
forcing what Todd Gitlin refers to as Trump’s support for an “apocalyptic
nationalism, the point of which is to belong, not to believe. You belong by
afﬁrming. To win, you don’t need reasons anymore, only power” (Gitlin 2017).
Trump values loyalty over integrity and he lies in part to test the loyalty of those
who both follow him and align themselves with his power. The Trump–Comey
affair must be understood within a broader attack on the fundamentals of education,
critical modes of agency, and democracy itself. This is especially important at a
time when the United States is no longer a functioning democracy and is in the
presence of what Zygmunt Bauman and Leonidas Donskis refer to as “the emer-
gence of modern barbarity” (Bauman and Donskis 2016, p. 79). Trump’s discourse
of lies, misrepresentations, and fakery give new meaning to what it means to
acknowledge that education is at the center of politics because it is crucial in the
struggle over consciousness, values, identity, and agency. Ignorance in the service
of education targets the darkness and reinforces and thrives on civic illiteracy.
Trump’s fake news machine is about more than lying, it is about using all of the
tools and resources for education to create a dystopia in which authoritarianism
exercises the raw power of ignorance and control.
Artists, educators, young people, and others need to make the virtue of
truth-telling visible again. We need to connect democracy with a notion of
truth-telling and consciousness that is on the side of economic and political justice,
and democracy itself. If we are going to ﬁght for and with the powerless, we have to
understand their needs, speak to and with them in a language mutually under-
standable, and create narratives in which they can both identify themselves and the
conditions through which power and oppression bear down on their lives. This is
not an easy task, but nothing less than justice, democracy, and the planet itself are at
risk. In what follows, I want to extend this argument about fake news by looking at
both Trump’s dystopian mode of governance and what it suggests about the role of
higher education in addressing a post-truth era and an emerging authoritarianism.
Trump’s ascendancy in American politics has made visible a plague of
deep-seated civic illiteracy, a corrupt political system, and a contempt for reason
that has been decades in the making; it also points to the withering of civic
attachments, the undoing of civic culture, the decline of public life, and erosion of
any sense of shared citizenship. Galvanizing his base of true-believers in
post-election rallies, the world is witnessing how a politics of bigotry and hate is
transformed into a spectacle of fear, divisions, and disinformation. Under President
Trump, the scourge of mid-twentieth century authoritarianism has returned not only
in the menacing plague of populist rallies, fear-mongering, hate, and humiliation,
but also in an emboldened culture of war, militarization, and violence that looms
over society like a rising storm.
The reality of Trump’s election may be the most momentous development of the
age because of its enormity and the shock it has produced. The whole world is
watching, pondering how such a dreadful event could have happened. How have
we arrived here? What forces have allowed education to be undermined as a
200
H. A. Giroux

democratic public sphere, capable of producing the formative culture and critically
engaged citizens that could have prevented such a catastrophe from happening in an
alleged democracy? We get a glimpse of this failure of civic culture, education, and
civic literacy in the willingness and success of the Trump administration to empty
language of any meaning, a practice that constitutes a ﬂight from historical mem-
ory, ethics, justice, and social responsibility. Under such circumstances and with
too little opposition, the government takes on the workings of a dis-imagination
machine, characterized by an utter disregard for the truth, and often accompanied,
as in Trump’s case, by “primitive schoolyard taunts and threats” (Gopnik 2017). In
this instance, Orwell’s “Ignorance is Strength” materializes in the Trump admin-
istration’s weaponized attempt not only to rewrite history, but also to obliterate
it. Moreover, Trump’s cries of “fake news” work incessantly to set limits on what
is thinkable. Reason, standards of evidence, consistency and logic no longer serve
the truth, according to Trump, because the latter are crooked ideological devices
used by enemies of the state. Orwell’s “thought crimes” are Trump’s “fake news”.
Orwell’s “Ministry of Truth” is Trump’s “Ministry of Fake News”. What we are
witnessing is not simply a political project but also a reworking of the very meaning
of education both as an institution and as a cultural force. Trump’s contemptuous
and boisterous claim that science and evidence-based truths are fake news, his
dismissal of journalists to hold power accountable as the opposition party, and his
willingness to bombard the American public with an endless proliferation of ped-
dled falsehoods reveal his contempt for intellect, reason, and truth.
The dark times that haunt the current age are also exempliﬁed in the deeply
antidemocratic forces that have come to rule the United States and now dominate
the major political parties and other commanding political and economic institu-
tions in the United States. Truth is now viewed as a liability and ignorance a virtue.
Under the reign of this normalized architecture of alleged commonsense, literacy is
now regarded with disdain, words are reduced to data, and science is confused with
pseudo-science. All traces of critical thought appear only at the margins of the
culture as ignorance becomes the primary organizing principle of American society.
For instance, two-thirds of the American public believe that creationism should be
taught in schools and a majority of Republicans in Congress do not believe that
climate change is caused by human activity, making the U.S. the laughing stock of
the world (Ellingboe and koronowski 2016). Politicians endlessly lie knowing that
the public is addicted to exhortation, emotional outbursts, and sensationalism, all of
which mimics celebrity culture. Image selling now entails lying on principle
making it all the easier for politics to dissolve into entertainment, pathology, and a
unique brand of criminality. The corruption of both the truth and politics is made all
the easier since the American public has become habituated to overstimulation and
live in an ever-accelerating overﬂow of information and images. Experience no
longer has the time to crystalize into mature and informed thought. Opinion now
trumps reasoned and evidence-based arguments. News has become entertainment
and echoes reality rather than interrogating it. Popular culture revels in the spec-
tacles of shock and violence (Evans and Giroux 2016). Too many colleges and
universities have become McDonalized as knowledge is increasingly subject to
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
201

image of a commodity resulting in curricula that resemble a fast-food menu (Beck
2010, pp. 53–59). Unsurprisingly, the educational force of the larger culture has
been transformed into a spectacle for violence, trivialized entertainment, and a tool
for legitimating ignorance. As education becomes central to politics itself, it
becomes essential to the formation of an authoritarian politics that has gutted
democratic values and a compassion for the other from the ideology, policies, and
institutions that now control American society.
I am not talking simply about the kind of anti-intellectualism that theorists such a
Richard Hofstadter, Ed Herman, Noam Chomsky, and Susan Jacoby have docu-
mented, however insightful their analyses might be. I am pointing to a more lethal
form of illiteracy that is often ignored. Illiteracy is now a scourge and a political
tool designed primarily to make war on language, meaning, thinking, and the
capacity for critical thought. Chris Hedges is right in stating that “the emptiness of
language is a gift to demagogues and the corporations that saturate the landscape
with manipulated images and the idiom of mass culture” (Hedges 2009). Words
such as love, trust, freedom, responsibility, and choice have been deformed by a
market logic that narrows their meaning to either a relationship to a commodity or a
reductive notion of self-interest. We don’t love each other, we love our new car.
Instead of loving with courage, compassion, and desiring a more just society, we
love a society saturated in commodities. Freedom now means removing one’s self
from any sense of social responsibility so one can retreat into privatized orbits of
self-indulgence and self-interest.
The new form of illiteracy does not simply constitute an absence of learning,
ideas, or knowledge. Nor can it be solely attributed to what has been called the
“smartphone society” (Aschoff 2015). On the contrary, it is a willful practice and
goal used to actively depoliticize people and make them complicit with the forces
that impose misery and suffering upon their lives. At the same time, illiteracy bonds
people, offers the pretense of a community bound by a willful denial of its cele-
bration of ignorance. How else to explain the popular support for someone like
Donald Trump who boldly proclaims “I love the poorly educated!” (Stuart 2016).
Illiteracy no longer simply marks populations immersed in poverty with little
access to quality education; nor does it only suggest the lack of proﬁcient skills
enabling people to read and write with a degree of understanding and ﬂuency. More
profoundly, illiteracy is also about refusing to act from a position of thoughtfulness,
informed judgment, and critical agency. Illiteracy has become a form of political
repression that discourages a culture of questioning, renders agency as an act of
intervention inoperable, and restages power as a mode of domination. Illiteracy
both serves to depoliticize people because it becomes difﬁcult for individuals to
develop informed judgments, analyze complex relationships, and draw upon a
range of sources to understand how power works and how they might be able to
shape the forces that bear down on their lives. Illiteracy provides the foundation for
being governed rather than how to govern.
It is precisely this mode of illiteracy that now constitutes the modus operandi of
a society that both privatizes and kills the imagination by poisoning it with false-
hoods, consumer fantasies, data loops, and the need for instant gratiﬁcation. This is
202
H. A. Giroux

a mode of manufactured illiteracy and education that has no language for relating
the self to public life, social responsibility or the demands of citizenship. It is
important to recognize that the rise of this new mode of illiteracy is not simply
about the failure of colleges and universities to create critical and active citizens; it
is about a society that eliminates those public spheres that make thinking possible
while imposing a culture of fear in which there is the looming threat that anyone
who holds power accountable will be punished (Furedi 2006). Under such cir-
cumstances, the attack on education as a public good and literacy as the basis for
critically engaged agents is less of a failing, as many conservative pundits claim,
than a deliberate policy to prevent critical thinking on the part of both teachers and
students. At stake here is not only the crisis of a democratic society, but a crisis of
education, memory, ethics, and agency (McChesney 2015; de Zengotita 2006).
What happens to democracy when the President of the United States labels
critical media outlets as “enemies of the people” and derides the search for truth by
disparaging such efforts with the blanket term “fake news”? What happens to
democracy when individuals and groups are demonized on the basis of their reli-
gion? What happens to a society when critical thinking becomes an object of
contempt and is disdained in favor of raw emotion or disparaged as fake news?
What happens to a social order ruled by an “economics of contempt” that blames
the poor for their condition and subjects them to a culture of shaming? What
happens to a polity when it retreats into private silos and becomes indifferent to the
use of language in the service of a panicked rage that stokes anger but not about
issues that matter? What happens to a social order when it treats millions of illegal
immigrants as disposable, potential terrorists, and criminals? What happens to a
country when the presiding principles of a society are violence and ignorance?
What happens is that democracy withers and dies, both as an ideal and as a reality.
In the present moment, it becomes particularly important for educators and
concerned citizens all over the world to protect and enlarge the formative cultures
and public spheres that make democracy possible. Under a relentless attack on the
truth, honesty, and the ethical imagination, the need for educators to think dan-
gerously is crucial, especially in societies that appear increasingly amnesiac—that
is, countries where forms of historical, political, and moral forgetting are not only
willfully practiced but celebrated. All of which becomes all the more threatening at
a time when a country such as the United States has tipped over into a social order
that is awash in public stupidity and views critical thought as both a liability and a
threat. Not only is this obvious in the presence of a celebrity culture that collapses
the distinction between the serious and frivolous but it is also visible in the pro-
liferation of anti-intellectual discourses and policies among a range of politicians
and anti-public intellectuals who are waging a war on science, reason, and the
legacy of the Enlightenment. How else to explain the present historical moment
with its collapse of civic culture and the future it cancels out? What is to be made of
the undermining of civic literacy and the conditions that produce an active citizenry
at a time when massive self-enrichment and a gangster morality at the highest
reaches of government undermine the public realm as a space of freedom, liberty,
dialogue, and deliberative consensus?
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
203

Authoritarian societies do more than censor, they punish those who engage in
what might be called dangerous thinking. At the core of thinking dangerously is the
recognition that education is central to politics and that a democracy cannot survive
without informed citizens. Critical and dangerous thinking is the precondition for
nurturing both the ethical imagination and formative culture that enable engaged
citizens to learn how to govern rather than be governed. Thinking with courage is
fundamental to a notion of civic literacy that views knowledge as central to the
pursuit of economic and political justice. Such thinking incorporates a critical
framework and set of values that enables a polity to deal critically with the use and
effects of power, particularly through a developed sense of compassion for others
and the planet. Thinking dangerously is the basis for a formative and educational
culture of questioning that takes seriously how imagination is key to the practice of
freedom. Thinking dangerously is the cornerstone of not an only critical agency and
engaged citizenship, but the foundation for a democracy that matters.
Any viable attempt at developing a democratic politics must begin to address the
role of education and civic literacy as central not only to politics itself but also to
the creation of individuals capable of becoming critical social agents willing to
struggle against injustices and ﬁght to reclaim and develop those institutions crucial
to the functioning and promises of a substantive democracy. One place to begin to
think through such a project is by addressing the meaning and role of higher
education and education in general as part of the broader struggle for and practice of
freedom.
The reach of education extends from schools to diverse cultural apparatuses such
as the mainstream media, alternative screen cultures, and the expanding digital
screen culture. Far more than a teaching method, education is a moral and political
practice actively involved not only in the production of knowledge, skills, and
values but also in the construction of identities, modes of identiﬁcation, and forms
of individual and social agency. Accordingly, education is at the heart of any
understanding of politics and the ideological scaffolding of those framing mecha-
nisms that mediate our everyday lives.
Across the globe, the forces of free-market fundamentalism are using the edu-
cational force of the wider culture to reproduce a culture of privatization, deregu-
lation, and commercialization while waging an assault on the historically
guaranteed social provisions and civil rights provided by the welfare state, higher
education, unions, women’s reproductive rights, and civil liberties, among others,
all the while undercutting public faith in the deﬁning institutions of democracy.
This grim reality has been called by Axel Honneth a “failed sociality” charac-
teristic of an increasing number of societies in which democracy is waning—a
failure in the power of the civic imagination, political will, and open democracy
(Honneth 2009, p. 188). It is also part of a politics that strips the social of any
democratic ideals and undermines any understanding of education as a public good
and pedagogy as an empowering practice, a practice which acts directly upon the
conditions which bear down on our lives in order to change them when necessary.
One of the challenges facing the current generation of educators, students, and
others is the need to address the role they might play in educating students to be
204
H. A. Giroux

critically engaged agents, attentive to addressing important social issues and being
alert to the responsibility of deepening and expanding the meaning and practices of
a vibrant democracy. At the heart of such a challenge is the question of what
education should accomplish not simply in a democracy but at a historical moment
when the many democracies are about to slip into the dark night of authoritarian-
ism. What work do educators have to do to create the economic, political, and
ethical conditions necessary to endow young people and the general public with the
capacities to think, question, doubt, imagine the unimaginable, and defend educa-
tion as essential for inspiring and energizing the citizens necessary for the existence
of a robust democracy? In a world in which there is an increasing abandonment of
egalitarian and democratic impulses, what will it take to educate young people and
the broader polity to challenge authority and hold power accountable? This is a
particularly important issue at a time when higher education is being defunded and
students are being punished with huge tuition hikes and crippling ﬁnance debts, all
the while being subjected to a pedagogy of repression that has taken hold under the
banner of reactionary and oppressive educational reforms pushed by right-wing
billionaires and hedge fund managers (Saltman 2016; Ravitch 2014; Giroux 2015a,
b).
Given the crisis of education, agency, and memory that haunts the current his-
torical conjuncture, educators need a new language for addressing the changing
contexts and issues facing a world in which there is an unprecedented convergence
of resources—ﬁnancial, cultural, political, economic, scientiﬁc, military, and
technological—increasingly used to exercise powerful and diverse forms of control
and domination. Such a language needs to be self-reﬂective and directive without
being dogmatic and needs to recognize that pedagogy is always political because it
is connected to the acquisition of agency. In this instance, making the pedagogical
more political means being vigilant about “that very moment in which identities are
being produced and groups are being constituted, or objects are being created”
(Olsson and Worsham 1999). At the same time, it means educators need to be
attentive to those practices in which critical modes of agency and particular iden-
tities are being denied.
In part, this suggests developing pedagogical practices that not only inspire and
energize people but are also capable of challenging the growing number of
antidemocratic practices and policies under the global tyranny of casino capitalism
(Ness 2015). Such a vision suggests resurrecting a democratic project that provides
the basis for imagining a life beyond a social order immersed in massive inequality,
endless assaults on the environment, and elevates war and militarization to the
highest and most sanctiﬁed national ideals. Under such circumstances, education
becomes more than an obsession with accountability schemes, an audit culture,
market values, and an unreﬂective immersion in the crude empiricism of a
data-obsessed market-driven society. In addition, it rejects the notion that colleges
and universities should be reduced to sites for training students for the workforce
and that the culture of higher education is synonymous with the culture of com-
mercialization, commodiﬁcation, and narrow market-driven values. I think that the
Nobel Prize winner J. M. Coetzee is right in criticizing the current collapse of
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
205

education into training when he points out that “All over the world, as governments
retreat from their traditional duty to foster the common good and reconceive of
themselves as mere managers of national economies, universities have been coming
under pressure to turn themselves into training schools equipping young people
with the skills required by a modern economy” (Coetzee 2013).
At issue here is the need for educators to recognize the power of education in
creating the formative cultures necessary to both challenge the various threats being
mobilized against the ideas of justice and democracy while also ﬁghting for those
public spheres, ideals, values, and policies that offer alternative modes of identity,
thinking, social relations, and politics. But embracing the dictates of making edu-
cation meaningful in order to make it critical and transformative also means rec-
ognizing that cultural apparatuses such as the mainstream media and Hollywood
ﬁlms are teaching machines and not simply sources of information and entertain-
ment. Such sites should be spheres of struggle removed from the control of the
ﬁnancial elite and corporations who use them as workstations for propagandizing.
In this instance, education as the practice of freedom emphasizes critical
reﬂection, bridging the gap between learning and everyday life, understanding the
connection between power and difﬁcult knowledge, and extending democratic
rights and identities by using the resources of history and theory. At the core of
analysing and engaging culture as a pedagogical practice are fundamental questions
about the educative nature of the culture, what it means to engage common sense as
a way to shape and inﬂuence popular opinion, and how diverse educational prac-
tices in multiple sites can be used to challenge the vocabularies, practices, and
values of the oppressive forces that are at work under neo-liberal regimes of power.
Consequently, any discussion of pedagogy must be attentive to how pedagogical
practices work in a variety of sites to produce particular ways in which identity,
place, worth, and above all value are organized and contribute to producing a
formative culture capable of sustaining a vibrant democracy (Giroux 2015a, b).
There is an urgent political need for both Canada and the United States, among
other countries, to understand what it means for an authoritarian society to both
weaponize and trivialize the discourse, vocabularies, images, and aural means of
communication in a society. How is language used to relegate citizenship to the
singular pursuit of cravenly self-interests, legitimate shopping as the ultimate
expression of one’s identity, portray essential public services as reinforcing and
weakening any viable sense of individual responsibility, and, among other,
instances, using the language of war and militarization to describe a vast array of
problems often faced by citizens and others.
I do not believe it is an overstatement to argue that education can all too easily
become a form of symbolic and intellectual violence, one that assaults rather than
educates. Examples of such violence can be seen in the forms of an audit culture
and empirically driven teaching that dominates higher education, especially in the
United States, but increasingly in other countries such as the United Kingdom and
more and more in Canada. These educational projects amount to pedagogies of
repression and serve primarily to numb the mind and produce what might be called
dead zones of the imagination. These are pedagogies that are largely disciplinary
206
H. A. Giroux

and have little regard for contexts, history, making knowledge meaningful, or
expanding what it means for students to be critically engaged agents. Of course, the
ongoing corporatization of the university is driven by modes of assessment that
often undercut teacher autonomy, treat knowledge as a commodity, students as
customers, and impose brutalizing structures of governance on higher education.
Under such circumstances, education defaults on its democratic obligations and
becomes a tool of control, powerlessness, and deadens the imagination.
The fundamental challenge facing educators within the current age of an
emerging authoritarianism worldwide is to create those public spaces for students to
address how knowledge is related to the power of both self-deﬁnition and social
agency. In part, this suggests providing students with the skills, ideas, values, and
authority necessary for them to nourish a substantive democracy, recognize
antidemocratic forms of power, and to ﬁght deeply rooted injustices in a society and
world founded on systemic economic, racial, and gendered inequalities. As Hannah
Arendt, once argued in “The Crisis of Education”, the centrality of education to
politics is also manifest in the responsibility for the world that educators have to
assume when they engage in pedagogical practices that lie on the side of belief and
persuasion, especially when they challenge forms of domination.
Education in this sense speaks to the recognition that any pedagogical practice
presupposes some notion of the future, prioritises some forms of identiﬁcation over
others, upholds selective modes of social relations, and values some modes of
knowing over others (think about how business schools are held in high esteem
while schools of education are often disparaged and an object of contempt).
Moreover, such an education does not offer guarantees as much as it recognizes that
its own policies, ideology, and values are grounded in particular modes of authority,
values, and ethical principles that must be constantly debated for the ways in which
they both open up and close down democratic relations, values, and identities.
At the same time, any critical comprehension of those wider forces that shape
public and higher education must also be supplemented by an attentiveness to the
historical and conditional nature of pedagogy itself. This suggests that pedagogy
can never be treated as a ﬁxed set of principles and practices that can be applied
indiscriminately across a variety of pedagogical sites. Pedagogy is not some recipe
or methodological ﬁx that can be imposed on all classrooms. On the contrary, it
must always be contextually deﬁned, allowing it to respond speciﬁcally to the
conditions, formations, and problems that arise in various sites in which education
takes place. Such a project suggests recasting pedagogy as a practice that is inde-
terminate, open to constant revision, and constantly in dialogue with its own
assumptions.
The notion of a neutral, objective education is an oxymoron. Education and
pedagogy do not exist outside of ideology, values, and politics. Ethics on the
pedagogical front demands an openness to the other, a willingness to engage a
“politics of possibility” through a continual critical engagement with texts, images,
events, and other registers of meaning as they are transformed into pedagogical
practices both within and outside of the classroom. Education is never innocent and
is always implicated in relations of power and speciﬁc visions of the present and
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
207

future. This suggests the need for educators to rethink the cultural and ideological
baggage they bring to each educational encounter; it also highlights the necessity of
making educators ethically and politically accountable and self-reﬂective for the
stories they produce, the claims they make upon public memory, and the images of
the future they deem legitimate. Understood as a form of educated hope, education
in this sense is not an antidote to politics, a nostalgic yearning for a better time, or
for some “inconceivably alternative future”. Instead, it is an “attempt to ﬁnd a
bridge between the present and future in those forces within the present which are
potentially able to transform it” (Eagleton 2000, p. 22).
At the dawn of the twenty-ﬁrst century, the notion of the social and the public
are not being erased as much as they are being reconstructed under circumstances in
which public forums for serious debate, including public education, are being
eroded. Reduced either to a crude instrumentalism, business culture, or deﬁned as a
purely private right rather than a public good, our major educational apparatuses are
removed from the discourse of democracy and civic culture. Under the inﬂuence of
powerful ﬁnancial interests, we have witnessed the takeover of public and
increasingly higher education and diverse media sites by a corporate logic that both
numbs the mind and the soul, emphasizing repressive modes of ideology that
promote winning at all costs, learning how not to question authority, and under-
mining the hard work of learning how to be thoughtful, critical, and attentive to the
power relations that shape everyday life and the larger world. As learning is pri-
vatized, depoliticized, and reduced to teaching students how to be good consumers
and obedient workers, any viable notion of the social, public values, citizenship,
and democracy wither and die (Wolin 2008).
Conceived as an important democratic public sphere, education, in its various
forms, when linked to the ongoing project of democratization can provide oppor-
tunities for educators, students, and others to redeﬁne and transform the connections
among language, desire, meaning, everyday life, and material relations of power as
part of a broader social movement to reclaim the promise and possibilities of a
democratic public life. Education is dangerous to many people and others because it
provides the conditions for students and the wider public to exercise their intel-
lectual capacities, embrace the ethical imagination, hold power accountable, and
embrace a sense of social responsibility.
One of the most serious challenges facing administrators, faculty, and students in
colleges and universities is the task of developing a discourse of both critique and
possibility. This means developing discourses and pedagogical practices that connect
reading the word with reading the world, and doing so in ways that enhance the
capacities of young people as critical agents and engaged citizens. In taking up this
project, educators and others should attempt to create the conditions that give stu-
dents the opportunity to become critical and engaged citizens who have the
knowledge and courage to struggle in order to make desolation and cynicism
unconvincing and hope practical. But raising consciousness is not enough. Students
need to be inspired and energized to address important social issues, learning to
narrate their private troubles as public issues, and to engage in forms of resistance that
are both local and collective, while connecting such struggles to more global issues.
208
H. A. Giroux

Democracy begins to fail and political life becomes impoverished in the absence
of those vital public spheres such as public and higher education in which civic
values, public scholarship, and social engagement allow for a more imaginative
grasp of a future that takes seriously the demands of justice, equity, and civic
courage. Democracy should be a way of thinking about education, one that thrives
on connecting equity to excellence, learning to ethics, and agency to the imperatives
of social responsibility and the public good. The question regarding what role
education should play in democracy becomes all the more urgent at a time when the
dark forces of authoritarianism are on the march all across the globe. As public
values, trust, solidarities, and modes of education are under siege, the discourses of
hate, racism, rabid self-interest, and greed are exercising a poisonous inﬂuence all
across the globe, and is most evident in the discourse Donald Trump and his merry
band of anti-intellectuals and white nationalists. Civic illiteracy collapses opinion
and informed arguments, erases collective memory, and becomes complicit with the
militarization of both individual, public spaces, and society itself.
Yet, all across the globe, there are signs of hope. Far from being normalized,
fake news is increasingly seen as a weapon of power, one that makes clear that
education can function in the wrong hands as a practice of violence. Alternative
public spheres and what a generation of younger radicals called the creating of a
parallel polis, which are emerging on social media and a variety of other alternative
spaces in order to educate people, raise political consciousness, and rescue
thoughtfulness and civic literacy from the clutches of armed ignorance. At the same
time, young people are protesting against student debt; environmentalists are
aggressively ﬁghting corporate interests; teachers in a variety of countries extending
from Canada and Brazil to the United States are waging a courageous ﬁght against
oppressive neoliberal modes of governance; young people are bravely resisting and
exposing state violence in all of its forms; prison abolitionists are making their
voices heard, and once again the threat of a nuclear winter is being widely dis-
cussed. In the age of ﬁnancial and political zombies, casino capitalism has lost its
ability to legitimate itself in a warped discourse of freedom and choice. Its poi-
sonous tentacles have put millions out of work, turned many Black communities
into war zones, destroyed public education, undermined the democratic mission of
higher education, ﬂagrantly pursued war as the greatest of national ideals, turned
the prison system into a default institution for punishing minorities of race and
class, pillaged the environment, and blatantly imposed a new mode of racism under
the silly notion of a post-racial society.
Reviving the Social Imagination
I want to conclude by pointing to a few initiatives, though incomplete, that might
mount a challenge to the current oppressive historical conjuncture in which many
societies and their respective colleges and universities now ﬁnd themselves
(Aronowitz 2016). At issue here is the question of how do we begin a meaningful
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
209

conversation about how to deﬁne the mission of colleges and universities. In doing
so, I want to address what I have attempted to map as a crisis of memory, agency,
and education and reclaim what I call a pedagogy of informed critique and educated
hope that is central to any viable notion of change that I am suggesting. At the level
of critique, I have argued both explicitly and implicitly that educators, students, and
others concerned about the fate of higher education need to mount a spirited attack
against the managerial takeover of the university that began in the late 1970s with
the emergence of a market-driven ideology, what can be called neoliberalism, that
argues that market principles should govern not just the economy but all of social
life including education. Central to such a recognition is the need to struggle against
a university system developed around the reduction in faculty power, the replace-
ment of a culture of cooperation and collegiality with a shark-like culture of
competition, the rise of an audit culture that has produced a very limited notion of
regulation and evaluation, and the narrow and harmful view that students are clients
and colleges “should operate more like private ﬁrms than public institutions, with
an onus on income generation” (Hill 2016, p. 13). In addition, any movement for
reforming colleges and universities must both speak out against modes of gover-
nance that have reduced faculty to the status of part-time employees and join the
ﬁght to take back the governing of the university from the new class of managers
and bureaucrats that now outnumber faculty, at least in the United States and
increasingly in Canada.
At the level of educated hope, I have argued that informed citizens are crucial to
a democracy and that the university must play a vital role in creating the formative
cultures that make such citizens possible. In part, this would mean creating intel-
lectual spaces free of coercion and censorship and open to multiple sources of
knowledge in the pursuit of truth, the development of critical pedagogies that
inform, energize, inspire, empower, and promote critical exchanges and dialogue.
At the same time, there is a need for not only enabling learning from below but also
for guarantees of full-time employment and protections for faculty while viewing
knowledge as a public asset and the university as a public good. With these issues
in mind, let me conclude by pointing to six further considerations for change.
First, there is a need for what can be called a revival of the social imagination
and the defense of the public good, especially higher education, in order to reclaim
its egalitarian and democratic impulses. This call would be part of a larger project
“to reinvent democracy in the wake of the evidence that, at the national level, there
is no democracy—if by ‘democracy’ we mean effective popular participation in the
crucial decisions affecting the community” (Aronowitz 2016). One step in this
direction would be for young people, intellectuals, scholars and others to go on the
offensive against a conservative-led campaign “to end higher education’s democ-
ratizing inﬂuence on the nation” (Nichol 2008). Higher education should be har-
nessed neither to the demands of the warfare state nor the instrumental needs of
corporations. Clearly, in any democratic society, education should be viewed as a
right, not an entitlement. Educators need to produce a national conversation in
which higher education can be defended as a public good and the classroom as a
site of engaged inquiry and critical thinking, a site that makes a claim on the radical
210
H. A. Giroux

imagination and a sense of civic courage. At the same time, the discourse on
deﬁning higher education as a democratic public sphere would provide the platform
for moving onto the larger issue of developing a social movement in defense of
public goods.
Second, I believe that educators need to consider deﬁning pedagogy, if not
education itself, as central to producing those democratic public spheres capable of
producing an informed citizenry. Pedagogically, this points to modes of teaching
and learning capable of enacting and sustaining a culture of questioning, and
enabling a critical formative culture that advances at least in the schools what
Kristen Case calls moments of classroom grace (Case 2014). Pedagogies of
classroom grace should provide the conditions for students and others to reﬂect
critically on commonsense understandings of the world, and begin to question,
however troubling, their sense of agency, relationship to others, and their rela-
tionships to the larger world. This can be linked to broader pedagogical imperatives
that ask why we have wars, massive inequality, and a surveillance state. There is
also the issue of how everything has become commodiﬁed, along with the withering
of a politics of translation that prevents the collapse of the public into the private.
This is not merely a methodical consideration but also a moral and political practice
because it presupposes the creation of critically engaged students who can imagine
a future in which justice, equality, freedom, and democracy matter. In this instance,
the classroom should be a space of grace—a place to think critically, ask troubling
questions, and take risks, even though that may mean transgressing established
norms and bureaucratic procedures. Such pedagogical practices are rich with pos-
sibilities not only for understanding the classroom as a space that ruptures, engages,
unsettles, and inspires, but also extend the meaning of the classroom into wider
cultural apparatuses in which education functions often by stealth to shape subjects,
identities, and social relations, often so as to mimic the values of a market-driven
society. Education as democratic public space cannot exist under modes of gov-
ernance dominated by a business model, especially one that subjects faculty to a
Walmart model of labor relations designed “to reduce labor costs and to increase
labor servility” (Chomsky 2015). In the U.S., over 70% of faculty occupy nontenure
and part-time positions, many without beneﬁts and salaries so low that they qualify
for food stamps. Faculty needs to be given more security, full-time jobs, autonomy,
and the support they need to function as professionals. While many countries do not
emulate this model of faculty servility, it is part of a neoliberal legacy that is
increasingly gaining traction across the globe.
Third, educators need to develop a comprehensive educational program that
would include teaching students how to live in a world marked by multiple over-
lapping modes of literacy extending from print to visual culture and screen cultures.
What is crucial to recognize here is that it is not enough to teach students to be able
to interrogate critically screen culture and other forms of aural, video, and visual
forms of representation? They must also learn how to be cultural producers. This
suggests developing alternative public spheres such as online journals, television
shows, newspapers, zines, and any other platform in which different modes of
representation can be developed. Such tasks can be done by mobilizing the
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
211

technological resources and platforms that many students are already familiar with.
It also means working with one foot in existing cultural apparatuses in order to
promote unorthodox ideas and views that would challenge the affective and ideo-
logical spaces produced by the ﬁnancial elite who control the commanding insti-
tutions of public pedagogy in North America. What is often lost by many educators
and progressives is that a popular culture is a powerful form of education for many
young people and yet it is rarely addressed as a serious source of knowledge. As
Stanley Aronowitz has observed, “theorists and researchers need to link their
knowledge of popular culture, and culture in the anthropological sense—that is,
everyday life, with the politics of education” (Aronowitz 2008, p. 50).
Fourth, academics, students, community activists, young people, and parents
must engage in an ongoing struggle for the right of students to be given a free
formidable and critical education not dominated by corporate values, and for young
people to have a say in the shaping of their education and what it means to expand
and deepen the practice of freedom and democracy. At the very least college and
university education if taken seriously as a public good should be virtually tuition
free, at least for the poor, and utterly affordable for the afﬂuent. This is not a radical
demand and countries such as Germany, France, Sweden, Norway, Finland, and
Brazil already provide this service for young people.
Accessibility to higher education is especially crucial at a time when young
people have been left out of the discourse of democracy. They are the new dis-
posable populations who lack jobs, a decent education, hope, and any semblance of
a future better than the one their parents inherited. Facing what Richard Sennett
calls the “specter of uselessness”, they are a reminder of how ﬁnance capital has
abandoned any viable vision of the future, including one that would support future
generations. This is a mode of politics and capital that eats its own children and
throws their fate to the vagaries of the market. The ecology of ﬁnance capital only
believes in short-term investments because they provide quick returns. Under such
circumstances, young people who need long-term investments are considered a
liability. If any society is in part judged by how it views and treats its children, the
United States by all accounts is truly failing in a colossal way. This is not a script to
be repeated in Canada. If young people are to receive a critical and comprehensive
education, academics might consider taking on the role of public intellectuals,
capable of the critical appropriation of a variety of intellectual traditions while
relating their scholarship to wider social problems. This raises questions about the
responsibility of faculty to function as intellectuals relating their specialized
knowledge to wider social issues, thinking hard about “how best to understand how
power works in our time,” and how education might function in the interest of
economic and social justice (Robbins 2016).
Fifth, in a world driven by data, specialisms, and the increasing fragmentation of
knowledge, educators need to enable students to develop a comprehensive vision of
society that “does not rely on single issues” (Aronowitz 2008, p. 50). It is only
through an understanding of the wider relations and connections of power that
young people and others can overcome uninformed practice, isolated struggles, and
modes of singular politics that become insular and self-sabotaging. In short, moving
212
H. A. Giroux

beyond a single-issue orientation means developing modes of analyses that connect
the dots historically and relationally. It also means developing a more compre-
hensive vision of politics and change. The key here is the notion of translation; that
is, the need to translate private troubles into broader public issues and understand
how systemic modes of analyses can be helpful in connecting a range of issues so as
to be able to build a united front in the call for a radical democracy.
Sixth, another serious challenge facing educators who believe that colleges and
universities should function as democratic public spheres is the task of developing a
discourse of both critique and possibility or what I have called a discourse of
educated hope. This means developing discourses and pedagogical practices that
connect reading the word with reading the world, and doing so in ways that enhance
the capacities of young people as critical agents and engaged citizens. In taking up
this project, educators and others should attempt to create the conditions that give
students the opportunity to become critical and engaged citizens who have the
knowledge and courage to struggle in order to make desolation and cynicism
unconvincing and hope practical. Critique is important and is crucial to break the
hold of commonsense assumptions that legitimate a wide range of injustices. The
language of critique is also crucial for making visible the workings of unequal
power and the necessity of holding authority accountable. But the critique is not
enough and without a discourse of hope, it can lead to a paralyzing despair or, even
worse, a crippling cynicism. Hope speaks to imagining a life beyond capitalism,
and combines a realistic sense of limits with a lofty vision of demanding the
impossible. Reason, justice, and change cannot blossom without hope because
educated hope taps into our deepest experiences and longing for a life of dignity
with others, a life in which it becomes possible to imagine a future that does not
mimic the present. I am not referring to a romanticized and empty notion of hope,
but to a notion of informed hope that faces the concrete obstacles and realities of
domination but continues the ongoing task of “holding the present open and thus
unﬁnished” (Benjamin 1997, p. 10).
The discourse of possibility not only looks for productive solutions, it also is
crucial in defending those public spheres in which civic values, public scholarship,
and social engagement allow for a more imaginative grasp of a future that takes
seriously the demands of justice, equity, and civic courage. Democracy should
encourage, even require, a way of thinking critically about education, one that
connects equity to excellence, learning to ethics, and agency to the imperatives of
social responsibility and the public good. Authoritarianism has created in many
societies a predatory class of unethical zombies—who are producing dead zones of
the imagination that even Orwell could not have envisioned, while waging a ﬁerce
ﬁght against the possibilities of a democratic future. One only has to look at the U.
S., Turkey, the Philippines, and Hungary, to realize that the time has come to
develop a political language in which civic values, social responsibility, and the
institutions that support them become central to invigorating and fortifying a new
era of civic imagination, a renewed sense of social agency, and an impassioned
international social movement with a vision, organization, and set of strategies to
challenge the neoliberal nightmare engulﬁng the planet. The dark shadow of
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
213

authoritarianism may be spreading, but it can be stopped. And that prospect raises
serious questions about what educators, youth, intellectuals, and others are going to
do today to make sure that they do not succumb to the authoritarian forces circling
so many countries across the globe, waiting for the resistance to stop and for the
lights to go out. My friend, the late Howard Zinn rightly insisted that hope is the
willingness “to hold out, even in times of pessimism, the possibility of surprise.” To
add to this eloquent plea, I would say, that history is open and it is time to think
otherwise in order to act otherwise, especially if as educators we want to imagine
and ﬁght for alternative futures and horizons of possibility.
References
Aronowitz, S. (2008). Against schooling. Boulder: Paradigm Publishers.
Aronowitz, S. (2016, April 14). What kind of left does America need? Tikkun.
Aschoff, N. (2015). The smartphone society. Jacobin Magazine, Issue 17 (Spring 2015). https://
www.jacobinmag.com/2015/03/smartphone-usage-technology-aschoff/. Accessed September
10, 2017.
Bauman, Z., & Donskis, L. (2016). Liquid evil. London: Polity.
Beck, U. (2010). Twenty observations on a world in turmoil. London: Polity Press.
Benjamin, A. (1997). Present hope: Philosophy, architecture, Judaism. New York: Routledge.
Berkowitz, R. (2017, March 18). Why Arendt matters: Revisiting “the origins of totalitarianism”.
Los Angeles review of books. Online: https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/arendt-matters-
revisiting-origins-totalitarianism/. Accessed September 10, 2017.
Case, K. (2014, January 13). The other public humanities. The Chronicle of Higher Education.
http://m.chronicle.com/article/Ahas-Ahead/143867/. Accessed September 10, 2017.
Chomsky, N. (2015, March 30). The death of American universities. Reader Supported News. http://
readersupportednews.org/opinion2/277-75/29348-the-death-of-american-universities.
Accessed
September 10, 2017.
Coetzee, J. M. (2013, November 1). JM Coetzee: Universities head for extinction. Mail &
Guardian.
http://mg.co.za/article/2013-11-01-universities-head-for-extinction.
Accessed
September 10, 2017.
Eagleton, T. (2000). The idea of culture. Malden: Basil Blackwell.
Ellingboe, K., & Koronowski, R. (2016, March 8) Most Americans disagree with their
congressional representative on climate change. ThinkProgress. http://thinkprogress.org/
climate/2016/03/08/3757435/climate-denier-caucus-114th-new-research/. Accessed September
10, 2017.
Evans, B., & Giroux, H. A. (2016). Disposable futures: The seduction of violence in the age of the
spectacle. San Francisco: City Lights.
Furedi, F. (2006). Culture of fear revisited. New York: Bloomsbury.
Giroux, H. A. (2015a). Education and the crisis of public values (2nd ed.). New York: Peter Lang.
Giroux, H. A. (2015b). Dangerous thinking in the age of the new authoritarianism. New York:
Routledge.
Gitlin, T. (2017, March 17). The management of unleashed insanity. Common Dreams. Online:
http://www.commondreams.org/views/2017/03/17/management-unleashed-insanity. Accessed
September 10, 2017.
Goodman, A. (2017, June 9). Is the president a “serial fabricator”? Fired FBI director Comey says
Trump repeatedly lies. Democracy Now.
214
H. A. Giroux

Gopnik, A. (2017, January 27). Orwell’s “1984” and Trump’s America. The New Yorker. Online:
http://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/orwells-1984-and-trumps-america. Accessed
September 10, 2017.
Hedges, C. (2009, September 28). The war on language. TruthDig. Online: http://www.truthdig.
com/report/item/20090928_the_war_on_language/. Accessed September 10, 2017.
Hill, R. (2016). Against the neoliberal university. Arena Magazine, Issue 140 (February 2016).
Honneth, A. (2009). Pathologies of reason. New York: Columbia University Press.
McChesney, R. W. (2015). Rich media, poor democracy: Communication politics in dubious
times. New York: Free Press.
McWilliam, T. (2015). Death of the word? Arena Magazine, Issue 134 (April/May 2015).
Ness, I. (2015). Southern insurgency: The coming of the global working class. London: Pluto Press.
Nichol, G. R. (2008, October 31) Public universities at risk abandoning their mission. The
Chronicle of Higher Education. Online: http://chronicle.com/weekly/v54/i30/30a02302.htm.
Accessed September 10, 2017.
Olson, G., & Worsham, L. (1999). Staging the politics of difference: Homi Bhabha’s critical
literacy. Journal of Advanced Composition, 18(3), 361–391.
Ravitch, D. (2014). Reign of error. New York: Knopf.
Robbins, B. (2016, October 22). A starting point for politics. The Nation. https://www.thenation.
com/article/the-radical-life-of-stuart-hall/. Accessed September 10, 2017.
Saltman, K. J. (2016). Scripted bodies: Corporate power, smart technologies, and the undoing of
public education. New York: Routledge.
Stuart, T. (2016, February 24) Watch Trump brag about uneducated voters, “The Hispanics”. Rolling
Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/watch-trump-brag-about-uneducated-voters-
the-hispanics-20160224. Accessed September 10, 2017.
Wolin, S. S. (2008). Democracy incorporated: Managed democracy and the specter of inverted
totalitarianism. Princeton University Press.
de Zengotita, T. (2006). Mediated: How the media shapes our world and the way we live in it.
New York: Bloomsbury.
What Is the Role of Higher Education in the Age of Fake News?
215

Afterword: Viral Modernity
From Postmodernism to Post-truth?
Declarations of the death knell of postmodernism are now quite commonplace.
Various publications such as those below suggest that, if anything, postmodernism
is at an end and has been dead and buried for some time. An age dominated by
playfulness, hybridity, relativism, and the fragmentary self has given way to
something else, as yet undeﬁned. McHale (2015) describes the life cycle of post-
modernism in terms of the “big bang” in 1966 with Derrida’s seminal paper
“Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences” at the Johns
Hopkins conference “The Languages of Criticism and the Sciences of Man”
symposium; its peak years 1973–1989; uncertainty and reorientation in the 1990s;
and the aftermath and beyond after 2001. What happened in the intervening period?
Beginning in the late 1980s and extending into the 1990s, there was a plethora of
books proclaiming the end of postmodernism in a variety of contexts and disci-
plines—Sociology after postmodernism (Owen 1997); Thinking Again: Education
after postmodernism (Blake et al. 1998); After Postmodernism: Education, Politics
and Identity (Smith and Wexler 1995); Encounters: Philosophy of history after
postmodernism (Domanska 1998), etc. The ﬂow of books continued well into the
2000s—Philosophy after postmodernism, (Crowther 2003); Feminism after post-
modernism (Zalewski 2000); Painting after postmodernism (Rose 2016); Literature
after postmodernism: reconstructive fantasies (Huber 2014); Value, art, politics:
criticism, meaning and interpretation after postmodernism (Harris 2007), and so
on.
In a letter to the editor in The Lancet responding to Muir Gray’s (1999)
“Postmodern medicine”, Watts (2000) succinctly expressed a particular current of
opinion that coagulates concerns around the concept of truth: “I think of post-
modernism as a condition of despair caused by the belief that it is impossible to
know truth, and which is sometimes accompanied by the belief that it is not possible
to know right and wrong. Postmodernism has shot itself in the foot in the same way
as logical positivism a few decades ago.” Watts here ascribes a kind of agency to
postmodernism here, as a cause of the condition that we have come to call
post-truth. And there are today any number of academic doyens and public intel-
lectuals who share the view that it was left leaning intellectuals such as Michel
Tina Besley, Michael Peters, and Sharon Rider
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
M. A. Peters et al. (eds.), Post-Truth, Fake News,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-8013-5
217

Foucault and Richard Rorty (rather than, say Donald Trump or Steve Bannon, for
instance) who brought about our present situation in which post-truth thrives.
In a recent piece written for The Conversation, “The surprising origins of
‘post-truth’—and how it was spawned by the liberal left”, Calcutt (2016), makes the
following observation:
Punditry on the “post-truth era” is often accompanied by a picture either of Donald Trump
(for example, BBC News Online: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37995600, or The
Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-
the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries)
or
of
his
supporters
(The
Spectator:
http://www.
spectator.co.uk/2016/11/post-truth-politics-dont-be-so-patronising/).
Although
The
Spectator article was a rare exception, the connotations embedded in “post-truth” com-
mentary are normally as follows: “post-truth” is the product of populism; it is the bastard
child of common-touch charlatans and a rabble ripe for arousal; it is often in blatant
disregard of the actualité.
He then goes on to claim: “Left-leaning, self-confessed liberals, they sought free-
dom from state-sponsored truth; instead they built a new form of cognitive con-
ﬁnement—‘post-truth’” (Calcutt 2016).
In an article with an even more sensationalist heading, “Richard Rorty and How
Postmodernism Helped Elect Trump”, Read (2016) argues that “Our whole culture
and civilisation has features which probabilify a tendency toward a notion that we
live in ‘post-truth’ times” including consumerism that “one can ‘buy’ whatever
subjective truth one wants”. A further example, also from The Guardian, is in an
interview Cadwalladr (2017) with the distinguished philosopher Daniel Dennett: “I
think what the postmodernists did was truly evil. They are responsible for the
intellectual fad that made it respectable to be cynical about truth and facts. You’d
have people going around saying: ‘Well, you’re part of that crowd who still believe
in facts.’” As one ﬁnal case in point, take the article by Sonne (2017), which asks
“Is Trump a Postmodern Prophet?” The author argues that the election of Donald
Trump illustrates the victory of the postmodern deﬁnition of truth. These examples
could be multiplied, of course. They are all cases of what we might call “fake
intellectual history”, in the sense that rather than a serious discussion of a very
serious matter, we are offered clickbait: a way of consolidating and conﬁrming
prejudices within one group as a means of demonizing and disparaging another
(even if, in this case, the groups in question are hardly known outside of seminar
rooms).
The assertion that Foucault (or Derrida, or Rorty) is responsible for the post-truth
condition is false, and fatuously so. In ignoring the complexity of the cultural
context in which ideas are formed, propagated, integrated, and transformed as well
as the historical facts of the matter with regard to relevant occurrences and
developments which give those ideas substance, the claim itself ﬁts neatly into the
post-truth format of oversimpliﬁcation, falsiﬁcation and appeal to visceral reactions
rather than reason and deliberation. This kind of axe-grinding has become com-
monplace among certain analytic philosophers (as well as some natural scientists
with chips on their shoulders about the humanities, and even humanities scholars
who harbor an abiding abhorrence for “theory”).
218
Afterword: Viral Modernity

But let’s take a closer look at the role of Truth in twentieth-century philosophy.
We can begin with the “veriﬁcationism” of the Vienna Circle and the Logical
Empiricists, which held sway in the 1920 and 1930s in Europe and which, largely
through the migration of its proponents to the US and the cross-pollination with
native American Pragmatism, was important to the development of what was to
become mainstream Anglo-Saxon analytic philosophy. By 1960, the movement had
lost steam and, by the 1970s, it had largely folded as a going concern (Creath 2017).
But the history of Logical Positivism (as opposed to its internal historiography) has
only recently begun to be written. A common understanding of the relationship
between language, truth, and logic (the title of A. J. Ayers’ famous pamphlet) has
yet to be established for all work that is described or describes itself as “analytic
philosophy”.
Given that there is no universally accepted account of the historical development
toward a generally recognized conception of truth, it is difﬁcult to say what exactly
it means to suggest that some philosophers (say Derrida, or Rorty) are post-truth by
dint of criticizing the assumptions of the mainstream. Rather, the denunciation of
“postmodernism” as a purveyor of “post-truth” seems to be mostly a way of sig-
naling that analytic philosophers disapprove of theoretical or critical projects that
implicitly undermine their own basic assumptions. It doesn’t mean that the
philosophers denounced are really “post-truth” in some broad, all-encompassing
sense. On the other side of the equation, more recent, historically sensitive retro-
spective accounts of the development of analytic philosophy have indicated that, as
a movement, it has no coherent set of unifying principles that deﬁne its present
borders (Biletzki and Matar 1998; Grafton 2004). What exactly are the reviled
postmodern philosophers “post”?
The history of analytic philosophy (see also The Journal of the History of
Analytic Philosophy https://jhaponline.org/) is the history of a speciﬁc kind of
engagement with a historically speciﬁc set of questions concerning truth, language,
and meaning. But the work emanating out of those questions today is largely based
on the application of formal methods to arrive at formal deﬁnitions, which is to say
that the “truth” of professional epistemologists does no real work outside of the
seminar room and journal articles. Already in 1967, in his famous paper “Truth and
Meaning” (1967), Donald Davidson concludes that natural languages are not
amenable to the direct application of formal methods to construct a correct deﬁ-
nition of the expression “true sentence” in harmony with the logic and spirit of
everyday language use, which is where the question of truth actually gets
interesting.
But leaving the history of “truth” within the mainstream twentieth-century
theory of knowledge aside, the heart of the matter regarding the accusation of
epistemic treason on the part of intellectuals working in other traditions, is to what
extent the case being made against the latter has some substance. If we take the case
of one of the usual suspects regarded as bearing much of the responsibility for our
current hankering for “alternative facts”, Michel Foucault, the ﬁrst thing we ought
to notice is that he is interested in a history of truth-telling (parrhesia) rather than a
notion of conceptual or factual truth. Indeed, he draws the distinction between an
Afterword: Viral Modernity
219

analytic account of truth and a history of truth-telling (Foucault 2001). Foucault
writes: “My intention was not to deal with the problem of truth, but with the
problem of truth-teller or truth-telling as an activity.” Moreover: “What I wanted to
analyze was how the truth-teller’s role was variously problematized in Greek
philosophy. And what I wanted to show you was that if Greek philosophy has
raised the question of truth from the point of view of the criteria for true statements
and sound reasoning, this same Greek philosophy has also raised the problem of
truth from the point of view of truth-telling as an activity” (Foucault 2001, p. 169).
In sum, the questions Foucault was raising were not the same ones as those dis-
cussed in most mainstream analytic epistemology. He was not “post-truth” in the
sense that he was denying or making assertions about truth or truth conditions; he
was not part of that discussion at all.
Similarly, Derrida also sees himself as a philosopher very much concerned with
upholding truth: “The value of truth (and all those values associated with it) is never
contested or destroyed in my writings, but only reinscribed in more powerful,
larger, more stratiﬁed contexts” (Derrida 1988, p. 146). Elsewhere, he distinguishes
between two interrelated notions of truth in the Western tradition: truth as presence
and truth as agreement:
“Truth” has always meant two different things, the history of the essence of truth – the truth
of truth – being only the gap and the articulation between the two interpretations or
processes […] The process of truth is on the one hand the unveiling of what lies concealed
in oblivion […] On the other hand […] truth is agreement (homoiôsis or adaequatio), a
relation of resemblance or equality between a re-presentation and a thing (unveiled, pre-
sent), even in the eventuality of a statement of judgment. (Derrida 1981, pp. 192–193)
In the Blackwell A Companion to Derrida, Norris (2014) corrects the misunder-
standing that Derrida’s project is to undermine the notion of truth:
[far] from rejecting or denouncing the notion of truth, Derrida can be found insisting on its
absolute indispensability to philosophical enquiry in general and – more speciﬁcally – its
crucial pertinence to the project of deconstruction (LI, 162–254). [H]e went out of his way
to controvert the widespread belief (put about chieﬂy by detractors in the mainstream
analytic camp) that deconstruction amounted to nothing more than an update on ancient
sophistical themes or a bag of crafty rhetorical tricks with absolutely no regard for rep-
utable, truth-apt standards of debate. All the same Derrida’s reiterated protests – asserting
his strict and principled allegiance to just those criteria of valid argument, logical rigor, and
conceptual precision – are often dismissed, by those so minded in advance, as a routine
show of respectability designed to conceal his indifference to truth in whatever common-
place or technical guise.
The point here is not to defend Derrida or to castigate his critics, but simply to note
that the misleading notion that post-structuralist, hermeneutic, phenomenological,
pragmatic, or Wittgenstein-inspired philosophers deny any sense to the idea of
truth, to criteria for the application of the term, and so forth, is an old canard. The
claim has almost exactly the same form today as it had 30 or 40 years ago, namely,
as a visceral reaction to the unfamiliar. In the best cases, some effort is put into
building an argument on the basis of the antipathy toward the kind of philoso-
phizing that falls roughly under the heading of “continental”, even if they normally
220
Afterword: Viral Modernity

make assumptions that undermine the relevance of the arguments they want bring to
bear. But in the worst cases, examples of which were enumerated earlier, the attacks
have the form of Trumpian innuendo, dismissive hand-waving, bullying and
character assassination.
To call everyone who poses other questions than those common to a certain
academic tradition “postmodern” is intellectually slothful, and contributes to the
general confusion rather than helping to clear it up. What has one really accom-
plished by packing together Wittgenstein, Peirce, James, Nietzsche, Popper,
Foucault, Derrida, Rorty, and others as “anti-foundationalists”? Whatever it is, it is
not a contribution to, nor a basis for a rigorous, balanced and open dialogue about
how to think about our notions of truth. It is rather the sort of move described by
Rorty as a “conversation-stopper”.
So we have in this picture of “postmodernist philosophy” both a false picture of
the history of contemporary philosophy and a ﬁctionalized portrayal of a dangerous
“post”- or even “anti”-truth movement that goes under the heading of “postmod-
ernism”. We have here also a rather sweeping idea of the postmodern as well. In
this context, it is useful to remind ourselves that there is a distinction to be made
between postmodernism in architecture, art and literature, and poststructuralism. In
“(Posts-) Modernism and Structuralism: Afﬁnities and Theoretical Innovations”,
Peters (1999) provides an account of poststructuralism, distinguishing it from
postmodernism, and from its predecessor movement, structuralism, noting that
while there are philosophical and historical overlaps between the two, it is
important to distinguish between them in order to appreciate their respective
intellectual genealogies and their theoretical trajectories and applications. He
stresses
in
particular
the
difference
between
their
theoretical
objects.
Poststructuralism takes as it theoretical object “structuralism”, whereas postmod-
ernism takes as its theoretical object “modernism”. Each movement is an attempt to
supersede in various ways that which went before. The two movements—post-
structuralism and postmodernism—while now intertwined and often equated with
the other or their terms and meanings conﬂated, are distinguished by a peculiar set
of theoretical concerns most clearly seen by tracing their respective historical
genealogies. Of course, if one doesn’t do the work, one will not see the difference,
which goes a long way toward explaining why the two terms are often used
interchangeably in philosophical polemics.
We have up to this point argued that the idea that the post-truth condition has
been created by a certain “postmodern” strain of philosophy is “fake news”, an
“alternative fact”, at least from the historical perspective. The issue at stake,
however, is not merely one of intellectual history, but also of political economy.
The crux of the matter is what we have, in the title of this book, referred to as “viral
modernity”. Viner (2016), editor-in-chief of The Guardian, relates the story of the
circumstances surround the news of David Cameron’s alleged intimate involvement
with a part of a pig’s anatomy while a student at Oxford, an anecdote extracted from
a new biography but the veracity of which no one could establish as fact. The
journalist who perpetrated the story and co-wrote the biography could not verify a
source or verify whether it was true. After the story had gone viral, she asks “Does
Afterword: Viral Modernity
221

the truth matter any more?” Viner (2016) widens her report to include Brexit and
refers to Arron Banks, a major sponsor of the Leave. EU Campaign who explained
the basis of the publicity offensive:
“It was taking an American-style media approach,” said Banks. “What they said early on
was ‘Facts don’t work’, and that’s it. The remain campaign featured fact, fact, fact, fact,
fact. It just doesn’t work. You have got to connect with people emotionally. It’s the Trump
success.” (cited in Viner 2016)
Viner (2016) asserts that, “[i]n the digital age, it is easier than ever to publish false
information, which is quickly shared and taken to be true[…]” Quoting Emily Bell,
the director of the Tow Centre for Digital Journalism at Columbia University, she
comments on the dramatic changes of the news ecosystem: the concentration of
ownership and power especially distribution; the automation that ﬁlter news
through platforms and algorithms; and the shift to consumerism, the so-called
domination of user content. Viner’s (2016) explanation is not ideology-driven.
Rather, she proposes an analysis of what the advent of digital media means for truth
in a world dominated by global media infrastructures owned by the few that count
billions among their users and utilize a distributive logic that displaces the authority
of journalism with personal belief based on the emotional charge of the issue for the
individual or group.
If representatives of research and higher education in general, and in particular,
those self-appointed guardians of Veritas, the philosophers, fall into a mob men-
tality of alarm, agitation and acrimony rather than liberality, curiosity and interest
toward opinions, ideas or traditions that are different, alien, or foreign to them, then
they unwittingly, and surely unwillingly, are part of the post-truth atmosphere of
mistrust and self-delusion which they are at such great pains to dispel. For let us not
forget what a powerful force a clearly focused common object of hate is:
The horrible thing about the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged to act a part,
but that it was impossible to avoid joining in. Within thirty seconds any pretence was
always unnecessary. A hideous ecstasy of fear and vindictiveness […] seemed to ﬂow
through the whole group of people like an electric current, turning one even against one’s
will into a grimacing, screaming lunatic. And yet the rage that one felt was an abstract,
undirected emotion which could be switched from one object to another like the ﬂame of a
blowlamp. (Orwell 1949, Chap. 1)
The idea that mastery of certain formal methods of extremely limited application in
the real world can inoculate one from the conventionalism, sadism, and provin-
cialism of group-thinking is a dangerous illusion, especially for intellectuals. We
should be wary of those who are already sure they know what the Truth is; so well,
in fact, that they are satisﬁed to reject dissenting opinions emphatically, with or
without good arguments.
222
Afterword: Viral Modernity

References
Biletzki, A., & Matar, A. (Eds.). (1998). The story of analytic philosophy: Plot and heroes.
London and New York: Routledge.
Blake, N., Smeyers, P., Smith, R., & Standish, P. (1998). Thinking again: Education after
postmodernism. Westport: Praeger.
Cadwalladr, C. (2017, February 12). Interview with Daniel Dennet. Daniel Dennett: “I begrudge
every hour I have to spend worrying about politics”. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.
com/science/2017/feb/12/daniel-dennett-politics-bacteria-bach-back-dawkins-trump-interview.
Accessed September 29, 2017.
Calcutt, A. (2016, November 18). The surprising origins of “post-truth”—And how it was
spawned by the liberal left. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/the-surprising-
origins-of-post-truth-and-how-it-was-spawned-by-the-liberal-left-68929. Accessed September
29, 2017.
Creath, R. (2017). Logical empiricism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy (Fall 2017 Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/logical-
empiricism/. Accessed September 29, 2017.
Crowther, P. (2003). Philosophy after postmodernism: Civilized values and the scope of
knowledge. Oxford: Taylor & Francis.
Davidson, D. (1967). Truth and meaning. Synthese, 17, 304–323.
Derrida, J. (1966). Structure, sign and play in the discourse of the human sciences. In R. Macksey
& E. Donato (Eds.), The structuralist controversy; The languages of criticism and the sciences
of man. Baltimore & London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Derrida, J. (1981). Dissemination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Derrida, J. (1988). Limited Inc. Evanston: Northwestern UP.
Domanska, E. (1998). Encounters: Philosophy of history after postmodernism. Charlottesville:
University of Virginia Press.
Foucault, M. (2001). Fearless speech. Berkeley, CA: Semiotext(e).
Grafton, A. (2004). A note from inside the teapot. In J. B. Schneewind (Ed.), Teaching new
histories of philosophy. Princeton: Princeton University Center for Human Values.
Harris, J. P. (2007). Value, art, politics: Criticism, meaning and interpretation after postmod-
ernism. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Huber, I. (2014). Literature after postmodernism: Reconstructive fantasies. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Muir Gray, J. A. (1999). Postmodern medicine. The Lancet, 354, 1550–1553.
McHale, B. (2015). The Cambridge introduction to postmodernism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Norris, C. (2014). Truth in Derrida. In Z. Direk & L. Lawlor (Eds.), A companion to Derrida.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Orwell, G. (1949). Nineteen eighty-four. New York: Signet Books.
Owen, D. (1997). Sociology after postmodernism. London: Sage.
Peters, M. A. (1999). (Posts-) modernism and structuralism: Afﬁnities and theoretical innovations.
Sociological Research Online, 4(3). http://www.socresonline.org.uk/4/3/peters.html. Accessed
September 29, 2017.
Read, R. (2016, November 22). Richard Rorty and how postmodernism helped elect Trump. The
Philosophers’
Magazine.
https://www.philosophersmag.com/opinion/147-richard-rorty-and-
how-postmodernism-helped-elect-trump. Accessed September 29, 2017.
Rose, B. (2016). Painting after postmodernism. Tielt, Belgium-USA: Lannoo Publishers.
Smith, R., & Wexler, P. (1995). After postmodernism: Education, politics and identity. London:
Routledge.
Sonne, M. (2017). Is Trump a postmodern prophet? Post-truth politics analysed. Undercurrent
philosophy. http://undercurrentphilosophy.com/medium/trump-postmodern-prophet-post-truth-
politics-analysed/. Accessed September 29, 2017.
Afterword: Viral Modernity
223

Viner, K. (2016, July 12). How technology disrupted the truth. The Guardian. https://www.
theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth. Accessed September
29, 2017.
Watts, T. L. P. (2000). Correspondence. The Lancet, 355.
Zalewski, M. (2000). Feminism after postmodernism. Theorising through practice. London:
Routledge.
224
Afterword: Viral Modernity

