 
1
Truth and Reality: How to be a scientific realist without believing scientific theories should 
be true 
Angela Potochnik 
 
Forthcoming in K. Khalifa, I. Lawler & E. Shech (eds.), Scientific Understanding and 
Representation: Modeling in the Physical Sciences, Routledge 
 
Abstract 
Scientific realism is a thesis about the success of science. Most traditionally: science has been so 
successful at prediction and guiding action because its best theories are true (or approximately 
true or increasing in their degree of truth). If science is in the business of doing its best to 
generate true theories, then we should turn to those theories for explanatory knowledge, 
predictions, and guidance of our actions and decisions. Views that are popular in contemporary 
philosophy of science about scientific modeling and the centrality of idealization create several 
challenges for this traditional form of scientific realism. Yet the basic idea behind scientific 
realism that science has been and will continue to be epistemically successful is deeply 
appealing. This chapter explores the challenges posed by idealization and scientific modeling to 
motivate a scientific realism fully divorced from the idea that science is in the business of 
generating true theories. On the resulting view, the objects of scientific knowledge are causal 
patterns, so this knowledge only ever provides partial, simplified accounts of a complex reality. 
This variety of selective realism better accommodates the nature of our present-day scientific 
successes and offers an interpretation of scientific progress that resists the antirealist’s 
pessimism.   

 
2
Scientific realism is a thesis about the success of science. Most traditionally: science has been so 
successful at prediction and guiding action because its theories are true (or approximately true or 
increasing in their degree of truth). Here’s Anjan Chakravartty in the Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy:  
Scientific realism is a positive epistemic attitude toward the content of our best theories 
and models, recommending belief in both observable and unobservable aspects of the 
world described by the sciences… most people define scientific realism in terms of the 
truth or approximate truth of scientific theories or certain aspects of theories.  
If science is in the business of doing its best to generate true theories, then we should turn to 
those theories for explanatory knowledge, predictions, and guidance of our actions and decisions. 
 
At least at first glance, views that are popular in contemporary philosophy of science 
create challenges for this traditional form of scientific realism. The embrace of model-based 
science introduces questions about whether theories are even the main epistemic currency in 
science. And though in the quote above Chakravartty includes models in his formulation of 
realism, it’s not clear how traditional realism applies to them. Models are not definitive like 
theories may be: it’s common to employ a variety of different models to the very same 
phenomena. Further, the occurrence of tradeoffs among modeling priorities such as predictive 
accuracy vs. generality calls into question whether the same scientific accounts can even deliver 
explanations, predictions, and policy-guidance. Perhaps we need to employ a variety of models 
to accomplish all our goals. Finally, the widespread importance of idealization in both models 
and theories is taken by some to cast doubt on the idea that the best scientific accounts are true, 
approximately true, or increasing in degree of truth over time. 

 
3
 
Yet the basic idea behind scientific realism that science has been and will continue to be 
epistemically successful is deeply appealing. In this chapter, I use the challenges of modeling 
and widespread idealization to motivate the view that scientific realism should be fully divorced 
from the idea that science is in the business of generating true theories. In section 1, I’ll say more 
about these challenges to a traditional realism as I understand them, trying to base this in views 
broadly endorsed in our field. Then, in section 2, I’ll motivate the possibility of a realism that is 
consistent with a rejection of the idea that science is in pursuit of truth. Again here, my aim is to 
carve out a general place in philosophical space, but I will also say a little about the version of 
this view that I have advocated. Finally, in section 3, I will address why this deserves to be called 
scientific realism and gesture toward what I think may be some advantages of this way of going 
about being a realist. Realism without a strict commitment to truth better accommodates the 
nature of our present-day scientific achievements, and it opens up an interpretation of cumulative 
scientific progress that resists the antirealist’s pessimism.  
 
1. The Trouble with Truth 
I will begin by describing how views endorsed in philosophy of science put pressure on the idea, 
bound up with traditional realism, that science aims for truth. I’ll start in the literature on 
scientific modeling. I consider models and theories to be two forms of what we might generically 
call scientific accounts. I will skirt the issue of how models and theories relate to one another, 
other than rejecting the idea associated with the semantic view of theories that models just are 
interpretations of scientific theories. Most agree that scientific models should not be judged by 
the metric of truth.  

 
4
First of all, models have reduced ontological commitments compared to theories. As a 
result, there’s more of an air of convenience in choice of modeling approach than in theory 
selection. According to Morrison (2016), for instance, while scientific theories have truth 
conditions that indicate what must be the case in order for them to apply, models incorporate 
idealized assumptions to aid in their application to specific types of systems, with the result that 
the models do not have straightforward truth conditions. In many fields, it is common practice to 
employ multiple different models to the same phenomena (Weisberg, 2013), and the same 
models are sometimes redeployed to very different kinds of phenomena. (See Potochnik, 2012, 
for example, regarding how game theory has been reinterpreted and redeployed across 
evolutionary biology and behavioral sciences.) Wimsatt (1987) outlines several ways in which 
even models recognized to be innaccurate (false, as he puts it) can nonetheless lead to truer 
theories, such as by suggesting refinements to existing theory, enabling scientists to localize 
errors to particular aspects of the model, or as a limiting model to define an extreme for the 
phenomenon of interest.  
Second, following from the point that it is common to employ multiple models to 
investigate a single phenomenon, philosophers have also observed that there are often or always 
tradeoffs among the advantages of different modeling approaches. The biologist Richard Levins 
wrote the seminal paper on this point (1966), arguing that scientists must choose the extent to 
which their models prioritize accuracy versus generality and that it is often decided to sacrifice 
some accuracy in favor of greater generality of application. Since, Odenbaugh (2003), 
Matthewson and Weisberg (2009), and others have more fully worked through these ideas. I 
want to make two points about this in the present context. First, this provides reason to think that 
a single model won’t accomplish all epistemic ends for a given investigation; in (Potochnik, 

 
5
2015) I develop this idea with an eye to the diverse aims of science. Second, scientists regularly 
prioritize other values for their models other than accuracy. Some degree of accuracy might be 
sacrificed for other aims. Compromises in truth or accuracy are regularly made, at least in 
model-based science, to further other scientific goals, including applicability across related 
phenomena. This sacrifice in accuracy seems, at least at first consideration, to contribute to 
epistemic success rather than to compromise it.  
Third, as Bokulich (see especially 2009, 2011) among others has emphasized, model-
based explanations proceed with substantial assistance from idealizations or even fictions. If 
false posits or fictions facilitate at least some varieties of scientific explanations, this role is 
another form of sacrificing some truth to facilitate other aims. Philosophers working on scientific 
explanation have developed a variety of views about how to accommodate idealizations’ 
contribution to explanation, many of which aim to maintain a commitment to the truth of 
successful explanations. But this contribution poses a potential challenge—even if the challenge 
is solvable—to the idea that scientific accounts should be (wholly) true. I will say more below to 
motivate the particular challenge idealizations pose to a traditional truth-centric realism.  
These points about scientific models are well appreciated in philosophy of science, and 
they make articulating epistemic success in terms of truth less obviously the right path forward 
for scientific modeling compared to scientific theorizing. Insofar as model-based science is an 
important form of science, it seems truth, approximate truth, or increasing truth may not always 
be the best descriptions of the accomplishments—or even the aim—of science. Insofar as 
scientific models can explain, successful scientific explanations may not always be true or 
approximately true. Indeed, some of the philosophers with the most influential early accounts of 
scientific models also suggested attenuated versions of realism on that basis, including Giere’s 

 
6
(1988) constructive realism and Suppe’s (1989) quasi-realism.  Others have suggested that the 
discussion about scientific realism can proceed independently from considering such details of 
scientific modeling. Chakravartty (2001) argues that model-based science inherits the same 
traditional challenges facing scientific realism. Psillos (2011), in turn, argues that scientific 
realism is fully consistent with the use of models in science and, in particular, with models’ 
apparent reliance on idealizations. Finally, Chakravartty, in the Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy article I quoted from above, last revised in 2017, formulates all the statements about 
scientific realism as claims regarding “theories and models,” generically. The article does not 
address any promise or challenges for realism specifically related to modeling.  
In the rest of this initial discussion, I will focus on the challenge posed by idealizations in 
particular. By idealizations, I mean assumptions made without regard for whether they are true 
and often with full knowledge they are false. Familiar examples include the assumptions that a 
gas is ideal, that a phenotypic trait reproduces to its degree of success, and that humans are 
perfectly rational agents. Though idealizations have perhaps received the most attention in 
discussions of scientific modeling, they are not just used to facilitate models but also support the 
application of a host of scientific laws and theories. Idealizations are widely recognized to 
contribute to scientific understanding; many of our most heralded scientific explanations involve 
idealizations. This goes beyond the model-based explanations that are Bokulich’s primary focus 
to include theory- and law-based explanations—consider, for instance, Cartwright’s (1983) 
decades-earlier discussion of how the laws of physics rely on idealizations. Chakravartty (2001) 
mostly puts the question of idealization’s significance for scientific realism to one side, but he 

 
7
does say in passing, “Ultimately, the question of how to make sense of idealization may pose the 
greatest challenge to the realist” (329).1 
Here is how the worry might be developed. Idealizations are common in our scientific 
accounts—including not just models but also theories and laws. As several philosophers have 
emphasized, idealizations persist in at least some of our best scientific accounts and contribute 
positively to the explanatory value of those accounts. Examples include Cartwright’s (1983) 
seminal account of idealizations in the laws of physics, Elgin’s (2004, 2017) account of how 
scientific understanding benefits from compromising truth, and Potochnik’s (2015, 2017) 
argument for the widespread use of idealizations to further diverse scientific aims, including 
understanding different features of the same phenomena. From the broadly recognized role of 
idealizations in scientific explanations, these philosophers have drawn the conclusion that 
explanations need not be true—that the understanding they produce is non-factive. These 
philosophers thus reject veritism about scientific explanation. Of course, none of these accounts 
posits that we are indifferent to the truth value of our scientific accounts or prefer falsehoods to 
truths. The claims made are subtler, such as that idealizations contribute directly to the epistemic 
success of our scientific explanations, and that less accurate explanations are sometimes better 
than more accurate alternatives.  
Put in terms of (successful) scientific explanations, these are my grounds for rejecting 
veritism: 
• An explanation Y can explain the target phenomenon without being entirely true 
of it. 
 
1 Levy (2017) explores the prospects for realism in light of challenges from modeling and idealization. The approach 
I develop here is most like his characterization of potential responses to perspectivism.  

 
8
• An explanation Y can better explain the target phenomenon than does an 
explanation Z that is more accurate of it.  
• A posit P in explanation Y can be crucial for Y explaining X without being 
remotely true.  
Here are very brief illustrations of each idea, using the tried-and-true example of the ideal gas 
law. An application of the ideal gas law can explain the approximate behavior of a real gas with 
molecules exhibiting attractive or repulsive interactions, despite the real gas’s properties 
deviating from the ideal gas law’s predictions. And, in many circumstances, the ideal gas law 
explanation is preferrable to a more accurate explanation with the van der Waals equation. 
Finally, the posit that a gas is ideal, i.e. composed of non-interacting point particles, is crucial for 
an ideal gas law explanation but may nonetheless deviate significantly from the properties of the 
real gas. (A note about example choice: I take it a toy example suffices insofar as disagreement 
about veritism does not hinge on whether there are examples with these features, but rather 
whether these are sufficient reasons to reject veritism.) 
Other philosophers accept the idea that idealizations contribute positively to scientific 
explanation but have developed accounts that seek to retain veritism about explanation. Such 
accounts have been developed by Lawler (2019), Sullivan and Khalifa (2019), and Pincock 
(2021), among others.  One motivation for developing a veritism about explanation that 
accommodates idealization is the perception that this will enable scientific realism to be retained 
(e.g. Rice, 2019). Nonetheless, for the sake of argument in the current investigation, let’s take 
seriously the view that these features of idealization warrant reconsidering whether or to what 
extent truth is a requirement or potentially even an aim of our scientific accounts. There may be a 
way to rehabilitate a central role for truth. But on the face of it, the important roles for 

 
9
idealizations—false assumptions—in our scientific accounts of the world, as well as the features 
of model-based science discussed earlier in this section, seem to support looking for a scientific 
realism that does not require a commitment to the truth, approximate truth, or increasing truth of 
our scientific accounts. At the very least, such a realism can remain noncommittal on these 
questions of the extent to which truth is a benchmark for epistemic success in science, thus 
sidestepping the complications of scientific modeling and idealization that have received 
significant attention of late in philosophy of science.  
 
2. Realism About What? 
In section 1, I used scientific modeling and idealizations to motivate the idea that it might be 
beneficial to develop a form of scientific realism that does not require strict truth, increasing 
truth, or potentially even the pursuit of true scientific accounts. Now I want to outline the form 
such a realism might take. As above, I am aiming for carving out a general place in philosophical 
space, but I will also develop a specific version of the view that I would like to advocate, 
influenced especially by the use of idealizations in science described above.  
 
The first task is to find a generic formulation of scientific realism that doesn’t already 
presume a commitment to truth, then we can work out the specifics of how to make good on a 
commitment to such a realism. Here’s Anjan Chakravartty again, a bit later in the SEP entry I 
drew from above: “What all of these approaches [of defining realism in terms of epistemic 
achievement] have in common is a commitment to the idea that our best theories have a certain 
epistemic status: they yield knowledge of aspects of the world, including unobservable aspects.” 
Without too much of a stretch, we can broaden this formulation to apply to any scientific 
accounts used to explain our world, which might include models and laws as well as theories, 

 
10
and perhaps still other varieties of accounts. Then, at its most basic, realism is the idea that our 
best scientific accounts qualify as epistemic achievements and yield knowledge of the world. This 
idea strikes me as at the heart of a commitment to realism. This formulation also creates room to 
maneuver: if there is a natural way to interpret scientific accounts as epistemic achievements that 
yield knowledge, despite any sacrifices of truth, then that can enable a form of realism to be 
preserved. This approach is akin to Asay (2013), who argues against ‘truth-mongering’ 
approaches to scientific realism that locate the debate in specifics about the theory of truth 
embraced. Asay instead advocates a ‘metaphysical’ approach to realism that locates the true 
debate in questions of ontological commitments. Though Asay does not identify a need for 
distancing scientific realism from the commitment to the truth of our scientific accounts, his 
articulation of what should be at issue for realists versus antirealists accommodates such a 
distancing.  
 
So, in what way—if any—do our scientific accounts yield knowledge bearing on 
observable and unobservable entities (despite potential sacrifices of truth)? On this initial 
question, insight can be gained from a convergence of views among recent accounts of 
idealization in explanation. Bokulich (2011), Batterman and Rice (2014), and I (Potochnik, 2015, 
2017), among others, emphasize patterns. Here’s Bokulich: “The model explains the 
explanandum by showing how elements of the model correctly capture the pattern of 
counterfactual dependence of the target system” (2011, 39). Batterman and Rice articulate the 
role of models in “[explaining] universal patterns across diverse real systems” (2014, 350). 
And, my take: “scientific knowledge consists of truths about causal patterns. Grasping those 
truths about causal patterns comprises understanding of the phenomena embodying the patterns. 
… [T]ruths of causal patterns are by and large partial untruths about phenomena, accomplished 

 
11
with the use of idealizations” (2017, 119). Though Elgin (2004, 2017) focuses less explicitly on 
patterns, her emphasis on the aim of exemplification suggests implicit reliance on pattern or a 
similar concept as well—instantiation of a property or relation across some range of 
circumstances. This suggests a potential way forward: such patterns might be the objects of our 
scientific knowledge.  This would be a form of selective realism, perhaps akin to a kind of 
structural realism: realism about the relations depicted in our scientific accounts, not taken as 
descriptions of the targets of investigation directly but of the patterns those targets of 
investigation embody.2 
The key move here is allowing non-identity between the target of investigation and the 
object of knowledge. You may study/learn about one thing, while the object of knowledge is 
technically something else. This non-identity creates two issues to address. The first issue 
regards the difference between the target of investigation and the object of knowledge. If the 
latter is not the same as the former, then what is it? Is the object of knowledge structure, patterns, 
or something else? Implicit in this question is the need to justify why this, whatever we settle on, 
should be taken to be the intended object of scientific knowledge. The second issue regards the 
connection between the target of investigation and the object of knowledge if we accept that this 
is not a relation of identity.3 What makes this knowledge qualify as an epistemic achievement 
about the target of investigation? There must be some special relationship—if not identity—for 
this to be the case. So, to summarize, the two questions are:  
1. The Difference: What is the object of knowledge if not the phenomena targeted in 
scientific investigation? 
 
2 This is particularly akin to Saatsi’s (forthcoming) proposed selective realism about counterfactual dependence, as 
these relationships are at the heart of causal patterns.  
3 Or, at least, if we accept that this is not always a relation of identity; this approach only requires that objects of 
knowledge at least sometimes be distinct from targets of investigation. 

 
12
2. The Connection: What makes this knowledge qualify as an epistemic achievement 
about the target of investigation? 
In the remainder of this section, I will indicate my suggestions for how to address these two 
questions. Along the way, I will gesture toward allied positions.  
 
2.1 The Difference 
Above I suggested on the basis of some recent views about the explanatory value of idealizations 
that the object of scientific knowledge might be patterns. In particular, following Bokulich’s and 
my formulations, I propose as the object of scientific knowledge patterns in counterfactual 
dependence—by and large, in the manipulability relations constituting causal dependence 
(Woodward, 2003). In (Potochnik, 2015, 2017) I termed these causal patterns. Postulating causal 
patterns rather than causal relationships or processes as the object of scientific knowledge 
reflects the scientific practice of strategically isolating difference-makers to indicate the scope of 
the dependence, i.e. the scope of what Woodward calls the invariance of the causal relationship.  
Thus, what I have in mind for what I called ‘the difference’ is causal patterns. Idealized 
scientific accounts cannot generate knowledge of the targets of investigation directly insofar as 
they are not true of those targets. But they can and do generate knowledge of causal patterns 
embodied by those targets. Beyond according with the insights of several recent accounts of 
idealization, this also captures well science’s frequent focus on general laws, patterns, and 
tendencies. Many causal patterns, like the pattern depicted by the ideal gas law, are broad 
regularities that are limited in scope and can have exceptions. On the other hand, sometimes 
scientists are interested in accounting for the interplay of multiple causes, which motivates a 
focus on a more specific causal pattern with a narrower scope, that is, present in a smaller set of 

 
13
phenomena. The van der Waals equation, with additional parameters specifying molecular size 
and attraction, depicts a more specific pattern with a narrower scope. As this illustrates, any 
target of investigation—such as the behavior of some real gas—embodies multiple, perhaps 
countless, causal patterns. The strategic isolation of a set (small or large) of causal factors gives 
rise to a focus on just one causal pattern among many embodied in the target of investigation. 
Just as it is a matter of choice which phenomena are targeted in scientific investigation, it is a 
matter of choice which causal pattern is targeted in the investigation of a given phenomenon.  
This many-one relationship between causal patterns and target phenomena is, in my view, 
of central importance. Insofar as our scientific knowledge regards causal patterns, the resulting 
knowledge is inevitably an incomplete perspective on the target of investigation—and, when 
idealizations facilitate the knowledge, a perspective enabled by false posits of features of the 
target that are incidental to the focal pattern. Positing causal patterns as the object of scientific 
knowledge introduces a variability in our scientific knowledge that goes beyond what 
phenomena our investigations target. The nature of our scientific knowledge is, on this view, 
relational to the sets of causes deemed interesting by investigators or their audience.4  This may 
be considered a form of perspectival realism. The view is in some respects similar to Massimi’s 
(2019) perspectival realism, particularly her emphasis on realism regarding robust phenomena. 
On the other hand, for my view, the status of qualifying as knowledge is not indexed to research 
context, which is often thought to be entailed by perspectivism. On my approach, the role for 
perspective is in what knowledge is prioritized, i.e., knowledge of which causal pattern(s).  
 
4 This relationality is, I gather, a distinctive feature of my view (Potochnik, 2017) in comparison with the other 
accounts advocating a focus on patterns. See Potochnik (2020) for a discussion of this difference from Elgin’s 
(2017) view in particular.  

 
14
So, in my view, the difference between the objects of scientific knowledge and targets of 
investigation is that of causal patterns versus the phenomena embodying those (and other) 
patterns. The key difference regarding truth and knowledge is that idealizations (such as the posit 
that a gas is ideal) can contribute directly to knowledge of a causal pattern, even as they 
introduce falsehoods of phenomena. Why create this gap, what I’ve called the difference, at all? 
First, based on considerations raised in section 1, to accommodate or even take our lead from 
scientific practices that appear to be driven by considerations other than maximizing the truth of 
our scientific accounts about the phenomena they target. Second, the landing point—a form of 
realism that accommodates how science has developed many different accounts of the very same 
phenomena—is, in my view, a welcome one. And third, I’ll offer a promissory note: I will argue 
for some further philosophical advantages to embracing this kind of approach to realism in 
section 3 below.  
 
2.2 The Connection 
Now that I have outlined a view for the difference between targets of investigation and objects of 
scientific knowledge, what is the connection? That is, why take knowledge of causal patterns to 
constitute an epistemic achievement about the phenomena targeted in scientific investigations? 
The brief answer is that, in my view, when a causal pattern is embodied in a phenomenon, 
knowledge of the causal pattern suffices to explain the phenomenon. But, given the many-one 
relationship between causal patterns and target phenomena, there is more that must be said about 
the conditions in which knowledge of the former suffices to explain the latter. Here I will sketch 
an approach, but it requires moves that I won’t be able to make fully precise or adequately 

 
15
defend in this chapter. For fuller articulation and defense in another philosophical context, see 
(Potochnik, 2017).    
 
Let’s presume a given scientific account qualifies as knowledge of some causal pattern, 
since what is at issue here is how that knowledge relates to the target of investigation such that it 
constitutes an epistemic achievement about that target. In my view, to explain the target of 
investigation, such an account must relate to the target phenomenon, how that phenomenon is 
characterized in the explanandum, and the audience in the proper ways. First, the pattern must be 
embodied by the target phenomenon. This entails that the causal claim(s) are approximately 
true—importantly, they need not be a comprehensive account of the phenomenon but merely 
depict the influence of at least one causal factor. Even the same causal factor(s) may be depicted 
differently in characterizations of distinct causal patterns, but the claims themselves still must be 
approximately true (tout court, not merely within a specific research context). Second, the causal 
pattern must account for the explanandum, that is, the features of the target phenomenon 
specified in the call for explanation. Roughly put, this means that what the depiction of the 
causal pattern, including any idealizations, would entail is specified by the (approximately true) 
explanandum as having occurred. Any given causal pattern embodied in a phenomenon can only 
explain features conforming to that pattern, not unrelated features of the phenomenon or 
deviations from the pattern. Third and finally, the depicted causal pattern must address the 
cognitive needs of those seeking explanation. Given the many-one relationship between causal 
patterns and target phenomena and the inevitable relationality of depicting one causal pattern 
rather than another, as described in 2.1, there is an ambiguity to which causal pattern is 
explanatory that needs to be resolved with reference to the agenda of those seeking explanation. 
This is influenced by their interests and background knowledge, as well as by incidental 

 
16
circumstances, potential biases, and blind spots. Specifying the explanandum cannot resolve the 
ambiguity (Potochnik, 2016). 
Our simple ideal gas law example can show what these requirements amount to. The 
ideal gas law succeeds as an explanation of the pressure in a balloon doubling when the volume 
was halved (the explanandum) when: (1) the depicted relationship between pressure and volume 
is roughly true; (2) this application of the ideal gas law entails the pressure roughly doubling; (3) 
the ideal gas law application addresses the explanation-seekers’ cognitive needs. This would be 
the case, for example, for someone with a rough understanding of the relevant physics but who’s 
forgotten the exact relationship between pressure and volume or what other variables, like 
temperature, that relationship depends on. This would not be the case for someone who well 
remembers the ideal gas law and how it applies here but thought the temperature had also 
increased to an extent that the balloon’s pressure would have caused it to pop. That requires a 
different causal pattern, featuring different causal influences, to explain. A background 
assumption here is that all scientific explanations are relative to the audience’s cognitive needs in 
this way. The shared background knowledge of a scientific community may constrain the variety 
of causal patterns that are explanatory, but variability will persist due to which specific questions 
are posed, which other phenomena are of interest, which methods are employed, and so on.  
This, briefly, is what I take to be necessary for knowledge of a causal pattern to constitute 
an epistemic achievement—in the form of an explanation—of the target of investigation. The 
best explanation of a given explanandum features a causal pattern (1) embodied by the 
phenomenon, (2) accounting for the explanandum, that (3) best addresses the audience’s 
cognitive needs. If increased accuracy of the phenomenon contributes to this, it does so only 
incidentally. More development of this view is needed, which you can find in (Potochnik, 2015, 

 
17
2016). Here I am simply sketching a view with the potential to connect target of investigation to 
object of scientific knowledge to flesh out one candidate for the selective realism I seek to 
motivate in this chapter. This view creates the desired space between objects of scientific 
knowledge and targets of investigation. The former are multiple while the latter—empirical 
reality—is single; knowledge of the former inevitably yields only partial and perspectival insight 
into the latter.  
 
3. A Realism Worth Having 
Let’s take stock. I have suggested that science achieving or even aiming for true accounts (of 
target phenomena) should not be a requirement for scientific realism. There may be a deep 
relationship between the objects of scientific understanding and the objects of scientific 
knowledge that is not identity. In particular, perhaps science explains phenomena by providing 
knowledge of (some of) the laws, patterns, and tendencies they embody. This kind of view 
requires specifying what the objects of scientific knowledge are, what I called the difference, and 
how that qualifies as an epistemic achievement about the targets of investigation, what I called 
the connection. I’ve sketched one way of working out those components of this form of realism: 
We come to understand phenomena by generating knowledge of causal patterns they embody.  
This approach suggests that the question of realism might be reformulated from ‘does 
science uncover legitimate knowledge (even about unobservables)’ to ‘about what, if anything, 
does science uncover legitimate knowledge?’ What, if anything, should we be realists about on 
the basis of our scientific findings? I have proposed causal patterns as a candidate—in the 
epistemic sense of claiming that we have scientific knowledge of them and thus also in the ontic 
sense of positing their existence. This is one version of a selective realism. Causal patterns might 

 
18
well not be the only kind of thing we should be realists about on the basis of scientific findings; 
that isn’t a requirement of the view I have outlined. For instance, I think some existence claims 
about individual events also likely qualify as legitimate scientific knowledge, such as ‘life on 
Earth evolved from one or a few common ancestors’ and ‘adding the starch will turn this iodine 
solution blue.’ In some cases, scientific explanations may also provide knowledge of target 
phenomena themselves. I have pointed to idealization and features of scientific modeling as 
reasons to doubt that, by and large, this is so; explanations that do not involve models or 
idealizations may not face the attendant complications. The selective realism introduced here is 
meant to replace a realism predicated on the requirement that scientific accounts aim for or 
achieve truth about the targets of investigation directly. It is meant to replace realism about the 
nature of phenomena depicted in science with a realism about some of the causal patterns 
embodied by those phenomena.  
In the remainder of this last section, I want to explore some advantages to this approach 
to realism in contrast to a realism that posits target phenomena as the objects of scientific 
knowledge. To start, this realism about causal patterns better accommodates some features of our 
present-day scientific achievements. The motivation for this approach is accommodating 
scientific practices bound up with the production of scientific knowledge that don’t seem to be in 
pursuit of truth (of target phenomena) or at least not truth alone, as detailed in section 1. Beyond 
that, this approach predicts a continuing plurality of scientific accounts of the very same 
phenomena whenever scientists are interested in different features of those phenomena rather 
than movement toward a single, integrated account. I take it this well describes the present 
situation in many fields, as evidenced by the philosophical popularity of various pluralisms. This 
approach reconciles this continuing plurality of accounts with both a realist perspective and the 

 
19
expectation of a unitary empirical reality, both of which I, at least, find to be compelling ideas, 
worth maintaining if possible.  
I wonder whether a causal pattern realism such as I have sketched here might not also 
open up an interpretation of cumulative scientific progress that resists the antirealist’s pessimism. 
If we are traditional realists, then we must conclude that science has fallen short of knowledge 
again and again, and that theory change doesn’t by and large seem to be getting us closer to the 
truth. Many superseded scientific theories posit radically different views of the world; they thus 
must have been radically incorrect. Thus the pessimistic meta-induction: Why think our current 
accounts are true, when their many predecessors were not? However, if we are realists about 
knowledge of causal patterns, the outlook is perhaps rosier. Taking our scientific achievements 
to constitute objective understanding of phenomena based in knowledge of some among many 
causal patterns enables a subtler accounting of what past scientific achievements have had right. 
The relationality of knowledge of causal patterns to the cognitive needs of the investigators and 
their audiences enables a possible explanation for radically different accounts. Though all cannot 
be true, they might all achieve or at least pursue knowledge of different causal patterns. Further, 
the sensitivity of our stores of scientific knowledge to the cognitive circumstances of scientists 
and their audiences can help legitimize the social influences on past scientific findings that other 
realisms may take to be threats.  
Of course, some scientific conjectures are simply wrong: they posit causal patterns that 
do not exist. But science arguably has latched onto some of the many causal patterns embodied 
in phenomena of interest. Many previously accepted theories captured causal patterns that are 
embodied in phenomena, even if they were later replaced by other theories that depicted other 
patterns, including sometimes more refined relatives of the original pattern. Causal pattern 

 
20
realism may be able to account for theory change resembling reduction of prior theories to their 
replacements in terms of related causal patterns and radical theory change in terms of 
transforming priorities, questions, and background assumptions. Of course, one would need to 
motivate the plausibility of this approach for specific instances of theory change, which is a 
project that is, unfortunately, not only beyond what I can accomplish in this chapter but also 
more or less beyond my expertise. So, my articulation of how a causal pattern realism can 
accommodate theory change will by necessity remain suggestive. 
Stanford (2003) and Tulodziecki (2017), among others, have argued against selective 
realism’s ability to rebut the pessimistic meta-induction. Both highlight how jettisoned theories 
fare poorly with regards to successful reference and approximate truth from the perspective of 
our current theories, which are presumed by the realist to be true. A causal pattern realism such 
as I have described, however, does not posit the truth of our current best theories—at least not 
their truth of the targets of investigation. Because different accounts of the same phenomena may 
target distinct and even unrelated causal patterns, misconstruing other features of the target 
phenomena along the way, these accounts may emphasize different aspects and even posit 
different entities. This does not give us grounds for claiming that a past theory’s successes will 
be conserved from the perspective of current theory but rather grounds for suspecting that past 
scientific accounts succeeded at generating scientific knowledge of causal patterns apt for the 
epistemic and social locations in which they were formulated. There can be different and even 
incompatible ways to define causal variables that give rise to patterns of counterfactual 
dependence invariant over some range of conditions. Note that this does leave intact the ability to 
diagnose shortcomings—empirical and programmatic—in past research. One may still complain 
that this suggests too low a bar for a proper realism. I intend attenuated commitments to truth or 

 
21
attempted truth to be a feature of the view, so I accept that the resulting realism—and its strategy 
for interpreting past scientific successes—might strike some as insufficiently yoked to accuracy.  
I propose that the same approach I have suggested for accommodating past scientific 
change suffices also as a basis for confidence in the epistemic success of our present scientific 
accounts. Our current best theories are probably not true. Some of our current best theories even 
contradict one another. All of those theories, along with scientific models and perhaps other 
forms of scientific accounts, stand a good chance of being jettisoned or significantly altered 
sometime in the future. But even if that comes to pass, it need not undermine their contribution 
to human understanding. If humans now use these accounts to yield knowledge of real causal 
patterns that satisfy our cognitive needs, then it does not matter if they aren't strictly true, or turn 
out to not be true, of the phenomena they target. Some postulated causal patterns may turn out 
not to obtain at all, but many more are real—revealing important aspects of the world, even as 
they are incomplete and shaped by our present epistemic and social locations.  
Whatever knowledge science generates is in response to our cognitive needs. That much 
is uncontroversial, I think. And our cognitive needs regularly motivate simplified accounts of our 
complex world. Simplified accounts privilege some aspects of phenomena to draw connections 
with other related phenomena, while neglecting other aspects. This is one reason for the 
widespread value of idealizations in scientific accounts. In this chapter, I have argued that these 
simplified accounts can qualify as knowledge even if they are not strictly true of phenomena 
insofar as they are knowledge of something else. It has often been said that science focuses on 
laws, regularities, and repeat phenomena rather than one-off events. It's not a far stretch to 
suggest that science achieves an understanding of phenomena—the events and occurrences of 
our world—by generating knowledge of some of the laws, patterns, and tendencies these 

 
22
phenomena embody. On the view I have developed, the resulting scientific knowledge is not 
technically of the targets of scientific investigation but of some of the causal patterns they 
embody. This causal pattern realism enables scientific realism to be maintained regardless of 
scientists’ habit of sacrificing truth of phenomena for other epistemic priorities, and it holds 
promise for a realism-friendly interpretation of past scientific change and present scientific 
knowledge. Science is always in revision, but along the way, it is amassing ever more 
understanding via knowledge of causal patterns. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Kareem Khalifa, Insa Lawler, and Elay Shech for organizing this volume; to Chris 
Pincock for fruitful exchanges and helpful feedback on this chapter; and to Insa Lawler, Kareem 
Khalifa, Michela Massimi, Aaron Novick, and the Caltech philosophy of physics reading group 
as well for their feedback and suggestions.  
 
References 
Asay, J. 2013. "Three Paradigms of Scientific Realism: A Truthmaking Account." International 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 27: 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1080/02698595.2013.783971 
  
Bokulich, Alyssa. 2009. "Explanatory Fictions," in Fictions in Science: Philosophical Essays on 
Modeling and Idealization, Mauricio Suárez Ed. Routledge Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 
New York: Routledge. 
  
Bokulich, Alyssa. 2011. "How Scientific Models Can Explain," Synthese 180:33-45. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-009-9565-1 
  
Cartwright, Nancy. 1983. How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/0198247044.001.0001 
  
Chakravartty, Anjan. 2001. "The Semantic or Model-Theoretic View of Theories and Scientific 
Realism," Synthese 127:325-345. 
  

 
23
Elgin, Catherine. 2004. "True Enough," Philosophical Issues. 14: 113-131. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-6077.2004.00023.x 
  
Elgin, Catherine. 2017. True Enough. Boston: MIT Press. 
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262036535.001.0001 
  
Giere, Ronald N. 1988. Explaining Science - A Cognitive Approach. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226292038.001.0001 
  
Lawler, Insa. 2021. "Scientific Understanding and Felicitous Legitimate Falsehoods," Synthese 
198 (7): 6859-6887. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02495-0 
  
Levy, Arnon. 2017. "Modeling and Realism: Strange Bedfellows?," in Routledge Handbook of 
Scientific Realism, Juha Saatsi Ed. New York: Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203712498-20 
 
Massimi, Michela. 2019. "Realism, Perspectivism, and Disagreement in Science," Synthese. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02500-6 
  
Matthewson, John and Michael Weisberg. 2009. "The Structure of Tradeoffs in Model 
Building." Synthese 170: 169-190. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-008-9366-y 
 
Morrison, Margaret. 2016. "Models and Theories", in Oxford Handbook to Philosophy of 
Science, P. Humphreys (ed.), Oxford: Oxford UP. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199368815.013.32 
  
Odenbaugh, Jay. 2003. "Complex Systems, Trade‐offs, and Theoretical Population Biology: 
Richard Levin's ‘Strategy of Model Building in Population Biology’ revisited," Philosophy of 
Science 70: 1496-1507. https://doi.org/10.1086/377425 
 
Pincock, Christopher. 2021. "A Defense of Truth as a Necessary Condition on Scientific 
Explanation." Erkenntnis. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10670-020-00371-9 
 
Potochnik, Angela. 2012. "Modeling Social and Evolutionary Games." Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical 
Sciences 43:202-208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsc.2011.10.035 
 
Potochnik, Angela. 2015. "The Diverse Aims of Science." Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Science 53: 71-80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2015.05.008 
 
Potochnik, Angela. 2015. "Causal Patterns and Adequate Explanations." Philosophical Studies 
172: 1163-1182. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-014-0342-8 
  
Potochnik, Angela. 2016. "Scientific Explanation: Putting Communication First." Philosophy of 
Science 83: 721-732. https://doi.org/10.1086/687858 
 

 
24
Potochnik, Angela. 2017. Idealization and the Aims of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226507194.001.0001 
  
Potochnik, Angela. 2020. "Review of Catherine Elgin's True Enough." Philosophical Review 
128: 363-366. https://doi.org/10.1215/00318108-7537361 
  
Psillos, Stathis. 2011. "Living with Models," Synthese 180: 3-17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-
009-9563-3 
  
Rice, Collin. 2019. "Understanding Realism," Synthese 198 (5): 4097-4121. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02331-5 
  
Saatsi, Juha. forthcoming. "Realism and Explanatory Perspectivism," in Understanding 
Perspectivism: Scientific Challenges and Methodological Prospects, M. Massimi & C.D. McCoy 
(Eds.), New York: Routledge. 
  
Stanford, Kyle. 2003. "Pyrrhic Victories for Scientific Realism," The Journal of Philosophy 100: 
553-572. 
  
Sullivan, Emily and Kareem Khalifa. 2019. "Idealizations and Understanding: Much Ado About 
Nothing?," Australasian Journal of Philosophy 97: 673-689. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2018.1564337 
  
Suppe, Frederick. 1989. The Semantic Conception of Theories and Scientific Realism. Chicago: 
University of Illinois Press. 
  
Tulodziecki, Dana. 2017. "Against Selective Realism(s)," Philosophy of Science 84. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/694004 
  
Weisberg, Michael. 2013. Simulation and Similarity: Using Models to Understand the World. 
Oxford: Oxford UP. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199933662.001.0001 
 
Wimsatt, William. 1987. "False Models as Means to Truer Theories," in Neutral Models in 
Biology. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
  
Woodward, J. 2003. Making Things Happen: A Theory of Causal Explanation. Oxford: Oxford 
UP. https://doi.org/10.1093/0195155270.001.0001 

