BOOK REVlEWS 
The Philosophical Review, Vol. 109, No. 2 (April 2000) 
PROBABILITY AhD CONDITIONALS: BELIEF REVISION AhD RATIONAL 
DECISION. Edited by ELLERY 
EELLS and B
m
 
SKYRMS. Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, 1994. Pp. vii, 201 
This collection of essays is a Festschrift for Ernest W. Adams, and is based 
on a symposium that was held in his honor in 1993. As the title suggests, 
most of the essays focus on probability and the logic of conditionals, and 
the relationship between them; they draw their inspiration from Adams’s 
seminal work on the subject. As a computer scientist, I was struck by just 
how much the topics discussed play a major role in much recent work in 
computer science, and how relevant much recent work in computer sci- 
ence is to some of the issues discussed here. 
The volume starts and ends with contributions by Patrick Suppes, who 
was Adams’s thesis advisor. (In fact, Adams was Suppes’s first student.) 
Suppes’ first contribution, “Some questions about Adams’ conditionals,” 
considers some issues related to Adams’s probabilistic analysis of condi- 
tionals. The last contribution, “A brief survey of Adams’ contributions to 
philosophy,” does just what its title says. 
The central theme of six of the essays is the analysis of the CCCP-the 
conditional construal of conditional probability. A reader coming to this 
topic for the first time is best advised to start by reading “The hypothesis 
of the conditional construal of conditional possibility,” by Alan Hfijek and 
Ned Hall, the sixth essay in the volume. It lays out the central problem 
very clearly. Writing A > B for the conditional “if A then B”, the CCCP 
roughly states that P(A > B) = P(Bk); that is, the probability of the con- 
ditional is just the conditional probability. Hfijek and Hall describe why the 
problem is of interest, the reasons to believe CCCP, and the reasons to be 
suspicious of it. To my mind, the reasons to believe the hypothesis all boil 
down to the “it sounds right” argument; as van Fraassen pointed out back 
in 1976, it seems that the probability of the assertion “if I throw an even 
number then it will be a six” seems to be precisely the conditional prob- 
ability of six given that I throw an even number. All the other reasons to 
believe the CCCP seem to me to appeal to intuitions based on this line of 
reasoning. 
As is well known, this reasoning is completely correct if (and only if) A 
is probabilistically independent of A > B. (Of course, to make sense of 
this statement, we need an underlying formal model of conditionals and 
probability. For the statement to be true, we must also assume that con- 
ditionals satisfy some standard properties. I take for granted in the re- 
mainder of this discussion that we have such models and that they satisfy 
the standard assumptions.) It seems that for many examples that arise in 
277 

BOOK REVLEWS 
practice, we can indeed assume that A is probabilistically independent of 
A > B. To my mind, that is what accounts for the intuitive appeal of the 
CCCP. However, there are well-known examples of situations where A and 
A > B are not independent. Perhaps the best known is Newcomb’s problem 
(Nozick 1969) 
While these examples may seem to settle the issue, they have not stopped 
various attempts to prove positive and negative results. The positive results 
involve coming up with variants of the CCCP that are valid; the negative 
results involve proving triviality results, showing that proposed variants of 
the CCCP hold only in trivial models. (The precise notion of “trivial” 
varies from paper to paper.) The remainder of the Hfijek and Hall paper, 
as well as the following two essays by Hfijek and Hall individually (“Triviality 
on the cheap?” and “Back in the CCCP”) are devoted to proving various 
such triviality results. Three essays that come earlier in the collection (“Ad- 
ams conditionals,” by Brian Skyrms, “Letter to Brian Skyrms,” by Robert 
Stalnaker, and “Conditionals as random variables,” by Robert Stalnaker 
and Richard Jeffries) are devoted to proving positive results. The key idea 
in all of these contributions is that of viewing conditional chances (in the 
case of Skyrms) and conditional sentences (in the case of Stalnaker and 
Jeffrey) as random variables on possible worlds. 
The fifth essay, “From Adams’ conditionals to default expressions, causal 
conditions, and counterfactuals,” is by a computer scientist, Judea Pearl. 
It takes as its point of departure work on defeasible and non-monotonic 
reasoning in the AI community (McCarthy 1980, Reiter 1980). The goal 
of this work is to provide semantics for statements like “birds typically/ 
normally/by default fly.” We want to be able to conclude from such state- 
ments that, for example, if all we know about Tweety is that Tweety is a 
bird, then Tweety flies, while still allowing it to be consistent that Oscar 
the bird does not fly. 
Many different approaches have been suggested for capturing default 
reasoning. Recently, a number of approaches have been suggested-based 
on preference orders (Kraus, Lehmann, and Magidor 1990), Spohn’s (1988) 
ordinal conditional functions, nonstandard analysis (Lehmann and Magi- 
dor 1992), possibility measures (Dubois and Prade 1991), and limiting prob- 
‘Recall that in Newcomb’s problem, there are two opaque boxes. In Box 1, there 
is $1,000, Box 2 either contains $1,000,000 or is empty. You can choose just Box 2 
or both Box 1 and Box 2. You get the contents of the box(es) that you choose. It 
seems obvious that you should choose both boxes, but there is a catch. A demon, 
who you believe can predict your behavior exactly (or, at least, extremely well), has 
chosen what to put in Box 2. The demon put $1,000,000 in Box 2 exactly if he 
expected you to take only Box 2; otherwise he left Box 2 empty. The question here 
is whether “I choose both boxes” is independent of “there is $1,000,000 in Box 1, 
given that I choose both boxes.” 

BOOK REVlEWS 
abilities (called €-semantics in the literature) (Pearl 1989)-that 
are all 
characterized by the same axioms, ones originally introduced by Adams 
(1966, 19’75) for conditional logic.* In retrospect, this should not be sur- 
prising. A defeasible statement like “birds typically fly” can be viewed as 
the conditional statement “if it is a bird then it flies.” Indeed, Pearl’s E- 
semantics is precisely Adams’s semantics for conditionals. Adams’s axioms 
are well known to license only a few of the conclusions we would hope to 
derive. For example, they do not allow transitivity: if as are typically bs and 
bs are typically a, we cannot conclude that as are typically a. Pearl discusses 
approaches for going beyond Adams’s axioms that would allow such con- 
clusions, including techniques involving maximum entropy, for example. 
He also connects these ideas to counterfactuals and belief revision. Perhaps 
it is worth mentioning here that Pearl has more recently done work on 
the probabilistic evaluation of counterfactual queries (Balke and Pearl 
1994; see also Pearl 2000), work that is quite related to the concerns of 
Skyrms’s article in this volume. 
The ninth essay, “The Howson-Urbach proofs of Bayesian principles,” 
by Charles Chihara, criticizes the arguments presented by Howson and 
Urbach (1989) in defense of the Bayesian approach, in particular, the Prin- 
ciple of Conditionalization. Part of the problem, as Chihara notes, is the 
lack of a formal statement of the Principle. What becomes clear reading 
Chihara’s essay is that another part of the problem is the lack of good 
models for representing how knowledge and beliefs change over time, as 
new information is acquired. I believe that some of the models used in 
computer science-while 
intended to model simpler settings than those 
typically considered in the philosophy literature-may help in this regard. 
At the risk of pointing too much to my own work, I direct readers to the 
models of runs and systems in (Fagin et al. 1995, chap. ll), which are 
applied in a probabilistic setting in (Halpern and Tuttle 1993). 
The tenth essay, “Learning the Impossible,” by Vann McGee, considers 
the problem of updating on evidence that has prior probability 0. He con- 
siders two approaches, one based on Popper functions, the other based on 
nonstandard probabilities, and proves them equivalent. Interestingly, as I 
mentioned earlier, nonstandard probabilities arise in a very similar way in 
the analysis of default reasoning (Lehmann and Magidor 1992). 
I’d like to conclude this review on a more personal note. I first met 
Ernest Adams in 1994. We discovered that we were using very similar tech- 
nical approaches to solve problems that were seemingly unrelated. I was 
working with some colleagues on finding approaches for going from sta- 
tistical information to degrees of belief (this work is reported in Bacchus 
‘For yet another approach that provides an explanation of why all these ap- 
proaches are characterized by the same axioms, see (Friedman and Halpern 1998). 
279 

BOOK REVIEWS 
et al. 1996); as it happens, our results also have relevance to nonmonotonic 
reasoning and conditional logic, although that wasn’t our primary moti- 
vation). Ernest was working with his son Jim, who has a Ph.D. in political 
science and at that time was a postdoctoral fellow, on extending some of 
the ideas in his approach to conditional logic to dealing with some voting 
anomalies in political theory. Among other things, the hope was to get a 
notion of conditional logic that allowed transitivity. In both cases the key 
idea was to assume a uniform prior on a set of states. (As shown in Bacchus 
et al. 1996, this idea is closely related to Pearl’s use of maximum entropy 
to achieve the same effect.) In the course of discussing these issues, it 
became clear how many points of contact there are between the work in 
this area in AI and computer science and the work in philosophy. This 
volume, with its discussions of probability, conditionals, counterfactuals, 
belief revision, and default reasoning-all 
issues of concern in both com- 
munities-helps 
bring out the connections clearly. 
JOSEPH Y. HALPERN 
Cornell University, Computer Science 
References 
Adams, E. 1966. “Probability and the Logic of Conditionals.” In Aspects o j  
Inductive Logic, ed. J. Hintikka and P. Suppes. Amsterdam: North Hol- 
land. 
. 1975. The Logic of Conditionals. Dordrecht: D. Reidel. 
Bacchus, F., A. J. Grove, J. Y Halpern, and D. Koller. 1996. “From Statistical 
Knowledge Bases to Degrees of Belief.” ArtiJicial Intelligence 87:75-143. 
Balke, A., and J. Pearl. 1994. “Probabilistic Evalution of Counterfactual 
Queries.” Proceedings of the Twelfth National Conference on ArtiJicial Intelli- 
gence (AAAI), 1994, 230-3’7. 
Dubois, D., and H. Prade. 1991. “Possibilistic Logic, Preferential Models, 
Non-monotonicity and Related Issues.” Proceedings of the Twelfth Interna- 
tional Joint Conference on Artz3cial Intelligence (IJCAI), 1991, 419-24. 
Fagin, R., J. Y. Halpern, Y. Moses, and M. Y. Vardi. 1995. Reasoning about 
Knowkdge. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Friedman, N., and J. Y. Halpern. 1998. “Plausibility Measures and Default 
Reasoning.” Forthcoming in Journal of the ACM. 
Halpern, J. Y., and M. R. Tuttle. 1993. “Knowledge, Probability, and Ad- 
versaries.” Journal of the ACM 40:91’7-62. 
Howson, C., and P. Urbach. 1989. ScientiJic Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach. 
La Salle, Ill.: Open Court. 
Kraus, S., D. Lehmann, and M. Magidor. 1990. “Nonmonotonic Reasoning, 
Preferential Models and Cumulative Logics.” ArtiJicial Intelligence 44:167- 
207. 
280 

BOOK REVlEWS 
Lehmann, D., and M. Magidor. 1992. “What Does a Conditional Knowl- 
edge Base Entail?” ArtiJicial Intelligence 55:l-60. 
McCarthy, J. 1980. “Circumscription-A Form of Non-monotonic Reason- 
ing.” Artijicial Intelligence 13:27-39. 
Nozick, R. 1969. “Newcomb’s Problem and Two Principles of Choice.” In 
Essays in Honor of Carl G. Hempel, ed. N. Rescher et al., 130-31. Dordrecht: 
D. Reidel. 
Pearl, J. 1989. “Probabilistic Semantics for Nonmonotonic Reasoning: A 
Survey.” In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Principles of 
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR), 
1989, ed. R. J. Brachman, H. 
J. Levesque, and R. Reiter, 505-16. Reprinted in Readings in Uncertain 
Reasoning, ed. G. Shafer and J. Pearl, 699-710 (San Francisco: Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1990). 
. 2000. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. New York: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 
Reiter, R. 1980. “A Logic for Default Reasoning.” Artijicial Intelligence 13: 
Spohn, W. 1988. “Ordinal Conditional Functions: A Dynamic Theory of 
Epistemic States.” In Causation in Decision, Belief Change, and Statistics, 
vol. 2, ed. W. Harper and B. Skyrms, 105-34. Dordrecht: D. Reidel. 
81-132. 
The Philosophical Review, Vol. 109, No. 2 (April 2000) 
LOGIC AhD REALITY: ESSAYS ON THE LEGACY OF ARTHUR PRIOR. By 
J. COPELAND, 
ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996. Pp. x, 545. 
Arthur Prior was a truly philosophical logician. Though he believed formal 
logic to be worthy of study in its own right, of course, the source of Prior’s 
great passion for logic was his faith in its capacity for clarifylng philosoph- 
ical issues, untangling philosophical puzzles, and solving philosophical 
problems. Despite the fact that he has received far less attention than he 
deserves, Prior has had a profound influence on the development of phil- 
osophical and formal logic over the past forty years, a fact to which the 
present volume bears eloquent witness. The genesis of the volume was the 
1989 Arthur Prior Memorial Conference, held appropriately enough at the 
University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand, where Prior had 
his first appointment in philosophy. However, this is not a volume of pro- 
ceedings. Only eight of the twenty-two essays were actually presented at the 
conference. The rest (with the exception of three previously unpublished 
essays by Prior) were solicited by the editor specially for the volume. The 
subtitle-Essays 
on the Legacy ofArthur Prior-is 
an appropriate one. Few of 
the essays devote much space to Prior’s work per se. Rather, most address 
281 

