Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
DOI 10.1007/s10508-006-9142-3
ORIGINAL PAPER
Asexuality: Classiﬁcation and Characterization
Nicole Prause · Cynthia A. Graham
Received: 6 December 2005 / Revised: 20 March 2006 / Accepted: 8 July 2006 / Published online: 8 March 2007
C⃝Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2007
Abstract The term “asexual” has been deﬁned in many dif-
ferent ways and asexuality has received very little research
attention. In a small qualitative study (N = 4), individuals
who self-identiﬁed as asexual were interviewed to help for-
mulate hypotheses for a larger study. The second larger study
was an online survey drawn from a convenience sample de-
signed to better characterize asexuality and to test predictors
of asexual identity. A convenience sample of 1,146 indi-
viduals (N = 41 self-identiﬁed asexual) completed online
questionnaires assessing sexual history, sexual inhibition and
excitation, sexual desire, and an open-response questionnaire
concerning asexual identity. Asexuals reported signiﬁcantly
less desire for sex with a partner, lower sexual arousability,
and lower sexual excitation but did not differ consistently
from non-asexuals in their sexual inhibition scores or their
desire to masturbate. Content analyses supported the idea
that low sexual desire is the primary feature predicting asex-
ual identity.
Keywords Asexual . Asexuality . Sexual arousability .
Sexual desire . Sexual orientation
N. Prause
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences,
Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, USA
N. Prause · C. A. Graham
The Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender,
and Reproduction, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, USA
C. A. Graham ()
Oxford Doctoral Course in Clinical Psychology, Isis Education
Centre, Warneford Hospital,
Headington, Oxford OX3 7JX, England
e-mail: cynthia.graham@hmc.ox.ac.uk
Introduction
While researchers often assess sexual desire as one con-
tinuous dimension, individuals with very high or very low
sexual desire typically are thought to be qualitatively distinct
from others with “normal” sexual desire in clinical settings
(cf. Haslam, 1995). The third edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM; American
Psychiatric Association, 1980) was the ﬁrst to include psy-
chosexual and, speciﬁcally, Inhibited Sexual Desire, disor-
ders. Subsequently renamed “hypoactive sexual desire disor-
der” in the DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association,
2000), it is deﬁned as a deﬁciency or absence of sexual fan-
tasies and desire for sexual activity, which causes marked
distress or interpersonal difﬁculty. The classiﬁcation of sex-
ual disorders in the DSM has recently come under criticism
(Bancroft, Graham, & McCord, 2001; Basson et al., 2000;
Tiefer, 2001; Vroege, Gijs, & Hengeveld, 2001), although
sexual desire is still thought to play a fundamental role in
the experience of sexuality (Brezsnyak & Whisman, 2004).
The DSM acknowledges the problematic lack of normative
age- or gender-related data on frequency or degree of sexual
desire to delineate “deﬁcient” sexual desire, and some have
suggested cutoffs for deﬁning normal levels of sexual desire
(Riley & Riley, 2000; Schover & LoPiccolo, 1982). A group
whose members identify as “asexual” has been appearing
increasingly on the Internet (e.g., Jay, 2003), which brings a
different perspective to what it might mean to have very low
sexual desire. Asexuality raises questions concerning the role
of “personal distress” in deﬁning sexual desire problems. In
this study, we attempt to better characterize the way that the
label “asexual” is used and investigate what distinguishes
those who identify as asexual from those who do not.
Implicit in the debate about what constitutes a “normal”
level of sexual desire is an assumption that some level of
Springer

342
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
sexual desire is normative. A person with no sexual desire
seeking guidance from a clinician may be diagnosed with
hypoactive sexual desire disorder or sexual aversion disor-
der, or may be referred for medical evaluation. Indeed, a
decrease in sexual desire can signal psychological or phys-
iological disorders (e.g., depression, hypothyroidism), but
is low or absent sexual desire necessarily associated with
pathology? “Pathologizing” has been deﬁned as assigning
a diagnosis on the basis of cognitions or behaviors in the
absence of substantive evidence that the cognitions or be-
haviors are maladaptive (Rubin, 2000). Currently, evidence
does not suggest that cognitions and behaviors associated
with asexuality necessarily signal a problem. All subsequent
use of the term “asexual” in this article refers to those who
identify as asexual.
One deﬁnition of “asexual” is lacking interest in or de-
sire for sex (Editors of the American Heritage Dictionaries,
2000). Some have suggested that human asexuals are in-
dividuals who “do not experience sexual attraction” (Jay,
2003), who have never felt sexual attraction to “anyone
at all” (Bogaert, 2004), or who have no “sexual interest”
(Carlat, Camargo, & Herzog, 1997). In one study, partici-
pants were said to be asexual if they did not prefer either
homosexual or heterosexual activities on a Sexual Activ-
ities and Preferences Scale (Nurius, 1983). Green (2000)
described asexual transsexuals as having “a dearth of sexual
attractions or behaviors” (p. 791, emphasis added). Women
in lesbian relationships that may have had romantic compo-
nents, but no sexual behaviors, have also been described as
asexual (Rothblum & Brehony, 1993). It is unclear whether
these characteristics are thought to be lifelong, or if they may
be acquired.
Despite this lack of clarity, some researchers tend to char-
acterize asexuality as negative. For example, they renounce
the “asexuality” of older persons (Deacon, Minichiello, &
Plummer, 1995), young lesbians (Zevy, 1999), and individu-
als with physical disabilities (Milligan & Neufeldt, 2001) or
severe mental illness (Carmen & Brady, 1990). In summary,
researchers have used the term “asexual” to refer to indi-
viduals with low or absent sexual desire or attractions, low
or absent sexual behaviors, exclusively romantic non-sexual
partnerships, or a combination of both absent sexual desires
and behaviors, and they often consider the label pejorative.
Very little research has addressed asexuality. Recently,
Bogaert (2004) used preexisting data from the U.K. Na-
tional Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Johnson,
Wadsworth, Wellings, & Field, 1994) to suggest that approx-
imately 1% of their adult sample was asexual. Asexuals were
deﬁned as those who endorsed the statement: “I have never
felt sexually attracted to anyone at all.” The study compared
the asexual group (N = 195) with the remaining “sexual”
participants (N = 18,426): those participants who reported
that they had felt attracted to males, females, or both. Of
the 15 variables investigated, many differentiated asexuals
from non-asexuals. The variables predicting asexual classiﬁ-
cation included gender (more females than males), older age,
marital status (more likely to be single), higher religiosity,
short stature, low education, low socioeconomic status, poor
health, later onset of sexual activity, later onset of menarche,
fewer sexual partners, and less frequent sexual activity with
a current partner. Analyses were also performed for each
gender separately. Asexuality in women was predicted by
age, socioeconomic status, education, race/ethnicity, height,
menarche age, and religiosity. Asexuality in men was pre-
dicted by socioeconomic status, education, height, and reli-
giosity.
This study had three primary limitations. First, only a
single item deﬁned individuals as asexual or sexual. The
reliability of the item is unknown, its discriminant validity
has not been established, and only limited evidence of con-
vergent validity was provided. Second, by using preexisting
data, constructs previously identiﬁed as potential features
of asexual identity were not assessed. For example, sex-
ual arousability was not available to assess. Additionally,
the question used to identify asexuals assessed the direc-
tion of attraction, but there was no measure of the amount
of sexual desire or attraction. Given the many authors who
have deﬁned asexuality in terms of a lack of sexual de-
sire, this oversight neglects a potentially central aspect of
asexual identity. Lastly, although Bogaert (2004) examined
sexual behavior frequency as possible predictors of asex-
uality, there were no questions on solitary sexual activi-
ties, including masturbation. It was acknowledged that the
study was primarily exploratory, required replication, and
that future work should investigate those who self-identify as
asexual.
The current research was designed to better characterize
individuals who self-identify as asexual and to provide ex-
ploratory data for future hypothesis-driven research. In Study
1, a small group of self-identiﬁed asexuals participated in
semi-structured, in-depth interviews that elicited informa-
tion about their sexual development and their understanding
and experience of asexuality. Based on the qualitative data
derived from these interviews, hypotheses were formulated
for a larger second study. In Study 2, a convenience sample
of 1,146 individuals (N = 41 self-identiﬁed asexuals) com-
pleted online questionnaires assessing their sexual history,
sexual excitation and inhibition, sexual desire, sexual arous-
ability, perceived advantages and disadvantages of asexual-
ity, and their understanding of the term “asexual.” The sur-
vey included several standardized questionnaires, but also an
open-ended, essay-response questionnaire, which was sub-
sequently evaluated by content analysis. The qualitative and
quantitative data for asexuals and non-asexuals were com-
pared to test our predictions concerning which variables were
most predictive of asexual status.
Springer

Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
343
Study 1
Method
Participants
Participants were recruited from ﬂyers posted in a Midwest-
ern town in the United States. The ﬂyer requested women
or men “who identify themselves as asexual” to participate
in an interview. The informed consent described the study
as designed to inform a larger, future questionnaire study
by consulting with those who think of themselves as asex-
ual. The ﬁrst author interviewed ﬁve individuals (3 women,
2 men). One of the male participants repeatedly asserted
during his interview that he no longer thought that he was
asexual, and his data were not included in analyses. Of the
remaining four interviewees, they ranged in age from 31 to
42 years (M = 35.5, SD = 5.07). Two had completed some
college and two held an undergraduate degree. All were cur-
rently single. On a 1 to 7 Likert scale, three reported being
completely heterosexual and one reported a “2” for predom-
inantly heterosexual. One reported experiencing orgasm in
his lifetime while the remaining three were unsure if they
had experienced orgasm.
Measures
Interviews were conducted individually. The semi-structured
interviews1 were taped and subsequently transcribed for con-
tent analyses. The broad content areas assessed included sex-
ual development, understanding/deﬁnition of asexuality, and
some additional areas covering what was thought would be
important to address in a study on asexuality. The intervie-
wees also completed two standardized questionnaires: the
Sexual Desire Inventory (SDI; Spector, Carey, & Steinberg,
1996), and the Sexual Inhibition and Sexual Excitation
Scales (Janssen, Vorst, Finn, & Bancroft, 2002).
Sexual Desire Inventory. The SDI was used to measure
trait levels of sexual desire. Two self-report subscales are in-
cluded in this measure: Solitary Sexual Desire (Solitary sub-
scale), measuring an individual’s desire for autoerotic sexual
activity, and Dyadic Sexual Desire (Dyadic subscale), mea-
suring an individual’s desire for sexual activity with a partner.
The Dyadic scale has been used as an index of “trait” sexual
desire (Giargiari, Mahaffey, Craighead, & Hutchison, 2005).
The same subscales emerged for men and women in psycho-
metric analyses. Scores on the SDI are not dependent upon
participants having had any sexual experience. For example,
a respondent may have never experienced sexual intercourse,
1An outline of the interview is available from the corresponding author
upon request.
but could still have a high Dyadic Sexual Desire score. The
two subscales correlated only .35, which the scale authors
have interpreted to mean that the subscales capture differ-
ent variance and may be thought of as measuring relatively
independent constructs (Spector et al., 1996).
Subjective distress is a symptom required for many psy-
chiatric diagnoses, including hypoactive sexual desire dis-
order (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). If asexuals
were not concerned about their level of sexual desire, cer-
tain diagnoses would not be appropriate. Considering the
importance of subjective distress in diagnostic classiﬁcation
schemes, we added the following two questions at the end
of the SDI: (1) “How worried are you about your current
level of sexual desire?” with the response options: “Not at
all worried,” “A little worried,” “Somewhat worried,” and
“Very worried;” (2) “Would you see a health professional to
help you with your level of sexual desire if you could?” with
the response options: “Yes,” “No,” and “Unsure.”
Sexual Inhibition and Sexual Excitation Scales. To as-
sess individuals’ propensity for sexual excitation and sex-
ual inhibition, participants completed the Sexual Inhibition
and Sexual Excitation Scales (Janssen et al., 2002). This
45 item self-report measure has three scales: sexual excita-
tion (SES), sexual inhibition due to threat of performance
failure (SIS-1, e.g., worry about losing an erection in inti-
mate situations with a partner), and sexual inhibition due to
threat of performance consequences (SIS-2, e.g., unplanned
pregnancy).
The SIS/SES was developed for use in men. The version
modiﬁed for use with women and used in this study was
found to have a similar factor structure but there were sig-
niﬁcant gender differences in scores on all three subscales
(Carpenter, Janssen, Graham, Vorst, & Wicherts, 2006). In
the larger male study (Janssen et al., 2002), each of the
three scales possessed acceptable internal consistency aver-
aged across the three different samples in which they were
administered (α: SES = .89, SIS-1 = .81, SIS-2 = .72).
Correlations among the scales were low, suggesting that each
captured unique variance. Test-retest reliability was adequate
for each subscale (r: SES = .76, SIS-1 = .67, SIS-2 =
.74).
Procedure
The interviews and questionnaires took approximately 2
hours to complete. Participants were compensated $20. Tran-
scripts were reviewed independently by both authors. Several
themes, presented below, were identiﬁed. These themes were
used to generate more speciﬁc, testable predictions that were
investigated in Study 2. The Institutional Review Board for
the Protection of Human Subjects approved this study and
the online questionnaire study described subsequently.
Springer

344
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
Results
The questionnaire scores of the interviewees are presented
in Table 1. The means and SDs for scores on each scale
of the SIS/SES from previous studies are reported for men
(Janssen et al., 2002) and for women (Lykins, Janssen, &
Graham, 2006) in Table 1. Unpublished SDI data (Prause,
2005) collected from 3,441 undergraduate university stu-
dents in an online survey conducted to provide some data for
comparison purposes are also provided (females: N = 2224,
males: N = 1217; Age: M = 19.26, SD = 3.86).
In comparison to these unpublished data, the intervie-
wees’ scores on the Dyadic Sexual Desire scale appear low.
Compared to the data for the Sexual Excitation and Inhibi-
tion Scales for men (Janssen et al., 2002) and women (Lykins
et al., 2006), the interviewees had considerably lower levels
of Sexual Excitation, and fairly similar scores on SIS-1 and
SIS-2.
Several themes emerged in the interviews:
Theme 1: Experience and Labeling of Sexual
Behaviors
There was considerable variation in the type and amount
of sexual experience reported by the four participants. One
of the three female participants had experienced very few
sexual behaviors:
Well, I’ve never kissed someone. I mean, I’ve kissed
people, I suppose . . . but not in any sort of sexual way.
I guess on occasion now I’ll kiss a close friend, if I
haven’t seen them for a while or whatever, it’s not a
sexual thing.
This same woman reported a similar lack of experience
of sexual dreams or fantasies:
I would say I’ve never in my life had a dream or a
fantasy, a sexual fantasy, for example, about being with
Table 1
Comparison group and Study 1 participant characteristics
Sample
Comparison
Study 1
Women
Men
(Interviews)
Measure
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
Dyadic sexual desirea
45.1
12.1 51.9
11.2 14.7
5.7
Solitary sexual desireb
6.9
5.2 12.9
5.7
6.0
2.9
SESc
50.6
8.6 57.2
7.9 35.8
5.6
SIS-1d
30.8
4.9 27.1
4.1 33.0
6.2
SIS-2e
31.4
4.7 27.7
4.8 36.1
6.0
aAbsolute range = 8–70.
bAbsolute range = 3–26.
cSexual Excitation Scale; Absolute range = 30–80.
dSexual Inhibition Scale 1; Absolute range = 14–50.
eSexual Inhibition Scale 2; Absolute range = 11–42.
another woman. So I can pretty much say that I have no
lesbian sort of tendencies whatsoever. You would think
that by my age I would have had some fantasy or dream
of something, wouldn’t you? . . . But I’ve never had a
dream or a sexual fantasy about having sex with a man,
either. That I can ever, ever remember.
The remaining three participants had engaged in sexual be-
havior of various kinds, although the descriptions they gave
of these experiences suggested that they were not particu-
larly pleasurable. For example, one woman, discussing her
attempt at masturbating, stated:
I can’t attach pleasure together with it somehow. Was
it physically pleasurable? I don’t know. I just can’t ﬁnd
the words.
One participant observed that a factor in her considering
herself as asexual may have been not ﬁnding sexual activities
enjoyable:
I think those experiences contributed because I didn’t
ﬁnd the act something I enjoyed. I guess I thought
‘What’s the big whoop, what everybody talks about?
Why are they so interested in this thing? I don’t get
anything out of it, so what’s the big whoop?’ I started
feeling this way in my 20’s.
Another woman, who had tried masturbation several times
because she had wondered if she might be able to reach or-
gasm, stopped because “I don’t feel anything and sometimes
it could get painful.” Describing her experience of sexual
intercourse with a man, this woman said:
To me, it was still rather a painful experience and I
didn’t really enjoy having sex. He surely seemed to be
enjoy[ing] it, so whenever he wanted it I didn’t really
refuse.
Lastly, one woman commented that watching sexually ex-
plicit ﬁlms had little effect on her:
The thing is, I could be watching a ﬂat out sexual scene,
like intercourse, and it would have no affect on me
whatsoever. . . . I’ve often been like, “Oh, you’re just
covering this up or whatever,” but I don’t honestly feel
anything. It’s just boring . . . . it’s not even remotely in-
teresting to me. Or it doesn’t [effect] me in any way I’m
aware of.
Interestingly, two of the female participants who had en-
gaged in masturbation talked about how they would not nec-
essarily label this as a “sexual” behavior. Speciﬁcally, one of
these two participants said “I would say masturbation doesn’t
necessarily make you sexual,” while the other struggled to
clarify her perspective saying “I can’t explain it, it doesn’t
seem sexual.”
Springer

Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
345
Theme 2: Deﬁnitions of Asexuality
Although the four participants varied in their degree of
sexual experience, all nonetheless identiﬁed as being “asex-
ual.” The deﬁning feature of asexuality for these individuals
appeared to be a lack of sexual interest or desire, rather than a
lack of sexual experience. One woman articulated this point
succinctly:
Now I can see that I experienced sexual things, but that
doesn’t make me sexual. I have no interest in it. So I
think to me having an interest in sex is what makes
you sexual, and you can be doing sexual things and not
really be sexual, I think.
Another woman made a similar point:
I sort of consider myself asexual because I have no
desire. There’s just no desire. I just really have no desire
to go and have sex with someone. It’s just the furthest
thing from my mind. It seems to me to be boring.
A third participant believed that asexuals’ lack of interest
might have a biological basis:
I think people are probably biologically programmed to
be interested, to have interest in sex, and it just comes
naturally. . . . I think for most people it’s no problem
to ﬁnd a partner to engage in the act, but for some-
body who’s asexual, they don’t have interest. They don’t
know how to get involved in the act, so they remain sex-
ually inactive. Basically, I think it’s the lack of sexual
interest.
Theme 3: Motivation for Engaging in Sexual Behavior
Participants primarily discussed two factors that might
motivate them to engage in sexual behavior, even if they did
not experience sexual interest or desire. The ﬁrst of these was
curiosity. One woman said that she had engaged in sexual
activity when she was younger because of curiosity:
Umm, I was very curious about the opposite sex and
having sex and stuff, things like that, when I was a
teenager, but when it actually–in my 20’s, I never really,
I didn’t ﬁnd the act, I didn’t get any pleasure from the
act.
Two of the female participants talked about getting books on
sexuality and engaging in masturbation although they had no
“desire” to masturbate:
I might have gotten a book on women’s sexuality. I was
like ‘let’s try to do some masturbation here and see if
this goes anywhere.’ And it’s like, ‘umm, no this is just
boring.’ So it was like that’s the extent of it. It was just
boring.
I mean, I was intellectually curious about sexuality. I
was like, ‘Wait, shouldn’t I be experiencing sexuality?’
More like, like something like you should be experi-
encing and I had no desire to do it so I guess there was
a time that I got a book . . .
The second factor that was perceived as a possible reason
for engaging in sexual activity was being in a romantic re-
lationship and feeling that the partner deserved or expected
sex. As one woman stated:
But I suppose if ever I got married to someone, I would
sort of feel like, I want to sort of learn how to ‘do’ sex
because it may be beneﬁcial for this person with me. I
mean, like most people have an expectation of sex in
a relationship and so if I was really going to have a
serious relationship with someone . . . they’re going to
expect it.
Another participant echoed this sentiment:
I think if the person is asexual, he or she might engage
in the act, probably if he or she has a partner, they may
feel obliged to engage in the act. They might pretend to
be like everybody else. They might fear being different
from others, I think. Even if the person is asexual, if
necessary, they might engage in the act just for the
sake, because the partner asked.
Theme 4: Concerns about Asexuality
Of the four interviewees, all but one had questioned why
they were asexual and had worried about whether they were
“normal.” One woman stated:
I’ve actually wondered, like, is there something wrong
with me? What is this business?
Another had worried about how the consequences of being
asexual (e.g., not being in a relationship) made her different
than other people:
I often wonder why I am the way I am now and I think
about not having married or not having a boyfriend or
not seeing anybody. I ﬁnd myself not really interested
but at the same time I kind of worry for not being like
everybody else, I guess.
This same participant also felt that she should make an “ef-
fort” to change:
I feel that I should be normal, not that I do have a clear
idea of what is normal . . . As for myself, I think I should
seek out the opposite sex and be more involved in social
life.
There was also some concern expressed about what other
people might be thinking about them:
I guess I’m wondering what other people are thinking
and other people are feeling and am I the only one who’s
not doing this?
Springer

346
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
Only the male participant indicated a lack of concern about
being asexual:
I’m not worried about it or I’m not concerned about
it. . . . My life is interesting enough and it’s not really,
um, a necessity.
Discussion
The four major themes that recurred in the interviews were
participants’ (1) history of sexual behaviors and what behav-
iors were perceived as sexual, (2) attempts to deﬁne asexual-
ity, (3) lack of motivation for engaging in sexual behaviors,
and (4) concerns about being different from others. Pro-
posed deﬁnitions of asexuality that were reviewed earlier
suggested that asexuals may experience a lower level of sex-
ual motivation and less sexual activity than others, but some
of the interviewees indicated a willingness to engage in un-
wanted, but consensual, sexual behaviors (for discussion of
unwanted, consensual sex, see O’Sullivan & Allgeier, 1998).
The interviews also suggested that asexuals interpret fewer
behaviors as sexual, as compared to non-asexuals, possibly
due to the lack of pleasure associated with them. The inter-
viewees also expressed some concerns that something might
be wrong with them or that they did not feel normal. Fi-
nally, none of the interviewees suggested that asexuals were
either averse to, or afraid of, sex but instead that they were
simply uninterested/bored by it. These observations led to
several hypotheses that guided the selection of assessment
instruments for Study 2.
Study 2
Several hypotheses were suggested by the Study 1 data. First,
it was hypothesized that individuals who identify as asexual
have a speciﬁc lack of sexual desire, although they may not
necessarily lack sexual motivation. Sexual motivation has
been described as incentive motivation (Agmo, 1999) or de-
sire for sexual behaviors that is driven by external cues, such
as the desire to satisfy a romantic partner (Basson, 2001).
Sexual desire, in this study, is conceptualized as the cog-
nitive (or “felt”) component of sexual arousal (Everaerd &
Both, 2001). Asexuals may be willing to engage in sexu-
ally motivated behaviors to achieve nonsexual goals without
experiencing sexual desire. Consequently, it was predicted
that asexuals would report markedly lower sexual desire than
non-asexuals, although they may or may not differ in their
amount of behavioral sexual experience. Sexual desire was
assessed by the Sexual Desire Inventory (Spector et al., 1996;
see description in Study 1). Amount of sexual behavior was
indexed by the number of lifetime sexual partners and fre-
quency of masturbation. Second, asexuals were predicted to
be less inclined to experience sexual arousal due to a higher
threshold to sexual arousal than non-asexuals. In Study 1,
the self-identiﬁed asexuals reported engaging in behaviors
that they recognized were considered sexual by most people
(e.g., genital touching), but that they themselves did not as-
sociate with pleasurable sexual arousal. Sexual arousability
has been deﬁned as an individual’s characteristic rate of ap-
proach to orgasm as a result of sexual stimulation (Whalen,
1966). If asexuals have a higher threshold to experience sex-
ual arousal, their scores on scales assessing sexual arousabil-
ity and related constructs should be signiﬁcantly lower than
non-asexual individuals. Sexual arousability was assessed by
the Sexual Arousability Inventory (Hoon, Hoon, & Wincze,
1976) and the SIS/SES (Janssen et al., 2002; see description
in Study 1).
Third, the interviews did not suggest that the participants
were particularly concerned about their sexual functioning
or about potential negative consequences of engaging in sex-
ual activity, so we predicted that asexuals would not score
higher on the two inhibition scales of the SIS/SES (Janssen
et al., 2002) compared with non-asexuals. Speciﬁcally, SIS-1
includes fears such as losing sexual arousal too easily, wor-
ries about the sexual partner being satisﬁed, and concerns
about performing well sexually. SIS-2 includes fears related
to being caught having sex, experiencing negative conse-
quences such as sexually transmitted infections, causing a
partner pain, and having an appropriate partner (e.g., not too
young).
Finally, the exploratory, qualitative portion of the survey
included open-ended questions about the participant’s def-
inition of asexuality and the advantages and drawbacks of
asexuality. These responses were ﬁrst quantiﬁed using con-
tent analysis and then asexuals’ and non-asexuals’ responses
were compared.
Method
Participants
Participants were recruited through convenience sampling
from undergraduate psychology courses at a large univer-
sity and by online advertisements (e.g., asexuality.org, kin-
seyinstitute.org). The introductory web page for the study
did not mention asexuality, but informed potential volun-
teers that they would be asked about their “sexual feel-
ings (or lack of feelings), sexual experience, and general
personality.”
Initially, 1,538 responses were obtained. Participants were
excluded from analyses who did not complete all of the stan-
dardized questionnaires (N = 357), resubmitted identical or
nearly identical responses (N = 25), or provided responses
Springer

Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
347
that clearly indicated that they were not responding seri-
ously (N = 5; e.g., “my dick is made of legos”). For par-
ticipants who submitted nearly identical responses the data
from the second submission were used. These resubmissions
were considered to reﬂect participants thoughtfully chang-
ing their previous responses. The ﬁnal 1,146 participants
(N = 511 women, 635 men) were between the ages of 18
and 59 (M = 21.7, SD = 6.3). Those recruited through
the psychology courses (N = 732) tended to be younger
(M = 19.77, SD = 2.65) than those recruited through the In-
ternet (N = 414; M = 25.13, SD = 8.96); similar numbers
from each source identiﬁed as female (N = 329 (44.9%),
N = 182 (44%), respectively), male (N = 403 (55.1%),
N = 227 (54.8%), respectively), or other (N = 0, N = 5
(1.2%), respectively).
Measures
Participants completed ﬁve questionnaires online presented
in the same order. Online surveys have been shown to elicit
greater reporting of behaviors that are socially undesirable
(e.g., Ross, Tikkanen, & Mansson, 2000) and are a preferred
method for reaching small populations efﬁciently (Binik,
Mah, & Kiesler, 1999; Birnbaum, 2004). Brief question-
naires were selected preferentially, other psychometric prop-
erties being similar, to increase the likelihood of completion
of all questionnaires (Mustanski, 2001).
Sexual History Questionnaire (SHQ). Developed at The
Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduc-
tion, the SHQ ﬁrst collects general demographic and sexual
information. Demographic questions included gender (male,
female, other), age, education, and relationship status, and
sexual information questions included number of lifetime
sexual partners, number of lifetime sexual intercourse part-
ners, masturbation frequency, worry about sexual problems,
and orgasm consistency (% times reached orgasm when mas-
turbating, % times reached orgasm when engaged in sexual
activity with a partner). One question concerning attraction
was similar to that used in the Bogaert (2004) study. It was
worded slightly differently and asked “Would you describe
the type of person you ﬁnd most sexually attractive as:” and
offered the response options “Only male,” “Mostly male,
but sometimes female,” “Could be equally male or female,”
“Mainly female, but sometimes male,” “Only female” or
“None of the above.”
The questions concerning the number of partners with
whom they had experienced any sexual behaviors in their
lifetime, and the frequency with which they masturbated,
were used as indicators of “Sexual Experience.” The “Life-
time sexual partners” measure was chosen to minimize the
possibility that differences in attitudes toward sexual in-
tercourse, as opposed to non-intercourse sexual behaviors,
might underlie between-group differences. “Masturbation
frequency” was selected to include sexual behaviors less
subject to potential partner availability confounds. Several
studies have noted difﬁculties with behavioral measures of
sexual experience, including participants’ difﬁculty under-
standing the behaviors described (Binson & Catania, 1998)
and difﬁculty accurately recalling the behavior (e.g., Stone,
Catania, & Benson, 1999). However, if sexual behaviors are
rare experiences for asexuals, recall of infrequent events may
be more accurate than if they had unusually high levels of
sexual behaviors. “Sexual activity” was also deﬁned in ev-
ery question that asked about sexual activity as including
“stimulating a partner’s genitals or breasts with your hand or
mouth, and intercourse” and a link through the word “sexual
activity” further speciﬁed “By sex we mean ANY contact
with genitals or with female breasts.”
The SHQ also provided a text box for participants to
type in their sexual orientation. The purpose of allowing
participants to write in their sexual orientation was to com-
pare it with their subsequent response to a multiple-choice
question about sexual orientation. The question was “Which
of these commonly used terms would you use to describe
yourself?” followed by the response options: Heterosex-
ual/Straight; Homosexual/Gay; Bisexual; Asexual. This was
done to quantify how many of those individuals who would
later select their sexual orientation as “asexual” in a multiple-
choice item had self-generated the term “asexual” in this
earlier questionnaire. From these questions, one can surmise
how many people actively used the term to describe their
sexual orientation spontaneously, as compared to those who
used the term only when it was offered as an option.
Sexual Arousability Inventory. The SAI purports to mea-
sure “arousability.” Participants indicated on a 7-point scale
how arousing each of a list of 14 activities was to them (Form
A short version; Hoon et al., 1976). Questions were gener-
ated by inductive methods (Burisch, 1984) then selected to
achieve good internal consistency (α = .91) and predic-
tive utility (e.g., frequency of intercourse). The SAI can be
completed by men or women, regardless of whether they
currently have a sexual partner (Hoon & Chambless, 1998).
Higher scores indicate that a person reports experiencing
more sexual arousal to the list of potential sexual experi-
ences. Recent research has supported the convergent and
discriminant validity of the measure (Zucker et al., 2004).
Sexual orientation questionnaire. The ﬁnal questionnaire
was created for this study by the authors and included two
multiple-choice questions, one multiple-selection question,
and seven questions requiring write-in responses about sex-
ual orientation development, feelings, and perceptions of
asexuality. Responses to the three write-in questions rele-
vant to deﬁnitions and perceptions of asexual identity were
content analyzed (see “Data Analyses” section). The ques-
tions were (1) “What kind of sexual or other experiences
do you expect a person to have had if they call themselves
Springer

348
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
asexual?” (2) “What drawbacks do you see for being asex-
ual, if any?,” and (3) “What beneﬁts do you see for being
asexual, if any?” One multiple-choice item was the follow-
up question for the previous question that requested partici-
pants write in their sexual orientation. Allowing participants
to self-identify their sexual orientation excludes other po-
tentially important aspects of sexual identity (for review, see
Sell, 1997) and does not account for label change over time
(Diamond, 2005). However, since research supports the no-
tion that self-identiﬁcation indices typically covary strongly
(Weinrich et al., 1993) and a main focus of this study was
to begin to examine what self-identiﬁcation as “asexual”
means, self-identiﬁcation of sexual orientation was used as
the primary grouping variable.
Data analyses
Between-groups(asexualvs.non-asexual)comparisonswere
made, although the nature of the samples precludes the pos-
sibility of drawing strong inferences since participants may
differ systematically from a more representative sample from
the population. Regarding gender and age, the only signif-
icant demographic difference between the groups was age
(t(1144) = 3.04, p < .01), so between group comparisons
were controlled for age, when possible, and corrected com-
parisons are reported if age changed the signiﬁcance of the
relationship.
To determine the variables (sexual desire level, sex-
ual arousability level, sexual behaviors, or sexual inhi-
bition shown in Table 2) that best discriminated asex-
uals from non-asexuals, we conducted a binary lo-
gistic regression and Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) analyses. Variables were conceptualized as indi-
cators of either sexual desire level (Dyadic Sexual De-
sire, Solitary Sexual Desire), sexual arousability level
(Sexual Arousability Inventory, Sexual Excitation Scale),
sexual behaviors (Number of lifetime sexual partners,
Masturbation frequency), or sexual inhibition (SIS-1,
SIS-2). A binary logistic regression was also conducted to
identify the predictive utility in odds ratios of the variable(s)
that best categorized individuals as asexual or non-asexual
controlling for age. A substantial minority of participants had
very low Solitary Sexual Desire scores. This violated the sta-
tistical assumption in binary logistic regression that the logit
of this predictor was linear to the binary dependent variable
(asexual identity). As a result, Solitary Sexual Desire was
analyzed as a 4-category, dummy-coded variable reﬂecting
face-valid groups who have desire for sexual activity that
occurs (1) rarely or never, (2) one to a few times per month,
(3) one to a few times per week, or (4) once daily or more.
ROC curve analyses supplemented the regression to as-
sess the classiﬁcation accuracy for each variable individu-
ally. These analyses could also be compared to the variables
found to be most predictive by the binary logistic regression.
Table 2
Study 2 participant characteristics
Asexualsa
Non-asexuals
Womenb
Men
N
%
N
%
N
%
N
%
Women
26
63.4
604
54.7
Completed college
18
43.9
159
14.4
543
86.5
422
83.1
Single/never marriedc
35
85.4
935
85
531
84.6
438
86.2
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
Age
25.5
8.1
21.5
6.2
21.4
5.8
21.9
6.5
No. lifetime sexual partnersd
10.2
33.5
11.5
18.9
9.4
15.2
13.9
23.8
Frequency masturbatione
3.7
2.0
4.5
1.9
3.5
1.8
5.6
1.3
Dyadic sexual desire
16.1
11.7
50.2
9.1
46.5
11.5
52.0
11.3
Solitary sexual desire
9.0
6.9
11.2
6.3
9.2
6.2
13.4
5.6
Excitation
36.0
11.3
53.0
8.1
51.0
9.2
54.2
8.1
SIS-1
33.5
6.9
30.2
5.8
31.3
5.3
29.1
6.3
SIS-2
32.1
8.5
30.3
5.0
31.9
5.0
28.5
4.6
Sexual Arousability Inventory
7.5
19.4
44.7
11.4
43.3
13.8
43.7
13.1
aGroup status (asexual or non-asexual) was deﬁned here by the forced-choice question concerning sexual orientation (not
the written response).
bFive participants identiﬁed as “other” gender. None of these identiﬁed as asexual.
cEight participants did not provide their marital status. All of these participants identiﬁed as non-asexual.
dAll ﬁgures exclude 5 non-asexual participants who reported ≥500 partners as outliers. These 5 individuals reported
10,000, 10,002, 10,003, 9999, and 500 sexual partners. Results of the logistic regression analyses did not change when
these participants were included.
eScale endpoints were: 1 (Never masturbated) and 7 (4 times/week or more).
Springer

Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
349
In ROC analyses, values on a given measure were eval-
uated for their ability to distinguish signal from noise as
outlined in signal detection theory (Green & Swets, 1966).
The false positive rate (those who the measure would clas-
sify as asexual who, in fact, were not asexual) was plotted
against the false negative rate (those who the measure would
classify as not asexual who, in fact, were asexual) for each
value of the measure. In the ROC analyses sensitivity indi-
cated the extent to which the variable accurately classiﬁed
as asexual participants who indeed identiﬁed as asexual, and
speciﬁcity indicated the extent to which a variable correctly
classiﬁed non-asexuals as non-asexual. All of the possible
cut points together formed a positive decelerating function.
The area between this function and a linear function repre-
senting chance classiﬁcation was described as the area under
the curve (AUC). The AUC characterizes how accurately
the sample was classiﬁed on a binary dependent variable
(asexual or non-asexual) beyond chance level. In this study,
the AUC measure quantiﬁed how well a measure correctly
classiﬁed asexuals as asexual.
Qualitative content analyses were completed using meth-
ods outlined for textual analysis by Carpenter (2002) with the
coding system criteria from Neuendorf (2002) using the soft-
ware N6 (QSR International Pty Ltd., 2002). Initially three
coders (the ﬁrst author and two trained research assistants) in-
dependently developed coding trees for each question in the
Sexual Orientation Questionnaire by reviewing 20 nonover-
lapping, randomly selected participant’s essays. The raters
collaboratively integrated their coding trees for each question
and drafted a codebook. Raters then randomly selected and
independently coded 30 additional, non-overlapping cases.
Following an open discussion of this revised codebook, ad-
justments were made to the coding trees. Finally, 201 par-
ticipants were selected. These included all of those asexuals
who provided at least one write in response (N = 32) and a
randomly selected sample of non-asexuals (N = 169) who
provided at least one write in response (see section on SOQ).
Ninety-seven were coded by the ﬁrst author alone, 84 by a
trained undergraduate alone, and 20 cases were coded by
both the ﬁrst author and the trained undergraduate to assess
continued coding agreement.
Results
Questionnaire analyses
Demographic characteristics
There were no signiﬁcant differences in the proportion of in-
dividuals who identiﬁed as asexual based on gender (women,
men, or “other”) χ2(2) = 1.35, ns (see Table 2). Asex-
uals were signiﬁcantly older than non-asexual individuals
t(1139) = 3.94, p < .01, dunpooled = .63. Also, asexuals
and non-asexuals were predominantly single, and asexuals
were more likely to have completed college χ2(1) = 26.37,
p < .01, rø = .15.
Sexual orientation
The ﬁrst opportunity for participants to provide their sexual
orientation occurred in the SHQ and their responses were
coded as: Heterosexual, Homosexual, Bisexual, Asexual,
Mixed, Unsure/Don’t Know, None (“N/A”), or as Miscella-
neous (e.g., “eyes”). The second opportunity to provide their
sexual orientation occurred in the multiple-choice question
in the SOQ. Of the 40 participants who identiﬁed as “Asex-
ual” in the multiple choice question, 22 (53.7%) had written
in their sexual orientation as “Asexual” earlier in the ques-
tionnaires (see Table 3). Of those who identiﬁed as “Het-
erosexual” in the multiple choice question, 933 (94.9%) had
written in their sexual orientation as “Heterosexual” earlier in
the questionnaires. Interestingly, of those 50 remaining who
eventually chose heterosexual, but had written in something
different initially, 24 (48%) of those had written responses
that could not be coded (e.g., “eyes”).
The ﬁrst published study on asexuality deﬁned asexuality
as “having no sexual attraction for either sex” (Bogaert, 2004,
p. 279). In the current study, participants were asked a simi-
lar question concerning their sexual attraction (see Methods).
The predictive utility of this attraction question in classifying
self-identiﬁed asexuals in this sample was evaluated. Only
17 of 41 (41.5%) self-identiﬁed asexuals in our sample re-
ported that they were not attracted to men or women. Of the
participants who reported no attraction to men or women
(N = 19), 17 (89.5%) identiﬁed as asexual. Thus, the item
used in the Bogaert (2004) study has high speciﬁcity, but
poor sensitivity when self-identiﬁcation as asexual was used
as the criterion.
Table 3
Use of asexual as a sexual orientationa
Responded
asexual for
multiple choice
Responded
heterosexual for
multiple choice
Original orientation
written in open response
N
%
N
%
Asexual
22
53.7
0
0.0
Heterosexual
6
14.7
933
94.9
Homosexual
1
2.4
7
0.7
Bisexual
1
2.4
7
0.7
Mixed
6
14.6
3
0.3
Unsure or don’t know
0
0.0
6
0.6
None or N/A
4
9.8
3
0.3
Miscellaneous
1
2.4
24
2.4
aIndicates for which question method (open response or multiple
choice) participants chose to identify as asexual.
Springer

350
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
Table 4
Predictors of asexual identitya
Odds ratio
Construct
Ratio
95% CIb
ROC
Measure
LL
UL
AUC
SE
Control
Agec
1.05
.98
1.13
.69
.05
Sexual desire
Dyadic sexual desire
.85∗∗
.80
.91
.96
.02
No/rare solitary desire (Ref)d
Desire 1–3 times per month
3.52
.45
27.49
Desire several times per week
14.37∗
1.09
188.77
Desire every day
106.15∗∗
4.12
2736.46
Sexual experience
Number sexual Ps, either gender
1.00
.98
1.02
.75
.06
Masturbation frequency
.78
.47
1.30
.69
.05
Sexual aversion
SIS-1b
1.07
.95
1.21
.66
.50
SIS-2b
.86∗∗
.76
.97
.62
.56
Sexual arousability
Sexual Arousability Inventory
.94∗
.90
.99
.93
.03
Sexual Excitation
.91†
.82
1.00
.88
.04
aIncludes the result of binary logistic regression and ROC analyses.
b95% CI is the 95% conﬁdence interval showing lower limit (LL) and upper limit (UL).
cKeyed in opposite direction for ROC graph only.
dDummy coded categorical variable.
†p < .10, ∗p < .05, ∗∗p < .01.
Sexual feelings and sexual behaviors
The Sexual Desire indicators (Dyadic sexual desire and Soli-
tary sexual desire), a Sexual Arousability indicator (Sexual
Arousability Inventory), and a Sexual Inhibition indicator
(SIS-2) were signiﬁcant predictors of asexual orientation in
the binary logistic regression (see Table 4). All of the predic-
tors together classiﬁed 98.8% of the participants accurately
as asexual (73.7% correct) or not asexual (99.6% correct).
The results of the ROC analyses were broadly simi-
lar to the regression analyses (see Table 4 and Fig. 1). A
Sexual Desire indicator (Dyadic sexual desire) and Sexual
Arousability indicator (Sexual Arousability Inventory) were
the best predictors of asexual versus non-asexual identity
(AUC = .96 and .93, respectively). These were followed
closely by the other Sexual Arousability indicator, the SES
Scale (AUC = .88). Compared with the regression anal-
yses, SIS-2 (AUC = .62) was less predictive of asexual
status.
Concerns about sexual desire
Asexuals reported being no more worried about their level
of sexual desire (M = 1.63, SD = .89) than non-asexuals,
(M = 1.40, SD = .69), t(1139) = 1.67, ns. Furthermore,
asexuals were not more likely than non-asexuals to want
to speak with a health professional about their sexual
desire level (56.1% of asexuals vs. 66.5% non-asexuals),
χ2(2) = 2.1, ns.
Content analyses
Table 5 shows the results of the content analyses. The re-
sponses of the asexuals were compared with those of the
non-asexuals. Although we did not have speciﬁc hypotheses
about particular subcategories within the responses coded,
chi-square values also are provided in Table 5.
Deﬁnition of asexuality
The ﬁve most common themes in participants’ responses
to what experiences they expected an asexual to have
had included (1) a psychological problem, (2) a very
negative sexual experience, (3) no/low sexual desire, (4)
no/little sexual experience, and, (5) no differences from the
experiences of non-asexuals. Of these, the most common
Springer

Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
351
Fig. 1
Receiver operating characteristic curves plotted for individual measures classifying participants as asexual or not asexual
expectation reported was that asexuals would have low/no
level of sexual desire. Non-asexuals were signiﬁcantly more
likely than asexuals to expect that asexuals would experience
low/no sexual desire, χ2(1) = 9.52, p < .01, rø = .09.
In contrast, the expectation that asexuals would have low/no
sexual experience was more often cited by asexuals than
non-asexuals, although this difference was not statistically
signiﬁcant, χ2(1) = .035.
Of those participants who subsequently self-identiﬁed as
asexual in a multiple-choice question, approximately half
had also spontaneously written “asexual” as their sexual ori-
entation in the earlier “write-in” question.
Table 5
Percentage of participants who gave responsea
Asexuals
(N = 32)
Non-asexuals
(N = 169)
Pearson’s
chi-square
Qualitative responses
%
N
%
N
χ2
p
Expectations of asexuals’ experiences
Psychological problems (e.g., physically abused, have no friends)
15.6
5
6.5
11
3.05
ns
History of negative sexual experience (e.g., sexual trauma, sex without pleasure)
12.5
4
5.9
10
1.80
ns
Experience no/low sexual desire
37.5
12
43.8
74
9.52
.01
Experience no/low sexual experience
43.4
14
36.1
61
.04
ns
No different than anyone else
31.2
10
10.7
18
.43
ns
Beneﬁts of asexuality
Avoid intimate relationship problems (e.g., more meaningful relationships, less emotional pain)
37.5
12
20.1
34
4.61
.04
Lower health risks (e.g., no STI or pregnancy risks)
59.4
19
30.2
51
10.12
.00
Less social pressure (e.g., worry less about appearance, no pressure to pursue relationships)
18.7
6
4.7
8
8.16
.01
Beneﬁts of free time (e.g., more relaxed, know yourself better)
37.5
12
8.3
14
20.39
.00
Drawbacks of asexuality
Partner relationship problems (e.g., can’t ﬁnd willing partner, partner unsatisﬁed with sex)
37.5
12
16.6
28
7.40
.01
Means that something is wrong (e.g., depressed, crazy, in need of help, hormone problem)
56.2
18
22.5
38
15.26
.00
Negative public perception (e.g., people will think they are lying or weird)
28.1
9
5.3
9
17.15
.00
Miss positive aspects of sex (e.g., never feel that closeness, excitement of attraction)
6.2
2
26.6
45
6.24
.01
aA subset (N = 201) of responses were content-analyzed by counting the presence or absence of each theme in the essay response provided.
Springer

352
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
Advantages of asexuality
The four beneﬁts of asexuality most commonly mentioned
were (1) avoiding the common problems of intimate rela-
tionships, (2) decreasing risks to physical health or unwanted
pregnancy, (3) experiencing less social pressure to ﬁnd suit-
able partners, and (4) having more free time. A greater pro-
portion of asexuals cited each beneﬁt compared with non-
asexuals. In particular, asexuals were much more likely to
report “Lower health risks” and “Beneﬁts of free time” as
advantages of being asexual, as compared to non-asexuals.
Drawbacks of asexuality
The four drawbacks of asexuality stated most often were
(1) problems establishing nonsexual, dyadic intimate rela-
tionships, (2) needing to ﬁnd out what problem is causing
the asexuality, (3) a negative public perception of asexuality,
and (4) missing the positive aspects of sex. For all but one of
the drawbacks mentioned, a greater proportion of asexuals
cited each drawback as compared to non-asexuals. Asexuals
were much more likely to report a drawback of asexuality as
needing to ﬁnd out what problem was causing the asexuality.
Non-asexuals, however, were more likely to mention missing
the positive aspects of sex as a drawback of asexuality.
Discussion
This exploratory study attempted to better characterize indi-
viduals who identify as asexual and to provide exploratory
data for future research. Asexuals were most clearly dis-
tinguished from non-asexuals by their lower/absent scores
on the Dyadic Sexual Desire subscale, lower scores on the
Solitary Sexual Desire subscale, and lower scores on the
Sexual Arousability Inventory. Other variables that differen-
tiated the groups less consistently included lower scores on
SES (propensity to become excited sexually) and SIS-2 (in-
hibition due to threat of performance consequences). Also,
asexuals did not express any greater interest in talking to
a health professional about their low sexual desire, despite
greater concern about their level of sexual desire. Finally,
in the qualitative analyses, both the asexual and non-asexual
groups cited no/low sexual desire and no/low sexual experi-
ences most frequently as the two primary deﬁning features
of asexuality.
The fact that neither Sexual Inhibition scale was a strong
predictor suggests that self-identiﬁed asexuals were not par-
ticularly sexually fearful, but that they had a lower excitatory
drive. The lower excitatory drive was exempliﬁed by their
lower scores on the Dyadic Sexual Desire, Sexual Excita-
tion, and Sexual Arousability Inventory questionnaires. This
pattern of ﬁndings suggests several conclusions. First, asex-
uals were not well-described as motivated by avoidance,
as relevant in social phobias and sexual aversion difﬁcul-
ties. Second, the results support the idea that excitation and
inhibition can be conceptualized as relatively independent
factors affecting sexual arousal (Bancroft, 1999). Finally,
when assessing an individual’s sexual desire level, it is pos-
sible that sexual excitation may be more relevant than sexual
inhibition.
Self-identiﬁed asexuals exhibited similar SIS-1 scores
and lower SIS-2 scores compared to non-asexuals. SIS-1
reﬂects concerns about sexual performance (e.g., erectile
problems) while SIS-2 reﬂects concerns about performance
consequences (e.g., contracting sexually transmitted infec-
tions, being caught having sex, etc.). The qualitative data
support this concern, as asexuals were more likely to men-
tion “avoiding disease” as a beneﬁt of their asexual status.
Both asexuals and non-asexuals may face common base-
line difﬁculties in establishing intimate sexual relationships,
hence not differing in their SIS-1 scores, but self-identiﬁed
asexuals may feel that their low desire confers a lesser risk of
subsequent sexual consequences. For instance, high sexual
arousal may potentiate sexual risk taking (Canin, Dolcini, &
Adler, 1999; Strong, Bancroft, Carnes, Davis, & Kennedy,
2005). This may occur directly, through limiting attention
paid to safety cues (e.g., as in alcohol myopia; Steele &
Josephs, 1990), or indirectly through the reduced use, for
instance, of alcohol to promote feelings of sexual arousal
by self-identiﬁed asexuals (Brown, Goldman, Inn, & Ander-
son, 1980). In other words, asexuals may have lower SIS-2
scores because they feel less vulnerable about being carried
away by feelings of sexual arousal into practicing unsafe
sex since they do not experience strong sexual excitation or
desire.
These data did not replicate several demographic and sex-
ual experience predictors of asexual status reported by Bo-
gaert (2004). First, we did not ﬁnd a gender or relationship
status difference between sexuals and asexuals. Given the
younger age of our non-asexual sample, it is possible that
they had less time available to have experienced a longer-
term relationship. It is noteworthy that Bogaert reported that
44% of the empirically-deﬁned asexuals in his sample were
currently in or had been in long-term (cohabiting or married)
relationships. Also, it is surprising that no gender differences
emerged in this study given that women tend to report less
sexual desire than men report on average (Beck, 1995). Sec-
ond, these data indicated that a higher percentage of asexuals
had completed at least a college degree as compared to non-
asexuals, and this was not accounted for by the group age
difference. The Bogaert study found the opposite. Third,
there was no signiﬁcant difference in the lifetime number
of sexual partners reported by asexuals and non-asexuals,
whereas in the Bogaert (2004) study asexuals reported fewer
Springer

Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
353
sexual partners. Finally, these data suggest that the item used
in the Bogaert (2004) study to identify asexuals likely failed
to identify many individuals who would have chosen to self-
identify as asexual given the opportunity. Whatever the ex-
planation for the divergent ﬁndings, it is clear that further
research is needed on the correlates of asexuality.
This study utilized a multi-method approach combining
qualitative and quantitative data. Collecting qualitative or
quantitative data consistently represent some tradeoff in ob-
jectivity for phenomenological detail, and research that col-
lects both qualitative and quantitative data has been recom-
mended to maximize the objectivity and interpretability of
data (Gray & Densten, 1998; Hyde, 2001). In our case, the
qualitative data were helpful in understanding several dif-
ferences found in the quantitative data. For instance, both
groups of participants reported that asexuals would differ
most from non-asexuals by their no/low sexual desire and
their no/low sexual experience, but the quantitative data sug-
gested that asexuals actually differed most in their sexual
desire and sexual arousability levels, and not the amount
of their sexual experience. It is possible that the concept of
“arousability” was not identiﬁed as a theme in the qualitative
data because it is simply not a term in common use by the
lay public. Non-asexuals might believe that asexuals would
not be sufﬁciently aroused to want to engage, or be able to
engage, in sexual behaviors.
A second example of how the use of multi-method data
collection is helpful is in understanding why asexuals were
no more worried about their level of sexual desire and no
more likely to want to speak to a health professional about
their level of sexual desire than non-asexuals. This could
simply reﬂect differences in conservatism in not wanting to
discuss “inappropriate” personal sexual health with health
professionals (e.g., sexuality concerns around pregnancy;
Alteneder & Hartzell, 1997). Asexuals’ written responses
provided another possible explanation. While asexuals were
signiﬁcantly more likely to respond that being asexual meant
that there was something wrong with the asexual person or
that they had more relationship problems, they were also
more likely to respond that there was a negative public per-
ception of asexuals as compared to non-asexuals. Speciﬁ-
cally, asexuals also frequently explained that what was wrong
with asexuality was something outside of their control (e.g.,
“something wrong genetically,” “hormone problem”). As
discussed earlier, there is an expectation that a person should
experience sexual desire, or they may be characterized as
having “Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder” or “Sexual
Aversion Disorder.” Asexuals may feel pressure to conform
to this expectation, but frame the abnormality as a problem
with the social expectations (or their physical health), which
is out of their control (Rubin, 2000). This has implications
both for asexuals who may seek treatment and for under-
standing disorders of sexual desire.
The level of concern of asexuals was particularly rele-
vant with regard to implications for diagnostic classiﬁcation
(Cole, 1993). As mentioned previously, personal distress is
one of the criteria for diagnosing hypoactive sexual desire in
the DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).
If personal distress is primarily due to conﬂicts with social
expectations or worry that a physical problem exists, then a
psychiatric diagnosis implying abnormality may exacerbate
concerns in an asexual individual. While behavior that is sta-
tistically abnormal may be problematic without a person’s
full recognition of when they are behaving abnormally, as
in schizophrenia, it remains to be determined to what ex-
tent asexuality is problematic in the absence of individual,
personal distress.
This study had four primary limitations. First, the sample
was not randomly selected. In particular, the non-asexual
sample was comprised mainly of younger students and
the asexual sample was comprised primarily of individuals
from the Internet, including asexuality sites. This difference
could have caused the lack of difference in relationship sta-
tus between asexuals and non-asexuals. Non-asexuals were
younger and perhaps less likely to be partnered as a result
of insufﬁcient time to locate a suitable partner rather than
as a result of their non-asexual identity. Second, the on-
line format of Study 2 introduced limitations. Despite the
considerable advantages of online questionnaires, including
increasing evidence that samples are not as select as was
once feared (Birnbaum, 2004), online studies also have dis-
advantages; for example, they may be completed in undesir-
able circumstances (e.g., with a partner observing), and the
anonymity may encourage deceptive responses. However,
steps were taken to minimize the likelihood of these prob-
lems. For example, to encourage participants to complete the
survey in private, the highly personal nature of the study was
mentioned in introductory web pages. The effects of obvi-
ous deception and/or incomplete responses were reduced by
thorough data cleaning. The advantages of the online for-
mat in reaching this likely small population and encouraging
the reporting of socially undesirable sexual behaviors were
judged to outweigh these disadvantages. Third, as the in-
terviews in Study 1 were in-depth and lengthy, only four
participants were interviewed. Given the rich data derived
from these interviews about self-identiﬁed asexuals, future
qualitative studies may be warranted. Finally, the measures
of sexual behavior (lifetime sexual partners and masturbation
frequency) are subject to inﬂuences that may confound their
interpretation (e.g., availability of sexual partners, abusive
sexual experiences, etc.).
This study suggests a way of conceptualizing asexuality
that leads to clear, testable hypotheses for future research.
First, asexual self-identiﬁcation was best predicted by low
excitatory processes, but not necessarily high inhibitory pro-
cesses. It may be that behavioral activation, as characterized
Springer

354
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
by Gray (1987), is generally low among asexuals, or that
depressogenic types are prevalent amongst self-identiﬁed
asexuals. However, correlations between scales measuring
general behavioral inhibition and activation and sexual ex-
citation and inhibition have been low (Graham, Sanders, &
Milhausen, 2006; Janssen et al., 2002). Animal evidence
also argues against this possibility. Sexually low-performing
rams with low sexual incentive motivation appear strongly
motivated in other domains, such as aggression in feeding
(e.g., Alexander, Stellﬂug, Rose, Fitzgerald, & Moss, 1999).
Second, asexuals cited both more beneﬁts and drawbacks
of asexuality than non-asexuals. This simply may reﬂect a
more complex consideration of the identity over time. How-
ever, it also may be that individuals who identify as asexuals
face challenges unrecognized by others and may counteract
those challenges by perceiving additional beneﬁts. Third,
asexuals appear to have similar levels of sexual behaviors
to non-asexuals. Investigating emotionally intimate partner
variables separately from sexuality variables could elucidate
this ﬁnding. For example, asexuals may be engaging in un-
wanted, but consensual sex for the purpose of maintaining
an intimate relationship with a sexual partner (O’Sullivan
& Allgeier, 1998). The reason for the lack of difference
is unclear and, given the nature of the sample, warrants
replication.
Finally, after a better understanding of the asexual con-
struct is developed, it may be useful to test the physiological
and psychophysiological correlates of asexuality. These in-
clude, but are not limited to, sexual psychophysiological
responses to sexual stimuli, neurological evidence of dif-
ferential intensity affective experience (Cuthbert, Schupp,
Bradley, Birnbaumer, & Lang, 2000), hormone proﬁles
abnormalities, or generalized, non-sexual motivated behav-
iors (for discussion, see Bindra, 1959). Indeed, a number of
physical factors can affect feelings of sexual desire including
menstrual phase (e.g., Hedricks, 1994), physical fatigue due
to recent childbirth (Hyde, DeLamater, & Hewitt, 1998),
or illness (Meuleman & van Lankveld, 2005), and central
dopamanergic dysregulation in women (Bechara, Bertolino,
Casabe, & Fredotovich, 2004) and men (Montorsi et al.,
2003, as related to erectile functioning).
One direction that seems particularly promising is con-
ceptualizing asexual development as a form of kindling.
Kindling can be deﬁned as sensitization to a previously
sub-threshold stimulus. Non-copulating rats appear not to
differ from copulating rats in baseline titers of testos-
terone (Alexander et al., 1999; Damassa, Smith, Tennent, &
Davidson, 1977), and cannot be induced reliably to perform
sexually by the introduction of supraphysiological testos-
terone (Damassa et al., 1977). Copulating rats have been
shown to have increased fos responses in the MPOA fol-
lowing vomeronasal stimulation with estrous female bed-
ding, whereas non-copulating rats do not show this change
(Portillo & Paredes, 2004). The present study data support
the idea that human asexuals may have a higher excita-
tory threshold for sexual arousal. Future research concerning
physical factors might focus on exploring generalized, cog-
nitive “kindling” differences in those who do and do not
identify as asexual. Although physiological mechanisms ap-
pear unlikely to completely explain asexuality, evidence of
some biological basis for asexuality also may offer asex-
ual individuals legitimacy, a conceptual framework for their
feelings, and reduce the extent to which others blame them
for assuming the identity (Irvine, 1993).
To our knowledge, this was the ﬁrst study to investigate
the deﬁning features of individuals who self-identify as asex-
ual. As such, it raises a number of empirical and theoretical
questions about asexuality as well as about “normal” sexual
functioning. Given these new questions and the paucity of
research concerning asexuality, future research should con-
tinue to explore this population.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the research assis-
tants whose work contributed to this project: Shandi Yuodzukinas,
Jeff Gluckman, Ryan McCracken, and Mary White. Also, we wish to
thank Martin Weinberg and the members of the Psychopathology and
Neuropsychometry Laboratory Reading Group at Indiana University,
William P. Hetrick, Paul D. Kieffaber, Chad R. Edwards, and Christine
A. Carroll, for their helpful comments.
References
Agmo, A. (1999). Sexual motivation–an inquiry into events determining
the occurrence of sexual behavior. Behavioural Brain Research,
105, 129–150.
Alexander, B. M., Stellﬂug, J. N., Rose, J. D., Fitzgerald, J. A., &
Moss, G. E. (1999). Behavior and endocrine changes in high-
performing, low-performing, and male-oriented domestic rams
following exposure to rams and ewes in estrus when copulation is
precluded. Journal of Animal Science, 77, 1869–1874.
Alteneder, R. R., & Hartzell, D. (1997). Addressing couples’ sexual-
ity concerns during the childbearing period: Use of the PLISSIT
model. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing,
26, 651–658.
American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC:
Author.
Bancroft, J. (1999). Central inhibition of sexual response in the male: A
theoretical perspective. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
23, 763–784.
Bancroft, J., Graham, C. A., & McCord, C. (2001). Conceptualizing
women’s sexual problems. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 27,
95–103.
Basson, R. (2001). Using a different model for female sexual response
to address women’s problematic low sexual desire. Journal of Sex
& Marital Therapy, 27, 395–403.
Basson, R., Berman, J., Burnett, A., Deragotis, L., Ferguson, D.,
Fourcroy, J., et al. (2000). Report of the international consensus de-
velopment conference on female sexual dysfunction: Deﬁnitions
and classiﬁcations. Journal of Urology, 163, 888–893.
Springer

Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
355
Bechara, A., Bertolino, M. V., Casabe, A., & Fredotovich, N. (2004).
A double-blind randomized placebo control study comparing the
objective and subjective changes in female sexual response us-
ing sublingual apomorphine. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 1, 209–
214.
Beck, J. G. (1995). Hypoactive sexual desire disorder: An overview.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 919–927.
Bindra, D. (1959). Motivation: A systematic reinterpretation. New
York: Ronald Press.
Binik, Y. M., Mah, K., & Kiesler (1999). Ethical issues in conducting
sex research on the Internet. Journal of Sex Research, 36, 82–94.
Binson, D., & Catania, J. A. (1998). Respondents’ understanding of the
words used in sexual behavior questions. Public Opinion Quar-
terly, 62, 190–208.
Birnbaum, M. H. (2004). Human research and data collection via the
internet. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 803–832.
Bogaert, A. F. (2004). Asexuality: Prevalence and associated factors
in a national probability sample. Journal of Sex Research, 41,
279–287.
Brezsnyak, M., & Whisman, M. A. (2004). Sexual desire and relation-
ship functioning: The effects of marital satisfaction and power.
Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 30, 199–217.
Brown, S. A., Goldman, M. S., Inn, A., & Anderson, L. R. (1980).
Expectations of reinforcement from alcohol: Their domain and
relation to drinking patterns. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 48, 419–426.
Burisch, M. (1984). Approaches to personality inventory construction:
A comparison of merits. American Psychologist, 39, 214–227.
Canin, L., Dolcini, M. M., & Adler, N. E. (1999). Barriers to and facilita-
tors of HIV-STD behavior change: Intrapersonal and relationship-
based factors. Review of General Psychology, 3, 338–371.
Carlat, D. J., Camargo, C. A., & Herzog, D. B. (1997). Eating dis-
orders in males: A report on 135 patients. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154, 1127–1132.
Carmen, E., & Brady, S. M. (1990). AIDS risk and prevention for
the chronic mentally ill. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 41,
652–657.
Carpenter, D. L., Janssen, E., Graham, C. A., Vorst, H., & Wicherts, J.
(2006). Women’s scores on the sexual inhibition/sexual excitation
scales (SIS/SES): Gender similarities and differences. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Carpenter, L. M. (2002). Analyzing textual material. In M. W. Wieder-
man & B. E. Whitley (Eds.), Handbook for conducting research on
human sexuality (pp. 327–343). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Cole, E. (1993). Is sex a natural function?: Implications for sex therapy.
In E. Rothblum & K. Brehony (Eds.), Boston marriages: Romantic
but asexual relationships among contemporary lesbians (pp. 188–
193). Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Cuthbert, B. N., Schupp, H. T., Bradley, M. M., Birbaumer, N., & Lang,
P. J. (2000). Brain potentials in affective picture processing: Co-
variation with autonomic arousal and affective report. Biological
Psychology, 52, 95–111.
Damassa, D. A., Smith, E. R., Tennent, B., & Davidson, J. M.
(1977). The relationship between circulating testosterone levels
and male sexual behavior in rats. Hormones and Behavior, 8, 275–
286.
Deacon, S., Minichiello, V., & Plummer, D. (1995). Sexuality and older
people: Revisiting the assumptions. Educational Gerontology, 21,
497–514.
Diamond, L. M. (2005). A new view of lesbian subtypes: Stable versus
ﬂuid identity trajectories over an 8-year period. Psychology of
Women Quarterly, 29(2), 119–128.
Editors of the American Heritage Dictionaries. (2000). The American
heritage dictionary of the English language (4th ed.). Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin Company.
Everaerd, W., & Both, S. (2001). Ideal female sexual function. Journal
of Sex & Marital Therapy, 27, 137–139.
Giargiari, T. D., Mahaffey, A. L., Craighead, W. E., & Hutchison,
K. E. (2005). Appetitive responses to sexual stimuli are attenuated
in individuals with low levels of sexual desire. Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 34, 547–556.
Graham, C. A, Sanders, S. A., & Milhausen, R. (2006). The Sexual Ex-
citation and Sexual Inhibition Inventory for Women: Psychometric
properties. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35, 397–410.
Gray, J. A. (1987). Perspectives on anxiety and impulsivity: A com-
mentary. Journal of Research in Personality, 21, 493–509.
Gray, J. H., & Densten, I. L. (1998). Integrating quantitative and qual-
itative analysis using latent and manifest variables. Quality and
Quantity, 32, 419–431.
Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and
psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Green, R. (2000). Birth order and ratio of brothers to sisters in trans-
sexuals. Psychological Medicine, 30, 789–795.
Haslam, N. (1995). The discreteness of emotion concepts: Categor-
ical structure in the affective circumplex. Personality & Social
Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1012–1019.
Hedricks, C. A. (1994). Female sexual activity across the human men-
strual cycle. Annual Review of Sex Research, 5, 122–172.
Hoon, E. F., & Chambless, D. (1998). Sexual Arousability Inventory
(SAI) and Sexual Arousability Inventory-Expanded (SAI-E). In
C. M. Davis, W. L. Yarber, R. Bauserman, G. Schreer & S. L.
Davis (Eds.), Handbook of sexuality-related measures (pp. 71–
74). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Hoon, E. F., Hoon, P. W., & Wincze, J. P. (1976). An inventory for the
measurement of female sexual arousability: The SAI. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 5, 291–300.
Hyde, J. S. (2001). The next decade of sexual science: Synergy from
advances in related sciences. Journal of Sex Research, 38, 97–
101.
Hyde, J. S., DeLamater, J. D., & Hewitt, E. C. (1998). Sexuality and the
dual-earner couple: Multiple roles and sexual functioning. Journal
of Family Psychology, 12, 354–368.
Irvine, J. M. (1993). Regulated passions: The invention of inhibited
sexual desire and sex addiction. Social Text, 37, 203–226.
Janssen, E., Vorst, H., Finn, P., & Bancroft, J. (2002). The Sexual
Inhibition (SIS) and Sexual Excitation (SES) Scales: I. Measuring
sexual inhibition and excitation proneness in men. Journal of Sex
Research, 39, 114–126.
Jay, D. (2003). Asexual visibility and education network. 2003, from
http://www.asexuality.org/ info.htm.
Johnson, A., Wadsworth, J., Wellings, K., & Field, J. (1994). Sexual
attitudes and lifestyles. Oxford: Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications.
Lykins, A., Janssen, E., & Graham, C. A. (2006). The relationship be-
tweennegative moodandsexualityinheterosexual college women.
Journal of Sex Research, 43, 136–143.
Meuleman, E. J. H., & van Lankveld, J. J. D. M. (2005). Hypoac-
tive sexual desire disorder: An underestimated condition in men.
British Journal of Urology International, 95, 291–296.
Milligan, M. S., & Neufeldt, A. H. (2001). The myth of asexuality: A
survey of social and empirical evidence. Sexuality & Disability,
19, 91–109.
Montorsi, F., Perani, D., Anchisi, D., Salonia, A., Scifo, P., Rigiroli,
P., et al. (2003). Apomorphine-induced brain modulation during
sexual stimulation: A new look at central phenomena related to
erectile dysfunction. International Journal of Impotence Research,
15, 203.
Mustanski, B. S. (2001). Getting wired: Exploiting the internet for the
collection of valid sexuality data. Journal of Sex Research, 38,
292–301.
Neuendorf, K. A. (2002). The content analysis guidebook. London:
Sage Publications.
Springer

356
Arch Sex Behav (2007) 36:341–356
Nurius, P. S. (1983). Mental health implications of sexual orientation.
Journal of Sex Research, 19, 119–136.
O’Sullivan, L. F., & Allgeier, E. R. (1998). Feigning sexual desire:
Consenting to unwanted sexual activity in heterosexual dating
relationships. Journal of Sex Research, 35, 234–243.
Portillo, W., & Paredes, R. G. (2004). Sexual incentive motivation,
olfactory preference, and activation of the vomeronasal projection
pathway by sexually relevant cues in non-copulating and naive
male rats. Hormones and Behavior, 46, 330–340.
Prause, N. (2005). [Sexual desire inventory normative data]. Unpub-
lished raw data. Indiana University, Bloomington.
QSR International Pty. Ltd. (2002). N6 (non-numerical unstructured
data indexing searching & theorizing) (Version 6). Melbourne,
Australia: QSR International Pty. Ltd.
Riley, A., & Riley, E. (2000). Controlled studies on women presenting
with sexual drive disorder: I. Endocrine status. Journal of Sex &
Marital Therapy, 26, 269–283.
Ross, M. W., Tikkanen, R., & Mansson, S. A. (2000). Differences
between internet samples and conventional samples of men who
have sex with men: Implications for research and HIV interven-
tions. Social Science and Medicine, 51, 749–758.
Rothblum, E. D., & Brehony, K. A. (1993). Boston marriages: Ro-
mantic but asexual relationships among contemporary lesbians.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Rubin, J. (2000). William James and the pathologizing of human expe-
rience. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 40, 176–226.
Schover, L., & LoPiccolo, J. (1982). Treatment effectiveness for dys-
functions of sexual desire. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 8,
179–197.
Sell, R. L. (1997). Deﬁning and measuring sexual orientation: A review.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 26, 643–658.
Spector, I., Carey, M., & Steinberg, L. (1996). The Sexual Desire In-
ventory: Development, factor structure, and evidence of reliability.
Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 22, 175–190.
Steele, C. M., & Josephs, R. A. (1990). Alcohol myopia: Its prized and
dangerous effects. American Psychologist, 45, 921–933.
Stone, V. E., Catania, J. A., & Binson, D. (1999). Measuring change in
sexual behavior: Concordance between survey measures. Journal
of Sex Research, 36, 102–108.
Strong, D. A., Bancroft, J., Carnes, L. A., Davis, L. A., & Kennedy,
J. (2005). The impact of sexual arousal on sexual risk-taking: A
qualitative study. Journal of Sex Research, 42, 185–191.
Tiefer, L. (2001). The “consensus” conference on female sexual dys-
function: Conﬂicts of interest and hidden agendas. Journal of Sex
& Marital Therapy, 27, 227–236.
Vroege, J. A., Gijs, L., & Hengeveld, M. W. (2001). Classiﬁcation of
sexual dysfunctions in women. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy,
27, 237–243.
Weinrich, J. D., Snyder, P. J., Pillard, R. C., Grant, I., Jacobson,
D. L., Robinson, S. R., et al. (1993). A factor analysis of the
Klein Sexual Orientation Grid in two disparate samples. Archives
of Sexual Behavior, 22, 157.
Whalen, R. (1966). Sexual motivation. Psychological Review, 73, 151–
163.
Zevy, L. (1999). Sexing the tomboy. In M. Rottnek (Ed.), Sissies
and tomboys: Gender nonconformity and homosexual childhood
(pp. 180–195). New York: New York University Press.
Zucker, K. J., Bradley, S. J., Oliver, G., Blake, J., Fleming, S., &
Hood, J. (2004). Self-reported sexual arousability in women with
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy,
30, 343–355.
Springer

