PREFACE.
THE history of Greek mathematics is, for the most part, only
the history of such mathematics as are learnt daily in all
our public schools. 
And very singular it is that, though
England is the only European country which still retains
Euclid as its teacher of elementary geometry, and though
Cambridge, at least, has, for more than a century, required
from all candidates for any degree as much Greek and mathe-
matics together as should make this book intelligible and
interesting, yet no Englishman has been at the pains of
writing, or even of translating, such a treatise. If it was not
wanted, as it ought to have been, by our classical professors
and our mathematicians, it would have served at any rate to
quicken, with some human interest, the melancholy labours
of our schoolboys.
The work, as usual, has been left to Germany and even
to France, and it has been done there with more than usual
excellence. It demanded a combination of learning, scholarship
and common sense which we used, absurdly enough, to regard
as peculiarly English. If anyone still cherishes this patriotic
delusion, I would advise him to look at the works of Nessel-
mann, Bretschneider, Hankel, Hultsch, Heiberg and Cantor,
or, again, of Montucla, Delambre and Chasles, which are so
frequently cited in the following pages. To match them we
can show only an ill-arranged treatise of Dean Peacock, many
brilliant but scattered articles of Prof. De Morgan, and three
essays by Dr Allman. I have treated all these writers with
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

VI 
PREFACE.
freedom and have myself added matter which is not to be found
in any of them, but they strike me still with humiliation such
as a classical scholar feels when he edits a text which Bentley
has edited before him.
My own book represents part of a collection of notes
which I have for many years been making with a view to
a general history of the great city of Alexandria. The fact
that the history of Alexandrian mathematics begins with the
Elements of Euclid and closes with the Algebra of Diophantus,
both of which are founded on the discoveries of several pre-
ceding centuries, made it necessary that I should extend my
inquiries over the whole field of Greek mathematics. 
In
this way, the materials for an account of the Alexandrian
Mathematical School grew to exceed the reasonable limits
of a chapter, and I have thought it desirable to publish them
as a separate essay. I shall treat the Literary School with
the same fulness.
As a history of Alexandria ought to be interesting to
most people, I took especial pains that my treatment of the
Mathematical School, which was the oldest, the most con-
spicuous and the longest-lived of them all, should not be
excessively technical. I have tried to put my account of it
generally in such a form as should be useful and attractive to
readers of various tastes. As a matter of fact, mathematicians
will here find some account of every extant Greek mathe-
matical book and a great number of pretty proofs translated
from the ipsissima verba of the ancients. Greek scholars will
find nomenclature and all manner of arithmetical symbols
more fully treated than in any other work. A student of
history, who cares little for Greek or mathematics in par-
ticular, but who likes to watch how things grow, will be able
to extract from these pages a notion of the whole history
of mathematical science down to Newton's time, and will find
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PREFACE. 
VII
some very curious questions raised which it is his especial
duty to answer. It was impossible to satisfy the requirements
of all readers, but each will perhaps be willing to concede
something to the claims of the others, and wherever a subject
is introduced but inadequately treated, I have at least given
references to sources of fuller information, if any such exist
to my knowledge.
As the whole book is an endeavour to compromise between
conflicting claims, I have allowed myself, with the same intent,
some inconsistency in two details. In the first place, I have not
drawn a strict line between pure and mixed mathematics, but have
given an account of the Phaenomena and Optics of Euclid and
the mechanical books of Aristotle and Archimedes, while I have
omitted any summary of Ptolemy's astronomical theories. The
former are books which are little known, which are short, which
came in my way and which are almost purely deductive. A com-
plete history of Greek astronomy is tolerably common, is long,
is founded for the most part on non-mathematical writers and
would consist largely of a history of astronomical observations.
In the second place, I have tried to write proper names
(following indeed Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Biography) in a way which should generally indicate the
Greek form and pronunciation without offending the ordinary
eye. I have always written c for K and final -us for -09. I
have generally not Latinized names ending in -cop, because it is
sometimes inconvenient and the Latin usage was inconsistent
with itself; for instance, it retained Conon but altered Platon.
I have left in their English form, the names of well-known
writers. Thus the reader will find Plato, Aristotle and Euclid
side by side with Heron, Nicoteles and Neocleides. If I must
offend somebody, I would soonest offend a pedant.
The complete MS. of this book left my hands last January
and the whole edition has been printed off, sheet by sheet,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

VU1 
PREFACE.
at various intervals, since that time. I have therefore been
unable to correct any errors or omissions which I observed too
late or to incorporate new matter which appeared after the
sheet to which it was relevant had gone to press. The chief
notices which I wish to insert are given in the Addenda
which immediately follow this preface.
My work, dreary as it has often been, has been enlivened
by one constant pleasure, the interest and unselfish assistance
of many friends. Two of them, in particular, deserve recogni-
tion very near the title-page. The first is Mr F. T. Swanwick,
late scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge, and now Mathemati-
cal Lecturer in the Owens College. He has, with incredible
care and patience, read through the whole book from page 66,
has made a hundred valuable suggestions and has saved me
a hundred times from myself. The other is Mr Joseph Jacobs,
late scholar of St John's College, Cambridge, whose wide
intellectual interests and unsurpassed knowledge of bibliography
have made the book far more useful and entertaining than
it otherwise would have been. 
I would say more of their
kindness to me but that I would not have them held respon-
sible for any slips which they may have overlooked in my work
but would not have made in their own.
JAMES GOW.
LINCOLN'S INN.
October, 1884.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

