Preface
In , Galileo Galilei was twenty-two years old and ready to do great
things. He authored his ﬁrst work, the Bilancetta, or Small Balance, a gem
of a treatise. As so often with Galileo, it brings much together: literary
erudition, mathematical sophistication, experimental precision.
Galileo begins with Vitruvius’s story of Archimedes’s solution to the
problem of the crown. We all remember this story: The king’s goldsmith
was provided the materials to make a crown of pure gold – but could he
have returned, instead, a crown made of an alloy containing silver? Could
he have pocketed the diﬀerence? Stepping into the bath – so Vitruvius
continued his tale – Archimedes suddenly realized that his body displaced
a volume of liquid equal to that of his own body; excitedly, he ran home
naked, shouting, “Eureka!” (“I have found it!”). It is possible to measure
how much of a liquid is displaced by a given body and thus to measure the
volume of any given body. And if so, we can also weigh the body and, by
dividing the two quantities – weight divided by volume – we can ﬁnd the
body’s (in modern terminology) “speciﬁc density” or, eﬀectively, “speciﬁc
gravity.” It is well understood that gold is rather heavier than silver (has a
higher speciﬁc gravity). So, the speciﬁc gravity of the crown would tell us
whether it is or is not made of pure gold. It was not, we are told by
Vitruvius. Archimedes – the mathematician detective – confronted the
goldsmith, who confessed. A triumph for science!
This Galileo retells – and refutes. Of course Vitruvius must have been
wrong. Why? Because Galileo read Archimedes himself (made newly
available in Commandino’s edition from ). The observation reported
by Vitruvius – that the surface of a liquid rises as you step into it – is trivial;
a really deep mathematical fact, however, which Archimedes did discover,
is the law of buoyancy. A body immersed in a liquid loses a weight equal to
the weight of the liquid it displaces. The fraction of the original weight lost as
a body is immersed in a liquid can therefore be used directly to measure
speciﬁc gravities – no need for messy (and inherently imprecise) measures
ix
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of volume displaced. Instead, use the “small balance” of Galileo’s treatise,
in which a counterweight is moved so as to balance an arm immersed in
water. Galileo shows the mathematical principles underlying the instru-
ment and their grounds in actual Archimedean science, and he crowns this
all with concrete, technical suggestions on how the small balance can be
made truly precise.
And so, for Galileo, a beginning. Not yet an original contribution, but
immediately following that, Galileo set his eyes on his own path in science.
Aristotle had argued that the motion of heavy bodies was simply down-
ward, but Archimedes (so Galileo learned, from Commandino’s edition)
had shown the mathematical reason why objects, when immersed in a
liquid heavier than themselves, are pushed upward. A thought then
suggested itself to the young Galileo: Would it not be possible, in general,
to account for the motions of bodies through the relative weights of the
moving object and the medium through which it moved? Could one
extend Archimedes’s theory of ﬂoating bodies into a theory of free fall?
This was Galileo’s ﬁrst major theoretical attempt, De Motu (On Motion),
embarked upon when he was just twenty-ﬁve. Like the Bilancetta itself, it
was never published in his lifetime, and the quest for a theory of free fall
ultimately would lead Galileo in many other, diﬀerent directions. The fruit
of all this labor would wait for many years, until the Dialogues Concerning
Two New Sciences, Galileo’s mature contribution, published in .
A major book, now – it set out the foundations of modern classical
mechanics. As a seventy-two-year-old, Galileo still reﬂected on where it
all started from: “It was Archimedes’ own books – which I had already read
and studied with inﬁnite astonishment – that rendered credible to me all
the miracles described by various writers.”
Galileo set himself, from the beginning, as a critic of Aristotle, and this
critique, indeed, would loom large in his career. We imagine him (prob-
ably a mere legend, though) hauling light and heavy balls up the Leaning
Tower of Pisa (light and heavy, they fall at the same speed, thus refuting
Aristotle!). More historically, we can spy him squinting at the sky with his
homemade telescope, so crude to our eyes and yet so powerful in Galileo’s
hands. He detects moons circling Jupiter, mountains and seas on the
surface of the moon. In other words, the heavens were not the ethereal,
unchanging realm of pure circular motions all centered around the earth,
as envisaged by Aristotle. They were a load of coarse matter pressing upon
G. Galilei, Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, trans. H. Crew and A. de Salvio (New York:
Macmillan, /), p. .
x
Preface
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

coarse matter, just like the earth – Copernicus, after all, must have been
right! The church, defending Aristotle’s orthodoxy, found objection to all
of this, and Galileo’s ensuing trial set out a powerful image. Historians
came to think of this era in such terms, breaking away, decisively, from the
constricted dogmas of Aristotle. In , Koyré called this the transition
“from the closed world to the inﬁnite universe”; Thomas Kuhn, a few years
later, saw this transition as a paradigm shift, the prime example of his 
classic, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions.
More recently, historians have become wary of such sweeping and even
teleological categories as the “scientiﬁc revolution.” Steven Shapin,
famously, began his study from , titled simply The Scientiﬁc
Revolution, with the following words: “There was no such thing as the
Scientiﬁc Revolution, and this is a book about it.” I am not here to beat a
dead horse. But this should be emphasized. The narrative of a scientiﬁc
revolution is mistaken, ﬁrst of all, in that it hinges on encounters such as
that of Galileo with Aristotle. But these, in fact, were not the decisive
moments leading to the rise of modern science. Far more crucial were
encounters such as that of Galileo with Archimedes. What gave rise to
modern science was a new appreciation of the science of antiquity and the
attempt, ﬁnally, to emulate and outdo it. To a large extent, modern science
came not from a scientiﬁc revolution but a scientiﬁc renaissance.
Modern science is ﬁrmly rooted in the science of antiquity. To be clear:
this ancient science was not only mathematical. William Harvey’s revival of
Galen’s medicine would ultimately be as important, in its own way. And
yet, the main line of development of modern science does begin with
Copernicus, passing through Galileo, Fermat, Kepler, and Descartes, and
leading on to Leibniz and Newton. This line of development, throughout,
can be characterized as a revival of the ancient tradition of the exact
sciences. And in this book, I set out to provide a new history of this
ancient tradition.
A topic as important as this – the soil from which grew modern
science – might be expected to attract signiﬁcant scholarly attention.
Astonishingly, this book is the ﬁrst such contribution in precisely a
century. Thomas Little Heath’s History of Greek Mathematics, published
in , has served as a reliable guide to many generations of scholars and
curious readers. Historiographies went in and out of fashion, but Heath
still stands, providing a clear and readable survey of the contents of most of
the works of pure mathematics attested from Greek antiquity. To a
modern reader, used to more critical, analytical historical approaches,
Heath’s work reads most like an encyclopedia, arranged by chronological
Preface
xi
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

principles. One may turn to the entry on Apollonius of Perga, for instance,
and ﬁnd seventy highly informative pages summing up the contents of the
Conics (forty-one pages), followed by smaller surveys of the contents of the
minor, indirectly attested works. I keep Heath by my side, and I urge you
to do so as well. This new history does not aim to replace Heath’s, and I do
not aim at his encyclopedic coverage. My goal, instead, is to provide a
historical account. Something quite deep – indeed, transformational – took
place in the ancient Greek world. A new kind of science emerged,
ultimately providing the tools for modernity. Why and how did that
happen? What we need is to understand the conditions and scope of
this achievement.
This Greek achievement belongs, in my view, to the history of science.
Science itself is not a word the Greeks used, although I think it is useful for
our purposes. The modern word mathematics is indeed ultimately Greek,
but what the Greeks called ta mathēmata was usually wider in meaning
than the modern term implies (and wider than what Heath understood as
the scope of his own history). Besides pure geometry and stereometry (as
well as the much less central ﬁeld of pure arithmetic), the ancient Greeks
always included within mathematics ﬁelds such as astronomy and theoret-
ical music, and they often added optics and mechanics as well. That there
was a diﬀerence between “pure” and “mixed” mathematics was often
acknowledged, but that the two belonged together was also clear. How
could it not be? As I will point out throughout this book, the identity
of Greek mathematics was, above all, that of a literary genre. And at this
level – the way they were written about – the diﬀerent ﬁelds were not all
that far apart. Whether in geometry or astronomy, optics or mechanics,
one would encounter nearly the same diagrams, nearly the same formulaic
language. It would be ahistorical as well as misleading to produce a history
of Greek mathematics and leave out the more applied ﬁelds. If you will,
you may think of it as a history of the Greek exact sciences. But I prefer to
keep the word mathematics: it is, in fact, closer to the way the Greeks,
themselves, thought about it. Even in the more applied ﬁelds, it was a
theoretical study, organized around the idea of proof, not around the idea
of experiment. But I am getting ahead of myself. I shall argue for all of this
throughout the book.
One ﬁnal word. Heath required two volumes, even while excluding all
the applied mathematical sciences. What I wish to produce is diﬀerent: a
single narrative account, of use for the general interested public, as well as
for undergraduate classes and for those graduate students and scholars
looking for some entry point into the historical foundations of science.
xii
Preface
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A wider public readership demands a slimmer apparatus. At the end of
each chapter, I provide a list of additional readings – those that directly
further the main topic – and oﬀer only a handful of footnotes suggesting
sources for more particular claims. My goal is simple: to make the story
interesting enough so that my readers, indeed, look further.
Plan of the Book
The seven chapters of the book are mostly – but not entirely – arranged in
chronological order. The ﬁrst three chapters provide a chronological survey
of (mostly) pure geometry as it developed from the beginnings to the era of
Archimedes (so, roughly until the year ). Chapter , “To the
Threshold of Greek Mathematics,” provides a comparative context, zooms
in on the Babylonian antecedents to Greek mathematics, and then argues
that the beginnings of Greek mathematics are to be found in the second
half of the ﬁfth century . I then argue that much of the creative activity
in Greek pure mathematics took place in two generational events. The ﬁrst
occurred early in the fourth century, and it is the subject of Chapter ,
“The Generation of Archytas.” The second occurred late in the third
century, and it is the subject of Chapter , “The Generation of
Archimedes” (which also surveys the developments in the era in between
the generations, including the important ﬁgure of Euclid). I argue that
there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two generations: in the
generation of Archytas, mathematics was in dialogue with philosophy; in
the generation of Archimedes, it was much more autonomous. Chapter 
has the most mathematics: many authors of this era are extant, and their
contributions are extremely important; as a consequence, it is also a
longer chapter.
The two chapters that follow take up the more applied mathematical
sciences: Chapter , “Mathematics in the World,” looks at various
“mechanical” and similar applications, and Chapter , “Mathematics of
the Stars,” looks at astronomy. Although these chapters break away from
the chronological sequence, many of the developments in those more
applied ﬁelds took place in the late Hellenistic era and then in the
Roman imperial period, so those two chapters, taken together, extend
the survey all the way down to around . Astronomy is a huge ﬁeld
(which is why Heath put it aside); thus, Chapter , once again, is a
longer chapter.
From onward, the legacy of Greek mathematics was formed and
carried forward by many civilizations. This is the subject of the ﬁnal two
Preface
xiii
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

chapters. Chapter , “The Canonization of Greek Mathematics,” discusses
the absorption of mathematics into Neoplatonist philosophy, and specif-
ically into the practice of philosophical commentary, in Late Antiquity.
The ﬁnal chapter, Chapter , “Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek
Mathematics,” considers both the survival of Greek mathematics, through
the transmission of the works in manuscript in Byzantium, and its impact
in later scientiﬁc civilizations, such as the Islamic world and, ﬁnally, early
modern Europe – with the renaissance of Greek mathematics giving rise,
ultimately, to the rise of modern science.
xiv
Preface
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

