PART III. GEOMETRY.
CHAPTER V.
PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY.
73. 
THE earliest history of Geometry cannot be treated in
the same way as that of Arithmetic. There is not for the
former, as there is for the latter, a nomenclature common to
many nations and languages; and the analysis of a geometrical
name in any one language leads only to the discovery of a root-
syllable which is common to many very different words and to
which only the vaguest possible meaning may be assigned.
Nor is any assistance, so far as I know, furnished by travellers
among savage and primitive races. Arithmetical operations are
matters of such daily necessity that every general arithmetical
proposition, of which a man is capable, is pretty certain to be
applied in his practice and to attract attention: but a man may
well know a hundred geometrical propositions which he never
once has occasion to use, and which therefore escape notice. I
have sought, in vain, through many books which purport to
describe the habits and psychology of the lower races, for some
allusion to their geometrical knowledge or for an account of
some operations which seem to imply geometrical notions.
One would be glad, for instance, to learn whether savages
anywhere distinguish a right angle from an acute. Have they
any mode of ascertaining whether a line is exactly straight or
exactly circular ? Do they by name distinguish a square from
any other rectilineal figure ? Do they attach any mysterious
properties to perpendicularity, angular symmetry, etc.? We
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

124 
PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY.
have, at present, no answer to these and similar questions and
there is consequently a gap in the history of geometry which
no writer, since Herodotus, has attempted to fill up. Where
this gap occurs will be seen from the following remarks1.
74. Geometry is the science of space and investigates the
relations existing between parts of space, whether linear, super-
ficial or solid. Some of these relations are obviously capable
of arithmetical expression, so soon as units of length, area
and solid contents are selected. For the first of these, some
measurement of the human body has universally served: the
finger-breadth, palm, span, foot, ell, cubit, fathom have been
and are, all the world over, the units of length. Distances
too great to be exactly ascertained have also generally been
measured by some reference to human capacity, such as 'a
stone's throw,' 'within shouting distance' (oa-a-ov re yiycove
fBorj<7a<; as Homer has it) 'a day's journey' etc. But the human
body does not furnish any convenient unit of area or solid
contents. Large areas and volumes, like long distances, seem in
primitive times to have been described roughly by reference to
labour; a field, for instance, is a 'morning's work' (Ger. morgen)
or a day's work for a yoke of oxen (Lat. jugerum): a barn
contains so many loads: but we do not know how small areas
and volumes were described2. Now the oldest exact geometry,
of which we know anything, is concerned almost entirely with
the measurement of various areas or solids by reference to a
square or a cubical standard unit. The selection of these par-
ticular shapes, out of several which prima facie would serve
1 The modern writers on the history 
sur I'origine etc. de Ge"omStrie (Paris,
of Greek geometry, whom I have 
1837 
and 
1875. 
Both 
editions
chiefly consulted, are the following: 
are identical). 
Bretschneider and the
Bretsohneider, Die Geometrie und die 
rest convict Montucla (Hist, 
des
Geometer vor Eukleides 
(Leipzig, 
Mathim. 1758) of so many mistakes
1870): Hankel, Zur 
Geschichte der 
in his history of Greek mathematics,
Mathematik (Leipzig,' 1875): Dr G. 
that I have seldom referred to him.
J. Allman, Greek Geometry from Tholes 
All these authors will in future be
to Euclid in Hermathena (Dublin) Nos. 
cited generally by name only,
v. and vn. (Vols. in. and iv. 1877 and 
2 Small volumes were perhaps de-
1881), Cantor, Vorlesungen ilber Ge- 
scribed by weight, as conversely Gr.
schichte der Mathematik (Leipzig 1880), 
Spaxw, properly a 'handful,'came to
Prof. M. Chasles, Apercu Historique 
be a standard of weight.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PRE-HISTOKIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY. 
125
just as well, implies a long period of observation and considera-
tion. How did this observation begin ? It must be assumed,
of course, that mankind, like birds and bees, were from the first
familiar with, and able to distinguish, the many symmetrical
figures which occur in nature and that they knew generally that
suspended strings all hang alike and that all posts, to be stable,
must be stuck in the ground in a particular manner1. But the
question is, how they were induced to examine the properties
of these figures, to investigate the peculiarities of this par-
ticular angle. Herodotus says (u. 109) that Sesostris (Ramses
II. abt. 1400 B. c.) divided the land of Egypt into equal
rectangular (or square) plots for the purpose of more convenient
taxation; that the annual floods, caused by the rising of the
Nile, often swept away portions of a plot, and that surveyors
were in such cases appointed to assess the necessary reduction
in the tax. 'Hence in my opinion' (BoKeei Si pot) he goes on
'arose geometry, and so came into Greece.' The same account
is elsewhere8 repeated as legendary, without reference to
Herodotus, and it is not unlikely to be an Egyptian tradition
which Herodotus appropriated. This history of geometry is
generally scouted3, but I think it perhaps contains a germ of
truth. Suppose that lands were originally measured roughly by
their produce or by the labour which they demanded. Then,
I imagine, the first attempt at exact numerical calculation of
areas was merely the measurement of the periphery, a method
which was useful enough so long as the areas were of approxi-
mately the same shape. But in process of time areas of one
1 It may be supposed that attention 
1098). The quotations are printed
would be called to the right angle be- 
in full in Bretschneider, Geometrie etc.
cause it is, as Aristotle calls it, the 
vor Eukleides, pp. 7—9.
' angle of stability.' But men might 
8 Prof, de Morgan quotes (Art.
well recognise a right angle in the 
Geometry in Penny Cyclop.) from "an
vertical plane without recognising it in 
obsolete course of mathematics" the
the horizontal. Compare the remarks 
following lines:
of (Enopides, an early Greek geometer, 
'To teach weak mortals property to
quoted below p. 147. 
scan
2 Heron Alex. Bell. ed. Hultsch, p. 
Down came geometry and formed a
138. Diodorus Sic. i. 69, and 81. 
plan.'
gtrabo, xvn. c. 3 (Meineke's ed. p.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

126 
PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY.
shape were exchanged for areas of another shape, and it was
then for the first time discovered that figures of equal periphery
are not necessarily of the same area1. A man who had had a
square field, for instance, exchanged it for a rhombus of equal
periphery, but found that he got less produce than before. A
discovery of this kind would at once call attention to angles
and suggest the propriety of establishing a unit of area. The
utility of the square unit might have been established by long
experience or have been suggested by the aspect of stone or
brick-buildings subsequent to the Cyclopean era of archi-
tecture.
75. But it is needless to dwell longer on a theory which
must, at present, remain purely conjectural. Whatever opinion
be ultimately adopted concerning the first steps in geometry, it
will always remain true that the word 'geometry' (ryea/jLerpia)
means 'land-measurement2,' that the Egyptians gave this science
to the world and that among the Egyptians, from first to last, it
answered to its name and was confined almost entirely to the
practical requirements of the surveyor.
The work of Ahmes, which was so frequently cited in the
earlier pages of this book, contains, beside sums in arithmetic,
a great many geometrical examples which deserve to be cited3.
Immediately after the examples of Tunnu- or difference-
calculation cited above (p. 19), Ahmes proceeds to calculate the
contents of barns and other similar receptacles, of which un-
fortunately we do not know the shape, so that the necessary
1 The erroneous assumption that 
2 So in Egyptian 
hunu = 'la,nd
figures of equal periphery are of the 
measurer,' 'geometer,' v. Brugsch's
same area appears in classical authors. 
Hierogl. Demot. Worterbuch, p. 967.
Thucydides (vi. 1) estimates the area 
3 It is curious that all the geo-
of Sicily by the time spent in circum- 
metrical matter occurs in the middle
navigating it. Polybius (ix. .21) men- 
of the arithmetical and that the cal-
tions' that there are some people who 
culation of solid contents precedes the
cannot understand that camps of the 
calculation of areas. From this it
same periphery may not be the same 
may perhaps be inferred that the geo-
size. Quintilian (i. 10, 39 sqq.) points 
metrical propositions known to Ahmes
out the fallacy as one that easily 
were empirically obtained and that
deceives the vulgar. So also Proclus 
he was really interested only in the
(ed. Friedlein, p. 237). See Cantor, 
arithmetical problems which they sug-
pp. 146—7. 
gested.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY. 
127
clue to the interpretation of the examples is wanting1. For the
examples in plane geometry (Nos. 49—55), however, the figures
given by Ahmes are sufficient, save in a few cases3 where
solutions and figures are given which have no connection what-
ever with the problems to which they are appended. The
rectilineal figures of which Ahmes calculates the areas are the
square, oblong, isosceles triangle and isosceles parallel-trapezium
(regarded as part of an isosceles triangle cut by a line parallel to
the base). As to the last two, the areas which he finds are
incorrect. Thus in Ex. 51 he draws an isosceles triangle of
which the sides measure 10 ruths, the base 4 ruths. He mul-
tiplies the side by half the base and finds the area at 20 square
ruths. The real area is 19-6. Similarly in no. 52 the area of
an isosceles parallel-trapezium is taken to be 100 square ruths,
instead of 99875s. The errors in these cases are small but are
not on that account the less suggestive. The area of a circle is
found (in no. 50) by deducting from the diameter ^th of its
length and squaring the remainder. Here IT is taken = (1
¥
6)2 =
3"1604 
, a very fair approximation.
76. Lastly, the papyrus contains (nos. 56 to 60)4 some
examples which seem to imply a rudimentary trigonometry.
In these (except the last) the problem is to find the uchatebt,
1 Eisenlohr pp. 93—117, Nos. 41—48. 
If in an isosceles parallel trapezium
The contents of all the barns are ob- 
^
tained in this way. Of three given
linear measurements two are multi-
plied together and the product is
multiplied by one-and-a-half 
of the 
62
third. But it does not appear whether 
the equal sides be a, a, the parallel
the first product is the area of the top 
sides blt 62, the area is
or the bottom or the side of the barn 
6 + 6 
/ 
Ib - 6 \ 2
or of what line the third given number 
%~ x \ / a ~ I 
<j J •
is the measure. 
Ahmes makes the areas
a E.g. nos. 53, 54. Eisenlohr pp. 
ab
ab 
, a(6
2~ a n
118—133. 
2 a n 
2
3 Eisenlohr, pp. 125, 127—129. If 
respectively, neglecting the difficult
in an isosceles triangle the equal sides 
square roots.
be a, a, the base 6, the area is 
4 Eisenlohr, pp. 134—149. On the
use of these seqt calculations, see be-
6_
2 _ 
low p. 142. In Ahmes, of course, they
4 
are only exercises in arithmetic.
/ 2 _
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

128
PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY.
piremus or seqt of a pyramid or obelisk. 
Uchatebt apparently
means 'search for the base' and is clearly a line which has
something to do with the base: piremus apparently means
'result (or issue) of the saw' and is a line which can be obtained
only by section of the pyramid: seqt apparently means 'relation'
or 'like-making,' and is a number. For the purposes of these
problems, the uchatebt is always halved. By means of these
clues, Eisenlohr and Cantor have very ingeniously explained
the purport of Ahmes' examples. In the pyramid figured the
uchatebt may be either IDE (i.e.
DL) or 2BE (i.e. BH): the pi-
remus may be either AD or AB,
according as the pyramid is cut
parallel with the base-line or
along the diagonal of the base-
square1. The problems which
Ahmes proposes are always of
the form 'Given any two of the
uchatebt, piremus and seqt, to find the third,' and the solution
is always obtained from the fact that the seqt is half the uchatebt
divided by the piremus. In the figure above given, therefore,
DE 
BE
the seqt is - j - ^ or -j-^ , i.e. cos ADE or cos ABE. 
The actual
seqt given by Ahmes is, in one case, 0"72, in three more O-75.
These are the cosines of the angles 43° 56' 44" and 41° 24' 34"
respectively. The angle ABE in most existing pyramids is
nearly of these measurements. Further, these cosines of ABE
correspond to angles of 53° 44' 7" and 51° 16' 40" respectively
at A DE and these again are nearly the slopes of most existing
pyramids2. This explanation being premised, the problems
1 It cannot be that the uchatebt is
the visible base-line, the piremus the
sloping edge; for it is a property of
pyramids upon square bases, such as
Ahmea seems to be considering, that
half the square of the base-line can
never be greater than the square of
the sloping edge. But in Ahmes' first
example the uchatebt is 360 ells, the
piremus 250. Eisenlohr, p. 135.
2 According to Piazzi Smith the
slopes of the largest pyramid at Gizeh
are between 51° 49' and 51° 51'. If
the face of a pyramid on a square
base were equal to the square of the
height, the slope would be 51° 50'.
If the base were equal to a circle of
which the height is the radius, the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PEE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY. 
129
themselves may here be given. In no. 56 it is required to find
the seqt (S) of a pyramid, whereof the uchatebt (U) is 360 ells,
the piremus (P) is 250\ The answer is £§$. Reducing ells to
palms, (1 ell = 7 palms) S is 5^6- palms, that is, there are 5 ^
palms in -^ to every ell in P. In no. 57 U is 140 ells : seqt is
5| palms. Find P. The answer is 93^ ells. In no. 58 the
dimensions of U and P are as in no. 57. Find 8. In no. 59
new dimensions of U and P are given, but 8 is again found at
5J palms. No. 60 does not relate to a pyramid at all. It
applies to an obelisk of which the height (qai) is 30 ells: the
base-line (senti) 15. The seqt here is determined at 4, which is
the tangent of the angle included between the side and the
base-line of a triangular face. The figures appended are very
ill-drawn to scale and are all furnished with a pedestal: e.g. the
figure to no. 58 is like
77. 
One or two glimpses of Egyptian geometry are ob-
tained also at a far later time. The most interesting is fur-
nished by the etymology of a Greek word. The philosopher
Democritus (cir. B. c. 460—370) is quoted by Clement of
Alexandria2 as saying, "In the construction of plane figures
(lit. composition of lines) with proof no one has yet surpassed
me, not even the so-called Harpedonaptae of Egypt." It was
evident, of course* that these Harpedonaptae were famous geo-
meters, but Prof. Cantor has first pointed out that their
name is compounded of two Greek words and means simply
slope would = 51° 51'. 
Mr Petrie's 
Lepsius, is O™# 525. Eisenlohr p. 94.
measurements (Pyr imids and Temples 
2 Strom, i. p. 357 (Potter's ed.) ypa^.-
of Gizeh, 1883, pp. 42, 97, 112) do 
niwv avvBecrios pera diroSei^ios ovBeis KU
not differ substantially from Piazzi 
pe irafyqh\a£eii, ovS oi Aiyvirriwi> Ka\e&-
Smith's. 
ixevoi'kpireSovaTTTai..
The Egyptian ell, according to
G. G. M. 
9
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

130 
PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY.
'rope-fasteners' or 'rope-stretchers.' He explains their functions
in the following way1. There is no doubt that the Egyptians
were very careful about the exact orientation of their temples
and other public buildings. But inscriptions seem to shew that
only the N. and S. line was drawn by actual observation of the
stars. The E. and W. line, therefore, was drawn at right-
angles to the other. Now it appears, from the practice of
Heron of Alexandria and of the ancient Indian and probably
also the Chinese geometers, that a common method of securing
a right angle between two very long lines was to stretch round
three pegs a rope measured into three portions, which were to
one another as 3 : 4 : 5. The triangle thus formed is, of course,
right-angled. Further, the operation of 'rope-stretching' is
mentioned in Egypt, without explanation, at an extremely early
time (Amenemhat I.) If this be the correct explanation of it,
then the Egyptians were acquainted, 2000 years B.C., with the
geometrical propositions familiar to us as Euclid I. 47, 482, or
with one particular case of them.
78. It will readily be supposed that the Egyptians, who
had so early invented so many rules of practical geometry,
could not fail in process of time to make many more discoveries
of the same kind, and thus be led to geometrical science. But
it appears that in Egypt land-surveying, along with writing,
medicine and other useful arts, was in the monopoly of the
priestly caste3; that the priests were the slaves of tradition,
and that, in their obstinate conservatism, they were afraid to
alter the rules or extend the knowledge of their craft. 
Of their
medicine, Diodorus (i. 82) expressly relates that, even in his
day, the Egyptian doctors used only the recipes contained in the
ancient sacred books, lest they should be accused of manslaughter
in case the patient died. 
Geometry seems to have been
treated with similar timidity. The temple of Horus at Edfu,
1 Vorles. i. pp.. 55—57 (Egyptian 
2 Compare Plutarch, Be Is. et Osir.
Temple inscriptions etc.) pp. 324—5 
c. 56.
(Heron): pp. 540—542 (the (Julva- 
3 Isocrates, Busiris, c. 9. Aristotle,
sutras): pp. 580—581 (Chinese ' Figur 
Metaph. i. 1. Diodor. Sic. i. cc. 69,
des Seiles'). Compare also Hankel, p. 
81, 82. With c. 82 comp. Arist. Vol.
83. 
m. 15.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY. 
131
in Upper Egypt, bears some inscriptions describing the lands
which formed the endowment of the priestly college attached
to the temple. These lands were given by King Ptolemy XT.
(Alexander I.) who reigned B.C. 107—88, but the geometrical
description of them, made 200 years since Euclid died, is un-
worthy of Ahmes himself. It will be remembered (supra, p. 127
n. 3) that Ahmes uses the incorrect formulae -_ and 
^—s
for the areas of an isosceles triangle and an isosceles parallel-
trapezium. The Edfu inscriptions retain both these, but they
apply the second for finding the areas of trapezia of every
kind, no matter how irregular1. The dulness, or laziness, of
this proceeding is monumental in more senses than one. It
is obvious that the Greek mathematicians had by this time no
more to learn from the native Egyptians, and we may therefore
leave Egyptian geometry with a quiet conscience.
79. It remains only to cite the universal testimony of
Greek writers, that Greek geometry was, in the first instance,
derived from Egypt, and that the latter country remained for
many years afterwards the chief source of mathematical teaching.
The statement of Herodotus on this subject has already been
cited. So also in Plato's Phaedrus Socrates is made to say
that the Egyptian god Theuth first invented arithmetic and
geometry and astronomy. Aristotle also [Metaph. I. 1) admits
that geometry was originally invented in Egypt, and Eudernus
(see post pp. 134, 135) expressly declares that Thales studied
there. Much later Diodorus (B.C. 70) reports an Egyptian
tradition that geometry and astronomy were the inventions
of Egypt, and says that the Egyptian priests claimed Solon,
Pythagoras, Plato, Democritus, (Enopides of Chios and Eudoxus
as their pupils2. 
Strabo gives further details about the
visits of Plato and Eudoxus. He relates that they came to
Egypt together, studied there thirteen years, and that the
1 Hankel, pp. 86, 87. Cantor, pp. 
soriptions use this also for triangles,
60, 61. In the case of a trapezium 
the dimensions here being given e.g.
with 4 unequal sides (a, b, c, d) the 
as "nothing by 5, and 17 by 17.''
, . a + b c + d 
„ , „ , . . 
2 Diodorus I. cc. 69,96.
formula is —— , —^- . The Edfu m-
9—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

132 
PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY.
houses where they lived were still shown in Heliopolis1. Later
writers, of course, have the same tale, and it is needless to
collect further evidence. Beyond question, Egyptian geometry,
such as it was, was eagerly studied by the early Greek philo-
sophers, and was the germ from which in their hands grew that
magnificent science to which every Englishman is indebted for
his first lessons in right seeing and thinking2.
80. A word or two should be added also in this place con-
cerning Babylonian mathematics8. The Chaldees, at a time
almost contemporaneous with Ahmes, but whether independently
or not cannot now be ascertained, had made advances, similar to
the Egyptian, in arithmetic and geometry, and were especially
busy with astronomical observations. It seems that they had
divided the circle into 360 degrees, and that they had obtained
a fairly correct determination of the ratio of the circumference
of a circle to its diameter. They used, also, in arithmetic, as
has been stated above, a sexagesimal notation, which the Greeks
afterwards adopted for astronomical purposes. Herodotus4 ex-
pressly states that the polos and gnomon (two kinds of sundials)
and the twelve parts of the day were made known to the Greeks
from Babylon. Much of the trigonometry and spherical geometry
of the later Greeks may also have been directly derived from
Babylonian sources.
Finally, it should be remembered that however scanty
geometrical theories may have been both in Egypt and Chaldea,
a very great variety of geometrical figures was used in both
1 Strabo, xvn. 1. Meineke's ed. 
famous of the ancient Greek sculptors,
p. 1124. Bretschneider (pp. 33, 34), 
studied in Egypt, as did their father
however, thinks that, before Plato's 
Rhoeeus, who designed the labyrinth
time, Greek geometry had so far out- 
in Lemnos. (Bretschneider, p. 24.)
stripped the Egyptian that no Greek, 
s See Cantor chap. in. pp. 67—94.
after about 450 B.C., would have visit- 
4 n. 109. Pliny (H. N. n. 76) attri-
ed Egypt for the purpose of learning 
butes the introduction of the gnomon
geometry. He supposes therefore that 
to Anaximenes, Suidas to Anaximan-
Plato and Eudoxus went to Egypt 
der (s. v.). Diogenes L. (n. 1) and
to learn astronomy, as in fact the 
Suidas both attribute a &POITKOTUOV,
passage of Strabo, above quoted, sug- 
probably the polos, to the latter. On
gests. 
the gnomon and polos see below p.
2 Diodorus i. 98 says also that 
145 n.
Telecles and Theodoras, the most
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PRE-HISTORIC AND EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY. 
183
countries for mural decoration and other ornamental purposes1.
To a Greek, therefore, who had once acquired a taste for
geometry, a visit to Egypt or Babylon would reveal a hundred
geometrical constructions which, on inspection, suggested new
theorems and invited scientific inquiry.
1 See Cantor, pp. 58, 59, 89, 90.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

