 
                                            2/23/22 
 
 
Prevention of Digital Crime and Corruption in a Web3.0 World 
Prof. Alex Pentland, MIT 
MIT Connection Science Whitepaper 1/23/2022 based on conversations with senior 
leadership of multinational companies (Mastercard, Visa, EY, Deloitte, IBM, Ferrovial, 
Barclays, China Construction Bank), nations (Treasury and Commerce departments of US, 
EU, Korea, Singapore, Indonesia, Australia, Denmark) and multilaterals (World Bank, 
OECD, UN Sec. General office, World Economic Forum, World Leadership Alliance).  The 
views in this paper do not necessarily represent those of the discussion participants. 
The Web 3.0 Security Challenge 
New “web 3.0” technologies….the combination of artificial intelligence (AI), blockchain, and 
Internet of Things (IoT)…have created new challenges for institutions and governments in combatting 
digital crime and corruption, as well as creating the potential for enormous inequality [1].  Blockchain 
systems may be the world’s largest path for ransom, money laundering, and illegal funds transfer.  AI is 
used within every sector to discover private, proprietary data and even national secrets, and IoT allows 
mass tracking of the behavior of private individuals, corporations, and organizations at a very high level 
of granularity.   
Today there are no generally accepted standards for monitoring or auditing these flows of 
money, material, environmental conditions or data, despite the obvious and serious risk these problems 
pose to individuals, corporations, governments, and even the entire world.  While there are historical 
systems and regulations in the domain of finance, and proposals for some aspects of these new all-
digital financial systems, there is no framework for a world-wide anti-fraud and anti-corruption 
framework that could be applied to all digital transactions. 
As much promise web 3.0 holds, the reality is that the technical means that would enable good 
governance and crime prevention don’t yet exist.  Without the ability to monitor and audit digital 
transactions we will not have an effective, reliable Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) 
measurement [2], reduction in large-scale financial fraud [3], monitoring of logistics chain risk [1,2,3], or 
early detection of pandemics.     
Development of standards and norms for these new Web 3.0 systems should happen before they are 
widely deployed, which means that discussions need to happen very soon. Discussions between nations, 
multinationals, and civil society organizations should focus on establishing norms of interaction, 
auditing, accountability and governance. Payments and some other types of financial transactions are 
examples of systems where this sort of interoperability and shared norms has been achieved. 

This suggests that a new “Digital Bretton Woods” multilateral effort is required, with the goal of 
developing a multilateral body to provide guidance for Web 3.0 platforms both for industry-developed 
platforms and those developed by China, Singapore and Switzerland. Unlike the World War II Bretton 
Woods effort, such coordination must not only be centered around banking and finance but must be 
intimately dependent on digital technical standards for trade and the unified risk-assessment science 
needed to measure and forecast interactions between finance, sustainability and social factors.  Such a 
body need not be expensive or large, as illustrated by the governance oversight platforms developed for 
the Internet and the World Wide Web. 
An Architecture for Web 3.0 Governance and Audit 
Transparency, accountability and fairness are the basis for justice and good governance.   These 
public goods are in tension with individual privacy, proprietary business data, and state secrets.   
Historically personal, company, and state secrets were protected by physically hiding them and by 
norms prohibiting discussion.  In the modern era we have developed more formal governance and crime 
prevention methods, such as the census (which puts certain information in the public domain), regular 
reporting of summary information (tax forms, company reports) that guide financial investment and 
potentially signal problems, and rules for maintaining private records for investigative audit.   
The tension between making information available and keeping it secret is everywhere in these 
systems, and is usually solved by either trusting the state to hold the data secret (e.g., tax records) or 
making them public (e.g., census and financial performance data).   Unfortunately, new technologies 
such as blockchain, AI and IoT make existing solutions outdated.  The Web 3.0 world may end up being a 
very lawless place, where the quick and the powerful rule with impunity and the rest of us are “mined” 
for our resources 
This whitepaper will lay out technical capabilities and system architecture that allow balancing 
the needs of individuals and the public while at the same time reducing risks of crime, corruption, and 
unintended consequences.  Our approach is based on two recent mathematical advances. The first is 
development of methods for constructing aggregate census-like data, including public performance and 
impact reports from companies and nations, without risk of exposing personal, company, or state data 
and without having to trust third parties such as government agencies.  The second is a method of 
proving that your operations are conforming to laws and are property reflected in your reports without 
revealing private, proprietary, or secret data.  Both methods have the separate advantage that they are 
very sensitive and quick methods to detect and isolate fraud or attack by third parties. 
The first new mathematical advance that we will make use of is the recent development of 
distributed computing technologies such as Secure Multiparty Computation (SMC) and distributed 
ledgers employing cryptographic constructs such as Merkle trees.  These technologies allow trusted, 
auditable computing that can automatically compute legal reports (e.g., tax, legal compliance, medical 
treatment data) and public, census-like data without endangering privacy, security, or state secrets.  For 
instance, in [4] we developed a protocol that turns a blockchain into an automated access-control 
manager that does not require trust in a third party. Transactions in this system are used to carry 
instructions, such as storing, querying and sharing data, making it possible to create a trusted, privacy-
preserving system for the full range of reporting requirements without exposing the underlying data. 
The second new mathematical advance is development of Cryptographic Proofs (CP) that 
guarantee that transactions and ledgers conform to legal guidelines, and which allow immediate 
identification of suspicious transactions and accumulations for more detailed auditing.   For instance, we 
have demonstrated in [5] a system that uses cryptographic proofs on distributed ledgers to ensure the 

secure cooperation of large groups of actors (individuals, companies, nations) by encapsulating 
transactions in an authenticated data structure known as a Merkle tree. With this method, regulators 
can provide a legal “blueprint” for the economy without specifying data or details. In other words, 
transaction verification can be separated from data itself, by having economic actors “prove” their 
integrity to their peers by exchanging cryptographic proofs.   This allows continuous compliance 
guarantees for transactions in areas ranging from finance, to environmental and healthcare monitoring.   
Supporting these publishing and compliance elements must be a ledger technology that 
immutably records each transaction for risk reduction through legal compliance, fraud or corruption 
detection, and ensuring fairness and lack of bias.  As new technological solutions emerge to manage 
increased data utilization within an organization – such as logical data warehousing, cloud data, data-
hubs, etc. – there is a corresponding need for organizations to incorporate data auditing as a core part 
of the data management lifecycle.    
The need for audit is driven not only by internal Enterprise data-consistency requirements, but 
also from regulatory compliance requirements notably when organizations obtain and utilize personal 
data (e.g. EU GDPR [6] and EU Data Governance [7]).  Included is data provenance tracking (e.g., data 
use permissions), data derivation (for instance, decisions of an AI system), and tracking of direct access 
and indirect access to data. 
The goal of a data audit infrastructure is to collect, organize and maintain evidence of data 
ingestion, usage and archiving across the various business units of an organization. The data audit 
infrastructure must be agnostic as to user/employee, applications and the data types. The advent of 
hash-chains and blockchain technology provides a core building-block for trace & audit, around which 
other data audit functions can be developed.  
Computer code development platforms such as GitHub [8] have been using many of these 
methods for nearly a decade now. Periodically the change-logs and access-logs are further summarized 
into a hash tree structure (e.g. Merkle tree) anchored to a distributed ledger, and summary statistics 
published for regulatory compliance or financial reporting, using techniques like Secure Multiparty 
Computation (SMC) and Cryptographic Proofs (CP), which guarantee protection of the underlying data.  
This SMC, CP and Merkle tree approach provides important benefits to data management systems 
employed by many organizations today, including independence from information type, lightweight 
anchors, persistence and privacy-preservation, and enables automated post-event audit. 
  Modern organizations in the digital economy will not only rely more on its own data, but it will 
also rely increasingly on data held by other entities. This dependence opens many opportunities for 
fraud and corruption which needs mitigation.  New methods to share insights and perform joint-
computations between parties without disclosing plaintext data, such as SMC and CP are being 
developed, and will reach the market in the next 3-5 years. This inter-dependence for data among 
business partners also introduces challenges from the perspective of audit, taxation and regulatory 
compliance. For example, organizations which share insights (e.g. using the OPAL paradigm [9]) must be 
able to prove to auditors of the interactions between them through the appropriate APIs. Thus, the 
notion of a lightweight audit-log blockchain discussed above lends itself for utilization also for cross-
enterprise interactions, whether in the context of the sharing of insights, or in asset-related 
transactions. 
The potential benefit of a lightweight blockchain that carries minimal information – consisting of 
records of a hash-value and tag (as a context identifier) – is increasingly being recognized by the 
industry. It is often referred to as a ``witness blockchain’’ denoting its main task as a time-stamp for 

hash-values. European Blockchain Service Infrastructure (EBSI) project [10] refers to something similar 
as its “notarization” blockchain. 
This same model may also be utilized for cross-border transactions (e.g. digital trade [11]), 
which may incorporate the sharing of data and/or the movement of digital assets (e.g. electronic 
payments). For instance, the entities involved can be private-sector organizations (e.g. commercial 
banks) or public-sector organizations (e.g. Border Port Authorities) 
Conclusion 
Both the financial crash of 2008, the current pandemic and attendant supply chain problems 
have laid bare the inadequacy of current systems, both in terms of their inability to prevent fraud, 
forecast and manage crises, and to prevent systemic exclusion or bias against of many parts of society. 
These challenges aren’t solved by current Web 3.0 technologies alone, and without the sort of 
governance and auditing mechanisms discussed in this whitepaper it is possible that Web 3.0 could 
actually exacerbate these problems. To build a safer, inclusive, innovative and equitable global economy 
there needs to be access to robust, timely and comprehensive “rich census data” including aggregated 
transaction data. As emphasized in the recent G20 meeting, open access to this sort of data will allow 
stakeholders to more quickly, and with greater certainty, forecast sources of local and global risks, 
ranging from financial crashes, to climate change, to pandemics, to systemic racial and gender 
discrimination to other precursors of social unrest.  
Coordinated multinational and national systems that allow unified and agile response is 
required. The need for technologies such as secure, privacy-preserving digital ID, accurate records of 
cross-border trade, and real-time sharing of health data are becoming urgent. There are of course many 
relevant initiatives underway, but there is no overarching vision and so gaps and contradictions are 
everywhere. The technology to build effective systems exists, and industry is willing to lead the way in 
deployment, and now governments need to enable effective, coordinated detection of attacks, fraud, 
and rules for proportional response. 
References 
[1] https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/07/the-future-of-sustainable-finance/ 
[2] https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/10/how-decentralized-systems-can-help-rebuild-
local-communities/ 
 [3] http://www.clubmadrid.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Digital-Cooperation-and-a-
Better-Global-Future-1.pdf 
 [4] Guy Zyskind, Oz Nathan, Alex Pentland, Decentralizing privacy: Using blockchain to protect 
personal data (5/2015), 2015 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, pp. 180-184 
[5] Eduardo Castelló Ferrer, Thomas Hardjono, Alex 'Sandy' Pentland, Marco Dorigo, (2021) 
Secure and secret cooperation in robotic swarms, Science Robotics, Vol 6, Issue 56, 
arXiv:1904.09266,  DOI: 10.1126/scirobotics.abf1538,   
[6] European Commission, Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data and on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation), Vol. L119, pp. 1-88, 
2016. 
[7] European Commission, EU Data Governance Act (DGA), November 2020. Document 
52020PC0767. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52020PC0767&from=EN 
[8] Wikipedia, Github, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GitHub. Accessed 14 Jan 2022. 

[9] A. Pentland, Open Algorithms, in Trusted Data: A New Framework for Identity and Data 
Sharing, MIT Press 2019. 
[10] European Commission, European Blockchain Service Infrastructure (EBSI), 2021. 
https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/wiki/display/EBSIDOC/General 
[11] Australia DFAT, Australia-Singapore Digital Economy Agreement – Fact Sheet, December 
2020. https://www.dfat.gov.au/sites/default/files/australia-singapore-digital-economy-agreement-fact-
sheet_0.pdf 

