Prosaics and Other 
Provocations
Empathy, Open Time, And The Novel
Gary Saul Morson
BOSTON /2013

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
A catalog record for this book as available from the Library of Congress.
Copyright © 2013 Academic Studies Press
All rights reserved
ISBN 978-1-61811-161-6 (hardback)
ISBN 978-1-61811-183-8 (electronic)
Cover design by Ivan Grave
On the cover: “Harvest at Black Walnut Inn,”  
photograph by Steven Blumenkranz, 2008.
Published by Academic Studies Press in 2013
28 Montfern Avenue
Brighton, MA 02135, USA
press@academicstudiespress.com
www.academicstudiespress.com

Effective December 12th, 2017, this book will be subject to a CC-BY-NC license. To view a copy of this 
license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. Other than as provided by these licenses, no 
part of this book may be reproduced, transmitted, or displayed by any electronic or mechanical means 
without permission from the publisher or as permitted by law. 
The open access publication of this volume is made possible by: 
This open access publication is part of a project supported by the National Endowment for the 
Humanities and The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Humanities Open Book initiative, which includes 
the open access release of several Academic Studies Press volumes. To view more titles available as 
free ebooks and to learn more about this project, please visit borderlinesfoundation.org/open. 
Published by Academic Studies Press 
28 Montfern Avenue 
Brighton, MA 02135, USA 
press@academicstudiespress.com 
www.academicstudiespress.com 

Ars rossica
Series Editor: David BETHEA
(University of Wisconsin — Madison)

For Jonathan and Fran 


T a b l e  o f  C o n t e n t s
Acknowledgements	
VIII
Preface (by David Bethea) 
X
Abbreviations	
XXI
Introduction 	
1
Part One. Overture
Chapter One. What Is Prosaics? 	
12
Part Two. What Is Open Time?
Chapter Two. Narrativeness 	
33
Chapter Three. The Prosaics of Process	
50
1/ The Vision of Poetics and Product	
51
2/ The Counter-Tradition: Presentness and Process	
67
3/ Outlining a Prosaics of Process	
100
Part Three. What Is Misanthropology?
Chapter Four. Misanthropology: Voyeurism	
126 
and Human Nature (by Alicia Chudo)
Chapter Five. Misanthropology, Continued: Disgust, Violence,	
145 
and More on Voyeurism (by Alicia Chudo)
1/ Another Look at Voyeurism	
145
2/ Identification	
154
3/ Laughter and Disgust	
161
Chapter Six. Misanthropology in Verse: An Onegin of Our Times	
171 
(by Alicia Chudo)
Part Four. What Is Literary Education?
Chapter Seven: Novelistic Empathy, and How to Teach It	
183
Part Five. What Is Wit?
Chapter Eight: Contingency, Games, and Wit	
223
Index	
249

—  VIII  —
A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
When Academic Studies Press asked me to put together a collection 
of my theoretical essays, I thought the task would be easy: just pick 
out the ones that have (or in my view should have) attracted the most 
interest. But when I sat down to do so, I found that my method of 
thinking through a problem—keep approaching it from different 
angles and see what ideas emerge—created a lot of overlap from essay 
to essay. I eventually decided to combine different essays into a single 
coherent statement, drawing on already published ideas while making 
connections between them and tracing new implications. 
And so the only essay that can could arguably called a reprint 
of one that appeared earlier is “Contingency, Games, and Wit,” which 
originally appeared in New Literary History’s special issue on play, vol. 
40, no. 1 (Winter 2009). Alicia Chudo published a version of “An Onegin 
of Our Times” in Formations vol. 6, no. 1 (Spring 1991).
* * *
Developing ideas that have been with me since the early 1980s, this 
book reflects debts of many kinds to several people. It owes most to 
my wife Katharine Porter, who read every line and was there for me 
every moment. Emily Morson and Alexander Morson were always 
in my thoughts. Jane Morson helped me develop many primitive  
insights.
David Bethea suggested I do this volume and was tireless in 
guiding it through; Caryl Emerson encouraged me; and Sharona Vedol 
made it all happen.
I often discussed time, contingency, and the unpredictable with 
the late Aron Katsenelinboigen, who remains one of the great intellectual 

Acknowledgments 
—  IX  —
influences of my life. The same is true of the late Stephen Toulmin, with 
whom I co-taught three courses at Northwestern University.
Elizabeth Allen, Nava Cohen, the late Helen Brenner, and Gayle 
Washlow-Kaufman helped many times in ways far beyond what I had 
any right to expect.
As a graduate student at Yale and long after, I learned from the 
late Victor Erlich and Martin Price, and from Robert Louis Jackson and 
Michael Holquist. I did not meet the late Thomas Greene until I was an 
assistant professor, when his ideas about anachronism helped direct my 
thinking. At the University of Pennsylvania, Alfred Rieber contributed 
to my awareness of the ways in which disciplinary presuppositions can 
blind one. The late Elliot Mossman’s encouragement kept me going at 
dark moments. At Northwestern I profited much from dialogues with 
Leonard Barkan, Sanford Goldberg, Robert Gundlach, Gerald Graff, 
Lawrence Lipking, Barbara Newman, Mark Ratner, Kenneth Seeskin, 
and my colleagues in the Slavic department. 
Time and again, I looked to Robert Alter and Frederick Crews 
of Berkeley for their corrections of my work. They suggested changes 
that made my books better than they would have been, and did so with 
grace as well as wisdom.
I owe a special debt to Joseph Epstein, who not only commissioned 
my first extended meditations on prosaics but also inspired me through 
years of conversation. Ralph Cohen and Herbert Tucker provoked 
me to write several articles for New Literary History which initiated 
extended creative projects. With Caryl Emerson I thrashed out theme 
after theme. 
Over the past three years I have had the singularly illuminating 
experience of co-teaching an interdisciplinary course with Morton 
Schapiro. His relentless sharpness and unfailing broadmindedness 
made learning about economics, education, and many other topics an 
adventure.
The late Michael André Bernstein not only inspired me with his 
amazing erudition and intellect but was also an incomparable friend 
since we met as students at Oxford in 1969. Not a day goes by when  
I do not miss him. 
I dedicate this book to Frances Padorr Brent and Jonathan Brent, 
not only for their guidance, editorship, and wise readings, but also for 
a deep personal understanding that has made all the difference.

—  X  —
P r e f a c e 
David M. Bethea
In her inspiring TED Talk (http://blog.ted.com/2008/03/12/jill_bolte_
tayl/), Harvard neuroanatomist Jill Bolte Taylor reprises how it feels 
to experience a stroke “from the inside out.” As someone who had 
deep personal reasons for dedicating her life to brain science—her 
brother had suffered from schizophrenia and had not been able, in her 
words, “to attach his dreams to a common, shared reality”—Taylor 
knew exactly what was happening when she awoke on the morning 
of December 10, 1996, with the symptoms of a serious stroke. She had 
a blinding pain above her left eye and her body was having difficulty 
obeying simple commands. The right and left hemispheres of her brain, 
which normally communicate with each other through the 300 million 
axonal fibers of the corpus collosum, were experiencing a kind of 
power outage in their back-and-forth circuitry. “Reality” was entering 
Taylor’s consciousness more and more through her right hemisphere, 
which can be likened to a “parallel processor” that operates exclusively 
in the present moment. Her body belonged, suddenly and weirdly, 
yet pleasantly, kinesthetically, to the energy flow of the universe; she 
sensed that her extremities were permeable edges where her molecules 
were intermingling with the molecules of the larger world in a massive 
oneness, and the pictures, the sounds and smells, that attended on this 
euphoric merging were beautiful.  
At the same time, the left hemisphere, the “serial processor” that 
provides the sense of “I am” and that “thinks in language,” was in 
deep trouble. Without this left-hemisphere serial functioning Taylor 
literally could not picture herself as a discrete body in time and space, 
as a separate mind that could cast back into the past and project into 
the future. The left hemisphere’s “chatter,” which is to say its mode 

—  XI  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
of linking the individual to the external world (our proverbial “to-
do” lists), was falling silent, surfacing only rarely and spasmodically 
amid the otherwise overflowing feeling of “Nirvana.” Fortunately, 
Taylor was ultimately able to dial the phone and communicate to  
a colleague her distress, after which she was rushed to Mass General 
and stabilized. Two and a half weeks later the surgeons removed a golf-
ball size blood clot that was pressing on her language centers; it then 
took her eight years and Himalayas of pain and patience to be restored 
to her pre-hemorrhage state, although truth to tell, with her story, the 
state to which she was ultimately returned was in many ways a new 
world. As she says in her talk,  
So who are we? We are the life force power of the universe, 
with manual dexterity and two cognitive minds. And we have 
the power to choose, moment by moment, who and how we 
want to be in the world. Right here right now, I can step into the 
consciousness of my right hemisphere where we are—I am—the 
life force power of the universe, and the life force power of the  
50 trillion beautiful molecular geniuses that make up my 
form. At one with all that is. Or I can choose to step into the 
consciousness of my left hemisphere, where I become a single 
individual, a solid, separate from the flow, separate from you.  
I am Dr. Jill Bolte Taylor, intellectual, neuroanatomist. These are 
the “we” inside of me.
I begin my comments here with Jill Bolte Taylor’s story because 
it seems to me that to read this splendid collection of essays by Gary 
Saul Morson is to experience in a particularly vivid verbal form the 
two-cognitive-mind dialogue that lies at the center of Taylor’s amazing 
“aha” moment. Also, because Taylor’s story is actually many stories 
in one, and because it is all about narrating one’s position in time and 
space at a given moment, it is Saul Morson’s special province and 
intellectual homeland. The only individual in our rather small and 
often insular Slavic/Russian studies discipline who is a true public 
intellectual, and someone whose very substantial body of written 
work and pedagogical performance speaks uniquely to the larger 
world of ideas and contemporary culture, Morson is one of the most 
advanced “serial processors” of ideas of our generation. His passion 
is to place ideas in a series, but that series is not closed, and it merges 
palpably with the external world and a future that contains multiple 
options. “Contingency” is his best ideational friend. Fierce in his own 

—  XII  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
reading of things and ever eager to go against the grain of received 
thought, Morson also celebrates what works, so to speak, which is 
a most refreshing turn in today’s academic landscape. He is willing 
to stand on the shoulders of giants, but he insists that they be giants. 
Thus, he is willing to celebrate when the occasion demands; however, 
that celebration will normally be expressed in a rather unorthodox, 
“misanthropological” (as he would put it) way.
In my remarks to follow I highlight ideas that are central to 
Saul Morson’s approach to the study of literature, culture, and, more 
pointedly, the seam separating the social sciences and the humanities. 
These ideas, I would like to suggest, are not just compelling in their 
own right, which they are, they are also heuristic “therapies” for 
dealing with the discursive “stroke” that, à la the story underlying 
Taylor’s TED Talk, has virtually paralyzed discussion (as in productive 
dialogue) in our time between the worlds of “scientific thinking” and—
for lack of a better word—“spirituality.” Whether what happened to 
Taylor on that December day in 1996 took place inside her head or 
outside of it makes no difference to Morsonian thinking. The human 
brain contains something like 100 billion neurons, of a thousand 
varieties or more, and those nerve cells are capable of making at least 
100 trillion connections. In the modern world we have established that 
neurons fire and are connected, but how exactly they act in concert to 
govern behavior remains a mystery. Reading Morson and following 
him through the epistemological thickets of contemporary thought is, 
while perhaps not the same as reading neuroscience, a very good place 
to go to frame correctly the mystery of consciousness as it happens. 
Few thinkers are better at addressing the “‘we’ inside of ‘me’.”
Prosaics, Bakhtin, Misanthopology
More a philosopher than a literary critic/scholar, Mikhail Bakhtin 
made a career out of developing terminology that took on a life 
of its own and spoke with particular authority to the modern 
condition. Heteroglossia, chronotope, dialogism, polyphony, carnival, 
“outsideness,” “unfinalizability,” “word with a loophole”—these 
terms inevitably opened speech acts that had seemed closed, made 
fluid narrative hierarchies that had seemed fixed. Morson has not 
only analyzed Bakhtinian thought, often and to great effect, he has 
also built on the master’s terminology, and in the process coined  
a powerful vocabulary of his own. Prosaics is, broadly speaking, the 

—  XIII  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
methodology Morson has developed over the years as an antidote to 
“poetics” and “structuralism,” which latter tend to look at a literary 
artifact as constructed “from the end” in such a manner that every part 
fits tidily into the whole and that when the work is completed, it seems 
to be held in mind almost spatially (the late Joseph Frank’s term), all 
at once, beginning to end.It is in this sense that he means “structure is 
the literary counterpart of providence” and “in God’s world and the 
literary masterpiece, optimality—the best state of affairs or the best 
structure—reconciles free will and providence.” From the structuralist 
perspective, all detours along the way to the final product, all rough 
drafts and resets, serve as a kind of hologram that the creative brain 
holds in limbo until the finished product presents itself. The reader who 
applies this approach casts himself or herself in the role of the author’s 
implied psyche, foregrounding details and selecting out thematic and 
semantic parallels of which the originating creating mind may not be 
aware. In other words, in Morson’s version of a careful structuralist 
reading of a poem or a play or a novel (it is clear he prefers novels, 
following Bakhtin, as the form most accommodating to process) there is 
an engulfing intentionality that is always present, even subconsciously, 
as the writer composes his work. No afterthoughts, only forethoughts.  
The problem with this view is that it doesn’t accurately reflect 
how the mind operates as it interacts with recalcitrant reality. Reality 
throws curve balls. For Morson, whether we are looking at the reality of 
a verbal artifact or the reality of the three-dimensional world, the puzzle 
is not Leibnizian (the contingent is possible, but only if it implies no 
logical contradiction), but Tolstoyan (the contingent is so unexpected 
and so inherently contradictory that to claim God can “foresee” it is 
to attenuate the divine mind out of existence, which may be the point 
to some believers). What is needed to understand Tolstoyan reality is 
“not a poetics of structure but a prosaics of process.” Here I would only 
say, not necessarily disputing Morson’s underlying thesis but engaging 
it along a slightly broader spectrum, that a very tightly constructed 
lyric poem, say Pushkin’s “I recall a wondrous moment” (Ia pomniu 
chudnoe mgnovenie), does tend more to a spatial arraignment of part 
to whole, where the interplay between and among sound, grammar, 
meter, rhyme scheme, stanzaic form, subtextual allusion, and so on 
strongly suggest, if not a completely closed, then a “closing” structure. 
If we take prosaics and translate it into the moral realm we 
get “misanthropology,” Morson’s witty term for the study of the 
“cussedness of human nature.” It is clearly, as the name implies,  

—  XIV  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
a turning on its head of anthropology and the cultural relativism that 
often attends on that discipline. Here Morson examines the, in this case, 
social scientist’s tendency to present the other that is distant in time or 
place with a phony neutrality, as in Margaret Mead’s famous study 
of Samoans who in their sexual mores seem to have found a way out 
of western bourgeois repression. “Misanthropology,” writes Morson, 
“focuses on human evil, and so by its very nature rejects relativism.” 
Evil is fundamental to our nature, as is good. We develop as social 
animals, our identities being formed through speech with others that is 
internalized into thought (Vygotsky) or composed of innerly persuasive 
voices that become “accented” into personhood (Bakhtin). There is no 
state of human cognition or consciousness that is not already social. 
The difference between the misanthrope and the misanthropologist is 
that the former, say Jonathan Swift, is a “reverse sentimentalist” and  
a frustrated utopian—believing that humanity is simply perverse, like 
the Yahoos—while the latter, say Dostoevsky, sees “both the evil and 
good in human nature as 1) irreducible to each other, 2) ineradicable, 
and 3) fundamentally social.” The process that brings one to view 
humankind misanthropologically is in effect the same process that 
brings one to read a novel dialogically, as a series of events involving 
human beings who can, in their present, evolve in different directions 
depending on the specific context and the choices that are made.
Aristotle, Part to Whole
One of the reasons prosaics is a potentially productive approach to  
a variety of topics from the humanities to the social sciences is that it 
looks at culture as an evolutionary process with “intelligent feedback 
loops.” Of course, the “misanthropological” optic means that the 
feedback does not always happen and is not always intelligent. 
As with all genuinely original thinkers, the originality of prosaic 
thinker is itself firmly contextualized, growing out of something and 
toward something else. What is fresh about such thinking is not that 
it takes place in a vacuum, but that it uses what has come before in 
ways commensurate with, and sometimes exceeding, the power of the 
precursor. One senses this especially keenly in Morson’s case, with 
his comments about Aristotle, which eventually lead to analogous 
comments about Darwin, which are then themselves leveraged into 
forays into the social and psychological. Microeconomic theories 
about how an individual’s choices in the marketplace are part of larger 

—  XV  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
patterns of consistency, or Freud’s argument that the mind doesn’t 
simply make mistakes but creates “slips” that are still meaningful, are 
precisely what is wrong, in Morson’s opinion, with a modern scientific 
episteme that claims to follow Darwinian logic but in fact does not.
First, Morson’s summation of Aristotelian versus Platonic 
thinking: 
For Aristotle, form is inseparable from matter, because it inheres 
in matter and gives it shape. Form does not exist on its own, 
any more than there can be color or shape without a thing that 
is colored or shaped. Believing in the independence of forms, 
as Plato did, is like supposing that because we can mentally 
abstract the properties of color, somewhere, in absolute purity, 
color must exist by itself.
For Aristotle, soul shapes the matter of living things. Psyche is 
Aristotle’s term for the form of the living object, and psychology 
is the study of the formal factor that makes a living object what it 
is. Psyche is therefore not separable from body. More accurately, 
form (or soul) is a shaping power, an entelechy, that is in the 
process of shaping matter. Thus, in nutrition (performed by the 
“digestive” soul), food becomes assimilated into flesh.  Living 
involves not just form but forming.
This is an elegant encapsulation of the ancient philosopher’s 
understanding of the origins of intelligent life: Aristotle’s psyche 
is the feedback loop that joins form to function, organ system to 
consciousness (voluntary/involuntary response), without separating 
them from each other, since to do so is to end life. Disgust, on the other 
hand, as Morson argues elsewhere, is that moment when we see this 
living ensemble compromised: the guillotined head that blinks and 
stares, the compound fracture where the bone pierces the tissue.
Darwin, Solov’ev, William James
Darwin enters the picture by placing Aristotle’s form/function correlation 
into at least two important nineteenth-century intellectual frames 
of reference: Thomas Malthus’s views of the dangers of population 
growth (hence the “survival of the fittest” terminology) and Charles 
Lyell’s discoveries about geological formations (including fossils) and 
their relations to continuous change over time (uniformitarianism vs. 
catastrophism), from which Darwin would extrapolate his ideas about 
species formation and natural selection. The distance from Aristotle to 

—  XVI  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
Darwin is that between a “soul” which “shapes the matter of living 
things” and a panda’s thumb (made famous by Stephen Jay Gould), 
which is not really a thumb at all but an extension of the radial sesamoid 
that is good enough to function as an opposable digit and help the panda 
eat its bamboo. It is the logic of this “good enough” that is everything. 
It is also this same logic to which Morson keeps returning in his essays. 
Prosaics are, one might say, Morson’s “panda’s thumb.”
Two other thinkers with whom Morson is in constant, though 
largely implicit, dialogue are the Russian philosopher Vladimir Solov’ev 
and the American philosopher-psychologist-humanist William James. 
Once again I suspect the touchstones are Aristotle and Darwin, with 
Bakhtin’s leitmotifs of structure as open-ended (i.e. evolving) and 
consciousness as dialogic (i.e. always already socially situated) added 
in. In his amazing 1889 study of Darwin (“Beauty in Nature”), Solov’ev 
fully endorses the great naturalist’s argument that species adapt and 
change through time and therefore are not created once and forever 
by an omniscient deity. The aesthetic, which is also one of Morson’s 
favorite topics, arises in nature when matter is “enlightened” by spirit 
into something potentially new and beautiful. A lump of carbon is pure 
matter and light by itself is pure air, but rearrange the carbon molecules 
through intense heat and shine light on the result and you get a dia-
mond. In the animal world we hear the aroused tomcat caterwauling 
on the rooftop and the nightingale singing its song. For Solov’ev, these 
are not the same thing. The sex drive, the explanation from origins, 
is insufficient to capture the full charm of the notes produced by the 
nightingale. There is something extra there, something more than  
a mating call.  
On the other hand, a worm (say, an acanthocephalan) appears 
“ugly” (bezobraznyi, “lacking form”) because it is all feeding (endosmosis, 
vsasyvanie: i.e. it sucks nutrients along its entire surface into the hollow 
cavity inside) and reproducing (the “complex structure” of what Claus 
terms its “mighty genitalia”). The other parts of an organ system that 
might constitute a complex configuration of form and function are 
not found here, and thus the aesthetic as a potentially transfiguring 
element has not yet done its work. (To be fair to Solov’ev, messiness 
does happen and all is a work in progress.) Indeed, the aesthetic for 
Solov’ev is most present, most seen and felt, when the sex and feeding 
drives are not, when the latter have moved into the background and 
appear veiled: e.g., the elaborate design on a tortoise’s shell that hides 
and protects the unprepossessing and vulnerable creature underneath. 

—  XVII  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
These ideas in turn find stimulating parallels in Morson’s statements 
about disgust and voyeurism.
One also imagines inviting William James to this symposium-
like roundtable led by Morson and joined in by Aristotle, Darwin, 
and Solov’ev. “By their fruits ye shall know them, not by their roots,” 
writes James in The Varieties of Religious Experience (1902). With the 
first part of this sentence James quotes Matthew 7:20, while with the 
second part he makes the case for a spirituality worthy of the name 
and endorsed by the exacting standards of American pragmatism. 
“The roots [James’s emphasis] of a man’s virtue are inaccessible to us,” 
and so why try to define that virtue by those roots? Curiously (is this 
the intellectual world absorbing Darwin deeper and deeper into its 
consciousness?), Solov’ev had argued exactly the same thing a decade 
earlier: “The question ‘What is a known object?’ never corresponds to 
the question ‘From what or whence came this object?’” James, however, 
trained in medicine at Harvard and fascinated with the discipline 
of psychophysiology, moves discussion into the area of personal 
spirituality. As opposed to a Richard Dawkins, he does not want to 
deny from the outside the validity of an individual’s experience of the 
divine, but he also wants to argue that that experience does exist in 
time, regardless of the protestations of the prophet or the saint. There 
is a “before” and “after,” the serial processing of which Morson often 
reminds his reader. James tells us matter-of-factly how notions of the 
“deity” have been historicized, and his tone, almost magically, manages 
to be both urbane and compassionate:
In any case, they [i.e. the founders of different religions—DB] 
chose him [the deity] for the value of the fruits he seemed to 
yield. So soon as the fruits began to seem quite worthless; so 
soon as they conflicted with indispensable human ideals, or 
thwarted too extensively other values; so soon as they appeared 
childish, contemptible, or immoral when reflected on, the deity 
grew discredited; and was erelong neglected and forgotten.
Is this not Darwinian logic, the “good enough” of the panda’s 
thumb, as applied to religious experience?  Is this also not what 
Morson brings to the contemporary discussion of how the God of the 
Old and New Testaments (i.e. His scribal traces) changed over time and 
was therefore not outside it. Thus, concludes James, “it is the voice of 
human experience within us, judging and condemning all gods that 
stand athwart the pathway along which it feels itself to be advancing.” 

—  XVIII  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
Once more it is what works in the here and now and what makes sense 
for our existential choices that is James’s quarry, but also Morson’s. 
Culture, including the spiritual side of human nature, moves forward 
the same way that Lyell’s work moved forward and Darwin’s work 
moved forward. We need to be cautious about those James called the 
“medical materialists,” who today would be in the camp of Dawkins 
and the hard science atheists. If Saint Teresa’s experience of revelation 
is too vague, too ecstatic to be taken seriously nowadays, then we 
should look more carefully at Tolstoy’s conversion experience, which 
James certainly does and which Morson, one of our most eloquent 
students of the Russian author, might see as a process, an unfolding 
story, rather than a one-off turning point. In a word, our understanding 
of spirituality needs to be more intelligent.
Teaching
It is probably no exaggeration to say that Saul Morson is one of the 
great teachers in the history of Northwestern University. He has won 
awards for his brilliant presence at the podium, his classes routinely 
attract some of the highest humanities enrollments in the country, and 
he has been known to team-teach a course with the university president 
himself. This is all doubtless laudable, but is not really the point. It 
(the teaching “aura”) is not a cause of anything, except perhaps local 
accolades; instead it is the byproduct of other choices, of “walking the 
walk” and living Prosaics in one’s professional life with students. To 
fully absorb the lessons of Mikhail Bakhtin is to become at some basic 
level the intelligent anti-theorist. College students are not trained in 
theory and will in all likelihood never “apply theory” in their future 
lives. Reaching them and turning them on is, or should be, the goal of 
our pedagogical travails.
In his spirited chapter entitled “What is a Literary Education?” 
Morson explains why great literature, especially great novels, are 
needed on our campuses (and in our society for that matter), and why 
that literature is not being done any favors by the widely held practices 
of today’s academy. It is not for the professor to “tell” Shakespeare 
what he “meant” to say with the help of Freud. Better to turn the tables 
and imagine how the creative genius Shakespeare might read the 
overreaching Freud. Going line by line through George Eliot or Tolstoy 
creates, as it were, organs of empathy in the individual who “lives into” 
each character’s story. Morson encourages his charges to view unfolding 

—  XIX  —
Preface by David M. Bethea
events as containing various possible futures. Novelistic characters are 
neither literary constructs (the formalist view) nor real persons (the so-
called pathetic fallacy); they are rather “possible people.” Thus, Mary 
Garth of Middlemarch may share personal qualities with Mary Anne 
Evans, which is interesting and relevant in and of itself, but the more 
important exercise is “practicing empathy” by living with Mary as she 
experiences the ups and downs of her relationship with Fred Vincy. 
Each event in their lives presents a series of choices. How does Mary 
remain Mary while making those choices? How does Fred improve 
on Fred by coming under Mary’s influence? Here we see a glimpse of 
Tolstoy’s famous idea that great literature “infects.” Morson wants his 
students to “feel ideas” and to enjoy fully the process of “first-time 
reading” (not the “re-reading” of the literary critics). He encourages 
them to make use of the right hemisphere (Anna Karenina’s Levin 
mowing with the peasants) and the left hemisphere (that same Levin 
undergoing confession prior to marriage) and the chatter between 
them that tries to make meaning in our time.
Quotations
Last but not least, Saul Morson is a student of quotations and sayings 
as well as a uniquely talented producer of them. There is a distinct 
pleasure in reading Morson, not only because his thoughts are 
inherently stimulating, but also because they turn out to be eminently 
quotable. I close with some of my own favorite quotes from these essays, 
as, saying more with less, they capture the texture of his thinking better 
than a long-drawn-out argument.
•	 “Men’s work becomes meaningful when it partakes of the spirit 
of women’s work.”
•	 “Sinners love fatalism.”
•	 “Prosaics assumes that the natural state of the world—at least, 
the human world—is mess, and that it is order, not disorder, that 
requires an explanation.”
•	 “History is not a riddle with a hidden solution.”
•	 “True holiness, which never fits a pattern, grows out of the 
particular situations of daily life.”
•	 “One has a science when one no longer needs a story.”
•	 “Darwin offers us an example of non-Newtonian science, one 
that requires narrative.”
•	 “Social scientists practice Leibnizism without God.”

Preface by David M. Bethea
•	 “Re-reading almost inevitably diminishes suspense. . . . Literary 
critics are by necessity re-readers.”
•	 “Modern atheists are haunted by a theology they do not 
recognize as such.”
•	 “Superstition is the social science of others.”
•	 “By process I mean not just a sequence of events extending 
over time but a sequence in which multiple paths are open at multiple 
moments.”
•	  “One becomes a genuine ‘personality,’ rather than a thing, 
when one is not just the sum of one’s experiences and qualities.  
A personality retains the capacity to surprise.”
Now, find your own favorites and enjoy!

—  XXI  —
A b b r e v i a t i o n s
Where no source of a biblical quotation is given, it is drawn from the King 
James version.
1984	
George Orwell, 1984 (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1961).
AA	
M. M. Bakhtin, Art and Answerability: Early Philosophical Essays,  
ed. Michael Holquist and Vadim Liapunov (Austin: University  
of Texas Press, 1990).
AP	Aristotle, “Poetics” in Critical Theory Since Plato, ed. Hazard Adams 
(New York: Harcourt Brace, 1971), 47-75.
AWD1	 Fyodor Dostoevsky, A Writer’s Diary, volume 1, 1873-1876, trans. 
Kenneth Lantz (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1993).
BK	Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Brothers Karamazov, trans. Constance Garnett 
(New York: Random House, 1950).
BoG	
Gary Saul Morson, The Boundaries of Genre: Dostoevsky’s “Diary  
of a Writer” and the Traditions of Literary Utopia (Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 1981).
BWA	
The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon (New York: 
Random House, 1941).
C&G	
John B. Cobb, Jr., and David Ray Griffin, Process Theology:  
An Introductory Exposition (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1976).
C&P	
Fyodor Dostoevsky, Crime and Punishment (New York: Random 
House, 1950).
CAID	 Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, ed. and trans. 
James Strachey (New York: Norton, 1961).
CWA2	 The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation,  
vol. 2, ed. Jonathan Barnes (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1984).

—  XXII  —
 
Abbreviations
DL	Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, vol. 2,  
trans. R. D. Hicks (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995).
DD	
Ambrose Bierce, The Devil’s Dictionary (New York: Doubleday, 
n.d.).
DJ	Lord Byron, Don Juan, ed. Leslie A. Marchand (Boston; Houghton 
Mifflin, 1958).
EAHB	 Gary S. Becker, The Economic Approach to Human Behavior 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992).
FTOS	
Alexander Herzen, “From the Other Shore” and “The Russian People 
and Socialism,” trans. Moura Budberg and Richard Wollheim (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1979).
GDR	
Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman, The Game Design Reader 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
GPR	
Elie Halévy, The Growth of Philosophic Radicalism, trans. Mary 
Morris (Boston: Beacon, 1955).
GT	The Portable Swift, ed. Carl Van Doren (New York: Viking, 1963), 489. 
HC	
The HarperCollins Study Bible, ed. Wayne A. Meeks (New York: 
HarperCollins, 1993).
HIPV	
Gary Saul Morson, Hidden in Plain View: Narrative and Creative 
Potentials in “War and Peace” (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
1987).
HIQ	
M. J. Cohen and John Major, History in Quotations (London: 
Cassell, 2000).
HoD	
Fyodor Dostoevsky, The House of the Dead, trans. Constance 
Garnett (New York: Macmillan, 1959).
I	
Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Idiot, trans. Constance Garnett  
(New York: Modern Library, 1962).
L&S	
Gary Saul Morson, The Long and Short of It: From Aphorism to 
Novel (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2012).
LaR	
The Maxims of La Rochefoucauld, trans. Louis Kronenberger  
(New York: Random House, 1959).
M	 George Eliot, Middlemarch (New York: Modern Library, 1984).
MB:CP	 Gary Saul Morson and Caryl Emerson, Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation  
of a Prosaics (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990).
MDQ	
The Macmillan Dictionary of Quotations, ed. John Dainith et al. 
(Edison, New Jersey: Chartwell, 2000).
N&F	
Gary Saul Morson, Narrative and Freedom: The Shadows of Time 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994).
NFP	
Martha C. Nussbaum, Not for Profit: Why Democracy Needs  
the Humanities (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010).

—  XXIII  —
 
Abbreviations
NFU	
Fyodor Dostoevsky, “Notes from Underground” and “The Grand 
Inquisitor,” the Garnett translation revised by Ralph E. Matlaw (New 
York: Dutton, 1960).
ODQ	
The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations, sixth edition, ed. Elizabeth 
Knowles (Oxford: Oxford University Pre, 2004).
OoS	
Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species: A Facsimile of the First 
Edition (Cambridge, MA, 1964).
QOK	
The Quatrains of Omar Khayyam: Three Translations of the Rubaiyat, 
trans. Edward Fitzgerald, Justin McCarthy, and Richard Le Gallienne 
(California: Bardic Press, 2005).
P	 Fyodor Dostoevsky, The Possessed, trans. Constance Garnett  
(New York: Random House, 1963).
PDP	
Mikhail Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, ed. and trans. 
Caryl Emerson (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984).
PI	 Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our 
Decisions, revised edition (New York: HarperCollins, 2009).
PL	The Riverside Milton, ed. Roy Flannagan (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1998).
PSS	
L. N. Tolstoi, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii [Complete Works], 90 vols., 
ed. V. G. Chertkov et al. (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaia literatura, 
1929-1958).
R&E	
Leo Tolstoy, Recollections and Essays, trans. Aylmer Maude 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1937; reprinted 1961).
RtR	
Stephen Toulmin, Return to Reason (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2001).
SEM	
Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind (New York: 
Ballantine, 1972).
SMW	
Gary Saul Morson, “Anna Karenina” in Our Time: Seeing More 
Wisely (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007).
TS	Laurence Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, 
ed. James Aiken Work (New York: Odyssey, 1940).
VH	
Niall Ferguson, Virtual History: Alternatives and Counterfactuals 
(New York: Basic Books, 1999).
W&P	
Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, trans. Ann Dunnigan (New York: 
Signet, 1968).
WoO	
The Words of Others; From Quotations to Culture (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2011).
YBQ	
The Yale Book of Quotations, ed. Fred Shapiro (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2006).


—  1  —
Introduction
Looking back over decades, one can hardly avoid the fallacious 
impression that one was already there at the beginning. Retrospectively, 
it seems as if I tacitly knew all I ever would know even if it took me 
a lifetime to write it down. All those thrilling moments of creativity 
were so many illusions. At best, they were mere discoveries. Numerous 
critics have written biographies of authors from this standpoint, and 
when one becomes a critic of oneself, it is hard not to adopt the same 
narrative approach.
If so, how smart I was when young! On the other hand, how 
pointless the years have been!
I think the view of life as mere unfolding is mistaken. After 
the fact, a pattern appears, and so we think it is the only pattern that 
could have appeared. But if another pattern had emerged, we would 
have deemed it inevitable as well. You only see the road you took. 
Irrevocability is easily mistaken for inevitability.
The winner of a lottery feels chosen by fate, but, if someone else 
had won, he too would have felt chosen. The only thing really fated is 
that someone is bound to misconstrue his good fortune as fated.
The idea that outcomes are not inevitable even if they seem so 
has constituted one of my favorite themes. Time is open, the present 
moment makes a difference, and whatever does happen, something 
else could have. The dominant tradition of Western theology held that 
God foreknew all, and from the seventeenth century on, science has 
been mistakenly seen as proving determinism. Iron-clad laws of nature 
have played the role of a God substitute. We are still held captive by  
a vision at odds with our own experience. But other theologies and 
other views of the world are possible. Science, properly understood, 
does not dictate to the world what it must be like.

2
Introduction
I believe deeply that at any given moment, more than one 
subsequent moment is possible. We live in a field of possibilities. It 
is not true that given all the facts about any moment, one could 
in principle predict every future moment and retrodict every past 
moment, as Leibniz, Spinoza, Laplace, and Einstein all believed. I think 
of myself as developing the ideas of the opposite tradition of thought, 
which holds that there are more possibilities than actualities. This 
counter-tradition includes thinkers as diverse as Aristotle and Tolstoy, 
who believed in genuine contingency, and Dostoevsky, who believed 
in human freedom. It is implicit in the temporality of the realist novel 
as a literary genre.
The greatest novelists, and especially Dostoevsky and Tolstoy, 
posed what the Russians called the “accursed questions” (proklyatye 
voprosy): are we responsible for what we do or is it all determined for 
us? Are our choices real or do they only seem so? Does the objective 
view of the world include everything, or is it essentially incomplete? 
Does it in fact omit what is most valuable to us, our direct sense of 
a subjective self? Is our selfhood given to us by outside forces, or do 
we in part make it ourselves? Do we change in unpredictable ways or 
merely reveal already given qualities? 
The tradition of posing such questions in novels, drama, and 
poetry characterizes Russian literature. It is reflected as well in Russian 
literary criticism, which has tended to raise philosophical problems 
by analyzing fiction. Russian philosophy often takes the form of 
commentaries on the great writers, Russian and foreign. To Westerners, 
Bakhtin’s Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics and Rabelais and His World best 
exemplify this peculiar tradition.
Like many earlier Russian critics, Bakhtin located the value of 
literature in its contributions to psychology, philosophy, and, especially, 
ethics. But he saw ethical and philosophical implications in the very 
shapes of works. Each kind of plot, for instance, represented a model 
for how events happen. With such analyses, he reconceptualized 
formalism as ultimately a matter not of form but of “ideology” 
(complexes of ideas). 
Thus Bakhtin approached genres as palpable philosophies. In his 
view, each genre constituted a “form-shaping ideology,” a view of the 
world seeking expression through appropriate forms. The way novels 
represent heroes and heroines, their exploration of the way society 
and individual psychology interact, and their inclusion of immense 
everyday detail, project a specific sense of people in the world. They 

3
Introduction
embodied a philosophy that Bakhtin found immensely appealing.  
So do I.
* * *
If Tolstoy is considered the supreme example of realism, then the realist 
novel suggests that the most important events in life are not the grand, 
dramatic, and striking ones. They are, instead, the prosaic, undramatic, 
and ordinary ones we often do not so much as notice. Those events 
include the “tiny alterations” of consciousness, the infinitesimally 
small and vanishingly brief mental gestures making us who we are. 
Taken together, they make life what it is. By bringing such events to 
our attention, novels can change our view of our world and our selves.
I coined the term prosaics to express two related ideas. First, 
as the word itself suggests, it indicates that what matters most—in 
history and individual lives, in ethics and aesthetics—are the details. 
As Tolstoy’s greatest reader, Ludwig Wittgenstein, explained: “The 
aspects of things that are most important to us are hidden because of 
their simplicity and familiarity. (One is unable to notice something 
because it is always before one’s eyes). . . . And this means: we fail to 
be struck by what, once seen, is most striking and most powerful”  
(PI, 50e). 
These details resist reduction to some overarching law. We would 
be mistaken to imagine that behind their inexhaustible variety lie some 
simple formulas, like Newton’s laws of motion. The world, especially 
the social and psychological world, exhibits infinite and irreducible 
complexity. Instead of trying to explain away that complexity by 
ascribing everything to some social scientific principles, as thinkers 
as diverse as Bentham, Marx, Freud, Malinowski, Lévi-Strauss, the 
rational choice theorists, and countless others have tried to do, we 
would do better to follow Wittgenstein’s repeated admonition: Don’t 
think, but look! Or rather (and this what Wittgenstein meant), appreciate 
the complexity of things before imagining they can be made simple.
The form of thought that best represents the prosaic view of life is 
the realist novel, and so the second meaning of “prosaics” is an approach 
to literature that, unlike “poetics,” focuses on prose generally and the 
realist novel in particular. As the term “poetics” implies, literary theory 
has seen prose as some sort of fallen poetry, literary only insofar as it 
can do what poetry does. That is why the word poetry often functions 
as a synonym for literature (not just verse) and why prose often 
means the opposite, whatever is unliterary. So we are told that poetry 

4
Introduction
draws attention to the means of expression, but “prose” is indifferent 
to them. The phrase “prose literature” then seems paradoxical or 
oxymoronic. 
If one approaches novels in terms defined by poetics, one will 
seek out metaphors, symbols, and other poetic devices, and thereby 
miss the distinctive features that make novels what they are. One needs 
instead to approach them, and everything else in culture one would 
like to understand, in their own terms. 
* * *
I begin this book with an essay on prosaics, which can serve as  
a kind of overture to everything that follows. The four other chapters 
of this volume develop “prosaics” in different ways. In each case, some 
new concern approaches this concept from a new direction and so, 
I hope, results in something valuable. 
The second chapter concerns open time. It develops a “prosaics 
of process.” 
I spent the academic year 1996-97 as a token humanist at the 
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences in order to 
develop ideas from my then-recently published book Narrative and 
Freedom: The Shadows of Time (Yale University Press, 1994). It was a year 
that had immense influence on my thinking. Hard-core Rational Choice 
theory dominated discussion. The methodology of economics, in its 
mathematicized form and most far-reaching ambitions, held sway. 
Economics was conceived not as a subject matter but as an 
approach to human behavior that just happened to have been developed 
by economists but is universally applicable. Thus, as Nobel prize-
winning economist Gary Becker has famously argued, “the economic 
approach does not draw conceptual distinctions between major and 
minor decisions, such as those involving life and death in contrast to 
the choice of a brand of coffee; or between decisions said to involve 
strong emotions and those with little emotional involvement, such as 
choosing a mate or the number of children in contrast to buying paint; 
or between decisions by persons with different incomes, education, or 
family backgrounds.”1 
In one conversation, a social scientist offered an argument  
I shall never forget. No real science, he explained, requires narrative. 
1	
EAHB, 8-9.

5
Introduction
To the extent that one can account for phenomena by laws, one does 
not have to tell stories. Given Newton’s laws of motion, there is no need 
to narrate the course of the planets. One can just derive their position 
at any chosen moment. When social science advances a bit more, with 
economics as its model, it too will dispense with narrative. Everything 
will be mathematicized. The only use for stories will be pedagogical, 
that is, as illustrative. But they will be superfluous for explanatory 
purposes.
It immediately struck me that if the world is not reducible to 
Newtonian formulae, then narrative would play an essential role. If open 
time exists, then predictability would be impossible and one would 
have to tell a story explaining how one outcome rather than another 
came about. The world would be characterized by narrativeness, that is, 
the indispensability of narrative for understanding. The first essay of 
chapter two, “Narrativeness,” explicates this term.
The second essay of chapter two develops the concept of open 
time. The essay’s first part, “The Vision of Poetics and Product,” 
explicates closed time. When time is understood as closed, the world 
resembles a well-made literary work, a finished product described 
by poetics from Aristotle to the present. Such works create a sense of 
inevitability. Everything has to be just as it is: nothing in it is just there, 
and a sufficient reason accounts for each detail. Everything plays its part 
in a total structure. That is why, as we read a literary work, we can guess 
at its ending by imagining what an effective structure would require. 
The essay’s second part, “The Counter-Tradition: Presentness and 
Process,” then explicates the alternative vision of a world in open time. 
In various forms, this vision has appeared in fields as diverse as biology, 
architecture, city planning, linguistics, and theology. Sometimes the 
traditional view of closed time is likely to prove more fruitful, as it 
did with Galileo, but at other times, the counter-traditional view fits 
the topic better, as it did for Darwin. I offer some rules of thumb for 
recognizing which situation is which. My overall point is that there is 
indeed a choice to be made. One cannot just presume the traditional 
view of closed time as if it were the only possible one.
If poetics and the works to which it best applies implicitly 
endorse closed time, are there literary masterpieces that poetics does 
not fit, works that exemplify open time? If so, how shall we describe 
their design? 
In fact, there are many such works—including Tolstoy’s War and 
Peace, Dostoevsky’s The Idiot, Sterne’s Tristram Shandy, Byron’s Don Juan, 

6
Introduction
Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy, Montaigne’s Essays, and, if approached 
in the right spirit, the Hebrew Bible. To be understood, they demand 
not a poetics of product but a prosaics of process. The third part of this 
essay outlines such a processual prosaics.
* * *
My dear friend and pseudonym, Alicia Chudo, wrote the three essays 
constituting this volume’s third chapter. Alicia is perhaps best known 
for her book And Quiet Flows the Vodka, or When Pushkin Comes to Shove: 
The Curmudgeon’s Guide to Russian Literature and Culture (Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 2000), which succeeded in offending 
lovers of the Russian soul everywhere. People have often asked why  
I used a pseudonym for these works. The answer is, I found it helpful 
to think through a certain vision of the world in a forum in which I did 
not have to ask whether I believed all its implications. So I imagined  
a curmudgeonly personality whose view of human nature is decidedly 
bleak, and who invented a discipline she calls misanthropology, the 
study of the “cussedness of human nature.” 
Given such a view of humanity, Alicia despises all utopian visions. 
The worst suffering, she intones, has been caused by those who would 
abolish it forever. She prefers the great tradition of satire, from Swift and 
Pope to Voltaire and Gogol. Her favorite book of Freud’s is Civilization 
and Its Discontents. Frequently quoting La Rochefoucauld, she sees 
history as Gibbon did. In her view, decline and fall is almost always 
far more likely than progress. She reminds us that there are no gains 
without losses, and that to soothe ourselves we usually underestimate 
the losses, especially if we would have to take responsibility for them. 
Original Sin, she remarks, is the one theological doctrine that has been 
empirically confirmed. 
Noting that nineteenth-century thinkers typically envisaged the 
twentieth century as a time of great strides in human happiness, she 
points out that only Dostoevsky saw that it would witness the creation 
of totalitarianism and be the bloodiest century in human history. It 
gave birth to Auschwitz, the Final Solution, the Rwandan genocide, 
the Soviet Gulag, the Chinese Cultural Revolution, and the Khmer 
Rouge. If these events do not disprove an optimistic view of human 
nature, she asks, what would? Is it possible after these recent events 
to believe that History has an inevitable trajectory upward? And to 
believe that if only some set of reforms were adopted, we could rest 
easy? 

