
A PRIMER OF ADLERIAN PSYCHOLOGY 

A PRIMER 
OF ADLERIAN 
PSYCHOLOGY 
The Analytic-Behavioral-
Cogn itive Psychology 
of Alfred Adler 
Harold H. Mosak 
Michael P. Maniacci 

Published by 
Brunner-Routledge 
29 West 35th Street 
New York, NY 10001 
Published in Great Britain 
Brunner-Routledge 
11 New Fetter Lane 
London EC4P 4EE 
A PRIMER OF ADLERIAN PSYCHOLOGY: The Analytic-Behavioral-Cognitive 
Psychology of Alfred Adler 
Copyright © 1999 Taylor & Francis. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of 
America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of 
this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored 
in a database or retrieval system, without prior written permission of the publisher. 
4 
5 6 7 8 9 0 
Cover design by Marja Walker. 
Cover photo courtesy of Sanford J. Greenburger Associates 
Edited by Hilary Ward and Mark Eggerts 
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the British Library. 
The paper in this publication meets the requirements of the ANSI Standard 
Z39.48-1984 (Permanence of Paper). 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Mosak, Harold H. 
A primer of Adlerian pyschology: the analytic-behavioral-cognitive pyschology of 
Alfred Adler/Harold H. Mosak, Michael P. Maniacci. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 1-58391-003-4 (pbk.: alk. paper) 
1. Adlerian psychology. 
2. Adler, Alfred, 1870-1937. 
1. Maniacci, Michael. 
II. Title. 
BFI75.5.A33M68 
1999 
150.19'53--dc21 
ISBN 1-58391-003-4 (paper) 
99-25738 
CIP 

Dedication 
Harold H. Mosak: To Ada, a class act ... 
Michael P. Maniacci: To the two women of my life, Laurie and Emily ... 

CONTENTS 
Preface 
IX 
Alfred Adler and Adlerian Psychology: An Overview 
1 
Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
12 
The Development of the Life Style 
30 
The Style of Life 
46 
Typology 
63 
Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
78 
The Tasks of Life 
96 
Psychopathology 
112 
Understanding a Person 
131 
Encouraging Growth 
146 
A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
162 
References 
176 
Index 
191 
VII 

PREFACE 
All men by nature desire to know. 
Aristotle (circa 350 BC) 
BELIEVING is what we humans do best. 
Michael S. Gazzaniga (1985) 
Who am I? Where do I come from? What is all of this about? Ques-
tions like these have been on the minds and in the hearts of humanity 
for what seems to be an eternity. Aristotle (350 BcIl941), in The Meta-
physics, posed just such questions and attempted to lay the foundation 
for those answers in philosophy and logic well over 2000 years ago. He 
was the founder of a school that trained some of the greatest minds of 
ancient Greece, he himself having graduated from Plato's Academy sev-
eral years earlier. In The Metaphysics, Aristotle attempts to explore how 
to understand "being," that is, the nature of all that exists. In the very 
first paragraph of this monumental work, he turns his attention to 
human beings and their ability to sense and perceive, and how that per-
ception leads them to search for answers to such eternal questions. "All 
men by nature desire to know" is the first line of the book (p. 689). 
Some 2000 years later, a cognitive neuroscientist, Gazzaniga, begins 
his book, The Social Brain (1985), with "BELIEVING is what humans do 
best" (p. 3). In it, he attempts to understand how the neural networks of 
the brain have both reflected and created the social networks of our 
community, culture, and environment. Much like Aristotle before him, 
Gazzaniga finds himself intertwined with the issue of our senses and 
human perception. 
Human beings, as a species, have been, and continue to be, preoccu-
pied with these issues. Though our answers to these questions have var-
IX 

X 
Preface 
ied across time and culture, with technology allowing us more precision 
in our responses (but no less rigorous answers than philosophers), the 
mere fact that we continue to ask these questions may be one of the 
fundamental distinguishing characteristics of human nature. The nature 
of what is "known" is difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish from the 
nature of those who are seeking to know; or, put more simply, what is 
"seen" is often influenced by who is "looking." This book is written by 
two psychologists, and our "answers" are couched in the science and 
philosophy of psychology. Though both of us have been trained in fields 
of inquiry other than psychology, and other disciplines and theories 
within psychology, our primary affiliation is with the system of psychol-
ogy and psychotherapy of the psychiatrist Alfred Adler. It is through this 
perspective that we practice and teach. 
Alfred Adler, and those who have joined him in a similar world view, 
have built a system of psychology called Individual Psychology. It provides 
not only a strategy of psychotherapy but a philosophical framework 
with which to interpret and comprehend information relevant to an 
understanding of human nature. In fact. Adler's most popular book, 
written in 1927, was entitled Understanding Human Nature (1927/1957). 
Adler's system is a growing, evolving, vibrant system, whose basic te-
nets have been gradually incorporated into diverse fields, not only 
within the disciplines of psychology and psychiatry, but in anthropol-
ogy, sociology, social psychology, and education. His insights have 
gained widespread acceptance, even though his name has often been 
forgotten. As Adler himself wrote in a book foreword in 1933, 
Individual Psychology, which is essentially a child of this age, will have a 
permanent influence on the thought, poetry, and dreams of humanity. It 
will attract many enlightened disciples, and many more who will hardly 
know the names of its pioneers. It will be understood by some, but the 
numbers of those who misunderstand it will be greater. It will have many 
adherents, and still more enemies. Because of its simplicity many will 
think it too easy, whereas those who know it will recognize how difficult 
it is. (Dreikurs, 193311950a, p. vii) 
Adler's words have been prophetic. Many of the insights he 
articulated have become "mainstreamed" into contemporary thought, 
particularly in psychology. As is evident throughout this work, psycho-
analysis (particularly self-psychology and object relations theory), 
cognitive therapy, systems theory and family therapy, existential psy-
chotherapy and philosophy, and social psychology, to mention only a 
few therapy systems, have incorporated much of what Adler espoused 
as early as the turn of the century. This book is an attempt to clearly ar-
ticulate the system Adler began building at that time. 

Preface 
XI 
There have been other attempts to systematize Adler's work in the 
form of introductory textbooks. Dreikurs (193311950a), Manaster and 
Corsini (1982), Wexberg (1929), and Wolfe (1932) have written such 
texts, but alL except Manaster and Corsini, have (at the time of this 
writing) gone out of print. Many of Adler's original works are out of 
print as well, but the work of Ansbacher and Ansbacher has served to 
collect, edit, and systematize Adler's writings (Adler, 1956, 1964g, 
1978). This book is an attempt to provide those in the field of Adlerian 
psychology with an introductory text and those who are as yet unfamil-
iar with the work of Adler a single source from which to evaluate his 
system as it stands today. It is not a book about Adlerian counseling and 
psychotherapy per se; rather it is a theoretical book that will touch upon 
counseling and psychotherapy as some of its topics. It is a text about the 
theory of Individual Psychology. 
This book is an exploration and elaboration of the theory and system 
of Individual Psychology. Chapter 1 reviews the historical background 
of Adlerian psychology. 
Chapter 2 begins with an analysis of the basic assumptions and phi-
losophy of Individual Psychology. It is intended to familiarize readers 
with the underlying assumptions of the system, in much the same way 
Chapter I attempts to acquaint readers with Adler himself. 
Chapter 3 examines human personality development as conceptual-
ized by Adlerians. The development of the life style entails taking into 
account the biologicaL psychologicaL and social influences upon per-
sonality development in light of the aforementioned assumptions of 
Adlerian theory. 
Chapter 4 provides an overview of the style of life, Adler's phrase for 
what is now known as personality. What it is and how it is used is detailed. 
Chapter 5 is, for all practical purposes, a continuation of Chapter 4 
and is called "Typology." Certain life styles have themes, or clusters of 
issues, that can form recognizable patterns theorists call "types." Adler's 
original four types, with some current additions, are detailed. 
Chapter 6 is titled "Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority 
Complexes." This chapter discusses how individuals respond to chal-
lenges posed by life and the social situations they both find themselves 
in and help to create and maintain. The general challenges people face 
can be clustered into six key areas .. and these are discussed in Chapter 7, 
"The Tasks of Life," 
In "Psychopathology," Chapter 8, various pathological methods of 
functioning are analyzed. Topics such as diagnosis, symptoms, and psy-
chodynamics are viewed from the interpersonaL goal-oriented perspec-
tive of Adlerian psychology. A detailed case history is presented that 
highlights the topics addressed in the chapter. 

XII 
Preface 
Chapter 9 is an overview of what Adlerians assess when they begin 
understanding a person. How the individual's style of life is assessed, the 
person's current movement in regards to his or her social field, and the 
meaning and purpose of behavior are the focus of this section. 
Intervention strategies is the topic of Chapter 10. Issues of prevention, 
parenting, parent and family education, counseling, psychotherapy, and 
psychoanalysis, including the reconceptualization of Adlerian psycho-
therapy as an "analytic-behavioral-cognitive" system, are explored. 
Finally, in Chapter 11, a critique of Individual Psychology is pre-
sented, along with an annotated bibliography of Adlerian works that 
readers may wish to examine for themselves, and a glossary of key 
terms. If Adlerian theory is to flourish, its strengths need to be high-
lighted and its limitations noted and corrected. Although Individual 
Psychology is a comprehensive, broad-based system, there are many 
areas future Adlerians must address if the system is to remain viable. 
Also, we examine Adler's influence as it continues today, particularly as 
it relates to one of the newest trends in clinical psychology and psycho-
therapy, cognitive constructionism. The chapter concludes with some 
comments upon the future of Individual Psychology. 
This is intended to be an introductory text; therefore at the end of 
each chapter, we have some questions that may be useful for instructors 
and students in classroom settings. In addition, summary points high-
lighting the key issues of each chapter are found immediately before the 
review questions. 
Because, as we have stated previously, the answers people find are in-
timately related to the "natures" of those who do the "looking," an ap-
propriate place to begin a textbook of Adlerian psychology is with the 
individual himself, the man who "did the looking," Alfred Adler. 
Harold H. Mosak 
Michael P. Maniacci 

Alfred Adler and Adlerian 
Psychology: An Overview 
It is one of the peculiar ironies of history that there are no limits to the mis-
understanding and distortion of theories . ... 
Erich Fromm (1961) 
D Alfred Adler: A Biographical Sketch 
Adler was the second of six children born to a Jewish family on February 
7, 1870. He was a sickly child who had rickets and suffered from spasms 
of the glottis. At the age of 3 years, his younger brother died in bed next 
to him (Mosak & Kopp, 1973). A year later, he contracted pneumonia 
and became seriously ill. Later, as an adult, he remembered the physi-
cian saying at that time to his father, "Your boy is lost" (Orgler, 19391 
1963, p. 16). As if these experiences were not enough to impress him, he 
was twice run over in the streets. Though he reported no memory for 
how these incidents happened, he did remember recovering conscious-
ness on the family sofa. Adler became very aware of death and vowed to 
become a physician in order to overcome it (Adler, 1947). 
Adler was raised on the outskirts of the intellectual capital of his day, 
Vienna. The area in which he lived was not predominantly Jewish, and 
he and his family were minority-group members. 
1 

2 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
These issues of belonging, inferiority, and weakness had a large influ-
ence upon the young Adler. He was a poor student with bad eyesight 
who was physically clumsy and felt uncoordinated, primarily because of 
his numerous physical ailments. His mathematics teacher recommended 
to his father that Adler leave school and apprentice himself as a shoe-
maker. Adler's father objected, and Adler embarked upon bettering his 
academic skills. Within a relatively short time, he became the best math 
student in the class. Adler became embroiled in a conflict with a class-
mate, and a fight broke out. Adler struck the boy, and hurt him. He 
vowed not to fight again. 
Adler studied medicine at the University of Vienna and in 1895 gradu-
ated with his medical degree and a specialization in ophthalmology.l He 
became interested in politics and began attending meetings of the ris-
ing socialist movement. Through these meetings, he met Raissa Timo-
feyewna Epstein, and they were married in 1897. She was a socialist and 
a feminist (R. Adler, 1899) who continued her active interest in political 
affairs throughout their marriage (Hoffman, 1994). 
He started his private practice. His practice soon switched to internal 
medicine, and he observed that many of the patients who sought his ser-
vices suffered from diseases that traced their origin to the social situations 
in which they lived and worked. As Ansbacher (1992a, b) notes, Adler's 
practice was located in an area that exposed him to lower socioeconomic 
classes, and his first publication was on the health of tailors (Adler, 1898). 
In it, Adler noted how the social conditions in which people worked and 
lived greatly influenced the diseases and disease processes that affected 
them. This seems to have been historically the first essay into community 
outreach (Papanek, 1965a). Along a similar line, Adler often treated the 
performers from the local circus, what used to be referred to as the 
"sideshow freaks," and Adler was greatly impressed by how their physical 
abnormalities influenced their choice of vocation and how their bodies 
appeared to "compensate" for such abnormalities. 
D Adler and Freud: Adler as a Psychoanalyst 
Freud's life and work has been documented and detailed in numerous 
biographies, for example by Jones (1953, 1955, 1957) and Stone (1971). 
It is also referred to by Ellenberger (1970). 
Freud was an eldest son of an upperclass Jewish family. He was bril-
liant, and as Mosak and Kopp (1973) note, provocative in personality. 
An early recollection of his suggests long self-training in this direction. 
At age 7 or 8 years, "Freud recalls having urinated [deliberately] in his 

Alfred Adler and Adlerian Psychology: An Overview 
3 
parents' bedroom and being reprimanded by his father, who said, 'That 
boy will never amount to anything'" (Jones, 1953, p. 16; Mosak & 
Kopp, 1973). 
He was unafraid of being negatively perceived. Freud wanted to be a 
scientist, and his intellectual "forefathers" were men who were bound to 
the scientific tradition. 
Freud (1900/1965) published his seminal work, The Interpretation of 
Dreams, in 1899 (though the work carried the year 1900, it was pub-
lished in the Winter of 1899 but postdated). As the editor of the English 
translation, Strachey notes in the introduction, it sold poorly (only 351 
copies in the first 6 years) and was roundly criticized. Freud fell into a 
depression shortly after its publication and general rejection. It was into 
this atmosphere Adler stepped. 
Legend has it that amidst all the criticism and negativity surrounding 
The Interpretation of Dreams, Adler published a vigorous defense of it in a 
local paper; this "paper" has never been found. Freud, reportedly, was 
grateful to have found someone who was willing to openly defend his 
position and, in 1902, invited Adler to meet with him on a Wednesday 
evening, to discuss these and similar issues. The Wednesday Night Meet-
ings, as they became known, led to the development of the Psychoana-
lytic Society. Adler became its first president, though he was 14 years 
younger than Freud. Adler (1931/ 1964b), even years after their split, 
had this to say about those early "meetings" and Freud's initial attempts 
to understand human nature: 
Despite the many scientific contrasts between Freud and myself, I have al-
ways been willing to recognize that he has clarified much through his en-
deavors; especially, he has severely shaken the position of positivistically 
[materialistischj oriented neurology and opened a wide door to psychology 
as an auxiliary science to medicine. This is his chief merit, next to his de-
tective art of guessing. (pp. 217-218) 
In two footnotes to that paper, Adler continues to note that: 
I remember very well when as a young student and medical man I was 
very worried about and discontented with the state of psychiatry and tried 
to discover other ways, and found Freud was courageous enough, actually 
to go another way to explore the importance of psychological reasons for 
physical disturbances and for neuroses. (p. 218) 
and that 
A psychological system has an inseparable connection with the life philos-
ophy of its formulator. As soon as he offers his system to the world, it ap-
peals to individuals, both laymen and scientists, with a similar trend of 

4 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
mind and provides them with a scientific foundation for an attitude to-
wards life which they had achieved previously. (p. 218) 
Adler was not a "disciple" of Freud; he was a collaborator (Ansbacher, 
1962; Hoffman, 1994; Maslow, 1962). The comments by Ansbacher and 
Ansbacher, found in Adler (1956), clarify this position. Adler had his 
own philosophy and was beginning to develop it before his association 
with Freud. As Adler astutely noted, the clash between him and Freud 
had to do with their respective personalities as much as with their re-
spective theories, for their theories were outgrowths of their personali-
ties (Stepansky, 1983). Adler became a "Freudian" and attempted to 
continue his train of thought within orthodox Freudian guidelines. He 
found, however, that his fundamental assumptions were different than 
Freud's, and tensions began to increase between the two men. As Ans-
bacher and Ansbacher (Adler, 1956, pp. 21-75) detail, even within the 
Freudian system, Adler originated these concepts within psychoanalysis, 
and Freud readily adopted them (sometimes, years after having split 
with Adler): 
The confluence of drives (Adler, 1908) 
The transformation of a drive into its opposite (Adler, 1908) 
The direction of a drive to one's own person (Adler, 1908) 
The aggression drive and the relationship of aggression to anxiety 
(Adler, 1908) 
Safeguarding tendencies (defense mechanisms) (Adler, 1912/1983b) 
The concept of the "ego-ideal" (Adler, 1912/l983b) 
The emphasis upon" ego" psychology (Colby, 1951) 
Colby (1951) and Furtmiiller (1964) discuss the notes of the meetings 
of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, and the eventual split of the group, 
with Adler and nine other members resigning their membership and 
Adler resigning not only his presidency but his position as coeditor of the 
psychoanalytic journal, in February of 1911. 
Adler was a subjectivistic, socially oriented theorist who had a feel 
for the "common people" (Ansbacher, 1959b), and he placed a great 
deal of emphasis upon philosophy. He cited, as his principle influences, 
the works of Kant, Nietzsche, Vaihinger, Goethe, Shakespeare, and 
the Bible. His early work was concerned with public health, medical 
and psychological prevention, and social welfare (Ansbacher, 1992b). 
As he continued his work, he wrote papers on and lectured extensively 
about: 
Children at risk, especially delinquency (Adler, 19301l963, 1930/ 
1983c, 1935) 
Women's rights and the equality of the sexes (Adler, 1978) 

Alfred Adler and Adlerian Psychology: An Overview 
5 
Women's rights to abortion (Adler, 1978) 
Adult education (Hoffman, 1994) 
Teacher training (Adler, 1924a, 1929b) 
Community mental health and the establishment of family coun-
seling clinics (Adler, 1929b) 
Experimental schools for public students (Birnbaum, 1935; Hoff-
man, 1994; Spiel, 1956) 
Brief psychotherapy ("The Father of Self-Help," 1995; Mani-
acci,1996a) 
Family counseling and education (Sherman & Dinkmeyer, 1987) 
This work stands in sharp contrast to Freud, who maintained a rela-
tively neutral stance towards many of these issues and never openly ad-
dressed most of them. Adler's split with Freud was as much about Adler 
returning to the doctrines that had preoccupied him prior to his associa-
tion with the psychoanalytic movement as it was about the theoretical 
and technical issues he and Freud debated. 
The final break with Freud centered around two key issues that 
are touched on only briefly here-the masculine protest (Adler, 1939; 
Mosak & Schneider, 1977) and the nature and origin of repression 
(Adler, 1911, 1956). Adler felt that the "driving force" behind "psychic 
disturbances" was the "masculine protest." The masculine protest was 
the attempt of some people to deal with society's overvaluation of mas-
culinity. Men who subscribed to this overvaluation wanted to be "like a 
real man" or, in other words, powerful. If they failed to meet this stan-
dard, they became discouraged, became resigned, "withdrew," or over-
compensated. Women who similarly overvalued masculinity competed 
with men, identified with men, overcompensated, became reSigned, or 
"withdrew." Adler felt that the striving of the disturbed individual was of 
a socially useless nature, and that this striving "to be above others" had 
its roots in the prevailing social orientation of the day; that is, masculin-
ity was viewed as dominant, and those who felt "weak, or inferior" 
viewed themselves as "feminine."2 Adler felt that this was a result of 
both psychological dynamics taking place within the individuals and the 
social values of the day. Freud wholeheartedly disagreed and responded 
that the masculine protest was, in reality, nothing other than "penis 
envy" or "the fear of castration." For Freud, social influences played lit-
tle, if any, role in the etiology of psychic disturbances. 
Adler felt that "repression," or the ability to not deal with certain is-
sues or actually "remove them from consciousness" was not the result of 
culture, but actually a sign of poor adjustment to society. Freud felt that 
repression resulted from individuals having to adapt to culture and 
hence "repress" their instinctual life. Freud felt that neurosis was the 

6 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
price we pay for civilization. Adler felt it was the price we pay for our 
lack of civilization. Adler felt that healthy adaptation came because of an 
adjustment to society, and repression was therefore a sign of poor adjust-
ment. Individuals who were "well adjusted" learned to adapt their 
"drives" to society, in constructive, prosocial ways and had no need to 
repress them. Hence, for Adler, repression was but one of many "safe-
guarding mechanisms" (Adler, 1911; Credner. 1936) individuals em-
ployed if "neurotic." For Freud, at the time of the break, repression was 
the cause of neurotic disturbance, and not simply one particular defense 
mechanism (fascinatingly enough, many years later, he reversed his po-
sition and adopted Adler's). 
For the first time in the history of science, these two contrasting posi-
tions (Freud's and Adler's) were put to a vote by members of the society, 
and "scientific facts" were decided by majority vote (Colby, 1951, 1956; 
Furtmiiller, 1964; Nunberg & Federn, 1962). Adler "lost" the vote and 
left the society. 
Adler was an important coworker, whom Freud considered to be a 
"serious opponent" to psychoanalysis. He may have been Freud's per-
sonal physician, and Freud himself turned over many of his patients to 
Adler prior to Adler's resignation. Thus, Freud lost the first of his "disci-
ples," although Adler did not regard himself as one. 
Adler originally entitled his new group The Society for Free Psycho-
analytic Research.' Later, the name was changed to Individual Psychol-
ogy. with "individual" meaning "indivisible," that is, holistic (derived 
from the Latin individuum). Adler and coworkers founded their own 
journal. started their own Adlerian organization, and began accepting 
members. 
Early in its inception, its primary focus was upon psychoanalysis. 
Adler himself maintained his private practice as a psychiatrist, but after 
World War I (during which time Adler served as a military physician) 
Adler turned much more social in his orientation and began working full 
force for many of the social issues listed previously. Hence, his work falls 
approximately into two periods: Prior to the First World War, Adler was 
a psychoanalyst. and that can be seen in his two most important, early 
works-The Neurotic Constitution (19121l983b), and The Practice and The-
ory of Individual Psychology (1920/ 1983d). 
These are the only two works Adler himself wrote on his own, with the 
latter being a collection of his papers that he assembled. After World War 1. 
Adler wrote increasingly as a philosopher. social psychologist, and educa-
tor, with works such as Understanding Human Nature (1927/1957), The Sci-
ence of Living (1929c), The Education of Children (193011970), What Life Should 
Mean to You (1931/1958), and Social Interest: A Challenge to Mankind 

Alfred Adler and Adlerian Psychology: An Overview 
7 
(1933/1964f) being directed to the lay public. These works are primarily 
based upon lectures and notebooks of Adler and were assembled by 
members of his group, with his approval. 
D Adler and America: 
The Early American Movement 
In 1926 Adler made his first trip to the United States. Though he was 56 
years old, he began to learn English, and soon he was not only profiCient 
but fluent. He lectured, did public demonstrations, and began to write 
and publish in English. As the Fascists came to power in Austria (Hoff-
man, 1994), he and his wife and family moved to America, at first part-
time as he continued to lecture worldwide in 1932; then by 1935, he 
settled in New York City and accepted the first chair of medical psychol-
ogy at Long Island Medical College. He also served as visiting professor at 
Columbia University. Adler wrote, maintained his practice, lectured on 
an international circuit, and did numerous demonstrations and public 
education seminars. He died of heart failure while on a lecture tour in 
Aberdeen, Scotland, on May 28, 1937, while he was on a walk (Feld-
mann, 1972). His work was carried on in this country by his followers, 
most notably Rudolf Dreikurs, a psychiatrist who originally studied with 
Adler in Vienna and later relocated to Chicago; Dreikurs' colleagues, 
Bernard Shulman and Harold Mosak; Adler's children, Alexandra and 
Kurt; and Lydia Sicher. 
Adler was very popular with American audiences. His work was well 
received. His pragmatic, socially oriented system seemed easy to grasp 
and nicely fit the prevailing Zeitgeist. After Adler's death, the movement, 
particularly in America, lost its momentum. The behaviorists had a 
stronghold in the universities and psychology departments; the psycho-
analysts held virtually a monopoly in the psychiatric training centers and 
hospitals. Adlerians were without a place to train and educate new 
members, and by and large they either "died off" or practiced in silence, 
so as not to draw the wrath of the prevailing psychoanalysts who were 
still opposed to Adler's system. 
Dreikurs fought hard to change this situation (Terner & Pew, 1978). 
He was a psychiatrist with a forceful personality and a strong, deter-
mined sense of rightness. Dreikurs lectured, did public demonstrations, 
and openly challenged not only the psychiatric community but psychol-
ogists and educators as well. Through his writings, his beginning of a 
new American journal, and his teaching, Dreikurs began to revive the 
Adlerian movement in this country. 

8 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
D Individual Psychology: Its Current Status 
Adlerian psychology is alive and well as we enter the turn of the century. 
In America, its principal organization is the North American Society of 
Adlerian Psychology (NASAP), with its conferences, workshops, news-
letters, and journal, the Journal of Individual Psychology, published quar-
terly by the University of Texas Press. There is an international journal; 
international organizations such as the International Association of Indi-
vidual Psychology (IAIP) and the International Congress of Adlerian 
Summer Schools and Institutes (ICASSI), which offers yearly confer-
ences throughout the world; and numerous member organizations 
throughout the world. 
Training in Adlerian psychology can be found at many universities and 
colleges in the United States and abroad as well as at numerous free-
standing, postgraduate training institutes throughout the United States 
and Canada. In addition, the Adler School of Professional Psychology in 
Chicago is one of the oldest Adlerian training sites in the United States. 
Originally founded by Dreikurs, Shulman, and Mosak in 1952 as the Al-
fred Adler Institute of Chicago, it was, in its early years, a postgraduate 
training center. In 1972, it began offering a Master of Arts degree in 
counseling psychology, and in 1987 an accredited Doctor of Psychology 
(Psy.D.) degree in clinical psychology. Through these and other training 
sites and institutions, Adlerians are growing in numbers and becoming 
increasingly integrated into mainstream practice. 
n The "Friends of Adler" Phenomenon 
O'Connell (1976) coined the phrase, "friends of Adler phenomenon." By 
this he meant many theorists have borrowed extensively from Adler 
without giving him due credit. Indeed, as Ellenberger (1970) has stated, 
"It would not be easy to find another author from which so much has 
been borrowed from all sides without acknowledgment than Adler" 
(p. 645). Similarly, Wilder (Adler & Deutsch, 1959, p. xv) has observed, 
"Most observations and ideas of Alfred Adler have subtly and quietly 
permeated modern psychological thinking to such a degree that the 
proper question is not whether one is an Adlerian but how much of an 
Adlerian one is." With the increasing trend to psychotherapy integration 
(d. Norcross & Goldfried, 1992, for example), Adler's system is gaining 
even greater recognition. As is evident throughout the remainder of this 
text, Adlerian psychology provides a basis for integrating many diverse 

Alfred Adler and Adlerian Psychology: An Overview 
9 
systems and strategies of psychotherapy and counseling. A recent study 
by Sherman and Dinkmeyer (1987) found that 
Adlerian theory in particular overlaps to a high degree with most other the-
ories ... [a fact that] is well borne out by the fact that on over 92% of the 
items, the Adlerians were in agreement with the majority of the other theo-
rists on the degree to which these items were accepted or rejected. (p. 105) 
The family therapy work of Minuchin (1974) and Haley (1976); the 
existential work of Frankl (1983), May (1983), Yalom (1980), and Sartre 
(1943/1956) (Frankl and May studied with Adler [Ansbacher, 1959a]); 
the self-psychology of Kohut (1971,1977) and Basch (1988); the cogni-
tive therapy of Ellis (1973) and Beck (1976); Kernberg's (1975) object 
relations theory; the" cultural schools" of Fromm (1941), Horney (1945, 
1950) and Sullivan (1953, 1964); and the integrationist/constructionist 
viewpoints of Guidano and Liotti (1983), Mahoney (1991), Safran and 
Segal (1990), and Wachtel (1977) all share striking similarities to Adler's 
work. The commentaries by Ansbacher and Ansbacher (Adler, 1956, 
1964g, 1978), Ellenberger (1970), and Ford and Urban (1963) offer pos-
sible explanations for such oversight of Adler's name while "borrowing" 
heavily from his theory. Our point in mentioning such trends is to make 
readers aware that Adler's theory and system has more to offer students 
and practitioners than historical significance. By learning the principles 
and applications of Adlerian psychology, it is easier to make the transition 
to contemporary clinical practice within other systems of thought. 
D Summary 
This chapter commences by stating that all people desire to know, and 
that believing is what we humans do best. Our quest for understanding 
ourselves, our world, and our future may be the single most distinguish-
ing feature of human nature. This book attempts to provide answers to 
some of these timeless questions, but from a perspective, for no one can 
see without seeing from somewhere. Adler (1937 /1964b), in the last 
year of his life, wrote that 
Everyone subordinates all experiences and problems to his own concep-
tion. This conception is usually a tacit assumption and as such unknown to 
the person. Yet he lives and dies for the inferences he draws from such a 
conception. It is amusing, and sad at the same time, to see how even scien-
tists-especially philosophers, sociologists, and psychologists-are caught 
in this net. In that it also has its assumptions, its conception of life, its style 

lOA Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
of life, Individual Psychology is no exception. But it differs in that it is well 
aware of this fact. (p. 24) 
It is against this "awareness," this background of a man who was 
small, poor sighted, physically ill and near death on several occasions, 
and considered poor in schooL that we present this text. Adler overcame 
his fear of death by becoming a physician; he studied hard to overcome 
his academic troubles; he became interested in social causes and the in-
fluence the environment had upon those less fortunate or privileged; 
and he was attracted to and married a strong, politically active woman. 
He stressed social and sexual equality, finding a place in life in usefuL 
prosocial ways and coming to grips with the challenges life presents us 
in cooperative, egalitarian ways. That was the background of Alfred 
Adler, the man. What follows is the philosophy and system of psy-
chology of Adler the theorist, philosopher, social scientist, educator and 
psychiatrist. 
D Points to Consider 
It is difficult to separate a theory from the person creating the the-
ory. The personality of the theorist often "spills into" his or her theory. 
Adler was not a disciple of Freud, but rather an important coworker. 
He had his own theory about human nature before he began working 
with Freud. 
Many of Adler's key concepts and insights have been absorbed into 
other systems, often without credit to their originator. With this real-
ization, theoretical integration of diverse systems can be facilitated by 
learning the principles of Adlerian psychology. 
D Questions 
1. What was Adler's original choice of a medical specialty? How might 
this have influenced his theory? 
2. What were some of the contributions Adler made to psychoanalysis 
which were later adopted by Freud? 
3. What were the two issues Adler and Freud debated during their 
break-up? 
4. Adler's theorizing can be divided into two periods. What are those 
two periods? 
5. What were some of the social issues Adler addressed and incorporated 
into his system? 

Alfred Adler and Adlerian Psychology: An Overview 
11 
D Notes 
'This is consonant with Adler's early theory expressed in Study of Organ Inferiority and Its 
Psychical Compensation (1907/1917). His specialization in ophthalmology, according to this 
theory, could have been a compensation for his poor eyesight. 
2Although Adler described the premises underlying the masculine protest. he totally dis-
agreed with them and endorsed the notion of sexual equality (Mosak & Schneider, 1977). 
3This was essentially a Freudian society that was "free" of Freud. 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy 
of Individual Psychology 
We have absolutely no experience of a cause; psychologically considered, we 
derive the entire concept from the subjective conviction that we are causes, 
namely, that the arm moves-but that is an error. We separate ourselves, 
the doers, from the deed, and we make use of this pattern everywhere- .... 
There is no such thing as a "cause" . ... 
Friedrich Nietzsche (1888/1967) 
... a mind not to be chang' d by Place or Time. The mind is its own place, 
and in itself Can make a Heav'n of Hell, and Hell of Heav'n. What matter 
where, if I be still the same . ... 
John Milton (1674/1957) 
Theory, be it psychological, theological, or historical, is constructed by 
individuals. As Mahoney has chronicled in his massive work, Human 
Change Processes (1991), humans are not only passive recipients of sen-
sory data from the environment; they are active agents in constructing the 
data perceived. This shift, called constructionism, is evident not only in 
12 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
13 
psychology, but in numerous other disciplines and, as Mahoney docu-
ments, has been in circulation, in some form or another, since antiquity. 
Only recently has it gained popularity and more general acceptance from 
the "mainstream" scientific community. 
As Shulman (1985) and Forgus and Shulman (1979) have detailed, 
Adler was a constructionist. He believed that people actively interpreted 
data according to biases that resided within the "cognitive map" of the 
individuals themselves (Mosak, 1995a). Hence, as documented in Chap-
ter 1, Adler felt that theory was as much an outgrowth of the person's 
style of life as it was a statement of "truth." 
What is the role of psychological theory? An analogy might clarify the 
issue. Theory is analogous to a pair of glasses (Adler, 1924b; Beecher & 
Beecher, 1951; Dreikurs, 1960), to the lenses we use to clarify our vision 
of life. With lenses we can better see. Some people need lenses that fit 
them and no one else. Others have lenses that can readily fit several oth-
ers. The lenses that fit me may not fit you-because I can see better with 
them, it is not a given that you will see "equally" as well with my lenses. 
My "eyes" suit me to different lenses than yours. The key becomes to 
find lenses that fit one's "biases." If they fit you, wonderful. If not, it is 
wise to keep looking for another pair of lenses. 
What follows are the basic assumptions of Individual Psychology. 
They are not "truth," but rather the lenses Adlerians use to construe 
life. Assumptions are not the "ends"; they are the means to an end. They 
are assumptions because if we "assume" these, they help us to proceeed 
further. If we assume that 2 + 2 = 4 in a base-l 0 system, then we can 
proceed to 2 + 2 + 1 = 5. However, this is only true if we assume a 
decimal system; it is not true in Boolian algebra, which uses other 
assumptions. 
Try watching a ballgame without knowing the rules (Le., the underly-
ing assumptions). It is difficult, to say the least. Knowing the rules "up 
front" makes watching the game more enjoyable, primarily because it is 
more understandable. One does not have to scramble around, attempt to 
infer what is going on, and therefore miss much of the action. One can 
"sit back" and concentrate on the game itself. 
Knowing the assumptions of a theory also allows another process to 
take place, that is, critical evaluation. In our culture (particularly among 
students), criticism commonly precedes scholarliness; in other words, we 
are all too ready to criticize without a thorough understanding. By un-
derstanding the assumptions first, and not simply the postulates, one can 
adopt a scholarly stance and then be in a better position to evaluate and, 
finally, criticize, a theory. For instance, a more fruitful approach to eval-
uating baseball is to know the game and its rules: Should there be a des-

14 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
ignated hitter or not? Have relief pitchers radically changed the nature of 
batting averages? A far less useful approach to evaluating baseball might 
be to criticize it for not having enough touchdowns. A system should be 
evaluated-and hence criticized-based upon the integrity of its system 
and assumptions, not upon another set of assumptions. "Drives," a basic 
assumption of classical psychoanalysis, are not part of the assumptions of 
Individual Psychology. Similarly, striving for superiority is a key assump-
tion of Adler's theory but has little direct relevance to Freud's system. 
"Don't," the old saying states, "confuse apples with oranges." 
D The Basic Assumptions of Individual Psychology 
In Chapter 1, we explored the "style of life" of Adler and how his back-
ground influenced the development of the person (Mosak & Kopp, 
1973). Adler astutely noted that a system, or theory, frequently has a life 
style of its own (Adler, 1931 11964b). That style reflects the personality of 
its originator and those who are attracted to it. What is about to be dis-
cussed is the life style of a theory-the underlying "schemas" that orga-
nize its structure. 
Holism 
Adlerians postulate that the person is an indivisible unit, that the person 
needs to be understood in his or her totality. From this vantage point, di-
viding the person into id, ego, and superego, or parent, child, and adult 
states, is not beneficial. As Adler (1956) stated: 
Very early in my work, I found man to be a [self-consistent] unity. The 
foremost task of Individual Psychology is to prove this unity in each indi-
vidual-in his thinking, feeling, acting, in his so-called conscious and un-
conscious, in every expression of his personality. (p. 175) 
What exactly is holism? In more concrete terms, holism can be concep-
tualized in the following ways. 
The whole is different than the sum of its parts (Smuts, 1926/1961). 
For instance, imagine three parallel lines of equal length. In their present 
configuration, one "sees" one pattern; these same three lines can be 
reconfigured to form an equilateral triangle or the letter N or the letter 
Z and other configurations. One must know the Gestalt in order to un-
derstand the particular item, for in each case, we have three lines of 
equal length. If we focus too exclusively upon the parts, we lose the 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
15 
Gestalt and, hence, we may "miss the boat." We do not see the forest for 
the trees. 
Similarly, to allude to the opening quote of this chapter from Niet-
zsche, to say "the arm moves" is to assign to "it" (i.e., the arm) a "mind" 
and "will" of its own. "I raised my arm" is a very different statement 
philosophically than "my arm rose." The first statement awards responsi-
bility to the person; the latter gives responsibility to the arm. Hence, 
Freud's emphasis upon drives and instincts originating from the id raised 
all sorts of "sticky" issues with regard to personal responsibility. Who, if 
anybody, was responsible for directing the instincts? If they "directed 
themselves," as Freud typically implied, that meant they had to have 
some sort of "ego-functions," a point Adler (1956) duly noted and called 
into question during his early days as a psychoanalyst. 
Finally, as we demonstrate in our teaching, imagine this: For a mo-
ment, hold your hands out in front of your chest, with elbows bent, 
hands close to your body, and hold your hands. Now, pull. Notice some-
thing? Your hands, to paraphrase Nietzsche, stay dead center. No matter 
how hard you pull, with your left hand pulling left, right hand pulling 
right, they stay center. Why? Because you choose to keep them there. As 
long as we conceptualize the "hands"-that is, the parts-as being the 
focus of our attention, we formulate the idea of internal conflict or in-
trapsychic conflict with the person expressing him - or herself as a victim 
of the conflict (Mosak & LeFevre, 1976). Actually, we have decided to 
keep our hands "in conflict." Rather than victims of conflict, we are cre-
ators of conflict. The conflict is only apparent from an atomistic, reduc-
tionistic perspective (a different set of assumptions). From a holistic 
perspective, the hands are not in conflict with each other because "they" 
are exhibiting equal force in opposing directions; the hands stay dead 
center because we have decided to keep them there by exerting equal 
force. Conflict is a decision not to make a decision, to stay "dead center." 
The "pain" we feel is the price we pay for not making the decision (and 
perhaps "look good" to ourselves and others). If you "allow" one hand to 
pull harder (Le., if you make a decision), notice how easily they move. 
Teleology 
Given this emphasis upon holism, and the fact the "intrapsychic con-
flict," or conflict that is related to a reductionistic perspective, is a func-
tion of choice, why would one choose to remain "in conflict?" It serves a 
purpose. In Aristotle's work, The Metaphysics (350 Bc/1941), this is re-
ferred to as the final cause. Aristotle delineated four causes and believed 

16 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
that in order to understand the nature of something (i.e., anything), we 
must know the: 
Material cause-what it is made of 
Efficient cause-how it came to be 
Formal cause-what shape or essence it is 
Final cause-for what sake, or purpose, it is 
A clinical example clarifies. A woman is depressed: 
Material cause: A sad presentation, with lethargy. diurnal variation, 
psychomotor retardation. 
Efficient cause: She may have a biological vulnerability she inher-
ited. She suffered a loss in childhood of a parent. Her husband has just 
left her. 
Formal cause: A mood (affective) disorder. She dislikes it and it 
causes suffering to herself and those around her. She complains and 
feels "horrible" and is self-critical. 
Final cause: It places others into her service. With it. she can get oth-
ers to move toward her and allow her to seek revenge upon her hus-
band ("Look how that bastard has ruined my life!"). 
The various "schools" of psychotherapy have emphasized different 
causes. The first three causes (the materiaL efficient. and formal) are 
well known, at least in applications, to most clinicians. Adler's emphasis 
was upon the fourth, the final. cause. To emphasize anyone to the ex-
clusion of the others would be reductionistic, and Adlerian psychology is 
holistic; we stress all four causes, particularly the final cause (Ansbacher, 
1951 ). 
As Adler (1927/1957) wrote, the "first thing we discover in the psy-
chic trends is that the movements are directed toward a goal .... This 
teleology, this striving for a goal. is innate in the concept of adaptation" 
(p. 28). In order to understand a person's goaL we need to understand 
his or her line of movement. People move towards goals in various ways; 
the most common goal is to belong. The importance of belonging is 
stressed by Horney (1950) in one of her central concepts, that of "basic 
anxiety," which she defines as "the feeling of being isolated and helpless 
in a potentially hostile world" (p. 18). All of us want to belong, and we 
establish a finaL fictional goal that directs us as to what we should be or 
accomplish in order to belong (Adler, 1956). Goals are generally differ-
entiated along two dimensions: concrete versus fictionaL and long-range 
versus short-range. Fictional goals are subjective and state what must be 
achieved-fame, power, perfection, money, sexual attractiveness, per-
formance, conquest, or so forth-in order to have a place in life. Because 
one can achieve significance in other ways, these goals are fictional. 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
17 
An example clarifies the matter. Carl establishes early during his de-
velopment (see Chapter 3) that the way for him to "fit in," to bond with 
his family, is to be "the best." This is unarticulated-it is learned pre-
verbally (Rogers, 1951). To be the best is a "fictional goal." It becomes 
concretized in many diverse ways, such as to be the smartest student, the 
swiftest runner, the most popular classmate, and so forth. Even the con-
crete, "tangible" manifestations can be further broken down. If his long-
term goal is to be the number-one student, many short-term goals can 
be envisioned: to study hard, to be "teacher's pet," or to have no one an-
swer more questions than he does when in class. The final, fictional goal, 
therefore, can have many permutations and components. Also, there 
can be more than one final fictional goal (Mosak, 1979). Carl may want 
to be the best and he may crave excitement as well. The competition to 
be number one is certainly important, but the feelings of excitement and 
the thrill of competing may be "addictive" for him as well. This second 
final, fictional goal can have the same kind of permutations and varia-
tions mentioned about being the best. 
To return to the issue from the beginning of this section, why would 
someone choose to be "in conflict?" What purpose could that serve? A 
more complete discussion is presented in the chapters on inferiority 
complexes and psychopathology, but for present purposes, a brief ratio-
nale can be offered. Sometimes, it seems beneficial "not to move," to 
"stay put" (Mosak & LeFevre, 1976). A man who cannot decide between 
his wife and his mistress can be conceptualized as in conflict. The pur-
pose: As long as he "cannot" choose, he keeps both. If he "suffers" 
enough, they feel sorry for him and continue to wait for his decision. It is 
apparent that not to decide is to make a choice. 
The Creative Self 
Adlerians view people as actors, not merely reactors. We are more than 
the product of heredity and environment, more than simply reactive or-
ganisms; as Mahoney (1991) has stated, the prevailing trend in the social 
sciences is to see individuals as actively constructing their experiences, 
not simply passively responding to what is presented. 
Adlerian psychology has been erroneously characterized as one that 
advocates merely reactive adjustment to society. Adler (1933 /l 964f), to 
the contrary, indicated that if we do not live in a suitable societal situa-
tion, we have the obligation to change it. 
Adler (1929b, p. 34) noted that the child "strives to develop, and it 
[the child] strives to develop along a line of direction fixed by the goal 
which it chooses for itself." Although heredity and environment do pro-

18 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
vide parameters (see subsequent discussion of "soft determinism"), they 
do not take into account how the person will perceive his or her heredity 
or background. 
Two processes are worth noting: feedback and feedforward mecha-
nisms. Feedback mechanisms are (generally) homeostatic in function; 
they interpret data and determine what adjustments need to be made in 
order to maintain the status quo or adjust accordingly. Feedforward 
mechanisms are proactive; they anticipate and modify the situation in 
order to produce feedback that is already in line with the organism's re-
quirements. The creativity we speak of is related to feedforward mecha-
nisms. Children, for example, not only passively receive input from their 
caregivers, but actively elicit responses from those same individuals 
(Mosak, 1980). Similarly, anyone can be victimized; life can, and does, 
"kick us in the teeth" on occasion. Whether or not one chooses to be-
come a victim, however, is not so automatic. As Frankl (1983) has dis-
cussed, life challenges us, but the meaning we derive from life is up to us. 
Life deals the cards; we only get a chance to play the hand. 
Soft Determinism 
This assumption becomes evident at this point. The classic philosophical 
debate has been between determinism and nondeterminism. The former 
assumes that causality (in the sense Nietzsche referred to at the opening 
of this chapter) is a fact, and that A implies (leads to) B. Nondeterminism 
assumes no causal connections whatsoever. Soft determinism is the mid-
dle ground. It stresses influences, not causes, and speaks of probabilities 
and possibilities, not givens. According to Adler (1933/ 1964f), the givens 
of a person's life situation and biologic constitution "are events of statis-
tical probability. The evidence of their existence should never be allowed 
to degenerate into the setting up of a fixed rule" (p. 27). As Adler (1936) 
was fond of pointing out, "Everything can also be different" (p. 14). 
Several clarifications need to be made, for the subtle distinctions of 
this issue have fostered considerable misunderstandings, even among 
Adlerians. First, choosing does not always mean wanting. I may choose a 
broken leg, even though I do not want it, if it means jumping from this 
burning building in order to save my life. Similarly, one may choose to 
go to graduate school to get one's doctorate, but one may not want to 
have to do all the work and read all the texts. 
Second, freedom to choose is not the same as freedom of choice. Life 
does impose certain limits, and within those limits I am free to choose. 
Freedom of choice typically implies unlimited choice. That rarely exists. 
Nonetheless, we are always free to choose, at least how we feel about 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
19 
what is presented, in other words, our attitude (see Frank!, 1983, for a 
cogent discussion of this topic). 
Third, the dynamics of responsibility, choice, and blame need to be 
explored. Although Adlerians hold them responsible for their actions 
(Maniacci, 1991; Mosak, 1987a), they do not blame people. Given the 
assumptions of holism, creativity, teleology, and soft determinism, peo-
ple choose; they, and they alone, are responsible for their choices. They 
may not be aware of making the choices or of the consequences of their 
choices and many of the implications that those choices entail, particu-
larly the social implications, but they are responsible for them. Adlerians 
do not believe that "the Devil made me do it." People are not to be 
blamed but to be educated, and Adler (1956) considered his therapy to 
be strongly reeducative (see the discussion of this issue by Ford & Urban, 
1963; and Mosak, 1995a). 
Phenomenology 
"1 am convinced," Adler (1933/ 1964f, p. 19) stated unequivocally, "that a 
person's behavior springs from his idea ... because our senses do not re-
ceive actual facts, but merely a subjective image of them." Technically 
speaking, we do not see the world, we apprehend it. Adler (1956, p. 182) 
spoke of a "schema of apperception [Apperzeptionsschema]." An appercep-
tion is a perception with meaning, a conclusion, attached to it. Whereas 
Freud operated from the premise (vantage point) of an objective psychol-
ogist, Adler was a subjective psychologist (Ford & Urban, 1963). Adler 
was not interested in facts per se, but the individual's perceptions of 
the facts. 
The cognitive map we form to guide us through life, to direct our line 
of movement toward our fina!, fictional goa!, is based upon our phe-
nomenological interpretation of experience (Mosak, 1995a). A story 
clarifies: 
A child turns to his father and asks, "Which is closer, the moon or China?" 
His father, being a man who values logic, replies, "China." The child force-
fully disagrees. Upon questioning, the child explains that the moon must 
be closer, because he can see the moon, and he's never seen China. 
An interesting historical note is in order. It is generally considered that 
the founder of the "school" of phenomenology was the mathemati-
cian/philosopher Edmund Husser!, who first detailed his system in his 
book, Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology (1913/1962). Adler 
was writing at the same time and had published his book The Neurotic 
Constitution a year earlier (1912/1983b). Though it is not commonly 

20 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
known, Husserl was a classmate of Freud; the only nonmedical course 
Freud took at the University of Vienna was from Franz Brentano, 
Husserl's mentor. Husserl's "star pupil" was a young theology student 
who switched to philosophy, Martin Heidegger, the founder of the 
school of existentialism. The phenomenological method is the corner-
stone of existential psychology (Yalom, 1980), and one of the key as-
sumptions of Individual Psychology (Allers, 1961; van Dusen, 1959). 
The interrelatedness of the two schools has been well documented (Ans-
bacher, 1959a; Birnbaum, 1961; Ellenberger, 1970; Farau, 1964; Holt, 
1967; Johnson, 1966; Radl, 1959; Schaffer, 1974, 1976; Stern, 1958; van 
Dusen, 1959). 
If the person is continually acting on, and not simply reacting to, his or 
her environment, and that person is actively creating his or her own 
perceptions, goals, and movements through life, then the Adlerian con-
ception sees development as an ongoing process; the person is continu-
ally creating (or recreating) him- or herself. He or she is always in the 
process of becoming (K. Adler, 1963; Allport, 1955). As is evident in 
Chapter 4, the influences, not causes, from the past may have had phe-
nomenological reality for us, but conditions do change, and we have the 
capacity to change with them. We may have "had to," from our phe-
nomenological reality, react a certain way "back then," but if the situa-
tion has changed, we are responsible if we continue to act as we did in 
the past. As a patient eloquently put it, "You mean I'm giving condi-
tioned responses to conditions which no longer exist." Time moves on, 
life changes, but we have a stubborn, tenacious ability to continue to see 
things "in the future," as "they were." Hence, as May (1983, p. 140) 
aptly phrased it, "What an individual seeks to become determines what he 
remembers of this has been. In this sense the future determines the past." 
Social-field Theory 
Individuals develop and live in a social context. The idea of a person liv-
ing outside of a world is incomprehensible. People have challenges; that 
is part and parcel of being human. Whether or not the challenges become 
problems is an issue that is contingent upon the individual's phenome-
nology, goals, and creativity. Not all problems are social problems, for 
some are genuinely within the province of the individual; but all prob-
lems are capable of becoming social problems. For example, if my toe 
aches, that is a challenge with which I must deal. I may choose to see it as 
a problem but not bother anybody about it. I can make it a social prob-
lem, however, quite easily: I can whine and complain, demand special 
services, and in general expect an "exemption" from life-and in a social 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
21 
context, that means that if I fail to pull my share of the load, sooner or 
later, someone will have to pull it for me or it will be left undone. 
Adler (1927 /l957, p. 34) stated it this way: "In order to know how a 
man thinks, we have to examine his relationship to his fellow men .... 
We cannot comprehend the psychic activities without at the same time 
understanding those social relationships" (p. 34). Adler was against clas-
sification and labeling. He cautioned that 
the student may very easily fall into the error of imagining that a type is 
something ordained and independent, and that it has as its basis anything 
more than a structure that is to a large extent homogeneous. If he stops at 
this point and believes that when he hears the word "criminal," or "anxiety 
neurosis," or "schizophrenia," he has gained some understanding of the in-
dividual case, he not only deprives himself of the possibility of individual 
research, but he will never be free from misunderstandings that will arise 
between him and the person whom he is treating. (Adler, 1933/1964f, 
p. 127) 
Flexibility is one key to adaptation, survival, and, as Gazzaniga (1985) 
postulates, human evolution. To say someone is phobic does not tell you 
much. Where is he or she phobic? With whom? For how long? What ap-
pears to precipitate it? To stop it? How does he or she feel about being pho-
bic? These types of questions help elucidate the phenomenological field, 
and therefore provide a better grasp of the person. A characteristic of mal-
adaptive behavior is its inflexibility (Krausz, 1973). To continue with our 
phobic patient: He or she may have been afraid of a particular dog that pro-
vided a rather nasty bite when our patient was quite young. If overgeneral-
ization occurs (Mosak, 1995a), all dogs may be perceived as threatening. If 
overgeneralization occurs, the phobia may be extended to any fur. The un-
derlying assumption (or schema) may be too rigid. A more extreme exam-
ple would be the man who feels he has to be "The Boss." At work, this may 
be fine, but it can cause him some grief at home or with his friends. 
A somewhat different, but related, issue revolves around preparation 
for practice as a psychotherapist. If, given this assumption, one needs to 
know not only the person but the person's social field, therapists need to 
be versed in more than psychology. Literature, myths, religion, ethnicity, 
history, movies, and the like all help to illuminate the person's picture. 
Striving for Superiority 
Motivation, from some Adlerian perspectives, is conceptualized as mov-
ing from a perceived minus situation to a perceived plus situation. As 
Ansbacher and Ansbacher have documented (Adler, 1956), Adler gave 

22 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
this movement several different names throughout his writings, with the 
phenomenological "plus" situation being variously described as being: 
A real man 
A will to power 
Self-esteem 
Security 
Perfection 
Completion 
Overcoming 
Superiority 
The first four phrases were characteristic of early Adler, when he 
wrote primarily as a psychoanalyst, and his concepts were about abnor-
mal individuals. The last group evolved as Adler wrote more and more as 
a philosopher, educator and social psychologist. During this period, he 
was more interested in describing normal development. A useful distinc-
tion is made by Lazarsfeld (1927/1991). She differentiates the normal in-
dividual who strives for perfection from the maladaptive person who 
tries to be perfect. In the first case, one realizes it is a goal that can never 
be totally achieved; but in the latter, one actually attempts to become 
perfect. Adler (1933/l964f) states it this way: "The material of life has 
been constantly bent on reaching a plus from a minus situation" (p. 97). 
In practice, it can be difficult to see how some people are moving 
towards a plus situation, or towards what Adler (19371l964e), in one 
of his last papers, finally referred to as superiority. Some elaboration 
clarifies. 
Adler (1937 /l964e) felt that everyone strives for superiority. That is 
the single, motivating force for all living organisms. The fina!, fictional 
goal is a goal that the person perceives as bringing him or her that supe-
riority. The degree of social interest that the person displays (see Chapter 
7) sets the direction to the striving. If he or she is very interested in the 
welfare of others, then the striving is on the socially useful side of life, as 
manifested in caring, compassion, social cooperation, and contribution 
to the common welfare (Mosak, 1991). If there is a low degree of social 
interest then the striving is not prosocia!, but rather antisocial (in the 
broad sense of the term). Those individuals attempt to gain their superi-
ority at the expense of those around them, rather than for the better-
ment of all involved. 
Sometimes, the price one pays to get to the perceived plus (i.e., superi-
ority), may be a "real" (i.e., concrete) minus. First a relatively common 
example. In order to have a clean house, I may have to work very hard 
and sacrifice some of my free time. Similarly, in order to earn a degree, I 
may have to spend a lot of money and time and put myself through con-

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
23 
siderable anxiety and discomfort. In the short term, I experience a 
"minus," but the "plus" will come. A more clinical example: How can 
self-mutilation move someone toward a plus situation? Once again, that 
may be a "real" minus, especially in the short-term situation. Long-term, 
however, that person may receive attention, others may "walk on 
eggshells" when near that person (so as to not "upset" him or her), and 
he or she may gain some sense of subjective relief from the act, including 
a sense of being able to tolerate pain. The self-mutilator may even de-
velop moral superiority, quoting Jesus (Mark 9:47): "And if your eye 
causes you to stumble, cast it out; it is better for you to enter the king-
dom of God with one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast into helL" 
The striving for superiority that takes into account the long-term 
good, or welfare, of those in life can seldom go wrong. If striving for su-
periority takes place at the expense of others, or on too short a term, 
others are not very likely to benefit. 
Idiographic Orientation 
Adlerians tend to emphasize the idiographic nature of individuals, that 
is, the particulars of the specific person. This is relatively evident, given 
the assumptions of phenomenology, teleology, soft determinism, holism, 
and creativity. "Certainly we cannot altogether avoid using it (the gen-
erallaw), for it enables us to generalize ... but it can give us very little 
idea of any particular case or its treatment" (Adler, 19331l964f, p. 127). 
The generaL or nomothetic, laws place us "in the ballpark," but only by 
knowing the particular person in his or her phenomenological idiosyn-
crasies can we know a person. This applies to all people, normal or ab-
normal. 
Research, for instance, has validated Adler's (1956) assumption that 
agoraphobic persons tend to value control (see Guidano & Liotti, 1983). 
That is the nomothetic principle. That does not tell us much about the par-
ticular person sitting across from us, in our office, seeking our help be-
cause the agoraphobia is becoming unbearable. All of us feel inferior at 
one time or another; that makes us human (Wolfe, 1932). How we feel in-
ferior, what we define as inferior (e.g., being short, fat, dumb, ugly, too 
talL too smart), when, and under what circumstances, all of this fleshes 
out the idiographic dynamics. Remediation in generaL and psychotherapy 
in particular, is greatly enhanced by knowing the person as a person, not 
as a cluster of signs, symptoms, and syndromes. The various diagnostic la-
bels place us in the ballpark but do not describe the individual patient. 
Given the phenomenolgical and idiographic assumptions, it follows that 
one cannot completely interpret a dream unless one knows the dreamer. 

24 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Psychology of Use 
Adler (1929c) stressed that "it is not what one has inherited that is im-
portant, but what one does with his inheritance" (p. 37). Mosak (1995a) 
has noted that life does, to some extent, provide limits to what one can 
do, but within those limits, the opinion one has of one's situation, and, 
hence, the use one makes of it, can be rather startling. A person born 
without legs will probably never be a high jumper in the Olympics; but 
Bo Jackson, with his artificial hip, can play for a pennant-contending 
major league baseball team. As Maniacci (1993, 1996b) points out, a dis-
tinction between impairment and disability can prove useful. Tvvo indi-
viduals with the same impairment may not be equally disabled. The 
stances they take toward their situation can be crucial determinants. 
Adler's early work led him to study the biological substrates of organic 
compensation. Published in 1907, Study of Organ Inferiority and its Psy-
chical Compensation was given considerable praise by Freud as having 
contributed greatly to understanding the biological origins of neurotic 
dynamics. In it, Adler discussed how certain organs or organ systems 
tended to compensate for deficiencies. One kidney is removed, and the 
other enlarges and assumes the missing kidney's function. As Adler pro-
gressed in this thinking, this original biologicaL mechanistic view be-
came replaced with a more psychologicaL holistic one. Although organ 
inferiority still retained its biological definition (an inherited deficiency 
or weakness of the body or organ or organ system), the compensations 
became more psychodynamic. Dreikurs (1948b) has elaborated upon 
this issue at length, and interested readers are referred to that work for a 
more complete discussion. But for present purposes, those Adlerians 
who are medically trained (or sensitive) can often quite accurately find 
biological correlates to many psychological conditions, such as an organ 
inferiority of the gastrointestinal system leading to personality traits of a 
getter (Adler, 1956). 
Three areas of special interest with reference to the assumption of psy-
chology of use are memory, emotions, and cognitive processes. We ex-
amine each in turn. 
Adler (1927/1957) noted that what we remember is greatly influenced 
by where we are going (hence May's comment noted previously about 
our future determining our past). As Adler stated, "We remember those 
events whose recollection is important for a specific psychic tendency" 
(p. 49). If I want to move toward someone, I will remember nice, pleas-
ant things about that person; but as soon as I want to move away from or 
against that person (Horney, 1945), I will remember negative, unpleas-
ant things. These serve to justify my movement to my goal. Not only will 
I remember what suits my purpose, but I will forget what does not suit it 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
25 
as well. The role of memory, and early recollections specifically, is dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 9, in which the process of assessment 
is detailed. For the present discussion, suffice to say that memory, like 
many other tendencies, is greatly influenced and used according to the 
goal we set for ourselves. 
Emotions are much the same. Adler (1927/1957, 1956) spoke of dis-
junctive and conjunctive emotions. Like other psychological processes, 
emotions are used according to the goals people establish (Beecher & 
Beecher, 1971/1987; Dreikurs, 1951). Some emotions move us towards 
others; others move us away. Adlerians tend to view emotions as moti-
vators for behavior; to use a metaphor, they are the gasoline we use to 
power us to our goals. Interestingly enough, contemporary psychoana-
1ysts such as Basch (1988, p. 68) state that "the affect attached to a par-
ticular perceptual goal moves a person to engage in behavior that will 
fulfill or reach it." This is strikingly similar to Adler's formulation. Once 
again, the idiographic component of Individual Psychology is important, 
for to know what purpose a particular emotion serves one needs to 
know the person. Some general guidelines about two particular emo-
tions can offer some clarity: anger and hurt. 
If one is angry, it generally serves the purpose of motivating one to 
change something. It is as if one is saying, "There is something about it 
or me that needs changing." However, for various reasons the person 
may fear or be unwilling to attempt that change. By being hurt the per-
son avoids changing it then because she or he first has to get over the 
hurt. The person shifts her or his focus from changing it to changing her 
or his feelings. More clinical examples, such as anxiety, fear, depression, 
and aggression are discussed in Chapter 8. 
Finally, Adler (1956) made a distinction between common sense and 
private sense (private intelligence) or what has more recently been re-
ferred to as private logic. Ansbacher (1965) and Dreikurs (1973) have 
provided detailed analyses. 
Common sense is that which is shared with others, the ability to speak 
a common language and share perceptions with others. One ingredient 
of common sense is consensuality; we all agree upon it. A second is that 
what we all agree upon may be a fiction (Vaihinger, 1911/1 965). In real-
ity, a paper dollar is only a piece of paper. We can tear it, burn it, write 
on it, and the like. But our society has created the fiction that it has 
worth, and as long as we observe that fiction and behave as if it has 
worth, it makes commerce easier. Private logic has three components: 
immediate goals, hidden reasons, and life style goals. 
Life style goals or long-term, personality goals, are the final, fictional 
goals. As mentioned previously, those are generally nonconscious, non-
verbal, and not clearly understood by individuals. Immediate goals are 

26 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
those short-term goals that are more readily attainable. These too are 
often not clearly understood and were discussed previously. The hidden 
reason is the explanation we give ourselves for what we are doing. Ma-
niacci (1993) has provided a clinical example of how all three operate in 
a case formulation, and a brief example is provided to illustrate: 
Life style goal 
To be perfect 
Frequent Immediate Goals 
To look good 
To be without error 
To never be corrected 
Frequent hidden reasons 
"I'm always right." 
"Who are you to judge me?" 
"I can't let anybody see me as weak." 
Imagine a client with this private logic. In his striving to be perfect, he 
does not allow anyone to contradict him; he is difficult and moody if 
"crossed" (and remember, given his phenomenology, he may perceive 
"crossed" quite differently than others). His hidden reasons (what many 
cognitive therapists term "self-statements" or "automatic thoughts") re-
flect this bias. A more detailed analysis of private logic is presented in the 
chapters on development, life style, and psychopathology. 
Finally, cognitive processes such as intelligence are greatly influenced 
by the person's private logic. For instance, if it does not suit a person's 
goal to use his or her intelligence, than that person may choose to fail in 
school if it furthers him or her along towards his or her goal. As one stu-
dent gleefully announced after flunking out of medical schooL "That's 
the first decision I ever made without my parents in all my life." 
Acting "As If" 
Adler (1956) was greatly influenced by the work of the philosopher, 
Hans Vaihinger (1911 /1965). According to Vaihinger, people construct 
"fictions" that help move them through life. These fictions are like lines 
drawn on a map. They do not exist in reality, but they provide useful 
guidelines for navigating. Adler applied this philosophical insight to his 
clinical work. It soon became a cornerstone of his theory. 
Given the aforementioned assumptions, people select goals, perceive 
according to those goals, and move throughout life as if all of this were 
"true." From a phenomenological standpoint, for the particular person, 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
27 
all of it is true. But as Adler (191211983b) stated on the first page of his 
first psychological book, "Everything is a matter of opinion." People act 
according to their fictions, their beliefs, and even set out to have life (and 
other people) conform to their expectations or construct life in terms of 
their expectations. Hence, someone who feels inferior tends to act that 
way, or to compensate so as to appear superior. 
Self-fulfilling Prophecy 
This is a natural outgrowth of the tendency to act "as if." As Festinger 
(1957) attempted to establish, if given a discrepancy between what we 
believe and what "is," cognitive dissonance occurs. We tend to stick to 
our beliefs. Adler (193311964f, pp. 19-20) provides an example: 
In a word, I am convinced that a person's behaviour springs from his 
idea .... As a matter of fact, it has the same effect on one whether a poiso-
nous snake is actually approaching my foot or whether I merely believe it 
is a poisonous snake. 
If I believe "it's a dog-eat-dog world out there," I act as if it is, construe 
events to support my belief, and probably provoke others to take a cold, 
if not hostile, stance toward me. I then feel justified in declaring, "See! I 
was right!" As Milton stated over 300 years ago, the mind can make a 
heaven of hell, or a hell of heaven. 
Optimism 
The last assumption of Individual Psychology is that of optimism. Freud's 
system is basically pessimistic; it postulates a different set of assumptions 
about human nature, assumptions that view individuals as in conflict, 
not only within themselves but with each other. Adler's system is much 
more optimistic. People can, and do, change. They can, and do, take re-
sponsibility for themselves and are quite capable of working coopera-
tively for the greater good. Adler (1978) was rather clear about one point, 
however, that is frequently overlooked. People are neither good nor bad; 
human nature is neutral. This view was enunciated by the 12th-century 
physician and philosopher Maimonides (118011944), who wrote, 
Pay no attention to the view ... that at man's birth God decrees whether 
he shall be righteous or wicked. That is not so! Every person has the power 
of becoming as righteous as Moses or wicked as Jeroboam-wise or stupid, 
tender or cruel, miserly or generous. (5: 1-2) 

28 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Heredity, environment, and the choice of the creative self all interact 
to help the person produce the final, fictional goal, which can be socially 
useful or useless, or neutral itself, with the nature of the movement to-
wards that goal being "good" or "bad." Adler was not naive. He lived 
through a world war, worked with criminals, psychotics, and the under-
privileged. He knew the extremes of human nature as well as did Freud. 
Freud came out of World War I and postulated the death instinct. He felt 
that the ultimate aim of human life was to return to an inorganic state. 
Adler came out of the same war, a war in which he served as a physician, 
and postulated the concept of social interest, more recently called com-
munity feeling (Ansbacher, 1992a). We, as a species, have the potential 
for good. Whether or not we actualize it is up to us. We are responsible 
for our fate-the best of it, or the worst of it. 
D Summary 
The assumptions of Individual Psychology are not very complex. Adler 
(1956) disliked technical jargon, and he was determined to avoid mak-
ing his system too complicated. To paraphrase him, on the surface it ap-
pears simple, but to those who know the system, it is comprehensive, 
broad in scope, and sophisticated in breadth. 
Having established the foundation, let us now turn our attention to 
how individuals develop. The development of the life style is examined 
in the next chapter, and with that, the assumptions that have been pre-
sented in static form can be seen in action, as they apply to the under-
standing of personality. 
D Points to Consider 
By knowing the assumptions of a system, one is in a better position 
to evaluate that system. Systems should be evaluated based upon their 
adherence to their assumptions, not from the basis of another set of 
assumptions. 
Adlerians emphasize the final cause of people's behavior. Although 
they consider all four causes (as detailed by Aristotle), they believe the 
final cause is crucial. 
Adler was neutral with regard to human nature. He felt that people 
could be either good or bad. 
Adlerians tend to speak of probable outcomes of certain back-
grounds. This is known as soft determinism. 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of 
29 
Although it is important to understand what a person has, it is more 
important to understand the use she or he makes of her or his qualities. 
D Questions 
1. What is phenomenology? How is it incorporated into Adlerian psy-
chology? 
2. What did Adler mean by "fictions?" 
3. What are some of the various terms Adler used to describe the "plus" 
position people strive for? 
4. What is the difference between freedom to choose and freedom of 
choice? 
5. How do Adlerians introduce teleology into their system? 
6. How do Adlerians tend to view "intrapsychic conflict?" 

The Development of the Life Style 
Blest the infant Babe 
(For with my best conjectures I would trace 
Our Being's earthly progress), blest the Babe, 
Nursed in his Mother's arms, who sinks to sleep 
Rocked on his Mother's breast; who with his soul 
Drinks in the feelings of his Mother's eye! ... 
Emphatically such a Being lives . .. 
For feeling has to him imparted power 
That through the growing faculties of sense 
Doth like an agent of the one great Mind 
Create, creator and received both, 
Working but in alliance with the works 
Which it beholds . ... 
William Wordsworth (1850/1979) 
Just as all psychologies have theories of human nature and how to com-
prehend them, people have their theories, their lenses, for understand-
ing life, people, and themselves. In this chapter, we examine how 
Adlerians view human personality development. The "facts" of personal-
ity development are not the question; people are born, grow, achieve 
maturity, suffer losses, succeed and fail, and eventually die. It is the way 
Adlerians perceive these facts to which we now turn. 
30 

The Development of the Life Style 
31 
D An Overview of the Concept of Life Style 
The life style is the individual's characteristic way of thinking, seeing, 
and feeling towards life and is synonymous with what other theorists 
call "personality." Adler (1956, pp. 187-188) wrote that 
[The child's] opinion of life, which is at the bottom of his attitude to life 
and is neither shaped into words nor expressed in thought, is his own mas-
terpiece. Thus, the child arrives at his law of movement which aids him 
after a certain amount of training to obtain a style of life, in accordance 
with which we see the individual thinking, feeling, and acting throughout 
his whole life. 
From this passage and throughout Adler's writings, it becomes evident 
that Adler conceived of the child as both the receiver and the creator of 
his or her own world. As Wordsworth alluded to in the opening quote 
for this chapter, the child is "creator and receiver both,/Working ... in 
alliance with [ that] IWhich it beholds." The child is exposed to "a certain 
amount of training," but that same child is active in his or her creation of 
the meaning of that training. A story might clarify the issue: 
Two brothers, a 6-year-old and a 5-year-old, decide that today is the day 
they will learn how to swear. The 6-year-old says, 'Tm gonna say the word 
'damn: " and the 5-year-old replies with glee, 'Til say the word 'ass: " and 
they giggle and wait for their opportunity. Mother calls for them to come 
down for breakfast. They run downstairs, into the kitchen, and jump on 
the stools. "What would you like for breakfast?" Mother asks the oldest. 
"Give me some cereal, damn it!" the 6-year-old replies, and without skip-
ping a beat, Mother slaps him with the back of her hand across his face. He 
runs crying and embarrassed to his room. She turns to the 5-year-old and 
with a stern grimace says, "And what would you like?" to which he replies 
with a tremor in his voice, "1 don't know, but you can bet your ass it won't 
be cereal." 
The message Mother was intending to send was "clear," to her: Don't 
swear! The message the 5-year-old heard was just as clear: Don't order 
cereal! As we explore here, development is an interactive process be-
tween people, not just from parents to children (Mosak, 1980). Parents 
may do everything "right," but that does not mean that that is how the 
children perceive it. Many times we have heard clients turn to spouses 
during marital sessions and utter something akin to, "But that's not how 
1 meant it. 1 was trying to protect you," to which the other typically 
replies, "I didn't know that. I thought you were telling me I was stupid." 
It is not an instance of parent to child, but the principle still applies. Peo-
ple are affected by their perceptions of the facts, not the facts themselves. 

32 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
In his introduction to Adler's (19291 1964d) Problems of Neurosis, Ans-
bacher (1964) articulates a crucial distinction Adler made to his theory 
of human development. In Adler's early writings, he was still formulat-
ing his theory of development from a drive-reduction perspective. Ini-
tially, Adler believed and wrote that children feel inferior, attempt 
to compensate, and then strive for superiority in any of its manifold 
forms. Thus, schematically presented, the general developmental pic-
ture is this: 
Feelings of inferiority are noticed, leading to 
Compensatory mechanisms, which lead to 
Striving for superiority 
Later Adler changed this sequence (d. Adler, 1937/1964e). The emphasis 
upon drive reduction was replaced with a growth motivation that states 
that children strive for superiority. When Adler speaks of superiority, he 
does not literally mean superiority but a more advantageous position. Al-
though many people do strive for actual superiority, Adler was really refer-
ring to the striving for competence, significance, and community feeling. 
Ansbacher (Dubelle, 1997) explains: 
The basic striving, according to Adler, is the striving for Vollkommenheit. 
The translation of Vollkommenheit is completeness, but it can also be trans-
lated as excellence. In English, only the second translation was considered; 
it was only the striving for excellence. The delimitation of the striving for 
excellence is the striving for superiority. 
Basically, it all comes from the striving for completeness, and there he 
said that it is all a part of life in genera!, and that is very true. Even a flower 
or anything that grows, any form of life, strives to reach its completeness. 
And perfection is not right, because the being does not strive-one cannot 
say to be perfect-what is a perfect being? It is striving for completeness, 
and that is very basic and very true (p. 6). 
Children become frustrated, feel inferior, and then compensate with 
additional striving. Schematically presented, it looks like this: 
Striving leads to 
Inferiority feelings, which lead to 
Compensation and further striving 
The change is crucial, and not simply cosmetic. The initial formulation 
implied that a tension was produced that the children "had to" reduce. 
This is similar to Freud's system, only "feelings of inferiority" are used 
instead of sexual energy (i.e., libido). Adler's second formulation empha-
sizes growth processes (d. Rogers, 1951), and research has tended to 

The Development of the Life Style 
33 
support the view of the infant as a growth-motivated, competence-seek-
ing organism (Basch, 1988; Stern, 1985). 
As Dreikurs and Soltz (1964) have discussed, children are excellent 
observers, but horrible interpreters. As we have attempted to point 
out, this comment applies not only to children, but to adults as well. 
We, like children, "see" a lot of what goes on around us, but the mean-
ing we attach to it can vary tremendously. The life style is the set of 
rules, the cognitive map (Mosak, 1995a), that guides us through life. It 
is the "rule of rules" (Shulman, 1973a, b) in that it directs us not only 
with reference to the feedback we receive, but the feedforward mecha-
nisms we send out. Its development by children is an attempt to make 
sense out of and control the data from the environment and their own 
bodies; they receive information, both internally and externally, that 
needs to be processed, and the life style is the key to how those data are 
used. 
Forgus and Shulman (1979) have discussed, at length, how the per-
ceptual program of the infant modifies needs and turns them into mo-
tives. Innate programs for interacting with the environment are slowly 
replaced by rules that the infant puts in place in order to achieve goals 
that the infant forms. Thus, according to Forgus and Shulman, an innate 
need for nourishment and contact is modified, through interaction with 
the environment and significant others, into a motive for attachment 
(Bowlby, 1983). How the infant decides to attach him- or herself be-
comes a matter of choice, training, biological equipment, and the like. 
The life style would be the general pattern, or theme, to which the infant 
coordinates his or her striving for significance. 
D Factors Influencing Development 
of the Life Style 
The human infant is a complex, highly sophisticated organism, yet it is 
one of the most dependent, slowly developing infants in the animal 
world. As we alluded to previously, holism is a key concept in Adlerian 
psychology, and Adlerians approach development from a similar stance. 
For ease of presentation, however, a distinction is made between biolog-
ical factors and psychosocial factors that affect development. In reality, 
both are intimately connected with one another. This connection itself is 
not necessarily holistic; it could be, and often is, dualistic in other psy-
chological systems. One factor, however, transcends both biological and 
psychosocial factors, and it is to it that we turn first. 

34 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Degree of Activity 
The degree of activity is the amount of energy an individual uses in 
meeting the challenges of life. According to Adler (1956, p. 164), "The 
individual degree of activity is created somewhat arbitrarily by the per-
sonality during earliest childhood." Some people display a high degree of 
it, and others a low degree, with numerous shades of difference in be-
tween. Generally speaking, the more active the individual was in meet-
ing the tasks and challenges of life, the healthier Adler believed the 
individual to be. 
Biological Factors 
Adler (1956) considered there to be three overburdening situations that 
could elicit behavior and psychopathology in individuals: being born 
with inferior organs (i.e., organ inferiority), pampering, and neglect. I 
Adler (1907/l 91 7) defined an organ inferiority as an inherited2 weak-
ness of an organ or organ system. What an individual is born with does 
play some part in development, and his or her biological equipment is 
affected by not only inherited (i.e., genetic) factors, but by prenatal fac-
tors as well. Dreikurs (1948b) pointed out that Adler's final formulation 
of organ inferiority had three components. If presented with an inferior 
organ, the individual could compensate along any of three dimensions: a 
somatic level, a sympathetic level, and a psychic level. An example of 
each clarifies. John, born with a dysfunctional limb, may compensate so-
matically by consciously or unconsciously developing the unaffected 
limb to an even greater degree than normal. If his left leg is deformed, 
his right may become very strong. A sympathetic level of compensation 
might be how he carries himself; he may walk and move in such a way 
that others hardly notice his impairment. On the psychic level, he may 
form a goal of being supercompetent in sports, activities, and "mascu-
line" activities. John is not so unusual. This is the actual case of the 
British romantic poet George Gordon, otherwise known as Lord Byron. 
He had a deformed foot from birth but carried himself in such a way that 
others hardly ever noticed, and he became internationally known for his 
love of swimming, horseback riding, and military adventures, as well as 
his poetry. Although Adler in his theoretical writings emphasized the 
compensatory aspects almost to the exclusion of other responses, in his 
discussion of cases he also alludes to the possibility of retreat and with-
drawal. Children may "declare bankruptcy," quit striving, feel sorry for 
themselves, and gain attention, sympathy, and service from others. 

The Development of the Life Style 
35 
Not only is the organ itself to be considered, but the person's percep-
tion of the organ inferiority as well. John may not consider his leg a 
handicap even if others may consider it an "overburdening situation." 
One person may consider being tall a plus; another may consider the 
same height a minus. This affects the developing life style as much as the 
organic component itself. 
Another biological factor, in addition to organ inferiority, relates to 
brain and central nervous system development. Adler (1956, p. 188) al-
luded to it in a quote cited earlier: The life style is "neither shaped into 
words nor expressed in thought." As Gazzaniga (1985) and Miller (1990) 
have written, the brain is modular in function. The left hemisphere is 
primarily interpretive; the right is mostly emotive and interactive. Gaz-
zaniga writes, 
The dominant left hemisphere is committed to the task of interpreting our 
overt behaviors as well as the more covert emotional responses produced 
by these separate mental modules of our brain. It constructs theories as to 
why these behaviors occurred and does so because of that brain system's 
need to maintain a sense of consistency for all of our behaviors. It is a 
uniquely human endeavor, and upon it rests not only the mechanism that 
generates our sense of subjective reality but also a mental capacity to free 
us from the binding controls of external contingencies. (p. 80) 
In a similar vein, Miller (1990) describes the function of the frontal 
lobes. He states that the frontal lobes allow individuals to judge and reg-
ulate ongoing external perceptions and to "calculate appropriate re-
sponses" to those perceptions (p. 57). He extends his view by remarking 
that 
The frontal lobe system is certainly important in social behavior .... So-
ciability is the form of adaptive behavior most appropriate to the human en-
vironment. and this. its situational adaptiveness. is what I think accounts 
for its dependence on frontal lobe functioning. (p. 59) 
and that 
[the frontal lobes) synthesize information received about the outside 
world (appointment dates. plane and train schedules) and information 
about internal states of the mind and body (financial goals. personal val-
ues). This provides the means by which ... behavior is regulated according 
to the effects produced by ... actions. (p. 57) 
From a neurodevelopmental perspective, what does all this mean? 
Children are receiving input from the world at least from birth (Skol-
nick. 1986), typically via the visual, auditory, tactile (Harlow. 1958), and 
sensorimotor systems. which are mostly innate, "hard wired" programs. 

36 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Their ability to linguistically sort, retrieve, and analyze that data (left-
hemisphere functions) and plan, regulate, and execute behavior that 
moves them towards goals in socially appropriate ways (frontal-lobe 
functions) are not better developed until a much later time, typically 
around the age of 5 to 7 years (Skolnick, 1986). Learning, especially 
learning that occurs between the ages of 8 and 24 months, is of a trial-
and -error type, spatial, and imagistic (Skolnick, 1986). As Miller (1990) 
elaborates, the "unconscious"3 may be the early learning that took place 
preverbally, through trial and error, in spatial, imagistic, right-hemi-
sphere processing. It is not particularly accessible to verbal, interpretive, 
typically left-hemisphere processing. Lessons learned prior to frontal-
lobe, left-hemisphere maturation may not be "pulled back" via verbal 
means-in other words, we know much more than we seem to under-
stand (Adler, 1956). This neurodevelopmental perspective sheds inter-
esting light upon a technique Adler (1956) pioneered for assessing 
individuals-the use of early recollections in order to determine the life 
style of the individual. Early recollections are those memories of inci-
dents that can be visualized as having occurred prior to the age of 8 or 9 
years (Mosak, 1958). This is explored in much greater detail in Chapter 
9, but for present purposes, suffice it to say that Adlerians have long con-
sidered these as being indicative of the core issues of the person's style. 
Children develop and learn rules about how to move towards goals, 
but they learn them in nonverbal, sensorimotor, action-oriented ways. 
Private logic (Adler, 1956; Ansbacher, 1965; Dreikurs, 1973), reconcep-
tualized from a neurodevelopmental perspective, may be just that: early 
learning prior to frontal-lobe, left-hemisphere processing. As Skolnick 
(1986) cites, research has verified a point that Adler, Freud, and Piaget 
noted through their observational, case-study methodology, that the 
personalities of children appear to be "fixed" around the age of 5 to 7 
years. That is approximately when children begin to behave "as if" their 
early learning were "true" and set in stone ("concrete operations"). They 
set out to confirm their expectations and apply them in ever increasingly 
wider social fields. Although these are seemingly "set in stone," slight 
modifications continue to occur throughout the life span; however, the 
core convictions remain constant unless the person has a therapeutic ex-
perience. A therapeutic experience is not necessarily limited to formal 
psychotherapy. Life itself may be therapeutic. A prototypic example is 
the transformation of Saul of Tarsus to st. Paul on the road to Damascus. 
The last biological factor we consider, albeit briefly, is the role of 
"needs" or "drives." In their extensive literature review, Forgus and 
Shulman (1979) have postulated that there are four primary needs that 
appear to be "hard wired" into infants at birth, and these are nourish-
ment and contact, protection and safety, mastery, and sensory variation 

The Development of the Life Style 
37 
(d. Maslow's [1970]"hierarchy of needs"). These four needs are biologi-
cal. Without sufficient attention given to them, infants either perish or 
fail to thrive. Through the socialization process these four needs become 
goals that become hierarchically arranged into the following four mo-
tives: attachment, security, competence, and cognition. Throughout de-
velopment, these goals become more and more articulated; for instance, 
the attachment motive can become a goal to have unfailing love from 
those around, or the competence motive can become articulated to be 
the best at whatever is attempted (d. Rogers, 1951). The particular 
arrangement of the motives (or goals) varies from person to person; 
some have attachment and security first; others may have cognition and 
competence as primary. How each becomes particularly differentiated is 
a matter of particular (i.e., idiographic) development. mo factors that 
may influence whether or not a motive is given an overt preference are 
the overindulgence of a particular need or the neglect of it (e.g., too 
much or too little contact leading to an overemphasis upon the attach-
ment motive and some of its specific variations). 
Psychosocial Factors 
As Sherman and Dinkmeyer (1987) aptly detail, Adler can be considered 
one of the first family therapists and systems theorists. Unlike Freud, he 
worked directly with children and families and wrote extensively about 
it (Mosak & Maniacci, 1993). A useful distinction can be made. Adler in-
terpreted personality from an individual-system perspective, rather than 
a group-system perspective. In the latter view, individuals are secondary 
to the system to which they belong; the parts cannot be understood 
without the whole, or, by and large, the system determines the dynamics 
of the individual. In the former view, the individual is both a reactor to 
and a creator of the system, and they mutually influence each other; 
the person is not merely a reactor to the system but "helped create" 
the dysfunctional system, for example, in which he or she is currently 
"suffering." 
There are numerous psychosocial factors that influence the life style, 
and Adler (1956) was particularly interested in not only how parents af-
fected children but how children affected parents, children affected each 
other, and the educational system reinforced or altered all of this. A 
thorough, in-depth discussion is beyond the scope of this chapter, but 
some general dynamics can be overviewed. 
The family atmosphere is one factor (Dewey, 1971). The emotional 
"tone" of the home, the family climate (Dewey, 1971; Shulman & 
Mosak, 1988), can have a very large effect upon the developing mood of 

38 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
individuals. In stormy, conflictual atmospheres, children may develop 
anxious, guarded styles. Perhaps nowhere is the idiographic, phenome-
nological perspective of Individual Psychology more evident than in sit-
uations such as this, for as soon as we write this, it becomes clear that 
just the opposite may happen. In that same atmosphere, children may de-
velop a hostile, aggressive posture and style. We, as practicing psycho-
therapists, never cease to be amazed by our observations of families. In 
the same family. one child perceives the atmosphere as tense and emo-
tionally abusive, but another perceives the "same" atmosphere as "typi-
cal" or "the way Italians are" or "no big deaL" and just "the way things 
are" and he or she does not seem to be "stressed out" at all. As noted in 
the story of the two brothers learning to swear, what message is sent 
may be very different than the message that is perceived. The family at-
mosphere can be set by any member of the family and can change. Sib-
lings, aunts, uncles, grandparents, and the like can all influence the 
prevailing tone of the family. Even a teacher can affect the tone, for ex-
ample by sending home notes. The parental relationship, in particular, 
can have a profound effect. How the parents get along with each other 
can have powerful influence upon the mood of the household and pro-
vide a model for man-woman relations. For example, if they are per-
ceived as loving and supportive of each other. a calm atmosphere may 
prevail, and the children's mood may be calmer and more secure. As 
mentioned previously, Adlerian psychology advocates a soft determin-
ism; one can only speak of probabilities, not certainties. If it is a male-
dominated atmosphere, the children may develop what Adler (1956) 
referred to as masculine protests, in which they overvalue masculinity 
and their ability to "live up to" the masculine standard (and this would 
apply to both the male and female children) (Adler, 1978; Bieliauskas, 
1974; Mosak & Schneider, 1977). If it is a female-dominated atmo-
sphere, children of either gender may develop feminine protests in 
which they overvalue femininity (Ronge, 1956). 
How values are acquired and "passed on" (Scheibe, 1970), therefore, 
becomes yet another psychosocial factor we note. Generally speaking, 
there are four types of values children are exposed to: family, paternaL 
maternaL and societal. Although once again aunts, uncles, and grand-
parents, peers, and so forth can (and frequently do) have roles in impart-
ing values to children (not to mention music and television, which are 
touched upon subsequently). in order to keep this chapter manageable, 
only these four are touched upon presently. Something that is perceived 
as an issue to the father typically becomes a paternal value; similarly, if it 
is perceived as important to the mother, it becomes a maternal value. If it 
is an issue for both parents, either positively or negatively (i.e., by its 

The Development of the Life Style 
39 
presence or overly strong denial), it becomes a family value. An example 
clarifies. 
Father loves to drink. He feels that children should be inculcated to 
the world of alcohol early. Thus far, it is a paternal value. Mother strongly 
opposes it, a maternal value, so much so that she frequently argues with 
Father about it. Drinking, therefore, for this family, may be perceived as 
a family value. If Mother were truly indifferent to it, it would remain a 
paternal value only. Although values that are held by one of the parents 
are important, they typically do not have the same impact upon children 
that family values do. With family values, the children are typically 
"forced" into taking a stand, one way or the other. In this case, to be for 
drinking implies an alliance with Father; to be indifferent, or neutral, 
may be seen as siding with either parent or neither; to be against it im-
plies siding with Mother. Family values typically entail taking some sort 
of stance, and it is difficult to do otherwise. 
Such dynamics of value acquisition can lead to individuals who incor-
porate some issues "whole" and others, even in the same family, who 
confuse being opposite with being different; hence, they assume that by 
being opposed to the family values, they are being their "own people." 
They may, in fact, simply be oppositional. We refer to these as "reverse 
puppets"; that is, when the right string is pulled, the left arm goes up. 
Another psychosocial factor that is relevant in development relates to 
parenting styles. Adler (1956, 1964g) delineated two that are particU-
larly troublesome, pampering and neglect. He felt that doing too much 
for children, or not enough, can lead to detrimental effects. However, as 
has been mentioned repeatedly, children are not passive recipients of 
data, and Adler noted that pampering may be seen objectively as charac-
teristic of the parents and subjectively as the attitude of children. Adler 
noted that, in general, pampering was "worse" than neglect. How so? 
Not all neglected children feel neglected. They may, like so many chil-
dren from the Depression era, not notice they are lacking (even affec-
tion). Pampered children, that is, children who have things done for 
them that they can do for themselves, can, and often do, feel neglected. 
They are accustomed to getting, and as soon as they are denied, they feel 
(I.e., perceive themselves as) neglected. 
There are many more parenting styles than Adler noted, such as 
overprotection, overindulgence, overdomination, inconsistency in one 
parent, inconsistencies between the parents, overambition, excessive 
standards of morality, denigration, and punishment. Again, the percep-
tion of the parental style by the child is more crucial than the objective 
style. Dreikurs (1958), Dreikurs & Soltz (1964), and many other Adleri-
ans (Corsini & Painter, 1975; Dinkmeyer & McKay, 1982; Grunwald & 

40 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
McAbee, 1985) have written extensively on parent education and pro-
vided manuals for working with parents to alter their styles in order to 
influence children. This topic is presented in greater detail in Chapter 10. 
In generaL parenting styles that are perceived as overcontrolling might 
produce children who are either very conforming or rebellious. Parent-
ing styles that are interpreted as permissive could produce children who 
are irresponsible and do not learn from consequences. Once again, the 
particulars of the situation and the total picture needs to be taken into 
account before such generalizations can be taken too literally. 
The sibling constellation is yet another factor in development. Adler 
(l920/l983d) was one of the first to note how children affect children. 
He emphasized that how siblings relate to each other frequently influ-
enced their development. For example, an only girl growing up with 
several brothers (MandelL 1942) might develop quite differently than 
one girl among other girls. An older sibling who is particularly dominant 
and aggressive will probably have a profound effect upon his or her sib-
lings. Mosak (1972) and Shulman and Mosak (1988) discuss the "teeter-
totter" effect. Where one sibling succeeds, his or her nearest competitor 
fails or gets out of the race. In the family constellation, children fre-
quently map out territories to call their own. They develop characteristic 
ways of behaving that, subsequently in development, can become typi-
cal of how they manifest their social roles. For example, if Mary is partic-
ularly smart and uses it (i.e., she decides to find her place in life through 
her intelligence), her nearest sibling, Sharon, has an interesting choice 
ahead of her: Should she attempt to be "as smart" as Mary? Because they 
probably have similar biological equipment, that may be possible. Or 
should she try and be smarter? After all, if she is "just" as smart as her 
big sister, she may not feel as noticed. To be smarter is more difficult, 
however, especially because Mary had a "head start" by being older. 
Sharon may decide to "be dumber" in order to "be smarter"; in other 
words, if she acts "as if" she were not as smart, she may get more atten-
tion. The teeter-totter effect occurs if siblings appear to act opposite each 
other on particular traits: Where one goes "up," the other goes "down." 
In this case, Sharon may avoid anything that smacks of being "intellec-
tuaL" or she may become intellectual in an area other than Mary's in 
order to stake out her claim as being different than Mary. She will also 
"watch" for where Mary fails, or does not try, and she may become a 
master in that area, such as sports. Similarly, Mary will "watch" Sharon, 
and she will (probably) adjust her behavior accordingly, constantly re-
minding her "little sister" how much smarter she (Mary) is. Many other 
variations are common (Hapworth, Hapworth, & Heilman, 1993; Shul-
man & Mosak, 1988). 

The Development of the Life Style 
41 
Finally, the last psychosocial factor we examine is the effect of the cul-
ture, neighborhood, and school upon development. There are many eth-
nic issues that have lasting effects upon personality formation (Arciniega 
& Newlon, 1983; Manaster, 1973). For example, the family atmospheres, 
parenting styles, and values of traditional Japanese families are different 
than those of Italian ones. Various religious practices, too, have effects. 
The household of an Orthodox Jewish family is probably going to be 
much different from that of an Irish Catholic one. Socioeconomic fac-
tors, the type of neighborhood in which children perceive themselves as 
growing up and the like, effect personality development as well (Davis 
& Havighurst, 1947). The type of school in general, and teachers in par-
ticular, is important, also. Adler (1956) wrote about school reform and 
Spiel (1956) established an experimental school that was based upon 
some of the principles that we discuss in Chapter 10. The music and tele-
vision to which children are exposed can modify values and establish 
what the peer groups determine to be "required" in order to "fit in." All 
of these issues play their parts in providing stimuli that children can 
evaluate and to which they can respond. 
The Concept of Life Style Reexamined 
with Reference to Development 
As Wolfe (1932) aptly notes, the human child is perhaps the only infant 
that experiences his or her own inferiority. The psychomotor skills, 
Wolfe notes, generally progress differently than conceptual ones, and 
hence children can be caught in an interesting predicament: Every human 
being experiences his incompleteness as a child.4 He cannot talk and he cannot 
walk and he cannot satisfy his hunger, but he can see that his parents 
and other adults are capable of all these mysterious actions. Thus there 
arises a sense of incompleteness or inadequacy. The physiological basis of 
this law is the fact that the human brains and apperceptive powers of 
children develop out of all proportion to their motor abilities to satisfy 
their wants. Also, the dependence of the human infant is relatively 
greater than the dependence of the young of any other species (Wolfe, 
1932, p. 29). 
A young child attempts to move forward, to do things for him- or her-
self, and becomes frustrated. Because of physiological and neurodevel-
opmental factors (including organ inferiorities), certain parenting styles, 
family atmospheres, his or her place in the family constellation, family 
values, and cultural, religious, socioeconomic, and early peer-group is-
sues, that child develops specific ways of perceiving and moving through 

42 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
life. A finaL fictional goal that organizes behavior is selected uncon-
sciously, and skills that reinforce movement toward that goal are empha-
sized, and those that subjectively appear to be irrelevant are discarded. 
The child's life style is a mixture of all these factors, plus that child's per-
ception of those factors, al1d the choices that the child makes in reference 
to those factors. 
D An Example of a Life Style 
What follows is a detailed analysis of a case. The names and relevant 
identifying factors have, of course, been altered to protect the person. 
We present a case because, though this chapter has had (at least what 
appears to us as) an abundance of information, we recognize its general-
ities. That is an issue that Adler often addressed. Individual Psychology 
places such emphasis upon holism, idiographic dynamics, phenomenol-
ogy, and the social field that it is difficult to discuss issues such as devel-
opmental factors in any great detail without having specific reference 
points. We examine each of the factors discussed in this chapter in turn. 
Liz was born to her parents when they were in their mid-20s. Mother 
had a normal pregnancy and Liz was born on time and healthy. Her se-
vere migraine headaches were apparently familial because her mother, 
sisters, aunts, and grandparents had them. If under enough stress, either 
biologically, such as through sleeping too much or not enough or eating 
certain foods (e.g., those having tyramine, such as eggplant or Chianti 
wine), or psychologically, such as if she pushed herself too hard in 
schooL she would experience headaches. She admitted that she could 
"use" these headaches, or even bring them on, in order to get attention, 
excuse herself from certain tasks, or seek revenge on her sisters if it 
suited her (e.g., she would complain they were making too much noise 
and have them "quieted" down by Mother or Father). This is an example 
of how one person can set the family atmosphere. 
Her perception of her family was that it was "uncomfortable" and, at 
times, abusive. The children could be beaten quite violently, usually by 
Mother for having lost a button on their clothes, particularly because 
Mother sewed most of their clothes for them. Liz recalled, rather vividly, 
being beaten for having her feet grow too fast and her parents having to 
spend money on new shoes at a time when money was scarce. 
Mother generally was described as given to violent mood swings (she 
was probably cyclothymic), periods of intense alcohol abuse, and periods 
of calm, almost loving tenderness. Father was a perfectionist who spent 
most of his time out of the house, working two jobs. When home, he 

The Development of the Life Style 
43 
might be totally disengaged from the family, or he might lord over them 
and have them pick up lint off the floor with their hands. Mother would 
observe but not intervene. 
Liz, the oldest child, had a sister 2 years younger, a brother 3 years 
younger, another brother 7 years younger, and a sister 12 years younger. 
She perceived herself as the oldest of three in what Adlerians call a 3-2 
subgrouping (Liz, Shari, and George being in one subgroup, and John 
and Carol in another). All of the children were described as strong-willed 
and stubborn, to one extent or another-a family value. Her nearest 
competitor, Shari, was athletic and into cheerleading. Shari was described 
as being emotional and more "female-acting." True to teeter-totter form, 
Liz described herself as tomboyish, stoic, and an exceptional student. 
Liz reported that she worked hard to try to fit into the lower class neigh-
borhood of her childhood, but it did not work. She was too oddly dressed, 
even for her neighborhood, and too "smart." Perhaps because of her feel-
ings of alienation and isolation, she found herself attracted to animals, and 
because she could not afford pets, she collected whatever she could catch. 
Frogs, mice, snakes, and the like became her pets, and her friends. 
Because of the unpredictability of Mother, the extended family rarely, 
if ever, came to visit. The parents' social life was virtually nonexistent. 
What might Liz, as a child, make of this? How could this background 
(or more accurately put, this perceived background) influence her cogni-
tive map? 
Liz developed a final, fictional goal of staying in control, like Father, 
and achieving and being as successful as she could be. She believed that 
to lose control was to appear like Mother. Still, she found it useful to as-
sert herself and to be determined, something she learned from being the 
oldest of her siblings, but to do so quietly. Imitating Father, she uncon-
sciously decided to become perfectionistic and emotionally detached. 
She worked hard to be different than Mother, so much so that she began 
to repudiate what she perceived to be "feminine" traits. With regards to 
her needs, two became crucial to her: safety and mastery. These eventu-
ally led to her striving to become (not as she perceived it) overly con-
trolled (a variation of the competence motive) and overly perfectionistic 
and guarded (variations of the security and cognitive motives). She 
learned to find her place in her social field through being smart, con-
trolled, and always on guard. 
An early memory she retains taps into many of these themes. She re-
ports this from when she was 3 years old: 
I was wearing a dress Mother had made. I had to go to the bathroom and 
when I did, I had to pull it down. I lost a button. Mother saw the button 
was missing and spanked me, really badly. She then realized it would have 

44 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
fallen off anyway, and she started to cry, becoming very emotional. She re-
alized she had overreacted, 
The feeling with the recollection was one of fear and pain initially, and 
then calmness and soothing. The part that stands out as most vivid for 
her is her mother crying and apologizing. What lessons could this visuaL 
nonverbaL imagistic learning be teaching to her? Why would she hold 
onto it into adulthood? 
Many of the aforementioned issues are evident. It was important to 
not lose control. In a metaphorical sense it is important "to have all your 
buttons." She had to watch what she did and not let little things slip by 
her unnoticed. Perhaps the only time she can conceive of being cared for 
is if she is hurting. Women can be hurtful, and at times it might be better 
to not be one of them, or at least to act like one of them (i.e., from her 
vantage point, "emotional"). 
Presently, she was in an unhappy marriage. She, like her mother, had 
five children and a husband who works too much. She kept the children 
home with her and provided them with home schooling. After all, too 
many bad things can happen with the other school children. She suf-
fered numerous psychosomatic complaints, with migraines being the 
major one, particularly around the time of her period. The issue of hor-
monal imbalance is a biological trigger; however, her feeling too "femi-
nine" at those times is a psychosocial issue that was difficult for her to 
handle, possibly making her "incapacity" at those times harder to bear. 
She still acted on the basis of her childhood script. 
D Summary 
This chapter examines how the life style is developed. The biological and 
psychosocial factors are touched upon, and a case is presented that artic-
ulates many of the factors discussed. 
People do not develop in a vacuum. They respond to cues from both 
their internal and external environments, and they actively set out to in-
fluence and arrange life to meet their expectations. They form rules 
about themselves, other people, and life that they use to guide them 
through their worlds, but these rules are typically nonverbal and not 
easily accessible to linguistic processing. They act" as if" these rules were 
true, and for all practical purposes, for them, they are. 
We now examine the nature of those rules, in particular, the "rule of 
rules" (Shulman, 1973b), the life style. Having detailed how it develops, 
we can begin to understand what it is in its developed, mature form. It is 
to that task that we turn next. 

The Development of the Life Style 
45 
D Points to Consider 
Given the assumption of holism, Adlerians emphasize the biologicaL 
psychologicaL and social systems dynamics of personality develop-
ment. All factors playa part in development. 
Though originally stating that inferiority feelings preceded striving, 
Adler later inverted this position. The move solidified his position as a 
growth -oriented theorist. 
The three key factors Adler noted that were crucial to personality 
development were organ inferiority, pampering, and neglect. Even 
these factors, however, were under the influence of the perception of 
the child and were more than mere "objective facts" the child experi-
enced. 
D Questions 
1. How does choice playa part in the "objective facts" of individual de-
velopment? 
2. Early Adlerians such as Wolfe noted that human infants experience 
their own sense of inferiority. If this is true, how might this influence 
personality development? 
3. What might be the effect of being an only boy growing up amongst 
sisters? What about being an only girl growing up with brothers? 
4. What is meant by the "teeter-totter effect?" 
5. Can you think of examples of famous people who overcompensated 
for their childhood inferiorities? 
6. What degree of activity did Adler typically associate with healthy in-
dividuals? 
D Notes 
lAs stated, this is a limited view, and although this view has been transmitted from genera-
tion to generation, Adler and subsequent Adlerians describe other forms of "overburden-
ing situations" that are described in this chapter. 
2By this definition, a handicap is not necessarily an organ inferiority, nor does every organ 
inferiority manifest itself in a handicap. 
lAdlerians use unconscious as an adjective rather than a noun, a reified concept. That is, we 
speak of unconscious processes, not "the unconscious" as if it were a place. 
4Janet (1924) speaks of the sentiment d'illcompiitude, and Zeigarnik (1927), in her seminal 
study of completed and uncompleted tasks that coined the term "Zeigarnik effect," was also 
described in Gestalt terms as a striving for closure. 

The Style of Life 
This . . . allows us to understand better what an existential psychoanalysis 
must be if it is entitled to exist. It is a method destined to bring to light . .. 
the subjective choice by which each living person makes himself a per-
son . ... The behavior studied by this psychoanalysis will include not only 
dreams, failures, obsessions, and neuroses, but also and especially the 
thoughts of waking life, successfully adjusted acts, style, etc. This psycho-
analysis has not yet found its Freud . . .. But it matters little to us whether it 
now exists; the important thing is that it is possible. 
Jean-Paul Sartre (1943/1956) 
. . . How could Sartre be unaware that this method already existed and had 
Alfred Adler for its author? 
Henri F. Ellenberger (1970) 
Perhaps the crowning achievement of Adler's thinking as a clinician was 
his concept of the style of life. Adler (1956), Ansbacher (1967), Dreikurs 
(1967), Mosak (1977b), Shulman (1973a, b), Powers and Griffith (1987), 
and Shulman and Mosak (1988) have written extensively on the topic of 
life style, and this chapter is an attempt to present an overview of that 
concept. 
46 

The Style of Life 
47 
D life Style: What Does It Do? 
The life style can be conceived of as the "rule of rules" (Shulman, 1973a, 
b). It is the subjective, unarticulated set of guidelines individuals develop 
and use to move them through life and toward their goals. It develops, as 
we examined in Chapter 3, through the interactions children have with 
their significant others, peers, and social world; through their experience 
of culture and community; through their biological growth and dysfunc-
tion; and, perhaps most significantly, through their perceptions and 
choices. 
It is both conscious and nonconscious, in that it exists on what current 
theorists call a tacit-implicit level as well as an explicit. verbal level 
(Guidano & Liotti. 1984; Mahoney, 1991). As Adler (1933/1964f) noted, 
"Man knows much more than he understands"; by that he meant that 
people frequently have an awareness of basic processes and issues that is 
not readily accessible to conscious, consensual thought (Sullivan, 1953). 
In fact. for the life style to function most effectively, Dreikurs (1933/ 
1950a, 1967) believed that nonconsciousness was actually beneficial. 
This topic requires some greater exploration. 
If we were conscious of all of our actions and intentions, we would 
have a difficult time functioning, not just effectively, but at all. It is 
analogous to learning to drive a car-during the initial period of learn-
ing (skill acquisition), we tend to be all too aware of what we are doing. 
The overemphasis upon conscious rehearsal and implementation hin-
ders "smooth" performance. As a rule of thumb, we tend to become bet-
ter at doing what we are doing the less we are conscious of it. We have 
all had the experience of driving for a period of time and suddenly real-
izing we have not been "conscious" of what we were doing or what we 
were about to do. The life style operates, in effect, upon the economy 
principle; it allows us to conserve energy and focus our attention to 
other, more important matters. Various skills, attitudes, convictions, 
and the like become "habits" and function almost in a reflex-like man-
ner. We do not need to process every bit of data about driving a car each 
time we sit behind a wheel and drive home at night. That would consti-
tute a waste of time and energy and would be a major impediment to 
future learning. 
In essence, the life style is the set of convictions, the attitudinal set 
(Mosak, 1954), we create in order to help us find our place in the world. 
Although these convictions may not be objectively true, "All opinions 
are correct from the point of view of the observer" (Dreikurs, 1972, p. 
41). As we explore in the chapter on development. Adlerians believe 
children (and people in general) are attempting to find their place. This 

48 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
initial project occurs within the family and early social network. The 
early social network, in particular the family, helps teach us what life is 
about, how we should fit in, what we are all about, ideas of masculinity 
and femininity, and ethics and values. These concepts are transmitted to 
us, and we perceive them according to our biases (our biased appercep-
tions) and our particular vantage point. Their adoption or rejection gives 
us a feeling of place. As we biologically mature and psychosocially ex-
pand our learning and experiences, we begin to believe that our concep-
tions about ourselves, life, and others are not our conceptions, but 
everyone's convictions ("Doesn't everyone?"). What we create as truths 
for ourselves and our early social world we assume are truths for people 
in generaL for our friends, family, and the world at large. We grow up, 
grow old, and move through life as if we know the answers when in real-
ity, psychologically speaking, we know only our reality. 
If our training (Adler, 1924a; Freund, 1928) and self-training (Seif & 
Zilahi, 1930) have been broad enough and consensual enough and ex-
posed us to enough, our "reality" closely matches others' reality. The 
views I hold have some semblance of validity with regards to the views 
you hold. In Adlerian terms, my private logic] has its own rules and 
assumptions that are mine and mine alone; but overalL I have common 
sense as well-my thinking blends my perceptions and conceptions 
into a weave, a tapestry, which has room enough for your conceptions 
and perceptions. We share some commonalities by virtue of being 
human, some by virtue of being of the same time, place, and culture, 
and some by virtue of chance. This forms the basis of our common lan-
guage, culture, and world view. We are separate yet tied to each other, 
with our own personal worlds that overlap to create common, shared 
worlds. 
The greater the overlap, the greater the chances of "successful" adap-
tation. As we chronicle in Chapter 8, Adlerians hold that some maps do 
not overlap very much with others. The private logic of some people, for 
example, psychotics and sociopaths, is very private, so private that they 
have a hard time sharing their reality with us. They cling to their private 
logic so tightly, so desperately, that they often choose it over reality, and 
over common sense. We, as fellow humans, know them, for they are not 
so removed that they are "alien" to us, but they seem to speak different 
languages at times (Mosak & Maniacci, 1989), and to hold views we find 
hard to grasp. Sometimes, they believe that to hurt themselves is nat-
ural; to believe they are the devil is a matter of fact; to see themselves as 
horrible, worthless, and totally unlovable is the nature of their reality. To 
a lesser, removed extent, some people believe that they belong only to 
the extent that they satisfy others, or that they are praised and admired 

The Style of Life 
49 
by others, or that they win unconditional approval or love. For some 
others, their private logic tells them that to love somebody is to hurt 
them or to be hurt by the ones you love. As Oscar Wilde (1898/1992) 
wrote, "Yet each man kills the thing he loves." These and other styles are 
examined in Chapter 8; these are the styles that sometimes lead people 
to difficulty. 
All of us have private logic that is not shared with others. That is part 
of the human condition. As Thoreau (1854/1991) observed, "If a man 
does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a 
different drummer." All of us have common sense, the ability to think in 
common with others and share a consensual view of life and its de-
mands. To understand these maps, these blueprints for existence, we 
need to explore the details of their instructions. The details of the in-
structions are called convictions. 
D life Style Convictions 
The convictions of the life style are similar to what Kelly (1955) referred 
to as the constructs of the personality. They can be broken down into 
four basic components: self-concept, self-ideal, Weltbild (a German term 
for "picture of the world"), and ethical convictions. In actuality, they 
are intimately intertwined with each other and cannot be as cleanly and 
artificially segmented as theoreticians show them to be. For heuristic 
and pragmatic purposes, however, such a division clarifies the task be-
fore us. 
The style of life is composed of these four clusters of beliefs. Each 
major section has numerous subsections and permutations. In some in-
dividuals, one set is emphasized more than others; in others all are 
equally weighted. In some persons, the degree of congruence between 
the various convictions is great; in others, the amount of incongruity is 
huge. As becomes evident here, most are learned roughly at the same 
time of development, but some can be, and frequently are, learned at 
different times, thus creating the possibility of incongruity once again. 
For example, Jack's self-concept may fall short of his self-ideal, what 
Rogerians called the selflideal self discrepancy. That is one form of 
incongruity. He may not be what he feels he should be, or he may feel 
that he is something he should not be. A frequent, but not often dis-
cussed, issue may be that he learned his view of himself (self-concept) 
at an earlier age than he learned his ideal of himself (self-ideal). For in-
stance, Jack may have been relatively happy with himself (Le., his self-
concept/self-ideal had a high degree of congruence) until kindergarten; 

50 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
at that time, his self-ideal underwent revision when he "discovered" he 
could not hit a baseball as well as his peers during playtime at lunch. 
Similarly, some children learn that they can live up to what life expects 
of them (for the most part); there is congruence between their self-
concepts and Weltbild convictions. Then, life "kicks them in the teeth," 
and their views of the world undergo radical revision, such as if chil-
dren who are relatively happy and productive experience a traumatic 
event such as a dethronement by the birth of another child, death, or 
severe accident. At that time, their Weltbild convictions may undergo 
revisions. 
A closer examination of the various components of the convictions 
provides more detail. Each is examined in turn. With reference to psy-
chopathology, Adler (1956) stated that every neurotic is partly right, and 
before we examine the implications of the dynamic interplay of convic-
tions, it might be useful to explore the significance of that assertion. 
Children, from their subjective perception, have "accurately" con-
structed what they believe to be necessary to find their places in their 
families of origin. To one degree or another, individuals' life styles are 
"adequate" to the task of finding a place within the family, for after all, 
they did survive. What may have worked for them, in their family, they 
attempt to recreate in "the world," so to speak, and hence they try to en-
courage others to react in ways that validate their expectations. Hence, if 
an adult's goal is to be a caretaker, it is not surprising to find out that, as 
a child, that same person was a caretaker and, to some extent, was re-
warded for it. To put it rather colloquially, if it worked at home, why 
shouldn't it work everywhere else? 
Finally, Adlerian psychology, as is probably becoming increasingly evi-
dent throughout this text, is difficult to categorize in any particular theo-
retical niche. It can be characterized as existential, cognitive, systemic, 
client-centered, and interpersonal in many of its features and, given its 
emphasis upon psychogenetic reconstruction and understanding of past 
influences, as analytic. In comprehending the life style of an individual, 
Adlerian psychology can be seen in its two central foci: its cognitive and 
motivational interaction. Adlerian psychology is cognitive in that it 
clearly focuses upon the cognitive structures that underlie personality; it 
is psychodynamic in that it stresses not just cognitive bases of personal-
ity, but motivational issues. In Adlerian psychology, motivation is not 
caused by libido, but rather the striving for significance. The goals people 
select for themselves (not always consciously) and how they move to-
ward those goals add the psychodynamic component to the cognitive 
perspective. As we are characterizing it, Adlerian psychology is an ana-
lytic-behavioral-cognitive psychology, as contrasted with a more traditional 
cognitive-behavioral psychology. Perhaps this curious blend is nowhere 

The Style of Life 
51 
more apparent than in how we understand and conceptualize the life 
style of a person. 
D Self-concept 
The self-concept contains all of the convictions about the "I." It is how a 
person defines him- or herself. "I am ... " or "I am not ... ," or "I do ... " 
or "I do not ... " are the sentence stems that are typically found. Body 
images, too, are found in this conviction. "I am small" and "I am fat," are 
some of the self-concepts that people have. Other convictions include 
self-esteem statements such as "I like myself," ''I'm a good person," and 
"I never feel deserving." 
The self-concept is the anchor upon which we make our comparisons, 
appraisals, and assessments (Rogers, 1951; Snygg & Combs, 1959). Mod-
ern psychoanalysts such as Basch (1988) and Stern (1985) have fol-
lowed the direction (though without apparently acknowledging it) of 
Adler (19121l983b), who postulated the basis of personality as being the 
self. Horney (1945), Sullivan (1953), and Kohut (1971,1977) also were 
early pioneers in emphasizing the concept of self as central in personal-
ity, and like Adler before them they built their systems upon interper-
sonaL "cultural" perspectives. Adler (1956) noted that the first task of 
the mother was to bond with the child; their relationship should be a co-
operative one, in which the child fills needs for the mother as well as the 
mother caring for the child. The next task is for the mother to "spread" 
this interest to the father, and they, in turn, to the rest of the family and 
the world. What Basch and Stern refer to as "affective attunement" 
Adler called empathy. As Shulman (personal communication, April 23, 
1993) has aptly pointed out, Adler stressed not only the need for affec-
tive attunement (matching and validating the child's emotions), but the 
need for teaching social responsibility and appropriate limits as well. 
From the Adlerian viewpoint, empathy encourages the child's self-con-
cept to develop in a healthy,2 prosocial manner, but the awareness of 
consequences and responsibility encourages a resilient and cooperative 
self-concept that takes into account others' needs and perspectives. 
The self-concept contains the convictions about the "I." That has been 
stated and is self-evident; the self, however, is part of a social matrix. As 
discussed in the basic assumptions, my view of myself is my business, 
but it can (and frequently does) have larger social implications. "I am 
lazy" is a static, psychology-of-possession statement. Rephrased into a 
psychology-of-use perspective, its social dynamics become clearer: "I am 
good at putting others into my service or getting others to push me, to be 
involved with me," or "I use laziness in order to find my place in this 

52 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
world." With this clarification, Adlerians' emphasis upon not only em-
pathy but responsibility in child development and rearing becomes un-
derstandable. Yes, it is important. perhaps crucial to mirror children's 
feelings in order to validate their emerging sense of self (Kohut, 1971). 
but it is just as important to develop an awareness of that sense of self in 
relation to others and their vantage points. 
o Self-ideal 
Adler (1912/1983b) coined the phrase "self-ideal." but the English trans-
lation in his first. crucial Adlerian book is poor (Adler, 1978, pp. 
416-417). "Self-ideal" is translated as "ego-ideaL" and "character" is 
translated as "constitution," to name but two instances. Rogers (1951) 
and his group renamed the "self/ideal" as the "ideal self" and explored 
this issue, particularly the self/ideal self discrepancy in their research. 
Both Adler and Rogers were interested in how people viewed them-
selves, and in particular how they measured up to their own standards. 
The sentence stems that characterize the self-ideal typically are as fol-
lows: "In order to have a place, I should (or should not) ... " or "in order 
to belong/to be significant! to have people have regard for or take notice 
of me, I should (or should not) ... " or "in order for me to have regard 
for myself, I should (or should not) ... " The long-range goals of the per-
sonality usually reside in the self-ideal. They have an imperative quality 
to them, and people generally develop a sense of what Ellis (1973) terms 
"catastrophic expectations" should their time table not be kept to. For 
example, a 6-year-old girl may develop the self-ideal that she should be 
a married woman with children. If she is not married by age 9, it is 
hardly catastrophic; if she feels, perhaps by watching her mother and 
nonconsciously making note of the age at which Mother married (Pow-
ers & Griffith, 1987), that she should be married by age 21. then she may 
begin to feel pressured or pressure herself by her late teens if she has not 
yet met "Mr. Right." The pressure may become subjectively catastrophic 
if she passes that age without being married. 
Within the self-ideal reside the issues that are central to adaptation. 
The hopes, dreams, and creations to which humanity has aspired find 
their sources in this conviction. Unlike the self-concept, which is 
squarely rooted in the here and now of experience, along with some key 
elements of the past (our subjectively remembered past, that is), the self-
ideal is teleological in direction. It points to the future and "pulls" us to-
ward what could be, what might be, and, often with discouraging 
consequences, what should be (d. Horney's [1950] "tyranny of the 
shoulds"). Humanity's brightest ideas and most painful failures rest upon 

The Style of Life 
53 
this concept. Our ability to change what we are, to build better worlds, 
and to envision grander possibilities finds its source in the self-ideal; by 
the same token, our ability to make our lives living hells also rests here, 
for it is through the self-ideal that we can mercilessly discourage and 
cruelly punish ourselves for not attaining what we dream about. Adler 
(1956) commented that the greatest tragedy of human nature might be 
that we make such great decisions about ourselves and our world when 
we are so small and know so little, but he added that it is just this same 
predicament that is humanity's greatest strength. The overreaching 
ideals, the high-flown goals, the unrealistic aspirations are part and par-
cel of being human, but so is the ability to dream and envision what can 
be, and hence the possibility to actualize those dreams. 3 
Whereas the self-concept forms out of empathy and responsibility, the 
self-ideal forms out of a sense of inferiority. We become aware of what 
we are not. and the object of that "not" becomes what we would ideally 
desire. That desire fosters the formation of the self-as-it-would-like-to-
be, and it is a short step from that position to what-it-should-be. If chil-
dren are aware of what they cannot be, have, or do, they strive to 
become, attain, or accomplish. The self-ideal thus emerges. 
c=J 
~~/tl)ilcl 
The Weltbild contains all the convictions about the "not-self." In terms of 
sheer number, it is possibly the most complex and detailed cluster of 
convictions. Once again, whereas the classical psychoanalysts paid no at-
tention to the "ego" and only later evolved an awareness of self or self-
objects, Adler considered that individuals also develop opinions about 
the world, others, and life. This concept has been somewhat touched 
upon by the object relation theorists (e.g., Kernberg, 1975), but the ob-
ject to which "object" refers is human. Adlerians consider there to be 
much more to the personality, or life style, than people's views of them-
selves and others; they also develop views about life, the world, nature, 
institutions, and so forth. Some of the sentence stems frequently found 
in the Weltbild include: 
"Life is ... " 
"The meaning of life is ... " (including issues of spirituality) 
"People are ... " 
"Men/women are ... " 
"Classes/types of people are ... " 
"The world is ... " (including ideas of nature, the physical world) 
"School/work/government is ... " (to name but three) 
The Style of Life 
53 
this concept. Our ability to change what we are, to build better worlds, 
and to envision grander possibilities finds its source in the self-ideal; by 
the same token, our ability to make our lives living hells also rests here, 
for it is through the self-ideal that we can mercilessly discourage and 
cruelly punish ourselves for not attaining what we dream about. Adler 
(1956) commented that the greatest tragedy of human nature might be 
that we make such great decisions about ourselves and our world when 
we are so small and know so little, but he added that it is just this same 
predicament that is humanity's greatest strength. The overreaching 
ideals, the high-flown goals, the unrealistic aspirations are part and par-
cel of being human, but so is the ability to dream and envision what can 
be, and hence the possibility to actualize those dreams. 3 
Whereas the self-concept forms out of empathy and responsibility, the 
self-ideal forms out of a sense of inferiority. We become aware of what 
we are not. and the object of that "not" becomes what we would ideally 
desire. That desire fosters the formation of the self-as-it-would-like-to-
be, and it is a short step from that position to what-it-should-be. If chil-
dren are aware of what they cannot be, have, or do, they strive to 
become, attain, or accomplish. The self-ideal thus emerges. 
c=J 
~~/tl)ilcl 
The Weltbild contains all the convictions about the "not-self." In terms of 
sheer number, it is possibly the most complex and detailed cluster of 
convictions. Once again, whereas the classical psychoanalysts paid no at-
tention to the "ego" and only later evolved an awareness of self or self-
objects, Adler considered that individuals also develop opinions about 
the world, others, and life. This concept has been somewhat touched 
upon by the object relation theorists (e.g., Kernberg, 1975), but the ob-
ject to which "object" refers is human. Adlerians consider there to be 
much more to the personality, or life style, than people's views of them-
selves and others; they also develop views about life, the world, nature, 
institutions, and so forth. Some of the sentence stems frequently found 
in the Weltbild include: 
"Life is ... " 
"The meaning of life is ... " (including issues of spirituality) 
"People are ... " 
"Men/women are ... " 
"Classes/types of people are ... " 
"The world is ... " (including ideas of nature, the physical world) 
"School/work/government is ... " (to name but three) 
Weltbild

54 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
The Weltbild is the background upon which the self-concept becomes 
illuminated. Just as it is difficult, if not impossible, to conceive of a per-
son without others, in total isolation, it is perhaps even more ludicrous 
to imagine a self without a world. As the existentialists have discussed, 
the person is a person within a particular context at a particular time-
being is being-in-the-world (Heidegger, 1927/1962). A brief overview of 
some of the dynamics of each clarifies. 
"Life is ... " typically entails judgments about what life is as it is (per-
ceived). "The meaning of life is ... " entails the evaluations about what 
life is about. For example, the statement that "life is a bowl of cherries," 
implies that life is good; its meaning may be, "and it should be eaten as 
often as possible." For some, life is hard, and they believe it should be. Is-
sues of God, spirituality, religion, and such existentiaL cosmic concerns 
add (or detract, in some instances) to life's meaning. 
"People are ... " and "Women/men are ... " determine how we see 
others. Our conceptions of masculinity, femininity, social obligations, and 
the like also reside here. "Real men don't cry" and "ladies must not 
swear" are examples of some of the issues. Similarly, our ideas about var-
ious classes of people, such as "kids should be seen and not heard," "a cop 
is a crook turned inside out," "blondes have more fun," "Yon Cassius has 
a lean and hungry look. Such men are dangerous," or assorted judgments 
about various races, religions, ethnic groups are located in the Weltbild. 
"A country life is for me," and "city life is the only place to live," are 
common variations of the convictions about the natural or physical 
world. Convictions about nature, the environment, and other such top-
ics are part of this conviction. Our beliefs about institutions also are 
found here, though these tend to develop later in the developmental 
cycle than most other convictions. Why? Whereas most of us experience 
ourselves, life, other people, and nature early in development, many of 
us may not begin to form opinions about institutions such as schooL 
work, church, or government until later, typically around the age of 5 or 
6 years. That is when we are usually "launched" into the world of 
school. With that, our education about how institutions operate, where 
certain types of people fit in, and what is appealing or not begin to be 
formed in more concrete, readily apparent terms. 
D Ethical Convictions 
The last set of convictions to which we turn our attention are those that 
provide direction with regards to what is perceived as right and wrong. 
Our ethical convictions are learned not only at home, but through 

The Style of Life 
55 
school, peer interaction, religion, and the like. These, similar to the con-
victions held in the self-ideal, typically have an imperative quality to 
them. They contain "shoulds." "This is right to do ... " and "you should 
not do this ... " are common stems. Also found in this cluster are convic-
tions about the consequences of our behavior, such as "if I do this, I'll get 
punished," or "if I maintain this, I'll be rewarded," or "if you're a good 
little boy or girl, Santa will leave something in your stocking." These are 
personal convictions, but by and large they are shared and do overlap 
with other people's views, for if they did not, we would have what is 
clinically referred to as a sociopathic style, or antisocial personality. For 
these individuals, their ethical convictions do not overlap to any great 
degree with those of others. This may not hold at a cross-cultural, ethnic, 
or religious level. 
At this point it is worth making a distinction to which we return 
subsequently and that is that these convictions (ethical ones, in particu-
lar) do not necessarily translate into actual behavior. We can know full 
well the "right" thing to do but not do it. Many people quote Oscar 
Wilde: "1 can resist everything except temptation." Similarly, some peo-
ple have convictions that are ethical but are not part of the larger (i.e., 
popular) Zeitgeist or society. These people are not sociopathic; they are 
simply different. For some religions, it is an ethical issue to seek or not 
seek medical treatment if ill. They are operating upon ethical principles, 
just not popular ones (or, more precisely phrased, commonly shared 
ones). 
D Congruence Reexamined 
We can now return to an issue touched upon in the opening of this 
chapter. How do these convictions interact and form the style of life? 
How can these four main convictions (self-concept, self-ideal, Weltbild, 
and ethical convictions) account for all of the complexities of personal-
ity? What happens if they are not congruent with each other? 
These convictions exist in infinite variety and combinations. One does 
not have to be a statistician to begin to appreciate the complexity of 
combinations that can be formed. Personality, in all of its splendid diver-
sity, can be readily accounted for via varied combinations of assorted 
convictions (in Chapter 5, we explore just such an issue). 
Adler (1927 11957) frequently stated that no two life styles are identi-
cal. Even identical twins reared in the same family have slightly different 
views of life, each other, and themselves. Hence, he repeatedly empha-
sized the importance of idiographic dynamics. 

56 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Given that no two life styles are the same, certain common patterns 
between convictions can be explored. First, the concept of inferiority 
must be more dosely presented. 
Inferiority 
An inferiority is objective. It is based upon an external criterion and 
therefore is measurable. If the external criterion is height, it is relatively 
simple to determine that one's height is "superior" or "inferior" to an-
other. More concretely, I am not as good a basketball player as Michael 
Jordan, and if that is used as a criterion or measure, I am inferior to him. 
Inferiority is context-dependent and situationally determined. It is not 
necessarily a value judgment. 
Inferiority Feelings 
The inferiority feeling is a subjective evaluation; it is not necessarily a 
feeling in the affective sense. It mayor may not have any relevance to 
reality. I may be shorter than you (an objective inferiority if height is the 
criterion), but I do not have to feel inferior to you because of it. I may 
choose to, but I do not have to. If I feel inferior, the world may not be 
aware of it, for I can compensate, hide the feeling or hide myself (d. "the 
impostor phenomenon" [Clance, 1986; Harvey & Katz, 1986]), or other-
wise distance myself, retreat, or escape. 
Inferiority Complex 
An inferiority complex is a behavioral presentation of a subjective feeling 
of inferiority. I may choose to let the world know that I am inferior, and 
then I am displaying an inferiority complex. For the most part, the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th edition; American Psy-
chiatric Association, 1994) is a catalogue of inferiority complexes, that is, 
behavioral presentations of subjectively perceived inferiorities, that allow 
one to not function (this issue is addressed in considerable detail in Chap-
ter 8). On a more normal side, there are many inferiority complexes that 
are not psychopathological. The most common inferiority complex in the 
United States, we believe, is about mathematics. "I never could do math," 
people say, and therefore they translate a feeling of inferiority into a rea-
son, a justification, for not doing mathematics (at least without a calcula-
tor). This inferiority complex is endemic with psychology students facing 

The Style of Life 
57 
a course in statistics. This issue is the focus of greater analysis in Chapter 
6, but for present purposes, suffice it to say that: 
An inferiority is objective. 
An inferiority feeling is a subjective appraisal of inferiority. Inferior-
ity feelings and inferiorities are not necessarily correlated. One may be 
inferior and not feel inferior. One may also feel inferior although there 
is no actual inferiority, only a perceived one. 
An inferiority complex is a behavioral manifestation of feelings of 
inferiority. 
Why the emphasis upon these issues? Because they yield insight into 
the dynamics of life style convictions that are incongruent. 
If the self-concept falls short of the self-ideal, people experience feelings of 
inferiority. If the self-concept does not measure up to the Weltbild, people ex-
perience feelings of inadequacy. Finally, if the self-concept fails to meet the ex-
pectations in the ethical convictions, people have feelings of guilt. Guilt feelings 
and feelings of inadequacy are no more than variations upon inferiority 
feelings. Adler (1929/l964c) postulated a unitary theory of psychopa-
thology, and on the surface it appears too simple. How can all problems 
people experience about themselves be boiled down to feeling inferior? 
It only appears simple. Once the psychodynamics of the life style are elu-
cidated, the complexities begin to emerge. When Adler stated that all 
neurotics, psychotics, problem children, and criminals were the result of 
inferiority feelings, he was speaking in nomothetic, general terms. Once 
the particular life style is understood, grasped in all its complexity, then 
how this particular person feels inferior becomes visible. Some feel inse-
cure, some inadequate, some weak, some vulnerable, some guilty. Oth-
ers feel poor, hated, abused, and picked on; still others feel unmanly 
("castrated"), unladylike, or inconsequential. All of these can be concep-
tualized as variations of inferiority feelings that are the result of incongru-
ence between convictions in the style of life. 
The life style does not define behavior. It acts as a limiter and expander 
of behavior (Mosak & Shulman, 1967). Given this attitudinal set, these 
convictions, individuals either develop or restrict their repertoires of 
behaviors. If I believe "real men don't show emotions," I seek out and 
develop behaviors that reinforce movement toward that goal. Simulta-
neously, I avoid or constrict the emotional behavior that runs counter to 
that conviction. I may become an "emotional illiterate," so to speak. 
Similarly, knowing the behavior does not automatically lead to an un-
derstanding of the conviction. "Life is dangerous" can cause many, many 
diverse behaviors. I can hide under my bed or ride motorcycles at 120 
miles per hour. I can act as if I am strong, invincible, or timid and in need 
of support. Once we comprehend the convictions, then the behavior is 

58 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
understandable. To work the other way, that is, from the behavior to the 
convictions, can only put us in "the ballpark" (see Chapter 8 and Adler's 
distinction between the general diagnosis and the specific diagnosis, in 
particular) . 
Adler (1927/1957) wrote about useful versus useless behavior. By that 
he meant socially useful (today we refer to it as "prosocial") or socially 
useless behavior. Behavior that is for the common good, in line with 
what he labeled "social interest" (see Chapter 7), he considered useful. 
That which ran counter to social interest he deemed useless. For Adler, 
there was no "normal" life style. Every life style was adequate, until life 
presented it with a task for which it was not prepared; it was at those 
times that its "weak points" emerged. Under stress, any structure's de-
sign flaws begin to emerge, and Adler felt that the human personality 
was no different. We prefer to speak of behavior not in terms of useful or 
useless, a two-dimensional concept, but rather as constructive, noncon-
structive, or destructive. 
Behavior that moves people toward their goals in cooperative, socially 
beneficial ways we call constructive. There are behaviors that move peo-
ple toward goals in nonconstructive ways, that is, ways that do not di-
rectly or necessarily benefit others, but do not harm the person or others 
either. And there are ways of moving toward goals that are destructive to 
others. That style of movement is at the expense of others or self. 
D The Core Functions of the life Style 
Why do we develop a life style? Perhaps we will never know the objec-
tive truth, but three guesses can be formulated. 
1. The life style helps us to understand life. We are thinking creatures. 
We communicate and explore and hypothesize. The life style allows 
us to make sense not only of what we are but of what life and other 
people are all about. 
2. It gives us a chance to predict life. Without a life style, we would have 
to learn, and relearn, each time. Life would become a neverending re-
cursive loop; we would be forced to reexperience the same mistakes 
and failures over and over again. By having a map, a plan, we can an-
ticipate, plan for the future, and adjust, that is, decide accordingly. 
3. It provides us with the opportunity to control life. Although, in an ex-
istential sense, no one can control life, on a pragmatic level we can 
control it to some degree. I can get to what I want. I can prevent cer-
tain things from happening to me. We can order situations to get our 
way. 

The Style of Life 
59 
D The Concept of Equipotentiality of Growth 
Adlerian psychology is optimistic. As we discussed in the chapter on the 
basic assumptions, Adler (193711964e) felt that human nature was neu-
tral, that it had the potential for "good or bad," and that made redemp-
tion, salvation, happiness, or whatever one chooses to call it possible. 
Equipotentiality (Bertallanfy, 1968) is the term biologists use to describe 
the ever-possible potential for growth. Although life styles have a ten-
dency to remain the same, under certain circumstances they can change. 
Therapeutic experiences do not have to occur solely in psychotherapy. 
Unlike Freud, Adlerians are not convinced of the effects of age upon a 
person's ability to change, a position analysts such as Kohut (1977) still 
held to even recently. Even old dogs can learn new tricks, and much the 
same young children, psychotics, addicts, sociopaths, and the like. Adler 
worked with all of them (Adler, 1956; Orgler, 193911963). People can 
modify how they think, and they can change the way they move toward 
their goals. Everybody can be better than he or she is currently. Such a 
statement does not mean that all people can be perfect, but they can be 
better than they are. 
This brings us to the final point of this chapter. Cognitive dissonance is 
what occurs if people's conceptions do not meet reality (Festinger, 
1957). How might this apply to life style? 
Let us take an example or two. If I believe that there are no purple ele-
phants, and I see one, one of two things must occur. Either my belief 
must change, or reality must. Either my conviction about elephants un-
dergoes a modification ("Okay, there are purple elephants!") or I must 
deny reality ("No, I didn't see that!") or expose reality as false (such as 
by discovering the elephant has been painted for a circus performance). 
On a somewhat more realistic level, Jack believes that he is unlovable. 
Joan falls in love with him. Either his conviction about himself (his self-
concept) must change, or he must alter reality (he provokes Joan into 
not loving him; he denies or ignores her feelings-"She's only saying 
that because she feels sorry for me"). If he accepts that she loves him, his 
view of himself must change. Life styles, if challenged, attempt to main-
tain equilibrium. They have a homeostatic function. Sometimes, people 
even attempt to change reality to suit their expectations. A poor map, a 
client recently said to us, is better than no map at all. Adlerian psycho-
therapy, in all its forms, is based upon this principle, and for the neurotic 
it is essential to help the patient develop a better map. 
This apperception-schema must always be traced and unmasked as being 
immature and untenable .... 50 long as he does not understand [his] 
error, so long as he regards his fictional world as the right one ... he will 

60 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
remain neurotic. If he can abandon his dream of world ... he will begin to 
feel himself an equal among equals ... and his reason and "common 
sense" will increase and gain control where heretofore he has been under 
the sway of his "private sense" .... The cure or reorientation is brought 
about by a correction of the faulty picture of the world. (Adler, 1956, p. 
333) 
Adlerians confront patients with the patients' views of the world. As 
their life styles are challenged, they are tempted to resist or even leave 
therapy, but if the relationship is strong and the therapist and patient 
have established a trusting, cooperative atmosphere, then the patient's 
views are exposed, and change is likely. 
D The Core Convictions of a life Style: 
A Brief Analysis 
The following is a brief example of the core convictions of Liz, the client 
who was discussed in Chapter 3, on development. Her convictions are 
the following: 
Self-concept: "I am at the mercy of others," "I can screw up," "I am a 
sensitive, caring person." 
Self-ideal: "In order to have a place, I should not make a mistake," 
"I must not lose control." 
Weltbild: "Life is a scary, punishing place," "Women can be emo-
tional and overreact." 
Ethical convictions: "Honesty is important, even if it hurts," "If I lie, 
I will get punished." 
The "subjective choice" to which Sartre referred in the opening quota-
tion of this chapter is apparent: Liz feels at the mercy of others and has 
chosen not to be in that position again. Her ability to attempt to control 
herself, and hence her world, is the subjective choice around which she 
has built her life. For if she does not control herself and commits mis-
takes, she will be hurt. That is her reality. As a child, it was painful and 
"real." As an adult, it is feared and to be avoided. In many ways, it is as 
much a reality now as it was then. Her feelings of inferiority, inadequacy, 
and pain are real to her, and although "objectively" she no longer lives in 
that same, abusive household, phenomenologically she acts as if she 
does. Life has changed-her convictions have not. In constantly staying 
prepared for what might happen, she is living as if it will happen. In 
order to never again experience the abuse, she must always be prepared 
for it. That is her strength, and her problem: That which she seeks most 

The Style of Life 
61 
to avoid, she lives with, in order to avoid it. The mind is its own place 
and "can make a heaven of hell, or hell of heaven." 
D Summary 
The life style is a creative, artistic production of the individual. It is a cog-
nitive map that leads to the creation of goals in childhood. It is both flex-
ible and adaptable to life and rigid and maladaptive to change. It is 
neither good or bad; it simply is. It leads us through life and brings us 
happiness and joy, pain and confusion. There are times when we would 
change it, but we have nothing that we can easily conceive of with 
which to replace it, or if we can conceive of such a thing, we may feel 
that we cannot actualize it. The life style is us, and we are it. We create it, 
we manage it, we fashion it, and we change it. We just may not see it, 
understand it, or know it needs to be changed. It is as unique as a finger-
print, but infinitely more complex and profound. We live our styles, for 
better or for worse. 
The core convictions of the life style can and do cluster around com-
mon themes. Though the possible variations of convictions are mind 
boggling, the types of themes-although still enormous-are more man-
age able and easier to grasp. It is to these clusters of recognizable themes 
that we turn next. Though no two subjective choices are ever the same, 
some are strikingly similar. 
D Points to Consider 
The style of life is the individual's rule of rules. It is a set of attitudes 
and convictions about how to belong. 
The life style does not necessarily contain instructions about exact 
behavior, for behavior can and does change depending upon the situa-
tion. It does lead to a prediction about probable behaviors. 
For teaching purposes, the life style can be broken into its four com-
ponent parts. The parts are the self-concept, self-ideal, Weltbild, and 
ethical convictions. 
Adler spoke of socially useful and socially useless behaviors. Al-
though he said that there were no "normal" life styles, he did note that 
they could be used in constructive or nonconstructive ways. 

62 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
D Questions 
1. What is the difference between inferiority, inferiority feelings, and in-
feriority complex? 
2. How is the self-ideal formed? 
3. What is the difference between the self-concept and the self-ideal? 
4. What types of convictions make up the Weltbild? 
5. Discuss the process of cognitive dissonance. What is its relationship to 
life style convictions? 
6. What are some of the core functions of the life style? 
7. How is Adlerian psychology both a cognitive and a psychodynamic 
theory? 
D Notes 
lIn the Li'l Abner comic strip he would often exclaim, "As any fool can plainly see. Ah sees it!" 
2Rogers (195 I) also pointed out the central role of empathy in helping the client in psycho-
therapy to change his or her self-concept. 
3Such sentiments have been expressed by Carl Sandburg in his "Washington Monument 
by Night" ("Nothing happens unless first a dream")' Theodore Herzl ("If you will it, it is no 
dream")' and Senator Edward Kennedy, who in his eulogy of his brother quotes Bobby as 
saying, "Some men see things as they are and say why. I dream things that never were and 
say why not." Thoreau (1854/1991) writes, "If one advances confidently in the direction of 
his dreams and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with success 
unexpected in common hours." 

Typology 
The first aspect, then, is teleonomic. Since behavior, I repeat, is action exerted 
upon the environment aiming from the moment of its initiation to produce 
results in the outside world, it cannot be compared to a random mutation 
generated quite independently of the environment . ... Because this goal-
directedness of behavior is essential to the organism's vital needs, and thus 
intrinsic to its overall dynamics, it requires from the outset detailed informa-
tion about the environment toward which actions are to be oriented. 
Jean Piaget (1976/1978) 
... From this standpoint, social life appears to us a system of more or less 
deeply rooted habits, corresponding to the needs of the community. 
Henri Bergson (1932/1956) 
There are no two life styles that are identical. They are as different as 
fingerprints, as unique as snowflakes, and as varied as clouds in the sky. 
Adler (1956) stated that no two children grow up in the same family, 
for with the birth of each child, the family constellation changes, and 
hence new dynamics are created and maintained. As different as life 
styles are, so too are people. Yet people are not completely different in 
every way. 
63 

64 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
We do share aspects in common. As different as we are, we still have 
commonalities that are recognizable. As psychologists have attempted 
to do for more than a century, and philosophers and writers have tried 
for what seems forever, people predict other's behaviors. We make 
guesses about what will come next. Adler (1956) wrote that one of the 
key traits Adlerian psychologists must develop is the art of guessing (Dai-
ley, 1966), and even late in his life, Adler, as we have seen, still credited 
Freud with having been the first to encourage this technique in clinical 
practice. 
As Herold (1983) has documented, there are several attempts in 
Adlerian psychology to find common themes, or patterns, in life styles. 
Adler (1929c, 1935, 1956), Kefir and Corsini (1974), Kopp (1986), Man-
aster and Corsini (1982), and Mosak (1959, 1968, 1971a, 1973, 1979) 
have all presented, and elaborated upon, the issue of typology. A brief 
overview of each is in order. 
Adler (1929b), in a work that has never been translated into English 
(Dutch, Spanish, Hebrew, yes, but not English), made an early attempt 
to form a typology. He discussed that some children preferred one sense 
modality over another, and he classified four primary "types:" motor, 
visual, auditory, and olfactory. Each modality had specific behavioral 
patterns and learning styles that would typically emerge. In another 
instance Adler (1933/1964f) speaks of the intellectual, emotional, and 
activity types. Similarly, some theorists consider that Adler's (1920/ 
1983d) early work on birth order was a form of typology and speak of 
the "oldest born type," "middle type," or "youngest type" (Leman, 
1985). 
A more formal, and detailed, typology appeared in the first issue of the 
International Journal of Individual Psychology, in which Adler (1935) spoke 
of four types: the ideal, or socially interested, type; the getting type; the 
ruling type; and the avoiding type. These types could be categorized ac-
cording to a four-fold system: degree of activity and amount of social in-
terest. The ideal type was the only one discussed that could not be used 
in a destructive way. These people were interested in the welfare of oth-
ers and worked cooperatively for the common good. They were charac-
terized as having a high amount of social interest and a high degree of 
activity. The other three types could be used either constructively, non-
constructively, or destructively. "Getters" had low degrees of activity and 
social interest and were interested in getting as much as they could. 
Their primary orientation was to lean on others and put others into their 
service (this type is explored in greater detail subsequently). "Rulers" 
had a high degree of activity but a low amount of social interest and 
they sought to dominate others and control them. "Avoiders," like the 

Typology 
65 
"getters," had low social interest and a low degree of activity, and they 
steered away from challenges and sought to distance themselves from 
demands. 
Horney (1945, 1950), whose work is strikingly similar to Adler's in a 
number of ways (and is frequently required reading in many Adlerian 
training institutes), formulated her own typology, which bears noting. 
Horney (1945) originally conceived of three methods for dealing with 
"inner conflicts" that are aroused if individuals fail to live up to expecta-
tions they have for themselves. She defined these in terms of movement 
in relation to people. Individuals would either move toward, away from, 
or against people. In a later work (1950), she reconceptualized these 
movements as "solutions" and described them as self-effacement, resig-
nation, and mastery. She acknowledges her indebtedness to Adler 
throughout her works (though often only briefly), but nowhere men-
tions his work on typology. A comparison might serve to clarify: 
Adler 
Getting type 
Ruling type 
Avoiding type 
Horney 
Movement toward (self-effacing solution) 
Movement against (appeal to mastery solution) 
Movement away (resignation/freedom as solution) 
Examining Adler's types in relation to Horney's movement types and 
solution types, some parallels begin to emerge. What Adler described as 
"ruling," Horney described as "mastery" and "movement against." 
"Avoiding" types "move away" and seek "freedom" from responsibility 
and commitment, "resigning" themselves to their fate. "Getters" move 
"toward" others in order to be in a better position to receive and fre-
quently adopt a "self-effacing" style, putting themselves down in order 
to keep those they perceive as more capable near them, so they can con-
tinue to "get." There are many such parallels in Horney's work. 
Kefir and Corsini (1974) speak of dispositional sets. They claim that 
individuals have four primary methods that they use to solve challenges, 
and these four methods are neither good nor bad, but sole reliance upon 
anyone at the expense of the others or too rigidly (i.e., without regard 
to the demands of the particular situation) results in maladaptive behav-
ior. The four sets are accord, conflict, evasion, and neutral. Some people 
seek to find solutions through reaching an accord, that is, peaceful solu-
tions. Others create conflict and increase tension. Still others sidestep 
and evade such issues; others remain neutral, and appear noncommit-
ted, and in fact they may even be anonymous. For Kefir and Corsini, the 
flexible use of all four sets led to healthy adaptation. 
Kefir (1972), Brown (1976), Dinkmeyer, Dinkmeyer, and Sperry 
(1987), and Manaster and Corsini (1982) discuss the issue of personal 

66 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
priorities. According to Kefir, who originally detailed this theory, indi-
viduals are exposed to an early situation that they cannot handle. This 
situation is called an impasse. Life styles are constructed in order to 
avoid this feared childhood situation from ever occurring again, and in-
dividuals develop priorities in order to avoid these impasses. The priori-
ties, and what people with them seek to avoid, are as follows: 
What is Sought 
Comfort 
Pleasing 
Control 
Superiority 
What is Avoided 
Stress/responsibility / expectations 
Rejection 
Humiliation 
Meaninglessness 
Someone with a priority of comfort, for example, strives to avoid too 
much stress or responsibility. For these people, Kefir hypothesized, life 
was too stressful, with expectations being too high for them, as children, 
and they grew up believing that the experience of stress is something to 
be avoided. Too much responsibility, therefore, and issues surrounding 
it, becomes an impasse for these people; it is something they have not 
learned to deal with, and because of their overemphasis upon seeking 
comfort, they still, as adults, do not learn to deal with it. 
Finally, Manaster and Corsini (1982) have characterized people as 
types. They describe many such characterizations, with names such as 
Mack the Knife, St. Sebastian, and Dr. Doolittle. They briefly describe 
what each style is like (e.g., Dr. Doolittle is someone who prefers animals 
and objects to people and hence is a loner) and some possible back-
ground data on each. These are short-hand descriptions of typical life 
styles they have encountered in their clinical work. 
Mosak (1959, 1968, 1971a, 1973, 1979) has written extensively on 
types. In examining the life styles of numerous individuals, he has found 
clusters of themes that can be described in brief, concise images. In an 
early work (Mosak, 1968), he related these common themes to diagnos-
tic categories. For example, in addictive disorders, he has found two 
common themes, getting and excitement seeking. In depressive disor-
ders, he has found themes of getting, controlling, and being good 
(Mosak, 1968, 1979). A more in-depth discussion of these themes, and 
types, is in order. 
D Mosak's Typology: 
An Attempt at a Modern Theory of Types 
Adler (1956) was opposed to classification. He did not believe in catego-
rizing people according to specific diagnostic labels, for that violated the 

Typology 
67 
social, field theoretical perspective he felt was crucial for understanding 
individuals. However, for heuristic and teaching purposes, it became im-
portant to communicate to others. Although individual psychology is an 
idiographic discipline first and foremost, without nomothetic guidelines 
of some kind it would be impossible to teach it to others. His develop-
ment of a theory of types (Adler, 1935) was an attempt to speak in gen-
eralities that could be used to describe some of the more common, 
central themes he found in life styles. 
Mosak's work has had much the same motivation. He has written on 
14 personality types (Mosak, 1971 a) and provided in -depth descriptions 
of 2 of the 14 types (Mosak, 1959, 1973). The fourteen types are getters, 
controllers, victims, martyrs, drivers, those who need to be superior, in-
adequate ones, excitement seekers, babies, feeling avoiders, those who 
need to be good, those who need to be right. those who oppose ("agin-
ners"), and those who need to be liked (pleasers). At the risk of oversim-
plification, these types are most easily identified by understanding their 
self-ideal statements, such as the getter believing that "in order to find 
my place, I should get." 
The original manuscript for the book in which these types first ap-
peared (Mosak, 1971a) was limited in the number of pages that could be 
used and, therefore, the number of types that could be examined. Other 
types that have been used by the authors include the observer, the mea-
surer, the star, Annie Oakley, the survivor ("Rocky"), and the pole 
vaulter. These are just a few; there are more, as many more as there are 
people. Along a similar line, people are seldom of one type. Often, they 
are combinations of types, such as the controller-driver-superior combi-
nation that often produces what is now called a type A personality 
(Friedman, 1996; Williams, 1989)-someone who is especially vulnera-
ble to heart disease and under considerable stress most of the time. 
As Mosak (1979) has written, the types can be used in constructive, 
nonconstructive, or destructive ways, a point Kopp (1986) has detailed 
and expanded upon in his work. As we discuss subsequently, the issue is 
not what type one is, but rather how one uses that type. It is beyond the 
scope of this chapter to detail all 14 of the original types, and interested 
readers are referred to Mosak (1954,1959, 1971a, 1973). Boldt (1994) 
also describes Mosak's types in her dissertation on characterological resis-
tance, that is, resistance based upon life style, in psychotherapy. For pres-
ent purposes, an examination of some of the other key types is in order. 
Drivers 
One of the most common, and most rewarded, types prevalent in our 
culture as we near the end of this century is what Mosak originally 

68 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
called the driver (Mosak, 1971a). Drivers are people who are typically 
classified as "workaholics," that is, they act as if they must have it all 
done-by yesterday. As Kopp (1986) has astutely pointed out, drivers 
have a goal of achievement. They measure themselves, and hence oth-
ers, by what is accomplished, when, and how well it is done. He makes a 
distinction between strategies and tactics, which is helpful. Strategies 
have to do with convictions, what people believe about themselves, life, 
and others. Tactics are how such people get (Le., move toward) what 
their cognitive map instructs them to be alert to. Mosak (1958) makes a 
similar distinction between the modus vivendi and the modus operandi, that 
is, between attitudinal set and behavior. For example, drivers typically 
have this strategy: Be productive in order to achieve! If used in a con-
structive way, these people's productivity often leads them to be helpful 
and supportive of others. The tactics they choose can be hard work, 
striving for accomplishment, and dedication. If they make mistakes, they 
tend to accept them, learn from them, and move on to other issues. 
Their self-esteem is usually not on the line. 
In cases in which the drivers are using their style in destructive ways, 
their strategies are different. Although the overall goal of productivity 
and achievement remains the same, the life style convictions become 
somewhat more skewed: It is important to be number one! Given a cog-
nitive map like this, their tactics tend to be more of the classic "work-
aholic" type, with strong trends toward compulsivity, ambition, and 
overly intense styles of interacting being prominent. They are often re-
ferred to as type A personalities (Friedman, 1996). 
These people, as children, probably exhibited a high degree of activity. 
Achievement was perceived as important, and these children found their 
places through it. Within the early family constellation, drivers probably 
had an especially intense competition with a sibling (or siblings) and 
found that it was important to keep (at least) one step ahead of the com-
petition and may have had the fear of falling behind. This was typically 
perceived as reinforced in school and with peers. Our culture does re-
ward these types, and we do tend to pay the price for it if we push this 
style too hard: These individuals are prone to heart-related conditions, 
such as high blood pressure, heart attacks, strokes. 
When drivers fall in love, like most other issues in their life, it can be 
perceived as something to be achieved. Such life "events" as courtship, 
marriage, family, and retirement are often perceived (possibly misper-
ceived) as something that happens "on a time schedule." There is a time 
to be married, a time to have kids, this much needs to be done before the 
wedding, before the vacations, and so on. Sexuality, particularly during 
adolescence, can be viewed as another "achievement," and for those 

Typology 
69 
who maintain such a posture, "notches on bedposts" become the key cri-
teria of a successful dating life. 
One of the key "enemies" of drivers is not an enemy in the usual 
sense. This enemy is not encountered face-to-face, nor is it a person who 
can be killed off and forgotten about very easily. This enemy is free time. 
Too much time off without a book, worksheet, telephone nearby, or a 
mountain to climb can be very stressful. Drivers tend not to be exces-
sively stressed by deadlines, meetings, and schedules, particularly if 
these are seen as part of the "job" requirements. Drivers are comfortable 
with them. They love mountains. Give them "busy work" or too much 
free time, and the end result is typically the same: They go crazy! They 
generally need to know that what they are doing will lead to something, 
something that they can look back upon and say, "I accomplished that." 
If they can, they do not experience subjective stress; they become tired, 
maybe even fatigued. Let them believe that what they are doing is for no 
particular good, and watch their fidgetiness increase. They can, and typi-
cally do, become irritable and restless at such times. 
Drivers feel inferior if they cannot achieve. Time is something that 
they need to learn to live with, for time is their ultimate competitor. Will 
they die before they have accomplished what they want to accomplish? 
If they run the race too hard, they may hasten the arrival of the end-
they tax their bodies and are forced to either slow down or die trying. If 
they are respectful of others, they enjoy the race; if they perceive them 
as threats, the race becomes exciting and taxing. The toll they pay is their 
wellness, their health, and strained interpersonal relations. 
Babies 
A point of clarification: Youngest born children are not necessarily babies! 
Babies can occur anywhere in the family constellation, and a frequent 
misconception is that if you are the youngest born, you must be a baby. 
"Youngest born" is a birth-order position. "Baby" is a type. They can, and 
admittedly often do, coexist, but no more so than drivers are necessarily 
oldest born. Many youngest-borns become drivers-they feel the most 
behind in the sibling array and try desperately to "catch up" the rest of 
their lives. Babies are entities unto themselves. 
Babies have two complementary goals: support and play. They love at-
tention and to be supported, and they frequently are quite good at giving 
attention and being supportive, but in playful, often emotional, ways. 
Babies love to have fun, to be carefree, and to play. These two goals, sup-
port and play, frequently intertwine. A closer examination sheds some 
light. 

70 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
If approached constructively, the strategy of the baby is to have a good 
time, teach others to have fun, and show concern for the welfare of oth-
ers in a good-natured, give-and-take way. For example, if you are laid up 
in the hospital, the baby will bring you games to play and play them 
with you. Babies may even jump up and stretch out in the bed with you. 
They mean no harm, and they can liven up a room and place things in 
perspective in just the right way. Their playfulness is warm, genuine, 
and elevating to those around them. Their tactics are humor, coyness, 
smiles, and a benign casualness, particularly when it comes to authority 
or convention. They receive their "strokes" through the playfulness 
given back to them. They want, at least temporarily, a playmate to sup-
port them in their revelry, and when it is time for business, they work, 
albeit with supervision, but they will get their chores done, so that they 
are then in a better position to go out and play. Other babies assume that 
work and responsibility was created for others. In terms of priorities the-
ory, they seek comfort rather than responsibility. 
A subtle, but crucial, distinction is made if the baby uses his or her 
style in a destructive way. The goals remain the same, but the strategy 
differs in a minute, but significant, aspect: Being cared for becomes being 
taken care of. They become masters at putting others into their service. 
The benign, playful give-and-take slides ever so gradually into a take-
and-take. Rather than "let's play so we'll both feel better," it becomes 
"play with me. I'm bored," or "entertain me!" Their tactics become lazi-
ness, forgetfulness, helplessness, and incorrigibility. Temper tantrums 
and pouting are often seen. A whiny voice becomes almost a surgical 
tool for extracting what is needed. 
As children, babies were the Peter Pans. They never wanted to grow 
up, and for many reasons their families were perceived as not wanting 
them to do so. Typically, babies realized that their families were too 
strict, too stodgy, and they were usually able to bring life to the crowd 
through their humor and playfulness. Parents can encourage this, espe-
cially in later- (or last -) born children, if they feel a sense of nostalgia 
about "letting go" of little Billy, Sherry, or Tommy (notice the "e" sound 
at the end of the names, names we refer to as diminutives). Babies per-
ceive that they may have a place through maintaining that posture as 
adults. When they go out and find a job, it is not too surprising if it is 
boring, stodgy, and a bit too stuffy, until they arrive, that is. 
Fun with others is constructive. Fun at the expense of others is not. 
Both of us making a mess together, and cleaning it up together, can be 
wonderfully liberating. Both of us making a mess, and you cleaning it 
up, can be a real pain-for you. Me making a mess and you cleaning it 
up is not fun at all for you; it can be downright abusive. Allow us to elab-
orate. 

Typology 
71 
The subtlety of babies and their abuse of others, if they are using that 
style in a destructive manner, is a masterpiece. Those that they select to 
manipulate often feel guilty for challenging them (Le., the babies) in the 
first place. After all, the babies frequently retort (in a whine, or pout), 
"What is the big deal? It's all in fun." And frequently, it is, and that is the 
crux of the problem. The fun does not stop. The same emotional playful-
ness can turn to temper tantrums, and people frequently "walk on 
eggshells" around them in order to avoid the fireworks. 
Solitude is the biggest threat to babies. Although they are perfectly ca-
pable of being alone, they frequently feel lonely. With some social inter-
est, they manage to rally the troops and everybody has a good time. 
Without it, it is not a matter of rallying the troops, it is a time to circle the 
wagons. They do not want to have fun; they want someone to create 
fun, and it is not going to be them. Similarly, babies may develop the 
skills to survive on their own; they just happen to prefer not to use them 
very often. Still, they can and do survive. On the more destructive side, 
they may not develop the requisite skills, and that typically means that 
someone has to do it for them. Let the games begin! They use their cute-
ness and manipulativeness to place others into their service, and as those 
who take care of them become increasingly more and more stressed and 
burned out, the babies continue to play. 
Excitement Seekers 
Excitement seekers are frequently similar to both drivers and babies. The 
crucial difference is one of emphasis. Whereas drivers often lead exciting 
lives, it is not the sensation that motivates them; it is the achievement. 
Babies can be wonderful at creating commotion, particularly during play 
time, but babies like to rest and be cuddled. For them, the interpersonal 
transactions become important; having fun is great, but having fun with 
others is better. Excitement seekers are stimulus junkies. It is the sensa-
tion they seek (Zuckerman, 1979). Our culture is a stimulus-bound cul-
ture. We have bright lights, loud music, busy roadways-not only with 
reference to traffic, but also when it comes to things along the sides of 
roads, such as billboards, signs, and so forth-and hundreds of television 
and radio stations. We print more books, newspapers, and journals than 
anyone person could read in anyone lifetime. A sign of the times is how 
many of us drive with the radio on, or sit with the television on, even if 
we are not watching it, simply for the "stimulation." 
Excitement seekers typically have one dominant goal: to experience 
sensations. They think about stimulating topics, create wonderfully elab-
orate fantasies, do wild, exciting activities, and in general lead stimulat-
ing lives. On the useful, constructive side, their strategy is typically to 

72 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
lead creative, adventuresome lives. Their tactics involve exploration, dis-
covery, creativity, risk, and novelty. They are active in their quest for 
something new, and will seek out adventure and work to create new 
possibilities. 
Excitement seekers who use their style in destructive, noncooperative 
ways have a different strategy: to seek pleasure, excitement, and "highs" 
anyway one can. Their tactics are perhaps the most varied of the types 
discussed thus far. Creating fights, taking drugs, risky behaviors, thrill 
seeking (Farley, 1986), gambling, and putting their own and others' lives 
in danger are frequent tactics. "Live fast, die young, and have a good 
looking corpse," as Willard Motley (1989) wrote in his noveL Knock on 
any Door. 
As children, excitement seekers probably exhibited high degrees of ac-
tivity, similar to drivers (babies probably displayed both high and low de-
grees of activity, depending upon the situation). Neurodevelopmental 
data indicate that some individuals have higher stimulus thresholds than 
others (Miller, 1990). Such children are fussy and require more contact 
and stimulation than others, yet if they get it they typically are not satis-
fied. They reach satiation at higher levels than most, and they are typi-
cally extensive scanners of the perceptual field and prone to learn slowly 
from experience (Forgus & Shulman, 1979). In other words, they absorb 
a lot of data, process it slowly, and learn from their mistakes only after 
repeated trial and error (if then). Psychosocially, these children are ac-
tively engaged in everything-they want to see, do, and feel more, 
whatever more is. The more varied, the better, and these children are 
curious. Being safe is not as important as exploring, and they perceive 
the feedback from their caretakers more on the basis of its sensation 
value than its content. For example, little Suzy loves to watch Mom and 
Dad fight, not so much for what they sayar do to each other, but for the 
tension and excitement it creates. 
These individuals can be bold and innovative. They can seek out and 
explore new avenues and lead themselves and others into new insights. 
They can also get themselves into deep trouble. If the goal is to experi-
ence, it sometimes matters little what is experienced, as long as it is stim-
ulating. Some become polydrug users. Significant others are often lost in 
the sensations of the moment; these people may be more in love with 
the feeling of love and passion than with the persons who provide the 
feelings. Hence, excitement seekers can make great dates but poor long-
term partners, unless they learn to create excitement with those that 
they care about, rather than in spite of them. 
Boredom is the challenge that excitement seekers fight most strongly. 
To be bored is to be "dead" in their lexicon, and to be dead is to stop feel-
ing. There is so much to do, so much to try, to experience and taste, and 

Typology 
73 
damned be those who get in their way. If their style is done construc-
tively, they can be joys to be around, and if done destructively, it can fre-
quently be tragic. Excitement seekers typically (but far from exclusively) 
realize the dangers into which they are heading all the while that they 
are heading into them. Those who care for excitement seekers some-
times become maddeningly frustrated as all they can do is sit and watch 
(and cover their eyes) as the ones they love drive off into the sunset-at 
120 miles per hour-or take that one extra "hit" of a drug. They love liv-
ing on the edge-and often fall off. They dearly tax the ones they love 
when they push "it" too far too fast. Farley (1986) and Zuckerman 
(1979) describe similar types. 
Pleasers 
Pleasers are nice to be around, and one of their most endearing-and 
perplexing-qualities, is that we seldom realize that we are around them 
(Leman, 1987). Kopp (1986) has noted that these people can be very 
diplomatic. In the mix of things, pleasers can be very accommodating 
and quite facilitative of what transpires around them, without ever 
really taking too strong a stand for themselves and their needs. As we 
soon discover, their needs are very much tied not to the outcome of situ-
ations but to the process that accompanies it. 
As both Kopp (1986) and Leman (1987) note, the overall goal of the 
pleaser is to maintain peace and tranquility. Mosak (1971 a) places the 
emphasis upon being liked because they are so pleasing. Consequently 
pleasers develop social skills that they trust will endear them to others. 
Their paramount fear being not pleasing, they become hypersensitive to 
criticism. To avoid possible criticism they become excellent "people read-
ers." They behave like chameleons, "giving the customers what they 
want" rather than stating their own opinions, taking a stand, or making 
decisions of which others might disapprove. In doing so they frequently 
lose their own sense of identity. As Aesop moralized in his fable, "The 
Miller, His Son, and the Donkey," "He who tries to please everybody 
pleases nobody." On the constructive side of life, the strategy is to help 
resolve conflicts and bring about successful resolution of differing fac-
tions. The useful tactics include negotiation, mediation, arbitration, and 
compromise. These individuals frequently keep us together and func-
tioning as a team. 
Pleasers encounter many perils (Hart, 1977). If their style is used in a 
destructive manner, pleasers have a strategy that entails acquiescing to 
others. They watch others and seek approval, and should they not get it 
they feel devastated and rejected. It is difficult to negotiate for your best 
interests if mine are too much on my mind. Therapists who do marital and 

74 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
family counseling who are too oriented to pleasing have a hard time being 
confrontational and setting appropriate limits. They do not want to "rock 
the boat," so to speak, and risk having someone dislike them. They there-
fore become too preoccupied with how they are doing rather than with 
what they are doing. That kind of split in concentration, a manifestation of 
countertransference, tends to reduce performance, not enhance it. l 
It is not uncommon to find pleasers who were family mediators even 
as children. Some of them are ACOAs (Adult Children of Alcoholics) 
(Kershaw-Bellemare & Mosak, 1993). These were compliant children 
who perceived their places in the family constellation as the ones who 
read the atmosphere and moods of the situation and people involved 
and then seemed to know just the right thing to say, or to ask for, which 
brought a smile to someone's face. Most children ask for what they want 
and then read the feedback about its possible achievement. Not so for 
these children. For pleasers, their "psychic" abilities are remarkable, if 
not occasionally outright amazing. They appear to know, before they are 
asked, what is the right thing to say or request, and they deliver it right 
on target. Frequently, they grow up alongside rather demanding siblings 
or parents, who model insensitivity or unpredictability. Keeping Father, 
with his temper and outbursts, in check, is felt to be their responsibility; 
or sister Karen, who could have a temper tantrum to end all temper 
tantrums, has to be kept appeased; otherwise Mother, who is already 
overtaxed, may become upset-if not depressed. These children find a 
way to comply, even if it is not their place to comply. 
Pleasing is a burdensome responsibility. These people are typically noth-
ing if not responsible, and if it is carried too far, they are too responsible, to 
the point of feeling guilty for having normal wants and needs. They often 
flagellate themselves for being "selfish" and overdo self-sacrifice. Wanting 
to not rock the boat becomes the prerequisite for having to not rock the 
boat. 
Pleasers are wonderful lovers and caretakers. Those who love them 
frequently can end up feeling cheated, however, by a subtle "trick" that 
often goes undetected for years. As an example, Tom is married to Mary. 
Mary is the pleaser who carries her role a little too far. Tom, initially, is 
amazed at how responsive and "in tune" they are, especially because she 
seems to know what he wants without his having to ask. For months, 
they go out for sushi every weekend. Tom loves it. Mary appears to love 
it. Finally, typically during a fight, or overheard during a conversation 
Mary is having with an old friend, Tom discovers a rattling "truth:" Mary 
hates sushi. He confronts her, and she sheepishly admits it. He feels 
betrayed and, suddenly, rather foolish. Sometimes, the stakes are some-
what higher, such as having children, engaging in certain sexual prac-
tices, moving to certain locations in order to pursue "his career," and the 

Typology 
75 
like, and the nonpleasing spouse is left feeling dumbfounded. It is glori-
ous to be pleased-it can feel belittling to be placated. 
The diplomatic nature of pleasers can be a godsend. They can find the 
answers to difficult situations that many of us feel trapped in and lost. 
They listen to our troubles and settle our disputes. They help us to feel un-
derstood and appreciated. That can be their biggest challenge. They, too, 
want to be appreciated, but they seldom know how to come out and ask. 
Even if they know how, they fear to ask because they fear their overtures 
maybe rejected. For them, the process of human interaction is more im-
portant than the content-that is, they are typically more concerned with 
the feelings of those around them than with their own feelings. Is every-
body happy? Yes? Then good! They must be too. Yet, something is missing 
from that equation. If they understand that, they can use their pleasing 
style in a usefuL constructive manner and realize that they are not wrong 
for attempting openly to please themselves. Because one way in which to 
know that one has pleased is through receiving applause, many pleasers 
gravitate to the performing arts. Applause and compliment, their payoffs, 
are related to what they do rather than who they are, for they do not 
know who they are or what they want-beyond pleasing others. 
D Typology: A Clinical Perspective 
A brief excursion in the realm of psychopathology is in order, particu-
larly as it relates to the topic of types. The early, classical Freudians felt 
that psychopathology could, and frequently did, develop parallel to 
character development. Hence, character neuroses were different than 
psychoneuroses, with the former generally having their roots in pre-
oedipal (prior to 5 or 6 years of age) development. In those cases, psy-
chopathology was "characterological" in nature. Psychopathology that 
had its roots in the oedipal or post-oedipal periods generally occurred 
despite having an intact character. Adler's notion of psychopathology, 
and therefore symptom formation, as being rooted in the life style of the 
individual (therefore, in the character, or personality) was not given 
much credence by the classical analysts. For Adler, all symptoms had to 
be understood on the basis of the life style, not independent of it. 
Although Horney (1945, 1950) was an early proponent of Adler's 
view, mainstream psychoanalytic thinking was most clearly influenced 
by Shapiro, most noticeable by his work Neurotic Styles (1965). In that 
work, Shapiro argued that 
Styles or modes may be found that are capable of describing general as-
pects of function (such as cognition, emotional experience, and the like), 
modes that themselves will then be related and organized. Such consisten-

76 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
cies of individual functioning as those between symptom and adaptive 
traits may be conceived of as reflecting such general modes, giving shape 
alike to symptom and non symptom, to defense against impulse and adap-
tive expression of impulse. (p. 4) 
With his work, it became "acceptable" to examine clients' "styles" and 
not simply symptoms. Paranoia became not simply a defense against 
what were then considered to be homosexual impulses, but, according 
to Shapiro, a clear and distinguishable style that affected symptoms and 
nonsymptomatic behavior alike. 
Most recently, the work of Oldham and Morris (1990) has attempted 
to continue that tradition. They take the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) personality 
disorders and present them in their "normal," nonpathological presenta-
tions. According to Oldham and Morris, 
Your personality style is your organizing principle. It propels you on your 
life path. It represents the orderly arrangement of all your attributes, 
thoughts, feelings, attitudes, behaviors, and coping mechanisms. It is the 
distinctive pattern of your psychological functioning-the way you think, 
feel, and behave-that makes you definitely you. (p. 15) 
In this work, they attempt to show how some people are not typically 
"dependent personality disorders"; more likely, they have "devoted 
styles" that, under enough stress, decompensate into the pathological 
version. What each style perceives as stressful is dependent upon the 
style itself; for instance, a "dramatic style" is fine as long as he or she re-
mains the life of the party or an actor. Pushed too far too often, that style 
can become the histrionic personality disorder. 
Similar efforts have been made by Millon (1981). He felt that in order 
to understand psychopathology, one had to come to grips with the under-
lying personality pattern. He describes (giving credit to Adler) various 
patterns, such as the asocial pattern (schizoid personality disorder) and 
the aggressive pattern (antisocial personality disorder). 
D Summary 
Many theorists and clinicians are moving more and more toward Adler's 
(1935) stance, that certain themes, or patterns, emerge in the personali-
ties of individuals that lead them to certain type of problems. The prob-
lems are not something that come over the style; rather, they are part and 
parcel of the style itself. Given certain themes, individuals will experience 
certain classifiable disorders if they decompensate (Mosak, 1968). It is 

Typology 
77 
how persons with these styles cope with life and its demands that we turn 
to next, for each style reacts in certain ways to the challenges of life. 
D Points to Consider 
Although no two life styles are identical, there are similarities that can 
be discussed. Those similarities form the basis of typological systems. 
In Adlerian psychology, there have been numerous attempts to cre-
ate typologies. Birth-order types, learning types, personal priorities, 
and Mosak's typology are some of the key ones. 
Typologies can be important for several reasons. They help commu-
nicate to other clinicians, they facilitate prediction, and they are very 
helpful in conducting research. 
D Questions 
1. What is the difference between being a youngest born and developing 
the life style of a baby? 
2. Karen Horney developed a system that stressed "solutions" to life's 
problems. How is her system similar to Adler's? How is it different? 
3. What are some recent parallels in contemporary practice when it 
comes to typology? 
4. What is stressful for a driver? 
5. What were the four types Adler first identified in 1935? 
6. Attempt to plot Adler's four life-style types on a graph, using degree 
of activity along the vertical axis and amount of social interest along 
the horizontal (baseline) axis. Where do each of the types fit? 
7. What are the three ways in which types can be used? 
D Note 
IPleasers, because they are excellent "people readers," often make excellent diagnosticians, 
but their function as therapists remains problematic. 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, 
and Inferiority Complexes 
As a concept, self-esteem is extremely useful for those trying to understand 
why people act as they do. As a reality, the importance of high self-esteem 
simply cannot be overstated. It might be thought of as the sine qua non of 
the healthy personality. It suggests a respect for and faith in ourselves that is 
not easily shaken, an abiding and deep-seated acceptance of our own worth. 
Ideally, self-esteem is not only high and unconditional; it does not depend on 
approval from others, and it does not crumble even when we do things that 
we later regret. It is a core, a foundation upon which a life is constructed. 
Alfie Kohn (1986) 
It seems generally believed, that, as the eye cannot see itself, the mind has no 
faculties by which it can contemplate its own state, and that therefore we 
have not means of becoming acquainted with our real characters . ... We 
are secretly conscious of defects and vices which we hope to conceal from the 
public eye, and please ourselves with innumerable impostures, by which, in 
reality, no body is deceived. 
Samuel Johnson (1751/ 1973) 
As we briefly touched upon in Chapter 4, people, by virtue of being 
human, experience incongruity between convictions. We all have "de-
78 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
79 
fects and vices which we hope to conceal," but as Johnson noted almost 
300 years ago, we are "secretly conscious" of our faults, our shortcom-
ings. How do we become conscious of our shortcomings, our defects? 
Why should we be conscious of them? Would it not be better to either 
have no defects, as the perfectionist might assert, or at least not be aware 
of them? (The perfectionist would certainly consider that a wonderful 
state.) In order to be in a better position to answer such questions, and 
explore our all-too-human responses to such psychological and philo-
sophical issues, we need to turn our attention to the concept of stress 
and its role in human functioning. 
D Stress and Human Adaptation 
Selye's (1974) work on stress and adaptation indicates that to exist with-
out stress is impossible. He writes that 
Stress is the nonspecific response of the body to any demand made upon it . .. it is 
immaterial whether the agent or situation we face is pleasant or unpleasant; all 
that counts is the intensity of the demand for readjustment or adaptation. 
(pp.I4-15) 
He notes, further on in his text, that "complete freedom from stress is 
death" (p. 20). Let us examine this in more detail. 
Selye, a biologist first and foremost, like Adler before him was con-
cerned with how living beings adapt to, compensate for, and cope with 
the stress life presents. Selye observed that different organisms react dif-
ferently to the same stressors. For humans, prior learning and motiva-
tion become key factors in not only determining how they adapt to 
stress, but even in perceiving what will be considered stressful. For Selye 
(1974, p. 58), successful adaptation to stress requires "collaboration" and 
altruistic tendencies that overcome "selfishness" and "egotism" (p. 53) 
and better prepare the organism to adapt to life's stressors. 
What does all this have to do with the purpose of this chapter, which 
explicates and details the role of inferiority feelings and complexes and 
differentiates them from actual inferiorities and our response to them? A 
great deal. Selye (1974) is accurately describing, from a biological view-
point, how intercellular collaboration fosters healthy adaptation; and on 
a grander scale, how organisms that work collaboratively together are 
better adapted to struggle with and overcome environmental challenges. 
Excessive focus upon individual identity at the expense of the others 
leads to maladaptive coping mechanisms for dealing with life's chal-
lenges. 

80 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Ornstein and Sobel (1987) and Williams (1989) have written exten-
sively on the role of usefuL cooperative adaptation not only in prevent-
ing illness, but in fostering wellness. For all of these researchers, the key 
to wellness is cooperative, egalitarian stances toward others. The role of 
expectations in dealing with stress, and our bodies' reactions to it, helps 
determine our biological functioning. 
The life style, with its constituent parts, holds the keys to the percep-
tual system, and therefore, to what the person perceives as distressful. 
Distress is harmfuL unpleasant stress; it places the organism in potential 
danger. How we deal with that stress, and whether or not it becomes dis-
tressful and eventually harmful to survivaL is a matter of how coopera-
tively and efficiently we adapt. The key, Selye maintained, was to 
experience "stress without distress." 
An inferiority, as defined in Chapter 4, is objective and contextual. For 
the purposes of this chapter, it can be conceptualized as a stress, a chal-
lenge to the organism's adaptation. For example, in the fable of the fox 
and the sour grapes, I see some grapes I want, and as I reach for them, I 
realize I am too short to reach them. In this context, I am experiencing 
stress. It becomes distress if I feel inferior. The feeling of inferiority, as 
noted previously, is the evaluation we make of the objective situation. 
We need to adapt to that situation. If I shy away from the challenge of 
reaching for the grapes, because I feel too inferior and do not want others to 
perceive me as so, I am exhibiting an inferiority complex. Such a stance 
prevents me from using my creativity to devise a way to reach the 
grapes. I am more concerned with my appearance, my inferiorities, than 
with the demands of life. I am prestige-oriented,] rather than task-
oriented. My ability to adapt, to survive and flourish, is impaired. 
This prestige-oriented stance not only hampers my individual adapta-
tion, it tends to impair my ability to effectively utilize my support system 
for assistance; in other words, I may not ask for help. Too much of an 
emphasis upon prestige and worth, and not enough upon the task, de-
creases my ability to function effectively. I may try to keep up appear-
ances. I may hide out for fear of failure or humiliation. It limits my 
choices and options. This is maladaptive not only for myself but for those 
around me. 
Inferiority feelings, as Adler (1927/1957) wrote, motivate us to "be-
come" (Adler 1930/1963; Allport, 1955) and compel us to work together to 
overcome. They invite us to develop and expand our behavioral repertoire 
and to utilize creativity and imagination to project how things could be dif-
ferent in the future. Adler (1933/1964f, p. 73) writes, "To be a human 
being means the possession of a feeling of inferiority that is constantly 
pressing on its own conquest." Inferiority feelings encourage us to develop 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
81 
realistic self-concepts and simultaneously appropriate self-ideals. Biologically, 
our awareness of our inferiority has allowed us to adapt better and create 
societies and technologies that we would not have envisioned had we not 
felt inadequate to our current living conditions. Inferiority feelings encour-
age us to reexamine our situations and decide what we can do to change 
them. They allow us to grow, both individually, and as a species. 
To sum up thus far, to be without stress is to be dead. To have no infe-
riorities is to be without movement, to be less than human, God-like. 
Because we do move, because we are alive, we encounter situations that 
require more of us than we are currently prepared to offer. Benign, igno-
rant indifference to such situations results in stagnation. We do not learn 
and we do not grow. Awareness of our inferiorities, via inferiority feel-
ings, urges us to be both more astutely aware of what we are (self-
concept) and what we need subjectively to want to be (self-ideal). How 
we deal with such an awareness determines how adaptive we are. If we 
display an inferiority complex, we withdraw from the challenge. 
Before we more specifically examine how we cope with such chal-
lenges, either through coping mechanisms, safeguarding operations, ex-
cuses, aggression, or distance seeking, one additional dynamic requires 
consideration. What about those who apparently do not have inferiority 
complexes? In fact, they appear to have the opposite reaction, an over-
estimation and unrealistic appraisal of their abilities. Adler (1956) ad-
dressed such situations, and they require some elaboration. 
D SUlleriority, Superiority Feelings, 
an(J Superiority Complexes 
The dynamics of superiority need to be examined in light of two trends 
that individuals display. First, we explore them as part of a normal devel-
opmental process, and then as an overcompensation for the inferiority 
complex. 
Some children are gifted and perceive themselves as such. Their self-
concepts are something like "I am the best at ... " By and large, they are 
the best at that particular item or class of items. Their feelings of superi-
ority are focal, contextual, and "accurate." Jane is the best mathematics 
student in the school system. She has the awards to prove it. Develop-
mentally, her sense of superiority in mathematics is appropriate. At this 
time, in this place or situation, she is objectively superior and may not 
feel superior as a person. 
A second set of children is told they are superior. The messages they 
perceive feed into their developing self-ideals, and they begin to believe 

82 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
that they are superior as persons (d. Muhammad Ali's "I am the great-
est!"). Developmentally, they confuse their self-ideals with their self-
concepts. They believe that because they should be superior, they are. 
They may be adapting to family dynamics. In some instances the quest 
for superiority may be compensatory for a parental inferiority complex. 
In either of these cases, the notion of superiority complex, as Adler 
(1956) defined it, is not really at issue. Both cases are artifacts oflearning 
and development and, to some degree, are more or less subjectively ac-
curate appraisals of early childhood experiences. 
These notions of superiority are to be differentiated from superiority 
complexes. Adler (1956, p. 260) stated unequivocally: 
The superiority complex is one of the ways which a person with an inferi-
0rity ... complex may use as a method of escape from his difficulties. He 
assumes that he is superior when he is not, and this false success compen-
sates him for the state of inferiority which he cannot bear. The normal per-
son does not have a superiority complex, he does not even have a sense of 
superiority. He has the striving to be superior in the sense that we all have 
ambition to be successful. 
The first two developmental situations we noted are indicative of what 
Adler referred to as "ambition to be successful." In the first scenario, the 
person attains his or her ambitions; in the second, the person, partly be-
cause of early feedback, believes he or she has been successful in attain-
ing his or her ambitions. The superiority complex to which Adler refers 
is compensatory for inferiority feelings that are manifested as an inferi-
ority complex. 
The superiority complex is reactive; it occurs out of a form of psycho-
logical desperation and is an exaggerated attempt to act as if one were 
not feeling inferior and then acting that way. It is an attempt to act as if 
one were superior, even though one feels extremely far from it, without 
admitting it. As Johnson is quoted in the opening of this chapter, it is an 
"imposture," a curious blend of the words "impostor" and "posture." 
One assumes the posture of something one is not. 
The superiority complex is nothing but a variation of the inferior-
ity complex. These people are not more adaptive; they are just better 
actors. To return to our earlier example of the grapes, I act as if I can 
reach them, I boast or even lie about my having had them, and I at-
tempt to convince others I can get them so very easily. Like its shadowy 
counterpart, it impairs adaptation and the necessary development of 
skills to actually attain what is needed. It too leads to further distress. 
The superiority complex is the vocaL prideful variation of the inferiority 
complex. 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
83 
Given the fact that to be human means to experience some kind of in-
feriority feeling, how do we cope with such challenges? The first step is 
to perceive challenges as challenges, not problems. Life will challenge 
us-it is up to us whether or not we turn them into problems. Some 
challenges are greater than others. The stance we take toward those 
challenges determines our degree of adaptation. 
In general, we can take two postures toward life and its stresses. We 
can see them as challenges and engage in what Adlerians call "coping be-
haviors"; or we can perceive them as problems and engage in what Adler 
(1956) and Credner (1936) called "safeguarding" behaviors, otherwise 
known as defense mechanisms. 
D Coping Behaviors 
Direct Problem Solving 
The most obvious way to meet challenges is through direct problem 
solving. Attention is focused upon the task, and whatever resources are 
needed are mustered. If the examination needs to be passed, one studies; 
if the car is broken, one fixes it. 
Compensation 
Some situations are difficult to solve in a direct, straightforward manner. 
At those times, compensatory activities may be required in at least one 
of the following three ways: within the area, in another area, or over-
compensation. A brief example of each clarifies. 
Compensation within the area typically involves coping with the task 
despite what appear to be severe challenges. For example, if I break my 
arm, I learn to function with the cast; if I become blind, I learn to navi-
gate my way around with a cane, a seeing-eye dog, and the like. Text-
books often cite Helen Keller, Teddy Roosevelt, and Demosthenes in this 
regard. 
Compensation in another area entails working to build up one area if 
another is deficient. For instance, I may be poor in school, but I can be-
come an excellent athlete. 
An overcompensation occurs if people overexcel in an area despite 
having a setback. Specifically, someone who is deficient in one area 
works extra hard to become not only proficient but better than what 
would normally (typically) be expected from someone who started out 

84 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
without the deficiency. An example might be someone with a foot prob-
lem who becomes not only a "normal" walker but a great dancer. Thus, 
overcompensation, if directed toward constructive goals, may culminate 
in excellent achievements. Adler (1956, p. 28) writes, "When overcom-
pensation attempts to assert itself in a cultural manner and in this effort 
enters into new, although difficult and often inhibited paths, the very 
great expressions of the psyche arise which we must attribute to genius." 
What individuals do if they feel they cannot meet the tasks that life 
presents is the focus of the rest of this chapter. Life demands that we 
adapt to it, but all of us, to one degree or another, at times ask for a par-
don, a dispensation, from life's demands. That only makes us "normal." 
As Lazarsfeld (1927/1991) has phrased it, we all need to develop the 
courage to be imperfect, or else we are always and forever seeking par-
dons. When these are used too often, or become the focus of one's life, is 
when we begin to move further and further away from common sense, 
and we begin to become less and less adaptive. 
D Safeguarding Behaviors 
Adler (1956) considered safeguarding behaviors to originate as interper-
sonal phenomena, whereas the early Freudians (prior to the work of 
Anna Freud) considered defense mechanisms to be intrapsychic in na-
ture. The difference is crucial. The Freudians see the ego as defending it-
self from the instincts. Adlerians see the person as protecting him- or 
herself against three threats to the self. The first is the threat to the phys-
ical self. We may get hurt, sick, and even die. The second involves social 
threat, that we may not look good in the eyes of others, that they may 
disapprove of us, humiliate us, or punish us. The third relates to the fear 
of loss of self-esteem, of not looking good in our own eyes. Contempo-
rary psychoanalysts have since moved closer to Adler's position, empha-
sizing the role of defense mechanisms in protecting the ego (A. Freud, 
1936/1946). What follows is a list of the six primary safeguarding opera-
tions Adler (1956) delineated throughout his writings (with appropriate 
subsections and elaborations). Generally speaking, all of these constitute 
what Adler (1956) used to call sideshows. Harkening back to his work 
with the sideshow performers, Adler observed that sideshows were ef-
fective means of distracting attention away from the main challenges of 
life (e.g., the tasks of life), and placing it upon other issues that were not 
constructive. Rather than deal with life, people created sideshows in 
order to distract themselves and others from the more important issues 
(Wolfe, 1932). 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
85 
Symptoms 
People who develop symptoms use them in order to evade some task, or 
challenge, for which they feel ill prepared. If I develop headaches, I may 
be too "ill" to study for the test. If I am too depressed, I may be able to 
get others to take care of me. If I become preoccupied with hearing 
voices commanding me to do things, I cannot meet the work task. The 
role of symptomatology in human functioning is explored in greater de-
tail in Chapter 8, but for present purposes, suffice to say that symptoms 
are created to safeguard our self-esteem, exempt us from responsibility, 
and engage others. 
Excuses 
Excuses are typically conscious, whereas the aforementioned symptom for-
mation is mostly unconscious. Individuals typically declare that "If it 
weren't for these ... 1'd be able to ... " Adler (193111958) referred to this 
movement as "Yes-but" (d. Berne's [1964] game, "Why don't you ... ? Yes 
but ... "). British Adlerians refer to it as "if only." For example, John has a 
handwashing compulsion. Placed into the language of the psychology of 
use, Adlerians would say John uses his handwashing in order to evade cer-
tain issues. More precisely, John's life style convictions are adhered to more 
rigidly than is beneficiaL and he would rather cling to his beliefs than adapt 
to reality, what Adler (1956) called common sense. In order to at least ap-
pear to be meeting the challenges, he makes an excuse, such as, "If only I 
could just stop this damn handwashing compulsion, I'd be able to get back 
to working the way I used to." What he is doing is providing himself with 
an excuse and telling us what it is he fears incapable of doing-working at 
the level he once attained. Linden (1993) provides a detailed analysis of the 
role of excuses in everyday life. A more formal term for "making excuses" 
is rationalization. The rationalization permits the person to avoid feelings of 
deficiency and defeat, as in the fable of the fox and the sour grapes. When-
ever one hears a "fox" uttering (or muttering), "Who cares?" one can as-
sume that the fox cares more than he or she cares to admit. In this sense 
rationalization safeguards the person's pride system. 
Aggression 
Adler (1956) was the one who originally proposed the concept of aggres-
sion to Freud and the early psychoanalysts. Sicher and Mosak (1967) 

86 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
have explored the issue of human aggression in considerable detail. 
Briefly stated, Adler considered aggression to be a secondary phenome-
non. It is a choice individuals make in order to move them toward their 
goals. If I value control and someone challenges me for it, I may become 
aggressive in order to regain control. The aggression is secondary to the 
conviction of being in control. Adler delineated three principle variations 
of aggression: depreciation, accusation, and self-accusation. In this delin-
eation he anticipated attribution theory. 
Depreciation is an actual putting down of others. If I feel inferior to 
you, I can work to elevate myself or I can bring you down. Two forms of 
depreciation are idealization and solicitude. With idealization, for exam-
ple, we "measure thumbs down" to a "real person by an ideal" (Adler, 
1956, p. 268). By maintaining that I am looking only for the "ideal 
woman," I secretly devalue most, if not all, of the women I meet-they 
are not good enough for me. If using the safeguarding operation of solic-
itude, individuals "act as if without their aid ... others would be inca-
pable of caring for themselves" (Adler, 1956, p. 269).2 By assuming they 
need me so badly, I elevate myself at their expense. Teichman and Foa 
(1972) provide empirical support of Adler's views on the depreciation 
tendency. 
Accusation as a form of aggression is relatively self-explanatory. Oth-
ers are held responsible for our "defeats." The object of the accusation is 
typically the one who suffers the most because of the patient's symp-
toms. This is explored in greater detail in Chapter 9. 
Self-accusation and guilt are the final forms of aggression Adler (1956) 
discusses. Adler noted that if people hurt themselves in order to hurt 
others, they are engaging in behaviors that are typical of children. He 
considered suicide the prime example of such a mechanism (K. Adler, 
1961; Karon, 1964). It is the ultimate act of self-accusation aimed at 
hurting others. It should be noted that through self-condemnation one 
can also elevate oneself. "I may have done wrong but at least I have the 
decency to feel guilty" or, more transparently, the psychotic depressive's 
proclamation, 'Tm the worst sinner God ever created." 
Distance Seeking 
Individuals typically display characteristic movements in relation to 
challenges. Whereas excuses are verbal, distance-seeking behaviors are 
related to movement; that is, they are indicative of what a person does. 
That person's rationale for such movement may be different than the 
movement itself, but as Adler often stated, "Trust only movement" for 
that tells one people's true intentions. Adler (1956) would quote Martin 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
87 
Luther's aphorism "not to watch a person's mouth but his fists" and 
often advocated that if we want to understand a person, we have to close 
our ears. We have only to look. In this way we can see as in pantomime. 
He originally described four styles of distance seeking (Adler, 19141 
1983e): backward, standing still, hesitation and back and forth, and cre-
ating obstacles. Mosak and Shulman (1977) have elaborated upon these, 
and their additions are mentioned here. 
Backward movement entails moving away from a challenge. In the 
schizoid maneuver, one ignores "it" until it goes away. With the ostrich 
maneuver (denial), one buries one's head and acts as if the challenge did 
not exist. The unraveler, referred to by Mosak as "the Penelope maneu-
ver," entails doing and then undoing in order to withdraw from the task. 
Penelope, in ancient Greek literature, was the wife of Ulysses. After he 
failed to return from his voyages (she waited 20 years), she began to be 
approached by suitors. Every day they would press her to marry, but she 
would hold them off by claiming to work on a burial shroud for Ulysses' 
father, Laertes. She informed the suitors that when she finished weaving 
the garment, she would marry one of them. Every day she would weave 
all day, and every night, after the suitors left, she would unravel it. Other 
types of backward movement include resignation (the half-hearted at-
tempt) and the declaration of bankruptcy (totally giving up). 
Standing still entails buying time. An example of such would be wait-
ing for the "right" one to come along before one marries. It can be a long 
wait, especially if one really does not want to get married. Developmen-
tally, an example of standing still might be if one acts as if one is still a 
late adolescent who drives fast cars, parties too much, has difficulty 
holding down a meaningful job, and continues to engage in short-term, 
noncommitted relationships even though one's peer group has reached 
adulthood. That person is standing still and refusing to "grow up." 
Hesitation movements keep the person in place or taking "baby steps" 
in life. Procrastination is one form of hesitation. Running in place or 
marking time are others. In these cases people look like they are per-
forming a lot of work, but they do not seem to be going anywhere. Adler 
(1914/198 3e) characterizes the movement of the neurotic as "the hesi-
tating attitude toward life." Back-and-forth movements involve taking 
several steps forward followed by several steps backward. The "cold feet 
syndrome" in the termination phase of therapy is an example of such 
movement. Adler (1956) considered a "Yes, but ... " attitude to be an-
other example. "Yes," the person says, "I know what I have to do, but you 
see I can't because ... " Although Berne (1964) considered this the first 
"game" ever discovered in transactional analysis, Adler (1931/ 1958) had 
already discussed it in 1931. Another example of hesitating, or back-
and-forth movement, is if couples get engaged, break it off, see other 

88 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
people, fall back in love, see each other again, break it off, see other peo-
ple, and so on. 
Finally, creating obstacles is another form of distance seeking. With 
this strategy, people move forward only after something is accomplished 
first. For instance, in creating hurdles, one cannot get to a task until one 
jumps through several hoops. A common example might be the person 
who cannot get a job until he settles his "emotional issues" first. As long 
as he does not want to work, he will never settle his emotional issues. If 
people make monsters or, to use Ellis's (1973) terms, "awfulize" and 
"catastrophize," they frighten themselves so badly that they cannot focus 
upon the task at hand. Choosing overwhelming tasks can be another 
way of creating obstacles. "I can't move on in life," she claims, ''I'm just 
too far behind. After I get this mess sorted out, then I'll see." The mess, 
she later defines, is her entire life. Similarly, one can busy oneself with so 
many details that one never really gets to the heart of the matter. The 
compulsive neurotic engages in this mode of living. These are just some 
ways in which people create obstacles in order to not meet challenges. 
Anxiety 
Adler (1956) claimed that one way to avoid meeting challenges, and 
hence safeguard self-esteem, is to create anxiety. One can become so 
afraid of life, people, or tasks that one cannot function. Certain phobias, 
panic attacks, and what used to be termed "nervous conditions" all serve 
the function of allowing individuals to sidestep demands. People typi-
cally use the phrase ''I'm afraid" in order to justify not accomplishing 
something. Anxiety, for Adler, was a safeguarding mechanism like many 
of the others mentioned in this section and had no particular relevance 
other than a means of evading challenges. For Adlerians, fear is no ex-
emption. If it were, we would never learn to walk or cross the street. 
Exclusion Tendency 
Lastly, Adler (1956) discussed the exclusion tendency. With this, he re-
ferred to the dynamic of narrowing down one's approach to life. The 
more flexible one's life style convictions, the greater the ability to adapt 
to whatever life presents. Rigid, inflexible convictions either "break," 
that is, give in to the demands of life, in which case the person learns 
and grows, or they remain intact. which means that life has to change. 
Although one cannot readily change life, one can restrict, for example 
through denial, the number and types of experiences one has. For exam-

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
89 
pIe, if I will only socialize with people who admire me, I have to limit my 
sphere of social interaction to those who fit my requirements. By nar-
rowing down my approach to life, I exclude all those people or situations 
that do not meet my requirements. 
Shulman (1964) has elaborated upon these safeguarding behaviors. 
His discussion revolves around what he terms defensive patterns, partic-
ularly seen in patients who are attempting to defend themselves against 
perceived threats from their doctors or therapists. He outlines 10 defen-
sive patterns, and we briefly touch upon each. 
D Defensive Patterns 
According to Shulman (1964), patients have nine perceived dangers 
that they defend themselves against: being defective, being exposed, 
incurring disapproval, being ridiculed, being taken advantage of, getting 
necessary help, submitting to order, facing responsibility, and facing 
unpleasant consequences. If anyone or more of these is perceived as 
likely to occur, patients engage in many of the following 10 defensive 
patterns. 
External ization 
Patients tend to blame life or others for their problems. Rosenzweig 
(1944) refers to this as "extrapunitiveness." One version of that entails 
cynicism, in that "life is all garbage anyway, so what do you expect?" Ex-
ternalization does not necessarily assign the blame to factors outside of 
the individual; it may also blame internal factors over which the person 
"has no control." We observe this in the legal defenses of insanity, dimin-
ished responsibility, and uncontrollable impulse. Other variations of 
externalization are proclamations of being a victim of sickness, of bio-
chemical and genetic causes, of a bad background, or of being a victim of 
one's own impulses or even supernatural forces ("The devil made me do 
it!"), and consequently being unable to help oneself. Rebellion is an-
other form of externalization. In rebelling, one can claim that because of 
"them" one had to do what one did; in other words, one blames parents, 
"authority," the Establishment, or "order" for one's behavior, and hence, 
one is justified in rebelling. Similarly, via projection, one can claim, 
'Tm not mad, you're the one being difficult," although all the while it 
is not the other, but oneself, who is mad. With projection, people "pro-
ject" some internal motive onto others, and then hold them accountable 
for it. 

90 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Blind spots 
Patients can choose not to see certain things. By developing blind spots, 
they can overlook issues that they do not want to see, and hence for 
which they do not want to accept responsibility. 
Excessive Self-control 
The ability to control one's emotions can be admirable. Carried to an ex-
treme, one can behave like a robot and become a "feeling avoider" 
(Mosak, 1971a). Being overly controlled can be a way of not dealing 
with pain, or in some cases ecstasies. 
Arbitrary Rightness 
If people use this defensive pattern, they assume an 'Tm right, you're 
wrong" stance that may have no grounding (or little basis) in fact. 
As one person declared, "I'm never wrong! I once thought I was, but 
I was wrong." Some individuals make up their minds and do not want 
to be confused by facts. They have their own opinions and do not 
want to hear otherwise. Their attitude is reminiscent of the bumper 
sticker that reads, "Don't confuse me with the facts. My mind's already 
made up." 
Elusiveness and Confusion 
To be confused means, "I'm not going to be pinned down" (Mosak & 
Gushurst, 1971), and if one cannot be pinned down, one cannot be 
wrong. If they do not remember, they cannot be held accountable. Those 
who use this pattern frequently speak much but say little. "Double talk" 
is common. 
Retreat 
For these people the motto might be "Nothing ventured, nothing lost." If 
retreating is used, patients simply may not come back. Given the oppor-
tunity, these people withdraw from demands. Adler (1914/l983e) pro-
vides many examples of what he calls distancing. 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
91 
Contrition and Self-disparagement 
Patients who use these techniques are pretending to blame themselves. A 
common example of this is a display of good intentions. By claiming, 'Tm 
so sorry," they hope to gain forgiveness without being held too account-
able (Beecher, 1950; Beecher & Beecher, 19711 1987; Bruck, 1950; Drei-
kurs, 1950b; Feichtinger, 1950; Geis, 1966; Rom, 1950; Sicher, 1950). 
They hope that the harder they beat themselves, the less others will do it. 
Suffering 
Suffering can be used for any of several purposes (Mosak, Brown, & 
Boldt, 1994). It can be a form of manipulation ("Look how much I hurt. 
See, I need special service") or a justification ("I deserve it. Look how I 
hurt when I'm deprived!"). Self-glorification can be yet another use for 
suffering ("Look how noble I am!"). 
Sideshows 
This has been briefly mentioned previously, and Shulman (1964) parti-
tions it out as a distinct defense mechanism in and of itself. It is a variant 
of creating obstacles. Instead of dealing with the "main tent" issues in life 
(Wolfe, 1932), patients can focus their attention (and others') upon less 
important, and at times trivial, matters. These sideshows allow them to 
evade the real issues. 
Rational ization 
Patients who use rationalization use "reasons" to actually excuse them-
selves from acknowledging defeat or deficiency or bad behavior. Wex-
berg (1947) speaks of "sour grapes" and "sweet lemon" rationalizations. 
In the former, the person assuages the pain of defeat by denying that she 
or he really wished to attain something. In the latter, the person soothes 
him- or herself by claiming that an undesirable outcome has positive as-
pects. If one's picnic has been rained out, one can always console oneself 
with rationalizations such as, "It's good for the farmers." 
We conclude this chapter by adding to this set eight additional defense 
patterns, or safeguarding behaviors. We have used these in our teaching, 
supervision, and clinical work and have found them helpful. 

92 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Intellectualization 
People using this defense mechanism keep others at a distance by talking 
in terms of abstract concepts and attempt to avoid feelings. If they are 
asked, "Have you ever been in love?" their answer likely is of the order, 
"Let's define our terms. What do you mean by love?" 
Identification 
If used constructively, the process of identification can help provide us 
with a sense of belonging and a foundation for the formation of our self-
concept. We form our values and our gender guiding lines through iden-
tification. If used as a safeguarding device, identification can forestall 
action. Rather than going out and playing baseball, for instance, I can sit 
and watch my "heroes" play. I can gain self-esteem vicariously through 
other's activities and not engage in my own coping behaviors to raise my 
self-esteem. 
Buying Double Insurance 
With this tactic, I enter into a "win-win" situation. I behave in such a 
way as to ensure that no matter what the outcome, I land on my feet. 
For example, if I do not study for the test, and I pass, I am a "hero" be-
cause I did not crack a book. It must be because I am smart. If I fail, it is 
because I was either too lazy, or busy, or preoccupied, or so forth, not be-
cause I am dumb. Either way, I never really lose. I play it doubly safe. 
Literalism 
If I take everything very seriously, I can encourage others to behave 
carefully around me. If instructed to do something, I can act in such a 
way that I become obsessed with the letter, and not the spirit, of the law. 
For example, if Mother says to her son, "Put all your clothes in the laun-
dry," and he puts everything in the laundry-shoes, jackets, ties, hat-
he sends her a subtle message: "See what happens when you count on 
me or push me." She may stop asking him. 
Literalism often makes good humor and comedy (Mosak, 1987b). At 
the end of each show, George Burns would request. "Say good night. 
Gracie," and Gracie Allen would respond, "Good night. Gracie." Abbott 
and Costello's routine, "Who's on First." is another such example. Clini-

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
93 
cally, literalism may disturb communication. In marriage counseling a 
man complains that his wife nags him 24 hours a day. Disgustedly his 
wife retorts, "You see what I have to put up with? Now tell the truth! Do 
I nag you when you're sleeping?" 
Fantasy 
Daydreaming can be fun and positive (Singer, 1975), but too much day-
dreaming wastes time (d. Walter Mitty). After alL there is an old expres-
sion: The first thing you have to do to make your dreams come true is 
wake up. Fantasy is engaged in if one cannot attain or accomplish some-
thing in actuality at the time. Three common themes of fantasy are the 
conquering hero, the suffering hero, and the lost prince or princess. In 
the first, only wonderful things happen. There is nothing the person 
cannot achieve or get. These fantasies provide a "high" for the day-
dreamer. The suffering hero gains nobility as one imagines how tough 
life is, how overwhelming it can be, and how one must fight incredible 
odds and overcome outrageous fortune to simply survive. Life is full of 
travail and suffering. Suffering is the substitution of nobility for no abil-
ity (Mosak, 1987b). These fantasies help to confirm a pessimism about 
life and oneself and create a mood in the present. Prometheus is a case in 
point. When chained to a rock unto eternity with a raven nibbling at his 
liver, he cries out, "Ye gods! How I suffer!" The lost prince or princess 
fantasy emerges if children feel unloved or punished, but the fantasy 
may carryover into adulthood. It is based upon the assumption that par-
ents who love their children do not ever punish them or disapprove of 
them. Because these "people" disapproved or punished them, they can-
not be their real parents. And although these "parents" may "get points" 
for taking them in now, some day their "real" parents will return and 
rescue them from their current situation, and they will be loved ever 
after. 
Displacement 
With displacement, people tend to "kick the dog," when they really want 
to kick someone else. Transference is a form of displacement. For exam-
ple, if Joe is aggravated with his boss, he is better served by speaking to 
his boss than by going home and taking it out on his wife and kids. Dis-
placement allows individuals to evade dealing with tasks that they per-
ceive as important, but they feel incapable of accomplishing. We feeL 
"You can't fight city hall!" 

94 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Doctrine of Balances 
We sometimes attribute divine intervention to occurrences in order to 
safeguard our self-esteem. "If she is beautiful," we say, "she must be 
dumb." "Cold hands, warm heart." "Lucky at love, unlucky at cards." 
For everyone thing a person is given, one is taken away, as if there were 
some greater force such as God or Providence maintaining a balance, as-
suring that despite one's deficiencies everyone gets something to coun-
terbalance it. Thus, no one really is cheated in life. Although this feeling 
may provide consolation for some. evidence does not substantiate it. 
Reaction Formation 
Some Adlerians consider this a variation of compensation, and in many 
ways, it is. We assume an outward posture that is the opposite of what 
we really believe or feel. Children do this quite often, such as when little 
boys tease the girls they like best. As adults, we sometimes act as if we 
are opposed to certain topics or types of situations, when in fact we 
would secretly want to do them. For instance, Pete acts as if he would 
never want the kind of job Artie has. He really would but feels he could 
never have it, so he acts as if he does not want it. 
D Summary 
This chapter attempts to detail how people either meet or evade chal-
lenges that are placed before them. There are far more safeguarding 
mechanisms that we could describe, but space limitations preclude such 
an undertaking. At the root of all of these issues is the feeling of inferior-
ity and how people choose to deal with such feelings. All of us, to some 
extent, meet some challenges some of the time; and all of us manage to 
sidestep some challenges sometimes, in an attempt to prevent us from 
exposing what we perceive to be our weaknesses and defects. We are, 
after all, human. 
Until this point, we have written about challenges in general. Adleri-
ans believe that there are certain challenges with which everyone must 
deal, either through direct problem solving, compensation, or safeguard-
ing. These challenges are part and parcel of being human, and they re-
quire an answer from us, even if that answer is no. ("No," itself may be a 
defensive pattern.) These challenges, these tasks of life, are the focus of 
Chapter 7. 

Inferiorities, Inferiority Feelings, and Inferiority Complexes 
95 
D Points to Consider 
It is impossible to live without stress. For theorists such as Adler and 
Selye, successful adaptation requires collaboration and altruistic ten-
dencies. 
If people are task-oriented, they focus upon what needs to be done. 
If they are prestige-oriented, they focus upon how they are doing. 
Everybody has inferiorities. The issue is how these are managed. 
Just as some people have inferiority complexes, some have superi-
ority complexes. Not all feelings of superiority are abnormal and com-
pensatory for feelings of inferiority, however. 
Generally speaking, people tend to either cope with situations as they 
arrive or engage in safeguarding mechanisms. Safeguarding mech-
anisms, more commonly known as defense mechanisms, limit the range 
of creativity and useful adaptation. 
D Questions 
1. Give some examples of "coping behaviors." How are these different 
from defense mechanisms? 
2. What did Selye believe about stress? How could we most successfully 
deal with it? 
3. What are some instances of people developing normal senses of their 
own superiority? 
4. Give an example of buying double insurance. 
S. What are some forms of distance seeking? 
6. What are sideshows? How are they used and why? 
7. In your conversations with family and friends, note how many safe-
guarding mechanisms you hear. Do you use any when you discuss 
some of your "issues?" 
D Notes 
lUsua\ly this is termed "ego-oriented," but because Adlerians do not accept the Freudian 
topology of id, ego, and superego, we use "prestige-oriented" or "worth-oriented." 
2ef. Wylie's (1994) "smother complex." 

The Tasks of Life 
I assume . .. that a point was reached in the history of mankind when the 
obstacles to continuing in a state of Nature were stronger than the forces 
which each individual could employ to the end of continuing in it . ... 
[SJince men can by no means engender new powers, but can only unite 
and control those of which they already possessed, there is no way in which 
they can maintain themselves save by coming together and pooling their 
strength . .. and learn to act in concert. 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1762/1947) 
For Adlerian psychologists, understanding people is a two-sided issue. 
There is a social matrix, a context, in which people exist that cannot 
be ignored. The existential philosophers, in particular, have noted that 
people are "thrown" into a world, and that to attempt to conceive of 
people without taking into account the world in which they live limits 
our understanding of what being human means (e.g., Heidegger, 1927/ 
1962). As we state in the chapter on the basic assumptions of individ-
ual psychology, Adlerians operate from a social-field theoretical per-
spective. 
Like most theoreticians operating from a subjective, phenomenologi-
cal perspective, Adler placed considerable emphasis upon understanding 
the private, personal world of the patients with whom he worked. The 
96 

The Tasks of Life 
97 
life style assessment, with its emphasis upon understanding the early 
childhood situation, family constellation, parental relationships, school 
and neighborhood environment, and early recollections (Powers & Grif-
fith, 1987; Shulman & Mosak, 1988), attempts to access individuals' per-
ceptions, impressions, and meanings they ascribe to life, themselves, and 
other people. Their maps, their blueprints about how to move through 
life, provide us with rich sources of information through which to un-
derstand them and, possibly, assist in changing them. That is half of the 
picture, however. 
Although Adlerians place a great deal of emphasis upon the phenome-
nological, they also examine people's relationship to the world. It is this 
other half of the equation to which we now direct our attention. How do 
we understand the world? What do Adlerians mean by "world" and why 
should we pay attention to it at all? Is having a sound grasp of people's 
life styles not sufficient? 
Adler (1956) stated that every life style is adaptable until life presents 
it with something for which the person is not adequately prepared. This 
is a crucial concept and requires closer examination. 
Let us discuss, for instance, someone we call Bill. Bill has the life style 
of a getter (Adler, 1935; Mosak, 1959). He "arranges" life in such a way 
as to maximize his getting. As Mosak (1959) has explained, getters are 
more preoccupied with the act of acquisition than with the actual hoard-
ing itself. Bill, for example, is more interested in the "hunt" (as he refers 
to it) than in the actual attaining of a romantic partner. He pursues vig-
orously, only to probably lose interest shortly after he has gotten what 
he wants, whatever that may be subjectively defined as. Given this style, 
his perceptual system is "biased" in favor of certain kinds of data. He 
views the world, life, other people, and circumstances from a vantage 
point that reinforces his expectations. He sets out to receive the kinds of 
responses that support him in that movement, even if he has to actively 
create situations that "give" him what he wants. 
That is what Adler (19201l983d, 1956) meant when he spoke of the 
"arrangement." We create feedback that supports our beliefs. Though we 
are frequently not aware of it, we do influence much of what we see 
around us. Let us elaborate on that point. If I construe life as being 
something that needs to be controlled, I will not only seek out situations 
that are in need of a "controller," I will probably create some of those 
same situations. I feel grounded, so to say, if I am controlling. 
The problems arise-at least potentially-if life is not so accommodat-
ing. Controllers with nothing or no one to control can feel rather out of 
place. Mosak (1995a) has given them the "handle" of "St. George with 
no dragons to fight." How they find "security," or "belonging," is, in that 

98 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
situation, seriously called into question. Despite all efforts to controL life 
may not yield to the controller'S demands. 
Adler (1956) delineated three main challenges that individuals must 
confront. Regardless of our style, we have to take a stand on these issues. 
Work, social relations, and sex are three tasks of life to which we are 
obliged to respond. Later Adlerians have noted that he addressed two 
others in his writings, though he never fully articulated or discussed 
them in detail (Dreikurs & Mosak, 1966, 1967; Mosak & Dreikurs, 
1967). These two additional tasks are self and spirituality. We believe, in 
line with Dinkmeyer et al. (1987), that parenting and family are another 
life task. Way (1950) and Wolfe (1932) have examined the life tasks and 
how they relate to life styles. 
People attempt to meet the life tasks according to their life styles. Dri-
vers typically storm their way through them and focus upon accomplish-
ment. Those who need to be good do what is "right and proper." 
Excitement seekers solve the life tasks in as exciting a way as possible. To 
whatever extent feasible, most of us try to have life conform to our ex-
pectations. We bend life to our will. 
Life and its responsibilities do not always accommodate to our de-
mands. The more we push our styles, values, and expectations upon life, 
the more it may push back. In the end, we must adapt to it, for it will 
only accommodate us for so long. These five areas, work, social rela-
tions, sex, self, and spirituaL provide tests, what we called challenges in 
Chapter 6, that severely assess our ability to survive and thrive. Our cog-
nitive maps need to be modified and reworked in order to navigate the 
new terrain life puts out before us. If we cling too tightly to our de-
mands, beliefs, and convictions, we have trouble meeting the require-
ments of the situation. These tasks become potential stressors and 
potentially distressful if we are not flexible, open, and ready to meet 
them head on. 
For some people, the issue becomes one of evading these tasks rather 
than meeting them. Their life styles, their maps, are not willing to ac-
commodate the new terrain, and these people stubbornly refuse to 
admit that what they require of life is not what life is about. Their adap-
tations tend to become maladaptive, for it is not easy to have life bend to 
them on such a consistent basis. This topic, however, is explored in 
greater detail in Chapter 8. For present purposes, it is enough to be 
aware that, in the challenge to meet the life tasks, for these people a bat-
tle ensues, and it is a battle few individuals can "win" without consider-
able cost and suffering to themselves and those around them. 
Adlerians attempt to learn how people adapt to their worlds. Their 
worlds, however, have these common tasks that are shared with others 
and their worlds. All of us are obliged to take a stand on the issues of 

The Tasks of Life 
99 
work, social relations, sex, ourselves, our place in the cosmos (a subtask 
of spirituality), and what we are going to do about parenting and family, 
and all of us can be evaluated on how we fare in our efforts. The test of a 
life style is how it meets these challenges, these tasks. Each of these tasks 
has many components, and some of them tend to occur at certain devel-
opmental epochs of the life cycle. They provide nodal points of how the 
life style is doing, of how adaptable, flexible, and cooperative it can be. 
We all live in this world, and we tend to know about it most profoundly 
if we realize that it is not under our controL that the map we have of life 
is a fictional map, a map in which we have invested a great deal of time 
and energy, but whose correspondence to what is "actually out there" 
nonetheless may be fleeting, at best (Adler, 1956; Vaihinger, 19111 
1965). It is at those times that we can measure ourselves and confront a 
most startling moment. Life may not be what we thought it was, what it 
appeared to be; what possibly, for a time, it seemed certain that it was; in 
the end, we only knew what we thought it was about. It is, and was, big-
ger than us and beyond our plan. It is at those times we become aware of 
our humanity. 
D The Work Task 
Regardless of what we do, we must do something with our time (Berne, 
1964). Adler (1956) spoke of the work, or occupation, task. He wrote 
that 
The first tie sets the problem of occupation. We are living on the surface of 
this planet. with only the resources of this planet .... It has always been 
the task of mankind to find the right answer to the problem these condi-
tions set us .... In every age, mankind has arrived at a certain level of so-
lution, but it has always been necessary to strive for improvement and 
further accomplishments. (p. 131) 
For Adlerians, people are tied to each other in their need to cooperate 
and build a community in which we can thrive and grow. By sharing the 
"work" required to survive, we can all function better. Very few of us, if 
any, could exist completely independently. The ability to make our own 
clothes, grow our own food, hunt, care for our own health, build our 
own shelters, and mate and raise a family is limited without support and 
constructive interdependence upon a community. As Wolfe (1932, p. 
203) declares, 
We mustl work, whether we wish to work or whether we prefer to be idle. 
The question of work is not a matter for us to decide according to our per-
sonal whim or fancy. The only choice that remains open to the individual 

100 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
is the manner in which he or she makes his or her contribution to the 
commonweal (p. 203) 
In general, there are six subtasks in the work task: occupational 
choice, occupational preparation, satisfaction, leadership, leisure, and 
sociovocational issues. Each is looked at more closely here. 
Occupational Choice 
"What do you want to be when you grow up?" That is a frequent ques-
tion we ask of children. Defining an occupational niche is a difficult task 
for some people; for others, it is quite simple. In our culture, at this time, 
people are frequently defined by what they do. A popular phrase we 
have recently heard states that people used to work where they lived; 
now, they live where they work. We are a country that places great em-
phasis upon work, and how we define what we do usually plays a large 
part in determining who we are. Adlerians also stress the reverse: Who 
we are "determines" what we do. Our life styles help us define what we 
select as acceptable (Attarian, 1978). Controllers, for example, tend to 
pick occupations that allow them to exercise control. 
Occupational Preparation 
The training we receive, and eventually give to others, is the second sub-
task. As early as the elementary school years, children can be seen train-
ing themselves for certain occupations through preference for certain 
subjects. Parents and other family members model, encourage, and occa-
sionally push, children into various areas. What we perceive as helpful 
in our movements toward our goal we do more of; that which we sense 
as having no or minimal use, we do less of. 
Satisfaction 
How satisfied are we with our work? Analogous to our discussion of pri-
vate logic (Dreikurs, 1973), issues of satisfaction can be separated into 
two broad categories, daily and career. On a daily basis, the amount of 
job satisfaction we accept tends to run to either of two extremes. For 
some, daily satisfaction is of uppermost importance. They prefer to get 
paid every day, conceptualize their salaries in terms of hourly wages, and 
forego longer-term "career" goals. They like working days or nights, out-
doors or indoors, regular or flexible hours, on salary or on commission. 

The Tasks of Life 
101 
For others, daily satisfaction is not the issue. If what they are doing is 
leading to some longer-range, "ultimate" career goal, they can tolerate a 
great deal of immediate, daily dissatisfaction. Their satisfaction comes 
with the attainment of their long-term goals. Many university students 
understand this concept all too well. The hours of studying, writing 
papers, doing research, taking examinations, and in general waiting to 
begin careers are rewarded when they begin their careers. Once again, 
issues of satisfaction are intimately tied to our life style goals. 
Leadership 
Determining whether we will be leaders or followers, who we perceive as 
leaders and followers, and how leadership is demonstrated will be yet an-
other subtask. Children determine their place within their peer groups, at 
school, and eventually, on their jobs. At work, some feel more at ease 
leading (e.g., "I've got to be my own boss!"); others are noticeably more 
comfortable following. Some have difficulty "taking orders"; others are 
too willing to "follow" and lack initiative. Some are better leaders than 
others; still others lead brilliantly in certain situations, under the right 
conditions. 
Leisure 
What do we do when we are not working? For certain individuals, 
leisure time is not an issue, because they work virtually all the time. For 
others, the pursuit of leisure is a full-time job. Retirement issues are part 
of this subtask. Work is but one of five tasks that we must undertake. 
There needs to be time for other issues. Increasingly with the ageing of 
the population, the issue of retirement is another facet of this task. 
Sociovocational Issues 
The final subtask entails dealing with coworkers. Like many of the sub-
tasks in this section, a considerable amount of training in this area can be 
seen in early-childhood school relationships. During family projects, 
how children relate to their siblings and parents plays a significant part 
as well. We encounter many people who are not our friends but to 
whom we are friendly. Coworkers play just such a role. Currently issues 
of sexual harassment are a prominent sociovocational problem. 

102 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
D The Social Task 
Wolfe (1932, p. 204) states: 
The second group of problems arises out of the specific human need for 
communal life. As individuals we are too weak to live alone, and nature 
has given us the human community as the best weapon against extinc-
tion .... The manner of his social adjustment admits of a tremendous vari-
ety of solutions, but the adjustment itself is fundamental to the good life 
and to human happiness. (p. 204) 
We need to get along with each other. Without the community, without 
the support and cooperation of others, we would be extinct. For Wolfe 
and other Adlerians, the issue becomes not only a psychological one, but 
biological as well. As a species, humans need each other. 
Adler (1956) stated that "we have always to reckon with others, to 
adapt ourselves to others, and to interest ourselves in them" (p. 132). He 
believed, like Sullivan (1953, 1964) years later, that psychology and psy-
chiatry were social sciences, and more specifically interpersonal sciences. 
How we get along with each other is a basic question, for, as Sullivan 
noted, we react and develop in relation to other people, even if only in 
our minds and imaginations. The two main subtasks are how we belong 
and how we interact or, more precisely stated, the nature of our transac-
tions with others. 
Belonging 
For Dreikurs (19331l950a), the fundamental question of human nature 
was belonging. How do we choose to belong? It is not a question of 
whether or not we belong, but how. Even a hermit needs a town outside 
of which to live (K. Pancner, 1978). If I belong, the chances of my feeling 
inferior are minimal; and even if I do feel inferior, my withdrawing for 
too long is not very likely. Stated in the form of a ratio: Belonging = lIin-
feriority feelings. This is an inverse proportion, by which the greater the 
sense of belonging, the less likely the feelings of inferiority and vice 
versa. How I found my place in childhood (typically, but not exclusively, 
in my family of origin) helped set the tone for my adult style of belong-
ing. There is a good chance that if I felt that I belonged by being cute, 
helpless, and inadequate, the baby (Mosak, 1971a), I probably find my 
place in the social task through similar means. If other people accept me 
like that, I probably do not feel very inferior. If they do not, the chal-
lenge begins. 

The Tasks of Life 
103 
Transactions 
Berne (1964, 1972) and subsequent transactional analysts have written 
extensively on this issue. Harris (1967) has outlined the basic positions 
that individuals take in reference to others. Massey (1989, 1990, 1993) 
has written on the relationship of Adler to Berne, as have Mozdzierz and 
Lottman (1973) and Wilson (1975). In fact Berne (1972, p. 58) himself 
wrote that "of all those who preceded transactional analysis, Alfred 
Adler comes the closest to talking like a script analyst." The "I'm OK, 
you're OK" descriptions are strikingly similar to the Adlerian notion of 
inferiority feelings and superiority feelings. For example, 'Tm not OK, 
you are" is, in transactional analytic terms, a statement of inferiority 
feelings. The "games people play" with each other, or the "ego states" 
(Le., parent-adult-child) Berne uses, are ways in which individuals 
move toward their goals. People find their places with others, they gain a 
sense of belonging, through certain styles, using certain patterns or what 
Adler (1935/1964c) labeled complexes. In that paper, he spoke of (for 
instance) the redeemer complex, possessed by someone who sacrifices 
him- or herself for others. 
D The Sexual Task 
Humans come in two sexes. Adler (1978) disliked the phrase "opposite 
sex," for it implied an antithesis between the sexes that he felt was artifi-
cially produced by the culture and society at large. Horney (1926/1967, 
pp. 69-70), in a paper written in 1926, wrote that 
Owing to the hitherto purely masculine character of our civilization, it has 
been much harder for women to achieve any sublimation that would 
really satisfy their nature, for all the ordinary professionals have been filled 
by men. This again must have exercised an influence upon women's feel-
ings of inferiority, for naturally they could not accomplish the same as 
men .... It seems to me impossible to judge to how great a degree the un-
conscious motives for the flight from womanhood are reinforced by the ac-
tual social subordination of women. One might conceive of the connection 
as an interaction of psychic and social factors. 
Adler (1978, p. 8) might have written that same statement when he said 
that 
A serious result of this myth of the inferiority of everything female is a pe-
culiar dichotomy of concepts. Masculine is simply identified with every-
thing valuable, strong, and victorious, and feminine with obedient, servile, 

104 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
and subordinated. This manner of thinking has become so deeply rooted in 
our culture that everything excellent has a male tint, whereas everything 
that is less valuable and objectionable is represented as feminine. 
For Adler, and for Horney, a female is not the opposite sex, but the other 
sex. If we learn to cooperate, we better our existence. If we cannot coop-
erate, the species dies (Wexberg, 1929). 
In general. the work task is the easiest to meet. It requires the least 
amount of cooperation and flexibility (Dreikurs & Mosak, 1966; Way, 
1950). The social task, getting along with others in a sense of community 
and friendship, is the next easiest. It requires more cooperation and is a 
greater test of our adaptability. The sexual task requires the greatest 
amount of intimacy and, therefore, the most skill to fulfill on a consis-
tent basis. It is the hardest task to meet. One of the biggest problems, 
though by no means the only one, is that men often view women as in-
ferior, a fact reinforced by our culture. The sense that women are less 
than men is sometimes subtle and barely noticed, but it is still prevalent. 
Bieliauskas (1974) points out that the tendency of some women to view 
men as inferior does not solve the problem. Adlerians favor equality of. 
and cooperation between, the sexes. The ever-increasing divorce rate 
may be evidence of the difficulty people have in meeting this task. 
There are four subtasks that need to be examined. They are the issues 
of sexual definition, sexual identification, development, and behavior. 
Sexual Sex Role Definition 
This subtask requires individuals to determine what it means to be a 
man or a woman. In the case of children, it involves the awareness of 
sex differences between boys and girls. Equality does not mean same-
ness, and although men and women are equal. they certainly are not the 
same. What those differences entail, as Adler and Horney noted in the 
passages in this section, is as much a social factor as it is a biological one. 
Sexual Sex Role Identification 
Once children have an awareness that a difference does exist between 
men and women (boys and girls), the issue rather rapidly becomes one of 
how closely they measure up to their conceptualization of masculine or 
feminine. The parental guiding lines are one obvious source of data, but 
so are siblings and peers, movies, television programs, and books. Chil-
dren observe the differences and tend to overgeneralize, such as if they 

The Tasks of Life 
105 
notice that Father does something differently than Mother and assume 
that the difference is not simply caused by the particulars of the family 
situation but is gender-related: "Men do ... , but women do ... " Issues of 
masculine and feminine protests can arise (Adler, 1910/1983a, 1939, 
1956, 1978; Bieliauskas, 1974; Mosak & Schneider, 1977; Ronge, 1956). 
The masculine protest is a frequently misunderstood concept. As 
Mosak and Schneider (1977) point out, it is an attempt to attest to the 
subjective "fact" that masculinity is prized and, as Adler (1978) and Hor-
ney (1926/1967) wrote, "superior" according to cultural standards. Indi-
viduals who display a masculine protest are attesting to the fact that they 
are overvaluing the issue of masculinity and are trying to appear supe-
rior. Both men and women may display masculine protests, because 
both may feel that it is more valuable to be men or "real men." As Ronge 
(1956) has pointed out, a feminine protest occurs as well, though admit-
tedly with less frequency. That is the situation in which either men or 
women attest to the fact that it is better to act as if they were feminine, 
because they subjectively perceive that as being superior. This will prob-
ably become a more frequent phenomenon as society moves toward 
greater sexual equality. Although the masculine protest occurs in normal 
men and women, Adler (19 30b) considered the masculine protest to be 
a common element in the development of all sexual deviations. 
Sexual Development 
There are certain developmental milestones, biological and social, with 
regards to sexual development through which individuals pass. Puberty, 
menstruation, developing secondary sex characteristics, masturbation, 
and successfully managing how they transmit to children their sexual 
identity are some of the typical milestones individuals encounter. Any of 
these issues can prove very challenging and can test the adaptability of 
the life style. 
Sexual Behavior 
Finally, there is the issue of sexual behavior itself. What is appropriate 
sexual behavior? How is intercourse performed? When do people begin 
acting upon their sexual feelings? Who are appropriate people with 
whom to engage with in sex? Is oral intercourse normal? Is this or that 
practice moral? These questions can prove quite perplexing, even to 
adults, and hard and fast rules are difficult, though not impossible, to de-
rive. And currently there are the challenges related to AIDS and other 

106 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
sexually transmitted diseases. What about dating? How do we attain our 
sexual goals? Who is an appropriate dating partner? 
D The Self Task 
As Dreikurs and Mosak (1967) and Shulman (1965) discuss, Adler never 
fully delineated this as a task, but it is evident throughout his writings. 
The crucial question this task touches upon is: There is an "I" and a "me" 
(myself), and how does the I relate to myself (James, 1890)? People 
need to come to a conclusion about themselves, and that process and its 
outcome can greatly influence functioning in all of the other tasks. There 
are four main subtasks that we examine: survival, body image, opinion, 
and evaluation. 
Survival 
How our sense of self "survives" is a crucial question. Survival issues 
tend to center around three main areas: biological, psychological, and 
social. Biological survival entails my health: How healthy am I? Do I take 
care of myself, or do I not? What should I eat? How often do I exercise? 
Do I comply with medical advice? Do I regularly engage in dangerous ac-
tivities? Do I take care of myself and my safety? Psychological survival is 
somewhat more familiar to most readers of this text. It revolves around 
self-esteem issues. Basically, psychological survival asks: Can I face my-
self in the mirror? If not, why not, and what am I willing to do about it? 
Can I live with myself? Social survival is similar to the issues defined 
under the social task, in particular, the subtask of belonging: Where do I 
fit in? How do I fit in? What do I have to change about me or develop in 
order to belong? More importantly, what will they think of me? Will 
they accept or reject me? Dare I risk this socially? 
Body Image 
My body may be just the kind of body I want-pretty, athletic, muscular, 
gorgeous eyes, the "right size" of breasts, "great legs," or graceful. On the 
other hand, it may not. The latter body image may keep plastic surgeons 
busy. In body-dysmorphic disorder it keeps both patients and surgeons 
busy. 
The body I have may not always be the body I perceive. The greater 
the degree of congruence between the two, the better the chances of my 

The Tasks of Life 
107 
doing something constructive about my perceptions, should I deem it 
necessary to do anything about it at all. For example, in case of anorexia 
nervosa, individuals perceive themselves as overweight when, for all 
practical purposes, they are underweight. Carried to an extreme, the dis-
order can be life-threatening. Until the perception of the body and the 
anorexic's actual body coincide, it is difficult to create positive change. If 
the actual body and the perception of it coincide, a person still has the 
issue of deciding whether or not she or he is comfortable with what she 
or he sees. 
Opinion 
What do I think of me? How do I relate to me? As James (1890) dis-
cussed, subjectively, individuals tend to make a distinction between the 
''I'' and the "me," with the former being the subject and the latter, the 
object of experience. In practice, most of us place a blank space between 
the "I" and the "me:" "I 
me." What goes in the blank space 
makes all the difference in the world. "Like," "hate," "love," "suspect," 
"appreciate," "ignore," and "focus too much upon" are some of the kinds 
of statements we frequently hear from clients when we ask them to "fill 
in the blank" during initial interviews. The opinion one has of oneself is 
a crucial component to one's life style and is a foundation to feelings of 
security, self-esteem, superiority, inferiority, and the like. 
Evaluation 
Sullivan (1953) has written considerably on this issue. He analyzes the 
difference between the "good me," the "bad me," and the "not me," trac-
ing their origins back to the empathic bonding (or lack thereof) between 
mother and infant. For Sullivan, the good me develops if children receive 
a sense of warmth and compassion from their caretakers. The bad me de-
velops if caretakers empathically communicate disapproval to their chil-
dren. The not me develops if caretakers and children experience an 
empathic breakdown; the children, primarily because of overwhelming 
anxiety in the caregivers that moves them away from the children, re-
ceive no feedback about themselves at such times, and hence they do not 
accurately process information about themselves. Mosak (1973) describes 
the relationship between the good me and the bad me, and how such a 
relationship is maintained into adulthood in order to move toward a goal 
of controlling, particularly oneself. It is actually a spurious battle if one 
views it holistically, a battle of, "Who is stronger, me or me?" 
The Tasks of Life 
107 
doing something constructive about my perceptions, should I deem it 
necessary to do anything about it at all. For example, in case of anorexia 
nervosa, individuals perceive themselves as overweight when, for all 
practical purposes, they are underweight. Carried to an extreme, the dis-
order can be life-threatening. Until the perception of the body and the 
anorexic's actual body coincide, it is difficult to create positive change. If 
the actual body and the perception of it coincide, a person still has the 
issue of deciding whether or not she or he is comfortable with what she 
or he sees. 
Opinion 
What do I think of me? How do I relate to me? As James (1890) dis-
cussed, subjectively, individuals tend to make a distinction between the 
''I'' and the "me," with the former being the subject and the latter, the 
object of experience. In practice, most of us place a blank space between 
the "I" and the "me:" "I 
me." What goes in the blank space 
makes all the difference in the world. "Like," "hate," "love," "suspect," 
"appreciate," "ignore," and "focus too much upon" are some of the kinds 
of statements we frequently hear from clients when we ask them to "fill 
in the blank" during initial interviews. The opinion one has of oneself is 
a crucial component to one's life style and is a foundation to feelings of 
security, self-esteem, superiority, inferiority, and the like. 
Evaluation 
Sullivan (1953) has written considerably on this issue. He analyzes the 
difference between the "good me," the "bad me," and the "not me," trac-
ing their origins back to the empathic bonding (or lack thereof) between 
mother and infant. For Sullivan, the good me develops if children receive 
a sense of warmth and compassion from their caretakers. The bad me de-
velops if caretakers empathically communicate disapproval to their chil-
dren. The not me develops if caretakers and children experience an 
empathic breakdown; the children, primarily because of overwhelming 
anxiety in the caregivers that moves them away from the children, re-
ceive no feedback about themselves at such times, and hence they do not 
accurately process information about themselves. Mosak (1973) describes 
the relationship between the good me and the bad me, and how such a 
relationship is maintained into adulthood in order to move toward a goal 
of controlling, particularly oneself. It is actually a spurious battle if one 
views it holistically, a battle of, "Who is stronger, me or me?" 

108 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
D The Spiritual Task 
Mosak and Dreikurs (1967) discuss that this task, like the self task, was 
mentioned throughout Adler's writings. Though he never fully artiCll-
lated it, he often refers to it (Jahn & Adler, 1933/1964). There are five 
subtasks with which individuals deal: relationship to God, religion, the 
universe, immortality, and the meaning of life. 
Relationship to Cod 
What is my idea of God? Do I believe in a God or not? If I do, do I see 
God as unforgiving, punishing, loving, or indifferent? How should I re-
late to my perception of God (Armstrong, 1993; Miles, 1996)? Many of 
the dynamics of the life style can be seen clearly in how individuals per-
ceive (or do not perceive) God. If there is no God, in what do I believe? 
Religion 
What do people do about religion? Do they run from it or toward it? Do 
they see it as a sanctuary or a place of punishment? Does it enrich their 
lives or cause them fear? Do they have religion? The stance individuals 
take toward religious practices is of interest as well. Do they practice rit-
uals or not? Why do they practice some and not others? What is sin and, 
according to Menninger (1973), whatever happened to it? What does 
one do about guilt, atonement, and reconciliation (Mosak, 1987a)? 
Relationship to the Universe 
Some individuals see humans as simply another animal. Others see hu-
mans as the pinnacle of God's creation. Some conceptualize people as 
basically good; others see people as mostly bad. For some, humans can 
change; for others, existence is a matter of destiny or fate. 
Metaphysical Issues 
How do we view life and death? Some believe in reincarnation, and that 
they accrue karma, which determines as what species they will return. 

The Tasks of Life 
109 
Others believe that salvation is achieved through good deeds, and that 
rewards are given in an afterlife. Still others hold to the conviction that 
there is no sense of immortality, other than (perhaps) through good 
works that survive after one dies. Is there a soul? An immortal soul? Are 
there a heaven and a hell? Is there resurrection? Reincarnation? Not 
only can these issues reflect life style issues, they can prove to be stern 
tests to which life style convictions must adapt. 
Meaning of Life 
For some people, life has no meaning. For others (e.g., Frankl, 1925, 
1963; Yalom, 1980), love provides meaning. Some, like the Epicureans 
of old, subscribe to a hedonistic philosophy, believing that the meaning 
of life is the attainment of pleasure; while others, especially some exis-
tentialists and some stoics, adopt a more pessimistic view, believing that 
the ultimate meaning of life is despair. 
D The Parenting and Family Task 
How do we relate to our families? Should we marry or cohabitate? How 
do we solve the issues of relating to our siblings, parents, grandparents, 
aunts and uncles, and children? This is similar to, but still different from, 
the social task. The bonds we have with family members can be much 
stronger, and much more intense, than with our friends. The issue of 
family dynamics has long been a focus of study and concern for Adleri-
ans (Adler, 193011963, 193011970; Dreikurs, 1948a). 
D The Life Style and the Tasks of Life 
As has probably become increasingly evident throughout this chapter, 
individual psychology is a breadth psychology, as opposed to a depth 
psychology. We do not necessarily look to explore "deeper and deeper" 
layers of a personality and, hence, uncover the meaning of what causes 
"dis-ease" to people. We attempt to look across the personality, to show 
how wide and pervasive the life style is in people's functioning. The life 
tasks provide us with such an opportunity. 
They are the points of contact between the person and the world. 
Too much emphasis upon either pole leaves the explorer with a dis-

110 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
torted picture. Too much of an emphasis upon the subjective side 
presents a picture in which everything is relative; there is no basis 
for shared realities, common tasks, and mutual communication; and is-
sues arise regarding the necessity of ethics and moral codes to guide 
conduct, for if life is completely a "matter of opinion," then anything 
goes. An overemphasis upon the objective pole results in the loss of 
personal freedom and responsibility as well. In that case, the environ-
ment and heredity play too crucial a role, and people become reactors 
to life, constantly attempting to adjust to it and not playing any part in 
creating it. 
Adlerian psychology attempts to take both positions into account. It is 
not only the life style which is important; how the person adapts it to 
life's challenges-the life tasks-is crucial too. People need to face the 
challenge of work, but how they perceive it, train for it, define it, and 
feel about it is very much an interplay of what they bring to it (i.e., their 
styles of life and skills) and what it entails itself (e.g., the work task). In-
dividuals do fall in love, and what they define as being suitable to do, 
with whom, for how long, and under what conditions encompasses both 
their unique style and the style of the other person set against the cul-
tural norms and standards of the time. It is by walking both sides of this 
line that Adlerian psychotherapists and counselors come not only to un-
derstand but to help people to change. 
Most of us can and do change on our own. To survive past infancy and 
early childhood means that we have had to adapt and find strategies that 
we found useful in getting us to our goals. To some degree or another, 
we do manage to meet the life tasks most of the time. Some individuals, 
however, meet them less frequently or in ways that most of us have dif-
ficulty comprehending. 
What seems to characterize such individuals? At the risk of overstating 
the point, these people cling to their life styles more tightly, more des-
perately, more determinedly, than most. Their ability to bend to life is 
limited, sometimes for perfectly understandable reasons. For the most 
part, if any of us overstep our limits-if we attempt to do more, be more, 
and enforce our guidelines too stringently upon life-that is when we 
forget our place in the world. That is when we create solutions to the life 
tasks that lead us into ever-increasing difficulties, for as we attempt to 
articulate in Chapter 8, it is our solutions to life's challenges that lead us 
to problems, not the fact that life has challenged us. The irony is that it is 
typically not life that creates our problems; it is our solutions to life that 
create our problems. That is the irony, and what provides writers and 
artists with the opportunity to portray the human condition as both 
tragic and, just as significantly, optimistic. 

The Tasks of Life 
111 
D Summary 
We have examined how the tasks of life are interwoven with our styles 
of life. This chapter is by necessity nothing but an overview. Literally, we 
could write volumes on the interactional effects between the styles peo-
ple adapt to their perceptions of what is required of them and the life 
tasks. For now, this overview will have to do, for, being clinicians, we are 
interested in turning to a particular manner of addressing-or not ad-
dressing-the life tasks. That is the issue of maladjustment, or destruc-
tive functioning. In more common professional language, we now turn 
to the issue of psychopathology. 
D Points to Consider 
In order to understand people, Adlerians examine two key dynam-
ics. The first is the life style, and the second is the situation in which 
the individual finds him- or herself. 
Adler originally discussed three tasks of life. These are occupation, 
social relations, and love and sex. 
Later Adlerians have identified three other tasks that Adler dis-
cussed but never clearly articulated. The three additional tasks are self, 
spirituality, and parenting and family. 
D Questions 
1. What are some of the subtasks involved in the occupation task? 
2. Why do Adlerians emphasize understanding both the person (Le., the 
style of life) and the situation (Le., the tasks of life)? How did the ex-
istentialists describe this? 
3. What are similarities between the work of Eric Berne and Alfred 
Adler? Between Harry Stack Sullivan and Alfred Adler? 
4. Belonging = lIInferiority Feelings. What does this ratio mean? 
5. What does Adler mean by the "masculine protest?" 
6. What are some of the subtasks involved in the love and sex task? 
7. How might atheism be an answer to the spiritual task? 
D Note 
lAlthough this may have been true during the Depression era when Wolfe made the state-
ment, it is no longer true today. 

Psychopathology 
Men at some time are masters of their fates; 
The fault . .. is not in our stars, 
But in ourselves . .. 
William Shakespeare (1599/1974) 
Taken in context, the life style is intertwined with the tasks of life, and 
the tasks of life are the points at which people most commonly come to 
know about life. People are free, within limits, to select how to meet the 
tasks. This chapter focuses upon how they exercise that freedom in ways 
that are troublesome not only to themselves but to the community at 
large. 
D Communitr Feeling and Social Interest: 
Theoretica Issues 
Adler (1933/1964f) felt that social interest was an innate potential that 
had to be developed. As Ansbacher (1992b) has recently documented, 
although the phrase social interest has been used extensively in this coun-
try, it is not the best translation for what Adler (1956) called Gemein-
112 

Psychopathology 
113 
schaftsgefuhl, and Ansbacher considers community feeling to be a more ac-
curate, broader translation. Ansbacher states that 
the two terms rather than being synonyms represent indeed different, though 
related concepts-[community feeling] being the broader and more fre-
quently used by Adler, and that particularly the English presentation of Adler-
ian psychology would gain if this difference were recognized and "community 
feeling" reinstated in its proper places, in addition to "social interest." (p. 402) 
For Ansbacher, community feeling is the broader concept. incorporating 
the individual's sense of feeling at home in the world at large and re-
sponsible for the welfare of people in general. Adler (1933/l964f, pp. 
275-276) wrote that 
[Community] feeling means above all a struggle for a communal form that 
must be thought of as eternally applicable, such as, say, could be thought 
of when humanity has attained its goal of perfection. It is not a question of 
any present-day community or society, or of political or religious forms. 
On the contrary, the goal that is best suited for perfection must be a goal 
that stands for an ideal society amongst all mankind, the ultimate fulfill-
ment of evolution .... Our ideal of [community] feeling as the final form 
of humanity ... is a regulative ideal. a goal that gives us our direction. 
Social interest would be this principle as it applies to human interac-
tion specifically. Ansbacher (1992b, p. 405) states that" Adler used 'social 
interest' in reference to the . .. life tasks .... For situations where other 
people are not directly involved, Adler retained 'community feeling: " 
Some elaboration clarifies. 
Community feeling is the empathic, emotional bond we have with 
each other and our world. As Adler (1933/1964£. 1956) writes, it is afeel-
ing. Social interest is an action based upon the feeling of community, of a 
sense of belonging. If we have feeling for each other and our responsibil-
ity for not only ourselves at this time and in this place, we act so as to 
take into account the benefits of people who may not yet be alive. We 
have an obligation to people and life in general. and if our sense of com-
munity is strong, we take them into account in our actions and leave 
posterity a better world. 
Mosak (1991a) refers to social interest as a construct. As a construct, 
people do not necessarily have it; they use it. Taking into account the 
principles of phenomenology, social-field theory, and psychology of use, 
Adlerians can say that people are using social interest if they display any 
of the following behaviors: courage, the courage to be imperfect. con-
tribution to the common welfare, confidence, caring, compassion, cre-
ativity, closeness, cooperation, and commitment. There are not single, 
specific incidents that can forever and always be generalized into dis-

114 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
playing social interest. At this time, in this situation, taking these kinds 
of issues into account this particular behavior displays social interest. 
For example, in many situations, caring can be expressive of social inter-
est (Kazan, 1978). There are some situations, however. in which caring 
may not be what the situation requires in order to move forward. At 
those times, courage (for instance) may be required, at others, creativity. 
To be more specific at this point requires data that we do not have. How 
does the individual perceive the situation? What are the demands of the 
moment? Knowing these kinds of questions, we can better guess what 
might be the requirements in order for us to use social interest. 
A clinical example sheds some light. A client is crying because she has 
lost one of her children. The clinician who demonstrates caring at such a 
time might be using social interest. A similar, but different circumstance, 
would be a client who uses tears and manipulative behaviors to put oth-
ers into her service. If she cries during a session, showing open caring for 
her might not be a display of social interest; a firm but kind commitment 
to the treatment plan, along with displaying confidence in her ability to 
solve the issue using her own resources, might be indicative of social in-
terest. The same behavior, crying, would be responded to with two dif-
ferent behaviors, both of which are indicative of social interest, yet the 
behaviors (caring versus commitment) could not be too successfully in-
terchanged without losing the meaning and overall goaL to encourage 
her to develop social interest in her. 
This is the theory behind community feeling and social interest: If we 
feel a bonding, a sense of obligation and belonging to the general welfare 
of others and the future, we will probably use social interest in our inter-
actions with others. I will probably recycle and will not litter even if there 
is no one around when! do it and there appears to be nobody who will im-
mediately suffer because of my littering. I will take into account who 
may be around, on this planet even after I am long gone. The feeling 
that we own this planet and are responsible for it not only now but in 
the future, after we are gone, is a part of community feeling. Deciding to 
recycle is a display of social interest. Fostering this feeling of intercon-
nectedness' of belonging, is one of the key components of psychother-
apy. How this relates to psychopathology is the focus of the next section. 
D Community Feeling and Social Interest: 
Clinical Issues 
For heuristic purposes, let us suppose that we could separate a life style 
from the tasks of life. Let us examine what happens in the (relatively) 
normal situation. 

Psychopathology 
115 
Elliot is a 17 -year-old adolescent. He is a maverick. He does things "his 
own way." Elliot's friends see him a strong, decisive, and creative. His 
teachers keep an eye on him, but in general they respect his style. Elliot 
can always be counted on to offer an alternative viewpoint, to debate a 
questionable point, or to explore new avenues. Elliot feels confident in 
his abilities. He is not the smartest kid in class, but he knows he is smart. 
Although he may not be the most athletic, he is good enough to play 
most sports. In school-his work task-he approaches classes with his 
independent, free-thinking style. He is sensitive, however, not only to 
his teachers' limits but to the rest of the class. He does not push his point 
of view too far. He challenges but does not belittle. Elliot debates but he 
seldom fights. Although he has his opinion, he respects others', and he 
admits his shortcomings. He has inferiority feelings like the rest of us, 
but he is not discouraged in his ability to find his place in constructive, 
socially useful ways; in other words, his compensations are prosocial. 
Scott is a 17 -year-old adolescent. Unlike Elliot, he is not a maverick-
he is a rebeL what Mosak (1971 a) refers to as an "aginner," someone 
who opposes for the sake of opposing. He has less community feeling 
and uses less social interest. With more feeling for others, his style would 
be virtually identical to Elliot's. With less feeling for others, with less of a 
sense of belonging, Scott's style becomes more a matter of opposing 
what others do. His teachers know him, too. Whereas Elliot debates, 
Scott argues. He uses his creativity to figure out ways to prove others 
wrong, not as a method of exploring alternatives. The more wrong 
"they" are, the better Scott feels about himself. He elevates himself at the 
expense of others. Scott has severely narrowed down his approach to 
life. He does not engage in sports unless he is assured of a victory. Dating, 
for him, becomes not a two-person function but rather an extension of 
his desire to be oppositional. He dates girls of whom he knows his family 
will disapprove. Like Elliot, he too knows his teachers' limits, but he 
knows them not in order to respect them but so as to know how far he 
has to push himself in order to cross them. 
Elliot and Scott are not very different from each other or from us. It is 
a matter of degree. With less community feeling, Scott's style, which is 
similar to Elliot's, causes others much more grief. Both styles, however, 
meet the life tasks. Elliot and Scott "work" (i.e., go to school), have 
friends, date, and so forth, yet Scott's flexibility is limited. The chances of 
his "running into" situations in which he has to "back down" are greater. 
He is regularly under more stress than Elliot. Elliot offers his divergent 
view and smiles-Scott disagrees and "bites his tongue." If life remains 
kind to Scott, he will get by, but there will always be the nagging suspi-
cion that he is an accident waiting to happen. Sometimes, accidents do 
not happen, and he may go through life biting his tongue, making others 

116 
A Primer oi Adlerian Psychology 
feel uncomfortable, and pushing the limits but still be relatively adapt-
able. Let us examine what happens if the degree of community feeling is 
even less evident. 
When most of us are confronted with life's challenges, we reply with a 
"yes, I can ... " attitude. As we discuss in Chapter 6, people with such an 
attitude are task-oriented. They engage in problem solving. If life chal-
lenges them, they focus upon what needs to be done. They seek to max-
imize their gains, but in such a way that they cooperate, contribute, and 
take into account the welfare of others. They use social interest. 
This "yes, I can ... " attitude entails a feeling of belonging. The em-
pathic stance that these people take is not just to one person or group of 
people. It is a bonding to people as a whole, to the community, not just 
as it exists now but "for an ideal society amongst all" (Adler, 1933/1964L 
p. 275). O'Connell (1965) referred to the process as "humanistic identi-
fication," that is, identification not with a person, but with humanity 
itself. 
Sicher (1955) spoke of planes of movement. People who move (psy-
chologically) along horizontal planes tend to use social interest. They see 
people as equals, and they are focused upon tasks. Others tend to move 
along vertical planes. These individuals perceive life as moving "up and 
down" or "above and below" (Adler, 1978; Allred, 1974). This antitheti-
cal mode of apperception divides the world into "black and white," and 
therefore you are either inferior or superior, weak or strong, winner or 
loser. Adler (1912/ 1983b) provided detailed descriptions of patients who 
view life along these lines; their dichotomous thinking was evident in 
their dreams, early memories, and fantasies. Life, for them, is of either 
being above people or below them, at their mercy. People who move 
along horizontal planes feel more at ease, more comfortable, with them-
selves and others. Be it work, social, sex, self, spiritual, or parenting 
tasks, such people meet the challenges directly and cooperatively. 
Adler (19121l983b, 1978) felt that antithetical thinking was a sign of 
potential difficulty. Little, if anything, in life is so neatly divided. As we 
discuss in Chapter 7, Adler felt that the sexes were not opposites, but 
variations, of each other. He believed that to conceptualize female gen-
der as being the opposite of male was to maintain a fiction that subtly 
placed the female in a inferior role, for she was viewed as a competitor 
(Adler, 1978; Horney, 1926/1967). Gender issues are not competitive by 
nature, but by choice and perception. A diagnostic clue in clinical prac-
tice is to be sensitive to such dichotomous thinking patterns, particularly 
as verbalized or described in dreams. 
Those with a "yes, I can ... " attitude, therefore, solve problems, leav-
ing their feelings of inferiority out of the main focus. They do what is re-
quired of them, as best they can. They constitute one group. 

Psychopathology 
117 
Another group, the first of the psychopathological group, responds 
with a different attitude. They respond with a "yes, but ... " attitude. 
These used to be called psychoneurotics in older classificatory systems. 
Their attitude has two subdivisions, and we need to explore each in 
greater detail. 
The first used to be found in those classified as the symptom neurotics. 
Their attitude declared, "Yes, but I'm sick." This group moves along verti-
cal planes and is "survival-oriented." They feel that to meet the task 
would jeopardize either their physical, social, or psychological survival. 
Instead of focusing primarily upon the task, they focus upon themselves, 
their inferiorities, and the risks of the undertaking. Rather than examine 
the challenge, evaluate options, and move ahead, they begin to safe-
guard themselves, seek distance, and make excuses. "Yes, I know I have 
to work, but I'm too nervous," is what Adler and his colleagues typically 
heard. Today, we might hear it called "anxiety" rather than "nervous-
ness." Anxiety, depressive, somatoform, psychosexual, and adjustment 
disorders are the most common "neurotic" conditions listed in the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual (American Psychiatric Association, 1994; 
Sperry & Carlson, 1996). "I would marry, but I'm too depressed," and 
"Yes, I'd love to be more social, but I'm too afraid of speaking in front of 
people," are some of the more common variations we hear today. 
The second subset used to be called the character neuroses and are 
now referred to as the personality disorders. The "yes, but ... " attitude 
of these is "Yes, but I'll do it my way." If life challenges them, they respond 
with their idiosyncratic approach, which they believe is a response to the 
task but somehow misses the mark (Sperry & Mosak, 1996). "Yes, I 
know I need to work, but I must be appreciated or else I won't be able to 
function," is what the narcissistic personality disorder typically believes 
(Sperry & Ansbacher, 1996). The paranoid, histrionic, borderline, and 
schizoid personality disorders are some of the more common presenta-
tions clinicians encounter. 
Both these subsets, symptom neuroses and character neuroses, the 
"yes, but ... " responses, are focused upon minimizing losses where the 
"yes" people attempt to maximize their gains. "Yes but" people see the 
proverbial glass as "half empty" and strive to prevent losing more. They 
already feel inferior, seek distance, safeguard themselves, and develop 
inferiority complexes. Their movement is vertical, and they are prestige-
oriented. Rather than focus upon what they are doing, they look at how 
they are doing. Such a split in attentional processes typically impedes 
performance, creating a vicious circle: The more they focus upon them-
selves, the less they attend to the task; the less focused upon the task, the 
poorer they do and the worse they feel, thereby increasing their self-
focus and perpetuating the cycle. 

118 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Thus far, we have the normals in this case, those who respond with a 
"yes, I can ... " attitude and problem-solving approach to life's chal-
lenges, and the psychoneurotic, those who respond with a "yes, but ... " 
attitude ("Yes, but I'm sick" in the case of symptom neuroses, and "Yes, 
but I'll do it my way" for the character neuroses). The final group are 
those who say no. 
The attitude of "no" to life's challenges is typical of those who used to 
be classified as psychotic. The more common labels used currently are 
the schizophrenic, delusionaL bipolar, and brief reactive psychosis disor-
ders (Sperry & Carlson, 1996). These individuals not only refuse to meet 
life's challenges, they typically create nonconsensually validated tasks 
that they are wiling to meet-in other words, they refuse the "real" tasks 
and create in their delusions, hallucinations, and fantasies, tasks that 
they can meet in their own ways. Some examples clarify the issue. 
Someone of the schizophrenic, paranoid type, might meet the spiritual 
task by creating the fiction that he or she is God, and others should bow 
and pray to him or her. The major depressive patient with psychotic fea-
tures might meet the work task by declaring that life is over, the world is 
coming to an end, and therefore he or she does not have to confront 
such trivial issues as maintaining a job. Those with delusional disorder, 
erotomania cal people, meet the sexual task by falling in love with some-
one famous and unattainable, thereby excluding all the rest that he or 
she encounters who would normally be more suitable. 
People with all of the psychotic disorders, those with a "no" attitude to 
life, respond by either ignoring the consensually validated tasks or cre-
ating their own, out of their own private, idiosyncratic worlds. It is 
not necessary to say "No" to all of the tasks. "No" to a single task may 
be a psychotic evasion. The person may still seem "normal" in all other 
respects. 
D Psychopathology: 
Structural and Dynamic Features 
This text is not a book on psychopathology.! It is intended as an in-
troductory text on Individual Psychology. Nonetheless, the general 
overview of Adlerian theory would be incomplete without a closer look 
at psychopathology from a more clinical perspective. With that as a goal, 
we briefly examine the previously mentioned categories (symptom neu-
roses, character neuroses, and psychoses) along two dimensions, their 
structural and dynamic features. Much of this work is derived from 
Dreikurs (1945,1967), Mosak (1968, 1977b), and Shulman (1968/1984, 
1973a). 

Psychopathology 
119 
Symptoms as Creations and Solutions 
In generaL symptoms are selected and chosen because they are per-
ceived as facilitating movement towards the person's goal. Symptoms 
are not merely reactions; they are solutions. A symptom such as depres-
sion may serve many purposes, but by and large depression is conceptu-
alized as an attempt to continue to move towards the goal the person has 
selected. For example, Pete may believe he has to get; he is of what Adler 
(1935, 1956; Mosak, 1959) called the getting type. If he feels that he is 
unable to continue getting, he may resort to using less active, more de-
structive ways of getting. By making himself depressed, he can place 
others into his service and have them help him get what he wants (K. 
Adler, 1961; Pancner & Jylland, 1996). Pete's life style refuses to bend to 
life; his self-concepti self-ideal convictions are structured so as to bias his 
perceptions: "I am small and need others." "I should get whatever I 
want." Given these two convictions, he may go to great lengths to get 
others to give to him. The key point is that his depression is not the 
"problem"; his manner of perceiving and interpreting life is. In other 
words, his life style, and his use of a depressive set of symptoms, allows 
him to maintain his convictions and have life meet him on his terms. 
Organ Inferiority 
Another reason, though far from the only one, that certain symptoms 
are selected is that there is an organ inferiority that predisposes individu-
als to "break down" at certain points. Adler (1956) wrote that "the or-
gans most disturbed ... are those which have been made susceptible by 
some inherited weakness" (p. 287). He means that under enough stress, 
we are likely to show the strain at our point of greatest physiological vul-
nerability (Griffith, 1984; Maniacci, 1996b). Most likely, as current re-
search is demonstrating with increasing accuracy each decade, the 
physiological underpinnings of psychopathological disturbances play at 
least some role in symptom formation. However, as Adlerians, although 
we do not deny the existence of such factors, we see them as but one of 
several issues which need to be taken into account. 
The Issue of Central Themes 
As Mosak (1968) has delineated, life styles tend to have certain common 
patterns, or themes, that characterize them. If certain themes appear in 
clusters, individuals are more apt to develop (select) certain symptoms. 

120 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
For example, if the themes of getting, opposing, and seeking excitement 
exist in the same life style, the chances are very high that such people 
will select certain behaviors that can be classically defined as sociopathic 
should their degree of activity be high and their amount of social interest 
or community feeling be low. What the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
(American Psychiatric Association, 1994) defines as antisocial personal-
ity disorder has many of the symptoms that cluster into these themes. 
We note in another chapter that the themes most commonly found in 
depression are getting, controlling, and wanting to appear or be good 
(Mosak, 1968, 1979). What actual behaviors are selected, and therefore 
what symptoms are used, depends upon the life styles of the individuals 
in question. 
Emotions 
Feelings, like symptoms, are also in service of the goal (Dreikurs, 1951). 
Adler (1927/1957) classified them into two broad categories: conjunc-
tive and disjunctive. Conjunctive emotions are those that move us to-
wards others. Disjunctive emotions are those that move us away from 
others, or create distance. The life style is the blueprint for movement 
through life; it is our guide and direction setter. Emotions "power" us to 
move. Without them, as Dreikurs (1951) has astutely pointed out. we 
would have trouble moving at all, for if we had to logically reason out 
everything we did, we could end up frozen in a logical abyss. Some bias 
is required in order to facilitate adaptation, and emotions provide us 
with the energy to move. Ellis (1973) holds similar views. With refer-
ence to psychopathology. emotions are no more a cause of our problems 
than life situations themselves. It is how we use our emotions that 
counts. As Dreikurs (1951. 1972) wrote, did you ever notice that we 
never get emotional when we are winning an argument? As soon as we 
are under the belief that we are losing, then we become emotional. The 
increased intensity provides us with a kind of "jump start" and allows us 
to move more intensely toward our goal. 
As long as it suits my goaL I create emotions to move toward you. As 
soon as it no longer suits my goaL I create emotions that move me away 
from you. If my goal is to be right. if you validate that. I generate feel-
ings that increase my contact with you, that move me toward you. 
Should you disagree, I am threatened, for my life style states that I 
should be right. and hence I generate feelings that move me away from 
you but allow me to subjectively continue moving toward my goal of 
being right. The popular sentiment. "I did it because I was angry," 

Psychopathology 
121 
would not be quite correct, from the Adlerian perspective. We would 
tend to restate that as, "You mean you made yourself angry in order to 
do what you did." 
Conscious and Unconscious Processes 
For Adler (1956), the distinction between conscious and unconscious is 
not as relevant as it is for the more classically oriented analysts. Both are 
in service of the goaL and we see the unconscious as an extension of 
what is typically found in consciousness, only less clearly formulated. 
For Adlerians, individuals arrange to make themselves unaware of cer-
tain issues in order to facilitate movement. With regards to psychopa-
thology, that means that we do not allow ourselves to focus upon certain 
issues, for to do so would only increase our sense of inferiority, and those 
who are displaying inferiority complexes are already all too aware of 
their shortcomings. Put succinctly, if I do not look at it, maybe I will not 
have to change it. 
Adlerians prefer to speak of common sense and private logic (Adler, 
1956; Ansbacher, 1965; Dreikurs, 1973). If using common sense, we 
know what the general opinion is and what the useful thing to do is; if 
using private logic, we follow our own biased, idiosyncratic thinking, 
which may not have much to do with common sense. As Mosak and 
Todd (1952) and Shulman (1985) have discussed, individuals construe 
their worlds through perceptual selectivity. This selectivity has elements 
that are unique to each person. The overlap between those common ele-
ments among people is considered common sense; it is high in social in-
terest and community feeling. Such perceptions and attitudes share a 
common perspective and take into account others. Everyone, however, 
has his or her own biases. Private logic is the idiographic bias each per-
son has that is unique to his or her life style. We all have private worlds,2 
and common worlds, we share with others; it is those private worlds, 
those thoughts, attitudes, beliefs, and convictions, that can cause us diffi-
culty in adapting. 
Dreikurs has outlined the structure of the relationship between com-
mon sense and private logic in the psychopathological disorders. In 
the symptom neuroses (e.g., anxiety, depression, psychosexual, adjust-
ment, or somatoform disorders), the relationship is that the person 
has common sense but makes excuses in order to follow private logic. 
An example is, "Yes, I know I should work, but I can't because I'm 
too sleepy. If I don't get some sleep, how can I function?" Such a "yes, 
but I'm sick" attitude entails a couple of interesting dynamics. Such in-

122 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
dividuals know the "correct" thing to do-they have common sense, 
but they follow their private logic. In order to maintain their illusory 
attempt at common sense, they acknowledge the requirement but 
arrange to contradict it nonetheless. They become unaware of the pur-
pose of their symptoms. 
In the personality disorders (e.g., obsessive compulsive, borderline, 
antisocial, or dependent disorder), the "yes, but I'll do it my way" atti-
tude is manifested structurally like this: The person has private logic, but 
acts as if that private logic was common sense. An example is, "Why 
shouldn't I steal? It's a dog-eat-dog world out there, and if I don't get it 
first someone else will get it. Everybody knows that." These individuals 
act as if their private logic was common sense. They frequently do not 
see anything very wrong about their world views, and, in fact they are 
amazed that others do not see life the way they do. 
In the psychotic disorders (e.g., schizophrenia, bipolar), common 
sense is usually intact but, structurally, it looks like this: These people 
have common sense but ignore it, choosing instead to act as if their pri-
vate logic were "real." An example is, "I am telling you, there are voices 
speaking to me! They are telling me to be on the lookout-the FBI has 
been bugging my teeth and can read my thoughts." These individuals, 
after their psychotic episode "quiets down," return to using some degree 
of common sense. In this bizarre but actual report from one of our pa-
tients, he acted "as if" he had very important information the FBI would 
want. Needless to say, his nonconsensually validated attempt at solving 
the self-task gave him a great deal of subjective importance. It also ex-
cused him from having to return to work and allowed him to stay on 
with his parents at home. 
D Psychopathology and the Style of Life: 
Exogenous Factors 
Let us return to where we began this chapter and reintegrate the life 
style into the life tasks. As Adler (1956) stated, every life style is adapt-
able until life presents it with a task for which it is ill prepared. Similarly, 
he believed that in every case of psychopathology the patient was partly 
right. By that, he meant that individuals developed their life styles as 
children in a context that to some degree supported, and may have even 
encouraged, the styles' development. If you grant the psychotic's initial 
assumptions about life and his or her place in it, everything that follows 
may make "sense." This is an important issue that needs to be considered 
in greater detaiL for its implications can be rather far-reaching. 

Psychopathology 
123 
As we noted in Chapter 7, the life tasks provide the test upon which 
the adequacy of the life style is judged. Every life style may be adequate 
until it is put to the test. More specifically, there are certain issues that 
certain life styles have difficulty meeting. These issues, if one is speaking 
of psychopathology, are called exogenous factors. They provide the occa-
sion for the onset of the disorders. 
Whereas Freud spoke of trauma, Adler (1956, p. 295) spoke of 
"shock." For Freud, trauma was (generally speaking) objective and uni-
versal. There were certain issues that everybody had to meet, such as the 
Oedipal stage, and if these were not successfully negotiated, the trauma 
would result in neurotic suffering (typically symptom neuroses, most 
classically the hysterical conversion psychoneurotic reaction). Adler 
viewed shock as mostly-but not exclusively-subjective and a product 
of the life style. If the person's life style did not prepare him or her for 
some contingency, it could be experienced as a shock. Thus far, that 
makes us normal. We cannot be prepared for everything, and things are 
bound to be a shock to us sometimes, as if we step off the curb without 
looking and a car screeches to a halt a foot from us. We are not prepared 
to deal with certain issues. For example, controllers (Mosak, 1973) are 
poorly prepared to deal with three issues: death, physical disability, and 
mental disability. Any "hint" of these issues threatens them. For others 
who are not so preoccupied with control, these issues are not so threat-
ening, though they may be discomforting. 
With less community feeling, we are exposed to the greater testing of 
our private logic. The more idiosyncratic my thinking, the less common 
sense I display, the greater the potential for me to be shocked. Think 
about it: If I believe people should never leave me, the shock of someone 
actually dying will be much harder on me than on someone who does 
not have a similar conviction. 
What characterizes individuals who develop psychopathology, accord-
ing to Adler (1956, p. 295), is their "clinging to the shock effects." Any-
one at anytime can be shocked by life. Some people are so shocked, they 
never let it go. They "nurse it, rehearse it," go over it in their minds again 
and again, and ruminate about it, as if they were enslaved by the 
thought. By clinging to the shock effects, they create an excuse for not 
moving on with life: "It was so bad, I can never allow that to happen 
again." With community feeling and social interest, these people learn 
from the event and the shock, engage in problem solving, utilize their 
support networks, and put it behind them (with time, of course). Others 
with less social interest withdraw further from the community, hence 
denying themselves the opportunity for support and growth. Rather 
than expose themselves with their inferiorities, as Adler (1927/1957) 

124 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
and Wolfe (1932) speculated that early humans did, and seek out each 
other in order to build stronger communities, these individuals with-
draw in order to hide their inferiorities and maintain the semblance of 
superiority. Therefore, they do not learn as quickly, do not adapt as well, 
and put themselves at risk for yet another shock. 
By clinging to the shock effects, such people allow themselves to use 
shock for safeguarding purposes: "I might have been happily married 
had it not been for ... " The irony is that by clinging to the event, they 
evade the life tasks and simultaneously hold onto the very thing of 
which they are most afraid. That which they worked hardest to avoid, 
they cling to desperately. If I never want to be rejected, I can hold onto 
the one time I was and build my life around it, so as to never have to face 
it again. It is a tragic solution at worst, and a bitter one at best. 
D A Case History 
Following is a case history that highlights these factors. It is not intended 
to be an example of Adlerian psychotherapy. There are some published 
examples of such cases in the literature (e.g., Manaster & Corsini, 1982; 
Mosak & Maniacci, 1995; Peven & Shulman, 1986). Although this was a 
case in our private practice, and we discuss some of the tactics involved 
in the psychotherapy, we prefer to focus upon the life style dynamics, 
life situation, and selection of symptoms. The history is from a real case, 
but all identifying information has been disguised in order to protect the 
individual's identity. 
Nick came for therapy after having seen one of the authors (MPM) do 
a life style assessment on a patient as part of a staff training session at a 
psychiatric hospital. Nick was employed as a master's level clinician and 
was working on his doctorate in counseling at the local university. He 
wanted to "have his life style done," as he put it, and he made the refer-
ral call himself. He was in his early 20s. He was seen for the initial inter-
view by one clinician (MPM). 
When he arrived for his initial interview, the presentation changed. 
He admitted that although the life style assessment was still his objec-
tive, he needed more than that. It seems he had been having some diffi-
culty over the course of the past year or so. In fact, he had quite a bit of 
difficulty. In the past II months, he had had thirteen trips to local emer-
gency rooms, each time for what he feared was a "heart attack." At each 
turn, he was given a clean bill of health, reassured, and discharged 
within hours. As the tolerance for his claims decreased with each repeat 
visit, he would take himself to a different emergency room with the sub-
sequent "attack." 

Psychopathology 
125 
Nick stated that he had been married for 4 years to "a wonderful 
woman, the best thing" in his life. They loved each other very much, but 
these trips to the emergency room were "causing a lot of tension," and 
she had had "enough." She was an oldest-born who was 2 years older 
than Nick, a very responsible, "take charge" type of woman, he said, and 
she was running a daycare center for children. She was losing her pa-
tience. They had been trying to conceive a child for over a year, "with no 
luck," and this was a strain on her as well. With Nick not moving 
through his doctoral program as fast as he should (because of all of his 
"medical concerns"), and their increasing medical bills, she said he had 
to get some help immediately. Along with all this, he added that the cou-
ple lived in his parents' "summer home," rent-free, under the agreement 
that he and his wife "fix it up" and do some much-needed work around 
the house. He agreed to the deal because of the financial gain, but the 
extra workload was "killing him." 
In the initial interview, Nick discussed that he came from a high-
achieving family. His father had two master's degrees; his mother was 
completing her doctorate (in education); his one and only sibling, an 
older sister, was a lawyer who had set the state record for highest score 
on the bar examination; a maternal grandfather was a physician; and a 
maternal aunt had her doctorate in clinical psychology. Nick got along 
well with each of them, and they expected great things from him. He 
was "a genius," he reported. His IQ was actually in the genius range and 
he had very little trouble with school, when he could keep his mind fo-
cused, that is. With all that was happening, especially with his medical 
concerns, he just could not concentrate. When he was asked, "What 
would be different if we could do away with your worry about your 
health?" Nick replied that two things would be different: First, he would 
be able to finish his "damn degree," and second, maybe he could settle 
down his "nerves" and see what was going on about the couple's fertility 
issues. 
Nick finished the interview with two additional points. One was that 
he still believed that all the "damn physicians were wrong," he did have 
an undiagnosed heart condition, and he would die from it; and another 
was that he had started smoking again, and that bothered him, for he 
knew that was not good for him, it was probably making things worse, 
and he knew he "should quit," as everybody kept telling him. 
As is customary with many Adlerians, and our practice in particular, 
we gave Nick a tentative outline for how we would proceed. Because we 
practiced multiple psychotherapy, one of us (MPM) would be his pri-
mary therapist, with the other (HHM) sitting in every fourth session (or 
so) as a consultant. We would structure the next two sessions by gather-
ing the data for a life style assessment. Nick agreed. Next, Nick was given 

126 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
a summary and feedback about what he had discussed. It seemed that 
there was a lot going on in his life. He seemed to be a man who pushed 
himself rather hard, had great expectations for himself, and spent little 
time relaxing or doing what he wanted. Nick was stunned; he never 
really thought about it. He was working nearly full time, working on his 
doctorate, fixing various rooms in the house, and maintaining a mar-
riage and trying to get pregnant. He was told that perhaps he needed to 
be a little "sick," otherwise how else could he ever get time for himself? 
We even pondered whether he should take some time off from his 
school, because he could not concentrate anyway. At first, Nick strongly 
disagreed-he had to keep going, he had to "push himself." Remarkably 
quickly, however, he calmed down, smiled, and said, well, yes, he had 
thought he needed a break, but how could he explain it to his wife, his 
parents, his dean? Nick was told it was "doctor's orders" that he relax, 
and that we could write a letter for him to the dean of the department 
requesting a leave of absence. Nick was truly surprised and very grateful. 
We ended the interview by stating one last thing: Although yes, smoking 
is not good for him, maybe this was his only form of self-indulgence (he 
worked out regularly and was in excellent physical condition), and if for 
the short run he wanted to keep smoking, "What the hell, consider it a 
form of self-care." 
Nick actually began to cry. When asked what was going on, how was 
he feeling, he replied that he could not explain it, but he felt so very re-
lieved, as if someone "truly understood," and he never thought he 
would hear someone say to him it was alright not only to not go to 
school but to keep on smoking. He said he eagerly awaited the life style 
assessment. 
Many of the aforementioned dynamics about psychoneurosis can be 
seen in this case. Nick knew what he wanted to do, but he felt compelled 
by what he "should" do. He was saying, "Yes, but I'm sick," to life. He 
never felt he had the right to pursue his own interests in life, but rather 
he had to keep up with a high-achieving family. When Nick was given 
permission to slow down, to relax, the purpose of his symptoms became 
apparent. He no longer needed them in order to "take a break," and he 
felt immediate relief. Someone had understood what he was saying with 
his symptoms, and now the process of trying to comprehend why he felt 
he needed the symptoms to excuse himself could begin. We started the 
life style assessment. 
The family-constellation interview took about 45 minutes. Nick was the 
younger of two. His sister was 2 years older, very powerful, and very suc-
cessful. She was a "straight A" student and the darling of the teachers. Not 
so with Nick. He was the "little devil," always in trouble, but extremely 

Psychopathology 
127 
cute, endearing, and playful. He was tested in elementary school for what 
was believed to be Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), and 
that was when it was discovered that he was a genius. Nick was placed in 
accelerated classes, where he did better once he was allowed to work at 
his own rapid pace, but he still was a bit much to handle. 
When asked what he wanted to be as a child, Nick said he had always 
wanted to be an actor, famous, with admiring fans all around him; when 
he told this to his mother, she said that no son of hers would be an actor 
(she was "teacher of the year" several times at the same elementary 
school that Nick attended) and that he had to be a doctor, like her father. 
Nick agreed, and remembers telling her that yes, he would be a doctor, 
but secretly, inside, he still longed for the spotlight. 
Nick's mother was a "hypochondriac" who thought she was "dying" 
all the time. It had taken her over a decade to work on her doctorate, 
and in fact she was still working on it today. Any sniffle, sneeze, or sore-
ness, and Nick said he and his sister were "whisked" off to Grandfather's 
office and then tucked into bed and given plenty of attention. He de-
scribed his father as an honest man, hard working, who always worked 
himself too hard, put in overtime for his family, and got both his master's 
degrees nights and weekends. Mother, however, was the "boss." What-
ever she said went, and everybody bowed to her will. 
The data, though abbreviated here for convenience, highlight the key 
issues. Nick had wanted to play, have fun, as a child, but he felt pres-
sured to "keep up," became discouraged, and used attention -getting 
mechanisms to keep others busy with him. Mother modeled sickness as 
an excuse for not achieving, and Father modeled achieving even if it 
meant working (sometimes) up to 65 hours per week. Nick tried to act as 
if he were Father, but he saw the benefits of acting as if he were like 
Mother. So he did both. If he felt he could achieve and outdistance his 
competitors, he would, but if he got "tired of the rat race," he would 
switch roles and act as if he were disabled. He acted it so well he even be-
lieved it. 
His choice of a mate reflected this. Like his achieving sister, Nick's wife 
was an achieving oldest-born (who, incidentally, was raised with a 
handicapped little brother of her own) who was also 2 years older than 
Nick. He competed with her, tried to keep up with her, and sometimes 
got discouraged and switched to his "baby" mode, which elicited her 
caretaking style, and she (at least temporarily) took the pressure off of 
him. She was past the time she had established for herself to have chil-
dren of her own. She wanted to be a parent more than anything she 
could imagine, and although she loved Nick very much, she was grow-
ing increasingly frustrated waiting. 

128 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
In the next 45-minute interview, Nick gave nine early recollections, 
some of which are reproduced here: 
Age 3: I was in my crib and it was early Saturday morning. I crawled out 
onto the dresser, down onto the floor, and ran into the playroom to watch 
cartoons. My parents came and got me, said I was not supposed to be up 
and in the room, and put me back in my crib. Feeling: Happy at first, and 
then sad I had to go back to my crib. Most vivid part: Being placed back in 
my crib. 
Age 5: I went to work with [my other] grandfather. He drove a pie truck. 
I went to the back of the truck and said "What's in here?" and pointed to 
the empty row of pie tins. He said, "Go on, explore," and I did. Feeling: 
Wow, cool, he said I could look. Most vivid part: Just looking. 
Age 8: I was being tested in school. This [female] psychologist was giving 
me an IQ test because they thought I was ADHD or something. I got every 
item correct except one! I couldn't figure that one question out. Feeling: 
Frustrated. Most vivid part: My parents were watching from behind a mir-
ror and I knew I had to do my best. 
Age 7: It was Christmas morning. Sister and I snuck out to peek at the 
gifts. There were hundreds of gifts under the tree, and mom and dad were 
setting up a video camera to tape our reactions when we came out. We re-
alized we were going to spoil their surprise and disappoint them, so we 
snuck back into our rooms. When they called, we came out, and I acted so 
stunned, I grabbed my chest, yelled, and hit the floor as if I'd fainted. They 
loved it! Feeling: I made them happy. Most vivid part: The spotlight on me 
as I grabbed my chest. 
Interpreted projectively, the themes become clear. Nick wanted to 
have fun, but he kept getting put back into his "crib." He would have 
loved for someone to give him permission to just relax and explore, even 
if his explorations led him to "nothing," but more often than not, he felt 
pressured (by women) to perform, as if the eyes and hopes of the family 
are on him, and he was frustrated by his inability to "know it all and live 
up to" his perfectionistic standards. In the end, the only escape-the 
only way to get all the goodies in life and not disappoint anybody-was 
to grab his chest, act as if he were dying, and get attention for it. The 
summary of these recollections (and the other five not reported here) 
was given to him. He was fascinated and felt the interpretations were 
"right on." He never made the connections of the significance of his cur-
rent situation to his childhood history before. Out therapy began by 
teaching him to say no to his parents, his wife, and his own perfectionis-
tic standards in a more prosocial, common-sense manner. He did, and 
after 18 months, he had no hospitalizations, no "heart attacks," and he 
dropped out of graduate school. Unfortunately, despite marriage coun-
seling, Nick and his wife broke up. He began to admit that he really did 

Psychopathology 
129 
not want kids, not for several years anyway, and that he wanted more 
time to "play." They broke up, peacefully, and within 2 years she remar-
ried and now has two children. 
Nick moved out of state. At 3- and 4-year follow-ups, he has been 
symptom-free. He remarried just this past year. He works as a master's 
level therapist during the day. Evenings and weekends he and his new 
wife run the local theater group in his community. He is the "lead actor." 
His mother has yet to finish her doctorate. 
D Summary 
For Adlerians, psychopathology is a combination of several factors, all 
intertwined: first, a low amount of community feeling and social inter-
est; next, a rigid, inflexible life style that values its convictions over life 
and its demands (Le., reality). A discouraged attitude toward life in 
which the person operates more prestige-oriented than task-oriented 
and moves not on a horizontal but a vertical plane is next. A predisposi-
tion to an organ inferiority that was most likely inherited and subjected 
to too much stress is yet another factor. Finally, life presents a challenge 
that becomes the exogenous factor for the onset of the psychopathology, 
a shock, which the individual clings to in order to safeguard self-esteem. 
Depending upon the amount of social interest, degree of activity, specific 
themes in the life style, structural relationship of common sense to pri-
vate logic, and family history of organ inferiorities, certain symptoms ap-
pear and are used in the service of the individual's goal. 
D Points to Consider 
Community feeling, sometimes translated as social interest, is a key 
construct in Adlerian psychology. It is the empathic, emotional bond 
people have with each other. 
Social interest keeps life styles operating on the useful side of life. 
Without some manifestation of it, people tend to develop disturbing 
behaviors. 
Psychopathological conditions can be structurally described by ex-
amining the balance of common sense to private logic. The traditional 
categories of neurosis, psychosis, and personality disorders can be 
structurally differentiated using these two constructs. 
Antithetical thinking, according to Adler, is a hallmark of potential 
rigidity and difficulty. Dividing the world into black and white, ei-
ther/or categories only gets individuals into trouble. 

130 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Emotions are to be understood as motivators of behavior. They are 
not the cause of psychopathology. 
D Questions 
1. What is the difference between common sense and private logic? 
How is that important in differentiating types of psychopathology? 
2. What role does biology play in symptom formation? 
3. What might be some of the life style convictions of the antisocial per-
sonality disorder? 
4. Freud wrote about trauma. What did Adler have to say about 
"trauma?" 
5. What is meant by "clinging to the shock effects?" 
D Notes 
[See Sperry and Carlson (1996) for some recent conceptualizations of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) from an Adlerian perspective. 
ZPhyliis Bottome, a novelist who was highly influenced by Adler and was Adler's biogra-
pher (1957), published a novel. Private Worlds (1934), which Hollywood made into a 
movie. 

Understanding a Person 
... the world, the human heart and mind-
To understand these things must be our aim. 
Goethe (1801/ 1949) 
Some one might call me a fool . .. ; such a man measures temperance by 
the . .. yard-stick of his own character. He must know that he is himself 
what he calls me. 
Euripides (circa 413 Bc/1960) 
In many ways, this is the point at which we began the book. As Aristotle 
and an endless number of thinkers, dreamers, and other souls have pon-
dered since the beginning of time, we desire to know. There is perhaps no 
more compelling issue for us to know than ourselves. As Socrates and 
the Delphian oracle declared in ancient Greece, "Know Thyself!" Phi-
losophers, theologians, scientists-all of us-have struggled with that 
dictum ever since (and probably even before Socrates declared it), and 
the answers at which we have arrived have been as varied and as diverse 
as the character of those who have asked. Goethe listed the world, heart, 
and mind as the aim of our understanding, and it is no coincidence that 
he wrote them in that order, poetic license notwithstanding. We seek to 
131 

132 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
know our world. That leads us, after a brief pause, to understand our 
hearts. Without a pause in his line, for there is no comma between heart 
or mind or break in the rhythm of the quote, Goethe states that our aim 
quickly comes to understanding the mind. The direction is not acciden-
tal-Goethe was a master of words and images. Understanding the world 
leads to understanding the heart, our passions, which invariably leads to 
the mind. The mind is the basis, the "last in the list," to paraphrase. They 
are intertwined, yes, but the order is not accidental. And then, there is 
Euripides. 
Euripides, the author of Medea and Electra to mention but two of his 
tragedies, was the youngest of the classical "big three" playwrights of an-
cient Greece, the other two being Sophocles and Aeschylus, and one of 
the most prolific, having written more than 80 plays before his death. 
Like Shakespeare centuries later, Euripides was a master not only of 
tragedy but of comedy. It was an unusual combination, especially for his 
day, but, as critics have commented time and again, that may be one of 
the keys to both Shakespeare's and Euripides' brilliant insights into 
human nature. They could see the interconnectedness of both sides of 
humanity, for it is a fine line between what destroys us and uplifts us. It 
is ironic yet poignant that we speak of being driven "mad" with both 
connotations of "insanity" (i.e., losing one's senses) and "fury." In our 
quest to understand-"measure" in Euripides' language-others, we use 
the "yardstick" of our own "character." In one of his most insightful 
comments, the playwright declares that in our quest to measure others, 
we "must know" that we find in them what we are. But must we know? 
His comment is as ironic as it is incisive. 
That is the trap we fall into in our quest to understand. We start out 
seeking to know life, the world, the nature of "things," and quickly find 
ourselves seeking to understand our passions and, therefore, our minds, 
our perceptions, and our thoughts and beliefs. But as physiologists have 
pointed out, the eye can see everything but itself. So we seek to know 
others, their passions, their minds, but we are what we call them. Be-
hind every quest to know them, we find ourselves. To forget that, to not 
take that into account, leads to comedy, at best, and tragedy, at worst. 
The balance of subject and object, the interrelatedness of what we 
study and what we are (what we seek or aim at), is becoming increas-
ingly accepted, even in the "hard" sciences such as physics. Psychology 
can be amazingly oblivious to it, even after other disciplines have real-
ized the influence we have upon what we see. When Adlerians attempt 
to understand a person, they strive to keep this balance in mind, to un-
derstand not only that person but how that person treats with others 
and with his or her world, our world, and the mutual effect we have 

Understanding a Person 
133 
upon each other. We follow Goethe's line of inquiry: To understand their 
world, we explore their hearts, and that entails knowing their minds, all 
the while trying to remain faithful to Euripides's principle: We are inti-
mately tied to what we see in others, and we must not lose sight of that. 
In a similar vein Ellis (1973) and Dreikurs (1951) agree that underly-
ing every emotion there is a cognition. It is not that they ignore emo-
tions; they merely have another approach to their understanding and 
treatment. 1 
D Diagnosis and Assessment 
Adler (1956) made a distinction which is briefly examined here. The as-
sessment process was a two-step matter for him. The clinician arrived 
first at the "General Diagnosis," then the "Special Diagnosis." One clarifi-
cation is needed first. 
Diagnosis generally differs from assessment, and although they are 
often used interchangeably, typically diagnosis entails understanding 
what is wrong, what makes the person "sick." Diagnosis is a medical 
model term. Assessment focuses upon what the person is, what makes 
the person "tick." It is diagnostic to know that people are in distress 
because they have a hand-washing compulsion; that tells us what is 
"wrong" with them. Knowing that they are controllers, people that only 
feel belonging if they are clean, organized, and "one step ahead" of life, 
tells us what they are about, what makes them "tick." The compulsive 
handwashers fear germs, which may place them out of control. They are 
the cleanest people, perhaps the only clean people in the world, and 
with their compulsions can look down on the rest of us dirty people. We 
examine both aspects. 
The General Diagnosis examines individuals in their current situa-
tions. If people come into psychotherapy, the first task of the therapist is 
to understand how they are functioning in the here and now. Let us look 
at this process more closely. 
D The General Diagnosis 
Mosak and Maniacci (1995) have presented an example of an actual psy-
chotherapy case, including portions of an initial interview that detail the 
process we are about to describe in general terms. Dreikurs (1954, 1967) 
has written about it as well. There are two basic parts to the General Diag-
nosis, understanding the subjective condition and the objective situation: 

134 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
In interviewing patients for the first time, we let them talk about their con-
dition, their symptoms, their discomfort and dysfunctions. They give us 
then-as we call it-the "Subjective Condition." We know then how they 
feel what they experience within themselves, what they came for. 
(Dreikurs, 1967, p. 80) 
This process can include a formal diagnosis (Sperry & Carlson, 1996; 
Sperry & Maniacci, 1992). After Adlerians have heard and understood 
what brought the patients to see them, they seek to understand how the 
patients function in meeting the tasks of life. 
Adlerians then examine the "objective situations" of the patients. 
They want to know the fields in which the patients move, the conditions 
under which they live, how they actually function. Adler gave us a 
framework for such examination by pointing to the life tasks (Dreikurs & 
Mosak, 1966) which include all human actions and endeavors. 
The general diagnosis is an attempt to understand individuals in their 
social worlds. Adlerians move back and forth between subjective and 
objective vantage points, in the process we explore in the chapter on 
the life tasks. Phenomenological comprehension entails seeing with 
their eyes, hearing with their ears, and, generally speaking, understand-
ing what life is like for them from their vantage point (Adler, 1931/ 
1958). That is the subjective part of the assessment. The objective part 
entails assessing how well they function in life. This is still, by and large, 
somewhat subjective, because Adlerians are still assessing how patients 
view the life tasks. It is relatively more objective, however, in that Adle-
rians are assessing how people function according to external criteria 
(see Chapter 7). Adlerians typically have varied styles for conducting as-
sessments (Manaster & Corsini, 1982). Whereas psychoanalytic theory 
has undergone radical revision since Freud's time, the method of assess-
ment and treatment has remained relatively consistent. This is not the 
case with Individual Psychology. Adler's theory has undergone very lit-
tle revision, for, unlike Freud, who attempted to tie his system of psy-
chology to the prevailing science of the day, Adler attempted to build 
his system based upon philosophy. Although science generally under-
goes revision as new technologies lead to greater understanding, philos-
ophy is much more stable in its assumptions. Unlike psychoanalysts, 
Adlerians have varied styles of conducting assessments and practicing 
psychotherapy. Although we share the basic philosophy and assump-
tions, there is a wide variety of therapeutic strategies from which we 
draw. Although working within the same system, Adlerians may do 
very different things. They are theoretic systematists and technical 
eclectics, although with respect to the latter, they are careful not to vio-
late the basic assumptions of Individual Psychology. OveralL in initial 

Understanding a Person 
135 
clinical assessments, if symptoms are involved, there are two basic ques-
tions utilized in order to increase understanding, and we briefly exam-
ine them in order to provide readers with the flavor of what Adlerians 
do and how they work. 
In investigating the subjective condition, Adlerians typically ask, 
"Who is most affected by your symptoms?" The answer to that question 
generally tells Adlerians against whom the symptoms may be directed. 
For example: 
Therapist: 
Client: 
Therapist: 
Client: 
Therapist: 
Client: 
So, who is most affected by your outbursts? 
I'm not sure what you mean. 
I mean, when you lose control, and throw things, who is 
most affected by it? 
Well, me, I guess. 
And then ... ? 
And then? I guess now that you mention it, my wife. It 
drives her crazy. She hates it. 
What the client has just told us, somewhat hesitatingly, is that his wife 
not only notices his outbursts, she is upset by them. What he originally 
believed to be his problem, an intrapsychic issue, was placed into a social-
field theoretical and transactional perspective. Perhaps there is something 
in their marriage with which he is not happy, and through his outbursts 
he is attempting to communicate it. Perhaps he is punishing her or intim-
idating her or trying to push her away. These ideas can be explored. 
In order to link the subjective condition and the objective situation, 
Adlerians use what is called "The Question" (Adler, 1929/1964d, 1956; 
Dreikurs, 1958, 1962; Mosak, 1995b). It tells for what purpose the symp-
toms are being used. To continue with the example: 
Therapist: 
Client: 
Therapist: 
Client: 
Therapist: 
Client: 
What would be different in your life if you didn't have 
these outbursts? 
Let me think ... I guess I'd be happier. 
And if you were happier, then what? 
Then, I think I'd be better off, you know, I'd get along better 
with people. 
Like whom? 
My wife, my employees. They'd be more comfortable 
around me. I'd be more at ease too, not worrying about 
when I'm going to blow. 
Once again, he has told us more than he realizes. He uses his outbursts in 
order to keep other people-and himself-on their toes. Without his out-
bursts, people would be more comfortable around him. Perhaps his goal is 
to keep them on edge so they can "jump" when he orders. Maybe he is a 

136 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
driver who will not tolerate anything but what he perceives to be excel-
lence in pursuit of his becoming number one (Mosak, 1971a). This hypoth-
esis and others can be more carefully assessed in subsequent interviews. 
Another use for The Question is for differential diagnosis (Adler, 1956; 
Brown, 1995; Dreikurs, 1945, 1958, 1962; Mosak, 1977a). In trying to de-
cide whether a somatic complaint is primarily functional or organic, clini-
cians can examine the response to The Question. If the client responds 
that, without the symptom, he or she would "feel better" and, with 
prompting, cannot come up with anything more specific, the probability of 
organic pathology underlying the symptom is great (Brown, 1995). If he or 
she says, "Well, then I'd be able to finish my schoolwork" for example, the 
purpose for having the symptom may be psychological or social and its ori-
gin may be functional. Notice we stress may be. More extensive medical or 
psychological work-up is usually advisable anytime a somatic complaint is 
the focus of treatment (Maniacci, 1996b). Even symptoms with a clear-cut 
organic pathology can be used for a psychological purpose. Maniacci has 
used the example of a broken leg. Its organic pathology is obvious, but a 
client can use it in order to get others to take care of him or her, and to put 
others into his or her service (d. Berne's [1964] "wooden leg"). 
The solution-focused school of brief therapy has made extensive use of 
The Question (de Shazer, 1988; Q'Hanlon & Weiner-Davis, 1989). They 
call it the miracle question: 
A framework for a whole series of questions (known collectively as "the 
miracle question") is used in almost every first session ... to help client 
and therapist alike to describe what a solution might look like .... We 
have found this way of quickly looking into the future to be a most effec-
tive frame for helping clients set goals and thus describe how they will 
know when the problem is solved. (de Shazer, 1988, pp. 5-6) 
They make no reference to Adler or Dreikurs but have documented how 
useful focusing upon goals can be, particularly if clients' symptoms are 
viewed as solutions to their problems. 
This is an overview of what Adlerians do in their assessment of the gen-
eral diagnosis. It puts them "in the ballpark." At the end of it, in the most 
general terms, Adlerians attempt to see where people fall in relation to 
their degree of activity and amount of social interest. They seek even more 
specificity, however, and for that purpose they turn to the special diagnosis. 
D The Special Diagnosis 
Whereas in the general diagnosis Adlerians attempt to understand peo-
ple and how they function in the tasks of life, thus attaining a cross-

Understanding a Person 
137 
section of their life styles in the here and now, present context, and to 
what they may be trying to avoid or say "yes, but ... " (or "no"), in the 
special diagnosis they investigate the people in depth or, as we allude to 
elsewhere in this work, in breadth. They conduct what has been called 
an investigation of the life style. 
Once again, some Adlerians never do a formal life style assessment. 
Others, particularly those who were trained by Dreikurs, Shulman, 
Mosak, or some others, do a formal assessment of the style of life 
(Dreikurs, 1956, 1958, 1967; Powers & Griffith, 1987; Shulman & 
Mosak, 1988). Manuals for the technique and process have been pub-
lished, and for present purposes, only an overview of this complex but 
clinically rich process is explored. 
There are two general parts of the life style assessment. First, clients 
are interviewed in order to assess their early childhood situation. After 
the data have been collected, their earliest childhood recollections are 
elicited. Summaries are provided of each, and lists of issues that need to 
be addressed are provided. Let us look at this process a bit more closely. 
The Early Childhood Situation 
Mosak (1972) and Shulman (1962) and Shulman and Mosak (1988) 
have written about this topic. Clients are interviewed in order to under-
stand several factors from their childhood. How they got along with their 
siblings and found their place in their family of origin is explored. Also 
investigated is how they found their place in elementary school, with 
peers, and what they learned about their gender and sexual identity, 
how their health was, their body image, and what their parents and 
other significant adults were like during the clients' early life. This is 
then summarized in a brief statement that captures how clients grew up 
and viewed their early life situations. For an example, readers are di-
rected to Dreikurs, Mosak, and Shulman (1984), Mosak (1995a), and 
Mosak and Maniacci (1995) for a transcription of a life style summary 
including a summary of the family constellation of a client (pp. 29-30). 
Early Recollections 
As Adler (1956) noted, there are no chance memories. What we remem-
ber from our early childhood is reflective of what we believe now. Mosak 
(1958, 1965) and Olson (1979) provide detailed descriptions of how to 
use early recollections in psychotherapy, and Powers and Griffith (1987) 
and Shulman and Mosak (1988) examine how to use them in the life 

138 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
style assessment process. Briefly, clients are asked to think back and de-
scribe the earliest incidents they remember. These memories should be 
from under the age of 10 years, be single, specific incidents, and include 
what is most vivid about the memory and how the client felt during it. 
For example, here is the memory of a 28-year-old woman: 
Age 3: I was with my mother. She was a school teacher and took me to 
school with her for parent-teacher conferences. I saw her talking to all 
these strange people, and I began to bawl really lOUdly. The feelings: Anger 
and frustration, I wanted her with me. The most vivid part: Crying. 
We typically elicit between six and eight such memories. Similar to the 
early childhood situation, we then summarize them in order to provide a 
concise description of how clients currently see life. Once again, inter-
ested readers are referred to Mosak (1995a) and Mosak and Maniacci 
(1995) to see how the process can be applied with a client. 
What this client is saying about herself is that she values people, and 
she wants them all to herself. When things do not go her way-and she 
is all too aware of what the "right" way is (her way)-she puts on an im-
pressive display of what Adler (1956) called "water power," tears and a 
temper tantrum, in order to get what she wants. What she wants most is 
her way and people's attention. Of all the things she could remember 
from her childhood, why this one? Because it tells us how she views life 
now. She carries this around as a nonverbal lesson she learned pre-
linguistically (see the chapter on development for a more detailed 
discussion) . 
The special diagnosis, otherwise known as the life style assessment, 
helps to understand the client in particular, in his or her idiographic 
style. We then combine the knowledge from this portion of the assess-
ment with what we learned in the general diagnosis to provide a picture 
of what this person is about in his or her unique style (the special diag-
nosis), and how he or she is using it to adapt to life and its challenges 
(the general diagnosis). It is a brief step from this point to the psycho-
therapy itself, but that is addressed in greater detail in the next chapter. 
D Dreams 
Adler (1936,1956), Dreikurs (1944), Gold (1979,1981), Krausz (1959), 
and Shulman (1969) have written on dreams and dream interpretation. 
Bonime (1962) has written a manual on the clinical use of dreams that, 
as Shulman (1969) astutely notes, could have been written by Adlerians 
themselves. We view dreams as the extension of individuals' conscious 
processing; that it, we do not see dreams as emanating from the uncon-

Understanding a Person 
139 
scious and, therefore, as attempts to disguise our true intentions from 
ourselves. They are a continuation of waking thought, but thought that 
is not bound by the constraints of logic and common sense. Dreams 
reflect our private logic most clearly. Whereas early recollections deal 
with long-term, personality goals (Le., life style issues), dreams con-
cern themselves with the more immediate, short-range goal of problem 
solving. 
A client, a young man in his early 20s, provided the following dream: 
I was walking through a grocery store, by the produce section. I felt lost. 
The next thing I knew I was in a bathroom, standing at a urinal, when 
some guy comes in and starts shooting everybody with a machine gun. I 
pick him up, and without killing him, I slam him repeatedly into the wall 
and off the floor. As I walk away, I tell him he needs to get some religion in 
his life. 
The client's associations to the dream were the following: The produce 
section-the healthy foods he should eat (fruits, vegetables, etc.); the 
bathroom-a place to relieve himself; the "shooter"-a famous athlete 
he admired in college. What is this client saying that can help us under-
stand him? 
He is driven by what Horney (1950, p. 64) called the "tyranny of the 
should." He is all too aware of what he "should do" in life. He should 
take better care of himself and take more responsibility for himself, as 
symbolized by being in the grocery store. It is there he feels lost. He 
knows he should, but he does not know how. Both his parents died of 
cancer at early ages, and his father was a physician. He watched as they 
died, and he felt helpless. When he feels lost, he focuses upon his own 
needs, but if he does, if he focuses too much upon relieving himself (and 
perhaps, his anger-symbolically stated by being at the urinal-and his 
being "pissed"), he is afraid he will get "shot down." What will shoot him 
down? His ambition. The famous athlete is how he would like to view 
himself. If he compares himself to others, he gets angry and wants to act 
out. He ends up "preaching," moralizing, and speaking about "higher 
things," and walks away feeling vindicated, at least for the moment. 
The client is caught in a self-imposed trap, between what he should do 
and what he does. He wants to be angry, and if he is, it typically comes 
after he has felt lost about taking better care of himself. At those times, 
he feels competitive, but rather than too openly and directly expressing 
his anger, he assumes a moralistic, intellectual posture. 
Dreams can be used to assess life style issues, and more immediate 
concerns. They can be used to check the progress of clients in psycho-
therapy. We generally create dreams in order to reinforce our movement 
in life, to rehearse future courses of actions, to problem solve, and to cre-

140 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
ate a mood for the next day. There are many other functions they serve 
(Mosak, 1992; Shulman, 1969), and interested readers are referred to 
some of the articles noted at the beginning of this section for greater de-
tail about dreams and their uses, particularly as they relate to the assess-
ment process. 
D Psychological Testing 
As Mosak (1995a) has documented, older, European-trained Adlerians 
have eschewed testing, viewing it as too limiting and leading to catego-
rization of individuals that loses the idiographic uniqueness that Individ-
ual Psychology stresses. Other Adlerians do recommend testing and use 
it quite often. 
Bieliauskas (1972), Maniacci (1990), Mosak and Gushurst (1972), 
and Mosak and Maniacci (1993) have discussed how psychological tests 
such as the Rorschach, the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, and 
drawing techniques (e.g., kinetic family drawings, Draw-A-Person Test), 
might be used from an Adlerian perspective. As long as the basic as-
sumptions of Individual Psychology are not violated, tests can be quite 
beneficial to clinicians and clients. 
For example, the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) is a series of cards 
with black-and-white pictures depicting scenes or situations about 
which clients are asked to create stories. Schneider (1989) has recently 
published a children's version she calls the Children's Apperceptive Sto-
rytelling Test (CAST), which is based upon Adlerian principles and has 
the additional benefit of being standardized and normed. One of the 
cards in the TAT is of a boy, sitting at a table, looking at a violin. A client 
provided the following story to the card: 
This is a boy who is upset with himself. He sees the violin but he doesn't 
want to play it. He wants to be outside, playing with his friends. His par-
ents are making him stay in and practice. He knows he should stand up to 
them, but he feels that will only get him in greater trouble. He doesn't 
know what he'll do, and he is sitting there, contemplating his options. 
Adlerians interpret this in a manner analogous to the way we use 
dreams and early recollections. We look for what the client is saying 
about himself, how he views his role in life, other people, and his possi-
ble options for behavior. In other words, we examine his movement. He 
is saying, in this story, that he knows what he should do, but he is reluc-
tant. He feels pressured by life and its demands, and he would rather be 
out "playing." In his imagination, he envisions how he would like to 
stand up to those who confine him, but his movement is hesitating-he 

Understanding a Person 
141 
"thinks a good game," but does not act upon it-and he ends up not 
moving at all. As he has constructed it, there are two options, fight or 
submit (antithetical modes of apperception). He does not move in either 
direction and creates a conflict, but a conflict with a purpose. As long 
as he does not move, he cannot be wrong and, hence, he "wins" (Mosak 
& LeFevre, 1976). This is an example of intellectualizing and thinking 
about what to do, rather than doing it (see Chapter 6, particularly the 
section on defensive patterns). 
Many Adlerians, particularly Adlerians who are trained as clinical psy-
chologists, use testing in order to gain glimpses of the style of life rather 
than to establish a nomenclature diagnosis. It is not the tests themselves 
that they emphasize, but their use. If used to elucidate the client's 
uniqueness, to understand his or her goals, intentions, and purposes, 
they can be extremely beneficial. In the Adlerian clinical psychologist's 
armamentarium are the conventional tests, the social history, the mental 
status examination, tests for organicity, role playing for assessment pur-
poses, and a wide variety of techniques upon which clinicians rely. 
o General Issues in Assessment 
Lombardi (1973) has listed eight ways Adlerians assess individuals: 
1. Case history data 
2. Psychological interviewing 
3. Expressive behavior 
4. Psychological testing 
5. Family constellation 
6. Early recollections 
7. Grouping 
8. Symptoms 
We have discussed numbers 2, 4, 5, and 6 already. Let us examine the 
others. 
With the case history data, we do not have to interact with the client, 
but rather we review the case history in detail. Adler (1929a, 1931/ 
1964a) presented two such cases, Miss R. and Mrs. A. With each, he lis-
tened to the detailed presentation of the case and interjected comments 
and interpretations along the way. This form of interlinear assessment 
characterizes the way Adlerians do assessment. They do not wait for all 
the data to be in before assessing. That is certainly not possible in psy-
chotherapy-one cannot wait until "later" to assess. Assessment must be 
ongoing as the patient speaks. The Adlerian assessor generates hypothe-
ses, accepts and rejects them, and generates alternative hypotheses, in 

142 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
an attempt to understand the immediate communication and to pattern 
the data to understand the total person. 
By using expressive behavior, Individual Psychologists can take note 
of body language in order to infer what may be certain issues in the per-
son's style of life (Mosak & Shulman, 1977; Peven, Mosak & Shulman, 
1979). What are the body posture, sleep position, general manner of car-
rying oneself, and so forth that may provide clues to the person (Adler, 
1929!l964d)? Adler felt that such issues, including handwriting, could 
be used to elucidate the style of life. 
By grouping, Lombardi (1973) refers to interacting with individuals. If 
we do, we can see not only how individuals engage in transactions with 
others, but how they feel about them. Smith ells (1983) has written on 
this as well. Dreikurs (1948a) and Grunwald and McAbee (1985) discuss 
how in the process of family counseling and understanding children, 
clinicians can use their own reactions to the children's behavior (specifi-
cally, their misbehavior) to detect children's goals (Dinkmeyer & McKay, 
1973, 1982; Mosak & Maniacci, 1993). For example, if a young child's 
goal is to get attention from others, his or her parents frequently feel an-
noyed or amused. If the child's goal is power, others typically feel threat-
ened and angry. This is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 10, in the 
section on Adlerian educational programs. 
Finally, Adlerians can assess individuals by examining their sympto-
matic behavior. Shulman and Mosak (1967) have discussed the various 
purposes of symptoms and have divided them according to nine cate-
gories. Let us review each. 
In the safety stratagem symptoms are designed in order to insure 
against failure, hurt, or loss of place. By developing certain symptoms, 
clients can assure themselves of not failing, such as if a man develops 
sexual impotence and uses that in order to evade ever failing at mar-
riage. In the hero-martyr-saint stratagem, symptoms are created in order 
to show how strong, saintly, or noble individuals are. In the attention-
service-love stratagem, symptoms are used to get something. Some-
times, what is gotten is love and attention. The power stratagem is 
designed to manipulate others or overwhelm others; the revenge and 
retribution stratagem is used as retaliation against someone or some-
thing. The face-saving stratagem is used to repair damaged self-esteem, 
such as if guilt feelings are used to excuse misdeeds (Dreikurs, 1950b; 
Mosak, 1987a). Creating excitement can be used as a stratagem if 
individuals create a furor and agitate others. In Berne's terms (1964), 
they "enjoy" playing "Uproar." The proof stratagem is designed to 
strengthen one's position, such as by creating rejection in order to 
"prove" one is right for not getting close to others. Finally, individuals 

Understand i ng a Person 
143 
can keep a symptom in reserve in order to bring it up and use whenever 
they need an excuse. 
Symptoms for Adlerians are like dreams and early recollections. They 
are not repressive in function, but expressive. They provide clues to 
understanding with what life style issues individuals are attempting to 
deal. 
D Theoretical and Philosophical Issues 
In generaL Adlerians attempt to understand people's goals and their 
movements toward them. The life style is the attitudinal posture people 
take to life and represents the core of the personality. The life style is 
concerned with the long-range movement of individuals. The immediate 
movement, specifically the behavior within the attitudinal posture (Le., 
the life style), is also assessed. Although it can be, and frequently is, con-
sonant with long-range, life style goals, it may not be. What I have for 
lunch may not be indicative of my life style. It could very well be a func-
tion of the context of the situation I am in, what I had for lunch yester-
day, what is available, how much it costs, who is around, and so forth. 
Then again, it may have a great deal to do with my life style. We do not 
deny that possibility, we just caution against an immediate assumption 
that everything is indicative of the style of life. Because it may be does not 
mean it has to be. Similarly, in psychotherapy, clients may come in with 
life style issues, but they may come in for particular issues (or at certain 
times during sessions) with topics which are indicative of immediate 
concerns, what Adler (1956) sometimes referred to as subgoals. Kathy 
may be a getter, but that may not be an issue with how she deals with 
her coworkers every time she has a conflict with one of them. It could, 
and probably does, playa part much of the time, but certainly not every 
time. 
Another theoretical issue concerns what Adlerians assess. Roughly, 
there are four guidelines that concern them. They are movement, pur-
pose, meaning, and social usefulness. 
By movement, they mean noting how people approach challenges. 
These are the "dance steps" to which we refer in Chapter 6. Some people 
move backward, others create obstacles, still others bury their heads in 
the sand. Adlerians look to see how they operate. 
Next, Adlerians examine the purpose of the movement, symptom, or 
behavior. As we discuss in Chapter 2, they are interested in the final 
cause, the goaL of behavior. The purposes of symptoms, listed here as 
stratagems, are an example of this. 

144 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Adlerian therapists are concerned with understanding the meaning of 
behavior. Purpose and meaning in Adlerian psychology are closely re-
lated but are not identical. The purpose, for instance, of self-induced 
vomiting may be to avoid gaining weight; its meaning may be, "I can't 
stomach this." To carry this example further, the person who vomits, the 
bulimic, may be saying, "I can't stomach this," about a lot of issues, such 
as having to appear one way when feeling another. A life style might be 
constructed around such apparent duplicity. Look as if one does not eat 
too much, but secretly gorge oneself to the point of sickness. Openly ap-
pear obedient, but covertly rebel. "I want to have my cake and eat it too, 
but not appear as such," they could be communicating. 
Lastly, Adlerians note the social usefulness of the behavior. Is it con-
structive' nonconstructive, or destructive? Does it entail a sense of com-
munity feeling, or not? If not, why not? Whenever possible, they look to 
encourage examples of community feeling and social interest and foster 
more of it. 
D Summary 
It is a difficult art to understand a person. We may find that the more 
we attempt to make it a science, the less we understand. Science has 
brought us great assets and has improved our lives immeasurably. Of 
that there is no doubt. Aristotle cautioned us centuries ago not to expect 
more precision from a topic than the topic could provide, and writers, 
poets, artists, and philosophers have studied human nature longer than 
science has existed. It is easy to write this chapter as if it were so neat, 
precise, and apparent. We know, all too well, it is far more challenging in 
practice. It is an art, and perhaps it needs to stay one. The methods of sci-
ence can be used to verify our understandings, but when it comes to 
human nature, verification of what we know lags far behind the ability 
to theorize about it. 
Understanding a person entails empathy, connectedness, and disci-
pline. It is an art that one must practice and, yes, study. It leads us to 
know our world, a world that exists with people. Our assessments must 
be sensitive, compassionate, and disciplined, lest we forget that what we 
see in others is really an extension of ourselves. Perhaps Plato was cor-
rect, on some level at least, in his assumption that humans could only 
learn what they already know to begin with. In the process of under-
standing a person, we can often find in them what we have seen in us. 
As is apparent, the process of assessment is already involved in the 
process of psychotherapy. More globally stated, once we understand 

Understanding a Person 
145 
something, we are well on the way to being able to change it. It is to this 
process we turn next, the topic of encouraging growth. 
D Points to Consider 
Adlerians attempt to understand individuals without violating the 
basic assumptions of Individual Psychology. Their assessments must 
therefore take into account holism, phenomenology, psychology of 
use, and social-field theory, to name but a few of the assumptions. 
Whereas diagnosis attempts to understand what makes a person 
"sick," assessment tries to understand what makes a person "tick." 
Adlerians generally have two steps to their case formulations, the 
General Diagnosis and the Special Diagnosis. 
The special diagnosis, for those Adlerians trained in the Dreikursian 
modeL entails doing what is called a life style assessment. It is an in-
vestigation of the person's early childhood history and an examination 
of his or her earliest recollections. 
"The Question" is a key diagnostic technique for Adlerians. Not only 
is it used for assessing what is avoided by clients, it can be used for dif-
ferential diagnosis of somatic from psychogenic disturbances. 
D Questions 
1. What is "The Question?" How is it used by Adlerians? 
2. What is the goal of the Adlerian in conducting the Special Diagnosis? 
3. How do Adlerians use dreams in their assessments? What are some of 
their purposes? 
4. What is an early recollection? How do Adlerians use them? 
5. What is the Adlerian view of psychological testing? 
6. Why do Adlerians ask, "Who is most affected by your symptoms?" 
Into what basic assumptions does that question tap? 
7. What is meant by understanding the client's "expressive behavior?" 
8. Discuss some of the various purposes of symptoms. 
D Note 
IThis is a point Freud (1963) misunderstood when he accused Adler of having created a 
psychology without love. In 1908 Adler (1956) had already written on the child's need for 
affection. 

Encouraging Growth 
Our Western tendency has been to believe that understanding follows 
technique; if we get the right technique, then we can penetrate the riddle 
of the patient. . .. The existential approach holds the exact opposite-
namely, that technique follows understanding. The central task and re-
sponsibility of the therapist is to seek to understand the patient as a being 
and as a being in his world . ... This does not derogate disciplined tech-
nique. It rather puts it into perspective. 
Rollo May (1983) 
Accustom yourself to give careful attention to what others are saying, and 
try your best to enter into the mind of the speaker . ... To a man with jaun-
dice, honey seems bitter; to one bitten by a mad dog, water is a thing of hor-
ror; to little children, a ball is a treasure of great price . ... For can it be 
supposed that a man's erroneous thinking has any less effect on him than 
the bile in jaundice . .. ? To change your mind and to defer to correction is 
not to sacrifice your independence; for such an act is your own, in pur-
suance of your own impulse, your own judgment, and your own thinking. 
Marcus Aurelius (circa 169/1964) 
How do Adlerians encourage growth? As we discussed in Chapter 9, un-
derstanding is the key. Although it is not always necessary that patients 
146 

Encouraging Growth 
147 
understand the origin, nature, and dynamics of their problems, the psy-
chotherapist should have some degree of insight into what is happening 
(Maniacci, 1991). We are guiding others-it does not seem too much to 
ask that we at least know where we are going (Mosak & Maniacci, 
1998). As people have understood for centuries, we need to give careful 
attention to what others are saying, and enter their worlds. Techniques 
are of secondary importance (not of no importance) to understanding, 
empathy, and compassion. We cannot expect to foster community feel-
ing in others if we do not feel it ourselves. Adlerians believe that social 
interest is contagious, that is, that acceptance of self and acceptance of 
and by others are interrelated (Berger, 1952; McIntyre, 1952). 
Adlerians encourage growth in people and society along three dimen-
sions. They use educational programs and techniques, counseling and 
psychotherapy, and social advocacy. Each is briefly examined. 
D Educational Programs and Techniques 
Child Guidance and Parent Education 
Adler (1917/1988b, 1926/1988a, 1930a, 1930b, 1930/1963, 1956); Adler 
and associates (1930); Dreikurs (1948a); Dreikurs, Corsini, Lowe, and 
Sonstegard (1959); Dreikurs, Grunwald, and Pepper (1982); Dreikurs 
and Soltz (1964); Holub (1928); and Loewy (1930) have been the 
strongest proponents of Adlerian child guidance and parent education. 
They wrote extensively on these topics and devoted a considerable 
amount of time disseminating parent and family education. Adler's work 
has been carried on by numerous Adlerians, most notably Beecher and 
Beecher (1955), Christensen and Schramski (1983), Corsini (1977), Cor-
sini and Painter (1975), Dinkmeyer and McKay (1973, 1982), Dink-
meyer, McKay, and Dinkmeyer (1980), Grunwald and McAbee (1985), 
Walton and Powers (1974), and West (1986). Adlerian child guidance 
should not be confused with Adlerian child psychotherapy. The goal of 
the former is educational; the goal of the latter is therapeutic (Mosak & 
Maniacci, 1993). 
Adler was a supporter of social reform and outreach programs (Ans-
bacher, 1992a; Hoffman, 1994). He worked often with troubled youth 
and their families, and with his coworkers established child guidance 
and marriage clinics for the lay public and teacher-education programs 
in the schools (Adler, 1956, 1978). At the time the Fascists assumed 
power in Austria in 1934 there were 28 child guidance clinics in opera-
tion. This outreach work has continued along three fronts: marital en-
richment programs, parent and family education, and teacher education. 

148 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Although therapy was being conducted on a one-to-one basis, Adler's 
innovative contribution was what was later named "open forum coun-
seling." Adler and his colleagues would counsel a family in sessions at-
tended by other parents and teachers. In this manner other families and 
educators could benefit from the counselor's advice to the family being 
counseled. They received education in family constellation issues, sibling 
rivalry, encouragement, and communication techniques. Dreikurs, 
Gould, and Corsini (1974) later added the family council, a weekly meet-
ing designed to foster family communication, family decision making, 
and a democratic family climate. The family council was also described 
by Barber (1972), Bartholow (1969), Catlin (1976), Phillips (1975), Poffen-
berger (1953), Rigney and Corsini (1970), and Weinhaus (1977). Drei-
kurs extended Adler's contributions to parent education in numerous 
publications. Sometimes this parent education was criticized as being 
directed to middle-class families; the criticism can be refuted in that sev-
eral Adlerian family counseling centers were located in lower socioeco-
nomic class neighborhoods (Hansen, 1944-45). 
Three of the major components in Adler's childrearing methods were 
encouragement, the understanding of the four goals of children's misbe-
havior, and the use of natural and logical consequences. 
Encouragement 
Numerous factors exist that may invite people to become discouraged. 
Societally, such conditions as war and the threat thereof. poverty, 
famine, crime, and various forms of discrimination are givens to which 
people must respond with problem solving. At the family level childrear-
ing practices; parental expectation, demand, and modeling; and sibling 
competition may serve, in noncausal fashion, to discourage children. 
The educational system may further discourage children. Given these 
discouraging influences, children, in Berne's terms (1972), may grow up 
as either "winners" ("princes" or "princesses") or "losers" ("frogs"). A 
winner is one who succeeds in what she or he attempts to accomplish; a 
loser does not. For Berne the goal is to convert frogs into princes or 
princesses. Berne and Adlerians share common descriptions of losers, 
often employing the same names, for example, "Sisyphus." 
Adlerians describe the process of transforming frogs into princes as en-
couragement. The encouraged person demonstrates faith in self and life. 
Although not pollyanna-like or subscribing to the pursuit of perfection, 
the encouraged person is usually willing to rely on self to meet the tasks 
of life and is willing to rely on self in assuming risk if one either does not 
know the consequences or faces potentially negative consequences. The 

Encouraging Growth 
149 
latter Individual Psychologists refer to as courage, etymologically related 
to the word encouragement. Adlerians see encouragement as a sine qua non 
in social relations (Dinkmeyer & Losoncy, 1996; Losoncy, 1977; Neuer, 
1936), in education (Dinkmeyer & Dreikurs, 1963), and in the therapeu-
tic process (Mosak, 1995). 
Although Adlerians and Berne largely concur in their views of win-
ners and losers, Adlerians place an additional "spin" on the topic. Al-
though subjectively bank robbers may regard themselves as winners if 
the hold-up is successful, society does not view them as winners. In ad-
dition to merely being successful at what one attempts, in order for 
Adlerians to consider the person a winner, the goal must be on the use-
ful side of life. 
Adlerian psychology further distinguishes between losing (failing) and 
being a loser (a failure), between the deed and the doer, and in religious 
terms, between the sin and the sinner. Everyone fails at something every 
day. That does not make us failures. To illustrate, Paul Ehrlich won the 
Nobel prize in 1908 for discovering the first cure for syphilis. The drug, 
salvers an, was informally known as 606 because the first 605 experi-
mental drugs failed. A baseball player with a batting average of .300 can 
command a huge salary, yet he fails more than twice as many times as he 
hits safely. Failures, then, are those who believe that they are (the inferi-
ority feeling) or behave as if they are (the inferiority complex). 
There is reason to believe that the more we encourage others, the 
more we encourage ourselves. By helping others' transformation into 
princes and princesses we become princes and princesses ourselves. The 
implications for parents, educators, and therapists are transparent. En-
couragement makes the practice of psychotherapy rewarding for both 
the patient and the therapist (Mosak, 1950). 
The Four Goals of Misbehavior 
According to Dreikurs (1948a), if children become discouraged in find-
ing their places usefully, they attempt to pursue one of four goals of mis-
behavior: 
Goal I. 
Attention getting 
Goal II. Power seeking 
Goal III. Revenge taking 
Goal IV. Displaying inadequacy 
Although in any single display of misbehavior a child may opt for any 
one of these goals, disturbed and disturbing children may characteristi-

150 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
cally select one goal as the most frequently pursued. These short-term, 
immediate goals can be detected in three ways: 
1. By observing what happens when children misbehave; the response 
they receive may be what they are looking for through their behavior. 
2. By the adults checking on how this misbehavior makes them feel. If 
the adult feels annoyed or feels it is "cute," the goal may be to obtain 
attention. Anger, on the part of the adult, is generally a response to an 
invitation to engage in a power struggle. Revenge typically evokes a 
sense of hurt in the adult. A display of inadequacy may leave the 
adult feeling discouraged, like giving up on the child or doing "it" for 
him or her. In other instances goal IV behaviors may evoke feelings in 
the adult of, "I have to redouble my efforts to conquer or eliminate 
the child's inadequacy." 
3. By observing what happens if you attempt to naively correct him or 
her. For example, if one gives the attention-seeking child attention, 
he or she will stop briefly, only to begin again shortly thereafter. The 
understanding of which goal children (or adults, for that matter) are 
striving for facilitates the handling of the situation in which these 
feelings arise. The various educational programs provide detailed in-
structions on how to deal with such matters. 
Natural and Logical Consequences 
One widely used method introduced by Dreikurs (1948a), the use of 
consequences, may be used as illustration. Consequences take two 
forms-natural and logical. A natural consequence occurs through no 
active intervention by the adult; one simply allows the natural conse-
quences of actions to take their course. If a person does not eat a meal, 
she or he may go hungry. If children do not wear gloves in wintry 
weather, the experience of discomfort generally teaches them the lesson 
better than reminding, coaxing, or scolding. If the natural consequence 
is too dangerous or not readily apparent (e.g., not eating vegetables may 
not have immediate natural consequences), logical consequences can be 
introduced. Whereas natural consequences teach the natural order of 
life, logical consequences teach the social order of life. For example, the 
logical consequence of not coming to meals on time can be that the child 
is not served that particular meal. Rather than employing punishment 
and reward as the prime means of discipline, Adlerians prefer to use con-
sequences and encouragement. 
In the educational programs, because the parent-child relationship is 
dyadic and bidirectional (Mosak, 1980), a wide variety of techniques for 

Encouraging Growth 
151 
both parents and children is taught. The programs are designed to reach 
relatively well-functioning families who may profit from the instruction 
and eliminate the need for therapeutic intervention. However, many, if 
not all, of the techniques can be used in conjunction with psychotherapy 
(Mosak & Maniacci, 1993). Although Adlerians do focus upon reme-
diation, they prefer prevention of negative behaviors and promoting 
growth in families and individuals. 
Schools 
Teacher-education Programs 
These programs are designed to increase cooperation in the classroom. 
Teachers and school administrators attend these programs, which are 
conducted in the same manner as the parent and marital programs. 
Teachers learn how to better deal with children so as to increase teacher 
effectiveness in the classroom. Allen (1970), Corsini (1977), Dinkmeyer 
et a1. (1980), Dreikurs et a1. (1982), and Mosak (1971 b) have developed 
these programs. Holmberg (1972) provides descriptions of how Adlerian 
methods have been introduced into schools. All of these programs are 
similar in structure and philosophy. The content differs according to the 
audience addressed. 
Couple-enrichment Programs 
Dreikurs (1946) and Dinkmeyer and Carlson (1984, 1989) have written 
marital education texts that have been used to conduct marital or cou-
ple-enrichment programs. Couples meet in groups of 10 to 12 and, using 
one of these texts, discuss how to improve their marriages or relation-
ships. The groups are typically led by counselors or paraprofessionals and 
run from an hour to an hour and a half in length. Exercises, video- or 
audiotapes, posterboards, and role playing are used to build relationship 
skills that strengthen couples (Sperry & Carlson, 1991). 
Parent and Family Education Programs 
Similar to the marital programs, these programs focus on how to build 
better family relationships. Beecher and Beecher ( 1955), Dreikurs 
( 1 948a), Dreikurs et a1. (1974), Dreikurs and Soltz (1964), Dinkmeyer 
and McKay (1973, 1982), Popkin (1987), and West (1986) have written 
some of the more popular programs. 

152 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
D Adlerian Counseling and Psychotherapy 
We have noted that Adler and his associates ran 28 child guidance centers 
in pre-World War II Vienna, and because of this enterprise, many early 
textbooks mistakenly characterized Adlerian psychotherapy as only use-
ful for children. During his Freudian period Adler treated adults and con-
tinued to do so throughout his lifetime (Manaster, Painter, Deutsch, & 
Overholt, 1977). Adlerian psychotherapy actually assumes numerous 
forms-individual, group, family, couple, and multiple-and the popula-
tions served range from the so-called normal through the spectrum of 
conditions listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (American Psychi-
atric Association, 1994). Older texts occasionally derided Adlerian psy-
chotherapy as "superficial," an "ego psychology." Subsequent to the 
Freudian legitimization of ego psychology, these criticisms waned. 
Adlerian psychology may be characterized as an analytic-behavioral-
cognitive psychology. Let us examine some of the ways in which Adleri-
ans function. 
Adlerian Cognitive Therapy 
Adlerians actively search for and confront cognitive distortions in their 
clients. As Shulman (1985; Forgus & Shulman, 1979) notes, Adler was the 
first cognitive therapist, a point Ellis (1973, p. 112) supports: 
Alfred Adler was certainly one of the main mentors in the formulation of 
RET (Rational-Emotive Therapy); and it is highly probable that without his 
pioneering work, the main elements of rational-emotive therapy might 
never have been developed .... Adler's view of emotion, and of its cogni-
tive or reasoning correlates, was unusually incisive, perceptive and to my 
way of thinking correct. 
As Freeman (1993, p. iv) notes: 
The seminal and groundbreaking work of Alfred Adler, Rudolf Dreikurs, 
and other Individual Psychologists has too often been given short shrift and 
only passing notice .... The theoretical orientation developed by Adlerians 
has been the basis for Frankl's logotherapy and the contemporary ego-
analytic approach of the psychoanalysts and has been one of the major in-
fluences for the development of present day cognitive behavior therapy. 
We have characterized Adlerian psychology as an analytic-behavioral-
cognitive one. Adlerians are cognitive in their emphasis upon thinking 
and how belief systems affect motivation and emotion and behavior. As 

Encouraging Growth 
153 
discussed previously, they also emphasize how that was learned, typi-
cally via psychogenetic reconstruction of early influences and the devel-
opment of a cognitive structure, a system of beliefs and values Adlerians 
refer to as the life style. Although the term "cognitive restructuring" did 
not come into vogue until much later, this was Adler's aim. Adler (1923, 
1934) at one point describes the goal of therapy as replacing large errors 
(in cognition) with smaller ones, "and to reduce these even further until 
they are no longer harmful" (Adler, 1923, p. 38). Ellis (1957) speaks of 
"depropagandizing" the patient. In 1997, the Journal of Cognitive Psycho-
therapy devoted an entire issue to exploring the Adlerian roots of cogni-
tive therapy ("Adlerian and Cognitive Psychotherapies," 1997). 
Adlerian Psychoanalysis 
Having spun off from Freudian psychoanalysis, it is understandable that 
Adlerian psychoanalysis retains some of the methods Freud introduced. 
Although they reconstruct the past, Adlerians do not regard the past as 
causalistic. They explore motivations that are not always conscious, al-
though Adlerians avoid reification and treat "conscious" and "uncon-
scious" as adjectives rather than nouns. Both use dream analysis, the 
Freudians to resolve past conflicts, the Adlerians as immediate problem-
solving behavior. Both explore the significance of the therapist-patient 
relationship (Mosak, 1965). They deal with the establishment of the re-
lationship, resistance (Boldt, 1994), transference (although Adlerians 
define it differently than Freud and Jung) (Zborowski, 1997), and the 
termination of the relationship (Mosak, 1965, 1995a). 
Adler (1912/1983b, 1929/1964d, 1956) described the Adlerian thera-
pist's role in many ways. The therapist's role included the fostering of 
community feeling or social interest. What was consonant with social in-
terest was also in the individual's self-interest. Although acknowledging 
that rational-emotive therapy possesses many similarities to Adlerian 
psychology, Ellis (1957, p. 4) expresses the opposite, that what is in the 
individual's self-interest is in the social interest: 
It is mainly, however, in the realm of his views on social interest that Adler 
would probably take serious issue with rational therapy. For the latter 
believes that rational human behavior primarily must be based on self-
interest; and that, if it is so based, it will by logical necessity also have to be 
largely rooted in social interest. Adler seemed to believe the reverse; that 
only through a primary social interest could an individual achieve maxi-
mum self-love and happiness. 

154 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
The therapist also closely observes the life style of the client and seeks 
to understand how the client interacts with the therapist. This interac-
tion is to a large extent transferential and to some degree reality-based 
because the therapist does not adopt the role of the anonymous thera-
pist. Because the client brings his or her life style to therapy, the relation-
ship with the therapist may reflect the interaction of the client with 
others in his or her social milieu. These interactions are paramount 
within the Adlerian framework, so much so that Berne (1972) has 
hailed Adler as the first transactionalist. 
Adler (1929/1964d) also characterized the therapist's role as assuming 
the belated function of the mother, that is, the one who encourages and 
corrects, a nurturer who teaches the client how to function more con-
structively in life. Rogers (1942, 1951). Maslow (1970). and Goldstein 
(1940/1963) refer to the latter as self-actualization and self-realization. 
Adlerian Behavioral Therapy 
Although in its psychoanalytic aspects Adlerian therapy aims at insight. 
insight does not consist merely of knowledge ("know thyseU") or under-
standing. For the Adlerian there is no insight unless there is an action 
component. Mosak and Shulman (1967, p. 42) define insight as "a mean-
ingful experience leading to perceptual change and leading to a change in 
the line of movement." Therefore, in addition to such media as psychoan-
alytic interpretation, resolving resistances, the transference, and cognitive 
restructuring, the Adlerian may conduct psychodrama or utilize music 
(Dreikurs, 1965; Dreikurs & Crocker, 1955; Greven, 1957), art (Cucher, 
1976; Dreikurs & Shulman, 1969), or dance therapy (Espenak, 1981). The 
therapist may do task setting (assign "homework") (Mosak, 1995a; Peven 
& Shulman, 1986), encourage action (Dinkmeyer & Dreikurs, 1963; 
Dinkmeyer & Losoncy, 1996), and reinforce behaviors. Although these 
methods may be viewed as behavior modification, as Adlerians implement 
them they represent vehicles for motivation modification (Nystul. 1985). 
Other Settings for Adlerian Psychotherapy 
Adlerian Family Therapy 
As Sherman and Dinkmeyer (1987) document. Adlerian family therapy 
is a systems theory that integrates many other theories. Foley (1989, 
p. 458) writes that: 

Encouraging Growth 
155 
Adlerian psychotherapeutic theory shares much with family therapy. Its 
emphasis on the family constellation is a major concept borrowed by fam-
ily therapists. Adler's approach was holistic, as is family therapy. The use 
of paradox, a major weapon in family therapy, has its roots in Alfred 
Adler. ... Likewise, an emphasis on the conscious and the present are 
Adlerian concepts. The freedom to improvise is a feature of family therapy 
and it. too, has its roots in Adler. ... The basic concepts of family therapy 
are found in a latent state in Adler's thinking. 
Adlerian family therapy can apply to many populations, from the "typi-
cal" family (Christensen & Schramski. 1983) to the family with severely 
disturbed members (Maniacci & Carlson, 1991). 
Marriage and Couple Counseling 
Procedurally Adlerians conduct marriage and couple counseling in 
various forms. All, however, are based upon the theoretical basic as-
sumptions, and almost all are transactional in nature. Their approach 
is constructivist and systemic (Sperry & Carlson, 1991). Corsini (1967) 
has "invented" a "first-aid kit for marriage problems." It is designed for 
"the kind of problems too minor to require a specialist but too major to 
ignore" (p. 40). Deutsch (1967) and Papanek (1965b) utilized group 
therapy in the treatment of married couples. Pew and Pew (1972) rely 
on a rating method to trace the perception of self and spouse. Mozdzierz 
and Lottman (1973) utilize a transactional approach in examining the 
"games married people play." Following the lead of Dreikurs, Shulman 
and Mosak do life style matching to determine areas of compatibility and 
incompatibility, following this with a transactional approach to treat-
ment unless the degree of psychopathology in one or both partners sug-
gests that the partners should be seen separately for psychotherapy 
rather than engaging in marriage or couple counseling. Carlson and 
Sperry (1998) recommend a similar approach. Kern, Hawes, and Chris-
tensen (1989) also write about couple's work. 
Adlerian Group Therapy 
Dreikurs (1959) was the first therapist to introduce group therapy into 
private practice, the first of many Adlerians to practice group psycho-
therapy. Given the social-field theoretical assumption of Adlerian psy-
chology, group therapy is a natural fit (Corsini, 1971, 1987; Papanek, 
1965b; Shulman, 1973a). Adlerians, such as O'Connell (1975) and Starr 
(1977), have written texts on the Adlerian use of psychodrama, both in 

156 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
group and individual therapy, and Corsini (1966) wrote one of the early 
manuals on the use of role playing in psychotherapy. 
Adlerian Individual Psychotherapy: General Guidelines 
As Dreikurs (1956) discusses, Adlerian psychotherapy consists of four 
processes-relationship, investigation and understanding, interpreta-
tion, and reorientation and change. All of these processes are in motion 
throughout the entire course of the therapeutic encounter. 
Relationship 
Adlerians attempt, in terms of relationship, to establish the kind of atmo-
sphere and relationship in which clients can feel comfortable divulging 
themselves, sharing feelings and cognitions with the therapist. l In spite 
of the efforts to keep the goals of the client and the therapist aligned, dif-
ficulties of various kinds, both on the part of the client and that of the 
therapist, occur, and the goals must be realigned in order for therapy to 
proceed. These resistances may be either situational or characterological 
(Boldt, 1994). 
Because the life style is consistent, what people generally do outside of 
therapy they reprise, sooner or later, in therapy (Maniacci, 1996a). What 
the Freudians consider to be transference and working through, Adleri-
ans (roughly) consider to be the dynamics of the life style and the pro-
cess of reorientation. Like the Freudians of the Chicago Institute of 
Psychoanalysis (Alexander & French, 1946), the Adlerian therapist pro-
vides corrective emotional experiences. 
Adler (1956, pp. 336-337), in describing transference, wrote, 
I expect from the patient again and again the same attitude which he has 
shown in accordance with his [life style] toward the persons of his former 
environment, and still earlier toward his family. At the moment of the intro-
duction to the [therapist] and often earlier, the patient has the same feelings 
toward him as towards important persons in general. The assumption that 
the transference of such feelings or that resistance begins later is a mere de-
ception. In such cases the [psychotherapist] only recognizes them later. 
From this perspective, Adlerians do not wait for a transference neurosis 
to emerge; they can begin working on the cognitive distortions rapidly, 
as soon as they feel the relationship is sufficiently solidified to permit 
such restructuring (Maniacci, 1996a). 
Finally there are the issues of termination, of dissolving the relation-
ship. Many clients, for whatever personal reasons they may have, feel 

Encouraging Growth 
157 
loath to relinquish therapy and may unconsciously wish to become "in-
terminable patients" (Freud, 1937/l959). 
In all of these relationship issues, the therapist must deal with the pa-
tient's motivations, expectations, demands, invitations, and tests. 
Understanding and Investigation 
Throughout the process the therapist engages in active listening to gain 
insight into the client's communication and behavior (Peven et aI., 
1979). She or he listens to tone, to volume, to emphasis, to accent, and 
for speech impediments (Mosak & Shulman, 1977). She or he listens to 
language, to metalanguage (Mosak & Gushurst, 1972), to regionalisms, 
to argot (Mosak, Mosak, & Mosak, 1979), to organ jargon (Griffith, 
1984; Robb, 1932), and for verbal "pathology" such as parapraxes, neo-
logisms, word salad, and aphasia (Mosak & Shulman, 1977). The thera-
pist interprets in her or his own mind the meaning and the purpose of 
the client's communication. The therapist observes physical character-
istics, carriage, dress, gesture, physical flaws, and impediments. Adler 
(1929/1964d), emphasizing the unity of the personality, comments that 
whatever a person does reflects the life style. Consequently, it is not too 
important that we have a specific format in therapy.2 Adlerians can focus 
on past, present, or future. They can discuss current issues, current prob-
lems, fantasies, or dreams. They can give clients crayons and ask them to 
draw or they can invite them to create poetry. All of these communica-
tions may provide clues to the life style. Much Adlerian assessment is 
thus informal in nature in that the therapist constantly endeavors to un-
derstand (Peven et aI., 1979). 
Adlerians also perform formal assessment for the usual reasons and 
with the usual clinical instruments. They generally test for specific forms 
of information rather than administer complete batteries. The interpre-
tation of these tests is based on Adlerian theory (Maniacci, 1990; Mele, 
1993). For a more global approach the Adlerian aims for a life style sum-
mary in most instances. This is not necessarily true for such conditions as 
situational neuroses, toxic psychoses, and neurological conditions, but it 
is applicable to what previously were called psychoneuroses, personality 
disorders, and functional psychoses. In these instances one usually can-
not do cognitive restructuring unless one knows the cognitive structure, 
namely the life style. 
The knowledge of the life style only affords access to the person's long-
range goals. Adlerians are also interested in the short-range goals of 
people. Early recollections, a projective instrument (Gushurst, 1971; 
Lieberman, 1957; Mosak, 1958; Munroe, 1955, Taylor, 1975), help ther-
apists to understand the long-range goals; dreams, a problem-solving 

158 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
activity, inform about the short-range goals (Mosak, 1992). Because 
dreams are not seen as "the royal road to the unconscious," dreams do 
not constitute a sine qua non in Adlerian therapy, although they are 
widely used. Listening and observation may also give the therapist in-
sight into both short- and long-term goals. 
I nterpreta tion 
Although Adlerians are systematic theoretically, they are often technical 
eclectics. They feel free to intervene in any manner so long as the inter-
vention does not violate the basic assumptions of Adlerian psychology 
and ethical standards. They use interpretation, reflection of feeling, 
paradoxical intention, humor, supportive techniques-a wide variety of 
therapeutic tactics (Mosak & Maniacci, 1998). They often teach social 
and communication skills. 
Some use psychotropic medication and other somatic interventions. A 
division of opinion exists among Adlerians with regard to the prescrip-
tion of medication in psychotherapy. Many medical-model practitioners 
(Pancner & Jylland, 1996; Sperry, 1990) are committed to prescribing 
medication, particularly with the chronically mentally ill (Maniacci, 
1991); growth-model therapists are not. The former may use psychotro-
pic medication as part of the therapy or for readying a patient for ther-
apy; the latter group of Adlerians, viewing Adlerian psychotherapy as 
educational or reeducational, refrain from relying upon such medica-
tions. Mosak (1985, 1995b), in two papers, describes the treatment of 
depression and schizophrenia without medication. 
Reorientation and Change 
Therapeutic change is often considered to be the endpoint of therapy. Yet 
reorientation can commence as early as the telephone call to arrange the 
first appointment. Although the achievement of insight may be desirable, 
it may not always be necessary. People change every day without insight. 
Although insight often precedes behavior change, the order is frequently 
reversed. Doing something different, perhaps creative or innovative be-
havior change or problem solving, can produce insight. One observes this 
most transparently if one is working puzzles and finally arrives at the "aha 
response." Although Adlerians do not dismiss the role of insight, they are 
aware that how it is attained is not always so simple as is portrayed. 
Every therapy has a specific theoretical goal. For example, the Freud-
ian hopes that "where id was, there shall ego be." The Adlerian aims to 
remove inferiority feelings and promote social interest. However, for 
each therapy there are also practical goals, especially in an era of third-

Encouraging Growth 
159 
party payments and managed care. Among these practical goals are 
changes in behavior and feelings, symptomatic change, changes in out-
look about the world (e.g., to become more optimistic), and changes in 
self-perception and self-esteem. 
Various techniques, as well as encouragement, are employed to assist 
clients in their efforts to change. Many of these are discussed by 
Dinkmeyer et a1. (1987), Mosak (1995a), Mosak & Maniacci (1989, 
1995, 1998), and Mosak & Shulman (1967). 
According to a survey conducted in 1972 and followed up in 1989, 
Adlerian therapy tends to be brief, typically lasting 4 to 6 months (16-24 
sessions). Special issues of the Journal of Individual Psychology (Ansbacher, 
1972) and of Individual Psychology (Sperry, 1989) contain papers devoted 
to brief therapy. Although Adlerians can and do engage in long-term 
therapy, by and large their work is brief (Maniacci, 1996a). As with tak-
ing one's car to the auto mechanic, some clients merely need to have 
their spark plugs cleaned; others require major overhauls. 
Multiple Psychotherapy 
Although multiple psychotherapy, or cotherapy as some refer to it, has 
been used sporadically and for specific purposes and populations since 
the beginning of the 20th century, it was midcentury before it was uti-
lized as a regular vehicle for the conduct of psychotherapy (Dreikurs et 
al., 1984). Using two therapists, the method contains advantages for both 
therapists and patients. Multiple psychotherapy incorporates a flexibility 
not available in individual psychotherapy. If one therapist is not available 
because of illness or vacation, the patient still has access to another who 
knows the patient equally well. Patients have the benefit that "two heads 
are better than one." Therapists can apply correctives to each other and 
prevent the therapy from getting into a rut through facilitating dealing 
with transferential situations and meeting resistances. Multiple psycho-
therapy also provides an excellent method for training and supervision. 
D Social Advocacy 
Adler (1978) was politically active, especially during his early years 
(Ansbacher, 1992a). Ellenberger (1970) and Hoffman (1994) provide an 
overview of such matters. Adler was a proponent of women's rights, 
democratic reform, preventive medicine, community mental health, and 
educational reform, to name but a few of the issues he advocated (see 
our introduction). Dreikurs (1971) and many other Adlerians (e.g., 
Gottesfeld, 1966; Lerner, 1952) have continued that tradition, stressing 

160 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
the need to build better communities based upon egalitarian, democratic 
principles. Adlerians' work in parent and family education, open-forum 
family counseling, and teacher education and school reform continues in 
this tradition. Environmental concerns occupy the attention of other 
Adlerians (Heyligers-Gunning, 1970; Meiers, 1972). 
D Summary 
This chapter provides a brief overview of how Adlerians encourage 
growth in people. We gear our work not only to the "sick," or "dis-
turbed
H individuals, but to people, regardless of their age, status, or "di-
agnosis." Healthy, well-functioning individuals can benefit from our 
psychoeducational programs and psychotherapy, which can also do a 
great deal to serve as a preventative measure against future problems. 
Our theory of counseling and psychotherapy takes into account many 
diverse perspectives and orientations, from psychoanalytic to cognitive, 
behavioral. existential. and family-systems viewpoints. Although Adleri-
ans adhere to a consistent unitary theory, they practice according to the 
needs of the situation and the dynamics of the case. In anyone day, an 
Adlerian therapist might act like a cognitive therapist one session, a psy-
choanalyst the next an existentialist the next and a family therapist 
later. Even within the same session, such diversity might occur. All of 
this occurs within the framework of our basic assumptions listed at the 
beginning of this work. 
We have come full circle. It is time to return our attention to where we 
started, and that is upon our theory itself. We know where it came from, 
who formulated it. how it developed, and how it operates. It is time to 
assess its usefulness, explore its limitations, and seek where else it needs 
to grow and expand. That is the focus of the next chapter, our last chap-
ter. a critique of Individual Psychology. Like individuals themselves, if a 
theory is to remain healthy and vital. it needs to evolve, to adapt to 
changes and remain flexible enough to cope with whatever life presents. 
Let us assess and lay the groundwork for Adlerian psychology as it 
moves into the next century. 
D Points to Consider 
Adlerians operate in a number of ways to encourage growth. They 
use educational programs, counseling and psychotherapy, and social 
advocacy. 

Encouraging Growth 
161 
Through psychoeducation, Adlerians reach out to not only dis-
turbed individuals, but to healthy people as well. They intervene not 
only with families and couples, but with schools and educational facil-
ities as well. 
With regards to counseling and psychotherapy, Adlerians are tech-
nically eclectic. That is, they use a wide variety of tactics in order to 
produce change. Adlerians use tactics that are cognitive, behavioraL 
and psychoanalytic. They work in individuaL couple, family, and 
group formats, and in long-term and brief-therapy formats. 
D Questions 
1. What is the difference between logical and natural consequences? 
2. What do Adlerians mean by encouragement? 
3. What are some of the behavioral tactics Adlerians use with clients? 
4. How do Adlerians define transference? How is it similar to and differ-
ent from Freudian definitions? 
5. What is multiple psychotherapy? Describe some of its advantages. 
6. Adler described the Adlerian therapist's role as assuming the "belated 
function of the mother." What did he mean by that? 
7. What are the four phases of Adlerian psychotherapy? 
D Notes 
lAdlerian psychology, like rational-emotive psychology, assumes that underlying every 
feeling a cognition exists (Dreikurs, 1951; Ellis, 1973). 
2Currently some states and third-party providers demand treatment plans at the initiation 
of psychotherapy, creating a problem for Adlerian and person-centered therapists. 

A Critique of the Theory of 
Individual Psychology 
Giving good advice means the therapist assumes that people have rational 
control of what they are doing. To be successful in the therapy business it 
may be better to drop that idea. 
Jay Haley (1976) 
Common sense has its own necessity; it asserts its rights with the weapon 
particularly suitable to it, namely, appeal to the" obviousness" of its claims 
and considerations. However, philosophy can never refute common sense, 
for the latter is deaf to the language ofphilosophy. Nor may it even wish to 
do so, since common sense is blind to what philosophy sets before its essen-
tial vision. 
Martin Heidegger (1943/1977) 
Nothing is perfect. As we have attempted to detail throughout this work, 
striving to be perfect can be a neurotic goal that is unattainable and typi-
cally serves to alienate others. Individual Psychology is not perfect and 
Adler himself, like all of us, made mistakes, not only as a person but as a 
theorist. What he created has stood the test of time remarkably well, but 
not without having been subjected to much criticism, not all of it unjus-
162 

A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
163 
tified. We will not concern ourselves with some of the more obvious 
points which Adler overstated, for we are more interested in the scope of 
his thought than the details. For example, as we briefly discuss in Chap-
ter 9, Adler (1956) viewed dreams as problem -solving functions that 
were concerned with the future (i.e., where we are expecting to go or be 
in the immediate future), not as attempts to fulfil infantile wishes. In 
general, this is becoming increasingly accepted (e.g., French, 1952). 
However, he also commented that healthy individuals no longer 
dreamed because they had the courage to solve their problems during 
the day (Adler, 1929/l964b). That simply is not true. Adler overstated 
his case. 
In attempting a critique of the theory of Individual Psychology, we ex-
amine 12 points that need to be examined. The first group are the "tradi-
tional" criticisms leveled against Adler and Adlerians. The second group 
are our thoughts about what we feel needs to be reexamined. We are not 
attempting to be comprehensive, for that would entail yet another entire 
manuscript. We are simply trying to be thought-provoking, not only for 
other Adlerians, but for any interested in psychological theory itself. We 
conclude with a look at how some of the basic Adlerian assumptions 
have become part of mainstream psychology, through the system known 
as cognitive constructionism. 
D "Traditional" Criticisms 
1. Story has it that during one of Adler's early lectures, a member of the 
audience stood up and proclaimed, "But Dr. Adler, all you speak is com-
mon sense!" Supposedly, Adler replied, "And what is wrong with that? I 
wish more psychiatrists did." Adlerians have traditionally been criticized 
for speaking "common sense."l Adlerians accept that criticism. It is a 
"valid criticism." Adlerians do speak common sense. Adler disliked tech-
nical jargon and wanted to base his system upon philosophy, not science, 
and he appealed to people who were not necessarily academically 
trained. He intentionally set out to make his system accessible to "com-
mon people." Like George Miller (1967), he wanted to give psychology 
away. Adler made it possible to train teachers, social workers, clergy, and 
even psychologists to work with people in trouble. Like Freud, he felt 
that one did not have to be medically trained to practice therapy. Once 
more, Adler also believed that people could help themselves ("The father 
of self-help," 1995), and he set out to explain his principles in such a 
way as to make them "user friendly." 
2. "It is a superficial, ego psychology that overemphasizes rational 
processes." In about as many words, Freud attempted to dismiss Adler's 

164 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
system. He also added that what Adler said was new was not true, and 
what Adler said was true was not new. As we note throughout the text, 
even psychoanalysis has become "ego-oriented" with the emergence of 
ego psychology, object relations theory, and self-psychology. The rise of 
cognitive therapy has been well documented. Adlerians do focus upon 
conscious operations, but they also examine what is not understood. 
Our concepts of the final, fictional goal and private logic are "beyond" 
rational, traditionally defined "ego" functions. But the emphasis is upon 
what people think, their perceptions, and expectations. 
3. "It works only with normal people." Everything works with "nor-
mal" people. That is why they make such great clients. Adlerians have 
followed Adler's tradition and have worked with varied populations, in-
cluding the psychotic, criminals, children, adolescents, families, and 
cross-culturally. Although the Freudians would not work with psychotic 
patients because the patients could not enter into a transference rela-
tionship, Adlerians, relatively unconcerned with transference, did treat 
them from the earliest times (Kramer, 1947; Seif, 1928; Trentzsch, 1928; 
Wexberg, 1928). A similar criticism is intended when Adlerians are 
"credited" with working with "children," but what they typically mean is 
that Adler's system works "only" with children. Yes, the principles work 
well with children, and Adler, Dreikurs, and other Adlerians have writ-
ten extensively about child guidance. It is equally applicable to others 
(Hapworth et aI., 1993). 
4. "Its psychotherapy is manipulative." Every psychotherapy is manip-
ulative (Dreikurs, 1960; Mosak & Maniacci, 1998). Even nondirective 
therapists "direct" their client by selectively reinforcing one type of com-
ment over another (Greenspoon, 1955). "Um-hmm" is directive and re-
warding; it tells the client to keep going into the area just raised. Adler 
gave therapists a direction, a guidepost, to direct their efforts-he called 
it community feeling and social interest. Adlerians do want to direct 
clients toward it, toward becoming useful, productive members of soci-
ety and the community. They do not pride themselves in being value-
neutral in that respect. They believe that people can learn, and they can 
change, and, with enough information, practice, patience, and encour-
agement, much can be accomplished. If that is manipulative, so be it. 
5. "Everything is a matter of power, will to power, superiority strivings 
or inferiority, and compensation" (e.g., Murphy, 1947). One might form 
that impression by reading the Adlerian literature from the early part of 
the century. But it is certainly untrue of current theory. That criticism 
Adlerians do not accept as valid, except on a general, nomothetic level. 
We have discussed how Adlerians distinguish between the idiographic, 
specific case, and the general or nomothetic principle. Generally speak-
ing, if we feel in the "minus position," that is when "trouble" is likely to 

A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
165 
occur. The minus position depends upon the life style with which we are 
dealing. Insecurity, low self-esteem, lack of control, inadequacy, lack of 
mastery, "feeling down"-these are just some of the idiographic varia-
tions the feeling of inferiority can take. 
These are the basic criticisms most Adlerians hear. There are gaps that 
exist in Adlerian psychology, and it is to those that we now turn our 
attention. 
D "Gaps" in Individual Psychology 
There are six main areas we believe Individual Psychology needs to ad-
dress if it is to remain a viable, growing system. In no particular order of 
importance, we examine them, beginning with a point made by others 
that needs far more critical examination than has heretofore been ac-
corded it. 
1. "The life style is all. Everything comes down to the life style." No, it 
does not. Not everything a person does is a matter of life style. Although 
we need a cognitive map in order to get to our destination, that is, the 
goal, we also watch the other cars, take into account the road conditions, 
and look at the road signs. Despite what Adler has written and other 
Adlerians have detailed, there are many things that we do that have 
nothing to do with our style of life (Shulman, 1965). Dreams reflect our 
current activity and thoughts. We believe they seldom, if ever, have any-
thing to do with our life style (though our style of solving the problems 
with which we are confronted in our dreams may be indicative of our 
style); yet some Adlerians disagree with this position (e .g., Gold, 1981) 
and believe that dreams are a part of our life style. Similarly, what I typi-
cally have for lunch has nothing to do with my life style. This requires 
elaboration. 
Life style, as we are portraying it, develops in order to teach us, guide 
us, and instruct us about how to belong. Issues that pertain to how we 
bond, fit in, or find our place are matters that come under the direction 
of the life style. What color shirt I wear when I dress in the morning 
probably has nothing to do with such issues, unless appearance is crucial 
for my sense of belonging (Shulman, 1965). For many people, it is not 
an issue. There may be consistency to our behavior, even patterns, that 
are not life style issues, for they do not entail issues of how we belong. 
For example, we may have a fairly consistent preference for what we eat 
for lunch, yet that probably is not a decision that is based upon our life 
style convictions. What organizes these behaviors? Is it "the self?" Are 
there elements of "the self" that are not contained within the life style? 
These areas need to be explored in greater detail. For now we only have 

166 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
speculations, and much more theory and even research is needed to ex-
plore this topic. There are situational factors that interact with the life 
style, and more attention needs to be directed to these factors. 
2. In generaL Adlerians have not dealt with the issue of love in great 
detail. Freud (1963) accused Adler of having created a psychology with-
out love. He wrote Oskar Pfister that Adler "forgets the saying of the 
apostle Paul ... 'And I know that ye have not love in you: He has cre-
ated for himself a world without love and I am in the process of carrying 
out on him the revenge of the offended goddess of the libido" (p. 48). 
What is love? Is it merely one emotion among others? Is there some-
thing special to it? What about sexuality? How is that related to love? 
Are they similar, different, or only tangentially related? Adlerians, like 
other psychologists, are interested in the same questions raised by Jesus, 
Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, Fromm, Freud, and others (Ansbacher, 1966; 
Dreikurs, 1946). 
3. For a theory and practice that deals with children to the extent 
Adlerians do, Adlerians do not have an adequate developmental (Mo-
sak, 1991b) or learning theory (Croake & Robertshaw, 1987). When 
Adler was writing, there were no developmental theorists as we know 
them today (other than Freud's psychosexual stage theory). Erikson, Pi-
agel, Sullivan, Mahler, Bowlby, Ainsworth, Gesell, and Stern came after 
Adler. Adlerians, except in a cursory manner, have not attempted to for-
mulate a theory of development. By and large, they do not know what is 
"appropriate" for certain age groups and they do not attempt to take that 
into account in their work (with West's 1986 work being a notable 
exception) . 
4. Adlerians do not make enough of a distinction between the issues of 
responsibility and change. In many of Adler's original writings, he comes 
across as rather harsh and blaming towards patients. For example, al-
though today "perversion" is a moral term, in Freud's and Adler's time it 
was a technical term. Because people can change does not mean that 
they will, nor does it explain how change occurs. They are responsible 
for changing themselves, but we do not detail how that process begins, 
maintains itself, and stops (see Mosak & Maniacci, 1998, for how this 
process operates in psychotherapy and counseling). 
5. Along a similar line, Adlerians are more prescriptive rather than de-
scriptive. Adlerians spend considerable time telling what to do without 
describing in any great detail what is going on. A clear, clinically rich ex-
ception to this is Shulman's (1968/1984) work on schizophrenia, in 
which he not only details what to do about someone who is using schiz-
ophrenic mechanisms but explores in great detail what the schizo-
phrenic experience is like, describing it and tracing its course. Adlerians 
need more works like this, describing what is happening in detail. 

A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
167 
6. Finally, Adlerians have existed as a school of psychotherapy since 
the second decade of this century, but they write little, if anything, 
about the process of psychotherapy except for assorted articles and 
chapters. An in-depth, detailed approach to Adlerian psychotherapy has 
yet to appear. They do function as system therapists, cognitive thera-
pists, analysts, counselors, and so forth. When do they "shift hats," so to 
speak? How do they shift? Much more detail is needed if the art of 
Adlerian psychotherapy is to continue once the masters have stopped 
practicing. 
D Adler's Continuing Influence 
As we have noted throughout the text, Adler's system seems to be con-
tinually "rediscovered." As has been noted by Ellenberger (1970), it 
would be hard to find another theorist from whom so much has been 
taken without due credit being given. We have mentioned Adler's influ-
ence upon existentialism, family therapy, psychoanalysis (especially self-
psychology and object relations), and cognitive-behavior therapy. We 
want to briefly turn to one of the latest trends in psychotherapy, con-
structionism, and highlight some of the remarkable similarities. 
Cognitive Constructionism 
Shulman (1985; Forgus & Shulman, 1979; Shulman & Watts, 1997) and 
Jones (1995) have presented the key works in this area, and the recent 
special issue of the Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy ("Adlerian and Cog-
nitive Psychotherapies," 1997) discusses the similarities between Ad-
lerian and cognitive therapies, especially cognitive constructionism. We 
would like to address some of the similarities in order to highlight our 
thesis that Adler's ideas-if not his system-are becoming more and 
more "mainstream." The main texts we draw from in the cognitive con-
structionism literature are Guidano and Liotti (1983), Mahoney (1991 l-
and Safran and Segal (1990), along with the aforementioned special 
issue of the Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy. 
Following are some of the important concepts in the cognitive con-
structionism literature. We examine each in turn: 
1. Autopoiesis 
2. Core ordering processes/personal-cognitive organization 
3. Tacit-explicit knowledge 
4. Feedforward mechanisms 

168 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
5. Knowledge as self-knowledge 
6. Attachment theory 
Autopoiesis 
This is the term many constructionists use to describe how individuals 
learn. From their perspective, individuals are active agents in their learn-
ing, that is, they are not merely passive receptors of data from their envi-
ronment. Constructionists believe that individuals cocreate their worlds. 
This is hauntingly similar to Adler's concept of the creative self (Adler, 
1956). Even the literal translation of the term "autopoiesis" gives "self-
creative." 
Core Ordering Processes/Personal-cognitive Organization 
Either of these terms is used, depending upon what text is being read. 
Both mean the same thing: Individuals have a set, established way of 
construing their world, and this set determines how the individuals will 
interact with others. The personal-cognitive organization is the set of 
rules which underlies individuals' attempts at bonding. The counterpart 
in Individual Psychology is the concept of life style (Shulman & Mosak, 
1988). 
Tacit-explicit Knowledge 
Constructionists write that knowledge is divided into two broad cate-
gories: tacit and explicit. Tacit knowledge is that which is barely under-
stood, is usually learned prelinguistically, and exists nonverbally and 
without consensual validation. Explicit knowledge is that which is lin-
guistically stored, consensually shared, and clearly understood. This is 
virtually identical to Adler's (1956) concepts of private logic and com-
mon sense. 
Feedforward Mechanisms 
In passive theories of the mind and brain, individuals are seen as mere 
receptors of the data coming in from the environment. Constructionists 
stress that although this is certainly true, the mind and brain are active 
as well in that we also send out signals that help produce the very feed-
back we receive. In other words, we may be sensitive to criticism, but 
our noticing such criticism in the first place is contingent upon us look-
ing for it and being sensitive to it to begin with. We may even send out 
subtle cues that stimulate others to provide us with the feedback we re-

A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
169 
ceive. This is what we earlier referred to as the self-fulfilling prophecy, 
and another instance of what Adler (1956) called the creative self. 
Knowledge as Self-knowledge 
Constructionists note that since the personal-cognitive organization sys-
tem controls all knowledge, whatever we know (basically) reflects some-
thing about who and what we are. This is most relevant when it comes 
to cognitive processes like memory. Constructionists believe that mem-
ory is not a passive faculty waiting to be retrieved. It is an active event 
that is created in order to justify current opinions and ideas about the 
self and others. Once again, this is almost identical to Adler's (1956) 
view of the importance of early recollections and biased apperceptions. 
Attachment Theory 
Constructionists believe that through early bonding interactions, indi-
viduals learn to encode and process information in such a way so as to 
feel secure. This becomes the basis of later attempts to bond with others; 
hence, if early attachment was disturbed or in any significant way disor-
dered, as adults, we may continue the inappropriate attempts at bonding 
in much the same manner as we did as children. In fact, most construc-
tionists believe that psychopathology is itself a disordered attempt at 
bonding. This is Adler's (1956) and Dreikurs' (193311950a, 1967) opin-
ion as well. Adlerians believe that psychopathology is a discouraged at-
tempt at belonging. 
We discuss these points in order to make a point: As Adler predicted 
long ago, although his name might not be remembered, his concepts 
have become part of the mainstream. Although his name is seldom re-
membered in the constructionist literature, his ideas are certainly to be 
found. It is important for Adlerians to keep up with the literature, espe-
cially of new schools and of new developments in the "traditional" 
schools, or else we may continue to talk only to ourselves and fail to re-
alize that we are much more mainstream than we realize. More dia-
logues like the one found in the Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy need to 
take place. 
The Future of Individual Psychology 
Where does this leave Adlerians as the new millennium approaches? It is 
our belief that Adler's system is a living, viable system. As we point out 
repeatedly throughout the text, and Adler himself noted near the end of 

170 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
his life, Adler's ideas are becoming incorporated into the mainstream of 
clinical practice and theory. Through the ever-evolving theories of cog-
nitive constructionism, cognitive behavior therapy, existentialism, and 
family therapy, and recent developments in psychoanalysis (especially 
object relations and self psychology), Adler's insights are becoming the 
basis for new generations of clinicians and academicians. Few may know 
his name, and even fewer seem to realize how similar their systems are 
to his, but, nonetheless, clinical psychology and psychiatry continues to 
move closer to the position adopted by individual psychologists. May 
this work help to build a bridge between these schools of thought and 
Adlerian psychology. 
Dreikurs (1960, p. 3) once asked the question, "Are psychological 
schools of thought outdated?" He noted that it is impossible to not have 
a theory of human nature, and that even therapists who claimed they 
were eclectic still had a theory-eclecticism. The question became not 
whether or not one had a theory, but how well one understood the the-
ory one had. 
Regardless of the theory one holds, one should know it welL and one 
of the best ways to understand a theory is to learn it in relation to an-
other system. Adlerian psychology is a good system to learn, especially 
if the goal is integration (Sherman & Dinkmeyer, 1987). By learning 
Adler's system, students and practitioners can better understand their 
current system. As we have repeatedly noted, because so many other 
systems have moved towards Adler's insights, Individual Psychology can 
provide a firm base from which to look at and examine other schools of 
thought. 
The future of Individual Psychology? Who can say with certainty? As a 
movement and school of psychology, it may wax and wane. As a system 
and a coherent set of assumptions, it continues to grow and be validated. 
D Summary 
We hope these challenges are taken in the spirit they are intended. They 
need to be met. By providing a guideline, we hope to create a dialogue in 
which some of these issues, and others we have not addressed, are ex-
plored. We cannot answer the questions we have posed in this work, one 
reason being that they are beyond the scope of this work. One must learn 
to walk before one runs, the old saying goes, and Individual Psychology 
needed a new, introductory text that would describe and set forth its 
principles and applications. We hope to have done just that in this work. 

A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
171 
D Questions 
1. What is cognitive constructionism? What are some of its basic premises? 
2. How are those premises similar to Adlerian psychology's basic as-
sumptions? 
3. How far should a theory be from "common sense"? If it is close to the 
"common sense," is that a problem? 
4. What is the basic premise behind "feedforward mechanisms"? How 
does Adler describe such processes? 
5. What would you see as some criticisms of Individual Psychology? 
How might an Adlerian address your concerns? 
6. What similarities do you see between Adlerian psychology and other 
systems? 
D Note 
lWhy this same criticism was not leveled against the eminent psychobiological therapist 
Adolf Meyer, whose collected papers were published as The Common Sense Psychiatry of Dr. 
Adolf Meyer (Lief, 1973) makes for interesting speculations. 
D Annotated Bibliography 
Adler, A. (1956). The Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler (H.L. Ansbacher & R.R. Ans-
bacher. Eds.). New York: Basic Books. 
This is considered to be the primary text for understanding Adler. The Ansbachers have 
surveyed Adler's writings and come up with selections which provide readers with an 
overview of Adler's theory. It also has some very helpful commentaries. 
Adler, A. (1964). Superiority and social interest (H.L. Ansbacher & R.R. Ansbacher, Eds.). 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
This is a collection of Adler's later writings. As before, the Ansbachers have collected sev-
eral writings from diverse sources, these mostly being from the last part of Adler's life. 
Once again, there are extremely useful commentaries throughout the text. 
Adler, A. (1978). Cooperation between the sexes: Writings on women, love and marriage, sexuality 
and its disorders (H.L. Ansbacher & R.R. Ansbacher, Eds.). New York: Doubleday. 
The last in the Ansbachers' trilogy, this volume examines Adler's early theoretical work, a 
period in which most of his writings had to do with love, sexuality, and gender dy-
namics. The commentaries, as usual, are excellent. 
Dreikurs, R., & Soltz, V. (1964). Children: The challenge. New York: Duell, Sloan & Pearce. 
This is one of the best books on parenting ever written. It is both theoretically sound and 
pragmatically helpful. It is Adlerian theory in practice, specifically as it applies to fam-
ily dynamics. 

172 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Grunwald, B. B., & McAbee, H. (1985). Guiding the family. Muncie, IN: Accelerated Devel-
opment. 
These were students and coworkers of Dreikurs. In this book, clear, concise guidelines are 
presented for conducting family counseling from an Adlerian perspective with fami-
lies from different backgrounds and with varied problems. Included are verbatim 
transcripts of what Adlerian family counselors actually do during sessions. A wonder-
ful text for graduate students. 
Hoffman, E. (1994). The drive for self" Alfred Adler and the founding of Individual Psychology. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
This is probably the best biography of Alfred Adler available, or ever written. Hoffman 
examines, in detaiL Adler's childhood influences, cultural and economic background, 
and theoretical development. A wonderful piece of scholarship that is very well 
written. 
Mosak, H. H., & Maniacci. M.P. (1995). The case of Roger. In D. Wedding & R.J. Corsini 
(Eds.), Case studies in psychotherapy (2nd ed., pp.23-49). Itasca, IL: F. E. Peacock. 
This is a transcript of brief psychotherapy (9 weeks) done before a live graduate student 
audience at an Adlerian training institute. The Adlerian tactics of life style assessment, 
interpretation, The Question, humor, encouragement. dream interpretation, and 
many others are demonstrated. 
Mosak, H. H., & Maniacci. M.P. (1998). Tactics in counseling and psychotherapy. Itasca, IL: F. 
E. Peacock. 
A useful manual designed to discuss what to do when therapists find themselves in vari-
ous situations with certain clients. Over 100 tactics are described, almost all with ac-
tual case examples demonstrating their use. 
Powers, R. L., & Griffith, J. (1987). Understanding life-style: The psycho-clarity© process. 
Chicago: Americas Institute of Adlerian Studies. 
This a very good manual about how to conduct an initial interview and life style assess-
ment interview. Included are forms needed to do the work, consent forms, billing 
agreements, and extremely useful transcripts detailing the "nuts and bolts" of how 
the process unfolds. 
Sherman, R., & Dinkmeyer, D. (1987). Systems offamily therapy: An Adlerian integration. 
New York: Brunner/Maze!. 
This book examines Adlerian family therapy and describes its theoretical underpinnings 
and practical applications. Included is something unique: five chapters written by ex-
perts in family therapy who received training in both Adlerian family therapy and 
one other system, such as structural family therapy or strategic family therapy. This 
books demonstrates how Adlerian family therapy can be integrative and serve as a 
basis for mastering other systems of family therapy. A very good book. 
Shulman, B. H., & Mosak, H.H. (1988). Manual for life style assessment. Muncie, IN: Acceler-
ated Development. 
This is the text for collecting, interpreting, and summarizing family constellation and early 
recollection materia!' It is written both as a theoretical textbook and a clinical man-
ua!' 
Adlerian and cognitive therapies: Towards an integrative dialogue [special issue]. (1997). 
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 11 (3). 
In 1997, several theorists and clinicians from Adlerian, cognitive-behavioraL and con-
structionist backgrounds began a dialogue exploring the theoretical and clinical simi-
larities and differences between Adlerian and cognitive psychotherapies. This special 

A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
173 
issue explores their dialogue and points to future directions both Adlerians and cogni-
tive therapists may want to explore. 
Sperry, L., & Carlson, J. (Eds.). (1996). Psychopathology and psychotherapy: From DSM-IV di-
agnosis to treatment (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Accelerated Development. 
This edited book explores the DSM-IVfrom an Adlerian perspective. As noted often 
throughout this text and annotated bibliography, Adlerian psychology is extremely 
useful for theoretical integration. The editors have asked experts in the field to write 
about how Adlerian formulations can be used to both understand and develop a 
treatment plan that not only is theoretically solid but incorporates the DSM-IVmodel. 
A very helpful manual. 
D Glossary 
Behaviorism: A theory of personality and psychotherapy that stresses observable behavior 
and learning. The environmental influences upon the organism are emphasized, and 
therefore remediation is seen as directed to changing the environmental influences 
themselves through tactics such as reinforcement, punishment, and reward. 
Cognitive therapy: A system of psychotherapy that assumes that individuals' dysfunc-
tional behavior stems from their erroneous thinking about life, themselves, and 
the future. The focus of intervention is primarily directed to changing people's 
thoughts. 
Community feeling: The more accurate translation of the German phrase Gemeinschaftsge-
fuhl. A broader concept than the traditionally translated phrase, social interest, com-
munity feeling means a sense of commitment to and respect for the world at large, 
including but not limited to the social sphere of activity. 
Compensation: The overcoming of deficit, physical or social through achievement, even 
excellence, in the area of the deficit or in another area. The deficit may be real, per-
ceived, or imagined. 
Consequences (natural and logical): A technique used by Adlerians, particularly those in-
fluenced by Dreikurs, in which individuals are allowed to experience the outcome of 
their actions or intentions. A natural consequence requires no active intervention and 
teaches the natural order of life; a logical consequence is established in advance by 
the parties involved and entails allowing people to experience the logically related 
outcomes of their actions, thereby teaching the social order of life. 
Constructionism: A new trend in cognitive therapy. Individuals are not seen as passive re-
ceivers of stimulation from the environment. but rather as active agents who are con-
stantly adapting to and influencing their environments. Therapists therefore do not 
question the accuracy of patients' thoughts (as in cognitive therapy) as much as they 
examine the consequences of having such beliefs. 
Degree of activity: The amount of energy a person uses in solving the challenges of life. 
Though existing along a continuum, Adler generally spoke of people having either 
high or low degrees of activity. 
Discouragement: In Adlerian psychology, the process by which individuals begin to doubt 
not only their place in their social world but their ability to usefully compensate for or 
cope with life's challenges. 
Distancing: A safeguarding device by which people avoid a task or situation in order to 
protect their self -esteem. 
Early recollections: Single, specific events remembered from under the age of 10 years. These 
events can be visually recalled and are used by Adlerians as a projective technique. 

174 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Encouragement: The inverse of discouragement. The individual believes in his or her effi-
cacy and feels optimistic about his or her place in the world. 
Ethical convictions: One of the four component parts of the life style (the other three 
being the self-concept, the self-ideaL and the Weltbild). Summarized as convictions 
centering around "it is good to ... " or "it is right to ... " or "it is bad to ... " or "it is 
wrong to ... " and so forth. 
Existentialism: The system of psychotherapy and philosophy that examines the lived, ex-
perienced realities of humans. Generally speaking, existentialism accepts life's reali-
ties and attempts to look at how people cope with those givens of existence. 
Family constellation: The early childhood social environment within the family. Generally 
speaking, it entails the sibling array, parental guiding lines, and other role models and 
alliances the child may have formed. 
Fictional final goal: The end point of our striving. The point towards which we move in 
order to assure our belonging, equivalent to the conviction in the life style called the 
self-ideal. 
General Diagnosis: The initial interview. The process by which Adlerians summarize the 
current situation of the client as it is operating in the here and now. 
Holism: The assumption in Adlerian psychology that people are different than the sum of 
their parts. It entails looking at people as individuals, and not as parts or part-func-
tions (e.g., id, ego, drives, emotions). 
Identification: The process by which people select others to modeL imitate, or in generaL 
"be like." 
Idiographic: The individual case. The single, specific dynamics of a particular situation. 
Inferiority: An actuaL observable function or system that falls short of some objective 
standard. It is contextual and measurable. that is, it can change depending upon what 
is measured. 
Inferiority complex: A behavioral manifestation of a subjective feeling of inferiority. Peo-
ple with inferiority complexes avoid situations because they fear exposing their feel-
ings of inferiority. 
Inferiority feeling: A subjective evaluation; when the self-concept falls short of the self-
ideal or is not congruent with the self-ideal or ethical convictions. 
Life style (or style of life): The attitudinal set of an individual. The set of convictions peo-
ple develop that directs how they will belong. It is composed of four component parts: 
self-concept, self-ideaL Weltbild. and ethical convictions. 
Life style assessment: The method, pioneered by Dreikurs and furthered by others. that in-
vestigates the early childhood situation and early recollections of individuals in coun-
seling or psychotherapy. The counselor's or therapist's formulations are then given 
back to the individuals for their feedback and is used as a basis for treatment plan-
ning. Typically it is done as part of the Special Diagnosis. 
Life tasks (or tasks of life): The challenges people must meet in order to function effec-
tively. There are six tasks: occupation, sociaL love and sex, sell. spirituaL and parent-
ing and family. 
Movement: This is akin to the concept of behavior. What an individual does in relation to 
his or her goal. 
Nomothetic: The general rule. The general dynamics of typical situations. 
Organ inferiority: An organ or organ system that is deficient in form or structure. It is in-
herited and therefore subject to the law of compensation. 
Phenomenology: A methodology in psychology and philosophy that examines the percep-
tions of the individual. It is a cornerstone of existentialism and Adlerian psychology. 
Projection: The attribution of one's faults to others. It has a somewhat different meaning 
when related to projective testing. 

A Critique of the Theory of Individual Psychology 
175 
Psychology of use: The assumption that psychological processes are not static and there-
fore are more beneficially conceptualized as being used by individuals in order to 
further movement towards their goals. In the language of a psychology of use, for ex-
ample, one would not say someone has a bad temper, but rather that he or she uses 
temper to move towards his or her goal. 
Resistance: What occurs when the goals of two people, typically the patient and the psy-
chotherapist, do not align. 
Safeguarding: The process by which people evade challenges in order to defend their self-
esteem. In other systems, this is known as a defense. 
Self-concept: All of the convictions in the life style about what "I am ... " or what "I am 
not ... " One of the four component parts of the life style, the other three being the 
self-ideal, the ethical convictions, and the Weltbild. 
Self-ideal: All of the convictions in the life style about what "I should be ... " or what "I 
should not be ... " in order to find my place and have significance. One of the four 
component parts of the life style, the other three being the self-concept, the ethical 
convictions, and the Weltbild. Equivalent to the final, fictional goal. 
Shock: The reaction people have to situations for which they are unprepared. Similar to 
Freud's notion of trauma. Shock is both objective, in that something occurs that trig-
gers the response, and relative, in that it is partially formed by the biases and subjec-
tive opinions of what is happening to the individual. In current clinical terminology, 
it is called "stress." 
Sideshows: The evasions and detours individuals create in order to deflect attention away 
from their inadequacies and onto some matter of relative unimportance. 
Social interest: An inadequate translation of the German phrase "Gemeinschaftsgefuhl." 
Community feeling would now be considered the more accurate translation. Roughly 
defined, it means an interest in the interest of others; the empathic bonding people 
feel for each other and the responsible actions and attitudes they take towards each 
other. 
Special Diagnosis: The detailed, idiographic inquiry into the unique history of the individ-
ual. For contemporary Adlerians, it typically involves a life style assessment. 
The Question: The assessment technique that asks patients the question, "What would be 
different in your life if you didn't have these symptoms?" or, "If I could wave a magic 
wand over your head and make your symptoms disappear, what would be different?" 
or, "If a miracle happened and you woke up and your problem no longer existed, 
what would be different?" Generally, it serves two purposes: to find out what the pa-
tient is avoiding and to aid in the differential diagnosis of somatic from psychogenic 
symptoms. 
Teleology: Purposiveness in Adlerian psychology, the fictional final goal that organizes be-
havior. 
Transference: In Adlerian psychology, the consistency of the life style as played out in 
therapy. The convictions about how to belong that operate outside of the psychother-
apy eventually operate within the psychotherapy. 
Weltbild: A German phrase that approximately translates to "picture of the world." One 
of the four component parts of the life style (the other three being the self-concept, 
the self-ideal, and the ethical convictions). All of the convictions about the "not me," 
The convictions that complete the phrases "life is ... " or "people are ... " or "men/ 
women are ... " and so forth. 

REFERENCES 
Adler, A. (1898). Gesundheitsbuch fur die Schneidergewerbe [Healthbook for the tailor's 
trade]. Berlin: C. Heymanns. 
Adler, A. (1908). Das Aggressionstrieb im Leben und in der N eurose [The aggression drive 
in life and in the neurosis]. Fortschritte der Medizin, 26,577-584. 
Adler, A. (1911). "Verdrangung" und "mannlichen Protest:" Ihre Rolle und Bedeutung fur 
die neurotische Dynamik ["Repression" and "masculine protest": Their role and sig-
nificance for the neurotic dynamic]. In A. Adler & C. Furtmuller (Eds.), Heilen und 
Bilden (pp. 103-114). Munich: Ernst Reinhardt. 
Adler, A. (1917). Study of organ inferiority and its psychical compensation (S.E. Jelliffe, Trans.). 
New York: Nervous and Mental Diseases Co. (Original work published 1907) 
Adler, A. (l923). Psychische Kausalitat [Psychic Causality]. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Indi-
vidualpsychologie, 2(6),38. 
Adler. A. (1924a). Training? Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individualpsychologie, 2( 6), 39. 
Adler, A. (1924b). Ober Weltanschauung. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individualpsychologie, 
2(6),38. 
Adler, A. (1929a). The case of Miss R.: The interpretation of a life story (E. Jensen & F. Jensen, 
Trans.). New York: Greenberg. 
Adler, A. (1929b). Individualpsychologie in der Schule: Vorlesungen fur Lehrer und Erzieher [Individ-
ual Psychology in the school: lectures for teachers]. Frankfurt: Fisher Taschenbuch. 
Adler, A. (1929c). The science of living. New York: Greenberg. 
Adler, A. (1930a). The pattern of life. New York: Cosmopolitan. 
Adler, A. (1930b). Das Problem der Homosexualitiit: Erotisches Training und erotischer Ruckzug 
[The problem of homosexuality: Erotic training and erotic retreat]. Leipzig: S. Hirzel. 
Adler, A. (1934). Lecture to the Medical Society of Individual Psychology, London, May 
17, 1934. Individual Psychology Medical Pamphlets, 13, 11-24. 
Adler, A. (1935). The fundamental views of Individual Psychology. International Journal of 
Individual Psychology, I (1), 5-8. 
Adler, A. (1936). On the interpretation of dreams. International Journal of Individual Psy-
chology, 2(1), 3-16. 
Adler, A. (1939). Sur la "protestation virile." [On the "masculine protest"]. Courage, 2(1),8-10. 
Adler, A. (1947). How I chose my career. Individual Psychology Bulletin, 6, 9-11. 
Adler, A. (1950). Foreword. In R. Dreikurs, Fundamentals of Adlerian psychology (p. vii). 
New York: Greenberg. (Original work published 1933) 
Adler, A. (1956). The Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler (H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ans-
bacher, Eds.). New York: Basic Books. 
Adler, A. (1957). Understanding human nature (W. B. Wolfe, Trans.). Greenwich, CT: Pre-
mier Books. (Original work published 1927) 
Adler, A. (1958). What hfe should mean to you (A. Porter, Ed.). New York: Prestige. (Original 
work published 1931) 
176 

References 
1 77 
Adler, A. (1963). The problem child (G. Daniels, Trans.). New York: Capricorn Books. (Origi-
nal work published 1930) 
Adler, A. (1964a). The case of Mrs. A. In H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ansbacher (Eds.). Superi-
ority and social interest (pp. 159-190). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
(Original work published 1931) 
Adler, A. (1964b). The differences between Individual Psychology and psychoanalysis. 
In H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ansbacher (Eds.), Superiority and social interest 
(pp. 205-218). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. (Original work 
published 1931) 
Adler. A. (1964c). Complex compulsion as part of personality and neurosis. In H. L. Ans-
bacher & R. R. Ansbacher (Eds.), Superiority and social interest (pp. 71-80). Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press. (Original work published 1935) 
Adler, A. (1964d). Problems of neurosis: A book of case histories (P. Mairet. Ed.). New York: 
Harper & Row. (Original work published 1929) 
Adler, A. (1964e). The progress of mankind. In H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ansbacher (Eds), 
Superiority and social interest (pp. 23-28). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
(Original work published 1937) 
Adler, A. (1964£). Social interest: A challenge to mankind (J. Linton & R. Vaughan, Trans.). 
New York: Capricorn. (Original work published 1933) 
Adler, A. (1964g). Superiority and social interest (H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ansbacher. Eds.). 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
Adler, A. (1970). The education of children (E. Jensen & F. Jensen, Trans.). South Bend, IN: 
Gateway Editions. (Original work published 1930) 
Adler, A. (1978). Cooperation between the sexes: Writings on women, love and marriage, sexuality 
and its disorders (H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ansbacher, Eds.). New York: Doubleday. 
Adler, A. (1983a). The masculine attitude in female neurotics. In The practice and theory of 
individual psychology (pp. 109-143). Totowa, NJ: Littlefield, Adams. (Original work 
published 1910) 
Adler, A. (1983b). The neurotic constitution (B. Glueck & J. E. Lind, Trans.). Salem, NH: 
Ayer. (Original work published 1912) 
Adler, A. (1983c). The pattern of life. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. (Original work pub-
lished 1930) 
Adler, A. (1983d). The practice and theory of Individual Psychology (P. Radin, Trans.). Totowa, 
NJ: Littlefield, Adams. (Original work published 1920) 
Adler, A. (1983e). The problem of distance. In A. Adler (1983), The practice and theory of In-
dividual Psychology (pp. 100-108). Totowa, NJ: Littlefield, Adams. (Original work pub-
lished 1914) 
Adler, A. (1988a). The child's inner life and a sense of community (L. Fleisher, Trans.). In-
dividual Psychology. 44, 417-423. (Original work published 1917) 
Adler, A. (1988b). Problem children (L. Fleisher, Trans.). Individual Psychology, 44, 406-416. 
(Original work published 1926) 
Adler, A., & Associates. (1930). Guiding the child (B. Ginzburg, Trans.). London: Allen & 
Unwin. 
Adler. K. A. (1961). Depression in the light of Individual Psychology. Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 17, 56-67. 
Adler, K. A. (1963). Foreword. In The problem child (pp. vii-viii). New York: Capricorn 
Books. 
Adler, K. A., & Deutsch, D. (Eds.) (1959). Essays in Individual Psychology. New York: Grove Press. 
Adler. R. (1899, July-December). Sollen die Frauen sich den Studiuum der Medizin 
zuwenden? Dokumente der Frauen [Should women devote themselves to the study of 
medicine?]. 289-293. 

178 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Adlerian and cognitive psychotherapies: Towards an integrative dialogue [Special issue]. 
( 1 997). Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy. 11 (3). 
Alexander. F. G., & French, T. M. (1946). Psychoanalytic therapy. New York: Ronald Press. 
Allen, T. W. (1970, Summer). The evaluation of a program of special classes for "disrup-
tive" children in an urban school system. Community Mental Health. 
Allers, R. (1961). Existentialism and psychiatry. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Allport, G. W. (1955). Becoming. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Allred, G. H. (1974). On the level: With self. family, society. Provo, UT: Brigham Young Uni-
vesity Press. 
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
(4th ed., rev.). Washington, DC: Author. 
Ansbacher. H. L. (1951). Causality and indeterminism according to Alfred Adler and some 
current American personality theories. Individual Psychology Bulletin, 9, 96-107. 
Ansbacher. H. L. (1959a). A key to existence. Journal of Individual Psychology, 15, 
141-142. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1959b). The significance of the socio-economic status of the patients of 
Freud and Adler. American Journal of Psychotherapy. 13, 376-382. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1962). Was Adler a disciple of Freud? A reply. Journal ofIndividual Psy-
chology, 18,126-135. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1964). Introduction to the Torchbook edition. In A. Adler (1964), Prob-
lems of neurosis: A book of case histories (pp. ix-xxx). New York: Harper & Row. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1965). Sensus privatus versus sensus communis. Journal of Individual Psychol-
ogy, 21,48-50. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1966). Love and violence in the view of Adler. Humanitas, 2, 109-127. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1967). Life style: A historical and systematic review. Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 23, 191-212. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1968). The concept of social interest. Journal of Individual Psychology, 24, 
131-141. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (Ed.). (1972). Adlerian techniques of psychotherapy: Proceedings of the 
Fourth Brief Psychotherapy Conference [Special issue]. Journal of Individual Psychology, 
28(2), 121-122. 
Ansbacher, H. L. (1992a). Alfred Adler, pioneer in prevention of mental disorders. Individ-
ual Psychology, 48, 3-34. 
Ansbacher. H. L. (1992b). Alfred Adler's concepts of community feeling and of social in-
terest and the relevance of community feeling for old age. Individual Psychology, 48, 
402-412. 
Ansbacher, H. L., & Ansbacher, R. R. (Eds.). (1978). Cooperation between the sexes. Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday. 
Arciniega, M., & Newlon, B. J. (1983). Cross-cultural family counseling. In O. C. Chris-
tensen & T. G. Schramski (Eds.). Adlerian family counseling: A manual for counselor, edu-
cator and psychotherapist (pp. 279-292). Minneapolis, MN: Educational Media. 
Aristotle. (1941). Metaphysica [The Metaphysics] (W. D. Ross, Trans.). In R. McKeon (Ed.), 
The basic works of Aristotle (pp. 689-926). New York: Random House. (Original work 
published circa 350 Be) 
Armstrong, K. (1993). A history of God. New York: Ballantine Books. 
Attarian, P. (1978). Early recollections: Predictors of vocational choice. Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 34( I), 56-62. 
Aubry, W. E. (1972). Life style analysis in marriage counseling. Marriage and Family Coun-
seling Quarterly, 8( I), 39-46. 
Aurelius, M. (1964). Meditations (M. Staniforth, Trans.). New York: Penguin. (Original 
work published 169) 

References 
179 
Barber, K. E. (1972, December). The family council (Pacific Northwest Cooperative Exten-
sion Bulletin #127). 
Bartholow, R. (1969). How to hold a family council. Oregon Society of Individual Psychology 
Newsletter, 10(2), 9-11. 
Basch, M. F. (1988). Understanding psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books. 
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International 
Universities Press. 
Beecher, W. (1950). Guilt feelings: Masters of our fate, or our servants? Individual Psychol-
ogy Bulletin, 8, 22-31. 
Beecher, w., & Beecher, M. (1951). What makes an Adlerian? Individual Psychology Bul-
letin, 9, 146-148. 
Beecher, W., & Beecher, M. (1955). Parents on the run. Marina Del Ray, CA: Devorss. 
Beecher, w., & Beecher, M. (1987). The mark of Cain: An anatomy of jealousy. Richardson, 
TX: Willard & Marguerite Beecher Foundation. (Original work published 1971) 
Berger, E. M. (1952). The relation between acceptance of self and expressed acceptance of 
others. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 47,778-782. 
Bergson, H. (1956). The two sources of morality and religion (R. A. Brereton, Trans., with as-
sistance from W. H. Carter). Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor. (Original work pub-
lished 1932) 
Berne, E. (1964). Games people play. New York: Grove Press. 
Berne, E. (1972). What do you say after you say hello? New York: Grove Press. 
Bertallanfy, L. v. (1968). General systems theory. New York: Braziller. 
Bieliauskas, V. J. (1972). The House- Tree-Person (H- T-P) research review. Beverly Hills, CA: 
Western Psychological Services. 
Bieliauskas, V. J. (1974). A new look at "masculine protest." Journal of Individual Psychol-
ogy, 30(1),92-97. 
Birnbaum, F. (1935). The Individual Psychological Experimental School in Vienna. Ameri-
can Journal of Individual Psychology, 12, 1-11. 
Birnbaum, F. (1961). Frankl's existential psychology from the viewpoint of Individual Psy-
chology. Journal of Individual Psychology, 17, 162-166. 
Boldt, R. (1994). Lifestyle types and therapeutic resistance: An Adlerian model for prediction and 
intervention of characterological resistance in therapy. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Adler School of Professional Psychology, Chicago. 
Bonime, W. (1962). The clinical use of dreams. New York: Basic Books. 
Bottome, P. (1934). Private worlds. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
Bottome, P. (1957). Alfred Adler: A portrait from life. New York: Vanguard Press. 
Bowlby, J. (1983). Attachment (2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books. 
Brown, J. F. (1976). Practical applications of the personality priorities. Clinton, MD: B. & F. As-
sociates. 
Brown, P. (1995). The reliability and validity of "The Question" in the differential diagnosis of so-
matogenic and psychogenic disorders. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Adler School of 
Professional Psychology, Chicago. 
Bruck, A. (1950). Do we need the concept of guilt feelings? Individual Psychology Bulletin, 8, 
44-48. 
Carlson, J., & Sperry, L. (1998). The disordered couple. Bristol, PA: Brunner/Mazel. 
Catlin, N. (1976). The family council. In J. W. Croake, H. O. Protinsky & N. Catlin (Eds.), 
Adolescence: Developmentally (pp. 86-90). Bremerton, WA: Economy Printing. 
Christensen, O. C., & Schramski, T. G. (Eds.). (1983). Adlerian family counseling: A manual 
for counselor, educator, and psychotherapist. Minneapolis, MN: Educational Media. 
Clance, P. R. (1986). The impost phenomenon: Overcoming the fear that haunts your success. New 
York: Bantam. 

180 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Colby, K. M. (1951). On the disagreement between Freud and Adler. American Imago, 8, 
229-238. 
Colby, K. M. (1956). Discussion of Adler's ideas by Freud and others. In A. Adler, The Indi-
vidual Psychology of Alfred Adler (H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ansbacher, Eds.) (pp. 69-75). 
New York: Basic Books. 
Corsini, R. J. (1966). Roleplaying in psychotherapy: A manual. Chicago: Aldine. 
Corsini, R. J. (1967). Let's invent a first-aid kit for marriage problems. Consultant, 7,40. 
Corsini, R. J. (1971). Group psychotherapy. In A. G. Nikelly (Ed.), Techniques for behavior 
change (pp. 111-115). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Corsini, R. J. (1977). Individual Education. Journal of Individual Psychology, 33,21-29. 
Corsini, R. J. (1987). Adlerian groups. In S. Long (Ed.), Six group therapies (pp. 1-47). New 
York: Plenum. 
Corsini, R. J., & Painter, G. (1975). The practical parent. New York: Harper & Row. 
Credner, L. (1936). Safeguards. International Journal of Individual Psychology, 2(3), 
95-102. 
Croake, J. W., & Robertshaw, D. (1987). Toward an Adlerian theory of learning. Seattle, WA: 
Seattle Institute of Adlerian Studies. 
Cucher, L. M. (1976). The art of Adlerian art therapy. Individual Psychologist, 13(2), 37-43. 
Dailey, C. A. (1966). The experimental study of clinical guessing. Journal of Individual Psy-
chology, 22, 65-76. 
Davis, A., & Havighurst R. J. (1947). Father of the man. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
de Shazer, S. (1988). Clues: Investigating solutions in brief therapy. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Deutsch, D. (1967). Group psychotherapy with married couples. Individual Psychologist, 
4(2), 56-62. 
Dewey, E. (1971). Family atmosphere. In A. G. Nikelly (Ed.), Techniques for behavior change 
(pp. 41-47). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Dinkmeyer, D., & Carlson, J. (1984). Time for a better marriage. Circle Pines, MN: American 
Guidance Service. 
Dinkmeyer, D., & Carlson, J. (1989). Taking time for love. New York: Prentice Hall. 
Dinkmeyer, D. C., Dinkmeyer, D. c., Jr., & Sperry, L. (1987). Adlerian counseling and psycho-
therapy (2nd ed.). Columbus, OH: Merrill. 
Dinkmeyer, D. C., & Dreikurs, R. (1963). Encouraging children to learn. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Dinkmeyer, D. c., & Losoncy, L. (1996). The skills of encouragement. Delray Beach, FL: St. 
Lucie Press. 
Dinkmeyer, D., & McKay, G. D. (1973). Raising a responsible child. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Dinkmeyer, D., & McKay, G. D. (1982). The parent's handbook: Systematic training for effective 
parenting (STEP). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 
Dinkmeyer, D., Sr., McKay, G. D., & Dinkmeyer, D., Jr. (1980). STET: Systematic training for 
effective teaching. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 
Dreikurs, R. (1944). The meaning of dreams. Chicago Medical School Quarterly, 5(3), 4-6, 25-26. 
Dreikurs, R. (1945). Psychological differentiation of psychopathological disorders. Individ-
ual Psychology Bulletin, 4,35-48. 
Dreikurs, R. (1946). The challenge of marriage. New York: Duell, Sloan and Pearce. 
Dreikurs, R. (1948a). The challenge of parenthood. New York: Hawthorn. 
Dreikurs, R. (1948b). The socio-psychological dynamics of physical disability. Journal of So-
cial Issues, 4, 39-54. 
Dreikurs, R. (1950a). Fundamentals of Adlerian psychology. New York: Greenberg. (Original 
work published 1933) 
Dreikurs, R. (1950b). Guilt feelings as an excuse. Individual Psychology Bulletin, 8, 12-21. 
Dreikurs, R. (1951). The function of emotions. Christian Register, 130, 11-14,24. 

References 
181 
Dreikurs, R. (1954). The psychological interview in medicine. American Journal of Individ-
ual Psychology, 10, 99-122. 
Dreikurs, R. (1956). Adlerian psychotherapy. In F. Fromm-Reichmann & J. L. Moreno 
(Eds.), Progress in psychotherapy (pp. 111-118). New York: Grune & Stratton. 
Dreikurs, R. (1958). A reliable differential diagnosis of psychological or somatic distur-
bances. International Record of Medicine, 171, 238-242. 
Dreikurs, R. (1959). Early experiments with group psychotherapy. American Journal of Psy-
chotherapy, 13, 882-891. 
Dreikurs, R. (1960). Are psychological schools of tnought outdated? Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 16, 3-10. 
Dreikurs, R. (1962). Can you be sure the disease is functional? Consultant. 
Dreikurs, R. (1965). Music therapy. In N. J. Long, W. C. Morse, & R. G. Neuman (Eds.), 
Conflict in the classroom: The education of emotionally disturbed children (pp. 199-202). Bel-
mont, CA: Wadsworth. 
Dreikurs, R. (1967). Psychodynamics, psychotherapy and counseling. Chicago: Alfred Adler In-
stitute. 
Dreikurs, R. (1971). Social equality: The challenge of today. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
Dreikurs, R. (1972). Dreikurs' sayings. Individual Psychologist, 9(2),38-45. 
Dreikurs, R. (1973). The private logic. In H. H. Mosak (Ed.), Alfred Adler: His influence on 
psychology today (pp. 19-32). Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Press. 
Dreikurs, R., Corsini, R., Lowe, R., & Sonstegard, M. (Eds.). (1959). Adlerian family counsel-
ing. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon. 
Dreikurs, R., & Crocker, D. (1955). Music therapy with psychotic children. Music therapy, 5, 
62-73. 
Dreikurs, R., Gould, S., & Corsini, R. J. (1974). Family council. Chicago: Henry Regnery. 
Dreikurs, R., Grunwald, B. B., & Pepper, F. C. (1982). Maintaining sanity in the classroom 
(2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row. 
Dreikurs, R., & Mosak, H. H. (1966). The tasks of life I: Adler's three tasks. Individual Psy-
chologist, 4. 18-22. 
Dreikurs, R., & Mosak, H. H. (1967). The tasks of life II: The fourth life task. Individual Psy-
chologist, 4, 51-55. 
Dreikurs, R., Mosak, H. H., & Shulman, B. H. (1984). Multiple psychotherapy. Chicago: Al-
fred Adler Institute. 
Dreikurs, R., & Soitz, V. (1964). Children: The challenge. New York: DuelL Sloan & Pearce. 
Dreikurs, S., & Shulman, B. H. (1969). Art therapy for psychiatric patients. Perspectives in 
Psychiatric Care, 7(3),134-143. 
Dubelle, S. (1997, September). Part two: Excerpts from an interview with Heinz Ansbacher, 
Ph.D. The Quarterly: Publication of the Adlerian Psychology Association of British Columbia, 5-7. 
Ellenberger, H. F. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious. New York: Basic Books. 
Ellis, A. (1957). Rational psychotherapy and Individual Psychology. Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 13( I), 38-44. 
Ellis, A. (1973). Humanistic psychotherapy. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Ellis, A. (1990). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Citadel Press. 
Espenak, L. (1981). Dance therapy. Springfield, Ii: Charles C. Thomas. 
Euripides. (1960). Electra. (M. Hadas & J. McLean, Trans). In Ten plays by Euripides (pp. 
205-239). New York: Bantam. (Original work published 413 Be) 
Farau, A. (1964). Individual Psychology and existentialism. Individual Psychologist, 2( I), 1-8. 
Farley, F. (1986, May). The big T in personality. Psychology Today, 45-52. 
The father of self-help. (1995, May/June). Psychology Today. 
Feichtinger, F. (1950). The psychology of guilt feelings. Individual Psychology Bulletin, 8, 
39-43. 

182 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Feldmann, E. (1972). Thirty days with Alfred Adler. Journal of Individual Psychology, 28, 
81-89. 
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University. 
Foley, V. D. (1989). Family therapy. In R. J. Corsini & D. Wedding (Eds.), Current psy-
chotherapies (4th ed .. pp. 455-500). Itasca, IL: F. E. Peacock. 
Ford. D. H .. & Urban. H. B. (1963). Systems of psychotherapy: A comparative study. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Forgus, R., & Shulman. B. H. (1979). Personality: A cognitive view. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
FrankL V. E. (1925). Psychotherapie und Weltanscha uung. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Indi-
vidualpsychologie [Psychotherapy and philosophy of life]. 3.250-252. 
FrankL V. E. (1963). Man's search for meaning. Boston: Beacon Press. 
FrankL V. E. (1983). The doctor and the soul. New York: Vintage Books. 
Freeman. A. (1993). Foreword. In L. Sperry & J. Carlson (Eds.), Psychopathology and psy-
chotherapy from diagnosis to treatment (pp. iii-vi). Muncie, IN: Accelerated Develop-
ment. 
French, T. M. (1952). The integration of behavior (Vol. 2). Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Freud. A. (1946). The ego and the mechanisms of defense (rev. ed.). London: Hogarth. (Origi-
nal work published 1936) 
Freud. S. (1950). The question of lay analysis. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Freud. S. (1959). Analysis terminable and interminable. In Collected papers (vol. 5. pp. 
316-357). New York: Basic Books. (Original work published 1937) 
Freud. S. (1963). Psychoanalysis and faith. New York: Basic Books. 
Freud, S. (1965). The interpretation of dreams (J. Strachey, Trans.). New York: Avon Books. 
(Original work published 1900) 
Freund. H. (1928). Dber Training [On training]. Internationale Zeitschrijt fur Individualpsycholo-
gie.6. 370-373. 
Friedman. M. (1996). Type A behavior. New York: Plenum. 
Fromm. E. (1941). Escape from freedom. New York: Farrar & Reinhart. 
Fromm. E. (1961). Marx's concept of man. New York: Frederick Ungar. 
Furtmiiller. C. (1964). Alfred Adler: A biographical essay. In A. Adler (1964), Superiority 
and social interest (pp. 309-393). Evanston, lL: Northwestern University Press. 
Gazzaniga. M. S. (1985). The social brain. New York: Basic Books. 
Geis, H. J. (1966). Guilt feelings and inferiority feelings: An experimental comparison. Dis-
sertation Abstracts. 13. 8515. 
Goethe. J. W. (1949). Faust (part one) (P. Wayne. Trans.). Baltimore: Penguin Books. 
(Original work published 1801) 
Gold. L. (1979). Adler's theory of dreams: An holistic approach to interpretation. In 
B. Wolman (Ed.), Handbook of dreams (PP. 319-341). New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold. 
Gold, L. (1981). Life style and dreams. In L. Baruth & D. Eckstein (Eds.), Life style: Theory, 
practice and research (2nd ed., pp. 24-30). Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt. 
Goldstein. K. (1963). Human nature in the light of psychopathology. New York: Schocken 
Books. (Original work published 1940) 
Gottesfeld. H. (1966). Changes in feelings of powerlessness in a community action pro-
gram. Psychological Reports. 19.978. 
Greenspoon. J. (1955). The reinforcing effect of two spoken sounds on the frequency of 
two responses. American Journal of Psychology. 68. 408-416. 
Greven, G. M. (1957). Music as a tool in psychotherapy for children. Music Therapy. 7. 
105-108. 

References 
183 
Griffith, J. (1984). Adler's organ jargon. Individual Psychology, 40, 437-444. 
Grunwald, B. B., & McAbee, H. (1985). Guiding the family. Muncie, IN: Accelerated Devel-
opment. 
Guidano, V. F., & Liotti, G. (1983). Cognitive processes and emotional disorders. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Gushurst. R. S. (1971). The reliability and concurrent validity of an idiographic approach to early 
recollections. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago. 
Haley, J. (1976). Problem-solving therapy. New York: Harper Torchbooks. 
Hansen, E. (1944-45). The child guidance clinic of Abraham Lincoln Center. Individual 
Psychology Bulletin, 4, 49-58. 
Hapworth, W., Hapworth, M., & Heilman, J. R. (1993). "Mom loved you best. " New York: 
Smithmark. 
Harlow, H. (1958). The nature of love. American Psychologist, 13,673-685. 
Harris, T. A. (1967). I'm OK-you're OK. New York: Harper & Row. 
Hart, J. L. (1977). The perils of the pleaser. In J. P. Madden (Ed.). Loneliness: Issues of living in an 
age of stress for clergy and religion (pp. 41-55). Whitinsville, MA: Affirmation Books. 
Harvey, J. C., & Katz, C. (1986). If I'm so successful, why do I fee/like a fake? The imposter phe-
nomenon. New York: St. Martin's Press. 
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York: 
Harper & Row. (Original work published 1927) 
Heidegger. M. (1977). On the essence of truth. In D. F. Krell (Ed. and Trans.), Basic writings 
(pp. 113-141). New York: Harper & Row. (Original work published 1943) 
Herold, P. (1983). Adlerian approaches to typology. Unpublished master's thesis, Alfred Adler 
Institute, Chicago. 
Heyligers-Gunning, C. l. (1970). Alles kan ook anders over de vervuiling [Everything can 
also be otherwise with respect to pollution]. Mededelingenblad von de Nederlandse 
Werkgemeenschap voor Individualpsychologie, 19(2),4-8. 
Hoffman, E. (1994). The drive for self" Alfred Adler and the founding of Individual Psychology. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Holmberg, J. (1972). "We love to learn." Rockford, IL: Rockford Public Schools. 
Holt, H. (1967). Existential analysis, Freud and Adler. Journal of Existentialism, 8,203-222. 
Holub, M. (1928). Geschwisterkampf[Sibling rivalry]. Vienna: Moritz Perles. 
Horney, K. (1945). Our inner conflicts. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Horney, K. (1950). Neurosis and human growth. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Horney, K. (1967). The flight from womanhood. In Feminine psychology (H. Kelman, Ed.) 
(pp. 54-70). New York: W. W. Norton. (Original work published 1926) 
Hussert E. (1962). Ideas: General introduction to pure phenomenology. (W. R. B. Gibson, 
Trans.). New York: Collier. (Original work published 1913) 
Jahn, E., & Adler, A. (1964). Religion and Individual Psychology. In A. Adler (1964). Supe-
riority and social interest (pp. 271-308). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
(Original work published 1933) 
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York: Holt. 
Janet, P. (1924). Principles of psychotherapy. New York: Macmillan. 
Johnson, E. L. (1966). Existential trends toward Individual Psychology. Individual Psycholo-
gist, 3(2}, 11-13. 
Johnson, S. (1973). On self-love and indolence. In A. M. Eastman et al. (Eds.), The Norton 
reader (3rd ed., pp. 579-583). New York: Norton. (Original work published 1751) 
Jones, E. (1953, 1955, 1957). The life and work of Sigmund Freud (3 vols.). New York: Basic 
Books. 
Jones, J. V., Jr. (1995). Constructivisim and Individual Psychology: Common ground for 
dialogue. Individual Psychology, 51. 231-243. 

184 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Karon, B. (1964). Suicidal tendency as the wish to hurt someone else, and resulting treat-
ment technique. Journal of Individual Psychology, 20, 206-212. 
Kazan, S. (1978). Adler's Gemeinschaftsgefuhl and Meyeroff's caring. Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 34(1),3-10. 
Kefir, N. (1972). Priorities. Unpublished manuscript. 
Kefir, N., & Corsini, R. (1974). Dispositional sets: A contribution to typology. Journal of In-
dividual Psychology, 30. 163-178. 
Kelly, G. A. (1955). A theory of personality. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Kern, R. M., Hawes, E. c., & Christensen, O. C. (Eds.) (1989). Couples therapy: An Adlerian 
perspective. Minneapolis. MN: Educational Media. 
Kernberg, O. E (1975). Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. New York: Jason 
Aronson. 
Kershaw-Bellemare, R., & Mosak, H. H. (1993). Adult children of alcoholics: An Adlerian 
perspective. Journal of Alcohol & Drug Education, 38.(3), 105-119. 
Kohn, A, (1986). No contest. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
Kohut, H. (1971). The analysis of the self New York: International Universities Press. 
Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self Madison, CT: International Universities Press. 
Kopp, R. R. (1986). Styles of striving for significance with and without social interest: An 
Adlerian typology. Individual Psychology. 42, 17-25. 
Kramer, H. C. (1947). Haufigkeit und Bedeutung von Minderwertigkeitsgefuhl in Psy-
chose [Frequency and significance oj inferiority feeling in psychosis]. Internationale 
Zeitschriftfur Individualpsychologie, 16(2),65-74. 
Krausz, E. O. (1959). The homeostatic function of dreams. Individual Psychology News Letter, 
9,48. 
Krausz, E. O. (1973). Neurotic versus normal reaction categories. In H. H. Mosak (Ed.), Al-
fred Adler: His influence on psychology tuday (pp. 53-57). Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Press. 
Lazarsfeld, S. (1991). The courage for imperfection. Individual Psychology. 47. 93-96. (Origi-
nal work published 1927) 
Leman, K. (1985). The birth order book. New York: Dell. 
Leman, K. (1987). The pleasers. Old Tappan. NJ: Fleming H. Revell. 
Lerner, H. H. (1952). Methodological convergence and social action. Journal of Social Issues, 
8,75-80. 
Lieberman, M. G. (1957). Childhood memories as a projective technique. Journal of Projec-
tive Techniques, 21, 32-36. 
Lief, A. (Ed.) (1973). The commonsense psychiatry of Dr. Alfred Meyer. North Stratford, NH: Ayer. 
Linden, G. W. (1993). Excuses, excuses! Individual Psychology, 49, 1-12. 
Loewy, I. (1930). Small children in guidance clinics. In A. Adler & Associates, Guiding the 
child (pp. 157-165). New York: Greenberg. 
Lombardi, D. N. (1973). Eight avenues of life style consistency. Individual Psychologist, 10, 5-9. 
Losoncy, L. (1977). Turning people on: How to be an encouraging person. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
Mahoney, M. J. (1991). Human change processes. New York: Basic Books. 
Maimonides, M. (1944). Mishne Torah (Ha-yad ha-chazakah). [Mishne Torah (The strong 
hand)]. New York: Hevro. (Original work published 1180) 
Manaster, G. J. (1973). Cultural patterns of coping. In R. E Peck et al. (Eds.), Coping styles 
and achievement: A cross-national study of children (Rep. Proj. HRD-167-55, OE-5-85-
063). Austin, TX: University of Texas. 
Manaster, G. J., & Corsini, R. J. (1982). Individual Psychology: Theory and practice. Itasca, IL: 
EE. Peacock. 
Manaster, G. J., Painter, G., Deutsch, J., & Overholt, B. (Eds.). (1977). Alfred Adler: As we 
remember him. Chicago: North American Society of Adlerian Psychology. 

References 
185 
Mandell. S. (1942). An only girl among brothers. Individual Psychology Bulletin, 2,25-30. 
Maniacci, M. P. (1990). An Adlerian interpretation of the Comprehensive System of the Rorschach 
inkblot test. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Alfred Adler Institute, Chicago. 
Maniacci, M. P. (1991). Guidelines for developing social interest with clients in psychiatric 
day hospitals. Individual Psychology, 47, 177-188. 
Maniacci, M. P. (1993). A primer of Individual Psychology. In L. Sperry & J. Carlson 
(Eds.), Psychopathology and psychotherapy from diagnosis to treatment (pp. 599-611). 
Muncie, IN: Accelerated Development. 
Maniacci, M. P. (1996a). An introduction to brief therapy of the personality disorders. In-
dividual Psychology, 52, 158-168. 
Maniacci. M. P. (1996b). Mental disorders due to a general medical condition and other 
cognitive disorders. In L. Sperry & J. Carlson (Eds.). Psychopathology and psychotherapy: 
From DSM-IV diagnosis to treatment (2nd ed., pp. 51-75). Muncie, IN: Accelerated De-
velopment. 
Maniacci, M. p" & Carlson, J. (1991). A model for Adlerian family interventions with the 
chronically mentally ill. American Journal of Family Therapy, 19,237-249. 
Maslow, A. H. (1962). Was Adler a disciple of Freud? Journal of Individual Psychology, 18,125. 
Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and personality. New York: Harper & Row. 
Massey, R. F. (1989). The philosophical compatibility of Adler and Berne. Individual Psy-
chology,45,323-334. 
Massey, R. F. (1990). Berne's transactional analysis as a neo-Freudian/neo-Adlerian per-
spective. Transactional Analysis Journal, 10, 173-186. 
Massey, R. F. (1993). Neo-Adlerian constructs in Berne's transactional analysis. Individual 
Psychology. 49, 13-35. 
May, R. (1983). The discovery of being. New York: W. W. Norton. 
McIntyre, C. J. (1952). Acceptance by others and its relation to acceptance of self and oth-
ers. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 47, 624-625, 
Meiers, J. (1972). Protection environmentale [Environmental protection]. Bulletin, Societe 
Fran(aise de Psychologie Adlerienne, 14,47-49. 
Mele, E. (1993). A framework for an Adlerian interpretation of Thematic Apperception Test pro-
files associated with program completion. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Adler School 
of Professional Psychology, Chicago, IL. 
Menninger, K. (1973). Whatever became of sin? New York: Hawthorn. 
Miles, J. (1996). God: A biography. New York: Vintage Books. 
Miller, G. (1967). On turning psychology over to the unwashed. Psychology Today, 3(7}. 53-54. 
Miller, L. (1990). Inner natures. New York: Ballantine. 
Millon, T. (1981). Disorders of personality. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Milton, J. (1957). Paradise lost. In M. Y. Hughes (Ed.), John Milton: Complete poems and 
major prose (pp. 173-469). Indianapolis: Odyssey Press. (Original work published 
1674) 
Minuchin, S. (1974). Families and family therapy. New York: Basic Books. 
Mosak, H. H. (1950). Evaluation in psychotherapy: A study of some current measures. Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago. 
Mosak, H. H. (1954). The psychological attitude in rehabilitation. American Archives of Re-
habilitation Therapy, 2, 9-10. 
Mosak, H. H. (1958). Early recollections as a projective technique. Journal of Projective Tech-
niques, 22, 302-311. 
Mosak, H. H. (1959). The getting type, a parsimonious social interpretation of the oral 
character. Journal of Individual Psychology, 15, 193-198. 
Mosak, H. H. (1965). Predicting the relationship to the psychotherapist from early recol-
lections. Journal of Individual Psychology, 21. 77-81. 

186 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Mosak, H. H. (1968). The interrelatedness of the neuroses through central themes. Journal 
of Individual Psychology, 24, 67-70. 
Mosak, H, H. (1971a). Lifestyle. In A. G. Nikclly (Ed.), Techniques for behavior change (pp. 
77-81). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Mosak, H. H. (1971 b). Strategies for behavior change in schools: Consultation strategies. 
The Counseling Psychologist, 3( 1), 58-62. 
Mosak, H. H. (1972). Life style assessment: A demonstration focused upon family constel-
lation. Journal of Individual Psychology, 28, 232-247. 
Mosak, H. H. (1973). The controller: A social interpretation of the anal character. In H. H. 
Mosak (Ed.), Alfred Adler: His influence upon psychology today (pp. 43-52). Park Ridge, 
NJ: Noyes Press. 
Mosak, H. H. (1977a). Does a "TMJ" personality exist? In H. Gelb (Ed.), Clinical management of 
head, neck, and TMJ pain and dysfunction (pp. 195-205). Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders. 
Mosak, H. H. (I 977b). On purpose. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
Mosak, H. H. (1979). Mosak's typology: An update. Journal of Individual Psychology, 35, 
192-195. 
Mosak, H. H. (1980). A child's guide to parent rearing. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
Mosak, H. H. (1985). Interrupting a depression: The pushbutton technique. Individual Psy-
chology, 41, 210-214. 
Mosak, H. H. (1987a). Guilt, guilt feelings, regret and repentance. Individual Psychology, 43, 
288-295. 
Mosak, H. H. (1987b). Ha ha and aha: The role uf humor in psychotherapy. Muncie, IN: Accel-
erated Development. 
Mosak, H. H. (1991a). "I don't have social interest:" Social interest as construct. Individual 
Psychology, 47, 309-320. 
Mosak, H. H. (199 I b). Where have all the normal people gone? Individual Psychology, 47, 
309-320. 
Mosak, H. H. (1992). The "traffic cop" function of dreams and early recollections. Individ-
ual Psychology, 48, 319-323. 
Mosak, H. H. (1995a). Adlerian psychotherapy. In R. J. Corsini & D. Wedding (Eds.), Cur-
rent psychotherapies (5th ed., pp.5 1-84). Itasca, IL: EE. Peacock. 
Mosak, H. H. (l995b). DrugJess psychotherapy of schizophrenia. Individual Psychology, 51, 
61-66. 
Mosak, H. H., Brown, P. R., & Boldt, R. M. (1994). Various purposes of suffering. Individual 
Psychology, 50, 142-148. 
Mosak, H. H., & Dreikurs, R. (1967). The life tasks III: The fifth life task. Individual Psychol-
ogy, 5, 16-22. 
Mosak, H. H., & Gushurst. R. S. (1971). What patients say and what they mean. American 
Journal of Psychotherapy, 25,428-436. 
Mosak, H. H., & Gushurst. R. S. (1972). Some therapeutic ust's of psychologic testing. 
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 26, 539-546. 
Mosak, H. H., & Kopp, R. R. (1973). The early recollections of Adler, Freud, and Jung. 
Journal of Individual Psychology, 29, 157-166. 
Mosak, H. H., & LeFevre, C. (1976). The resolution of "intrapersonal conflict." Journal of 
Individual Psychology, 32, 19-26. 
Mosak, H. H., & Maniacci, M. P. (1989). An approach to the understanding of "schizo-
phrenese." Individual Psychology, 45, 465-472. 
Mosak, H. H., & ManiaccL M. P. (1993). Adlerian child psychotherapy. In T. R. Kratochwill 
& R. J. Morris (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy with children and adolescents (pp. 
162-184). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

References 
187 
Mosak, H. H., & Maniacci, M. P. (1995). The case of Roger. In D. Wedding & R. J. Corsini 
(Eds.), Case studies in psychotherapy (2nd ed., pp. 23-49). Itasca, IL: F. E. Peacock. 
Mosak, H. B., & Maniacci, M. P. (1998). Tactics in counseling and psychotherapy. Itasca, IL: 
F. E. Peacock. 
Mosak, H. B., Mosak, L. E., & Mosak, N. S. (1979). The argot of the drug culture. Chicago: Al-
fred Adler Institute. 
Mosak, H. H., & Schneider, S. (1977). Masculine protest, penis envy, women's liberation 
and sexual equality. Journal of Individual Psychology, 33, 193-20 I. 
Mosak, H. H" & Shulman, B. H. (1967). Introductory Individual Psychology: A syllabus. 
Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
Mosak, H. H., & Shulman, B. H. (1977). Clinical assessment: A syllabus. Chicago: Alfred 
Adler Institute. 
Mosak, H. H., & Todd, F. J. (1952). Selective perception in the interpretation of symbols. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 47,255-256. 
Motley, W. (1989). Knock on any door. De Kalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press. 
Mozdzierz, G. J., & Lottman, T. J. (1973). Games married couples play: An Adlerian view. 
Journal of Individual Psychology, 29, 182-194. 
Munroe, R. L. (1955). Schools of psychoanalytic thought. New York: Dryden Press. 
Murphy, G. (1947). Personality: A biosocial interpretation. New York: Harper. 
Neuer, A. (1936). Courage and discouragement. International Journal of Individual Psychol-
ogy, 2(2), 30-50. 
Nietzsche, F. (1967). The will to power (W. Kaufman & R. J. Hollingdale, Trans.; W. Kauf-
man, Ed.). New York: Vintage. (Original work published 1888) 
Norcross, J. c., & Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (1992). Handbook of psychotherapy integration. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Nunberg, H" & Federn, E. (Eds.). (1962). Minutes of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. New 
York: International Universities Press. 
Nystul, M. S. (1985). The use of motivation modification techniques in Adlerian psycho-
therapy. Individual Psychology, 41,489-495. 
O'Connell, W. E. (1965). Humanistic identification: A new translation for Gemeinschaftsge-
fuhl. Journal of Individual Psychology, 21,44-47. 
O'Connell, W. E. (1975). Action therapy and Adlerian theory. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
O'Connell, W. E. (1976). The friends of Adler phenomenon. Journal of Individual Psychol-
ogy, 32,5-17. 
O'Hanlon, W. H., & Weiner-Davis, M. (1987). In search of solutions. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Oldham, J. M., & Morris, L. B. (1990). The personality self-portrait. New York: Bantam. 
Olson, H. A. (Ed.). (1979). Early recollections: Their use in diagnosis and psychotherapy. Spring-
field, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Orgler, H. (1963). Alfred Adler: The man and his work. New York: Mentor Books. (Original 
work published 1939) 
Ornstein, R., & Sobel, D. (1987). The healing brain. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Pancner, K. (1978). The use of parables and fables in Adlerian psychotherapy. Individual 
Psychologist, 15(4), 19-29. 
Pancner, R. J., & Jylland, C. W. (1996). Depressive disorders. In L. Sperry & J. Carlson 
(Eds.), Psychopathology and psychotherapy: From DSM-IV diagnosis to treatment (2nd ed., 
pp. 115-157). Washington, DC: Accelerated Development. 
Papanek, H. (1965a). Adler's concepts in community psychiatry. Journal of Individual Psy-
chology, 21, 117-126. 
Papanek, H. (1965b). Group psychotherapy with married couples. In J. H. Masserman 
(Ed.), Current psychiatric therapies (pp. 157-163). New York: Grune & Stratton. 

188 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Peven, D. E., Mosak, H. H .. & Shulman, B. H. (1979). Interviewing: A syllabus. Chicago: Al-
fred Adler Institute. 
Peven, D. E., & Shulman, B. H. (1986). Adlerian psychotherapy. In 1. L. Kutash & A. Wolf 
(Eds.), Psychotherapist's casebook (pp. 10 1-123). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Pew, M., & Pew, W. L. (1972). Adlerian marriage counseling. Journal of Individual Psychol-
ogy, 28, 192-202. 
Phillips, D. (1975). The family council: A segment of adolescent treatment. Journal of Be-
havior Therapy, and Experimental Psychiatry, 6. 283-287. 
Pia get. J. (1978). Behavior and evolution (D. Nicholson-Smith, Trans). New York: Pantheon. 
(Original work published 1976) 
Poffenberger, T. (1953). The family council. . kidscan confer. Corvallis. OR: Oregon State College. 
Popkin, M. (1987). Active parenting: Teaching cooperation. courage. and responsibility. San Fran-
cisco: Harper & Row. 
Powers, R. L., & Griffith, J. (1987). Understanding life-style: The psycho-clarity© process. 
Chicago: Americas Institute of Adlerian Studies. 
RadL L. (1959). Existentialism and Individual Psychology. In K. A. Adler & Danica 
Deutsch (Eds.), Essays in Individual Psychology (pp. 157-167). New York: Grove Press. 
Rigney, K. B., & Corsini. R. J. (1970). The family council. Chicago: Family Education Associ-
ation. 
Robb, M. (1932). Organ jargon. Individual Psychology Medical Pamphlets. 4. 61-68. 
Rogers, C. R. (1942). Counseling and psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
Rogers, C. R. (195 I). Client-centered therapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
Rom. P. (1950). These feelings of guilt. Individual Psychology Bulletin. 8,32-38. 
Ronge, P. H. (1956). The "feminine protest." American Journal of Individual Psychology. 12. 
112-115. 
Rosenzweig, S. (1944). Rosenzweig Picture-Frustration Study. St. Louis, MO: Author. 
Rousseau, J. J. (1947). The social contract or, principles of political right. In E. Barker 
(Ed.), Social contract (pp. 167-307). New York: Oxford University Press. (Original work 
published 1762) 
Safran, J. D., & SegaL Z. v. (1990). Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic 
Books. 
Sanre, J. P. (1956). Existential psychoanalysis. In Being and nothingness (H. E. Barnes, 
Trans.) (pp. 712-734). New York: Washington Square Press. (Original work published 
1943) 
Schaffer, H. (1974). Existentialisme Sartrien et psychologie Adlerienne [Sartre's existentialism 
and Adlerian psychology]. Bulietin, Societe Fran(aise de Psychologie Ad!erienne, 20, 1-7. 
Schaffer, H. (1976). Existentialisme Sartrien et psychologie d'Adler [Sartre's existentialism 
and Adler's psychology]. Bulletin. Socihe Frml(aise de Psychologie Adlfrienne, 26, 1-9. 
Scheibe, K. E. (1970), Beliefs and values. New York: Holt. Rinehart & Winston. 
Schneider, M. F. (1989). CAST Children's Apperceptive Storytelling Test. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 
SeiL L. (1928). Zur Problem der Psychosen [The problem of the psychoses]. Internationale 
Zeitschrift fur Individualpsychologie, 6. 273-279. 
Seif, L., & Zilahi, L. (Eds.). (1930). Selbsterziehung des Charakters [Self-education of charac-
ter]. Leipzig: S. Hirze!' 
Selye, H. (1974). Stress without distress. New York: Signet. 
Shakespeare, W. (1974). The tragedy of Julius Caesar. In C. B. Evans (Ed.), The Riverside Shake-
speare (pp. I 105-1134). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. (Original work published 1599) 
Shapiro, D. (1965). Neurotic styles. New York: Basic Books. 
Sherman, R., & Dinkmeyer, D. (1987). Systems offamily therapy: An Adlerian integration. 
New York: Brunner/Maze!' 
Shulman, B. H. (1962). The family constellation in personality diagnosis. Journal of Individ-
ual Psychology, 18, 35-47. 

References 
189 
Shulman, B. H. (1964). Psychological disturbances which interfere with the patient's co-
operation. Psychosomatics, 5, 213-220. 
Shulman, B. H. (1965). A comparison of Allport's and the Adlerian concepts of life style: 
Contributions to a psychology of the self. Individual Psychologist, 3, 14-21. 
Shulman, B. H. (1969). The Adlerian theory of dreams. In M. Kramer (Ed.), Dream psychol-
ogy and the new biology of dreaming (pp. 117-137). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Shulman, B. H. (1973a). Contributions to Individual Psychology. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
Shulman, B. H. (1973b). What is the life style? In B. H. Shulman, Contributions to Individual 
Psychology (pp. 16-44). Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
Shulman, B. H. (1984). Essays in schizophrenia (2nd ed.). Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute. 
(Original work published 1968) 
Shulman, B. H. (1985). Cognitive therapy and the Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler. 
In M. J. Mahoney & A. Freeman (Eds.), Cognition and psychotherapy (pp. 243-258). 
New York: Plenum. 
Shulman, B. H., & Mosak, H. H. (1967). Various purposes of symptoms. Journal of Individ-
ual Psychology, 23,79-87. 
Shulman, B. H., & Mosak, H. H. (1988). Manualfor life style assessment. Muncie, IN: Acceler-
ated Development. 
Shulman, B. H., & Watts, R. E. (1997). Adlerian and constructivist psychotherapies: An 
Adlerian perspective. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, II, 181-193. 
Sicher, L. (1950). Guilt and guilt feelings. Individual Psychology Bulletin, 8, 4-11. 
Sicher, L. (1955). Education for freedom. American Journal of Individual Psychology, 1l, 97-103. 
Sicher, L., & Mosak, H. H. (1967). Aggression as a secondary phenomenon. Journal ofIndi-
vidual Psychology, 23,232-235. 
Singer, J. (1975). The inner world of daydreaming. New York: Harper & Row. 
Skolnick, A. S. (1986). The psychology of human development. Chicago: Harcourt Brace Jo-
vanovich. 
Smithells, T. A. (1983). Working with children: Observation, interpretation and psycho-
logical disclosure. In O. C. Christensen & T. G. Schramski (Eds.), Adlerian family coun-
seling: A manual for counselor, educator and psychotherapist (pp. 117-136). Minneapolis: 
Educational Media. 
Smuts, J. C. (1961). Holism and evolution. New York: Viking Press. (Original work published 
1926) 
Snygg, D., & Combs, A. W. (1959). Individual behavior. New York: Harper. 
Sperry, L. (Ed.). (1989). Varieties of brief therapy [Special issue]. Individual Psychology, 45 
(l & 2). 
Sperry, L. (1990). Personality disorders: Biopsychosocial descriptions and dynamics. Indi-
vidual Psychology, 46, 193-202. 
Sperry, L., & Ansbacher, H. L. (1996). The concept of narcissism and the narcissistic per-
sonality disorder. In L. Sperry & J. Carlson (Eds.), Psychopathology and psychotherapy: 
From DSM-IV diagnosis to treatment (2nd ed., pp. 337-351). Washington, DC: Acceler-
ated Development. 
Sperry, L., & Carlson, J. (1991). Maritaltherapy. Denver: Love. 
Sperry, L., & Carlson, J. (Eds.). (1996). Psychopathology and psychotherapy: From DSM-IV di-
agnosis to treatment (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Accelerated Development. 
Sperry, L., & Maniacci, M. P. (1992). An integration of DSM-III-R diagnoses and Adlerian 
case formulations. Individual Psychology, 48, 175-181. 
Sperry, L., & Mosak, H. H. (1996). Personality disorders. In L. Sperry & J. Carlson (Eds.), 
Psychopathology and psychotherapy: From DSM-IV diagnosis to treatment (2nd ed., 
279-335). Washington, DC: Accelerated Development. 
Spiel, O. (1956). The Individual Psychological Experimental School in Vienna. American 
Journal of Individual Psychology, 12, 1-11. 

190 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Starr, A. (1977). Rehearsalfor living: Psychodrama. Chicago: Nelson-Hall. 
Stepansky, P. (1983). In Freud's shadow: Adler in context. Hillside, NJ: Analytic Press. 
Stern, A. (1958). Existential analysis and Individual Psychology. Journal of Individual Psy-
chology. 14, 38-50. 
Stern, D. N. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant. New York: Basic Books. 
Stone, I. (1971). Passions of the mind. New York: New American Library. 
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Sullivan, H. S. (1964). The fusion of psychiatry and social science. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Taylor. J. A. (1975). Early recollections as a projective technique: A review of some recent 
validation studies. Journal of Individual Psychology, 31, 213-218. 
Teichman, M., & Foa, U. G. (1972). Depreciation and accusation tendencies: Empirical 
support. Journal of Individual Psychology, 28,48-50. 
Terner. J .. & Pew, W. L. (1978). The courage to be imperfect: The life and work of Rudolf 
Dreikurs. New York: Hawthorn. 
Thoreau, H. D. (1991). Walden. New York: Random House. (Original work published 1854) 
Trentzsch, P. J. (1928). Detection of early symptoms of psychosis. Internationale Zeitschrift 
fur lndividalpsychologie, 6. 251-257. 
Vaihinger, H. (1965). The philosophy of"as if" (C. K. Ogden, Trans.). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. (Original work published 1911) 
van Dusen, W. (1959). Adler and existence analysis. Journal of Individual Psychology, 15, 
100-111. 
WachteL P. L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and behavior therapy. New York: Basic Books. 
Walton, F. X., & Powers, R. L. (1974). Winning children over: A manual for teachers, counselors, 
principals and parents. Chicago: Practical Psychology Associates. 
Way, L. (1950). Adler's place in psychology. London: Allen & Unwin. 
Weinhaus, E. (1977). A practical guide for family meetings. St. Louis: Author. 
West, G. K. (1986). Parenting without guilt: The predictable and situational misbehaviors of child-
hood. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. 
Wexberg, E. (1928). Zur Frage der Psychosen [The question of the psychoses]. Interna-
tionale Zeitschriftfur Individualpsychologie, 6,280-289. 
Wexberg, E. (1929). Individual Psychology (W. B. Wolfe. Trans.). New York: Cosmopolitan. 
Wexberg, E. (1947). Introduction to medical psychology. New York: Grune & Stratton. 
Wilde, O. (1992). The ballad of Reading Gaol. New York: Dover. (Original work published 1898) 
Williams, R. (1989). The trusting heart. New York: Times Books. 
Wilson, F. R. (1975). TA and Adler. Transactional Analysis Journal, 5. 117-122. 
Wolfe, W. B. (1932). How to be happy though human. New York: Penguin. 
Wordsworth. W. (1979). The prelude. In M. H. Abrams (Eds.), The Norton anthology of Eng-
lish literature (4th ed .. Vol. 2. pp. 230-313). New York: W. W. Norton. (Original work 
published 1850) 
Wylie, P. (1994). Generation of vipers. Catchogue, NY: Buccaneer Books. 
Yalom, I. D. (1980). Existential psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books. 
Zborowski, R. M. (1997). The phenomenon of transference: An Adlerian perspective. Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation. Adler School of Professional Psychology, Chicago. 
Zeigarnik, B. (1927). Das Behalten erledigter und unerledigter Handlungen [The remem-
brance of complete and incomplete acts]. Psychologisches Forschung, 9.1-85. 
Zuckerman, M. (1979). Sensation seeking. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

INDEX 
A 
Accomplishment, 68--69 
Accusation, 86 
Acting "as if:' 26-27 
Activity level 
of excitement seeker type, 72 
on life style, 34 
Adaptation 
and inferiorities, 79-81 
self-ideal on, 52-53 
Adjustment, to society, 5-6 
Adler, A. 
biographical sketch of, 1-2 
on classification, 66-67 
on community feeling, 113 
continuing influence of, 167-170 
on death, 1 
on diagnosis, 133 
and early American movement, 7 
early work of, 4--5 
Freud's influence on, 2-7 
on human nature, 59 
on individual challenges, 98 
on inferiority feelings, 80-81 
on overcompensation, 84 
as psychoanalyst. 2-7 
on the sexes, 104--105 
on superiority complex, 82 
on therapist's role, 153-154 
on transference, 156 
typology of, 64-65 
Adler School of Professional Psychology, 8 
Adlerian psychology. See also Counseling, 
Adlerian; Person, understanding of; 
Psychology, individual 
on behavior interpretation, 144 
on behavioral therapy, 154 
central focus of. 50-51 
on cognitive dissonance, 59-60 
counseling in, 152-159 (See also 
Counseling, Adlerian) 
current status of, 8 
on diagnosis, 134-137 
on encouragement, 148-149 
on life style and the tasks of life, 110 
psychotherapy in, 152-159 
Affective attunement, 51 
Age, on adaptability, 59 
Aggression, 85-86 
American movement, early, 7 
Analytic-behavioral-cognitive 
psychology, 50-51 
Ansbacher, H. L" 2, 4, 21-22, 32,64, 
112-113,166 
Ansbacher, R. R., 4, 21-22 
Anxiety, 88 
Arbitrary rightness, 90 
Aristotle, 15-16, 131 
Armstrong, K., 108 
Arrangement, 97 
Assessment, 141-143 
vs. diagnosis, 131 
Assumptions 
of Individual Psychology, 14-29 (See 
also specific types, e.g" Holism) 
underlying, 13-14 
Attachment theory, 169 
Attarian, P., 100 
Attitudinal set, 47 
Aurelius, M., 146 
Autopoiesis, 168 
Avoiding type, 64-65 
B 
Babies, in Mosak's typology, 69-71 
Back and forth, in distance seeking, 87-88 
Backward movement, in distance 
seeking, 87 
191 

192 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Balance, of subject vs. object, 132-133 
Basch, M. F., 51 
Beecher, M., 13, 147 
Beecher, W., 13, 147 
Behavior, and life style, 57-58 
Behavioral therapy, 154 
Belonging, 16 
Berger, E. M., 147 
Bergson, R., 63 
Berne, E., 99, 103, 142, 148-149 
Bieliauskas, V. J., 104, 140 
Biological factors, on life style, 34-37 
Blame, 89 
Blind spots, 90 
Body image, 106-107 
Boldt, R., 156 
Bonime, W., 138 
Boredom, 72-73 
Brain development, 35-36 
Brief therapy, 136 
Buying double insurance, 92 
C 
Carlson, J., 118, 134 
Case history data, 141-142 
Catastrophic expectations, 52 
Cause, in teleology, 15-16 
efficient, 16 
final, 16 
formal, 16 
Central nervous system, development of, 
35-36 
Central themes, in psychopathology, 
119-120 
Challenges, of individuals, 98 
Change, 166 
in psychotherapy, 158-159 
Child guidance, 147-148 
Childhood 
early situation of, 137 
inferiority in, on life style, 32, 41-42 
Children 
sexual identification of, 104-105 
subjective perception of, 50 
and values exposure, 38-39 
Children's Apperceptive Storytelling Test 
(CAST),140 
Choice, in soft determinism, 18-19 
Cognitive contructionism, 167-168 
Cognitive dissonance, 59 
Cognitive processes 
in Adlerian psychology, 50-51 
in psychology of use, 25-26 
Cognitive therapy, 152-153 
Colby, K. M., 4, 6 
Collaboration, as stress adaptation, 79-80 
Common sense 
as traditional criticism, 163 
vs. private logic, 121-122 
Community feeling 
in psychopathology, clinical issues in, 
114-118 
in psychopathology, theoretical issues 
in, 112-114 
Compensation, 83-84 
Completeness, striving for, 32-33 
Conflict, intrapsychic, 15-16 
Confusion, 90 
Congruence, in life style, 55-56 
Conscious processes, in psychopathology, 
121-122 
Consequences, on growth, 150-151 
Constructionism, 12-13 
cognitive, 167-168 
Contrition, 91 
Controllers, 123 
Conviction(s),49-51 
core, 60 
ethical, 54-55 
Cooperation, as stress adaptation, 80-81 
Coping behaviors, for inferiorities, 83-89 
aggression as, 85-86 
anxiety as, 88 
compensation as, 83-84 
direct problem solving as, 83 
distance seeking as, 86-88 
exclusion tendency as, 88-89 
excuses as, 85 
safeguarding behaviors as, 84 
symptoms as, 85 
Core ordering processes, 168 
Corsini, R. J., 65-66, 134 
Counseling, Adlerian, 152-159 
cognitive therapy in, 152-153 
couple counseling in, 154-155 
family therapy in, 154-155 
group therapy in, 155-156 
marriage counseling in, 154-155 
psychoanalysis in, 153-154 
psychotherapy in, 156-157 
Counseling, open forum, 148 
Couple counseling, 155 

Couple-enrichment programs, 151 
Creative self, The, 17-18 
Credner, L., 83 
Critical evaluation, 13-14 
D 
de Shazer, S., 136 
Defensive patterns, 89-94 
Depreciation, as aggression variable, 
86 
Depression, 119 
Description, vs. prescriptive style, 166 
Determinism, soft, 18-19 
Developmental theory, 166 
Diagnosis 
general, 133-136 
special, 136-138 
Dinkmeyer, D. c., 9,154-155,170 
Direct problem solving, 83 
Displacement. 93 
Dispositional sets, 65-66 
Distance seeking, as coping behavior, 
86-88 
Doctrine of balances, 94 
Double insurance, 92 
Dreams, 138-140 
problem-solving function of, 163 
as therapy tool, 157-158 
Dreikurs, R" 7, 8, 13,24,33,98, 100, 
102,106,108,120,121,133-134, 
150,156,164,166,169,170 
Drivers, in Mosak's typology, 67-69 
Drives, of infants, 36-37 
E 
Early American movement, 7 
Early recollections, 36 
Educational programs, 147-151 
child guidance in, 147-148 
consequences in, 150-151 
couple-enrichment programs in, 
151 
encouragement in, 148-149 
family education in, 151 
misbehavior goals in, 149-150 
parent education in, 147-148, 151 
teacher education in, 151 
Ego-functions, 15 
Ego psychology, 163-164 
Ellenberger, H. E, 8, 46, 167 
Ellis, A., 52, 88, 133, 152-153 
Elusiveness, 90 
Emotions 
Index 
193 
in psychology of use, 25 
in psychopathology, 120-121 
Empathy, 51 
Encouragement, 148-149 
Environment, on the creative self, 
17-18 
Equipotentiality, of growth, 59-60 
Euripides, 131-132 
Evaluation 
critical, 13-14 
in the self task, 107 
Excitement seekers, 71-73 
Excitement stratagem, 142 
Exclusion tendency, as coping behavior, 
88-89 
Excuses, as coping behavior, 85 
Exogenous factors, in psychopathology, 
122-128 
Expectations, catastrophic, 52 
Expressive behavior, 142 
Externalization, 89 
F 
Face-saving stratagem, 142 
Family atmosphere, 37-38 
Family, constellation of, 126-127 
Family council, 148 
Family education, 151 
Family task, 109 
Family therapy, 154-155 
Fantasy, as defensive pattern, 93 
Farley, E, 72 
Federn, E., 6 
Feedback mechanisms, 18 
Feedforward mechanisms, 168-169 
Festinger, L., 59 
Flexibility, in social field theory, 21 
Foa, U. G., 86 
Foley, V. D., 154-155 
Forgus, R., 13, 33, 36-37, 72 
Frankl, V. E., 109 
Freeman, A., 152 
French, T. M" 163 
Freud, S. 
on Adler, 2-7 
on Adlerian system validity, 163-164 
on love, 166 
on safeguarding behaviors, 84 
on trauma, 123 

194 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Friends of Adler. 8-9 
Fromm, E., 1 
Fun, and baby type, 69-70 
Furtmilller, c., 4, 6 
G 
Gazzaniga, M.S., 35 
Gemeinschaftsgefuhl, 112-113 
Getting type, 64-65 
in tasks of life, 97 
Goals 
in psychology of use, 25-26 
in teleology, 16 
God, relationship to, 108 
Goethe, 131-132 
Greenspoon, J., 164 
Griffith, J., 97, 119, 137 
Group therapy, 155-156 
Grouping, 142 
Growth, encouragement of, 146-161 
child guidance in, 147-148 
consequences in, 150-151 
couple-enrichment programs in, 151 
encouragement in, 148-149 
family education in, 151 
misbehavior goals in, 149-150 
parent education in, 147-148, 151 
psychotherapy guidelines in, 156-159 
(See also Psychotherapy, guidelines for) 
social advocacy in, 159-160 
teacher education in, 151 
Growth equipotentiality, 59-60 
Grunwald, B. B., 142 
Guidelines 
life style as, 47-49 
for psychotherapy, 156-159 
Gushurst, R. 5., 90, 140 
H 
Haley, J., 162 
Harris, T. A., 103 
Hart, J. L., 73 
Heidegger, M., 54,96, 162 
Heredity, on the creative self, 17-18 
Hesitation, in distance seeking, 87 
Hoffman, E., 2 
Holism, 14-15 
Horney, K., 16,65,75-76, 104, 105, 139 
Human adaptation, and inferiorities, 
79-81 
Human Change Processes, 12-13 
HusserL E., 19-20 
Id,15 
Ideal type, 64-65 
Ideas: General Introduction to Pure 
Phenomenology, 19 
Identification, 92 
Idiographic orientation, 23 
Individual Psychology. See Psychology, 
Individual 
Infants, development of, 33-45 
Inferiority(ies) 
aggression as, 85-86 
anxiety as, 88 
of childhood, on life style 
development, 32,41-42 
compensation as, 83-84 
defensive patterns in, 89-94 
direct problem solving as, 83 
distance seeking as, 86-88 
exclusion tendency as, 88-89 
excuses as, 85 
human adaptation on, 79-81 
in life style, 56 
safeguarding behaviors as, 84 
stress on, 79-81 
and superiority complexes, 81-83 
symptoms as, 85 
Inferiority complex. See also 
Inferiority(ies) 
and lifestyle, 56-58 
Insight, 158 
Intellectualization, 92 
Interpretation, in psychotherapy, 158 
Interpretation of Dreams, 3 
Intrapsychic conflict, 15-16 
Investigation, in psychotherapy, 157-158 
J 
Johnson,S., 78-79 
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 167, 
169 
Journal of Individual Psychology, 8 
K 
Karon, B., 86 
Kazan,S., 113 
Kefir, N., 65-66 

Kelly, G. A., 49 
Kershaw-Bellemare, R., 74 
Knowledge 
as self-knowledge, 169 
as tacit-explicit knowledge, 168 
Kohn, A., 78 
Kohut, R., 51-52, 59 
Kopp, R. R., 1, 2-3, 14, 68,73 
L 
Lazarsfeld, S., 22, 84 
Leadership, 101 
Learning theory, 166 
LeFevre, Coo 15, 17 
Leisure, 101 
Leman, K., 64, 73 
Life, meaning of. 109 
Life style, 46-62 
congruence in, 55-56 
convictions in, 49-51 
convictions in, core, 60 
convictions in, ethical. 54-55 
core functions of. 58 
growth equipotentiality in, 59-60 
as guidelines, 47-49 
in individual psychology, 165-166 
inferiority complex in, 56-58 
inferiority in, 56 
in psychoanalysis, 153-154 
in psychopathology, 122-124 
in psychopathology, case history of. 
124-129 
self-concept in, 51-52 
self-ideal in, 52-53 
on tasks of life, 109-110 
Weltbild in, 53-54 
Life style, development of. 30-45 
activity level on, 34 
biological factors on, 34-37 
childhood inferiority on, 41-42 
concept overview of. 31-33 
example of. 42-44 
psychosocial factors on, 37-41 
Linden, G. w., 85 
Literalism, 92-93 
Logic, VS. common sense, 121-122 
Lombardi, D. N., 141-142 
Lottman, T. J., 103 
Love, 166 
Luther, M., 86-87 
Index 
195 
M 
Mahoney, M. J., 12-13, 17 
Maimonides, 27 
Manaster, G. J., 66, 134 
Maniacci, M. P., 48, 119, 124, 
133-134,136,138,140,147, 
151,156,164 
Manipulation, 164 
Marriage counseling, 154-155 
Masculine protest. 5 
Massey, R. E, 103 
May, R., 20, 146 
McAbee, R., 142 
McIntyre, C. J., 147 
Meaning of life, 109 
Medication, 158 
Memory 
early recollections, 36 
and psychology of use, 24-25 
Menninger, K., 108 
Metaphysics, in the spiritual task, 
108-109 
Metaphysics, The, 15-16 
Miles, J., 108 
Miller, G., 163 
Miller, L., 35-36 
Millon, T., 76 
Milton, J., 12 
Misbehavior goals, 149-150 
Morris, L. B., 76 
Mosak, R. R., 1,2-3, 5, 7, 8, 14, 15, 17, 
24,47,48,66,85-86,87,90,92,93, 
97,98,102,105,106,107,108,113, 
119, 123, 124, 133-134, 137-138, 
14~ 
142-143, 14~ 14~ 
150-151, 
154,164 
Mosak, typology of. 66-75 
babies in, 69-71 
drivers in, 67-69 
excitement seekers in, 71-73 
pleasers in, 73-75 
Mother, in relationship to child, 51 
Motley, W., 72 
Movement 
in distance seeking, 86-88 
in dream interpretation, 140-141 
planes of. 116 
Mozdzierz, G. J., 103 
Multiple psychotherapy, 159 
Murphy, G., 164 

196 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
N 
Kafir, 65-66 
Needs, of infants, 36-37 
Neglect, as parenting style, 39-40 
Neurosis, Freud vs. Adler on, 5-6 
Neurotic Constitution, The, 6, 19 
Neurotic Styles, 75-76 
Neurotics, symptom type of, 117 
Nietzche, F., 12, 15 
Nomothetic principle, 23 
Normal people, 164 
North American Society of Adlerian 
Psychology (NASAP), 8 
Nunberg, H., 6 
NystuL M. S., 154 
o 
Objective perspective 
in general diagnosis, 134 
vs. subjective, 132-133 
Obstacle creation, in distance seeking, 88 
Occupational choice, 100 
Occupational preparation, 100 
O'ConnelL W. E., 8, 116 
O'Hanlon, W. H., 136 
Oldham, J. M., 76 
Olson, H. A., 137 
Open forum counseling, 148 
Opinion, in the self task, 107 
Optimism, in individual psychology, 
27-28 
Organ inferiority, 34-35 
Organ systems, 24 
Orientation, idiographic 23 
Ornstein, R., 80 
Outreach programs, 147-148 
Overcompensation, 83-84 
p 
Pampering, 39 
Pancner, K., 102 
Papanek, H., 2 
Parent education, 147-148, 151 
Parenting styles, 39 
Parenting task, 109 
Perception, in lifestyle development, 31-32 
Perceptual selectivity, 121 
Personal-cognitive organization, 168 
Personality disorders, 117 
Personality typologies. See also Typology of 
Boldt, 156 
Corsini, 65-66 
Mosak,67 
Phenomenology, 19-20 
in tasks of life, 96-98 
Piaget, J., 63 
Playfulness, of baby type, 69-70 
Pleasers, in Mosak's typology, 73-75 
Plus position, 22-23 
Power, 164-165 
Power stratagem, 142 
Powers, R. 1., 97, 137 
Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology, 
The, 6 
Prestige orientation, 80 
Private logic, vs. common sense, 121-122 
Problem solving, 83 
Problems of Neurosis, 32 
Proof stratagem, 142-143 
Prophecy, self-fulfilling, 27 
Psychoanalysis, 153-154 
Adlerian assumptions of, 4 
Psychoanalyst, Adler as, 2-7 
Psychoanalytic Society, 3-4 
Psychological testing, 140-141 
Psychological theory, role of, 13-14 
Psychology, Individual 
acting "as if" in, 26-27 
creative self in, 17-18 
current status of, 8 
future of, 169-170 
holism in, 14-15 
idiographic orientation in, 23 
optimism in, 27-28 
origin of, 6 
phenomenology in, 19-20 
psychology of use in, 24-26 
self -fulfilling prophecy in, 27 
social-field theory in, 20-21 
soft determinism in, 18-19 
striving for superiority in, 21-23 
teleology in, 15-17 
underlying assumptions in, 13-14 
Psychology, Individual, critique of, 
162-171 
Adler's continuing influence on, 
167-170 
"gaps" in, 165-167 
traditional criticisms of, 163-165 
Psychology of use, 24-26 
Psychopathology, 112-130 
central themes in, 119-120 

community feeling in, clinical issues in, 
theoretical issues in, 112-118 
conscious and unconscious processes 
in, 121-122 
emotions in, 120-121 
life style in, 122-124 
life style in, case history of, 124-128 
organ inferiority in, 119 
in personality types, 75-76 
social interest in, 112-118 
symptoms in, 119 
Psychosocial factors, on life style, 37--41 
Psychotherapy, guidelines for, 156-159 
change in, 158-159 
Q 
interpretation in, 158 
investigation in, 157-158 
multiple psychotherapy in, 159 
relationship in, 156-157 
reorientation in, 158-159 
understanding in, 157-158 
Quest, for understanding, 9-10 
Question, The, 135-136 
R 
Rationalization, 91 
Reaction formation, 94 
Reality, perception of, 48 
Recollections, early, 137-138 
Relationship, in psychotherapy, 
156-157 
Religion, 108 
Reorientation, 158-159 
Repression, 5-6 
Responsibility, 166 
Retreat, 90 
Rightness, arbitrary, 90 
Rogers, C. R., 17, 52 
Ronge, P. R., 105 
Rosenzweig, S., 89 
Rousseau, J.-J., 96 
Ruling type, 64-65 
s 
Safeguarding behaviors, 84 
Safety stratagem, 142 
Sartre, J.-P., 46 
Satisfaction, 100-101 
Schneider, M. F., 5, 105, 140 
Schools, on growth, 151 
Index 
197 
Self-accusation, as aggression variable, 86 
Self-concept, 51-52 
Weltbild on, 53-54 
Self-control, excessive, 90 
Self-disparagement, 91 
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 27 
Self-ideaL on life style, 52-53 
Self-knowledge, 169 
Self task, 106-107 
Selye, R., 79-80 
Sexual task, 103-106 
Shapiro, D., 75-76 
Sherman, R., 9,154-155,170 
Shulman, B. R., 7, 8, 13,33, 36-37,47, 
72,87,89,91, 97,106,137, 
142-143,154,166,167 
Sibling constellation, 40 
Sieher, L., 85-86, 116 
Sideshows, 91 
Singer, J., 92 
Skolnick, A. S., 35-36 
Smuts, J. c., 14 
SobeL D., 80 
Social advocacy, 159-160 
Social-field theory, 20-21 
Social interest 
in psychopathology, clinical issues in, 
114-[[8 
in psychopathology, theoretical issues 
in,112-114 
Social issues, Adler on, 4-5 
Social matrix, on tasks of life, 96-99 
Social reform, 147-148 
Social task, 102-103 
Society, adjustment to, 5-6 
Sociovocational issues, 101 
Soft determinism, 18-19 
Solitude, on baby type, 71 
Soltz, V., 33 
Sperry, L., 118, 134 
Spiritual task, 108-109 
Standing still, in distance seeking, 87 
Stepansky, P., 4 
Stern, D. N., 51 
Stimulation, on excitement seekers, 
71-73 
Stress, on inferiorities, 79-81 
Striving for superiority, 21-23 
Study of Organ Inferiority and its Psychical 
Compensation, 24 
Style, of life. See Life style 

198 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Subjective perspective 
in general diagnosis, 134 
VS. objective, 132-133 
Suffering, 91 
Sullivan, R. S., 102 
Superiority, striving for, 21-23 
Superiority complexes, 81-83 
Survival. in the self task, 106 
Symptom neurotics, 117 
Symptoms 
T 
as assessment tool. 142-143 
as coping behavior, 85 
in psychopathology, 119 
Tacit-explicit knowledge, 168 
Task-orientation, 80 
Tasks of life, 96-111 
life style and, 109-110 
parenting and family task in, 109 
self task in, 106-107 
sexual task in, 103-106 
social matrix in, 96-99 
social task in, 102-103 
spiritual task in, 108-109 
work task in, 99-101 
Teacher education, 151 
Teichman, Moo 86 
Teleology, 15-17 
Testing, psychological. 140-141 
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT). 
140 
Theory. psychological. 13-14 
Thoreau, R., 49 
Transference, 156 
Trauma, 123 
Typology, 63-77 
clinical perspective of. 75-76 
common themes of. 64-66 
Mosak's typology in, 66-75 (See also 
Mosak, typology of) 
Tyranny, of the shoulds, 139 
U 
Unconscious processes, 121-122 
Understanding 
assessment in, 133, 141-143 
diagnosis in, general. 133-136 
diagnosis in, special. 136-138 
dreams in, 138-140 
early childhood in, 137 
early recollections in, 137-138 
historical perspective in, 131-13 3 
in psychotherapy, 157-158 
of a person, 131-145 
philosophical issues in, 143-144 
psychological testing in, 140-141 
quest for, 9-10 
subjective vs. objective in, 132-133 
theoretical issues in, 143-144 
Universe, relationship to, 108 
V 
Vaihinger, R., 26 
Values, children's exposure to, 38-39 
Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, 4 
Volkommenheit, 32 
W 
Way, L., 98 
Weiner-Davis, M., 136 
Weltbild, 53-54 
Wexberg, E., 91. 104 
Wilde, 0., 49 
Wilder, 8-9 
Williams, R., 80 
Wilson, F. R., 103 
Wolfe, W. Boo 41, 84, 91. 98, 99-100, 102, 
124 
Wordsworth, W., 30 
Work task, 99-101 
Workaholic type, 68 
Writing, 167 
y 
Yalom, 1. D., 109 
Z 
Zuckerman, M., 71 

